Third Edition
Veterinary
Virology
Frederick A. Murphy
E. Paul J. Gibbs
Marian C. Horzinek
Michael J. Studdert
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
VETERINARY
VIROLOGY
Third Edition
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
VETERINARY
VIROLOGY
Third Edition
Frederick A. Murphy
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
 Davis, California
E. Paul J. Gibbs
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida
Marian C. Horzinek
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Utrecht University
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Michael J. Studdert
School of Veterinary Science
University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
An Imprint of Elsevier
San Diego London Boston New York Sydney Tokyo Toronto
Cover illustration: Rabies encephalitis. Two hallmarks of street rabies virus infection
are minimal cytopathology of infected ncurons and minimal inflammatory infiltration into.
the neuropil. Here, in a thin section of part of the cytoplasm of a neuron in the
hippocainpus of a haimster inoculated int:acerebrally 6 days earlier with a street rabies
virus, thearchitccture of ceular organelles appearsnormal, but some of the cytosolhas
been displaced by aggregated viral nucleocapsids (smoothly granular areas; seen by light
microscopy as Negri bodics). Large numbers of bullet-shaped virions are evident
 budding from adjacent cndoplasinic reticulun membranes. Thin-section electron
microscopy; uranyl acctatc and lead citrate stain; 1magnification X 25,000.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. @
All Rights Reserved.
Ae Aq no roy Aue ur pausn ro pandsi q Aeu uond s jo ped on
means, electronic, or inechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information
storage and retieival system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Permissions may be sought direetly from Elsevier's Science & Technology Rights Department in
Oxford, UK; phone: (44) 1865 843830, [ax: (44) 1865 85333, ermail: perminsions@elsevier.co.uk.
YoumayalscomleyourreqestniviaElsevirhmepaghp/wwwleviery
suossma duenqo, uai pue uodung jos, nas
Academic Press
An Imprint of Eisevier
525 B Street, Suite 1900, San Diego. California 92101-4495, USA
http://www.academicpress.com
Academic Press
Harcourt Place, 32 Jamestown Road, London NW1 7BY, UK
http://www.academicpress.corm
Library of Congress Catalog Cardi Number: 99-60582
ISBN-13: 978-0-12-511340-3
ISBN-10: 0-12-511340-4
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
060708QW9876
FRANKJ.FENNER
DAVIDO.WHITE
This book is dedicated to our dear friends, Frank J. Fenner and David O. White, the
founders of the series of books that now includes three editions of this book and four editions
of "Medical Virology." They set a standard of scholarship that is impossible to match and a joie
de vivre that made the writing and editing almost fun.
They taught us that the subject of virology must be seen within the context of society as a
whole as well as within the context of science. They envisioned virology as being so broad as to
extend from its roots as a microbiological science, a molecular and cell biological science, an
infectious disease science, to become a major contributor to the overall advance of human and
animal well-being. All this as a single seamless cioth. We hope our students will come to
understand the *"big picture' of veterinary and medical virology as well as Frank and David
have throughout their amazing careers.
We would also like to dedicate this book to our families, our teachers and mentors, and
 our students, all of whom have shaped our thinking and provided our inspiration over the years
in so many ways.
Frederick A. Murphy
E. Paul J. Gibbs
Marian C. Horzinek
Michael J. Studdert
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
COntents
Dedication
Preface
ix
Part I: principles of Virology
1. The Nature of Viruses as Etiologic Agents of Veterinary and
Zoonotic Diseases
3
2. Viral Taxonomy and Nomenclature
23
3. Viral Replication
43
4. Viral Genetics and Evolution
61
5.Virus-Cell lnteractions
81
6. Mechanisms ofInfection and Viral Spread through
the Body
93
7. Determiｎants of Viral Virulence and Host
Resistance/Susceptibility
111
8. Immune Responseto Viral Infections
127
9. Pathogenesis of Virai Diseases: Viral Strategies and Host
Defense Mechanisms
145
lO. Pathogenesis ofViral Diseases: Representative Model Diseases
161
1l. Mechanisms of Viral Oncogenesis
177
12. laboratory Diagnosisof Viral Diseases
193
13. Vaccination against Viral Diseases
225
14. EpidemiologyofViral Diseases
245
15. Surveillance, Prevention, Control, and Eradication
ofViralDiseases
259
Part li: Veterinary and Zoonotic Viral diseases
16. Poxviridae
277
17. Asfarviridae and lridoviridae
293
18. Herpesviridae
301
19. Adenoviridae
327
20. Papovaviridae
335
2l. Parvoviridae
343
vi
vili
Contents
22. Circoviridae
357
23. Retroviridae
363
24. Reoviridae
391
25. Birnaviridae
405
26.Paramyxoviridae
411
27.Rhabdoviridae
429
28.Filoviridae
447
29. Bornaviridae
455
30. Orthomyxoviridae
459
3l. Bunyaviridae
469
32.Arenaviridae
485
33.Coronaviridae
495
34.Arteriviridae
509
35. Picornaviridae
517
36.Caliciviridaa
533
37.Astroviridae
543
38. Togaviridae
547
39.Flaviviridae
555
40. Prions: Agents ofTransmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies
571
4l. Other Viruses: Hepadnaviridae, Deltavirus
581
42. Viral Diseases by Animal Species
585
Glossary
601
Index
615
PrEface
The aim- of "Veterinary Virology" is to present
thology and immunity, their laboratory diagnosis, and
the fundamental principles of virology to students of
their epidemiology, prevention, and control.
veterinary medicine and related medical, biomedical,
 In order to focus on major virologic concepts and
ecological, environmental, and comparative medical sci-
 mechanisms that form the bases for our understanding
 ences. It will also serve as a useful resource for clinicians,
of specific clinical diseases, minutiae have been omitted
teachcrs, and those involved in research in many related
 and much of the factual information is consolidated into
fields of comparative medicine. The pace of change since
tables and figures. Likewise, statements are not individu-
the previous edition has been so great that the book
 ally supported by citation of research papers; however,
has been completely rewritten and greatly expanded.
selective lists of authoritative books, reviews, and some
Covcrage of zoonotic viruses and the diseases they cause
key rccent papers are provided at the end of each chapter
has been expanded as has coverage of the viruses and
to simplify the reader's entry into the virologic and infec-
viral diseases of laboratory animals, poultry, fsh, and
tious discasc literature.
wildlife. We have tricd to weave the concept of new,
Thc pattern of producing "Veterinary Virology**
emerging, and reemerging viral diseases into the fabric
 and its companion volume “Medica! Virology” involves
 of the book, reflecting the new perspective this concept
alternating research, writing and editing between the
has brought to veterinary and zoonotic virology and
two, with the authors’ sense of the advances in the
related felds.
scicnce pertaining to veterinary medicine being incor-
The arrangement of the previous editions has been
poratcd into one volume and at the same time into
retained, hut our account of thc molecular biology of
the fles from which the next volume pertaining to
viral infections is much more detailed and more thor-
human mcdicine is initiated; and, then, vice versa. Of
 oughly integrated into the overall subject. Similarly, our
course, this system pertains mostly to Part I and to
account of viral genetics, phylogeny, and evolution has
the frst part of cach chapter in Part II of each book.
 been expanded and has become a more intcgral part of
We believe that this cross-fertilization between the
the book. This, of course, is built on accurate and up-
veterinary and human medical sciences is a valuable
to-date viral taxonomic usage. The classifcation and
and unique aspcct of these volumes and a useful
nomenclature decisions of the International Committee
foundation for the concept of comparative medicine.
on Taxonomy of Viruses, to May 1998, have been incor--
Comparative medicine, in our view, is a powerful
porated in this new edition.
impetus in advancing both human and animal health.
Part I presents an overview of the principles of
Thus, this book has as its base the fourth edition of
animal virology, starting with the viruses themselves and
"Medical Virology" published in 1994. In turn, this
progressing to the infecrions they cause at the level of
volume wil serve as a foundation for the ffth edition
the cell, the individual animal host, and the host popula-
 Of "Medical Virology.*"
tion. The emphasis is on pathogenesis, that is the events
We would like to acknowledge the help of the
in the war between virus and host that we see as acute,
 many colleagues who in so many ways have helped us
chronic-persistent, and more subtle forms of discase. Our
 in preparing this book: this has ranged from discussions
focus on pathogenesis naturally leads to emphasis on
 on the qualities and shortcomings of the earlier editions
subjects pertaining to the host response to infection and
 and expectations for this edition, to the provision of new
to thc means of intervcning in the course of infection:
information from ongoing research work, to insights
immunology, diagnostics, vaccinology, epidemiology.
into the future of the science and its integration into
prevcntion, and control.
clinical practice. We also acknowledge the help of many
 Part II is arranged by virus family, with major
 colleagues with the illustrations used throughout this
subsections in each chapter providing more speciic in-
book. Without all this help we would not have had the
formation about the viruses, their classification, their
inccntive to revise the book to the extent that we hope
 molecular properties and their replication, and on the
 is evident. In this regard, we would also like to acknowl-
important veterinary and zoonotic diseascs caused by
 edge the help of our teachers and our students who
specific viruses. The diseases are covered from the per-
in their own ways have provided life-long incentives.
spective of their clinical features, their pathogenesis, pa-
Veterinary students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
Preface
fellows were all in mind as we pondered questions of and layout that are evident as one looks at all the editions
"too little” or “too much?"
in the series.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the devo-
tion of Ms. Shirley Light of Academic Press in the prepa-
Frederick A. Murphy
ration and production of this edition. Ms. light has
E. Paul J. Gibbs
 served in this role from the first edition and has played
Marian C. Horzinek
 a central rolc in the continuing improvements in the style
 Michael J. Studdert
PART I
Principles of Virology
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Chapter 1
The Nature of Viruses as Etiologic
Agents of Veterinary and
Zoonotic Diseases
Veterinary and Zoonotic Virology as Infectious Disease Sciences..
3
Viruses, "At the Edge of Life"
6
Viral Morphology....
7
Chemical Composition of Virions .....
15
Stability of Viral Infectivity .
19
Further Reading.
20
Veterinary and Zoonotic
 base as an infectious disease science. It is the perspective
Virology as Infectious
 cstablished by Frank Fenner and David White, who in
1970 conceived the venue for a book, “Medical Virol-
Disease Sciences
Ogy, now in its fourth edition, and in 1987 its comple-
Infectious disease is one of the few genuine adven-
It is the perspective that many others have used to teach
tures left in the world. The dragons are all dead
 medical and veterinary and zoonotic virology in many
and the lance grows rusty in the chimney corner. .
countries.
. . About the only sporting proposition that remains
It seems fitting to start with a sense of the roots
unimpaired by the relentless domestication of a
of the subject, with a sense of how the roots of veterinary
once freeliving human species is the war against
and zoonotic virology are intertwined with those of all
those ferocious litle fellow creatures, which lurk in
the other infectious disease sciences. The history of veter-
the dark corners and stalk us in the bodies of rats,
 inary and zoonotic virology is brief, spanning only about
mice, and all kinds of domestic animals; which fly
a century, but it is crowded with wonderful discoveries
and crawl with the insects, and waylay us in our
 and practical applications. It centers on the replacement
food and drink and even in our love.
 of centuries-old beliefs, conceptions, and theories with
scientific proofs. Scientific proofs established the concept
This quote is taken from the book "Rats, Lice and His-
of specificity of disease causation; i.e., particular viral
 tory,"' written in 1935 by the great microbiologist Hans 
diseases are caused not by some common miasma (a
Zinsser as he reflected on his life in infectious disease
mysteriously poisonous substance), but rather by specific
science. Zinsser's thought has challenged generations of
viruses. This concept led to the introduction of specific
students and professionals ever since, and now it chal-
prevention and control strategies, specifc diagnostic
lenges those who use this book, those who, by their own
 tests, and specifc therapeutic approaches.
clinical and scholarly experiences, understand that the
 This concept and the reformation of thought that
infectious diseases of today are as demanding as those
 it caused involved birter struggle against entrenched
that faced Zinsser.
 opposition, but in the end the scientifc method, the
This book presents the subject of veterinary and
evidence-based method, won out. In a larger sense,
zoonotic virology from the perspective of its traditional  t
 the infectious disease sciences have played a paramount
I.Viruses us Ftiologic Agents
role in the reformation of all veterinary and medical Leewenhoek, who in 1676 first saw bacteria with his
thought: the concept of specifcity of disease causation 
 microscope; Spallanzani, who in 1775 frst grew bacteria
and the requirement for verifiable scientific proofs have
 in culture; Jenner, who in 1796 introduced vaccination
been extended universally throughout all medical and
against the viral disease smallpox; Semmelweis and
veterinary sciences. Ar the same time, the practical
Holmes, who in the 1840s developed practical methods
application of the infectious diseasc sciences has led
 of cleanliness and antimicrobial disinfection; Davaine,
to improvements in animal and human hcalth and
 who in 1850 first associated an infectious organism, the
well-being that have exceeded thc contribution of any
 anthrax bacillus, with disease; and Darwin, Wallace, and
other branch of science.
Mendel, who from 1859 onward revolutionized thinking
Proof of this practical value of the infectious dis-
 in genetics and evolution.
easc sciences is scen in the momentous effects of scientifc
discoveries on animal productivity, life expectancy, and
well-being, worldwide. For cxample, the great epidemics
Pasteur's Influence
of foot-and-mouth disease, rinderpest, hog cholera, and
fowl plague, to name a few, that were so common in
 On this foundation, Pasteur (Figure 1.1) established the 
the 19th century have been virtually eliminated from
 microbiologic/virologic/infectious disease sciences, first
developed countries by the application of various preven-
 in 1857 by discovering the specificity of microbial fer-
tion and control strategies. At the same time, many of the
 mentations (wine, beer, cheese), then in 1865 by ex-
zoonotic and food-borne diseases that were the causes
 tending the concept to infectious diseases of silkworms,
 of many human deaths have largely been controlled in
 and finally between 1877 and 1895 by extending the
devcloped countries.
 concept to animal and human infectious diseases. His
Howcvcr, even as the great epidemic infectious
 carly infectious disease work centered on septic war
diseases have been conquered, new diseases have
 wounds; he then turned to anthrax and other bacterial
emerged, in every case requiring increasing expertise and
 diseases and fnally to rabies. In each instance, he moved
more cormplex rechnological solutions than ever imag-
 quickly from studies aimed at discovering the causative
ined when diseases like foot-and-mouth diseasc and hog
 agent to the development of specific intervention. In
cholera were the primary targets of control efforts. Just
 1885, Pasteur gave the frst rabies vaccine to a boy,
a few years ago it was canine parvovirus disease that J
 Joseph Meister, bitten severely by a rabid dog—-that day
 took center stagc and today it is bovine spongiform en-
 marks the opening of the modern cra of infectious disease
ccphalopathy that rcprescnts the need for advanced vet-
 science aimed at disease prevention and control. Clearly,
crinary virologic expertise, technologies, and control  1
Pasteur deserves his title of father of the microbiologic/
stratcgics. Tomorrow it will bc other diseases, their virologic/infectious disease sciences.
cause, naturc, and means of control totally unpredict-
 Pasteur was joined by Koch, who discovered the
able. In any case, our virologic knowledge base, the stuff
 causative agents of tuberculosis and cholera and contrib-
of this book, is the starting point for managing the viral
 uted much to the development of laboratory methods
diseases that affecr doinestic and wild animals and often
 in bacteriology. As a result, the identification of the caus-
humans in direct and indirect contact with animals. This
ative agents of many important human bacterial diseases
is what the authors mcan in presenting the suhject of
 proceeded at breakneck pace around the turn of thc 20th
veterinary and zoonotic virology as an infectious dis-
 century. At the same time, the seminal work of Salmon,
ease science.
Smith, Kilborne, Curtice, and others identifed the spe-
cifc cause of many important animal pathogens, includ-
ing the causative agent of Texas fever (Babesia bigemina,
transmitted by thc tick Boophilus annulatus--the first
Discoverers and Discoveries
 proof that arthropods can transmit infectious agents).
The foundation of the virologic/infectious diseasc sci-
 These successes in turn nurtured the founding of the
ences predates the concept of the specifcity of disease
science of virology.
causation and is heavily dependent on initial discoveries
about bacteria. There are great names and discoverics
to be remembercd: Hippocrates, the Greek physician
 Founders of the Science of Virology
and father of medicine, who in the 4th century, made
important epidemiologic observations on many infec-
 In the feld of virology, thcrc are great names and discov-
tious diseases, including rabies; Fracastoro, who theo-
eries to be remembered: Beijerinck and Ivanovski, who
rized in 1546 that epidemic diseases wcre disseminated
 in the 1890s discovered the frst virus, tobacco mosaic
by minute particles carried over long distances; van
1 virus, and Loeffler and Frosch, who in 1898, working
Veterinary and Zoronotic Viretogy as Infectious Discase Sciences
5
Shope, who in 1931 discovered swine influenza virus;
FIGure 1.2.
Andrewes, Laidlaw, Smith, and Burnet, who in 1933
frst isolated influenza virus, just 15 years after the great
influenza pandemic of 1918-1919 in which 25 to 40
million people died; Max Theiler (Arnold Theiler's son),
who in 1935 developed the yellow fever vaccine that is
still in use today; Olafson, Pritchard, Gillespie, Baker,
and colleagues, who in the 1940s-1950s determined the
causc of bovine viral diarrhea; Sigurdsson, who in the
1950s in srudics of scrapie and maedi/visna in sheep
 proposed the concept of slow infectious diseases; Salk
and Sabin, who in 1954 and 1957 developed inactivated
virus and attenuated virus polio vaccines; Montagnier
and colleagues, who in 1984 discovercd hunan immuno-
deficiency virus (HIV); Carmichael, Parrish, and col-
F. A. J. Loeffer (lef) and P. Frosch, in 1898, working with Robert
leagues, who in 1978 discovered caninc parvovirus;
Kochrighiscoveredtherstvirusfverteralsfootandmouh
Pedersen and colleagues, who in 1987 discovered feline
diseasevirus.
immunodeficiency virus; the many British veterinary vi-
1ologists, who in 1986 discovered the agent of bovine
spongiform cncephalopathy, and Prusiner, who discov-
with Koch (Figure 1.2), discovered the first virus of verte-
ered the nature of prions, the etiologic agents of bovine
brates, foot-and-mouth disease virus. They described the
 spongiform encephalopathy, scrapie, and similar dis-
filterability of the virus, noting that *"the fltered material
eases and who in 1997 was awarded the Nobel Prize in
 contained a dissolved poison of extraordinary power or
Medicine for his work.
an as yet undiscovered agent that is so small that it is
The field of viral disease pathogenesis also cele-
able to pass through the pores of a filter definitely capable
 brates great names and discoveries: the feld was pio-
of retaining the smallest known bacteria." On the basis
neered by Fenner, who in the 1940s in classical studies
 of its virulence after successive dilutions in experimental
of ectromelia (mousepox) introduced viral quantitation
animals, they concluded that the causal agent of foot-
methods for determining the sequential events in the
and-mouth disease was not soluble but “corpuscular."
course of infection, from portal of entry, viremic spread,
 Loefler and Frosch gavc filtration a new emphasis by
 seeding of target organs, to transmission. Fenner was
focusing attention on what passed through thc fiter 
followed by Mims, who starting in the 1960s used immu-
rather than what was retained and establishing an experi-
 nofluorescence to visualize the development of viral anti-
mental methodology that was adopted widely in the early
 gens in serially collected experimental animal tissues. In
20th century in rescarch on viral diseases.
turn, Appel in the 1960s applied these methods to the
There are othcr great names to be remembered:
 study of canine distermper virus infection in dogs.
Sanarelli, who in 1898 discovered myxoma virus; Reed
The sciences of immunology and cell and molecu-
and Carroll, who discovered the first virus of humans,
lar biology have been intertwined with virology and the
yellow fever virus, and who, influenced by the work of
infectious disease sciences from their beginnings: these
Salmon, Curtice, and their colleagues, also discovered its 
sciences also cal to mind great names and discoveries
mosquito transmission cycle; M'Fadyean, who in 1900
that have influenced modern veterinary and zoonotic
discovered African horse sickness virus; Centanni, Lode,
virology greatly. In immunology, we acknowledge
and Gruber, who in 1901 discovercd fowl plague virus;
Metchnikoff, Bordet, and Ehrlich, who by discoveries
Remlinger and Riffat-Bay, who in 1903 discovered ra-
made between 1883 and 1909 outlined the nature of the
bies virus; DeSchweinitz and Dorset, who in 1903 dis-
immune system; Loeffler, Rous, Yersin, and Behring.
covered hog cholera virus; Arnold Theiler, who in the
who in 1888 discovered bactcrial toxins and antitoxins;
 early 1900s made breakthrough discoveries concerning
Avcry and Lanccficld, who bctwecn 1928 and 1933 de-
rinderpest, African horse sickness, and other animal dis-
velopcd thc basic concepts of infectious disease diagnos-
eases; Ellermann and Bang, who in 1908 discovered
tics; Porter, Edelman, and Nisonoff, who in 1959 de-
avian leukemia virus, the first cancer-causing virus;
scribed  the structure and molecular function
of
Landsteiner and Popper, who in 1909 discovered polio-
antibodies; Jerne and Burnet, who in 1974 conceived
virus; Rous, who in 1911 discovered the frst solid tumor 
clonal selcction as the basis of the immune response;
virus now known as Rous sarcona virus; Laidlaw and
 Doherty and Zinkernagel, who in 1974 discovered how
Dunkin, who in 1926 discovered canine distemper virus; t
the cellular immune system recognizes virus-infected
6
1.Viruses as Etiologic Agents
cells; and Kohler and Milstein, who in 1975 developed They contain only one type of functional nucleic acid,
the first monoclonal antibodies. In cell biology we recog-
either DNA or RNA, never both, and they differ from
nize Carrel, Steinhardt, Eagle, Puck, Dulbecco, Enders,
 microorganisms in having two clearly defined phases in
and others, who from the 1910s to the 1960s invented
their life cycle. Outside their host cell, the viruses are
cell culture methods, and Palade, Claude, Porter, and de
metabolically inert; this is the phase of their life cycle
Duve, who in the 1960s and 1970s described the fne
involved in transmission. Inside their host cell, the viruses
structure of cells and organelles and their biochemical
are metabolically active; this is their replicative phase in
functions. In molecular biology we acclaim the work of
which the viral genome exploits the machinery of the
Avery, Hershey, and Chase, who berween 1944 and
host cell to produce progeny genome copies, viral mes-
1952 showed that DNA carries all hereditary specifcity;
senger RNA, and viral protcins (often along with carbo-
Watson and Crick, who in 1953 discovered the structure
hydrates and lipids) that assemble to form new virions
of DNA and thereby the molecular basis for heredity;
(virion, the complete virus particle),. Unlike any microor-
Nierenberg, Ochoa, Matthaei, and Khorana, who be-
 ganism, many viruses can reproduce even if only their
tween 1961 and 1966 deciphered the genetic code; and
 genomic DNA or RNA is introduced into the host cell.
Cohen and Boyer, who in 1973 developed recombinant-
 These qualities have been used to argue the question,
DNA technology.
"Are viruses alive?"" One answer is to envision "viruses,
From this brief, far from complete, history, it is
 at the edge of life," in some ways fulfilling the criteria we
clear that from its beginning veterinary and zoonotic
use to define life, in some ways not. The key differences
virology has been intertwined with medical virology and
between viruses and microorganisms are listed in Ta-
the other infectious disease sciences. In fact, in the early
ble 1.1.
1900s, there did not seem to he any separation whatso-
Given their unique characteristics, where might
ever, and today, in some areas of veterinary virology,
viruses have originated? There are two theories that have
notably those dealing with the zoonotic and arthropod-
been argued for many years: viruses are either degenerate
borne viruses, the seamless cloth is still intact. Even
 bacteria that have lost most of their cellular functions
though this book now proceeds to deal with veterinary
 or thcy are escaped eukaryotic genes, i.e., nucleic acids
and zoonotic virology per se—the viruses infecting ani-
that have learned to survive outside the environment of
mals and the diseascs they cause-—understanding the
 the ccll. Viral genomic sequence analyscs may at last
full scope of the infectious diseases requires continuing
 resolve this question: for example, the genome of a plant
integration of this subject with all the other infectious
viroid (a subviral agent composed of naked RNA), po-
 disease sciences—this is the perspective of “"comparative 
tato spindle tuber viroid, seems to be a self-replicating
medicine,’ "comparative virology,”" and the perspective
RNA copy of a bit of host DNA. Many of the genes of
Of *lifelong learning." It is the perspective that all stu-
 poxviruses are similar to those of eukaryotes. In any
dents and professionals who use this book will want
 case, it seems certain from viral genomic sequence analy-
to practice.
ses that all the viruses did not evolve from a single pro-
genitor; rather the different kinds of viruses likely arose
independently and then continued to diversify and adapt
Viruses, ''At the Edge of Life'"
their survival and transmission qualities to better ft par-
ticular niches by the usual Darwinian mutation/selection
The unicellular microorganisms can be arranged in order
 mechanisms. Some viruses have continued to evolve in
of decreasing size and complexity: protozoa, fungi, and 
 long association with their evolving hosts (e.g., the her-
bacteria (the latter including mycoplasmas, rickettsiae,
 pesviruses); others have evolved by *"host species jump-
 and chlamydiae). These microorganisms, however small
 ing" (e.g., influenza viruses) and yet others by developing
and simple, are cells. They contain DNA as the repository
 zoonotic transmission schemes (e.g., rabies virus).
of their genetic information; they also contain RNAs
Scveral important practical consequences follow
and they have most or all of their own machinery for
 from understanding that viruses are different from mi-
 producing energy and macroimolecules. These microor-
croorganisms and all other life forms: for example, (1)
ganisms grow by synthesizing their own macromolecular
 somc viruses can persist for the lifetime of their host by
constituents (nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates, and
 the integration of their genomic DNA (or a DNA copy
lipids), and most multiply by binary fission.
of their genomic RNA) into the genome of their host
Viruses, however, are not cells, arc not microor-
 cell or by the carriage of their genomic DNA episomally
ganisms. They possess no functional organelles and are
 in their host cell, and (2) most viruses have defed all
completely dependent on their host for the machinery
 antiviral drug development. Because viruses use the repli-
 of energy production and synthesis of macromolecules.
 cative machinery of their host cell, drugs thar interfere
ViralMorphology
Table 1.1
Properties of Unicellular Microorganisms and Viruses
PROPERTY
BACTERIA
RIckeTtSIAE
MYCOPLASMAS
CHLAMYDIAE
VIRUSES
>300 nm diameter*
+
+
Growth on nonliving mediob
+
+
 Binary fission
+
+
+
 DNA and RNA
+
+
+
+
Infectious nucieic acid
Functional ribosomes
+
+
+
+
Metabolism
+
+
+
 Sensitivity to antibiotics
+
+
Some mycoplasmas and chlamydiae are less than 300 nm in diameter
bChlamydiae ond most rickettsiae are obligate intracelllar parasites.
"Some, among both DNA and RNA viruses.
With very few exceptions.
with viral replication nearly always interfere with essen-
humans, as cited at the beginning of this chapter, were
 tial cell functions (bacteria have unique metabolic path-
 all made using ultrafltration (together with animal inoc-
ways, different from those of their host, and antibiotics
ulation of the fltrates).
are directed at these pathways).
The simplest viruses consist of a DNA or RNA
genome contained within a protein coat, but there are
Electron Microscopy of Viruses
classes of even simpler infectious agents: viroids, which
as noted earlier consist of a naked RNA molecule that
For a time the viruses were also called “"ultramicro-
is infectious, and prions, the agents of the spongiform
 scopic,' as they are smaller than the limit of resolution
cncephalopathies, which consist of an infectious protein,
 Of the light microscope (which is about 0.3 μm, i.e., 300
with no associated nucleic acid.
nm; poxviruses, the largest viruses, are just about this
size but are visible in the light microscope using only
dark-field optics or certain staining techniques). Only
Viral Morphology
with the advent of the electron microscope was it possible
to visualize the viruses. It then became apparent that the
We know that viruses are smaller than microorganisms,
viruses range in size from about the size of the smallest
but we forget how unbelievable this realization was at
 microorganisms down to the size of large protein mole-
frst and we forget just how small the viruses are—in
cules.
fact, it is very diffcult to understand from the perspective
Early electron microscopic studies of viruses by
of direct human experience sizes of entities much smaller
 Ruska in 1939-1941, which ermployed metal shadowing
than we can see with the naked eye (Table 1.2). The first
 of purified virus preparations, were expanded during the
 unequivocal discovery of an animal virus occurred in
1950s to include ultrathin sectioning of virus-infected
1898, when Loeffler and Frosch demonstrated that the
cells. In 1959, visualization of viral ultrastructure was
etiologic agent of foot-and-imouth disease, then an im-
 transformed when negative staining was developed. For
portant disease of cattle throughout Europe and many
 negative staining, a solution of potassium phosphotungs-
other regions of the world, could be transferred by mate-
 tate, which is electron dense, is added to a virus suspen-
rial that had been passed through a filter with pores to0
 sion on a coated specimen grid; it surrounds and fills
small to allow the passage of bacteria. The new infectious
 the interstices in the surface of virions, giving a negative
agents became known as fiterable viruses, quickly short-
image of the virion, showing details not previously seen
ened to viruses. Once the concept of fiterability of viruses
(Figure 1.3). The remarkable diversity of the viruses is
took hold, this experimental procedure was applied to
evident when one compares the morphology of various
many candidate infectious agents. The early discoveries
 s  a ie  se s
of many imporrant pathogenic viruses of animals and
 diversity is revealed in a different way when one com-
1.Viruses as Etiotogic Agents
TaBle 1.2
Perspective on the Size of Viruses
100
1m
1 m
Humans, adult males, are about 2 meters tall
10-1
0.1m
Human, adult, hand is about 10 cm wide
10-2
0.01 m
1 cm
Aedes aegypi, adult, mosquito is about I cm long
10-3
0.001m
1 mm
Ixodes scapuiaris tick, nymphal stage, is about 1 mm long
10 4
0.0001m
100 μm
 Smallest things visible to the naked eye
10-5
0.00001 m
10 μm
Lymphocytes are about 20 μm in diameter
Bacillus anthracis, among the largest of pathogenic bacteria, is 
μm wide and 5-10 μm long
10 
0.000001m
1μm
Smallest things visible in light microscope are about 0.3 μm in size
Poxviruses, the largest of the viruses of vertebrates, are 300 nm [or
 0.3 μm) in their longest dimension
10 7
0.0000001 m
100 nm
Influenza viruses and retroviruses, ypical medium-sized viruses, are
obout 100 nm in diameter
 Pestiviruses, such as bovine viral diarrhea virus, typical smaller-
sized viruses, are about 50 nm in diameter
10-8
0.00000001 m
10 nm
Picornaviruses, such as foot-and-mouth disease viruses, typica!
small viruses, are about 30 nm in diameter
Circoviruses, the smallest of the viruses of vertebrates, are 17-22
nm in diameter
10-9
0.000000001m
1 nm
Smallest things visible in transmission electron microscope; DNA
double helix diameter is 2 nm
10-10
0.0000000001 m
1A
Diameter of aloms is about 2-3 A
 pares the morphology of various viruses as they appear
fraction patterns have been employed to advance our
in ultrathin sections of infected cells (Figure 1.4).
knowledge of virion structural details at near atomic
 Electron micrographs of virions and infected cells
resolution (Figure 1.6A). X-ray crystallographic analyses
representing the families of viruses that cause animal
 of many important viruses have provided remarkabie
 and zoonotic diseases are shown in the chapters of Part
insight into virion organization and assembly, the loca-
II of this book. In the past few years, ultrathin sectioning
tion of antigenic sites on the surface of virions, and
 of virus-infected cells and tissues and negative staining
 aspects of virion attachment and penetration into cells.
 of purified virions have been complemented by several
 For example, in several picornaviruses, the amino acids
new microscopy technologies, particularly scanning elec-
of each of the three larger structural proteins have been
tron microscopy and computer-based image construc-
found to be packaged so as to form wedge-shaped, eight-
tions of frozen, unstained virions. It seems that each
stranded antiparallel β-barrel domains (Figures 1.6B and
 new technology reveals the viruses as more and more
1.6C). The ovcrall contour of picornavirus virions re-
beautiful—but this is a terrible beauty (Figures 1.5A
flects the packing of these domains. In the same way,
and 1.5B).
other amino acid chains have been found to form loops
that project from the main wedge-shaped domains. Some
loops form flexible arms that interlock with the arnis of
X-Ray Crystallography of Viruses
adjacent wedge-shapcd units, thercby providing physical
stability to the virion. Other loops, those involved in
 Electron microscopic approaches have added much to
virion attachment to the host cell, harbor the antigenic
our understanding of the nature and structure of viruses,
sites (epitopes) that are the targets of the host's neutraliz-
  q nou sq ai s  nsd su e ig
ing antibody response against the virus.
provement in their resolving power-—for this, X-ray
 Larger viruses are much more complex in structurc
crystallography and computer analysis of resulting dif-
(Figures 1.3 and 1.4). To study thc finc structure of the
Viral Morphotogy
Figure 1.3.
Negative contrast electron microscopy of selected viruses. The remarkable diversity of the viruses is revealed by allkinds of electron microscopic
Papibiiidlirii
1 lcapsidonlyelopnt shwn(F)Fmilyhboviridegens lyairs,rabie virus)FamilCalivirideensVesivirusein
calicivirus.HFamily Bunyaviridae,genus Phebovirus,Riftallyfevervirus.Family Ohomyxoviridae,genus InuenzavirusA,infuenza
Ui puo z laldou u uaib aun sasnia snoua  jo sazis rsuoyuow snooa fuasadau sabowi asaui tNhi ae/1/buoy buo/ shuia
the chapters in Part Il of this book.
more complex viruses, it is ncccssary to separate well-
 X-ray crystallography, is composed of 120 copies of VP3
 defined substructures, crystallizc them, and subject the
 that self-assemblc and then seem to direct the assembly
crystals to X-ray diffraction analysis. For example,
 of the surrounding capsid layers (Figure 1.7). The struc-
 bluetongue viruscs are composed of a subcore and two
ture of the entire bluetongue virus virion was dctermincd
capsid layers. The subcore structure, as determined by
by X-ray crystailography in 1997—intact virions are
10
1.Viruses as Ftiologic Agents
FiGUre 1.4.
Thin-section electron microscopy of selected viruses. The remarkable diversily of the viruses is also revealed by hin-section eleclron microscopy
of infected cells. (A} Family Poxviridae, genus Orthopoxvirus, variola virus. (B) Family Herpesviridae, genus Simplexvirus, human herpesvirus 1. 
)FmiliidnirDFigiiqilr
various viruses are given in the chapters in Part Il of this bock.
composed of more than 1000 separate protein molecules
Of course the largest viruses, such as the poxviruses,
(see Chapter 24).
 asfarviruses, and herpesviruses, are even more complex
One of the pioneering studies of viral structure
and their study requires even more dissection of viral
was the determination by X-ray crystallography of the
 proteins and substructures (see Chapters 16, 17, and 18).
structure of the hemagglutinin molecule of influenza vi-
ruses and the placement and variation of neutralizing
epitopes on this molecule. This has been described in
Capsid Structure
exquisite detail (Figure 1.8). Today, the determination
of new variations in the amino acid sequence and the
The virion, i.e., the complete virus particle, of the sim-
structure of the influenza hemagglutinin are used in the
 plest viruses consists of a single molecule of nucleic acid
development of updated vaccines and antiviral drugs.
(DNA or RNA) surrounded by a morphologically de-
ViratMorphtog?
FIGURE 1.5.
[A) Semlki Forest virus, amember of the mily Togviridae, gens Alphavirus.urified virus was placed in monolcyer on a coafed grid and
digiizedhdlsisThflfy
microscopic images of the virus showing the arrongement of the siruchural units that moke up rhe icosahedral capsid. [A, courtesy ol C.-H. von
Bonsdorff;B,mRGWestendAGranfdsEncyleifVirlgydd.CDOMAcadmicPresnon98.
12
1.Virses as Etiotogic Agents
nisms driving this process have been recognized, includ-
Figure l.8.
ing the presence of packaging signals in the genomic
nucleic acid sequence.
Virion Symmetry
 For reasons of evolutionary progression and genetic
economy, virions are assembled from multiple copies of
one or a few kinds of protcin subunits-the repeated
occurrence of similar protcin-protein interfaces leads to
assembly of the subunits into symmetrical capsids. This
efficiency of design also depends on principlcs of self-
assembly, wherein structural units are brought into posi-
tion through random thermal movcmcnt and are bonded
in place through weak chemical bonds. Viruscs come in
a variety of shapes and sizes, depending on the shape,
size, and number of their protein subunits and the nature
of the interfaces between these subunits; howcvcr, only
two kinds of symmetry havc becn recognized, icosabe-
Classical schermatic diogram of the three-dimensional structure of
drat and belical (Figure 1.9).
the infuenzavirus hemaglutinin trimer asdetermined from X-ray
 p (soo pmispuus jo subayAis
gions of cx-helix (helices) are represented. (Courtesy of F. Hughson
lcosahedral Symmetry
and D. Wiley.]
Thc symmetry found in isometric viruses is invariably
that of an icosahedron, one of the five classical platonic
solids of geometry; virions with icosabedral symmetry
fincd protein coat, the capsid; the capsid and enclosed
have 12 vertices (corners), 30 edges, and 20 faces, each
nucleic acid constitute thc nucleocapsid. The nucleocap-
face an equilateral trianglc. Icosahedra have axes of
 sid of somc viruses is surrounded by a lipoprotein enve-
two-, thrcc-, and fivefold rotational symmctry, which
lope (Figurc 1.3). There arc many variations on thcse
 pass through thcir edges, faces, and vertices, respectively
constructions and diverse additional components are 
(Figure 1.10). The icosahcdron is the optinum solution
found in the more complex viruses (Figure 1.9).
to the problcm of constructing, from repeating subunits,
New information on the structure and organiza-
 a strong strucrurc enclosing a maximum volume. The
 tion of the components of the viral capsid obtained from 
X-ray crystallographic analyses requires a new synthesis
 minster Fuller in his design of icosahedral buildings (geo-
 of the terminology used to describe virions. Some fea-
desic domes). Only certain arrangciments of structural
tures pertain to morphologically defined structures, oth-
units can form the faces, edges, and vertices of viral
ers to molecular components thcmselves. Capsomers or
icosahedra. The structural units or capsomers on the
 morphologic units are discernible features (protrusions,
faces and cdges of adenovirus virions, for examplc, bond
depressions, ctc.) seen on the surface of virions by elec-
to six neighboring capsomers and are called hexons;
tron nicroscopy (Figure 1.3). They may or may not
those at the vertices bond to five neighbors and are
correspond to individual molecular components. Folded
called pentons (Figure I.8). In the virions of some viruses,
 polypeptide chains, specifed by tht viral genome, com-
both bexons and pentons are composcd of the same
prise protein subunits; assemblages of these protein sub-
 polypeptide(s), whereas in those of other viruses they
units comprise structural units and in turn sets of these
are formed from different polypeptides. The arrange-
structural units comprise assembly units, which are the
ments of structural units on the surface of virions of
major intermediates in the formation of viral capsids.
thrcc small icosahedral model viruses arc shown in Fig-
 Only the simplest virions are assembled from the primary
ure 1.10. Because of variations in the arrangcmcnt of
products of biosynthesis, i.e., protein subunits; in most
the structural units on different viruses, some appear
cases, virions are constructed from distinct subassem-
rather hexagonal in outline and somc appcar nearly
blies by processes involving sequcntial synthesis and
spherical. Even within rathcr smooth ovcrall surface con-
 modification or cleavage of precursors. One crucial need 
fgurations, functional protrusions, bulges, and projec-
 in virion assembly is the incorporation of the viral nucleic
tions (often housing cellular attachment ligands and neu-
acid into the nasccnt virion—several differenr mecha-
tralizing epitopes) and depressions, clefts, and canyons
Viral Morphotogy
13
Figure 1.9.
Fiber
Capsomer
Penton ba
Peripentonal hexon
RNA
Hexon
Group of
nine hexons
A
B
Peplomers
Matrix protein
Lipid bilayer
，
Hemagglutinin
Neuraminidase
Hydrophilic
external domain
Transmembrane domain
C
D
FeaturefirinseexmlidbynvisAbmaicvisB),ndinvisC,}Achedscn
haiffdi
wasfirildbstfibiilwi
nulecsidsllwicaiirsneliemnpmersssl
helixhkNgnefisingroeneinerafechasmerndiswdmhelixhxlendshnghf
virion.CStructureofvirionof influenzaA virusAll animalviruseswihahelicalnucleocapsidand some of thosewithancoschedralcapsid
renvelpdhnlsidsiheliclseyrelongndnndininfnzavirscrsgsntswhia
connected loosely (not shown]. The viral RNA is wound helically within the helically arranged capsomers of each segment, as shown for tobacco
mosaic virus. (D)The envelopeof infuenza virusconsists ofa lipid bilayerinwhichseveral hundred glycoprotein peplomers or pikes are inserted;
bentdblvirsifdixtipinefinziiswdif
hemagglutininarod-shaped trimer andneuraminidasefamushroom-shoped teframerl,eachofwhichconsists ofahydrophobicinternaldomoin,
q transmembrane domqin, and a hydrophilic exlernal domain. Some 50 molecules of a smallmembrane-associated protein, M2 (not shown,
form a smllnumber of pores in thelipid bilyer.[A,fromJ.Mack and R.M.Bumelt,in“Biclogical Macromolecules andAssemblies:Virus
Structures" (F. Jurnak and A. McPherson, eds.1, Vol. 1, p. 337. Wiley, New York; 1984; B, from C. F. T. Mattern, "Malecular Biology of Animal
Viruses'" [D. P. Nayak, ed.1, p. 5. Dekker, New York, 1977.]
(also housing attachment ligands but usually not neu-
forms a spiral within the nucleocapsid (Figure 1.9).
tralizing epitopes) may be secn at highcr resolution (Fig-
Many of thc plant viruses with helical nucleocapsids are
ures 1.11A and 1.11B).
rod shapcd, flexible or rigid, and nonenveloped. How-
evcr, in all such animal viruses the helical nucleocapsid
Hlelical Symmetry
is wound into a secondary coil and enclosed within a
The nucleocapsid of several RNA viruses self-assembles
lipoprotein envelope.
as a cylindrical structure in which the protcin structural
units are arranged as a helix, hence the term belical
symmetry. It is the shape and repeated occurrence of
Viral Envelopes
idcntical protein-protein interfaces on the structural
units that lead to the symmetrical assembly of the helix.
The virions of the member viruses of many different virus
 In helically symmetrical nucleocapsids the genomic RNA
families are enveloped, and in most cases the integrity of
14
1.Viruses as Etiotogic Agents
Figure 1.10.
A
B
L
D
{Upper row) An icosahedron viewed along [A) twofold, (B) threefold, and (C) fivefold axes of symmetry. (Lower row] Diferences in the clustering
of capsid polypeplides are responsible For the characteristic appe
(D) When capsid polypeptides are arranged as 60 trime
this is the case wih foot-and-mouth
disease virus. [E) when capsid polypeptides are grouped as 12 P
with caliciviruses.
the envclope is necessary for viral infectivity. Envcloped
of matrix protein, which in turn is tightly bound to
virions acquire their outer layer when their nuclcocap-
the viral envelope and the internal domain of the
sid is extruded through one of the celluiar mem-
surface glycoprotein peplomers.
branes—-this process is known as budding. The lipids
of the viral envelope are derived directly from the
cellular membrane, but the proteins associated with
Virion Structure/Function Relationships
the envelope are virus coded. There are several kinds
 of envelope-associated proteins associated with at least
Viral capsids and envelopes are not just packages—-they
four crucial activities: receptor binding, membrane fu-
must be stable enough in their expected environment to
sion, uncoating, and receptor destruction. Glycopro-
protect their contained nucleic acid, yet at the samc time
teins, usually in the form of dimers or trimers, assemble
they must be in a primed status to facilitate uptake and
 into the virion peplomers (peplos = envelope) or spikes 
infection of target cells. This primed status usually in-
(Figure 1.9) seen in electron micrographs on the surface
volves conformational rearrangements in virion surface
 of orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses, rhabdoviruses,
structures in responsc to various triggers. For example,
floviruses, coronaviruses, bunyaviruses, arenaviruses,
 upon entry of the host, the hemagglutinin of influenza
and retroviruses. Fusion proteins are glycosylared and
viruses is cleaved by extracellular enzymes, generating
are also associated with peplomers; they are involved
 a primed modified structure. Upon entry of the host cell
in key steps in viral entry and viral releasc. Matrix
via endocytosis, the primed hemagglutinin is activatcd
 Ie e se punoj are pue panejasoos[guou sie suaioud
when exposed to the low pH within the endosome. This 
on the inside of the enveiope of orthomyxoviruscs,
activated hemaggiutinin mediates endosome membrane
paramyxoviruses, rhabdoviruses, filoviruses, and re-
 damagc, thereby allowing viral RNA entry into the cyto-
troviruses, but not coronaviruses, bunyaviruses, and 
plasn.
arenaviruses. Matrix protcin provides added rigidiry
From this examplc, it is clear that knowledge of
to the virion; for example, the helical nuclcocapsid of
the fine structure of virions can shed light on practical
rhabdoviruses is closely apposed to a rather rigid layer
matters: (1) the steps in virion attachment, penetration,
Chenical Composition ofVirions
15
Figure 1.11.
Axisof5-fold
symmetr
Canyon
B
hin
canyon
containing ligand
koop
(A)The locafion of the canyon conlcining the celluar recepors surrounding the axes of fivefold symmety on the rhinovirus irion. (B}Modelof
the interactions beween receptors on host cells and ligands on virions, using rhinovirus and foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) as examples.
In theinteractionof rhinoviruswihishost celheligndsaresiuatedwihin surfacedepressionscanyonsnearxes fivefoldsymmetry
This location of the ligands serves to prevent antibody binding at those crucial sites. Anfibodies specic for other antigenic sites on the surface of
rhinviredonfecerilybockvirioncelecetorineractiontheinertionfofandouhiseseirwihisostceleligands
are situated on Hexible, sequence-variable loops exfending from the surface of the virion. These loops are not protected from antibody bincing,
which does block virion-cellinteraction. (Courtesy of M.G.Rossmann and R.R.Rueckert.]
and uncoating as targets for antiviral drug design; (2)
Chemical Composition
the steps in virion assembly, again as targets for
of Virions
antiviral drug design and use; (3) the bases for virion
integrity as targets for disinfectant design; and (4) the
Viruses are distinguished from all other forms of life
 mechanisms of viral shedding and the patterns of viral
 by their simple chemical composition, which includes
transmission as targets for vaccinc development. In
these ways, knowledge of virion structure contributes
a genome comprising one or a few molecules of either
to the development of diseasc prevention and con-
DNA or RNA, proteins that form the virion (i.e.,
trol strategies.
structural proteins, including capsid proteins, in some
 Perhaps most important of virion structure/func-
 cases tegument proteins, envelope proteins such as
tion relationships and virus/host relationships are those
 glycoproteins, fusion proteins, and matrix proteins),
that pertain to virion attachment and entry into the host 
 proteins that are needed for virion assembly (nonstruc-
cell. In this contcxt the terms receptor and ligand have
tural proteins), proteins that facilitate the viral takeover
 often been used in imprecise ways. In this book, the 
 of host cell machinery (enzymes involved in viral repli-
term receptor is used to designate specific molecule(s)
cation, including replicases, polymerases, transcriptases,
or structure(s) on the surface of host cells that are in-
etc.), some of which are incorporated in the virion,
volved in virus attachment. The term ligand is used for
and in some viruses carbohydrates (mostly as side
the receptor-binding molecule(s) on the surface of the 
chains on glycoproteins) and lipids. The simplest virus
virus. For cxample, the hemagglutinin of the influenza
(tobacco necrosis virus satcllitc, a defective virus that
virus is the ligand that binds to the receptor on the host 
 needs a helper virus to provide some of its functions)
cell surface, in this case a glycoconjugate terminating in
directs the synthesis of only one protein; many impor-
N-acetylneuraminic acid.
tant viruses direct the synthesis of 5-10 proteins; and
16
.
Virutses as Ftiologic Agents
the largest viruses, such as poxviruses and herpesvi
Table I.3
ruses, direct the synthesis of up to 200 proteins—still
Families of Viruses Containing Pathogens of
this is very few relative to the number of proteins
Animals and Humans
involved in the life processes of bacteria (more than
5000 protcins) and eukaryotic cells (more than
DNA viruses
100,000 proteins).
 Double-slranded DNA
Viruses exhibit a remarkable variety of strategies
for the expression of their genes and for the replication
Poxviridae
Asfarviridae
of their genomes. Knowledge of these schemes has much
Iridoviridae
practical significance, especially in understanding infec-
tion and disease pathogenesis and the application of
Herpesviridae
rational means of disease prevention and control. Many
Adenoviridae
of the viruses discovered most recently have very limited
Papovaviridae
host ranges and tissue tropisms (e.g., feline immunodefir-
Single slranded DNA
ciency virus). As more and more such viruses are discov-
Parvoviridae
ered, we can expect to find additional novel genome
Circoviridae
replication and expression strategies, each of which will
DNA and RNA reverse-transcribing viruses
require new research approaches.
Double stranded/ single-stranded DNA
Hepadnaviridae
Single-stranded RNA
Viral Nucleic Acids
Rerroviridoe
RNA viruses
Viral genes are encoded in either DNA or RNA genomes;
 Double-stranded RNA
genomic DNA and RNA can be double stranded or single
Reoviridae
stranded and can be monopartite (all viral genes con-
Birnaviridoe
tained in a single molecule of nucleic acid) or muitipartite
Single stranded RNA
(segmcnted: viral genes distributed in multiple molecules
Negative sense,
or segments of nucleic acid). For cxample, among the
 Nonsegmented Order: Mononegavirales
RNA viruses, only the member viruses of the families
Paramyxoviridae
Reoviridae and Birnaviridae have a double-stranded
Rhabdoviridae
RNA genome, and these genomes are segmented ( Reovir-
Filoviridoe
idae: 10, 11, or 12 segments, depending on the genus;
Birnaviridae: 2 segments). All viral genomes are haploid,
Bornaviridoe
 Negative sense, Segmented 
i.e., they contain only one copy of cach gene, except for
Orthomyxoviridae
retrovirus genomes, which are diploid. These characters,
 and others, have been used to order the presentation of
Bunyaviridae?
the families of viruses containing pathogens of animals
Arenaviridae*
(and humans) in this book (Table 1.3).
 Positive sense, Nonsegmented nested set ranscription
When extracted carefully from the virion, the nu-
Order: Nidovirales
cleic acid of viruses of certain families of both DNA and
Coronoviridae
RNA viruses is itself infectious, i.e., when experimentally
Arteriviridae
introduced into a cell it can initiate a complete cycle of
Direct transcription
viral replication, with the production of a normal yield
Picornaviridae
of progcny virus. The essential features of the genomes
Caliciviridae
of viruses of vertebrates are summarized in Table 1.4.
Astroviridae
 Their remarkablc variety is reflected in the diverse ways
Togoviridoe
 in1 which the information encoded in the viral genome
Floviviridoe
 is transcribed to RNA, then translated into proteins, and
Subviral agents: Satellies and prions
the ways in which the viral nucleic acid is replicated (see
Single-stranded RNA [Negative sense, defective]
Chapter 3).
Floating genus: Deltavirus
Viral Genomic DNA
No known nucleic acid, selfreplicating protein
Prions
The genome of all DNA viruses of vertebrates is mono-
partitc, consisting of a single molecule which is doublc
"Some member viruses of the family Bunyoviridoe and oll member
stranded, cxccpt in the case of the parvoviruses and the
viruses of the family Arenaviridoe have ambisense genomes.
Chemicat Compesition of Virieons
17
TaBle 1.4
Structure of Viral Genomes
FAMLY
STRUCTURE OF GENOME
Poxviridae
A single molecule of linear double-stranded DNA, both ends covalently closed, with inverted
Asfarviridae
terminal repeats
Iridoviridde
Herpesviridae
A single molecule of linear double-stranded DNA, containing terminal and internal reiterated
sequences, usually forming Iwo covalently linked components (L and S) that result in the fof-
mation of rwo or four isomeric Forms oriented differently in the various herpesviruses
Adenoviridae
A single molecule of linear double-stranded DNA with inverted terminal repeats and a cova
lently bound terminal protein
Papovaviridae
A single molecule of circular supercoiled double stranded DNA
Parvoviridae
A single molecule of linear single-stranded DNA, negative or positive sense, with palin-
dromic sequences at ends hat allow circularization of the DNA during replication
Circoviridae
A single molecule of circular singlestranded DNA, ambisense or posilive sense
Hepadnaviridae
A single molecule of circular double shranded DNA with a region of single stranded DNA
Retroviridae
Diploid linear single-stranded RNA, positive sense, each molecule hydrogen bonded at 5'
end with 3'-termini polyadenylated and 5' ends capped
Reoviridae
Ten, 1l, or 12 molecules of linear double-standed RNA (segmented genome)
Birngviridae
Two molecules of linear double-stranded RNA (segmented genome)
Order: Mononegavirales
A single molecule of linear singlestranded RNA, negalive sense
Paramyxoviridae
Rhabdoviridae
Filoviridoe
Bornaviridae
Orthomyxoviridae
Eight, 7, or 6 molecules of linear single-stranded RNA, negative sense (segmenled genome]
Bunyaviridae
Three molecules of linear singlestranded RNA, negative sense or ambisense, with "sticky
ends' that allow circularization [segmented genome)
Arenaviridae
Two molecules of linear singlestranded RNA, negative sense or ambisense, with "'sticky
ends"' that allow circularization (segmented genome)
Order: Nidovirales
A single molecule of linear single-stranded RNA, positive sense, with nested set transcription
Coronaviridae
Arteriviridae
Picornaviridae
A single molecule of linear single-slranded RNA, positive sense, 3' end polyadenylated (ex
Caliciviridae
cept most member viruses of the family Flaviviridoe], 5' end capped, or protein covalently
Astroviridae
bound (Picornaviridae, Caliciviridae, Astroviridae)
Togoviridoe
Flaviviridoe
Deltavirus
A single molecule ofcircular singlestranded RNA, negative sense
Prions
No nucleic acid, self-replicating infectious prion protein (Pr?)
Varying among the various parvoviruses.
circoviruses (Figure 1.12). DNA genomes may be linear
circle mechanism. The two strands of poxvirus DNA are
 or circular, depending on the virus family. The DNA
 covalently cross-linked at thcir termini (forming hairpin
of papovaviruses, hepadnaviruses, and circoviruses is
ends), so that on denaturation, the molecule becomes a
circular. The circular DNA of hepadnaviruses is partially
large single-stranded circle. The linear double-stranded
 double stranded, partially single stranded. The circular
DNA of several DNA viruses (and the linear single
 DNA of the papovaviruses is also supercoiled.
stranded RNA of retroviruses) contains repeat sequences
Most of the linear viral DNAs have characteristics
at the ends of the molecule that permit circularization.
that enable them to adopt a circular configuration, which
In adenovirus DNA there are inverted terminal repeats;
 e pns s a aq udau r i e s
these are also a feature of the single-stranded DNA of
18
I.Virnses as Etiotogic Agents
to yield several distinct mRNAs, each of which may be
Figure l.12.
translated into a different protein.
Viral DNAs contain several kinds of noncoding
sequences, some of which have been conserved through-
out evolutionary time because they cncode vital func-
tions; these include DNA replication initiation sites,
RNA polymerase recognition sites, translation initiation
and termination sites, RNA splice sitcs, promofers, en-
hancers, and so on.
Viral Genomic RNA
With the exception of reoviruses and birnaviruses, the
genomes of all vertebrate RNA viruses are single
stranded. They can be monopartite or multipartite: for
example, retroviruses, paramyxoviruses, rhabdoviruses,
filoviruses, coronaviruses, arteriviruses, picornaviruses,
togaviruses, and flaviviruses have monopartite genomes,
For this classical image, the DNA was released osmotically from a
whereas orthomyxoviruses, bunyaviruses, and arenavi-
single T4 bacteriophage virion and Hoated on a liquid surface. From
ruses have multipartite genomes. The genomes of arena-
here,thespredout DNA and he now empy virionhead were
viruses consist of 2 segments, bunyaviruses 3, ortho-
translerred to a coated electron microscope grid ond shadowed with
aloms of aheay metl.An mazing amunt of DNA,up to 200
myxoviruses 6, 7, or 8 (depending on the genus),
kbp, is coiled into the heads of the large DNA bacteriophages.
birnaviruses 2, and reoviruses 10, 11, or 12 (depending
on the genus). Each RNA molecule in these viruses is
unique (often encoding a single protein). Except for the
parvoviruses. Another typc of terminal structure occurs
very small circular single-stranded RNA of delta hepati-
in adenoviruses, hepadnaviruses, parvoviruses, and some
tis virus (the structure of which rescmbles that of viroids
single-stranded RNA viruses such as the picornaviruses 
of plants), no animal virus RNA gcnome is a covalently
and caliciviruses. In thcsc viruses, a protein, which has
linked circle. However, the single-stranded RNA of
an cssential function in replication of the genome, is
,  on sede ssae pe sseu
linked covalently to thc 5' tcrminus.
because of “sticky" hydrogen-bonded ends. The ge-
The size of viral DNA genomcs ranges from 1.7
nomes of single-stranded RNA viruses have a consider-
kb for some circoviruses, to over 200 kbp for the largest 
able secondary structure, regions of base pairing causing
 of the double-stranded DNA herpesviruses and poxvi-
the formation of loops, hairpins, and so on, which proba-
ruses. As 1 kb or 1 kbp for double-stranded DNA con-
bly serve as signals controlling nucleic acid replication,
tains enough genetic information to code for about one
transcription, translation, and/or packaging into the
avcrage-sized protein, it might be surmised thar viral
capsid.
 DNAs contain roughly berween 2 and 200 genes, coding
 Single-stranded genomic RNA can be defined ac-
for some 2 to 200 proteins. However, the relationship
Jo sI ai JI (ed se ou ose) sas Sh on Sios
between any particular nucleotide sequence and its pro-
the same sense as mRNA, i.e., it can direct the synthesis
tein products is not as straightforward as this. On the
 of protein, it is said to be of positive sense. This is the
one hand, the DNA of most of the larger viruses, like
case with the picornaviruses, caliciviruses, togaviruses,
 that of mammalian cells, contains what appears to be
flaviviruses, coronaviruses, and retroviruses. If, however,
 redundant information in the form of repeat sequences,
the genomic nucleotide sequence is complementary to
So the coding capacity of large viral genomes might be
that of mRNA, it is said to be negative sense. Such is the
 overestimated. On the other hand, the coding capacity
case with paramyxoviruses, rhabdoviruses, filoviruses,
 might be underestimated: first, a given DNA or mRNA
 orthomyxoviruses, arenaviruses, and bunyaviruses, all
sequencc may be read in up to three different rcading
of which have an RNA-dependent RNA polymcrast
frames, giving rise to two or three proteins with different
(transcriptase) in the virion, which in the infected cell
amino acid sequences; second, either or both strands of
 transcribes positive-sense RNA using the viral genome
double-stranded viral DNA may be transcribed, and in 
as the template. With arcnaviruses and at least one genus
cither direction, each yiclding different proteins; third,
 of bunyaviruscs, one of the RNA segments is ambisense,
genes may overlap, yielding various transcripts and pro-
i.e., part positive sense, part negative sense. Where the
tcin products; and finally, a singlc primary RNA tran-
viral RNA is positive sense, it is usually polyadenylated
script may be spliced or cleaved in several different ways at its 3' end (in picornaviruses, caliciviruses, togaviruses,
Stability ofVirat Infectivity
19
and coronaviruses, but not in flaviviruses) and capped 
Viral Glycoproteins
 at its S' end (togaviruses, flaviviruses, coronaviruses).
 Most viral glycoproteins occur as membrane-anchored
The size of singte-stranded RNA virai genomes
 peplomers (spikes) extending outward from the envelope
varies from 1.7 to 21 kb (M, approximately 1-10 mil-
 of enveloped viruses, but the virions of some of the more
lion) and that of double-stranded RNA viruses from 18
 complex viruses also contain glycosylated internal or
to 27 kbp, a much smaller range than found among
 outer capsid proteins. Oligosaccharide side chains (gly-
doubie-stranded DNA viruses. Accordingly, these vi-
cans) are attached by N-glycosidic or, more rarely,
ruses encode fewer proteins than many DNA viruses,
 O-glycosidic linkages. Because they are synthesized by
generally less than a dozen. Most of the segments of
 cellular glycosyl transferases, the sugar composition of
the genomes of orthomyxoviruses and reoviruses are
these glycans corresponds to that of host cell mem-
individual genes, each coding for one unique protein.
brane glycoproreins.
Anomalous Features of Virai Genomes
Viral Envelope Lipids
Viral preparations often contain some particles with an  Most lipids found in enveloped viruses are present as a
atypical content of nucleic acid. Several copies of the 
 typical lipid bilayer in which the virus-coded glycopro-
complete viral genorme may be enclosed within a single
 tein peplomers (spikes) and, in some cases, other viral
virion, or virions may be formed that contain no nucleic
 proteins are embedded. As a consequence, the composi-
acid (empty particles) or that have an incomplete genome
 tion of the lipids of particular viruses differs according
(defective interfering particles). Moreover, host cell
 to the composition of the membrane lipids of the host
DNA may sometimes be incorporated into virions (e.g-
cells from which they came. The composition of the
papovavirus), whereas fragments of ribosomal RNA
 membrane lipids of viruses also varies with the particular
 have been found in orthomyxovirus and arenavirus vi-
membrane system employed for virion budding. For ex-
rions.
ample, the lipids of paramyxoviruses that bud from the
plasma membrane of host ceils differ from those of bun-
 yaviruses and coronaviruses, which bud from the mem-
Viral Proteins
branes of intracytoplasmic organelles. Lipids constirute
about 20-35% of the dry weight of most enveloped
 The virions of all viruses of vertebrates contain several
viruses; some 50-60% of viral envelope lipid is phospho-
 different proteins, the number ranging from 1 in the
lipid and most of the remainder is cholesterol
simplest virus to >100 in the most complex. Some virus-
coded proteins are structural, i.e., they are used to con-
struct the capsid and other components of the virion.
Stability of Viral Infectivity
Other proteins are nonstructural; some of these that
are not part of the mature virion are involved in virion
In general, viruses are more sensitive than bacteria or
assembly whereas others are involved in the various as-
fungi to inactivation by physical and chemical agents, but
 pects of viral replication processes. The latter are en-
there are important exceptions. A knowledge of specific
zymes, most of which are involved in nucleic acid replica-
viral sensitivity to environmental conditions is therefore
tion, transcription, and translation and in the shutdown
important for ensuring the preservation of the infectivity
of host cell functions and the subversion of its machinery
 of viruses as reference reagents and in clinical specimens
 to viral synthetic activities. These include various types
collected for diagnosis, as well as for their deliberate
of (1) replicases (e.g., DNA-dependent DNA replicases)
inactivation for such practical ends as sterilization, disin-
and other enzymes involved in viral DNA replication, (2)
 fection, and the production of inactivated vaccines.
transcriptases that transcribe mRNA from viral genomic
 double-stranded DNA or double-stranded RNA or nega-
tive-sense single-stranded RNA, and (3) various prote-
Temperature
ases, helicases, and ligases. Reverse transcriptase, which
transcribes DNA from RNA, is found uniquely in retro-
The principal environmental condition that may ad-
viruses and hepadnaviruses. Other unique enzymes 
versely affect the infectivity of viruses is temperature.
found in retroviruses are involved in the integration of  S
 Surface proteins are denatured within a few minutes at
the DNA product of reverse transcription into the cellu-
temperatures of 55-60°C, with the result that the virion
lar chromosomal DNA. Poxviruses, which replicate in  i
 is no longer capable of normal cellular attachment, pene-
the cytoplasm and therefore have less access to cellular t
tration, and/or uncoating. At ambient temperature the
machinery, cary a number of unique enzymes for pro-
rate of decay of infectivity is slower but significant, espe-
cessing RNA transcripts and replicating their DNA.
cially in the summer or in the tropics. To preserve infec-
20
.Viruses as Etiofogic Agents
tivity, viral preparations must therefore be stored at low
 gents are used commonly by virologists to solubilize viral
temperature; 4°C (wet ice or a refrigerator) is usually
envelopes and to liberate proteins for use as vaccines O1
 satisfactory for a day or so, but longer-term preservation
for chemical analysis.
requires much lower temperatures. Two convenient tem-
peratures are -70°C, the temperature of solid CO2 (dry
ice) and of some mechanical freezers, or -196°C, the
Further Reading
temperature of liquid nitrogcn. As a rule of thumb, the
half-life of most viruses can be measured in seconds at
Alberts, B, Bray, D., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Roberts, K,
60°C, minutes at 37°C, hours at 20°C, days at 4°C, and 
and Watson, J. D. (1994). "Molecular Biology of the
 years at -70°C or lower. Enveloped viruses are more
Cell,” 3rd ed. Garland Publishing, New York.
heat labile than nonenveloped viruses. Enveloped viri-
Bhatt, P. N., Jacoby, R. O., Morse, H. C., and New, A.
E. (1986). *Viral and Rickertsial Infections of Labora-
ons, e.g., those of the genus Pneumovirus in the family
tory Rodents. Academic Press, Orlando, FL.
Paramyxoviridae, are also susceptible to repeated freez-
Branden, C., and Tooze, J. (1991). "Introduction to Pro-
ing and thawing, probably as a result of disruption of
tein Structure. Garland Publishing, New York.
the virion by ice crystals. This poses probiems in the
Calnek, B. N., Barnes, H. J., Beard, C. N., McDougald,
collection and transportation of clinical specimens. The
L. R., and Saif, Y. M., eds. (1997). "Diseases of Poul-
 most practical way of avoiding such probiems is to de-
try,"" 10th ed. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
Carter, G. R., Chengappa, M. M., and Roberts, A. W.
liver specimens to the laboratory as rapidly as practica-
 ble, packed without freezing, on cold gel packs.
cd. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, MD.
 In the laboratory, it is often necessary to preserve
Coetzer, J. A. W, Thompson, G. R., and Tustin, R. C.,
virus stocks for years. This is achieved in one of two
eds. (1994). "Infectious Diseases of Livestock with Spe-
cial Reference to Southern Africa," 2 vols. Oxford Uni-
ways; (1) rapid freezing of small aliquots of virus sus-
versity Press, Cape Town.
 pended in medium containing protective protein and/
Darai, G., ed. (1987). "Virus Diseases in Laboratory and
or dimethyl sulfoxide, followed by storage at - 70° or
Captive Animals." Kluwer, Boston, MA.
-196°C, or (2) freeze drying (lyophilization), i.e., dehy-
Fenner, F. (1998). History of virology. In *Encyclopedia
dration of a frozen viral suspension undcr vacuum, fol-
of Virology," (R. G. Wehster and A. Granoff, eds.),
2nd ed. (CD-ROM). Academic Press, London,
lowed by storage of the resultant powder at 4°C or
Fowler, M. E., ed. (1986). "Zoo and Wild Animal Medi-
-20°C. Freeze drying prolongs viability signifcantly
cine," 2nd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
even at ambient temperatures and is used universally in
Fraser, C. M. (1998). "The Merck Veterinary Manual: A
thc manufacture of attenuated virus vaccines. The most
Handbook of Diagnosis, Therapy, and Disease Preven-
 prominent exception to this is thc prions, which are
tion and Control for the Veterinarian," Sth ed.
Merck, Rahway, NJ.
amazingly stable under virtualy all environmental con-
Gaskell, R. M., and Bennett, M. (1996). "Feline and Ca-
ditions, surviving boiling, freezing, many physical and
nine Infectious Diseases." Blackwell, London.
 chemical insults, and even large doses of y-irradiation
Greene, C. E., ed. (1998). “Infectious Discases of thc
(see Chapter 40).
Dog and Cat," 2nd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Harrison, G. J., and Harrison, L. R. (1986), "Clinical
Avian Medicine and Surgery." Saunders, Philadelphia,
lonic Environment and pH
PA.
Harrison, S. C., Skehel, J. J., and Wiley, D. (1996). Virus
structure. In *Fields Virology," (B. N. Fields, D. M.
 On the whole, viruses are best preserved in an isotonic
Knipc, P. M. Howley, R. M., Chanock, J. L. Melnick,
environment at physiologic pH, but some tolerate a wide
T. P., Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.),
ionic and pH range. For example, whereas most enve-
3rd ed., pp. 59-99. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia,
PA.
loped viruses are inactivated at pH 5-6, rotaviruses and
Horzinek, M. C., ed. (1987-1996). "Virus lnfections of
many picornaviruses survive the acidic pH of the
Vertebrates," Book Series, vols. 1-6 Elsevier, Am-
stomach.
sterdam.
Hugh-Jones, M. E., Hubbert, W. T., and Hagstad, H. V.
(1995). “Zoonoses: Recognition, Control, and Preven-
Lipid Solvents and Detergents
tion.' Iowa State University Press, Ames.
Koprowski, H., and Oldstone, M. B. A. (1996). "Mi-
crobe Hunters, Then and Now." Medi-Ed Press,
 Because the infectivity of enveloped viruses is destroycd
Bloomington, IN.
readily by lipid solvents such as cther or chloroform or
Lcman, A. D., Straw, B. E., Mengeling, W. L., D'Allaire,
detergents such as sodium deoxycholate, thcsc agents
S., and Taylor, D. J., eds., (1992). "Diseases of
 Swine." Jowa State University Press, Ames.
must be avoided in laboratory procedures concerned
Levine, A. J. (1992). "Viruses." Scientifc American Li-
with maintaining the viability of viruses. However, deter-
brary Frecmaln, New York.
Fiarther Reading
21
Levine, A. J. (1996). The origins of virology. In "Fields
Cattle, Sheep, Pigs, Goats and Horses, 8th ed. Bail-
Virology, (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley,
liere Tindall, London.
R. M., Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roiz-
Rintoul, D., Welti, R., Storrie, B., and Lederman, M.
man, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed, Pp. 1-14. Lippin-
(1995). *A Student's Companion in Molecular Cell Bi-
cort-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
ology," 3rd ed. Scientifc American Books Freeman,
Lodish, H., Baltimore, D., and Berk, A. (1995). *Molecu-
New York.
lar Cell Biology," 3rd ed. CD ROM. Scientific Ameri-
Spencer, S., and Sgro, J.-Y. (1998). "Multimedia Library,
can Books Freeman, New York.
Computer Visualizations of Viruses and Viral Substruc-
Mahy, B. W. J. (1997). "A Dictionary of Virology." Aca-
tures, Access Point to Digitized Electron Micrographs
demic Press, San Diego, CA.
of Viruses at Several Internet Websites." Institute for
Mahy, B. W. J., and Collier, L. H., eds., (1997).*Topley
Molecuiar Virology, University of Wisconsin, Madi-
and Wilson’'s Microbiology and Microbial Infections,
son. Available at http://www.bocklabs.wisc.edu
Vol. 1. Edward Arnold, London.
Timoney, J. F., Gillespie, J. H., Scott, F. N., and Bar-
Martin, W. B., and Aitkin, 1. D., eds. (1991). "Discases
lough, J. E. (1988). *Hagan and Bruner's Infectious
of Sheep," 2nd ed. Blackwell, London.
Diseases of Domestic Animals," 8th ed. Cornell Uni-
Mims, C. A., Playfair, I. H., Roitr, I. M., Wakelin, D.,
versity Press, Ithaca, NY.
and Williams, R. (1993). "Medical Microbiology.*
Waterson, A. P., and Wilkinson, IL. (1978). “"An Introduc-
Mosby, St. Louis., MO.
tion to the History of Virology." Cambridge Univer-
National Research Council, National Academy of Sci-
sity Press, Camhridge, UK.
ences of the United States of America (1991). “Infec-
Webster, R. G., and Granoff, A., eds. (1998). "Encyclope-
tious Diseases of Mice and Rats." National Academy
 dia of Virology," 2nd ed. (CD-ROM). Academic
Press, Washington, DC.
Press, London.
Olsen, R. G., Krakowka, S., and Blakeslee, J. R, eds.
White, D. O., and Fenner, F. (1994). "Medical Virol-
Ogy," 4th ed. Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
eases." CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Wolf, K. (1988). "Fish Viruses and Fish Viral Diseases.""
Pedersen, N. C. (1988). “Feline Infectious Diseases."
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
American Veterinary Publications, Goleta, CA.
Zinsser, H. (1934). "Rats, Lice and History." The Atlan-
Radostits, O. M. Blood, D. C., and Gay, C. C. (1994).
tic Monthly Press/Little, Brown, Boston, MA.
"Veterinary Medicine, a Textbook of the Diseases of
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
CHaPter
2
Viral Taxonomy and Nomenclature
Viral Taxonomy....
23
Families of DNA Viruses..
24
Families of Reverse-Transcribing Viruses.....
33
Families of RNA Viruses ...
34
Subviral Agents: Defective Viruses, Satellites, and Prions (Agents
of Spongiform Encephalopathies......
40
Viral Nomenclature ....
40
Groupings of Viruses on the Basis of Epidemiologic Criteria .
41
Taxonomy and the Causal Relationship Between Virus and Disease .
41
Further Reading...
42
 There is evidcnce to indicate that all organisms may be
 viruses, human viruses, viruses transmitted by arthropod
 infected by one virus or another: indeed, every organism
vectors, and others.
that has been studied has yielded viruses. The number
of different viruses existing as pathogens or silent passen-
gers in animals, plants, invertebrates, protozoa, fungi,
Viral Taxonomy
 and bacteria is accordingly very large—more than 4000
different viruses and 30,000 differcnt strains and sub-
The earliest efforts to classify viruses were based on
types have been rccognized (particular strains and sub-
 common clinical and pathogenic properties, common
types often have distinct health or economic signifi-
 organ tropisms, and common ecological and transmis-
 cance). Several hundred differcnt viruses are known to
 sion characteristics. For example, viruses that cause hep-
 infect humans and somewhat fewer have bcen recovered
atitis (e.g., canine hepatitis virus, an adenovirus, Rift
from individual animals (livestock, companion animals
Valley fever virus, a bunyavirus, and hepatitis B virus,
and horses, laboratory animals, wild animals, birds, rep-
a hepadnavirus) might have been brought together as
tiles, amphibians, and fish). There is a sense that a sig.
"hepatitis viruses."
 nifcant proportion of all existing viruses of humans and
 Subsequent taxonomic systems have focused on
domestic animals have now been isolated—this is cer-
the viruses themselves and have been based on determi-
tainly not true of the viruses infecting the myriad of
 nations of virion size, determined by ultrafiltration and
 Other specics populating thc Earth.
 clectron microscopy; virion morphology, determined
 Becausc all viruses, whatever their hosts, share the
 by clectron microscopy; virion stability, determined by
properties described in the preceding chapter, virologists
varying pH and temperature, exposure to lipid solvents
have devclopcd a single system of classification and no-
and detergents, etc., and virion antigenicity, determined
menclature that covers all viruses—t
-this is the system of
 by various serologic methods. This approach has
the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses
 worked because after large numbers of viruscs had
(ICTV). In this book we will be concerned primarily
been studied and their characteristics used to build the
with the viruses that cause disease in animals; however,
 overall taxonomic system, it was necessary in most
 in some cascs taxonomic categories blur among animal
 cases only to measure a few characteristics in order
23
24
2.Vral Taxonomy and Nonencleatwre
wouy pue ‘uoxen iadoid s1! u! .umouyun, ue sejd o1
Virologists are still working on this; most of the viruses
there to identify it specifically. For example, an isolate
described in this book will stand as species, but a few
from the respiratory tract of a dog, identified by 
 may end up as subspecies Or strains.
negative contrast electron microscopy as an adenovirus,
 In the next section of this chapter, the 26 virus
might be submitted immediately for serologic identifica-
families that contain animal and human pathogens are
tion-—it would certainly turn out to be a member of
outlined in the same order as the chapters in Part lI of
the family Adenoviridae, genus Mastadenovirus (thc
this book (see Table 1.3, Tables 2.1 and 2.2, and Figure
adenoviruses of mammals), and would be identifable
 2.1'). The terms uscd reflect the system of the Interna-
serologically as either canine adenovirus 1 or 2 or
tional Committec on Taxonomy of Viruses as of April
perhaps it would turn out to bc a ncw adenovirus
1998. The order of presentation is sct by (1) nucleic acid
of dogs!
type and strandedness (RNA or DNA, single or doublc
Today, thc primary criteria for delineating the
stranded); (2) genome characteristics (e.g., segmentation,
main viral taxa are: (1) the typc and character of the
genome sense—positive, negative, or ambisense); and
viral genome, (2) the strategy of viral replication, and
(3) replication and transcription strategy.
(3) the structure of the virion. Sequencing, or partial
sequencing, of the viral genome provides powerful taxo-
nomic information and now is often done very early in
Families of DNA Viruses
identification protocols. Reference genome sequcnces for
all viral taxa are available in public databases (e.g., Gen-
Family: Poxviridae
Bank, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of
Subfamily: Chordopoxvirinae
Health, Bcthesda, Maryland, United States: http://
Genus: Orthopoxvirus (vaccinia virus²)
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Such an approach in most cases
Genus: Capripoxvirus (sheeppox virus)
allows one to cut to specifc taxonomic placement imme-
Genus: Leporipoxvirus (myxoma virus)
diately, although traditional methods are often still used
Genus: Suipoxvirus (swinepox virus)
for reasons of economy.
Genus: Molluscipoxvirus (molluscum contagio-
The universal system of viral taxonomy is set at
sum virus)
the levels of order, family, subfamily, genus, and species.
Genus: Yatapoxvirus (yabapox and tanapox vi-
The names of orders end with thc suffx -virales, families
ruses)
with the suffix -viridae, subfamilics with the suffix
Genus: Avipoxvirus (fowlpox virus)
-virinae, and genera with the suffix -virus. Lower levels,
Genus: Parapoxvirus (orf virus)
such as subspecies, strains, and variants, are established
Subfamily: Entomopoxvirinae
for practical purposcs such as diagnostics and vaccine
Three genera: Entomopoxvirus A, B, and C (en-
development, but this is not a matter of formal classifica-
tomopoxviruses A, B, and C)
tion and therc arc no universal defnitions or nomencla-
ture at these lower levels.
Characteristics: Poxviruses (poc, pocc, pustule)
Presently, the universal taxonomy system for vi-
virions are brick shapcd and complex in structure,
ruses encompasses two orders, both of which contain
dasxo) azis u uu 0oz × 0oz × 0sz anoqe Suunseou 
animal and human pathogens, 54 families, 26 of which 
for the genus Parapoxvirus where virions are ovoid
contain animal and human pathogens, and 184 genera
and 260 × 160 nm in size). The genome consists of
(Table 2.1). Orders are only used to tie together families
 a single linear molecule of double-stranded DNA, with
that exhibit distant phylogcnetic relationships (e.g., an-
covalently closed ends, 170-250 kbp in size. Virion
cient conserved genes, sequences, or domains) and be-
formation involves coalescence of DNA within crescent-
cause all viruses did not derive from a common ancestor,
 shaped immature particles, which then mature by the
there is no intention to place all familics into orders
 addition of outer coat layers. Replication and assembly
and fil in a single viral evolutionary tree. The universa!
 occur in discrete sites within the cytoplasm (called
taxonomy system is complete at the level of families and
viroplasm or viral factories), and virions are relcased
genera; i.e., virtually all of the viruses mentioned in this
 by budding (enveloped virions) or by cell lysis (nonenve-
book have been placed in a family and genus. Subfamilics
 loped virions). Transmission is by direct contact (includ-
are used only where needed to deal with very complcx
 ing wounds, abrasions), by fomites, by acrosol, or
interrelationships among the viruses in a family. Specics
is the most important taxon in all systems to classify life
For taxa that do not contain aninal or human pathogens, see Mur-
phy et al. (1995).
forms, but it is also the most diffcult to define and
Throughout this chaprer, names in parentheses are the type species of
apply—-this is certainly the case in rcgard to thc viruses.
thr taxotl.
FamiliesofDNAViruses
25
TABLE 2.1
Universal Taxonomy System for Taxa Containing Veterinary and Zoonotic Pathogens
Type Species (host IF NOt
Family (Order)
SUBFAMILY
GENUS
YERTebratE)
DNA viruses
Double-stranded DNA viruses
Poxviridae
Chordopoxvirinae
Orthopoxvirus
Vaccinia virus
Capripoxvirus
 Sheeppox virus
Leporipoxvirus
Myxoma virus
Suipoxvirus
Swinepox virus
Mollucipoxvirus
Molluscumcontagiosumvirus
Avipoxvirus
Fowlpox virus
Yatapoxvirus
Yaba monkey tumor virus
Parapoxvirus
Orf virus
Entomopoxvirinae
Entomopoxvirus genera
[Ilnsect viruses, but likely also
A. B. C
pathogens of fishj
Asfarviridae
Asfivirus
African swine fever virus
tridoviridae
Ranavirus
Frog virus 3
Lymohocystivirus
 Flounder virus
Herpesviridae
Aiphaherpesvirinae
Simplexvirus
 Human herpesvirus 1
Varicellovirus
Human herpesvirus 3
Unnamed, Marek's
 Marek's disease virus
disease-like viruses
Unnamed, infectious 
 Gallid herpesvirus 1
laryngotracheilislike viruses
Betaherpesvirinae
Cytomegalovirus
Human herpesvirus 5
Muromegalovirus
Mouse cytomegalovirus 1
Roseolovirus
Human herpesvirus 6
Gammaherpesvirinae Lymphocryptovirus
 Human herpesvirus 4
Rhadinovirus
Ateline herpesvirus 2
 Unnamed, channel 
 Unnamed, channel catfish
Ictalurid herpesvirus 1
 catfish herpesvirus-
herpesvirus-like viruses 
lika viruses
Adenoviridae
Masiadenovirus
 Human adenovirus 2
Aviodenovirus
Fowl adenovirus 1
Proposed, Atadenovirush
Ovine adenovirus 287
 Papovaviridae
Polyomavirus
 Murine polyomavirus
Papillomavirus
 Cottontail rabbit 
 papillomavirus
Single-stranded DNA viruses
Parvoviridae
Parvovirinde
Parvovirus
 Minute virus of mice
Erythrovirus
B19 virus
Dependovirus
 Adeno-associated virus 2
Circoviridoe
Circovirus
Chicken anemia virus
26
2. Viral Taxommomy and Nomenctature
Tasle 2.1 -Continued
Type Species {host If not 
FaMily [ordEr)
SUBFAMILY
VeRteBrAte)
 DNA and RNA reverse-
 transcribing viruses
Hepadnaviridae
Orthohepadnavirus
Hepalitis B virus
Avihenodnovirus
 Duck henatitis B virus
Retroviridae
Alpharetrovirus (avian
Avian leukosis virus
type C retroviruses)
Beraretrovirus (mammalian
Mouse mammary tumor virus
type B and type D
retroviruses)
Gammaretrovirus (mammalian Murine leukemia virus
and reptilian type C retroviruses)
Deltaretrovirus (bovine leukemia Bovine leukemia virus
and human T lymphotropic
viruses]
Epsilonretrovirus (fish retrovi-
Walleye dermal sarcoma
{uses]
virus
lenfivirus
Human immunodeficiency
virus 1
Spumavirus
Human foamy virus 1
 RNA viruses
 Double-stranded RNA viruses
Reoviridoe
Orthoreovirus
Reovirus 3
Orbivirus
 Bluetongue virus 1
Rotavirus
Simian rotavirus SA11
Coltivirus
Colorado tick fever virus
Aauareovirus
Golden shiner virus
Birnaviridae
Avibirnavirus
Infectious bursal disease
virus of fowl
Aquabirnavirus
Infectious pancreatic necrosis
virus of fish
Single-stranded negative-sense
RNA viruses
 Order: Mononegavirales
Paramyxoviridae
Paramyxoviringe
Respirovirus
Human parainfluenza virus
Morbilivirus
Measles virus
Rubulavirus
Mumps virus
 Possible new genus,
Australian equine
Australian equine
morbillivirus 
morbillivirus 
Pneumovirinae
Pneumovirus
Human respiratory syncy-
tial virus
Metapneumovirus
Turkey rhinotracheitis virus
Families of DNA Viruses
27
TaBle 2.1-Continued
Type species host if not
FAMIlY iORDErl
SUBfAMILY
GENUS
VErteerate!
Order: Mononegavirales
Rhabdoviridae
Vesiculovirus
Vesicular stomatitis Indiana
virus
Lyssavirus
Rabies virus
Ephemerovirus
 Bovine ephemeral fever virus
Novirhabdovirus
Infectious hematopoietic ne.
crosis virus of fish
Order: Mononegavirales
Filoviridae
Unnamed, Marburg-like viruses  Marburg virus
Unnamed, Ebola-like viruses 
Ebola virus
 Order: Mononegavirales
Bornaviridae
Bornavirus
Borna disease virus
Orthomyxoviridae
influenzavirus A
Influenza A virus
Inflvenzavirus B
Influenza B virus
Influenzavirus C
Influenza C virus
Thogotovirus
Thogoto virus
Bunyaviridae
Bunyavirus
Bunyamwera virus
Hantavirus
Hantaan virus
Nairovirus
Nairobi sheep disease virus
Phlebovirus
Sandfly fever Sicilian virus 
Arenaviridae
Arenavirus
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus
Single-stranded positive-
 sense RNA viruses
Order: Nidovirales
Coronaviridae
Coronavirus
 Avian infectious bronchitis 
virus
Torovirus
Berne virus
Order: Nidovirales
Arteriviridae
Arterivirus
Eguine arteritis virus
Picornaviridae
Enterovirus
 Poliovirus 1
Rhinovirus
Human rhinovirus lA
Hepatovirus
Hepatitis A virus 
Cardiovirus
Encephalomyocarditis virus
Aphthovirus
Foo-and-mouth disease 
virus O
Parechovirus
Echovirus 22
28
2.
Virat Taxonomy and Nomenclature
TABLe 2. 1-Continued
TYPE SPECIES (HOST IF NOT
FAMIlY (ORDEr)
SUBFAMILY
GENUS
VERTEBRATE)
Caliciviridae
Vesivirus
Vesicular exanthema of
swine virus
lagovirus
Rabbit hemorrhogic disease
virus
Unnamed, SRSV group I and 
Norwalk virus
2 viruses
 Unnamed, classical human
Sapporo virus
enteric caliciviruses
Floating genus: Unnamed,
Hepatitis E virus
hepatitis E-like viruses
Astroviridae
Astrovirus
 Human astrovirus 1
Togaviridae
Alphavirus
Sindbis virus
Rubivirus
 Rubella virus
Flaviviridae
Flavivirus
Yellow fever virus
Pestivirus
 Bovine viral diarrhea virus
Hepacivirus
Hepatitis C virus
Subviral ogents: Viroids,
suapj suod pu saas
of spongiform encephalopa-
(hies)
Satelites
Deltavirus
Hepatitis delta virus
Prions
Scrapie prion
The lerms used reflect he system of the Internationol Commitee on Taxonomy ofViruses as of April 1998
ThisprpsedgenushadtbeenapprvedbyhentenationalCommiteeonTaxonmyofVirusesaofhdatefpublitionthisbok.
fowlpox virus, canarypox virus, and pigeonpox virus.
narrow host ranges, although thcre are some notable
Genus Parapoxvirus: orf virus (contagious pustular
exceptions, including vaccinia virus and some of the
 dermatitis virus), pseudocowpox virus, bovinc papular
avian poxviruscs.
stomatitis virus, and parapoxvirus of red dcer. Subfam-
Pathogens: Genus Orthopoxvirus: variola (small-
ily: Entomopoxvirinae: cntomopox-like virions, pre-
 pox) virus, vaccinia virus (seen as rabbitpox in colo-
viously only associated with insects, have been found
nized rabbits and as buffalopox in buffaloes and cartle),
in lesions in commercially raised fish.
cowpox virus, ectromelia (mousepox) virus, rabbitpox
virus, monkeypox virus, camelpox virus, and
Irac-
coonpox virus. Genus Capripoxvirus: sheeppox virus,
Family: Asfarviridae
goatpox virus, and lumpy skin disease virus (cattle).
Genus Leporipoxvirus: myxoma virus (rabbits), rabbit
Genus: Asfivirus (African swine fever virus)
fibroma virus (Shope f
fbroma virus), hare fbroma
virus, and squirrcl fbroma virus. Genus Suipoxvirus:
Characteristics: (the family name Asfarviridae is
swincpox virus. Genus Molluscipoxvirus: molluscum
derived from African Swine Fever And Related viruses;
contagiosum virus (humans). Genus Yatapoxvirus: ta-
the genus name Asfivirus is derived from African Swine
napox virus and yabapox virus (monkeys). Genus
 Fevcr) virions are enveloped, 175-215 nm in size and
Avipoxvirus: many specifc bird poxviruses, including 
contain a complex icosahedral capsid composed of
famities of DNA Viruses
29
TABLE 2.2
Viral Properties That Distinguish and Define Virus Families
VIRION
NUCLEOCAPSID
GENOME
DIAMETER
STRUCtURAL
SizE
FAMILY
(nm)
ENVELOPE
 SYMMETRY
UNITs
NATURE
[kb, kbp)
Poxviridae
250 × 200
Complex
NA
ds, linear
170-250
x200
Asfarviridae
175-215
+
lcosahedral 
>1892
ds, linear
170-190
iridoviridae
130-300
+
lcosahedral 1892
ds, linear
150-350
Herpesviridoe
150
+
lcosahedral 162
ds, linear
125-235
Adenoviridae
80-100
lcosahedral：
252
ds, linear
36-44
Papovaviridae
45-55
lcosahedral  72
ds, circular
5-8
Parvoviridae
25
lcosahedral  32
5s, [-], linear
5
Circoviridae
17-22
lcosahedral 32?
ss,[+), circular
1.7-2.3
Hepadnaviridae
42
lcosahedral 
3
ds, circular
3.2
Retroviridoe
80-100
lcosahedral 
？
ss, [+), linear
7-11
×
Reoviridae
60-80
lcosahedral  92
ds, linear, 10, 11, or 
16-27
12segments
Birnaviridae
60
lcosahedral
92
ds, linear, 2
7
segments
Paramyxoviridae
150-300
+
Helical 
NA
ss, (-), linear
15-16
Rhabdoviridae
180 × 75
+
Helical
NA
ss, [-], linear
13-16
Filoviridoe
790-970 × 80
+
Helical
NA
ss, (-), linear
19.1
Bornaviridae
50-60
+
lcosahedral
ss, [-], linecr
8.9
Orthomyxoviridae 80-120
+
Helical
NA
ss, (-], linear, 6, 7, or
10-13.6
8 segments
Bunyaviridae
80-120
+
Helical
NA
ss, [-], linear, 3
11-21
segments
Arenaviridae
100-300
+
Helical
NA
5s, (--), linear, 2
10-14
segments
Coronaviridae
80-220
+
Helical
NA
ss, [+1],linear
20-32
Arteriviridoe
50-70
+
lcosahedral
？
ss, [+], linear
15
Picornaviridae
28-30
lcosahedral 60
ss, [+), linear
7.2-8.4
Caliciviridae
30-38
lcosahedral  32
5s, [+], linear
7.4-7.7
Astroviridae
28-30
lcosahedral
32
ss, (+), linear
7.2-7.9
Togaviridde
70
+
lcosahedral 
ss, [+], linear
9.7-11.8
Flaviviridae
45-60
+
lcosahedral 
ss, [+), linear
9.5-12.5
Deltavirus
36-43
+
？
ss,{-},circular
1.7
Prions fagents of
Prolein
NA
NA
NA
NA
M,33-35,000
spongiform
(Prps)
encephalopathies)
30
2.
Virat Taxononry and Nonenclature
Figure 2.1.
DNA VIRUSES
Poxviridae
Asfarviridae
Herpesviridae
Adenoviridae
®
REVERSE-TRANSCRIBING
VIRUSES
PapovaviridaeParvoviridae
Circoviridae
Hepadnaviridae
Retroviridae
RNAVIRUSES
ReoviridaeBirnaviridaeParamyxoviridae
Rhabdoviridae Bornaviridae
Filoviridae
OrthomyxoviridaeBunyaviridaeArenaviridae
（Coronavirus)
(Torovirus)
Coronaviridae
®
?
Arteriviridae Picornaviridae Caliciviridae Astroviridae Togaviridae Flaviviridae
Diagram illstrting the shapes and sizes of viruses of fmiles that inlude animal, zoonotic, and human pathogens. The virions ore drwn t
scale, but ortistic license has been used in representing their structure, In some,the cross-sectional struchure of capsid and envelope is shown,
with d representation of the genome; with the very small virions, only their size and symmetry are depicted.
Families of DNA Viruses
31
≥1892 capsomers and 180 nm in diameter. The genome
Genus: Muromegalovirus (mouse cytomegalo-
consists of a single molecule of linear double-stranded
virus 1)
DNA, 170-190 kbp in size. The DNA has covalently
Genus: Roseolovirus (human herpesvirus 6)
closcd ends and encodes up to 200 proteins. Replication
Subfamily: Gammaherpesvirinae
occurs primarily in the cytoplasm, although the nucleus
Genus: Lymphocryptovirus (human herpesvi-
is needed for viral DNA synthesis, and virions are re-
rus 4—Epstein-Barr virus)
leascd by budding or cell lysis. Virus strains differ in
Genus: Rhadinovirus (ateline herpesvirus 2)
virulence; some strains cause severe discase and near
Subfamily: Unnamed (channel catfish herpesvirus-
100% mortality, whercas others cause transient disease
like viruses) (ictalurid herpesvirus 1)
or even silcnt infection. The virus is transmitted by con-
 Genus: Unnamed (channel catfish-like herpesvi-
tact and also by soft ticks (genus Ornithodoros).
ruses) (ictalurid herpesvirus 1)
 Pathogens: African swine fever virus is the only
member of this taxon; it is an important pathogen of
Characteristics: Herpesvirus (herpes, creeping) vi-
domestic swine, warthogs, bushpigs, and giant forest 
rions are enveloped, about 150 nm in diameter, and
hogs.
contain an icosahedral nucleocapsid about 100 nm in
diameter. The genome consists of a single linear molecule
of double-stranded DNA, 125-235 kbp in size. Viruses
Family: Iridoviridae
replicate in the nucleus and mature by budding through
the nuclear membrane, thus acquiring an envelope. A
Genus: Ranavirus (frog virus 3)
feature of all herpesvirus infections is lifelong persistent
Genus: Lymphocystivirus (flounder virus)
infection, usually in latent form. Excretion, especially in
Genus: Unnamed (goldfish virus 1)
saliva or genital secretions, may occur continuously or
intermittently and with or without episodes of recurrent
Characteristics: Iridovirus (irido iridesccnt) viri-
clinical signs. Some member viruses of the subfamily
Ons are enveloped, up to 300 nm in diamcter, and contain 
Gammaherpesvirinae cause tumors (e.g., herpesvirus
a complex icosahedral capsid, 130-170 nm in diameter.
ateles and herpesvirus saimiri in monkeys, and Epstein-
Thc gcnome consists of a single linear molccule of doul-
 Barr virus in humans, which is associated with nasopha-
ble-stranded DNA, 150-350 kbp in size (mosquito iri-
ryngeal cancer and Burkit's lymphoma).
descent virus has been reported to have a genome 440
Pathogens: Subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae, genus
kbp in size, the largest genome of any virus). The host
Simplexvirus: human herpesviruses 1 and 2 (herpes sim
cell nucleus appears to be required for transcription and
plex viruses 1 and 2), bovine herpesvirus 2 (bovine mam-
replication of DNA, but some DNA synthesis and assem-
illitis virus), B-virus (macaques). Genus Varicellovirus:
bly of virions take place in the cytoplasm.
human herpesvirus 3 (varicella-zoster virus), bovine her-
Pathogens: Genus Ranavirus: frog viruses 1-3,
pesvirus  1 (infectious  bovine rhinotracheitis virus),
5-24, L2, L4, L5, and several other viruses that affect
equine herpesvirus 1 (equine abortion virus), equine her-
amphibians. Genus Lympbocystivirus: flounder virus
pesvirus 4 (equine rhinopneumonitis virus), and pseudo-
and many related viruses. Genus, unnamed: goldfish vi-
rabies virus. Genus, unnamed (Marek's disease-like
ruses 1-2.
viruses): Marek's disease virus. Genus, unnamed (infec-
tious laryngotracheitis-like viruses): gallid herpesvirus 1
(infectious laryngotracheitis virus) of fowl. Several ani-
Family: Herpesviridae
mal pathogens have been placed in this subfamily, but
 not in genera: equine herpesvirus 3 (coital exanthema
Subfamily: Alpbaberpesvirinae
virus), feline herpesvirus 1 (feline rhinotracheitis virus),
Genus: Simplexvirus (human
herpesvirus
and canine herpesvirus. Subfamily Betaherpesvirinae,ge-
1—-herpes simplex virus 1)
nus Cytomegalovirus: human herpesvirus 5 (human cy-
Genus:Varicellovirus (human
herpesvirus
tomegalovirus). Genus Muromegalovirus: mouse cyto-
3—varicclla-zoster virus)
 megalovirus 1. Genus Roseolovirus: human herpesvirus
Genus: Unnamed (Marek's discase-like viruses)
 6. Several cytomegaloviruses of animals, including por-
(Marek's disease virus)
cine cytomegalovirus, have been placed in this subfamily
Genus: Unnamed (infectious laryngotracheitis-
but not in genera, Subfamily Garmmaherpesvirinae, ge-
like viruses) (infectious laryngotrachcitis virus)
nus Lymphocryptovirus: human herpesvirus 4 (Epstein-
Subfamily: Betaberpesvirinae
Barr virus). Genus: Rbadinovirus: ateline herpesvirus 2,
Genus: Cytomegalovirus (human herpesvirus
equine herpesvirus 2, and equine herpesvirus 5. Several
5—-human cytomegalovirus)
animal pathogens have been placed in this subfamily
32
2.Virat Taxonony and Nomencfathre
but not in genera. Subfamily, unnamed (channel catfish 
with icosahedral symmetry. Virions are 45 (genus Poly.
herpesvirus-like viruses): ictalurid herpesvirus 1 (channel
 omavirus) and 55 (genus Papillomavirus) nm in diame-
catfish herpesvirus). Some important animal herpesvirus
ter. The genome consisrs of a single molecule of circular
havc not been classified beyond the family level.
double-stranded DNA, 5 (genus Polyomavirus) and 8
kbp (genus Papillomavirus) in size. Genomic DNA is
infectious. Infection often is persistcnt, with the viral
Family: Adenoviridae
genome carried in an episomal form or integrated into
the host cell DNA. Individual polyoma viruses and papil.
Genus: Mastadenovirus (human adenovirus 2)
lomaviruses have narrow host ranges.
Genus: Aviadenovirus (fowl adenovirus 1)
 Pathogens: Genus Polyomavirus: mouse polyoma
Genus (proposed): Atadenovirus (ovinc adeno-
virus, SV40 virus (both of which have been useful models
virus 287)3
for the study of viral oncogenesis), and budgerigar fledg-
ling diseasc virus (thc only papovavirus that causes an
Characteristics: Adenovirus (adenos, gland) viri-
acutc disease). Genus: Papillomavirus: human papillo-
ons are noncnveloped, hexagonal in outline, with icosa-
maviruses (more than 70 typcs; cause of warts; particular
hedral symmctry, 80-100 nm in diameter. The genome
types are associatcd with cancer of the cervix, arnus, and
consists of a single linear molecule of double-stranded
 pharynx), bovine papilomaviruses (cause of cutaneous
DNA, 36 to 44 kbp in size. Viruses replicate in the
papillomas in cattle), canine oral papillomatosis virus,
nucleus and their replication is facilitated by extensive
and rabbit papillomavirus. Papillomaviruses cause le-
modulation of the host imrmune response. The viruses
sions in many other species of mammals and birds.
have narrow host ranges. Many adenoviruses cause per-
 sistent infection and may be reactivated by immunosup-
pression—some viruscs, such as equine adenovirus,
Family: Parvoviridae
cause severe disease in immunocompromised hosts.
Some of the adenoviruses of humans, carte, and chickens
Subfamily: Parvovirinae
cause tumors when inoculated into newborn hamstcrs
Genus: Parvovirus (minute virus of mice)
and have been used in expcrimental studies on oncogene-
Genus: Erythrovirus (human parvovirus B19)
sis, but none causes tumors in its natural host.
Genus: Dependovirus (adeno-associated
Pathogens: Genus Mastadenovirus: human adeno-
virus 2)
viruses 1-49, equine adenoviruses 1 and 2, canine adcno-
virus 1 (infcctious canine hepatitis virus), canine adcno-
Characteristics: Parvovirus (parvus, small) virions
virus 2 (canine adenoviruses have also caused epidemics
 are nonenveloped, spherical in outline, with icosahedral
in foxes, bears, wolves, coyotes, and skunks), bovine
symmetry, 25 nm in diameter. The genome consists of
adenoviruses 1, 2, 3, and 10, and ovine adenovirus 3.
a single molecule of linear single-stranded DNA, 5 kb
Genus Aviadenovirus: hemorrhagic enteritis virus (fowl,
in size. Some parvoviruses encapsidate only negative-
turkeys), marble spleen discasc virus (fowl), unnamed
 sense DNA strand (e.g., minutc virus of micc), whereas
viruses that cause pncumonitis and edema. Genus (pro-
others encapsidate different proportions of either strand
posed) Atadenovirus: ovine adenovirus 287, bovine ad-
(e.g., bovine parvovirus). DNA replication is complex,
enoviruscs 4, S, 6, 7, and 8, and egg drop syndrome virus.
involving the formation of hairpin structures, extension
 to form a complete double-stranded DNA intrermediate,
and cndonuclease cleavage of this intermediate. Replica-
Family: Papovaviridae
tion and assembly take place in the nucleus; replication
requires host cell functions of the S phase of the cell
Gerus: Polyomavirus (murinc polyomavirus)
division cycle, indicating a viral requirement for host
Genus: Papillomavirus (cottontail rabbit papil-
 DNA replication machinery. Alternatively, some parvo-
lomavirus)
viruses require coinfection with other viruses, such as
Characteristics: Papovavirus [sigla, from papil.
adenoviruscs or herpcsviruscs, for their replication. The
loma, polyoma, vacuolating agent (early nane for
viruses have narrow host ranges. Virions are very stable
SV40)] virions are nonenvcloped, spherical in outline,
in the environment.
Pathogens: Genus Parvovirus: fcline panleuko-
pcnia virus, canine parvovirus 1, 2a, and 2b, mink enteri-
This proposed genus had not been approved by the International Com
tis virus, Aleutian mink disease virus, bovine parvovirus,
mittee on Taxomomy of Viruses as of the datc of publication of this
book.
goose parvovirus, porcinc parvovirus, murine parvovi-
Famities of Rererse-Trunserilbing Viruses
33
rus, rat parvoviruses, and rabbir parvovirus. Genus
DNA, consisting of a long (3.2 kb) and a short (1.7-2.8
Erytbrovirus: human parvovirus B19 (the cause of an
kb) strand. Replication involves an RNA intermediate
exanthem in children and hemolytic crisis in people with and requires a virus-coded reverse transcriptase. Hepad-
sickle celldisease). Genus Dependovirus: member viruses t
 naviruses replicate in the nucleus of hepatocytes and
are defective, requiring an adenovirus for replication;
 cause hepatitis, which may progress fo chronic disease,
they occur in birds, cattle, horses, dogs, and hunans 
 cirrhosis, and primary hepatocellular carcinoma.
and may confound diagnostic test interpretation, but are
Pathogens: Genus Orthohepadnavirus: hepatitis B
 not known to cause disease.
virus (humans), woodchuck hcpatitis B virus, and
ground squirrel hepatitis B virus. Genus Avibepadnavi-
rus: duck hepatitis B virus, and heron hepatitis B virus
Family: Circoviridae
(important causes of avian disease in some regions of
the world).
Genus: Circovirus (chicken anemia virus)
Characteristics: Circovirus (circo, circular) virions
Family: Retroviridae
are nonenveloped, spherical in outline, with icosahedral
symmctry, 17-22 nm in diameter. The genomc consists
Genus: Alpharetrovirus (avian typc C retrovi-
of a single molecule circular (covalently closed ends)
ruscs) (avian lcukosis virus)
single-stranded DNA, 1.7-2.3 kb in size. Some viruses
Genus: Betaretrovirus (mammalian type B and
employ an ambisense transcription strategy, encoding
lou Ae ssno) (sasnoni I ad
some genes in the viral sense DNA strand and other
virus)
 genes in the complemcntary sense strand; other viruses
Genus: Gammaretrovirus (mammalian and rep-
encode all genes in the viral sense DNA. Replication
tilian type C retroviruses) (murinc leukemia
occurs in the nucleus of cells in the S phase of the cell
virus)
cycle. The viruses have narrow host ranges.
Genus: Deltaretrovirus (bovine leukemia and
 Pathogens: Gcnus Circovirus: chicken anemia vi-
human T-lymphotropic viruses) (bovine leuke-
rus (the cause of transient anemia and immunosuppres-
mia virus)
sion in baby chicks), psittacine beak and feather disease
Genus: Epsilonretrovirus (fish retroviruses)
virus (the cause of chronic and ultimately fatal disease
(walleye epidermal sarcoma virus)
in psittacine birds), porcine circovirus (first isolated from
Genus: Lentivirus (human immunodeficiency
culrures of pig kidncy cells and later from a high propor-
virus 1)
tion of swine in Gcrmany; now being considered as the
Genus: Spumavirus (human foamy virus 1)
cause of postweaning multisystemic wasting syndrome
in swine).
Characteristics: Retrovirus (retro, backwards) viri-
ons are enveloped, 80-100 nm in diametcr, with an
icosahedral capsid, about 60 nm in diameter. The ge-
Families of Reverse-
nome is diploid, consisting of two molecules of lincar
positive-sense single-stranded RNA, arranged as an in-
Transcribing Viruses
verted dimer; each monoiner is 7-11 kb in size. Retrovi-
rus replication is unique: replication starts with reverse
Family: Hepadnaviridae
transcription of virion RNA into double-stranded DNA
by the enzyme reverse transcriptase. These linear double-
Genus: Ortbobepadnavirus (hepatitis B virus)
stranded DNA intermediates are circularized, integrated
Genus: Avibepadnavirus (duck hepatitis
into the host chromosomal DNA, and then used for
B virus)
transcription, including transcription of full-tength geno-
mic RNA and various mRNAs. Virion assembly occurs
Characteristics: Hepadnavirus (bepar, liver; dna,
via budding from plasma membranes. The retroviruses
sigla for DNA) virions are spherical, 42 nm in diameter,
are disributed widely in vertcbrates. Endogenous provi-
and consist of a 27-nm icosahedral core within a closely
ruses (products of ancient retrovirus infections of germ
 adherent outer capsid that contains cellular lipids, glyco-
line cells, inherited as Mendelian genes) also occur widely
proteins, and a virus-specific surface antigen (HBsAg).
 in vcrtebrates.
The genomc consists of a singlc molecule of circular
 Pathogens: Retroviruses are associated with many
partially double-stranded, partially single-stranded d
 different diseases, including leukemias, lymphomas, sar-
34
2.Viral laxonomy cud Nomenclature
comas, carcinomas, immunodefciencies, autoimmune
in each genus. The genome is linear doubie-stranded
diseases, lower motor neuron diseases, and several acute
 RNA, divided into 10 (genera Orthoreovirus and Or-
diseases involving tissue damage. Genus Alpbaretrovi-
bivirus), 11 (genus Rotavirus), or 12 (genus Coltivirus)
rus: Rous sarcoma virus, avian carcinoma viruses, avian  segments. The overall genome size is 23 (genus Ortho-
sarcoma viruses, avian leukosis viruses, avian myelo-
reovirus), 18 (genus Orbivirus), 16-21 (genus Rotavi-
blastosis viruscs, and duck spleen necrosis virus. Genus 
rus), or 27 (genus Coltivirus) kbp. Replication and
Betaretrovirus: mousc mammary tumor virus, Mason--
asscmbly take place in the cytoplasm, oftcn in associa-
 Pfzer monkey virus, simian type D virus 1, Langur type
 tion with granular or fbrillar inclusion bodies. Rotavi-
 D virus, squirrel monkey type D virus, and ovine pulmo--
 ruses and reoviruses are spread by direct contact and
nary adenomatosis virus (Jaagsiekte virus). Genus Gam-
 indirectly by fomites (fccal-oral transmission); orbivi-
maretrovirus: many murine leukemia viruses (e.g., Abel-
 ruses and coltiviruses are transmitted via arthropods
son, Friend, Moloney murine leukemia viruses), many
(e.g, culicoides, mosquitoes, or ticks).
murine sarcoma viruses (e.g., Harvey, Kirsten, Moloney
Pathogens: Genus Orthoreovirus: reoviruses 1,
murine sarcoma viruses), feline leukemia virus, feline
 2, and 3 (humans, rmice, and other species; these viruses 
sarcoma viruses, gibbon ape leukemia virus, woolly
 are isolated often but a causal relationship with disease
monkey sarcoma virus, porcine type C virus, guinca pig
 is rare), avian reoviruses. Genus Orbivirus: bluetongue
type C virus, viper type C virus, and avian reticuloendo-
viruses 1-25, African horsc sickness viruses 1-9, epiz0-
theliosis viruses. Genus Deltaretrovirus: bovine leukemia
 otic hemorrhagic disease of deer viruses 1-7, Ibaraki
virus, human T-lymphotropic viruses 1 and 2, and simian
virus, equine encephalosis viruses 1-2, and other viruses
T lymphotropic viruses. Genus Epsilonretrovirus: wall-
 affecting various animal species. Genus Coltivirus: Col-
eye dermal sarcoma virus, walleye epidermal hyperplasia
orado tick fever virus and Eyach virus. Genus Rotavi-
viruses 1 and 2, and similar viruses of fish. Genus Lentivi-
rus: group A rotaviruses (important pathogens of hu-
rus: human immunodefciency virus 1 and 2, simian im-
mans and other animals), group B rotaviruses
munodefciency viruses (African green monkey, sooty
(important pathogens of humans), group C rotaviruses
mangabey, stump-tailed macaque, pig-tailed macaque,
(porcine pathogens), group D rotaviruses (fowl patho-
Rhesus, chimpanzee, and mandrill viruses), equine infec-
 gens), group E rotaviruses (porcine pathogcns), and
tious anemia virus, maedivisna virus, caprine arthritis-.
 group F rotaviruses (avian pathogens). Gcnus Aquareo-
 encephalitis virus, feline immunodeficiency virus, and
virus: golden shiner virus, several salinon reoviruses,
bovine immunodeficiency virus. Genus Spumavirus: bo-
grass carp reovirus, chub reovirus, and channel cat-
vine, feline, simian, and human foamy viruses (which
fish rcovirus.
arc a problem when they contaminatc culturcd cclls but
art not known to cause disease).
Family: Birnaviridae
Families of RNA Viruses
Genus: Avibirnavirus (infectious bursal dis-
ease virus)
Family: Reoviridae
Genus: Aquabirnavirus (infectious pancreatic
necrosis virus)
Genus: Orthoreovirus (reovirus 3)
Genus: Orbivirus (bluetongue virus 1)
Characteristics: Birnavirus (sigla: bi-rna, two seg-
Gcnus: Rotavirus (simian rotavirus SA11)
ments of RNA) virions are nonenveloped, hexagonal in
Genus: Coltivirus (Colorado tick fever virus)
 Outline, with icosahedral symmetry, 60 nm in diameter.
Genus: Aquareovirus (goldcn shiner virus
The genome consists of trwo molecules of linear double-
of fish)
stranded RNA, 7 kbp in overall size. Virions assemble
and accumulate in the cytoplasm and are released by
Characteristics: Reovirus (sigla, respiratory en-
cell lysis. Avian viruscs are transmitted both vertically
tcric orphan virust) virions are noncnvelopcd, appcar
and horizontally; geographic distribution is worldwide.
nearly spherical in outline, and have a diameter of
Natural hosts include chickens, ducks, furkeys, and other
60--80 nm. Virions have two or three shells (cach with
domestic fowl, salmonid fish, other fresh-water and ma-
icosahedral symmetry), differing in morphologic details
 rine fishes, and bivalvc mollusks.
 Pathogens: Genus Avibirnavirus: infectious bursal
diseasc virus of chickens, ducks, and turkeys. Genus
The frst reoviruses were found in both the respiratory and the cnterie
tract of humans and animals, but were not associated with any dis-
Aquabirnavirus: infectious pancreatic necrosis virus of
case--"viruses in search of a disease" were called orphans.
salmonid fish.
Fannilies of RNA Viruses
35
(Order: Mononegavirales)
[Order: Mononegavirales)
Family: Paramyxoviridae
Family: Rhabdoviridae
Subfamily: Paramyxovirinae
Genus: Vesiculovirus (vesicular stomatitis Indi-
 Genus: Respirovirus (human parainfluenza vi-
ana virus)
rus 1)
Genus: Lyssavirus (rabies virus)
Genus: Morbillivirus (measles virus)
Genus: Ephemerovirus (bovine ephemeral fe-
Genus: Rubulavirus (mumps virus)
ver virus)
 Possible new genus: Unnamed (Australian
Genus: Novirhabdovirus (infectious hemato-
equine morbillivirus)
 poietic necrosis virus)
Subfamily: Pneumovirinae
Genus: Pneumovirus (human rcspiratory syncy-
Characteristics: Rhabdovirus (rhabdos, rod) viri-
tial virus)
ons are bullet shaped, about 180 × 75 nm, and consist of
Genus: Metapneumovirus (turkey rhinotra-
an envelope, covered with large peplomers surrounding
cheitis virus)
a helically coiled cylindrical nucleocapsid. The genome
consists of a single molecule of linear negative-sense,
Characteristics: Paramyxovirus [para, similar to
single-stranded RNA, 13-16 kb in size. Replication
(ortho)myxoviruses; myxa, mucus] virions are pleo-
takes place in the cytoplasm, and assembly occurs via
morphic in shape (spherical as well as flamentous
budding on plasma (vesiculoviruses) or intracytoplasrmic
forms occur), 150-300 nm in diameter. Virions are
(lyssaviruses) membranes, Rabies virus produces promi-
enveloped, covered with large peplomers, and contain
 nent cytoplasmic inclusion bodies (Negri bodies) in in-
a herringbone-shaped helically symmetrical nucleo-
 fected cels. The viruses have broad host ranges; many
capsid. The genome consists of a single linear molecule
replicate in and are transmitted by arthropods, Rabies
 of negative-sense, single-stranded RNA, 15-16 kb in
virus is transmitted by bite.
size. The envelope contains two glycoproteins, a hemag-
Pathogens: Genus Vesiculovirus: vesicular stoma
glutinin (in most species with neuraminidase activity
titis-New Jersey virus, vesicular stomatitis-Indiana virus
also) and a fusion protein. Replication takes place in
(VSV-1 type 1), Cocal virus (VSV-I type 2), Alagoas virus
the cytoplasm, and assembly occurs via budding on
(VSV-I type 3), Maraba virus (VSV-I type 4), Chandipura
 plasma membranes. The viruses have narrow host
virus, Piry virus, Isfahan virus, pike fry rhabdovirus
ranges and have only been identifed in vertebrates,
(grass carp rhabdovirus), spring viremia of carp virus.
primarily in mammals and birds. Transmission is
Genus Lyssavirus: rabies virus, Mokola virus, Duven-
 mainly by aerosol and droplers. Only morbilliviruses
hage virus, Lagos bat virus, European bat viruses 1 and 2,
cause persistent infections, some with long-term clini-
Australian bat lyssavirus. Genus Ephemerovirus: bovine
cal consequences.
ephermeral fever virus, Adelaide River virus, and Berri-
Pathogens: Subfamily, Paramyxovirinae, genus
mah virus. Genus Novirhabdovirus: infectious hemato-
 Respirovirus: human parainfluenza viruses 1 and 3, bo-
poietic necrosis virus of fish. Many animal rhabdoviruses
vine parainfluenza virus 3, mouse parainfluenza virus 1
have not been classifed beyond the family level [e.g.,
(Sendai virus), and simian parainfluenza virus 10. Genus
viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus of salmon (Egtved
-nujeied ueunq (sueunu) snia sdunu snannqny
virus)].
 tnza viruses 2, 4a, and 4b, Newcastle disease virus (avian
 paramyxovirus 1), avian paramyxovirus 2 (Yucaipa vi-
rus), avian paramyxoviruses 3, 4, 5 (Kunitachi virus),
(Order: Mononegavirales)
 6, 7, 8, 9, porcine paramyxovirus (la-Piedad-Michoacan-
Family: Filoviridae
 Mexico virus), and simian parainfluenza viruses 5 and
 41. Genus Morbilivirus: measles virus, canine distemper
Genus: Unnamed (Marburg-like viruses) (Mar-
virus, rinderpest virus, peste-des-petits-ruminants virus
burg virus)
(goats and sheep), marine mammal morbilliviruses [por-
Genus: Unnamed (Ebola-like viruses)
 poise distemper virus, phocine (seal) distemper virus,
(Ebola virus)
dolphin distemper virus, etc.]. Possible new genus: Aus-
tralian equine morbillivirus. Subfamily Pneumovirinae,
Characteristics: Filovirus ( filo, thread-like) virions
genus Pneumovirus: human respiratory syncytial virus,
 arc enveloped, pleomorphic, and appear as long ila-
bovine respiratory syncytial virus, and pneumonia virus
 mentous forms, sometimes with extensive branching,
of mice. Genus Metapneumovirus: turkey rhinotra-
and sometimes as "U"-shaped, "6"-shaped o1 circular
cheitis virus.
forms. Virions have a uniform diameter of 80 nm and
36
Viral Taxonomy and Nomenclature
vary greatly in length (Marburg virus unit length is
Genus: Influenzavirus C (influenza virus
about 800 nm, Ebola virus 1000 nm; multimeric long
C/California/78)
forrms are up to 14,000 nm in length). Virions consist
Genus: Thogotovirus (Thogoto virus)
of an envelope with large peplomers surrounding a
rather rigid helical nucleocapsid. The genome consists
Characteristics: Orthomyxovirus (orthos, straight;
 of a single molecule of linear negative-sense, single-
 myxa, mucus) virions are pleomorphic (often spherical
stranded RNA, 19.1 kb in size. Replication takes place
but filamentous forms also occur), 80-120 nm in diame-
in the cytoplasm, and assembly involves envelopment 
 ter. Virions consist of an cnvelope with large peplomers
via budding of preformed nucleocapsids. Nucleocapsids
(that have either hemagglutinin or neuraminidase activi-
accumulate in the cytoplasm, forming prominent inclu-
ties) surrounding helically symmetrical nucleocapsid seg-
sion bodics. The natural history of thc viruscs remains
ments of different sizes. The genome consists of cight
unknown. The viruses are Biosafety Level 4 pathogens;
(influenza viruses A and B) or seven (influenza virus C)
they must be handled in the laboratory under maximum
or six (Thogoto virus) molecules of linear negative-sense,
containmcnt conditions.
single-stranded RNA, 10-13.6 kb in overall size. Repli-
Pathogens: Genus, unnamed (Marburg-like vi-
cation takes place in the nucleus and cytoplasm, and
ruses): Marburg virus, Genus, unnamed (Ebola-like vi-
assembly occurs via budding from plasma membranes.
ruses): Ebola virus (subtypes Zaire, Sudan, Reston,
Particular influenza A viruses infect humans and other
Cote d'lvoire).
mammalian and avian species; interspecies transmission
coupled with mutation and genetic recombination ac-
counts for the emergence of new human pandemic
(Order: Mononegavirales)
strains. Transmission is by aerosol and droplets and is
Family: Bornaviridae
water-borne among ducks. Thogoto and Dhori viruses
are transmitted by ticks and replicate in both ticks
Genus: Bornavirus (Borna disease virus)
and mammals.
Pathogens: Genus Infuenzavirus A: influenza A
Characteristics: Borna disease virus virions are 
viruses are pathogcns of birds, horses, swine, mink, seals,
spherical, envclopcd, about 90 nm in diameter, and con-
and whales, as well as humans. Gcnus Infuenzavirus B:
tain a core that is about 50-60 nm in diameter. The 
influenza B viruscs arc human pathogens only. Genus
 genome consists of a single molecule of linear negative-
Influenzavirus C: influcnza C viruscs infect humans and
scnsc, single-stranded RNA, 8.9 kb in size. Most unusu-
swine, but rarely cause scrious disease.
ally, the genome is transcribed in the host cell nucleus
into subgenomic mRNAs and produces high levels of
polycistronic mRNAs. The genome contains three tran-
Family: Bunyaviridae
scriptional units that code for five protcins through poly-
merast rcadthrough and posttranscriptional  RNA
Genus: Bunyavirus (Bunyamwera virus)
splicing.
Genus: Hantavirus (Hantaan virus)
Pathogens: Borna disease virus is the only membel
Genus: Nairovirus (Nairobi sheep disease virus)
of this taxon; it is the cause of meningoencephalomyelitis
Genus: Phlebovirus (sandfly fever Sicilian virus)
in a wide variery of vertebrates, including horses, sheep.
cats, and birds, and has been transmitted expcrimentally
Characteristics: Bunyavirus (Bunyamwera, a lo-
to rodents, rabbits, and primates (macaques). Serologic
cality in Uganda) virions are spherical or pleomorphic,
and molecular evidence (polymerase chain reaction, us-
80-120 nm in diameter, and consist of an envelope
ing Borna virus primers, on human brain specimens)
with fine peplomers within which there are three circu-
suggests that the virus may infect humans and cause
lar helical nucleocapsid segments. The genome consists
neuropsychiatric disorders.
Of three molecules (L, M, S) of "circular"’ negative-
or ambisense, single-stranded RNA, 11-21 kb in over-
all size. Circular nucleocapsids arc formcd by base-
Family: Orthomyxoviridae
paired terminal nucleotidcs, not by covalent bonds.
Genome segments are negative sense except for the S
Genus: Influenzavirus A (influenza virus A/Pr8/
 RNA segment of phleboviruses, which encodes proteins
8/34 H1N1)
in both viral and complementary strands. Viruses repli-
Genus: Influenzavirus B (influenza virus
cate in the cytoplasm and bud from Golgi membranes.
B/Lce/40)
Because of their segmented genomes, closely related
Farnilies of RNA Viruses
37
viruses can undergo genetic reassorrment. All members pathogens, Lassa, Machupo, Junin, and Guanarito vi-
of the family except the hantaviruses are arboviruses 
 ruses, are Biosafety Level4 pathogcns and can be worked
(various viruscs are transmitted by mosquitoes, ticks,
with in the laboratory only under maximum contain-
phlebotomine flies, and other arthropods) and have
ment conditions.
wild animal reservoir hosts; some are transmitted trans-
Pathogens:
Genus Arenavirus:Lymphocytic
 Ovarially in mosquitoes. Hantaviruses are transmitted
choriomeningitis (LCM) virus (rcservoir is Mus muscu-
by persistently infected rodents via aerosolization of
 lus, globally; a human pathogen and an important labo-
urine, saliva, and feces. Some viruses have narrow host
ratory model for the study of persistent infection and
ranges, whereas others have wide host ranges. A few
immunopathology), Lassa virus (Lassa fever, humans),
of the viruses are Biosafety Lcvel 4 pathogens; thcy
Machupo virus (Bolivian hcmorrhagic fever, humans),
x n    p aq a
 Junin virus (Argentine hemorrhagic fever, humans), and
containment conditions (e.g., Rift Valley fever virus,
Guanarito
virus (Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever,
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fcver virus).
humans).
Pathogens: Genus Bunyavirus: Bunyamwera virus,
 Bwamba virus, Oriboca virus, Oropouche virus, Guama
virus, LaCrosse virus, Jamestown Canyon virus, Califor-
[Order: Nidovirales]
nia encephalitis virus, snowshoe hare virus, Tahyna virus
Family: Coronaviridae
(all human pathogens), Akabane virus, and Aino virus
(both livestock pathogens). Genus Phlebovirus: Rift Val-
Genus: Coronavirus (avian infectious bronchi-
ley fever virus (livestock and human pathogen); sandfy
tis virus)
fever Naples virus and sandfly fever Sicilian virus (both
Genus: Torovirus (Berne virus)
human pathogens). Genus Nairovirus: Nairobi sheep
disease virus and Crimcan-Congo hemorrhagic fever vi-
Characteristics: Coronavirus (corona, crown) viri-
rus (sheep, humans). Genus Hantavirus: Hantaan virus,
 ons are enveloped, 80-220 nm in size, and roughly
Seoul virus, Dobrava virus (all causing hemorrhagic fever
sphcrical in shape (coronaviruses) or 120-140 nm in
with renal syndrome), Sin Nombre virus and several 
 size and disk, kidney, or rod shapcd (toroviruses). Viri-
newly identified rclated viruses (causing acute respira-
 ons havc large club-shaped peplomers enclosing what
tory distress syndrome in humans), and Puumala virus
appears to be an icosahedral internal core structure
(nephropathia cpidcmica).
within which is a helical nuclcocapsid (coronaviruses)
or a tightly coiled, doughnut-shaped nucleocapsid (toro-
viruses). The genome consists of a single molecule of
Family: Arenaviridae
lincar positive-sense, singlc-stranded RNA, about 20 kb
(toroviruses) or 27-32 kb (coronaviruses) kb in size,
 Genus: Arenavirus (lymphocytic choriomenin-
 thc latter being the largest RNA virus genomes known.
gitis virus)
Transcription of the genomic RNA yields full-length
complementary RNA that acts as a template for the
Characteristics: Arcnavirus (arena, sand, host cell
synthesis of a nested set of five to seven subgenomic
ribosomes resembling grains of sand occur within viri-
mRNAs. Virions mature in the cytoplasm by budding
ons) virions are pleomorphic, 100-300 nm in diameter,
through the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi mem-
and consist of an envelope with large club-shaped 
branes. The viruses have narrow host ranges. Aerosol,
peplomers enclosing two loosely helical circular nucleo-f
 fecal-oral, and fomite transmissions are common.
capsid segments. The genome consists of two molecules 
Pathogens: Genus Coronavirus: avian infectious
(L and S) of "circular"’ negative- and ambisense, single-
bronchitis virus (fowl), turkey bluecomb virus, transinis-
stranded RNA, 10-14 kb in overall size. Circular nucleo-
sible gastroenteritis virus (swine), hcmagglutinating en-
capsids are formed by base-paired terminal nucleotides,
cephalomyelitis virus (swine), porcine epidemic diarrhea
not by covalcnt bonds. Both RNA segments encode pro-
virus, calf coronavirus, feline infcctious pcritonitis virus,
teins in both viral and complementary strands. Replica-
feline cnteric coronavirus, caninc coronavirus, mouse
tion takes place in the cytoplasm, and assembly occurs 
hepatitis viruses, rat coronavirus (sialodacryoadenitis vi-
via budding from the plasma membrane. Arenaviruses
rus), rabbit coronavirus, human coronaviruscs 229-E,
cause chronic, oftcn lifelong inapparent infections in spe-
OC43, and others (causing thc common cold, upper
cific rodent reservoir hosts; humans are infected via aero-
 respiratory tract infection, probably pneumonia, and
sol exposure to dried rodent urine, feces, and saliva and
 possibly gastroenteritis in humans). Gcnus Torovirus:
may develop scrious generalized disease. The human
 Berne virus (horse), Breda virus (calves), porcine toro-
38
2.Viral Taxonomy and Nomenctature
virus, human torovirus (recent evidence indicates that
 7.2-8.4 kb in size. Replication and assembly take place
toroviruses infect humans and cause enteric and respira-
 in the cytoplasm and the virus is released via cell lysis.
tory disease).
Infection is generally acute and cytolytic, bur persistent
infections occur with some viruses. The viruses have
narrow host ranges. Transmission is horizontal, mainly
[Order: Nidovirales)
by contact, fecal-oral, or airborne routes.
Family: Arteriviridae
Patbogens: Genus Enterovirus: polioviruses 1, 2,
and 3; coxsackieviruses A1-22 and A24; coxsackievi-
Genus: Arterivirus (equine arteritis virus)
ruses B1-6; human echoviruses 1-7, 9, 11-21, 24-27,
and 29-33; human cnteroviruses 68-71; swine vesicular
Characteristics: Arterivirus (from arteritis) virions
 disease virus; Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus;
are 50-70 nm in diameter and consist of an isometric
porcine enteroviruses 1-8; bovine enteroviruses 1-7;
nucleocapsid surrounded by a closely adherent envelope
and simian enteroviruses 1-18. Genus Rhinovirus: hu-
with ring-like surface structures. The genome consists of
man rhinoviruses 1-100, 1A, 1B; bovine rhinoviruses
a single molecule of linear positive-sense, single-stranded
1 -3. Genus Hepatovirus: hepatitis A virus and simian
RNA, 15 kb in size. Transcription of the genomic RNA
hepatitis A virus. Genus Cardiovirus: encephalomyocar
yields full-length complementary RNA, which acts as a
ditis virus. Genus Aphthovirus: foot-and-mouth disease
template for the synthesis of a nested set of six subgeno-
viruses O, A, C, SAT 1-3, and Asia 1, equine rhinovirus
mic mRNAs. Primary host cells are macrophages. Persis-
1. Genus Parechovirus: human echovirus 22 and 23.
tent infections are established regularly. Transmission is
 Ungrouped: equine rhinoviruses 2 and 3.
by contact (including sexual contact), fomites, and
aerosol.
Pathogens: Genus Arterivirus: equine arteritis vi-
Family: Caliciviridae
rus; lactate dehydrogenase-elevating virus (mice); simian
hcmorrhagic fever virus; Lelystad virus (porcine repro-
Genus: Vesivirus (marine/vesicular disease vi-
ductive and respiratory syndrome virus); and VR2332
ruses) (vesicular exanthcma of swine virus)
virus (swine). No known human pathogen.
Genus: Lagovirus (rabbit hemorrhagic disease
virus)
Genus: Unnamed (SRSV group 1 and 2 viruses)
Family: Picornaviridae
(Norwalk virus)
 Genus: Unnamed (classical human enteric cali-
Genus: Enterovirus (poliovirus 1)
civiruses) (Sapporo virus)
Genus: Rhinovirus (human rhinovirus 1A)s
Floating genus: Unnamed (hepatitis E-like vi-
Genus: Hepatovirus (hepatitis A virus)
ruses) (hepatitis E virus)§
Genus: Cardiovirus (encephalomyocarditis
virus)
Characteristics: Calicivirus (calix, cup) virions are
Genus: Aphthovirus (foot-and-mouth disease
nonenveloped, 30-38 nm in diameter, and have icosahe-
virus O)
dral symmetry. By negative contrast electron micros-
Genus: Parechovirus (human echovirus 22
copy, virions often have 32 symmetrically arranged cup-
and 23)
shaped depressions on their surface. The genome consists
of a single molecule of linear positive-sense, single-
Characteristics: Picornavirus ("pico"
“micro-
stranded RNA, 7.4- 7.7 kb in size. Characteristically,
micro," rna, sigla for RNA) virions are nonenveloped,
capsids are constructed from 60 copies of a single large
 27 nm in diameter, and have icosahedral symmetry. The
protein. Replication and assembly take place in the cyto-
atomic structure of representative viruses of all genera
plasm, and the virus is released via cell lysis. Viruses
has bcen solved; virions are constructed from 60 copies
have narrow host ranges.
each of four capsid proteins and a single copy of the
Pathogens: Genus Vesivirus (marine/vesicular dis
genome-linked protein. The genome consists of a single
ease viruses): vesicular exanthema viruses I--13 of swine,
molecule of linear positive-sense, single-stranded RNA,
San Migue! sea lion viruses 1-17, feline calicivirus, ceta-
cean calicivirus (Tur-1), primate calicivirus (Pan-1),
Evidence indicates that equine rhinoviruses 1 and 2 are not rhinovi-
ruses; equine rhinovirus 1 has been placed in the genus Aphthovirus;
Hepatitis E-like viruses were members of the family Caliciviridae, but
equine rhinovirus 2 may be placed in a new genus.
have been removed because of substantial genomic differences.
Fawilies of RNA Viruses
39
skunk calicivirus, and reptile calicivirus (Cro-1), Genus (
 cells is persistent and noncytolytic. Alphaviruses have a
Lagovirus: rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus, European
wide host range; the rubella virus infects only humans.
brown hare syndrome virus. Genus, unnamed (SRSV
Pathogens: Genus Alpbavirus: eastern equine en-
group 1): Norwalk virus, Southampton virus, Snow
cephalitis virus, western equine encephalitis virus, Vene-
Mountain virus, Hawai virus, and Taunton virus; (SRSV
 zuelan equine encephalitis virus, Sindbis virus (and vari-
group 2): Toronto virus, Lordsdale virus and swine cali-
ants Ockelbo and Babanki viruses), chikungunya virus,
civiruses. Genus, unnamed (classical human enteric cali-
 O'nyong-nyong virus, Igbo Ora virus, Ross River virus,
civiruses): Sapporo virus and Manchester virus. Unclassi-
 Mayaro virus, Barmah Forest virus, and Getah virus.
fied caliciviruses: bovine enteric caliciviruses, canine
Genus Rubivirus: rubella virus.
calicivirus, mink calicivirus, porcine enteric calicivirus,
walrus calicivirus, lion calicivirus, chicken calicivirus,
and other caliciviruses of birds. Floating genus (removed
Family: Flaviviridae
from family): hepatitis E virus of humans and a similar
virus of swine.
Genus: Flavivirus (yellow fever virus)
Genus: Pestivirus (bovine viral diarrhea virus)
Genus: Hepacivirus (hepatitis C virus)
Family: Astroviridae
Characteristics: Flavivirus (favus, yellow) virions
Genus: Astrovirus (human astrovirus 1)
 are enveloped, spherical in outline, and 45-60 nm in
diameter. Virions have fine peplomers that do not show
Characteristics: Astrovirus (astron, star) virions
 symmetrical placement. The viral core is spherical and
are nonenveloped, 28-30 nm in diameter, and have ico-
is thought to have icosahedral symmetry, but its structure
sahedral symmetry. By negative contrast electron micros-
 is unknown. The genome consists of a single molecule
copy, virions often appear to have a distinctive five- 0r
of linear positive-sense, single-stranded RNA, 10.7
six-pointed star on their surface. The genome consists of
(flaviviruses), 12.5 (pestiviruses), or 9.5 (hepatitis C vi-
a single molecule of linear positive-sense, single-stranded
rus) kb in size. Replication takes place in the cytoplasm,
RNA, 7.2-7.9 kb in size. Replication and assembly take
 and assembly involves envelopment by internal host cell
place in the cytoplasm, and the virus is released via cell
 membranes (true budding is not seen). The infection of
lysis. The viruses have narrow host ranges; transimission
vertebrate cells is cytolytic, arthropod cells noncytolytic
is by the fecal-oral route.
 and persistcnt. Flaviviruses are transmitted between ver-
Pathogens: Genus Astrovirus: human astroviruses
tebrates by mosquitoes and ticks; some viruses have a
1-5, bovine astroviruses 1-2, ovine astrovirus, porcine
 limited vertebrate host range, whereas others have a
astrovirus, canine astrovirus, and duck astrovirus.
wide host range and worldwide distribution. Pestiviruses
infect only certain animals and are transmitted by direct
and indirect contact (e.g., fecaily contaminated food,
Family: Togaviridae
urine, or nasal secretions); all pestiviruses are also trans-
rnitted transplacentally and congenitally. The hepatitis
Genus: Alphavirus (Sindbis virus)
C virus is transmitted by close contact, sexual contact,
Genus: Rubivirus (rubella virus)
and blood transfusion. A few of the viruses are Biosafety
Level 4 pathogens; they must be handled in the labora-
Characteristics: Togavirus (toga, cloak) virions are
tory under maximum containment conditions (e.g.
enveloped, spherical in outline, 70 nm in diameter, with.
rnembers of the tick-borne encephalitis complex includ-
an icosahedral nucleocapsid (50 nm in diameter). Virions 
ing Russian Spring-Summer encephalitis virus, Omsk
have rather indistinct peplomers. The genome consists of
hemorrhagic fever virus, and Kyasanur Forest virus).
a single molecule of linear positive-sense, single-stranded
Patbogens: Genus Flavivirus: yellow fever virus;
RNA, 9.7-11.8 kb in size. Viral replication involves 
 dengue viruses 1-4; West Nile virus; St. Louis encephali-
the synthesis of a subgenomic mRNA, from which the t
 tis virus; Japanese encephalitis virus; Murray Valley en-
structural proteins are synthesized. Replication takes
 cephalitis virus; Rocio virus; tick-borne encephalitis vi
place in the cytoplasm, and assembly involves budding
 rus complex (including European and far eastern tick-
through host cell membranes. Alphaviruses are transmit- 
 borne encephalitis viruses, Russian Spring Summer en-
ted between vertebrates by mosquitoes and certain other
 cephalitis virus, Kyasanur forest disease virus, Omsk
hematophagous arthropods; the infection of vertebrate
 hemorrhagic fever virus, louping ill virus, Powassan vi-
cells is acute and cytolytic but the infection of mosquito
 rus), Israel turkey meningoencephalitis virus, and Wes-
40
Virat Taxononry and Nonenclature
selsbron virus (sheep). Genus Pestivirus: bovine viral
 with brain tissue of infected people during rites of ritual.
diarrhea virus (mucosal disease virus), hog cholera virus,
 istic cannibalism. Some cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis-
and border disease virus of sheep. Genus Hepacivirus:
ease are acquired iatrogenically, some are familial (with
hepatitis C virus and hepatitis G virus.
specific mutations in the PrP gene), but most are sporadic
and of unknown origin.
Pathogens: Scrapie of sheep and goats, bovine
Subviral Agents: Defective
spongiform encephalopathy (which has occurred in cats
 and captive exotic felids and ungulates), transmissible
Viruses, Satellites, and Prions
mink encephalopathy (scrapie in mink), chronic wasting
disease of mule deer and clk, kuru (human), Creutzfeldt-
(Agents of Spongiform
Jakob disease (human), new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob
Encephalopathies)
discase (human), Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syn-
 drome (human), and fatal familial insomnia (humans).
Defective Viruses and Satellites
Floating genus: Deltavirus (hepatitis D virus)
Viral Nomenclature
Characteristics: Hepatitis D virus, the only mem-
 Proper use of the specialized vocabulary of biological
ber of this genus, is a efective, satellite virus, the replica-
sciences and medicine, along with the additional vocabu-
tion of which is dependent on simultaneous infection by
lary of veterinary medicine and veterinary and zoonotic
the hepadnavirus hepatitis B virus (hence in nature it
virology, is key to accurate communication in all profes-
only occurs in humans). Virions are spherical, about
sional activities, whcther these be clinical, research, or
36-43 nm in diameter, and consist of a core encapsidated
 public program activities. The proper use of spccialized
by helper hepadnavirus protein. The genome consists
virologic nomenclarure is as indicative of one's undcr-
of a single molecule of circular negative-sense, single-
standing of the infectious discases as is the proper usc
stranded RNA, 1.7 kb in size. In humans infected simul-
 of the nomenclature of pathology, cpidemiology, or clini-
tancously with the hepatitis B virus, the hepatitis D virus
 cal medicine
causes more severe disease, often progressing to cirrho-
 In formal usage of virus nomenclature, the first
sis. The genome structure and autocatalytic activities of
letters of the virus family, subfamily, and genus names
hepatitis D virus closely resemble those of some viroids
 are capitalized and the terms are printed in italics. Species
and satellitc viruses found in plants.
designations are not capitalized (unless they are derived
Patbogens: Hcpatitis D virus.
from a place name) nor are they italicized. In formal
usage, the identification of the taxon precedcs the name;
for example: ". . . the family Paramyxoviridae"' or ". 
Prions (Agents of Spongiform
the genus Morbillivirus."' The following are examples of
Encephalopathies)
formal taxonomic terminology:
Characteristics: Prions are modifed host protein
Order Mononegavirales, family Rhabdoviridae, gcnus
molecules, not associated with detectable nucleic acid,
Lyssavirus, rabies virus,
that are transmissible and induce fatal neurologic dis-
Family Poxviridae, subfamily Chordopoxvirinae, genus
ease. The modified protein, designated PrPx (M, 33,000-
Suipoxvirus, swinepox virus.
35,000), is generated from the normal isoform of the 
Family Herpesviridae, subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae,
protein, PrPc. Infecting PrP* molecules are presumed to
genus Simplexvirus, bovine herpesvirus 2 (bovine
combine with PrPc molecules, giving rise via abnormal
mamillitis virus or pseudo-lumpy skin disease virus).
protein folding to new PrPs molecules. PrPx molecules
Family Picornaviridae, genus Aphthovirus, foot-and-
aggrcgate into fbrils that resist normal enzymatic degra-
mouth disease virus Asia 1.
dation; their accumulation causes neurologic disease by
Family Parvoviridae, subfamily Parvovirinae, genus Par-
unknown means. The mechanism of natural transmis-
vovirus, canine parvovirus 2.
sion of scrapie among sheep and goats is still unproved;
 transmission of the bovine spongiform encephalopathy
 In informal vernacular usage, all terms are written
agent has involved consumption of fecd supplemcnts 
 in lowercase script (except those derived from place
contaminated with tissues of infected animals. Kuru in
names); they are not italicized, do not include the
the New Guinea Fore people was transmitted by contact
 formal suffix, and the name of the taxon follows the
leaxonomy cnd the Causal Relationship between Virus and Disease
41
name. For example, “. . . the picoinavirus family" and
 included in the families Togaviridae, Flaviviridae, Rhab.
". . . the enterovirus genus." One particular problem 
doviridae, Bunyaviridae, Reoviridae (genera Orbivirus
 in vernacular nomenclature lies in the common use of
 and Coltivirus), and Asfarviridae.
the same root terms in family and gcnus names-it
Oncogenic viruses are acquired by close conract
 is sometimes difficult to determine which level is being
(including sexual contact), injection, fomites, and by un-
cited. For example, the vernacular namc “"bunyavirus"
 known means. The viruses usually infect only specifc
might refer to the family Bunyviridae, to the genus
Bunyavirus, or to one particular virus, such as Buny-
 come persistent and may evoke transformation of host
amwera virus. The solution is to add taxon identifica-(
 cells, which may in turn progress to malignancy. Viruses
tion, even some formal taxonomic identification. For 
 that have demonstratcd the capacity to bc oncogenic, in
cxample, when referring to Bunyamwcra virus, one
 experimental animals or in nature, are included in the
a a j r e 'sa , es u
families Retroviridae,Hepadnaviridae,Papovaviridae,
Bunyavirus in the family Bunyaviridae..."
Adenoviridae, and Herpesviridae.
Groupi
Ihtes.
 of Viruses on the
Taxonomy and the Causal
Basis of Epidemiologic Criteria
Relationship between
Virus and Disease
Separatc from the formal universal taxonomic system
 and the formal and vernacular nomenclature that stems
One of the landmarks in the history of infectious
from it, there are other categorization of viruses that are
diseases was the development of the Henle-Koch postu-
practical and useful. These are based on virus tropisms 
 lates, which established the evidence required to prove
 and modes of transmission. Most viruses of animals are
 a causal relarionship berween a particular infectious
transmittcd by inhalation, ingestion, injection (including
 agent and a particular disease. These simple postulates
via arthropod bites), close contact (including scxual con-
were originally drawn up for bacteria, but were revised
tact), or congenitally.
in 1937 by Rivers and again in 1982 by Evans in
Enteric viruses arc usually acquired by ingestion
attempts to accommodate thc spccial problem of
(fecal-oral transmission) and replicate primarily in the
proving disease causation by viruses (Table 2.3). In
 intestinal tract. The tcrm is usually restricted to viruses
 many cases, virologists have had to rely on indirect
that rcmain localizcd in the intestinal tract, rather than
evidence,
‘“guilt by association," with associations
causing generalized infections. Enteric viruses are in-
based on epidemiologic data and patterns of serologic
cluded in the families Picornaviridae (genus Enterovi-
positivity in populations. The framework of virus
rus), Caliciviridae,Astroviridae, Coronaviridae, Reoviri-
taxonomy, again, plays a role, especially in trying to
dae (genera Rotavirus and Reovirus), Parvoviridae,
 distinguish an etiological rather than a coincidental
and Adenoviridae.
or opportunistic relationship berween a virus and a
Respiratory viruses are usually acquired by inhaia-
given disease.
tion (respiratory transmission) or by fomites (inanimate
 For example, carly in the investigation of human
 objects carrying virus contagion) and replicate primarily
acquired inmunodeficicncy syndrome (AIDS), before its
 in the respiratory tract. The term is usually restricted to
ctiology was established, many kinds of viruses were
viruses that remain localized in the respiratory tract,
 being isolated from patients and many candidate etio-
rather than causing gencralized infections. Respiratory
 logic agents were being advanced. Prediction that the
viruses are included in the families Picornaviridae (genus
etiologic agent would turn out to be a member of the
Rhinovirus), Caliciviridae, Coronaviridae (genus Coro-
family Retroviridae was based on years of veterinary
navirus), Paramyxoviridae (genera Paramyxovirus, Ru-
 research on animal retroviruses and animal retroviral
bulavirus, and Pneumovirus), Orthomyxoviridae, and
diseases. This prediction was based on the recognition
Adenoviridae.
of common biologic and pathogenetic characteristics of
Arboviruses (from “arthropod-bornc viruses")
AIDS and animal retroviral diseases, This prediction
replicate in their hematophagous (blood-feeding) arthro-
guided many of the early experiments to find the etiologic
 pod vectors and are then transmitted by bite to vertebrate
 agent of AIDs; later, aftcr human immunodeficiency vi-
 hosts, whcrcin virus replication produces viremia of suf-
rus (HIV) was discovered, its morphological similarity
ficient magnitude to infect other blood-feeding arthro-
 t0 equine infectious anemia virus, a prototypic member
pods. Thus, the cycle is perpetuated. Arboviruses are
of the genus Lentivirus, family Retroviridae, was the key
42
2.Virat Taxonony and Nomenctatnre
to unraveling confusion over the fact that the human
TaBle 2.3
virus killed host lymphocytes rather than transforming
Criteria for Disease Causation: A Unified
them as typical oncogenic retroviruses would do. Ever
Concept Appropriate for Viruses as
Causative Agents of Disease, Based on
since, this essential quality of comparative medicine has
Henle-Koch Postulates, Developed by
been guiding HIV/AIDS experimental design in many
A. S. Evans
 areas,including drug design, diagnostics, and vaccine de-
velopment.
1. Prevalence of the disease is significantly higher in sub-
jects exposed lo the putative virus than in those not so
pesodxa
Further Reading
2. incidence of the disease is significantly higher in sub-
jects exposed to the putative virus than in those not so
Ackermann, H.-W., and Berthiaume, L. (1995). “Atlas of
exposed (prospective studies)
Virus Diagrams."' CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
 3. Evidence of exposure to the putative virus is present
American Type Culture Collection. (1996). “Reference
Guide for Animal Viruses and Antisera, Chlamydiae,
more commonly in subjects with the disease than in
and Rickettsiae,”" 7th ed. American Type Culture Col-
those without the disease
lection, Rockville, MD.
4. Temporally the onset of disease follows exposure to
Bichen-Osmond, C., and Gibbs, A. J. (1998). *"Index Vi-
 the putative virus, always following an incubation
rum (a collection of index files that list all names of vi-
 period
rus families, genera and species). Research School of
 5. A regular pattern of clinical signs Foliows exposure to
Biological Science, Australian National University,
the putalive virus, presenting a graded response, offen
Canberra. Available at: http://www.life.anu.edu.au/
from mild to severe
viruses/lctv/fr-index.htm
Evans, A. S., and Kaslow, R. A., eds. (1997). *Viral Infcc-
6. A measurable host immune response, such as an anti-
tions of Humans: Epidemiology and Control." 4th ed.
body response and/or a cel-mediated response, fol
Plenum, New York.
lows exposure to the putative virus. In those individuals
International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses.
-nbas sipaddo asuodsai eu 'aouaadxa joud bulai
(1998). Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
larly, ond in those individuals with prior experience,
ICTV (constantly updated resource for the most up-
the response is anamnestic
to-date viral taxonomy and nomenclature).
7. Experimental reproduction of the disease follows delib-
Koonin, E. V., and Dolja, V. V. (1993). Evolution and
erate exposure of animals to the putative virus, but non-
taxonomy of positive-strand RNA viruses: implica-
exposed control animals remain disease free. Deliber-
tions of comparative analysis of amino acid sequences.
ate exposure may be in the laboratory or in the field,
Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 28, 375-430.
as with sentinel animals
Murphy, F. A. (1996). Virus taxonomy. In “Fields Virol-
8. Elimination of the putative virus and/or its vector de
ogy" (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley,
creases the incidence of the disease
R. M., Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roiz-
man, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 15-58.Lip-
9. Prevention or modification of infection, via immuniza-
pincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
tion or drugs, decreases the incidence of the disease
Murphy,F.A.,Fauquet, C.M., Bishop,D. H.L., Gha-
10. "The whole thing should make biologic and epidemio-
briai, S. A., Jarvis, A. W., Martelli, G. P., Mayo,
logic-sense'
M. A., and Summers, M. D. (1995). *Virus Taxon-
 omy: The Classification and Nomenclature of Viruses.
°A. S. Evans and R. A. Kaslow, eds., "Viral Infectlions of Humans:
The Sixth Report of the International Committee on
Epidemiology and Control," 4th ed. Plenum, New York, 1997.
Taxonomy of Viruses." Springer-Verlag, Vienna.
CHaＰter
3
Viral Replication
Viral Replication Cycle...
43
Strategies of Replication...
48
Transcription....
51
Translation...
54
Replication of Viral Nucleic Acids .......
56
Assembly and Release...
57
Further Reading...
59
Unraveling the complexities of viral replication is a cen- j
 ing either in suspension or as a 'monolayer adhering
tral focus of much of experimental virology. Studies with to a flat surface. Classic studies of this kind defined
bacteriophagcs in the 1940s and 1950s provided the t
the one-step growth curve, in which cells in a culture
first insights. With the development of mammalian cell a
are infected simultaneously using a high multiplicity
culture methods, the techniques uscd for the study of
 of infection, and the increase in infectious virus over
bacteriophages were adaptcd to animal viruses. Progrcss
time is followed by sequential sampling and titration
has been such that the basic mechanisms of transcription,
(Figure 3.2).
translation, and nucleic acid replication have been char-
Virus that is free in the medium can be titrated
acterized for all the major families of aninal viruses and
separately from virus that remains cell associated.
the strategies of gene expression and regulation have
been clarified as weil.
pears"'—infectious particles cannot be demonstrated,
Our knowledgc of viral replication continues to
even intracellularly. This eclipse period continues until
grow in complexity. It was easier to generalize when we  t
 the first progeny virions become detectable some hours
knew less, but now we know that every family of viruses 1
 later. Nonenveloped viruses mature within the cell and
employs unique replication strategies. One important 
 may be detectable for some time as infectious intracellu-
unifying and simplifying concept, as originally proposed  lar virions before they are released by cell lysis. Many
one of six classes based on the composition of their p
plasma membrane of the host cell and are thus released
 d oi a a ad a  so
 immediately into the medium. The eclipse period gener-
mRNAs (Figurc 3.1). This chapter presents an overview
 ally ranges from 2 to 12 hours for viruses of different
of the subject, indicating similarities and differences in
families (Table 3.1).
the replication strategics adopted by viruses of each fam-
Early studies, relying on quantitative electron
ily that contains pathogens of animals. Further informa-
 microscopy and assay of infectious virions, provided
tion is provided in the viral replication sections of the
information about the early and the late events in the
chapters in Part II.
replication cycle (attachment, penetration, maturation,
 and release), but not about what happened during the
eclipse period. Investigation of the expression and
replication of the viral gcnomc became possible only
Viral Replication Cycle
with the introduction of biochemical methods for
the analysis of viral nuclcic acids and proteins—-now
One-Step Growth Curve
all of the sophisticated tcchniques of molecular bio-
Most studies of the replication of animal viruses have
 logy are being applied to this aspect of the infection
been conducted using cultured mammalian cells grow-  process.
43
44
Viral Replication
FIgure 3.1.
dsDNA
dsDNA
SSDNA
dsRNA
SSRNA
SSRNA
SSRNA
(+1-)
pari-al
(+or-）
(+1-)
（+）
（-）
（+）
dsDNA
SSRNA
SSDNA
(+7-)
mRNA（+)
Animal vius replication strategies based on Ihe composion of their genomes and the poathways of their mRNA synthesis.[Modied from
D. Baltimore. Expression of animal virus genomes. Bacteriol. Rev. 35, 235-241 [1971].] 
Figure 3.2.
Total virus: Input vlrus
(attached and unattached).
and progeny virus
(intraceliular and extracelluiar)
Total cell free virus: input virus
(unattached), and progeny virus
(extracellular)
Total cell-associated virus: input virus
(attached but not penetrated),
and progeny virus (intracelluiar)
Time
One-step growth curve of a nonenveloped virus. Atachment and penelration are followed by an eclipse period of 2 to 12 hours [see Table 3.1 
during whichcll-associated infectiviy cannotbedetectedThis is folowed by aperiod of several hours duringwhichviralmaturationoccurs.
Virions of nonenveloped viruses are often released late and incompletely, when the cellyses. The release of enveloped virions occurs concurrently
with maturation by budding from the plasma membrane.
Viraf Replication Cycte
45
Table 3.1
Characteristics of Replication of Viruses of Different Families
SITE OF NUCLEIC
ECLiPSE PERIOD
FAMILY
ACID REPUCaTION
[HOURS")
BUDDING SITE
Poxviridae
Cyioplasm
4
Golgi membrane
Asforviridae
Cytoplasm
5
 Plasma membrane
Herpesviridae
Nucleus
4
 Nuclear membrane
Adenoviridae
Nucleus
10
None
Papovaviridae
Nuceus
12
None
Parvoviridae
Nucleus
None
6
Circoviridae
Nucleus
？
None
Hepadnaviridoe
 Nucleus
？
None
Refroviridae
Nucleus
10
 Plasma membrane
Reoviridae
Cytoplasm
5
Noneb
Birnaviridae
Cytoplasm
4
None
Paramyxoviridae
Cytoplasm
4
 Plasma membrane
Rhabdoviridae
Cytoplasm
3
 Plasma membrane
Filoviridae
Cytoplasm
2
Plasma membrane
Bornaviridae
Nucleus
？
Enveloped but site unknown
Orihomyxoviridae
Nucleus
4
 Plasma membrane
Bunyaviridae
Cytoplasm
4
Golgi membrane
Arenaviridoe
Cytoplasm
5
Plasma membrane
Coronaviridae
Cytoplasm
5
Endoplasmic reticulum
Arteriviridae
Cytoplasm
5
Endoplasmic reticulum
Picornaviridae
Cytoplasm
2
None
Caliciviridae
Cytoplasm
3
None
Astroviridae
Cytoplasm
3
None
Togaviridae
Cytoplasm
2
 Plasma membrane
Flaviviridoe
Cytoplasm
3
Endoplasmic reticulum
iffer wihlliyfotinfirulndhsiicndi.
EPseudoenvelopes Formed that are not essential for infectivity.
Events during Eclipse Period
scribed. The late proteins arc principally viral structural
proteins used for the assembly of new virions; some
 Figure 3.3 illustrates in a greatly simplified fashion the
 Of these are subject to posttranslational modifications
major stcps that occur during the eclipse period, using
before use. Maturation occurs in the nucleus. Each in-
 adenovirus as an example. Following attachmcnt, thc
fected cell yields thousands of virions that are free to
virion enters the cell and is partially uncoated to expose
infect other cells.
the viral genome. Certain early viral genes are tran-
For most DNA viruses, transcription and DNA
scribed into RNA, which may then be processed in a
replication take place in the cell nucleus, using cellular
number of ways, including splicing. The early gene prod-
RNA polymerase ll and other ceilular enzymes. Most
ucts translated from this messenger RNA (mRNA) are
 RNA viruscs replicate in the cytoplasm and, because
of three main types: proteins that shut down cellular
-  e   o  s  s
 nucleic acid and protein synthesis, protcins that regulate
plate, either the viral genome must itself function as
 the expression of the viral genome, and enzymes required
inRNA or the virus must encode and carry its own
for the replication of the viral nucleic acid. Following
 RNA polymerase to transcribc RNA from the RNA
viral nucleic acid replication, late viral genes are tran-
genome.
46
3.Viral Replication
Figure 3.3.
2 Penetralion
-3Uncoating
Transcription of early mRNA
5Translatian olearlyproteins
6Replicationof viralDNA
Transcription of late mRNA
9 Assembly oi virions
-10Release
Generalfillsingimictfislig
sslAq sn y sus ad sd asy jas'ssd ap a  u ys aua 
Attachment
viruses (e.g., orthomyxoviruscs and paramyxoviruses)
may utilize the same receptor and, conversely, viruses
In order to initiate infection, virions must be able to
in the same family or genus may use different receptors
bind to cells. Binding occurs between ligands on the
(see Chapter 7). All in all, viruses have evolved to make
surface of the virion (viral attachment proteins) and re.
 opportunistic use of a wide variety of host cell surface
ceptors on the plasma membrane of the cell. Too often
proteins as their receptors, in most cases using as recep-
the illustrations used to describe this interaction make
tors cellular proteins that are crucial for fundamental
it seem too simple, but there are many variables and, in
cellular functions-—such cellular proteins arc strongly
vivo, there are many different ligand-receptor pairings.
conserved over evolutionary time so that viruses are
In fact, the lack of correlation between attachment stud-
rarely caught out by failure to find their favorite re-
ies in cultured cells vs intact animals may be seen as an
ceptors.
indication of this complexity. For examplc, with herpcs-
 The cellular receptor for most orthomyxoviruses
viruses, several viral enveiope glycoproteins may serve
is the terminal sialic acid on an oligosaccharide side
as attachment proteins and several cellular receptors may
 chain of a glycoprotein (or glycolipid) exposed at the
be involved, in sequential order, first achieving a loose 
cell surface, whereas the viral ligand is in a clet at the
attachment via one receptor, then irreversible binding 
distal tip of each monomer of the trirmeric viral hemag-
via another. This multiple set attachment phenomenon
glutinin glycoprotein (see Chapter 1). The receptors for
provides redundancy and also facilitates the need that
a number of other viruses are members of the immuno-
the herpesviruses have for invading epithelial and neural
globulin supcrfamily, such as ICAM-1 (intracellular ad-
tissues so as to support their latent/recrudescent infec-
 hesion molecule-1), which is the common receptor for
tion cycles. Othcr viruscs do the same. Although there is
 many rhinoviruses. In the best-studied receptor-ligand 
a degree of specificity about the recognition of particular
interaction of all, that of human cells and human immu-
cellular receptors by particular viruses, quite different
nodcficiency virus (HIV), attachment initially involves
Viral Replication C'ycle
47
CD4 molecules on the surface of target cells, notably
 of capsid protein VP4 of picornaviruses, for example,
 macrophages and T helper lymphocytes, via thc viral
leads to release of the viral RNA from the virion into
gp120 envelope glycoprotein subunit tcrmed SU. The
the cytosol. Similarly, at the acidic pH of the cndosome,
CD4-SU complex then binds to a second cell receptor
the hemagglutinin molecule of infuenza virus undergoes
molecule, caled fusin, which when sprung mousetrap
a conformational change, which enabies fusion to occur
fashion, displaces the SU subunit and brings the trans-
betwcen thc viral envelope and the endosomal mem-
membrane (TM) subunit into direct contact with the cell 
branc, lcading to release of the viral nucleocapsid into
membrane. A fusogenic domain of thc transmembrane
 the cyroplasm. Many other nonenveloped and enveloped
subunit then brings about the fusion of the viral envelope
viruses undergo comparable changes.
with the plasma membrane of the cell, permitting the
viral nucleocapsid to enter the cytoplasm. Reccptor-
 Fusion with Plasma Membrane
ligand interactions in other lentivirus infections are
The F (fusion) glycoprotein of paramyxoviruses causes
similar.
the cnvclope of these viruses to fuse directly with the
 plasma membrane of the cell, even at pH 7. This allows 
the nucleocapsid to be releascd directly into the cyto-
Uptake (Penetration)
plasm. A number of other envcloped viruses have the
ability to fuse the host cell plasma membrane with their
Following attachment, virions can enter celis by one of
 Own envelope, thereby gaining cntry of their nucleic acid.
two main mcchanisms: receptor-mediated endocytosis
or fusion.
Uncoating
Rcccptor-Mediated Endocytosis
The majority of mammalian cells are cngaged continu-
For viral genes to become available for transcription, it
ously in receptor-mediated cndocytosis for the uptake of
is necessary that virions be at least partially uncoated.
Macromolecules via specifc receptors. Many enveloped
In the casc of enveloped RNA viruses that enter by fusion
and nonenveloped viruses use this esscntial cell function
of their envclopc with either the plasma membrane or
to initiate infection (Figure 3.4). Virion attachment to
 an endosomal membrane, the nucleocapsid is discharged
receptors, which cluster at clatbrin-coated pits, is fol-
directly into the cytoplasm and transcription commences
lowcd by endocytosis into clathrin-coated vesicles. Vesi-
from viral nucleic acid still associated with this structure.
clcs entcr the cytoplasm and, aftcr removal of the clathrin
With the noncnveloped icosahedral reoviruses, only cer-
coat, fuse with endosomcs (acidic prelysosomal vacu-
 tain capsid protcins are removed and the viral genome
oles). Acidification within the vesicle triggers changes in
expresses all its functions without ever being released
virion proteins and surface structures. The configuration f
from the virion core. For most other viruses, however,
Figure 3.4.
Receptor-medicted endocytosis: penetration by a togcvirus. (A) Aftochment ond movement into α clcthrin-coated pit; (B) endocytosis, producing
a coaled vesicle. (Courtesy of A. Helenius and K. Simons.]
48
3.Viral Replicatiom
 uncoating proceeds to completion. For some viruses that  mechanism of cleavage (and sometimes splicing) of their
replicate in the nucleus, the latet stages of uncoating
 polycistronic RNA transcripts to yield monocistronic
occur there rather than in the cytoplasm.
mRNA molecules. RNA viruses, most of which replicate
in the cytoplasm, do not have acccss to the RNA
processing and splicing enzymes of the nucleus, havc
Strategies of Replication
developed a remarkable diversity of solutions to thc
problem. Somc have developed a scgmented genome
Replication of most DNA viruses involves mechanisms
in which each molecule is, in gcneral, a separate gene.
that are familiar in cell biology; transcription of mRNA
Others have evolved a polycistronic genome but produce
from double-stranded DNA and replication of DNA
monocistronic RNA transcripts by terinination and reini-
(Figure 3.3). The situation is quite different for RNA
tiation of transcription. Yet others make use of a ncsted
viruses, which are unique in having thcir genetic informa-
set of overlapping RNA transcripts each of which is
tion encoded in RNA. RNA viruses with different types
translated into a single gene product. Finally, some have
of gcnomes (single or double stranded, positive or nega-
a polycistronic viral RNA that is translated into a poly-
tive sense, monopartite or segmented) have necessarily
evolved different routes to the production of mRNA. In
final products.
the case of positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses,
T'he diverse strategics followed by viruses of differ-
the genomic RNA itself functions as messenger, whereas
ent familics for transcription and translation are illus-
 a  n   yo s ro l
 trated diagrammatically in Figure 3.5 (for DNA viruses)
into mRNA. Because cukaryotic cells contain no RNA-
and Figure 3.6 (for RNA viruses) and are described as
 dependent RNA polymerasc, negative-sense, single-
follows.
stranded RNA viruses and double-stranded RNA viruscs
must carry an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase in
the virion.
DNA Viruses
 Further, cukaryotic cells are not equipped to trans-
 late polycistronic mRNA into several individual species
Poxviruses, Asfarviruses, and Iridoviruses
 of protcin, because in gcneral they cannot reinitiate
Poxviruses, asfarviruses, and iridoviruses, which repli-
translation part way along the RNA molecule. DNA
cate in the cytoplasm, carry their own transcriptase
viruses overcome this limitation by using the cellular
(DNA-dependent RNA polymerase) in the virion. Their
Figure 3.5.
Family
Genome
Transcriptase
RNA transcripts
 Proteins
Papovaviridae
cellular
Adenoviridae
dsDNA
spliced
Herpesviridae
Poxviridae
virat
Asfarviridae
dsDNA
Parvoviridae
 cellular
(-)SsDNA
 spliced
Hepadnaviridae
ceilular
 ss/dsDNA
viral reverse transcriptase
Simplified diagram showing he essential features of the replication of DNA viruses. The sense of each nucleic acid molecule is indicated by an
sapo yxa as s s  uys uaq sy s yoa j siads uad pu  jo raqu u al ay a - uy au o 1 mo
StrategiesofReptication
49
Figure 3.6.
Virion
RNA
Family
Genome
transcriptase
transcripts
Proteins
Picomaviridae
(+) ssRNA
Flaviviridae
cleaved
Togaviridae
Caliciviridae
(+)ssRNA
cleaved
RNA polymerase
 cleaved
Coronaviridae
(+)ssRNA
RNA polymerase
10 les palsan
ANAtranscripts
Paramyxoviridae
Rhabdoviridae
(-)SSRNA
Filoviridae
Orthomyxoviridae
∑(-)SSRNA
Arenaviridae
Bunyaviridae
2(-,+)ssRNA
Reoviridae
∑ dsRNA
Retroviridae
+
2[(+)ssRNA]
cleaved
reverse
dsDNA
spliced
cleaved
Simplified digram showing theessential features of he replicaion of RNAviruses.The sense of each nucleicmolecule is indictedby an arrow
[+ to the right; - lo the lef; - , + for Arenaviridce and Bunyaviridae, indicating ambisense RNA}. ∑, segmented genome; 2, diploid genome
of Retroviridae. The number of mRNA molecules and protein molecules has been shown arbitrarily as four, as have he number of segments in
viruses with segmentedi genomes [although less for Arenaviridae and Bunyaviridae). See text for details.
50
3.Viral Replication
very large genomes encode numerous other enzymes that by cellular RNA polymerase II, followed by splicing of
 makc them virtually independent of the cell nucleus. the RNA transcripr as well as cleavage of the resulting
Monocistronic mRNAs are transcribed directly from the
 proteins. Some full-length, positive-sense RNA tran
viral DNA.
scripts associate in pairs to form the diploid genomes of
new virions.
Herpesviruses, Adenoviruses,
and Papovaviruses
one respect,the most straightforward strategy of replica-
tion: the viral DNA is transcribed within the nuclcus by
 Reoviruses and Birnaviruses
cellular DNA-dependent RNA polymerase HI. There are
 Reoviruses and birnaviruses have segmented double-
two or more cycles of transcription, the various tran-
 stranded RNA genomes. The negative-sense strand of
scription units (groups of genes under the control of a
each segmcnt is transcribed separately in the cytoplasm
single promoter) being transcribed in a given temporal 
 by a virion-associated transcriptase to produce mRNA.
sequence. Polycistronic, but subgenomic, RNA tran-
These positive-sense RNAs also serve as tenplatcs for
scripts (corresponding to sevcral genes but less than the
replication. The resulting double-stranded RNA in turn
 whole genoine) undergo cleavage and splicing to produce
 serves as the template for furthcr mRNA transcription.
monocistronic mRNAs, with introns being removed in
the process.
Paramyxoviruses, Rhabdoviruses,
Filoviruscs, and Bornavirus
Parvoviruses and Circoviruses
The nonsegmented negative-sense, single-stranded RNA
 Parvoviruses and circoviruses, with their single-stranded
 of paramyxoviruses, rhabdoviruses, floviruses, and
 DNAs, use cellular DNA polymerases to synthesize dou-
 Borna disease virus carries an RNA-dependent RNA
ble-stranded DNA, which is then transcribed in the nu-
polymerase (transcriptase), which transcribes five or
cleus by cellular DNA-dependent RNA polymerase I1.
more subgenomic positive-sense RNAs, each of which
Then, transcripts are processed by splicing to produce
serves as a monocistronic mRNA. In contrast, transcrip-
mRNAs.
tion in the replication mode (by the same polymerase
acting as a replicase) produces a full-length, positive-
sense strand that is used as the template for the synthesis
Reverse-Transcribing Viruses
of new negative-sense viral RNA. The strategy of replica-
tion of Borna disease virus is somewhat more coniplex
H lepadnaviruses
(see Chapter 29).
The single-stranded DNA portion of the partially dou-
ble-stranded DNA genome of hepadnaviruses is frst Orthomyxoviruses, Bunyaviruscs,
completed by a virion-associated DNA polymerase, and and Arenaviruses
the DNA is converted into a supercoiled, double- Orthomyxoviruses, bunyaviruses, and arenaviruses have
ase II then occurs. Full-length,positive-sense RNA serves cach segment being transcribed separately by a tran-
as a template for a viral reverse transcriptase and a nega- scriptase carried in the virion. mRNAs transcribed from
synthesis of the double-stranded DNA. The mRNA is  In the case of orthomyxoviruses, but not in the other two
transcribed from double-stranded DNA starting from families, most of the segments encode single proteins.
various promoters.
Furthermore, the S segment of arenaviruses and some
bunyaviruses is ambiscnse, i.e., part positive sense and
Retroviruses
part rnegative sense. The replication strategy of ambisense
 In retroviruscs the viral RNA is positive sense, but in-
RNA viruses, like the sense of their genomes, is mixed,
stead of functioning as mRNA, it is transcribed by a
with features of both positive-sense and negative-sense,
viral RNA-dependent DNA polymerasc (reverse tran-
single-stranded RNA viruses.
scriptase) to produce first an RNA-DNA hybrid mole-
cule, which is in turn convcrted to double-stranded DNA
Coronaviruses and Artcriviruses
(by another activity of the same cnzyme) and inserted
Coronaviruses and arteriviruses display an unusual tran-
 permanently into the cellular DNA gcnome. This inte-5
 scriptional strategy: initially, part of the virion RNA
 grated viral DNA (provirus) is subsequently transcribed acts as mRNA and is translated to produce an RNA
Iranscriptiron
51
 polymerase, which then synthesizes a genome-length, Regulation of Transcription
 negative-sense strand. From this RNA, a nested set of :
 from Viral DNA
overlapping subgenomic mRNAs with a common 3'-
 In 1978 Fiers and colleagues presented the first complete
termination site is transcribed. Only the 5'-terminal se-
 description of the genome of an animal virus (Figure
quence of each successive member of this set of overlap-
 3.7). Analysis of the circular double-stranded DNA
ping transcripts is translated.
 molecule of the papovavirus SV40 and its transcription
Picornaviruses, Caliciviruses, Astroviruses,
 program revealed some remarkable insighrs, many of
which can be generalized to other double-stranded DNA
Togaviruses, and Flaviviruses
 Picornaviruses, caliciviruses, astroviruses, togaviruses,
viruses. First, ealy genes and late genes are transcribed in
and flaviviruses, i.e., positive-sense, single-stranded RNA
opposite directions, from different strands of the DNA.
viruses, replicate by the most straightforward means—-
 Second, certain genes overlap, so that their protein prod-
 their genomes function directly as mRNAs. Genomes of
 ucts have some amino acid sequences in common. Third,
 some regions of the viral DNA may be read in different
tronic mRNA, are translated directly into a single poly-
 reading frames, so that quite distinct amino acid se-
protein that is subsequently cleaved to give the individual
 quences are translated from the same nucleotide se-
viral structural and nonstructural proteins. One of these
 quence. Fourth, certain long stretches of the viral DNA
proteins is an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, which
 consist of introns, which are transcribed but not trans-
replicates the viral genome, transcribing viral RNA into
 lated into protein because they are spliced out from the
a complementary (negative-sense) copy, which in turn
 primary RNA transcript.
serves as a template for the synthesis of positive-sense
 For many years a one-to-one relationship between
(viral) RNA. In togaviruses, only about two-thirds of
 a gene and its gene product (protein) was envisioned.
the viral RNA (the 5' end) is translated; the resulting
 Now, with overiapping reading frames, rmultiple splicing
 polyprotein is cleaved into nonstructural proteins, all of
 patterns of RNA transcripts, posttranslational cleavage
which are required for RNA transcription and replica-
 of polyproteins, and so on, it is too simplistic to designate
tion. Viral RNA polymerase makes a full-length, nega-
 a particular nucleotide sequence as a gene encoding a
tive-sense strand, from which rwo species of positive-
 particular protein. It is more appropriate to refer to the
sense RNA are copied: full-length virion RNA destined
 transcription unit, which is defined as a region of the
for encapsidation and a one-third length RNA, which is
 genome beginning with the transcription initiation site
collinear with the 3' terminus of the viral RNA and is
 and extending to the transcription termination site (in-
translated into a polyprotein from which the structural
 cluding all introns and exons in between), the expression 
proteins are produced by cleavage. Caliciviruses produce
of which falls under the control of a particular promoter.
both genome-length and subgenomic mRNA species.
 Simple transcription units may be defined as those encod-
ing only a single protein, whereas complex transcription
units code for more than one.
Adenoviruses may be used to elucidate some of
Transcription
the mechanisms that regulate the expression of viral
The viral RNA of most positive-sense, single-stranded
 genomes—these operate principally, but not exclu-
RNA viruses binds directly to ribosomes and is translated
 sively, at the level of transcription. There are several
 -dsnn d ae r pa s iom ned u o  u
 adenovirus transcription units; at different stages of
tional step. From all other classes of viral genomes,
mRNA must be transcribed in order to begin the process
 mediate," and "“late” transcription units are transcribed
of expression of the infecting viral genome. In the case 
in a set temporal sequence. A product of the early
of DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus, ceilular
 region E1A induces transcription from the other early
DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II performs this func-
 regions, including E1B, but following viral DNA repli-
tion. All other viruses require a unique and specific tran--
 cation there is a 50-fold increase in the rate of transcrip-
scriptase that is virus coded and is an integral component
tion from the major late promoter relative to early
of the virion. The double-stranded DNA viruses that
 promoters such as E1B and a decrease in E1A mRNA
replicate in the cytopiasm carry a DNA-dependent RNA
 levels. A second control operates at the point of termi-
 polymerase, whereas double-stranded RNA viruses have
 nation of transcription. Transcripts that terminate at
 a specific double-stranded RNA-dependent RNA poly-
 a particular point early in infection are read through
merase and negative-sense single-stranded RNA viruses
 later in infection to produce a range of longer tran-
carry a specific single-stranded RNA-dependent RNA
scripts with different polyadenylation sites and different
polymerase.
functions. Again, we are reminded of the economy of
52
3.Viral Replication
Figure 3.7.
0.9
EcoR!
0.8
0.2
0.7
0.3
0.6
Origin
1.5
large
Transcriptionmap of the DNA of the papovavirus SV40.The circular double-stranded DNA is oriented wih the EcoRl restriction endonuclease
counterclockwise on one DNA strand (open arrows] and of the late genes is clockwise on the other strand (stippled and shaded arrows]. The hin
lines indicate regions of the primary RNA transcripts hat are not ransiated into proteins, whereas he wavy lines indicale regions of the ranscript
that are spliced out (introns]. The 3'-terminal poly(A) tail of each mRNA is labeled A. The coding regions of the primary transcript are shown as
ll
bywonnigsgionsfNAhinidsqefewiminllfweeshr
reading frame. (Courtesy of W. Fiers.)
viral genomes in encoding complex functions in mini-
However, other mechanisms of regulation are re-
mal nucleic acid sequences.
quired for viruses with nonsegmented negative-sense
RNA genomes. In cells infected by these viruses, once 
the nucleocapsid is released into the cytoplasm, the RNA
Regulation of Transcription
 polymerase initiates transcription from the 3' end of the
genome. Because there is only a single promoter, one
from Viral RNA
might imagine that only full-length, positive-strand tran-
In RNA viruses, the regulation of transcription is gener-
scripts could be made. While some full-length, positive-
ally not as complex as in DNA viruses. In particular,
sense strands are made as remplatcs for RNA replication,
the temporal separation into early genes transcribed be-
mRNAs corresponding to each gene are also made, in
forc thc replication of viral nucleic acid, and late genes
the following fashion. The several genes along the viral
thereafter, is not nearly so clear. In most families of
RNA are each separated by a consensus sequence that
viruscs with positive-sense, single-stranded RNA ge-
includes termination and start signals as well as short
nomes, which serve directly as messengers, transcription
intergenic sequences of U residues that enable the tran-
is required only to make the ncgative strand rcquircd
scriptase to generate a long poly(A) tail for each mRNA
for RNA replication.
by a process of reiterative copying (stop-start transcrip-
Transeription
53
tion, also known as stuttering). Each completed mRNA
the provirus, greatly augmenting (trans-activating) the
is cleaved off, but the enzyme continues to transcribe
transcription of all viral genes (including tat itself),
the next gene, and so forth.
thereby establishing a positive feedback loop that pro-
Paramyxovirus transcription also involves a pro-
 motes the production of large numbers of progeny
cess known as editing. The P gene encodes two proteins,
virions. Moreover, because TAR is present in all viral
P and V, which share a common N-terminal amino acid
mRNAs, as well as in the proviral DNA, it is probable
sequence but differ completely in their C-terminal se-
that tat enhances both transcription and translation.
 quences because of a shift in the reading frame brought
 Although the control of lentivirus transcription may
 about by the insertion of two uncoded G residues into ^ b
 be unusually complex because of its compiicated repli-
 the RNA transcript by transcriptase stuttering.
cation cycle and requirement for the establishment of
latency, these viruses contain only nine genes, compared
with 100 in the case of some DNA viruses.
Regulatory Genes and
Responsive Elements
Postranscriptional Processing
 In analyzing viral genomes and RNA transcripts derived
from them, much attention has been given to identifying
 Primary RNA transcripts from eukaryotic DNA are sub-
the open reading frames in order to derive the amino acid
ject to a series of posttranscriptional alterations in the
sequence of their gene products. There is also interest
nucleus, known as processing, prior to export to the
in the untranslatcd regions of the genome that contain 
cytoplasm as mRNA. First a cap, consisting of 7-methyl-
numerous conserved (consensus) sequences, sometimes
 guanosine (m'Gppp), is added to the 5' terminus of the
called motifs, which represent responsive elements, that 
 primary transcript; the cap facilitates the formation of
play crucial roles in the regulation of transcrip-
a stable complex with the 40S ribosomal subunit, which
tion. For example, each transcription unit in viral
 is necessary for the initiation of translation. Second, a
genomes has near its 3' end an mRNA transcription
 sequence of 50-200 adenylate residues is added to the
initiation site (start site), designated as nucleotide +1.
3' terminus. This poly(A) tail may act as a recognition
Within the hundred or so nucleotides upstrcam of the
signal for processing and for transporting mRNA from
start site lies the promoter, which up-regulatcs thc 
 the nucleus to the cytoplasm and it may stabilize mRNA
transcription of thar gene (or genes). Upstream O1
 against degradation in the cytoplasm. Third, a methyl
downstream from the start site there may be a long
 group is added at the 6 position to about 1% of thc
 sequence with several, in some cases repeated, elements
adenylate residues throughout the RNA (methylation).
known as enbancers, which amplify transcription cvcn
 Fourth, introns are removed from the primary transcript
further. These regulatory regions are activated by the
and the exons are linked together in a process known
binding of viral or cellular DNA-binding proteins.
as splicing. Splicing is an important mechanism for
Several such proteins may bind to adjacent responsive regulating gene expression in nuclear DNA viruses. A
elements in such a way that they also bind to one ?
 given RNA transcript can have two or more splicing
another or otherwise interact to facilitate attachment
 sites and be spliced in several alternative ways to
of the viral RNA polymerase. Viral rcgulatory genes
 producc a variety of mRNA species coding for distinct
that encode such regulatory proteins may act in trans,
 proteins; both the preferred poly(A) site and the splicing
i.e., they may transactivate genes residing on a com-
pattern may change in a regulated fashion as infec-
pletely different molecule.
tion proceeds.
A description of the role of one of the six
 Special mention should be made of an extraordi-
rcgulatory genes of human immunodefciency virus 1
nary phenomenon known as cap snatching. The tran-
(HIV1) will ilustrate the sophistication of such regula-
scriptase of influenza virus, which also carries endonucle-
tory mechanisms. When a DNA copy of the viral
 ase activity, steals the 5'-methylated caps from newly
genome is integrated into a chromosome of a resting 
synthesized cellular RNA transcripts in the nucleus and
T cell, it rcmains latent until a T-cell mitogcn or a
uses thcm as primers for initiating transcription from
cytokine induces synthesis of thc NF-xB family of
the viral genome.
DNA-binding proteins. NF-kB then binds to the en-
Thc rate of degradation of mRNA provides an-
hancer present in the integrated provirus, thercby trig- (
 othcr possible level of regulation. Not only do different
gering transcription of the six HIV rcgulatory gcncs.
 mRNA spccies have different half-lives, but the half-life
One of these, tat, found in all lentiviruses, encodes a
of a given mRNA species may change as replication pro-
protein that binds to a responsive element, TAR, within
gresses.
54
3.Viral Replication!
Translation
earlier, it can be seen that there are several mechanisms
of exploiting overlapping reading frames to maximize
Capped, polyadenylated, and processed monocistronic
the usage of the limited coding potential of the small
viral mRNAs bind to ribosomes and are translated into
 genomes of viruses.
protein in the same fashion as cellular mRNAs. The
Most viral proteins undergo various sorts of post-
  s ps q su sa o ans
 translational modification, such as phosphorylation (for
infected cells. Each monocistronic mRNA molecute
ucleic acid binding), fatty acid acylation (for membrane
binds via its capped 5' terminus to the 40S ribosomal
insertion), glycosylation, myristylation, or proteolytic
subunit, which then moves along the mRNA molecule
cleavage (see later). Newly synthesized viral proteins
until stopped at the initiation codon. The 60S ribosomal
 must also be transported to the various sites in the cell
subunit then binds, together with methionyl-transfer
where they are needed, e.g., back into the nucleus in thc
RNA and various initiation factors, after which transla-
 case of viruses that replicate there. The sorting signals
tion proceeds.
that direct this traffc are only now beginning to be
 In mammalian cells, mRNA molecules are mono-
understood, as are the polypeptide chain-binding pro-
cistronic (encoding only one protcin) and, with few ex-
teins (molecular chaperones) that regulate folding, trans-
ceptions, translation commences only at the S'-initiation
location, and assembly of oligomers of viral as well as
codon. However, with certain viruses, polycistronic
 cellular proteins.
mRNA can be translated directly into its several gene
products as a result of initiation, or reinitiation, of trans-
lation at internal AUG start codons.
Glycosylation of Envelope Proteins
Where initiation of translation at an internal
AUG is an option, a frameshift can occur. Another
Viruses exploit cellular pathways normally used for the
mechanism, known as ribosomal frameshifting, occurs 
synthesis of membrane-inserted and exported secretory
fortuitously when a ribosome happens to slip one
 glycoproteins (Figure 3.8). The programmed addition
nucleotide forward or back along an RNA molecule.
of sugars occurs sequentially as the protein moves
 This phenomenon is exploited by retroviruses to access
in vesicles progressively from the rough endoplasmic
the reverse transcriptase reading frame hidden within
 reticulum to the Golgi complex and then to the plasma
the gag mRNA. Thus, taken together with the phenom-
membrane. The side chains of viral envelope glycopro-
enon of RNA splicing and RNA editing described
teins are generally a mixture of simple (high mannose)
 Figure 3.8.
Plasma
Golgi apparatus
membrar
Vesicle
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Signal
Nascent polypeptide
Further glycosylation
and acylation
mRNA
Ribosome
Cytoplasm
Glycosylationof viral protein.The amino terminus of viral envelope proteinsconfains an initil sequence of 15-3uhydraphobic amino acids,
knownasa signal sequence,whichfaciltates binding of the growingpolypeptide chaindoted areceptorsite onthectoplasmic ideof th
sdo
certain asparagine residues of he nascent polypeptide by en bloc transfer of a mannose-rich core of preformed oligosacharides, and glucose
resicuesareremovedbyglycosidasescalled frimminglTheviralglycoproteinis hen transported fromtheroughendplasmic reticulumothe
Golgicomplex.Heree corecarbohydrate isfurhermodified byheremoval of severalmannose residuesandby theddition of further
[also called highmannose oligosaccharides]and complexoligosaccharides.Acoaledvesicle then transports thecompleted glycoprotein lo the
cellular rmembrone from which fhe particular virus buds.
Transtation
55
and complex oligosaccharides, which are usually N-
linked (to asparagine) or, less commonly, O-linked (to
Table 3.2
Categories of Proteins Encoded by
serine or threonine). The composition of the oligosac-
Viral Genomes
charides is determined not only by the amino acid
sequence and tertiary structure of the proteins con-
Structural proteins of the virion?
cerned, but more importantly by the particular cellular
Virion-associated enzymes, especially polymerases [tran-
glycosyltransfcrases prevalent in the type of cell in
scriptases)b
which the virus happens to be growing at the time.
Nonstructural proteins, mainly enzymes, required for tran-
scription, replication of viral nucleic acid, and cleavage of
proteinsc
Posttranslational Cleavage
Regulatory proteins that control the temporal sequence of ex-
of Viral Proteins
pression of the viral genomed
Proteins down-regulating expression of cellular genes?
 In the case of positive-sense picornaviruses and flavi-
Oncogene products (oncoproteins) and inactivators of cellu-
viruses, the polycistronic viral RNA is translated directly
lar tumor suppressor proteins?
 into a single polyprotein, which carries protease activity
Proteins influencing viral virulence, host range, tissue tro-
that cleaves the polyprotein at defined recognition sites
pism, etc.9
into smaller proteins. The first cleavage steps are carried
Virokines, which act on noninfected cells to modulate the
out while the polyprotein is still associated with the
progress of infection in the body as a wholeh
ribosome. Some of the larger intermediates exist only
fleetingly, whereas others are functional for a short pe-
oComprising capsid and (lor some viruses] core and/or envelope.
riod but are subsequently cleaved by additional virus-
bRNA viruses of posilive sense and DNA viruses that replicate in the
coded proteases to smaller proteins with alternative func-
nucleus do not carry a transcriptase in the virion. Virions of some
viruses, e.g., poxviruses, also contain several other enzymes.
tions. Posttranslational cleavage occurs in several other
DNAandRNA polyrae,helicse,protse,DNAvires
 RNA virus families, e.g., togaviruses and caliciviruses,
withlrgemexenmetbypxvirusndhresie
also encode numerous nzymes needed for nuletide sythesis.
in which polyproteins corresponding to large parts of
Sifespecific DNA-binding proteins (transcription faclors that bind to
the gcnome are cleaved. Some viruses encode several
enhancer sequences in the viral genome or to anothertranscription
different proteases. Most are either trypsin-like (serine
factor. Some may act in trans transactivators].
or cysteine proteases), pepsin-like (aspartyl proteases),
Upgrade expression of certain cellular genes; may lead to celltransfor-
or papain-like (thiol proteases).
mation ond eventually lo cancer. Observed with herpesviruses, adeno-
 Cellular proteases, present in organelles such as
viruses, papvaviruses, and reoviruss.
sRecorded so far mainly in the more complex DNA viruses [poxviruses,
thc Golgi complex or transport vesicles, are also vital
herpesviruses, adenoviruses] but may be more widespread.
to the maturation and assembly of many viruses. For
aass usq
example, cleavage of the hemagglutinin glycoprotein of
kines, down-regulating MHC expression, and blocking the comple-
 orthomyxoviruses or the fusion glycoprotein of para-
mentcascade.
myxoviruses is essential for virion infectivity.
Classes of Viral Proteins
Some viral proteins, including some with other
important functions, serve as regulatory proteins, modu-
Table 3.2 lists the various classes of proteins encoded by
lating the transcription or translation of cellular genes
the genomes of viruses. In general, the proteins translated
 Or of early viral genes. The large DNA viruses also encode
from the early transcripts of DNA viruses include en-
numerous additional proteins, called virokines, which
zymes and other proteins required for the replication of
do not regulate the viral replication cycle itself but influ-
viral nucleic acid, as wel as proteins that suppress host
ence the host response to infection. Included in these are
ceil RNA and protein synthesis. The large DNA viruses
homologues of cellular cytokines.
(poxviruses and hcrpesviruses) also encode a number of
 For poxviruses and herpesviruses, it is possible t0
enzymes involved in nucleotide metabolism.
identify, using gene deletion studies, a significant number
The late viral proteins are translated frorm late
 of genes (more than 40% of all gencs) that are not essen-
mRNAs, most of which arc transcribed from progeny
tial for the replication of the virus in cultured cells. Of
viral nucleic acid molecules. Most of the late proteins
course, in the strict economy of viral genomes, it is likely
 are viral structural proteins and are often made in consid-
that most or all of such genes are important in viral
erable excess.
survival in nature.
56
3.Viral Replication
Replication of Viral
nously, in a 5' -→ 3' direction, using a virus-coded DNA
Nucleic Acids
polymerase. It does not require the synthesis of Oka-
zaki fragments.
Replication of Viral DNA
Herpesviruses encode many or all of the proteins
required for DNA replication, including a DNA poly-
 Different mechanisms of DNA replication are employed
merase, a helicase, a primase, a single-stranded DNA-
by each family of DNA viruses. Because cellular DNA
binding protein, and a protein recognizing the origin of
polymerases cannot initiate synthesis of a new DNA
replication. Poxviruses and asfarviruses, which replicate
strand but only extend synthesis from a short (RNA)
cntirely within the cytoplasm, are self-sufficient in DNA
primer, onc end of newly synthesized viral DNA mole-
Icplication machinery. Hepadnaviruses, like retrovi-
cules might be expected to rermain single stranded. Vari-
ruses, utilize positive-scnsc, single-stranded RNA tran-
ous DNA viruses have evolved different strategies for
 scripts as intermediates for the production of DNA by
circumvcnting this problem. Viruses of some families
 reverse transcription. The single-stranded DNA parvovi
have a circular DNA genome, othcrs have a linear ge-
ruses use 3'-palindromic sequences that form a double-
nome with complementary termini that serve as primers,
 stranded hairpin structure as a primer for cellular DNA
while yet others have a protein primer attached cova-
 polymerase binding.
lently to each 5' terminus.
 Several virus-coded enzyme activities are generaily
required for the replication of viral DNA: a helicase
Replication of Viral RNA
(with ATPase activity) to unwind the doublc helix; a
helix-destabilizing protein to kcep the two separated
 The replication of RNA is a phenomenon unique to
strands apart until each has bcen copied; a DNA poly-
viruses. Transcription of RNA from an RNA template
merase to copy each strand from the origin of replication
requires an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, a virus-
in a 5' → 3' direction; an RNAsc to degrade the RNA
 coded enzyme not found in uninfected cells. The replica
 primer after it has served its purpose; and a DNA ligase
tion of viral RNA requires first the synthesis of comple-
to join the Okazaki fragments together (see later). Often 
 mentary RNA, which then serves as a template for mak-
a single largc enzyme carries out two or more of these ac-
ing more viral RNA.
tivities.
Where the viral RNA is of negative sense (ortho-
 The papovavirus genome, with its associated cel.
 myxoviruses, paramyxoviruses, rhabdoviruses, flovi-
lular histones, morphologically and functionally resem-
 ruses, bornavirus, arenaviruses, and bunyaviruses), the
bles cellular DNA and utilizes host cell enzymes, includ-
complementary RNA will be of positive sense and the
ing DNA polymerase A, for its replication. An early
 RNA polymcrasc involved resembles the virion-associ-
viral protein, large-T, binds to sites in the regulatory
 ated transcriptase used for the primary transcription of
scquence of the viral genome, thereby initiating DNA
 mRNAs. However, whereas most transcripts from such
replication. Replication of this circular double-stranded
 negative-sense viral RNAs are subgenomic mRNA mole-
DNA commences from a unique palindromic sequence
 cules, some full-length, positive-sense strands must also
and procecds simultaneously in both directions. As in
be made in order to serve as templates for viral RNA
thc replication of mammalian DNA, both continuous 
 synthesis (replication). For some viruses there is good
and discontinuous DNA synthesis occurs (of lcading
evidence that the RNA polymerases used for transcrip-
and lagging strands, respcctively) at the two growing
tion and replication are distinct, whereas in others the
forks. The discontinuous synthesis of the lagging strand
same enzyme functions differently.
involves repcated synthesis of short oligoribonucleotide
In the case of positive-sense RNA viruses (picorna-
 primcrs, which in rurn initiate short nascent strands
viruses, caliciviruses, togaviruses, flaviviruses, coronavi-
of DNA (Okazaki fragments), which are then joined
ruses, and arteriviruses),the compiementary RNA is neg-
covalently by a DNA ligase to form one of the grow-
ativc sense. Several viral RNA inolecules can bc
ing strands.
transcribed simultancously from a single complementary
 The replication of adenovirus DNA is quite differ-
 RNA tcimplate, with cach RNA transcripr bcing thc
ent. Adenovirus DNA is linear, with the 5' end of each
 product of a scparately bound polymerase molecule. The
strand being a mirror image of the other (terminally
rcsulting strucrurc, known as the replicative intermedi-
repeatcd inverted scquences) and each is linked cova-
ate, is thereforc partially doublc stranded, with single-
lently to a protein, thc precursor of which servcs as
stranded tails. Initiation of replication of picornavirus
the primer for viral DNA synthesis. DNA replication
 and calicivirus RNA, like that of adenovirus DNA, re-
 proceeds from both ends, continuously but asynchro- quires a bound protein rather than an oligonucleotide
Assenbly and Reteuse
57
as primer. This small protein is attached covalently to
lar chromosomal DNA. Transcription of viral RNA oc-
the S' terminus of nascent positive and negative RNA
curs from this integrated (proviral) DNA.
strands, as well as to virion RNA, but not to mRNA.
 Little is known about what determines whether a given
Assemk
 and Release
picornavirus positive-sense RNA molecule will be di-
rected (1) to a replication complex (a structure bound
Maturation and Release
to smooth endoplasimic reticulum), where it serves as
templatc for transcription by RNA-dependent RNA
of Nonenveloped Viruses
 polymerase into negativc-scnse RNA, (2) to a ribosome,
where it serves as mRNA for translation into protcin,
Aill nonenveloped animal viruses have an icosahedral
 n oss h!   pisdd 1 on () 
structurc. Thc structural proteins of simple icosahedral
a virion.
viruscs associate spontaneously to form capsomers,
 Retroviruses have a genome consisting of positive-
which self-assemble to form capsids into which viral
sense, single-stranded RNA. Unlike other RNA viruses,
nucleic acid is packaged. Completion of the virion often
they replicate via a DNA intermediate. The virion-associ-
involves proteolytic cleavage of one or more species of
 ated reverse transcriptase, using a transfer RNA molecule
capsid protein. The best-studied example, that of the
as a primer, makes a single-stranded DNA copy. Then,
 prototype picornavirus, poliovirus, is depicted in Fig-
functioning as a ribonuclease, the same enzyme removes
ure 3.9.
the parental RNA molecule from the DNA:RNA hybrid
The mechanism of packaging viral nucleic acid into
 and at the same time copics the negative-sense, single-
 a prcassembled empty procapsid has been elucidated for
stranded DNA strand to form a linear double-stranded
adenovirus. A particular protein binds to a nuclcotide
 DNA, which contains an additional sequence known as
sequencec at one end of the viral DNA known as the
the long terminal repeat (LTR) at each end. This double-
 packaging sequence; this enables the DNA to enter the
stranded DNA then circularizcs and integrates into cellu-
 procapsid bound to basic core proteins, after which some
Figure 3.9.
Uncleaved
Cleaved
protomer
 Pentamer
pentamer
Procapsid
Assembly
NCVP1a
(NCVP1a)5
Assembly.
Virion
Provirion
Cleavage
(VP1,2,3,4)60 + RNA
[VP0,1,3]60
+ RNA
Overview of the assembly of a picornavirus. The capsomer precursor protein INCVPla) agregoites to form penlamers; each of the 5 NCVP1
event, which cleaves each VPO molecule into VP2 and VP4, is required lor RNA incorporation. The mature virion is a dodecahedron with 60
capsomerachofwhichismadepof onemoleculeeachofP123nd4Xraycrystallography shwsthattheassembling unitshve
extensions that reoch across adjacent units ta form second and third nearest neighbor relationships.
58
3.Virat Replication
of the capsid proteins are cleaved to make the mature
(e.g., togaviruses), each protcin molecule of the nucleo-
virion.
capsid binds directly to the cytoplasmic domain of the
Most nonenvelopcd viruses accumulate within thc
 membrane glycoprotein oligomer, thus molding the en-
cytoplasm or nucleus and are released only when the
velope around the nucleocapsid. In the more usual case
cell eventually lyses.
of viruses with helical nucleocapsids, it is the matrix
protein that attachcs to the cytoplasmic domain of the
glycoprotcin peplomer; in turn the nuclcocapsid protein
Maturation and Release
recognizcs the matrix protcin and this initiates budding.
of Enveloped Viruses
Rclcase of each enveloped virion does not breach the
intcgrity of the plasma mcmbranc, hencc thousands of
 All mammalian viruscs with helical nucleocapsids, as
virus particles can be shed over a period of sevcral hours
well as some with icosahedral nucleocapsids (e.g., her-
or days without significant cell damage (Figure 3.11).
 pesviruses, togaviruses, and retroviruses), mature by ac-
Many, but not all, viruses that bud from the plasma
quiring an envelope by budding through cellular mem-
 membrane are noncytopathogenic and may be associated
branes.
with persistent infcctions.
Epithelial cells display polarity, i.e., they have an
Budding from Cellular Membranes
apical surface facing the outside world and a basolateral
 Enveloped viruses bud from the plasma membrane, from 
surface facing the interior of the body; the rwo are sepa-
internal cytoplasmic membranes, or from the nuclear
 rated by lateral cell-cell tight junctions. These surfaces
 membrane. Viruses that acquire their envelope within 
are chemically and physiologically distinct. Viruses that
the cell are then transported in vesicles to the cell surfacc.
are shed to the exterior (e.g., influenza virus) tend to
Insertion of the viral glycoprotein(s) into the lipid bilayer
bud from the apical plasma membrane, whereas others
 of membranes occurs by lateral displacement of celular
(e.g, C-type retroviruses) bud through the basolateral
 proteins from that patch of membrane (Figure 3.10A).
membrane (see Chapter 5).
The monomeric cleaved viral glycoprotein molecules as-
sociatc into oligomers to form the typical rod-shaped or
Exocytosis
club-shaped peplomer with a hydrophilic domain pro-
 Flaviviruses, coronaviruses, arteriviruses, and bunyavir-
jecting from the extcrnal surface of the membrane, a
 uses mature by budding through membranes of the Golgi
hydrophobic transmembrane anchor domain, and a
complex or rough endoplasmic rericulum; vcsicles con-
short hydrophilic cytoplasmic domain projecting slightly
taining the virus thcn migrate to the plasma membrane
into the cytoplasm, In thc case of icosahedral viruses
with which they fuse, thereby releasing the virions by
Figure 3.10.
Budding virion
Peplomers.
Nucleocapsid
 Matrix protein
A
Plasma membrane
Smooth-walled
vesicies
RER
Structural
Golgi
proteins
B
MatatflvirVirsewirixsiwihtrixprnbhh
membrane in which glycoprotein peplomers have accurnulated over matrix protein molecules. [B] Most enveloped viruses that do not have α
matrix protein bud into cytoplasmic vesicles [rough endoplasmic reticulum [RER) or Golgil], then pass through the cytoplasm in smoorh vesicles
and are released by exocytosis.
Further Reading
$9
Figure 3.11.
Lentivirus virions budding from the plasma membrane. (A) Feline immunodehiciency virus buding rom the plasmc membrane of a feline 
membrane.(B} Scanning electronmicrograph of human immunodeliciency virus I budding rom the plasmamembrane of a human Tlymphocyte.
Bars: 100 nm.[(A} courtesy of J. A. Marshall;(B) courtesy of C. S. Goldsmith.]
exocytosis (Figure 3.10B). Uniquely, thc cnvelope of the
Pennington, T. H. (1998). The replication of viruses. In
 herpesviruses is acquired by budding through the inner
lainella of the nuclear membranc; the enveloped virions
Infections" (B. W. J. Mahy and L. H. Collier, eds.),
then pass directly from the space bctween the two lamel-
Vol. 1, pp. 23-32. Edward Arnold, London.
lac of the nuclear membrane to the exterior of the cell
Peterlin, B. M. ed. (1993). Transcriptional regulation of
viruses. Semin. Virol. 4, 1-150.
via thc cisternae of the endoplasmic reticulum.
Roizman, B., and Palese, P. (1996). Multiplication of vi-
ruses: An overview. In *Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields,
Further Reading
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howiey, R. M., Chanock, J. L.
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 101-112. Lippincort-Raven, Phila-
Fields, B. N., Knipe, D. M., 1Iowley, R. M., Chanock,
delphia, PA.
R. M., Melnick, J. L., Monath, T. P., Roizman, B.,
Stephens, E. B., and Cormpans, R. W. (1988). Assembly
and Straus, S. E., eds. (1996). “Fields Virology, 3rd
of viruses at cellular membranes. Annu. Rev. Micro-
cd. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
biol. 42, 489-525.
Joklik, W. K. (1992). The viral multiplication cycle. In
Strauss, J. H. (1990). Viral proteases. Semin in Virol. 1,
“Zinsser's Microbiology” (W. K. Joklik, H. P. Willett,
307-336.
and D. B. Amos, eds.) 20th ed. pp. 789-835. Apple-
Watson, J. D., Hopkins, N. H., Roberts, J. W., Steitz,
ton & Lange, CT.
J. A., and Weiner, A. M. (1987). “Molecular Biology
Lodish, H., Baltimore, D., and Berk, A. (1995). "Molecu-
of the Gene,” 4th ed., Vol. 2. Benjamin-Cummins,
lar Cell Biology," 3rd ed. with CD ROM. Scientific
Menlo Park, CA.
American Books Frecman, New York.
Wimmer, E. (1994). *Cellular Receptors for Animal Vi-
Marsh, M., and Helenius, A. (1989). Virus entry into
ruses." American Society for Microbiology, Washing-
cells.Adu.Virus Res.36,107-1S2,
ton, DC.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Chapter
4
Viral Genetics and Evolution
Mutation ....
62
Genctic Recombination between Viruses...
67
Interactions betwccn Viral Gene Products....
69
Mapping Viral Genomes
70
Recombinant DNA Technology .
73
Genetic Variation and Viral Evolution.....
75
Further Reading.
80
 In nature, viruses undergo an infinitely long series of viral tropisms and the employment of specifc host cell
replication cycles as they are transmitted from host to  receptors define many disease patterns. Further,the evo-
host. During this process, spontaneous mutants are con-
lution of the capacity to grow in immunologically seques-
tinually generated, some of which will have different 1
tered sites (such as brain or kidney) or in cells of the
biological properties than the parent virus from which  immune system itself provides great survival advantage.
they arisc. Thc in vivo environment brings pressurcs to
4. The capacity to be shed for long periods of
bear which favor the selection of certain of these biologi-
time. Thc evolution of the capacity for chronic shedding
cal variants, primarily because of their preferential abil-
 offers exceptional opportunity for virus survival and
ity to be transmitted serially. Properties important in the 
 entrenchincnt (e.g., in maedi/visna virus infection, per-
survival and evolutionary progression of various viruses
sistence is so sustained that discase control has requircd
in nature include:
 slaughter of sheep over largc areas). Recrudescencc
 and intermittent shedding add additional survival ad-
1. The capacity to replicate rapidly. In many in-
vantages to the virus (e.g., herpesvirus infections in
stances, the most virulent strains of a virus replicatc
all animals)
faster than more temperate strains. However, if replica-
5. The capacity to elude bost defenses. Animals
tion is too rapid, it can be self-defeating—extremcly
y  havc cvolved elaborate immune systems to defcnd them-
rapid viral growth may not allow time enough for trans-
 selves against the viruses, but the viruses in rurn have
mission before the host is removed by death or severe
 evolved equally elaborate systems to evade host defenses.
illness.
Viruses, particularly those with large genomes, have
2.The capacity to replicate to high titer. A very
 gcnes that encode proteins that interfere with specific
high vertcbratc host viremia titcr is employed as a sur-
host antiviral activities. The capaciry to cause immuno-
vival mechanism by arthropod-borne viruscs to favor
 logically tolerant infcction represents an evolutionary
infection of the next arthropod. The same viruses pro-
 progression that gives the virus an cxtreme survival ad-
duce very high titers in the salivary glands of their arthro-
vantage (e.g., bovine viral diarrhea virus infection in
pod hosts so as to favor infection of the next vertebrate
 calves, felinc immunodeficiency virus infection in cats,
host. Such very high virus titers can be associated with1
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection in mice).
silent infections in some natural vertebrate hosts (e.g..
6. The capacity to survive after being shed into
reservoir avian hosts), but in vertebrate hosts the evolu-
the external environment. All things being equal, a virus
tion of this capacity is most often associated with severe,
 that has evolved a capsid that is environmentally stable
even fatal, illness.
 must have an evolutionary advantage. For example, be-
3. The capacity to replicate in certain key tissues.
 causc of its stability, caninc parvovirus was fransported
This quality is often important for the completion of the
around the world within 2 years of its emergence, mostly
viral transmission cycle. For example, the evolution of
 by carriage on human shoes and clothing, cages, etc.
61
62
4.Viral Genetics and Evolntion
7.The capacity to be transmitted vertically.Vi-
Types of Mutations
ruses that employ vertical transmission and survive with-
Mutations can be classifed according to the kind of
out ever confronting the external environment represent
change they produce in the viral genome or the kind of
another evolutionary progression.
change they produce in the properties of the virus or the
Knowledge of the genetic bases for many of these
 infection it causes. The former pertains to change in the
viral survival strategies expanded greatly following the
viral genotype, the latter in the viral phenotype. Pheno-
inception of recombinant DNA technology by Berg,
typic change may be evidenced by a change in a physical
Boyer, and Cohen in 1972. During the 1980s molecular
characteristic of the virion, by a change in a replicative
cloning and nucleotide sequencing methods became gen-
characteristic seen during infection in cell culture, or by a
trally available in many veterinary and zoonotic virology
change in a pathogenetic property in an infected animal.
laboratories. Another quanrum leap followed the intro-
Genotypic Classification of Mutants
duction of the polymerase chain reaction in the mid-
1980s. It was found that viruses, overall, employ remark-
The most common mutations are single nucleotidc sub-
ably diverse and seemingly clever molecular mechanisms 
 stitutions-these are called point mutations. Mutations
to assure their survival. It was also found that they have
may also involve deletions or insertions of single nucleo-
evolved intricate ways to maximize their limited cod-
tides or small or large blocks of nucleotides. The pheno-
ing capacity. For example, even a small single-stranded
typic expression of a nutation may be reversed not only
RNA virus may encode genes (1) in different reading
 by a back-mutation in the affected nucleotide(s) but also
frames, (2) in reading frames that are encoded in opposite 
by a suppresser mutation occurring elsewhere in the same
directions, (3) in overlapping reading frames, or (4) in
 gene, or even in a different gene, which leads to the
rcading frames that are read by frameshifting or with
 reappearance of the wild-type phenotype. For example,
alternating splicing patterns of the transcribed mRNAs.
 some temperature-sensitive mutants of influenza virus
The large double-stranded DNA viruses employ even
 developed as potential attenuated virus vaccines have
more complex schemes to synthesize all the proteins they
reverted to virulence because of independent suppresser
need to succeed in their Darwinian battle for survival.
 mutations in apparently unrelated genes. Mutations
Clearly, an understanding of viral genetics is central to
based on nucleotide substitutions revert most frequently,
the study of veterinary and zoonotic virology and to
those based on small dcletions or insertions less fre-
understanding how to interfere with viral transmission
 quently, and those based on large deletions rarely if ever.
cycles, whether this be for the prevention, control, or
Various other sorts of viral gene rearrangements also
treatment of viral diseases or for more basic or compara-
 Occur that mimic simple mutations; these occur especially
tivc purposes.
in DNA viruses and retroviruses and include large dupli-
cations, inversions, and the incorporation of foreign viral
or celluiar nucleic acid sequences by recombination. Such
Mutation
 genomic changes often have important biological conse-
quences.
In productive virus infections of animals, a few virions
 gain entry and replicate through many cycles to generate
Phenotypic Classification of Mutants
millions or billions of progeny. During such replication
 The phenotypic expression of a mutation may be seen
cycles, errors in copying the viral nucleic acid inevitably
in various ways: relative to the wild type a mutant may
occur; these are called mutations. Most mutations are
 produce a different type of plaque in a cell monolayer
lethal because the mutated virus has lost some vital infor-
(plaque mutants), may become resistant to neutraliza-
mation and can no longer replicate or compete with the
 tion by antibody raised against the wild type (antibody
wild-type virus, Whether a particular nonlethal mutation
escape mutants), or may exhibit any of many other vari-
survives depends on whether the resultant phenotypic
 ant properties. Mutations affecting antigenic determi-
change in its genc product is disadvantageous, neutral,
 nants on virion surface proteins are strongly favored
 Or affords the mutant virus somc selective advantage. In
when viruses replicate in the presence of an antibody.
the laboratory, genetic variants are obtained by sub-
 Such mutants are of importance in persistently infected
jecting a virus population to some selective condition and
animals (e.g., in sheep infected with maedi/visna virus
isolating a clone, i.e., a population of virions originating
 and horses infected with equine infectious anemia virus).
from a single virion, in this case a variant virion. A clone
They are also important epidemiologically (e.g., in swine
is usually obrained by picking a single viral plaque in a
infected with vesicular cxanthcma viruses where anti-
cell monolayer, followed by replaquing or other means
 body escape mutants emerged very often and in sea lions
to assure that only one genotype has been isolated.
infected with San Miguel sea lion viruses where the same
Mutation
63
phenomenon occurs). Perhaps the most prominent ex-
have revealed massive deletions and a great diversity of
ample of the importance of mutations affecting viral
genomic rearrangements.
antigenicity is influenza viruses, where antigenic drift
In cell culture, the concentration of Dl particles
occurs constantly.
increases greatly with serial passage at high multiplicity.
Conditional lethal mutants cannot grow under cer-
 This is due to several mechanisms: (1) their shortened
tain (restrictive) experimental conditions but can repli-
 genomes require less time to be replicated; (2) they are
catc under other (permissive) conditions. When a partic-
less often diverted to serve as templates for transcription
ular growth condition is chosen that allows only such
of mRNA; and (3) they have enhanced affnity for the
 mutants to replicate, usually several different genotypic
viral replicase, giving them a competitive advantage over
variants arc present, each adapting to the restrictive
their full-length counterparts. Thesc featurcs also explain
 growth conditions via different mutations, even muta-
why defective interfering particles interfere with the rep-
tions in different genes. The conditional lethal mutants 
lication of infectious virions with full-length RNA ge-
studied most commonly are those whose replication is
 nomes with progressively greater effciency on serial
blocked in certain host cells (host range mutants) or
passage.
at certain defined temperatures (temperature-sensitive
The generation of other defective DNA virus ge-
mutants, cold-adapted mutants). With the latter, the se-
 nomes can occur by any of a great variety of modes of
lective condition used is the tcmperature of incubation
 DNA rearrangement. For example, papovavirus defec-
of infected cells. Mutation results in a structurally abnor-
tive interfering particles usually contain reiterated copies
 mal protcin which—although functional at the permis-
of the genomic origins of replication, sometimes inter-
sive temperature—cannot maintain its structural integ-
 spersed with DNA of host cell origin.
rity and functional conformation when the temperature
Our knowledge of DI particlcs derives mostly from
is changed by a few degrecs. Temperature-sensitive mu-
studies in cultured cells, but they may also play a role
 tants and cold-adapted mutants have been used exten- i
 in the animal: by interfering with the replication of an
sively in attempts to producc attenuated virus vaccines;  (
 otherwise lethal standard virus they may attenuate its
therc has been exceptional success in the development 
 virulence. This may explain “zone phenomena," where
of cold-adapted influenza vaccines.
virus preparations cause disease only when diluted, while
concentrated stock virus is attenuated. Defective interfer-
ing mutants may be involved in a variety of chronic
Special Case of Defective
animal diseases. However, because their defective and
variable nature makes them difficult to detect in animals,
Interfering Mutants
their role in disease is still obscure.
Defective interfering (DI) mutants have been demon-
stratcd in most families of viruses; these mutants cannot
replicate by themselves but need the presence of the
 Mutation Rates
parental wild-type virus; at the same time they interfere
with and usually decrease the yield of the parental virus.
Replication of cellular DNA in eukaryotic celis is subject
All DI particles of RNA viruses that have been character-
to proofreading, an error-correcrion mechanism involv-
izcd are deletion mutants. In influenza viruses and reovir-
ing exonuclease activity. Because the replication of those
uses, which have segmented genomes, defective virions
 DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus is subject to
lack one or more of the larger segments and contain
 the same proofreading, their mutation rates are probably
instcad smaller segments consisting of an incomplete
similar to that of host cell DNA. Errors occur at a rate
portion of the encoded gene(s). In the case of viruses with
 of 10-10 and 10-1 per incorporated nucleotide (i.e., per
 a nonsegmented genome, defective interfering particlcs
 nucleotide per replication cycle). Point mutations in the
contain RNA that is shortened, as much as two-thirds
third nucleotide of a codon are often silent, i.e., do not
of the genome may have been deleted in the defective 
 result in an altered amino acid, because of redundancy
intcrfering particles of vesicular stomatitis viruses. Mor-
 in the genetic code and some point mutations are lethal
phologically, defective interfering particles usually re-
because they produce nonfunctioning gene products, a
semble the parental virions; however, in vesicular stoma-
stop codon, or other aberrant regulatory sequences. Via-
titis viruses, with their normally bullt-shaped virions,
ble mutations that are neutral or deleterious in one host
they arc shorter than wild-type virions. In the jargon used
 may provide a selective advantagc in a differcnt host.
to dcscribe these particles, normal vesicular stomatitis
 Because of the absence of a cellular proofrcading
virions are called B particles and the defective interfering
 mechanism for RNA, error ratcs during the replication
 particles are called truncated or T particles, Sequencing
 of viral RNAs are much higher than those of viral DNA.
studies of the RNA of these defective interfering particles
 For example, the nucleotide substitution rate in the 11-
64
4.Viral Genetics and Fvolntion
kb genome of the vesicular stomatitis virus is 10-3 to mutations, including massive deletions, which affect
10- per nucleotide per replication cycle, so that in an thcir pathogenicity. From this, one might wonder how
infected cell nearly every progeny genome will be differ-
 coronaviruses or other RNA viruses can maintain their
cnt from the parental genome and from every other prog-
identities as pathogens over any evolutionarily signifi-
eny genome in at least one nucleotide. This rate of nucleo-
cant period of time; why have these viruses not mutated
tide substitution is about one million times higher than 
 Out of existence? The answer lies in the quasispecies
the average rate in eukaryotic DNA. Of course, most 
conccpt, which is not just an abstraction but a proven
of the nucleotide substitutions are deleterious and the
reality in vesicular stomatitis viruses, foot-and-mouth
 genomes containing thcm arc lost. However, nonlethal
 disease viruses, influenza viruses, and others.
mutations in the genome of RNA viruses accumulate
If viral nucleic acid replication was without error,
very rapidly. For example, genomic sequence compari-
 all progeny would be the same and there would be no
son of two hepatitis C virus isolates obtained from a
 on sa i na a  d o ua
chronically infected person at an interval of 13 years
 mutants of all sorts would appear and the viral popula-
showed that the mutation rate was about 2 X 10 'nucleo-
tion would lose its integrity. However, at an intermediate
tide substitutions per genome nuclcotide per year. The
error rate such as is seen with RNA viruses, the viral
changes found were distributed unevenly throughout the
population becomes a coherent, self-sustaining entity
genome, which means that genes coding for different
that resembles a metaphorical cloud of variants centered
proteins evolved at different rates. This uneven rate is
around a consensus sequence, but capable of continuous
most probably a consequence of selection of certain mu-
expansion and contraction in different dircctions as new
tants over others. As another example, in 1978-1979
mutants continue to emerge and others disappear within
outbreaks of human poliomyelitis causcd by poliovirus 
the population. Darwinian selection limits the survival
1 were traced from the Netherlands ro Canada and then
 of the most extreme mutants—extreme outliers do not
to the United States. Viral RNA obtained from patients
 survive—-and favors varianrs near the center of the cloud
in each country showed that over a period of 13 months
a s isn ', l aae saq  se
of epidemic transmission there were about 100 nucleo-
center of a cloud is unclear, so the consensus sequence at
tide changes in the genome of 7441 nucleotides.
the heart of the quasispecies is inscrutable. Any published
viral genomic nucleotide sequence reflects a random
choice of starting matetial, one biological clone among
Viral Quasispecies Concept
 many, more or less representative of the consensus se-
 quence of thc gcnome of the population as a whole, the
Every virus specics, as defincd by conventional pheno-
 cloud as a wholc. In Eigen's metaphor, the cloud is the 
typic propertics, exists as a gcnetically dynamic, diverse
quasispecies—a graphic depiction has bcen used to try
 population of virions in which individual genotypes have
 to make this concept more understandablc (Figure 4.1).
only a fleeting existence. Most individual viral genomes
To return to the example of rhc coronaviruses as
differ in one or more nucleotides from the consensus or
 highly mutablc pathogens, studies on the pathogenesis of
average sequence of the population and over relatively
 the coronavirus, feline infectious peritonitis virus, have
short times genotypic drift occurs as particular variants
 shown that every cat harbors its own unique coronavirus
 gain advantage. Genotypic drift over longer times leads 
 quasispecies cloud that persists at low levels of replica-
to the cvolution of substantially different viruses. Man-
 tion in the gut, kept in chcck by an effcient immune
fred Eigcn, John Holland, and their colleagues intro-
 system. The fatal discase is the result of mutants arising
duced thc terni quasispecies to describe such diverse,
 in large numbers when a burst of replication activity
rapidly evolving and competing viral populations.
occurs (e.g., after immunosuppression); among these are
 The evolution of quasispecies would be expected to
 mutants that grow to high titers in macrophagcs, induc-
be most conspicuous in viruses with large RNA genomes,
ing a cascade of immunosuppressive and immunopatho
where nonlethal changes may accumulate rapidly. In-
logic events.
 deed, the genomes of coronaviruses, the largest RNA
 gcnomes known, are fraught with “genetic defects.” At
the mutation rates noted earlier, 1 out of 3000 nucleo-
Mutagenesis
tides in every coronavirus genome would be changed in
 tvery round of replication; because coronavirus genomes
Spontaneous mutations occur becausc of errors during
contain about 30,000 nucleotides, every genome must
 replication. Their frequcncy can be enhanced by the
differ from the next by at least one nucleotide. Further,
 treatment of virions or isolated viral nucleic acid with
coronavirus genomes undergo other more substantial
 physicail agents such as UV- or X-irradiation or with
Mlfatitn
65
nucleotide substitution or deletion or addition of inter-
FIGuRE 4.1.
est; (4) the extension of this partial hybrid containing
the mutation of interest, using a DNA polymerase and
ligase, to form a complete double-stranded DNA copy;
(5) the transfer of this DNA to an appropriate host
system such as Escberichia coli or any of several verte-
brate viruses, where millions of copies of the mutant
may be produced; and (6) screening for the murant of
 interest using selcctive conditions favoring the replica-
tion of the mutant (called marker rescue). The polymer-
ase chain reaction followed by sequencc analysis may
bc used to verify success in introducing the mutation of
intcrest (Figure 4.2).
Depiction f he qusispecies concept ofManfed Eigen The ox
The ability to isolate infectious viral DNA clones
represetssqeenflli
that might occur when a viusreplicates throughmany infection
and infectious complementary DNA clones of RNA vi-
cycles. The central spot represents the lack of variance that would
ruses and to manipulate these clones have been comple-
folwifereplitinprcessftheiruswapefectlyaccurl
mented by the development of several viral vectors, i.c.,
cndenvironnlselctivepressurswereconstntThclodo
calletresntsviralppltondiveiyh
vertebrate viruses with desired tropisms and infection
ally Folows on an intermediate error rate inreplication.The popula
characteristics that make them valuable in carrying for-
fion, overall becomes α coherent, sef-sustaining entity that meta
eign genes. Poxviruses, adenoviruses, herpesviruses, par-
phorically resembles a cloud in that its center, the original consensus
voviruses, enteroviruses, togaviruses, and other viruses
sequence,siscrtable,whresitsdgesrepresentprobes phig
inlo the environment seeking a betterand-belter"fit" Viral evolution
have been advanced as vectors, cach for particular pur-
operates at the level af the quasispecies as a whole, not individual
poses. The power of this approach is that without know-
genotypes, andtheresulis the conining mergence ofnewvirl
ing the role of a particular sequence beforehand, it is
phenotypes, some ofwhich cause new or more severe disease. From
M. Eigen, Viral quasispecies. Sci. Am. 269, 42-49 [1993]]
possible to determine the protein(s) it encodes and its
function(s) by altering its sequence and reintroducing all
variants back into host cells (or even host animals). This
 chenicals such as nitrous acid or nitrosoguanidine. Nu-
approach has becn called reverse genetics, i.e., genetic
cleotide analogs such as S-fluorouracil (for RNA viruses)
invcstigation proceeding from genorype to phenotype.
 or 5'-bronodeoxyuridine (for DNA viruscs) are muta-
Sitc-directed nutagenesis has opened other new research
genic only when virus replicates in thcir prcscnce, be-
avenues in veterinary and zoonotic virology; for exam-
 cause they are incorporated into the viral nucleic acid
 ple, mutations can be introduced into genes suspected
 and produce mutations by miscoding during replication.
of having roles in viral pathogenicity and mutations can
be introduced to produce attenuated virus vaccines that
Site-Dirccted Mutagenesis
may also carry an immunological marker.
Instcad of relying on chance mutations anywhere in the
genome, recombinant DNA tcechnology makes it possible
to introduce mutations at any site of interest and to test
Genetic Analysis of
their effects on the viral phcnotype. That is, using site-
Noncultivable Viruses
directed mutagenesis the nuclcotide at any prescribed
position in a DNA genome or complementary DNA
Growth in cell culture is no longer a precondition for
(cDNA) transcribed froim an RNA genomc can be
the study of viruses as virtually unlinited quantities of
changed to any other nucleotide or it can be deleted or
any required viral nucleic acid can be produced using
affected by the nearby insertion of an additional nucleo-
 polymerase chain reaction or cloning. Remarkable prog-
tide(s). There are many variations in the methods used
ress has been made in the genetic analysis of pathogens
to carry out these inanipulations, especially in the host
 that cannot be grown in cell culture or experimental
chosen to accept thc manipulated gene. In general the
 animals: for example, noncultivable bovine papillomavi-
technology involves (1) the synthesis of cloned copies of
ruses have been analyzed using DNA extracted directly
the DNA of interest, usually in a bacteriophage vector
from papillomas collected at abattoirs. The complete
such as M13; (2) the denaturation of this DNA to yield 
nucleotide sequcnccs of rabbit hemorrhagic disease vi-
single-stranded molccuics; (3) the hybridization of this
rus, a calicivirus that cannot be cultivated in cell culture,
singlc-stranded DNA with chemically synthcsized oligo-
has becn dctermined, starring with virus obtained from
nucleotides (short sequences of DNA) containing the 
the livers of infected rabbits. Sinilarly, the genomcs of
66
4. Virat Genetics and Fivotution
human hepatitis C virus and hepatitis G virus, both un-
: Figure 4.2.
cultivablc faviviruses, have bcen sequcnced and thc se-
A.Deletion
B.Point Mutation
qucnces used to produce synthetic diagnostic antigens.
Clonedviral DNA
Cloned
viral DNA
Genetics of Viral Adaptation to Cell
Cultures or Laboratory Animals
Although experiments with viruses of veterinary impor-
Cutcloned DNA
tancc can often be carricd out in thcir natural hosts,
endonucleaseat
growing the viruses in cultured cells or small laboratory
desired site
animals offers great advantages. Many wild-type viruses
initially grow poorly in cell cultures or laboratory ani-
mals, but can be adapted by serial passage. Such adapta-
tion depends on the spontaneous generation of mutations
and progressive selection of the best growing mutants.
These host-range variants may contain mutations in
Hybridize
any of several genes, but most often in genes encoding
SE
withmutant
oligonucleotide
the virion surface proteins. Adapted variants often
 have modified attachment domains on their surface pro-
teins that bind better to the differcnt receptors on cul-
tured cells or key cells in experimental animals. For ex-
ample, influcnza viruses may acquire the capacity to
 grow well in the lungs of mice or in cultured mammalian
 or avian cells via point mutations affecting their hemag-
Recircularize
 glutinin. Often such mutations affect the protcolytic
withDNA
ligase
clcavagc of the hemagglutinin, which is cssential for vi-
ral infcctivity.
 Some viruses produce a cytopathic effect or diseasc
the first timc they are inoculated into ccll cultures of
experimcntal animals [e.g., Eastern cquine encephalitis
virus in BHK-21 (baby hamster kidney) cells or suckling
Clone containing
mice]. In other cases, a minimal cytopathic effect or
viral DNA with
deletion
Infect cells;
 disease may be observed at first, but may be produced
replication
regularly after serial passage, even prolonged blind pas-
K
sage (e.g., bluetongue viruses in mice and various cell
cultures; street rabies virus in mice, hamsters and neuro-
blastoma cells). Likewise, newly isolated viruses at first
often fail to grow well in certain kinds of cultured cells,
but can be adapted by serial passage. Most modern viro-
logic research is performed with virus strains highly
Clone containing
adapted to a given host system, usually a particular cell
point mutation
culture system that provides a maximum virus yield.
 A frequent by-product of such adaptation is a loss of
Site-directemtgenesis ADeletionsmayemdeinclevil
virulence for the natural host species; thus adaptation
DNA [or complementary DNA obtained by reverse-transcribing viral
RNAbyinseing heDNAinaplsmidandremoving wholebloks
of infectious canine hepatitis virus (an adcnovirus) to
of DNA berween wo restriction endonuclease culting siltes or by
pig kidney cell cultures results in its attenuation for the
cuting ata single reslriction site and using an exonuclease to remove
nucleotides from both cutends.Deletions ofvarious sizes may be
dog--this was the basis for the development more than
selected from a collection of such clones.(B)Point mutations may be
40 years ago of the most widely used attenuated virus
inserted in cloned viral DNA by (1} denaluring the DNA to obtain
vaccine for dogs.
singleslranded molecules,(2)hybridizing these molecules toachem
ically synthesized oligonucleotide primer that is mismatched at a
 Although such adaptations of viruses to cultured
desired site farrow),(3}xtendingedouble-srandedNAusing
cells and laboratory animals havc becn practiced for
α DNA polymerase, and (4) cloning the resulting DNA and selecting 
many years, leading to many practical vaccine products,
clones containing the mulant of interest.
until recently little was known of the nature of the muta-
Genetic Recombination between Viruses
67
tions involved. Now, using site-directed mutagenesis and
 Omaviruses, but not always in cells transformed by papil-
other molecular genetic methods, the key viral genes,
lomaviruses or certain herpesviruses, in which transfor-
their gene products, and their infection strategies are 
 mation may occur, although the viral DNA usually
 being revealed. Seemingly, the more we study attenuating
rcmains episomal.
mutations the more complex they become; however, at
 Recombination between viral and cellular genetic
the same time, more and more practical products are
information has been established and, for at least some
 coming from our increased genetic understanding.
viruses, is also important in virus evolution. After all,
viruses have access to the almost unlimited gene pool
 of their host cells and certainly have the capacity to
Genetic Recombination
incorporate and exploit genes that favor their growth
and survival. The presence of cellular genes or pseu-
between Viruses
dogenes within the genomes of rctroviruses is wel
established, and the same has now been found for
When two different viruses simultaneously infect the
 other RNA viruses. For example, in influenza virus
same cell, generic recombination may occur between the
 infections, proteolytic cleavage of the viral hemaggluti-
nucleic acid molecules during or after their synthesis;
 nin by cellular proteases is essential for the production
this may take the form of intramolecular recombination,
 Of infectious progeny. During the adaptation of nonvir-
reassortment, or reactivation (the latter if one of the
ulent influenza virus strains to chicken cells (which
viruses had been inactivated) (Figure 4.3).
 are nonpermissive for hemagglutinin cleavage), a patho-
 genic variant was isolated that contained an insertion
of 54 nucleotides that was complementary to a region
Intramolecular Recombination
 of host cell 28S ribosomal RNA. This suggests template
switching by the viral polymerase during viral RNA
Intramolecular recombination involves the exchange of
 replication. This insertion seems to have changed the
nucieotide sequences between different—but usually
 conformation of the viral genc product, the heinaggluti-
closely related—-viruses during replication (Figure 4.3A).
nin, rendering it accessible to cellular proteases and
It occurs with all double-stranded DNA viruses, presum-
thercby producing infectious virions in previously non-
ably because of template switching by the polymerase.
permissive cells.
 Intramolecular recombination also occurs among RNA
The pathogenetic consequences of cellular infor-
viruses (e.g-, picornaviruses, coronaviruses and togavi-
 mation bcing inserted into viruses by intramolecular re-
ruses); western equine encephalitis virus arose as a result
combination can be dramatic. The discovery that
of intramolecular rccombination between an ancient
Marck's disease virus, an oncogenic herpesvirus of
Sindbis-like virus and eastern equine encephalitis virus.
chickens, had been misclassified because it carries extra
Such phenomena are likely more widespread among
 genes was particularly surprising. This virus had been
 RNA viruses than has been appreciated because the de-
considered a gammaherpesvirus, partly because all other
tection of recombinants has been difficult. Now, use of
 oncogenic herpesviruses are members of this subfamily.
 the reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction has
Subsequently, as the genome of the virus was partially
overcome earlier technical problems.
sequenced it was realized that it is an alphaherpesvirus--
 Under experimental conditions, intramolecular re-
oncogenic strains of the virus had acquired oncogenic
 combination may even occur between viruses belonging
 genes either from avian retroviruses or from the cellular
to different families; the best example is the now classical
homologues of retrovirus genes.
discovery of recombination between SV40 (a papovavi-
 Equally surprising was the discovery of the molecu-
rus) and adenoviruses. Both SV40 and adenovirus DNAs
lar basis for the progression of bovine viral diarrhea to
occasionally become integrated into cellular DNA, so it 
 mucosal diseasc. When a cellular ubiquitin gene is in-
is perhaps not surprising to find that when rhesus mon-
 serted into a nonstructural gene of noncytopathic bovine
key cells that harbor a persistent SV40 infection are
viral diarrhea virus strains they become cytopathic and
superinfected with an adenovirus, not only does comple-
 gain the capacity to cause persistent infection. Severe
mentation occur, the SV40 acting as a helper in an other-
disease, i.e., mucosal disease, occurs when such mutant
wise abortive adenovirus infcction, but recombination viruses infect bovine feruses previously infected with
occurs between SV40 DNA and adenovirus DNA to
 noncytopathic, nonpersistcnt virus strains during the
yield hybrid (recombinant) DNA, which is packaged into
first 80 to 100 days of gestation. This complex infection
adenovirus capsids. Integration of viral DNA into cellu-
 and mutation pattern explains thc sporadic occurrence
lar DNA by intramolecular recombination occurs in cels
 of universally fatal mucosal disease in calves and, in
transformed by adenoviruses, hepadnaviruses, and poly-
some cases, older animals.
68
4.Viral Genetics amd Euotution
FIgure 4.3.
XX
XXC
XOXOXXX
A. Intramolecular recormbination
+
B. Genetic reassortment
C. Polyploidy
D. Heteropolyploidy
E. Phenotypic mixing
genome"a'
genome "a"
F.Phenotypic mixing
capsid "A"
mixed capsld
"b+
G. Transcapsidation
capsid "B""
capsid"B"
s
RNA viruses(E-G)Phnolypicmixing:(E} wihenvelope viruses, (F)virses wihicoshdral capsids,(G)ranscapsidtion.
 Unlike other RNA viruses, retroviruses have no
tions occur between the two DNA copics of the diploid
replicating pool of viral RNA. Although the genome 
e  retrovirus genome, as well as between the DNA provi-
 of retroviruses is positive-sense, single-stranded RNA,
rus and cellular DNA. In thc latter instance, the retrovi-
replication does not occur until the genomic RNA is
 rus may pick up a cellular oncogene; such oncogencs
transcribcd into DNA by the virion-associated reverse
 are incorporated into the viral genome to become
transcriptase and the resultant double-stranded DNA
viral oncogenes, which confer the property of rapid
is integrated into the DNA of the host cell. However,
 oncogenicity on the retrovirus concerned (see Chapters
both negativc-strand and positive-strand recombina-
11 and 23).
Iteractions betrcen Viral Gene Products
69
Reassortment
 This can occur between two strains of the same virus, two
related viruses, or rwo unrelated viruses [e.g., between an
Reassortment is a form of genetic recombination ob-
adenovirus and an adeno-associated virus (a parvovirus)
served in RNA viruses with segmented genomes, whether
 or between an adenovirus and SV40 virus (a polyomavi-
these be single or double stranded and whether these
rus)]. One virus provides a gene product that the other
involve few or many segments. Reassortment has been
cannot make, thereby allowing the latter to replicate
documented in families with 2 (Arenaviridae and Birna-
in the mixedly infected cell. Of course, because neither
viridae), 3 (Bunyaviridae), 6, 7, or 8 (Orthomyxoviri-
 genome is involved, nothing permanent comes of this.
dae), or 10, 11, or 12 (family Reoviridae) genome seg-
 Genes can be localized by compiementation analysis, as
ments (Figure 4.3B). In a cell infected with two related
viruscs with mutations in identical genes do not comple-
viruses within each of these families, an exchange of
ment cach other.
 segments may occur, with the production of viable and
stable reassortants. Such reassortment occurs in nature
and is an important source of genetic variability; for
Phenotypic Mixing
example, bluetongue virus isolates have been found in
cattle that are reassortants of rwo parental viruscs.
Following infection of cells by rwo viruses, progeny viri-
ons may be found that have acquired phenotypic charac-
teristics from both parents. For example, when cells are
Reactivation
coinfccted with an influenza virus and a paramyxovirus,
the envelopes of somc of the progeny particles display
The tcrm multiplicity reactivation is applied to the pro-
 antigens derived from both parents. However, each vi-
duction of infectious virus by a cell infcctcd with two
rion contains the gcnome of only one parent and on
or morc virus particles of the same strain, cach of which
 passage produces only virions resembling that parent
had suffered a lethal mutation in a different gene. Multi-
(Figures 4.3E and 4.3F). Phenotypic mixing plays an
plicity reactivation could theoretically lead to the cmer-
 essential part in the replication cycle of envelope-defec-
gence of infectious virus if animals were inoculated with
tive retroviruses. The progeny virions are called pseu-
vaccines produced by UV-irradiation or chemical muta-
 dotypes and contain thc genome of the defectivc parental
genesis; these methods are therefore not uscd for vaccine
virus cnveloped by host cell membrane containing the
production. Cross-reactivation, genome rescue,
，and
 glycoproteins of the hclper retrovirus, in whose company
DNA fragment rescue are terms used to describe gcnetic
it will always be found.
recombination between infectious and inactivated vi-
Experimentally, and in nature with some viruses,
ruses of related but distinguishable genotypes (or a DNA
 phenotypic mixing of nonenveloped viruses can take the
fragment from such a virus). Appreciation of such phe-
form of transcapsidation (Figure 4.3G), in which there
nomena was important in the development of viral vec-
 is partial or usually complete exchange of capsids. For
tors as vaccines.
example, poliovirus nucleic acid may be enclosed within
a coxsackievirus capsid or the adenovirus 7 genome may
be enclosed within an adcnovirus 2 capsid. Because the
Interactions between Viral
viral ligands that govern cellular attachment reside in
 the capsid, transcapsidation can change the tropism of
Gene Products
a virus.
Thc interaction between viruses may involve not only
their nucleic acids but also their proteins, and the prod-
Polyploidy
ucts of such interactions may affect the viral phenotype.
For the most part, such interactions are laboratory phe-
With the exception of the diploid retroviruses, vertebrate
nomena, but some may operate in nature and some have
viruses are haploid, i.e., they contain only a single copy
proven useful in practical ways.
 of each gene. Even with thc rctroviruses, diploidy is in
 no sense comparable to that scen in eukaryotic cells, as
both copies of the genomc are essentially identical and
Complementation
derived from the samc parental virus. Among viruses
that mature by budding from the plasma mcmbrane,
The term complementation is used to describe interac-
e.g., paramyxoviruses, several nucleocapsids (and thus
tions between viral proteins in doubly infected cells that 
 genomes) may be found enclosed in a single cnvelope
result in rcscue or increased yields of one or both viruses.
(polyploidy or beteropolyploidy, Figure 4.3C and 4.3D).
70
4.Viral Genetics and Evotution
Mapping Viral Genomes
fragment, from the labeled S' end to the break point,
indicates the location of a G residue in the original DNA.
Viral genomes have been mapped in many ways. Since
To visualize the sequence, the degraded fragments from
the early 1980s, partial or complete sequencing has
 each reaction mixture are separated by gel electrophore-
 largely replaced all older methods for analyzing viral
sis. The gel is then exposed to X-ray film where only
genomes, especially smaller viral genomes. Methods
the products containing the radioactively labeled 5' end
have become simpler, cheaper, more automated, and
become visible (Figure 4.4). This method allows detec-
 more accessible to the average virology laboratory. The
tion of up to 1000 bp of DNA from a single gel. Unfortu-
complete sequences for protorypic members of every
 nately, fragment preparation is tedious and the chemical
family containing animal or zoonotic pathogens are now
 base digestions are difficult to control. Because of these
available and retrievable from international databanks,
 diffculties, this method is no longer widely used.
and partial sequences are being used in many genetic
studies and reference identifcation schemes. Restriction
Sanger Method
endonuclease analysis is still useful for characterizing
In 1977 Fred Sanger described a DNA sequencing
viruses with large genomes, but most other older meth-
 method based on the enzymatic synthesis of complemen-
ods, such as oligonucleotide fingerprinting using T1 ribo-
nuclease digestion followed by trwo-dimensional electro-
phoresis, have fallen by the wayside.
Figure 4.4.
C
Viral Genomic DNA and RNA
G
G
Sequence Analysis
C
3
G
There are two basic sequencing techniques, known as the
AT
sequencing is based on the chemical degradation of the
T
fragment to be sequenced and Sanger sequencing (also
C
called the dideoxy method) is based on the enzymatic
G
synthesis of the DNA strand to be sequenced. Both meth-
G
 ods work because gel electrophoresis produces very high-
G
 resolution separations of DNA molecules; fragments of
 DNA that differ in size by only a single nucleotide can
T
 be resolved. Variations on the Sanger method are used
T
most commonly today—they are often automated,
allowing high throughput and computer-based manage-
T
ment and interpretation of data.
T
The Maxam-Gilbert Method
Walter Gilbert's knowledge of organic chemistry al-
lowed him to sclect a set of chemicals that specifically
break DNA at A's, G's, or T's. By separatring the frag-
 ments of DNA that result from such chemical treatment
it was possible to infer the order in which each of the
 nucleotides was present in the fragment of DNA.
In this method, individual fragments are frst iso-
lated by treating thc DNA with a restriction endonucle-
ase; these fragrments arc thcn radioacrively 5' end labeled
with 2P or 3S. The fragments are then cut with a second
restriction enzyme and the resulting fragments are sub-
 jected to chemical trcatments to modify and remove spe-
Maxam-Gilbert method of sequencing DNA (see text for details.
cific nucleotides. For example, in one reaction mixture,
Chemicals are used that specifically break fragments of DNA at either
chemicals are chosen that break the DNA fragments
A's,G's,rT's. The radioactivelylabeled fragments greseparated by
at G residues. Reaction mixtures specifc for the other
gel electrophoresis and he gel is exposed to X-ray hlm. The heading
of the lanes of the gel indicates the product of each reaction; the
nuclcotides are run in parallel. The length of each DNA
nucleolide sequence is shown at the side.
Mapping Viral Geromes
71
tary strands of DNA using the DNA of interest as the
FIGURE 4.5.
template. Synthesis of these complementary strands is
terminated by the incorporation of nucleotide analogues,
referred to as dideoxynucleotides (ddNTP). In the reac-
tion mixtures the DNA polymerase incorporates normal
dNTPs to form the growing chains until it uses a ddNTP,
which forces chain termination.
 By performing four reactions, each containing a
single dideoxynucleotide (ddATP, ddCTP, ddGTP, or
 ddTTP), along with all four normal dNTPs, four sets 
of DNA fragments are generated. To visualize the
 products of the polymerase reaction, either the primer
or the normal nucleotides are radiolabeled ([2P]- or
[S]dNTP). Newly synthesized fragments are denatured
from their templates and resolved according to size
by electrophoresis in a denaturing polyacrylamide gel.
The resulting gel is then exposed to X-ray film (Figure
4.5). The DNA sequence is determined by reading the
a usadan su inog au u spua jo ipio
nucleotide. These bands form a ladder corresponding
to the size of the specifically terminated fragments.
The fastest migrating bands (from all four reactions)
represent the shortest fragments synthesized. The se-
quence can be interpreted by reading up the four lanes
of the autoradiogram in order of the occurrence of
the bands on the ladder. Using this method, 300-500
nucleotides can be sequenced per set of reactions. This
is far fewer than the Maxam-Gilbert method, bur far
more runs can be managed per day; without automated
equipment, one person can sequence about 25,000 bp
per week.
Automated Fluorescencc Scquencing
The Sanger method requires four lanes per sample, one
for each of the bases (A, C, T, G). In automatic sequenc-
Sanger [dideoxy)method of sequencing NA [see ext for detis.
ing, each dideoxy terminator or primer is marked with
The products of fourreactinseachcontainingradiolabelednormal
dNTP and a single dideoxynucleotide (ddATP, ddCTP, ddGTP, or
a differenr fluorochrome (conventionally, red for T,
ddtspecifcallemnateNAragensythesisrepled
 green for A, blue for C, and black for G). The sample
in adjcent lanes nd electrophoresedThebandisFormaladder
is loaded in a single lane on the gel and separated by
in the autoradiograph corresponding to he size of the specificall
lerminatedfagmentsThesequence isred fom thebomup
electrophoresis, but the gel is housed in a complex detec-
tor thar discriminates the four different fluorochrome
signal becouse it is the newly synthesized DNA fragments thol
signal ermissions using a laser to scan across the bottom
ladder is the compiement (A = T, G = C) of hat in the viral
of the gel as the labeled fragments pass by. Software then
DNA of interest. This small part of a sequencing gel is from α
superimposes the four readings, producing an integrated
study of the genome of equine arteris virus. (Courtesy of N.
readout (Figure 4.6). The software provides an interpre
J. Maclachaln.]
tation of the colorimetric data—it determines the maxi-
mum color intensity at each position and indicates over
the peak the corresponding nucleotide. Another technical
sible for a single person to process 32 DNA samples pe1
improvement invoives the use of Taq polymerase instead
day, sequencing about 600 nucleotides per sample, i.e.,
of E. coli DNA polymerase—this allows multiple cycles 
96,000 nucleotides per week. A major focus of the Hu-
of termination reactions to occur, as is done in the poly-
 man Genome Project is the development of even better
merase chain reaction, greatly amplifying sequence sig-
automated sequencing technology—one goal is to be
nal from limiting quantities of template DNA. Using
 able to accurately and economically sequence 100,000
automated fluorescence sequencing equipment,it is pos-
or more nucleotides per day per person.
72
4.Viral Genetics und Euotntion
Uses of Sequencing in Veterinary
of genetic information is becoming crucial in the logical
and Medical Virology
design of vaccines, diagnostic reagents, and antiviral
drugs.
Viral genomc sequencing is yielding an ever increasing
 The pace and scale of progress in viral genomics
body of genetic information, The field of molecular epi-
is leading, as it is in the Human Genome Projct, to the
demiology has blossomed, based on sequencing (usually
emergence of a new feld, that of functional genomics,
partial sequencing) of large numbers of isolates obtained
i.e., is the linking of phenotypic characters to specific
in the course of investigating outbreaks, epidemics, or
genes. This field promises much further progress that
endemic viral disease problems. For example,in medical/
will advance the standard of practice in veterinary and
 public health virology, nearly all poliovirus isolates are
zoonotic virology laboratories and clinics.
partially sequenced as the basis for identifying them as
(1) poliovirus 1, 2, or 3; (2) wild or vaccine genotype; (3)
endemic or imported genotype; (3) a traceable imported
Restriction Endonuclease Mapping
 genotype, providing clues for guiding intensified vaccine
usage; and (4) evidence in the global surveillance being
Several hundred sequence-specific DNases, called restric-
done as part of the WHO Polio Eradication Program.
tion endonucleases, have been identifed and purified
Similar partial sequencing of large numbers of isolates
from various bacteria. Each recognizes a unique palin-
is being done as part of regional dengue surveilance
dromic sequence of nucleotides (a sequence that reads
 programs--in this case the finding of newly introduced
the same backward as forward), four to nine nucleotide
genotypes is thc basis for intensified mosquito control
 pairs long. Depending on the location and frequency of
programs. In the major epidemic of Venezuelan equine
 its target sequence in the DNA molecule of interest a
encephalitis in Columbia and Venezucla in 1995, thc
 given restriction endonuclease cleaves DNA into a deter-
partial sequencing of large numbers of isolates was cru-
 minate number of fragments of precise sizes. Different
cial in establishing the source of the epidemic virus as a
 endonucleases, recognizing different scquences, cleave
 mutant of an endemic virus genotype.
the same DNA into different numbers and sizes of frag-
Sequencing is also proving to be of great value in
ments, all of which may be separated by gel electrophore-
more basic virologic studics. Open reading frames
sis. The pattcrn of these fragments in gels is also referred
(ORFs) in viral genoines are identifed easily [translarable
 10 as rcstriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
sequences start with the methionine codon (AUG) and
 Of as a DNA fngerprint.
are uninterrupted by stop codons (UAA, UAG, UGA)].
 Different viruses, along with closely related strains
This is the first stcp in idcntifying the viral structural
 of the same virus yield characteristically different restric-
Or nonstructural protein encoded by each open reading
 tion endonuclease fragment patterns or fingerprints. Re-
frame. The function of viral proteins can often be sur-
 striction endonuclease mapping has been invaluable for
mised by comparing the sequence of the gencs that cn-
 distinguishing viruses or sirains of large genomes, e.g.
code them to those of known proteins with established
 orthopoxviruses and herpesviruses. Further, with con-
functions from other viruses or eukaryotic organisms.
 siderably more effort, depending on the size of the ge-
Such comparisons are carried out by searching interna-I
 nome, the order of the restriction fragments can be deter-
tional computer databases. It is also possible from an 
1  mined, and when large numbers of such fragments are
examination of viral genome sequences to find charac-
 laid out they can provide a physical map of the entire
teristic groups of amino acids, called motifs, that indicate 
viral genome. By convention the genome of a virus repre.
particular functions of encoded proteins. For example, 
 sents 100 map units so that the coordinates of individual
particular motifs indicate (1) signal sequences, i.e., se-
 restriction fragments can be given. Restriction enzymes
quences that target a given protein to the endoplasmic
 can also be used to analyze the molecularly cloned com-
reticulum or the plasma membrane; (2) transmembrane
 plementary DNA copies of genomcs or individual genes
sequences and glycosylation sequences, i.e., sequences
 of RNA viruses and to identify specific map locations
that indicate that the protein is a peplomer or other
 of various genetic markers in the viral genome sequence.
virion surface protein that may contain epitopes that are
Similarly, mRNAs of both DNA and RNA viruses can
targets of the immune response; (3) protein-nucleic acid
be analyzed by these procedures.
or protein-protein-binding sequences, i.c., scquences
that indicate that the protein is involved in viral synthetic
or regulatory processes; and (4) short sequence motifs,
Recombination Mapping
i.e., sequences involved in viral gene expression (e.g..
sites of mRNA polyadenylation, often indicated by AAU-
 Among viruses that undergo intramolecular recombina-
AAA, indicate the 3' end of a viral protein). This kind
tion, the probability of recombination occurring be-
Recombinunt DNA Techmotogy
73
tween two markers reflects the distance between them, Role of Vectors in Recombinant
DNA Technology
 approximately additive. Two-factor crosses are used
The use of animal viruses and vertebrate and insect celis
to determine recombination frequencies between pairs
for the expression of foreign genes was developed early
of mutants; for very close or distant markers, three-
factor crosses are used to resolve ambiguities. Re-
in the evolution of molecular cloning techniques. Papo-
 combination maps have been made for several largc
vaviruses were first utilized to introduce foreign genes
 DNA viruses, notably herpesviruses, and for poliovirus.
 into mammalian cells: early understanding of the nature
of the genomes of these viruses and their capacity to
With the determination of nucleotide sequences, the
gcnctic markcrs of a number of viruses havc bcen
 incorporate rather large amounts of foreign DNA un-
 derpinned this breakthrough research. Success in devel-
locatcd on the relevant physical maps. For viruses that
have segmented genomes, reassortant maps can be
 oping full-length infectious clones of DNA viruses used
constructed by crossing mutants of different serotypcs
as vectors and full-length complementary DNA clones
that have electrophoretic polymorphisms for cach of
from RNA viruses, used as vectors, has opened the door
for many new ways to produce valuable proteins (for
the genome segments. They have confrmed that mu-
tants able to rccombine reside on different genome seg-
vaccines and diagnostic reagents) and nucleic acids (for
diagnostic probes and DNA vaccines).
ments.
Poxviruses as Vcctors
 Among the DNA viruses, poxviruses have been proto-
Recombinant DNA Technology
types as cloning and expression vectors, delivering for-
tign genes of interest into many kinds of cultured cells
The discovery of restriction endonucleases and the recog-
 and into mammals and birds. The large genomes of the
nition of other enzymes involved in DNA synthesis (poly-
 poxviruses have allowed the insertion of large amounts
mcrases, ligascs, transferases) opened up the possibility
of foreign DNA into nonessential genome regions. Vac-
of deliberately introducing foreign genetic information 
 cinia virus has become a workhorse of recombinant DNA
into the DNA of viruses, bacteria, yeast, and vertebrate
 technology; hundreds of foreign protcins of biological
cells. The discovery that such foreign DNA can be ampli-
 and medical importance have becn vectored by the vac-
ficd greatly by coreplicating along with the DNA of its
 cinia virus system. When engineered properly, the pro-
host opened up many other possibilities, including novel 
 teins vectorcd by vaccinia virus and expressed in mam-
vaccines (e.g., DNA vaccines) and diagnostic rcagents I
 malian cells or animals have had the predicted molecular
(c.g., hybridization probes). Overall, the technology is
 mass, have undergone proper posttranslational modifi-
called molecular cloning or, in lay terms, genetic engi-
cations required for biological activity (proteolytic cleav-
neering.
age, glycosylation, phosphorylation, myristylation), and
When a foreign DNA segment is inserted into
 have been transported to the proper intracellular or ex-
e     a e 
tracellular compartment. Because of the broad host
upstream and downstream regularory sequences and
range of vaccinia virus, many ccll-type specific products
the recombinant plasmid is introduced into a host cell,
 have been vectored successfully.
the forcign DNA may be expressed, i.e., the protein
Vaccinia virus recombinant vectors are generated
it specifies may be produced in large amounts. This 
 by incorporating the foreign DNA into the intact viral
technology is called expression. The vecror uscd may
 genome via homologous recombination. This is facili-
be a bacteriophage (a virus of bacteria) or a bacterial 
 tated by adding vaccinia DNA flanking sequences to the
plasmid so that the protein is expressed in bacteria
 foreign DNA. In infected cells, recombinant, chimeric
(Figure 4.7). Similarly, the foreign DNA may be in-
vaccinia genomes are packaged faithfully into infectious
corporated into a yeast plasmid or virus so that it
 progeny. 1n contrast to procedures used with other DNA
may be expressed in yeast, insect cells, or mammalian
viruses, the transfected foreign DNA can only be rescued
cells. The bacteriophage or plasmid or virus serve as
 by infectious vaccinia virus. This is due to the noninfec-
cloning vectors (to amplify the foreign DNA) and/or
tious nature of isolated poxvirus DNA, which replicates
expression vectors (to produce gene products). Some
in the cytoplasm and requires many virion-associated
vectors have been engineered to replicate in different
 cnzymatic functions. One particular advantage of vac-
host cells and are called shuttle vectors. Some eukaryo-
cinia virus recombinants is their very large carrying ca-
tic vectors allow the introduction and expression of
 pacity—-it has bcen estimated that the vaccinia virus can
foreign genes in intact animals—these are called
 carry over 25 kbp of foreign DNA without its infectivity
transgenic vectors.
being affected. This allows the simultaneous expression
74
Viral Genetics and Frotution
Figure 4.7.
Bacterial pla
mid DNA (vector)
(1) Foreign cell DNA
个
←
个
Restriction endonuclease cuts the DNA at the sites
marked to produce fragments with sticky ends
3]
shown ww
(2)
NAT
二二二二
Sticky ends are covalently
joined using DNA ligase
(4)
Recombinant plasmids are introduced into bacteria.
1 (9)
Recombinant plasmids multiply
within each bacterium,separately
from chromosome (not shown)
(6)
Recombinant plasmids, multiplied several million times, are
Several million copies of
 fragments of foreign DNA
Sheps in obtaining lorge amounts of recombinant DNA. In porallel, DNA (genome DNA or complemenfary DNA from virion RNA or mRNA)
from a virus (1) is cut into fragments by a selected resriction endonuclease (2)], ond the circular DNA molecule of the plasmid vector is
cut withesame endonuclease (3)TheviralDNAis insered and ligoted inl theplasmidDNA,which is thus circularized agin (4）.The
plasmid is then introduced into the host boxcterium by lransfection (5). Replication of the plasmid as an episome may producemany copies
Piouow jpieaas peloldeui eq Aow susb paysads o Aom s u le) puo (z] sdals ui pekoidua som so asoapnuopue uousai awns
With the appropricle addiion of regulatory and temmination sequences,he protein product of the inserted genemay be expressed in
prokaryofic or eukaryofic cell in very large amounts.
 of multiple foreign proteins and offers promise for the
tensive field testing has been carried out with a vaccinia-
development of multivalent vaccines.
 based rabies glycoprotein G recombinant, and its safety
Vaccinia virus-vector technology has been cx-
and efficacy have been ascertained. A similar construct
tended to other poxviruses, providing vectors and candi-
in raccoonpox virus for the control of the large raccoon
 date vecrored vaccines with desired limited host ranges
rabies epidemic in eastern regions of the United States has
(avipoxviruses,capripoxvirus,raccoonpoxvirus, suipox-
also been proven in field trials. Vaccinia recombinants
virus, etc.). The practical application of poxvirus-vec-
 expressing the H and/or F protein of rinderpest virus
tored vaccine candidates has been demonstrated for the
have been shown to protect cartle and are being tested
 control of several veterinary and zoonotic diseases: ex-
 in large open feld trials in Africa. In addition to being
GenetieVariation andViratEroltion
75
efficacious, safe, and inexpensive, these vaccines have (
 contemplated before it became possible to produce large
thc added advantage of being very stablc at elevated
 quantities of selected fragments of viral nucleic acid by
anbient temperatures, a great advantage in the tropics
the use of the polymerase chain reaction. Among the
and in bait-delivercd vaccines.
achievemcnts so far are:
Other Viruscs as Vectors
 1. Complcte scquencing of the genomes of representa-
Viruses that havc been used in research toward the goal
tivc viruses of all the families of DNA viruses con-
 of developing vectored vaccines to carry genes for anti-
taining animal pathogens, including the 230-kbp ge-
gcns of viruses for which no vaccines exist include bacu-
 nome of a cytomegalovirus and the 192-kbp
loviruses, herpesviruses, adenoviruses, papillomaviruses,
genome of vaccinia virus.
SV40 (a polyomavirus), cnteroviruses, togaviruses, flav-
 2. Complete sequencing of the complementary DNA
 jviruscs, and influenza viruses. Because many attenuated
 corresponding to the genomes of representative vi-
virus vaccines have been so successful there is also a
ruses of most of the families of RNA viruses con-
 potential for using them as vectors for veterinary vac-
taining animal pathogens.
cines--it scems likely that every licensed attenuated virus
3. Characterization of the viral or proviral DNAs that
vaccine used in veterinary practice is being considered
are integrated into the DNA of transformed cells
for such use in one lahoratory or another.
and animals infected with retroviruses and papillo-
maviruscs.
 4. Development of probes for use in rapid diagnostic
Transgenic Mice and Recombinant
assays, including hybridization assays (dot-blot
DNA Technology
assays).
 5. Application of the polymerase chain reaction to am-
Transgenic mice provide a valuable tool for investigating
plify specific viral genome sequences for diagnostic
many problems in virology, immunology, and develop-
and research purposes.
 mental biology. They are produced by injecting selected 
 6. Development of marker rescue by transfection with
cloned fragrments of DNA into the nuclei of fertilized
gene fragments as a method for genctic mapping.
eggs washed out of the mouse oviduct. After replace-
 7. Production of protcins coded by specific viral
ment, some ova develop normally to form the base of a
genes, using bacterial, yeast, baculovirus, and ani-
colony of transgenic mice. The technique provides in-
mal cell expression systems and by cell-free transla-
sights into thc potential role in viral pathogenesis of
tion systems.
individual viral genes and gcnc products in the context
 8. Production of peptides based on DNA sequence
of the intact animal. For example, transgenic mice have
data for use in diagnostics and immunothera-
been produced in which every cell contained genome
peutics.
length hepatitis B DNA sequences. All of these mice had
viral antigen in their plasma, but the viral genes were
selectively exprcssed only in cells of thc liver, kidney,
Genetic Variation and
and pancreas. Likewise, transgenic mice containing the
DNA for the early region of bovinc papillomavirus devel-
Viral Evolution
oped skin tumors at 8-9 months of age. In these mice,
episomal viral DNA was detected in tumor cells and
Because viruses leave no fossils (except perhaps within
integrated viral DNA in normal tissues.
frozen bodies, within formalin-fixed pathology speci-
mens, or within arthropods and other creatures and their
blood meals embedded in amher), it was presumed that
Practical Achievements of Recombinant
there never would be enough evidence to prove whether
DNA Technology
different viruses had common evolutionary roots. Some
scientists regarded it as axiomatic that viruses evolved
Practical applications of genetic engineering of viruscs 
 originally from DNA or RNA already present in a cellu-
include the development of nucleic acid probes for diag-
lar organelle or chromosome or from some form of intra-
nosis and novel methods for the production of vaccines, 
cellular parasite such as a bacterium. Others pictured a
such as the usc of vaccinia virus as a vector. Combined
 primeval "RNA world"' in which a form of sclf-replicat-
with the availabiliry of simple and fast methods of se-
ing RNA akin to modern viroids prcdated DNA, pro-
quencing nucleic acids, genetic engineering has also led  t
 teins, and cells. In either case, most virologists agreed
to studies of animal virus genomes that could not be  that it would be foolish to consider any idea of a single
76
4.Viral Genetics and Erohttion
evolutionary "'tree” for allthe viruses. The generally very
insertion or deletion. Such mutations do not appear at
 different morphoiogical and physicochemical character-
the same rate in all genes. Many of these singlc-stranded
istics of the member viruses of many different families
RNA viruses also have a similar 5'-terminal covalently
supported this view.
linked polypeptide, a 3'-terminal poly(A) tract, a
 Now, as genorme sequencing is revealing many con-
S'-terminal cap, and employ a subgenomic RNA to as-
served functional or nonfunctional "fossil" domains of
sure the production of very large amounts of their capsid
 ancicnt lineage, for the first time the archaeology of the
 proteins. Even though there are many hundreds of thesc
viruses is being explored from the perspective of data,
 single-stranded RNA viruses, they seem to fall into only
not just "“armchair theory." We now know that many
three clusters; picorna-like viruses, toga-like viruses, and
viruses have gained some functional gcnes from their
flavi-like viruses. So, even though these viruses infect
hosts (and hosts have gained some genes from their vi-
 hosts as different as vertebrates, invertebrates, plants,
ruses) and have gained other genes from other viruses,
and bacteria, again it would sem that all may have
i.e., viral genomes seem to represent more-or-less ancient 
 derived from a common ancestor and diverged along
"grab bags"” of genes, fine-tuned by the Darwinian forces
only three lines.
 of selection into replicative machines with extraordinary
Within this subject of viral archeology, one of the
functional economy.
most interesting debates centers on which characteristics
We now know that the genomes of viruses in differ-
 of a virus are most ancient, which are most recent, which
ent families, in most cases, are extremely different from
are most stable, and which are most changing. Many
each other, but we also know that in some cases seem-
virologists had considered that virion structural elements
ingly unrelated viruses are similar—similar in gene order
werc most ancient; after all, cumulative mutations in
 and arrangement, fine points of strategy of replication,
icosahedral capsids could only lead to lethal instability.
and even in conserved sequence domains encoding simi-
Other virologists had considered that viral genome ex-
larly functioning proteins. Overall,the differences be-
pression strategies were most ancient; again, even if a
tween most kinds of viruses are so great that it stil seems
virus were able to reinvent its capsid, changes in inte-
foolish to think of building a monophyletic tree uniting
grated multigenic replication steps would certainly be
all the viruses. However, unexpected similarities have
lethal. At present, however, the fnding of conscrved
prompted new considcrations for a small set of indepen-
 sequence domains in polymerases, helicases, and prote-
dent trees. One example has been the construction of
ases, but not in structural or other genes of single.
the order Mononegavirales, comprising the families Par-
stranded RNA viruses, suggests that the answer to this
amyxoviridae, Rhabdoviridae, Filoviridae, and Bornavi-
 question is not yet at hand. It is unforrunate that viruscs
ridae. This order was formcd in recognition that the
have such small genomcs, so that there will not be an
 mcmber viruses have similar gene arrangements, similar
 opportunity to find confirmatory cvidences of rclation-
 gene products, and some common sequences in their 
ships by analyzing additional genes.
The genetic mechanisms described in this chapter,
common ancestor. The order Nidovirales, comprising
operating under the pressure of Darwinian forces of vari-
the families Coronaviridae and Arteriviridae,
was
 ation (mutation) and the fixation of traits under the
formed for similar reasons, especially in recognition of
pressure of selection, have been incriminated clearly in
the common nested-set transcription strategy used by
several recent important examples of viral evolution ( Ta-
 all member viruses and some common sequences, again 
 ble 4.1). Here we shall content ourselves with a descrip-
perhaps indicative of a common anccstor.
tion of two viruses that illustrate particularly well the
There is a further occasion for considering ancient
 dramatic impact of evolution, even over a relatively short
common roots: many of the positive-sense, single-
 time span. One, myxoma virus, highlights the coevolu
stranded RNA viruses have the same genome organiza-
tion of viral virulence and host resistance. The other,
tion, gene order, and sequence similarities in domains
influenza A viruses, illustrates how effectively viruscs
 encoding their RNA-dependent RNA polymerases, their
can evolve in horses, birds, swine, and humans to avoid
proteases, and their helicases. These viral protcases and
thc host's immune response.
helicases display suffcient resemblance to their cellular
homologues to indicate that they might originally have
 been acquired from cellular gcnes by recombination. In-
Coevolution of Virus and
deed, there is much evidence to suggest that genetic re-
Host in Myxomatosis
combination among viruses has been a morc important
evolutionary mechanism than poinr mutation. Minor
Myxoma virus (family Poxviridae, genus Leporipox-
changes continue to occur at a very high frequency as a
virus) occurs naturally as a mild infection of rabbits in
result of point mutations or less frequently nucleotide
South America and California (Sylvilagus spp.), in which
Genete Variation cand Vireaf Erofation
77
TablE 4.1
Genetic Chanqes and Recent Evidences of Viral Evolution
MECHANISM
ExAMPlE
 Point mutation
Avian influenza virus [H5N2], minimally pathogenic strain changed 
into lethal epidemic strain by just a few point mutations
Point mulation
Canine parvovirus, host range mutation of feline panleukopenia virus
leading to the emergence of a new global pathogen
Intramolecular recombination
Western equine encephalitis virus, originated by recombination be
tween Eastern equine encephalitis virus and a Sindbis-like alphavirus
that no longer exists
Genetic reossorlment [shift]
Pandemic human influenza A subtypes H1N1 (1918), H2N2 (1957),
and H3N2 (1968), each originated by gaining genes from avian vi-
ruses, in each case after passage through swine
Intramolecular recombination and mutalion
Polio vaccine viruses, reversion of altenuated viruses to virulence fol.
lowing vaccinalion
Probable mutation in individual host
Feline infeclious peritonilis virus, evolution of lethal virus rom emper-
ate feline coronavirus
 Possible mutation
Lelystad virus (porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus]
Possible mutation
Equine morbillivirus, the cause of acute respiratory distress syndrome
in horses and humans in Australia, may have required a host range
mutation to jump from its reservoir in bats
it produccs a benign fibroma from which virus is trans- condition for wccks instead of a few days. Within 3 years
 mitted mechanicaly by biting insects. Howcvcr, in labo-  such attenuated mutants became the dominant strains
ratory (European) rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus), thc
throughout Australia. Some inoculation campaigns with
virus causes a lethal infection, a fnding that led to its
 the virulent virus produced localized highly lcthal out-
use for the biological control of wild European rabbits
 breaks, but in general the viruses that spread through
in Australia.
the rabbit populations cach year were the attcnuated
The wild European rabbit was introduced into
strains, which because of the prolonged illncss in their
Australia in 1859 for sporting purposes and rapidly
 hosts provided a greater opportunity for mosquito trans-
spread over the southern part of the continent, wherc it 
 mission. Thus the original highly lethal virus was pro-
became the major animal pest of agricultural and pasto-
gressively replaccd by a heterogeneous collection of
ral industries. Myxoma virus from South America was
strains of lower virulence, but most of them still virulent
successfully introduced into the rabbit population in
enough to kill 70-90% of genetically unselected rabbits.
1950; when originally liberated, the virus produced case-
Rabbits that recover from myxomatosis are im-
fatality rates of over 99%. This highly virulent virus was
mune to reinfection. However, because most wild rabbits
transmitted readily by mosquitoes. Farmers undertook
 have a lifespan of less than 1 year, herd immunity is not
"'inoculation campaigns" to introduce virulent myxoma
so critically important in the epidemiology of myxoma-
virus into wild rabbit populations.
tosis as it is in infections of longer lived species. The early
 It might have been predicted that the disease—-and
 appearance of viral strains of lower virulence, which
with it the virus--would disappear at the end of cach
allowed 10% of genetically unselected rabbits to recover,
summer, duc to thc greatly diminished numbers of sus-2
 allowed selection for genetically morc resistant animals
 ceptible rabbits and the grcatly lowered opportunity for
 to occur. In areas where repeated outbreaks occurred,
transmission by mosquitoes during the winter. This must t
the genetic resistance of the rabbits increased steadily
often have occurred in localizcd arcas, but it did not S
such that the case-fatality rate after infection under labo
happcn over the continent as a whole. The capacity of ratory conditions with a particular strain of virus fell
the virus to survive the winter conferred a great selcctivc
 from 90% to 50% within 7 years. Subsequently, in areas
advantage on viral mutants of reduccd lcthality, since
 where there were frequent outbrcaks of myxomatosis,
during this period, when mosquito numbers were low,
 somewhat more virulent strains of myxoma virus became
rabbits infected by such mutants survived in an infectious
dominant, because they produced the kind of disease
78
4.  Virat Genetics and Evotution
that was best transmitted in populations of genetically much lower than in 1918, probably because the strain
resistant rabbits. Thus, the ultimate balance struck be-
was intrinsically less virulent, although the availability
tween myxoma virus and Australian rabbits involved
of antibiotics to  treat  secondary  bacterial  infection
adaptations of both the virus and host populations,
, undoubtedly saved many lives. In 1968 this subtype
reaching a dynamic equilibrium that finds rabbits greatly
was in turn replaced by another subtype, A/H3N2,
reduced compared with thcir premyxomatosis numbers
known as the “Hong Kong flu.* In 1977 the A/H1N1
(600 million to 1 billion), but still too numerous for
subtype mysteriously reappeared, and since then the
the wishes of farmers and conservationists. Now, rabbit
two subtypes, A/H3N2 and A/H1N1, have cocircu-
 hemorrhagic diseasc virus is being used across Australia
lated.
to complement the cffects of myxoma virus.
Clear evidence that distinct mcchanisms arc in-
volved in the processes of antigenic shift and drift have
come from sequencing of hemagglutinin genes of repre-
Genetic Shift and Drift and the Evolution
sentative isolates; scquencing has shown relatively closc
of Influenza A Viruses
relationships between strains within each of the three
human subtypes, H1, H2, and H3, but major differences
 Influenza A viruses produce important diseases in birds,
 between subtypes, indicating that a sharp discontinuity
horses, swine, mink, marine mammals, and humans. Be-
in the evolutionary partern had occurred with the emer-
cause of the importance of human influenza, derailed
 gence of H2 viruses in 1957 and H3 viruses in 1968.
long-term studies of the evolution of the viruses have
As data from sequencing all eighr gene segments of many
been carried out, often in the vain hope of predicting
strains of influenza viruses isolated from scveral spccies
future epidemics. Since the frst isolation of an influenza
of animals and birds became available, it bccame clear
virus in 1933, many strains have been obtained from all
that all of the influenza viruses of mammals, including
 parts of the world and their antigenic properties studied
 humans, originated from the avian influenza gene pool,
in derail. In recent years their genetic properties have
which itself presumably evolved from a common ances-
been studied in parallel, thus revealing the molecular 
tral avian influenza virus. In 1957, five of the eight gene
bases for their remarkable evolutionary progression.
 segments of the prevalent human HiN1 subtype were
 Influenza A viruses are classifed according to epi-
replaced by Eurasian avian influenza genes to produce
topes on their two envelope proteins, the hemagglutinin
the human H2N2 subrype; then, in 1968 the human
(H) and neuraminidase (N). All 15 subtypes of the 
H2N2 subtype acquired two gene segments, including
hcmagglutinin have been found in birds, 3 of them
the hemagghutinin gene from another avian influenza
 also in humans, 2 cach in pis, horses, seals, and whales,
virus to produce the human H3N2 subtypc. Morcover,
and 1 in mink. Thc 9 N subtypes show a similar distri-
retrospective serological studies have indicated that the
bution. An outstanding feature of influenza A viruses is
 1890 human pandemic subtype was H2N8, the 1900
the antigenic variability of these two proteins as a result
 subtype H3N8, and the 1918 subtypc H1N1, suggesting
pe p uun o us saueu jo sad omi jo
 a pattern of recycling of the three human H subtypes
shift. Antigenic drift occurs within a subtype and in-
(H1, H2, H3) and suggesting the origin of the virus that
volves a gradual accumulation of point mutations; those
 caused the 1918 pandemic in swine.
affecting neutralizing cpitopes produce strains cach anti-
 Influenza A viruses from birds grow very poorly in
genically slightly different from its predecessor. In con-
humans, and vice versa; indeed, reassortants containing
trast, antigenic shift involves the sudden acquisition of
avian genes have been tested as experimental vaccincs
the gene for a completely new hemagglutinin or neur-
because of their avirulence and their inability to spread
 aminidase, giving rise to a novel subtype that may spread
from human to human. Howcver, both avian and human
rapidly around the world, unencumbered by any herd
 influenza viruses can replicate in swinc, and genetic reas-
immunity.
 sortment between them can be demonstrated experimen-
tally in that host. It has now been shown quite certainly
Genetic/Antigenic Shift
that an antigenic shift in nature occurs when the prevail-
 During the past century there have been five pandemics
 ing human strain of influenza A virus and an avian influ
of human influenza: in 1890, 1900, 1918, 1957, and
 enza virus concurrcntly infcct a pig, which scrves as a
1968. The pandemic at the end of the first World War
"mixing vessel." Evcry 10-20 ycars a reassortant virus
killed over 20 million pcople—more than the war itself.
from the pig, containing genes encoding replicative func-
 In 1957 the H1N1 subtypc was suddenly replaced by a
 tions from a human virus and a hemagglutinin gene
new subtype, A/H2N2, known as “Asian flu because derived from an avian virus, emerges. It might be argued
it originared in China. Within a year over a billion pcople that the chances of this happening again must be van-
[u u  pie sq i i anq s k sa   k iq  uq p
Genetic Variation and Virat Farotation
79
 southeast Asia, the most densely populated area of the
FIGURE 4.8.
world, hundreds of millions of people live and work in
close contact with domesticated pigs and ducks. It is no
coincidence that the last two antigcnic shifts that have
 produced rmajor pandemics in humans emanated from
China.
However, not all new influcnza viruses in mam-
mals arise by reassortment between a preexisting mam-
malian strain and an avian virus. For example, the H1N1
swine influenza virus strain that appeared in Europe in
1979 was derived directly from birds, and the equine
H3N8 influcnza virus that appeared in northern China in
1989 was very different from the H3N8 equine influenza
virus currently found elsewhere in the world, but very
similar to an avian H3N8 influenza A virus. An impor-
tant additional example of bost species jumping without
 genetic reassortment occurred in 1997 in Hong Kong
(see later).
N2
Genetic/Antigenic Drift
After a new pandemic influenza virus strain has emerged
 as a consequence of genetic reassortment, antigenic drift
h jo e u aenne sonin jod uum saag
RNA segments (Figure 4.8). Mutations in the genc en-
coding the hemagglutinin sometimes aiter its antigenic
sites. When antiserum against the formerly prevalent
strain no longer neutralizes the variant, a new strain has
N
C2
ermerged. Changes in the hemagglutinin are clustercd
in five regions of the molecule, which correspond to
important antigenic sites. Substitution of a singlc amino
is shown inmore detailinFigure.8,but showing asblack dots
 acid in a critical antigenic site may abolish the capacity
the location of all the amina acid positions thar changed in the
of the antibody to bind to that site. However, some
A/HongKong19683N2sbypedringnaaldribee
regions of the hemagglutinin protein are conserved in
1968 and 1986. Most of the changes are concentraled near he
receptr-binding pocket at he cener of the lip ofemoleule.
all human and avian strains, presumably because they
A
are essential for the maintenance of the structure and
and B, wih fewer changes at sites C, D, and E.When
he
function of the molecule. The important feature of anti-
anbodydbnciinds
in sites A and B,itcan stericallyhinder otiachment of the virus
 genic drift in human influenza viruses is that in immune
toits cllarecetorWhen tevirudris,ntboy seciic
populations the new strains have a selective advantage
frecrlieirussainslngebindsttesioeandh
 Over their predecessors and tend to displace them. Al-
virus is ree to cause infection,ransmission chains, nd epidemics
(From J. J., Skehel, D. C., Wiley, E., Domingo, J. J., Holland
though minor variants may cocirculate, a novel strain
and P. Ahlquist, eds., "RNA Genetics. Vol. 3, p. 142. CRC
usually supplants previous strains of that subtype in a
Press, Boca Raton, FL 1988.1
particular region.
Avian Influenza
 gesting that the change in virulence had becn due to
 In April 1983, a H5N2 influenza virus appeared in chick-
point mutations, ie., to genetic drift. Previous studies
ens in Pennsylvania, producing a mortality of less than 
had shown that virulence for birds is polygenic but that
10%. Comparison of the genome segments of this isolate
 the hemagglurinin gene is of major importanc. Sequenc-
       
 ing of the hemagglutinin genes from the April and Octo-
indicated that all of its gcnes were closely related to the
 ber isolates revealed seven nucleotide differcnces, re-
 genes of H5N2 isolatcs from wild birds in the castern 
sulting in four predicted amino acid changcs in the
United Statcs at the timc. Then, suddenly, in October
 hemagglutinin protein. One of these changes indeed re-
1983, mortality rose to over 80%. Comparison of indi-
 moved a glycosylation sitc, thereby facilitating the clcay-
vidual RNA segments of the April and October isolates 
 age and activation of the hemagglutinin. The importance
showed that reassortment (shift) had not occurred, sug-
 of this critical single nucleotide change may be measured
80
4. Virat Genetics md Fuotution
 in practical terms: measures to control the epidemic and
Fenner, F., and Ross, J. (1993). Myxomatosis. In “"The
 protect the poultry industry of the United States involved
European Rabbit. The History and Biology of a Suc-
the slaughter of more than 17 million chickens at a cost
cessful Colonizer," (H. V. Thompson, and C. M.
King, eds.) pp. 205-245. Oxford Univcrsity Press,
of about $60 million.
Oxford.
In August 1997, an H5N1 avian influenza virus
Garcia-Sastre, A., and Palese, P. (1993). Genetic manipu-
not prcviously known to infect humans and without the
lation of negative-strand RNA virus genomcs. Annu.
intcrmediary cycle through swine infected humans in
Rev. Microbiol. 47, 765-790.
Hong Kong, four of whom died. The end of British rule
Gibbs, A. J., Calisher, C. H., and Garcia-Arenal, F., eds.
in Hong Kong had resulted in the shipment of many
(1995). “Molecular Basis of Virus Evolution." Cam-
bridgc University Press, Cainbridge, UK.
chickens from mainland China to Hong Kong. The
Holland, J. J, de la Torre, J. C., and Steinhauer, D. A.
H5N1 virus, which had been causing an epidemic in
(1992). RNA populations as quasispecies. Curr. Top.
 chickens in China, was transported into a setting where
Microbiol. Immunol. 176, 1-20.
viral genetic analysis was being done as part of a global
Jarvis, T. C., and Kirkegaard, K. (1991). The polymerasc
surveillance systcm to identify new human strains. A
in its labyrinth: Mechanisms and implications of RNA
recombination. Trends Genet. 7, 186-202.
decision was made to destroy all chickens in Hong
Klenk, H-D., and Rott, R. (1989). The molecular biol-
Kong—some 1.2 million birds—-at a cost of $4 million
ogy of influenza virus pathogenicity. Adv. Virus Res.
(see Chapter 30). As this happened, futher genetic analy-
34, 247-282.
sis of the virus showed (1) that the human pathogen had
Koonin, E. V. ed. (1992). Evolution of viral genomes.
retained all of its avian virus genes; (2) that the virus
Semin. Virol. 3, 311-450.
Lodish, H., Baltimore, D., and Berk, A. (1995). "Molecu-
retained its cxtreme virulence for chickens while at the
lar Cell Biology," 3rd ed. with CD ROM. Scientific
same time gaining the capacity to infect humans (this
American Books. Freeman, New York.
was the frst time this had bcen proven); and (3) that
Nathanson, N., and Murphy, F. A. (1997). Evolution of
there was some human-to-human transmission, raising
viral diseases. In “Viral Pathogenesis" (N. Nathanson,
R. Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. E. Griffn, K. V.
concern that the virus might be introduced into other
Holines, F. A, Murphy, and H. L, Robinson, eds.),
human and poultry populations by the travel of infected
PP. 353-370. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
humans (sce Chapter 30).
Rice, C, M., ed. (1992). Animal virus expresson vectors.
Semin.Virol. 3, 235-370.
Roux, L., Simon, A. E., and Holland, J. J. (1991). Effccts
Further Reading
of defective interfering viruses on virus rcplication and
pathogenesis in vitro and in vivo. Adv. Virus Res. 40,
181-212.
Bangham, C. R., and Kirkwood, T. B. (1993). Defective
Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T., eds.
interfering particles and virus cvolution. Trends Micro-
(1989). “Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual,"
biol. 1, 260-264.
2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold
Barrett, A. D., and Dimmock, N. J. (1986). Defective in-
Spring Harbor, NY.
terfering viruses and infections of animals. Curr. Top.
Strauss, E. G., Strauss, J. H., and Levinc, A. J. (1996). Vi-
Microbiot. Immunol. 128, S5-84.
rus cvolution. In “Fields Virology (B. N. Fields,
Burden, D., and Whitney, D. B. (1995). ^Proteins to
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M., Chanock, J. L,
PCR: A Coursc in Strategies and Lab Techniques."
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
Birkhaeuser, Boston, MA.
eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 153-172. Lippincott-Raven, Phila-
Coen, D. M., and Ramig, R. F. (1996). Viral genetics. In
delphia, PA.
"Fields Virology, (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M.
Tartaglia, J., Gettig, R., and Paolerti, E. (1996). Vectors,
Howley, R. M., Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T.' P.
animal viruses. In "Encyclopedia of Virology" (R. G.
Monath, B. Roizman, and S. F. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed,
Webster and A. Granoff, cds.), 2nd ed. (CD-ROM).
pp. 113-153. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Academic Press, London.
Duarte, E. A., Novella, I. S., Weaver, S. C., Domingo, E.,
Webster, R. G., and Kawaoka, Y. (1994). Influenza—an
Wain-Hobson, S., Clarke, D. K., Moya, A., Elena,
cimerging and re-emerging disease. Semin. Virol. 5,
S. F, de la Torre, J. C., and Holland, J. J. (1994).
103-111.
RNA virus quasispecies: Signifcance for viral disease
White, B. A., and Totowa, N. J. eds. (1997). "PCR Clon-
and epidemiology. Infect. Agents Dis. 3, 201-214.
 ing Protocols: From Molecular Cloning to Genetic En-
Eigen, M. (1993). Viral quasispecies. Sci. Amer. 269,
gineering, Methods Mol. Biol., Vol. 67. Humana
42-49.
Press, Clifton, NJ.
Chapter 
5
Virus-Cell Interactions
Types of Virus-Cell Interactions....
81
Cytocidal Changes in Virus-lnfected Cells.
82
Noncytocidal Changes in Virus-Infected Cells.
86
Inclusion Bodies ....
87
Polarity of Viral Budding ...
87
Ultrastructural Changes in Virus-Infected Cells
89
Virus-Induced Cell Death: Apoptosis Versus Necrosis .
90
Interferons ..
90
Further Reading.........
92
Just as understanding of the nature of a viral infection
Types of Virus-Cell
in the individual host animal is key to understanding
Interactions
infcction in the whole host population, so understanding
of thc nature of infection in the individual cell is kcy to
understanding infection in complex tissues, organs, and
Viral infections may be categorized as cytocidal (cyto-
lytic, cytopathic) or noncytocidal. Further, not all viral
the whole host animal. The range of changes induced in
infections are productive, i.c., not all infections lead to
the morc than 200 different kinds of cells in the typical
the production and release of new virions. Host cell
animal host by different viruses is remarkably diverse.
 changes of a profound nature, leading to cell death in 
Viruses oftcn encode genes that induce, mimic, o1 shut
 some instances and cell transformation in others, may
down host cell functions for their own benefit and, of
also occur in nonproductive (abortive) infections. Cer-
course, the host has elaboratc systcms to shut down
viral functions. Thc outcomc of infection may vary from
tain kinds of cells are permissive, i.e., they support com-
 plete replication of a particular virus, whereas others arc
essentially benign and undetcctable, to tolcratcd, to le-
thal. The viral and cellular factors thar influencc the 
 nonpermissive i.e., viral replication may be blocked at
outcome of infection are often in delicate balance, easily
 any point from viral attachment through to the final
shifted one way or the other, e.g., by the physiologic,
stagcs of virion assembly and release. Cytopathic
immune, or inflammatory responses of the host or by
 changes can occur in both permissive and nonpermissive
the expression of virulence factors by the virus. The
 cells. Oftcn a virus that replicates perfectly well in a
disruption of cellular functions, the induction of cell 
particular cell type finds a similar cell type nonpermissive
death or transformation, or the activation of an inappro-
 or nonproductive; in such cases it may be impossible to
priate immune response are manifested as disease. Al-
trace the defect to the cell or the virus—it often is the
though virus-induced changes at the cellular, subcellular,
 combination that is unproductive. For example, if there
and molecular levels are most commonly studied in cul-
 is a defect in the viral genome, replication may be non-
tured cels, in recent years the use of explant and organ
productive even within an otherwise fuily permissive ccll.
cultures and transplantation of infected cells and tissues
 Two particular examples of such virai defects are the
back into experimental animals have brought research
deletion mutants known as defective interfering (Dl) mu-
findings in cellular pathology closer to the whole animal
 tants and the point mutants known as conditional lethal
 and clinical practice.
mutants (see Chapter 4).
81
Virus-Cefl Interactions
82
 Some of the most important of all nonproductive
a cytopathic virus, the first round of infection yields
virus cellinteractions are those associated with persistent
progeny virus that spreads through the medium to infect
infections or latent infections.The term persistent infec-
adjacent as well as distant cells—eventually all cells in
tion simply describcs an infection thar lasts a long time.
the culture may become infected. T'he resulting cell dam-
The rerm latent infection describes an infection that *"ex-
age is known as a cytopathic effect (CPE). Cytopathic
ists but is not exhibited,' i.e., an infection in which infec-
effect, can usually be observed by low-powcr lighr mi-
tious virions arc not formed, In either case, the virus or
croscopy of unstained cell cultures (Figurcs 5.1 and
its genome is maintained indefinitely in the cell, either by
5.2A-5.2C). The nature of the cytopathic effcct is oftcn
the integration of thc viral nuclcic acid into the host cell
 characteristic of the particular virus involved and is
 DNA or by carriage of thc viral nuclcic acid in the form
 thereforc an important preliminary cluc in the idcntifica-
of an episome. In thcse instances, the cell survives, indeed
tion of clinical isolates (see Chapter 12). Fixation and
may divide repeatcdly. In some instances such cells never
staining of infected ccll monolayers may reveal further
release virions, in others the infection may become pro-
diagnostic details.
ductive when induced by an appropriate stimulus (see
Chapter 10). Persistent or latent infections may also be
associated with cell transformation; the transformation
Mechanisms of Cell Damage
 of cells by oncogenic viruses is described in Chaprer 11.
So many pathophysiologic changcs occur in cells infected
virus and cell are summarized in Table 5.1.
with cytopathic viruses that the dcath of the cell usually
cannot be attributed to any particular event; rather, cell
death may be the final result of the cumulative action
of many insulrs. Nevertheless, in recent years several
Virus-lnfected Celfs
spccific mechanisms have been discovered, some of
which are becoming targets of therapeutic drugs. Particu-
Cytopathic viruses kill the cells in which they replicate.
lar viruses can cause host cell damage by many differ-
When a monolayer of cultured cells is inoculated with
ent means.
Table 5.1
Types of Virus-Cell Interaction
FRODUCTION Or
TYPE OF INFECTION
EFFECTS ON CELL
 INFECtIOUs ViRIONS 
EXAMPLES
Cytocidal
Morphologic changes in
Yes
Alphaherpesviruses,
cells (cytopathic effects);
enteroviruses,
inhibition of protein,
reoviruses
RNA and DNA synthesis; 
cell death
Persistent, productive
No cytopathic effect;
Yes
Pestiviruses,
lile metabolic 
grenaviruses, rabies
disturbance; cells
virus, most
 continue to divide; may
retroviruses
be loss of the special
functions of some
differentiated cells
Persistent, nonproductive
Usually nil
No, but virus may be
Canine distemper
inducedo
virus in brain.
Transformation
Alteration in cell
No, oncogenic DNA
Polyomavirus,
 morpholagy; cells can be
viruses
qdenoviruses
passaged indefinitely;
may produce tumors
when transplanted to
Yes, oncogenic
Murine, avian
 experimental animals
retroviruses
leukosis, and sarcoma
viruses
By coculivation,irradiation, or chemical mutagens.
Cytocidat Changes in Virns-Infected Cells
8.3
 Figure 5.1.
glass or plaslic Hask in which they form a monolayer. IA} Primary monkey kidney epithelial cells obtained directlyby he dissociction of cell om
a kidney; this produces α mixed population of mainly spithelial cells. [B) Diploid celline of fetal ibroblasts. (C) Continuous line of malignant
epihelial cells. Magnification: X60. (Courtesy of I. Jack.j
Inhibition of Hlost Cell Nucleic
needed to form mature mRNAs. ln some instances,
Acid Synthesis
spliceosomes are formed, but subsequent catalytic steps
Inhibition of host cell DNA synthesis is common in viral
are inhibited. For example, a protein synthesized in her-
infections. It is an inevitable consequence of viral inhibi-
 pesvirus-infected cells suppresses RNA splicing and leads
tion of host cell protein synthesis and its effect on the
to reduced amounts of cellular mRNAs and the accumu-
machinery of DNA replication, but some viruses employ
lation of primary mRNA transcripts.
 more specific mechanisms. For exampie, poxviruses pro-
 duce a DNase that degrades cellular DNA, and herpesvj-
Inhibition of Host Cell Protein Synthcsis
ruses specifically displace the synthesis of host cell DNA
The shutdown of host cell protein synthesis, while
with their own synthctic processes.
viral protein synthesis continues, is a characteristic of
 many virus infections. This shutdown is particularly
Inhibition of Host Cell RNA Transcription
 rapid and profound in picornavirus infections, but it
Many different classes of viruses, including poxviruses,
is also pronounced in togavirus, influenzavirus, rhab-
rhabdoviruses, reoviruses, paramyxoviruses, and pico-
 dovirus, poxvirus, and herpesvirus infections. With
rnaviruses, inhibit host cell RNA transcription. In some 
some other viruses, the shutdown occurs late in the
instances, this inhibition may be the indirect consequence
course of infection and is more gradual, whereas with
 of viral effects on host cell protein synthesis, which de-
noncytocidal viruses, such as pestiviruses, arenaviruses,
creases the availability of transcription factors required
and retroviruses, there is no shutdown and no cell
for RNA polymerase activity. In other instances, viruses
 death. The mechanisms underlying the shutdown of
encode specific transcription factors for the purpose of
host cell protein synthesis are varied: some are as
regulating the cxpression of their own genes and, in
 mentioned earlier, whereas others include (1) the pro-
 some instances, these factors modulate the expression of
duction of viral enzymes that degrade cellular mRNAs,
cellular genes as well. For example, herpesviruses encode
(2) the production of factors that bind to ribosomes
proteins that bind directly to specific viral DNA se-
and inhibit cellular mRNA translation, and (3) the
quences, thereby regulating the transcription of viral
alteration of the intracellular ionic environment fa-
genes.
voring the translation of viral mRNAs over cellular
mRNAs. Most importantly, some viral mRNAs simply
Inhibition of Processing
outcompete cellular mRNAs for cellular translation
of Host Cell mRNAs
machinery by mass action; i.e., the large excess of
Many viruses, including vesicular stomatitis viruses, in-
viral mRNA ·outcompetes cellular mRNA for host
fluenza viruses, and herpesviruses, interfere with the
ribosomes. Viral proteins may also inhibit the pro-
splicing of cellular primary mRNA transcripts that are  cessing and transport of cellular proteins from the
S.Vius-Cell Interactions
84
FIGURE 5.2.
Cytopathic elfechs produced by diferent viruses. The cell monolayers are shown as hey would normally be viewed in the laboratory, unfixed and
Unstained (ATypicalcyopathlgy ofanenterovirus:rpid rounding o ells, progressing  complete cllysis (B}Typicalcyopatholoy of 
herpesvirus: focal areas of swollen rounded cells. C) Typical cytopathology of a paramyxovirus: focal clusters of cell are used to form syncyic.
(D) Hemadsorption: erythrocytes adsorb to infected cells that have incorporaled hemagglutinin into he plasma membrane. Magnification: X60.
[Courtesyof I.Jack.]
Cytocidal Chenges in Virus-tnfected Cells
8.5
endoplasmic reticulum, and this inhibition may lead
 entry into cells of normally excluded macromolecules or
to their degradation. This effect is seen in lentivirus
 escape of intracelular molecules, occurs early during
and adenovirus infections.
picornavirus, alphavirus, reovirus, rhabdovirus, and ad-
enovirus infections. Most importantly, enveloped viruses
Cytopathic Effects of Toxic Viral Proteins
also direct the insertion of their surface giycoproteins,
 Large amounts of various viral components may accu-
including fusion proteins, into host cell membranes as
mulate in the cell late in infection. In the past, it was
 part of their budding process, often leading to membrane
thought that the cytopathic effect was simply a conse-
fusion and syncytium formation.
quence of the inrrinsic toxicity of these proteins, but in
Cell Membrane Fusion and
the supervening of viral replication events on cellular
Syncytium Formation
events. Hence, the list of "toxic proteins" has been short-
A conspicuous feature of infection of cell monolayers
ened, but some remain. For example, the toxicity of
 by lentiviruses, paramyxoviruses, morbilliviruses, pneu-
adenovirus penron and fber proteins seems direct and
moviruses, some herpesviruses, and some other viruses
independent of adenovirus replication.
is the production of syncytia (Figures 5.2C and 5.3C),
which result from the fusion of an infected cell with
neighboring infected or uninfected cells. Such multinu-
Cytopathic Changes Invoiving
cleate syncytia may also be seen in the tissues of ani
Cell Membranes
mals infected with these viruses; for example, in horses
fatally infected with the Australian equine morbillivi-
Celiular membranes participate in many phases of viral
rus, a prorminent feature of the interstitial pneumonia
replication, from viral attachment and entry, to the for-
has been alveolar epithelial syncytia (also called multi-
mation of replication complexcs, to virion assembly. Vi-
nucleate giant cells). Such syncytia may represent an
ruses may alter plasma membrane permeability, affect 
important mechanism of viral spread in tissues: fusion
ion exchange and mcmbrane potential, induce the syn-
bridges may allow subviral entities, such as viral nucleo-
thesis of new intracellular membranes, and induce the
capsids and nucleic acids, to spread whilc escaping
rearrangement of previously existing membrancs. A gcn-
 the cffccts of host defenses. Cell membranc fusion is
1
mediatcd by viral fusion proteins or fusion donains
Figure 5.3.
A
B
Types of viral inclusion bodies thematoxylin and eosin stain. [A) Inranuclear inclusions and syncytium formation (herpesvirus). Small arrow,
incsiniswilsndyninnininl
syncytium fomation (lypical of all morbillviruses]. Small arrow, intracytoplasmic inclusion body; large arrow, intranuclear inclusion body.
Magnification: X200. (Courtesy of I. Jack.)
86
5.Virus-Cell Interactions
 on other viral surface proteins. For example, the fusion
Cytopathic Changes Involving
activity of influenza viruses is carried on hemagglutinin 
the Cytoskeleton
peplormers (spikes), whereas the fusion activity of many
paramyxoviruses, such as parainfluenza virus 3, is
Changes in cell shape are one of the common characteris-
carried on separate peplomers composed of fusion
tics of virus infection in cultured cells. Such changes are
(F) protein.
caused by damage to the cytoskeleton, which is made
At high multiplicity of infection, paramyxovi-
up of several filament systems, such as microfilaments 
(e.g., actin), intermediate flaments (e.g, vimentin), and
ruses may cause a rapid fusion of cultured cells without
microtubules (e.g., tubulin). The cytoskeleton is respon-
 ply as a result of the action of fusion protein activity
sible for the structural integrity.of the cell, for the trans-
- d m n  se s i jo
port of organelles through the cell, and for certain cell
branes. This phenomenon has been used to produce
motility activities. Particular viruses are known to dam-
functional heterokaryons by fusing different types 
age specifc flament systems: for example, canine distem-
of
cells. In the pioneering experiments by Milstein and
per virus, vesicular stomatitis viruses, vaccinia virus, and
Kohler that produced the first monoclonal antibodies,
herpesviruses cause a depolymerization of actin-con-
parainfluenza virus inactivated by irradiation with ul-
taining microfilaments and enteroviruses induce exten-
traviolet light was used to produce bybridoma cells
 sive damage to microtubules. Such damage contributes
by the fusion of antibody-producing B lymphocytes
to the drastic cytopathic changes that precede cell lysis
with myeloma cells.
in many infections. The elements of the cytoskeleton are
also employed by many viruses in the course of their
replication: in viral entry, in the formation of replication
Hemadsorption and Hemagglutination
complexes and assembly sites, and in virion release.
Cells in monolayer cultures infected with orthomyxovi-
ruses, paramyxoviruses, and togaviruses, all of which
 bud from the plasma membrane, acquire the ability
Noncytocidal Changes
to adsorb erythrocytes. This phenomenon, known as
hemadsorption (Figure 5.2D), is due to the incorpora-
in Virus-lnfected Cells
tion of viral glycoprotein peplomers into the plasma
 membrane of infected cells where they serve as recep-
 Noncytocidal viruses usually do not kill the cells in which
tors for ligands on the surface of erythrocytes.
.The
they replicate. On the contrary, they often cause persis-
same glycoprotein peplomers are responsible for hem-
tent infection, in which infected cells produce and release
agglutination, in vitro, i.e., the agglutination of ery-
virions but overall cellular metabolism is little affected.
throcytes. In this instance, virions added to an erythro-
 In many instances, infected cells even continue to grow
cyte suspension form cell-virus-cell bridges involving
and divide. This type of virus-cell interaction is found
large numbers of erythrocytes. Although hemadsorption
 in cels infected with several kinds of RNA viruses: pes-
and hemagglutination are not known to play a role
tiviruses, arenaviruses, retroviruses, and some para-
in the pathogenesis of viral diseases, both phenomena
myxoviruses, in particular. Nevertheless, with few excep-
are used extensively in laboratory diagnostics (see
tions (e.g., some retroviruses), there are slowly
Chapter 12).
progressive changes that ultimately lead to cell death. In
the host animal, cell replacement occurs so rapidly in
Cytolysis by Immunologic Mechanisms
most organs and tissues that the slow fallout of cells dut
Viral proteins (antigens) inserted into the host cell
to persistent infection may have no effect on overall
 plasma membrane may constitute targets for specific hu-
function; however, neurons, once destroyed, are not re-
moral and celular immune responses that may cause
placed and persistently infected differentiated cells may
the lysis of the cell. This may happen before significant
lose their capacity to carry out specialized functions.
progeny virus is produced, thus slowing or arresting the
 progress of infection and hastening recovery (see Chapter
 8). Alternatively, in some instances the immune response
Effects of Noncytocidal Viral Infection
on Functions of Specialized Cells
ter 9) and, in cells that are transformed by viruses,
viral antigens incorporated in the cell membrane may
Some viruses, such as pestiviruses, arenaviruses, and re-
behave as tumor-specific transplantation antigens (sce
troviruses, that do not shut down host cell protein, RNA,
Chapter 11).
or DNA synthesis and do not kill their host cells produce
Noneytocidat Cbanges n Virns-Infected Cells
87
Inclusion Bodies
 s    d 
affecting crucial functions that are neither associated
with the integrity of cells nor their basic housekeeping
A characteristic morphological change in cells infected
functions. Damage to the specialized functions of differ-
by certain viruses is the formation of inclusion bodies
 entiated cells may affect the regulatory and homeostatic
(or inclusions), which may be recognized by light micros-
functions of endocrine organs, the digestive and meta-
copy following fixation and staining (Figures 5.3A, 5.3B,
bolic functions of exocrine organs, the locomotor and
5.3C). Depending on the virus, inclusion bodies may be
circulatory functions of muscles, the “fght-or-fight”" be-
intranuclear or intracytoplasmic, single or multiple, large
havioral functions of neuroendocrine systems, and the
or small, round or irregular in shape, and acidophilic
protective functions of the immune system. The effects
(pink, stained by eosin) or basophilic (blue, stained by he-
 of viral infections on these organs and tissues, affecting
matoxylin).
 hormonal levels, enzyme activities, chemical and electri.
 The most striking viral inclusion bodies are the
cal neurotransmitter functions, and other higher func-
 intracytoplasmic inclusions found in cells infected with
tions, are just beginning to be appreciated, yet there is
 poxviruses, reoviruses, paramyxoviruses, and rabies vi-
 already a sense that this will be a major extension from
 rus and the intranuclear inclusion bodies found in cells
research into clinical practice in the future.
infected with herpesviruses, adenoviruses, and parvovi-
To date, much of the basis for considering the 
 ruses. Some viruses, e.g., canine distemper virus and
importance of this subject stems from experimental mod-
 porcine cytomegalovirus, may produce both nuclcar and
els in laboratory rodents. For example, lymphocytic
 cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in the same cell.
choriomeningitis virus replicating in somatotropic cells
Inclusion bodies are diverse in nature: some inclu-
of the piruitary gland of the persistently infected mouse
sions are accumulations of viral components. For exam-
lowers the production of the mRNA for growth hormone
 ple, the intracytoplasmic inclusions in cells infected with
in infected cells, thus impeding the growth and develop-
rabies virus, known as Negri bodies, are actually masses
ment of the animal. Similarly, lymphocytic choriomenin-
of viral nucleocapsids, and the intracytoplasmic inclu-
gitis virus replicating in β cells of the islets of Langerhans
sions found in cells infected with poxviruses are actually
in the pancreas of the mouse can induce hyperglycemia
sites of viral synthesis (ziroplasm, also called viral facto-
that is not dissimilar to insulin-dependent diabetes in
 ries). Other inclusions are composed of crystalline aggre-
dogs or humans. Neuropsychiatric effects may follow
 gates of virions; for example, adenovirus inclusions in
the nucleus and reovirus inclusions in the cytoplasm of
for example, Borna disease virus induces bizarre changes
 infected cells represent large accumulations of virions.
in the behavior of rats, cats, and horses and is now being
Still other inclusion bodies are the result of degenerative
studied as the possible cause of depression and other 
cellular changes. In fixed, stained cells, herpesvirus intra-
 bipolar neuropsychiatric illnesses in humans.
nuclear inclusions are often striking in appearance—-they
When the pathophysiologic effects of persistent
 yo sq si  ,'saa so, s e 
viral infection are manifested through influences On
induced chromatin condensation and a fixation artifact
the immune systerm, we do not usually think about
that results in the formation of a clear zone between
the infection of individual cells, but rather about infec-
centrally condensed nucleoplasm and marginated chro-
tion in the whole organ system, the whole host animal.
Viruses that infect lymphocytes may induce a general-
matin (Figure 5.3A).
ized immunosuppression or more subtle dysfunctions
in particular immune responses, The complexity of the
 infection caused by feline immunodeficiency virus is a
Polarity of Viral Budding
 case in point. Similarly, when persistent infection in-
volves muscle cells, we usually focus on system dysfunc-
In the course of their replication, viruses belonging to
tions, such as changes in cardiac capacity or rhythm
several families of enveloped viruscs insert zheir glyco-
or gastrointestinal motility. When infection involves 
 proteins into the plasma membrane of their host cells;
respirarory epithelial cells, we focus not on thcsc cells
 as discussed in Chapter 3, this insertion is not a random
but on cilial stasis, airway congestion, and the likeli-
matter. Viruses that mature at the apical surface of epi-
hood of bacterial superinfection and secondary pneu-
thelial cells may be shed into the environment, whereas
monia (Figure 5.4). Nevertheless, in each case it is
those maturing at the basolateral surface are free to
 damage to specialized functions of differentiated cells
proceed to other sites in the body, sometimes entering the
that underlies the complex pathophysiologic effect and
bloodstream and establishing systemic infection (Figure
the disease.
5.5). For example, in reservoir host species, rabies virus
88
5.Virus-Cell Interactions
FiGure 5.4.
Effectof arhinovirus onbovine racheal epitheliumgrown in vitras an explant culture also called organ cultuel, ashownby scanning electron
microscopy. [A) Normal appearance of iliated cells. (B) Six days aer infeclion; many cells ore rounded up or detached. (Courtesy of S. E. Reed
and A. Boyde.)
is shed fron the apical surface of salivary gland epithelial  Wild-type parainfluenza virus 1 (Sendai virus), which
cells wherc it cnters the saliva and is transmirtcd by
causes respiratory disease in several animal species, buds
bite. Howcver, lcntiviruses bud from basolateral plasma
apically into airways and is transmitted by aerosol,
mcmbranes and pass directly froin cell to cell or become
whereas a variant that causes generalizcd discasc buds
disseminated through tissue spaces and the bloodstream.
basolaterally.
Ulorastrnctural Cbanges in Virus-nfeetee Cefts
89
Figure 5.5.
Apical Surface
influenza
rabies
paramyxo
virus
virus
virus
endoplasmic
reticulum
coronavirus
flavivirus
nucleus
Golgi
herpesvirus
bunyavirus
O
alphavirus
lentivirus
vesicular
stomatitisvirus
BasalSurface
Sites of budding of various enveloped viruses. Viruses that bud from apical surfaces of epithelial cells ot body surfaces are in position to be shed
inrespiraoryorgenital secretionsorintestinal contents.Virusesthatbudfrombasalsurfacesarenpositionfor systemicspreadviaviremia or
lymphatics. Some viruses, such as flaviviruses, bunyaviruses, and coronaviruses, toke a more circuitous route in exifing the cell (see specific
chapters inPar ll.Viruses that donot budusually arereleased only via cellysis.
Ultrastructural Changes
of cytoplasmic membranes. Other ultrastructural
in Virus-lnfected Cells
changes that are promineut in many viral infections in-
clude disruption of cytoskeletal elements, mitochondrial
 damage, and changes in the density of the cytosol. Late
As seen at thc higher resolution provided by the electron
 in the course of infection, many cytolytic viruses cause
microscope, specific and nonspecific changes in virus-
 nuclear, organelle, and cytoplasmic rarefaction and/or
infected cells are varied and may bc dramatic. Early
 condensation, with terminal loss of host cell membrane
 changes in cell structure often are dominated by prolifer-
integrity. In many instances the inevitability of celi death
 ation of various cell inembranes: for example, herpesvi-
is obvious, but in others host cell functional loss is subrle
ruses cause increased synthesis, even reduplication, of
 and cannot be artributcd to particular ultrastructural
nuciear menbranes; flaviviruses cause proliferation of
 pathologic changes. In noncytolytic infcctions, most
thc cndoplasmic reticulum; picornaviruses and calicivi-
functional losses cannot be attributed to damage that is
ruses cause a distinctivc proliferation of vesicles in the
 Inorphologically evident. Specific examples reflecting the
 cytoplasm; and many tetroviruses cause peculiar fusions
 range of host cell changes occurring in virus-infected
90
S.Virus-Cefl Interactions
cells are included in many of the chapters in Part II of 
In other cases, viruses induce apoptosis indirectly
this book.
through their effects on cellular processes. Conversely,
 In addition to changes directly attributable to viral
 some viruses have acquired one or more antiapoptotic
replication, most virus-infected cels also show nonspe-
 genes and gene products to prolong cell survival until
cific changes, very much like those induced by physical or
 their replication cycle is complete and progeny virions
chemical insults. The most common early and potentially
have been released.
reversible change is what pathologists call cloudy swell-
All in all, programmed cell death, i.e., apoptosis,
ing. This change is associated with increasing permeabil-
seems to be an important host defense mechanism. When
 ity of the plasma membrane. Electron microscopic study
a virus induces cell death by necrosis, it usually does so
of such cells reveals diffusc swelling of the nucleus, dis-
late, after progeny virus production is complete. In many
 tention of the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria,
cases, e.g., with picornaviruses, lysis of the host cell by
and rarefaction of the cytoplasm. Later in the course of
necrosis is part of the viral strategy to effect virion re-
many viral infections the nucleus becomes condensed
lease. However, when a cell induces its own death, by
and shrunken, and cytoplasmic densiry increases. Cell 
apoptosis, it usually does so early, before progeny virus
destruction can be the consequence of further loss of 
production is complete. Paradoxically, this early elimina-
Osmotic integrity and leakage of lysosomal enzymes into
tion of virus-infected cells that occurs before the release
the cytoplasm. This progresson, overall, is called by
 of progeny virus may arrest or at least slow the spread
pathologists the common terminal pathway to cell death.
of virus throughout the body enough such that other
host defenses can be marshaled.
Virus-Induced Cell Death:
Apoptosis Versus Necrosis
Interferons
It had long been assumed that viruses kill cells by direct
Viral interference is said to occur when a virus-infected
mcans, by usurping cellular machinery, disrupting
cell resists superinfection with the same or a different
membrane integrity, ctc. That is, it was thought that the
virus. The interfering virus does not necessarily have to
level of insult was such that the cell could not go on
replicate to induce interference, and the ability of the
living—that in the words of the virologist Kay Holmes,
challenge virus to replicate may be completely or only
"the cell dies by necrosis, or 'murder.'" In recent ycars,
 partialy inhibited. Two main mechanisms have been
 however, it has been found that although some viruses
demonstrated: (1) interference mediated by defective in-
do cause the necrosis of their host cell, many others
terfering mutants, operating only against the homolo-
kill their host cell by triggering cellular “suicide,’ or
 gueous virus (see Chapter 4), and (2) interference medi-
programmed cell death. Cells that have activated their
atcd by interferons.
 programmed cell death pathway undergo characteristic
morphologic changes referred to as apoptosis. The strik-
ing morphologic changes that occur during apoptosis
Properties of Interferons
are distinguishable from those of necrosis. Cells dying
 by apoptosis exhibit chromatin condensation and mar-
In 1957 lsaacs and Lindenmann reported that cells of the
gination and eventually break up into membrane-bound
 chorioallantoic membrane of embryonated hen's eggs
bodies that contain dense cytoplasmic and nuclear de-
infected with influenza virus release into the medium a
bris. Also, characteristically, a cellular endonuclease is
activated during apoptosis that cleaves cellular DNA(
cells against infection with the same or unrelated viruses.
into 180- to 200-bp fragmcnts. These are seen in agarose
 This discovery raised hopes that this substance would
gels as many rather evenly spaced bands, called "lad-
become a safe, nontoxic, broad-spectrum antiviral che-
ders. This endonuclease-induced change is not seen inI
motherapeutic agent. Despite an enormous amount of
cellular necrosis.
work since then, and the capaciry ro produce large
Therc are several potential mechanisms by which
 amounts by recombinant DNA technology, its usefulness
cells are induced to activate their apoptotic pathway;
as a thcrapeutic agent for the treatment of viral diseascs
some viruses inducc apoptosis by the direct action of 1
 remains an unfulfilled dream.
a spccific protein—-adcnoviruses, alphaviruses, and the
Today we know that there are about 24 interferons
circovirus, chicken anemia virus, have protcins that by
 in humans, and fewer in animals probably only because
themselves are suffcicnt to induce apoptotic cell death.
 of less research. We know that interferons are typical
Interferons
91
TaBlE 5.2
Properties of Interferons
PROpeRTY
INTERFERON α
Interreron fβ3
Interferon y
 Principal source
Leukocytes, many other cells 
Fibroblasts
T lymphocytes, NK cells
Epithelial cells
Inducing agent
Virus infection
Virus infection
Antigen (or mitogen)
Number of subtypes
At least 22 in humans,
1
1
 fewer identified in animals
Glycosylation
No (most subtypes)
Yes
Yes
 Functional form
Monomer
Dimer
Telramer
 Principal activity
 Antiviral
Antriviral
Immunomodulation
 Mechanism of action
 Inhibits protein
Inhibits protein
Enhances MHC antigens;
synthesis
synthesis
activates cytotoxic T cells,
macrophages, and NK cells
members of the large family of normal cellular regulatory
as in knockout mice, enhances the severity of infection;
proteins called cytokines. They fall into three chemically
and (3) treatment with interferons protects against in-
distinct types, known as interferon α (which occurs as
fection.
at least 22 subtypes in humans), interferon β, and inter-
feron y—-some of their properties are listed in Table 5.2.
 Interferons are not synthesized by cells constitu-
Antiviral Actions of Interferons
tively, rather they are produced and secrcted transicntly
in response to external stimuli, such as viral infections.
Following their induction by viral infection, interferons
Any virus, especially RNA viruses, multiplying in al-
 are released from the infected cell and bind to specifc
most any typc of cell, in any vertebrate species, induces
receptors on thc plasma membrane of other cclls. There
interferons α and β. Interferon y is made only by T
appears to bc one receptor for interferons α and β and
lymphocytes (and natural killer cells) and only follow-
another for interferon y. Binding of intcrfcrons α and
ing antigen-specifc or mitogenic stimulation; it is a
β to their rcceptor activates a complcx transcriptional
lympbokine, with immunoregulatory functions. Some
cascade by signal transduction, which in turn leads to
interferons, cspecially β and y, display a degree of
the synthesis of many cellular proteins—over 20 cellular
host species specificiry; for instance, mouse interferons
 genes are up-regulated. Binding of interferon y to its
are ineffective in humans, and vice versa. However,
receptor triggers a different cascade, a different set of
therc is little or no viral specificity, i.e., interferons α,
 genes and protcins. Many of the induced proteins directly
β, or y induced by, say, a paramyxovirus infection
or indirectly inhibit the replication of virus, each in a
are fully cffcctive against a togavirus infection. Secreted
different way. The mechanisms involved arc beyond the
interferons arc distributed locally or carried by the
scope of this book, but one example will be used to
circulation throughout the body. Usually, virus-induced
 illustrate the complexity of mechanisms involved in in-
interferons are produced early in the course of infection,
terferon-mediated interference.
as early as the time viral progeny are first released by
P1/elF-2a kinase, which is made constitutively at
infected cells; thus, they can have a very important
low lcvels in untreated cells, is up-regulated by interferon
effect in protecting neighboring cells and inhibiting the
Q, β, or y. Following binding of double-stranded RNA,
 early spread of virus locally and the early dissemination
of virus throughour thc body.
 course of RNA virus replication, this protein kinasc
The important role played by interferons as a de-
 phosphorylates its own P1 subunit, thus activating the
fense mechanism has been documented by three typcs
cnzyme to phosphorylatc the α subunit of the eukaryotic
of experimental and clinical observations: (1) in many
 protcin synthesis initiation factor elF-2, thereby inacti-
viral infections, interferon production corrclates with
vating it. Becausc cIF-2 is required to initiate the synthc-
rccovery; (2) inhibition of interferon production, such
 sis of all polypeptides, interferon-induced P1/eIF-2a ki-
92
Airrrs-feff lmfereretirons
nase inhibits thc synthesis of all proteins of any virus 
 cumventing the host's interferon system. For example,
that has stimuiated its activation.
adenoviruses encode RNAs that bind to P1/eIF-2a ki-
Hase, prevcnting its activation by double-stranded RNA.
Reoviruses, which might be expected to be exceptionally
Interferons and Resistance/Susceptibility
susceptible to interferons because they have double-
to Viral Infections
stranded RNA genomes, are not because one of their
capsid proteins binds more strongly to viral doublc-
It is diffcult to determine which celltypes are responsiblc
stranded RNA than P1/eIF-2a kinase.
for interferon production in particular viral infections
in vivo. Ccrtainly, interferons can be found in the fluids
bathing most infection sites, e.g., in thc mucus bathing
airway epithelial surfaces during respiratory infections
Further Reading
and in the blood in systemic infcctions. Thesc intcrferons
are produced by epithelial and mesenchymal cells as
Alberts, B., Bray, D., Johnson, A., and Lewis, J., cds.
(1997). *Essential Cell Biology: An Introduetion to
well as by T cells, natural killer cells, killer cells, and
the Molecular Biology of the Cell.* Garland Publish-
macrophages in infection sites.
crs, New York.
 Compelling evidence that interferons can be instru-
Ball, L. A. (1998). Virus-host cell interactions. In
mental in deciding the fate of the animal foliowing viral
Topley and Wilson's Microbiology and Microbial In-
infection was provided in the early 1970s by Gresser
fections"' (B. W. J. Mahy and L. H. Collier, cds.), Vol.
and colleagues, who showed that mice infected with any
1, pp. 115-146. Edward Arnold, London.
Benz, J. (1993). "Viral Fusion Mechanisms." CRC Press,
of several nonlethal viruses, or with sublethal doses of
 Boca Raton, FL.
more virulent viruses, die if anti-interferon globulin is
Carrasco, L.. (1987), "Mechanisms of Viral Toxicity in
adrministercd. In studies with transgenic micc carrying
Animal Cells." CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
multiple copies of the gene for hurman interferon β, en-
Carrasco, L. (1994). Entry of animal viruses and macro-
hanced resistance to pseudorabies virus was found that
molecules into cells. FEBS Lett. 350, 151-154.
Greber, U. F., Singh, I., and Helenius, A. (1994). Mecha-
was proporrional to the resulting concentration of circu-
nisms of virus uncoating, Trends Microbiol. 2, 52-56.
lating interferon evoked by the transgene.
Helcnius, A. (1992). Unpacking the incoming influenza vi-
Although it is widely thought that interferons play
rus. Cell 69, 577-578.
Johnson, H. M., Bazer, F. W., Szente, B. E., and Jarpe,
an important role in recovery from viral infections, data 
are less certain. If interferons were key, one might expect
M. A. (1994). How interferons fight disease. Sci. Am.
that infection caused by any virus or indeed immuniza-
270,68-75.
Knipe, D. M. (1996). Virus-host cell interactions. In
 tion by any attenuated virus vaccine might protect an
"Fields Viology" (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M.
animal against challenge with an unrelated virus, yet
Howley, R. M., Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P.
this cannot be demonstrated. The evidence is somewhat
Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, cds.), 3rd ed.,
stronger that infection of the respiratory tract with one
pp. 273-299. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Lodish, H., Baltimore, D., and Berk, A. (1995). "Molecu-
virus wil provide temporary, local protection against
lar Cell Biology," 3rd ed. with CD ROM. Scientific
others. Perhaps this distinction provides a clue that the
American Books Freenan, New York.
antiviral effect of interferons is limitcd in both timc and
Oldstonc, M. B. A. (1989). Viral alteration of cell func-
space. Their main antiviral effect in natural infections
tion. Sci. Am. 261, 34-39.
 may be local, protecting cells in the immediate vicinity
Tucker, S. P., and Cornpans, R. W. (1993). Virus infec-
of the initial focus of infcction, slowing down the move-
tion of polarized epithelial cells. Adt. Virus Res. 42,
187-214.
ment of virus during crucial early stages of infection.
Welsh, R. M., and Sen, G. C. (1997). Nonspecifc host re-
sponses to viral infections. In *"Viral Pathogenesis"
(N. Nathanson, R. Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D.
Actions of Viruses to Combat Effects
E. Griffn, K. V. Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L.
Robinson,eds.), Pp. 109-142. Lippincott-Raven, Phil-
of Interferons
adelphia,PA
Williams, G. T. (1994). Programmed cell death: A funda-
 Because of its early induction and broad effectiveness,
mental protective response to pathogcns. Trends Mi-
many viruses have evolved defense mechanisms for cir-
crobiol. 2, 463-464.
CHaPtER
Mechanisms
s of Infection and Viral
Spread through the Body
Routes of Enrry .....
93
Host Specificity and Tissue Tropism.
97
Mechanisms of Spread in the Body ...
97
Mechanisms of Infection of Major Target Organs and Tissues ..
102
Mechanisms of Virus Shedding ....
.107
Furt.her Reading...........
.108
At the level of the cell, infcction by viruses is quite differ-
 protective covering, and in the eye the skin is replaced
 ent from that causcd by bacteria and other microorgan-
by a layer of living cells to form the conjunctiva and
isms. However, at the lcvcl of thc whole animal and
 cornea. Each of these sites is the target for invasion by
animal populations thcrc arc more similarities than dif-
 one or morc viruscs.
ferences. Like microorganisms, viruses must gain entry
into their host's body, replicate, and sprcad, eitherlocally
 a sl pl u pe ass no
localize in appropriate target organs (Tablc 6.1). Further,
Entry via the Respiratory Tract
to survive in nature, viruses must be transinitted, i.c.,
 The mucosal surfaces of the respiratory tract have living
they must be shed with secretions or excretions into the
cells at thcir surfaces; these cells can support the replica-
environment, be taken up by a host or a vcctor, or bec
tion of many viruses so safeguards are necessary to mini-
passed congenitally from mother to offspring.
mize the risk of infection. The respiratory tract is ordi-
 narily protected by rwo effective cleansing systems: (1)
a blanket of mucus produccd by goblet cells that is kept
Routes of Entry
in continuous flow by (2) thc coordinated beating of
ciliated epithelial cells lining the upper and much of the
To infect its host, a virus must first attach to and infect
 lower respiratory tract. Most inhaled virions are trapped
cells of one of the body surfaces, i.e., unless the body
 in mucus, carried by ciliary action from the nasal cavity
surfaces are bypasscd by parcntcral inoculation via a
 and airways to the pharynx, and then swallowed or
wound, needle, or the bite of an arthropod or vertehrate.
 coughed out. Particles that are 10 μm or more in diame-
The animal body may be represented by Cedric Mims?
 ter are usually trapped on the nasal mucosa over thc
now classic diagram of a set of surfaces, each covered
turhinate boncs, which project into the nasal cavity and
by a sheet of epithelial cclls scparating host tissues from
 act as baffle plates. Particles S-10 μm in diameter may
the outside world (Figure 6.1).
be carried to the trachea and bronchioles, where they
The outer surface of the body propcr, the skin,
are usually trapped in the mucus blanket. Particles 5 μm
has a relatively impermeable, dry, outer layer of dcad,
 or less in diameter are often inhaled directly into the
keratinized cells. In the respiratory tract and in the intcs-
lungs and some may reach the alveoli where they may
tinal rract, the surface lining consists of one or more
 be ingested by alveolar macrophages. At each of these
layers of nonkcratinized epithelial cells. In the urogenital
 levels, virus may infect epithelial cells.
tract, where urine and scxual fluids are produced annd
 Despite its protectivc systems, the respiratory tract
excreted, there is another discontinuity in the body's
 is, overall, the most conmon portal of viral entry into
93
94
6.Mlectamisms of Infeetinon and Viral Spread fhrough the Body
TabLe 6.1
Obligatory Steps in Viral Infection
 Step In infection process
REQuiRement FOr ViRal SurvvAl And PrOGResSIoN Of
NOWDINI
Entry into host and primary viral replication
Evade host's natural protective and cleansing mechanisms
Local or general spread inthe host, cel and tissue tro-
Evade immediate host defenses and natural barriers to
pism, and secondary viral replication
spread; at the cellular level the virus takes over necessary
host cell functions for its own replication processes
Evasion of host inflammatory and immune defenses
Evade host inflammatory, phagocylic, and immune defenses
long enough to complete the viral transmission cycle
Shedding from host
Exit host body at site and at concentration needed to en-
sure infection of the next host
Cause damage to host
Not necessary, but this is the reason we are interesled in
the virus and its pathogenetic processes
the body (Tablc 6.2). All viruses that infect the host rectly or they may first infcct cells in the oropharynx,
1  oi uyoe Aq os op klqeqoid ioen kroendsi aqi eia
their progeny being eventually carried into the intestinal
specific receptors on epithelial cells. Following respira-
tract. The esophagus is rarely infected, probably because
tory invasion, many viruses remain localized (e.g., rhino-
 of its tough stratifed squamous epithelium and the rapid
viruses, adenoviruses, and influenza viruses of mammals)
 passage of swallowed material over its surface. The intes-
whereas others become systemic (e.g., foot-and-mouth
tinal tract is prorected by mucus, which may contain
 disease viruses, canine distemper virus, rinderpest virus,
specific secretory antibodies (IgA), but the directional
hog cholera virus, and Newcastle disease virus).
portunities for virions to contact susceptible epithelial
Entry via the Oropharynx
cells. Virions may also be taken up by M cells that overlie
and Intestinal Tract
Peycr's patches in the ileum, from where they may be
 passed to adjacent mononuclear cells where they may
 Many viruses are acquired by ingestion. They may either
replicate.
be swallowed and reach the stomach and intestine di-
Other protective mechanisms may inactivate vi-
ruses in the intestinal tract: acid in the stomach and bile
and proteolytic enzymes in the smallintestine. In general,
viruses that cause intestinal infection, such as rotavi-
Figure 6.1.
ruses, caliciviruses, and enteroviruses (Table 6.3), are
acid and bile resistant. However, there arc acid- and
mouth
conjunctiva
bile-labile viruses that cause important intestinal infec-
nose
tions; for example, bovine, porcine, and murine coro-
lungs
scratch
naviruses are protected during passage through the stom-
bite
ach of young animals by the buffering action of milk.
Some enteric viruses not only resist inactivation by pro-
teolytic enzymes in the stomach and intestine, their in-
skin-
fectivity may actually be increased by such exposure.
 aq d Pis rn  jo a s
proteases enhances the infectivity of rotaviruses and
capillary
some coronaviruses.
Rotaviruses, caliciviruses, toroviruses, and astro-
urogenital
viruses are now recognized as major causes of viral
tract
anus
diarrhea in animals, whereas the great majority of
 intestinal infections caused by enteroviruses (e.g., por-
The surfaces of the body in relalion to the entry and shedding of
cine, avian, and murine encephalomyelitis viruses) and
viruses. (Courtesy of C. A. Mims.]
adenoviruses are asymptomatic. Parvoviruses cause di-
Routes of Entry
95
Table 6.2
Viruses of Animals That Initiate Infection by Entry through the Respiratory Tract
FAMILY/GENUS
VIRus
Producing respiratory disase
Herpesviridae/several genera
Herpesviruses of many animals
Adenoviridge/ Mastadenovirus and Aviadenovirus
 Adenoviruses of many animals
Paramyxoviridae/several genera
Parainfluenza and respiratory syncytial viruses
Orthomyxoviridae/ influenzavirus A
Influenza viruses of swine and horse5
Coronaviridae/Coronavirus
Infectious bronchitis virus of chickens
Picornaviridae/ Rhinovirus and Aphthovirus
 Rhinoviruses of many animals, footand-mouth disease
viruses
Caliciviridae/Vesivirus
Feline calicivirus
Producing systemic disease, usually without initil respiratory sigs
Herpesviridae/several genera
Pseudorabies, bovine malignant catarhal fever, Marek's
disease viruses
Paramyxoviridae/ Morbillivirus
Canine distemper, rinderpest viruses
Orihomyxoviridae/ Influenzavirus A
Avian influenza viruses (fowl plague viruses)
 Arenaviridae/ Arenavirus
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
Flaviviridae/ Pestivirus
Hog cholera virus
arrhea after reaching cells of the intestinal tract via t
 tough and usually impermeabie barrier to the entry of
viremic spread.
viruses. Breaches in skin integrity such as cuts, punctures,
abrasions, or wounds expose deep epidermal layers that
contain few blood vessels and lymphatics and therefore
Entry via the Skin
are rather remote from host inflammatory defenses. Vi-
ruses that enter these layers, such as the papillomavi-
The skin is the largest organ of the body, and because
ruses, typically induce local pathology (Table 6.4).
 its outer layer consists of keratinized cells, it provides a
 Deeper trauma may introduce viruses into the dermis,
Table 6.3
 Viruses of Animals That Initiate Infection by Entry through the Intestinal Tract
FAMIly /GenUS
ViRus
Producing diarrhea
Parvoviridae/ Parvovirus
Feline panleukopenia virus, canine parvovirus
Reoviridae/Rotavirus
Rotaviruses of many animals
Caronaviridae/ Coronavirus
Enteric coronaviruses of many animals, mouse hepatitis virus
Coronaviridae/Torovirus
Breda virus
Astroviridoe/ Astrovirus
Astroviruses of many animals
Floviviridae/Pestivirus
Bovine viral diarrhea virus
Producing systemic disease, usually without diarrhea
Adenoviridae/ Mastadenovirus and Aviadenovirus
 Adenoviruses of many animals
Picornaviridae/Enterovirvs
Enteroviruses of many animals
Caliciviridoe/ Vesivirus
Vesicular exanthema of swine virus
96
Merhmisms of Infeetion and Virat Sprecd through the Body
TaBtE 6.4
Viruses That Initiate Infection by Entry through the Skin, Oral Mucosa, Genital Tract.
or Eye
Routt 
FAMILY/GENUS
VIRUS
Minor abrasions [skin or mucosa]
Papovaviridae/Papillomavirus
Papillomaviruses of many animais
Herpesviridae/several genera
Herpesviruses of many animals
 Poxviridae/several genera
Cowpox, swinepox, orf, bovine papu.
lar stomatitis, pseudocowpox, fowl
pox viruses
Picornaviridae/Enterovirus
 Swine vesicular disease virus
Rhabdoviridae/Vesiculavirus
Vesicular stomalitis viruses
 Arthropod bite (mechanical trans-
 Poxviridae/several genera
Fowlpox, swinepox, myxoma viruses
mission]
Retroviridae/Lentivirus
Equine infectious anemia virus
Rhabdoviridae/Vesiculovirus
Vesicular stomatitis viruses
Arthropod bite (biological transmis-
Asfarviridae/Asfivirus
 African swine fever virus
sion, ie.,wih viral replication in the
Reoviridoe/Orbivirus
 Bluetongue viruses, African horse sick-
(podosy
ness viruses
Rhabdoviridae/Ephemerovirus
Bovine ephemeral fever
Rhabdoviridae/Vesiculovirus
Vesicular stomatitis viruses
Bunyaviridae/Phlebovirus
Rift Valley fever virus
Bunyaviridae/Nairovirus
 Nairobi sheep disease virus
Togaviridae/Alphavirus
 All member viruses 
Flaviviridae/Flavivirus
Nearly all member viruses
Bite of vertebrate
Retroviridae/Lentivirus
Feline immunodeficiency virus
Rhabdoviridae/lyssavirus
Rabies virus
Contaminated needlesor equipment
 All viruses causing systemic infec-
Papillomaviruses of many animals
tion, e.g., Papovaviridae/Papillo
mavirus
Refroviridae/lentivirus ond Deliaret
Equine infectious anemia, bovine leu
rovirus
kemia virus
Flaviviridae/Pestivirus
Hog cholera, bovine viral diarrhea
viruses
 Genital coniact
Herpesviridae/several genera
 Herpesviruses of many animals
Papovaviridae/Papillomavirus
 Bovine papillomaviruses
Arteriviridae/Arterivirus
Equine arteritis virus
Conjunctival contact
Herpesviridae/several genera
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus,
equine herpesvirus 1
Adenoviridae/Mastadenovirus
Canine adenoviruses l and 2
with its rich supply of vessels, lymphatics, and nerves, or
One of the most cfficient ways by which viruscs are
even into the underlying subcutaneous tissue and muscle.
introduccd through the skin is via the bite of arthropods,
These tissues often provide fertile ground for viral rcpli-
such as mosquitoes, ticks, Culicoides spp, or sandflies.
cation and subsequent dissemination. Generalized infec-
Insects, especially flies, may act as simple mechanical
tions of the skin with exanthema, such as in lumpy skin
vectors ("flying needles"'); for example, equine infectious
disease, sheeppox, and swine vesicular disease, are due
 anemia virus is spread among horses, rabbit hemorrhagic
to viral spread via viremia.
disease virus and myxoma virus are spread among rab-
Meebanisms of Spread n tbe Boy
97
bits, and fowlpox virus among chickens in this way.
Viral enhancers are short, often tandem-repeated
However, most viruses that arc spread by arthropods
scquences of nucleotides that can regulate tissue-specific
replicate in their vector. Viruses that are transmitted by
transcription. Papillomavirus DNA contains such en-
and replicate in arthropod vectors are called arboviruses
hancers, which arc active only in kcratinocytes and
(from arthropod-borne).
indeed only in the subset of thcse cells wherc papillo-
 Infection can also bc acquired through the bite of
 mavirus replication occurs. Enhanccr scquences have
 an animal, as in rabies. Finally, introduction of a virus 
also bcen dcfincd in thc gcnomes of rctroviruscs and
by skin penctration may bc iatrogenic, i.e., the result 
sevcral hcrpcsviruses, wherc they appear to influcncc
of veterinary care or related husbandry practices. For
 tropism by regulating the cxpression of viral gcncs in
cxample, equine infectious anemic virus has becn trans-
specific cell types. For example, certain strains of
mitted via contaminated needles, twitches, ropes, and avian leukosis virus induce lymphomas, whereas others
harnesses and orf virus and papillomaviruses have been (
 cause osteoporosis.
 transmitted via ear tagging or tattooing.
Mechanisms of Spread
Entry via Other Routes
in the Body
The urogenital tract is the route of entry of several impor-
tant pathogens (e.g., bovine herpesvirus 1, equine herpes-
Viruses may replicate only at or near the body surface
virus 3, and porcine papillomavirus). Small tears or abra--
through which they entered, whether this be the respira-
sions in the penile mucosa and thc epithelial lining of
tory tract, intestine, skin, genital tract, or conjunctiva;
thc vagina may occur during sexual activity and permit
 alternatively, they may cause generalized infections or
the entry of virus. The conjunctiva, although much less 
infections in specific organs following lymphatic and
resistant to viral invasion than thc skin, is constantly
hematogenous spread from entry sites.
cleansed by the flow of secretion (tears) and is wiped by
 In pioneering experiments that first revealed the
the eyelids; some adenoviruses and enteroviruses gain
pathogenetic events leading to systcmic infection and
entry in this way.
discase, Frank Fenner uscd cctromelia (mousepox) virus
as a model system. Groups of mice were inoculatcd in
the footpad of a hind limb and at daily intcrvals their
Host Specificity and
 organs were titrated to dcterminc thc amount of virus
presenr. Fenner showed that during the incubation pe-
Tissue Tropism
riod, infection sprcad through the mouse body in a step-
wise fashion (Figure 6.2). The virus first replicated locally
The capacity of a virus to selectively infect cells in partic-
in tissues of the footpad and then in local lynph nodes.
ular organs is referred to as tropism (see Chapter 7).
Virus produced in these sites gained entry into the blood.
Viral tropism depends on viral and host factors. At the
 stream, causing a primary viremia, which brought the
cellular level, there must be an interaction between viral
virus to its ultimate target organs, especially lymphore-
attachment proreins and matching cellular receptors. Al-
ticular organs and the liver. This stage of infection was
though such interactions are usually studied in cultured
accompanicd by the development of focal necrosis, first
cells, the situation in vivo, whcre heterogeneous cell pop-
in thc skin and draining lymph nodes in the inoculated
ulations are involved, is much more complex. If, for
hind limb and then in the spleen and liver. Within days
example, experimental animals are treated with neur-
there was massivc necrosis in the spleen and liver leadinig
aminidase intranasally, there is substantial protection
 to death. However, this was not the whole pathogenetic
against intranasal infection with influenza virus that lasts
sequence--to complete the viral life cycle, shedding and
until the neuraminidasc-sensitive receptors have regencr-
infection of the next host had to be cxplained. Fenner
ated. Receptors for a particular virus are usualy re-
found that the virus produced in the major targct organs,
stricted to ccrtain cel types in crtain organs; only thcse
i.c., the splccn and livci, caused a secondary vircmia,
cells can be infected. In largc part, this accounts for both 
bringing the virus back to the skin. Infection in thc skin
the tissue and organ tropism of a given virus and the
 caused a macular and papular rash from which largc
pathogencsis of the disease caused by the virus. Of 
amounts of virus were shed, leading to contact cxposurc
course, the prcsence of receptor is not rthe only factor
 of other mice. These experiments led to many more stud-
that determines whether the cell may become infected
ies, of many other viruses in many different animal spe-
other, intracellular factors, such as cnhancers, are re-
 cies, cumulatively bringing us to our present state of
quired for productive infection.
knowledge of the pathogenesis of viral diseases in ani-
98
6.Mechanisms of Infection and Viral Spread througi the Body
cnvironmcnt from these sites. Thc spread of infection
Figure 6.2.
 along epithelial surfaces usually ocurs by the sequential
Day
infcction of neighboring cells. Many poxviruses produce
Skin:Invasion
 infection via the skin, but in addition to spreading from
Multiplication
cell to cell, there is usually also local subepithelial and
Regional lymph node:
lymphatic spread. For example, in myxoma virus infec-
Multiplication
tion in rabbits, a few epidermal cells are usually infected
by scarification (or by a biting arthropod) and the virus
Bloodstream:
sprcads locaily from cell to cell, primarily in the epider-
Primary viremia
mis, before spreading to the local lymph nodes. The
poxviruses that cause molluscum contagiosum, orf, and
tanapox remain localized in the skin and produce an
overgrowth of cells and inflammatory infltration. In the
Spleen and liver:
skin, papillomaviruses initiate infection in the basal layer
Multiplication
Necrosis
of the epidermis, but the maturation of virions occurs
only in cells as they move toward the skin surface and
become keratinized. Because this is a slow process, taking
Bloodstream:
several weeks, papillomas develop slowly.
Secondary viremia
Viruses that enter the body via the respiratory
or intestinal tracts can spread rapidly in the layer of
Skin: Focal infection
fluid that covers epithelial surfaces; consequently, such
Multiplication
infections often progress rapidly. Usually these viruses
have a short incubation period as well. After infections
Swelling of foot:
of the respiratory tract by paramyxoviruses and influ-
leril
Primary lesion
enza viruses or the intestinal tract by rotaviruses or
coronaviruses, there is little or no invasion of subepi-
thelial tissues. A
Although these viruses usually enter
lymphatics and thus have the potential to spread, they
usually do not replicate well in deeper tissues, possibly
Early rash:
because appropriate virus receptors or other permissive
Papules
 cellular factors, such as cleavage-activating proteases,
10
are restricted to epithelial cells or because the tempera-
ture of deeper tissues is higher than the optimal remper-
ature for viral replication.
Severe rash:
 Restriction of infection to an epithelial surfacc
Ulceration
cannot be'equated with a lack of sevcrity of discase.
Large areas of intestinal epithelium may be damaged
Frank Fenner's classic study of the pathogenesis of ectromelia
by rotaviruses and coronaviruses, causing severe diar-
mousepxvirusnftioniswashfirsstudeernesing
rhea. The severity of localized infections of the respira-
serial [daily) titration of the virus content of organs and tissues and
the model for many studies that have since advanc
tory tract depends on their location: infcctions of thc
nced knowledge
of the pathogenesis of systemic virol infections. [From F. Fenner,
upper respiratory tract may producc scvere rhinitis but
Mousepox linfectious ectromelia of mice): A review. J. Immunol. 63,
few other signs, whereas infection of the bronchioles
341-373 (1949).]
or alveoli may produce more severe respiratory distress.
 The whole tracheal epithelial and bronchial lining
may be destroyed in influenza or parainfluenza virus
mals infected in nature and underlining the importance
infections, causing extravasation of fluids and hypoxia,
and general applicabiliry of the ectromelia model.
espccially in young animals. Fluid buildup in airways
may predisposc to secondary bacterial invasion—
shipping fever in cattle is often a consequence of
Local Spread on Epithelial Surfaces
parainfluenza virus 3 infection followed by Pasteurella
bemolytica superinfection. The generalized signs of
Many viruses replicate in epithelial cells at the site of
fever, chills, malaise, fatigue, and anorexia accompa-
entry and produce a localized or spreading infcction in
nying localized respiratory infections are generally the
the epithelium-some are then shed directly into the
result of induced circulating cytokines.
Mechanisns vof Spread in thbe Bocdy
99
Subepithelial Invasion
lymphatics are carried to local lymph nodes. As they
and Lymphatic Spread
enter, virions are exposed to macrophages lining mar-
ginal sinuses and may be engulfed. Virions may be inacti-
The factors that direct some viruses to invade subepithe-
vated and processed by macrophages and dendritic cells
lial tissues are poorly understood. In addition to the
so that their component antigens are presented to adja-
distribution of viral receptors and the differences be-
cent lymphocytes in such a way that an immune response
tween body core and surface temperatures, as discussed
is initiated (see Chapter 8). Somc viruses, however, also
earlicr, directional shedding of viruses from infected epi-
thelial layers may be crucial. Release of virus into the
 replicate in macrophages (e.g., many rctroviruses, canine
distemper virus, feline infectious peritonitis virus, Borna
lumen of the respiratory or intestinal tracts facilitates
disease virus, arteriviruses, some adenoviruses, and somc
local spread to contiguous cpithelial surfaces and imme-
herpesviruses), whercas other viruses are able to rcplicate
diate shedding into the environment, but does not favor
 in lymphocytes or dendritic cells. Some virions may pass
invasion of subepithelial tissues. Conversely, shedding
 directly through lymph nodes to enter the bloodstream.
from the basolateral cell surface of cpithelial cells facili-
 Monocytes and lymphocytes circulate through the
tates the invasion of subepithelial tissues and the subse-
 blood, lymphatics, and lymph nodes; this circulation is
quent dissemination of virus through lymphatics, blood
 an effective means of disseminating viruses throughout
vessels, or nerves.
the body.
 Paramyxoviruses and orthomyxoviruses are re-
 Normally, there is a local inflammatory response
leased preferentialy from lumenal (or apical) surfaces 
at the site of viral invasion, the extent of which depends
 Of epithelial cels, whereas rhabdoviruses (except rabies
on the extent of tissue damage. Local blood vessels be-
virus in salivary glands) are shed from basolateral sur-
 come dilated and rendered more permeable so that
faces into subepithelial spaces. Within the family Coro-
 monocytes and lymphocytes, cytokines, immunoglobu-
naviridae, transmissible gastroeneteritis virus is shed
lins, and complement components may be delivered di-
from lumenal surfaces of infected cells from where it
 rectly to the site of infection. These events are especially
 enters body excretions, whereas strains of mouse hepati-
vigorous once the immune response has been initiated.
tis virus that cause generalized disease are shed from
In some cascs, viruses take advantage of these events to
basolateral membranes from where they can enter the
 infect involvcd cells and spread locally or systemically.
circulation and be carried to other target organs. These
shedding patterns are determined by the localization of
the insertion of viral surface glycoproteins in the plasma
Spread via the Bloodstream: Viremia
 membrane of the host cell; in turn, viral glycoprotein
localization is determined by specific signaling sequences
 In veterinary medicine, unintentional inoculation of a
within the glycoproteins themselves.
virus into the bloodstream is rare, but it may occur
After traversing the epithelium and its basciment
during the transfusion of infected blood (e.g., transmis-
 membranc to reach subepithelial tissues, virions can en-
sion of fcline immunodeficiency virus) or by use of non-
ter lymphatics that form a network beneath all cutaneous
 sterilc instruments (e.g., transmission of many viruses
and mucosal cpithelia (Figurc 6.3). Virions that enter 
by reuse of disposable syringes and needles or improperly
Figure 6.3.
ymphaticsinus
linedbymacrophages
ymphatic
lymphoid
poojo
fferent
Mede
lymphatic
connective
tissue matrix
ymphatic
duct
Subepithelial invasion and lymphatic spread of inlection.(Courtesy of C. A.Mims.)
100
Aleeaisms of tfeetion and Viral Sprcad through the Bondy
 sterilized multiuse syringes and needles). The bite of ar-
 In the blood, virions may be free in the plasma or
thropod vectors also allows direct entry of virus into
may be contained in, or adsorbed to, leukocytes, plate-
the bloodstrcam.
lets, or erythrocytes. Parvoviruses, enteroviruses, togavi-
The blood is the most effective and rapid vehicle
ruses, and flaviviruses circulate free in the plasma. Vi-
for the spread of virus through the body. Once a virus
ruses carried in leukocytes, generally lymphocytes or
has reached the bloodstream, usually via the lymphatic
 monocytes, are not cleared as readily or in the same way
 system (Figurc 6.3), it can localize in any part of the
as viruses circulating free in the plasma. Being protected
body within minutes. The first entry of virus into the
 from antibodies and other plasma components, they can
blood is called primary vireria. This early viremia may
be carried to distant tissues. Monocyte-associated vire-
be clinically silent, known to have taken place only be-
mia is a feature of canine distemper, bluetongue, feline
 cause of the invasion of distant organs. Virus replication 
leukemia, and of beta- and gammaherpesvirus infections;
 in major target organs leads to thc sustained production
lymphocyte-associated viremia is a feature of Marek's
 of much higher concentrations of virus, producing a
 disease, lymphocytic choriomeningitis, and feline immu-
secondary viremia (Figure 6.4), which can in turn lcad
nodeficiency virus infections. In infections causced by Af-
to the establishment of infection in yet other parts of
rican swine fever virus, Rift Valley fevcr virus, Colorado
the body.
tick fever virus, and bluetongue viruses, virions are asso
 Figure 6.4.
Infection
Paramyxoviruses
Rotaviruses
1
Papillomaviruses
Body surface
010l010l0
Lymph node
?
Movementofvirions
Sites af shecdding
Blood
No shedding
Primary viremia
? Sites of replication
lar endothelium
iver
R
?
?
Blood
Secondaryviremia
Vectorsofarboviruses
Respiratory tract
mucousmembrani
R
Salivary gland
orkidney
?
?
Canine distemper
Lumpyskin:
Arbovirus and
Rabies(salivary gland only)
Rinderpest
disease
canine distemper
Arenaviruses
encephalitis
Cytomegaloviruses
Therlinfirhiingsififhs
[Adapted from the work of C. A. Mims and D. O. white.]
Mecbanisms cf Spreurd in the Body
101
ciated with erythrocytes—in bluetongue and Colorado
) antigen-presenting cells and therefore play a pivotal role
tick fever virus infections, the virus replicates in erythro-
 in initiation of the primary immune response (see Chap-
cyte precursors in the bone marrow, producing a viremia
ter 8). The antiviral action of macrophages depends on
that lasts for the life span of erythrocytes. Certain mouse
the age and genetics of the host and their site of origin
lcukemia viruses and arenaviruses infect megakaryocytes
 in the body; indeed, even in a given site there are subpop-
and thereby are presenr in circulating platelets, but this
ulations of macrophages that differ in phagocytic compe-
 does not appear to be important in thc pathogenesis of
tencc and in susceptibility to infcction. Their state of
diseases caused by these viruses. Neutrophils havc a very
activation is also important. The various kinds of interac-
 shor life span and powerful antimicrobial mechanisms;
tions that can occur between macrophages and virions
thcy are rarely infected, although thcy may contain
 may be described in relation to Kupffer cells, the macro-
phagocytosed virions.
phages that line the sinusoids of the liver, as shown in
Viruses circulating in the plasma encounter many
Figure 6.5. Not shown in this model is tissue invasion
kinds of cells, but two play special roles in determining
via carriage of virus inside mobile monocytes/macro-
 the subsequent fate of infection: macrophages and vascu-
phages as they emigrate across capillary or sinusoidal
lar endothelial cells.
walls (diapedesis). Such transport of viruses inside in-
fected cells has been referred to as the "Trojan Horse"
Virus Interactions with Macrophagcs
mechanism of invasion; it is especially importanr in the
 Macrophages are very efficient phagocytes and are pres-
pathogenesis of lentivirus infections.
ent in all compartments of the body: free in plasma,
 Differences in virus-macrophage interactions may
in alveoli, subepithelial tissues, sinusoids of the lymph
account for differences in the virulence of virus strains
nodes, and above all the sinusoids of the liver, spleen,
and differences in host resistance. Even though they are
and bone marrow. Together with dendritic cells and B
innately efficient phagocytes, this capacity is enhanced
lymphocytes, macrophages are antigen-processing and
greatly during an immune response in response to the
Figure 6.5.
Kupffer cell
Hepatic
Inactivation in Kupffer cell
Growth in Kupffer cell
+
Passage through Kupffer celi
Growth in Kupffer cell
±growth in hepatic cell
± bile duct excretion
+releasejntoblood
+ release into blood
3
TpesfineonweirueandmpheldbKeemhthtininidinhei
Macrophagesmay fail tphagocylose virions eg..inVenezu
cuelanequineencephalisvirus infection thisis animportantFfactorfavoring prolonged
high viremia. (2) Virions moy be phagocytosed and destroyed: because the macrophage system is so eficient, viremia can be mainlained only
ifvrionsnlehebldasfst asheyareremoved3)Virinsmayephgocytoedand thentransferredpassvelyoadjocentcels hpatoytes
liversustains thehighviremia.41Virionsmaybephagocytosedbymocrophagesand thenmay replicate in hm:(4A)with someviruses, such
hepatis. [Adapled from the work of C. A. Mims and D. O. White.]
102
Mechenisns of tufection and Virat Spread through the Body
 release of cytokines, notably from T helper lymphocytes.
 to allow invasion of the nervous system. The capacity
Macrophages also have Fc receptors and C3 receptors
to produce viremia and the capacity to invade tissues
 in their plasma membranes, which further enhance their
from the bloodstream are thus two different properties
ability to ingest virions, especially when they are
of a virus. For example, some strains of Semliki Forest
coated with antibody or complement. Certain togavi-
virus, an alphavirus, have lost the capacity to invade the
ruses, flaviviruses, coronaviruses, arenaviruses, reovi-  (
 central nervous system while retaining the capacity to
ruses, and especially retroviruses are capable of replicat-
 generate a viremia equivalent in duration and magnitude
ing in macrophages-when virus uptake is facilitated
 to that produced by neuroinvasive strains.
by bound antibody, antibody-mediated enhancement of
infection may occur. This is a major pathogenetic factor
in human dengue, feline infectious peritonitis, and many
Spread via Nerves
retrovirus infections.
An important route of infection of the central nervous
Virus Interactions with Vascular
system is via the peripheral nerves, as seen, for example,
Fndothelial Cells
in rabies, Borna disease, B virus encephalitis, pseudora-
 The vascular endothelium with its basement membrane
 bies, and bovine herpesvirus 5 encephalitis. Herpesvirus
and tight cell junctions constitutes the blood-tissue inter- C
capsids travel to the central nervous system in axon
face and for particles such as virions, often a barrier.
cytoplasm and while doing so also sequentially infect
Parenchymal invasion by circulating virions depends on 
the Schwann cells of the nerve sheath. Rabies virus and
crossing this barrier, usually in capillaries and venules
Borna disease virus also travel to the central nervous
where blood flow is slowest and the barrier is thinnest.
 system in axon cytoplasm, but usually do not infect the
 nerve sheath. Sensory, motor, and autonomic nerves may
thelial cells and basement membranes or they may infect
be involved in the neural spread of these viruses. As
endothelial cells and “grow" their way through this bar-
these viruses move centripetally, they must cross cell-cell 
rier. This subject has been studied most intensively in
junctions. Rabies virus and pseudorabies virus are
relation to viral invasion of the central nervous system
known to cross at synaptic junctions (Figure 6.6).
(see later), but it also applies to secondary invasion of the
 In addition to passing centripetally from the body
skin, respiratory tract, salivary glands, intestine, kidney,
surface to the sensory ganglia and from there to the brain,
and placenta.
herpesviruses, such as pscudorabics virus and bovine
herpesvirus 1, can move through axons centrifugally
Maintenance of Viremia
from ganglia to the skin or mucous mermbranes. This is
 Because virions circulating in the blood are removed
what happens in the reactivation of latent infections and
continuously by macrophages, viremia can be main-
in the production of recrudescent epithelial lesions.
tained only if there is a continuing introduction of virus
 Rabies virus, Borna disease virus, and some togavi-
into the blood from infected tissues or if clearance by
ruses are able to use olfactory nerve endings in the nares
macrophages is impaired. Although circulating leuko-
as sites of entry. They gain entry in the special sensory
cytes can themselves constitute a site for viral replication,
endings of the olfactory neuroepithelial cells, cause local
viremia is usually maintained by infection of the paren-
-uo sana leqns roi sna Asoid pue uo
chymal cells of target organs such as the liver, spleen,
taining the viral genome) then travels in axoplasm of
lymph nodes, and bone marrow. In some infections, such
olfactory nerves directly to the olfactory bulb of the
A p d si ta an    s
brain.
the infection of endothelial cells. Striated and smooth
 muscle cells may be an important site of replication of
some enteroviruses, togaviruses, and rhabdoviruses,
Mechanisms of Infection
with virions reaching the blood via the lymph circulation.
of Major Target Organs
There is a general correlation between the magni-
and Tissues
their capacity to invade target tissues. However, the fail-
ure of some attenuated vaccine viruses to generate a
Infection of the Respiratory Tract
significant viremia may account for their lack of invasive-
 ness. Certain neurotropic viruses are virulent after intra-
The frequency and diversity of clinical respiratory infec-
 cerebral inoculation, but avirulent when given peripher-
tion episodes are only the “"tip of the iceberg" in relation
ally because they do not attain viremia titers high enough
to the number of viral assaults occurring in the close-
Mechanisms vof lnfection of Major Target Organs and Tissues
103
FIGure 6.6.
Evens leading to the passage of pseudorabies vinus acrossthe junctionbeweenerve cels onits centripercl intragxonl transit to the brain:
[1Vironsrepliateinthencleusf a peripherl nevecllcquiring anenvelopestheybud frmthinerlmeli tenciearenelope.
thecyoplasm invacuoles.6Virions enterthenexneuronby fusion of he viral envelopeandplasma
invadeandreplicateintheSchwanncelftemyelnsheahssurroundingeuronstherebymlifyingtheamountfvirusvailaleinvade
rat central nervous system: Ulrastructural characterization of viral replication, transport and pathogenesis. J. Neurosci. 13, 2515-2539 (1993).
With permission.]
 sa pre smie is s m si u p i ln she  jo a io
that viruses are the cause of more than 90% of upper
 capacity to dislodge debris. In animals that survive, at
respiratory infections and the predisposing trigger for
 this stage of infection airways are lined by a layer of flat,
 undifferentiated basal epithelial cells that are resistant to
ferent viruses are considered to favor different levels in
further progression of the infection. These cells lack viral
the respiratory tract, from the nasal turbinates to the
 receptors and likely are temporarily protected by inter-
alveoli, but there is more overlap than is usuaily appreci-
 ferons. By the time these cells differentiate into ciliated
ated. For example, influenza viruses primarily cause tra-
and mucus-secreting columnar epithelial cells, the evolv-
cheitis, bronchitis, and only to a lesser extent alveolar
 ing host irmmune response protecis them from continuing
 infection and pneumonia in mammals, whereas bovine
rounds of infection.
respiratory syncytial virus primarily causes bronchiolitis.
At whatever level of the respiratory tree that is involved,
 infection leads to (1) local cessation of cilial beating, (2)
Infection of the Intestinal Tract
local loss of integrity of the overlying mucus layer, and
(3) multifocal destruction of small numbers of epithelial
The intestinal epithelium is usually infected directly by
cells. There is progressive infection of epithelial cells at
 ingested virions, but sometimes viremic infections reach
the edges of such lesions; more and more cells are invaded
 the intestinal epithelium, also causing enteritis and diar-
until there are large denuded patches. The coincident
 rhea. The pathophysiologic effects of viral diarrhea are
influx of inflammatory cells and transudated fluid contin-
 a consequence of rapid destruction of epithelial cells and
ues to damage the mucous protective layer and lay bare
their replacement by immature, transitional cells that
 more and more epithelial cels and eventually in the most
 cannot carry out normal absorptive, resorptive, and en-
severe infections there is acidosis, edema, and massive
zyme secretory functions. Glucose-coupled sodium
epithelial sloughing.
transport is impaired, disaccharidase (lactase, sucrase)
Accumulation in the airways, especially in the nar-
activities are diminished, and, in some cases, adenylate
row-diameter airways of small animal species and new-
 cyclase and cyclic AMP levels are increased (the latter
 borns, of transudates, exudates, inflammatory infltrates,
 causing a hypersecretion of water and chlorides). The
and necrotic epithelial cell debris leads to a local state
disturbance to the osmotic equilibrium is most severe
 of anoxia and respiratory distress. Total plugging of
in newborns because of the normal presence of high
 small airways can cause anoxic death, again, especially
concentrations of milk lactose in the intestinal lumen.
104
6.Meebanisms of tufeetion and Viral Spread tbrongh tbe Body
Osmotic equilibrium returns when the regenerating in-(
of the dermal vessels may lead to petechial or hemor-
testinal epithelium matures sufficiently to produce lac-
 rhagic lesions, although coagulation defects and throm-
tase and to absorb the hexoses resulting from the enzy-
 bocytopenia may also be important in the genesis of
matic breakdown of milk lactose.
such lesions. Viral exanthems, such as those caused by
Although the pathophysiologic mechanism of dial-
 poxviruses in various animals, usually present a progres-
rhea is similar whatever the etiologic agent, there are
 sion through these lesions, in most cases terminating
differences in clinical and epidemiologic manifestations
with full resolution or fatal progressive systemic disease.
 of disease caused by each of the important groups of
diarrhea viruses, namely rotaviruses, caliciviruses, coro-
naviruses, toroviruscs, and parvoviruses (see Chapters 9
Infection of the Central Nervous System
 and 10). In infections caused by most of these viruses,
it is the differentiated cells at the tips and upper parts
Because of the controlling physiologic importance of the
of villi that are involved primarily. In feline and canine
 central nervous system and its vulnerability to damage
 parvovirus enteritis, it is the cells in the crypts that are
 by any process that damages neurons directly or indi-
in S phase of the cell division cycle that are destroyed.
 rectly via increased intracranial pressure, viral invasion
The destruction of crypt cells and the consequent failure
of the central nervous system is always a serious matter.
of the process of replacement of cells lost by normal
Viruses can spread from distal sites to the brain via
sloughing at the tips of villi leads to the same sort of
 nerves, as already described. Viruses can also spread
imbalance in the absorptive and secretory functions of 
from the blood to the brain, but first they must overcome
villus epithelium as occurs when cells at the tips of villi 
 the obstacle of the blood-brain barrier. This anatomic
are infected-in some cases repair takes longer when
 and functional barrier is made up of capillary endothelial
crypt cells are destroyed (the cell division cycle of crypt
ceils with tight junctions, vascular basement lamina, and
cells is about 8 hours). In all cases, villi become blunted
choroid plexus and ependymal epithelia with tight junc-
and club shaped and there is progressive further epithe-
tions. However, despite knowledge of this microana-
lial necrosis and desquamation.
tomy, little is known about how most viruses transit this
Nearly all intestinal viral infections are localized
 barrier and gain entrance into the parenchyma of the
to the intestinal epithelium (and to a lesser extent to (
 central nervous system. Studies using incrt particles the
cells of the lamina propria). The failure to penetrate S
 same size as viruses have shown that there is no absolute
further may represent an evolutionary progression on H
 hindrance to direct movement across capillary walls, yet
the part of the viruses that maximizes the shedding ca-
 some small viruses seem to penctrate this barrier whereas
pacity and transmissibility without destroying the host
others do not. Some viruses are able to infect the endothe-
population.
lium of deep capilaries and “grow across" the barrier;
others localize in blood vessels in the meninges and in-
vade by progressive extension from that site, and yet
Infection of the Skin
others infect the choroid plexus and ependyma, with
invasion of the brain parenchyma then occurring via the
As well as being a site of initial infection, the skin may
cerebrospinal fhuid. Rarely, virus may be carried across
be invaded secondarily via the bloodstream, producing
 ia eod uq n cn slm arde
erythema (inflammation), which may be generalized but 
 in infected leukocytes (Figure 6.7).
more often is localized and seen readily on exposed,
 Subsequent spread in the central nervous system
hairless, nonpigmented areas such as the snout, ears,
can take place via intercellular spaces or by the sequential
paws, scrotum, and udder. Infection of the skin may also 
 infection of neural cells. Lytic infections of neurons,
result in a rash. Individual lesions in generalized rashes 
whether due to togaviruses, herpesviruses, or other vi-
are described as macules, papules, vesicles, and pustules.
ruses, lead to the thre histologic hallmarks of encephali-
Lasting localized dilation of dermal blood vessels pro-
 tis; neuronal necrosis, phagocytosis of neurons (neuron-
duces macules. Macules become papules if there is also
 ophagia), and perivascular infiltrations of mononuclear
localized edema and infiltration of cells into the area.
 cells (perivascular cuffing), the latter two reflecting the
Primary localized involvement of the epidermis or sepa-
immune response to infection. In some infections these
ration of the epidermis from the dermis by fluid pressure
 hallmarks are not seen and the cause of clinical neuro
results in the formation of vesicles. Localized erosion or i
 logic signs is more obscure. For example, although street
sloughing of cpithelium results in ulceration and scab- 1
 rabies virus infection of neurons is noncyrocidal and
bing, but prior to this vesicles may be converted to pus-
 evokes little inflammatory reaction, it is uniformly lethal
tules by neutrophil infiltration. More severe involvement
 for most mammalian species.
Mlecbanisnts of Infetien of Mujor Ttrget Organs and Tissues
105
Figure 6.7.
cerebral
directspreadfrom
bloodvessel
adjacentstructures
刀
bloodvessel
inchoroid
pia
plexus
brain
substance
nerve
ependyma
fromperipheral
nerveendingor
meningeal
nasal mucosa
ventricle
bloodvessel
Routes of virl inasion of the cenral neous syslem.[From C.A.Mims, I. H.Playfir, I.M.Roin, D.Wakelin and R. Wilims, "Medicl
Microbiology." Mosby, St. Louis, MO, 1993.]
of bovine spongiform encephalopathy in the United
Kingdom, transmission occurred through inclusion of
progressive diseases of the central nervous system. In
sheep and subsequently cattle central nervous system
bovine spongiform encephalopathy in cattle and scrapie
tissue in meat and bone meal fed to cattle. Transmission
in sheep, for example, there is slow progressive neuronal
 of rabics and other neurotropic viruses to humans has
 degeneration and vacuolization, and in maedivisna virus
occurred via laboratory aerosolization of animal brain
infection of shccp there are changes in glial cells that
 material. All in all, it seems anomalous that neurotro-
lead to demyelination.
pism should be the outstanding characteristic of so many
 In most cases, central nervous system infection
of the most notorious pathogens of animals and zoonotic
seems to be a dcad end in the natural history of viruses,
 pathogens of humans and yet be the pathogenetic charac-
i.e., shedding and transmission of most neurotropic vi-
teristic least related to virus perpctuafion in nature. Thc
ruses do not depend on pathogenetic events in the ner-
irreparable damage that is of such grave consequence to
vous system. For example, in the cnccphalitis caused by
the host is of such little consequence to the virus.
canine distemper virus (and its late manifestation, old
dog encephalitis), virus may be recovered from brain
rissue long after the acute phase of infection, but only
Infection of the Lymphoreticular
 by methods such as cocultivation and explant culture
and never under circumstances where transmission
Systems
might occur.
Most cell types in the lymphoreticular and hematopoietic
 Togavirus, flavivirus, and bunyavirus encephaliti-
lineages are the targets of one or more viral pathogens.
des represent dead ends also; in these cases, it is the 
In every case the interaction between cell and virus is
extraneural sites of virus replication that generate the
complex and intertwined with the immune response.
viremia and thereby sustain transmission by allowing
Infection
and
damage of  reticuloendothelial  and
 the infection of the next arthropod host. The exceptions 
lymphoid tissues assures an invading virus protection
to this generalization are important, however. Alphaher-
from phagocytic removal and from inflammatory or im-
 pesviruses depend on the delivery of virus from cranial
munological inactivation. Some of the most destructive
and spinal sensory ganglia to epithelial sites. Epithelial
and lethal viruses known exhibit this tropism: filoviruses,
shedding, which follows on recrudescent virus emer-
arenaviruses, hantaviruscs, certain bunyaviruses such as
gence from ganglia, is important because it offers the
 Rift Valley fever virus, Venezuelan equine encephalitis
opportunity for transmission long after primary lesions 
virus, and yellow fever virus. Commonly, invasion starts
have resolved. There arc othcr examples where virus
with phagocytic viral uptake by dendritic macrophages,
such as occurs in the marginal zones of lyrmph nodes,
the source for transmission, For example, in the epidemic
thymus, bone marrow, Peyer's patches, and the white
106
6.Mechanisns of tnfection and Virat Sprcad througi the Body
Infection of the Fetus
pulp of the spleen. Later, virus shed from these cells
infects nearby lymphoid cells, leading to overwhelming
lymphoid dysfunction and destruction. In the course of
Most viral infections of the dam have no harmful
these destructive events, nearby hematopoietic cells are
effect on the fetus, but some blood-borne viruses cross
 often caught up and destroyed as well. These events are
the placenta to reach the fetal circulation, sometimes
 becoming more appreciated; for example, they are now
after establishing foci of infection in the placenta
recognized in the progression that is operative in the
(Table 6.5).
early stages of several retrovirus infections (feline leuke-
Severe cytolytic infections of the fetus cause
mia virus infection, maedivisna virus infection).
fetal death and resorption or abortion; these outcomes
Table 6.5
Viral infections of the Fetus or Embryo
ANIMAL
FAMILY/GENUS
VIRUs
SYNDROME
Catle
Herpesviridae/Varicellovirus
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
Fetal death, abortion
virus
Retroviridae/Deliaretrovirus
 Bovine leukemia virus
Inapparent infection, leukemia
Reoviridae/Orbivirus
Bluetongue virus
Fetal death, aborion, congenitl
defects
Bunyaviridae/Bunyavirus
Akabane virus
Fetol death, abortion, sillbirth,
congenital defects
Flaviviridae/Pestivirus
Bovine viral diarrhea virus
Fetal death, abortion, congenital
defects, inapparent infection wih
lifelong carrier state and
shedding
Horses
Herpesviridae/Varicellovirus
Equine herpesvirus 1
Fetal death, abortion, neonatal
disease
Arteriviridoe/Arterivirus
Equine arteritis virus
Fetal death, abortion 
Swine
Herpesviridae/Varicellovirus
 Pseudorabies virus
 Fetal death, abortion 
Parvoviridoe/Parvovirus
 Swine parvovirus
Fetal death, abortion, mummifica-
tion, stillbirth, inferility
Flaviviridae/Flavivirus
Japanese encephalitis virus
 Fetal death, abortion
Flaviviridae/Pestivirus
Hog cholera virus
Fetal death,abortion, congenitl
defectsnppeninfinw
lifelong carrier state and
shedding
Sheep
Reoviridae/Orbivirus
Bluetongue viruses
Fetgl death, abortion, congenital
defects
Bunyaviridae/Phlebovirus
Rift Valley fever virus
Fetal death, abortion
Bunyaviridae/Nairovirus
Nairobi sheep disease virus
Fetal death, abortion
Flaviviridoe/Pestivirus
Border diseose virus
 Congenital defects
Dogs
Herpesviridae/ungrouped
Canine herpesvirus
 Perinatal death
Cals
Parvoviridae/Parvovirus
 Feline panteukopenia virus
Cerebellar hypoplasia
Retroviridoe/
Feline leukemia virus
Inapparrent, leukemia, fetal
Gammaretrovirus
death
Mice
Parvoviridae/Parvovirus
Rat virus
 Fetal death
Arenaviridoe/Arenavirus
Lymphocyic choriomeningitis
Inapparent, with lifelong carrier
virus
 slate and shedding
Chicken
Picornaviridae/Enterovirus
Avian encephalomyelitis virus
Congenital defects, fetal death 
Retroviridae/Alpharetrovirus
Avian leukosis/sarcoma viruses
Inapparent, leukemia, other dis-
e058s
Meehamusms of Virus Shedding
107
Mechanisms of Virus Shedding
are common in, for example, pseudorabies and parvovi-
rus infections in swine. Also important are the terato
genic effects of less lethal viruses such as bovine viral
Shedding of infectious virions is crucial to the mainte-
diarrhea virus and Akabane virus infections in cattle
nance of infection in populations (see Chapter 14). Exit 
and sheep.
usually occurs from one of the body openings or surfaces
that are involved in viral entry. With viruses that cause
The outcome of infections of pregnant animals
with teratogenic viruses is influenced to a great extent
infection only in cells at one or another body surface
(particularly respiratory and intestinal cpithelium), the
by gcstational age. Generally, infection in the early
same body opening is involved in entry and exit (Figure
period of gestation is most damaging, usually leading
6.1); in generalized infections, a greater variety of sites
to fetal death and abortion. Maternal infcction with
 of shedding is recognized (Figure 6.4), and some viruses
viremia, oftcn subclinical in nature, leads to the subse-
quent transplacental passage of virus. Larer in preg-
are shed from multiple sites. The amount of virus shed
in an excretion or sccretion is important in relation to
nancy the outcome of infection is influenced by the
transmission. Very low concentrations may be irrelevant
dcvcloping fetal immune response. For example, infec-
tion of piglets with porcine parvovirus after days 65
unless very large volumes of infectcd material are in-
volved; however, somc viruses occur in such high concen-
to 70 of gestation does not result in death but in fetal
 trations that a minute quantity of virus-laden secretion
antibody production and normal birth. When bovine 
viral diarrhea virus infects thc ferus in the first half
 O1 excretion can lead to transmission to the next ani-
of gestation, immune tolerance is cstablished, leading
mal host.
to lifelong virus persistence and chronic disease. When
the infection occurs late in gestation, an effectivc im-
mune response usually eliminates the virus and there
Viral Shedding from the
is no disease. When viral replication in the fetus is
rapid, as in alphaherpesvirus infections in horses, cattle,
Respiratory Tract
swine, and dogs, fetal death and abortion can occur,
Many differcnt viruses that cause localized disease of
even during the last trimester of pregnancy.
the respiratory tract are shed in mucus or saliva and
are expelled from the respiratory tract during coughing,
sneezing, eating, and drinking. Respiratory viruses, such
Infection of Other Organs
as bovine herpesvirus 1, paramyxoviruses, some coro-
naviruses, and bovine respiratory syncytial virus, are
Almost any organ may be infected via the bloodstream
excreted in both nasal and oral secretions. Viruses are
with onc or another kind of virus, but most viruses
also shed from the respiratory tract in several systemic in-
have well-defined organ and tissue tropisms. The clinical
fections.
importance of infection of various organs and tissues
depends, in part, on their role in the physiologic well-
being of the animal. The critical importance of the brain,
heart, and lungs is self-evident, and invasion of the liver,
Viral Shedding from the Oropharynx
causing severe hepatitis, as in Rift Valley fever and infec
and Intestinal Tract
tious canine hepatitis, is also usually a life-threatening
situation. Infection of muscle cells occurs with several
Enteric viruses are shed in the feces, and the more
togaviruses and coxsackieviruses, whereas infection of
 voluminous the fluid output the greater is the environ-
thc synovial cells of goats by caprine arthritis-
 mental contamination they cause. Enteric viruses are in
encephalitis virus produces arthritis. Infection of the sali-
 general morc resistant to inactivation by environmental
vary glands or mammary glands may lead to lesions in
 conditions than respiratory viruses; especially when
those organs and excretion of virus in saliva or milk.
suspended in water, such viruses can persist for
 One virus or another cmploys virtually every organ and
some time.
tissue in the animal body as its primary targct-given
A few viruscs are shed into the oral cavity from
the harsh Darwinian sclcctivc prcssures that drive viral
 infected salivary glands (e.g., rabics virus and cytomega
 evolution, there is likely to be survival value and purpose
 loviruses) or from the lungs or nasal mucosa. Salivary
in every viral tropism and pathogenctic mcchanism that S
 spread depends on activities such as licking, nuzzling,
we uncover. Herc is an area of veterinary medical re-
 grooming, or biting. Viral shedding in saliva may con-
search that still has far to go before we have adequate 
tinue during convalescence or rccurrently thereafter, es-
understanding.
 pecially with herpesviruses.
108
(.Meetanisns of tnfectin ctned Viral Spreaed thorough tbe Bocty
Viral Shedding from the Skin
sidered important sources of viral contagion. Blood is
the usual source from which arthropods acquirc viruses,
The skin is an important source of virus in diseases
and blood may also be the source of viruses transferred
in which transmission is by direct contact or via small
to the avian egg or mammalian fetus. As noted earlier,
abrasions: cowpox, vaccinia, orf, pseudocowpox, and
mechanical transmission by arthropods ("flying nee-
molluscum contagiosum viruses, as well as papillomavi-
ruses and herpesviruses employ this mode of transmis-
tious anemia virus and bovine leukemia virus may be
sion. Although skin lesions are produced in several gener-
alized diseases, in only a few are viruses shed from skin
animals. Virus-laden blood is also the basis for transinis-
lesions. Hlowever, foot-and-mouth disease viruses and
sion when it contaminates needles and othcr equipment
vesicular stomatitis viruses and swine vesicular disease
used by veterinarians and others treating or handling
virus are produced in great quantities in vesicular muco-
sick animals.
sal lesions and are then shed as vesicles break. Localiza-
tion of virus in the feather follicles is important in the
shcdding of Marek's disease virus by infected chickens.
Infection without Shedding
Many sites of viral replication imight be considered “dead
Viral Shedding from the Urinary Tract
ends" from the point of view of natural transmission to
the next host. One might question the role of any target
 Urine, like feces, tends to contaminate food supplies and
 Organ not connected with a body surface, but on further
the environment. A number of viruses (e.g., rinderpest
reflection it becomes clear that viral replication in many
virus, infectious canine hepatitis virus, foot-and-mouth
 organs can contribute indirectly to viral transmission.
disease viruscs, and arenaviruscs) replicate in tubular
 For example, carnivores and omnivores may be infected
epithelial cells in the kidncy and are shed in urine. Viruria
by consuming virus-laden meat or tissues. In the past,
is prolonged and common in equine rhinovirus 1 infec-
 hog cholera, African swine fever, and vcsicular exan-
tion and lifelong in arenavirus infections of reservoir
 thema of swine viruses were often transmitted through
host rodents and constitutes the principal mode of con-
feeding garbage containing contaminatcd pork scraps.
tamination of the environment by these viruses.
The epidemic of bovine spongiform cncephalopathy in
the United Kingdom was most likely triggered by the
feeding of meat and bone meal containing scrapie-in-
Viral Shedding from the Genital Tract
fected sheep offal to cartle; it clearly then was transmitted
widely among cattle by the feeding of mear and bone
 Several viruses that cause important discascs of cattle,
 meal containing bovine offal.
horses, and sheep are cxcrcted in the semen and are
 Many retroviruses are not shed at all, but instead
transmitted during coitus. For example, equine arteritis
are transmitted directly in the germplasm or by infection
virus persists for long periods in the accessory sexual
of the avian egg or developing mammalian ermbryo-
glands of fertile stallions. Viruses shed from the genital
these viruses accomplish the same ends as those shed
tract depend on mucosal contact for successful trans-
 into thc environment,i.e., transmission to new hosts and
mission.
 perpetuation in nature.
Viral Shedding in Milk
Further Reading
Several viruses replicate in the mammary gland and are
Collicr, L. H. ed. (1997). *Topley and Wilson's Microbi.
excreted in milk, which may scrve as a route of transmis-
ology and Microbial Infections,” 6 vol. Edward
sion, e.g., caprine arthritis-cncephalitis virus, mouse
Arnold, London.
Connor, D. H., Chandler, F. W., Schwartz, D. A., Manz,
mammary tumor virus, and some of the tick-borne flavi-
H. J., and Lack, E. E. (1997). "Pathology of Infec-
viruses.
tious Diseases." Appleton & Lange, Stamford, CT.
Fenner, F. (1949). Mousepox (infectious ectromelia of
mice): A review. J. Immunol. 63, 341-373.
Viral Shedding via Blood and Tissues
Johnson, R. T. (1982). "Viral Infections of the Nervous
Systcm." Raven, New York.
Jubb, K. V. F., Kcnnedy, P. C., and Palmer, N., eds.
Although not "shedding" in the usual sense of the word,
blood and tissues from slaughtered animals must be con-
Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Furthey Reading
109
Knipe, D. M. (1996). Virus-host cell interactions. In
Nathanson, N., Ahmed, R., Gonzalez-Scarano, F.,
"Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M.
Griffin, D. E., Holmes, K. V, Murphy, F. A., and
Howley, R. M., Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P.
Robinson, H. L, eds. (t997). Viral Pathogenesis."
Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed.,
Lippincott-Ravcn, Philadelphia, PA.
Pp. 273-299. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Tyler, K. L. (1998). Pathogenesis. In "Encyclopedia of
Miims, C. A. (1989). 'The pathogenetic basis of viral tro-
Virology” (R. G. Webster and A. Granoff, eds.),
pism, Am. J. Pathol. 135, 447-488.
2nd ed. (CD-ROM). Academic Press, London.
Mims, C. A., and White, D. O. (1984). "Viral Pathogene-
Tyler, K. L., and Fields, B. N. (1996). Pathogenesis of
sis and Inmunology." Blackwell Scicntific Publica-
viral infections. In "Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields,
tions, Oxford.
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L.
Mims, C. A., Dimmock, N., Nash, A., and Stephen, J.
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
(1995). "Mims' Pathogenesis of Infectious Disease,""
eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 173-218. Lippincott-Raven,
4th ed. Academic Press, London.
Philadelphia, PA.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
ChaＰteｒ
7
Determinants of Viral Virulence
and Host Resistance/Susceptibility
Interplay of Viral Virulence and Host Resistance/Susceptibility Factors...
111
Assessment of. Viral Virulence ..........
112
Determinants of Viral Virulence......
113
Determinants of Host Resistancc/Susceptibility...
115
Physiologic Factors Affecting Host Resistance/Susceptibility ..
119
Model Studies of Bases for Viral Virulence and Host Resistance/
Susceptibility....
122
Further  Reading......
126
 Infection is not synonymous with disease. Many infec-
tors operating at the levcl of the individual animal. Thc
tions are subclinical (asymptomatic, inapparent),
determinants of viral virulence are usually muitigenic,
whereas others result in disease, with varying degrees a
 and thc determinants of host resistance/susceptibility are
 of severity and characteristic, identifable clinical signs usually multifactorial. In rccnt years, the application of
is the product of the virulence of the infecting virus on
 map virulence determinants in the viral genome (e.g., by
1
the one hand and the susceptibility of the host on the s
site-dirccted mutagenesis, recombination, reassortment)
other. The term virulence is used as a quantitativc or a
and resistance determinants in the host experimental
relative measure of the pathogenicity of thc infecting 3
 animal genome (e.g., by use of knockout mice, chimeric
virus, i.te., a virus is said to be pathogenic or nonpatho-
 mice), thereby adding a new level of analysis of these
genic, but its virulence is stated in relative tcrms ("virus 
determinants. Virus strain differences may be quantita.
A is more virulent than virus B" or “virus strain A is 
tive, involving the rate and yield of virus replication, the
more virulent in animal species Y than specics Z"). Thc
 number of cells infected in a given organ, or they may
terms pathogcnicity and virulence refcr to thc capacity
 be qualitative, involving organ or tissue tropism, lcvel
of a virus to cause disease in the host animal, not to the
 of host cell damage, mode and effcacy of spread in the
properties of infectiousness or transmissibility, proper-
 body, and character of the disease (disease pathogcnesis,
ties that are discussed in Chapter 14.
sec Chapters 6 and 9). Virus strain differences, usually
multigenic in nature, are of coursc also the basis of atten-
uated virus vaccines.
Within a susceptible outbred population in narure,
Interplay of Viral Virulence
the resistance or susceptibility of individual animals var-
and Host Resistance/
ies not only with their genetic constitution (which may
affect, among other things, their capacity to mount a
Susceptibility Factors
rapid immune response), but also with their age, nurri-
Viruses may differ greatly in their virulence; conversely,
tional status, level of stress, other hormonal factors, and
within an animal population infected by a particular 1
 many other factors. Together, thcse genetic and physio-
virus there are often striking differences in the outcome  1
 logic factors determine what is called the nonspecific
of infection depending on resistance/susceptibility fac-  (natural, innate) resistance of the host, in contrast to the
111
112
7.Determitnts of Viral Virtence and Hlost Resistance/Sasceptibility
is a valuable measure of the character of the virus. For
Figure 7.1.
example, in the susceptible BALB/c strain of mouse, the
LDso of a virulent strain of ectromelia virus is 5 virions,
Deathofanimal
compared with 5000 for a moderately attenuated strain
Severe disease
and about 1 million for a highly attenuated strain.
Viral virulence can also be measured in cxperimen-
Moderate disease
tal animals by determining the ratio of the dose of a
 particular strain of virus that causes infection in 50%
Milddisease
of individuals (infectious dose 50, IDso) to the dose that
kills 50% of individuals (the IDs/LDso ratio). Thus with
Subclinical infection
a virulent strain of ectromelia virus, testcd in highly
susceptible BALB/c micc, thc IDso is 1-2 virions and the
Exposure
withoutinfection
LDso about 5 virions, whereas for resistant CS7BL strain
mice the IDsn is the same but the LDso is 1 million virions.
TheIcebergConcept
The severity of an infection, therefore, depends on the
ofViral Infection
interplay between the virulencc of thc virus and the resis-
tance of the host.
The iceberg concept of virol infection and disease
Assessment of histopathologic lesions can also be
a valuable measure of viral virulencc-—-the severity and
location of lesions, cven ultrastructural pathologic
specific (acquired) rcsistance to infection and reinfection
changes, have provided valuable insighr in many in-
that results from the intervention of the spccifc immune
stances where the virulence of a virus has been in ques-
rcsponse, as described in Chapter 8.
tion. For example, the virulcnce of various rabies virus
strains that had been uscd in attenuated virus vaccines
for dogs and cats were compared and although their
Assessment of Viral Virulence
 Occasional lethality was diffcult to assess, some were
found to cause necrotic, inflanmatory lesions in the
In nature, viral virulence may vary over a wide range,
brains of intracerebrally inoculated mice. These strains
from strains of virus that alinost always cause inapparent
were revicwcd morc carefully and found to be the most
infections, to those that usually cause discase, to those
troublesome in clinical usc—vaccines containing these
that usually cause death. Meaningful comparison of the
viruses were removed from the marketplace.
virulence of viruses requires that factors such as the
 Variability in the response of individual animals
infecting viral dose, the age, scx, and condition of the
to infection is observed regularly during epidemics, For
host animals and their spccific immune status be equal;
example, during an outbreak of Venezuelan equine en-
however, these conditions are never met in nature or in
cephalitis, some horses die, whereas others suffer a bricf
clinical practice where hetcrogeneous outbred animal
illness but quickly recovcr. The grear majority of arbovi-
 popularions are the rule and viral exposure and infecrion
rus and many other viral infections are subclinical; for
dynamics are incredibly varied. Hence, qualities describ-
every individual animal that develops cnccphalitis during
ing thc virulence of parricular viruses in domestic and
 an epidemic, many more will have no clinical signs and
wild animals are usually stated in vague terms—precise
the only evidence of infection will be a sharp rise in
 measures of virulence are usually derived from assays in
 antibody titer. The dose of infccting virus may play a
inbred animals, such as inbred strains of mice. Of course,
 part in determining such differences, but genetic and
such assays are only feasible for those viruses of clinical
physiologic factors in the host scem to be more impor-
interest that grow in mice, and when this approach is
tant. Certainly in instances like this, caution is callcd for
employcd, care must be taken in extrapolating from mice
in attributing epidemic charactcristics to viral virulence.
to the host specics of intcrest.
 One can regard an acute infection as a race between 
The virulence of a particular strain of virus admin-
thc capacity of thc virus to replicate, spread in the body,
istered in a particular dosc, by a particular route, to a
 and cause disease versus thc capacity of the host to curtail
 particular age and strain of a laboratory animal mnay be
 and control these events (see Chapter 6). Because of the
assesscd in various quantitative ways. Measurcs of thc
variables in this race, one individual animal may not
capacity of the virus to produce discase, death, specifc
be seriously affected even by a virulcnt strain of virus,
clinical signs, or particular histopathologic lesions have
whercas anothcr animal, usually one with a low levcl of
been used for many years. The dose of the virus required  i
innate or acquired resistance, may be endangered by a
to cause death in 50% of animals (lethal dose 50, LDso) relatively avirulent strain of virus.
eferirtsofVrifVirfernr
113
Determinants of
lating the expression of celiular genes and up-regulating
Viral Virulence
the expression of particular viral genes at appropriate
times in the replication cycle. A third class of viral genes
(virokines, see later) has bcen recognized, which is not
 Unraveling the genetic basis of viral virulence has long
 involved in viral replication per se, but which enhances
been one of the major goals of animal virology, and also
thc spread and ultimatc titer of virus in the body as a
 one of the most difficult to achieve, as many viral genes
whole, principally by suppressing the host's immunc re-
    o    
With advances in molecular genetics it has bccn possiblc
sponse.
to dissect the problem in a more precise way. Of neces-
sity, most experimental work has bccen carricd out in
Viral Tropism and Dissemination and
inbred laboratory animals.
With viruses causing acute infections, those with
Resistance/Susceptibility to
segmented genomes (orthomyxoviruscs, bunyaviruses,
Viral infections
arenaviruses, rcoviruses, birnaviruses) have provided the
 most casily manipulated experimental models. Each seg-
All viruses exhibit host and tissue specificity (tropism),
ment of the genome of these viruses is cquivalcnt to onc
usually more than is appreciated clinically. Mechanisti-
gene (in most cases) and rcassortants bctween strains
cally,the organ or tissue tropism of the virus is an expres-
can be obtained readily. Study of large numbers of rcas-
sion of all the steps in cellular infection: the correspon-
sortant viruses carrying different combinations of ge-
dence between viral attachment molecules (ligands) and
nome segments from parental viruses with known phe-
cellular receptors (see later); the viral functions that as-
notypic characters allows the functions that relate to
sure penetration of the cell and viral uncoating; the effi-
virulence to be assigncd to particular gencs. For cxample,
 cacy of the viral replicative machinery; and other factors
the function of each gene of reovirus 1 and 3 has been
that govern successful viral infection of the host cell (see
determined, virulence characters assigned, and differ-
 Chapter 3). Organ and tissue tropisms also involve all
ences in the pathogenesis of infections caused by the rwo
 stages in the course of infection in the whole host animal,
viruses explained.
from the site of entry, to the major target organs respon-
 Using a different approach, thc basis of caninc 
sible for the clinical signs, to the site involved in shedding.
parvovirus virulence has been explained in great derail:
Tropisms of the viruses that are importanr in veterinary
in this case, nucleotide sequcnce comparisons of the ge-
 medical practice are describcd throughout Part I of this
nomes of different wild-type viruses with those of aviru-
book; an illustration of the diversity and precision of
lent vaccine strains have allowed identification of nucleo-
tropism of specifc viruscs for particular cells in one
(r pie oue uoisuxa kg p) saur a
 tissue/organ system, the immune system, is provided in
responsible for virulence and attcnuation. Invcstigations 
Table 7.1.
with poxviruses have revealed the complexiry of the ar-
Mouse hepatitis virus, the cause of the most
mamentarium of viral gene products directed against
important disease in mouse colonies worldwide, pro-
various components of innate and acquired host resis-
vidcs an example of the effect of organ and tissue
tance. Investigations of herpesvirus infections of several
tropism as a determinant of viral virulence. Particular
animal species have gone a long way to explain the
 strains of wild-type mousc hcpatitis virus replicate in
complex genetic basis of persistent infection, latency,
intestinal epithelial cells and cause lethal diarrhea—this
and recrudescence that has madc thesc infections so dif-
is the tropism that is most devastating in mouse colonies
ficult to deal with in veterinary practice (scc Chapter 
because so much virus is shed that spread is very
10). Studies have been conducted with retroviruses to
 efficient. Other strains replicate mainly in hepatocytes,
cxplain the genetic basis of cellular transformation and
the tropism thar originally gave the virus its name.
oncogenicity (see Chapter 11). Further examples are pro-
 Yet other strains replicate in both neurons and oligode-
vided at the end of this chaptcr to ilustrate how molecu-
 ndroglia and cause acutely fatal encephalomyelitis as
lar biology has opened up the new feld of molecular
a rcsult of neuronal destruction. Variant substrains,
pathogenesis.
 howcver, show marked reduction in their neuronotrop-
 Most viral genes encode proteins that arc esscntial
ism and do not kill cheir hosts acutely, but rather
for viral replication, notably thosc required for viral
 producc persistent infection of oligodendroglia leading
cntry into the principal host cells, replication of the viral 
 to demyelination and hind limb paralysis. This range
genome, production of viral proteins, and assembly/re-
of clinical presentations, thc cause of many diagnostic
lcasc of new virions. A second class of viral genes has
puzzles over the years, is simply a matter of viral
evolved to maximize the yield of virions by down-regu-
yariants exhibiting different tropisms.
114
7.Deterntimntts of Virat Virtence and flost Resistance/Susceptibility
capillaries. Thc samc is truc for viruscs such as rabics
Table 7.1
Viruses That Infect Cells of the
and herpesviruses (e.g., pseudorabies virus and B virus)
Immune System
that are disseminated by the neural route—the more
virus present at peripheral nerve endings the more nerve
CELl
VIrus
fbers that become involved in transporting virus to
the brain.
Tlymphocytes
Feline leukemia virus
Feline immunodeficiency virus
 Simian immunodeficiency virus
Viral Enhancers, Promoters, and
Human immunodeficiency viruses 1 and 2
Transcription Factors and Resistance,
B lymphocytes
 Equine herpesvirus 2
Susceptibility to Viral Infections
 Simian type D retrovirus
Murine leukemia virus
Enbancers are a class of gene activarors that increase
Infectious bursal disease virus fowl
the efficiency of transcription of viral or cellular genes.
Infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (fish)
These nucleotide sequences often contain a number
Epstein-Barr virus (human]
of motifs representing DNA-binding sites for various
Monocytes
 Canine distemper virus
cellular or viral site-specifc DNA-binding proteins
Influenza viruses (horse, fowl, human]
(transcription factors). They bring about augmcnted
binding of DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II to
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus
promoters, thereby accelerating transcription. Because
(horse, human)
many of the transcription factors affecting particular
Parainfluenza viruses (catle, human, sev-
eral host species!
genomes are restricted to particular cells, tissues, or
Maedi/visna virus (sheep)
host species, they can determine the tropism of viruses
 Caprine arthritis-encephalitis virus
and can act as specifc virulence factors. Enhancer
Lymphocytic choriomeningilis virus
sequences have been defined in the genomes of retrovi-
[mouse, hamster)
ruses, herpesviruses, and hepadnaviruses, and in all
Lactate dehydrogenase elevating virus
cases these appear to influencc the tropism of the
[mouse)
viruses by regulating the cxpression of viral gencs in
 Cytomegaloviruses [many host species]
specific types of cells.
Dendritic cells
Venezuelan equine encephalitisvirus
[horse, human] 
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
Virokines and Resistance/Susceptibility
[mouse, hamster)
to Viral Infections
Human immunodeficiency viruses 1 and 2
Stromal cells of 
Virokines coinprisc a class of virus-coded proteins that
 Borna disease virus (horse, rabbit, cat!
lymphoreticular
are not required for viral replication in vitro, but influ-
Cytomegalovirus [many host species)
tissues
ence the pathogenesis of infection in vivo by sabotaging
the body's innate resistance or immune response. Viro
kines can be grouped as (1) inhibitors of T cell cytotoxic-
ity that bind nascent class I MHC protein; (2) inhibitors
Viral dissemination from primary sites of replica-
of cytokines, such as interleukin 1, interferon y and
tion represents an cxtension of the concept of tropism.
rumor necrosis-factor o; (3) inhibitors of thc complement
Viremia, either as frec extracellular virions or as virus-
cascade; (4) inhibitors of antibody-mediated cytolysis;
 infected circulating cels, is a crucial step in the dissemi-
 and (5) cytokine mimics, e.g., interleukin 10. Many viro-
 Dation of many viruses that cause systermic diseasc. It
kines mimic normal cellular molecules involved in the
can bc a key virulencc dcterminant. Reduction in the
immune response, such as cytokines and cytokine recep-
titer or duration of viremia can have a major infuence on
tors. For example, three virokines encoded by poxviruses
 the outcome of infection, which is cspecially important in
 closely resemble the receptors for tumor necrosis factor
ccntral nervous system infections. Herc, the outcome
α, inrerferon y, and interluckin 1. So far, virokines seem
 of the viral assault on the blood-brain barrier is often
 to be confined to large DNA viruses--poxviruses, her-
determined by the concentration of virus present in brain
 pesviruses, and adenovirus—and to retroviruses. The
Determinents of Host Resistance/Susceptibility
115
number of genes involved is considerable; more than a
Immune Response Genes and
quarter of all the genes of vaccinia virus can be deleted
Resistance/Susceptibility to
without impeding its replicarion in cell culture, although
Viral Infections
such deletion mutants are attenuated in vivo. Currently
only a few vaccinia virus genes have been identified as
virokines, but their diversity already indicates that we
Immune responsiveness to particular viral infections dif-
may have only begun to unravel this important new arca
fers greatly from one individual animal to another, being
under the control of specific immune response (Ir) genes.
of molecular pathogenesis.
There are many of these antigen-specific immunoregula-
tory genes, most of them situated in the MHC. Suscepti-
Determinants of Host
bility of mice to infection with some viruses, e.g,
cytomegaloviruses, 1etroviruses and lymphocytic chorio-
Resistance/Susceptibility
 meningitus virus, has been linked to particular MHC
 genotypes. Particular Ir genes encode class II MHC pro-
Genetic differences in resistance/susceptibility to viral
teins on the surface of macrophages and B lymphocytes
infections are most obvious when different animal
and are necded to present immunogenic peptides to the
species are compared. Common viral infections often
 receptors carried by helper T cells. Presentation of these
 peptides to receptors on B cells initiates antibody synthe-
than in exotic or introduced species. For instance,
sis (see Chapter 8). Nonresponsiveness of an animal host
myxoma virus produces a small benign fbroma in its
to a particular virus may be caused by a lack of class II
natural host, the wild rabbit of South America, Sylvila-
MHC molecules capable of binding an important epitope
gus brasiliensis, but an almost invariably fatal general-
on the virus. Even when a viral epitope is presented
ized infection in the European domestic rabbit, Orycto-
satisfactorily by antigen-presenting cells, there will be
lagus cuniculus. Likewise, most zoonoses (diseases
 no response if the animal does not possess a clone of T
 caused by viruses transmitted from animals to humans),
cells with a receptor capable of recognizing that particu-
such as arenavirus, filovirus, and various arbovirus 
 lar epitope. Such *"holes" in the MHC and T cellreceptor 
diseases, are more sevcre in humans than in their
repertoires occur with both MHC class II-restricted
reservoir hosts.
CD4+ (helper) T cells and MHC class I-restricted CD8+
Accurate data on the bases of variations in resis-
(cytotoxic) T cells. While the number of immunogeni-
tance to infection arc difficult to obtain from outbred
 cally important peptides derived from even the simplest
 animal populations in nature, largely because genetic,
viruses is not known, nor for the most part is the impor-
physiologic, and environmentral differences are generally
tance of paiticular peptides, it will seldom be the case
 confounding. With inbred strains of mice, however, it
 that the hole in the MHC peptide-binding repertoire will
has bcen possible to study the genetics of resistance
 not be compensated for by other peptides that are bound.
to viral infection in some detail. Having identifed a
The reactivity of antigen-specific receptors on the surface
susceptible (S) and a resistant (R) mouse strain, the
 Of B and T lymphocytes may be defeated only rarely in
LD assay is repeated in (S × R) F1 and F2 backcrossed 
 an otherwise irmmunocompetent animal, but when this
mice to determine whether a single gene is responsible
 does happen, infection may resemble that in a pro-
and whether susceptibility or resistance is dominant.
foundly immunosuppressed animal.
Then, recombinant or congenic strains can be con-
A variety of inherited defects leading to immuno-
structed, with a common genetic background differing 
 logic nonresponsiveness have been identifed in humans
only in the gene in question. In this way, resistance/
and mice and a few have been identified in domestic
susceptibility to a few viruses has been mapped to
animals. These include agammaglobulinemia, where
 particular genes. Often such experiments become quitc
functional B cells arc reduced greatly in number or are
complicated as additional genes that influence resis-
entirely absent and thymic aplasia where T cells responsi-
tance/susceptibility in quite different ways have been 
 ble for cell-mediated immunity are absent. There are also
found. For example, the rcsponse of mice to murine
 conditions where there are defects in the cells responsible
leukemia viruses is influenced by ovcr a dozen genes,
for both humoral and cellular immune responses. These
whereas the response to murine cytomegalovirus is
"experiments of narure' are instructive in indicating
influenced secondarily by one genc that maps to the
which arms of the immune response are crucial in infec-
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region and
tions with particular viruses—some infections are fought
a sccond gene that determines by unknown means the
 a s  n y   ad
titer of virus in the spleen.
cellular immune arm. For example, certain Arabian foals
116
eierynivts of Vrtl Virtence ad Host Resistance/Snsceptihility
that suffer from primary severe combined immunodefi-
Ectromelia virus, injected intravenously into non-
ciency disease, in which there is an almost toral absence
immune mice, is cleared rapidly from the blood by
of both T and B cells, are particularly susceptible to t
the resident macrophages of the liver, the Kupffer cells.
adenovirus infections—as maternal antibody levels
 The outcome of the infection depends entirely on the
wane, these foals die of fulminant systemic disease.
battle fought betwcen virus and macrophages (macro-
In a similar fashion, acquired defects in immune
 phages activated by T cells, mediating antiviral activity
responsiveness, including various forms of immunologic
 partly by secretion of interferons α and β). Macro-
tolerance, can also be considered determinanrs of host 
 phages/monocytes play a major role in the pathogencsis
resistance/susceptibility. For example, the congenital in-
 of rctroviruses, especially lentivirus infections in ani-
fcction of bovine feruses by bovine viral diarrhea virus
 mals. In some lentivirus infections, macrophages are
leads to persistent viral carriage and shedding and is the
the frst cells infected, whereas in others they are the
key to the success of this virus as a pathogen in cattle
only cclls infected. In all cases they are the major
worldwide. As in this example, it is clear that immune
reservoirs of virus, providing virus for viremia and
response defects (whether inherited or acquired) are not 
 spread of infection to different tissues within the body.
only imporrant in regard to the outcome of infection in
 In many other acute viral infections of animals, includ-
the individual affected animal, they can also be impor-
ing those caused by herpesviruses, vesiculoviruses, coro-
tant epidemiologically, as affected animals may shed
 naviruses (mouse hepatitis virus in particular), arenavi-
high titers of virus over very long periods.
ruses,
bunyaviruses (Rift Vally fever virus in
particular), flaviviruses, and pestiviruses, macrophages
are central to host resistance.
Other Genes Influencing Resistance/
Susceptibility to Viral Infections
Cellular Receptors and Resistance/
Many gcnes affecting resistance/susceptibility to particu-
 Susceptibility to Viral Infections
lar viruses do not map to the MHC region of the genome
and presumably operate via any of a wide range of non-
A cell cannot be infected by a particular virus unless
immunologic mechanisms. For example: (1) cellular
 it expresses on its plasma membrane the molecule that
 genes turned on by interferons that encode proteins that
serves as the receptor for that virus. Viral reccptors
inhibit the replication of viruses; (2) cellular genes turned
 are usually proteins, but carbohydrates and occasionally
on by interferons thar encode protcins that arc required
 glycolipids are employcd as well. Receptors are mole-
for thc rcplication of particular viruses; (3) cellular genes
 culcs essential to thc normal functioning of the cell,
 turned on by interferons that cncode the various recep-
usually molecules that are highly conserved over time.
 tors that are needed for entry of viruses; and (4) certain
Viruses have evolved so that their surfaces are studded
cellular gencs turned on by interferons that determine 
with viral attachment proteins, i.e., ligands that have
 high affnity for binding with specifc cellular reccptors
can resist destruction by macrophages. Clearly, such
 So as to initiate viral attachment. Viruses have evolved
qualities may be major determinants in the overall suc-
t0 take advantage of the unfailing presence of their
 cess or failure of a virus as a pathogen.
specific receptors at entry sites and in target tissues
of their usual hosts; many viruses have no fallback
means to bypass this crucial step in their life cycle.
Macrophages and Resistance/
Theoretically, any cellular membranc component might
Susceptibility to Viral Infections
scrve as a receptor for one virus or another; in fact,
thc variety of molccules used as receptors by different
Macrophages play a central role as determinants of 
viruses is remarkablc (Table 7.2; Figure 7.2).
host resistance/suscepribility, in part because of their
Good evidence exists that receptor exprcssion on
role in inflammatory and immunc responses and in
 candidate target cells is a fundamental determinant of
part bccausc of thcir intrinsic susccptibility to infection.
 host resistance/susceptibility to the particular virus. The
Macrophages arc concentrated at natural portals of
first indication came from studies of influenza virus infec-
viral entry, such as in alveoli in the lungs, and respond 
 tion. It was shown in the late 1940s that intranasal
quickly following viral entry. Nevertheless, some viruses
 prctreatment of micc with neuraminidasc conferred tem-
replicate preferentially in macrophages, in fact in some
diseases they appear to be thc only celis infected. In
 Subsequcntly, it was shown that influenza viruses attach
to various sialic acid (N-acetyneuraminic acid) residues
basis for clinical signs.
 On the apical surface of respiratory cpithelial cells, the
Determinauts of Host Resistance/Snsceptibility
117
TaBle 7.2
Cellular Receptors for Animal Viruses
Virus famILY
Virus
ReCEpTOR ON taRGet CELlS
Poxviridae
Vaccinia virus
Epidermal growth factor receptor 1
Herpesviridae
Bovine herpesviruses l and 4
Heparan sulfate
Pseudorabies virus
Heparan sulfate
Murine cytomegalovirus
Major histocompatibility complex I
Herpes simplex virus 1
Heparan sulfate
Adenoviridae
Human adenovirus 2
Specific integrins
Papovaviridae
 Polyomavirus
 Sialic acid-containing oligosaccharides
Parvoviridoe
 Canine parvovirus 2
Sialic acid-containing oligosaccharides
Retroviridae
 Feline immunodeficiency virus
CD4 and an unknown number of coreceptors
Human immunodeficiency virus 1
CD4 and more than 10 coreceptors
Reoviridae
Reovirus 3
β-Adrenergic receptor and sialic acid-
containing oligosaccharides
Rolavirus SA11 {vaccine strain]
Sialic acid-containing oligosaccharides
Paramyxoviridae
 Parainfluenza viruses
Sialic acid-containing oligosaccharides,
gangliosides GD1a, GQ16
Rhabdoviridae
Rabies virus
Acetylcholine receptor, gangliosides,
phospholipids
Orthomyxoviridae
Influenza A viruses
 Sialic acid-containing oligosaccharides
Arenaviridae
Lymphocyic choriomeningitis
100 kDa glycoprotein
virus
Coronaviridae
Transmissible gastroenteritis virus
 Porcine aminopeptidase N
Bovine coronavirus
Sialic acid-containing oligosaccharides
 Mouse hepatitis virus
Carcinoembryonic antigen family
[immunoglobulin superfamily)
Picornaviridae
Foot-and-mouth disease viruses
Integrins
Polioviruses
Poliovirus receptor immunoglobulin
superfamily)
Coxsackie B viruses
Decay-accelerating factor
Echoviruses
 Decay-acceleraling factor and integrins 
Rhinoviruses [major group]
1CAM-1
Togaviridae
Sindbis virus
Laminin receptor
Semliki Forest virus
HLA H2-K, H2-D protein
same residues removed by neuraminidase treatment.
truding from the receptor complex—the two fit together
 Ncuraminidase became known as the receptor destroy-
as lock and key. On the surface of respiratory epithelial
ing enzyme. Then, in 1981, the structure of the influenza
cells sialic acid occurs in numerous combinations with
hemagghutinin was determined by X-ray crystallography
 other sugars, and different combinations have different
and a few years later the structure of its cellular reccptor
affinities for different influenza virus strains. Avian,
complex was determined by the same means
-this was
cquine, and human influenza viruscs bind preferentially
the first virus attachment protein/receptor complex com-
to cells with different sialic acid/sugar combinations
bination to be resolved at very high resolution. Thesc
this may play an important role in detcrmining the host
studies showed that there is a conserved pocket near the
rangc of each virus. Influenza viruses also bind to the
tip of the viral hemagglutinin molecule that engages the
 sarme receptors on erythrocyte membranes, causing hem-
terminal sialic acid on an oligosaccharide side chain pro-
agglutination.
118
7.
Determrinnts of Viral Virulence and Host Resistance/Susceptibitity
FIGURE 7.2.
二
ICAM-1 Integrin 
BGP1
APN
CD46EGFR MHC-I
Rhino
FMOY
MHV
TQEY
 Measles Vacclnla mCMY
PRCV
0000000
0000.0
CD4 BLVR ALV-AR
CAT
PIT
HIV-1
A"θ
ALV-A
MLV-E
Galv, Mlv-a, Folv-8
Manydiferentefce re prtisseespeicrecersseefthearltdshicallm
severalfmsfglyprtinanheirerctityrthecprybeexpesdnthmmbraenligrnthw
Mayflwtnhlii
(BGP1npiasNAPN)HCssrotnndD4irecrsnblindsfrrwfaruhpidmalh
fatrrelinuhdnidinexlfvir
receprvidrbiisAfiksisvi;T
TGE
viusALisiiinlkii;ALbbnevirikiir
B, feline leukemia virus B. Semicircles, immunoglobulin-like domains; boxes, serine-threonine-rich domains; rectangles, cysteine-rich domains;
hick black line, plasma membrane. [Adapled from D. M. Knipe, Virus-host cellinteractions. In 'Fields Virology' (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M.
Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B.Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 273-299. Lippincot-Raven, Philadelphid
PA, 1996.]
The more conserved or ubiquitous the receptor,
two or more distinct attachment proteins in concert
the wider the host range of the virus that exploits it; for 
 or sequentially, seemingly for tighter binding or for
example, rabies virus, which uses sialylated gangliosides
 more complex mechanisms for viral attachment. Her-
as well as the acetylcholine receptor, has a very wide
 pesviruses bind initially to low-affinity receptors, then
host range. However, rabies virus infection is restricted
 move to secondary higher-affinity receptors that better
narrowly to few host cell types, such as striated muscle
facilitate viral entry by fusion. Human immuno-
cells, neurons, salivary gland, and a few other glandular
deficiency virus 1 uses CD4 as its primary receptor,
epithelial cells.
but it has several secondary coreceptors (fusin and
Some viruses utilize alternative receptors to enter
 other moiecules), each of which is now the target of
different cells in different tissues and in different hosts.
 antiviral drug research.
For example, the life cycle of Sindbis virus requires that
When varianr viruses are found that cause new
it alternates between mosquito and vertebrate hosts. The
 disease patterns, changes in viral attachment proteins
virus has a wide vertebrate host range, including birds
 and the specifciry of cellular receptors must be sus-
and mammals, but a narrow arthropod host range, pri-
 pected. For example, transmissible gastrocnteritis virus
marily Aedes spp. mosquitoes. The vertebrate receptor
has long been the cause of enteric disease in piglets; it
is the laminin receptor, a membrane protein that is vcry
replicates in epithelial cells of the small intestine and in
highly conserved and present in many different verte-
the lung. In the 1980s, a variant virus was discovered
brates; the arthropod receptor remains unknown.
 in Europe that caused only respiratory infection. This
Some of the larger, more complex viruses use
virus, which spread rapidly and caused severe economic
Pbysiofogic Factors Affecting lHost Resistance/Susceptibitity
119
losses, was found to be very closely related to transmissi-
8. Little is known of many of the nonspecific factors in
ble gastroenteritis virus but had specific mutations in
resistance, but age, nutritional status, levels of certain
 genes cncoding the viral attachment protein and one
hormones, especially as affected by pregnancy, and cell
other protein. These mutations affected the tropism of
differentiation play roles in a variety of viral diseases.
the virus as well as its transmissibility. Variant viruses
example, the explosive emergence of canine parvovirus
Age and Resistance/Susceptibility to
in 1978 was the consequence of specifc attachment
Viral Infections
protcin mutations of an ancestral felid virus (see
Chapter 21).
Viral infections tend to be most serious at the extremcs
of life. The extreme susceptibility of neonates to many
viral infections is a major concern in clinical practice.
Tumor Necrosis Factors, Interferons,
 In the newborn, even a few days matter, as very rapid
and Other Cytokines and Resistance/
physiologic changes occur during the postpartum period
and resistance to the most severe manifestations of many
Susceptibility to Viral Infections
intestinal and respiratory infections builds quickly. The
basis for this change lies mainly in the maturation of the
The role of intcrferons as cytokines that are important
 immune system, but anatomic and physiologic changes
in the host response to viral infections is covered in
 are involved as well. The best-studied model of this is
Chapter 5. Tumor necrosis factors α and β are cytokines
 lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection in inbred
that also have direct antiviral and immunomodulatory
 mice. In the days after birth, mice pass from a stage of
activities. Tumor necrosis factor α is produced by macro-
 nearly complete immunologic nonreactivity to immuno-
phages, natural killer (NK) cells, and other cell types;
logic maturity. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus in-
tumor necrosis factor β is produccd mainly by T cells.
 duces a persistent tolerated infection, free of clinical
  s  a s sisu so
 signs, when inoculated into newborn mice, but a fulmi-
act as cellular growth factors and differentiation factors,
 nant fatal meningoencephalitis in mice infected when
but they can also act synergistically with the antiviral
over 1 wcck old. The virus is the cause of the classic
actions of interferons, inhibit viral synthetic activities,
 immunopathologic disease-thc infection itself causes
and induce cell death by apoptosis.
no acute damagc, as evidenced in thc survival of new-
The discovery of so many other cytokines makes
 borns, but thc infection evokes an cxuberant host im-
it clear that there are many more such antiviral effectors
 mune response that destroys crucial cells and upsets ho-
active within host cells. It is clear that the degree of meostasis in the brain. Mice often die in convulsion.
sensitivity of any particular virus to any particular inter-
Most domestic animals are reasonably mature im-
feron or other cytokine represents only one small facet 
 munologically at the time of birth; nevertheless, new.
in the overall virus-cell interaction. As we learn how
 borns arc particularly vulnerable to infections with vi-
particular viruses have developed different mechanisms
 ruses such as canine distemper virus, canine parvovirus,
for circumventing thc antiviral actions of interferons and
 transmissible gastroenteritis virus (swine), hog cholera
other cytokines, wc can see the intricacy of the web of
virus, bovine viral diarrhea virus, enteropathogenic coro.
biochemical pathways involved and we can appreciate  I
naviruses (many animals), rotaviruses (many animals),
better how much more there is to learn about virus
 and various herpesviruses (many animals). In mamma-
cell interactions and the means to interfere with virus
lian and avian species, an umbrella of maternal antibody
replication. Wc can also see the role of continuing evolu-
 protects newborns against many viruses for the frst few
tion in the never-ending battle for survival between host
months of life. The importance of this protection is seen
anld virus.
in individual animals that are born without maternal
antibodies or fail to receive such antibodies in colostrum
or yolk (sec Chapter 8).
Physiologic Factors Affecting
Host Resistance/Susceptibility
Nutritional Status and Resistance/
Susceptibility to Viral Infections
A great variety of physiologic factors affect host resis-
tance/susceptibility, the most important being the im-
Malnutrition can interfere with any of the mechanisms
mune response, which is described in detail.in Chapter
that act as barriers to the replication or progress of
120
7
Determrincnts iof Virat Virulence and Host Resistance/Susceptibility
viruses through the body. It has been demonstrated re-
 phages and is induced during immune responses. In-
peatedly that severe nutritional deficiencies interfere with
 terleukin 1 is found in inflammatory exudates and acts
the generation of antibody and cell-mediated immune 
 on the temperature-regulating center in the anterior hy-
responses, with the activity of macrophages, and with
 pothalamus. The incrcased metabolic rate augments the
the integrity of skin and mucous membranes. However,
 metabolic activity of phagocytic cells and the rate at
often it is impossible to disenrangle adverse nutritional
which inflammatory responses are induced. Of course
effects from other factors found in animals living in
0 thesc effects might be expected to have antiviral effects.
extremely harsh environments. Moreover, just as malnu-
In classic studies of myxoma virus infection in
trition can exacerbate viral infections, so can viral infec-
 rabbits it was demonstrated that increasing body temper-
tions cxacerbate malnutrition, especially when severe
ature incrcased protection against infection whereas de-
diarrhea is present. Thus, starvation and malnutrition
creasing temperature increased the severity of infection.
and viral diseases can crcate a vicious circle.
Blocking the development of fever with drugs (e.g., sali-
 Animals with a general protein deficiency or defi-
 cylates) increased mortality. Similar results have been
ciencies in certain key amino acids may be highly suscep-
 obtained with ectromelia and coxsackievirus infections
tible to particular viruses. Viruses that cause epithelial
in mice.
infections, cspecially respiratory and intestinal infec-
tions, become particular problems. Secondary bacterial
infections arc common as the cause of life-threatening
 Cell Differentiation and Resistance/
pneumonia and entcritis.
Susceptibility to Viral Infections
The replication of some viruses is determined by the
Hormones and Pregnancy and
state of differentiation of the cell. The warts produced
by papillomaviruses in many species of animals provide
Resistance/Susceptibility to
a classic example. Productive infection is not seen in the
Viral Infections
deeper layers of the epidermal tumor, but occurs only
when the cells become keratinized as they move to the
During pregnancy certain infections of the dam can be
 surface layers. Basal cells contain 50-200 copies of viral
more severe or can be reactivated (e.g., Rift Valley fever  I
 DNA, but viral antigens and finally viral particles are
virus infcction in shcep). In addition a novel set of poten-
 produced only as the cells differentiate whcn they ap-
tially susceptible tissues appcar, including the fetus, the
 proach thc surface of the skin. Other examples involve
placenta, and the lactating mammary gland. Herpesvirus
cells of the immune system. For cxample, vesicular sto-
infections may be rcactivated during pregnancy, leading
 matitis and distemper viruses, which do not replicate in
to abortion or pcrinatal infection.
normal (resting) peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures,
The immunosuppressive effects of therapeutic
 do so when cells differentiate after activation by mitogen.
doses of corticosteroids exacerbates many viral infec-
Likewise, maedi/visna virus infects monocytes abortively
tions (e.g., infectious bovine rhinotracheitis and pseudo--
with low levels of transcription of viral RNA, but thc
rabics). The precisc mechanisms have not been deter-
 infection becomes productive as the cells differentiate
mined, but corticostcroids reduce inflammatory and into macrophages.
immune responses, dampen macrophage action, and de-
The stage of the cell cycle may affect susccptibility.
press interferon synthesis. It is also clear thar adequate
 Parvoviruses replicate only in cells that are in the late S
levels of these hormones are vital for the maintenance
 phasc of the cell cycle. Most vulnerable are the rapidly
of normal resistance to infection. Stress causes adreno-
dividing cells of bone marrow, intestinal epithelium, and
cortical immunosuppression, which is seen in many set-
the developing fetus. In the feline fetus, the parvovirus,
tings where animals are transported or broughr into
 feline panleukopenia virus, infects the rapidly dividing
crowded environments. For example, stress contributes
 cells of the germinal layer of the cerebelum, destroying
to the prevalence and severity of shipping fever in cattle.
 somc of them and arresting the normal migration of
othcrs to their final locations in the mature brain-—this
resulrs in cerebellar hypoplasia, clinical ataxia, and se-
Fever and Resistance/Susceptibility
vere neurological disease. In ncwborn cats thc samc virus
infects rapidly dividing cells in the bonc marrow and
to Viral Infections
intestinal epithclium, producing severe leukopenia and
Alinost all viral infections are accompanied by fever.
 diarrhea. The same virus is much less virulcnt when it
The principal mediator of the febrile response is the
 infects adult cats where fewer cells in these tissues are
cytokine interleukin 1, which is produced in macro-
 in the late S phasc and dividing.
Modet Stdies of Bases for Viral Virntence ned Host Resistance/Srsceptibifity
121
Natural Inhibitors of Attachment
Campylobacter spp.,Pneumocystis carini,Toxoplasma
of Virions to Cells
gondi, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare,Candida
albicans, and Cryptococcus neoformans. Although the
Blood, mucus, milk, and othcr body fluids contain a
list of secondary opportunistic infections may be shorter,
wide range of substances that can coat particular viruses
the same sort of clinical management problems occur in
and impede their attachment to celis. For cxample, in-
veterinary medical practice, e.g., when cats are infected
fluenza virions can be neutralized by mannose-binding
initially with feline immunodeficiency virus, feline leuke
lectins (conglutinin and “mannose-binding protein,'
 mia virus, or feline panleukopenia virus, or when puppies
MBP) found in the piasma of a number of animal specics
are infected with canine parvovirus or canine distem-
and in the lungs as pulmonary surfactant proteins, as well
per virus.
as by sialylated glycoproteins found in plasma and respi-
ratory mucus. Cytomegaloviruses are often coated with
Model Studies of Bases for
β2-microglobulin, a component of plasma. Antiviral fatty
acids derived from lipids in colostrum and milk have also
Viral Virulence and Host
becn described. The rclativc importance ofsuch inhibitors
Resistance/Susceptibility
remains unknown, but givcn the range of normal plasma
and tissue proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and more com-
Canine Parvovirus as a Model of Viral
plex substances, the ones we know about may represent
Determinants Affecting Host Range
the tip of an iceberg of innate natural defense mechanisms,
which through recombinant DNA technology might be
and Susceptibility
exploited for chemotherapeutic purposes.
A dramatic example of the emergence of a new virulent
Multiple Infections
virus by mutation is afforded by canine parvovirus. Sero-
logical evidence suggests that this virus made its fist
Under intensive management systems,such as cattle feed-
- appearance as a new pathogen of dogs in 1976. The
lots, swine farrowing units, and broiler houses, multiple
virus was isolated in 1978 as the cause of severe enteritis,
infections are common and can be difficult to analyzc as
 somctimes fatal, that occurred in dogs in the United
 States, Europe, and Australia (see Chapter 21). Out-
infections with two or rmore viruses or a virus and one
 breaks of sudden death in puppies due to myocardiris
or more bacteria are important as the cause of severe
were also linked to the new virus. Soon after its isolation,
respiratory and intestinal diseases.
it became clear from antigenic analysis and restriction
Viral infections of the respiratory tract often pre-
cndonuclease mapping that the canine virus was related
dispose animals to bacterial superinfection; for example,
 d e s d a on 
shipping fever may be initiated by a variety of respirarory
 had been recognized at least since the 1920s. Sequence
viruses and other stressors, but its serious consequences
 analysis of the canine virus by C. R. Parrish, I.,. E. Carmi-
are due to secondary infection with Pasteurella multoc-
 chael, and colleagues at the Jamcs A. Baker Institute for
ida or bemolytica (see Chapter 10). Alrernately, primary
 Animal Health at Cornell University and others showed
bacterial respiratory infection may increase the severity
that the canine virus differed from the feline panleuko-
of secondary avian and equine influenza virus infections.
 penia virus in only a few nucleotides and probably origi-
 In thc course of such dual infections, the bacteria (any
 nated as a result of only two ainino acid substitutions
 one of several different bacteria) produce proteases that
 in the viral capsid. These changes allowed the virus to
cleave the influenza virus hemagglutinin, thereby activat-
 attach to and replicate in dog cells (Figure 7.3). The
ing its viral attachment domain and facilitating viral
 rapidity with which canine parvovirus disease spread
 entry into airway epithelial cells.
around the world has not been explained, but the ex-
Secondary opportunistic infections, viral, bacte-
 treme physical stability of parvoviruses makes fomite
rial, or fungal, are particular problems when the primary
carriage very likely.
infection is caused by a virus that is immunosuppressive.
Today, the classic example is HIV infection, which so
Avian Influenza Viruses as a Model
 profoundly depletes the infected person's CD4+ cell pop-
of the Multigenic Nature of Viral
ulation that any of a number of secondary infections
Virulence Determinants
may be lethal: clinical management problems are caused
by herpesviruses (especially cytomegaloviruses), papillo-
maviruses, polyomaviruses, adenoviruses, and hepatitis
The great pioneer in experimental virology, F. M. Burnet,
viruses B and C, as well as Salmonella, Shigella, and
first suggested that influenza virus virulence is
122
7.Determinants of Viral Virulence aud Host Resistancc/Susceptibility
FIguRE 7.3.
Virus
VP2 nucleotide # 1
Virus titer
CPy:
(wild type or mutant)
specific
9 13 3
epitope
Canlne paroprus
NA
N
1
m
K
A
Canine paryoy
Camninanta v81279
NA
D
mum
+
NA
N
+
NYN
+
Feline panleukopenia ylrus
N
ND
(mutant,vB1339)
Analysis of the sequence differences behween canine parvovirus (CPV) (solid bars] and leline panleukopenia virus (FPV) (hatched bars), which
delerminebiyfeinevirinfetgnddgserfntfwiruswpreednttd
ability to infect canine cells or feline cells.Changing either nucleofile93 or nucleofide 323inhe canine parvovirus genome to the feline
ussdssd
dogcehnnletides93nd323flinepnlekopeniairuswerechangedtencltidesFondincain parovis th
resulingisined thbity cinyntgclnnhninglinel paekpniirrgi
riggq
multigenic, i.e., no one gene determines its virulence.
of avian influenza in Pennsylvania in 1983. Early in the
Subsequent studies by R. Rott, C. Scholtissek, and col-
 year, a virus (H5/N2) was introduced from wild birds
leagues at the veterinary faculty in Giessen, Germany,
into chicken flocks, producing a mortality of less than
 proved this point: they made reassortants between highly
10%. However, in October 1983, the accumulation of
virulent and avirulent strains of avian influenza virus,
about seven point mutations in the hemagglutinin gene
exchanging separately each of the eight genome segments
 of each strain. The virulence of the progeny viruses they
80% and a coincident increase in viral transmissibility-
obtained varied in complex patterns. They showed that 
all contributing to an epidemic that cost the regional
 so  ra rg pm se s
 pouitry industry more than $60 million. One of the mu-
there was an optimal combination of genes, an optimal
tations abolished a glycosylation site on the viral hemag-
gene constellation, that favored viral survival in narure
 glutinin molecule, thus exposing the HA1/HA2 cleavage
and determined virulence.
site that had previously been concealed by a carbohy-
 Despite this proof that all influenza genes are im-
drate side chain.
portant in determining virulence in the chicken (and in
horses and humans), the gene encoding the viral hemag-
 glutinin is preeminent--more specifcally, the essential
Reoviruses as Model for Associating
virulence determinant is the cleavability of the hemagglu-
Viral Virulence Determinants with
tinin. In relatively nonpathogenic strains of avian influ-
Clinical and Pathological
enza virus, the HA1 and HA2 polypeptide chains of the
hemagglutinin are linkcd by a single arginine residue,
Characteristics of Disease
whereas in virulent strains the linker is a sequence of
 several basic amino acids that is cleaved more readily
Now classic studies of the genetic bases for the virulence
by available cellular or bacterial protease(s). Cleavage
 of reoviruses for mice were carried out over many years
activates the hemagglutinin, making it rcady to attach
by B, N. Fields and colleagues ar Harvard University.
to receptors on target cells. The most striking lesson of
Many of the pathogenetic principles that are now being
how easily hemagglutinin cleavability can be aitered and
extended to other viruses, to other host animals, and to
virulence changed comes from analysis of an outbreak
clinical practice stem from these studies. This is the case
Modet Studies of Bases for Virat Virutence and Host Resistance/Susceptibility
12.3
Table 7.3
Reovirus Genes and Proteins and Their Functions
GENOME
 SPECIFIED
COpies/
LOCATION IN
 FunctoN (effect of mutatOn
SEGMENT
 PROTEIN
VIRON 
VIRION
ON PatHOgenESIS IN MiCe}
L1
A3
12
Inner capsid
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
[neonatal myocardirtis)
L2
A2
60
 Outer copsid,
Guanyl lransferase
core spike
(efficiency of horizontal spread)
L3
Al
120
 nner capsid
Binds double-stranded RNA, zinc
metalloprotein
[unknown)
M1
μ2
12
Inner capsid 
RNA synthesis
[unknown)
M2
μ1
600
Outer capsid
 Cleaved in intestine yielding ISVP
(determines invasion by the intestinal 
route and neurovirulence] 
M3
μNS
0
 Nonstructural
Binds single-stranded RNA, associates
with cytoskelelon, role in gene
assortment
{unknown}
S1
αl
36-48*
 Outer capsid
Cell attachment protein, primary
serotype determinant, hemagglutinin 
[neurotropism, oily-fur syndrome]
αls
0
 Nonstruclural 
Unknown
S2
α2
120-180
 Inner capsid
Binds double-stranded RNA
[unknown]
53
SNE
0
Nonstructural
Binds single-stranded RNA, role in
assortment
(unknown]
S4
600
Outer capsid
 Major outer capsid protein; inhibitor
of host cell protein and RNA
synthesis; cleaved yielding ISVP
[virion stability in the environment)
oNumber uncertain.
despite the fact that reoviruses are not important patho-
1. Gene S1 encodes protein o1, which is located
gens in nature. At the heart of these studies has been the
at the end of the stalks that are extended at cach of the
 manipulation by reassortment of the 10 genome seg-
12 vertices of infectious subviral particles (ISVPs)there
 ments of reoviruses 1 and 3 and the functional character-
are 36 or 48 copies of this protein in each virion. This
 ization of the protein product of each gene of each of
 protein mediates the attachment of the virion to the host
these viruses. In rurn, the role of each protein in the
 cell receptor and therefore directs ceilular and tissue
pathogenesis of reovirus disease has been unraveled. The
tropism. Reovirus 1 and 3 differ in their tropism in
 overall account is complex, indecd, especially since most
the mouse central nervous system, the former infecting
reovirus proteins have more than one function. The fol-
ependymal cells, the latter neurons. Studies with reas-
 lowing is just a sampling of the associations berween
 sortants of these two viruses indicate that the S1 gene
viral genes, their gene products, and their pathoge-
determines this pattern—-differences in virulence be-
netic functions.
 tween the trwo viruses conform to the same pattern, with
Four genes (S1, S4, M2, and L2) encode four pro-
neuronal infection and encephalitis being associated with
teins that make up the outer capsid of reoviruses (Table
enhanced mortality compared with ependymal infection.
7.3 and Figure 7.4). Each of these proteins has specifc
2.
 Gene S4 encodes protein o3, which is the major
functions in the interaction of the virus with target cells
outer capsid protein—there are 600 copies of this protein
 and animal hosts:
in each virion. Proteolytic enzymes, either in the intesti-
124
7.fDeteroninants of Virat Virrlentce ant Host Resistance/Susceptibility
Figure 7.4.
23/u2
21/o2
Schematic representalion of part of the reovirus capsid, showing he localion of some proteins hat play major roles in infection and virulence.
[A} Intact virion, showing protein l, which foms he spike that mediates attachment, located at each verex of the viral icosahedron. In the intact
virionthe pike isnot exposed at he virin surfaceThisrepresenation als shws proein 3,which is temajor outercapsid protein andis
responsible For rhe extreme environmental stability of the virion. (B) Infecfious subvirion paricle ISVP), formed in the intestinal lumen by the action
of chymolrypsin (or within endosomes by the achion of cellular proteases). Enzymatic action causes Ihe rermoval of protein 3 and the cleavoge
of protein μ1, lecving the strucure that enters the host cell and initiates replication. The removal of 3 also causes the extension and activation
oftheviraacet prten lwhichendirectsecelllarnd tisepismf thevirus.AdapedromM.LNibet,Achifnd
B. N. Fields, in 'Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, I. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E.
Straus, eds.1, 3rd ed., pp. 1557-1596. Lippincot-Raven, Philadelphia PA, 1996.]
nal lumen or within endosomes, remove this protein
 patterns, the reovirus model makes it clear that many
(and also cleave μ1),leaving infectious subviral particles,
othcr factors determine the course and outcome of infec-
which are the structures that enter host cells and initiate
tion in the whole animal.
replication. The removal of o3 also causes thc cxtension
of thc viral attachment protcin o1, thercby activating it.
This protein is a major determinant of virion stability
Rabies as Model of Interaction of Viral
in the environment and because it also inhibits cellular
Virulence Determinants with Host and
protein and RNA synthesis, it plays a role in establishing
Ecologic Determinants
persistent infection.
3. Gene M2 encodes protein μ1 (and μ1C), which
is another major outer capsid protcin that, along with
Rabies can serve to illustrate host and ecologic determi-
protein o3, determines the capacity of the virus to invade
 nants as keys to viral adaptations and changing transmis-
by the intestinal routethere are 600 copies of this
sion patterns. The ongoing cpidemic of raccoon rabies
 protein in each virion. The μ1 protein (and o3 protein)
in the northcastern United States has brought these deter-
is cleaved by chymotrypsin in the intestine; the resulting
 minants into focus. The epidemic has been traced to the
ISVPs, but not intact virions, adhere to and enter M cells 
importation of raccoons from an old rabies endemic
overlying lymphoid tissues of the intestine. From here,
 area in Florida to West Virginia in 1977. Its continuing
infection spreads to intestinal cpithelial cells.
spread, as far as eastern Canada and across the Appala-
4. Gene L.2 encodes protein A2, which are ar-
chian mountains into Ohio, is the cause of massive prc-
ranged at each of the 12 vertices of the outcr capsid and
vcntion and control efforts. One key to our undcrstand-
are involved in the extension of the receptor-bearing
ing of this epidemic was the discovery some years ago
stalk when ISVPs are activated—there are 60 copics of
that rabies virus is not a single invariant virus, rathcr it is
this protcin in each virion.
a sct of different variants or genotypes, each transmitted
within a separate reservoir host niche. In North Amcrica,
Reovirus molccular pathogenesis provides a sense
there are six genotypes in terrestrial animals (and many
 of balance in our understanding of the importance of
more in various species of bats): one genotype involves
various viral genes and gene products. Although a great
the skunk in the north-ccntral United States and south-
deal of attention is given to genes encoding viral attach-
central Canada, one the skunk in the south-central
mcnt proteins as determinants of tropism and disease
 United States, one the Arctic fox and red fox in Alaska
Motet Strdies of Bases for Viral Virmtence und Host Resistamce/Susceptibility
125
and Canada, one the gray fox in Arizona and western
"Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M, Knipe, P. M.
Texas, one the coyote in southern Texas and northern
Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Mo-
nath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., Pp.
Mexico, and one the raccoon as cited earlier. "Raccoons-
273-299.Lippincott-Raven,Philadelphia,PA.
bite-raccoons-bite-raccoons,"’ and after an unknown
Mims, C. A., Playfair, J. H. L., Roitt, I. M., Wakelin, D.,
time their virus becomes a distinct genotype, highly
and Williams, R. (1993). "Medical Microbiology."
adapted to the host and incfficiently transmitted if intro.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, MO.
duced into anothcr host. Whcn this discovery was made
Mims, C. A., Dimmock, N., Nash, A., and Stephen, J.
(using monoclonal antibodics and partial genomic se-
(1995). "Mims' Pathogenesis of Infectious Disease,'
4th ed. Academic Press, London.
qucncing of isolates), many mysteries of rabies ecology
Nathanson, N., Ahmed, R., Gonzalez-Scarano, F., Grif-
werc clarifed. Now, even finer variations in genotypes
fin, D. E., Holmes, K. V., Murphy, F. A., and Rob-
arc bcing analyzed to determine virus transmission pat-
inson, H. L., eds. (1997). *Viral Pathogenesis. Lippin-
terns within the major host animal niches and likely
cott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Noinoto, A.,ed. (1992). Cellular receptors for virus infec-
sites of future epidemic spread. Here, modern virologic,
 cpidemiologic, and ecologic sciences are coming together 
tion. Semin. Virol. 3, 77-186.
Roitt, 1. M., Malc, D., and Bonstoff, J. (1996). "lmmu-
around the common need to understand virus and
nology,* 4th ed. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, MO.
host variables.
Tyler, K. L., and Fields, B. N. (1996). Pathogcncsis of vi-
ral infections. In “Fields Virology” (B. N.Fields,
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L
Mclnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
Further Reading
cds.), 3rd ed., pp. 173-218. Lippincott-Raven, Phila-
delphia, PA.
Baron, S., Coppenhaver, D. H., Dianzani, F., Fleischiman,
Welsh, R. M., and Sen, G. C. (1997). Nonspecific host re-
W. R., Hughes, T. K., Klimpel, G. R., Niesel, D. W.,
sponses to viral infections, In "Viral Pathogenesis"*
Stanton, G. J., and Tyring, S. K. (1992). "Interferon:
(N. Nathanson, R. Ahmcd, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. E.
Principles and Medical Applications." University of
Griffin, K. V. Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L. Rob-
Texas Medical Branch Press, Galvcston.
inson, eds.), pp. 109-142. Lippincott-Raven, Philadel-
Knipe, D. M. (1996). Virus-host cell intcractions. In
phia, PA.
 This Page Intentionally Left Blank
CHapter
8
Immune Response to
Viral Infections
Cellular Components of the Immune System .
127
Subcellular Components of the Immune System.....
131
Immunologic Memory .
139
Immune Responses to Viral Infection...
139
Recovery from Viral Infcction...
141
Immunity to Reinfection....
142
Passive Immunity..
142
Further Reading....
144
 In response to the constant threat of invasion by infec-
cant component in the pathogenesis of disease, and
tious agents, including viruses, vertebrates have evolved
where the virus evades the immunc system and estab-
an elaborate set of defensive mcasures, called, collec-
 lishes a persistent infection.
tively, the immune system. During the initial encounter
with a virus, the immune system of the host recognizes
certain viral macromolecules (proteins, carbohydrates)
Cellular Components of the
called antigens as foreign which elicit scveral kinds of
responses to eliminate the virus and to prevent reinfec-
Immune System
tion. B lymphocytes respond (the humoral immune re-
sponse) to an antigenic stimulus by producing and secre-
The cells of the immune system include B and T lympho-
ting immunoglohulins or antibodies. T lymphocytes
cytes, cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineage, den-
respond (thc cell-mediated immune response) by secre-
dritic cells, and natural killer (NK) cells (Figure 8.1).
A sssr s a ei r s 
 Lymphocytes have antigen-specific receptors on their
coordinating the activities of the various types of cells
involved, including antibody production by B lympho-
 Any given T or B lymphocyte possesses receptors with
 cytes; T lymphocytes also have direct effector functions,
specificity for a single epitope. When T or B lymphocytes 
such as cytotoxic functions. Both B and T lymphocytes
bind antigen they signal the cell to divide to form an
bear highly specific receptor molecules that recognize
expanded clone of cells (clonal expansion). B lympho-
discrete regions on viral proteins, known as antigenic
cytes differentiate inro plasma cells, which are end cells
determinants or epitopes.
 that produce and secrete antibody. T lymphocytes sccrcte
Antigen-specifc immune responses in conccrt
soluble factors known as lymphokines or interleukins,
with innate defensc mechanisms terminate many viral
which are represcntatives of a large family of hormone-
infcctions before much damage has been done; this
like moleculcs, known genericaily as cytokines; these
results in mild disease or cven subclinical infection.
molecules modulate the activities of the cells involved
This chapter deals with the role of the immune response
 in the immune response. Some T and B cells revert to
in recovery from viral infection and resistance to rein-
long-lived. small lymphocytes responsible for immuno-
fection. Later chapters address situations wherc the
 logic memory. Whereas antibodies and the receptors on
immune system docs not function so effectively, where B cells recognize epitopes on foreign antigens in their
thc inimune response is actually harmful and a signifi- native conformation, T cell receptors recognize small
127
128
8.lmmne Response to Viral Infections
Figure 8.1.
INFLAMMATORYRESPONSE
Fibroblasts
Endothelialcells
TNF.TGF-β
IL-1
Hypothalamus
IL-1
PDGF
Macrophage
M-CFS,TNF,
Neutrophil
1,IL-6,TNF-a
GM-CSF,G-CSF
IL-1,IL-6,
IL-11,-12
Neutrophil
Hematopoiesis
IL-1,IL-6,
IL-8,TNFa
IL8,IL-10,
IL-12,IL-15,
IFNc,β,
IL-3,IL-4,
TNFa
Stem cell
IL-10,IL-13,
IFNa,TNFβ
IL-3,IL-6,
IL-7,GM-CSF
Antigen
RestingTHcell
IL-3,IL-4,I10
IL-10,IL-4
RestingB cell
IL-3,IL-5
IL-4
IL-2
IL-2
Activated
15
TGF-β,IL-2,
IL-4,IL-5、
IL-13,IFN-Y
Activated
NKcell
Bcell
Clonal expansion
LAKcell
IL-6
Tccell
Plasma cell
Anoverviwhcmlexnewrk finterainsof theimne systemfollwingvirusinfectionhe processbeginswihenteractionf
extracliratigenwihrphageswhichprssndprenf ppidlegeprdctsfentieninasctwith
signstionpwyhtdsysisndrlsefiufkiesochfwhichthnindsissc
receptor onthe surfaceofothercells and signas hose cells t respond either by also releasing other cytokines orby more direct effector actions
such as cellysisof virusinfected target cellsby Tc cells (Frm J.Kuby,lmmunology, 3rdedFreeman,NewYork, 1997).
Cellrtar Comapoments ot tbe tme Systeri
129
peptides that are formed by the cleavage of viral proteins; 
the case of heavy chains that also somatically recombine
they do this only when the foreign peptides are presented 
 with V genes. Somatic mutation (sce larer) also adds to
to thcm in association with membrane glycoproteins 
 the generation of antibody diversity to yield potentially
known as major histocompatibility complex (MHC) pro-
 more than 10? unique specifcities.
teins.
 Each individual B lymphocyte and its progeny ex-
press a set of inmunoglobulin gcnes that are specifc for
a single epitope. During developmenr such cclls have
Antigen-Specific Receptors
threc possible fatcs: (1) they may react with a sclf-antigcn
and be eliminated, (2) they may be nonviable and be
The antigen-specifc receptors on thc surface of B lym-
eliminated, or (3) they may react with a foreign antigen
 phocytes arc modified irminunoglobulin molecules com-
 and prolifcrate.
 posed of four polypeptides: two light (L) and two heavy
In contrast to T cells, the slg receptors of B cils
(H) chains termed surface immunoglobulin (slg). They
 rccognize antigens in their native and soluble state rather
are modified at the C terminus of the H chains to have
than as peptide-MHC complexes on the surface of cells
a transmembrane domain that anchors them in the cell
hence B cells interact directly with viral proteins or viri-
 membrane where thcy serve their receptor function. Prior
 ons. When the particular clones of B cells bcaring recep-
to primary antigen stimulation the slg molecules arc
 tors complcmcntary to any one of the several epitopes
slgM; aftcr class switching (see later) the Ig of the class 
 on an antigcn bind that antigen, they respond, after
switch becomes the slg antigen-specific receptor.
receiving thc appropriate signals from helper T cells,
The T cell antigen-specific rcceptor (TCR) is quite
 by division and differentiation into antibody-secrcting
distinct;itis a two polypeptide heterodimer and although
1 plasma cells.
immunoglobulin like, it is encoded by an entirely differ-
Each plasma ccll secretes antibody of a singlc speci-
 ent set of genes. The two polypeptides of the most com-
ficity, corresponding to the particular V (variable) region
mon T cell receptors are designated w/β. A second T(
 of the slg receptor it expresses. Initially, this antibody
lynphocyte population bears a different T cell receptor  i
 is of the IgM class, but somatic genetic rccoinbination
designated y/8.
(translocation) then brings about a class switch by associ-
Specific reccognition and binding of cither sIg or a T
 ating V gene segments with different H chain constant
cell receptor to its epitope triggers, by signal transduction
domains. Various cytokines play an important role in
across the plasma membrane of the lymphocytc, a wide
 isotype switching. Thus, after a few days, IgG, IgA, and
rangc of effector processes that attack and rcmove the
 sometimes IgE antibodies of thc same specificity begin
invading virus and/or virus-infected cells (Figurc 8.1).
 to dominate the immune responsc. Early in the immune
Thc resulting cascadc of cell-cell interactions and cytok-
 response, when large amounts of antigen are present,
inc secretion amplifies the immune response to match the  
 antigen-reactive B cells may be triggered cven if their
scale of the virus infection and, in additiou, establishes a
receptors fit the epitope with relatively poor affinity; the
long-lived memory that enables the immune system to
 result is the production of antibody that binds the antigen
respond more quickly (secondary or anannestic re-
with low affnity. Later on, when only small amounts
 sponse) to reinfection with the same virus.
of antigen remain, B cels that have evolved by hypermu-
tation in their V region genes to produce receptors that
bind the antigen with high affnity are selected (affnity
B Lymphocytes
maturation) and the affnity of the antibody secreted
increases correspondingly.
Some of the pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells origi-
 nating from fetal liver and later from bone marrow dif-
ferentiate into B lymphocytes in the bursa of Fabricius
T Lymphocytes
 in birds or its equivalent, the bone marrow, in mammals.
They are characterized by the presencc of specific anti-
T lymphocytes are so named because of their dependence
 gen-binding rcceptors on their surface, plus receptors for
on the thymus for their maturation from pluripotent
complement (C3) and receptors fo1 thc Fc portion of
 hematopoietic stem cells. Within the thymus there is
immunoglobulin. During ontogeny, sevcral hundred in-
 positive selection for those cells able to recognize appro-
herited V (variable) I. and H chain immunoglobulin gene
 priate peptides on the surface of cells and negative selec-
segmcnts undergo somatic recombination. There are also
tion to climinate those T cells that recognize self antigens
multiple copies of J (joining) gene scgments in the case
with possible autoimmune disease as a consequence.
of light chains and J and D (diversity) gene scgments in
 Only 1 or 2% of the lymphocytes that are produced in
1.30
8.
Immune Respomnse to Virat Infections
the thymus leave and populate the secondary lymphoid
1sumed by Th and Tc cells. T cells may suppress various
tissues. Functionally, "T lymphocytes are classifed into
 arms of the immune response in a varicty of ways; e.g.,
two subsets: T belper (Th) lympbocytes, which are fur-
by direct interaction with lymphocytes or via the produc-
ther divided into Th1 and Th2 cells, and cytotoxic T /Tc)
tion of immunosuppressive cytokines.
lymphocytes (CTLs). Th cells are generally considered to
have a regulatory function and Tc cells a direct effector
Cytotoxic T Iymphocytes
function, i.e., target cell lysis. Close examination of T
 Cytotoxic T lymphocytes carry the CD8 surface marker
cell clones indicates that a single cell type can discharge
and possess T cell receptors that recognize viral peptides
both regulatory and effector functions and secrete a
 prescnted on the surface of virus-infected target cells
 range of different lymphokines.
 in association with class I MHC molecules. Activation 
and subsequent cytolysis of target cells by Tc cells
T Helper Lymphocytes
require direct Tc-target cell contact in a manner remi-
T helper cells carry a surface marker known as CD4.
niscent of a synapse (this contact has been called “the
They recognize viral peptides in association with class
kiss of death'"). Granules within the cytoplasm of the
 II MHC protein, usually on the surface of an antigen-
Tc cell polarize toward the target cell plasma membrane
presenting cell (APC). They then secrete cytokines that
and their contents are released. A monomeric. protein
further activate themselves and subsequently activate
called perforin is secreted and polymerizes to form ~ 17-
 other ceils, including other Th, Tc, and B lymphocytes,
 mer mushroom-shaped structures that insert themselves
in the process helping Tc lymphocytes to become cyto-
into the target cell plasma membrane, creating a pore
toxic and B cells to produce antibody.
that brings about the lysis of the cell. Perforin is
Th1 cells (inflammatory T cells) are defined as
structurally and functionally very similar to C9, which
typically (1) secreting the cytokines IL-2, IFN-y, and
 is responsible for complement-mediated lysis (see later).
TNF-β [plus granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulat-
There is also evidence that both Tc and NK cells
ing factor (GM-CSF) and IL-3]; (2) mediating delayed-
 release lymphocyte-specific granules that have serine
type hypersensitivity; and (3) promoting IgG2a produc-
 esterase activity (granzymes); these granules induce
tion. Th2 cells are defined as typically (1) secreting IL-
apoptosis in target cells.
4, IL-5, and IL-6 (plus GM-CSF and IL-3); (2) providing
The effector response of T cells is generally
help, but not directly mediating delayed-rype hypersensi-
transient: in certain acute infections, Th and Tc activi-
tivity responses; and (3) promoting the switch by B cells
 ties peak about 1 week after the onset of viral infection
from IgG2 to IgG1 production in some species. Individ-
 i ao s i 'sm  o z kq ede pue
ual CD4- T cell clones vary widely in the parricular 
whether this is attributable to the desiruction of infected
coinbinations of cytokines they produce; the two domi-
 cells with consequential removal of the antigenic stimu-
nant patterns described earlier tend to cmerge in chronic
lus or whether it is due to suppressor functions of
persisting infections.
T cells.
Th1 cells, i.e., cells expressing CD4 (and some
expressing CD8), secrete lymphokines that set up the
y/8 'T Lymphocytes
inflammatory response and greatly augment the immune
An entirely different class of T cells with a different type
response by attracting both monocytesmacrophages and
 of T cell receptor composed of polypeptide heterodimers
other T cells to the site of the viral infection, These same
 designated  and & (rather than the conventional α and
lymphokines are self-activating, causing the cells that
 β chains) is found principally in epithelia such as the
secrete them to be activated, to proliferate, to differenti-
 skin, intestine, and lungs. In mice and humans this class
 ate, and to sccretc other cytokines. This response is the
 constitutes a small minority (about 5%) of the T cell
basis for delayed-type hypersensitivity responses that are
 population. These cells appear to display a relatively
a recognized part of the pathogenesis of many viral infec-
 limited immunologic repertoire, reflecting highly re-
tions. The same response occurs whenl an antigen is in-
 stricted V (variable) gene usage. There is emerging evi-
jected intradermally—-this is thc basis for skin tests
dence, howevcr, that these T cells are involved in the
whercin a localizcd reaction is elicitcd in previously in-
 immune responses to viral infections that cnter through
fected animals.
those portals at which they are localized and there is
Some T cells can be demonstrated to down-regu-
 evidence that they may recognize antigen in a non-MHC-
late other T cell and/or B cell responses, which at one
 restrictcd manner. These characteristics suggest that
time suggested that there may be a further class of cell,
 thesc cells may be more important than previously recog-
once refcrred to as T suppressor cells. However, it has
proved difficult to clone T cells that display this property
 infections have not been established. In swine, rumi-
and the view now is that suppressor functions are sub-
 nants, and chickens, y8 cells represent about 30% of T
Surbcefhutar Conponentsofthe lmmune Systen
1.31
lymphocytes and are distributed more widely in the
Subcellular Components
body.
of the Immune System
Major Histocompatibility Complex
Monocytes, Macrophages, and
Dendritic Cells
To understand antigen processing and presentation, one
must first know something about the structure and intra
 Monocytes, because of their mobility and homing capac-
cellular production of MHC proteins. During ontogeny,
ity, and macrophages and dendritic cells, because of their 
the positive selection of developing T cells in the thymus
key locations in various tissues (e.g, alveolar macro-
by "self" MHC molecules results in mature T cells that
phages in the lung, Kupffer cells in the liver, Langerhans
can recognize foreign peptides, but only ifthey are located
dendritic cells in the skin), are important initiators of
 in the peptide-binding cleft of "self* MHC protein mole-
the immune response against viral invasion. They are
 cules—-not when they are free in the extracellular space
involved early in the host's response: (1) monocytes infil-
 and not when they areassociated with non-self MHC mol-
trate tissue and differentiate to become macrophages,
ecules (Figure 8.2). This phenomenon is known as
(2) macrophages often become the predominant cell in
MHC restriction.
an infection focus by 24 hours after viral invasion, and
There are two classes of MHC molecules, class I
(3) dendritic celis carry out afferent immune functions
and class Il; their structure is shown in Figure 8.3A. The
ydukj se yons sueaio Aay u pue saoeuns Apoq le ne
two classes of T lymphocytes namely, Th and Tc, are
nodes, spleen, and liver, where most phagocytic removal 
defined by their interactions with class 1 or class II MHC
of foreign particles occurs. Al three cell types bear immu-
proteins, respectively. The pathways used by cells to
noglobulin Fc and C3b receptors on their surfaces, which
 process and present antigenic peptides to Th and Tc cells
promotes the phagocytosis of immune complexes, i.e.,
are fundamentally different: they are referred to as the
virions coated with antibody. By serving as “'profes-
exogenous pathway for those peptides presented in asso-
sional antigen-prcsenting cells, these cells exercise a
ciation with MHC class II molecules and as the endoge-
controlling influence over the rapidity, magnitude, and
dynamics of the immune response.
nous pathway for those peptides presented in association
with MHC class I molecules.
Macrophages then also give expression to the 
efferent limb of the immune response: cytokines se-
The MHC is a genetic locus encoding three MHC
crcted by activated T cells bring more monocytcs 
class I proteins and up to 12 MHC class II proteins,
into the infection focus and activate them as they
each of which occurs in frorm 50 to 100 alternative allelic
differentiate into macrophages. Activated macrophages
forms. Class I glycoproteins can be expressed on the
have increased chemotactic activity, phagocytic activity,
 plasma mcmbrane of most types of cells (neurons are
and digestive powers.
tivcly, class II glycoproteins are expressed principally by
"profcssional" antigen-presenting cells. At the distal tip
Natural Killer Cells
of each class of MHC protein there is a cleft in which
thc antigenic peptide is bound and presented (Figures
 dni s e a s (  
8.3A and 8.3B). Peptide binding is determined by only
CD3-, CD16', CD56+ large granular lymphocytes of
 two or three hydrophobic amino acids, called anchor
uncertain lineage that have the capacity to kill virus- r
 residues, in a particular peptide and accordingly a partic-
infected cells and tumor cells. The basis for their selectiv-
 ular MHC protein can bind numerous different peptides
tion of the synthesis and expression of MHC class I molecules. Peptides presented by class I molecules are
proteins ('missing self-hypothesis"), which is an carly
usually 9 amino acids long (range 8- to 11-mers),
fcature of many virus-infected cells. They display no
 whereas peptides binding to class Il proteins range from
immunologic specificity for particular viral antigcns, no
 13 to 18 amino acids. The peptide-binding cleft in the
memory, no MHC restriction, and no dependence on (
 case of class IH is open at the ends whcreas that of class
antibody. They are an important early defense mecha- 1
1 is closed. Specific amino acids that form pockets on
nism, as their activity is enhanced greatly within 1 or 2  t
the floor of the cleft of any particular MHC protein
days of viral infection. Virus-induced activation of NK
 determine the particular range of peptides that can bind
cells is mediated by interferons, acting synergisticaly
(Figure 8.3B). The peptidc-MHC complex is in turn
with IL-2, and NK cells themselves secrete several cytok-r
 recognized, with absolute specificity, by the T cell recep-
ines, including interferon y and tumor necrosis factor α.t
 tor of the appropriate clone of T cells. Amino acid resi-
132
S.
fmmue Response lo Viral Infections
FIGUrE 8.2.
Antigen
Pre
ClassIl
B2microglobulin-
Plasma
MHC
ClassIMHC
membranePeptide
Peptide
TCR-
CD4
TCR-
CD8
CD3
p56lck
CD3
p56lck
A
CytotoxicTcell
B
HelperTcell
Model for the interaction among MHC proleins, T cellreceptors, and CD4 or CD8 molecules. [A) CD8 on a cytotoxic T cell binds to a class 
MHC protein on a target cell and interacts with a T cel receplor (TCR) molecule that is binding both to the same class I MHC protein and to the
viral peptide it is presenting. (B) CD4 on a helper T cell binds to a clas Il MHC protein on an antigen-presenting cei and interacts with a TCR
moleceisnngbptdiirenghCRisherdirfwpiechin
CD4orDTh classMC prtenis polyeptidchinwihhreexacelllardomainsssociated wihmicrogloblin;thelsM
protein is composed of two polypeptide chains, each having two extracelular domains.Additional pairs of complementary adhesion molecules
ofdiferenttypesno shown} conributeoestablishing andstabiizing closecontaet beweenTcells andantigen-presenting clls includingB
cells. [Adapted fom J. R. Parnes, Immunology. In 'Encyclopedic of Human Biology" (R. Dulbecco, ed), Vol. 2, P. 225. Academic Press, San
Diego, CA, 1991.]
dues that do not bind in the MHC cleft are hydrophobic
 class II protein while rcsting, but more following activa-
and project outward, inviting recognition by T cell rc-
ceptors.
tion, B lymphocytcs become important antigen-prcs-
Although there is extensive polymorphism of 
enting cells; they are especially important during thc
MHC gcnes between individual animals, any individual 
latter stages of an infection and during reinfection. Mcm-
has only a limited number of different MHC proteins
 ory B cells scrve as very effcient antigen-prescnting cells.
and any givenn antigenic peptide binds only to certain
Viral antigen, or the virion itself, binds to the specific
MHC molecules. If certain peptide-MHC complexes are
immunoglobulin receptors on the B lymphocyte and is
important in eliciting a protective immune response to
 endocytosed, cleaved into peptides that are presented on
a serious viral infection, animals lacking suitable MHC
the surface of the B cell in association with class II MHC
proteins will be genetically more susceptible to that dis-
proteins. These peptides gencrally represent different epi-
easc. A further cause of increased susceptibility lies in
topes from those of the same antigen recognized by the
the possible absence from an individual animal's T cell
 B cell for the production of antibody. CD4+ Th cells
 repertoire of lymphocytes bearing receptors for that par-
to which B cells present antigen rcspond by secreting
ticular MHC-peptide complex.
cytokines that stimulate B cells to make antibody. Such
cognate interaction, involving close physical association
Antigen Presentation by Cells Expressing
of T and B cells, ensures very efficient delivery of *"helper
MHC Class II: The Exogenous Pathway
factors" (cytokines) from the Th cell to the relevant
 Only a restricted range of cells, defned as antigen-pres-
primed B cell.
enting cells, proccss and present antigens in association
Virus or viral proteins taken up from an external
with MHC class I to Th cells. Antigen-presenting cells
include dendritic cclls, monocyte/macrophages, and,
cxogenous pathway; they pass progressively through
latcr in the immune response, B lymphocytes. Dendritic
early endosomes to late (acidic) endosomes and prelyso-
cells, including Langerhans cells of the skin and the den-
somes, where thcy are cleaved by proteolytic enzymes
dritic cells of lymph nodes and the splenic red pulp and
(Figure 8.4). Some of the resulting viral peptides are able
marginal zones, are so named because they form long
to bind to class II MHC α and β polypeptides to form
finger-like processes that interdigitate with lymphocytes,
a trimeric complex that is then transported to the plasma
thereby favoring antigen presentation. Unlike dendritic
membrane where they are rccognized by CD4+ T cells,
 cells, macrophages express relatively low levels of MHC
leading to a Th cell response.
Stbcetiutar Conpoments of the Imnune Systen
133
Antigen Prcsentation by Cells Expressing
plasm by the large (26S) LMP-containing proteosome
MHC Class I: The Endogcnous Pathway
complex—-these viral proteins are said to cnter the cn-
Almost all cels can be induced to synthesize MHC class 
 dogenous pathway. The resulting peptides are then trans-
I proteins following virus infection; neurons are an ex-
 ported by a transporter molecule (TAP, for transporter 
ception. After synthesis, MHC class I α- and β-micro-
associated with antigen processing) into the endoplasmic
 globulin polypcptides are transportcd to the endoplasmic
reticulum, where they assemble with class I MHC mole-
reticulum wherc they assemble to form a stablc complex
cules to form a stable trimcric complex, which is then
 in association with a molecular chaperone protein called
exported, via the Golgi complcx, to the cell surface for
calnexin (Figure 8.4). In virus-infected cells, some viral
 presentation to Tc cells. Both LMP and TAP proteins 
protcin molecules are degraded (cleaved) in thc cyto-
are coded for within the MHC gene complex.
Figure 8.3.
A
ClassImolecule
ClassII molecule
Peptide-binding
cleft
Membrane-distal
domains
Membrane-proximal
domains
(Ig-fold structure)
Transm
88888
Cytoplasmictail
B
(A)SchematiiramfMHClasIndMClas oleclesshwingeexenldmins,rnmembran dminsandcyplsmil.
Thepeptideiningcletsredbydismin}irlidesickmodllingineleffanMCassmoleculTh
peptide arches up away from the β strands that form the Hoor of the binding cleft and interacts with 12 water molecules [spheres). (Adapted from
J. Kuby, "Immunology," 3rd ed. Freeman, New York, 1997.)
134
P
Immme Response to Virat Infectiomns
Figure 8.4.
Exogenous
|antigen
Endocytic
ClassIMHC
compartments
Peptid
Digested
invariant
Golgi complex
chain
Peptidel
|Rough
Peptide
endoplasmic
reticulum
Invariant
chain
ssIMHC
Class II MHC
TAP
Nucleus
Endogenouspathway
Exogenouspathway
(class I MHC)
(classIIMHC)
Theendgensndexgenuspwyfnigenpresing nd prenttinhemdfntigenenryintcelnd th sitefanigen
processingpeardeeminewheherantigenicpepideacitewiMHclassmoleculsinhrougedplsicreficlum
dotted line) or with MHC class Il molecules in endocylic comparments [right of dotted linel. (From J. Kuby, "mmunology," 3rd ed. Freeman,
New York, 1997.]
Cytokines
cells carry receptors for the particular cytokines. A
single cytokine may exert a multiplicity of biological
Cytokines are low molecular weight hormone-like pro-
effects, often acting on more than one type of cell.
teins that stimulate or inhibit the proliferation, differenti-
Moreover, different cytokines may exert similar effects,
ation, and/or maturation of immune cells (Table 8.1;
although perhaps via distinct postreceptor signal trans-
Figure 8.5). They differ from true hormones in a number
duction pathways, resulting in synergism (Figure 8.6).
of ways, including being produced by nonspecialized
There is much redundancy in the actions of cytokines,
 presumably linked to the need to provide fail-safe
kincs) or monocytes/macrophages (monokines) and serve
defense mechanisms; it is frequently the case that the
t0 regulate the immune response by coordinating the
use of knockout mice characterized by the deletion of
activities of the various cell types involved. Thus, while
a single cytokinc gene fail to succumb to particular
 cytokines are not antigen specific, their production and
virus challenges.
actions are often antigen driven.
 Cytokines up-regulate or down-regulare the rarget 
Cytokines may act on the cell that produced
 cell, and different cytokines can antagonize one another.
 them (autocrine) or on cells in the immediate vicinity
Typically, a cytokine secreted by a particular typc of
(paracrine), particularly at cell-cell interfaces, where
 cell activates another type of cell to secrete a different
directional secretion may occur and very low concentra-
 cytokine or to express receptors for a particular cytokine,
tions may be effective, or they may act on cells at
and so on in a sort of chain reaction (Figure 8.1). Because
 more distant locations (endocrine). Responsive target 
 Of the intricacy of the cytokine cascade, it is rarely possi-
SceltalrCopnentsftbelmneSysten
135
Table 8.1
Cytokines: Sources, Targets, and Effectsc.b.
CYTOKINE
 PRiNCIPAL SOURCE
PRincipAI taRgst /crrects
IL-1α, β
Monocytes/macrophages, B
Proliferation of T cells, I2 receptor expression, antibody, Fever
cells, dendritic cells
IL-2
Thl cells
Proliferation and differentiation of T cells
IL-3
T cells, NK cells, mast cells
Stem cells and mast cells; hematopoiesis, histamine release 
IL-4
Th2 cells, mast cells, NK
Proliferation and differentiation of B cells, T cells, and macrophages;
cells
switch from igM to IgG1 and IgE: up-regulates MHC class i ex-
pression
IL-5
Th2 cells, mast cells
Proliferation and differentiation of B cells and eosinophils; class switch
to lgA
IL-6
Th2 cells, macrophages,
Proliferating B cells, plasma cells hepatocytes; promotes differentfiation
other cells
to plasma cells; synthesis of acute-phase proteins (fever)
1L-7
Bone marrow and thymic
Proliferation of pre-B and pre-T cells; increases expression of IL-2 and
stromal cells
its receptor
1L-8
Macrophages, endothelial
Chemotaxis, adhesion, and diapedesis of neutrophils
cells
IL-9
Th cells
 Some Th cells; acts as a mitogen supporting proliferation in the ab-
sence of antigen
IL-10
Th2 cells
Inhibits cytokine production by macrophages and hence indirectly re.
duces cytokine production by T cells
iL-11
 Bone marrow stromal cells
 Pre-B cells, plasmocytoma cells, megakaryocytes, hepatocytes; growth
and differentiation
IL-12
Macrophages, B cells
Acts synergistially with Il-2 to promote diferentition of T cells; pro-
liferation of NK cells
IL-13
Th cells
Macrophages; inhibits activation and release of inflammatory cy-
tokines
IL-15
I cells, intestinal epithelium,
Growth and proliferation of intestinal epithelium and T cells; co-
NK, and activated B cells 
mitogen
IL-16
I cells (primarily Tc cells),
Th cells, chemotaxis, MHC class Il expression, suppression of antigen-
macrophages, eosinophils 
 induced proliferalion
TNF-αx,β
Macrophages, Thl, Te, and
Anliviral; proliferation nddifferenatinfTells,celma
mast cells
 phages, NK cells and fibroblasls; fever; cytotoxic, induces cachexid
TGF-β
Platelets, macrophages, lym-
Inhibits proliferation of T cells, B cells, and stem cells and induces in-
phocytes, mast cells
creased Il-1 production, thereby inhibiting infiammalion and promot-
ing wound healing: induces class switch to lgA
IFN-cα, β
Leukocytes, other cells
Antiviral; fever
IFN-y
Th1, Tc, and NK cells
Antiviral; activation of Th2 cells, macrophages, and NK cells; IgM to
lg2a switch; blocks IL4induced class switch to lgE and IgG1; up-regu-
lates MHC and Fc receptars
GMCSF
T cells, macrophages, endo-
Hematopoiesis, granulocytes, monocytes
thelium
Cytokines are pleitropic, i., single mleces hae severl distinct and seeminglyunelted phenyic elts.
bOnly certain maior activities of the best-studied cytokines are listed in this condensed summary.
ble to attribute a given biological event in vivo to a
Sa  sn   u aq  o
single cytokine.
sion; (2) regulation of the immune response, e.g., anti-
 Cytokines can influence viral pathogenesis in a
body isotype switching by interleukin 4, 5, 6, or inter-
number of ways: (1) augmentation of the immune re-
feron y; (3) suppression of the immune response, e.g..
sponse, e.g., of cytotoxic T cells by tumor necrosis factor
interleukin 10 inhibits the synthesis of interferon y; (4)
136
8. Immtne Response fo Viral lnfections
 Figure 8.5.
(a)
Inducing
(b)
stimulus
Cytokine-producingcell
Autocrine action
Cytokine
Paracrine action
Nearby cell
Receptor
Circulation
Target cell
Endocrineaction
Distantcell
Biological
effects
[A) General overview of the induction and function of cytokines. (B) Most cytokines have cutocrine andor paracrine actions; some also have 
endocrine actions. (From J. Kuby. "lmmunology," 3rd ed. Freeman, New York, 1997.)
 inhibition of viral replication by interferons; and (5) up-
The immunologic specifcity of an antibody mole-
regulation of viral gene expression.
cule is determined by its ability to bind specifically to a
particular epitope. The binding site, i.e., the antibody-
Antibodies
binding groove, is located at the amino-terminal end of
the molecule. The variable regions of both L and H
The end result of activation and maturation of B cells
chains comprise about 107 amino acids within which
is the production of antibodies, which react specifically
 there are three hypervariable domains termed comple-
 re a     
mentary determining regions interspersed between four
Antibodies fall into four main classes: two monomers,
conserved regions called framework regions. When the
IgG and IgE, and rwo polymers, IgM and IgA. All
peptides fold to forrm the three-dimensional functional
immunoglobulins of a particular class have a similar
Ig structure, the six complementary determining regions
structure, but they vary widely in the amino acid se-
(three each from L and H chains) are located in the
quences comprising the antigen-binding site, which de-
 antigen-binding groove. It is the variability of the com-
termines their specificity for a given antigenic determi-
plementary determining regions that accounts for the
nant. The commonest immunoglobulin found in serum,
limitless range of different epitopes recognized by these
IgG, consists of two H and two L chains, and each chain 
 molecules. (Similar principles underlie the generation of
consists of a constant and a variable domain. The chains
antigenic diversity found in T cell receptor variable re-
are held together by disulfde bonds. Papain cleavage
gions.)
separates the molecules into two identical Fab fragments,
 Antibodies directed against certain epitopes on the
which contain the antigen-binding sites, and an Fc frag-
surface of virions neutralizc infectivity; they may also
ment, which carries the sites for various effector func-
 act as opsonins, facilitating the uptake and destruction
tions such as complement fixation, attachment to phago-
of virions by macrophages. In addition, antibody may
 cytic cells, and placental or colostrum transfer (Figure
attach to viral antigens on the surface of infected cells,
8.7).
leading to their destruction following activation of the
Subcettutar Compomrcnts of the tmme System
137
Figure 8.6.
TARGETCELL
EFFECT
Activation
Proliferation
Differentiation
M
PLEIOTROPY
Bcell
2
Proliferation
Thymocyte
ActivatedTHcells
Proliferation
Mast cell
REDUNDANCY
Proliferation
IL-5
ActivatedTHcells
Bcell
SYNERGY
Induces class switch toIgE
ActivatedTHcells
Bcell
ANTAGONISM
Blocks class switch to IgE
IL-4
inducedbyIL-4
IFN-Y
ActivatedTH cells
Bcell
Examples of cytokine pleipy, reddncy, sergy, and ontagonism. FromJ. Kuby, "mmology, 3rd ed. Freman, New York, 17.
138
8.Jmmune Response to Viral Infections
heavy chains and consequently in biological propeties
Figure 8.7.
such as complement fixation and binding to phagocytes.
Immunoglobulin M
lgG
 Immunoglobulin M (IgM) is a particularly avid class of
antibody, being a pentamer of five IgG equivalents, with
=Antigen
10 Fab fragments and therefore 10 antigen-binding sites.
Because IgM is formed early in the immune response
and is later replaced by IgG, specifc antibodies of the
IgM class are diagnostic of recent (or chronic) infection.
lgM
Low levels of IgM may be found in the fetus as it develops
immunologic competence in the second half of preg-
nancy. In fact, because IgM does not cross the placenta
from dam to fetus in any species, the presence of IgM
antibodies against a paticular virus in a newborn animal
may be indicative of intranterine viral infection.
lmmunoglobulin A
 Immunoglobulin A (IlgA) is a dimer, with four Fab frag-
ments. Passing through epithelial cells, IgA acquires a J
 fragment (J, for joining, also called the secretory piece)
to become secretory IgA, which is secreted through the
epithelium into the respiratory, intestinal, and urogenital
tracts. Secretory IgA is more resistant to proteases than
other immunoglobulins and is the principal immuno-
IgA(secretorydimer)
globulin on mucosal surfaces and, in some species of
animals, in milk and colostrum. For this reason lgA
Thebasicsruchreof eimmunoglobulins.Thenigenbindingend
antibodies are important in resistance to infection of the
ofeachcssfimnglobulinmoleculeconsistsofwoidenil
respiratory, intestinal, and urogenital tracts, and lgA
light polypaplide chains and two identical heavy chains linked o-
odnpsusga
antibody responses are much more effectively elicited by
globuladminsDieret ntbodieshediferenVnd
oral or respiratory than by systemic administration of
mains, which are highly variable, whereas the remaining domains
antigen, a matter of importance in the design and route
[C, and C 1, 2, etc.are relatively constant in omino acid sequence
and struchure. IgG occurs as Four subclasses—igG1,2,3, and 4——
of delivery of some vaccines (see Chapter 13).
pasd
very farge amounts in bovine colostrum]. IgM molecules are penta-
Imnunoglobulins D and E
AD isou suuspuqwssuquyaym
IgD and IgE are minor immunoglobulin species, account-
Idly. IgA, in its soluble Form as found in the circulation, resembles
IgG; in irs secretory fom, as found in mucus and other secrefions,
ing for less than 1% of total immunoglobulin levels: (1)
it is a dimer, fomed by the binding of a J chain (secretory piece],
most IgD is bound to the surface of B lymphocytes but
which facilitales its movement across mammary epithelium and into
its function there is not clear; (2) IgE, which is produced
mucus secretions
-sa e aresa a r ss esd pdaqns a
tinal tracts, binds strongly to mast cells where it reacts
classical or alternative complement pathways or by arm-
with certain kinds of antigens (allergens). It stimulates
ing and activating Fc receptor-bearing cells such as NK
the release of mediators of anaphylaxis such as serotonin
cells, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and macrophages 
and histamine.
(antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity).
Immunogkobulin G
Complement
The major class of antibody in the blood is immunoglob.
ulin G (igG), which occurs as IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and
The complement system consists of about 30 serum pro-
IgG4 subclasses. Following systemic viral infections, IgG
- a d, o a aq u ym 
continues to be synthesized for many years and is the 
mune response (Figure 8.8). As well as the classical com-
 principal mediator of protection against reinfection. The
plement activation pathway, which is dependent on the
subclasses of IgG differ in the constant region of their
presence of antibody-antigen complexes, there is also
Iemnte Responses to Viral fufectiost
139
 Figure 8.8.
Polymorph accumulation,
inflammation
Chemotaxis
Viral antigen
antibody (Ab)
Histamine
Fc
Classical pathway
C3
AbC1 -AbC142
+C3
convertase
Alternate pathway
Attachment
Membrane
activation, without
to phagocyte
damage
antibody
Phagocytosis of
Lysis of virus
virus，Ab C
 or infected cell
the cormplement components are not sequential becouse they were assigned before the sequence of action was elucidated. [Courtesy of C. A.
Mims and D. O. White.)
an alternative antibody-independent pathway. Both are
the primary encounter. Memory B cells, on reexposure
important in viral infections.
 to antigen, also display an anamnestic (secondary) re-
Activation of complement by the classical pathway
sponse, with the production of larger amounts of spe-
may lead to the destruction of virions or virus-infected
cific antibody.
cells, as wcll as to inflammation. Virions are destroyed
 Little is known about the mechanism of the longe-
as a result of opsonization, enhancement of ncutraliza-
vity of immunologic memory in T or B lymphocytes in
tion, or lysis of the viral envelope. Complement activa-
thc absence of demonstrable chronic infection. The cells
tion following interaction of antibody with viral antigens
may be restimulated periodically by the original anti-
in tissucs lcads to inflammation and the accumulation of
 genic peptide retained for long periods as peptide-MHC
leukocytes. Activation of complement via the alternative
 complexes on follicular dendritic cells in lymphoid folli-
 cles or by surrogate antigen in the form of either fortu-
enveloped viruses that mature by budding through the
itously cross-reactive antigens or anti-idiotypic antibod-
 plasma membrane; because it does not requirc antibody,
ics. Memory T and B lymphocytes may survive for years
the alternate pathway can occur immediately after viral
without
 dividing, until restimulated following rein-
invasion of the body.
fection.
Immunologic Memory
Immune Responses
Following priming by antigen and clonal expansion of 
to Viral Infection
lymphocytes, a population of long-lived memory cells
arises that persists indefinitely. Memory T cells are char-
An overview of the major features of the immune re-
acterizcd by particular surface markers (notably
 sponsc to a typical acute viral infection is ilustrated in
CD45RO) and homing molecules (adhesins) that arc
Figure 8.1. As shown, at least three phenomena contrib-
associated with distinct recirculation pathways. When
ute to recovery from infection: (1) destruction of infected
reexposed to the same antigen, even many years later,
 cells, (2) production of interferons, and (3) neutralization
they respond more rapidly and more vigorously than in
of the infectivity of virions. Shortly after infection, some
140
Imnre Response to Viret infectiors
virus particles are phagocytosed by macrophages. Except
leukocytes, and other kinds of killcr cells. NK cells, how.
in the case of certain viruses that are capable of growing
 ever, are activated by interferon or directly by viral glyco-
in macrophages, the engulfed virions arc destroyed. Their
 proteins. They demonstrate no immunologic specifcity,
proteins arc cleaved into short peptides that are pre-
but preferentially lysc virus-infected cells. In addition, in
sented on the surface of the macrophage in association
the presence of antibody, macrophages can phagocytose
with class II MHC protein. This combination is recog-
and digest virus-infected cells.
nized by the appropriate clones of CD4+ lymphocytes.
Th1 lymphocytes respond by clonal proliferation and
release of lymphokines, which attract blood monocytes
Neutralization of Viral Infectivity
to the site and induce rhem to proliferate and differenti-
atc into activated macrophages, the basis of the inflam-
In contrast to T cells, B cells and antibody generally
matory response. Th2 lymphocytes respond by secreting
rccognizc epitopes that are conformational, i.e., critical
a differcnt set of lymphokines that assist the appropriate
residues that make contact with the antigen-binding site
clones of B cells, following binding of viral antigen, to
 of the antibody molecule are not necessarily contiguous
dividc and differentiate into plasma cells. Tc cells are
 in the primary amino acid sequence but are brought
activated following the recognition of viral peptides in
 into close apposition as a result of the folding of the
association with MHC class I on the surface of infecicd
 polypeptide chain(s) to produce the native conformation.
cells. The Tc response usually peaks at about 1 weck
Such B cell epitopes are generally located on the surface
after infection, compared with the antibody response
of thc protein, often on prominent protuberances or
that peaks latcr (2 to 3 weeks). NK cell activity is maxi-
loops, and generally represent relatively variable regions
o  d ae   s   
 of the molecule, differing berween strains of that species
with the peak titer of virus.
of virus.
Antibody synthesis takes place principally in thc
While a specific antibody of any class can bind to
spleen, lymph nodes, gut-associated lymphoid tissucs 
 any accessible cpitope on a surface protein of a virion,
(GALT), and bronchus-associated lymphoid tissues
only those antibodies that bind with reasonably high
(BALT). The spleen and lymph nodes receive viral anti-
 affinity to particular cpitopes on a particular protcin of
gens via thc blood or lymphatics and synthesize antibod-
the outer capsid or envclope of the virion arc capable
ies rmainly restricted to the IgM class early in the response
of neutralizing viral infectivity. The key protein is usually
and igG subclasses subsequently. Howcver, the submu-
the one containing thc ligand by which thc virion atta-
cosal lyrmphoid tissues of the respiratory and digestive 
chcs to reccptors on the host cell. Mutations in critical
tracts, such as the tonsils and Peyer's patches, receive 
 epitopes on such a protcin allow thc virus to escape from
antigens directly from overlying epithelial cells and make
 neutralization by antibody, and the gradual emergence
antibodies mainly of the lgA class.
of mutations in a majority of these epitopes leads to the
emergence of a novel strain (genetic/antigenic driff; see
Chapter 4).
Immune Cytolysis of Virus-infected Cells
 Neutralization is not simply a matter of coating
the virion with antibody nor indeed of blocking attach-
Destruction of infected cells is an essential feature of
ment to the host cell. Except in the presence of such high
 recovery fron viral infections and it results from any
concentrations of antibody that most or all accessible
of four different processes, involving cytotoxic T cells,
antigenic sites on the surface of the virion are saturated,
antibody complement-mediated cytotoxicity, antibody-
neutralized virions may still attach to susceptible cells.
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, or NK cells. Be-
In such cases the neutralizing block occurs at some point
cause some viral proteins, or peptides derivcd therefrom,
following adsorption and entry. Onc hypothesis is that
appear in the plasma membrane beforc any virions have
whereas the virion is normally uncoated intracellularly
been produced, lysis of the cell at this stage brings viral
 in a controlled way that preserves its infectivity, a virion--
 replication to a halt before significant numbers of prog-
antibody complcx may be destroyed by lysosomal cn-
eny virions are releascd.
zymcs. For example, in the case of picornaviruses, the
Antibody-complemcnt-imediated  cytotoxicity
1S
 neutralizing antibody appears to distort the capsid, lead-
demonstrable readily in vitro cven at very low concentra-
ing to loss of a particular capsid protein, which renders
tions of antibody. The alternative complement activation
the virion vulnerable to enzymatic attack. With influenza
pathway (Figure 8.8) appears to be particularly impor-
virus, more subtle conformational changes in the hcmag.
tant in this phenomenon. Antibody-dependent cell-medi-
 glutinin molecule may prevent the fusion event thar pre-
ated cytotoxicity (ADCC) is mediated by leukocytes that
cedcs the releasc of the nucleocapsid from the viral cn-
carry Fc receptors: macrophages, polymorphonuclear
velope.
Recotrery fre Vireaf fnfeetio
141
Recovery from Viral Infection
cells elicited following infection with this construct can
adoptively transfer complete protection to naive mice
 Cell-mediated immunity, antibody, complement, phago-
 against challenge with influenza virus.
cytes, interferons, and other cytokines are all involved
 in recovery from viral infections—in most cases several
of these arms of the immune system act in concert, again
Role of Antibody
depending on the particular host-virus combination.
 In generalized diseases characterized by a viremia in
which virions circulate free in the plasma, circulating
Role of T Lymphocytes
antibody plays a significant role in rccovery. Data arc
not available for veterinary and zoonotic diseascs, but
Lymphocytes and macrophages normally predominate
there are good data from human diseases: human infants
in the cellular infiltration of virus-infected tissues; in
contrast to bacterial infections, polymorphonuclear lcu-
 mally from mcasles virus infection, but are about 10,000
kocytes are not at all plentiful. T cell depletion by neona-
times more likely than normal infants to develop para-
tal thymectomy or antilymphocyte serum treatment in-
lytic disease after vaccination with attenuated poliovirus
Creases the susceptibility ofexperimental animals to most
[  vaccine. These infants have normal cell-mediated im-
viral infections; for example, T cell-deplered mice in- I
 mune and interferon responses, normal phagocytic cells,
fected with ectromelia virus fail to show the usual in-a
 and a normal complement system, but cannot produce
flammatory mononuclear cell infiltration in the liver, 3
 antibody, which is essential if poliovirus spread to the
develop extensive liver necrosis, and die, despite the pro-
 central nervous system via the bloodstream is to be pre-
duction of antiviral antibodies and interferon. Virus ti-
vented.
ters in the liver and spleen of infected mice can be reduced
Although there is reasonably good evidence that
greatly by the adoptive transfer of immune T cells taken
antibody plays a key role in rccovery from picornavirus,
from recovered donors; this process is class I MHC re-
togavirus, flavivirus, and parvovirus infections in ani-
stricted, implicating Tc cells, and is lifesaving.
mals, it does not necessarily follow that antibody is act-
ui a ass, on pasn node soou
 ing solely by neutralizing virions. Indeed it has been
response of experimentally infected inbred mice is to
 shown that certain nonneutralizing monoclonal antibod-
ablate completely all immune potential (using X-irradia-
ies can save the lives of mice inoculated with various
tion, cytotoxic drugs, ctc.), then to separately add back
viruses, presumably by antibody-dependent cell-medi-
individual components. In a now classic model, virus-
 atedi cytotoxicity, antibody complerment-mediated lysis
primed cytoroxic T lymphocytes of defined function and
of infected cells, or by opsonization of virions for macro-
specificity, cloned in culture and then transferred to in-
phages.
fected animals, saved the lives of mice infected with
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, influenza virus, and
several other viruses. Generally, grcater protection is
Lessons from Experimentai and Natural
conferred by CD8+ T cells than by CD4+ T cells. More-
Congenital Immunodeficiencies
over, transgenic mice lacking CD8+ T cells suffer higher
morbidity and mortality than normal mice following
One approach to understanding the mechanisms in-
virus chaillenge. Nevertheless, CD4+ T cells have been
volved in rccovery from viral infection that is not subject
shown to play a significant role in recovery, as do thc
C to laboratory artifact is simple clinical observation of
cytokines they secrete, notably interferon  and IL-2.
viral infections in animals or children suffering from
Although T cell determinants and B cell epitopes
 primary immunodefciencies. For cxample, athymic
 On surface proteins of viruses sometimes overlap, the 
(nude) mice, which are congenitally deficient in T cells,
 immunodominant Tc determinants are often situated on
1 are highly susceptible to many viral infections. In certain
the relatively conserved proteins located in the interior
families of Arabian horses there is a total or near total
of the virion or on nonstrucrural virus-coded proteins 
absence of both B and T lymphocytes. Characteristic
that occur only in virus-infectcd cells. Hence T cell re-
findings are lymphopenia and hypogammaglobulinemia,
sponses arc generally of broadcr specificity than neu-
which render foals unusually susceptible to infections,
tralizing antibody responses and display cross-reactivity
 especially cquine adenovirus 1 infection. There are also
 several types of B lymphocyte defciency that predispose
a protein that fails to elicit any neutralizing antibody
newborn animals to very severe infections. Among these
(e.g., the NP, M, or NS protein of influenza virus) is
are a primary agammaglobulinemia of thoroughbred
incorporated into the genome of vaccinia virus, the T
horses, a selective deficiency in foals of IgM-producing
142
8.Immune Response to Virat Infections
 B cells, a deficiency of IgG2-synthesizing cells in some tions with different strains of influenza A virus is largely
breeds of cattle, and dysgammaglobulinemia in certain directed to antigenic determinants of the particular strain
lines of White Leghorn chickens. Furthermore, there are
of virus with which that individual was first infected.
conditions characterized by a T cell deficiency due to  This phenomenon, irreverently called "original antigenic
thymic hypoplasia. Of different origin and significance,
sin," is also seen in infections with enteroviruses, reovir-
but of great practical importance, are secondary agam-  l
 uses, paramyxoviruscs and togaviruses. Original anti-
maglobulinemias  and  hypogammaglobulinemias  in  g
 genic sin has important implications for the interpreta-
foals, piglets, lambs, and especially calves, associated 
tion of seroepidemiologic data, for understanding
with the failure of antibody transfer via colostrum
 immunopathologic phenomena, and particularly for the
(see later).
development of efficacious vaccination strategies.
Immunity to Reinfection
Passive Immunity
Whereas a large number of interacting phenomena con-
 There is abundant evidence for the efficacy of antibody
tribute to recovery from viral infection, the mechanism
 in preventing infection. For example, artificial pasive
of acquired immunity to reinfection with the same virus 
immunization (injection of antibodies) termporarily pro-
appears to be much simpler. The first line of defense is t
 tects against infection with canine distemper, feline pan-
antibody, which, if acquired by active infection with a
leukopenia, hog cholera, and many other viral infections
virus that causes systemic infections, continues to be
(see Chapter 13). Furthermore, natural passive immuni-
synthesized for many years, providing solid protection
 zation, i.e., the transfer of maternal antibody from dam
against reinfection. The degree of acquired immunity
 to fetus or newborn, protects the newborn for the first
few months of life against most of the infections that
serum. Further, transfer of antibody alone, whether by
 the dam has experienced.
artificial passive immunization or by maternal antibody
transfer from dam to fetus or newborn, provides excel-
lent protection in the case of many viral infections. Thus
 Natural Passive immunity
it is reasonable to conclude that antibody is the most
influential factor in immunity acquired by natural infec-
 Natural passive immunity is important for two major
tion or by vaccination. If the antibody defenses are inade-
reasons: (1) it is essential for the protection of young
quate, the mechanisms that contribute to recovery are
animals, during the fist weeks or months of life, from
called into play again, the principal differences on this
 the myriad of microorganisms, including viruses, that
occasion being that the dose of infecting virus is reduced
 are present in the cnvironment into which animals are
 -oduai a pue 1 Aouaw paud seq pue xpoque Aq
born and (2) maternally derived antibody interferes with
cytes generate a more rapid secondary response.
 active immunization of the newborn and must therefore
As a general rule, the secretory IgA response is 
 be taken into account when designing vaccination sched-
short lived compared to the serum IgG response. Accord-
ules (see Chapter 13).
ingly, resistance to reinfection with respiratory viruses
and some enteric viruses tends to be of limited duration.
For example, reinfection with the same serotype of para-
Transfer of Materna! Antibodies
influenza virus or respiratory syncytial virus is not un-
common. Moreover, reinfection at a time of waning
 Maternal antibodies may be transmitted in the egg yolk
immunity favors the selcction of neutralization-escapei
 in birds, across the placenta in primates or via colostrum
mutants, resulting in the emergence of new strains of andor milk in other mammals. Different species of mam-
viruses such as influenza virus by antigenic drift. Because1
mals differ strikingly in the predominant route of transfer
there is little or no cross-protection between antigenically
 Of maternal antibodies, depcnding on the structurc of
distinct strains of virus, repeated attacks of respiratory
the placenta of the species (Table 8.2). In those species
infections occur throughout life.
 in which the maternal and fetal circulations are separated
The immune response to the first infection with a
by relatively few (one to three) placental layers, antibody
virus can have a dominating influence on subsequent ofthe IgG (but not IgM) class is able focross theplacenta,
immune responses to antigenically related viruses, in that
and maternal immunity is transmitted mainly by this
the second virus often induces a response that is directcd
route. However, the placenta of most domestic animals
mainly against the antigens of the original viral strain.  is more complex (five to six layers) and, it is hypothe-
For example, the antibody response to sequential infec- sized, acts as a barrier even to IgG; in these spcies,
PassiveImmnily
143
Tablt 8.2
Transfer of Natural Passive Immunity in Mammals
NUMBER OF
PRENATAL
POSTNATAL
TRANSLOCATION
PLACENTAL LAYERS
TRANSFER
TRANSFER
CUT-OFF TimE
SPECIES
PLACENTATION
MATERNAL
FETAL
[VIa PlaCeNta]
(VIA GUT)
(DAYS)
Cattle, swine,
 Epitheliochorial 
3
3
0
+++
2
horses
 Sheep, goats
 Syndesmochorial
2or3
3
0
+++
2
Dogs, cats 
 Endotheliochorial
1
2 or 3
±
+++
2
Mice, rats
Hemochorial
++
+
16-20
maternal immunity is transmitted to the newborn via t
tine to reach the circulation of the newborn in an un-
colostrum and, to a much lesser extent, via milk.
dergraded form. Small amounts of other antibodies
 Different spccies differ in regard to the particular
(IgM, IgA) present in colostrum or milk may, in some
class or subclass of immunoglobulin that is transferred
 species, also be translocated across the gut, but disappear
preferentially to the newborn in colostrum (Table 8.3),
quickly from the circulation of the young animal. The
but in most domestic animals it is mainly IgG. In cattlie
and sheep thcre is a selective transfer of IgG1 from the
colostrum, is translocated (callcd the translocation cutoff
serum across the alveolar epithelium of thc mammary
time) is sharply defined and very brief (about 48 hours)
gland during the last few weeks of pregnancy, such that
in most domestic animals (Table 8.2).
the level of IgG1 in colostrum may reach 40 to 70 g/liter,
 In birds there is a selective transfer of IgG from
 compared with about 1.0 to 1.8 gliter in mik and 13
 the maternal circulation; the level of IgG in chicken egg
 gliter in serum. Antibodies of thc lgG1 class are impor-
yolk is 25 g/liter compared to 6 g/liter in the maternal
 tant in protection against cnteric infections as long as
circulation. A laying hen produces about 100 g of IgG
suckling continues.
per year for transfer to yolk, which is about as much as
The selective transfer of IgG from the maternal
she synthesizes for her own needs. IgG enters the vitelline
circulation across the mammary alveolar epithelium is
circulation and hence that of the chick from day 12 of
a function of the Fc fragment of the molecule. The very
 incubation. Some IgG is also transferred to the amniotic
large amounts of IgG present in colostrum are ingested
fluid and is swallowed by the chick. Close to the time
of hatching, the yolk sac with the remaining maternal
specialized cells present in the upper part of small intes-
immunoglobulin is completely taken into the abdominal
Table 8.3
Concentrations of Immunoglobulin Classes lgG, lgA, and lgM in Colostrum
and Milk of Some Mammalian Speciesa
IMMUNOGLOBUliN CONCENTRatION (GRAMS/ utEr)
COLOSTRUM
MILK
SPECIES
IgG
lgA
lgM
IgG
IgA
IgM
Catle
36-77
4-5
3.2-4.9
1.0-1.8
0.2
0.04
Swine
62
10
3.2
1.4
3.0
1.9
Horse
80
9
4
0.35
0.8
0.04
Dog
2.0
13.5
0.3
0.01
3.6
0.06
Human
0.3
120
1.2
0.1
1.5
0.01
"An underbar indicates major components.
144
8.Imumune Response to Virat Infections
cavity and incorporated into the wall of the small intes-
   a   
tine of the chick.
Chapter 13).
Maternal antibody in the bloodstream of the new-
born mammal or newly hatched chick is destroyed quite
rapidly, with first-order kinetics. The haif-life, which is
Further Reading
somewhat longer than in adult animals, ranges from
about 21 days in the cow and horse through 8 to 9 days
Berke, G. (1995). Unlocking the secrcts of CTL and NK
in the dog and cat to only 2 days in the mouse. Of course,
cells. Immunol. Today 16, 343-346.
the newborn animal will bc protected against infection
Bjorkman, P. J., and Burmeister, W. P. (1994). Structurcs
with any particular virus only if the dam's IgG contains
of two classes of MHC molccules elucidated: Crucial
specific antibodies, and protection may last much longer
differences and similarities. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.
4,852-856.
than one IgG half-life if the initial titer against that virus 
Bloom, B. R., and Zinkernagel, R. eds. (1996). Immunity
is high.
to infection—overview. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 8,
Although the levels of IgA transferred via colos-
465-466.
trum to the gut of the newborn animal are considerably
Braciale, T. J., ed. (1993). Immune responses to virus in-
lowcr than those of IgG, it helps to protect the neonate
fection. Semin. Virol. 4(2), 81-82.
Brandtzaeg, P. (1995). Basic 1mechanisms of mucosal im-
against enteric viruses against which the dam has devel-
munity: A major adaptive defense system. Immunolo-
 Oped immunity. Moreover, there is cvidence that after
gist 3, 89-95.
translocation cutoff immunoglobulins present in ordi-
Brown, J. H., Jardetzky, T. S., Gorga, J. C., Stern, IL. J.,
nary milk, principally IgA but also IgG and IgM, may
Urban, R. G., Strominger, J. L., and Wiley, D. C.
continuc to provide some protective immunity against
(1993). Thrce-dimensional structure of the human
class Il histocompatability antigen, HLA-DR1. Nature
gut infections. Often the newborn encounters viruscs
(London) 364,33-39.
while still partially protected. Under thcse circumstances 
Caux, C. Y., Liu, J., and Banchereau, J. (1995). Recent
the virus replicates, but only to a limited extent, stimulat-
advanccs in the study of dendritic cells and folicular
 ing an immune response without causing significant dis-
dendritic cells. Immunol. Today 16, 2-4.
casc. The newborn thus acquires active immunity while
Dimmock, N. J. (1995). Update on the neutralization of
animal viruses. Rev. Med. Virol. 5, 165-179.
partially protected by matcrnal immunity.
Doherty, P. C. (1993). Inflammation in virus infections.
Semin. Virol. 4, 117-122.
Doherty, P. C., Allan, W., Eichelberger, M., and Carding,
Failure of Maternal Antibody Transfer
S. R. (1992). Roles of α/β and y/8 T cell subsets in vi-
ral inmunity. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 10, 123-151.
The failure or partial failure of maternal antibody trans-
Engelhard, V. H. (1994). How cells process antigens. Sci.
Am.271(2), 54-61.
fer is the most common immunodeficiency disease of
Jorgensen, J. L., Reay, P. A., Ehrich, E. W., and Davis,
domestic animals. For example, between 10 and 40%
M. M. (1992). Molecular components of T-cell recog-
of dairy calves and up to 20% of foals fail to receive
nition. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 10, 835-873.
adcquate levels of maternal antibody. Mortality during
Kuby, J. (1997). "Immunology," 3rd cd. Freeman, New
York.
the neonatal period, particularly from enteric and respi-
Mims, C. A., Playfair, J. H. L., Roitt, I. M., Wakelin, D.,
ratory discases, is higher than at any other time of life
and Williams, R. (1993). "Mcdical Microbiology."
and there is a strong correlation with failure of antibody
Mosby, London.
transfer. Biologic reasons for failure are (l) premature
Notkins, A. L., and Oldstone, M. B. A., eds. (1984,
birth of weak animals,(2) delay to first suckle, (3) death
1986, 1989). *Concepts in Viral Pathogenesis, Vol.
of the dam, (4) low colostrun production by the dam,
1, 2, and 3. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Paul, W. E., cd. (1993). "Fundamental Immunology,""
(5) low antibody levels in maternal serum and thus in
3rd cd. Raven, New York.
colostrum, (6) poor maternal instinct, particularly in
Roitt, 1. M. (1997). "Essential Immunology, 9th ed.
primiparous dams, (7) premature lactation, (8) roo many
Blackwell, Oxford.
in the littcr, and (9) domination of the weak in the litter
Thomas, D. B., ed. (1993). "Viruses and the Immune Re-
sponse." Dekker, New York.
by the strong. Of these, the most critical factors arc the
van Regenmortel, M. H. V., and Neurath, A. R., eds.
amount of colosrrum available and the delay betwcen
(1985, 1991). "Immunochemistry of Viruses," Vols. 1
 birth and first suckling. Poor management also plays a
and 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
major role by the imposition of unnatural conditions
Whitton, J. L., and Oldstone, M. B. A. (1996). Immune
 on parturition and early suckling. Espccially in large
response to viruscs. In "Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields,
 production units, making sure that cvery newborn re-
D. M. Knipc, P. M. Howlcy, R. M. Chanock, J. L.
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roiznan, and S. E. Straus,
 ceives colostrum is a major challenge. Maternal immuni-
cds.), 3rd ed., pp. 345-374. Lippincott-Raven, Phila-
zation to protect ncwborn animais has become an impor-
delphia, PA.
Chapter
9
Pathogenesis of Viral Diseases:
Viral
1 Strategies and Host
Defense Mechanisms
Viral Strategies Used to Evade Host Defenses.
145
Viral Damage to Tissues and Organs...
149
 Persistent Infection and Chronic Damage to Tissues and Organs .
153
Infection-Induced Damage to the Immune System ...
154
Immunopathology in Viral Disease .
155
Hyperscnsitivity Reactions in Viral Infections.
156
Nonspecific Pathopbysiologic Changes in Viral Diseases .
158
Further Reading....
158
 In previous chapters various aspects of viral infections
Viral Strategies Used to Evade
have been reviewed from the perspective of the host
Host Defenses
cell: this has centered on the mechanisms used by
viruses to gain entry into their target cells, to replicate,
and perpetuate themselves. This has also centered on
 apeaa o sasna Aq paaopua are saiaiens Aue
the mechanisims used by host animals to counter viral
immune and inflammatory responses in vivo. Their re-
 markable diversity is diffcult to categorize, but most
infection, again primarily at the cellular level but with
emphasis on the host immune response. This chaptcI
pertain to viral survival in the face of the onslaught of
and the ncxt rwo center on the clinical and pathologic
host inflammatory and immune defenses (Tablc 9.1). Of
consequences of these interactions at the level of the
course, these strategies used by viruses also point to
host strategies used to overcome them. The folliowing
intact host animal. This is thc essence of viral disease
pathogenesis and the esscnce of a concept first defined
represent only some of the many strategies presently
by the great pathologist, Howard Florey, as the patho-
known.
physiologic basis of disease. Mechanisms operating at
the level of the individual host animal pertain to (1)
viral strategies used to evade host defenses and host
 Evasion by Noncytocidal Infection
strategies used to counter them; (2) viral injury to
tissues, organs, and entire animals, and again, host
 Arenaviruses and hantaviruscs are examples of noncy-
strategics used to overcome functional loss; and (3)
tocidal viruses that establish chronic infections in their
viral injury to the immune system, and again, host 
 rodent hosts without killing the cells in which they repli-
 strategies used to overcome dysfunction while avoiding
 cate. Infection causes little or no damage except rarely
immunopathological consequences. The samc mecha-
 when certain immunopathological complications may
nisms that pertain to the individual infected animal,
 develop later in life. Retroviruses are noncytocidal in
in turn, become the basis for understanding the nature 
virtually all target cells, tissues, and organs in all the
of viral diseases in populations and in ecosystems.
various hosts that they infect.
145
146
9.
Patbogcnesis of Viral Diseases
Table 9.1
 Some Viral Strategies used to Evade Host Defenses
MECHANISM
EXAMPLES
Noncytocidal infection
Failure to shut down host cell nucleic
Arenaviruses, hantaviruses, retrovi-
acid and protein synthesis
 ruses in natural host animals
Cellto-cell spread
 Membrane fusion
Lentiviruses (equine infectious ane
mia virus), morbilliviruses (canine dis-
temper virus), herpesviruses 
Infection of nonpermissive, resting.
Failure to up-regulate viral gene ex-
Herpesviruses in ganglionic neurons,
or undifferentiated cells
pression
papillomaviruses in basal epithelial
layers, lentiviruses in lymphocytes
Litle or no viral antigen on cell mem-
Infection with restricted viral gene ex-
Lentiviruses in lymphocytes and mac-
brane
pression
rophages, herpesviruses in ganglion
neurons
Loss of viral antigen by "'stripping"
Marek's disease virus in T cells, ca-
and endocytosis
nine distemper virus in neurons, cyto-
 megaloviruses in epithelium
Destruction of immune effector cells
Infection of lymphocytes
infectious bursal disease virus, cyto
and macrophages
megaloviruses, feline panleukopenia
virus, feline immunodeficiency virus,
human immunodeficiency virus
Infection of macrophages
Lactate dehydrogenase elevating vi-
rus, African swine fever virus
Down-regulation of MHC antigen ex-
Viral proteins inhibit production or
Adenoviruses, relroviruses
pression
maturation of MHC proteins
Evasion of cytokines
Viral proteins interere with interferon
Adenoviruses, herpesviruses
and other cytokine actions
Evasion of neutralizing antibody
Production of large amounts of solu-
Ebola and Marburg viruses, Lassa vi
ble viral protein that "soaks up" an-
rus, and other arenaviruses
ribody
Masking of viral epitopes by carbo-
Rift Valley fever virus, arenaviruses,
hydrates on glycoproteins
Ebola and Marburg viruses
Induction of nonneutralizing an-
 Production of low-affinity antibody or
Aleutian disease virus of mink, Afri-
tibody
antibody reacting with irrelevant epi-
can swine fever virus, lymphocytic
topes—an immune decoy
choriomeningitis virus
Enhancing antibody
 Antibody altached to virus enhances
Cytomegaloviruses, lactate dehydro
 infection of macrophages
genase elevating virus, feline infec.
tious peritonitis virus, dengue viruses
in humans
No antibody produced
Nonimmunogenic agent
Scrapie
Induction of immunologic tolerance
Induction of clonal anergy or specific
Bovine viral diarrhea virus, hog chol-
suppressor T cells
era virus, arenaviruses, some retrovi-
ruses
Sequestration in immunologically
Viral replication in sites inaccessible
 Rabies virus in muscle cells, pseudo-
privileged tissues
to afferent or efferent limbs of im-
rabies and rabies viruses in neurons
mune response
Integration of the viral genome into
Recombination-like process 
Retroviruses
the host cell genome
Genelic/antigenic drit 
Mutations leading to antigenic
Maedi/visna virus, equine infectious
variants
anemia virus, influenza viruses
Viral Strategies tised to) Frede Hfost Defenses
147
Evasion by Cellto-Cell Spread
the immune response. The extreme example of destruc-
(Membrane Fusion)
tion of the body's immune system is provided by human
immunodeficiency viruses 1 and 2 in AIDS in humans,
Lentiviruses (e.g., equine infectious anermia virus), mor-
 wherein the virus replicates in CD4+ T lymphocytes and
billiviruses (e.g., canine distemper virus), and herpesvi-
cells of the monocyte/macrophage series. Virrual elimi-
ruses (e.g., cytomegaloviruses of many species) cause 
 nation of helper T cells from the body results in such
adjacent cells to fuse together, enabling the viral genome 
 profound depression of the immune response that pa-
to spread contiguously from cell to cell without ever
tients die from opportunistic infections or from cancer.
 being exposed to the host's immune mediators. This may
 not help the virus in regard to host-to-host transmission,
 but it is important in viral spread, especially within the
Evasion by Down-Regulation of MHC
central nervous system.
Antigen Expression
 Because CD8+ T cells only recognize viral peptides bound
Evasion by Infection of Nonpermissive,
to MHC class I antigen (and CD4+ T cells only recognize
Resting, or Undifferentiated Cells
them in the context of MHC class II antigen), viral persis-
tence is favored by reduction of the concentration of
Viruses may undergo productive replication in one cell
MHC molecules on the cell surface. Adenoviruses encode
type but nonproductive latent infection in another. For
 an early protein that binds to newly synthesized MHC
txample, many herpesviruses assume a latent state in
 class I antigen, preventing its normal processing and thus
 ganglionic neurons or B lymphocytes but replicate pro-
 reducing its cell surface expression. Betaherpesviruses,
ductively and cause acute lesions in mucosal epithelial
 in addition to down-regulating MHC class I expression
cells. Even in a given cell type, permissiveness may be
       s
determined by the state of cellular differentiation or acti-
 synthesize MHC class I-ike molecules that act as a decoy
vation. For example, papillomaviruses invade basal cells
to prevent lysis by NK cells, which lyse cells that do not
 of stratifed epithelium but produce infectious virions
 express a normal complement of MHC class I molecules.
 only in fully differentiated cells near the body surface.
Evasion of Cytokines
Evasion by Infection with Restricted
Viral Gene Expression
Interferons display a wide range of antiviral as well as
immunomodulatory activities, as described in Chapter
Viral latency may be maintained by restricted expression
 5. However, some viruses have evolved genes that in one
 of genes thar have the capacity to kill the cell. During
 way or another sabotage the specific antiviral actions of
latent infection, some viruses, such as the herpesviruses, 
effector molecules. For example, some vinuses interfere
express only a few early genes that are necessary in the
 with cellular proteins known as interferon-regulated pro-
maintenance of latency. During reactivation, which is teins, which are instrumental in the up-regulation of
 often stimulated by immunosuppression and/or by the  interferon synthesis and secretion. Other viruses counter
action of a cytokine or hormone, the whole viral genome
 antiviral cytokines in a more direct fashion; for example
is transcribed again. This strategy protects the virus dur-
 an adenovirus gene product protects infected cells
 ing its latent state from ail host immune actions.
against rumor necrosis factor α, thereby assuring host
cell survival until viral production is complete.
Evasion by Destruction of Immune
Effector Cells and Macrophages
Evasion of Neutralizing Antibody
(Masking of Epitopes and the
Many viruses can replicate productively or abortively in
Immune Decoy)
cells of the lymphoid and reticuloendothelial systems and
it is noteworthy thar these systems are often implicated
in persistent infections. Lymphocytes and monocytes/
 Some viruses have evolved strategies for evading neutral.
macrophages represent tempting targets for any virus,
 ization by the antibody they elicit. Filoviruses and arena.
in that they move readily throughout the body and can
 viruses resist neutralization by convalescent sera by still
seed virus to any organ, as well as being key players in
1 mysterious means. One notion is that the Ebola virus
148
9.Pathogeesis of Virat Diseases
uses an “immune decoy” to evade neutralizing antibody:
 likely to induce immunologic tolerance and thereby per-
the virus produces two glycoproteins, one forming its sist. Bovine viral diarrhea, hog cholera, arenavirus infec-
surface peplomers, the other, a truncated version of the
 tions, and some retrovirus infections are particular prob-
same protein is made in large amounts and secreted  lems because of chronic viral shedding from newborns
body, thereby protecting the virus. Glycoproteins of fi-  B cell tolerance is demonstrable but there is a degree
loviruss, arenaviruses, and many bunyaviruses (e.g.,
,of T cell unresponsiveness to the virus. In lymphocytic
Rift Valley fever virus) are also glycosylated very heav-
choriomeningitis virus infection of mice, newborns in-
ily—-carbohydrate may constitute onc-third of the mass
fected from their dams while in utero do not mount any
 of their surface peplomers. It has been hypothesized that
T cell response to the virus; thc fact that this is reversible
epitopes on virions and virion budding sites on the
indicates that it is due, not to the deletion of virus-
plasma membrane of infected cells may be masked by
reactive T cell clones during embryonic life, but to clonal
these carbohydrates. In such cases they may not present
 anergy or production of suppressor T cells.
B cell or T cell recognition signals or, once sensitization
has occurred, may not present optimal targets for the
immune response.
Evasion by Sequestration in
Immunologically Privileged Tissues
Evasion by Induction of
A striking proportion of persistent infections involve the
Nonneutralizing Antibody
central nervous system. The brain is insulated from the
immune system to some degree by the blood-brain bar-
Many persistent infections are characterized by the pres-
rier and, further, neurons express very little MHC anti-
ence of (1) low antibody titers or (2) high antibody titers 
 gen on their surface, thereby conferring some protection
against nonneutralizing viral epitopes. In the latter case, 2
 against destruction by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. During
virus-antibody and viral antigen-antibody complexes  t
 their latent phase, most alphaherpesviruses avoid im-
 may accumulate at the basement membranes of renal  mune elimination by remaining within cells of the ner-
glomeruli and other sites, causing a variety of immune vous system, as episomal DNA.
complex or neoplastic diseases.
 Certain viruses grow primarily in cpithelial cells
Nonneutralizing antibody is ofren directed against on lumcnal surfaces: for example, cytomegaloviruses
relevant in immune clearance; in fact, such antibodies,  
 glands and are shed more or less continuously in the
by binding to virions, may block the attachment of neu-
 corresponding secretions, even when there are abundant
tralizing antibody by steric hindrance. For example, the
e neutralizing antibodies and cytotoxic T cells in sur-
lethal course of Aleutian disease in mink and many retro-
 rounding tissues. The anatomic barrier (basement mem-
virus infections is a direct result of this phenomenon.
branes, connective tissue, etc.) surrounding glandular
Research has suggested the feasibility of refocusing the
 epithelia is a major contributor to this sequestration.
neutralizing antibody response by targeted dampening
of immunodominant epitopes, using molecular and
chemical means—-this approach offers exciting possibili-
Evasion by Integration of Viral Genome
ties for vaccines against viral diseases that have so far
into Host Cell Genome
resisted all vaccine design strategies. For example, novel
vaccines, expressing natural nondominant neutralizing
The integration of retroviral proviral DNA into the ge-
epitopes, are being considered to protect animals against 
 nome of the host germ line cells assures indefinitc mainte-
feline infectious peritonitis, bovine respiratory syncytial
 nance from one generation to the next; such proviral
disease, bovine viral diarhea, cquine infectious anemia,
 DNA is jmplicated in oncogenesis (see Chapter 11). The 
and caprine arthritis-encephalitis.
 proviral DNA of lentiviruses, however, becomes inte-
 grated only in somatic cells during the viral replication
Evasion by Induction of
the placenta or at birth. Viruses of the acquired immuno.
Immunologic Tolerance
deficiency disease subgroup of the lentiviruses destroy
 lymphocytes and/or macrophages, permitting the un-
The probability of an acute infection becoming persistent
checked proliferation of a variety of opportunistic infec-
is strongly age related; congenital infcctions are most
tious agents.
Viraf Dumege to Tissues and (Organs
149
Evasion by Genetic / Antigenic Drift
hepatocytes, which are lysed rapidly. In this experimen-
tal model, all defense mechanisms of the host are over-
Maedi/visna and equine infectious anemia viruses avoid
whelmed and the destruction of cells in the target organ,
the host immune response by antigenic drift. During
the liver, is lethal.
persistent infection, sequential antigenic variants are
produced, with each successive variant different enough
Damage to the Epithelium
to evade the immune response raised against the preced-
of the Respiratory Tract
ing variant. In equine infectious anemia, clinical signs
 Respiratory viruses initially invade and destroy just a
occur in cycles, with each cycle being initiated by a new
few epithelial cells, but such microscopic lesions progres-
variant. In addition to providing a mechanism for escape
 sively damage the protective layer of mucus and lay
from immune elimination, each new variant may be more
 bare more and more epithelial cells. As viral replication
virulent than its predecessor and this may directly affect
 progresses, large numbers of progeny virions are released
the severity and progrcssion of the discase.
into the lumen of the airway. Early in infection, the
beating of cilia, the primary function of which is to
cleanse the respiratory tract of inhaled particles, may
Viral Damage to Tissues
actuaily help to move released progeny virus along the
airway, thereby spreading the infection. As secretions
and Organs
 become more profuse and viscous, the cilial beating be-
comes less effective and ceases as epithelial cells are de-
 The severity of a disease is not necessarily correlated
stroyed.
with the degree of cytopathology produced by the
 In respiratory virus infections the spread of infec-
virus in cells in culrure. Many viruses that are cytocidal
tion via contiguous expansion from initial foci may prog-
in cultured cells do not produce clinical signs (e.g.,
 ress until virtually every columnar epithelial cell at many
many enteroviruses), whereas some that are noncytoci-
 airway levels is infected (Figures 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3). This
dal in vitro cause lethal disease in animals (e.g., retrovi-
 can result in complete denuding of large areas of epithe-
ruses and rabies virus). Further, depending on the organ 
 lial surface and the accumulation of large amounts of
affected, cell and tissue damage can occur without
 transudates, exudates containing inflammatory cells, and
producing clinical signs of disease, e.g., a large number
 necrotic epithelial cell debris in the airways. Where infec-
 Of liver cells may be destroyed in Rift Valley fever in
tion of the cpithelium of the nasal passages, trachea, and
sheep without significant clinical signs. When damage
 bronchi procccds to a fatal outcome, there are usually
to cclls does impair the function of an organ or tissue,
 one or morc complications: bactcrial superinfection
this may be of minor importance in one part of the
 (nurtured by the accumulation of fluid and necrotic de-
body, such as muscle or subcutaneous tissue, but of
bris in the airways), infection and destruction of the
grcat importance in another part of the body, such as
lung parenchyma and the alveolar epithelium, and/or
thc heart or the brain. Likewise, inflammation and
 blockage of airways that are so small in diameter that
edema may be unimportant in many sites in the body
 mucous plugs cannot be dislodged by forced air move-
but may have serious consequences in particular tissucs
 ments. Blockage of the airways is of most significance
and organs, such as the brain. In this case it is the
in newborn animals. In all of these complications there
host's responsc to infection that results in increased
 is hypoxia and a pathophysiologic cascade that leads to
intracranial pressure and disease. In the same way, the
 acidosis and uncontrollable fluid exudation into airways.
host's response to viral infection in the lungs may
 Degencration of respiratory tract epithelial sur-
interfere with gaseous exchange and infection in the
faces may be extremely rapid, but so is regeneration. In 
heart may interfere with conduction.
studies of influenza in ferrets, for example, it has been
shown that the development of a complete new columnar
epithelial surface via hyperplasia of remaining transi-
Direct Tissue and Organ Damage
tional cells may be complete in a few days. The transi-
tional epithclium and the newly differentiated columnar
 Somctimes all clinical signs and all pathologic changes 
 epithelium that arises from it are resistant to infection,
on atp ioaup au Aq paudxa aq au iee ue u
 probably by virtue of interferon production and a lack of
cells causcd by a highly cytocidal virus. Mice inoculatcd 
virus receptors. The role of other host defenses, including
intravenously with a large dose of Rift Valley fever virus, S
 soluble factors such as mannose-binding lectins and lung
for cxample, develop hepatic necrosis within 4 hours; 
 surfactants, as well as macrophages, NK cells, IgA and
 a p-o  p so i  e s i a y a ssd s
150
9.Pathogenesis of Virat Diseases
FIGURE 9.2.
Avicninfuenzvirs infectionin the respiratory fract ofa chickenThenrmal sideby-side posiionof colmr epithelil cellshasbeenreplacd
Magnificafion: X10,000.
FIGURE 9.3.
aeruginosa.Bar: μmA)Normalmouse rachea showing a single bacteriumfarrow on serouscll.(}Microcolonyof Paeruginosa adhering
to a residual epithelial cell on on otherwise denuded surface. [Courtesy of P. A. Small, Jr.]
Viral Damage fo Tissues and Orgaus
151
nisms in terminating infection, is covered in Chapters 7
lium, thereby removing the source of the short-lived vil-
and 8.
lus cpithelial cells.
 Infection generally begins in the proximal part of
Damage to the Epithelium
the small intestine and spreads progressively to the jeju-
of the Intestinal Tract
numi and ileum and sometimes to the colon. The extent
 Nearly all enteric infections occur following virus entry
of such spread depends on the amount of virus ingested,
by ingestion; in most cases the incubation period is very
the virulence of the virus, and thc host's immunologic
short and the onset of disease is without any prodromal
status. As the infection progresses, the absorptive cells
signs. The principal agcnts causing viral diarrhea in ani-
 are replaced by immature cuboidal cpithelial cells whose
 mals are the rotaviruses; other viruses that produce diar-
 absorptive capacity and enzymatic activity are greatly
rhea include coronaviruses, toroviruses, caliciviruses,
reduced. Becausc these cells are relatively resistant to
astroviruses, and certain adenoviruses and parvoviruses.
viral infection, the discase is often self-limiting if dehy-
Rotaviruses infect cells at the tip of villi and cause
dration is not so scvere as to be lethal. The rate of
marked shortening and occasional fusion of adjacent
recovery is rapid, cspecially when infection does not
villi (Figures 9.4 and 9.5) so that the absorptive surface
involve the crypt epithelium.
of the intestine is reduced. This results in fluid accumula-
Fluid loss in viral infections from the intestinal
tion in the lumen of the gut and diarrhea. In contrast,
tract is mainly a loss of extracellular ffuid due to impaired
parvoviruses infect and destroy dividing crypt epithe-
absorption and osmotic loss due primarily to the pres-
ence of undigested lactose in the lumen (in newborn
animals) rather than activc secretion. As virus destroys
FIGuRE 9.4.
the absorptive cells therc is a loss of those enzymes re-
sponsible for the digestion of disaccharides, and the loss
of differentiated cells diminishes glucose carrier, sodium
carrier, and Na*, K', and -ATPase activities. This leads
to a loss of sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarhonate,
and water and to the devclopment of acidosis. Another
cause of acidosis is incrcased microbial activity associ-
ated with the fermentation of undigested milk. Acidosis
can create a K+ ion exchange across the ccllular mem-
brane, affecting cellular functions that maintain the nor-
mal potassium concentration. Dchydration, as noted ear-
licr, and hypoglycemia, due to decreased intestinal
absorption, reduced glyconeogenesis, and increased gly-
Crypt
Peyer'sPatch
colysis follow, completing a complex of pathophysio-
Lymph Node
logic changes that, if not corrected promptly by fluid
Rotavirus
 and electrolyte therapy, results in death.
Astrovirus
Calicivirus
Coronavirus
Adenovirus
Torovirus
Pathophy
ysiologic Changes without
Reovirus
Tissue and
Torovirus
Astrovirus
In some viral infections damage may not be obvious, but
infected cells may carry out their functions less effectivcly
and clinical signs may reflect this. The virus may cause
Parvor
a loss in specialized functions of cells required not so
Torovirus
much for their own survival but for systemic homeosta-
sis. In mice infected with lymphocytic choriomeningitis
Structure of the villus epithelium of the smll intestine with locations
virus there is a reduction in normal levels of growth
targeted by certain viruses. (Top) Cros section rhrough a villus and
and thyroid hormones due to infection of the cells that
to form nondividing mature enlerocytes. (Bottom) Cells infected by
produce them. The mRNA levels for these hormones are
various enteric viral pathogens. [FromM.E. Conner, and R. E. Ramig.
reduced significantly in infccted mice. Reduced growth
Viral enteric diseases. In "Viral Pathogenesis" N. Nathanson, R.
hormone synthesis is associated with a runting syndrome
Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. E. Griffin, K. V. Holmes, F. A.
Murphy, and H. L. Robinson, eds.1, pp. 713-743. Lippinco-Raven,
in young infected micc, and reduced thyroid hormone
Philadelphia, PA. 1997.]
synthesis is associated with myxedena and a subnormal
152
9.Pathogenesis of Viral Diseases
Figure 9.5.
Scanning electron and light micrographs of intestinal tissues hom a gnotobiotic calf sacrificed 30 minutes affer onset of rotavirus diarrhea. {A)
Proximalsllintestine wihshrtened vili anddenuded ilus tis.HatoxylinandeosinMagniicalion:X120)B)Samelevelof intestines
in[A},depictingdenudedvillbyscanningelectronmicroscopyMagniliction:180)(CDistasmllintestinwinormalvocuolatedepitheliol
cells andnormalill.HematoxlinandeosinMagnication:×120)D)Same areaasinC)by scanning electronmicroscopyepitheliol cells
calves by the virus of human infantile gastroenteritis. Vet. Pathol. 14, 273-282. (1977].]
basal metabolic ratc. Persistent lymphocytic choriomen-
Tissue and Organ Damage
 ingitis virus or encephalomyocarditis virus (a picornavi- Predisposing to Secondary
rus) infection of pancreatic islet cells may result in a
lifelong reduction of insulin and elevation of blood glu-
Bacterial Infection
cose levcls (diabetes). Viruscs may also alter the cxprcs-
sion of cell surface molecules, such as class lI MHC
As well as having direct adverse effects, viral infections
markers, by indirect mechanisins, which may be thc basis
of thc respiratory and digestive tracts often predispose
for clinical signs.
animals to secondary infections with bacteria, even those
Persistent Infectort and Choroni Damege to Tissnes ant Organs
153
that may belong to the normal flora in the nose and
 survival in individual vaccinated animals and herds, and
throat. In cattle, parainfluenza virus 3 and other respira-
(5) they may bc of epidemiologic importance, the source
tory viruses may destroy the ciliated epithelium and
-n u pe lods jea asp- u ue jo
cause fluid exudation into the lumen of airways, thereby
/ troduction after viral elimination from a given herd,
allowing Pasteurella hemolytica and other bacteria to flock, region, or country.
invade the lungs and cause secondary bacterial pncumo-
 For convenience, persistent viral infections may be
nia (shipping fever). In equine influenza the virus dc-
subdivided into several categorics.
stroys large patches of ciliated epithelium in the airways
Persistent infections, per sc, in which infectious
and causes exudation, thereby allowing strcprococci and
virus is demonstrable continuously, whether or not there
other bacteria to invade the lungs and cause pneumonia.
 is ongoing disease. Disease may develop late, often with
Conversely, proteases secreted by bacteria help activatc
 an immunopathologic or neoplastic basis. For examplc,
influenza virus infectivity by proteolytic cleavage of thc
in the deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus), the reser-
viral hemagglutinin (see Chapter 30).
voir rodent host of Sin Nombre virus and the etiologic
 Similarly,in the intestinal ract, rotavirus and coro-
 agent of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in humans,
navirus infections may lead to an increase in susceptibil-
virus is shed in urine, saliva, and feces probably for the
ity to enteropathogenic Eschericbia coli and this syner-
life of the animal, even in the face of neutralizing an-
 gistic effcct may lead to morc severc diarrhea than if
tibody.
the bacterium or the virus were acting separately. In
Latent infections, in which infectious virus is not
veterinary and zoonotic diseases there is a particular
demonstrable except when reactivation occurs. For ex-
concern for the potentiating effect of viral infections on
 ample, in infectious pustular vulvovaginitis, the sexually
intercurrent infestations with parasites. Because domes-
 transmitted disease caused in cattle by bovine herpesvi-
tic animals are almost universally infested with protozoa
 rus 1, virus usually cannot be isolated from the latently
and helminths, and it is known that such infestations
infected carrier cow cxcept when there are recrudes-
generally lower resistance to viruses and bacteria, indi-
cent lesions.
vidual animal and herd health management systems must
Slow infections, in which infectious virus graduaily
accommodate all aspects of such multifactorial infec-
 incrcases during a very long preclinical phase, leading
tious disease problems.
to a slowly progrcssive lethal discase. For cxample, in
scrapie the infectious agent, the scrapic prion, only be-
comes detectable in target tissues ycars after infection
Persistent Infection and
but by the time of death it has reached very high titers
Chronic Damage to Tissues
in the brain.
Acute infections with late clinical manifestations,
and Organs
in which continuing replication of the causative virus is
not involved in the progression of the disease. For exam-
 Persistent infections of one type or another are produced
 ple, in the cerebellar syndrome that occurs in young cats
by a wide range of viruses; indeed in veterinary medicine
 aS a result of fetal infection with feline panleukopenia
acute self-limiting infections seem to be the exception 
virus, virus cannot be isolated at the time neurologic
rather than the rule. Apart from most viral diarrheas
 damage is diagnosed. In fact, because of this the cerebel-
and respiratory infcctions, most other categories of viral
 lar syndrome was for many years considered to be an
infections have more or less important chronic manifes-
 inherited malformation.
tations. For example, in some cases of canine distemper
 It may be noted thar these categories are defined
the virus is nor eliminated with the tcrmination of the
 primarily in terms of the extent and continuity of viral
acute disease, instead the virus persists for months or 
 replication during the long period of persistence. The
 years, causing late pathologic manifestations in several
 presence or absence of shedding and disease are second-
organs. In other instances, persistent viruses have been 
 ary issues as far as this catcgorization is concerned. Fur-
found to be rcsponsible for subtle chronic discases even
 ther, somc persistent infcctions possess featurcs of more
whcn the acutc manifestations of infcction have been
 than onc of these categorics. For exampic, all retrovirus
trivial or subclinical.
 infections are persistent and most exhibit features of
 Persistcnt viral infections are important for several
latency, but the diseases they cause may be subacute with
rcasons: (1) thcy may be reactivatcd and cause recrudes-
late clinical manifestations or only manifest as slowly
cent episodes of disease in the individual host, (2) they
 progrcssivc diseases. Thc variety of patterns of persistent
may lead to immunopathologic disease, (3) they may
viral infections is shown diagrammatically in Figure 9.6;
be associated with neoplasia, (4) they may allow viral
further examples are given in Table 9.2.
154
9.Pathogenesis of Viral Diseases
Figure 9.6.
ACUTE
Acute self-limited infection {rotavirus diarrhea}
Anfectiousbovinerhinotracheitis
LATENT
 Acute infection, becomes latent with recrudescences and shedding
T
T
T
物
Congenital infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
CHAONIC
Glomerulonephritis
Death
Foot-and-mouth disease in cattle
CHRONIC
Acute infection, often becomes chronic withrecurrent shedding
一
I
I
ACUTE, OCCASIONALLY CHRONIC
Canine distemper
Old dog encephalitis
 Postinfection encephalitis
Death
Death
Scrapie
SLOW
? shedding
Death
138858888888
Episode of illness
Time(months/years)
 Period of shedding
Virus demonstrablein tissues
Thehedisnflnil sisinindiinisin
by the diseases indicated. The time scale is notional and the duration of various events approximate.
Infection-Induced Damage
viruses (HIV 1 and 2), similar viruses have been discov-
to the Immune System
ered in monkeys [simian immunodeficiency viruses
(SIVs)], cattle [bovine immunodeficiency virus (BIV)],
and cats [feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)]. In suscep-
Because the immune system plays a key role in protection
tible animals, each of these viruses acts in a similar way,
against infections, viral damage to its components can
exacerbare the severity of disease or predispose to super-
destroying specific but different cells of the immune sys-
infection with other infectious agents. In addition, both
tem, thereby causing immunosuppression. Immunosup-
specific acquired immunodeficiency and generalized im-
 pression may be inconspicuous (as in SIV infection of
munosuppression cann occur in viral infections.
 some monkey species and in virtually all BIV infections)
Infection of the bursa of Fabricius in chickens (the
or may lead to death from opportunistic infections after
site of B cell differentiation) with infectious bursal dis-
a prolonged clinical course (as in feline AIDS).
 Infections with certain other viruses (e.g., hog chol-
ease virus leads to atrophy of the bursa and a severe
 deficiency of B lymphocytes, with an increase in suscepti-
era, bovine viral diarrhea, canine distemper viruses, fe-
bility to bacteria, particularly Salmonella spp. and E.
 line and canine parvoviruses) may temporarily suppress
coli, and Marek's disease, Newcastle disease, infectious
 humoral and/or cell-mediated immune responses. The
 bronchitis, and infectious laryngotracheitis viruses. Simi-
immune response to unrelated antigens is reduced or
larly, B cell-based immune defciency caused by feline
 abrogatcd in such animals, and the situation is thus dis-
leukemia and feline immunodeficiency viruses predis-
-ads e oi asuodsau sunuu a jo uoisssiddns uo ioun
poses to a wide range of secondary infections,
cific virus by immune tolerance after intrauterine infec-
 Since the discovery in 1981 of acquired immunode-
tion. The mechanisms involved in such general
ficiency syndrome (AIDS) in humans and the discovery
immunosuppression are not fully understood, but may
in 1983 of its etiologic agents, human immunodeficiency
 result from the replication of virus in lymphocytes and/
Immmopathotogy in Viral Discetse
1.5.5
TaBlE 9.2
 Slow Infections: Long Preclinical Phase, Slowly Progressive Fatal Diseuse
VIRUS
Host
 SiTe OF InfEctION
ANTBODIES
DISEaSE
Maedi/visna virus
Sheep
Macrophages
+ (nonneutralizing)
 Slowly progressive neurologi-
cal and pulmonary disease
 Ovine progressive pneumonia
Sheep
Brain, lung
+
 Slowly progressive pulmo-
virus
nary and neurological
disease
Caprine arthritis-encephalitis
Goats
Macrophages,
+ [nonneutralizing)
 Slowly progressive arthritis,
virus
brain, joints
encephalitis
Feline immunodeficiency virus
Cats
? Helper T cells
+ [nonneutralizing)
Feline acquired immunodefi-
ciency syndrome
Scrapie prion
Sheep
Central nervous
None
 Slowly progressive neurologi-
system cnd
cal disease
lymphoid tissue
 Bovine spongiform encepha-
Cattle
Central nervous
None
 Slowly progressive neurologi-
lopathy prion
 system and
cal disease
lymphoid tissue
Chronic wasting disease prion
Deer;
Central nervous
None
 Slowly progressive neurologi-
elk
 system and
cal disease
lymphoid tissue
or macrophages. Many viruses are capable of replication 
are viral infections in which such manifestations of the
in macrophages and several have been shown to grow
 immune response arc the cardinal factors in the onset
in T cells, especially activated T cells. Some herpesviruses
and progression of the disease (Table 9.3).
replicate nonproductively in B cells, transforming them
and altering thei function.
Virus-induced immunosuppression may in turn
Autoimmune Disease
lead to enhanced viral replication. When the immune
system is suppressed by endogenous or exogenous fac-
 One traditional hypothesis proposed to explain autoim-
tors, latent herpesvirus, adenovirus, or papovavirus in-
mune diseases in animals and humans has been that
fections can be reactivated. Such situations are encoun-
 they are manifestations of subtle viral infections. Many
tered frequently following the use of cytotoxic drugs or
variations on this hypothesis have been elaborated: (1)
irradiation for organ transplantation in humans and are
viral infection causes polyclonal T and B cell activation,
which becomes directed indiscriminately at normal host
 of unknown origin, is probably responsible, at least in
 antigens; (2) viral infection evokes altered self- or neo-
part, for the reactivation of herpesviruses in animals.
antigens, the new determinants becoming targets of an
immune response; (3) viral infection induces an anti-
idiotypic response, i.e., a response to structural domains
Immunopathology
on the oligoclonal antibody molecules synthesized in
response to the infection; and (4) viral infection of
in Viral Disease
lymphoid cells causes aberrant unregulated expansion
of immune effector cells.
 The immune response plays a two-edged role in the
pathogenesis of most viral diseases. Infltration of af-
Autoimmune Damage Caused
fected tissues by lymphocytes and macrophages, release
by Molecular Mimicry
 of cytokines, and the resultant inflammation are regular
The presence of structural homologies, linear or confor-
features of viral infections, but have both protective and
 mational, between host and viral proteins is known as
destructive effects. Fever, erythema, edema, and enlarge-
molecuiar mimicry. If viral and host determinants are
ment of lymph nodes also have an immunologic basis
similar enough to cross-react, yet different enough to
and have both protective and destructive cffects. There
break normal immunologic tolerance, mimicry may in-
156
9.Pathogenesis of Viral Diseases
Table 9.3
 Chronic Infections with Late Immunopathologic or Neoplastic Consequences
SITE OF PERSISTENT
VIrus (faMily / genus)
Host
INFECTION
LATE DISEASE
Aleutian disease virus
Mink
Macrophages
Hypergammaglobulinemia, arteritis, glo-
[Parvoviridae/Pavovirus)
merulonephritis
Avian leukosis viruses
Chickens
Widespread
Leukosis, leukemia
[Retroviridae/Alpharetrovirus]
Equine infectious anemia virus
Horses
Macrophages
Anemia, vasculitis, glomerulonephritis
[Retroviridae/Lentivirus]
Feline immunodeficiency virus
Cats
Macrophages,
 Opportunistic infeclions due to profound
[Retroviridae/Lentivirus]
lymphocytes
immunodeficiency
Human immunodeficiency virus
Humans
Macrophages,
Opportunistic infections due to profound
(Retroviridae/Lentivirus)
lymphocytes
immunodeficiency
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
Mice
Widespread
Glomerulonephritis
[Arenaviridae/Arenavirus]
duce autoimmune disease. The concept of molecular
target sites delivers activated T cells in the bloodstream
mimicry has bccn verifed with the aid of monoclonal
 from where they cross the blood-brain barrier and at-
antibodies, and indeed common immunological determi-
tack self-antigens in the brain. In a similar fashion, mo-
 nants on viruses and host proteins are quite common:
lecular mimicry may be involved in the neurologic disor-
about 4% of antiviral monoclonal antibodies react with
ders
associated
with maedi/visna and(
caprine
host cell components. The molecular basis for these com-
arthritis-encephalitis virus infections, and rarely in post-
 mon dctcrminants has bcen cstablished by sequenc-
vaccinial encephalitis.
ing—-in turn, peptides synthesized to match common
deterrminants, when injected into experimental animals,
 have evoked antiviral and anti-self immunc rcsponses.
Hypersensitivity Reactions
 For examiple, a monoclonal antibody recognizing
in Viral Infections
a neutralizing cpitope on coxsackie B4 virus also rcacts 
against heart muscle; coxsackie B4 virus is known to
target muscle, including myocardial muscle of mice and
 Immunopathologic (hypersensitivity) reactions arc tradi-
humans, and to cause myocarditis in humans. Sequence
tionally classified into types I, II,III, and IV (Table 9.4).
 homologies havc also been found between normal myelin
Although advances in cellular immunology have now
basic protcin and proteins of hepatitis B virus, adenovir-
blurred some of the distinctions, the classification is still
uses, Epstein-Barr virus, papillomaviruses, and human
convenient. For most viral infections it is not known
herpesvirus 6. At one time or another these viruses have
whether immunopathology makes a significant contribu-
been implicated as triggers (along with measles, canine
tion to disease and, if so, which of the four classical
distemper, and human coronaviruses) of multiple sclero-
hypersensitivity reactions is implicated. Nevertheless, it
sis, the debilitating autoimmune neurologic disease of
is instructive to discuss the possible involvement of dif-
humans.
ferent kinds of hypersensitivity reactions in viral diseases.
 This triggering concept, however, has never been
proven; however, autoimmune encephalomyelitis has
been considered pathogenctically similar to multiple scle-
Type I Hypersensitivity Reaction
rosis and it can be induced experimentally by immuniza-
(Anaphylactic Reaction]
tion of animals with peptides common to some of these
viruses and myclin basic protein. These peptides, which
Type I hypersensitivity reactions depend on the interac-
have worked as molecular mimics of epitopes on myelin,
tion of antigens with IgE bound to the surfacc of mast
have a similar stereochermical fit into the HLA DR groovc
cells via an Fc rcccptor, resulting in the release of hista-
 of the MHC complex. It has been hypothcsized that
mine and heparin and the activation of serotonin and
sensitization of host T cells by viral antigens in infection
plasma kinins. Except for its contribution to erythema
Hypersensititity Reactiens in Viral Infections
157
Table 9.4
 Hypersensitivity Reactions in Viral Infections
Type II
Type IV
{ANTIBODY-DEPeNDENT
Type III
(DELaYED, cELL-
CHARACTERISTIC
[ANaPHYLACTIC)
CYTOTOXIC!
[IMMUNE COMPLEX)
Time course
Initiation
Minutes
Minutes
3-6 hours
18-24 hours
Persistence
Minutes
 Dependent on antigen 
Dependent on anti-
Weeks
and antibody
 gen and antibody
Transfer with
IgE
IgM, IgG
gG
T lymphocytes
Complement re-
No
Usually
Yes
No
quired
Histamine de-
Yes
No
Yes
No
pendent
Histology
Edema, congestion,
Cell destruction,
Necrosis, neutro-
Lymphocytes, macro-
eosinophils
phagocytosis
 phils, later plasma 
phages, necrosis 
cells
Viral immuno-
Minor, some ery-
Minor, some erythema
Major
 Major in brain, lung
pathology
thema
acute: fever
Chronic: immune
complex disease
and in some acute respiratory infections, anaphylaxis is
Type Ill Hypersensitivity Reaction 
(immune Complex-Mediated
is responsible, however, for adverse rcactions to some
viral vaccines.
Cytotoxic Reaction]
Antigen-antibody reactions cause inflammation and tis-
sue damage by various mechanisms. If the reaction oc-
Type Ii Hypersensitivity Reaction
curs in extravascular tissues, there is edema, inflamma-
iAntibody
y-Dependent
tion, and infltration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes,
Cytotoxic Reactionj
which later may be replaced by mononuclear cells. This
is a conmon course of mild inflammatory reactions.
Originally identified in cytotoxic reactions attributable
This type of imnune complex reaction constitutes the
to antibodies to autologous antigens, as in blood transfu-
classical Arthus response, which is especially important
sion reactions, type II cytolytic reactions also occur
in persistent viral infections.
when antigen-antibody complexes at the cell surfacc
If antigen-antibody rcactions occur in the blood,
activate thc complerment system, leading to cell lysis.
they producc circulating immune complexes, which are
Alternativcly, antibodics can
1  sensitize virus-infectcd
found in most viral infections. The fate of the immune
cells to destruction by cytotoxic T lymphocytcs, natural
complexes depends on the ratio of antibody to antigen,
killer cells, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, or macro-
If there is a large excess of antibody, each antigenic
phages via antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxic-
 moiety (c.g., each virion) becomcs covered with antibody
ity. While it has been demonstrated that virus-infected
and is removed by macrophages that have receptors for
cells are lysed by these mechanisms in vitro, their role
thc Fc component of the antibody molecule. If thc
 in viral diseases is unclear, They may bc operative in
amounts of antigen and antibody are about equal, lattice
certain herpesvirus infections, but defnitive proof of
structures, which develop into large aggregates, are
this is lacking. Uninfected cells can be targets for type
formed and removed rapidly by the reticuloendothelial
 II reactions as when complemcnt-mediated lysis occurs
system.
after equine infectious anemia virus binds to equine
 In some persistent infections, viral antigens or viri-
crythrocytes and contributes to the ancnia seen in
ons themselves are released continuously into the blood
this disease.
but the antibody response is weak and antibodies are
158
9. Patbogenesis of Viral Diseases
of low avidity. Complexes continue to be deposited in  the blood-brain barrier, producing meningitis, cerebral
glomeruli over periods of weeks, months, or even years, edema, convulsions, and death. Elsewhere than in the
leading to the impairment of glomerular fltration and  central nervous system, cytotoxic T cells help control
eventually to chronic glomerulonephritis. A classic ex-  the infection (by destroying infected cells); within the
ample is lymphocytic choriomeningitis infection in mice f
rigid confines of the skull this host response is fatal.
infected in utero or as neonates. Viral antigens are pres-
 The death of mice infected in this way can be prevented
ent in the blood and small amounts of nonneutralizing 
 by chemical immunosuppression, by X-irradiation, or
antibody are formed, giving rise to immune complexes 
 by antilymphocyte serum.
that are deposited progrcssively on renal glomcrular
 Although occasionally the cause of immunopathol.
membranes. Dcpcnding on the strain of mouse, the end
ogy, cell-mediated immune responses are generally an
result may be glomerulonephritis, uremia, and death.
inportant component of the process of recovery from
Circulating immunc complexes may also be deposited
viral infections (see Chapter 8), as becomcs evident if
in the walls of the small blood vesseis in the skin, joints,
they are abrogated by cytotoxic drugs or are abscnt, as
and choroid plexus, whcre they attract macrophages and
 in some immunodeficicncy diseases. Elimination of cclls
activatc complement. In addition to these local effects, 
supporting the growth of a lytic virus is essential if the
by mobilizing soluble mediators, antigen-anribody com-
 individual is to survive. Whether this process results in
plexes contributc to systemic reactions, such as fever
a crisis depends on the cxtent of the infection and how
and malaise.
vital the infected clls are to the survival of the host.
Systemic immune complex reactions may activate
 Perhaps this is the cvolutionary reason why neurons,
the enzymes of the coagulation cascade, leading to hista-
which cannot be replaced, do not express MHC antigens
 mine release and increased vascular permeability. In such
On their plasma membranes.
cases, fibrin may be deposited in the kidneys, lungs,
adrenals, and pituitary gland, causing multiple thrombo-
ses, infarcts, and scattered hemorrhages--this is known
Nonspecific Pathophysiologic
 as disseminated intravascular coagulation. This is seen
in viral hcmorrhagic fevers in humans, all of which are
Changes in Viral Diseases
zoonoses caused by arenaviruses, bunyaviruses, flovi-
ruses, and flaviviruses. Kittens infected with feline infec-
Some pathologic changes found in viral infections
tious peritonitis virus exhibit disseminated intravascular
 cannot be attributed to direct cll destruction by the
coagulation and it also ocurs in fowl plague, hog chol-
virus, to inflammation, or to immunopathology. Pcr-
era, and rabbit hemorrhagic diseasc.
haps the most important of these effects relarcs to
alterations in the function of the adrenal glands in
response to the strcss of the infection. Most examplcs
Type IV Hypersensitivity Reaction
of this kind of indirect damaging effect come from well-
(Celi-Mediated or Delayed
studied experimental animal models; similar changes
 probably occur in natural infections but they have not
Hypersensitivity Reaction)
 yet been documented.
 Most viral diseases are accompanied by a number
Unlike the other reactions, type IV reactions, also called 
 Of vague general clinical signs, such as fever, malaise,
delayed hypersensitivity reactions, are mediated by  
 anorexia, and lassitude. ILittle is known about thc causes
cells—T lymphocytes—-and are manifested as inflam- (
 of thcsc clinical signs, which collectively can significantly
mation, lymphocytic infiltration, and macrophage infil-
 reduce the animal's performance and impedc rccovery.
tration and activation. They are important, for example,
Fever can be attributcd to interleukin 1 and possibly to
in the pathogenesis of Borna discase and may also con-
 intcrferons. These and other soluble mediators produced
tribute to consolidation of the lung in various severe
 by responding leukocytes or relcased from virus-infected
lower respiratory tracr discases.
cells may be responsiblc for other vague clinical signs
Once again, thc classic virological model
.is
as well.
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection—this time
primary infection of adult mice. After intracerebral
inoculation the virus replicates harmlessly in the menin-
Further Reading
ges, cpendyma, and choroid plexus epithelium until
about the seventh day, when CD8' class I MHC-
Ada, G. 1. (1998). Immune response, In *Encyclopedia
restricted cytotoxic T cells invade and damage the
of Virology" (R. G. Webster and A. Granoff, eds.),
infected cells. This causes a massive breakdown of
2nd cd. (CD-ROM). Academic Press, London.
Further Reading
159
Babiuk, L. A., Lawman, M. P. J., and Bielefeldt, O. H.
Mims, C. A., and White, D. O. (1984). "Viral Pathogene-
(1988). Viral-bacterial synergistic interaction in respira-
sis and Immunology." Blackwell, Oxford.
tory discase. Adv. Virus Res. 35, 219-250.
Mims, C. A., Dimmock, N., Nash, A., and Stephen, J.
Connor, D. H., Chandler, F. W., Schwartz, D. A., Manz,
(1995). "Mims" Pathogenesis of Infectious Diseases,"
H. J., and Lack, E. E. (1997). "Pathology of Infec-
4th ed. Acadeinic Press, London,
tious Diseases." Appleton & Lange, Stamford, CT.
Notkins, A. L., and Oldstone, M. B. A., eds. (1984,
 Jubb, K. V. F., Kennedy, P. C., and Palmer, N., eds.
1986, 1989). "Conceprs in Viral Pathogenesis, Vols.
(1993). "Pathology of Domestic Animals, 4th ed. Ac-
1, 2, and 3. Springer-Verlag, New York.
ademic Press, San Diego, CA.
Oldstone, M. B. A., ed. (1989). Molecular mimicry.
Lawman, M. J. L., Campos, M., Ohmann, H. B., Griebel,
Cross-reactivity between microbes and host protcins
P., and Babiuk, L. A. (1989). Recombinant cytokines 
as a cause of autoirnmunity. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Im-
and their therapeutic value in veterinary medicine. In
munol.145,1-1.50.
"Anjmal Biotechnology” (L. A. Babiuk and J. P.
Oldstone, M. B. A. (1996). Principles of viral pathogene-
Phillips, eds.), Comprehensive Biotcchnology Series.
sis, Cell 87, 799-801.
Pp. 1-260. Pergamon, Oxford.
Oldstone, M. B. A. (1997). How viruscs escape from cy-
Mason, P. W., Ricder, E., and Baxt, B. (1994). RGD se-
totoxic T lymphocytes: Molecular paraineters and
qucnce of foot-and-mouth disease virus is cssential for
players.Virology 234, 179-185.
infecting cells via thc natural receptor but can be by-
Smith, G. L. (1994). Virus strategies for evasion of the
passed by an antibody-dependent cnhancement path-
host response to infection. Trends Microbiol. 2,
way. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 1932-1936.
81-88.
McFadden, G., ed. (1995).*Viroceptors, Virokines and
von Herrath, M. G., and Oldstone, M. B. A. (1996). Vi-
Related Immune Modulators Encoded by DNA Vi-
rus-induccd autoimmune disease. Curr. Opin. Immu-
ruses." R. G. Landes, Austin, TX.
nol. 8, 878-885.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
CHaprer
10
Pathogenesis
s of Viral Diseases:
Representative Model Diseases
Viral Respiratory Disease ..
161
Viral Intestinal Disease ..
163
Viral Lymphoreticular and Hematopoietic Disease ...
165
Viral Central Nervous System Disease ...
165
Viral Multisystem Discase...
167
Chronic Viral Disease....
170
Slowly Progressive Viral Disease ....
174
Further Reading..
176
To this point the pathogenesis of viral infections has horses in the population at risk. Infcction of horses in
been dissected in several ways, secking understanding of
a nonimmune population may b severe, even fatal, epe
the bases for disease in a piecemeal fashion. Drivcn by
cially in the young, old, or debilitated. More commonly,
sophisticated experimental methods, this kind of reduc-
infection results in fever up to 42°C, a cough that may
tionisric, mechanistic approach is at the heart of much of
last for wccks, and often secondary bacterial (usually
modcrn pathogenetic research. However, this approach
 streptococcal) bronchitis and pneumonia. Full recovery
often leads to too many generalizations and too much
may take months.
oversimplifcation in explaining viral diseases as they
The pathogenesis of this syndrome is the same as
occur in nature. There is merit in considering the patho-
 in influenza in other mammalian species, and as in other
genesis of representative model viral diseases as thcy
 species interrupting thc pathogenetic progression has
occur in domestic and wild animals, if only to provide
 proven diffcult. Influenza virus virions in aerosolized
        , b
droplets are inhaled and alight on the film of mucus
host factors come to influence the clinical coursc of dis-
that covers the epithelium of the upper respiratory tract.
ease and how little is known about their interrelation-
Alternatively, virions contained on fomites may gain en-
ships. This constitutes the intersection between virology
try into the nares, the conjunctiva, or the oral cavity and
and pathology and clinical veterinary medicine.
from there move to the respiratory tract. Aerosolized
droplets of different sizes alight at different levels of
the respiratory tree and infection may accordingly bc
initiated at diffcrent levels, but in general the upper respi-
 Disease
ratory tract is the site of initial infcction, and the trachea
and bronchi are the sites of infcction that cause the most
Equine Influenza
comnon clinical signs. Immcdiately upon alighting, thc
Influenza viruses are maintained among horses by spo-
virus is met by host defense mechanisms-if the horse
radic clinical cases and by inapparent infections. In out-
 has previously been infcctcd or vaccinated with thc same
breaks, virus is spread to susceptible horses introduced
(l aqueu) Apoqnue sna jo uens eus Aiaa e io
into the herd by birth, transport for show, sale,training,
 present in thc mucus may neutralize it. Mucus also con-
or racing and to horscs with waning immunity. The
 tains glycoproteins similar to the rcceptor molecules on
clinical outcome following exposure depends on the na-
respiratory epithelial cells, which may combine with viri-
ture of the virus and the immunological status of the ons and prevent them from attaching to epithelial cells.
161
162
10.Pathogrnests of Viral Diseases: Representative Modet Disecses
In turn, the viral neuraminidase may destroy enough of
 ated immune effector mechanisms, also play a part in
this host glycoprotein to allow virions to atrach to and
terminating the infection.
infect epithelial cells.
 Immunity is fleeting, whether evoked by natural
Very small virus-containing aerosolized droplets
infection or vaccination, and reinfection is common. Un-
id r a se a o aaap i
like the situation with human influenza where the indi-
barrier, namely the cleansing action of beating cilia. In--
vidual's immune status is often rendered moot by anti-
haled particles are normally carried in thc flow of mucus
 genic drift of viruses circulating in the population, equine
generated by cilial beating to the pharynx wherc they
influenza viruses have shown only modest drift. It is the
 are swallowed. However,initial invasion and dcstruction
failure to stimulate a strong enough, long-lasting enough,
of just a few epithclial cells by influenza viruses can
mucosal immune response in the airways that makes
initiate lesions that progressively damage the mucus
 cquine influenza such a problem. As an indication of the
layer, thereby baring more and more epithelial cells.
 problem, the "Guidelines for Vaccination of Horses of
Viral replication progresses, and large numbers of prog-
the American Association of Equine Practitioners" in-
eny virions are budded into the lumen of the airways.
cludes the following protocol: primary vaccination, two
 Early in infection, cilial beating helps to move released
 to three doses, 3 to 4 weeks apart, and booster vaccina-
progeny virus along the airways, thereby spreading the
 tions at intervals of 2 to 12 months, depending on the
infection. As the secretions become more profusc and
level of exposure. If the immunogenicity of equine vac-
viscous, cilial beating becomes less effective and ccases 
 cines was better, certainly fewer doses would be needed.
as epithelial cells are destroyed.
Clearly, the localization of the infecrion in the respiratory
 The spread of the infection via contiguous expan-
tract without systemic spread and the rather sequestered
sion from initial foci often does not stop until virtually
location of viral budding from apical plasma membranes
every columnar epithelial cell at the particular airway
 of airway epithelial cells (and perhaps characteristics of
level is infected. The result is complete denuding of large
the key viral glycoproteins themselves) combine to favor
areas of epithelial surface and the accumulation in the
the virus over the host. Better vaccines and better vacci-
airways of transudates and exudates containing in-
 nation protocols are required.
fammatory cells and necrotic epithelial cell debris. In
the proces of infecting and destroying cpithelial cells,
the virus induccs cytokine production; thcse cytokines
Bovine Pneumonia (Shipping Fever)
are the causc of many of the clinical signs. These cytok-
ines also have a central role in the induction of the
 In cattle there is a seasonal incidence of bronchopneumo-
immune responsc and in the exacerbation of the in-
nia in fall and early winter that corresponds with the
flammatory response.
extra stress of harsh climatic conditions and husbandry
 Respiratory distress follows, which is made worse
 practices as well as the extra activity of respiratory vi-
when animals arc forced to move. There may be onc
ruses and mycoplasmas. This syndrome of bronchopneu-
 Or more complications: (1) secondary bacterial infection
monia, often extending to a true fbrinous pleuropneu-
(again usually streptococcal infection), nurtured by the
 monia, is called shipping fever in many countries. In the
accumulation of fluid and necrotic debris in the airways;
 United States and Canada the syndrome represents the
(2) infecrion and destruction of the lung parenchyma
most economically important health problem in cattle,
and alveolar epithelium (interstitial pneumonia); and/
especially feedlot cattle--it is estimated that this syn-
 0r (3) blockage of airways that are so small in diameter
drome costs the North American cattle industry morc
that mucous plugs cannot be dislodged by forced air
than $1 billion per year. Despite having diverse initial
 movements. In all of these complications there is hyp-
causes, the syndrome has a common terminal pathway
oxia and a pathophysiologic cascade that leads to
and etiology, with terminal manifestations being caused
acidosis and uncontrollable fluid exudation into
by overwhelming infection by Pasteurella hemolytica
airways.
and, to a lesser extent, P. multocida. Respiratory virus
 Degeneration of respiratory tract epithelial sur-
 infections (e.g., bovine herpesvirus 1, parainfluenza virus
faces during influcnza infection is extremely rapid, but
3, bovine respiratory syncytial virus) contribute to the
so is regeneration—-development of a complete ncw co-
susccptibility of cattle to the bacteria that are always
lumnar epithelial surface via hyperplasia of remaining
 present in the respiratory tract. Respiratory epithelial
transitional cells may be complete in a few days. The
 damage and fuid exudation, as described earlicr for in-
transitional epithelium and the ncwly differentiated co-
fluenza, are major factors favoring bacterial growth.
lumnar epithelium that arises from it are resistant to
Viral infcctions can also alter bovine host defense
infection, probably by virtue of interferon production.
 mechanisms in other ways: ( 1) they can be directly immu-
Other host defenses, including antibody and cell-medi-
nosuppressive or can damage macrophage and neutro-
Viral lntestinat Disease
163
phil function in the lungs and airways; (2) they may
Viral lntestinal Disease
induce such an exuberant inflammatory response that
Rotavirus, Coronavirus, and
the delicate epithelial surfaces of the alveoli are de-
stroyed; and (3) they can alter the surface properties
Torovirus Enteritis
of respiratory epithelial cells, thereby favoring bacterial
adherence and growth.
 Enteritis in animals is often multifactorial and interac-
In these circumstances, bacterial microcolonies re-
tions of infectious agents with immunologic, environ-
sist phagocytosis and the effects of antibodies and antibi-
 mental, and nutritional factors can often cxacerbate the
otics, and bacteria can therefore enter the lower respira-
disease. The entry into the body of viruses destined to
tory tract more readily. Another effect of viral damage
 infect the gastrointestinal tract usually starts with the
is the release of iron, which also enhances bactcrial
 ingestion of contaminated food, water, or fomites. The
 growth and colonization. Interactions berween various
virus must survive the acidic conditions of the stomach
factors during the development of bovine pneumonia
 and then the alkaline conditions and the presence of
 are summarized in Figure 10.1.
 enzymes and bile salts in the small intestine before reach-
 It is more important to control the viral infections
 jng intestinal epithelial cells, which are invaded directly.
that initiate shipping fever than the bacterial superinfec-
The harsh environmental conditions in the digestive sys-
tions that produce the pneumonia. The Pasteurella spe-
tem must destroy large numbers of virions continuously,
cies that are always present in the bovine respiratory tract
but in nature, there are physiologic circumstances when
are unlikely to be eliminated by any means. Antibiotic
 pH extremes are buffered (e.g., in newborn animals by
therapy may yield positive results, but in many cases
 milk and in adult animals by normal inrermittent gastric
cxtensive damage has already occurred by the time the
alkalosis) so that enough virus is protected and can go
diagnosis is made. If microcolonies have been established
 on to cause infection. In fact, the old generalization that
and infection has progressed to the formation of ab-
viral enteric pathogens must be stable, i.e., acid and
scesses, it is impossible to obtain effective anribiotic levels
bile salt resistant, as are the enteroviruses, reoviruses,
at target sites. If infected cattle survive, they are often
rotaviruses, parvoviruses, and adenoviruses, is now
unthrifty and are prone to further debilitating discases.
 known to be faulted. Important pathogens that are sensi-
Viral vaccine programs aimed at preventing the pathoge-
tive to low pH and intestinal enzymes and bile salts
netic cascade must be assessed and justified by their
include enteric coronaviruses, pestiviruses, toroviruses,
overall effect on the prevalence of the multifactorial
and paramyxoviruses (thc latter particularly in birds)
iso 'sd s s  os 
(Table 10.1)
those involving the use of Pasteurella spp. vaccines, have
 In the intestinal tract, cntry and shedding involve
not proven their worth—there has always been anec-
the same cells, i.e., epithelial cells that are infected by
dotal evidence of positive effects, but in controlled trials
invading virus and are also the source of the virus,
efficacy and economic beneft are never confrmed. As
which is shed and continues the transmission chain.
in the case of equine influenza, better vaccines and better
 Most viruses that infecr intestinal epithelium exhibit
strategies for their delivery are required.
 common pathogenetic characteristics, such as rapid
Figure l0.1.
Virus
Modification of
Tissue damage
 Inflammation 
lung defenses
Mediators released
Immunopathology
Enhanced bacterial growth and adherence
Decreased clearance
Microcolony formation
Ineracnsbwenventssocialed wihviralnberil infectinsithedevelpmentofbovienemniashippingfeer.ortesyf
L. A. Babiuk.]
164
Iti.Pathogeresis of Vireat Disetses: Representative Model Diseases
TaBLe 10.1
Viruses Causing Diarrhea'
FAMILY/GENUS
Celt TYPE InFECTED
 DisTributiOn of virus-InduceD INJurY
Parvoviridae
Dividing cells of the crypt
Smll intestine
Adenoviridae
Mature enterocytes
 Apices of vill, smoll intestine
Caliciviridae
Mature enterocytes
Sides of villi, proximal small intestine
Astroviridae
 Mature enterocytes,
Apices of villi, small intestine [ovine] Peyer's patches, proximal
M cells covering Peyer's
small ntestine (bovine) 
patches
Reoviridae/
Mature enterocytes
Apices of villi in proximol or distal small intestine, depending on
Rotavirus
host
Coronaviridae/
Mature enterocytes
Small intestine
Coronavirus
 Surface and crypt cells 
Large intestine
Coronaviridae/
Villus enterocytes
Distal small intestine
Torovirus
M cells covering Peyer's
Peyer's patches
patches and crypt cells
Large intestine
From M. E. Conner, and R. F. Ramig, Virel eneric diseases. In "Virol Pathogenesis" (N. Nathanson, R. Ahmed, F. GonzalezScarano, D. E.
Griffin, K. V. Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L. Robinson, eds.], pp. 713-744. Lippincot-Raven, Philadelphia, PA, 1997.
growth and high yield, all aimed at completing the
 pends on the initial dose, the virulence of the virus, and
fecal-oral transmission cycle before host immune dc-
the host's immunologic and physiologic status. In piglets 
fenses intervcnc.
and lambs, viral enteritis is most often centered in the
The incubation period of these infections is usually
jejunum and ileum and in calves in the duodenum and
very short-as short as 12 hours in soime cases of rotavi-
jejunum. In mice, where rotavirus enteritis is a major
Ius enteritis. Clinical signs include watery diarrhea, an-
 problem in laboratory colonies, infection is most often
 orexia, deprcssion, dehydration, and, in some spccies,
centercd in the duodenum and jejunum. Infection does
vomiting. Repeated bouts of diarrhea often causc a fail-
not usually cause much inflammatory response; little is
lre to thrive. IDeaths attributed to viral enteritis result
seen macroscopically and microscopically there is usu-
from severe dehydration sccondary to loss of water from
ally only a mild mononuclear cell infltration into thc
diarrhea; newborn animals and small species with less 
 lamina propria of the small intestine. Perpetuation of
fluid reservc are more vulnerable. Because very high con-
 enteropathogenic viruses is favored by an explosive in-
centrations of virus are shed by infected
animals and
 fection causing diarrhea and a burst of virus shedding
because the infectious dose is small in most enteric viral
rather than a smoldering infection. Nearly all such infec.
infections, minimal environmental
contamination is
 tions are localized. The failure to penetrate into decper
enough to cause widesprcad disease.
tissues and cause systemic discase may reprcscnt an evo-
The severity of thc enteritis caused by the various
lutionary progression that maximizes shedding capacity
cnteric viruses varics according to the immune status,
 and transmissibility without destroying the host popu-
age, and general condition of the animal at the time of
lation.
infection. In enteritis caused by rotaviruses, coronavi-
 In many cases of diarrhea more than onc virus is
ruses, and toroviruses, there is epithelial cell destruction,
active; if rwo viruses have different sites of replication,
with marked shortening and occasional fusion of adja-
their combined effect may be more sevcre than either
cent villi (see Chapter 9). Because absorptive cells are
 alone. Furthermore, many bacterial infections (e.g., en-
concentrated at thc tips and secretory cells at the basc
terotoxic Escherichia coli infection) are more severe if
 of villi, there is a change in the ratio of absorptive and
combined with a viral infection.
sccretory capacities. This rcsults in fluid accumulation
Viral enteritis is essentially a problem in the first
 in the lumen of the gut and diarrhea. Infection generally
few weeks or months of life and susccptibility decrcases
begins in the proximal part of the small intestine and
rapidly with increasing age. To prevent infection of
spreads progressively to the jejunum and ileum and
newborn animals, antibody must be present continu-
somctimes to the colon. The extent of such spread de-
ously in the Jumen of the gut. This does not occur
Viral Central Neruous Systen Disease
165
for more than about 7 days unless the dam is hyperim-
 infected animals. All in all, this precise progression in
munized against the common cnteric viruses. Because
 the pathogenesis of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus
vaccination of newborns is often not practical, maternal
 infection in the hamster is rapid, effcient, and ex-
vaccination is gaining widespread support. More and  tremely destructive.
more specific protocols are being introduced-in con-
 Although quantitative virologic data are not avail-
troled trials, many of thcse arc proving that this
 able, studies of infected horses using histopathology and
frozen-section immunofluroescence of tissues havc indi-
settings (sec Chapter 13).
cated that the pathogenctic pattern is similar to that in
hamsters. Infection of lyinphoreticular and hematopoi-
etic tissues leads to the death of most horses before
the virus gains entry into the central nervous system.
Viral Lymphoreticular and
Infcction induces the secretion of many soluble media-
Hematopoietic Disease
tors (cytokines, clotting factors, complement factors,
etc.), which likely contribute to the severity of the dis.
Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis
ease. Finally, in some horses that survive long enough
there is an acute necrotizing encephalitis, resembling that
tems could be used to illustrate an important effect of case of Venezuelan equine encephalitis, it is the virus
virus infection in these organ systems. The lessons from 
 produced in lymphoreticular and hematopoietic tissues
pathogenetic studies in these systems are complex and
that seeds the viremia that brings the virus to the central
intertwined with the immune response and other crucial
 nervous system.
host functions. In most instances, these interactions are
not fully understood. Many encounters between viruses
and cells of the reticuloendothelial and lymphoid systems
Viral Central Nervous
are subtle and have been studied most thoroughly by
nonmorphological means using isolated cells. However,
System Disease
such studies usually turn our attention to the host im-
mune response to these encounters rather than to the
Rabies
infection per se. When the pathology and pathogenesis of
these encounters are studied in vivo, however, it becomes
Infection by the bite of a rabid animal usually results in
clear that thcy can be devastating.
the deposition of rabies-infected saliva deep in striated
Venezuelan cquine encephalitis virus infection
 muscles, but rabies can also occur, albeit with less cer-
stands out as a representative model because there is a
tainty, after superficial abrasion of the skin or mucous
precise chronological and topographical progression of  I
 membranes. Initially, the virus replicates in musclc cells
infection and destruction of lymphoreticular and hema- until it has reached a suffcient concentration to reach
topoietic tissues. In hamsters, in the thymus, spleen,
 nearby sensory or motor nerve endings. Here the virus
lymph nodes, bone marrow, and Peyer's patches, there 
binds specifically to the acetylcholine receptor or to other
is early productive infection of reticular cells (dendritic
 receptors expressed at sensory end organs or motor end
 macrophages and less differentiated reticular cels) and
 plates. The virus enters these distal reaches of the nervous
 later infection and severe cytonecrosis of lymphoid and
 system and begins its second stage of infection, in which
myeloid cells that leads to the acute death of all infected
 there is neuronal infection and centripetal passivc move-
animals (Figure 10.2).
 ment of the viral genome within axons.
The phagocytosis of virus by macrophages is ex-
The incubation period, i.e., the time between the
pected to trigger the afferent limb of the immune re-
infective bite and the development of signs of central
sponse--viral peptides should be prescnted to lympho-
nervous system involvement, is usually between 14 and
cytes that have virus-specifc receptors on their surface 
 90 days, but may occassionally be as long as several
and the immune response initiated. However, when the 
 years, possibly because virus remains sequestered in stri-
initiation of this cascade is prevented by acute cyto-
 ated muscle cells before entering peripheral nerves and
necrosis of macrophages, subsequent immunologically
 ascending to the brain. Movement of the viral genome
specific events are obviated. When this kind of destruc-
 within axons eventuaily delivers virus to the central ner
tion occurs in Peyer's patches in the small intestine, the
e  vous system, usually initially to the spinal cord. An as-
local integrity of the intcstinal wall breaks down—this
 cending wave of ncuronal infection and neuronal dys-
is thought to be the basis for the sepsis seen in some
function then occurs. Virus reaches the limbic system of
166
10.Pathogenesis of Viral Diseases: Representative Model Diseases
the brain, where it replicates extensively and causes the
toplasmic membranes. In the salivary gland, however,
release of cortical control of behavior—this is the basis
virions bud almost exclusively from plasma membranes
for the aberrant behavior that we call "furious rabies.""
at the lumenal surface of mucous celis and are released
Spread within the central nervous system continues, and
in high concentrations into the saliva. In reservoir hosts,
when replication occurs in the neocortex, the clinical
such as the fox, virus titers in saliva may reach 106
picture changes to that of “dumh rabies." Depression,
infectious units per milliliter. Diabolically, at the time
coma, and death from respiratory arrest follow. On his-
when viral replication within the central nervous system
topathologic cxamination there is little evidence of brain
causes the infected animal to become furious and bite
damage, yet elcctron microscopic or fluorescent antibody
 indiscriminately, its saliva is maximally infectious. Virus
studies show that almost all neurons are infected--there
shedding from salivary gland epithelium into saliva of-
is minimal cellular destruction to match the extensive
fers certain advantages to the virus. Shedding may con-
neurologic dysfuncrion seen in this disease.
tinve for a longer time than is the casc with shedding
Coincidentally with its replication in the limbic
from airway or intestinal epithelium. Shedding may con-
system of the brain, rabies virus moves centrifugally from
tinue after the immune response is initiated because of
the central nervous system, down peripheral nerves to
the immunologically sequestered status of the salivary
a variety of organs: the adrenal cortex, pancreas, and,
gland epithelium and the directional shedding of virus
most importantly, the salivary glands (Figure 10.3). In
 only on apical plasma membranes directly into salivary
 u pqse i  is 'ss su s
duct lumens. This is the pattern of shedding not only of
FiGure 10.3.
Rabies virus infection in the submandibular salivary gland and brain of a rabid fox. (A) Virions budding from the lateral piasma membrane of
wo mucogenic epithelial cell ltight junctions between cells defining an intercellular canaliculus cre marked with arrowheads). This silte of budding
is delivering virus into saliva into the Furthest 'upstream' channel of the salivary duct system.
ViratMuftisysten Disease
167
FIguRe 10.3. (continued)
(B) Massive accumulation of virions "downstream' in the major salivary cduct of the same fox. (C) Infection in the brain of the sdme lox. Bullet-
bylighticrosoyiseenasNegribodyInthhealivaryglandandtbrainthinfectionisncyopthic,binbrinearyll
virus is formed by budiding on intemol membranes of neurons and so is trapped, whereas in the salivary gland nearly allvirus is formed by
buingniclesweifenlireirsinvDfrir
milliterf ivthfksibiinsono0500.
rabies virus, but other viruses that are shed in saliva,
riod because of the delay in most cases between the initial
such as cytomegaloviruses, hantaviruses, and arenavi-
viral replication in muscle cells and the entry of virus
ruses.
into the protected environment of the nervous system.
The pathogenesis of rabies is remarkable in that
When the bite of a rabid animal occurs on the head
infection, spread to the central nervous system, and the
 or when the virus is introduced directly into peripheral
 development of clinical signs occur with minimal immu-
nerves, the incubation period is often short and in some
nologic response. Although rabies proteins are highly
cases postexposure treatment fails.
immunogenic, neither humoral nor cell-mediated re-
sponses can be detected during the stage of movement
of virus from the site of the bite to the central nervous
Viral Multisystem Disease
system. The basis for this seems to be that very little
antigen is presented to the immune system. Most viral 
Canine Distemper
antigen is sequestered within muscle cells or within neu-
rons. However, this early stage of infection would be
 Canine distemper has for many years been a prototypic
affected by antibodies if they were produced. The proof
multisystem viral disease model, largely because of the
of this is the efficacy of classical Pasteurian postexposure
 pioneering pathogenetic research of Max Appel of Cor-
vaccination, especially when vaccine is used in combina-
nell University. Canine distemper is trypically an acute/-
tion with hyperimmune immunoglobulin. Immunologic
 subacute disease, but its variable clinical presentations
intervention is effective during the long incubation pe-
and variable clinical course make it quite complex (Fig-
168
Pathegenesis of Virat Diseases: Representatire Modet Diseases
FIgure 10.4.
ACUTE PHASE
LATE COMPLICATIONS
DAY AFTER
VIRUS IN
MONTHS AFTER
COMPLICATION
INFECTION
INFECTION
Alveol:
macrophages
1-2
Latede
ephalo
myelitis lrare , fatall
2
Bronchiaf lymph nodes
3Blood mononuclear celis
Following continued replication
inneurons,gradual onset  old
dog encephalitis (very rare, fatal)
4-6
Thymus, spleen,bone
marrow, lymph nodes
Migrating mononuclear cells below
epithelium of visceral organs and
skin and perivascular spaces in
central nervous system
8-10 Surface epithelium, glandular
epithelium, ano cells of central
central nervous system
10-30 Recovery Icomplete antibody
formation]
Continued viral replication
JQ
[restricted antibody formation]
The pathogenesis of canine distermper. (Courtesy of M. J. G. Appel.)
ure 10.4). Infection occurs via virus inhalation into the
 8 or 9. In such dogs the virus disappears rapidly from
 respiratory tract. Following initial infection of the respi-
the lymphatic tissues and the infection remains subclini-
 ratory epithelium and alveolar macrophages, the virus
cal. If measurable antibody is not present by day 9 or a
 is transfered within 2 days to mononuclear cells in the
titer of 100 has not been attained by day 14, the virus
 bronchial lymph nodes and tonsils. During the first week
 spreads throughout the body. Extensive infection of
following exposure, before the onset of clinical signs, 
the epithelium in the intestinal, respiratory, and urogeni-
cell-associated virus spreads via the bloodstream to the
tal tracts, skin, and exocrine and endocrine glands oc-
 bone marrow, spleen, thymus, cervical and mesenteric
 curs, as well as continued infection of mononuclear cells
 lymph nodes, and macrophages in the lamina propria
in the lymphoreticular system. Infection of the gastroin--
of the stomach and small intestine.
testinal tract causes vomiting and diarrhea, infection of
The rate of spread and distribution of virus after
the respiratory tract causes bronchitis and sometimes
days 8 and 9 varies and appcars to depend on the rate
 pneumonia, and infection of the skin is associated
 of development of neutralizing antibody, although the
with dermatitis.
role of cell-mediated immunity has not been studied ade-
When the brain is infected, usually after the virus
quately. No neutralizing antibody is found on day 7,
 but in some dogs the titer reaches 100 or higher by days
 macrophages and mononuclear cells in the perivascular
Vortl Mnltsysten Diseuse
169
adventitia and later in ependymal and glial cells and
1 a shortening and blunting of the villi with an intense 
neurons. Neuronal infection is associated with behav-
inflammatory infitration into the lamina propria.
ioral changes, myoclonia, tonic-clonic spasms, and pare-
sis, which often persist after recovery. Forty to 60 days
The pathogenetic cvents leading to these syn-
after apparent recovery, encephalitis with characteristic
dromes have been studied in depth, starting with bench-
demyelination develops in some dogs, often leading to
mark work by L. E. Carmichael, M. J. G. Appel,
1
death. In thcse dogs, high titers of neutralizing antibody
R. V. H. Pollock, and colleagues at Cornell University.
are found in both blood and cerebrospinal fluid. Recov-
 Such studies have involved serial sampling of experimen-
cry is followed by prolonged immunity, probably life-
1
 tally infected puppies and older dogs and examination of
long, but even in the face of high titers of neutralizing
 appropriate specimens by (1) hematological and serolog-
antibody, a second type of encephalitis, called old dog
ical methods, (2) virus titration in cell culture,
encepbalitis may, in rare cases, occur years later (see
(3) histopathology, and (4) immunohistochemistry and
later).
frozen-section immunofluorescence.
 Following viral entry via the oropharynx, initial
viral replication has been found to occur in the tonsils
Canine Parvovirus Disease
 and regional lymph nodes and immediately thereafter in
the thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. In these tissues,
The remarkable bost-range mutation (species-jumping
 it is lymphoid cells that are infected first (lymphocytes
mutation) that transformed a feline parvovirus into
in the cortex of the thymus, germinal centers in the
canine parvovirus 2 and led to its rapid dissemination  t
 tonsils, lymph nodes and Peyer's patches and whitc pulp
around the world is dealt with in Chapter 21. A
of the spleen). Viral replication in lymphocytes in these
second remarkable aspect of the emergence of canine
 tissues has been detected as early as 24 hours after 0ral
parvovirus 2 involves its pathogenicity and the patho-i
 infection. Virus produccd in these initial sites of infection
p si shop u ss ii aasp au jo sisue
 seed nearby cells and very quickly there is necrosis and
that the canine virus has retained characteristics from
1  a generalized decrease in cellularity in these sites. This
its progenitors. The central characteristic that underpins
infection produces the plasma viremia thar by day 2
the pathogenesis of canine parvovirus disease is the
 brings virus to other targct tissues. In the bone marrow,
requirement of the virus for cells in the S phase of
 cells of thc myeloid, erythroid, and megakaryocytic scries
the cell division cyclc for its rcplication. In the fetus
 are destroyed-it is not known whether all damage is a
O1 neonatal dog, whcrc cell division goes on at a high
 direct result of infection or whether some may be due
level in a wide varicty of tissues, many tissues are
to “bystander effects" and the release of cytotoxic lym-
infected and damagcd. In older animals the virus repli-
 phokines. In puppies, cardiac muscle cells are destroyed
cates primarily in lymphoid tissues, hematopoietic tis-
(cardiac muscle cell division ceases at about 15 days of
sues, and the intestinal epithelium, sites of continuing 
 age—puppies infected after this time do not develop
cell division. In its target cells the virus causes an
 myocarditis). Virus infects the rapidly dividing crypt epi-
acute lytic infection, ending in cell death without
 thelial cells mainly in the ileum and jejunum and by day
residual evidences of the infection. In keeping with the
 3 postinfection high titers of virus are shed in the feces
localized sites of high level cell division, two syndromes
(up to 109 IDsw/gran of feces). Damage to crypt epithe-
are seen in dogs.
lium is most severe adjacent to Peyer's patches. The loss
 of crypt epithelial cells interferes with replacement of
1. Puppies may develop a multifocal necrosis of
the normal high rate of cellular loss from the tips of villi
the myocardium and die of acute heart failure days to
and results in a flattened (attenuated) epithelium with
weeks after infection, usually in ventricular fibrillation.
shortened villi. These changes affect the balance between
Many clinical signs secn in puppies, such as lethargy,
 secretory and absorptive functions of villous epithelium
dyspnea, and pulmonary edema, are consequences of
 and lead to an osmotic dysregulation and diarrhea. It
this myocarditis.
 has also been suggested that some clinical signs are a
 2. Dogs older than about 5 weeks at the time of
result of cndotoxemia, perhaps related to the damagc to
 infection develop a leukopenia ( with relative lymphope-
 the intcgrity of the epithclium over Peyer's patches.
nia) and about 20% of animals develop severe hemor-
In dogs that survive these peracute events, recovery
rhagic enteritis, seen as diarrhea and sometimes vom-
is rapid: (1) antibody is detected from day 5, rising to
iting. Dogs may die as a result of dehydration and
high levels by day 7 postinfection; (2) the regeneration of
possibly endotoxemia. In these animals, characteristic
lymphoid, hematopoietic, and intestinal epithelial cells
lesions are seen in lymphoid organs and the intestine——in
 is exuberant—lymphoid hyperplasia is seen by day 7
the former there is necrosis and in the latter there is
 postinfection; (3) the amount of virus in blood and tis-
170
10.Patbogerests of Viral Diseuses: Represcntative Model Diseases
sues declines rapidly and in most instances by day 6 to
The pathogenesis of Ebola virus infection in hu-
8 virus is no longer detectable in tissues; and (4) the
mans and monkeys centers on the reticuloendothelial
amount of virus in feces declines at the same time, al-
system (including macrophages in lymph nodes and
though in rare instances it has been detected for as long
spleen), endothelium throughout the body, and the pa-
as 22 days. If it were not for the destruction of cells that
 renchyma of multiple organs, especially the liver (Figure
are not replaced, such as cardiac muscle cells (and in
10.5). The infection of these tissues is devastating, with
kittens infected with feline panleukopenia virus, cells of
 swelling, hemorrhage, and focal necrosis. The rapid de-
the cerebellum), there would be no late traces of the
 struction of lymphoreticular tisues may be partially re-
 infection. These pathogenetic events point to the diffi-
sponsible for the common absence of an effective im-
culty in attributing any late or continuing clinical signs
 mune response, although the virus may also use an
 in dogs to an earlier canine parvovirus infection-
evenat
"'immune decoy"' to evade the traces of neutralizing anti-
necropsy there is no confirming evidence that myocardial
-ssa (e randu aasi pand aq Ae se poq
 damage may have been caused by an earlier acute par-
ated intravascular coagulation is an important end event.
vovirus infection.
Virus is shed from all body surfaces and orifices, includ-
ing the skin and mucous membranes, and especially from
hemorrhagic diatheses.
Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever
 In common with other successful pathogens, Ebola
virus is thus effective in humans and monkeys in gaining
 A number of severe diseases of humans are described
entry, escaping innate resistance factors and the host
clinically as viral hemorrhagic fevers; the viruses that
immune response, finding receptors on specific celis in
 cause these diseases are all zoonotic and generally occur
 several organs, finding cellular substrates for systemic
in life cycles in nature that only rarely involve humans
 infection, and assuring itself of shedding and continua-
(see Table 15-4). The pathogenesis and pathophysiology  t
tion of its life cycle. Despite the complexity of the
of these infections are poorly understood; clearly there
 multiorgan systemic infection, the virus outmaneuvers
 are more differences than similarities but all are pathoge-
host defenses by (1) its speed—animals often die before
netically intriguing. One representative model disease
 it might be expected that they could mount an effective
stands out: Ebola hemorrhagic fever (caused by Ebola
 primary inflammatory/immune response, and (2) its tro-
virus subtypes Zaire, Sudan, and Cote d’Ivoire), one of 
 pism(s)—the early reticuloendothelial and lymphoid tro-
the most severe hemorrhagic fevers in humans. It has
 pisms likely minimize the response that might be elicited
 been said that “the evolution of the disease often scems
otherwise. There is no evidence for latency or persistence
 inexorable and invariable." Following an incubation pe-
 in the infection in humans or animals that have been
riod of usually 4 to 10 days there is an abrupt onsct
 studied. Neither is there evidence that subclinical or si-
 Of illness with initial nonspecific signs and symptoms,
lent productive infections play any important role in
including fever, severe headache, malaise, myalgia,
animals or humans. Until the natural reservoir host of
bradycardia, and conjunctivitis. Deterioration over the 
Ebola virus is found, there is no way to say how the
following 2 to 3 days is marked by pharyngitis, nausea
 pattern of infection seen in humans and monkeys might
and vomiting, hematemeses, and melena. There is pros-
contribute to the survival of the virus in nature-
tration and bleeding, which is manifested as petechiae,
infection in the reservoir hosts(s) is likely to be quite
ecchymoses, uncontrolled bleeding from venipuncture
different and infection of humans is certainly so inciden-
sites, and visceral hemorrhagic effusions. Death usually
 tal as to not play an essential role in the natural history
occurs 6 to 9 days after the onset of disease. Abortion
of the virus.
 is a common consequence of infection, and infants born
to sick mothers are infected fatally. Convalescence is
 slow and marked by prostration, weight loss, and often 
Chronic Viral Disease
by amnesia.
There is considerable similarity in the way Ebola
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
virus attacks humans and certain specics of monkeys. In
rhesus (Macaca mulatta), cynomolgus (Macaca fascicu-
 Most domestic cats are persistently infected with coro-
laris), and African green ( Cercopithecus aethiops) mon-
naviruses. Many antigenically similar strains have been
keys and baboons ( Papio spp.) the incubation period is
 ar o s  u r  p
4 to 6 days. With the onset of clinical disease there is
virulence. Feline coronavirus strains of low virulence
interstitial hemorrhage, which is most evident in the
that are not systemically invasive and replicate only in
gastrointestinal tract, profound prostration, and shock.
mature intestinal epithelial cells are called feline enteric
Infection nearly always ends in death.
coronaviruses. These strains usually cause only mild,
Chronic Viral Disease
171
self-limiting diarrhealillnessin kittens; in adult cats these 5 and 10 years of age have a lower incidence, but then
strains usually cause only subclinical infection. As these
 incidcnce increases again in cats over 13 years of age,
virus strains replicate, however, mutants appear at the 
the latter probably because of a decline in the capacity
 periphery of their quasispecies swarm (see Chapter 4).
of the cell-mediated immune systeim.
Sequence analyses have shown that every cat harbors its
 Clinically, there are two major forms of feline in-
own unique quasispecies swarm, its own variant popula-
fecrious peritonitis: an effusive form ("wet form"), char-
tion, which evolves continuously during low-level virus
 acterized by high protein fluid accumulation in body
replication in the intestine.
cavities, and a noneffusive form ("dry form"), character-
There is considerable evidence, but no absolute 
 ized by multiplc pyogranulomatous lesions. In the effu-
proof, that enteric coronaviruscs mutatc and thcreby
sive form of the discase, damage is caused by the deposi-
develop the pathologic and invasive characteristics that
 tion of immune complexes in small blood vessels; this
are associated with feline infectious peritonitis virus. Vir-
 leads to leakage of serum proteins and fluids into body
ulencc varies markcdly among strains--somc isolates 
cavities. Cats with the effusive form of the disease usually
consistently producc severe disease whereas others rarely
 develop progressive abdominal distention due to perito-
do so. Sequencc analysis of multiple isolates from the
 neal fluid accumulations. There may also be pleural and
same cat confim the existencc of very closely related
 pericardial fluid accumulations. In the noneffusive form
pairs of virulent/endemic viruses, indicating that the for-
 of the discase, the cell-mediated immune response of
 mer arise from the latter. The genomes of such pairs are
the cat results in localized perivascular infiltrations of
 >98% identical, whereas any rwo virus strains collected
 inflammatory cels (lymphocytes, macrophages, neutro-
from different cats show <90% sequence identity. From
phils, and plasma cells) in the parenchyma of many or-
studics in experimentally infected cats, it has becn shown
gans, especially the eyes, central nervous system, and
that the outcome of infection depcnds not only on the
 abdominal organs. These cellular infltrates cause local
virus strain, but also on the infecting dose and route of
tissue necrosis and functional disruptions.
entry, the age of the cat, and on conditions of housing
The course of feline infectious peritonitis virus in-
and husbandry. Gcnetic predisposition may be another
fection is cstablished quickly following infection, with
contributing factor; this has not been proven in domestic
the dynamics of the development of cell-mediated and
cats, but the lack of genetic diversity in the cheetah and
 antibody responses determining the outcome. Cats that
 produce antibody but fail to generate a cell-mediated
virus infection are likely related.
 immune responsc develop effusivc disease, which in fact 
 The variance in virulence among virus strains is
 js an immune complex-mediated immediate hypersensi-
related to their ability to infect and replicate in macro-
 tivity reaction. Antibodies to feline infectious peritonitis
phages. This tropism seems to stem from mutations in
virus are not only nonprotective—there is evidence of
the gene cncoding the virion S glycoprotein,the peplomer
 antibody-dependent enhanccment of infection. That is,
protein responsible for viral attachment and membrane
when antibody is present, the uptake of infectious anti-
fusion, and the usual target of virus-neutralizing antibod-
 body-virus complexes by monocytes and macrophages
ies (see Chapter 33). Endogenous mutations are the likely
is facilitated; the virus then replicates in these cells and
cause of disease in cats living in isolated environments 
 the progress of disease is accelerated. Noneffusive disease
that develop discase late in life. Stress, crowding, poor
 is believed to result from a partially protective cell-medi-
sanitation, parasites, and intercurrent diseases, particu-
ated immune response.
larly immunosuppressive diseases, such as feline leuke-
 Cats that mount a rapid cell-mediated immune
 mia and feline immunodeficiency virus disease, may ex-
response apparently do not devclop disease, although
acerbate the impact of feline infectious peritonitis virus 
 they harbor virus latently and pcrsistently. This persis-
infection in these settings.
 tent infection seems to provide the antigenic stimulus to
The endemic presence of virus in catteries is sup-
 maintain their immune status. In these cats, infection
ported by chronic asymptomatic carriers/shedders. In-
may be reactivated by intercurrcnt infections that are
fected cats are immune to superinfection—-active immu-
immunosuppressive, such as feline leukemia or feline
nity, although unable to clear the infection, prevents 
 immunodeficiency virus disease. If latently infected cats
infection by antigenically related variants. This explains
 clear their infection they may losc their cell-mediated
why littermates, which most likely are infected at the
immune reactivity; if this happens while they continue
same time and from the same source, harbor genetically
 t0 produce antibody they may be hypersensitive if reex-
related but slightly different variants (quasispecies) long
 posed to virulent virus.
after weaning. The incidence of feline infectious peritoni-
 Understanding the pathogenesis of feline infectious
tis is age related and biphasic: cats 6 to 12 months of
 peritonitis helps cxplain its refractoriness in regard to
age have the highest incidence of disease, cats between
 vaccine development. A vaccine bascd on a temperature-
172
[0.Pathegertesis of Virtl Diseases: Representatire Moetel Diseases
sensitive virus strain has been licensed in the United
cells; there is, howevcr, conflicting evidence of their role:
 States; however, its effcacy has been questioned and,
 some mutant viruses that do not synthesize these tran-
moreover, it has been said to evoke the same kind of
scripts can still become latent; these transcripts do not
antibody-dependcnt enhancement seen in natural in-
ou si au put suod ou peisun aq oi esdde
fection.
understanding of the mechanism by which they may
maintain the latent state or their role in reactivation of
the virus.
Latency, Lifelong Carrier Status, and
The maintenance of latency is of crucial value to
Recurrent Herpesvirus Diseases
thc virus. There is no advantage to the virus in eliminat-
 ing its sitc of latency—to the contrrary, because neurons
 Several alphaherpesviruses of animals and herpes sim-
do nor divide there is no need for continuing viral replica-
 plex viruses 1 and 2 of humans have similar pathogenic
tion that might damage the host cell. In latent herpes
patterns in which primary infection is followed by life-
 simplex infection in humans it is estimated that from 1
long, latent infection that results in intermittent episodes
 to 30% of trigeminal ganglionic neurons may contain
of recurrent disease and virus shedding. The mechanisms 
viral DNA, with 20-100 copies per cell.
involved have been described in greatest detail for infec-
Periodically, the latent viral infection in ganglionic
tious bovine rhinotracheitis (bovine herpesvirus 1 infec-
 neurons is reactivated. In most cases, reactivation leads
tion), pseudorabies in swine, and herpes simplex virus 
to the transit of virus (or more likely viral nucleocapsids)
infections in humans.
down the sensory nerves back to the same neuroepider-
Following initial invasion via the nasopharynx,
mal junctions in the nasopharyngeal or genital epithe-
virus infects mucocutaneous epithelial cells, causing ne-
lium where the primary infection occurred. Here, there
crosis that is seen as vesicles and ulcerative lesions (rhino-
is infection of epithelial cells, vesicle formation and ne-
trachcitis). In many cases these lesions are too small to
crosis, and a burst of virus shedding just as in primary
be recognized, but they are the source of progeny virus,
infection. The nature of recurrent lesions is influenced
some of which enters ncarby nerve endings and is trans-
by the amount of virus reactivated and the swiftness
ported in the axoplasim of sensory nerve fibers to sensory
of the host's immunc response—usually lesions are less
cranial (particularly the trigeminal) and/or spinal gan-
 pronounced, more rcstricted in their distribution and in
glia. In the case of invasion via thc genital tract during
 many instances inapparent. It is not clear whether there
sexual contact, virus causes similar cpithelial lesions (vul-
is any host cell damage during the latent state—if there
vovaginitis and balanoposthitis), again with lesions often
is it is minimal. However, during reactivation there is
 too smallto be recognized, and then enters nerve endings
substantial inflammatory cel infiltration and destruction
and is transported to spinal ganglia. The precise details
 of neurons and surrounding ganglionic tissues. In some
 of how the virus, viral nucleocapsid, or viral genome
 cases during reactivation virus is transported through
 alone is transported along nerve pathways to the gan-
axons to the brain where it causes a necrotizing encepha-
glion cells is not known but transit occurs in the face of
litis—-this is not uncommon when pseudorabies virus
a vigorous immune response that eliminates all nonneu-
infects cartle, but is rare in bovine herpesvirus 1 infec-
ronal infected cells and all cell-frce virus.
tions of cattle.
 The establishment of latency is a key element in
Every element in this pathogenic pattern contrib-
alphaherpesvirus pathogenesis. Whereas all viral syn-
utes to the survival and spread of the alphaherpesviruses
thetic processes proceed rapidly in infected epithclial
among their host animal populations—transmission
cclls (see Chapters 3 and 18), in ganglionic neurons the
from acutely involved primary infection sites is inmpor-
 replication of the virus is restricted greatly. When these
‘uoneansesu Aq papiaoid ,dn-yoeq, aun st os inq squel
neurons are frst infected, replicative processes, including
recurrent disease, and further virus shedding. Through-
messengcr RNA synthesis, occur to some extent but do
out the life of latently infected animals there are continu-
 not result in cell lysis. After a few days the level of
ing intermitrent rounds of viral shedding and transmis-
transcription from the circularized, episomal form of
sion. Reactivation is usually associated with stress,
thc viral genome bccomes restricted to a few transcriprs
intercurrent disease, trauma, hormonal irrcgularities, im-
sad puel sdiuosua paiossr ouai se uou
munosuppression, and/or waning immunity. It so hap-
 several other viral gene products, including thymidine
 pens thar these contributing factors are most pronounced
kinase, ribonucleotide reductase, and immediate early
when uninfected animals in the population are most
protein IE110).
vulnerable, e.g., as when cattle are shipped to feedlots.
 Latency associated transcripts are the only viral
Cytomegaloviruses  (betaherpesviruses)  establish
products synthesized in large amounts in latcntly infected
latent infections in salivary gland and bladder epithelia
Chronie Viraf Disease
173
as well as in blood mononuclear cells. The viruses are (
 difficult to assess. Pharyngcal fluids may contain large
shed, intermittently or continuously, in saliva and urine.
 amounts of virus, which may be aerosolized by cattle
Murine cytomegaloviruses may become a problem in
when they cough, but attempts to demonstrate transmis-
mouse and rat colonies when they are transmitted in this
 sion from carriers to susccptible cattle have given equivo-
way. Human cytomegalovirus infections may be reacti-  cal results. Epidemiological data, however, indicate that
vated after organ transplantation, cven when the donor
  d  s n  
was demonstrably frcc of infcctious virus or viral anti-
buffalo to cattle occurs often cnough to be a factor in
gen. In fact, cytomegalovirus infection is the most com-
eradication programs.
mon cause of death in organ transplant recipients. This
momentum—-the risk to recipients and to the population
Old Dog Encephalitis
from “species jumping" cytomegaloviruses of donor spe-
cics (swine, nonhuman primates) is a matter of scientific
 Some dogs that have recovered frorm canine distemper
and public debate.
continue to harbor the virus in neurons, where slow,
The gammaherpesviruses typified by equine her-
pesvirus 2 and Epstein-Barr virus of humans infect and
cephalitis. The situation is analogous to subacute scleros-
lyse epithelial cells and become latent in B lymphocytes, i
ing panencephalitis in humans, caused by persistent neu-
which do not permit fullcycle replication.Epstein-Barrronal infection by measles virus. In subacute sclerosing
virus causes glandular fever/infectious mononucleosis (a
 panencephalitis, at the time of death, some neurons con-
misnomer because the cells are in fact B lymphocytes 
 tain large masses of viral nucleocapsids but complete
undergoing blastogenesis). There is lifelong carrier status
 virions are not made, apparently because a mutant virus
and intermittent shedding, ensuring that the viruses are 
 is selected that is defective in the production of matrix
reliably passed from one generation to the next. The 
 protein and other envelope components. Nevertheless,
diseases produced are described as low grade: mild fever,
the complete viral genome is present, as mcasles virus can
inflammation of the oropharynx, lymph node swelling.
, be isolated by cocultivation of brain cells with permissive
loss of appetite, and malaise with a prolonged recoverycell Inold dog encephalitis,the situation is simila,bt
time. In the case of the equine herpesvirus 2, antigenically
y virus can be cultivated dircctly from the brain of affected
different viruses occur and horses are infected with dif-dogs if tissue samples arc washed to remove neutralizing
ferent viruses throughout life so that recurrent disease antibody. Old dog enccphalitis, like acute/subacute ca-
associated with reactivation of latent virus as well as
 nine distemper, has virtually disappeared in countrics
reinfection with different stains of virus are recognized.
where vaccination has become widespread.
Epstein-Barr virus is associated with the production of
B cell lymphomas (Burkitt's lymphoma) and nasopha-
ryngeal carcinoma.
Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis has been the preeminent
Foot-and-Mouth Disease
representative model viral disease, the ultimate model
for understanding the complexities of viral immunology
Although convalescence after foot-and-mouth disease in  and immunopathology. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
cattle is often protracted, for many years it was thought 
 virus is maintained in nature by lifelong persistent infec-
that recovery was complete, with elimination of the vi- tion of mice (Mus musculus). The virus is usually trans-
rus. However, it is now known that foot-and-mouth mitted in utero and horizontally to newborns, such that
disease viruses can cause persistent infection of the phar- every individual in a wild cohort or a laboratory colony
ynx in cattle, sheep, goats, and other ruminants. Not may become infected. Infected mice are normal at birth
all infected animals become carriers nor is there any
 and appear normal for most of their lives, although care-
correlation between antibody levels and the cairier state.
ful study may reveal certain functional impairments. Al.
Cattle vaccinated with inactivated vaccine may become
 most cvcry cell in infectcd mice may become infected
carriers if subsequently infected. The recovery of virus
 and remain so throughout life; infected mice also have
from pharyngeal fluids is often intermittent, possibly
 persistent viremia and viruria. Some circulating free anti-
because of variability in sampling tcchniques, but isola-
 body can be detected, but most circulates as virion-IgG-
tions have becn made from cattlc and Cape buffalo for up
 complement complexes, which are infectious. Late in
to 2 years after infection. The mechanism of persistence is 
S life some inbred mouse strains exhibit a "late disease,"
unknown and its epidemiologic significance has been which is due to the deposition of these complexes in
174
I0.Patbogenesis of Virat Diseases: Representative Model Diseases
tissues. This may be manifested as glomerulonephritis,
cells does not achieve this end—-only CD8+ cytotoxic T
arteritis, and/or chronic inflammatory lesions in virtually
 lymphocytes can terminate the infection.
any organ. In contrast, when laboratory mice become
The patterns of lymphocytic choriomeningitis vi-
infccted as adults thcy either clear the virus with lasting
rus infection can also vary according to the virus strain:
immunity or, if infected via intracranial injection, they
 lymphotropic or macrophage-tropic variants may fail
dic of a fulminant immunopathological meningoenceph-
to kill adult mice even when inoculated intracerebrally,
alitis.
whereas neurotropic variants do. Further, a virus strain
 The basis for these seemingly paradoxical patterns
 may appear less virulent in one strain of mice while
of infection has been made clear through the work of
 appearing more virulent in another strain. Another basis
'sn Au so ssioo e siso Au
for the varying virulence of particular strains of virus
 In all of these patterns the infection, per se, is without
 pertains to their immunosuppressive nature, particularly
pathogenic  consequence—infection  is  noncytopathic
when inoculated into mice at a high dose—-lethal menin-
and cellular functions essential for the life of the cell are
 goencephalitis does not occur when the cytotoxic T cell
mostly unimpaired. However, persistently infected mice
response is severely compromised in this way. Immuno-
exhibit a split tolerance to the virus, i.e., although they
suppressive variants tcnd to replicate to very high levels
mount an antibody response, they do not generate virus-
 in lymphoid organs and may mediate immunosuppres-
specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CD8: T lymphocytes),
sion by replicating in CD4+ T cells and macrophages or
which are needed to clear the infection. In the acute
 by inducing a high antigen dose tolerance.
infection in adult mice, both the clearance of the virus
One intercsting pathogenic feature of lymphocytic
 and the lethal meningoencephalitis are due to this virus-
choriomeningitis virus is its ability to cause a loss in
specifc cytotoxic T lymphocyte response.
specialized cellular functions required not for cell sur-
 Antiviral cytotoxic T lymphocytes were frst dem-
vival but for homeostasis of the whole mouse. For exam-
 sr    p
ple, persistent infection results in reduced levels of
model: Doherty and Zinkernagel, in their Nobel Prize-
growth and thyroid hormones in mice. Infection of pitu-
winning work, used this model to demonstrate the im-
itary and thyroid cpithelia causes significant reductions
portant concept of MHC class I restriction in cytotoxic
in levels of mRNA encoding these hormones. Reduced
T lymphocyte recognition. Acurely infected adult mice
 growth hormone synthesis is associated with a runting
usually succumb between 6 and 9 days postinfection at
syndrome in young mice.
which time their meninges, choroid plexuses, and epen-
 dyma arc infltrated by large numbers of T lymphocytes
 and monocytes/macrophages (Figure 10.6). Tissne dam-
Slowly Progressive
age is mediated by the secretion by cytotoxic T cells
and infiltrating macrophages of tumor necrosis factor α,
Viral Disease
IL-1α and -13, IL-6 and interferon y. In the absence of
virus-specifc cytotoxic T cells the animal survives and
The term "slow virus disease' was coined by the Icelan-
a persistent infection is established. Abrogation of thc
dic veterinarian Sigurdsson to describe the slowly pro-
usual cytotoxic T celi response may be produced experi-
gressve lentivirus diseases, maedi and visna, found in
mentally by antilymphocyte serum, y-irradiation, or im-
shcep in Iccland. The term is now used in a general sense
munosuppressive drugs (e.g., cyclophosphamide).
 t0 categorize viral infections with a very long preclinical
When mice are infected in utero or are inoculated
phasc followed by a slowly progressive clinically patent
with virus within a day of birth they fail to mount a
 phase that is invariably fatal. There are two groups of
virus-specific cytotoxic T lyrmphocyte response. These
slow diseases, one caused by prions, the agcnts of thc
mice may appcar runted, but survive. They are not gener-
 spongiform encephalopathies (see Chapter 40),the other
ally  immunosuppressed—their unresponsiveness 
is
by lentiviruses. Maedi/visna disease is the prototypic
highly specifc. They can reject skin grafts, elicit usual
lentivirus disease, providing insight into the diseases
 ostunaoddo on qunoons sou op pue sasuodssu sunuru
 caused by equine infectious anemia virus, caprine arthri-
infections. The basis for this phenomenon is that virus-
tis-enccphalitis virus, feline immunodeficiency virus, bo-
specific T cells are deleted in a manner identical to the
vine immunodeficiency virus, simian immunodeficiency
deletion of self-reactive T cells—virus-specifc T ceils
viruses (African green monkey, sooty mangabey, stump-
do not leave the thymus. Therefore, the virus is not
 tailed macaque, pig-tailed macaque, Rhesus, chimpan-
recognized as non-self and is not attacked. If virus-spe-
zee, and mandrill viruses), and of course human immu-
cific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (spleen cells or lymph node
 nodeficiency viruscs 1 and 2 (sce Chapter 23). Our under-
 celis) from immune mice are infused into these mice the
standing of the pathogenesis of maedi/visna virus
infection is terminated. Infusion of B cells or CD4· T
infection in sheep has been advanced over years, cspe-
Slouly Progressive Viral Disease
175
cially through the work of the Icelandic scientists who sheep progresses through specific phases. Like human
followed Sigurdsson and by the work of the veterinarian
immunodeficiency virus infection in humans, the early
Narayan and colleagues.
 phase involves very high levels of production and a wide
 dissemination of virus throughout the body (high viral
load). This phase is followed by some immune dampen-
Maedi /Visna Disease (Ovine
ing of viral load and a long prodromal status. This phase
Progressive Pneumonia)
is followed by a resurgence of virus production caused by
the ermergence of immune escape mutants, viral-induced
The pathogenesis of maedi/visna virus infection in sheep, 
 immunosuppression, and secondary irmmunosuppressive
likc that of other lentivirus infcctions of animals, involves 
 effects. This leads to the insidious onset of discase, seen
many fcaturcs that favor the virus over host defenses.
as either cachcxia, dyspnea, and progressivc respiratory
The result is pcrsistent, lifelong infcction, late manifcsta-
distress (maedi) or incoordination, neurogenic weakness,
tions of diseasc, and inevitably death. These pathogenetic 
and progressive neurologic deficit (visna). The long pro-
features may be categorized, as follows.
 dromal (not latent) state and late onset of diseasc ensure
Pathogenetic features pertaining to the nature of
yirus transmission as new generations of susceptible
the virus. Like other lentiviruses, maedi/visna virus is
lambs are born into the flock.
an exogenous, nononcogenic retrovirus, which, in the
Patbogenetic features pertaining to the nature of
course of its replication, inserts its genome into that
the host response. By replicating in macrophages the
of the host cell chromosomal DNA, thereby persisting
virus causes a dysregulation of the immune response.
indefinitcly in the individual infectcd animal (but not in 
The response is exuberant, yet rather inefective in clear-
the population as is the case with cndogenous retrovi-
 ing virus and virus-infected cells. Most importantly,
ruses). The virus has a high mutation ratc-it exists as
there is a specific and progressive immune escape phe-
a quasispecies, a swarm of mutant viruscs constantly
 nomenon (which has been best studied in equine infec-
selected for fit. Mutants that escape host immunity have
tious anemia). The infected animal produces neutralizing
selectivc advantage—many of thesc mutants are more
 antibody but it is not effective in eliminating virus. In-
virulent than parental genotypes.
stead, it selects ccrtain varianrs from among the quasispe.
Pathogenetic features pertaining to the nature of
 cics swarm--variants that reprcsent mostly point dele.
the infection of host cels. Unlike many viruses, maedi/
tions and single base substitutions that are non-
visna and other lentiviruses are able to replicate in nondi-
 neutralizable and proliferate. Curiously, the parental vi-
viding, terminally differentiated cells. In these ceils infec-
rus docs not disappcar—-another evidence of the ineffec-
tion may be activated by host factors (see Chapter 23).
tivcness of the immune response. In equine infectious
In effect, the infection is rather indifferent to many non-
 anemia, sequential episodes of fcver and hemolytic crisis
 specific host defenses and is at the same time activated
 are associated with each round of emergence of a new
by changes associated with stress and physiological dis-
 immune escape variant. In maedi/visna infections, such
turbances
cpisodes are not scen clinically. As virus replication con-
Pathogenetic features pertaining to the nature of
tinues in this way the inflammatory response continues
the infection of host tissues and organs. Maedi/visna
 to build and damage to organs and tissues accelcrates.
virus, like other lentiviruses of ungulates, infects cclls
There is also a host genetic predisposition involved: fatal
of the macrophage lineage. Infection does not involve
 maedi and visna were most pronounced in the highly
lymphocytes, such as is the case in human immunodefi-
 inbred and isolated sheep of Iceland. Much milder dis-
ciency virus infection in humans. This tropism results
 ease is seen in sheep in the United States—visna is not
in thc activation of macrophages and the consequent
 seen and maedi-like disease (called ovine progressive
massive inflammatory infitrations sccn in infected tis-
 pneumonia) is usually so indolent that death is not com-
sues and organs. In turn, this inflammatory response
monly scen,
causcs massive cytokinc release and secondary tissue
All these features serve to illustrate the complexi-
damage. The variation that is seen in the sites of these
 ties of lentivirus disease pathogencsis and the shortcom-
lesions relates to the targcts presented by variant viruses:
ings of the immunc system when faced with this kind
 in visna the result is meningoencephalomyelitis, choroid-
 of infection. Nevertheless, in some countries, prevention
itis, and demyelination; in maedi the result is classic
 and control must be considered. As might be expccted
interstitial pneumonia. This is immunopathologic dis-
from the ineffectiveness of infection immunity, vaccinc
case in its clcarest manifestations, varying in target sites,
 development for lentivirus infections, including maedi/
not in character of lesions.
visna virus infection, has been disappointing—in fact
Pathogenetic features pertaining to the infection
 no lentivirus vaccine candidates have been successful.
in the individual sheep. Maedi/visna virus infection in
 It might be inagined that any vaccine would just
176
[0. Pathogenesis of Viral Diseases: Representative Model Diseases
provoke rhe emergence of further immune escape vari-
inson, eds.), pp. 575-592. Lippincorr-Raven, Philadel-
ants, some of which might be even more virulent than
phia, PA.
those that emerge naturally. The one Achilles' heel in
Joag, S. V., Stephens, E. B., and Narayan, O. (1996). Len-
tiviruses. In *Fields Virology (B. N. Fields, D. M.
the pathogenesis and natural history of the lentiviruses
Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick,
of animals is their rather inefficient transmission: the
T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), pp.
viruscs are only transmitted by body fluids (mucus,
1977-1996. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
milk, etc.—and insccts such as horseflies in the case
 Jones, C. (1998). Alphaherpesvirus latency: Its role in dis-
 of equine infectious anemia). In The Netherlands, a
easc and survival of the virus in nature. Adu, Virus
 Iather successful control program is based on removal
Res. 51, 82-133.
Macartney, I., McCandlish, I. A. P., Thompson, H., and
of clinically affected sheep and their lambs from flocks.
Cornwell, H. J. C. (1984). Canine parvovirus enteritis
Over time this rcduces the exposure of new gencrations
2: Pathogenesis. Vet. Rec. 115, 453-460.
 of lambs to the virus and may even tead to climination
Mahy, B. W. J. (1985). Strategies of virus persistence. Br.
if the chain of transmission is interrupted. Development
Med. Bull. 41, 50-55.
 of this kind of control strategy in othcr parrs of the
Mettenleiter, T. C. (1996). Immunobiology of pscudora-
bies (Aujeszky's disease). Vet. Immunol. Immunopa-
world whcre maedi is a problem, such as Peru, will
thol. 54, 221-229.
require furthcr investigation and proof of concept in
Mins, C. A., and White, D. O. (1984). "Viral Pathogene-
the feld.
sis and Immunology." Blackwell, Oxford.
Mumford, I. A., and Hannant, D. (1996). Equine influ-
enza. In "Virus Infections of Vertebratcs" (M. J. Stud-
Further Reading
dert, ed.), vol. 6, pp. 285-293, Elsevicr, Amsterdam.
Murphy, F. A. (1977). Rabies pathogenesis. A review.
Arch.Virol. 54,279-297.
Ahmed, R., Morrison, L. A., and Knipe, D. M. (1996).
Murphy, F. A., and Nathanson, N. (1997). An atlas of vi-
Persistence of viruses. In *Fields Virology” (B. N.
ral pathogenesis. In "Viral Pathogcnesis" (N. Na-
Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock,
thanson, R. Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. F. Grif-
J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E.
fin, K. V. Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L.
Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., Pp. 219-250. Lippincott-Raven,
Robinson, cds.), Pp. 433-463. Lippincott-Raven, Phil-
Philadelphia, PA.
adelphia, PA.
Appel, M. J. G., and Gillespic, J. H. (1972). Canine dis-
Murphy, F. A., and Peters, C. J. (1998). Ebola virus:
temper virus. Virol. Monogr. 11, 1-153.
Where does it come from and where is it going? In
Babiuk, L. A., Lawman, M. P. J., and Bielefeldt, O. H.
“"Emerging Infections" (R. Krause and A. Fauci, cds.),
(1988). Viral-bacterial synergistic interaction in respira-
pp. 375-410. Academic Press, New York.
tory disease. Adv. Virus Res. 35, 219-250.
Narayan, O., Joag, S. V, Chebloune, Y., Zink, M. C.,
Buchmeier, M. J., and Zajac, A. J. (1998). Lymphocytic
and Clements, J. E. (1997). Visna-Maedi: The Proto-
choriomeningitis virus. In “Persistent Virus Infections
type Lentiviral Disease. In "Viral Pathogenesis” (N.
(R. Ahmed and I. Chen, eds.) pp. 575-605. J. Wiley,
Nathanson, R. Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. F.
Chichester, Sussex.
Griffin, K. V. Holnics, F. A. Murphy, and H. L, Rob-
Conner, M. E., and Ramig, R. F. (1997). Viral enteric dis-
inson, cds.), Pp. 433-463. Lippincott-Raven, Philadel-
eases. In "Viral Pathogenesis” (N. Nathanson,
phia, PA.
R. Ahmed, F. Gonzales-Scarano, D. F. Griffn, K. V.
Notkins, A. L., and Oldstone, M. B. A., eds. (1984,
Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L. Robinson, cds.),
1986, 1989). "Concepts in Viral Pathogenesis," Vol.
pp. 713-743. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
1, 2, and 3. Springer-Verlag, New York.
DeMartini, J. C., Brodie, S. J., de la Concha-Bermejillo,
Parrish, C. R. (1995). Pathogcncsis of feline panleuko-
A., Elis, J. A., and Lairmore, M. D. (1993). Pathogen-
penia virus and canine parvovirus. Bailliere's Clin.
csis of lymphoid interstitial pneumonia in natural and
Haematol. 8, 57-71.
experimental ovine lcntivirus infection. Clin. Infect.
Pedersen, N. C. (199S). An overview of feline entcric co-
Dis. Suppl. 1(S), 236-242.
ronavirus and infections pcritonitis virus infections. Fe-
Gibbs, E. P. J. (1981). Persistent viral infections of food
line Pract. 23, 7-20.
animals: Their relevance to the international move-
Pede1sen, N. C., Addie, D., and Wolf, A. (1995). Rccorm-
ment of livestock and germplasm. Adv. Vet. Sci.
mendations from working groups of the international
Comp. Med. 25, 71-95.
feline enteric coronavirus and feline infectious peritoni-
Hardcr, T. C., and Ostcrhaus, A. I. (1997). Canine dis-
tis workshop. Feline Pract. 23, 108-111.
teniper virus—a morbillivirus in search of new hosts?
Pétursson, G. (1994). Experience with visna virus in Icc-
Trends Microbiol. 5, 120-124.
land. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 724, 43-49.
Hecht, S. J., Sharp, J. M., and DeMartini, J. C. (1996).
Pollock, R. V. H. (1982). Experimental caninc parvovirus 
Retroviral etiology and pathogenesis of ovine pulmo-
infection in dogs. Cornell Vet. 72, 103-119.
nary carcinoma: A critical appraisal. Br. Vet. J. 152,
Wright, P. F. (1997). Respiratory diseases. In "Viral
39S-409.
Pathogenesis" (N. Nathanson, R. Ahmed, F. Gonza-
Jackson, A. C. (1997). Rabics. In *Viral Pathogenesis*
lez-Scarano, D. E. Griffin, K. V. Hlolmes, F. A. Mur-
(N. Nathanson, R. Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. E.
phy, and H. L, Robinson, eds.), pp. 703-743. Lippin-
Griffin, K. V. Holmcs, F. A. Murphy, and H. L. Rob-
cott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
CHaPter
11
Mechanisms of Viral Oncogenesis
Cell Transformation...
177
Oncogenes and Oncoproteins.......
179
Retrovirus Oncogenes and Oncoproteins ..
181
Activation of Cellular Oncogenes...
184
Tumor Induction by Retroviruses ....
185
Tumor Induction by DNA Viruses...
187
Multistep Oncogenesis..
191
Further Reading...
191
The revolution in molecular cell biology during the last
 needed: oncology is the study of tumors or cancers; a
few years has provided remarkable insights into the
 benign tumor is a growth produced by abnormal cell 
 mechanisms of regulation of cell growth and differentia-
 proliferation that remains localized and does not invade
tion, and thesc insights have, in turn, advanced our un-
 adjacent tissue; α malignant tumor, in contrast, is locally
derstanding of thc mechanisms underpinning failures of
invasive and may also be metastatic, i.c., spread to other
regulatory processes that are expressed as cancer. Thc
 parts of the body. Malignant tumors are often referred
genetic changes seen in cancer may bc caused by chemical
to as cancers. Malignant tumors of epithelial cell origin
or physical agents or viruses, but all involve certain com-
are known as carcinomas, whereas those that arise from
mon cellular pathways. Study of thesc pathways in cells
cells of mesenchymal origin are known as sarcomas.
and animals infected with oncogenic viruses is providing
Solid tumors arising from leukocytes are known as
crucial information that pertains to cancers caused by
lympbomas, or if circulating cells are involved leukemias.
nonviral agents as well.
Collectively, cspccially in veterinary medicine, lympho-
Thc discoveries of the viral etiology of avian
 mas and leukemias are known as leukoses. The process of
leukcmia by Ellerman and Bang and of avian sarcoma
development of tumors is termed oncogenesis, synonyms
by Rous in 1908 and 1911, rcspectivcly, were long
for which are tumorigenesis and carcinogenesis.
regarded as curiosities unlikely to be of any fundamen-
tal significance. However, study of these avian viruscs
and related retroviruses of mice has incrcased our
Cell Transformation
Overall understanding of oncogenesis greatly, and since
the 1950s there has been a steady stream of discoveries
 The capacity to study oncogenesis at a molecular level
clearly incriminating other viruses in a variety of benign
was facilitated greatly when it became possible to inducc
and malignant tuinors of numerous species of mam-
 genetic changes in cultured cells that resemble thosc that
mals, birds, amphibians, reptiles, and fsh (Table 11.1).
Occur in cancer—this process is known as cell transfor-
Many avian retroviruses are major pathogens of poul-
mation.
try. Many other retroviruses produce tumors in domes-
Transformed cclls, like cells in malignant tumors,
tic animals and two have bccn implicated as causes of
express distinctivc antigens, called tumor-associated
human leukemia. Some herpesviruses, hepadnaviruses, 
antigens. Cells transformed by nondefective retrovi-
and sevcral papillomaviruscs are also implicated in
ruses also cxpress the full range of viral proteins and
cancers of animals and humans. Ir is noteworthy that
 antigens, and ncw virions bud from their membranes.
the list embraces five families of DNA viruses, but
 In contrast, transformation by DNA viruscs usually
only two families of RNA viruses.
occurs in cells undergoing nonproductive infection. In
 Dcfinitions for a few commonly used terms are
this case, viral DNA is integrated into thc cellular
177
178
11.Mecbanisms of Viral Oncogenesis
Table 11.1
Viruses That Can Induce Tumors in Domestic or laboratory Animals or Humans
FAMILY / GENUS
VIRUS
KIND OF TUMOR
DNA viruses
Poxviridae" / Leporipoxvirus
Rabbit fibroma virus and squirre!
Fibromas and myxomas in rabbits
fibroma virus
and squirrels (hyperplasia rather than
neoplasia}
Poxviridae* / Yatapoxvirus
Yaba monkey tumor virus
Histiocytoma in monkeys
Herpesviridae/ Alphaherpesviringe/
Marek's disease virus
T cell tymphomatosis in fowl
unnamed genus
Herpesviridoe!
 Ateline herpesvirus 2 and saimirine
Nil in natural hosts, iymphomas and
Gammaherpesvirinae/Rhadinovirus
herpesvirus 2
leukemia in certain other monkeys
Herpesviridoe!
Epstein--Barr virus
Burkit's lymphoma, nasopharyngeol 
Gammaherpesvirinae/
carcinoma, and B cell carcinomas in
Lymphocryptovirus
humans and monkeys
Baboon herpesvirus
Lymphoma in baboons
Herpesviridoe!
 Cottontail rabbit herpesvirus
 Lymphoma in rabbits 
Gammaherpesvirinae/ungrouped
Herpesviridae/ungrouped
Lucke frog herpesvirus
 Renal adenocarcinoma in frogs and
tadpoles
Adenoviridae/Mastadenovirus
Many adenoviruses
Solid tumors in newborn rodents, no 
humors in notural hosts
Papovaviridae/ Papillomavirus
Cottontail rabbit papillomavirus
Papillomas, skin cancers in rabbits
Bovine papillomavirus 4
 Papillomas, carcinoma of intestine,
bladder
Bovine papillomavirus 7
Papilomas, carcinoma of eye
 Human papillomaviruses 5,. 8
Squamous cell carcinoma
Human papillomaviruses 16, 18
Genital carcinomas
Papovaviridae/ Polyomavirus
 Murine polyomavirus and simian
Solid tumors in newborn rodents
virus 40
 Reverse transcribing Viruses
Hepadnaviridae/Orthohepadnavirus
Human, woodchuck hepatitis viruses 
Hepatocellular carcinomas in humans 
and woodchucks
Hepadnaviridae/ Avihepadnavirus
 Duck hepalitis virus
Hepatocellular carcinomas in ducks
Retroviridae/Alpharetrovirus
Avian leukosis viruses
Leukosis (lymphoma, leukemio],
osteopetrosis, nephroblastoma in fowl
Rous sarcoma virus
Sarcoma in fowl 
Avian erythroblastosis virus
Erythroblaslosis in fowl
Avian myeloblastosis virus
Myeloblastosis in fowl
Retroviridae/Betarelrovirus
 ShjA owouiooa Aowwow 9snow
Mammary carcinoma in mice
 Mason-Pfizer monkey virus
 Sarcoma and immunodeficiency
disease in monkeys
Retroviridae/ Gammaretrovirus
Feline leukemia virus
Leukemia in cats
 Feline sarcoma virus
 Sarcoma in cats
 Murine leukemia and sarcoma
Leukemia, lymphoma, and sorcoma
viruses
in mice
Avian reticuloendotheliosis virus
Rericuloendotheliosis in fow!
Oncogenes and Oncoproteins
179
TasLle I 1.1--Continued
FAMILY/GENUS
VIRUS
KInd OF TuMOR
Refroviridae/Deltoretrovirus
 Bovine leukemia virus
Leukemia (B cell lymphoma) in catle
 Ovine pulmonary adenocarcinoma
Pulmonary adenocarcinoma in sheep
virus {Jaagsiekte virus)
HTLV 1 and 2 viruses and simian
Adult T cell leukemia and hairy cell
HTLV viruses
leukemia in humans, leukemia in 
monkeys
RNA viruses
Flaviviridoe/ Hepacivirus
Hepatitis C virus
Hepatocellular carcinoma in humans
Not true oncogenic viruses. Theydilfer from allother viruses listed in that poxviruses replicate in cytoplasm and da not affect the cellular genome
DNA of the transformed cells, except in the case of
logueues and some DNA virus genes not known to have
papillomaviruses and herpesviruses where the viral
cellular homologues.
DNA remains episomal.
 In normal cells, c-onc genes are involved in the
Certain virus-specifc antigens are demonstrable
regulation of cell growth, division, and differentiation.
in transformed cells. Some tumor-associated antigens
The proteins they encode, caled oncoproteins, act in five
are expressed on the plasma membrane where, in
 major ways--they serve as (1) growth factors, (2) growth
vivo, they constitute potential targets for immunologic
factor receptors, (3) intracellular signal transducers,
attack, One view of cancer is that it represents a failure
(4) nuclear transcription factors, and (5) cell cycle con-
of immunologic surveillance mechanisms, a failure to
trol proteins.
 eliminate cells expressing tumor-associated antigens on
their surfaces.
Transformed cells differ in many ways from nor-
Table l1.2
mal cells (Table 11.2). One major difference is a loss of
 Characteristics of Cells Transformed by
regulation of cell growth (Figure 11.1); transformed cells
Viruses
may continue to divide in an uncontrolled fashion. This
 can be demonstrated in a variety of ways, including the
Viral DNA sequences present, integrated into cellular DNA
production by such cells of tumors in athymic mice,
or as episomes 
which have defective T cell immunity but do not support
Greater growth potential in vitro
the growth of normal foreign cells. Similarly, this can
Formation of threedimensional colonies of randomly ori-
 be demonstrated in transgenic (knockout) mice lacking
ented cells in monolayer culture, usually due to loss of 
certain immune response genes.
contact inhibition
Capacity to divide indefinitely in serial culture
Higher efficiency of cloning
Oncogenes and Oncoproteins
Capacity to grow in suspension or in semisolid agar (an-
chorage independence)
An important element in our present understanding of
Reduced serum requirement for growth
oncogenesis has comc from the discovery of oncogenes
Altered cell morphology
 by Harold Varrnus and J. Michael Bishop. Oncogenes
were originally found in retroviruses, where they are
Altered cell metcbolism and membrane changes 
collectively referred to as v-onc genes. For each of the
Chromosomal abnormalities
more than 60 v-onc genes identified so far there is a
Virus-specified tumor-associated antigens
corresponding normal cellular gene, which is referred to
 Some at the cel surface behave as tumor-specific trans-
as a c-onc gene, or as a proto-oncogene, a term that
plantation antigens
suggests the origin of v-onc genes of retroviruses. The
New intracellular antigens (e.g., T antigens) 
term oncogene is now applied broadly to any genetic
Capacily to produce malignant neoplasms when inoculated 
element associated with cancer induction, including
into isologous or severely immunosuppressed animals
some cellular genes not known to have viral homo
180
1.
Mecbmisns of Viral Oncogenesis
Figure 11.1.
Transformation of a rat fibroblast cell line by different viruses. (A} Normal F1ll cells. (B) Cells transformed by Rous sarcoma virus. [C) Cells
transformed by Harvey murine sarcoma virus. (D) Cells transformed by Abelson leukemia virus. (El Cells transformed by mouse polyomavirus.
{F}Polymavirransfoedcellinsgar)CelsransfomedbyV0H}Celsansfoed by siminadenvirus7[FrmRevins
cnd P.K.Vog. Cellrasfomalion by viruses.nFieds Virology(B.N.Fields,D.MKnipe, P.M.Howley, R.M, Chanock,J.LMelnick, T. P.
Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.1], 3rd ed., pp. 301-344. Lippincol-Raven, Philadelphia PA, 1996. With pemission.]
Tumor Suppressor Genes and Cell
that they hold the cell at the G1 phase (Figure 11.2).
Cycle Control Proteins
 This rcgulatory role may be ablated by mutations in
tumor suppressor genes or by the binding of other
Cell cycle control proteins arc encoded by a complctely
 oncoproteins to these genes. It is estimated that at
different class of cellular genes from the gcncs encoding
least half of all canccrs, including those caused by
othcr proteins involved in oncogenesis—these are called 
viruses, may bc associated with altered tumor suppres-
tumor suppressor genes—they play essential regulatory
sor genes.
roles in normal cell division. Their protein products
 Retinoblastoma (Rb) and p53 tumor suppresso1
are involved in negative regulation of the cell cycle in
1 proteins each block the progression of the cell cycle at
Retrouvirus Oncogenes and Oncoproteins
181
Figure 1I.2.
The oncoprotein products of the various retroviral
oncogenes act in many different ways to affect cell
growth, division, differentiation, and homeostasis. A re-
markable amount of inforrmation is available about the
mechanism of action of the oncoproteins of the major
Rb
retrovirus pathogens of animals. It is clear that v-onc
p53
genes differ from c-onc genes in several significant ways:
G1
s
· v-onc genes usually contain only that part of their
 corresponding c-onc gcne that is transcribed into
messenger RNA—in most instances they lack the in-
trons that arc so characteristic of eukaryotic genes.
* v-onc genes arc separated from the cellular context
that normally controls gene expression, including
Cell cyce rgets of viral oncoproteins. Cellcyclemay behel in
thc normal promoters and other sequences that regu-
G1 because of disruption of the normal action of p53 or Rb tumor
latc c-onc gcne expression.
suppressor proteins. Various DNA tumor virus oncoproteins act
disrupnormal conrolbyRband3,allwinguncnrolledcel
y-onc genes are under the control of the viral long
division.FrmJ.R.Nevins, andP.KVog.Cellransformaonby
terminal repeats (LTRs), which are not only strong
viruses. In"Fiels Virology'(β. N.Fields, D. M.Knipe, P. M.Howley,
R.M.,Chanock, J.L.Melnick,T.P.Monath,B.Roizman, and S.E.
promoters but are also influenced by cellular regula-
Stseddd34iinRi,
tory factors. For some retrovirus v-onc genes, such
PA, 1996. With permission.]
as myc and mos, the presence of viral LTRs is all
that is nceded for tumor induction.
* v-onc genes may undergo mutations (deletions and
G1. The p53 protein, in response to various signals,
rearrangcments) that alter the structure of their pro-
also plays a role in triggering programmed cel dcath
tein products; such changes can interfere with nor-
 mal protcin-protcin interactions leading to escape
(apoptosis). Adenovirus E1B oncoprotein inhibits the
action of these two key tumor suppressor protcins and
from normal regulation.
thereby drives an otherwise resting (in G1) cell to enter
 sa  r mi    s oa
S phase. The expression of the viral E1B gene in a cell
such a way that their functions are modifed. For ex-
ample, in Abelson murine leukemia virus the v-abl
ders p53 protein inactive, leading to uncontrolled cell
 gene is expressed as a fusion protein with a gag pro-
growth.
tein; this arrangement directs the fusion protein to
thc plasma membranc where the Abl protein func-
tions. In felinc leukemia virus the v-onc gene fms is
also expressed as a fusion protein with a gag pro-
Retrovirus Oncogenes
tcin, thus allowing thc insertion of the Fms onco-
and Oncoproteins
protein in the plasma mcmbrane.
Retrovirus v-onc' genes are not cssential for viral replica-
 As with c-onc gcnes and gcne products in normal
tion; rather, these genes have been acquired over timc
cells, the mechanisms of action of the various v-onc
by the viruscs and have bccn selected for, most likcly
 genes and the proteins they encode are assigned to major
because they cause cellular transformation, which in turn
classes: (1) growth factors, (2) growth factor receptors
favors viral growth and perpetuation in nature. Many
and hormone receptors, (3) intracellular signal transduc-
retroviruscs carrying a v-onc gene are replication defec-
ers, and (4) nuclear transcription factors (Table 11.3 and
tive and arc always found in the company of a replica-
Figure 11.3).
tion-competent helper virus that supplies missing func-
tions, such as an environmentally stable envelopc. The
advantage to both viruses is presumably that when thcy
Retroviral Oncoproteins That Act
 are together they can infect more cells and produce more
as Growth Factors
progeny of both viruses.
Only onc cxamplc of an oncogenc encoding a growth
factor analoguc is known, v-sis, which codes for one of
By convention, v-onc gcnes, such as sre, are designated in lowercase
and in italics; tlhe oncoproteins they encode, such as Src protein,are
the two polypeptide chains of platelet-derived growth
designated in Roman script, with the first letter capitalized.
factor (PDGF). This oncogenc, under the control of the 
182
11. Mechanisms (of Viral Cncogencsis
Table 11.3
Retroviral Oncogenes and Functions of Oncoproteins They Encodea
VInAL
 SuBcELlulaR location of
Nature or oncoprotein/
ONCOGENE
VIRUS
ONCOGENE PRODUCT
 ASSOCIATED TUMORS
Retoviral oncogenesthat encode growth facors
V-sis
Feline leukemia virus
 Secreted and cytoplasm
 Plateletderived growth factor/
 Simian sarcoma virus
leukemia, sarcoma
Reroviral oncogenes that encode growth factor receptors and hormone receptors
v-erbB
Avian leukosis virusesh
 Plasma membrane
Truncated epidermal growth factor
receplor/erythroblastosis
v-erbA
 Avian leukosis virusest
Nucleus
Thyroxine receptor; activated form
prevents differentiation/erythroblastosis
v-fms
 Feline sarcama virus
Plasma membrane
Mutated CSf-1 receplor/sarcoma
Relroviral oncogenes that encode intracelar signal transducers (plasma membrane-associated tyrosine kinases)
v-src
Rous sarcoma virus
Cytoplasm
Tyrosine phosphokinase/sarcoma
v-fps and
Avian sarcoma viruses
Cytoplasm 
Tyrosine phosphokinase/leukemia and
v-fesc
 Feline leukemia and 
sarcoma
sarcoma viruses
v-ob!
Feline leukemia virus and
Cytoplasm
Tyrosine phosphokinase/leukemia and
murine leukemia viruses
sorcoma
 Retroviral oncogenes that encode intracellular signal transducers (cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinases)
v-mos
Murine leukemia viruses
Cytoplasm
Serine/threonine kinase (cytostatic
factor)/leukemia and sarcoma
Retroviral oncogenes that encode intracellular signal transducers (membrane-ossociated GTP-binding proteins)
v-Ha-ras
 Murine sarcoma viruses
 Plasma membrane
GTP-binding protein/sarcoma
Retroviral oncogenes that encode intracellular signal transducers Icytoplasmic regulatory proteins!
Avian leukemia viruses
Cytoplasm
Signaling protein/sarcoma
Retroviral oncogenes that encode nuclear transcription faclors
v-myc
Feline leukemia virus and
Nucleus
Binds to DNA; regulates lranscription/
avian leukemia viruses
iymphoma and myeloblastosis
oOncogenes are designated by three lelters in lowercase ond italics.
mes, respectively
 powerful enhancer/promoter complex in the viral LTR,
cell nucleus, For example, the v-erbB oncogene product
induces fibroblasts to synthesize a growth factor that
is a modified epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor
they do not normally express. This leads, in cell culture,
that retains tyrosine kinase activity. In normal cells this
to immortalization of fbroblasts and, in vivo, possibly
kinase becomes activated only after the binding of circu-
to the induction of malignant tumors.
lating epidermal growth factor to the receptor. However,
in thc presence of the v-erbB gene product, ErbB, the
enzyme is activated permanently, phosphorylating any
Retroviral Oncoproteins That Act
intracytoplasmic protein in its vicinity, thereby initiating
as Growth Factor Receptors
a cascade of events culminaring in the transmission of
conflicting signals to the nucleus. In some cells this results
and Hormone Receptors
in uncontrolled growth.
The product of the v-erbA gene mimics the intracel-
 In normal cells, growth factor receptors bind particular
lular receptor for thyroid hormonc. This oncoprotcin,
 growth factors, thereby sending a growth signal to the
ErbA, competes with the natural receptor for the hor-
Retrorirus Oncogenes and (Oncoproteins
183
Figure 11.3.
Growth factor (l)
Growth factor receptor (Il)
 Intracellular
Intracellular
J effector region
transducers (lll)
Second messengers
Intracellular
receptors (II)
(phosphorylated proteins)
Nucieus
Transcriptionfactors(IV)
DNAY
XXC
Cellular growth control involves st
es For which can give rise to oncogenes. They include Il growth factors,
[llgrowfactorreceplorsandhrmonereceporsllinracelarsignalransducersand(IV}uclearranscripionfactors.Adaedom
H. Lodish, D. Baltimore, and A. Berk, "Molecuiar Cell Biology," 3rd ed. wirh CD ROM. Scientific American Books/Freeman, New York, 1995.)
mone, causing uncontrolled growth. In avian erythro-
The best understood of thc v-onc genes that act
 blastosis virus, v-erbA and v-erbB oncogenes act syner-
as signal transducers are Ha-ras and Ki-ras; thcir cellular
gistically to cause uncontrolled cell growth.
equivalents were the first nonviral oncogcnes to bc dis-
covered. Most Ras protein molecules exist in an inactive
state in the resting cell, wherc thcy bind guanosine di-
Retroviral Oncoproteins That Act as
phosphatc. When they receive a physioiogic stimulus
Intracellular Signal Transducers
from a transmembrane receptor thcy arc tcmporarily
activated, leading to the synthesis of guanosine triphos-
 Most retrovirus v-onc genes mediate their oncogenic ef-
phate, one of the key ingredicnts in DNA synthesis. ras
fects by altering signal transduction pathways (Figure
 genes acquire transforming properties by mutational
11.4). Signal transduction pathways link the cell surface
 changes, mostly point mutations at specifc sites, which
to synthetic and regulatory functions in the nucleus.
stabilize Ras proteins in their active statc. This causes a
Taken together, the various v-onc genes encode proteins
continuous flow of signal, leading to malignant transfor-
that interfere at virtually every step along these
mation.
pathways.
 A typical growth signal arrives at the surface of
the cell in the form of a polypeptide growth factor
Retroviral Oncoproteins That Act as
(ligand) that binds to its specific receptor. The receptor,
Nuclear Transcription Factors
often an integral membrane protein with tyrosine kinase
activity, is activated by binding the ligand; i.e., its
By one mechanism or another, the activity of oncogenes 
kinase activity is switched on, resulting in autophos-
 evcntually results in a change in gene expression in the
phorylation of specific residues in the tail of the mole-
cell nucleus. In most cascs this effect is indirect, as noted
cule that protrudes into thc cytoplasm. Thc signal is
earlier; however, somc oncogenes encode proteins that
propagated further by spccific sequcntial protcin/pro-
bind to DNA or dircctly affect transcription. The v-jun
 gene product is homologous to AP-1, an important tran-
toplasrmic proteins and cvcntually the signal reachcs
scription factor, which can bind tightly to another nuc-
the nucleus. The ultimate rccipients of the propagated
lear oncoprotein, Fos. The oncoproteins that switch on
signal are transcription factors that up-regulate specific
v-jun so that it begins to direct the synthesis of Jun protein
sets of gcncs and start a cascade of synthesis that leads
are componcnts of mitotic signal chains—-v-jun induces
to cell growth.
cancer through its role as a transcriptional regulator.
184
1.
Mechanmisnis of Viratl Oncogenesis
Figure l1.4.
EGF
Epldermai growth factor (EGR) blnds to the
EGFreceptor,Induclng dlmerization,The
tyrosinekinase activityof thereceptor ls
Increased:regulatory tyrosnes in the cytoplasmic
EGFReceptor
tall of the receptor become phosphorylafed.
The adaptor proteln Grb2, which contains
Sos
of Grb2 are recognzed by the Sos proteln.
Grb
Ras
The Grb2-Sos complex binds to Ros, a GTPase.
Sosservesasanucleotideexchangefactorfor
Ras. moving Ras into the GTP-bound active state.
GTP-Rasbindstothecytoplasmicserine/
Raf
threonine kinase Raf, elevating Its catalytic
activlfy.
Activated Raf hliates akinase cascade
MAPKinase
(MAP kinase).
The signal becomes franslocated to the
nucieus.detalls unknown.Therelfresults
in the activation of transcrption factors
TranscriptionFactors
An example of amulistep signal transduction pathway.The epidermal growth facor(EGF] receplorforms thefrst link in a chain conecting the
cell surface and synthetic and regulalory funclions in the nucleus. The signal is propagated by specilic sequentiol proteinprotein interactions
exampleriosngeneprdtssuhsafRassand,affect thispwaydingconroldcellgrwandisi.
[From J. R. Nevins, and P. K. Vogt. Celtransformation by viruses. In *Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M., Chanock,
J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Sraus, eds.1), 3rd ed., pp. 301-344. Lippincon-Raven, Philadelphia, PA, 1996.]
Activation of
oncogenic avian leukosis viruses, which lack a v-onc
Cellular Oncogenes
 gene, produce tumors. When avian leukosis viruscs cause
 malignant tumors, thc viral genome is generally found
to be integrated at a particular location, immediately
Therc is evidence that c-onc genes may themselves bc
upstream from a c-onc gene. Intcgrated avian leukosis
responsiblc for some oncogenic transformations. It is
 provirus increases the synthesis of the normal c-myc
not difficult to imagine a tumor arising from overexpres-
 oncogene product 30- to 100-fold. Experimentally, only
 sion or inappropriate expression of a c-onc gene, e.g-.
the LTR need be integrated to cause this effect; further-
in the wrong cell or at the wrong time. Such abnormal
 more, by this mechanisn c-myc may be expressed in
C-onc gene expression may occur in a variety of ways.
cells in which it is not normally expressed or is normally
expressed at much lower levels.
Oncogene Activation via
Oncogene Activation via Transposition
Insertional Mutagenesis
The prescnce upstream fron a c-onc genc of an inte-
Transposition of c-onc genes may result in their en-
 grated provirus, with its strong promoter and enhancer 
 hanced exprcssion by bringing them under the control
clemcnts, may amplify the expression of the c-onc gene 
 of strong promoter and enhancer elements. For instance,
greatly. This is thc likely mcchanism whcrcby thc wcakly
the 8:14 chroimosomal translocation that characterizes
Tumor Induction by Retrorirnses
185
Burkitt's lymphoma (a tumor of African children associ-
moted production of the viral oncoprotein will readily
 ated with Epstein-Barr herpesvirus infection) brings the
exceed that of the normal cellular oncoprotein. The re-
C-myc gene into position just downstream of a strong im-
sult can be uncontrolled cell growth.
 munoglobulin promoter. v-onc genes may be transposed
from their initial site of integration in a similar way.
Tumor Induction
Oncogene Activation via
by Retroviruses
Gene Amplification
Retroviruses are the major cause of leukemias and
Amplification of oncogenes is a feature of many tumors;
 lymphomas in many species of animals, including cattle,
for example, a 30-fold increase in the number of c-ras
 cats, nonhuman primates, mice, and chickens. They are
gene copies is found in a cell line derived from a human
 also the cause of certain rare forms of leukemia in hu-
cancer and the c-myc gene is amplified in several human 
 mans. Oncogenic retroviruses are subdivided in two
tumors. The increase in gene copy number leads to a
 ways; according to whether they are replication compe-
corresponding increase in the amount of oncogene prod-
tent or replication-defective and according to whether
uct, thus producing cancer.
they are endogenous or exogenous.
Oncogene Activation via Mutation
Replication-Competent and Replication
Defective Retroviruses
Mutation in a c-onc gene, e.g., c-ras, may alter the func-
tion of the corresponding oncoprotein. Such mutations
The genome of a typical replication-competent retrovirus
can occur either in situ as a result of chemical or physical
(Figure 11.5 A) consists of two identical copies of a
mutagenesis or in the course of recombination with inte-
 positive sense, single-stranded RNA molecule, each of
grated retroviral DNA. Given the high error rate of re-
which has three genes: gag, encoding core proteins; pol,
verse transcription, v-onc gene homologues of c-onc
encoding the reverse transcriptase; and env, encoding
 genes will always carry mutations and the strongly pro-
 envelope glycoproteins. A second kind of rapidly onco-
Figure 11.5.
RNA
gag
po!
env
A3
Viral RNA
+
gag
po
enV
IRU3
LLU3IR
Provirus
LTR
[A]3
Q
ly(A)3
Simplied diagrams of the slructure of retrovirus genomes and inegrated provirus; in A, C, and D only one of the two idenfical RNAmolecules
ishow. (A)The genome of  repliatin-comefent slowly transfoming retrovirus. The mcjor cocing regions gog, pol, and envencode the virdl
proteins. The 5'teminus is capped and the 3' terminus is polyadenylated. A short sequence, R, is repeated at both ends of the molecue, wherecs
unique sequences, U5 and U3, are located near the 5' and 3' termini, immediately proximal to R. There is a 16-18 nucleotide sequence adjacent
tU5,the prieriningsitewhichiscomplemenarye3'teminus fatNAwhichbinds tind actss prinefrrevrse transcrip.
(BProvirus,o-strnedDAisintgtedintcellrNhgenmeisfnkedatehminsbyddiinal seqence
the long erminal repeat(TR}Eachlong teminal repeotcomprisesU3,ndU5plus short inverted repeat sequences{(R}t the distalend.3
conlains the pramoter (P} and enhancer (E) sequences, as well s several other sequences with important functions. [C) The genome ofa replication
defeclive rapidly ransforming rerovirus. A v-onc gene (wavy line) has replaced all of the pof and part of the gag and env genes. D) The genome
pol, and env genes.
186
11.Mechanisms of Viral Oncogenesis
ed  na   a   q  t 't poe e s oae soxa 
v-onc, that is responsible for the rapid malignant change  to progeny (i.e., via ova or sperm) and may thus be
in infected ceils. Because the oncogene is usually incorpo-
 perperuated in every cell of every individual of certain
rated into the viral RNA in place of part of one or
vertebrate species. Such proviral genomes are under the
more normal viral genes (Figure 11.5 C), such viruses
control of cellular regulatory genes and are normally
are usually defective, i.e., they are dependent on nonde-
completely silent in normal animals. Such retroviruses
fective helper retroviruses for their replication. However,
are said to be endogenous (Table 11.4). Expression of
 Rous sarcoma virus is atypical in that its genome con-
such proviruses can be induced by various factors such
tains a viral oncogene (v-src) in addition to complete 
as irradiation and exposure to mutagenic or carcinogenic
functioning gag, pol, and env genes (Figure 11.5 D)-
chemicals or hormonal or immunological stimuli, so that
 -d re junados uodi si sa eos sno
virions may be produced in some circumstances with
idly oncogenic.
some viruses.
 In evolutionary terms, retroviral oncogenes have
 In contrast, other retroviruses behave as more typi-
very recently been derived from the host, most likely
cal infectious agents, spreading horizontally to con-
from the species from which the virus was isolated. There
tacts---they are said to be exogenous.
is little evidence thar the defective rapidly transforming
Most endogenous retroviruses never produce dis-
viruses are transmitted effciently. Retroviruses, in gen-
ease, cannot transform cultured cells, and contain no
eral, are transmitted horizontally very ineffciently, and
 Oncogene in their genome. Most exogenous retroviruses,
because rapidly transforrming viruses kill their hosts
 however, are oncogenic; some characteristically induce
quickly there is even less chance of transmission. Al-
leukemias or lymphomas, others sarcoinas, and yet oth-
though the virushost recombination events that give rise
ers carcinomas, usually displaying a predilection for a
to new oncogene-carrying viruses are probably very rare,
particular target cell (Table 11.5).
Darwinian selection of such viruses is very efficient-
 Exogenous retroviruses can be subdivided further
such viruses are amplifed in rapidly growing tumors and
 into rapidly oncogenic and slowly oncogenic viruses. The
 preferentially transmitted in certain circumstances, such
rapidly oncogenic sarcoma viruses, like Rous sarcoma
as between chickens in usual commercial husbandry
virus, are the most rapidly acting carcinogens known,
systerms.
transforming culrured cells in a day or so and causing
death in chickens in as little as 2 weeks after infection.
These properties are attributable to the v-onc gene, which
Endogenous and
they carry as part of their genome. Most exogenous
Exogenous Retroviruses
retroviruses carry only one particular v-onc gene, e.g.,
v-src in the case of Rous sarcoma virus. The genomes
A complete DNA copy of the genome (known as the
 of slowly transforming viruses contain no v-onc gene,
provirus) of one, or sometimes more than one, retrovirus
but can induce B cell, T cell, or myeloid leukemia with
Table 1 1.4
 Comparison of Endogenous and Exogenous Retroviruses
Exogenous RitroviRusEs
SLOWLY TRANSFORMING OR
RAPIDLY TRANSFORMING OR
CHARACTERISTIC
Endogenous RetrovirusEs
ciS-ACTING RETROVIRUS
Transducing retrovirus
Transmission
Vertical igerm line!
Horizontol
Horizontal
Expression
Usually not, but inducible
Yes
Yes
Genome
Complete
Complete
Defectiveo
 Replication
Independent
Independent
Requires helper?
Oncogene
Absent
Absent
 Present
Tumorigenicity
Nil, or rarely leukemia
Leukemia affer long incubation
 Sarcoma, leukemia, or carci-
period
noma, affer short incubation 
in vitro transformation
No
No
Yes
"Except for Rous sarcoma virus.
Iumror lndnction by DNA Viruses
187
Table l1.5
Mechanisms of Oncogenicity of Retrovirusesa
EFFICIENCY
ABILTY TO
TUMOR
OF TUMOR
ONCOGENIC
STATE OF VIRAL
ViRUS CATEGORY
LATENCY PERIOD
FORMATION
EFFECTOR
GENOME
 CultuReD cells
Transducing
Short (days) 
High (can in-
Cell-derived on-
Viral-cellular chi-
Yes
retroviruses
volve 100% of
cogene carried
mera, replication
animals)
 in viral genome
defective
cisactivating
Intermediate
High to interme-
Cellular onco-
Intact, replica-
No
retroviruses
(weeks to
diate
gene activaled in
tion-competent
months)
 situ by provirus
genome
transactivating
Long (months to
Very low [<1%)
Virus-coded regu-
Intact, replica-
Na
retroviruses
years)
latory protein 
tion-competent
controlling tran-
genome
scription
"From J. R. Nevins and P. K. Vogt, Cell transformation by viruses. In "Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M.
Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed.,p. 301-344. LippincotRaven, Philadelphia, PA, 1996.
low effciency and after a much longer incubation period.
and thus usurping normal cellular regulation of this gene;
For example, avian leukosis viruses, which are endemic
in many chicken flocks, produce lifelong viremia, which
   i nd i e  sn
usually causes no disease. However, a small percentage
transcription from the viral long terminal repeat or inter-
 of birds late in life develop a wide variety of tumors
fere with the transcriptional control of specific cellular
involving the hematopoietic system and even fewer birds
genes.
develop solid tumors—sarcomas, carcinomas,
pue
 Because most transducing retroviruses have lost
endotheliomas—as c-onc genes are activated
1(see
 part of their genome in the course of the original recom-
Chapter 23).
bination event that led to the acquisition of a c-onc gene
(now a v-onc gene), they are replication defective and
rely on a helper retrovirus for their replication that is
Mechanisms of Tumor Induction
always found with them in the host animal. Transducing
retroviruses transform cells rapidly both in vitro and in
by Retroviruses
vivo. Whereas cis-activating retroviruses are replication
The replication cycle of retroviruses is described in Chap-
competent, induce tumors more slowly, and do not trans-
ter 23, but certain aspects associated with the integration
form cells in culture, trans-activating retroviruses either
of the DNA copy of the RNA genome into the cellular
have no oncogenic activity or induce tumors very late
DNA need to be described here in order to explain ret-
by affecting cellular transcription.
roviral oncogenesis. When released in the cytoplasm, the
single-stranded RNA genome is converted to double-
stranded DNA, which is integrared into the chromo-
Tumor Induction 
somal DNA as provirus (Figure 11.5B). The expression
DNA Viruses
of mRNA from the provirus is under the control of the
viral transcriptional regulatory sequences, which include
promotcr and enhancer elcments that are located in the
Although retroviruses are the most important oncogenic
long tciminal repeats. In some ways, the proviral DNA
viruses in animals, certain DNA viruses are also impor-
behaves like other chromosomal genes, segrcgating dur-
tant as known causes of cancers (Table 11.1). DNA
 ing mitosis and in some cases gaining access to the germ
S     n  n s r
line of the animal.
(1) productive infection, in which the virus completes
Retroviruses producc tumors in one of three ways:
 its replication cycle, resulting in cell lysis, or (2) nonpro-
(1) transducing retroviruses introduce a v-onc gene into
ductive infection, in which the virus transforms the
the chroinosome of the cell; (2) cis-activating retrovi-
cell without completing its replication cycle. During
ruses, which lack a v-onc gene, transform cells by becom-
such nonproductive infection, the viral genome or a
ing integrated in the host cell DNA close to a c-onc gene
truncated version of it is integrated into the cellular
11.Mechbeisms of Viraf Oncogenesis
188
DNA or, alternatively, the complete genome persists
Tumors Induced by Polyomaviruses
as an autonomously replicating plasmid (episome). The
 and Adenoviruses
genome continues to express early gene functions. The
molecular basis of oncogenesis by DNA viruses is best 
During the 1960s and 1970s two members of the
understood for polyomaviruses, papilomaviruses, and
family Papovaviridae, genus Polyomavirus, murine
adenoviruses, all of which contain genes that behave
 polyomavirus and simian virus 40 (SV40), as well as
as oncogenes, including tumor suppressor genes (Table
certain human adenoviruses (types 12, 18, and 31),
were found to induce malignant tumors following
11.6).
 These oncogenes appear to act by mechanisms sim-
 inoculation into baby hamsters and other rodents. With
ilar to those described for retrovirus oncogenes: they act
 the exception of murine polyomavirus, none of these
primarily in the nucleus, where they alter patterns of
viruses induces cancer under natural conditions in its
gene expression and regulation of cell growth. In every
natural host, they transform cultured cells of certain
case the relevant genes encode early proteins having a
other species (Figure 11.1) and provide good experi-
dual role in viral replication and cell transformation.
 mental models for analysis of the molecular events in
With a few possible exceptions, the oncogenes of DNA
cell transformation.
viruses have no homologue or direct ancestors (c-onc
 Polyomavirus- or adenovirus-transformed cells do
 genes) among cellular genes of the host.
 not produce virus. Viral DNA is integrated at multiple
 The protein products of DNA virus oncogenes are
 sites in the chromosomes of the cell. Most of the inte-
multifunctional, with particular functions that mimic
grated viral genomes are complete in the case of the
functions of normal cellular proteins related to particular
 polyomaviruses, but defective in the case of the adenovi-
domains of the folded protein molecule. They interact
 ruses. Only certain early viral genes are transcribed, al-
with host cell proteins at the plasma membrane or within
beit at an unusually high rate. By analogy with retrovirus
the cytoplasm or nucleus. Polyoma middle T protein
 genes, they are now called oncogenes. Their products,
(Py-mT), for example, interacts with c-src, resulting in
demonstrable by immunofluorescence, used to be known
increased levels of the protein kinase activiry of Src
 as tumor (T) antigens. A great deal is now known about
protein.
the role of these proteins in transformation. For exampie,
Table 11.6
Oncogene proDuct
VIRUs
ONCOGENE
FUNCTION
LOCATION
Adenoviruses
EIA
Regulatestranscription
Nucleus
E1B
?
Nucleus, membranes
Papillomaviruses
E5
 Signaling
Nuclear membrane
E6
 Transcription/replication
Nucleus, cytoplasm
E7
Transcription/replication
Nucleus, cytoplasm
Polyomaviruses (murine polyoma virus)
Py-t
Regulates phosphatase activity
Cytoplasm, (nucleus)
Py-mT
Binds and regulates product of c-src and 
Plasma membrane
related kinases
Py-T
Transcription/replication
Nucleus
Polymaviruses [simian virus 40}
SV-t
Regulates phosphatase activity
Cytoplasm, nucleus 
SV-T
Iniliates DNA synthesis, regulates tran-
 Plasma membrane, nucleus
scription
Tumor lnduction by DNA Viruses
189
Py-mT of polyomavirus (like the product of the v-ras
 Bovine papillomavirus 4 does not have an open
 gene of retroviruses) seems to bring about the change in
 reading frame E6, which is present in most other papilo-
cell morphology and enables the cells to grow in suspen-
 maviruses; the E6 gene product binds to p53 and it is
sion in semisolid agar medium as well as on solid sub-
this intcraction that is linked to cell proliferation. In the
strares (anchorage independence), whereas Py-T, like the
casc of the bovine virus, transformation has becn
 product of the v-myc gene of retroviruses, is responsible
mapped to E7 and E8 gencs. The E7 protein possesses
for the reduction in dependence of the cells on serum
conscrved motifs required for interaction with Rb (reti-
 and enhances their life span in culture.
noblastoma) protein, a potent tumor suppressor gene.
Virus can be rescued from polyomavirus-trans-
Cattle vaccinated with E7 protein undergo early regres-
formed cells, ie., virus can be induced to replicate, by
sion of papillomas, pointing to the rolc of E7 as a tumor
irradiation, treatment with certain mutagenic chemicals,
 rejcction antigen and as a candidate therapcutic vaccine.
or cocultivation with certain types of permissive cells.
The viral E8 protein, which localizes in the cell mcm-
This cannot be done with adenovirus-transformed cells,
brane, confers the capacity for anchorage-independent
as the integrated adenovirus DNA contains substantial
growth to in vitro-transformed cells and mutations of
dcletions.
E8 abrogate this property.
It should bc stressed that the integration of viral
In hot, sunny climates, such as in northern Austra-
 DNA does not necessarily lead to transformation. Many
lia and Texas, viral papillomas around the eye and on
 Or most episodes of integration of papovavirus or adeno-
 hairless or nonpigmented patches of skin, particulaly
virus DNA have no recognized biological consequence.
 of polled Hereford cattle, may become malignant; ultra-
Transformation by these viruses in experimental systems
violet light is considered a cofactor for thc virus in the
is a rare event, requiring that the viral transforming genes 
 progression of thesc papillomas to malignant carci-
be integrated in the location and orientation needed for
nomas.
their cxprcssion, Even then, many transformed cells re-
 Certain human papillomaviruses initiate changes
vert (abortive transformation). Furthermore, cells dis-
 that lead to malignant carcinomas. Papillomaviruses 16
playing the characteristics of transformation do not nec-
 and 18 induce cervical dysplasia that may progress to
essarily produce tumors.
invasive carcinoma. The viral genome, in the form of
an unintcgrated, autonomously replicating episome, is
found regularly in the nuclci of premalignant cells in
Tumors Induced by Papillomaviruses
cervical dysplasia. In contrast, cells in invasive cervical
carcinomas contain chromosomally integrated DNA of
Papillomaviruses produce papillomas (warts) on the skin
human papillomaviruses 16 or 18. Each cell carries at
and mucous membranes of most animal species. These
least onc, and some up to hundreds, of incoinplete copics
-a e sqmoino ssediady ae sio uug
 of the viral genome. Integration disrupts one of the carly
ally regress spontaneously. Occasionally, however, they
 genes, E2, and other genes may be deleted, but the viral
may progress to malignancy. There is evidence that co-
 oncogencs E6 and E7 remain intact and are expressed
factors may be required.
efficiently and cause the malignant transformation.
One of the most instructive models is bovine papil-
lomavirus, of which seven types are recognized (see
 Chaptcr 20). Different bovine papillomaviruses are asso-
Tumors Induced by Hepadnaviruses
ciated with the development of tumors in different sites.
In the Scottish Highlands, multiple benign papillomas
 Mammalian and avian hepadnaviruses are associatcd
are common but only cattle that consume bracken fern
strongly with naturally occurring hepatocellular carcino-
develop carcinoina of the alimentary tract or bladder.
 mas in their native hosts. Chronically infected wood-
Mature virions are demonstrable readily in papillomas
but arc absent from carcinomas. However, in situ hybrid-
 abscncc of other carcinogenic factors. Duck hepatitis
ization with a labeled bovine papillomavirus 4 DNA
- shi in si q olo nou d s s
probe reveals that the cells of carcinomas contain the
 gratcd DNA has been found in mycotoxin-associated
viral genome, not integrated but frce, in the form of a
 hepatocellular carcinomas in Pekin ducks. Oncogenesis
closed circular molecule of double-stranded DNA. Viral 
 by mammalian hepadnaviruses is a multifactorial pro-
DNA is also found in distant metastatic tumors, ruling
cess. These viruses contain a protein, HBx, which stimu-
out the possibility that it represents contamination from
lates transcription of many growth-activating host cell
papillomas. The fact that it is all episomal indicates that
genes (e.g., C-myc and c-fos) and possibly inhibits cellular
integration of viral DNA is not required for the induction
 growth suppressor proteins. HBx protein can comple-
of malignancy.
ment E1A-defective adenoviruses. Deregulated overcx-
190
11.Mechanisms of Viral Oncogenesis
 pression of HBx and viral surface proteins is often found
 be weakened by suppression of Epstein--Barr virus mem-
in the carly stages of hepatocellular carcinoma. In carci-
 brane antigen expression and by blocking prograrmmed
 noma cells, the viral genome is integrated at five to seven (
 cell death mediated by tumor necrosis factor. Some Bur-
sites scattcred through the genome. Insertional activation
kitt's lymphomas also have mutations in the cellular
of positive growth factors, such as N-Myc in wood-
 tumor suppressor gene p53. It has been proposed that
chucks, has been described. Furthermore, host cell DNA
Burkitt's lymphoma develops in three stages: (1) Ep-
seems to be destabilized by hepadnavirus DNA, leading
 stein-Barr virus infection arrests B cell differentiation
to gene rearrangcments, deletions, and cven chromo-
and stimulates cell division, thereby enhancing the prob-
somal translocations. The hepatocellular regeneration
 ability of chromosomal damage; (2) an environmental
accompanying cirrhosis of the liver also promotes the
 cofactor, postulated to be jnfection with the malaria
development of tumors. The likelihood of hepadnavirus-
parasite Plasmodium falciparum, impairs the capacity
 associated carcinoma is greatest in animals (and humans)
 of Tc cells to control this proliferation of Epstein-Barr
infected at birth.
virus-immortalized B cells; and (3) chromosomal translo-
cation leads to constitutive activation of the c-myc onco-
gene, resulting in Burkitt'slymphoma. It has been postu-
Tumors Induced by Herpesviruses
lated that similar events occur in B cell lymphomas seen
in irmmunocompromised patients, particularly AIDS pa-
Tumors Induced by Members of the
tients.
Subfamily Alpbaberpesvirinae
The genus Rhadinovirus includes viruses that cause
Marek's disease virus of chickens transforms T lympho-
lymphomas in heterologous primate hosts (e.g., herpesvi-
 e annid  aid on  s s
rus siamiri), human herpesvirus 8, associated with Ka-
ized polyclonal T lymphocyte tumor (lymphomatosis).
posi sarcoma mostly in HIV-infected humans, and bo-
The disease is preventable by vaccination with live-atten-
vine malignant catarrhal fever virus, an acute fatal
uated virus vaccines. Marek's disease virus, but not the
lymphoproliferative discase (sce Chapter 18). These vi-
related vaccine strains, contains retrovirus v-onc genes.
 ruses are lymphotropic and contain at least 20 unspliccd
 One of the v-onc genes codes for a protein called bZip.
 genes that seem to have bccn captured over considerable
a membcr of a family of transcription factors called
evolutionary time from the host during viral replication.
leucine zippers, which include thc oncogenes jun, fos,
 Thesc captured genes typically encode proteins that
and maf.
(1) regulate cell growth, (2) are immunosuppressive, or
(3) arc cnzymes involved in nuclcic acid mctabolism—-
Tumors Induced by Members of the
they include genes for interleukin 6 (originally called
Subfamily Gannaherpesvirinae
 B cell growth factor), interleukin 10, an interleukin 8,
Herpesviruses of the subfamily Gammaherpesvirinae are
receptor and bcl2, among others. Interleukin 6 and bcl2
lymphotropic and the etiologic agents of lymphomas
 can block apoptosis and somc of the othcr proteins have
and carcinomas in hosts ranging from amphibians, to
functions that are consistent with the lymphotropic and
primates, including humans.
transforming properties of these viruses.
Epstein-Barr virus in otherwisc healthy young hu-
Epstein-Barr nuclear antigens and latent mem-
man adulrs causes infectious mononucleosis (glandular
brane proteins that are required for the maintenance of
fevcr), in which there is B lymphocyte proliferation
viral latency and for lymphocyte transformation are not
which rcsolves. The mechanism by which the virus goes 
 prcsent in oncogenic rhadinoviruses. However, there is
on to produce malignancy in some subjects has bcen
 a striking, correlation berween the putative functions of
best studied in Burkirt's lymphoma, a malignant B cell
 some of the cellular homologue genes found in rhadinov-
lymphoma found in children in East Africa and less fre-
iruses and the cellular genes induced by Epstein-Barr
quently in children in other parts of the world. The
virus. Thus, these hcrpesviruses seem to have evolved/
acquired different strategies to ovcrcome cell cyclc arrest,
copics in each cell of most African Burkitt's lymphomas.
 apoptosis, and activation of cellular immunity, all to
It is generally in thc form of closed circles of complete
favor viral replication and survival, all also causing lyn-
genomic DNA, which occur as autonomously replicating
phocyte proliferation and transformation.
episomes. The tumpr cells express EB virus nuclear anti-
gen, but do not produce virus. These cells also contain a
characteristic 8:14 chromosomal translocation. Burkitr's
Tumors Induced by Poxviruses
lyinphoma may develop as a consequencc of c-myc de-
regulation due to this translocation, which in turn causes
Although some poxviruses are regularly associated with
an arrest of normal cellular maturation and differentia-
the devclopment of benign tumor-like lesions, there is
tion processes. In parallel, bost defensc mechanisms may
 no evidence that these ever become malignant, nor is
Further Reading
191
 therc evidence that poxvirus DNA is ever integrated into
of initiating a chain of two or more evenrs leading eventu-
cellular DNA. A very carly viral protein produced in
 ally to malignancy. If viruses or oncogenes are considered
poxvirus-infected cells displays homology with epider.
as cocarcinogens in a chain of cvents culminating in the
 mal growth factor and is probably responsible for the
formation of a tumor, it may be important to determine
cpithelial hyperplasia characteristic of many poxvirus
whether their role is that of initiator, promoter, or both.
infections. For somc poxviruses (e.g., fowlpox, orf, and
The most plausible hypothesis is that (1) c-onc genes
rabbit fbroma viruses), cpithelial hyperplasia is a domi-
rcprcsent targets for carcinogens, including chemicals,
nant clinical manifcstation and may be a conscqucnce
irradiation, and other tumor viruses, and (2) the full
 Of a morc potent form of the poxvirus epidermal
 expression of malignancy may generally requirc thc mu-
growth factor.
tation or enhanccd cxpression of more than one class of
oncogene, and perhaps also mutations in both copies of
critical tumor suppressor genes.
Multistep Oncogenesis
The development of malignancy requires multiple steps.
Further Reading
A potentially neoplastic clone of cells must bypass
apoptosis (programmed death), circumvent the need
Aaronson, S. A. (1991). Growth factors and cancer. Sci-
for growth signals from other cells, escape from immu-
ence 254, 1146-1148.
nologic surveilancc, organize its own blood supply,
Bishop, J. M. (1991). Molecular themes in oncogenesis.
Cell 64, 235-245.
and possibly metastasize. Thus, tumors other than
Coffin, J. M. (1996). Retroviridac: the viruses and their
those induced by rapidly transforming retroviruses like
replication. In “Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M.
Rous sarcoma virus gencrally do not arise as the result
Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick,
 Of a single event, but by a series of steps leading to
T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd
ed., pp. 1767-1848. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia,
progressively greater loss of regulation of cell division.
PA.
Signifcantly, the gcnome of some retroviruses (e.g,
Coffin, J. M., Hughes, A. H., and Varmus, H. E., eds.
avian erythroblastosis virus) carries two different onco-
{1997). "Retroviruses." Cold Sprung Harbor Labora-
genes (and that of murine polyomavirus, thrce), whcreas
tory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
 two or more distinct oncogenes are activated in certain
Dulbecco, R. (1990). Oncogenic viruses Il: RNA-con-
human tumors (e.g., Burkitts lymphoma). Cotransfec-
(B. D. Davis, R. Dulbecco, H. N. Eisen and H. S. Gin-
tion of normal rat embryo fbroblasts with a mutated
sberg, eds.), 4th cds., Pp. 1123-1130. Lippincott, Phil-
c-ras gene plus the polyomavirus large PyT genc, with
adelphia, PA.
C-ras plus the ElA early gene of oncogenic adenovir-
Hunter, T. (1997). Oncoprotein networks. Cell 88,
uses, or with v-ras plus v-myc converts them into
333-346.
Levine, A. J. (1997). p53, the cellular gatekeeper for
tumor cells. Whereas v-ras and v-myc are typical v-
growth and division. Cell 88, 323-331.
 onc genes, originally of c-onc origin, the other two had
Lodish, H., Baltinore, D., and Berk, A. (1995). "Molecu-
 been assumed to bc typical viral genes. Furthermore, a
lar Cell Biology," 3rd ed. with CD ROM. Scientific
chemical carcinogen can substitute for one of the two
Aincrican Books Freeman, New York.
v-onc genes; foliowing immortalization of cells in vitro
Nevins, J. R., and Vogt, P. K. (1996). Cell transforma-
tion by viruses. In ^Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields,
by treatment with a carcinogen, fransfection of a cloned
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L.
oncogene can converr the cloned continuous cell line
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
into a tumor cell line. To achieve full malignancy,
eds.), 3rd ed., Pp. 301-344, Lippincott-Raven, Phila-
mutations in tumor suppressor gencs may also be
delphia, PA.
needed.
Teich, N., ed. (1991), *Viral oncogenes. Parts I and I1.
 These points resurrect earlier unifying theories of
Semin.Virol. 2, 305-330.
Varrmus, H., and Weinbcrg, R. A. (1993). "Genes and
cancer causation that viewed viruses as analogous to
the Biology of Cancer." Scientifc American Library,
other mutagenic carcinogens, any one of which is capable
New York.
 This Page Intentionally Left Blank
CHaPter
12
Laboratory
Diagnosis
of Viral Diseases
Rationale for Specific Diagnosis...
197
Collection, Packaging, and Transport of Specimens .
198
Initial Processing in the Laboratory ........
199
Diagnosis of Viral Infections by Histopathology........
199
Direct Identification of Viruses...
200
Direct Identification of Viral Antigens...
201
Direct Identification of Viral Nucleic Acids....
206
Viral Genomic Sequencing.....
211
Oligonucleotide Fingerprinting and Restriction Endonuclease Mapping .
211
Virus Isolation in Cultured Cells...
212
Virus Isolation in Animals and Chick Embryos ..
214
Virus Quantitation. ....
214
Interprctation of Virologic Laboratory Findings .
215
Detection and Quantitation of Antiviral Antibodics (Serologic Diagnosis).
216
Interpretation of Serologic Laboratory Findings .
220
Laboratory Safety ..
221
Further Reading.....
223
Tests for the specific diagnosis of a viral infection are  ses and printouts make interpretation of results as
of two general types: (1) those that demonstrate the
 objective as possible as well as facilitating reporting.
presencc of infectious virus, viral antigen, or viral r
record keeping, and billing.
nucleic acid and (2) those that dcmonstrate the presence 
 Although less spectacular in veterinary medicinc
of viral antibody. While many traditional methods are
 in comparison with human medicine (for reasons of eco-
still widely used, most are too slow to have any direct
nomic return on investment and range of tests required
 influcnce on clinical manageiment of a particular case,
across each species), there has been a rapid expansion
providing results after several days. A major thrust of
in the number of commercially available rapid diagnostic
the developmcnts in diagnostic virology has becn to-
kits. Thesc tests dctect viral antigens, allowing a diagno-
ward rapid methods that provide a definitive answer
sis from a single specimen taken directly from the anirmal
in less than 24 hours or even during the course of d
during the acute phase of the illness, or they test for
thc initial examination of the animal. The best of
 antibody. Solid-phase enzyme immunoassays, (EIAs), in
thesc methods fulfil five prcrequisires: speed, simplicity,
particular, have revolutionized diagnostic virology for
sensitivity, specificity, and low cost. For many viruses,
 both antigen and antibody detection and are now mcth-
(1) standardized diagnostic tests and reagents of good
 ods of choice in many situations. For laboratory-based
quality are available commercially, (2) assays have 
diagnosis, the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is being
been miniaturized to conserve reagents and lower costs,  widcly exploited to detect viral nucleic acids in clinical
(3) instruments have bcen developed to automate tests,
 specimens as a very rapid alternative to other virus detec-
again often lowering costs, and (4) computerized analy-
 tion methods.
193
194
12. Laboratory Diagnosis of Viral Diseases
The provision, by a single laboratory, of a compre-
prising that no single laboratory can have the necessary
hensive service for the diagnosis of viral infections of
specific reagents available or the skills and experience
 domestic animals is a formidable undertaking. Over 200
for the identification of all viruses. For this reason, veteri-
individual viruses, belonging to some 25 viral families,
nary diagnostic laboratories tend to specialize [e.g., in
 cause infections of veterinary significance in the eight
 diseases of food animals, companion animals, poultry
 major domestic animal species (cattle, sheep, goat, swine,
01 laboratory species, or in diseases caused by exotic
horse, dog, cat, and chicken). If viral subtypes, strains,
viruses (foreign animal diseases)]. Within these special-
and variants are considered and if the number of animal
ized laboratories there is considerable scope for the de-
species is broadened to include turkey, duck, laboratory
velopment of rapid diagnostic methods that short circuit
 animals, and wildlife species, then the number of known 
the need for virus isolation and traditional means of
viruses becomes very large indeed. It is estimated that
identifcation, all of which are expensive, tisme-
international reference centers and culture collections
 consuming, and, in some cases, insensitive. Table 12.1
track over 30,000 viral variants. It is therefore not sur-
provides a guide to the principles and interrelationship
Table 12.1
Principles and Objectives of Diagnostic Methods
PRINCIPLE
 METHoD
 SpEcimens/findings
CHARACTERISTICS
Visual information leading to a presumptive diagnosis
Review of the disease his-
Subject animal and its body fluids/
Essence of differential and rule out
tory, clinical examination,
abnormal values
diagnosis; presumptive diagnosis 
chemistry, hematology, etc.
determines the specimens and meth-
ods for further testing
Pathology, histopathology,
Animals, organs, tissues, cels/char-
Although slow and expensive, still
ultrastruclural pathology
acteristic esions, incusion bodies
important in veterinary diagnostics
Detection of viruses by elec-
Tissues, cells, secretions, excrerions,
 Rapid; sensitive enough with many
tron microscopy
vesicular contents/particles of uni-
diseases, especially diarrheas; ex-
Form, characteristic morphology
 pensive; technically demanding, ex-
 pertise unavailable in many seltings
Detection and identification of viral antigens
Enzyme immunoassay meth-
 Tissues, cells, secretions,
Rapid; sensitive and specific. Most
ods e.g., antigen-capture
excretions/reaction of viral antigen
common methods in use today, es-
enzyme immunoassay]
with antibody of known specificity 
 pecially methods based on antigen
caplure
Irmmunochromatography.
Blood, secretions, excretions/virl
Rapid, senstive, specific. Vey ex
immunogold-binding
antigen identified by reaction with
pensive,but suitable foresting of
assays [ihe equivalent of
antibody of known specificity
individual specimens in the clinical
the home pregnancy test!
setting
Immunofluorescence
Tissues, cells, secrelions,
Rapid; sensitive and specific. Local-
excretions/viral antigen identifled
 ization of antigen in specific cells
in situ by reaction with anlibody of
-ua ssousp jo Aains o sppo
known specilicity
 cally demanding
Irmmunohistochemistr (im-
Tissues, cells, secretions,
 Slow, but sensilive and specific. Lo
munoperoxidase stainingl
excrelions/viral antigen identified
 calization of antigen in specific
in situ by reaction with antibody of
cells adds to surety of diagnosis;
known specificity
 the technical expertise involved is
more like an extension of histopa-
thology
Immuncelectron mi-
Tissues, cells, secretions,
 Extension of diagnostic electron mi-
croscopy
excretions/character and aggrega-
croscopy. Rapid; sensifive and spe-
tion of virus by specific antibody of 
cific. Expensive and technically de
known specificity
manding: expertise unavailabile in
many setings
Radioimmunoassay
Tissues, cells, secretions,
Very elaborate equipment and re.
excretions/viral antigen identified
 agents needed; rarely used in veteri-
 by reaction with antibody of known 
nary diagnostics
specificity
Ratiomatefor SpecificDiagnosis
195
TasLe 12.1-Continved
PRINcIPLE
METHOD
 SpEcimeNS/FinDiNGS
CHARACTERISTICS
Latex particle agglutination
 Exiracls from tissues, cells, secre
Most simple method of all; modeled
tions, excretions/viral antigen iden-
after the brucellosis slide aggluting-
tified by reaction with antibody of
tion test where + /-- results are ob.
known specificity
tained quickly; insensitive and sub-
ject lo nonspecific reactions
Immunodifusion
Extracts from fissues, cells secre
 Another very simple method; insensi-
tions, excretions/vira! antigen iden-
tive and subject to nonspecific reac-
tified by reaction with antibody of 
tions
known specificity
 Direct detection and identification of viral nucleic acids 
Hybridization methods, in-
Extracts from rissues, cells, sece
 Dot blot methods are rapid, simple
cluding in situ hybridiza-
tions, excretions/viral nucleic acid
lo carry out, very sensitive, and 
tion, Southern blot hybrid-
identified by reaction with specific
with suitable reagents very specific.
jzation and dot blot filter
DNA probe
There will be more use of these 
hybridization methods
 methods in the future
Polymerase chain reaction
Extracts from tissues, cells, secre-
Subject to contamination causing
(PCR}) and amplification by
 tions, excretions/viral nucleic acid
false-positive results. Nevertheless,
isothermal amplification
specilicallyamplified using primer
 because of incredibie sensitivilty
sets and then identified by various
 and specifity becoming used very
methods such as fragment size anal.
widely in circumstances where the
ysis, labeled DNA probes, probe
"'state of the art' is required. Auto-
hydrolysis, and partial sequencing
mation and new methods for identi-
fying amplified products are lead-
ing to quicker, more reliable, and
less expensive tesls
Viral genomic sequencing
Extractsfrom tissues, cells, secre
 Slow and expensive, but when auto-
and partial sequencing
tions, excretions/viral nucleic acid
mated, combined with automated
specificolly mlified usually ia
 genome amplificalion methods and
the PCR and then subiected to auto-
computer-based analyses of results,
mated sequencing, usually of only
this becomes the new 'gold stan-
100-300 bases in selected geno-
dard'" in identifying a virus. Partil
mic regions
sequencing is used exclusively to
dengue viruses for public heolth pur-
poses
 Oligonucleotide fingerprint-
Extracts from tissues, cells, secre
Very slow, expensive, difficult to
ing and restriction endonu-
tions, excretions/viral nucleic acid
automate, and complex to analyze.
clease mapping
 amplified, usually via the PCR or
However, method is wellsuited for
growing the virus in cell culture,
identifying isolates of viruses with
then restriction enzyme digestion
large genomes (e.g., herpesviruses)
and gel electrophoresis to deter-
at the level needed for molecular
mine characteristic banding pat-
epidemiological studies
terns ("'viral bar coding")
 Virus isolation and identification
Virus isolation in cultured
Tissues, cells, secretions,
Very slow, expensive, and techni.
cells
excrelions/specimens inoculated
cally demanding. However, this is
into suitable cell cultures and pres-
the only method that provides a vi.
ence of virus detected by various
ral isolate for further festing (e.g..
methods, usually immunological
strain typingi and is therefore
methods
widely used in reference centers
Virus isolation in animals
Tissues, cells secretons,
Even slower, more expensive, and
and chick embryos
excretions/ specimens inoculated
technically demanding than virus
into animals, usually newborn or 3.
isolation in cell culture. However,
weekold mice, usuallyby the intr-
for viruses that do not grow well in
cerebral or intraperitoneal routes or
cell culture this is the only method
196
12. Iaboratory Diagnosis of Viral Diseases
Tasle 12.1 --Continved
PRINCIPLE
 SpEcimeNS/fINDiNgS
CHARACTERISTICS
chick embryos, by various routes,
that provides a viral isolate for fur-
with sickness or death as indication
ther testing (e.g., strain typingl and
of viral growth. Identificalion of vi-
is therefore still used in reference
rus by various methods, usually im-
centers in special circumstances.
munological methods
The method of choice for some vi-
ruses [e.g., influenza viruses]
Virus quantiation, espe-
 Tissues, cells, secretions, excrelions,
 Special addition to virus isolation
cially plaque assay
and products of virus isolation in
methods used to determine key bio
cell culture or animals/specimen5
logical properies of viral isolates.
inoculated into animals or cell cul-
Very slow, expensive, cumbersome,
ture. Assays in animals: usually
and technically demanding. How-
newborn or 3-week-old mice, usu-
ever, in certain circumstances it is 
ally by intracerebral or intraperito-
crucial to know virulence properties
neal routes, with sickness or death
and potentil for emergence of vari-
as indication of viral growth, identi-
ants, etc.
fication of virus by various immuno
logical methods
Deteclion and quantitation of antiviral antibodies [serologic diagnosis]
Enzyme immunoassay
 Serum/specimens tested for pres
Rapid, sensitive, and specific; the
[EIA]—enzyme-linked immu-
ence of specific antibodies indicat
pillar ofretrspective diagnosis for
nosorbent assay (ELISA)
ing recent or past infection
many clinical and epidermiological
purposes. All serological diagnoses
suffer from the need to wait until an-
tibodies are produced, in some
cases a few days but in others
weeks affer infection. In many
cases paired sera are needed
IgM class-specific antibody
 Serum/specimens tested for pres
Rapid, sensitive, and specific; be-
EIA-ELISA
ence of specific IgM anlibodies indi-
coming the pillar of serologic diag-
cating recent infection 
nosis of recent infection. In most 
cases α single serum suffices 
Serum neutralizalion assay
Serum/ specimens tested for pres-
Cell cuiture-based method; slow, ex-
ence of specific antibodies indicat-
pensive, and technically de-
ing recent or past infection
manding. However, this is the
"gold standard" of serology as neu-
Iralizing antibodies correlate best
with immune protection
Immunoblotting (western
Serum/specimens tested for pres-
 Slow, expensive, and technically de.
blotting
ence of specific antibodies indicat-
manding. However, this is another
ing recent or past infection
"gold standard'" because of its ca-
 eds o sepoquo Ayuap! oi Aisod
cific viral proteins
Indirect immunofluores-
 Serum/specimens tested for pres-
Rapid, sensitive, but subject lo ma-
cence assay
ence of specific ontibodies indicat.
jor problems because of uncontrolla-
ing recent or past infection
ble nonspecific reactions
Hemagglutination-
 Serum/specimens tested for pres-
Rapid, sensilive, and specifi;
inhibition assay
 ence of specific antibodies indicat-
widely used for retrospective diag-
ing recent or past infection
 nosis for epidemiological and regu
latory purposes. Still a pillr in
avian viral diagnostics and for
 many mammalian viral diseases
Immunodiffusion
Serum/specimens tested for pres
Rapid but insensitive and subject to
ence of specific antibodies indicat
 specificily problems
ing recent or past infection
Rationale for Specifie Ditgnosis
197
 of those rapid diagnostic tests in current veterinary use f
 mals, notably pigs, that have been “"humanized" by
that do not rely on virus isolation or cytopathology.
transgenic insertion of human major histocompatibility
genes be used as an alternativc to scarce human cadaver
material for transplantation programs. An overriding
Rationale for
concern is the exclusion of passenger viruses and prions
Specific Diagnosis
from such donor animals.
At the Statc, Country, and
International L.evel
Why bother to establish a definitive laboratory diagno-
sis? Many viral diseases can be diagnosed clinically and
Epidemiologic and economic awareness. Provision of a
others with the assistance of the pathologist, but there
 sound veterinary service in any state or country depends
are several circumstances under which laborarory con-
 on a knowledge of prevailing viral diseases, hence cpide-
firmation of the specific virus involved is desirable or,
 miologic studies to determine the prevalence and distri-
indeed, essential.
bution of particular viral infections are frequently under-
taken, usually based on the detection of a specifc
At the Individual Animal or Individual
antibody. Such programs are also directed against z00-
Herd Levc!
notic, food-borne, water-borne, rodent-borne, and ar-
Diseases in which the management of the aninal or
thropod-borne viruses.
its prognosis is influenced by the diagnosis. Respiratory
Test and removal programs. For retrovirus infec-
diseases (e.g., in a broiler facility, kennel cough in a
tions, Marek's disease, infectious bovine rhinotracheitis,
boarding kennel, shipping fever in a feedlot), diarrheal
 pseudorabies, bovine viral diarrhea, and certain other
diseases (e.g., rotavirus, coronavirus, torovirus, calicivi-
diseases, it is possible to reduce substantially the inci
rus infections in calves), and some skin diseases may be 
dence of disease or eliminare the causative virus from
caused by a variery of agents, viral and bacterial. Proper 
the herd or flock by test and removal programs. The
management of individual cases or infected herds or
 elimination of pseudorabies from several countries in
flocks is often improved by specific differential diag-
Europe and states in the United States is an example.
noses.
Laboratory diagnosis is essential for thc implementation
Certification of freedom from specific infections.
of such programs; it is particularly effective when differ-
 For diseases in which there is lifelong infection, such as
ential tests (tests that discriminate bctween narurally in-
bovine and feline leukemia, equinc infectious anemia,
 fected and vaccinated animals) arc linked to the use of
 and herpesvirus infections, a ncgative test certificatc is
modern vaccines (see Chapter 13).
often required as a condition of sale, particularly export
Surveillance programs in support of endemic dis-
sale, for exhibition at a state fair or show, or for competi-
ease research and control activities. Surveillance of viral
tion, as at race meetings.
infections, based on laboratory diagnostics, is the key
Artificial insemination,embryo transfer,and blood
 in all epidemiologic research, whether to determine the
transfusion. Males used for semen collection and females 
signifcance of a particular virus in a new setting, to
used in embryo transfer programs, especially in cattle,
 unravel the natural history and ecology of a virus in a
and blood donors of all species arc usually screened for
 particular host animal population, to establish priorities
a range of viruses to minimize the risk of viral transmis-
 and means of control, or to monitor and evaluate immu-
sion to recipient animals.
nization programs.
 Zoonoses. Several viral diseases such as rabies,
Surveillance programs in support of exotic disease
 Rift Valley fever, and eastern, western, and Venezuelan
research and control activities. The developed countries
equine encephalitis are zoonotic and are of sufficient
 of Europe, North America, Australia, and Japan are free
public health significance as to require the maintenance
 Of many devastating diseases of livestock that are still
of specialized diagnostic laboratories. Early warning of
 endemic in other parts of the world, such as foot-and-
a potential cquinc encephalitis virus cpidemic through
 mouth disease, African swine fever, rinderpest, and fowl
diagnosis of disease on an individual farm allows the
 plague. Clearly it is of the utmost importance that the
implementation of mosquito control and other measures,
 clinical diagnosis of a suspected exotic virus be confirmed
such as restriction of the movement of horses. Confirma -
 quickly and accurately (see Chapter 15). All developed
tion of the diagnosis of rabies in a skunk that has bitten
 countries maintain or share the use of spccialized biocon-
a child provides the basis for postexposurc treatment de-
tainment laboratories devoted to diagnosis and rcsearch
cisions.
 On exotic viruses that cause “foreign animal diseases."
Xenotransplantation for humans. It has been pro-
Prevention of new,emerging,andreemerging viral
posed that animal organs and tissues obtained from ani-
diseases of animais. Continuous surveillance of animal
198
12.Iaboratory Diagnosis of Virat Diseases
populations for evidence of new viruses, new diseases,
TaBlE 12.2
and new epidemics is essential if new threats are to be
Specimens Appropriate for Laboratory
dealt with rapidly and comprehensively. New viruses and
Diagnosis of Various Clinical Syndromes
new virus-disease associations continue to be discovered
virrually every year. We need only make the point that
SYNDROME
SPECIMEN
over 90% of all the pathogcnic viruses known today
werc completely unknown at thc end of World War I1.
Respiratory
Nasal or throat swab; nasopharyngeal
  m se s a e aq a
aspirate
diagnostic virologists and epidemiologists is essential for
Enteric
Feces
early rccognition of such occurrcnces.
Genital
 Genital swab
Eye
 Conjunctival swab
Skin
Vesicle swab or scraping: biopsy of
Collection, Packaging, and
solid lesion
Transport of Specimens
Centrol nervous
 Cerebrospinal fluid, feces, nasal swab
systerm
Generalized
Nasal swab°, feces?, blood leukocytes?
The chance of isolating a virus depends critically on
Autopsy/biopsy
Relevant organ
the attention given by the attending veterinarian to the
 Any disease
Blood for serologyb
collection of the specimen. Clearly, such specimens must
be taken from the right place at the right time. The right
"Depending on presumed pathogenesis.
time is as soon as possible after the animal frst develops
bBlood allowed to clol, serum kept for assay of antibody.
clinical signs because virus is usually present in maxi-
mum amount at about this timc then falls away, often
rapidly, during the ensuing days. Specimens taken as a
to which has been added protein (e.g., gelatin, albumin,
last resort when days or weeks of empirical therapy
or fetal calf serum) to protect the virus against inactiva-
have failed are almost invariably useless and will usually
tion, and antibiotics to prevent the multiplication of
consumc more laboratory time than an early well-col-
bacteria and fungi. If it is at all probable that the speci-
lectcd specimen.
men will also be used for attempted isolation of bacteria,
 The site from which the specimen is collected
rickettsiae, chlamydiae, or mycoplasmas, the collection
will be influenced by thc clinicai signs, together with
 medium must not contain antibiotics—the portion used
a knowledgc of the pathogenesis of the suspected
for virus isolation can be treatcd with antibiotics later 01
disease. As a general rule the epithelial surface that
a completely separate set of often specially impregnated
 constitutes the portal of entry and the primary site of
swabs should be obtained for the isolation of these or-
viral replication should be sampled (Table 12.2). The
ganisms. The swab stick is then broken or cut off asep-
most important specimen, routine in respiratory infec-
tically into the fluid, the cap is fastened tightly and se-
tions as well as in many generalized infections, is a
cured with adhesive tape to prevent leakage, the bottle
nasal or throat swab or a nasopharyngeal aspirate in
is labeled with the identity of the animal/owner, date of
which mucus is sucked from the back of the nose and
collection, and nature of specimen, and is then dis-
throat. The second important specimen, routine in
patched immediately to the laboratory. The specimen is
enteric and many generalized infections, is feces. Swabs
accompanied by a properly completed laboratory sub-
may be taken from the genital tract, from the eye, or
 mission form (seal in a plastic sleeve to prevent it getting
from vesicular skin lesions. Skin scrapings may be
wet) that includes all necessary details, including an in-
obtained with a scalpel blade from pock-like skin
formative clinical hisrory, a provisional diagnosis, and
lesions. Some viruses responsible for systemic infections
a request for a particular test(s). The specimens should
can be isolated from blood leukocytes (buffy coat).
be protected from breaking in transit and should be sent
 Biopsy or necropsy specimens may be taken from any
refrigerated (but not frozen), with “cold packs" (4°C)
appropriate part of the body—obviously, tissue taken
or ice in a thermos flask or Styrofoam box (Figure 12.1).
for the purpose of virus isolation must not be placed
International or transcontinental transport generally re-
in formalin or other fixative.
quires that specimens be packed in dry ice (solid CO2).
 Because of the lability of many viruses, specimens
Governmental and IATA regulations relating to the
 intended for virus isolation must always be kept cold
transport of such specimens require precautions such as
 and moist. Immediately after collection a plain cotton 
 double-walled containers with absorbent padding in case
or dacron swab should be swirled around in a small
of breakage. Permits must be obtained from the appro-
screw-capped container containing virus transport me-
priate authorities for interstate and international trans-
dium. This medium consists of a buffered salt solution,
portation.
Diaguosis of Virat Vnfections by Hlistopatbotogy
199
Figure 12.1.
B
Equipment required lor collction of virus samples. (A) Sterile Forceps, scissors, and scalpels. (B) Selection of serile swabs. (C) Vials containing
virus transpormedium with antbioticsforcollectionfsamplesforvirus isolation oridentication.D)Bolesfor collclion ffeces,biood,nd
sy a pxe eqo nssy  xy snogo u sag ii  odsuy s b u pio sads a
specimens.(H) Swabs and transport medium for bacteriological investigation.(U) Cool box.(K) Heavy-duty plastic bogs For postmortem material.
Initial Processing in
the specimen was collected and processed within the
the Laboratory
laboratory; the dilution factor relative to the high con-
centrations in which viruses and antigens can occur in
secretions/excretions and tissues is generally of minor
On arrival in the laboratory the specimen is processed
significance; further the weight/volume of clinical mate-
immediately or refrigerared when this is not practical.
For inoculation into cell culture, swabs are shaken in
rial collected is seldom known, making the correction
fluid medium, feces are dispersed in fuid medium, and
difficult. For critical studies on pathogenesis, the dilution
factor is acknowledged and the titer adjusted to reflect
tissue specimens are homogenized in a high-speed
conccntration  per  measured/weighed  militer  of
 blender. Cell debris and bacteria are deposited by low-
secretion/excretion or gram of tissue collected.
speed centrifugation, after which the supernatant is usu-
ally passed through a 0.45-μm syringe-top membrane
filter to remove remaining nonviral contaminating or-
Diagnosis of Viral Infections
ganisms. Some of the original sample and of the filtrate
by Histopathology
is retained at 4°C or frozen at -70°C, at least until
virus isolation attempts are completed. The filtrate is
inoculated into cell cultures and/or sometimes into chick
If biopsy/necropsy samples are collected for possible his-
embryos or newborn mice. Clinical specimens processed
in this way are generally suitable for detection of viral
 mens in appropriate fixative, routinely formalin or Bou-
antigens/DNA/RNA by in vitro tests.
in's fxative, are required. If special procedures such as
 In this chapter, the titer of a virus, the concentra-
frozen sections, histochemistry, or thin section electron
tion of antigen, or gene copy number is usually expressed
 microscopy are to be requested, the receiving laboratory
per milliter of the virus transport material into which
 should be consulted for procedural and material details.
12. Laboratory Diagnosis of Viral Discases
200
Direct Identification of Viruses
vable viruses, notably rotaviruses, caliciviruses, astrovi-
 Detection of Viruses by
ruses, and previously unknown adenoviruses and
 Electron Microscopy
coronaviruses.
Low sensitivity is the biggest limitation of electron
 microscopy as a diagnostic tool. Quite a bit of time
 Perhaps the most obvious method of virus identification
 is required (15 minutes or more) for a skilled microsco-
is direct visualization of the virus itself (Figure 12.2).
pist, using a very expensive machine, to scan the
The morphology of most viruses is suffciently character-
grid adequately and detect viruses when the specimen
istic to assign an unknown virus to the correct family
contains fewer than 10’ virions per milliter. Such
and, in the context of the particular case (e.g., detection 
levels are often surpassed in feces and vesicle fluid,
 of parapoxvirus in a scraping from a pock-like lesion 
 but not in respiratory mucus. Feces are first clarified
on a cow's teat), the mcthod may provide an immediate
 by low-speed centrifugation; the supernatant is then
definitive diagnosis. Noncultivablc viruses may also be
subjected to ultracentrifugation, often through a sucrose
detectable by electron microscopy. Beginning in the late
 cushion, to deposit the virions. Alternatively, salts and
1960s, electron microscopy was the means to the discov-
water can be removed from a drop of virus suspension
ery in feces of several new groups of previously nonculti-
 hanging from a carbon-coated plastic support film by
FiGurE 12.2.
DignsticlmicyThhlgymsirssffieycheristicignwisrtil
this case, direct negative staining of vesicular Huid revealed lorge r
bovine rhinotracheitis. Magnification: ×10,000.
Direct ltentification of Virat Antigens
201
diffusion into agar, leaving the concentrated virions
Direct Identification of
 on the film. Specimens are then stained negatively with
Viral Antigens
 phosphotungstate, or sometimes uranyl acetate, and
scanned by electron microscopy.
Immunofluorescence
If antibody is labeled with a fluorochrome, oftcn fluo-
Identification of Viruses by
rescein isothiocyanate, the antigen-antibody complex,
when excited by light of short wavelength, emits light
Immunoelectron Microscopy
 of a particular longer wavelength, which can be visual-
Definitive identification (and further concentration) of 
 ized as fluorescence in an optical microscope when liglht
virions may be achieved by adding specific antibody to(
 of all other wavelengths is filtered out. The sensitivity
the specimen before depositing the virus-antibody com-
 of the method is generally too low to detect complexes
 plexes onto the electron microscopic grid by centrifuga-
 Of fluorescent antibody with virions or soluble antigen,
tion. Negative staining reveals the virions as aggregates
 hence, the antigen in the test typically takes the form of
(Figure 12.3).
virus-infected cells. There are two main variants of the
To improve detection, the antibody may be la-
 technique, direct immunofluorescence and indirect im-
beled with gold. Solid-phase immunoelectron micros-
munofluorescence:
 copy techniques have been developed in which virus-
 Direct immunofluorescence involves the visualiza-
specifc antibody is frst bound to the plastic support-
ing flm on the copper grid. Sensitivity can also be
 ing'd with a specific fluorescein-tagged antiviral antibody.
enhanced by a double layering procedure, whereby
A frozen tissue section, a cell smear, or a cell monolayer
staphylococcal protein A (which binds the Fc fragrment
 on a coverslip is fixcd, usually with methanol or acetone,
of IgG) is first bound to the film, to which virus-
 and floodcd with fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugated
specific antibody and the unknown sample
are
 to antiviral antibody (Figure 12.4, left). Unbound anti-
added scquentially.
body is then washed away and the tissue or cells are
Figure 12.3.
Immunoelecronmicrospynntericaliciviswaseenbydietegativestiningfacal specimenAlqutf hspecenwashn
ofenisermcelmpingftheiusanlwdiltinsfntisermcausefzzyhalsroundindividalvirionsrmallls
of virions. Bar: 100 nm. (Courtesy of A. Z. Kapikian.]
202
12. Lahoratory Diagnosis of Viral Discases
FIGuRE 12.4.
Fluorescein-labeled
goat anti-rabbit
Apognue
Fluorescein-labeled
Antivirus
 antivirus antibody
antibody (rabbit)
Viral antigen
Viral antigen
in fixed cells
in fixed cells
Immunofluorescence. (Lef) Direct method. (Right) Indirect method.
examined by light microscopy using a powerful
peroxide together with a benzidine derivative forms a
ultraviolet/blue light source. The apple-green light emit-
colored insoluble precipitate. Advantages of the method
ted from the specimen is revealed (against a black back-
are that the preparations are permanent and it requires
ground) by incorporating filters in the eyepieces that
less expensive equipment than immunofluorescence-
absorb all the blue and ultraviolet incident light (Fig-
an ordinary light microscope is used. A disadvantage is
ure 12.5).
that endogenous peroxidase is present in the cells of
Indirect immunofluorescence differs in that the
 many tissues, particularly leukocytes. This may produce
 pue uaue oi spua l paaeun s apoqnue iiae
 false positives, but this problem can be circumvented by
is itself recognized by fluorescein-conjugated anti-immu-
 meticulous technique and adequate controls (Figure
noglobulin or a second antibody (Figure 12.4, right).
12.6).
The high affnity of avidin for biotin can also be exploited
in immunofluorescence, by coupling biotin to antibody
and fluorescein to avidin.
Enzyme Immunoassay-
Enzyme-Linked
Although technically demanding, immunofluo-
Immunosorbent Assay
rescence has proved to be of great value in the early
identification of viral antigens in infected cells taken
Enzyme immunoassays, often referred to as enzyme-
from animals with diseases known to have a relatively
linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), have revolution-
small number of possible etiological agents. There is no
ized diagnostic virology. Assays can be designed to detect
difficulty in removing partly detached infected cells from
viral antigens or antibodies. The exquisite sensitivity of
the mucous membrane of the upper respiratory tract,
the method enables less than 1 ng of viral antigen per
genital tract,ye,or skin, simply by swabbing or scraping
milliliter to be detected in specimens taken directly from
 the infected area with reasonable firmness. Cells are also
the animal. A wide variety of different assay procedures
present in mucus aspirated from the nasopharynx or in
are used, including direct, indirect, and competitive
fluids from other sites, including tracheal and bronchial
s as e uo po aq a sesse p ses
lavages, or pleural, abdominal, or cerebrospinal fluids;
in the veterinarian's clinic or on many hundreds at a
cells must be washed, extensively in the case of mucus,
 time using automated systems in centralized laboratories.
by low-speed centrifugation before fixation and staining.
Most enzyme imrmunoassays are solid-phase enzyme im-
Respiratory infections with paramyxoviruses, ortho-
-pe Aq payoene s! Apoqjue aundeo, au iskesseounu
 myxoviruses, adenoviruses, and herpesviruses are partic-
sorption at pH 9.3 to a solid substrate, typically the
ularly amenable to rapid diagnosis by immunofluores-
wells of polystyrene or polyvinyl microtiter plates. The
cence. The method can also be applied to tissue, e.g.,
simplest format is a direct enzyme immunoassay (Figure
 biopsies for the diagnosis of herpesvirus diseases, or at
12.7, left). Enzyme immunoassays have replaced the
necropsy, for the verification of rabies infection of the
complement fixation test for most applications, includ-
brain of animals euthanized after biting humans (Fig-
ing those for the differentiation of the serotypes of foot-
ure 12.5)
and-mouth disease.
Virus and soluble viral antigens from the specimen
are allowed to bind to the capture antibody. After un-
Immunohistochemistry
bound components are washed away, an enzyme-labeled
(lmmunoperoxidase Staining)
antiviral antibody (the “detector" antibody) is added
(Various enzymes can be linked to antibody; horseradish
 An alternative method of locating and identifying viral
 peroxidase and alkaline phosphatase are the most com-
antigen in tissues is to use antibody coupled to horse-
monly used.) After a washing step, an appropriate or-
radish peroxidase. Subsequent addition of hydrogen ganic substrate for the particular enzyme is added and
Direct Identification OfViral Antigens
203
readout is based on the color change that follows. The
Monoclonal antiviral antibodies may be used as
colored product of the action of the enzyme on the sub-
capture and/or detector antibodies in cnzyine immuno-
 strate is recognizable by eye. The test can be made quanti-
 assays. Their obvious advantages are that they represent
tative by serially diluting the antigcn to obtain an end
well-characterized, highly pure, monospecifc antibody
point or by spectrophotometry to mcasure the amount
 Of a defined class, recognizing only a single epitope,
 Of enzyme-conjugated antibody bound to the captured
are free of "natural" and other extraneous antibodies
antigen.
against host antigens or adventitious agents concurrently
 A further refinement takcs advantage of the ex-
infecting the animal, and can be made available in large
amounts as reference reagents. It is important to select
The antibodyis conjugated tobiotin, a reagent that gives
 monoclonal antibodies of high affinity, but not of such
rcproducible labeling and docs not alter the antigen-
high specificity that some strains of the virus sought
binding capacity of antibody. The antigen-antibody
 might be missed in the assay. Indeed, the specificity of the
 complex is recognized with high sensitivity simply by
 assay can be predetermined by selecting a monoclonal
 adding avidin-labeled enzyme, then substrate (Figure 
 antibody directed at an epitope that is either confined
12.7, right). Other modifications of enzyme immunoas-
to a particular viral serotype or common to all serotypes
says, such as high-energy substrates that release fluores-
within a given species or genus.
cent, chemiluminescencc, or radioactive products, fur-
Enzyme immunoassays have also been adapted to
ther increase the sensitivity.
formats suitablc for use in veterinary clinics on single
 Indirect enzyme inmunoassays are widely used
animal specimens (Figure 12.8).
 because of their greater sensitivity and avoidance of the
need to label each specific antiviral antibody in the reper-
toire of the laboratory. Here, the detector antibody is
unlabelcd and a second labeled (species-specific) anti-
Immunoc
nromar
immunoglobulin is added as the “"indicator” antibody;
 Iinmunochromatography tests are modeled after the
 of course, the antiviral antibodies constituting the cap-
home prcgnancy tests now used by women in many
rure and detector antibodies, respectively, must be raised
 countries; they differ fron usual systems for measuring
in different animal species (Figure 12.7, right). Alterna-
antigen-antibody rcactions in that the specimen from
tively, labeled staphylococcal protein A, which binds to
the subject animal is made to flow through a filter
the Fc moiety of IgG of most mammalian species,
,can
after which it is immobilized in a membrane at a site
 be used as the indicator in indirect immunoassays.
where antigen (or antibody) in the specimen comcs
Figure 12.7.
Substrate
Enzyme-labeled
avidin
 Substrate
Enzyme-iabeled
Biotin-labeled
antivirus
antibody
antibody
Specirmen
Specimen
{virus]
Y
Antivirus
Antivirus
antibody
Enzmelnyndinyffvirsilnin
medidinbididin
for color reaction.
Figure 12.8.
A
SampleWell
ResultWindow
Activate Circle
Activator
InterpretingTest Result
Todeterminetestresultreadthereactionots
FIVAb
Sample
positive
in theResult Window.Colordevelopmentin
G
Spot
control
samplespotsisproportionaltotheconcentration
Q
negative
FeLVAg
ofFeLVantigenorFIVantibody in thesample.lf
control-
Sample
no colordevelopsinthepositivecontrolspot,
Spot
repeat the test.
NegativeResult
Only positivecontrolspot
developscolor.
PositiveResult
FeLVAntigen
FeLVAntigenandFIVAntibody
FIV Antibody
1)
20
3
Positivecontrolspotand
Positivecontrol spotand
Positive control spot
FeLVAg samplespot
both samplespots
andFIVAbsample
developcolor.
developcolor.
spot developcolor.
Reaction with Negative Control
Thenegativecontrolspotservesasasafeguardagainst falsepositives.
Positive Result
2
InvalidResult
IfcolorintheFIVAbor
If colorin thenegative
FeLVAg sample spot is
controlspotisequaltoor
darkerthannegative
darkerthanFIVAbor
controlsotresults
FeLVAg ale spothe
positivefor thatspot.
testisinvalidforthat
sample spot.
Invalid Results
1.Background
2.No ColorDevelopment
Ifthesampleisallowedtoflowpastthe
Ifpositivecontroldoesnotdevelop
activatecirclebackgroundcolormay
color,repeat thetest.
result.Somebackgroundcoloris
normal.However,ifcoloredbackground
obscurestestresultrepeat thetest.
[A} Commercial enzyme immunoassay cdevice For clinical use on α single animal. This kit is lor the simultaneous detection of Feline eukemia virus
(FeLV) antigen and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) antibody in feline serum, plasma, or wholeblood The detecion of FeLV group-specic
Direct Identification of Viral Antigens
205
FIcure 12.8. (continued)
B
antigen tp27} is diagnostic of FeLV infection, and the detecion of speciic antibody to FIV is indicarive of infection. The fest ufilizes a
monoclonal antibody to FelY p27, inacrivaled FIV antigen, and posive and negalive controls. A conjugate mixure contains enzyme
conjugated antibodyl27andenzyme-conjugaedFIVanigen.Uponmixing theconjugate andthe test sampleconjugiedmonoclonal
antibody wilbind27ontigen lif presen and teconjugated FIVanigenwill bind toFIV anboy if present The smle/conjugte
mixhure is then added to he "Snap' device and Hows across the spolted matrix. The matmix-bound p27 antibody [FelV spotl will capture
the p27-conjugated antibody complex, whereas the mafrix-bound FIV antigen (FIV spot) will capture the FIV antibody-conjugated antigen
 o as a a a ue sp ro saa  a po ad a s os a  
the presence of FIV anibody. (Courtesy of Idexx Laboralories, Inc.] (B) FIV antibody detection by enzyme immunoassay in a 96-wel
well, αa medium positive serum [second well), and a negative serum (third well. The remaining 93 wells conlain various feline serum
ds
of gray/black. The enzyme used cctually produces a blue reaction product; the density of the blue color is measured spectrophotomelrically
andtheresultsareprintedouatmficall.Catswhoseserumproducesanindeerminantresultreretestedsomeweekslan
example shown, the wells contain a single dilution of serum from individual cats; this is a qualitative lest (the results are read as posive,
negrninnFcreingpsssllycient;ixnscafultds
made quantitative by serially diluting the sera.
 into contact with a test antibody (or antigen) already
Latex Particle Agglutination
present in the membrane. All controls are included in
 Perhaps the simplest of all immunoassays is the aggluti-
the membrane as well and results are seen as colorcd
spots or bands, as one of the tcst rcagents is conjugated
nation by antigen of small latex beads previously coated
to colloidal gold or a chromogcnic substance. Because 
with antiviral antibody. The test can bc rcad by eye
all this is done in a plastic device, often with only
within a minute or so. Not surprisingly, diagnostic kits
based ou this method have become popular with small
one step required to activatc thc rcaction, tests are
laboratories and with some veterinary practitioners.
quite simple to do and secmingly foolproof. Of course,
the latter depends on thc quality of thc rcagents and
 However, current tests suffer from low sensitivity and
the conditions of the test. In any case, these tests are
low specifcity. Thus, false negatives occur unless large
usually quite expensive.
numbers of virions are present, therefore this assay for
antigen tends to be restricted to examination of feces.
False positives, however, occur quite commonly with
Radioimmunoassay
fecal specimens. If thesc problems can be overcome, latex
agglutination may develop a better reputation for relia-
Radioimmunoassay predates enzyme immunoassay but
bility.
is progressively being superseded by it. The only signifi-
cant difference is that the label is not an enzyme but a
radioactive isotope such as 125I and the bound antibody
Immunodiffusion
 or antigen is measured in a gamma counter (Figure 12.9).
It is a highly sensitive and reliable assay that lends itself
 In agar gel diffusion, also called immunodiffusion assays,
well to automation, but thc cost of the cquipment and
 a sample suspected to contain viral antigen is placed in
the health hazard of working with radioisotopes argue
e a well cut in agar opposite a similar well containing
against its use in small laboratories.
 antibody; the reactants diffuse toward each other and
206
12.Laboratory Diaguosis of Viral Diseases
FIguRe 12.9.
1261-Labeled
anti-rabbit IgG
125 1-Labeled
Rabbit
antivirus
antibody
antivirus
antibody
Specimen
 Specimen
[virus}
{virus)
Guinea pig
Antivirus
s
Apoge
antibody
Radioimmunoassay for the detection of virus and/or viral antigen. (lelt) Direct method. [Right Indirect mathod.
form a visible line of precipitation if antigen is present.
 transport, or (3) latent infections in which the viral ge-
Such assays are seldom used, although a few cxamples
 nome lies dormant and infectious virus is absent.
where the antibody is the unknown are still used.
For most routine diagnostic purposes it is offen
  p iso s  ad, oi uesou 
level of strain, variant or local vs exotic variety. How-
Direct Identification of Viral
ever, there are certain situations when important epide-
miologic information can be obtained by viral nucleic
Nucleic Acids
acid characterization. There are several methods for de-
 riving valuable information from the detection of viral
The sensitivity and versatility of nucleic acid hybridiza-
nucleic acids.
tion techniqucs have been expanded rapidly such that
 probing for the viral genome has overtaken probing for
antigen as the diagnostic method of choice in many labo-
Hybridization Methods
ratories. More dramatic still has been the extraordinary
adoption of PCR as an amplification step for enhancing
The detection of specific viral nucleic acid by hybridiza
the detection of viral nucleic acid in clinical specimens.
tion using labeled viral DNA and RNA probes to detect
It is now theoretically possible for a single laboratory
nucleic acid has been widely used for rapid diagnosis,
with access to a complete panel of oligonucleotide prim-
although the methods bave been superseded in many
ers to use the polymerase chain reaction to provide a
 instances by the polymerase chain reaction.
comprehensive diagnostic service within 24 hours from
The principle of nucleic acid hybridization is that
specimen submission. Howcver, the added sensitivity
 single-stranded DNA will hybridize by hydrogen-bonded
provided by amplification of vira! nucleic acid can actu-
 base pairing to another single strand of DNA (or RNA)
ally create new problems. Unlike the situation with bac-
 of complementary base sequence. Thus the two strands
terial pathogcns, it has usually been the case that just
of the target DNA molecule are frst separated by heat-
detecting a pathogenic virus in a lesion, or from a clini-
 ing, thcn following cooling, allowed to hybridize with
cally ill animal, has been enough evidence of its ctiologic
a labeled single-stranded DNA or RNA probe present
Iole. As detection mcthods have become increasingly
 in excess. The reaction can be accomplished in solution,
sensitive, questions of viral "passengers" and noninfec-
which is useful for determining the kinetics of annealing
tious degraded viral genormes become more pertinent.
 Or the stoichiometry of the reaction, from which can
 Nuclcic acid detection methods are invaluable
 be calculated the percentage identity berween the two
when dealing with (1) viruses that cannot bc cultured
 sequences calculated from the kinctics of annealing. The
satisfactorily, (2) specinens that conrain predominantly
conditions set for annealing, especially temperature and
inactivated virus, as a result of prolonged storage or
ionic strength, determine the degree of discrimination
Direct Identification of Virat Nucteic Acids
207
(stringency) of the test. Under conditions of low strin-
induced canccrs for evidence of integrated or noninte-
 grated copies of the viral genome. Frozen sections on
whereas at high stringency such a heteroduplex is un-
slides are probed, much as described earlier, and the
stable.
intracellular location of viral nucleic acid sequences is
The other major factor determining the specificity
rcvealed by autoradiography or immunoperoxidase cy-
of the test is, of course, the nature of the probe itself.
tochemistry.
This may correspond in length to the wholc viral genome
or a single gene or a much shorter nuclcotide sequence
deliberately choscn to represent either a variable or a
Southern Blot Hybridization Methods
conserved region of thc gcnome, depending on whether
it is intended that the probc be type specifc or more
The introduction of Southern blotting (Figure 12.10) has
versatile. The oligonuclcotide sequence intended as a
been of grcat significancc and widc application. Restric-
probe is produced by chemical synthesis or by cloning
tion endonucleases are used to clcave the DNA into
in a bacterial plasmid or bactcriophage.
fragments of various size and number, depending on thc
Traditionally, radioactive isotopes such as z2P and
3S were used to label nucleic acids or oligonucleotides
intended as probes for hybridization tests, with the signal
FIGURE 12.10.
being read by counting in a spcctrometer or by autoradi-
ography. The trend is now toward nonradioactive labels.
kb
A
B
C
D
E
Some of these (e.g., fluorescein or peroxidase) produce
a signal directly, whereas others (e.g., biotin or digoxi-
genin) act indirectly by binding to another labeled com-
9.4
 pound, which then ermits the signal. Biotinylated probes
can be combined with various types of readout, e.g., an
6.6
avidin-based enzyme iminunoassay. Chemiluminescent
substrates, such as luminol, are also bcing widely ex-
4.4
ploited. Indeed, we are witnessing a proliferation of diag-
nostic kits for various diseases, many of them based on
novel labels and/or methods of readout.
2.3
2.0
Dot Blot (Filter Hybridization} Methods
The most popular hybridization methods are two-phase
systems, generically known as filter hybridization. In its
simplest format, dot (blot) hybridization, DNA or RNA
extracted from virus or infected cells, is denatured and
then spotted directly onto a chargcd nylon or nitrocellu-
lose membrane to which it binds tightly on baking. The
to the target nucleic acid in situ on the membrane, and
0.5
unbound probe is washed away. The signal gcncrated
by the bound probe is measured by autoradiography if 
Southern blot hybridization of DNA extracted from a wart-like skin
the probe is radioactive or by the formation of a colored
lesion.TheDNAwasrstdigested wihresrictonenzyes
 precipitate if an enzyme-labeled probe is used. By choos-
(lane A), EcoRI (lane B), Pshl (lane C), Pvul (lane D), and BamHI
ing RNA as a probe, sensitivity can bc improved and
as
the incidence of false posirives reduccd by treating the
theblotwashybridizedathighstringency toaprobecnsisting of
filters with RNase before counting.
ps
expose X-ray ilm. The pattern of restriction frogmenis is used to
identily thevirus.Thgenomeofpapillavirusessnormallyfound
incellsicurlsidofaboutbiise
In Situ Hybridization Methods
estimale DNA size by gelelectrophoresis when itislinear li.e., after
digesionelasmid wiresrictionenzyesneP
diges,the plasmid is cut only once to produce theul-length linear
In situ hybridization has been widcly used by patholo-
form},whereas the other enzymescut two ormoretimes.(Courtesy
 gists to screen animals with persistent infections or viral-
of H. E. Trowell and M. L. Dyall-Smith.]
208
12.Laboratory Diagnosis of Virat Diseases
location and numnber of rcstriction sites. The fragments
FIGuRe 12.11.
are then separated by electrophorcsis on an agarose 0r
 polyacrylamide gel. After staining with ethidium bro-
DNA region to be amplified
mide to revcal thc position of the fragments, the gel is
treated successively with acidic and basic solutions to
A sequence
depurinate and denature the DNA, which is then trans-
ferred by clectrophoresis, diffusion, O1 other means
B sequence
("blotting') onto a nylon or nitrocellulose membrane.
Denature at >90°℃
Add primers  and
inexcess
Individual bands (fragmcnts) are revealed by hybridiza-
 Cool to 50-60°℃ to allow primer binding 
tion of a labcled DNA or RNA probe followed by autora-
diography or a color developrment process. Northern
3
 blotting for the detection of RNA follows similar prin-
5
ciples.
Add thermostable DNA polymerase and
deoxynucleotides
Incubate 70-75°C for DNA synthesis by
Polymerase Chain Reaction
3
In 1983 Kary Mullis cnvisioned a mcthod for the in
vitro amplifcation of DNA, which became known as
the polymerase chain reaction, and for which Mullis
Repeat cycle of denaturation, prirmer binding.
DNA synthesis in automated thermocycler
received the Nobel prize. As for other major advances
 in molecular biology, the polymerase chain reaction has
 been applied in many areas, including genetics, evolu-
tionary biology, forensic mcdicine, parentage determina-
5'-
tion, and the diagnosis of infcctious diseases. In 1997
ovcr 20,000 entries in the Current Contents refercnce
databasc were obtained from a search for the keyword
"PCR." The inmcnse potential of thc polymerase chain
reaction to spccifically amplify minimal amounts of tar
 Repeat for approx. 30 cycles
gct DNA was particularly appcaling for the diagnosis of
viral diseases. It is said that "the polymerase chain reac-
Ampictin of part of a DNA sequence by the polymerase chain
tion detects a needlc in a haystack and makes a haystack
reaction.Oligonucleotide primersmust firstbemade according to
Out of the needle.' It must not be forgotten that polymer-
the sequences at either end of the portion of DNA tbe aplied.
ase chain reaction technology amplifies the target gene
After Ihe DNA has been denatured by heating, the primers
car
sequence, in itself it is not a diagnostic test; specifc
s
hepresencefhearesistnNApoleranddeoxyuclede
detection of the amplified product is by one of the tech-
triphosphates, two new copies of the desired region are produced.
niques described later.
The cyclsof meting, anneoling, and extension are repeated rapidly,
eachmemuntflgeDNquenceole
 Principles of the Polymcrase Chain
lirst rewcycles,virtuallyall he templates consist of just the short
Reaction
region chosen r mlication.Afer30cycles,aking abo3
Thc polymerase chain reaction is an in vitro method for
many millionfold. (Courtesy of I. H. Holmes ond R. Strugnell.)
the enzymatic synthesis of specifc DNA sequences using
rwo oligonucleotide primers, usually of about 20 resi-
ducs (20-mcrs), thar hybridize to oppositc strands and
degenerate. Reactions are carried out under carefully
flank the region of interest in the target DNA; the primer
controlled conditions of ionic strength, temperature,
pairs are somctimes referrcd to as forward and reverse
 primer concentration, and nucleotide concentration. Re-
primers (Figure 12.11). Computer programs are used for
 action mixtures include the template (clinical specimcn),
the design of oprinum primer sets and ro predict the
the primers, polymerase, and single nucleotides. In a
paramctcrs (time/temperature) for the reactions. De-
 programmable instrument known as a thermocycler, rc-
pending on the dcgrce of conscrvation of thc putative
petitive cycles involving template denaturation by hcat-
target sequence, primers may be chosen to be strain,
 ing, primer annealing, and extension of thc annealed
gcnus, or family specific. Where therc are eithcr know-
 primers by DNA polymerase at a lower tempcraturc
ingly or unknowingly mismatched bases between the
rcsult in the exponcntial accumulation of a specific DNA
 primer and targer sequences, the primers are said to be
fragment whose termini are defined by the 5' ends of
Direct Identificutron of Viral Nucteic Acids
209
the primers. The primer extension products synthesized
reaction methods, and improved methods for the visual-
in one cycle serve as templates in the ncxt, hencc the
ization of amplified products by colorimetric reactions.
number of target DNA copies approximately doubles
Nested polymerase chain reaction methods. This
every cycle; 20 cycles yields about a millionfold amplifi-
method uses two sets of primers in two sequential ampli-
cation.
fication reactions. The first primer pair amplifies through
The specificity of the reaction is de facto indicated
 20 or so cycles, a DNA fragment which is then used as
by obtaining a reaction product of the cxpected size;
tcmplate in the second reaction. The primers for the
 base pair size markers are always included in the gels
second round of amplification are either both different
uscd to visualize the amplified products. The identity of
from the first set, i.e., both are located within the first
the reaction products may be confirmed more spccifically
 amplified DNA region (nested PCR), or one is the same
 as target virus by restriction enzyme digcstion, Southern
and one, located within the amplified region, is different
blotting and use of a specific probe, or direct sequencing
(semincsted PCR). Nested amplification is highly sensi-
of the fragment (Figure 12.12).
tive. The second set of primers serves to verify the speci-
ficity of the frst round product, and the transfer of the
Modifications of Original Polymerasc
first round product into a new reaction mixture has the
Chain Reaction
useful effect of diluting possible inhibitors that may be
Originally, the polymerase chain reaction used the
 present in the original sample. However, nested polymer-
 Klenow fragment of Escherichia coli DNA polymerase
 ase chain reaction increases the risk of template contami-
I for primer extension, which was inactivated in the
nations.
 denaturation step and therefore had to be replenished
Multiplex polymerase chain reaction methods. In
 in each cycle. The introduction of a thermostable poly-
this method, two or more primer pairs specific for differ-
merase derived from the thcrmophilic 
：bacterium
 ent target sequences are included in the same amplifica-
Thermus aquaticus termed Taq polymerase improved
 tion reaction. Coamplification of several targets is more
 cost effective where multiple pathogens are possible etio-
erably. lt aiso increascd the specificity of the reaction
logic agents. Coamplification of internal controls may
 because the annealed primers could be extended at con-
also be included in multiplex reactions.
siderably higher tcmperatures, which reduced secondary
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
structure formation.
methods. The development of reverse transcriptase poly-
Among orher modifications most relevant to viral
merase chain reaction (RT-PCR) methods to assist in
diagnosis are nested polymerase chain reaction methods,
the detection of RNA viruses has been a major advance
multiplex polymerase chain reaction methods,
reverse
in viral diagn
ostics and research. The RNA template is
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction methods for the
first transcribed into cINA using reverse transcriptase
detection of RNA viruses, quantitative polymerase chain
originally derived from retroviruses. The virus-derived
FiGURE 12.12.
1. PCA
2. Hybridization
3. Enzyme
Immunoassay
PCR
subslrat
PCA
biobinrytat
DNA-RNA
hytrids
自
日
microliter plale
DetectinfpolymerasechinectionprodutssingabioinyltedRNAprobeandanenzyem
labeled DNA-RNA hybrid molecules by antibiotin anibody. [Courtesy of R. H. Yolken.]
210
12.  Laboreafory Diagnosis of Viral Diseases
enzymes cannot tolerate temperatures above 42"C,
veterinary importance as long as some viral sequence is
which is a nonstringent hybridization temperature for
available. The polymerase chain reaction is the method
most primers. Furthermore, at low temperatures, single-
of choice to detect viral template directly in clinical speci-
stranded RNA templates tend to form stable secondary
mens. However, molecular diagnostic procedures em-
structures. The combination of low stringency of tem-
 ploying the polymerase chain reaction are unnecessary
plate binding and secondary structure reduced the effi-
if the diagnostic procedures currently jn use are cost
ciency of cDNA synthesis. The introduction of a recom-
effective, rapid, sensitive, reliable, and meet national
 binant DNA polymerase derived from the thermophitic
and/or international legislative requirements.
bacterium T. thermophilus that also had efficient rcverse
The polymerase chain reaction is useful in the diag-
 transcriptasc activity allowed rcactions to be performed
nosis of virus infections wherc viral antigens or virus-
at 70°C. This allowed high stringency of primer-
 specific antibodics cannot be detected and where the
template binding and the elimination or marked reduc-
 presence of viral nucleic acid may be the only evidence
 tion of secondary structure formation and thus improved
of infection. This is particularly true for latent virus
specifcity and sensitivity.
 infections, including herpesvirus, retrovirus, or papillo-
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction methods.
mavirus infections. The polymerase chain reaction is
 To quantify the amount of template DNA or RNA in
 most useful for the detection of viruses such as certain
clinical samples, quantitative polymerase chain reaction
cnteric adenoviruses, papillomaviruses, astroviruses, or
 assays have been developed. One approach uses a com-
rotaviruses that are either noncultivable or diffcult to
d srs ar a pe s rn enn d
cultivate and for viruses that grow without a visible
set and can be discriminated (e.g., by size difference)
cytopathic effect such as respiratory syncytial virus, bo-
from the target sequence. A known quantity of the com-
vine viral diarrhea virus, coronaviruses, or certain gam-
petitive template is mixed with the sample. When the
maherpesviruses. For the study of viruses that cause zoo-
amounts of target sequence and competitor template art
 notic infections, including rabies virus, poxviruses, or
equivalent, equal amounts of the respective polymerase
 influenza viruses, the polymerase chain reaction may be
chain reaction products are produced. The amount of
the preferred method to minimize the risk of exposure
target sequence prescnt in the sample is determined by
for laboratory personnel.
interpolation of the cquivalence point of both products.
The polymerase chain reaction may be superior to
conventional virus detection mnethods in the differentia-
Methods for Detection
of Amplifed Products
tion of vaccine virus from wild-type virus. The use of
attenuated virus vaccincs that have nucleotide dcletions
 The products of polymerase chain reaction amplifcation
 in so-called marker genes has gained considerable impor-
 are usually detected by agarose gel electrophoresis analy-
tance in veterinary medicine (e.g., in the vaccination of
 sis and ethidium bromide staining. To circurmvent this
pigs against pseudorabies). Detection of marker genes is
time-consuming step, colorimetric and chemilumines-
important for herd health, regulatory, eradication, and
cence methods have been developed. Although the ap-
forensic purposes and for studies of latency and epidemi-
proaches to visualize DNA products are diverse, most
 ology. Although deletions in marker genes can be moni-
are based on cnzyme-linked assays. Some procedures
tored serologically, the detection of virus and differentia-
use biotinylated or digoxigcninated primers to label the
tion by the polymerase chain reaction is a fast and
 polymerase chain reaction products, whereas others de-
sensitive alternative.
tect the unlabeled amplified DNA by anti-DNA mono-
The immense potential is also considered the great-
clonal antibodies or biotinylated and fluoresceinated
 est hazard of the polymerase chain reaction. As for any
DNA probes. The enzyme-linked oligonucleotide sor-
 procedure, inconclusive or indererminate results are ob-
bent assay (ELOSA) for the detection of bluetongue vi-
tained with the polymerase chain reaction. It is argued
rus, for example, relies on annealing of separate biotinyl-
that the risk of cross-contamination between specimens
ated and fluoresceinated probes to the amplifed viral
 Imay outweigh the advantage. This is particularly the case
 nucleic acid; these complexes are captured on streptavi-
for polymerase chain reaction assays based on nested
din-coatcd microtitration wells and detected using a
 amplification, which can detect as little as a single copy
horseradish  peroxidase-labeled  antifluorescein  anti-
 of viral nucleic acid. Strict precautions to avoid cross-
body conjugate.
contamination between specimens and adequate quality
controis must be adopted as for any other techniquc
Advantages and Limitations of the
Polymerase Chain Reaction
used in diagnostic clinical virology.
Currcnt procedures are labor intensive and expen-
There are few limits ro the use of the polymerase chain
sive, which limits their use to large laboratories or re
reaction in assisting the diagnosis of virus diseases of
 search-oriented diagnostic laboratories at universities.
Oligonucleotide Fingerprinting and Restriction Endonuclease Mapping
211
The ability to automate polymerase chain reaction proce- P
 polymerase chain reaction, automated sequencers, and
dures is therefore considered a key factor in determining C
 computer analysis of partial sequence information is
how large a role the polymerase chain reaction will play
the key to overall value.
in the future. For some viruses, commercially available
 Today, all human polioviruses of inrerest are sub-
polymerase chain reaction kits have been introduced.j
 jected to partial sequencing immediately upon isola-
may be involved in say respiratory, enteric, or genital ming from such sequencing includes identifcation of
infections and could be developed for exotic viral disease wild vs vaccine strains, local or imported strains, and,
clusters of a particular species such as vesicular disease in the latter case, often the geographic source of the
reaction kits are designed for amplifcation in conven-V
 virus isolates. In veterinary medicine, partial sequencing
tional thermocyclers with colorimetric detection of the  is being used to detect further mutations in canine par-
biotinylated polymerase chain reaction products. Second
vovirus that might predict the need for another reformu-
generation kits for use in automated workstations are
lation of the vaccine.
being tested and appear to be extremely accurate, sensi-
Two noncultivable putative herpesviruses, ovine
tive, fast, and versatile. Real time computerized analysis l
 herpesvirus 2, the cause of sheep-associated bovine ma-
 of polymerase chain reaction results ailows for sequential 
 lignant catarrhal fever, and the herpesvirus associated
testing and/or simultaneous detection of different patho-
 with Kaposi sarcoma in humans, were discovered by
 gens in the same specimen. Minimization of cross-con-
 methods that were based on strategies that required large
 taminations between samples is considered a major ad-
amounts of sequencing. The ovine herpesvirus was de.
vantage of the automated polymerase chain reaction
tected by use of the polymerase chain reaction and pro-
system.
 gressive sequencing of amplified products. Human her-
 There has been an extraordinary large number of
 pesvirus 8 was discovered by representational difference
what may be considered initial reports of the use of the
 analysis (RDA), a very complex method based on ampli-
 polymerase chain reaction for viral diagnosis. Develop-
 fying differences in DNA sequences in tissue specimens
 ment of diagnostic polymerase chain reaction to a stage
of interest and control specimens thought not to contain
where it will become even more widely adopted and for
 the putative virus. This method employs the polymerase
many viruses the procedure of frst choice, will require
 chain reaction (or reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
time, knowledge, money, and rigorous validation.
reaction), cloning, subtractive hybridization, sequenc-
ing, and computer technology to eliminate unique nonvi-
ral DNA sequences.
Gene Amplification
by Isothermal Amplification
Oligonucleofide Fingerprinting
Isothermal amplification is a technique that does not
require the temperature cycling and accompanying
and Restriction
equipment used in the polymerase chain reaction. Three
Endonuclease Mapping
enzymes involved in the replication of retroviruses are
simply mixed with either a DNA or a RNA template and
 For most routine diagnostic purposes it is usually not
 DNA primers at a constant temperature and millionfold
necessary to "type" the isolate. Sometimes, however,
 amplification is achieved rapidly.
important epidemiologic information can be obtained
by going even further, to identify differences between
Viral Genomic Sequencing
using the polymerase chain reaction and partial sequenc
ing, oligonucleotide fngerprinting of viral RNA, or the
Direct viral genomic sequencing' has become a major
determination of restriction endonuclease fragment pat-
factor in viral diagnostics, particularly in protocols 
S terns (fingerprints) of viral DNA. For example, in 1981
based on viral nucleic acid amplification via the poly-
the origin and spread of foot-and-mouth disease virus
merase chain reaction. Sequencing methods in viral
 in an epidemic that spread between countries in Europe
 diagnostics are the same as in the rest of the world  were accomplished by the use of oligonucleotide finger-
of molecular biology; in the diagnostic setting, where  printing of viral RNA obtained from isolates from key
large numbers of specimens are of interest and where
sites.
diagnostically unique sequences must, for practica!
 Viral DNA prepared from virions or infected cells
reasons, be detected quickly, critical primers for the 
 can be cut with appropriately chosen restriction endonu-
[2. Laboratory Diagnosis of Virat Diseases
212
cleases and the fragments separated by agarose gel elec- are, in most cases, almost as good. Often the nature of
trophoresis. When stained with ethidium bromide or t
 the disease from which the material was obtained will
silver, restriction endonuclease fingerprints are obtained.
 suggest what virus may be found, and in such cases the
The method has found application in all DNA virus 
 optimum cell culture for that virus can be chosen, often
families, particularly in epidemiologic studies. De-
 in parallel with a second type of culture with a wide
 pending on the viral family, the resolution of these meth-
 spectrum. Cell lines offer some advantages and are avail.
ods is such that different isolates of thc same virus are
able for most domestic mammals.
distinguishable. Minor degrees of genetic drift, often not
 Special types of cell and organ culture are utilized
reflected in serologic differences, can sometimes be de-
for particular viruses. For example, betaherpesviruses
tected in this way.
and gammaherpesviruses may be recovered from mono-
layer cultures propagated directly from tissues taken
from the diseased animal, whereas inoculation of estab-
Virus lsolation in Cultured Cells
lished monolayer ceil cultures with cell-free material
may be negative. For some coronaviruses and rhinovi-
 Despite the explosion of new techniques for “same-day
ruses that do not grow well in monolayer cultures,
diagnosis"’ of viral disease by demonstration of virus,
 growth may occur in explant cultures (e.g, small cubes
viral antigen, or viral nucleic acid in specimens taken
 of tissue with intact epithelium taken from the trachea
directly from the animal, it is still true to say that few
 Or gut). Cocultivation of explant tissues with cell
of them achieve quite the sensitivity of virus isolation in
monolayers can be used to enhance the isolation of
cell culture. Theoretically at least, a single viable virion
viruses associated with latency (e.g., herpesviruses from
present in a specimen can be grown in cultured cells,
the trigeminal nerve ganglia). Arthropod cell cultures
thus expanding it many millionfold to produce enough
 are used frequently as a parallel system for isolating ar-
material to be characterized antigenically. Virus isolation 
boviruses.
lnoculation and Maintenance
ods must be compared. There is an excitement in isolat-
of Cell Cultures
ing viruses. Moreover, it is the only technique that can
detect the unexpected, i.e., identify a totally unforeseen
 Monolayer cultures for viral diagnostic purposes are
virus, or even discover an entirely new agent. Accord-
generally grown in screw-capped plastic flasks.
ingly, even those laboratories well equipped for rapid 
 Multiwell plates are very convenient for serum neutral-
diagnosis sometimes also inoculate cell cultures in an
ization tests, where large numbers of cultures are
 attermpt to isolate the virus. Culture is the only method of
required and economy of medium, equipment, and
producing a supply of live virus for further examination,
 space is important, but the risk of cross-contamination
such as antigenic variation. Research and reference labo-
 argues against therm for virus isolation. The inoculated
ratories, in particular, are always on the lookout for new
 cultures are usually incubated at 37°C, even though the
viruses within the context of emerging diseases; such
 normal body temperature of various domestic animal
viruses require comprehensive characterization. More-
 species varies somewhat above and below 37C. In
over, large quantities of virus must be grown up in cui-
 the case of viruses of the upper respiratory tract such
tured cells to produce diagnostic antigens and mono-
as influenza viruses, rhinoviruses, and coronaviruses
clonal antibodies for distribution to other laboratories.
(which grow best at 33°C, the temperature encountered
Vaccine development is currently dependent, in nearly
in the nasal mucosa), incubators may be set at 33°℃.
all cases, on the availability of viruses grown in culture,
Cultures are usually inspected daily for the development
even though the production of the vaccine may not be
of cytopathic effects.
dependent on culturing because of recombinant DNA
Recognition of Viral Growth
technology, as discussed in Chapter 13.
in Cell Culturcs
Although rapidly growing viruses such as most picorna-
Cell Culture Methods
viruses or most alphaherpesviruses can be relied upon
to produce detectable cytopathic effect within a day or
The choice of the optimal cell culture for the primary
 two, other viruses such as some beta- and gammaherpes-
isolation of a virus of unknown nature from clinical
 viruses are notoriously slow and may not produce an
specimens is largely empirical. Primary cells derived from (
 obvious cytopathic effect for 1-4 weeks or not at all
fetal tissues of the same species usually provide the most
 on first passage. By this time, the uninoculated control
sensitive cell culture substrates for virus isolation. Con-
 cultures will usually start to show nonspecific degenera-
 tinuous cell lines derived from the homologous species t
 tion, which may resemble a cytopathic effect. In such
Virus Isolation in Cultured Cells
213
 cases the cells and supernatant fluid, usually after freez- available immunologic techniques is very wide. Some
ing and thawing several times, from the infected culrure
 are best suited to particular families of viruses. Each
"(ssd p s  o po a
 laboratory makes its own choice of favored procedures
after which the cytopathic effect usually appears.
based on considerations of sensitivity, specifcity, repro-
When changes indicative of viral replication be-
ducibility, speed, convenience, and cost. For virus dis-
 come evident, a number of courses arc open. The cyto-
eases important in national or international commerce,
 pathic effect is often sufficiently characteristic, even in
 it is usual that the identification conform to a defined
the living unstained culture viewed in situ (see Chapter
panel of tests for a particular virus.
 5), for a provisional diagnosis to be made. Some viruses
 One of the simplest ways of identifying a newly
that arc relatively noncytopathic for cultured cells may
isolated virus is by fluorescent antibody staining of the
 be recognized by means of hemadsorption. Most viruses 
infected cell monolayer itsclf. This can provide a defini-
that hcmagglutinate will be amenable to test by hemad-
tivc answer within an hour or so of recognizing the
sorption; the growth of paramyxoviruses, for example,
earliest indication of a cytopathic effect. Immunofluo-
is routinely recognized in this way. Alternatively, it is
rescence is best suited to the identification of viruses
usually instructive to fix and stain the infected monolayer
with no close relatives or in epidemic situations when a
that has been grown on coverslips or in special cell cul-
 particular virus is suspccted; otherwise replicate cultures
ture slide chambers to more closely examine the cells
 must be screened with a range of antisera.
showing a cytopathic effect. Inclusion bodics, multinu-
e e se o ro s
cleate giant cels (syncytia), and other findings can be
 to thc identification of virions and soluble antigen pres-
identified after staining with hematoxylin and eosin; if
 ent in the cell culture supernatant. Enzyme immunoas-
present, these changes are usually sufficiently character-
says are now probably the most commonly used, al-
istic to enable the isolate to at least be assigned to a
 though virus neutralization remains the gold standard
family. Such cuitures can also be stained with fluorescent
for defining and distinguishing serotypes (Figure 12.13).
antibody for positive identifcation. It is usually most
 Monoclonal antibodics with defined specificity have be-
advantagcous to submit some of the cell culture-grown
 come the standard for idcntifying many viruses. These
yirus for negativc stain electron microscopic cxami-
 make it possible to proceed quickly to very specific diag-
nation.
nosis, even to the level of subtypes, strains, or variants
One of the key goals in a busy diagnostic labora-
(e.g-, rabies viruses from different geographic areas).
tory is to reach a point at which suffcient information 
Family-, genus-, and type-specific monoclonal antibodies
has been obtained to confrm the diagnosis. An isolate
 are also available in some instances (e.g., influenza virus
can be characterizcd further if necessary; thc decision as
 antibodies). As thcy become available commercially, we
to which tests to do is the mark of a knowledgeablc and
 can expect monoclonal antibodies to be more widely
skilful laboratory diagnostician; there is art as well as
used.
science in diagnostic virology!
Identification of Viral Isolates:
Ientification of Viral Isolates:
Hemadsorption and Hemagglutination
Antigenic Characterization
Cells infccted with member viruses of several families
A newly isolated virus can usually be allocated provision-
 bind red blood cells on their plasma membranes at the
ally to a particular family, and sometimes to a genus or  sites of virion budding --this is called hemadsorption. It
specics, on the basis of thc clinical findings, the particular 
 may be used to determine specific viruses via a hemad-
type of cell culture yiclding the isolate, and the visible
 sorption-inhibition assay in which antibodies of known
result of viral growth (cytopathic effect, hemadsorption, specificitices are used. Hemagglutination-inhibition
inclusion body formation, etc.). Definitive identification,
 assays are somewhat similar: many viruses bind to red
however, rests on antigenic characterization. By using
 blood cells of various species of mammals and birds,
the new isolate as antigen against a panel of antiscra, for
forming bridges betwecn cells and agglutination of large
example, in an cnzyine immunoassay, thc virus can first (
 clumps of cells. When specific antibody and virus are
be placed into its correct family or genus (c.g., Adeno-
mixed prior to thc addition of red blood cells, hemagglu-
viridae). If it is considered important to do so, one can 1
 tination is inhibited—therefore, thc specificity of the an-
 then go on to identify thc species (e.g., canine hepatitis
 ribody uscd serves to identify the virus isolatcd in cell
virus) or serotype by moving to monoclonal antibodics
 culture. The hcmagglutination-inhibition rcaction is
Or to one of the more discriminating scrologic proce-
highly sensitive and specific. Moreovcr, it is simple, inex-
dures, such as ncutralization or hemagglutination inhibi-
 pensive, and rapid and has been historically the serologic
tion. This sequential approach is applicablc only to fami-
 procedure of choice for identifying isolates of hemagglu-
lies that share a conumon family antigen. The choice of 
 tinating viruses.
214
12. Laboratory Diagnosis of Viral Diseases
FIgure 12.13.
Yirus neutralizalion. A pig developed encephalitis during an epidemic of porcine enterovinus I infection. An enterovirus was isolcted from the
feces. Onehundred tissue culture infeclious doses TCIDs) ofhis virus were incubated at 37C for60 minutes with a suitable dilution ofinactivated
56°℃, 30 minutes] porcine enterovirus 1 anfiserum (a reference serum raised in a rabbit).[A) Mixtures were inoculated onto monolyers of swine
kidney cels inwells of amicroculure rayB}Viruswas similrly incubatedwith nomalrabit serum ndinoculted ontidenticl cells.The
cultures were incubaled at 37C or several days and inspected daily for cytopathic effect. The infectivily of the virus isolate has been neutralized
by his antiserum,therebyidentifying theisolaleasporcine enterovirus1;he control culture (Bshowshe typicalcyopathic effct cousedbyhis
virus. Unstained. Magnification: X25.(Courtesy of l.Jack.)
Virus lsolation in Animals and
tic pocks caused by poxviruses) but otherwise other
Chick Embryos
means are used to detect virus growth (e.g., hemaggluti-
nation, immunofluorescence).
 Many viruses will grow satisfactorily in chick embryos
or newhorn mice but neither is now commonly used
because cell culture is generally the simpler option. Mice
Virus Quantitation
can be used to isolate arboviruses and rabies virus; suck-
ling mice less than 24 hours old are injected intracere-
Many viral identifcation procedures cannot be per-
brally and/or intraperitoneally, then observed for up to
formed until the quantity or “dose"' of the virus has been
2 weeks for the development of pathognomonic signs 
 determined. Quantitation is accomplished by preparing
before euthanizing them for examination by various
serial, 10-fold dilutions of the virus-infected material;
means such as histopathology, immunofluorescence, im-
 an aliquot from each dilution serves as inoculum for
munohistochemistry, or serology.
susceptible hosts (a cell culture is also a “host" in this
Where all other methods have failed, it is also an
context). Ideally, replicate numbers of hosts are inocu-
 option in veterinary medicine to use the putative natural
lated with each virus dilution. Most commonly five or
host animal to ^“isolate” viruses. Natural host animals
six replicates for each dilution are used. This approach,
are also used for other purposes such as pathogenesis
although best scientifically, is impractical in clinical vi-
and immunity research.
 rology; the cost of large numbers of animals or cell cul.
 Embryonated hens' eggs are used for the isolation
tures is too high. Most laboratorics utilize modified titra-
of influenza A viruses and for many avian viruses. Indeed,
 tion methods to gauge thc viral dose within acceptable
there are sevcral important pathogens that replicate
accuracy limits.
much better in eggs than in cell cultures derived from
Most virus titration procedures are quantal rather
chick cmbryo tissues. According to the virus of interest,
 than truly quantitative in that rcsults do not really indi-
the diagnostic specimen is inocuiated in the amniotic
cate the number of infectious virions in the spccimcn,
cavity, the allantoic cavity, the yolk sac, or on the chorio-
but instcad provide an approximation. Estimation of
allantoic membrane. Evidences of viral growth may be
viral dose by quantal techniques is satisfactory for most
 seen on thc chorioallantoic membrane (e.g., characteris-
 purposes. These assays provide a result defined in terms
lnterpretation of VirelogicLahoratory Findings
215
of the highest virus dilution in which the virus affects
innovative methods based on molecular biologic tech-
50% of the hosts. When the titration is done in animals
nologies. For example, the quantitative polymerase
(e.g., mice) or embryonated eggs and the end point is
chain reaction is used in human medicine to quantitate
death, the unit is expressed as the 50% lethal dose (LDso).I
HIV virus load in patients as the basis for prescribing
When the end point measured is some parameter other
 various antiviral drug regimens. Quantitative enzyme
than death (e.g., paralysis, presence of skin lesions) the
unit is expressed as the 50% infective dose (IDso). When 
 dures in which titration end point determinations are
the titration is done in replicate cell cultures (tube cul-
 based on measuring the presence of viral antigens in
tures, microtiter well cultures, etc.) and the end point is
each dilution are also widely used, partly because they
cytopathology, the presence of inclusion bodies, antigen,
lend themselves to automated dilution, addition of
immunofluorescent antigen, and so on, the unit is ex-
 reagents, and colorimetric readout. Statistical methods
pressed as the 50% tissue culture infective doses
are used to convert raw readout data into precise
(TCIDso). In all of these kinds of quantal assays, raw end 
units, indicating the number of infectious units per
point data are analyzed by standard statistical methods,
 unit volume of the original clinical specimen.
with the result being the best approximation of the dilu-
tion of the specimen that has enough virus in it to affect
 50% of the mice, eggs, or cell cultures inoculated. Two
Interpretation of Virologic
statistical methods have been used in virology labora-
tories for many years: the Reed-Muench method and the
Laboratory Findings
Karber method—they are described in any diagnostic
laboratory methods manual. When a virus present in a
The isolation, identification, and quantitation of a partic-
clinical specimen has been quantitated in these ways, the
ular virus from an animal with a given disease is not
results are expressed as a log1o value: for example,*107.95
 necessarily meaningful in itself. The name diagnostic
TCID/ml," which is to say that there are 89,125,093
laboratory is in fact a misnomer; the laboratory provides
infectious units of virus in 1 ml of the original undiluted
 data upon which the submitting veterinarian can base
specimen (an unrealistic degree of precision, of course).
his/her diagnosis within the context of the clinical his-
tory. The laboratory does not provide a definitive diag-
 nosis. For example, concurrent subclinical infection with
Plaque Assays
a virus unrelated to the causative agent of the disease in
question is not uncommon. Koch's postulates or Evans'
The most common methods of virus quantitation, repre-
criteria for disease causation (see Chapter 2) are as rele-
senting adaptations of the previously described methods,
 vant here as in any other microbiological context, but
are plaque assays. Plaque assays, first described by Re-
 are not always easy to fulfill. When attempting to inter-
nato Dulbecco in 1952, involve adsorption of 10-fold
 pret the significance of the detection of a virus from a
serial dilutions of the virus-containing specimen onto
 clinical specimen, one must be guided by the following
monolayer cell cultures. The monolayers are overlaid
considerations.
with agar containing nutrient medium, which prevents
The site from which the virus was isolated. For
free virus spread throughour the culture but allows cell-
 example, one would be quite confident about the etiolog-
to-cell spread. A circular plaque of infected cells is i
 ical significance of equine herpesvirus 1 isolated from
formed around each infectious unit. The cultures are
 the tissues of a 9-month-old aborted equine fetus with
stained with a vital dye, and plaques are counted to
typical gross and microscopic lesions. However, recovery
determine the titration end point. The unit is expressed as
 of an enterovirus from the feces of a young pig may not
 plaque-forming units (PFU) per unit volume of specimen.
 necessarily be significant because such viruses are often
Again, statisticai methods are used to convert raw plaque
 associated with inapparent infections.
counts into precise units. Plaque assays are the standard
The epidemiologic circumstances under which the
for quantitating many viruses, c.g., many animal herpes-
virus was isolated. Interpretation of the significance of
viruses, togaviruses, picornaviruses, and vesiculoviruses. a virus isolation may be much more meaningful if the
same virus is isolated from several cases of the same
illness in the samc place and time.
Other Methods for Virus Quantitation
The pathogenetic character of the virus isolated.
Knowledgc that the virus isolated is nearly always etio-
Physical methods for virus quantitation include count-
logically associated with frank disease, i.e., rarely is
ing virus paricles by electron microscopy, a method
 found as a “passenger,”’ engenders confidence that the
that is quite complex and not often used, and many
 isolate is significant.
216
12. Laboratory Diagnosis of Viraf Diseases
Detection and Quantitation
ing, such as enzyme immunoassays, immunofluores-
of Antiviral Antibodies
cence, or immunodiffusion. Paired sera are then titrated
(Serologic Diagnosis)
for antibodies using any of a wide range of available
serologic techniques. The basic principlcs of the most
 Innovative assay strategies based on increasing knowl-
widely used tests are set out in Table 12.1.
 edge of the nature of the immune response to viral infec-
tion, miniaturization of assay systems affecting the cost
Enzyme Immunoassay—Enzyme-Linked
of reagents (e.g., multiwell plates), automated equip-
ment, and integrated communication systems for rapid
Immunosorbent Assay
reporting of diagnostic laboratory data have all contrib-
uted to a revolution in clinical veterinary and zoonotic
Enzyme immunoassays (EIAs), also called enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), are the serologic assays
virology. In particular, innovative enzyme immunoas-
 of choice for the qualitative (positive or negative) or
says, often based on monoclonal antibodies or viral anti-
quantitative determination of viral antribodies. Enzyme
gens produced by rccombinant DNA technologies, have
led to thc widespread development of diagnostic kits by
immunoassays offer the advantage that quantitative
 assays can be based on a single dilution of serum—the
commercial vendors. Thus, assays that are extremcly
complex in design, engineering, materials, and readout
 colorimetric (optical density) end point being interpo-
are reduced to the most straightforward, simple procc-
lated by the spectrophotometric instrument and attached
dures in the clinical sctting. These same assays, of proven 
computer (*"the reader" in the usual vernacular usage).
 In the most common formats for serologic enzyme immu
sensitiviry and specifcity, are now also incorporated into
noassays, the wells of 96-well microtiter plates are coated
even regional eradication prograrms (see Chapters 14 and
with purifed antigen so as to reduce nonspecific binding
15). Nowhere has this revolution had more impact than
of antibody. Positive and negative serums are included
 in every run and cutoff limits are adjusted by the reactiv-
in laboratory methods based on serology, i.e., thc mca-
ity of these controls in the given run. Kits have been
sureiment of the host's immune response to viral in-
fection.
designed for in-clinic testing of single serum samples in
 For the serologic diagnosis of a viral discase in an
which only three wells are used for each case: the test
individual animal, the classic approach has been to test
sample and a positive and negative control serum (Fig-
paircd sera, i.e., an acute and convalescent serum from
ure 12.8).
 In a more widely used format, the test serum flows
 the same animal, for the prcsence of a specific antibody.
The acute-phase serum sample is taken as early as possi-
through a membrane filter that has three circular areas
 ble in the illness, the convalescent-phase sample usually
impregnated with antigen, two of which have already
 interacted with a positive and a negative serum, respec-
at least 2 weeks later. Given this time line, diagnosis
aadsoi, a o pies s yeodde s uo pasig
tively (Figure 12.8). After the test serum flows through
 In rccent years this approach has, in many cascs, been
the membrane and a washing step is completed, a second
complemented by serologic methods for detecting spe-
antispecies antibody with an enzyme linked to it is added
and thc membranc is again rinsed before the addition
tive diagnosis may be made on the basis of detecting
of thc enzyme substratc. The result is read as a color
change in the test sample circle, which is compared to
IgM antibody in a single acute-phase serum specimen.
thc color changc in the positive control and no change
in the negative control. Such single patient tests arc rela-
tively expensive compared to the economies of testing
Serum Specimens for Serologic Assays
hundreds of scra in a single run in a fully automated
laboratory, bur the great savings in time and effort to
 Blood, collected in plain tubes, is allowed to clot and
send samples to the laboratory, as well as the fact that
the serum is separated. Paired acute and convalescent
decisions can be made while both client and patient are
scra are tested simultaneously. For certain tests that mea-
still in the consulting room, make single tests attractive
surc inhibition of somc biologic function of rhe virus,
and useful in the inmediate clinical management of
e.g., virus neutralization or hemagglutination inhibition,
somctimcs critically ill animals.
log .gs ie sueay kq paeaioeu, a isy asnu eias 
30 minutes. Sometimes sera must also be treated addi-
tionally, e.g., by absorption with kaolin or treatment 
 Serum Neutralization Assay
with neuraminidase, to remove nonspecific inhibitors.
 Prior treatment of the serum is not generally required
As virus isolation is considered the gold standard for the
for assays that simply measure antigen-antibody bind- detection of virus against which other assays must be
Detection and Quantitation of Antivirat Antibodies (Serrtogic Diagnosis)
217
compared, so it has been that serum neutralization has
mixtures are inoculated into disposable, nontoxic, ster-
been the gold standard, when available, for the detection
ile, plastic plates with 96 flat-bottomed wells in each of
and quantitation of antiviral antibodies. Neutralizing
which a cell monolayer has been established. Plates are
 antibody also attracts great interest because it is consid-
then incubated until the wells containing the “"virus only""
ered a direct correlate of protective antibody in vivo.
controls develop evidence of infection (Figure 12.13).
For the assay of neutralizing antibody, two general pro-
 By neutralizing the infectivity of the virus, antibody pro-
cedures are available: the alpha or constant serum-vari-
 tects the cells against viral destruction—-the highest dilu-
able virus method and the beta or constant virus variable
tion of antibody that protects cells from the virus repre-
serum method.
sents the titer of neutralizing antibody contained in the
 In the alpha procedure, two 10-fold dilution series
 serum specimen. Again, statistical methods are used to
of virus are set up, usually in a 96-well microtiter plate.
 convert raw end point data into precise units of neutraliz-
To one of the series a constant amount of the test serum,
ing antibody.
usually diluted 1 : 10 or 1 : 100, is added and to the other
 series a negative or perhaps an acute-phase serum from
the test animal is added. The assay is based on the differ-
Immunoblotting (Western Blotting)
ence in virus titer between the two titrations. The amount
to which the virus titer is reduced by the test (or convales-
Western blotting tests simultaneously but independently
cent) serum compared to the normal or acute-phase se-
rum is a measure of the amount of antibody in the
a particular virus. There are four key steps to Western
test serum.
blotting (Figure 12.14). First, purified virus is solubilized
 In the beta procedure, a constant amount of virus,
with the anionic detergent sodium dodecyl sulfate and
usually 100 TCIDso, obtained by previous titration and
 the constituent proteins are separated into discrete bands
dilution of a stock virus, is mixed with serial, usually
 according to their molecular mass (M.) by sodium dode-
twofold dilutions, of the test serum. The highest dilution
 cyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-
of serum that neutralizes the test dose of virus is the titer
PAGE). Second, the separated proteins are transferred
of the serum. In both the alpha and the beta versions of
 electrophoretically (*"blotted") onto nitrocellulose to im-
the test, end points may be indicated by cytopathology,
 mobilize thcm. Third, the test serum is allowed to bind
immunofluorescence, or even by enzyme immunoassay.
to the viral proteins on the membrane. Fourth, their
In both alpha and beta systems the serum-virus
 presence is demonstrated using a radiolabeled or, most
Figure 12.14.
ectropharesis
Elec
?
1. Protein separation
2. Protein transfer
3. Antigen detection
mmlsiniridssiisd
bandsfvirlprotinarethentransferredblednarircellosemmbraneandimmbize.3Thencupiedaresf th
niellqdn
to test individualnimal seraEach stipisincubatedwihanindividual test serum toenableantbodiestobind to theindividualviral proteins.
Folwnndbliw
are revealed by the addition of a substrate for the enzyme and a chromogen chosen to produce an insoluble colored product. (Courtesy of 1. H.
Holmes and R. Strugnell. 
218
12.Laboratory Diagnosis of Viral Diseases
commonly, an enzyme-labeled antispecies antibody. usually four or eight hemagglutinating units, is added.
 Thus, immunoblotting permits demonstration of anti-
The highest dilution of serum that inhibits the aggluti-
bodies to some or all of the proteins of any given virus
nation of the red blood celis by the standardized
and can be used not only to discriminate between infec-
amount of virus represents the hemagglutination-
tion with closely related viruses sharing certain antigens,
inhibition titer of the serum (Figure 12.15).
but also to monitor the presence of anribodies to different
antigens at different stages of infection. Dip stick ver-
sions of these assays in which membrane strips con-
Immunodiffusion
taining the separated viral proteins arc exposed to the
serum and the strips are “developed" are designed for 
Historically, agar gel diffusion assays wcre used for the
consulting room use.
specific diagnosis of a number of diseases, including hog
cholera, equine infectious anemia (Coggins test), and
bovine leukemia. This was because the assays require
Indirect Immunofluorescence Assay
only very simple, readily available materials. A further
advantage of the assays was that the antigen used could
 Indirect immunofluorescence assays for the detection
 be a relatively crude preparation (e.g, spleen pulp from
and quantitation of antibody have been widely used in
 an infected animal). In a commonly used format, six
many clinical and research laboratories for many years.
 peripheral wells and a single central well, all 3 mm in
The assay, which is similar in principle to enzyme immu-
 diameter, were cut in agar with a punch. Antigen was
noassays and radioimmunoassays, involves two steps: P
 placed in the central well, a known positive serum was
first the serum of interest is layered over the substrate P
 placed in every other peripheral well, and three sera from
containing the virus (usually virus-infected cells fixed on
animals of interest were placed in the remaining wells.
 glass microscope slides); following incubation of the slide
Precipitin lines were formed by antibodies diffusing from
to allow binding of antibodies in the serum to the viral
the wells containing the positive control sera and antigen
substrare and washing to remove unbound antibody,
 diffusing from the central well. Precipitin lines produced
fluorescein  isothiocyanate-conjugated  antiglobulin
 by any of the test sera and the antigen indicated that
(matched to the species from which the serum specimen 
1
thcy contained antibody; precipitin lines from test sera
was obtained) is added. Slides are examined in a micro- t
that fused with lines produced by the positive control
scope equipped with an ultraviolet light source and filters  scra were considered as a confirmed indication of the
that transmit only light emitted from the fluorescnt
 presence of specifc antibody.
label. A positive reaction is seen, as apple-grcen color
cell substrate, only when the serum specimen contains
IgM Class-Specific Antibody Assay
antibodies to the virus in question. Although the method
is rapid and may be useful in detecting antibodies that 
A rapid antibody-based diagnosis of a disease can be
are diffcult or even impossible to demonstrate by any
made on the basis of a single acute-phase serum by dem-
other means, nonspecific fluorescence frequently con-
onstrating virus-specific antibody of the IgM class. Be-
fuses interpretation of results.
cause IgM antibodies appear early after infection but
drop to low levels within 1 to 2 months and generally
disappear altogether within 3 months, they are usually
Hemagglutination-Inhibition Assay
indicative of recent (or chronic) infection. Moreover,
if found in a newborn animal, they are diagnostic of
 For those viruses that hemagglutinate red blood cells
intrauterine infection, because maternal IgM does not
of one or another species, such as many of the arthro-
cross the placenta.
pod-borne viruses and infuenza and parainfluenza vi-
The most common method used is the IgM anti-
ruses, hemagglutination-inhibition assays are widely
body capture assay, in which the viral antigen is bound
uscd. For detecting and quantitating antibodies in the
 on a solid-phase substrate, say a microtiter wcll. The
serum of animals, the methods arc sensitive, specific, 
 test serum is allowed to react with this substrate and
simple, reliable, and quite inexpensive. Assays are
then specific IgM antibodies "captured" by the antigen
conducted in 96-well microtiter platcs in a procedure
 are detected with labeled anti-IgM antibody matched to
similar to that of a constant virus-variable serum
1  the species from which the specimen was obtained. All
dilution ncutralization assay. Serum is diluted serially
of the immunoassays described earlier can readily be
in the wells of thc microtiter plate, usually in twofold rcndered IgMclasspecifc--enzyme immunoassays, ra-
steps, and to each well a constant amount of virus, dioimmunoassays, and indirect immunofluorescence
Detection and Quantitatio of Antiviral Antibodies (Serologic Diagnosis)
219
FiGure 12.15.
10
20
40
801603206401280
Titer
S-1
<10
S-2
40
S-3
160
S-4
640
1
2
4
8
Virusassay
Hemaglutination-inhibiionlestused forfirating ntibodiesto the inluenzavirushemaglutinin.Intheexample ilustrated, ahorsewasimmunized
ginsfiind4klz
4 weeks affer the first vaccine dose, and 4 weeks after rhe second. Sera were treated with periodate and heated at 56C for 30 minutes to
inactivate nonspeciic inhibitors of hemagglutination and then diluted in wells of a microfier plate in twofold steps from 1 : 10 to 1 : 1280 [dilutions
aocyprndbisndrnfd
gepldinwnidlntngisfvirdi
originally had no hemagglutinin-inhibiting antibodies against this particular strain of influenza virus top row]. One dose of vacine produced
an antibody (titer 20]; the second injection boosled the response lo a titer of 640.(Courtesy of I. Jack.]
   s gi  ( gs  ni a  aa ud s ssse
munoassays for virus-specific IgM are depicted in Figurc
 mediated hypersensitivity states). Such immunoglobulin
12.16. Class-specific immunoassays can also be designed
 class-specific antibody capture assays have an increas-
to measure IgG subclasses (useful in measuring colostral
 ingly important place in the armamentarium of diagnos-
antibodics in cattle and sheep), IgA (useful in measuring
tic laboratories.
Figure 12.16.
Virus
Test serum
from dog
Apoanue nB
gMantlbody
mmnoayrhdionf pecicvralnbiesfelgMlsssingcaninesermsanexmlendmmnlgicregents
suitable for testing for canine IgM antibodies to a gjiven virus. (left) Indirect method. (Right) IgM antibody-caplure method.
220
12.Iaboratory IDiagnnsis of Virat Diseases
Interpretation of Serologic
if the same enzyme immunoassay is uscd to screen a
Laboratory Findings
high-risk population with a known bovine leukemia
 prevalence of 50%, the predictivc value of the assay will
A rise in antibody titer between acute and convalcscent 
be high, but if it is used to screen a population with a
samples is a basis, albeit in retrospect, for a specifc
 known prevalence of 0.1%, the great majority of the
viral diagnosis; in some diseases, such as eastern equine
3.1% of animals that test positive will in fact be false
 encephalitis, a signifcant rise can occur within 48 hours
positives and will require folow-up with a confirmatory
of the onset of clinical signs. Sometimes the demonstra-
test of much higher specificity. This striking illustration
tion of antibody in a single serum sample is diagnostic
draws attention to the importance of selecting diagnostic
 assays with a particular objective in mind. An assay with
of current infection (e.g., with retroviruses and herpesvi-
high sensitivity is required when the aim is to screen for
ruses, because these viruses establish lifelong infections).
However, in such circumstances there is no assurance
a serious infection or where eradication of the disease
that the persistent virus was responsible for the disease
is the aim, in which case positive cases must not be
under consideration. Assays designed to detect IgM anti-
missed. An assay, usually based on an independent tech-
 body provide evidencc of rccent or current infection. A
mation thar the diagnosis is correct.
summary of the major strengths and limitations of the
The sensitivity of a given immunoassay is also a
 several alternative approaches to the serological diagno-
 sis of viral infections is given in Table 12.1.
measure of its ability to detect small amounts of antibody
 Detection of antiviral antibody in presuckle new-
(or antigen). For instance, enzyme immunoassays, radio-
born cord or venous blood provides a basis for specific
immunoassays, and neutralization assays generally dis-
diagnosis of in utero infections. This approach was used,
 play substantially higher sensitivity than immunodiffu-
for example, to show that Akabane virus was the cause of
sion. Improvements in sensitivity may be obtained by the
arthrogryposis-hydranencephaly in calves (see Chapter
 use of purified reagents and sensitive instrumentation.
However, the specificity of an immunoassay is a measure
31). Because transplacental transfer of immunoglobulins
 does not occur in most domestic animals, the presence
of its capacity to discriminate the presence of antibody
 of either IgG or IgM antibodies in presuckle blood is
directed against one virus versus another. This quality
is influenced mainly by the purity of the key reagcnts,
indicative of infection of the fetus.
 especially the antigen when testing for antibody and the
antibody when testing for antigen.
Quite apart from the problem of spurious cross-
Sensitivity and Specificity
reactions caused by impure reagents or mysterious sub-
stances in specimens that bind to antigens or antibodies,
The interpretation and value of a particular serologic
it is crucial to understand that the specificity of any assay
test is critically dependent on an understanding of two
 can be manipulated to match one's particular objective.
key parameters: sensitivity and specificity. The sensitivity
For example, because of the presence of antigenic deter-
of a given test is expressed as a percentage and is the
 minants common to many or all related viruses, say all
number of animals with the disease (or infection) in 
 the viruses within a given genus, the serum of an animal
question that are identified as positive by that test, di-
infected with just one of these viruses may contain anti-
vided by the total number that have the disease. For
bodies that cross-react broadly. To render the assay more
example, a particular enzyme immunoassay used to
 specific it is often necessary to use absolutely pure anti-
screen a population for bovine leukemia virus antibody
 gens, e.g., antigens produced by recombinant DNA tech-
may have a sensitivity of 98%, i.e., of every 100 infected
 nologies or peptides produced by organic synthesis. Al-
cattle tested, 98 will be diagnosed correctly and 2 will
ternatively, one can select an immunoassay that registers
be missed (the false-negative rate = 2%). In contrast,
 only those particular antibodies that bind to type-specific
the specificity of a test is a measure of the percentage 
 epitopes on the virus; virus neutralization and hemagglu-
of those without the disease (or infection) who yield a
 tination-inhibition assays are very specific because they
negative result. For example, the same enzyme inmuno-
 measure only antibodics directed against epitopes in-
assay for bovine leukemia virus antibody may have a
 volved in virus binding and attachment to celis that are
specificity of 97%, i.e., of every 100 uninfected cattle,
 usually extremely type specific.
97 will be diagnosed corectly as negative but 3 will be
diagnosed incorrectly as infected (the false-positive
rate = 3%). Whereas sensitivity and specificity are fixed
Applications of Serology
 percentages intrinsic to the particular diagnostic assay,
the predictive value of an assay is affected greatly by the
 A significant (conventionally, fourfold or greater) rise
 prevalence of the disease (or infection) involved. Thus,
 in antibody titer to a given virus between acute and
Laboratory Safety
221
convalescent serum samples is indicative of recent infec- 1
 lence of animals with antibody through vaccination may
tion. Because of the necessary interval between the two be in question if vaccine use has not resuited in expected
specimens, a diagnosis is provided only in retrospect. reductions in disease incidence. Large poultry and swine
Nevertheless, there are several circumstances wherein (
 operations include serological assessments as part of
serology may still be the diagnostic method of choice.
 their preventive medicine programs. Decisions to retain
There are circumstances when it is not practicable
 and, if necessary, boost vaccination when the incidence 
to attempt virus isolation or when the virus in question 
of disease has fallen dramatically are often rclated to
is one that is notoriously difficult to isolate from clinical
the percentage of the herd prcsumed to be protected.
specimens. For example, some togaviruses and bunyavir- 
 Continued suppression of rindcrpest in cattle in some
uscs disappear so rapidly from the blood and tissues of 
 countries of West Africa in the 1970s was based on this
infected animals that only serological diagnoses are prac-
approach. Whcn the herd immunity fell because of civil
ticable.
strife interfering with vaccination programs, rinderpest 
 There are circumstances when thc managcment
 reemerged.
of the case or the question of risk of transmission to
uninfected animals is not an urgent matter. For example,
when a cat returns to its homc cattery from a show
Laboratory Safety
where there havc been a numbcr of cases of suspected
feline herpesvirus 1 disease the frst question might bc
 Many cases of serious illness and several hundred deaths
whether the virus is present in the cattery or not. If thc
 from laboratory-acquired infection have bccn recorded
home cattery is virus free and if the exposed cat can be
 over the years, particularly from togaviruses, flavivir-
quarantined, it may be prudent to wait for as long as it
uses, bunyaviruses, arenaviruses, floviruses, and other
takes to obtain laboratory results before allowing the
 Biosafery level 3 and 4 pathogens. Prccautions to avoid
cat to reenter the cattcry.
laboratory hazards consist essentially of good laboratory
Thcre arc circumstances when the prcsencc of per-
 practices and adequate facilities and equipment (Tables
sistently infectcd animals in a herd pose a continuing
12.3, 12.4 and Figure 12.17). Safe practiccs include:
thrcat. For example, the presence of pseudorabies virus
in a herd may be determined serologically and an eradica-
1. Rigorous ascptic technique must be uscd. The
tion program initiated.
practice veterinarians have in asepric surgery provides a
There are circumstances when it is important to
valuable base upon which similar laboratory techniques
assay the dynamics of immunity to a given virus. For 
 may be learned. For example, the proper way to put on
example, assessment of vaccine coverage, i.e., the preva-
Iadoid su on res si Aons io sao pue uog
Figurt 12.17.
inpnebngryflsebleeicminks
can be used for experiments. [Courtesy of K. M. Johnson.]
222
12. Laboratory Diagnosis of Viral Diseases
Table 12.3
Recommended Biosafety Levels for Infectious Agents*
BIOSAFETY
 SafetY EqUIPmen?
FACILITY
LEVEL
AGENTS
PRACTICE
(PRIMARY BARRIErs)
(SECONDarY barRiErs)
BSL 1
Not known to cause hu-
Standard microbiologi-
None required 
Open bench
man disease
cal praclices
BSL 2
Associated with human
BSL 1 practices plus lim-
 Primary barriers: Class I
BSL 1 plus autoclave
disease, hazard of auto
ited access, biohazard 
or ll BSCsb for all manip-
availoble
inoculation, ingestion,
warning signs,
vlations that cause 
mucous membrane ex-
"'sharps" precautions,
splashes or cerosols,
posure
protocol for medical sur-
laboratory coats,
veillance, waste decon-
 gloves, face proteclion
tamination
as needed
BSL3
 Indigenous or exotic
BSL 2 practice plus con-
 Primary barriers: Class I
BSL 2 plus physical sep-
agents with potential
trolled access, decon-
or Il BSCs used for all
aration from access cor-
for aerosol transmis-
 tamination of all waste,
manipulations, pro-
ridors self-closing,dou-
sion; disease may have
 baseline serum, decon-
tective lab clothing.
ble door access,
 serious or lethal conse
tamination of lab cloth-
 gloves; respiratory pro.
exhaust air not recircu-
quences
ing before laundering
tection as needed
lated, negalive air flow
into laboratory
BSL 4
Dangerous/exotic
BSL 3 praclices plus
 Primary barriers: Class
BSL 3 plus separate
agents that pose high
clothing change before
II BSCs or Class I or Il
building or isolated
risk of life-threatening
entering, shower on
BSCs in combination
zone with dedicared air
disease, derosol-trans-
exit, all material decon-
with positive pressure
supply and exhaust, vac-
mited lab infections, or
taminated before exit 
full-body suit with con-
uum, and decontamina-
related agents with un-
from facility
tained air supply, for all 
tion systems, other re-
known risk of trans-
procedures
quirements as well
mission
From Centers for Disease Control and National Insiutes for Healh, "Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Loboralories," 3rd Ed.
U.S. Government Printing Ofice, Washington, DC, 1993. There are additional guidelines for practices, safely equipment, and facilities for
working with experimenlal animals infecied with pathogens.
Biological safely cabinet.
way of removing gown and gloves after working with
a dangerous virus in the laboratory.
 2. Laboratory clothing, gloves, and even masks 
or respirators are chosen to match the virus or clinical
TaBLe 12.4
 material being worked with. Laboratory clothing is de-
Laboratory Hazards
contaminated before being sent to the laundry.
 3. Various classes of biological safety cabinets
HAZARD
providing increasing levels of containment are available
for procedures of various degrees of biohazard; their use
Aerosol
Homogenization (e.g., of tisue in blenderl
is summarized in Table 12.4. Biosafety level 4 viruses,
Centrifugation
Ultrasonic vibration
 such as Ebola, Marburg, Lassa, and equine morbillivirus,
Broken glassware
are handled only in maximum-containment laboratories.
Pipetting
 4. Careful attention must be given to the auto-
Ingestion
Mouth pipeting
claving of all potentially infectious waste.
Eating or smoking in laboratory
 5. Mouth pipetting is banned; instead mechani-
Inadequate washing/disinfection of hands 
cal pipetting devices are used.
Skin pene
Needle-stick
6. Particular care is taken when centrifuging ma-
tration
Hand cut by broken glassware
terial containing or possibly containing a dangerous
Leaking containercontaminating hands
Handling infected organs at necropsy
virus.
Splash into eye
7. Where possible, particularly dangerous vi-
Animal bite
ruses employed in various laboratory tests are inacti-
Furtber Reading
223
 8. Spills are cleaned up with an appropriate
Table 12.5
Restricted Animal Viruses*
chemical disinfectant.
 9. Where zoonotic or human or primate tissues
VIRUS
FAMILY /GENUS
are handled, personnel are immunized against such
 pathogens as hepatitis B virus, polioviruses, and rabies
African horse sickness
Reoviridae/ Orbivirus
virus, as well as against exotic agents such as Rift
viruse5
Valley fever virus in the special laboratories han-
African swine fever virus
Asfarviridge/ Asfivirus
dling them.
Avian influenza viruses [cer-
Orthomyxoviridae/
10. Limitations arc placed on the type of work
tain viruses such as those H5 influenzavirus A
undertaken by pregnant women or immunosuppressed
and H7 viruses that cause se
vere disease with high mor-
employees.
tality—previously called fowl
plague)
The United States Centers for Disease Control and
Borna disease virus
Bornaviridae/ Bornavirus
Prevention, in conjunction with the United States De-
Bovine ephemeral fever virus
partment of Agriculture and similar bodies in other coun-
Rhabdoviridae/
tries, including the Offce International des Epizooties,
Ephemerovirus
 provide guidelines for appropriate laboratory practices,
Camelpox virus
Poxviridae/ Orthopoxvirus
 procedures, containment facilities, and equipment for
Foot-and-mouth disease
Picornaviridae/ Aphthovirus
working with dangerous viruses (and other microor-
viruses
ganisms).
Lumpy skin disease virus
Poxviridae/ Capripoxvirus
Nairobi sheep disease virus
Bunyaviridae/Nairovirus
Newcastle disease virus 
Paramyxoviridae!
Security for National Livestock Industries
[velogenic strains]
Rubulovirus
 Porcine policencephalo-
Picornaviridae/Enterovirus
 In addition to personal hazard, exotic animal viruses
myelitis virus
 pose special community risks such that major industrial-
Rift Valley fever virus
Bunyaviridae/ Phlebovirus
ized countries with large livestock industries support
Rinderpest virus
Paramyxoviridae!
special laboratories for their investigation and for refer-
Morbilivirus
ence diagnosis. These laboratories are popularly desig-
 Swine vesicular disease virus Picornaviridae/ Enterovirus
nated by their location: for example, Plum Island in the
Vesicular exanthema virus
Caliciviridae/ Vesivirus
United States, Pirbright in the United Kingdom, Geelong
Wesselsbron virus
Flaviviridae/Flavivirus
in Australia, Ondestepoort in South Africa, and so on.
Animal viruses that are restricted to these laboratories
"Far the United States. In other developed countries there are similar
 in the United States are listed in Table 12.5. The importa-
lisinge
bluetongevirsepidemicrhgicdisefdevir
tion, possession, or use of these viruses is prohibited or
 restricted by law or regulation. The imporration of some
mni
is totally prohibited (e.g., foot-and-mouth disease viruses
stomaitis viruses, and the scrapie and bovine spongiformencephalopa-
and vesicular stomatitis viruses into Australia); more
thy prions, butexcludes bovine ephemeral fever virus, which is endemic
in Australia. Additionally, cetain viruses of lish and mollsks are notifi
 often their importation and study are restricted to na-
able to the Office International des Epizooties, in Paris: epizootic hema-
 tional maximum containment laboratorics.
topoietic necrosis virus, inlectious hematopoietic necrosis virus, spring
viremia of carp virus, viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus, channel caf-
fisheildrird
tious poncreatic necrosis virus,
Further Reading
Arnheim, N., and Erlich, H. (1992). Polymerase chain re-
action strategy. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61, 131-162.
vated (e.g., floviruses, arenaviruscs and certain togavi-
Centers for Disease Control/National Institutes for
ruses, bunyaviruses, and flaviviruses). This can be done,
Health. (1993). "Biosafety in Microbiological and Bio-
without destroying viral antigenicity, by y-irradiation or
mcdical Laboratories," 3rd ed., Publ. NIH 88-8395.
by photodynamic inactivation with ultraviolet lighr in
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
the presence of psoralen. Increasingly, viral proteins pro-
Fleming, D. O., Richardson, J. H., Tullis, J. J., and Ves-
 duced by recombinant DNA technologies are being em-
ley, D. (1995). "Laboratory Safety. Principles and
Practices," 2nd ed., American Society for Microbiol-
 ployed instead of whole virus as safe antigens for sero-
Ogy Press, Washington, DC.
logic tests.
Freshney, R. 1. (1988). "Culture of Animal Cells: A Man-
224
12. J.aboratory Diagnosis of Virat Diseases
ual of Basic Techniques," 2nd ed. Liss/Wiley, New
Lennctte, E. H., Halonen, P., and Murphy, F. A., cds.
York.
(1988). "Laboratory Diagnosis of Infcctious Diseases.
Hierholzcr, J. C. (1991). Rapid diagnosis of viral infec-
Principles and Practice," Vol. 2. Springer-Verlag, New
tion. In *Rapid Methods and Automation in Microbi-
York.
ology and Iminunology” (A. Vaheri and A. Balows,
Murray, P. R., Baron, E. J., Pfaller, M. A., and Tenover,
eds.), pp. 556-590. Springer-Verlag, New York.
F. C., (1995). "Manual of Clinical Microbiology," 6th
Innis, M. A., Gelfand, D. H., Sninsky, J. J., and White,
cd. American Society for Microbiology Press, Washing-
T. J., eds. (1990). *Polymerase Chain Reaction Proto-
ton, DC.
cols: A Guide to Methods and Applications." Aca-
Palmer, E. L., and Martin, M. L. (1988). *"Elcctron Mi-
demic Press, San Diego, CA.
croscopy in Viral Diagnosis."' CRC Press, Boca Raton,
Jamcs, K. (1990). Immunoserology of infectious diseases.
FL..
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 3, 132-155.
Reubel, G. H. and Studdert, M. J. (1998). Benefits and
Johnson, F, B. (1990). Transport of viral specimens. Clin.
limitations of polynierase chain reaction in veterinary
Microbiol. Rev. 3, 120-139.
diagnostic virology. Vet. Bull. 68, 505-516.
Katz, J. B., Alstad, A. D., Gustafson, G. A., and Moser,
Rose, N. R., dc Macario, E. C., Folds, J. D., Lane, H. C.
K. M. (1993). Scnsitive identification of bluetongue vi-
and Nakamura, R. M, eds. (1997). "Manual of Clini-
rus serogroup by a colorimetric dual oligonucleotide
cal Laboratory Immunology," 5 ed. Amcrican Socicty
sorbent assay of amplifed viral nucleic acid. J. Clin.
of Microbiology Press, Washington, DC.
Microbiol. 31, 3028-3030.
CHaPter
Vaccination against Viral Diseases
Live-Virus Vaccines ..
226
Nonreplicating Native Antigen Vaccines..
227
Vaccines Produced by Recombinant DNA and Other Innovative
Technoloies......
228
Methods for Enhancing Immunogcnicity....
233
Factors Affecting Vaccine Efficacy and Safety ..
233
Passive Immunization...
236
Vaccination Policy.
236
Vaccination Schedules
237
Available and Rccommended Vaccines...
240
Chemothcrapy of Viral Diseases.
240
Further Reading..
243
Vaccination is the most effective way of preventing viral
World Health Organization (WHO) exerts persuasive
diseases. The control of so many viral (and othcr infec-
 leadcrship for human vaccine usage and maintains a
tious) diseases of animals by vaccination is probably
 numbcr of programs such as the Global Program for
the single most outstanding achievement of veterinary
Vaccines and Immunization, a program that is un-
medicine. The history of vaccination is a fascinating one;
 matched for animal vaccine usage by its sister agencies,
vaccines were introduced by Edward Jenner in 1798 to
 the Food and Agriculture Organization and the Offce
arly a century
 International des Epizooties. Further, within countries,
 greater latitude is allowed in the manufacture and use
could be used to
 of vaccines for veterinary and zoonotic diseases than is
prcvcnt rabics. With the advent of cell culture techniques 
 allowed by national regulatory authorities for human
in thc 1950s, a second era of vaccination was introduced
vaccines. As may be seen in the tables in Chapter 42,
and many attcnuated virus and inactivated virus vaccines
 there are many viral vaccines available for use in domes-
were developed. Today, the feld of vaccinology has en-
tic animals, whereas, currently, only about 13 are avail-
tered a third era through the application, in many differ-
 able for use in humans. Finally, even a very small number
ent ways, of recombinant DNA technologies. While the
of vaccine-associated illnesses or deaths constitutes a
attenuated virus and inactivated virus vaccines of the
 major objection to the use of a vaccine in humans. If a
sccond era are still the *work horses"' of veterinary prac-
vaccine is effective and the potential cost of failure to
tice, third generation vaccines are now complementing
 control the disease is suffciently high, mild disease (and
and, in some cascs, replacing them.
even, in the past, occasional death) is tolerated in vctcri-
Therc arc some important differences between vac-
nary medicine.
cination practices in humans and animals. Except in
Traditionally, until the advent of the third gencra-
developing countries, economic constraints are of less
tion vaccines, there werc two major strategies for the
importance in human medicine than in veterinary prac-
 production of viral vaccines; one employing attenuated
tice. There is greater agreemcnt about the safety and
virus and the other employing chemically inactivated
efficacy of vaccines in use in human medicine than there
virus. Today, the situation is far more complex; while
is with animal vaccines. At the international level, the 
e most of the vaccines in wide-scale production contain
225
226
13.Vaccination cgainst Virat Disedses
either attenuated or inactivated virus, new vaccines are
Live-Virus Vaccines
being developed through recombinant DNA technolo-
Attenuated virus vaccines, when they have been proven
gies that promise significant improvements in safcty, ef-
to be safe, have bcen the best of all vaccines. Several of
ficacy, and cost (Table 13.1). The excitement of the pros-
 them have been dramatically successful in reducing the
pect of *"DNA vaccines" is conspicuous in this regard.
Live virus vaccines replicate in the vaccine recipient
 incidence of important diseases of animals and humans.
and, in so doing, amplify the amount of antigcn pre-
Most live-virus vaccines are injected subcutaneously or
intramuscularly, but some are delivercd orally and a few
sented to the host's irmmune system. There arc important
by acrosol or to poultry in their drinking water. For
benefits in this because the replication of vaccine virus
thesc vaccines to be successful the vaccine virus must
mimics infection to the extent that the host immune
 response is more similar to that occurring aftcr natural
 rcplicate in the recipient, thereby eliciting a lasting im-
mune response, while causing little or no disease. In
infection than is the case with inactivated or subunit
effect, a live-virus vaccine mimics a subclinical infection.
vaccines. When inactivated virus vaccines are produced,
Livc-virus vaccines are derived from several sources.
the chemical or physical treatment used to eliminate
infectivity may be damaging enough to modify immuno-
genicity, especially cell-mediated immunogenicity, usu-
Vaccines Produced from Naturally
ally resulring in an immune response that is shorter in
Occurring Attenuated Viruses
duration, narrower in antigenic spectrum, weaker in cell-
mediated and mucosal immune responses, and possibly
The original vaccine (vacca = cow), introduced by Jen-
less effective in totally prevenring viral entry. Nonethe-
ner in 1798 for the control of human smallpox, utilized
less, very serviceable and safe inactivated vaccines are
 cowpox virus, a natural pathogen of the cow. This virus
available and widely used.
 produced only a mild lesion in humans, but, because it
TaBLE 13.1
Approaches to the Design of Viral Vaccines
Live-virus vaccines
Vaccines produced from naturally occurring attenuated viruses
Vaccines produced by serial passage in cultured cells
Vaccines produced by serial passage in a heterologous host aninal
Vaccines produced by selection of cold-adapted imutants and reassortant5
Nonreplicating native antigen vaccines
Vaccines produced from inactivated whole virions
Vaccines produced from native viral subunits
Vaccines produced from purified native viral proteins
Vaccines produced by recomhinant DNA and other innovative technologies
Vacines produced hy recombinant DNA technology by the attenuation of viruses by gene deletion or site-directed
mutagenesis
n 'si au sud ea Jo ux  q so a  q pd sa
insect) (or bacterial cells
Vacines produced by recombinant DNA iechnology by the expression ol viral proteins thal self-assemble into virus-like
particles
Vaccines produced by recombinant DNA technology by the expression of viral antigens in viral vectors.
Vaccines produced by recombinant DNA technology by the expression of viral antigens in baclerial vectors
Vaccines produced by recombinant DNA technology by the formation of viral chimeras (viruses with the teplicative
machinery of one virus and the protective antigens of another)
Vaccines produced by recombinant DNA technology by the organic synthesis of viral peptides
sooqe sopi-u jo uonsupe pue uonpod ai Aq Aoouqn vna nueuquosau Aq panpod sous
DNA vaccines
Nonreplicating Native Antigen Vaccines
227
is antigenically related to smallpox virus, it conferred
Vaccines Produced by Attenuation of
protection against the severe human disease. The saime
Viruses by Serial Passage in
principle has been applied to other diseases (e.g., the
Heterologous Host
protection of chickens against Marek's disease using a
vaccine derived from a related herpesvirus of turkeys
and the protection of piglets against porcine rotavirus
 Serial passage in a heterologous host was a classic means
infcction using a vaccine derived from a bovine ro-
of empirically attenuating viruscs for use as vaccines.
 For example, rinderpest and hog cholera viruses were
tavirus).
Virulent viruses given by an unnatural routc have
saessed pess u pue siqeu ui mone on pandepe yoes
historically becn used as vaccincs in veterinary practice
 became sufficiently attenuated to be used in earlier vac-
 cines. Many viruses were passaged in embryonated hen's
(t.g., wild-type avian infectious laryngotracheitis virus).
eggs in similar fashion.
Vaccines Produced by Attenuation of
Vaccines Produced by Attenuation of
Viruses by Serial Passage in
Viruses by Selection of Cold-Adapted
Cultured Cells
Mutants and Reassortants
Most of the live-virus vaccines in common use today
Thc observation that temperature-sensitive (ts) mutants
have been derived empirically by serial passage in cul-
(unable to replicate satisfactorily at temperatures much
tured cells. The cells may be of homologous or, more
higher than normal body teimperature) generally display
commonly, heterologous host origin. Adaptation of virus
reduccd virulence suggcsted that they might make satis-
to more vigorous growth in cultured cells is fortuitously
factory live vaccines. Unfortunately, even vaccines con-
accompanied by progrcessive loss of virulcnce for the
taining more than one ts mutation have displaycd a dis-
natural host. Loss of virulence may bc dcmonstrated
turbing tendency to revert toward virulence during
initially in a convenient laboratory model, often a mouse,
 replication in vaccinated animals. Attention accordingly
before being confirmed by clinical trials in the species
moved to cold-adapted (ca) mutants, derived by adapta-
of interest. Because of the practical requirement that the
tion of virus to grow at suboptimal temperatures. The
vaccine must not be so attenuated that it fails to replicate
rationale is that such mutant viruses might comprise
satisfactorily in vivo, it is sometimes necessary to com-
safer vaccines for intranasal administration in that they
 promisc by using a strain that may induce mild clinical
would rcplicate well at the lower temperature of the
signs in a few of the recipient animals.
nasal cavity (about 33°C in most mammalian species),
 During multiple passages in cultured cells, vaccine
 but not at the temperature of thc more vulnerable lower
seed viruses may accumulate numerous point mutations
 respiratory tree and lungs. Cold-adapted influenza vac-
 in the genonie, which lead to attenuation. In recent years,
 cines containing mutations in almost every gene do not
genomic sequencing has brought considerable undci-
 revert to virulence. In 1997, influenza vaccines based on
standing of attenuation, allowing better predictions of
such mutations were licensed for human use in the United
vaccine efficacy and safety. It has been shown that for
States—the same approach is currently under study for
most viruses, several genes contribute to virulence and
 the development of improved vaccines against equine in-
tropism and do so in several different ways. For example,
fluenza.
in contrast to the systemic infection associated with the
wild-type virus, it has been found that some vaccine
viruses, administered by the respiratory route, replicate
Nonreplicating Native
only in the upper respiratory tract; in other cases, vaccine
viruses, administered orally, replicate only in specific
Antigen Vaccines
intestinal epithelial cells.
 Despite the outstanding success of empirically de-
Vaccines Produced from Inactivated
rived attenuated virns vaccines, extensive research is cur-
Whole Virions
rently aimed at replacing what some veterinarians sec
aa pisp a, m n se, s
Inactivated virus vaccincs are usually made from virulent
neered" vaccines. In these engineered vaccines, the muta-
 virus; chemical or physical agents are used to destroy
tions associated with the attenuation are known, stable,i
infectivity while maintaining immunogenicity. When
and predictable. This approach has already yielded sey 
 prepared properly, such vaccines are safe, but they need
eral promising vaccines, as discussed later.
228
13. Vaccination against Virat IDiseases
response commensurate with that attainable by a much t
that contribute to virulence. The large DNA viruses, in
smaller dose of attenuated virus vaccines. Normally the
 particular, carry a significant number of genes that are
primary vaccination course comprises two or three injec-r
not essential for replication, at least for replication in
tions; further (*"booster") doses may be required at inter-
cultured cells. "Genetic surgery" is used to construct
vals to maintain immunity.
deletion mutants that are stable over many passages.
 Thc most commonly used inactivating agents are
 Several herpesvirus vaccines have been constructed using
formaldehyde, β-propiolactone, and ethylenimine. One this strategy; one of these, pseudorabies vaccine for
of the advantages of β-propiolactone, which is used in  swine, produced by recombinant DNA technology with 
the manufacture of rabies vaccines, and erhylenimine, a deletion of the thymidine kinase (TK) gene of the virus,
which is used in thc manufacture of foot-and-mouth is in wide use in veterinary practice in many countries.
disease vaccines, is that they are completely hydrolyzed  (
 Other pseudorabies virus vaccines have becn constructed
the center of aggregates may be protected from inactiva-
 glycoprotein gene(s) (gE, gB, or gG). The deleted glyco-
tion, it is important that aggregates be broken up before protein may be used as caprure antigen in an ELISA,
inactivation, ln the past, failure to do this occasionally 
 so that vaccinated, uninfected pigs, which would test 
resulted  in  vaccine-associated  disease 
outbreaks-
negative, can be distinguished from naturally infected
several foot-and-mouth disease outbreaks have been
 pigs, enabling eradication programs to be conducted in
traced to this problem (see Chapter 15).
 parallel with continued vaccination.
 Site-directed mutagenesis permits the introduction
of prescribed nucleotide substitutions into viral genomes
Vaccines Produced from Purified Native
at will. As more becomes known about particular genes
Viral Proteins
 that are influential in virulence and immunogenicity,
these genes may be modified. Further, other meaningful
Lipid solvents such as sodium deoxycholate are used in
 insertions or changes in the viral nucleotide sequence
the case of enveloped viruses to solubilize the virion
may be tested easily. Indeed, the day is coming when
and release the components, including the glycoprotein
licensing authorities may demand that new vaccines be
spikes of the cnvclope. Differential centrifugation is used
fully defined genetically, ie., that the complete nucleo-
to semipurify thesc glycoproteins, which are then formu-
tide sequence of the vaccine virus be known and perhaps
lated for use as so-called "split' vaccines. Examples in-
stipulated in the license application.
 clude vaccines against herpesviruses, influenza viruses,
and coronaviruses.
Vaccines Produced by Expression of
Vaccines Produced from Purified
Viral Proteins in Eukaryotic {Yeast,
Naturally Occurring Viral Proteins
Mammalian, Insect] or Bacterial Cells
The earliest vaccine for human hepatitis B virus was
Recombinant DNA technology provides a means of pro.
unusual in that it was prepared as purifed hcpatitis B
 ducing large amounts of viral proteins that can be puri-
surfacc antigen (HBsAg) from human blood of chroni-
cally infected carriers of the virus. There are no com-
fied readily and formulated into vaccines. Once the criti-
cal  viral protein conferring protection has been
monly used veterinary vaccines of this kind.
identified, its gene (or, in the case of an RNA virus, a
cDNA copy of the gene) may be cloned into one of a
Vaccines Produced by
wide choice of expression plasmids and expressed in any
of several cell systems. If the immunogenic viral protein
Recombinant DNA and Other
of interest is glycosylated, eukaryotic expression systems
Innovative Technologies
Inust be used so that the expressed protein is glycosylated
and produced ideally in its proper conformation.
Vaccines Produced by Attenuation of
 Useful eukaryotic expression systems include yeast
cells (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), insect cells (Spodoptera
Viruses by Gene Deletion or Site-
frugiperda), and various mammalian cells. Yeast offers
Directed Mutagenesis
the advantage that there is extensive experience with
The problem of back mutation (i.e., a mutation by which
 duced by expression of a cloned gene, human hepatitis
the vaccine virus regains virulence) may be largely cir-
 B vaccine, was produced in yeast. Insect cells offer the
cumvented by completely deleting nonessential genes  advantage of simple technology derived from the silk
Vaecines Produced byReconrbinant DNA and Other Innovative Technologies
229
industry: moth cell culturcs (or caterpillars!) may be
which VLPs have been made and shown to be immuno-
Sd jea jo shu siie a sssidxa in ape
 genic include picornaviruses, caliciviruses, rotaviruses,
through infection with baculoviruses carrying the gene(s)
 and orbiviruses. Virus-like particles may be equated to
of the virus of interest. The promoter for the gene encod-
ing the baculovirus polyhedrin protein is so strong that
empty) in that they are totally devoid of nucleic acid
the product of a viral genc of interest inserted within
and therefore are safe. They may also be equated to an
the baculovirus polyhcdrin genc may comprise up to half
inactivated whole virus vaccinc but without the poten-
of all the protein thc infected moth cells or caterpillars
tially epitope-damaging step of chemical inactivation.
make.
 Surprisingly, no virus-like, particle-based vaccines are in
Mammalian cells offer the advantage over cells
commercial use. Possible rcasons for this include cost
from lower eukaryotcs in that they are more likely to
 of production, low yields, and less effective immunity
possess the machinery for correct posttranslational pro-
 compared to cxisting vaccines, cven when these are
cessing, including glycosylation and secretion, of viral
whole-virus inactivated vaccines.
proteins. The relative advantages of these systems arc
presented in Table 13.2.
Vaccines Utilizing Bacteria as Vectors
for Expression of Viral Antigens
Vaccines Produced by Expression of
Viral Proteins That Self-Assemble into
Rather than proceed to formulate a vaccine using the
 protein derived from the systems described previously,
Virus-like Particles
recombinant DNA technology allows the expression of
viral epitopes on the surface of bacteria that infect the
When the genes coding for the production and cleavage
host directly. The general approach is to insert the DNA
of capsid proteins of viruses within certain families of
encoding a protective viral antigen or epitope into a
nonenveloped icosahedral viruses are cloncd into plas-
 region of the genome of a bacterium, or one of its plas-
 mids and expressed, the resulting individual capsid pro-
 mids, that encodes a prominent surface protcin. Provided
tcins assemble into virus-like parricles (VLPs). Thcsc
 that the added viral protein structures do not seriously
VLPs may bc used as a vaccine. Examples of viruses for
 interfere with the transport, stability, or function of the
Table 13.2
Advantages and Limitations of Aftenuated, Inactivated, and DNA Vaccines
PROPERTY
 AtTenUaTeD Virus vacCinE
INactivated virus vaccine
DNA vaCCiNE
Route of administration
Injeclion, inhalalion or oral 
Injection 
Injection 
Amount of virus in vaccine
Low
High
Nil
esop
Number of doses
 Single, generaily
Multiple
 Single, generally
Need for adjuvant
No
Yes
No
Duration of immunity
Many years
Generally I year or less
Many yedrs
Antibody response
lgG, lgA fif via mucosal
IgG
IgG
route]
Cell-mediated response
Generally modest
pooo
Heat lability
Yes, for most viruses
No
No
Interference by prior an-
Yes
Usually no
Apparently no
tibody
 Side effects
Occasional, local, or sys-
Occasional, local 
Uncertain
temic
 Use in pregnant animals
Often not advised, but com-
Yes
Yes
monly done
Reversion to virulence
Rarely
No
No
Cost
Low
High
y6!H
230
13. Vaccinationt against Virat Diseuses
bacterial protein, the bacterium can multiply and present
 technology is being explored seriously in other contexts,
the viral epitope to the immune system of the host. En-
including the correction of defective genes, anticancer
teric bacteria that multiply naturaily in the gut would
 therapy, and the correction of some degenerative diseases 
seem to be ideal expression vectors for presenting protec-
associated with aging in humans. Thc concept for vac-
tive cpitopes of virulent enteric viruses to the gut-associ-
 cines against disease involves inserting the gene coding
 ated lymphoid tissue. The main vaccines under develop-
for the antigen (against which protective responses are
ment employ attenuated strains of Escherichia coli,
 generated in the host) of the virus causing the disease
Salmonella spp., and Mycobacteria spp. for immuniza-
 of interest into the genome of an avirulent virus. This
tion against enteric organisms and/or for the preferential
 modified avirulent virus is then administered as a live-
stimulation of mucosal immunity.
virus vector. Cells in which thc vector virus replicates
in vivo will express the foreign protein and the animal
will mount both a humoral and a cell-mediated immune
Vaccines Utilizing Viruses as Vectors
response to it. In the original proof test of this concept,
for Expression of Viral Antigens
the human hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) gene,
flanked by the nonessential vaccinia gene for thymidine
DNA Viruscs as Vectors
kinase and its promoter, was inserted into a bacterial
 Recombinant DNA techniques alow any foreign gene
plasmid (Figure 13.1). Mammalian cells infected with
 to be introduced into the viral genome, and the product 
vaccinia virus were then transfected with this chimeric
of the foreign gene is then carried into and expressed in
 plasmid, which by homologous recombination produced
 the cell. The method is in use in veterinary medicine and
vaccinia virus carrying the HBsAg. The recombinant vi-
involves the use of viruses as vectors to carry the genes
Ius was then used as a hepatitis B vaccine. Genes for
 for the protective antigens of other viruses. The same
 many antigens from a variety of viruses have been incor-
Figure 13.1.
Restriction Sites
Vaccinia Promoter
Heterologous DNA
Start
Stop
ATG
Codon
Plasmid
Orlgln of
Replication
9684890
Antibiotic
Resistance
Ligatlon
Marker
Chimeric
Plasmid
Transfection
Infection
Homologous
Recombination in
Tissue Cuture Cels
TK-Spontaneous
BudR
Expression Identification
Mutants
Selection
TK- Recombinant Virus
Heterologous
DNA
Mehdfnsinainiisvecryingstdgenemnirs.,thidineenefiniirus
bromodeoxyuridine; TK, thymidine kinase. [Courtesy of B. Moss and J. Esposito.]
Vaccines Prodiiced by Recombinant DNA and Otber lnnovative Tecbnologies
231
porated into the genome of vaccinia virus, and vaccina-
 mologueous reassortment (segiment swapping) by cocul-
tion of animals with these recombinant-vectored vac-
tivation of an existing vaccine strain virus with the new
 cines has, in nearly every case, produced a good antibody
 isolate. Viruses with the desirable growth properties of
response. For example, vaccinia virus-vectored rabies
 the vaccine virus but with the immunogenic properties
vaccines have been shown to protect foxes and raccoons
of the recent isolate were selected, cloned, and used as
when incorporated into baits administered orally. Be-
vaccine.
cause the large vaccinia gcnome can accommodate at
least a dozen foreign genes andstillbe packaged satisfac-
torily within the virion, it is theoretically posible to
Synthetic Peptide Vaccines
construct, as a vector, a single recombinant virus capable
of protecting against several different viral diseases.
Techniques have been dcveloped for locating and defin-
Fowlpox virus is a logical choice as a vector for avian
 ing epitopes on viral proteins and it is possible to synthe-
vaccines. Most surprisingly, fowlpox virus has also been 
size peptides chemicaily corresponding to these antigenic
shown to be a useful vector in mammals. Even though
determinants (Table 13.3). Such synthetic peptides have
this virus and the closely related canarypox virus do
 been shown to elicit neutralizing antibodies against foot-
not replicate to produce infectious virus in mammals
and-mouth disease virus, rabies virus, and certain other
(including humans), the inserted genes are expressed and
animal pathogens, but in general this approach has been
induce an antibody response.
disappointing. While the approach merits further re-
 So far, the only vectored vaccines to be used in
search, one limitation is that most epitopes that elicit
the field are vaccinia-rabies constructs used for the vacci-
 humoral immunity are conformational. Epitopes are not
nation of foxes in Europe and raccoons in the United
 composed of linear arrays of contiguous amino acids,
States and rinderpest vaccines (based on vaccinia and
but rather are assembled from amino acids that, while
capripox viruses) in Africa. Recent research suggests that
 separated in the primary sequence, are brought into close
adenoviruses, herpesviruses, and parvoviruses wil also
apposition by the folding of the polypeptide chain(s).
have value as vectors and may have advantages in terms
An effective antigenic stimulus requires that the three-
 of long-term antigen expression.
dimensional shape that an epitope has in the native pro-
tein molecule or virus particle be maintained in a vaccine.
RNA Viruses as Vectors
Because short synthetic peptides lack any tertiary or qua-
Several RNA viruses, such as Sindbis virus and several
picornaviruses, are also bcing developed as vectors. This
Table 13.3
approach opens up the possibility of designing vaccines
 Synthetic Peptides as Potential Vaccines
for the range of viral and bacterial and perhaps parasitic
infections common in each species of domestic animal
Advantages
in any particular country.
 Short defined amino acid sequence representing protec-
tive epitope
Viral Chimeras (Viruses with Replicativc
 Safe, nontoxic, stable
Machinery of One Virus and Protective
ll jo wioy a u pauesaid Aipnou aio sadoda li 1
Antigens of Another) as Vaccincs
ear peptides so they can be included easily in the
Conceptually, this is a subtle form of vectored vaccine.
vaccine
When a particular virus strain has very well tested and
 May be engineered to contain B cell and T cell epitopes
useful properties, such as safety and high yield, it is
or several epitopes of one or more proteins
possible to add or substitute gene segments from a less
May be engineered to lack immunosuppressive domains 
well-characterized virus of the same species into the ge-
present in ngive proteins
nome of the former for use as a vaccine. A hypothetical
Disadvantages
example might be a recently isolated variant of avian
Poorly immunogenic; adjuvant, liposome, ISCOM, or po-
encephalomyelitis virus that grows poorly in cultured
lymerization needed
cells and embryonated hen eggs. A cDNA of the capsid-
Most B cell epitopes are nonlinear [discontinuous] and
coding region of the virus of interest is uscd to replace the
therefore not reproduced by peptides
corresponding region of a high-yielding cxisting vaccine
May be too narrowly specific, not protecting against natu-
strain. The chimeric virus is then used as vaccine for the
ral variants
newly isolated virus strain.
 Singleepitope vaccine may readily select mutants in the
 For influenza viruses and other viruses with seg-
field
mented genomes, the principle of chimeric viruses was
No response in animals lacking appropriate MHC class I
well established beforc the advent of recombinant DNA
antigen
technology. Reassortant viruses were produced by ho-
232
13. Vaccination against Virat Diseases
ternary conformation, most antibodies raised against I
DNA technology stems from the discovery that viral
them are incapable of binding to virions, hence neutraliz-
 DNA itself can be used as a vaccine. In the early 1990s,
ing antibody titers may be orders of magnitude lower
it was observed that a plasmid construct that included
than those induced by inactivated whole virus vaccines
the β-galactosidase gene, when inoculated into mouse
 or purified intact proteins.
skeletal muscle, expressed the enzyme for up to 60 days
 In contrast, the epitopes recognized by T lympho-
 postinoculation. From this early observation, there has
 cytes are short linear peptides (bound to MHC protein).
been an cxplosion of interest in the development of DNA
 Some of thcse T cell epitopes are conscrved between
vaccines. Experimental vaccines exist for a wide range
strains of virus and therefore elicit a cross-reactive T cell
of applications, including bacterial, viral (Table 13-1),
response. Thus, attention is moving toward the construc-
 parasitic, antitumor, and antiallergic therapies. Experi-
 tion of artificial heteropolymers of T cell epitopes and
 Mentally, the methodology can be applied to screening
 B cell epitopes, perhaps coupled to a peptide facilitating
for protective antigens.
fusion with cell membranes to enhance uptake. Such
With hindsight, such a discovery may not be that
constructs might prime T cells to respond more vigor-
surprising. In 1960, it was shown that cutaneous inocula-
ously when boosted with an inactivated whole-virus vac-
tion of a phenol extract of DNA from Shope papillomavi-
cine or on natural challenge. This approach may have
 rus induced papilloma in rabbit skin at the site of inocula-
merit for developing vaccines effective in thoroughbred  t
tion. Subsequently, it was shown for many viruses that
horses in which the MHC diversity is restricted. Peptide- V
 whole viral DNA, RNA, or cDNA of virai RNA, when
based vaccines have shown promise in eliciting protec-
transfected into cells, could undergo full cycle viral repli-
tion against canine parvovirus, mink parvovirus and
 cation. In principle, the technique is relatively simple;
foot-and-mouth disease virus infections.
most notably, it cuts out the step of constructing an
infectious viral or bacterial vector. Recombinant plas-
mids are constructed to contain genes capable of express-
Vaccines Utilizing
ing viral antigens. The DNA insert in the plasmid, on
 injection, transfects cells. The expressed protein elicits
Anti-idiotypic Antibodies
an immune response that simulates, for the particular
The antigen-binding site of the antibody produced by
 antigen of interest, the response elicited by the viral infec.
each B cell contains a unique amino acid sequence known
tion. Both humoral and cellular immune responses are
as its idiotype or idiotypic determinant. Because anti-
 detectable. Most importantly, for a growing number of
idiotypic antibody is capable of binding to the same
viruses the immune response has been shown to be pro-
idiotype as binds the combining epitope on the original
tective.
antigen, the anti-idiotypic antibody mimics the confor-
 DNA vaccines usuaily consist of an E. coli plasmid
with a strong promoter, the gent of interest being cloned
raised against a neutralizing monoclonal antibody to a
 into a polycloning site, with a polyadenylation/transcrip-
particular virus can conceivably be used as a vaccine.
tional termination sequence and a selectable marker (am-
Anti-idiotypic antibodies raised against antibodies to the
 picillin resistance). Because it is a strong promoter with
reovirus S1 capsid antigen elicit an antiviral antibody
broad cell specificity the human cytomegalovirus imme-
response upon injection into animals, and an anti-idioty-
 diate early promoter is commonly used. The plasmid is
pic antibody generated against a T cellreceptor for para-
amplifed, commonly in E. coli, purifed, suspended in
influenza virus 1 (Sendai virus) has been shown to induce
 buffered saline, and then simply injected into the host.
 both humoral and cell-mediated immune responses in
Ceils, initially at least, at the site of injection are
 mice. It is still uncertain whether this points the way
 transfected by the plasmid; the DNA is transported to
to a practical vaccine strategy, but there are situations,
the nucleus where the protein of interest is translated.
 probably in human rather than veterinary medicine,
Intramuscular immunization is most effective. It was
where such vaccines,if effcacious, would be have advan-
initially believed that myocytes were transfected and
tages over orthodox vaccines, primarily because of
were responsible for sustained antigen production and
their safety.
acted as antigen-presenting cells. It is now believed that
"professional' antigen-presenting cells of bone marrow
origin are required; these cells infltrate the site, take up
Vaccines Utilizing Viral DNA
the antigen, and carry them to regionaf lymph nodes.
("DNA Vaccines')
 Direct transfection of antigen-presenting cells, particu-
larly Langerhans cells of the skin, may also occur.
 Perhaps the most revolutionary new approach to vacci-
A significant improvement in response to vaccina-
nation to emerge from the onward rush of recombinant
tion has been achieved by coating the plasmid DNA onto
Factors Affeeting Vaccine Efficacy and Safety
233
microparticles, commonly 1- to 3-μm-diameter gold  their chermistry and in their modes of action, which may
 particles, and injecting them by "bombardment" using include (1) prolongation of release of antigen; (2) activa-
a helium gas-driven gun-like apparatus (the gene gun);
 tion of macrophages, leading to secretion of lymphokines
less than 1 μg DNA delivered by a gene gun is adequate.
 and attraction of lymphocytes; and (3) mitogenicity for
As is possible with other recombinant vaccines, the
 lymphocytes. The adjuvants used most widely in animal
incorporation of genes encoding immunostimulatory
vaccines are alum and mineral oils. One of the most
proteins, including interleukin 2, interleukin 12, and
 promising new adjuvants being developed is muramyl
interferon y, has been used.
dipeptide, which can be coupled to synthetic antigens
Advantages of DNA vaccines include purity, physi-
or incorporated into liposomes.
ochemical stability, simplicity, a relatively low cost of
production, distribution, and delivery, inclusion of mul-
tiple antigens in a single plasmid, and expression of anti-
Liposomes and
gens in their native form (thereby facilitating processing
Immunostimulating Complexes
and presentation to the immune system). Repeated injec-
tion may be given without interference and both Th
 Liposomes consist of artificial lipid membrane spheres
and Tc as well as antibody responses are elicited. One
into which viral proteins can be incorporated. When
 interesting aspect of DNA immunization is that it induces
 purified viral envelope proteins are used, the resulting
immunity in the presence of maternal antibodies
"virosomes” (or "immunosomes") resemble somewhat
Among disadvantages of DNA vaccines is an over-
 the original envelope of the virion. This enables not only
riding concern about the fate of the foreign, genetically
 a reconstitution of virus envelope-like structures lacking
tngineered DNA. Concerns relate to possible integration
 nucleic acid and other viral components, but also allows
 into chromosomal DNA, leading to insertional mutagen-
 the incorporation of nonpyrogenic lipids with adju-
esis or oncogenicity, induction of autoimmune disease
vant activity.
including anti-DNA antibodies, and induction of toler-
When viral envelope glycoproteins or synthetic
ance or breaking of self-tolerance due to sustaincd ex-
 peptides are mixed with cholesterol plus a glycoside
pression of antigen, These concerns are being addressed.
 known as Quil A, spherical cage-like structures 40 nm
The plasmids used lack an origin of replication and there-
 in diameter are formed. Several veterinary vaccines based
fore are not themselves replicated. Plasmids are also de-
on ISCOM technology have reached the market.
signed without sequences that would knowingly enable
them to integrate into the chromosomal DNA. For ani-
mals that will enter the human food chain, the costs of
proving safety will be significant. Table 13.2 summarizes
Factors Affecting Vaccine
the advantages and limitations of live, inactivated, and
Efficacy and Safety
DNA vaccines.
Attenuated virus vaccines delivered by mouth or nose
Methods for
depend critically for their efcacy on replication in the
intestinal or respiratory tract, respectively. Interference
Enhancing Immunogenicity
can occur between the vaccine virus and enteric or respi-
Iatory viruses incidentally infecting the animal at the
The immunogenicity of inactivated vaccines, especially
time of vaccination. In the past, interference occurred
that of purified protein vaccines and synthetic peptides,
 between different attenuated viruses contained in certain
usually needs to be enhanced; this may be achieved by
vaccine formulations (e.g., bluetongue vaccines). Canine
mixing the antigen with an adjuvant, incorporation of
the antigen in liposomes, or incorporation of the antigen
 an extent that it interferes with the response of dogs to
in an immunostimulating complex (ISCOM).
vaccination against canine distemper.
 In much of the world, vaccines are made under a
broad set of guidelines, termed Good Manufacturing
Adjuvants
Practices (GMP). Properly prepared and tested, all vac-
cines should be safe in immunocompetent animals. As
Adjuvants are formulations that, when mixed with vac-
 a minimum standard, licensing authorities insist on rig-
cines, potentiate the immune response, both humoral orous safety tests for residual infectious virus in inacti-
and/or cellular, so that a lesser quantity of antigen and/ vated virus vaccines. There are other safety problems
 or fewer doses will suffice. Adjuvants differ greatly in  that are unique to attenuated virus vaccines.
234
13.Vaccination against Viral Diseases
Immunologic Considerations
virulence further by additional passages in cultured cells
 have been accompanied by a decline in the capacity of
The objective of vaccination is to protect against disease
the virus to replicate in the vaccinated animal, with a
and ideally to prevent infection and virus transmission
 corresponding loss of immunogenicity.
within the population at risk. If infection with wild-type
Such side effects, as occur with current animal virus
virus occurs as immunity wanes following vaccination,
 vaccines, are minimal and do not constitute a significant
the infection is likely to be subclinical, but it will boost 
disincentive to vaccination. However, it is important that
immunity. For endemic viruses, this is a frequent occur-
attenuated virus vaccines are used only in the species for
rence in farm animals and birds in crowded pens.
which they werc produced; for example, canine distem-
 IgA is the most important class of immunoglobulin 
 per vaccines cause fatalities in some members of the
 relevant to the prevention of infection of mucosal sur-
family Mustelidae, such as the black footed ferrct, where
faccs, such as those of the intestinal, respiratory, genito-
an inactivated whole virus vaccine must be uscd.
urinary, and ocular epithelia.
 One of the advantages of an oral attenuated virus
vaccine, such as Newcastle disease vaccine, is that by
Genetic Instability
virtue of its replication in the intestinal tract, it leads to
prolonged synthesis of local IgA antibody. By preventing
infection, such a vaccine regimen may make feasible thc
Some vaccine strains may revert toward virulence during
replication in the recipient or in contact animals to which
prospect of eradication of the virus from the local popu-
lation.
the vaccine virus has spread. Most vaccine viruscs are
incapable of such spread, but in those that do there may
Immunity to reinfection is virtually lifelong follow-
ing infection with most viruses that reach their target
be an accumulation of back mutations that gradually
organ(s) via systemic (viremic) spread. This solid immu-
leads to a rcstoration of virulence. The principal example
nity is attributabie to antibody of the IgG class, which
of this phenomenon is the very rare reversion to virulence
successfully neutralizes any virus to which an animal is
of Sabin poliovirus type 3 oral vaccine in humans, but
reexposed. Immunity to those respiratory and enteric
temperature-sensitive mutants of bovine viral diarrhea
viruses whose pathogenic effects are manifested mainly
virus have also proven to be genetically unstable.
at the site of entry is attributable mainly to antibodies
of the IgA class and tends to be of shorter duration.
Thus the principal objective of vaccination is to mimic
Heat Lability
natural infection, i.e., to elicit a high titer of neutralizing
 antibodies of the appropriate class, IgG and/or IlgA, di-
Live-virus vaccines are vulnerable to inactivation by high
rected against the relevant epitopes on the virion in the
 ambient temperarures, a particular problem in the trop-
hope of preventing infection.
ics. Because most tropical countries also have underde-
 Special difficulties also attend vaccination against 
veloped veterinary serviccs, formidable problems are en-
viruses known to establish persistent infections, such as
countered in maintaining the “cold chain" from
herpesviruses and rctroviruses; a vaccine must be out-
manufacturer to the point of administration to animals
standingly effective if it is to prevent not only the primary
 in rcmote, hot, rural areas. To some extent the problem
discase, but also the establishment of lifelong latency.
has been alleviated by the addition of stabilizing agents
Attenuated virus vaccines are generally found to be much
to the vaccines, selection of vaccine strains that are inher-
more effective in eliciting cell-rmediated immunity than 
ently more heat stable, and by packaging them in freeze-
inactivated viruses. Further, cell-mediated immunity is
dried form for reconstitution immediately before admin-
the most effective arm of the immune system in modulat-
istration. Simple portable refrigerators for use in vehicles
ing, if not eliminating, latent/persistent infections.
and temporary field laboratories are invaiuable. The con-
trol of rinderpest in West Africa is a classical case study
of this approach.
Underattenuation
Some attenuated virus vaccines in routine use produce
Contaminating Viruses
some clinical signs in some animalsin effect, a very
mild case of the disease. For example, some carly caninc
 Because vaccine virsuses are grown in animals or cells
parvovirus vaccines that had undergone few cell culrure
derived from them, there is always a possibility that a
vaccine will be contaminated with another virus from
maternal immunity, but were found to produce an unac-
that animal or from the medium used for culturing its
ceptably high incidence of disease. Attempts to attenuate
cells. An early example, which led to restrictions on
Factors Affecting Vacine Lfficacy and Safety
235
 international trade in vaccines and sera that are stil in  kittens werc not protected; when challengcd, they died
effect, was the introduction into the United States in  quickly of feline infectious peritonitis, probably because
1908 of foot-and-mouth disease virus as a contaminant
 of antibody-dependent enhancement of the disease.
of smallpox vaccine produced in calves. The use of em-
While not studied in such detail, eastern equinc encepha-
 bryonated eggs to produce vaccines for use in chickens
litis in young horses, previously vaccinated with forma-
may pose problems (e.g., the contamination of Marek's
 lin-inactivated virus, has many similarities to the earlier
disease vaccine with reticuloendotheliosis virus). An-
 problems sccn with human respiratory syncytial vac-
 other important source of viral contaminants is bovine
cines.
fetal calf serum, used univcrsally in cell cultures; all
batches must be scrccncd for contamination with bovine
viral diarrhea virus. Likcwisc, porcine parvovirus is a
common contaminant of crude preparations of trypsin
Vaccination Frequency and Inoculation
prepared from pig pancreases, which is used commonly
Site Reactions
in the preparation of animal cell cultures. The risk of
contaminating viruses is greatest with live-virus vaccines,
 In veterinary medicine, beyond the primary vaccination
 but may also occur with inactivated whole virus vaccines,
 schedule, there is no general consensus on how often
as some viruses are morc resistant to inactivation than
animals need to be revaccinated. For most vaccines, there
others.
is comparatively little information available on the dura-
tion of immunity. For example, it is well recognized that
immunity following attenuated canine distemper vaccine
is of long duration, perhaps lifelong. However, the dura-
Adverse Effects in Pregnant Animals
tion of immunity to other viruses or components in a
combined vaccine may not be of such long duration.
Attcnuated virus vaccines are not generally recom-
 In companion animal practice the cost of vaccination,
 mended for use in pregnant animals because they may be
rclative to other costs, is small when clients visit their
abortigenic or teratogenic. For example, many infectious
veterinarian, so it has been argued that if revaccination
 bovine rhinotracheitis vaccines are abortigenic, and fe-
 does no harm it may be considered a justifed componcnt
line panleukopenia, hog cholcra, bovine viral diarrhea,
 of the routinc annual "checkup'" in which a wide spec-
Rift Valley fever, and bluetongue vaccincs arc terato-
trum of health care needs may be addressed. In many
 genic. These adverse effects are usually due to primary
 countries, annual revaccination has bccome a corner-
 immunization of a nonimmune pregnant aninal. Propri-
 stone of broad-based companion animal preventive
etors of large dog and cat breeding establishmcnts often
health-care programs.
wish to boost antibody titers in pregnant animals, espe-
This rationale was disturbed in the mid-1990s by
reports of subcutaneous fibrosarcomas in cats at sites
for maternal transfer, but it is bctter to immunize the
(often behind the shoulder) corresponding to actual or
dam just before mating or use inactivated virus vaccinc.
possible vaccination sites—more than 3000 instances
 Contaminating viruses in vaccines sometimcs go unno-
 have been reported. These occurrenccs have not been
ticed until used in pregnant animals. The discovcry that
bluetongue virus contaimination of canine vaccines
fully explained: there are still several epidemiological
questions that need to be answered, including true inci-
caused abortion and death in prcgnant bitches was uncx-
 dence (the fbrosarcomas are relatively infrequent), type
pected.
of vaccines involved (inactivated, alum-adjuvanted vac-
cines, mainly feline leukemia and rabies vaccines have
been incriminated), frequency of vaccination, and other
Adverse Effects from
possible cofactor corrclations. In any case, however,
these occurrences have reopened the issue of revaccina-
Nonreplicating Vaccines
tion. In the United States, for many companion animal
Somc inactivated whole virus vaccines have becn found
vaccines there havc bccn new recommendations on the
t0 potcntiate disease. The earliest observations were
 preferred vaccination site, vaccination inrerval (extended
 made with inactivated vaccines for measles and human
from 1 to 3 years for some vaccines), and systems fo1
rcspiratory syncytial virus. In veterinary medicine, at-
 reporting adversc rcsponses. In general, vaccine manu-
tempts to produce a vectorcd vaccinc for the coronavirus
 factures have supported these recommendations. It re-
that causes feline infectious peritonitis illustrate the
 mains to be seen whcther other issues pertaining to the
problem. A rccombinant vaccinia virus that expressed
 safety of revaccination when it is not ncccssary to main-
the coronavirus E2 protein was used to immunize kittens.
 tain the immune status of the recipient animal will
Despite the production of neutralizing antibodies, the
emerge.
236
13.Vaccination igainst Virat Iisetses
Passive Immunization
address such questions as to whether it is possible to
 climinate an infcction; what proportion of hosts must
 Instead of actively immunizing with viral vaccines it is
be vaccinated to achieve this; what age should hosts first
possible to confer short-term protection by the subcuta-
be vaccinated; and at what interval, if at all, should hosts
neous administration of antibody, as immune serum or
 be revaccinated. Rabies in foxes and foot-and-mouth
immunoglobulin. Homologous immunoglobulin is pre-
 disease in cattle have becn used as guides to the design
ferred because heterologous protein may provoke a hy-
 of vaccination programs and the general uscfulness of
persensitivity response. Pooled normal immunoglobulin
thc models. The models indicate, as one might expect
contains sufficient high concentrations of antibody
for diseases that are transmitted directly between animals
against all the common viruses that causc systemic dis-
 of the samc species, that vaccination has advantagcs
 ease in the respective species. Higher titers occur in con-
 not only for the vaccinated hosts, which are directly
valescent serum from donor animals that have recovcred
 protected, but also for unvaccinated hosts. The latter
from infection or have been hyperimmunizcd by rcpcated
 are protected indirectly becausc opportunities for the
vaccinations; such hyperinmunc globulin is thc pre-
 transmission of the virus in thc population as a whole
ferrcd product if availahle cominercially (e.g., for canine
are reduced.
distemper and canine parvovirus infection). Passive im-
There is an important threshold defined by thc
munization by subcutaneous injection of antibody is not
condition R = 1. If R, > 1, each primary case will, on
used routinely in practice.
average, producc more than one secondary case and
A more common practice is to vaccinate (prefera-
the infection will spread through thc host population,
bly using an inactivated virus vaccine) the pregnant dam
leading to an epidemic. Conversely, if R。 < 1, each
or female bird approximately 3 weeks before anticipated
 primary case will, on average, produce less than one
 secondary case and, although some secondary cases may
with passive (maternal) immunity via antibodies present
 occur, the infection will tend to die out without a major
in the egg (in birds) or in colostrum and milk (in mam-
cpidemic. An epidemic is possible only if Ra is greater
mals). This is particularly important for diseases in which
than or equal to one.
the major impact occurs during the frst few weeks of
The value of Ro for a given virus in a given host
life, when active immunization of the newborn cannot
 population is dctcrmined by a number of different fac-
be accomplished early enough. With avian encephalomy-
tors, including thc transmissibility of the virus,the period
elitis, this strategy is employed for the further reason
 over which an infected host is infectious, the population
that the attenuated virus vaccines themselves are patho-
 density of hosts, and, where appropriate, thc density of
genic in young chicks.
arthropod vectors and the capacity of the vectors to
 transmit the virus. The details of these relationships de-
pend on the mode of transmission (e.g., direct contact,
venereal, vector-borne transmission). Equations have
Vaccination Policy
becn developed to take account of the impact of host
life expectancy, duration of protection due to maternal
Design of Vaccination Programs
antibody, and the duration of protection afforded by
a vaccinc.
Epidemiologic theory is applied less widely in the study
The predictive value of the equations is bascd on
of animal diseases than in human diseases. Two possible
 certain assumptions; hosts are considered homogeneous
reasons have been suggested; data on animal disease 
with respect to the epidemiology of infection and the
incidence are more difficult to obtain and theoretical
 consequences of vaccination. All hosts are considered
analysis is not promoted so widely.
 to be equally exposed and equally susceptible (unless
The optimal design of a veterinary vaccination pro-
 vaccinated) to infcction, the assumption being that the
gram depends on both the characteristics of the vaccine
 populations of infectious and susceptible hosts are per-
and the epidemiology of the virus. Relevant vaccine char-
fectly mixed. While these assumptions are rarely satisfed
acteristics are the proportion of those vaccinated that
 in practice, the approach appears to work well. Other
are protected initially, the duration of protection, and
factors thar havc an impact on the basic R number are
the coverage achieved by the vaccination program. The
 stocking density and management practices and varia-
most important epidemiological parameter is the repro-
 tion berwcen host breeds and betwcen virus types. Thc
duction number, Ro; this is defined as the number of
 influences of climate and other environmcntal factors
sccondary cases arising from a singlc primary case in the
are diffcult to assess. In the case of rabies in foxes in
absence of any constraints on the spread of infection.
two arcas of Belgium, estimates for R, were betwcen 2
Mathematical theory can integrate this information to  and 5 and vaccine had a major impact in reducing the
Vaccinttion Sebecdufes
237
incidence of disease with vaccine takes above 90% and in South Africa, for example, being exotic to thc
a duration of protection of at least 1.5 years compared  United States.
with a fox mean life expectancy of 2.0 years. The objec-
The decision to use a vaccine is governed by a
tive was to achievc coverage suffcient to climinate en-  complex equation, balancing expected extra profit
demic infection. According to mathematical predictions, against costs and risks. If the disease is lethal or causes
thc requirement was for 50 to 80% of the foxes to be  major economic losses, thc nteed for vaccination is clear;
vaccinated successfully. This was achieved in both areas
both thc owncrs and thc vaccine-licensing authorities
using vaccine containing baits, and endemic rabies infec-
 will accept a risk of occasional quitc serious side effects.
tion was eliminated successfully.
 If, howevcr, the diseasc is perceived as trivial or economi-
 In a sccond study, outbrcaks of foot-and-mouth
 cally unimportant, no vaccine would be used. Where
 disease on cattle farms in Saudi Arabia were analyzed.
-d e isuae aqeae are saea aoeyses aenba
The R, was as high as 70 and the vaccine take was in
 ticular disease, considerations of cost and ease of adimin-
excess of 95%, but the duration of immunity was less
istration usually tip the balance (e.g., toward vaccines
than 0.5 ycars compared with a mean cattle life expec-
 administered via drinking water in poultry).
tancy of 5.0 years, giving a low vaccine impact (which
Once a disease has been controlled in an area
was lower still with virus antigenically different from the
 to the point where it is of low incidence, continued
vaccine strain). In these circumstances the mathematical
vaccination is often difficult to sustain because of
formula predicted that the critical interval between vacci-
fading awareness of the risk. Yet it is essential because
nations to provide herd immunity would bc extremely
a reduction in circulation of wild-type virus leaves
short, perhaps as low as a few days, which was clearly
nonvaccinated animals highly susceptible by removing
impractical. Although vaccinations were given on some
 the protective effect of repeated subclinical infections.
farms at intcrvals as little as 3 months, the discase was
 Legislation for compulsory vaccination against particu-
not controlled.
lar diseases is perhaps the most effective single measure
These contrasting cxamples illustrate the potential
 for maintaining protection in the apparent absence
for epidcmiological theory to provide helpful insights
Of disease.
into the predicted consequences of vaccination at the
population level, to the interpretation of thc results of
vaccine trials, and as an aid in the design of optimal
vaccination programs.
Vaccination Schedules
The availablc range of vaccines, oftcn in multivalent
Economic Considerations
formulations and with somewhat different recommenda-
tions from each manufacturer regarding vaccination
 Cost-benefit factors are critical in determining the  schedules, means that the practicing veterinarian needs
usage of veterinary vaccines. For examplc, good vac- to constantly educate her/himself about vaccine choice
cines are available for the control of many diseases and usage. Multivalent vaccine formulations, such as
of swine and poultry, but their costs limit their use ↑
those   available
 for   canine   distemper/hepatitis/
 to large producers, and the diseases remain endemic
parvovirus/coronavirus/parainfluenza virus/bordetella/
elsewhere. Economic constraints are most evident in
 leptospirosis for dogs, confer major practical advantages
developing countries. For example, in the 1970s, eco-
 by reducing the number of visits the owner must make to
nomic constraints led to the abandonment of vaccina-
the veterinarian. Also, multivalent vaccines allow more
 tion against rinderpest in sub-Saharan Africa, despite
extcnsive use of vaccines against agents of secondary
the fact that a concertcd vaccination program could
importance. Unlike the situation in human medicine,
 well have led to regional elimination and eventually
 however, where there is general agreement on vaccine
to global eradication of this virus.
formulations and schedules for vaccination against all
Because of large markets (economy of scale of
the common viral diseases of childhood, there is no such
production), together with somewhat less stringent 
consensus in vcterinary mcdicinc. Furthermore, unlike
licensing requirements, veterinary vaccines are generally
the situation in human medicine, where there are few
less cxpensive than those used in humans. Some avian
vaccine manufacturcrs, there are many veterinary vac-
viral vaccines cost lcss than 1 cent per dose; many
 cine manufacturers, each promoting their own products.
human (and some veterinary) viral vaccincs cost many
Some of the principles underlying decisions on vaccina-
 dollars per dose. The pattern of vaccine usage differs
tion schedules are outlined and tables of schedules for
strikingly from country to country, with many of the
 the vaccination of various domestic animals are provided
 principal diseases against which vaccines are employed
in this chapter.
238
1.3.Vaccinaticon against Viral Diseases
Optimal Age for Vaccination
 In practice, relatively few vaccine failures are en-
countered if one simply follows the instructions from
The risk of most viral diseases is greatest in young
 the vaccine manufacturers, who have used averaged data
animals. Most vaccines are therefore given during the
 on maternal antibody levels and rate of IgG decay in
first 6 months of life. Maternal antibody, whether
that animal species to estimate an optimal age for vacci-
transferred transplacentally or, as in domestic animals,
nation. It is recommcnded commonly, even in the case
in the colostrum or via the yolk sac, inhibits the
of live-virus vaccines, that a number of doses of vaccine
immune response of the newborn or newly hatched
bc administered, say at monthly intervals, to cover the
to vaccines. Optimally, vaccination should be delayed
window of susceptibility in animals with particularly
until the titer of maternal antibody in the young animal
high maternal antibody titers. This precaution is even
has declined to near zero. However, waiting may leave 
 more relevant to multivalent vaccine formulations be-
the animal defenseless during the resulting "window
cause of the differences in maternal antibody levels
 Of susceptibility." This is life-threatening in crowded,
 against each virus.
highly contaminated environments or where there is
intense activity of arthropod vectors. There are a
number of approaches to handling this problem in
different animal species, but none is fully satisfactory.
Thc problem is complicated further because young
Dam Vaccination
animals do not necessarily respond to vaccines in the
same way as older animals do. In horses, for example,
 Thc aim of vaccination is generally thought of as the
 protection of the vaccinee. This is usually so, but in the
are poor until recipients become yearlings.
case of certain vaccines (e.g., those for equine abortion
Bccause the titer of passively acquired antibody
virus, rotavirus infection in cattle, parvovirus infection
in the circulation of newborn animals after receiving
in swine, infectious bursal disease of chickens) the objec-
colostrum is proportional to that in the dam's blood and 
tive is to protect the vaccince's offspring either in utero
because the rate of its subsequent clearance in different
(e.g., equine abortion) or as a neonate/hatchling. This
 animal species is known, it is possible to estimate, for
 is achieved by vaccination of the dam. For neonates/
any given maternal antibody titer, the age at which no
 hatchlings, the level of maternal antibody transferred in
measurable antibody remains in the offspring. This can 
the colostrum and milk or in the egg ensures that the
be plotted as a nomograph, from which the optimal age 
 offspring have a protective level of antibody during the
of vaccination against any particular disease can be read
 critical early days. Since many attenuated virus vaccines
(Figure 13.2). The method is seldom used, but should
 are abortigenic or teratogenic, inactivated vaccines are
bc considered for exceptionally valuable animals.
recommended for dam vaccination.
Figure 13.2.
24
20
16-
ate
12
8
10
100
1,000
10,000
100,000
 Reciprocal titer of antibody in dam
Nomograph indicaling optimum times for vaccinating kittens with feline panleukopenia vaccines, based on the antibody titer of the dam and a
half-life of igG in the kiten of 9.5 days. (Courtesy of F. W. Scot.)
Vaccination Sebedntes
239
Table 13.4
Sthedule for Vaccination ogainst Viral Diseases of Cattle
VACCINE
BASIC COURSE
REVACCINATION
Attenuated virus vaccines
Bovine viral diarrhea virus
4-9 months of age (single dose],b
Annual
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus
3-4 months of age (singie dose)
Annual
Rinderpest virust
6-8 months of age (single dose)
None
Respiratory syncyial virus
4-6 months of age (two doses with α 4week
Annual
interval)
Parainfluenza virus 3
4-6 months of age (two doses with a 4-week
Annual
intervall
Inactivated virus vaccines
Foo-and-mouth disease virusesd
4 weeks of age (single dose)
4-12 months
Infectious bovine rhinotracheiris virus
 3-4 months of age (two doses at a 4-week intervall
6-12 months
Rotaviruses
 6-8 weeks and 2 weeks before end of gestation
Each pregnancy
Coronaviruss
6-8 weeks and 2 weeks before end of gestation
Each pregnancy
 Parainfluenza virus 3, reovirus, various
6 weeks, 3 months, 7 months of age
Annual
adenoviruses
Whenvacintoniscarrid ot ateayge,seconddseisrecmmende because of posibl inteference withmaenl antbds.
bEmergency vacination: ail caie older than 2 weeks of age except animals during the first rimester of pregnancy.
cOnly in countries where the disease occurs.
dCompulsory in some counties; mulivalent vaccine.
Dam vaccination.
 In Ovo and Other Vaccination Methods
produced birds are vaccinated against as many as eight
for Chickens
different viral diseases. The cost of each dose is usually
a fraction of a cent; much of this economy of scale
In the United States alone, the annual production of
is linked to low-cost delivery systems (aerosol and
poultry birds exceeds $8 billion. All commercially
 drinking water). Further cconomies bave been achieved
Table 13.5
Schedule for Vaccination against Viral Diseases of Sheep and Goats
VACCINE
BASIC COURSE
REVACCINATION
 Atenuated virus vaccines
Bluetongue viruses" (polyvalent vaccines;
 3-6 months of age two doses with a 3-week
Annual
up to 15 types]
intervall
 Sheeppox virus?
 3 months of age (single dose)
2 years
 Rinderpest virus" [and peste des pelits 
3 months of age (single dose)
None
ruminants virus)
Wild-type virus vaccines
Orf virusb
 2-3 months of oge (single dose]
None
Inactivated virus vaccines 
Foot-and-mouth disease viruses?
3-4 months of age (single dose)
 Annual
"Only in countries where the disease ocurs.
bln some countries; only on properties where scabby mouth is a problem.
240
13. Vaccination against Virat Diseases
TaBLe 13.6
Schedule for Vaccination against Viral Diseases of Swine
VACCINE
BASIC COURSE
 RevaccinatION
 Attenuated virus vaccines
Hog cholera virusa
8 weeks of age (single dosel
None
Pseudorabies virusa
All ages [wo doses with a 4-week interval]
4-6 months
Inactivated virus vaccines
Pseudorabies virus
4 weeks of age (rwo doses with a 4-week interval]
5-6 months
Porcine polioencephalitis viruse
8-12 weeks of age (two doses with a 4-week 
None
interval)
Porcine parvovirus
Before maling (hwo doses with α 4-week intervall]
Annual
Influenza viruses
Any age (rwo doses with a 4-week intervall)
Annual
Depends on current policy in particular counties.
by the introduction of in ovo immunization of 18-
Available and
day-old embryonated eggs; an instrument (called an
Recommended Vaccines
 Inovoject) capable of immunizing 40,000 eggs per hour,
is been used. Thus far, only Marek's discase vaccine,
 The types of vaccines available for each viral disease (or
the lack of any satisfactory vaccine) are discussed in each
old chicks, is delivered in this way, but others vaccines
chapter of Part II of this book and in the tables in Chapter
are being explored. In 1997, over 80% of birds 
in
 42. There are obvious geographic variations in the re-
the United States were vaccinated by this method. In
quirements for particular vaccines (e.g., between some
rural economies with village chickcns, methods have
countries in South America where vaccination against
bcen developed for the delivery of Newcastle disease
foot-and-mouth disease is practiced and the United States
virus vaccine in fecd pellets.
where it is not). There are also different requirements
TaBle 13.7
Schedule for Vaccination against Viral Diseases of Horses
VACCINE
BASIC COURSE
REVACCINATION
Attenuated virus vaccines
Equine abortion virus (equine herpesvirus
3 months of age (three doses with 2- and 6-month
9-12 months
1
intervals]
Equine arteritis virus?
3 months of age (two doses with a 4-week intervall
1-2 years
African horse sickness virusesa (polyvalent
6-8 months of age (single dose)
2-3 years
vaccine)
Inaclivated virus vaccines
Influenza viruses (bivalent vaccine)
 3-5 months of age (three doses with 2- and 6-month
Every 3-6
intervals]
months
Eastern, western, and Venezuelan enceph-
 3 months of age (wo doses with a 3-week intervall
Annual
alitis viruses
Equine abortion virusb lequine herpesvirus
10 weeks of age (three doses with 1- and 6-month
6-12 months
1) and equine rhinopneumonitis virus 
intervals)
[equine herpesvirus 4)
Only recommended in areas where the disease occurs.
AlsincmbininwihinnzaandrviruesndMsshodbaciatdddinally,and9monhf pregany
Chemotherapy ot Virat Diseases
241
Tasle 13.8
Schedule for Vaccination aaainst Viral Diseases of Dogs
VACCINE
BASIC COURSE
REVACCINATION
 Attenuated virus vaccines
Canine distemper virus 
 6-8 weeks of age (three doses with 3 week intervals)
Every 2 years
Canine hepatitis virus 
6-8 weeks of age (three doses with 3 week intervais)
Every 2 years
Canine porvovirus 24
6 weeks of age (three doses with 3 week intervals)
Annual
 Inactivated virus vaccines
 Robies virus
12 weeks of age (single dose)
 Annual or every 3 years
 Canine parvovirus 2
6-8 weeks of age (three doses with 3 week intervals)
Annual
Canine coronavirus
9-16 weeks of age (three doses wilh 3 week intervals)
Annual
Parainfluenza viruses
6-8 weeks of age [three doses with 3 week intervals)
Annual
See Chapter 21.
appropriate to various types of husbandry (e.g., for dairy
tics that havc been so effective against bacterial diseases
cattle, beef cows, and their calves on range or cattle in
 havc few counterparts in our armamcntarium against
fccdlots and in poultry for breeders, commercial egg
viral diseases. The reason is that viruses are intimarely
layers, and broilers) (see Tables 13.4 to 13.10).
dependent on the metabolic pathways of their host
cell for their replication, hence most agcnts that inter-
fere with viral replication are toxic to the cell. In
recent years, however, increased knowledge of the
terolo
biochemistry of viral replication has led to a more
Viral Diseases
rational approach in the search for antiviral chemo
therapeutic agents, and a small number of such com-
If this had been a book about bacterial diseases of
 pounds have now become a standard part of the
domestic animals, there would have been a large section
 armamentarium against particular human viruses. As
 on antimicrobial chemotherapy. However, the antibio-
 yet there are no specifically antiviral chemotherapeutic
Table 13.9
 Schedule for Vaccination aaainst Viral Diseases of Cats
VACCINE
BASIC COURSE
REVACCINATON
Altenuated virus vaccines
Feline panleukopenia virus?
6-12 weeks of age (three doses with 3 week intervals)b
Annual or every 3 years
 Feline calicivirus
 6-12 weeks of age (three doses with 3 week intervals)b
Annual
 Feline herpesvirus
 6-12 weeks of age [three doses with 3 week intervals]b
 Annual
Inactivated virus vaccines
Feline panleukopenia virus
6-12 weeks of age [three doses with 3 week intervals)
 Annuai
Rabies virus
12 weeks of age [single dose]
 Annual or every 3 years
Feline calicivirus
6-12 weeks of age (three doses with 3 week interals)
Annual
Feline herpesvirus
6-12 weeks of age (three doses with 3 week intervals)
Annual
Feline leukemia virus (subunit)
 9 weeks of age (two doses with 3- to 15-week intervals)
 Annual
Feline leukemia virus (whole
10 weeks of age (hwo doses with a 1-month intervall 
Annual
virus)
bfist vaccination is given at more than 9 weeks of oge, only one adional dose is needed.
242
13.Vaccinution against Viral Diseases
Table 13.10
Schedule Vaccination against Viral Diseases of Poultry*
AGE
VAccine
RouTe
Broilers
1 day
Infectious bronchitis virus
Spray
Newcastle disease virus
Spray (if required)
18 days
Infechious bronchitis virus
Drinking water or spray
Newcastle disease virus
Drinking water Or spray (if required)
Chickens: Broilers, layers, breeders
 3 days before hatching or
Marek's disease virus
1novo
1 day or
 Intramuscular injection
3 weeks
Newcastle disease virus
Drinking water
Infectious bronchitis virus
Drinking water
Marek's disease virus
Intramuscular injection
8weeks
Infectious bronchitis virus
Drinking water or spray
Newcastle disease virus
Drinking water or spray
10 weeks
Infectious bursal disease virus
Drinking water
14 weeks
Avian encephalomyelitis virus
Drinking water
16 weeks
Newcastle disease virus
Intramuscular injection
Infeclious bronchitis virus
Intramuscular injection
Infectious bursal disease virus
Intramuscular injection
Chickens: Layers
 3 days before hatching or
Marek's disease virus
tn ovo
I day or
Intramuscular injection
3 weeks
Newcastle disease virus
Drinking water or spray
Infectious bronchitis virus
 Drinking water or spray
7 weeks
 Infectious bronchitis virus
 Drinking water or spray
Newcastle disease virus
 Drinking water or spray
10 weeks
Avian encephalomyelitis virus
 Drinking water
14 weeks
Newcastle disease virus
Intramuscular injection
 Infectious bronchitis virus
Intramuscular injection 
Egg drop syndrome virus 
Intramuscular injection 
Turkeys: Breeders
3 weeks
Newcastle disease virus
Spray
6 weeks
Newcastle disease virus
Spray
12 weeks
Newcastle disease virus
Intramuscular injection
Paramyxovirus 3 virus
Intramuscular injection
24 weeks
Newcastle disease virus
Intramuscular injection
Paramyxovirus 3 virus
Intramuscular injeclion
Allarelenuatedlivevirus vacines except thoseforgg dropsyndrome and infectiousbrldisease virus sedat 16weeks frbroilror
layer breeders.
Furter Reading
243
agents in common use in veterinary practice, partly 
(Acyclovir), an inhibitor of herpesvirus DNA polymer-
because of the very high cost. Several antiviral drugs 
ase. Acyclovir is in fact an inactive prodrug that requires
 are now in use in human medicine and the day is sure
 another herpesvirus-coded enzyme, thymidine kinase, to
to come when they are cost effective for veterinary
 phosphorylate it to its active form. Because this viral
medicine. Accordingly it is appropriate to outline briefly
enzyme occurs only in infected cells, Acyclovir is non-
some potential developments in this field.
toxic for uninfected cells, but very effective in herpesvi-
rus-infected cells. So far, such drugs have found only
limited use in veterinary medicine (e.g., for treatment of
Strategy
feline herpesvirus 1 corneal ulcers), but again this will
surely change.
Antiviral Agents
 X-ray crystallography has opened a major new
Several steps in the viral replication cycle (see Chapter
 approach in the search for antiviral drugs. Now that
 3) represent potential targets for selective antiviral drug
the three-dimensional structure of many icosahedral
attack. Theoretically, all virus-coded enzymes are vulner-
virions, such as those of picornaviruses, is known, it
able, as are all processes (enzymatic or nonenzymatic)
has been possible to characterize receptor-binding sites
that are more essential to the replication of the virus
 on capsid proteins at the atomic level of resolution.
than to the survival of the cell. Table 13.11 sets out the
Complexes of viral proteins with bound cellular recep-
 Most vulnerable steps and provides examples of antiviral
tors can be crystallized and examined directly. For
drugs that display activity, indicating those that have
 exainple, for some rhinoviruses, receptor-binding sites
 already been licensed for use in humans.
Pdes sn u s *a! 's, u ae sa o
 A logical approach to the development of new
surface.
 Drugs have been found that fit into these
antiviral drugs is to isolate or synthesize substances that
 clefts, thereby preventing viral attachment to the host
 might be predicted to serve as inhibitors of a known
 cell. Further information is provided by mapping the
virus-coded enzyme such as a transcriptase, replicase,
position of the particular amino acid residues that
Or protease. Analogs of this prototype drug are then
form these clefts, thereby alowing the design of drugs
synthesized with a view to enhancing activity and/or
that better fit and better interfere with the viral infection
selectivity. A further refnement of this approach is well
 process. This approach also lends itself to thc develop-
illustrated by the nuclcoside analog acycloguanosinc
ment of drugs that block viral penetration of the host
cell or uncoating once inside. Of course, the close
similariry betwcen human rhinoviruses and important
 animal pathogens, such as foot-and-mouth disease vi-
TaBle 13.11
Possible Targets for Antiviral Chemotherapy
ruses and equine rhinoviruses, means that as human
in Veterinary Medicine
 drugs come closer to licensing, adaptation to veterinary
usage may follow.
TARGET
PROTOTYPE DRUG
Attochment of virion to cel!
Receptor analogs
Further Reading
receptor
Uncoating
Rimantadine
Ada, G. L. (1998). Vaccines. In "Encyclopedia of Virol-
 Primary transcription from viral
 Transcriptase inhibitors
Ogy,"*(R. G. Webster and A. Granoff, eds.), 2nd ed.
genome
(CD-ROM). Academic Press, London.
Reverse transcription
American Veterinary Medical Association. (1985). Guide-
Zidovudine---AZT
lines for vaccination of horses. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Regulation of transcription
Lentivirus tat inhibitors
Assoc. 185, 32-36.
 Processing of RNA transcripts 
Ribavirin?
American Veterinary Medical Association. (1989). Ca-
nine and feline immunization guidelines. J. Am. Vet.
Translation of viral mRNA into
Interferons
Med. Assoc. 195, 314-316.
protein
Anderson, R. M., and May, R. M. (1991). “"Infectious
 Postranslational cleavage of
Protease inhibitors
Diseases of Humans: Dynamics and Control." Oxford
proteins
University Press, New York.
Replication of viral DNA
Anonymous. (1992). "International Symposium on the
Acycloguanosine
First Steps Towards an International Harmonization
genome
[Acyclovir]
of Veterinary Biologicals." Inrernational Association
Replication of viral RNA
 Replicase inhibitors
of Biological Standardization and Offcc International
genome
des Epizooties. Karger, Basel.
Babiuk, L. A., van Drunen Little-van den Hurk, S., Ti-
licensed for human use.
koo, S. K., Lewis, P. J., and Liang, X. (1996). Novel
244
13. Vaccination cgainst Viral Diseases
viral vaccines for livestock. Vet. Immunol. Immunopa
nary Vaccines for Use in Developing Countries." Food
thol.54,355-363.
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Bittle, J. L., and Muir, S. (1989). Vaccines produced by
Rome.
conventional means to control major infectious dis-
Murphy, B. R., and Chanock, R. M. (1996). Immuniza-
eases of man and animals. Adv. Vet. Sci. Comp. Med.
tion against virus disease. In “Fields Virology,” (B. N.
33, 1-64.
Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock,
Bittle, J. L., and Murphy, F. A. eds. (1989). Vaccine bio-
J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E.
technology. Adv. Vet. Sci. Comp. Med. 33, 1-444.
Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., Pp. 467-498. Lippincott-Raven,
Brown, F., ed. (1985-1998). "Vaccines *85-'98: Molecu-
Philadelphia, PA.
lar Approaches to the Control of Infectious Diseases
Ogra, P. L., and Garofalo, R. (1990). Secretory antibody
(published annually)." Cold Spring Harbor Labora-
response to viral vaccines. Prog. Med. Virol. 37,
tory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
156-179.
Brown, F. ed. (1991). Impact of biotechnology on protec-
 Paoletti, E. (1996). Applications of pox virus vectors to
tion against infectious diseases. World J. Microbiol. Bi-
vaccination: An update. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
otechnol. 7, 105-109.
93, 11349-11353.
Coyne, M. J., Reeves, N. C. P., and Rosen, D. K. (1997).
Peters, A, R., ed. (1993). "Vaccines for Veterinary Appli-
Estimated prevalcnce of injection-site sarcomas in cats
cations." Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
during 1992. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 210, 249-251.
Powell, D. G. (1996). Epidemiology and control of
De Clercq, E. (1993). Antiviral agents: Characteristic ac-
equine viral disease. In *Virus Infections of Verte-
tivity spectrum depending on the molecular target
brates" (M. J. Studdert, ed.), Vol. 6. Chapter 22.
with which they interact. Adv. Virus Res. 42, 1-56.
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Donnelly, J. J, Ulmer, J. B., Shiver, J. W., and Liu, M. A.
van Regenmortel, M. H. V., and Neurath, A. R., eds.
(1997). DNA vaccines. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 15,
(1985, 1991). "The Basis for Serodiagnosis and Vac-
617-648.
cines. Immunochemistry of Viruses," Vol. 1 and 2.
Green, C. E. (1998). "Infectious Diseases of the Dog and
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Cat, 2nd Edition, W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
White, D. O., and Fenner, F. (1993). Chemotherapy of vi-
Morein, B., Villacres-Erikisson, M., Sjoilander, A., and
ral diseases. In “Medical Virology,” 4 ed. Academic
Bengtsson, K. L. (1996). Novel adjuvants and vaccine
Press, Orlando, FL.
delivery systems. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 54,
Woodhouse, M. E. J., Haydon, D. T., and Bundy, A. P.
373-384.
(1997). The design of veterinary vaccination pro-
Mowat, N., and Rweyemamu, M. (1997). "Vaccine Man-
grammes. Vet. J. 153, 41-47.
ual: The Production and Quality Control of Veteri-
CHapter
14
Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
Computations and Databases .
245
Types of Epidemiologic Investigation....
247
Virus Transmission....
249
Mechanisms of Survival of Viruses in Nature ...
253
Variations in Disease Incidence Associated with Seasons and Animal
Management Practices ....
257
Epidemiologic Aspects of Immunity ...
258
Further Reading.....
258
Epidemiology is the study of the determinants, dynamics,
Computations and Databases
and distribution of diseases in populations. The risk of
infection and/or disease in an animal or animal popula-
Calculations of Rates
tion is determined by characteristics of the virus (e.g-.
antigenic variation), the host and host population (e.g..
The comparison of disease experience in different popu-
lations is expressed in the form of rates. Multipliers
innate and acquired resistance), and behavioral, environ-
(e.g., rates per 10") are used to provide rates that are
mcntal, and ecological factors that affect virus transmis-
manageable whole numbers—the most common rate
sion fron one host to another. Epidemiology, which is
multiplier used is 100,000, i.e., the given rate is expressed
part of the science of population biology, attempts to
 per 100,000 of the given population. Four rates are most
meld these factors into a unifed whole.
widcly used: the incidence rate, the prevalence rate, the
Although originally derived from the root term
morbidity rate, and the mortality rate. In all four rates
demos, meaning pcople,the word epidemiology is widely
the denominator (total number of animals at risk) may
used now no mattcr what host is concerned, and the
 be as general as the total population in a state or country
words endemic, epidemic, and pandemic arc used to
 Or as specifc as thc population known to be susceptible
characterize disease states in populations, whether of
 Or at risk (e.g., the number of animals in a specifed
humans or other aninals. By introducing quantitative
 population that lack antibodies to the virus of interest).
measurements of disease trends, epidemiology has coine
 In cach situation it is imperative that the nature of the
 to have a major role in advancing our understanding of
 dcnominator is made clear--indced, epidemiology has
thc naturc of diseases and in alerting and directing dis-
bcen called “the science of the denominator." Each of
ease control activitics. Epidemiologic study is also effec-
these rates may be affected by various attributes that
tive in clarifying the role of viruses in the etiology of
 distinguish one individual animal from another: age, sex,
diseases, in understanding the intcraction of viruses with
 genetic constitution, immune status, nutrition, preg-
environmental determinants of disease, in determining
 nancy, and various behavioral parameters. The most
factors affecting host susceptibility, in unraveling modes
widely applicable attribute is age, which may encompass,
of transmission, and in large-scale testing of vaccines
 and can therefore be confounded by, the animal's im-
and drugs.
mune status as well as by various physiologic variables.
245
246
14. Epidentiotogy of Viral Diseases
 Incidence Rate
Morbidity Rate
The morbidity rate is the percentage of animals in a
Incidence rate
population that deveiop disease attributable to a particu-
 number of cases X 10,
lar virus over a defined period of time (commonly the
-in a specified period of time
duration of an outbreak).
 population at risk
The incidence rate, or attack rate, is a measure of the
Mortality Rate
occurrence of infection or disease in a population over
Mortality from a disease can be categorized in two ways:
time, e.g., a month or a year, and is especially useful for
the cause-specific mortality rate (the number of deaths
describing acute diseases of short duration. For acute
from the disease in a given year, divided by the total
infections, three parameters determine the incidence of
 population at midyear), usually expressed per 100,000
infection or disease in a population: the percentage of 
 population, or the case-fatality rate (the percentage of
susceptible animals, the percentage of susceptible ani-
animals with a particular disease that die from the
 mals that are infected, and the percentage of infected 
disease).
animals that suffer disease. The percentage of animals
susceptible to a specific virus reflects their past history
 Other Terms and Concepts Uscd
of exposure to that virus and the duration of their immu-
in Epidemiology
nity. The percentage infected during a year or a season
Endemic disease refers to the presence of multiple or
may vary considerably, depending on factors such as
continuous chains of transmission resulting in the contin-
animal numbers and density, season, and, for arbovirus
infections, the vector population. Of those infected, only
of time.
some may develop overt disease. The ratio of clinical
to subclinical (inapparent) infections varies greatly with
Epidemic disease refers to peaks in disease inci-
different viruses. The secondary attack rate, when ap-
dence that exceed the endemic baseline or expected inci-
plied to comparable, relatively closed groups such as
dence of disease. The size of the peak required to consti-
 tute an epidemic is arbitrary and is influenced by the
herds or flocks, is a useful measure of the “infec-
tiousness" of viruses transmitted by aerosols or droplcts.
background infection rate, the morbidiry rate, and the
anxiety that the disease arouses because of its clinical
Ir is defned as the number of animals in contact with
severity or potential economic impact. Thus, a few cases
thc primary or index case(s) that become infected or sick
 of velogenic Newcastle disease in a poultry flock might
within the maximum incubation period as a percentage
 be regarded as an epidemic, whereas a few cases of infec-
 of the total number of susceptible animals exposed to
tious bronchitis would not be.
the virus.
Pandemic disease refers to worldwide epidemics,
Prevalence Rate
such as the canine parvovirus pandermic that swept
around the world in the early 1980s.
Note: the terms enzootic, epizootic, and panzootic
Prevaience rate
have often been used for diseases of animals, but, in this
 number of cases × 10"
book, in keeping with modcin usage, the general terms
 at a particular time
population at risk
endemic, epidemic, and pandemic are used when refer-
ring to diseases of both animals and humans.
It is diffcult to measure the incidence of chronic diseases,
 Incubation period refers to the interval between
especially where the onset is insidious, and for such dis-
infection and the onset of clinical signs. In many diseases
eases it is customary to determine the prevalence rate,
there is a period of a day or so during which animals
i.e., the ratio, at a particular point in time of the number
 are infectious before they become sick.
of cases currently present in the population divided by
Period of contagiousness refers to the time during
the number of animals in the population; it is a snapshot
which an infected animal sheds virus. This period varies
of the occurrencc of infection or disease at a given time.
depending on the disease concerned. For example, in
The prevalencc rate is thus a function of both the
 lentivirus infections such as feline immunodcficiency vi-
incidence rate and the duration of thc disease. Seropreva-
 rus infection, animals shed virus for a very long period
lence relates to the occurrence of antibody to a particular
 before showing clinical signs. In such infections the
virus in a population. Because neutralizing antibodies
 amount of virus shed may be very small, but because
often last for many years, or even for life, seroprevalence
the period of infectivity is so long, the virus is maintained
rates usually represent the cumulative experience of a1
 readily in the population.
 population with a given virus.
Seroepidemiology simply denotes the use of sero-
Types of Epideiniofogic lnwestigation
247
logical data as the basis of epidermiological investigation.
 presence of foot-and-mouth disease is notifable in virtu-
Serological techniques employed are outlined in Chapter
ally all developed countries.
12. Seroepidemiology is extremely useful in veterinary
disease control operations and in veterinary research.
Because of the expense of collecting and storing sera
 properly, advantage is ofen taken of a wide range of
+
sources of representative serum samples, such as abat-
Investigafion
 toirs, culling operations (especially useful for assessment 
 of wildlife populations), and vaccination programs. Such
Conceptual Framework
sera can be used to deterimine the prevalence or incidence
The case-control study, the cohort study, the crosssec-
 of particular infections, to evaluate eradication and im-
tional study, and the long-term herd study provide the
munization programs, and to assess the impact, dynam-
ics, and geographic distribution of new, emerging, and
conceptual framework upon which can be determined
the relationships between cause and effect, the incidence
reemerging viruses. By detecting antibodies to selected
viruses in various age groups of the population, it is
and prevalence of disease, the evaluation of risk factors
of disease, the safety and effcacy of vaccines, and the
possible to determine how effectively viruses have spread
or how long it has been since the last appearance of a
therapeutic value of vaccines and drugs.
particular virus in the population. Correlation of sero-
Case-Control Studics
logic data with clinical observations makes it possible
Case-control studies are retrospective, i.e., investigation
to determine the ratio of clinical! to subclinical infections.
 starts after the disease episode has occurred. In human
Molecular epidemiology denotes the use of molec-
disease epidemiology, this is the most common type of
ular biological data as the basis of epidemiological inves-
 study, often used to identify the cause of a disease out-
tigation. Many of the molecular diagnostic techniques 
break. Advantages of retrospective studies are that they
described in Chapter 12 are used. For example, with
 make use of existing data and are relatively inexpensive
DNA viruses (e.g., pseudorabies virus and equine herpes-
virus 1), restriction endonuclease fingerprinting, nucleic
 ble method of investigating rare occurrences. Although
acid hybridization, and other approaches to genome
case-control studies do not require the creation of new
mapping are used for the identification of feld isolates
data or records, they do require careful selection of the
 with a precision that surpasses serologic methods. With
 control group, carefully matched to the subject group,
viruses that have segmented double-stranded RNA ge-
 S0 as to avoid bias. Because necessary records are gener-
nomes, such as orbiviruses and rotaviruses, polyacryl-
 ally not available in most animal disease outbreaks, this
amide gel electrophoresis of genomic RNA is used to
 can present irresolvable diffculties in veterinary med-
icine.
ficity is valuable in tracking the introduction and relative
 prevalence of different viral genotypes in livestock popu-
Cohort Studics
lations. Other techniques, such as partial sequencing.
Cohort studies are prospective or longitudinal, i.e., inves-
the polymerase chain reaction ( with identifcation of am-
tigation starts with a presumed disease episode, say a
 plified products), and oligonucleotide fingerprinting, are
 suspected viral disease outbreak, and with a population
 also used to characterize viral variants among large num-
 exposed to the suspected causative virus. The population
bers of isolates that might be considered homogeneous 
s is monitored for evidence of the disease. This type of
by serology. For example, the 1981 outbreak of foot-
 study requires the creation of new data and records.
and-mouth disease in the United Kingdom was traced
d It also requires careful selection of the control group,
by oligonucleotide fingerprinting to the presence of a(
 designing it to be as similar as possible to the exposed
 residual infectious virus in a vaccine being used in France.
 group except for the absence of contact with the pre-
 Determining the occurrence of a particular disease sumed causative virus. Cohort studies do not lend them-
 in a given animal population is more diffcult than the selves to quick analysis as groups must be followed until
computation of the rates just described. The denomina-(
 disease is observed, often for long periods of time. This
tor, i.e., the number of animals in the population at risk, makes such studies expensive. However, when cohort 
 is often impossible to calculate or estimate accurately.
studies are successful, proof of cause-effect relationships
 Determining the number of cases of the disease may also
 is usually incontrovertible.
 prove impossible. Where such information is regarded
 Once the causal agent is identified, and serological
as essential, government regulations may declare a dis-
 and other diagnostic tests have been developed, case-
ease to be notifable, requiring veterinarians to report C
 control and cohort studies can progress to cross-sectional 
 all cases to authorities. For example, suspicion of the
 and long-term herd studies.
248
14.Epidemiofogy of Viral Diseases
Cross-Sectional Studies
infectious, but were unable to isolate a virus from af-
When the cause of a specifc disease is known, a cross-
fectcd calves. However, when precolostrai sera from such
sectional study can be carried out relatively quickly using
 calves were tested for antibody to a number of viruses,
serology and/or virus identification. This provides data
antibody to Akabane virus, a bunyavirus, which was
 on the prevalence of the particular disease/infection in a
first isolated from mosquitoes in Akabane Prefecture in
 population in a specific area.
Japan in 1959, was found in almost all sera. A retrospec-
  a     
Iong-Term Herd Studies
bctween the geographic distribution of the discase and
 Long-term herd studies are another kind of epidemio-
the presence of antibody to the virus, suggesting that
logic investigation thar can provide unique information
 Akabane virus was the etiologic agent of the congenital
 about the presence and continued activity (or lack of 
 arthrogryposis-hydranencephaly in cartle. Cohort (pro-
activity) of a given virus in an area. They can be regarded
 spective) studies were thcn organized. Sentinel herds
as a series of cross-sectional studies. They can also be
 were established in Japan and Australia, and it was soon
 designed to provide information on the value of vaccines
 found that the virus could be isolated from fetuses ob-
or therapeutic drugs. Despite automation of diagnostic 
 tained by slaughter or cesarean section for only a short
methods and computerization of data files, such studies
 period after infection, thus explaining earlier failures in
are still very expensive and require long-term dedication
 attempts to isolate virus after calves were born. Experi-
of both personncl and funds. When used for evaluating
 mental inoculation of pregnant cows with Akabane virus
yaccines or therapeutic agents, long-term herd studies
during the first two trimesters resulted in congenital ab-
have the advantage that they include all of the variables
normalities in calves similar to those seen in natural cases
 attributable to the entire husbandry system.
 of the disease; clinical signs were not seen in the cows.
When used to derermine the introduction of a par-
Following these studies and estimates of the economic
ticular virus into a population in a given area, such
 impact of the disease, a vaccine was developed and con-
investigations arc referred to as sentinel studies. For ex-
 trol programs were set in place, which are still being used.
anple, such studies are widely used for determining the
 initial introduction of arboviruses into high-risk areas-
 Investigating Geographical Distribution
scntinel animals, usually chickens, are bled at weekly
and Genctic Variation of Viruscs
intcrvals and sera are rested serologically for the frst
The concerted investigations of veterinary scientists in
cvidcnce of viral activity. The frst seroconversions often
many countries interested in understanding the global
prcsage infection of horses, other animals, and humans
epidemiology of bluetonguc virus (an orbivirus; Chapter
by several weeks, enough time to initiate vector con-
24) illustrate the use of cross-sectional and long-term
trol actions.
herd studies and the application of both seroepidemiol-
ogy and molecular epidemiology. Bluetongue of sheep
was considered an cmerging discase of great inrerna-
Examples of How Various Kinds
tional importance from the late-1950s to the mid-1980s;
of Epidemiological Investigations
cvidence of the presencc of thc virus in a country was
Are Used in Prevention and Control
uscd as a nontariff trade barrier, i.e., a mcans to curtail
unwanted international trade in animal products, breed-
of Viral Diseases
ing animals, and germ plasm. For example, bluetongue
virus 20 was isolated from collections of Culicoides spp.
Investigating Causation of Disease
in Australia in 1977 and bluetongue virus 2 from similar
 The original investigations of the production of congeni-
 collections in Florida in 1983, in each case without any
tal defects in cattle by Akabane virus provide examples
disease being recognized. Serologic surveys were used to
 of both case-control and cohort studies. Case-control
 determine the geographic distribution of both viruses;
studies of epidemics of congenital defects in calves,
 stored sera wcrc used to estimate how long the viruses
characterized by deformcd limbs and abnormal brain
had becn prescnt. Using long-term herd studies, which
 development [referred to as congcnital arthrogryposis-
 relied heavily on scntincl animals and extended respec-
hydranenccphaly (see Chaptcr 31)], were carried out
 tively into countries to the north of Australia and into
in Australia in the 1950s and 1960s, but the causc of
the Caribbean region from Florida, it was discovered
the diseasc was not identificd. During the summer and
 that therc were scveral additional serotypes of bluc-
early winter months frorm 1972 to 1975, approximately
tongue virus present in each rcgion. Further, thesc studics
42,000 calves were born with these congenital defects in
 confirmed that clinical signs were rarely, if ever, seen
central and western Japan, causing significant economic
 and established that different species of Culicoides spp.
loss. Japanese scicntists postulated that the disease was
 vectors were able to transmit the virus in different regions
Virus Iransnission
249
of the world. Molecular techniques were used to monitor  ness of disease control programs. In this regard, most
the evolution of the viruses within each region; from
 attention has been given to the potential national and
data generated, it was concluded that bluetongue had
international spread of exotic virus diseases. Figure
been present in these ecosystems for a considerable time
14.1 illustrates the modeling of an outbreak of foot-and-
and that the presence of the virus did not constitute
 mouth disease in the United States, commencing with
an “emerging disease" threat. Import regulations were
the introduction of the virus and progressing through
changed by some countries and international trade ex-
discovery of its presence to the stage where the disease
 panded in some instances on the basis of these discov-
becomes well established and traditional control mea-
eries.
sures (quarantine, slaughter, and disinfection) become
ineffective. The model suggests that in the so-called
Vaccine Trials
"worst-case scenario, 60% of the cattle herds in the
The immunogenicity, potency, safety, and efficacy of
United States could become infected within a 30-week
yaccines are first studied in laboratory animals, followed
period. In this model, if it were decided not to vaccinate
by small-scale closed trials in the target animal species,
 or if sufficient vaccine of the correct antigenic type were
and finally by large-scale open field triais. In the latter,
 not available, the disease would increase again in inci-
epidemiologic methods like those employed in cohort
dence after 60 weeks and begin a series of endemic cycles.
 studies are used. There is no alternative way to evaluate
Such models bring a number of issues into focus.
new vaccines, and the design of field trials has now been
 The results are often unexpected, pointing to the need
 developed so that they yield maximum information with
for better data and different strategies for disease control.
minimum risk and cost. Even with this system, however,
 They are also dependent on detaied information on the
a serious problem may be recognized only after a vaccine
 mechanisms of virus transmission and virus survival in
has been licensed for commercial use. This occurred after
nature as is now discussed.
the introduction of attenuated virus vaccines for infec-
 tious bovine rhinotracheitis (caused by bovine herpesvi-
rus 1) in the United States in the 1950s. Surprisingly,
the vaccines had been in use for S years before it was
Virus Transmission
recognized that abortion was a common sequel to vacci-
Viruses survive in nature only if they can be transmitted
nation. Case-control and cohort studies confrmed the
from one host to another, whether of the same or another
causal relationship.
species (Table 14.1). Transmission cycles require virus
entry into the body, replication, and shedding with sub-
sequent spread to another host. These basic aspects of
Mathematical Modeling
viral activity are described in relation to individual ani-
mal hosts in Chapters 3 and 6; aspects relevant to the
From the time of William Farr, who studied both
spread of viruses in populations are covered here.
medical and veterinary problems in the 1840s, mathe-
maticians have been interested in "epidemic curves"
Virus transmission may be horizontal or vertical.
Vertical transmission describes transmission from dam
and secular trends in the incidence of infectious dis-
 to offspring. However, most transmission is horizontal,
eases. With the development of mathematical modeling
using the computer there has been a resurgence of
i.e., between animals within the population at risk, and
 can occur via direct contact, indirect contact, or a com-
interest in the dynaimics of infectious diseases within
mon vehicle or may be airborne, vector-borne, or iatro-
populations. Because modeling involves predictions
 genic. Some viruses are transmitted in nature via several
about future occurrences of diseases, models carry a
degree of uncertainty; skeptics have said that "for
modes, others exclusively via one mode.
but in recent years models have played an increasing
role in directing disease control activities.
Horizontal Transmission
Mathematical models have been developed to pre-
dict various epidemiologic parameters, such as (1) criti-
Direct Contact Iransmission
cal population sizes required to support the continuous
 Direct contact transmission involves actual physical
transmission of animal viruses with short and long incu-
 contact between an infected animal and a suscep-
bation periods; (2) the dynamics of endemicity of virusest
tible animal (e.g., licking, rubbing, biting). This cate-
 that establish persistent infection; and (3) the important
 gory also includes sexual contact, which, for exam-
variables in age-dependent viral pathogenicity. Com-
 ple, is important in the transmission of some herpesvi-
puter modeling also provides insights into the effective-
ruses.
250
14. Epiderniotogy of Viral Diseases
Figure t4.1.
A
Dissemination rate
Peak
Actual U.K. incidence |4.52|2.13 |1.821.210.67|0.660.860.710.66|0.53|0.79|5.5
Possibie U.S. incidence4.523.542.471.831.35]1.000.750.750.750.750.757.0
Weeks
2400 
2000
奠
1600
Feasible U.S.
ad
runaway epizootic 
1200 
Point at which
traditional controls
800
are abandoned
400
U.K.1967-1968
4
7
8
9
10
11
12
Weeks after introduction
B
Waning immunity
Restocking
Susceptible
Removed
 Siaughter of contact animals
Infec
Slaughter of affected animals
Convalescent animals
Infectious
Immune
Effective vaccination
{A) A state-transition model of a major epidemic of foot-and-mouh disease in the United States from the point of virus introduction, through the
time of discovery of its presence, to the sfoge where the disease is wellestablished and traditional control measures (quarantine, slaughter, and
disinfetineneivdlidiicininmngwhhuk
recorded on 2364 farms. The model permis α variely of disease-confrol stralegies to be examined. Itilustrates several key characteristics of a
uemdswyielicldwn
appropriate variables), (3) it mimics real-ife situations, and (4) it is simple enough to be fested rigorously, but is not naively simplistic. Courtey
of M.W.Mier. Bn themode he basic unit is he herdEach herd is considered o be inone of fourmutually exclusive catgories: "suscepile,
expected to be in each category during the next week are calculated. A key factor in detemining the probability of a susceptible herd becoming
inletdinwekisiwhihshids
rate used in the model is based on that calculated for the 1967-1968 epidemic in the Uniled Kingdom, With this dissemination rale, α situation
wherein Iroditional control methods fail is reached 4-5 weeks after introducfion of the virus.
Indirect Contact Transmission
and virus-contaminated meat or bone products (e.g., for
Indirect contact transmission occurs via fomites, such
the transmission of vesicular exanthema of swine, hog
as shared eating containers, bedding, dander, restraint
 cholera, pseudorabies, and bovine spongiform encepha-
 devices, vehicles, clothing, improperly sterilized sur-
lopathy).
gical equipment, or improperly sterilized syringes or nee-
dles (thc later also comes undcr the heading iatrogenic
Airborne Transmission
transmission).
Airborne transmission, resulting in infection of the respi-
ratory tract, occurs via droplets and droplet nuclei (aero-
Common Vehicle Transmission
sols) emitted from infectcd animals during coughing or
 Common vehicle transmission includes fecal contamina-
 sneezing (e.g., influenza) or from environmental sources
 tion of food and water supplies (fecal-oral transmission)
such as dander or dust from bedding (e.g., Marek's dis-
Virus Transmissin
2.51
TaBle 14.1
 Common Modes of Transmission of Viruses of Animals
VIRUS FAMILY
 MOdE OF traNSMISSION
Poxviridae
Contact (e.g., orf, cowpox viruses)
Arthropod (mechanical, e.g., myxoma virus, fowlpox virus)
Respiratory, contact (e.g., sheeppox virus]
Asfarviridoe
Respiratory, arthropod (ticks), ingestion of garbage (infected meaf
Herpesviride
Sexual (e.g., equine coital exanthema virus)
Respiratory [e.g., infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus)
Transplacental (e.g., pseudorabies virus)
Adenoviridae
Respiralory, fecal-oral
Papovaviridae
Direct contact, skin abrasions (e.g., papillomaviruses)
Parvoviridae
Fecal-oral, respiratory, contact, translacentl (e.g., feline panleukopenia virus]
Circoviridae
Fecal-oral, respiratory, contact
Retroviridae
Contact, in ovo lgerm line], ingeshion, mechanically by arthropods
Reoviridoe
Fecal-oral (e.g., calf rotavirus)
Arthropod (e.g., bluetongue viruses)
Birnaviridae
Fecal-oral, water
Paramyxoviridae
Respiratory, contact
Rhabdoviridae
Animal bite (e.g., rabies virus)
Athropod and contact (e.g., vesicular somatitisviruses)
Filoviridae
Unknown in nature; human-to-human spread is by direct contact
Bornaviridae
Unknown in nature; animal-to-animal spread is by direct contact
 Orthomyxoviridae
Respiratory
Bunyaviridae
Arthropod (e.g., if Vvalley fever virus)]
Arenoviridae
Contact with contaminated urine, respiratory
Coronaviridae
Fecal-oral, respiratory, contact
Arteriviridae
Direct contact, fomites
Picornaviridae
Fecal-oral (e.g., swine enteroviruses)
Respiratory (e.g., equine rhinoviruses)
Ingestion of garbage (infected meat) (e.g, foo-and-mouth disease viruses in swine)
Caliciviridae
Respiratory, fecal-oral, contact 
Togaviridae
Arthropod (e.g., Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus)
Flaviviridae
 Arthropod (e.g., Japanese encephalitis virus) 
Respiratory, fecal-oral, transplacental (e.g., bovine viral diarrhea virus)
Prions
Contaminated pastures (scrapie); contaminated feedstuff(e.g., bovine spongiform encephc
lopathy); unknown [e.g., chronic wasting disease of deer and elk)
case). Large droplets settle quickly, but microdroplets
Arthropod-Borne Transmission
cvaporate, forming droplet nuclei (less than 5 μm in 
 Arthropod-borne transmission involves the bites of ar-
diameter) that remain suspended in the air for extended  
 thropod vectors (e.g., mosquitoes transmit equinc en-
pcriods. Droplets may travel only a metcr or so, but (
 cephalitis viruses, ticks transmit African swine fever vi-
 droplet nuclei may travel long distances--many kilo-
rus, Culicoides spp. transmit bluetongue viruses) (see
meters if wind and other weather conditions are favor-
 section on Arthropod-Borne Virus Transmission Pattein
able.
later in this chapter and Table 14.2).
252
14. Fpidemintogy of Viraf Diseases
TaBle 14.2
Major Arthropod-Borne Viral Zoonoses
FAMILY
GENUS
VIRUs
 ReseRvoIr HoSt
ARthrOpod VEcTOR
Togaviridae
Alphavirusa
Eastern equine encephalitis virus?
Birds
Mosquitoes
Western equine encephalitis virus
Birds
Mosquitoes
Venezuelan equine encephalitis
Mammals,
Mosquitoes
virusa
horses
Ross River virusa
 Mammals
Flaviviridae
Flavivirus
Japanese encephalitis virus
Birds, pigs
Mosquitoes
St. Louis encephalitis virus
Birds
Mosquitoes
West Nile virus
Birds
 Mosquitoes
Murray Valley encephalitis virus
Birds
Mosquitoes
Yellow fever virust
Monkeys,
Mosquitoes
humans
Dengue virusesb
Humans,
s
monkeys
Kyasanur Forest disease virus 
Mammals
Ticks
Tick-borne encephalitis viruses
Mammals,
Ticks
birds
Bunyaviridae
Phiebovirus
Rift Valley fever virus
Mammals
Mosquitoes
Sandfly fever virusesa
 Mammals
Sandflies
Nairovirus
 Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic
 Mammals
Ticks
Fever virus
Bunyavirus
 California encephalitis virus
Mammals
Mosquitoes
La Crosse encephalitis virus 
Mammals
Mosquitoes
Tahyna virus
Mammals
Mosquitoes
 Oropouche virus
2 Mammals
Mosquitoes, midges
Reoviridae
Coltivirus
Colorado fick fever virus
Mammals
Ticks
 In certain episodes, virus is transmited by insects from human to human.
y o uoy soy snso Aq pwsuy Alons am
 Other terms are used to describe transmission by
Nosocomial Transmission
mechanisms that embrace more than one of the just-
Nosocomial transmission occurs while an animal is in
described routes.
a veterinary hospital or clinic. During the peak of the
canine parvovirus epidemic in the 1980s, many pup-
 pies became infected in veterinary hospitals and clinics.
latrogenic Transmission
In some hospitals, the (
disinfectants in routine use
Iatrogenic ("caused by the doctor") transmission occurs
were found to be ineffective against the virus. Feline 
as a direct result of some activity of the attending veteri-
respiratory infections are also acquired nosocomially.
narian, veterinary technologist, or other person in the
 In human medicine, the Ebola virus episodes in Zaire
course of caring for animals, usually via nonsterile equip-
{now]
Democratic Republic of Congo) in 1976 and
ment, multiple-use syringes, or inadequate handwashing.
1995 were classic examples of iatrogenic nosocomial
Iatrogenic transmission has been important in the spread
epidemics.
 Of equine infectious anemia virus via multiple-use syrin-
ges and needles. Similarly, chickens have been infected
Zoonotic 'I'ransmission
with reticuloendotheliosis virus via contaminated Mar-
Because most viruses are host restricted, the majority
ek's disease vaccine.
of viral infections are maintained in nature within
MecbanisnesofSurvivalofViruses inNature
253
populations of thc same or closely related species.
virus and maedi/visna virus of sheep). Vertical transmis-
However, a number of viruses are sprcad naturally
sion of a virus may cause early embryonic death or
between several different species of animals, c.g., rabies
 abortion (e.g., several lentiviruses) or may be associated
and the arboviral cncephalitides. The term zoonosis is
with congenital disease (e.g., bovine viral diarrhea
used to describc infections that are transmissible from
virus), or the infection may be the cause of congenital
animals to humans (Table 14.3). Zoonoses, whether
defects (c.g.,
Akabane virus). Herpesviruses of many
involving domestic or wild animal reservoirs, usually
 species and parvoviruses of several specics are impor-
 Occur only under conditions wherc humans are engaged
tant causes of congenital diseases.
in activities involving close contact with animals or
where viruses arc transmitted by arthropods (Table
14.2).
Mechanisms of Survival
Vertical Transmission
of Viruses in Nature
Vertical transmission is usually used to describe infec-
 Perpctuation of a virus in nature depends on the mainte-
tion that is transferred from dam to embryo or fetus or
nance of serial infections, i.e., a chain of transmission; the
newborn prior to, during, or shortly after parturition,
occurrence of disease is neither required nor necessarily
although somc authorities prefer to restrict the term to
advantageous (Table 14.4). Indeed, although clinical
situations where infection occurs before birth. Certain
cases may be somewhat more productive sources of virus
retroviruses are transmitted vertically via the integration
than inapparent infections, the latter are generaily more
of proviral DNA directly into the DNA of the germ
numerous and morc important because they do not re-
line of the fertilized egg. Cytomegaloviruses are often
strict the movement of infcctious individuals and thus
transmitted to the fetus via thc placenta, whereas othcr
 provide a better opportunity for viral dissemination. As
herpesviruses are transmitted during passage through
our knowlcdge of thc differcnt fcaturcs of the pathogene-
the birth canal. Yet other viruses are transmitted via
sis, specics susccptibility, routcs of transmission, and
colostrum and milk (e.g., caprinc arthritis-encephalitis
environmental stability of various viruses has increased,
Table 14.3
 Major Nonarthropod-Borne Viral Zoonoses
 MOdE of transMIsSION 
FAMILY
ViRus
ReseRvOir HoSt
TO HUMANS
Poxviridae
Cowpox virus
Rodents, cats, catle
Contact, abrasions
 Monkeypox virus
 Squirrels, monkeys
Contacl, abrasions
Pseucocowpox virus
Catle
Contact, abrasions
sA HO
 Sheep, goats
Contact, abrasions
Herpesviridae
B virus
Monkey
 Animal bite
Paramyxoviridae
 Equine morbillivirus
Fruit-eating bats
Uncertain
Rhabdoviridoe
Rabies virus
Various mammals
Animal bite, scratch, respiratory
Vesicular stomatilis viruses
Catle
Contact with secretions*
Filoviridae
Ebola, Marburg viruses
Monkeys
Contact; ialrogenic (injection]b
Orthomyxoviridae
Influenza A virusest
Birds, pigs
Respiratory
Bunyaviride
Hantaviruses
Rodents
 Contact with rodent urine
Arenaviridae
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis, Junin,
Rodents
 Contact with rodent urine
 Machupo, Lassa, Guanarito viruses
° May be arthropod-borne.
6 Alsa human-to-human spread.
sortanlsb
andavianinfluenzc
viruses lperhaps arising during coinfection of pigs may result in human pandemics due to antigenic shift.
254
14. Epidemiology ofViral Diseuses
Table 14.4
Modes of Survival of Viruses in Nature
FAMILY
ExAMPLE
 Mode of survival
Poxviridae
Orf virus
Virus stable in environment
Asfarviridae
African swine fever virus
Acute selflimiting infection; persistent infection in solt ticks
Herpesviridae
Bovine herpesvirus 1
Persistent infection, intermittant shedding
Adenoviridae
Canine adenovirus 1
 Persistent infection; virus stable in environmenl
Papovaviridae
 Papillomaviruses
Persistent in lesions; virus stable in environment
Parvoviridae
Canine parvovirus
Virus stable in environment
Circoviridae
 Psitacine beak and feather disease
Virus stable in environment
virus
Retroviridae
 Avian leukosis viruses
 Persistent infection; vertical transmission
Reoviridae
Calf rolaviruses
Acute self-imiting infection; very high yield of virus from
infected animals 
 Bluelongue viruses
 Arthropod-borne
Birnaviridae
Infectious bursal disease virus
Acute slf-limiting infection
Paramyxoviridae
 Newcastle disease virus
Acute selflimiting infection; vetical with velogenic strains
Rhabdoviridae
Rabies virus
long incubation period
Vesicular stomatitis viruses
Virus stable, arthropod-borne
Filoviridoe
Ebola virus
Unknown
Bornaviridae
Borna disease virus
 Persistent infection
Orthomyxoviridae
Influenza viruses
 Acute selflimiting infection
Bunyaviridae
Rift Valley fever virus
Arthropod-borne; vertical transmission in food-water mos-
quitoes
Arenaviridae
lassa virus
Persistent infection
Coronaviridoe
Feline infectious peritonitis virus
 Persistent infection with enteric virus
Arteriviridae
 Equine arteritis virus
 Persistent intection
Picornaviridae
Foot-ond-mouth disease viruses
Acute self-limiting infection; sometimes persistent infection
Caliciviridae
Feline calicivirus
Persistent infection with conlinuous shedding
Togaviridoe
 Equine encephalitis viruses 
Arthropod-borne
Flaviviridae
Japanese encephalis virus
Arthropod-borne
Bovine viral diarrhea virus
Acute selflimiting infection; persistent affer congenital in-
fection
Prions
 Scrapie prion
 Prion stable in environment
epidemiologists have been able to recognize four major
in water, fomites, or on the mouthparts of mechanical
patterns by which viruses maintain serial transmission
 arthropod vectors favors transmission-—this is particu-
 in their host(s): (1) the acute self-limiting infection pat-
larly important in small or dispersed animal communi-
tern, in which transmission is always affected by host
ties. For example, the parapox virus that causes orf in
population size, (2) thc persistent infection pattern, (3)
sheep survives for months in pastures. During the winter,
 the vertical transmission pattern, and (4) the arthropod-
myxoma virus, which causes myxomatosis in rabbits,
borne virus transmisson partern.
can survive for several weeks on the mouthparts of mos-
 The physical stability of a virus affects its survival
quitoes.
 in the environment; in general, viruses that are transmit-
 Most viruses have a principal mechanism for sur-
ted by the respiratory route have low environmental
vival, but if this mechanism is interrupted, e.g., by a
stability whereas those transmitted by the fecal-oral
sudden decline in the population of the host species, a
route have a higher stability. Thus, stability of the virus
second or even a third mechanism may exist as a
Mechanisms of Suruial ofViruses in Nature
2.5.5
"backup." For example, in bovine viral diarrhea there 1
rinderpest, leading to a period in the 1960s when its
 is a primary fecal-oral transmission cycle that is backed
global eradication was anticipated. Unfortunately, in the
up by the less comrmon persistent shedding of virus by
1970s, vaccination programs in West Africa were main-
congenitally infected calves. An appreciation of these 
tained poorly and by the 1980s the disease had once
 Mechanisms for viral perpetuation is valuable in design-
again become rampant and the cause of major losses in
 ing and implementing control programs.
many parts of Africa. This prompted renewed vaccina-
tion campaigns in African and the Indian subcontinents;
once again the prospect of global eradication of rinder-
Acute SelfLimiting Infection Pattern
 pest is being considered.
The cyclical nature of the occurrence of such dis-
 The most precise data on the importance of population 
eases is determined by several variables, including the
sizc in acute, self-limiting infections come from studies
rate of buildup of susceptible animals, introduction of
of measles, which is a cosmopolitan human disease. Mea- the virus, and environmental conditions that promote
sles has long been a favorite disease for modeling epidem-
viral spread.
ics because it is one of the few common human diseases
in which subclinical infections are rare, clinical diagnosis
is easy, and postinfection immunity is lifelong. Measles
Persistent Infection Pattern
virus is related closely to rinderpest and canine distemper
viruses, and many aspects of the model apply equally
 Persistent viral infections, whether they are associated
well to these two viruses and the diseases they cause.
with acure initial disease or with recurrent episodes of
Survival of measles virus in a population requires a large
clinical disease, play an important role in the perpetua-
continuous supply of susceptible hosts. Analyses of the
 tion of many viruses. For example, recurrent virus shed-
 incidence of measles in large cities and in island commu-
 ding by a persistently infected animal can reintroduce
nities have shown that a population of about half a
 virus into a population of susceptible animals, all of
million persons is needed to ensure a large enough annual which have been born since the last clinically apparent
 episode of infection. This transmission pattern is irmpor-
to maintain the virus in the population. Bccause infection
 tant for the survival of bovine viral diarrhea virus, hog
depends on respiratory transmission, the duration of
 cholera virus, equine arteritis virus, and herpesviruses,
cpidemics of measles is correlated inversely with popula- 
 and such viruses have a much smaller critical population
tion density. If a population is disperscd over a large
 size than occurs in acute self-limited infections; indeed
area, the rate of spread is reduced and the epidemic will
 the sustaining population for some herpesviruses may
last longer so that the number of susceptible persons
be as small as a single farm, kennel, catrery, or breed-
 needed to maintain the transmission chain is reduced.
ing unit.
However, in such a situation a break in the transmission
Sometimes the persistence of infection, the produc-
chain is much more likely. When a largc percentage of
 tion of disease, and the transmission of virus are dissoci-
the population is susceptible initially, the intensity of the
 ated; for example, togavirus and arenavirus infections
epidemic builds up very quickly and attack rates are
 have little adverse effect on their reservoir hosts (arthro-
almost 100% (virgin-soil epidemic). There are many ex-
 pods, birds, and rodents) but transmisson is very effi-
amples of similar transmission patterns among viruses
 cient. However, the persistence of infection in the central
of domestic animals, but quantitative data are not as 
 nervous system, as with canine distemper virus, is of no
complete as those for measles. Exotic viruses, i.e., those
 epidemiologic significance, as no infectious virus is shed
that are not present in a particular country or region,
from this site; infections of the central nervous system
represent the most important group of viruses with a
 may have a severe effect on the dog, but is of no conse-
potential for causing virgin-soil epidemics.
quence for survival of the virus.
The history of rinderpest in cattle in Africa in the
early 2oth century shows many parallels with measles
 in isolated human populations. Whcn it was frst intro-
Vertical Transmission Pattern
duced into cattle populations the initial impact was dev-
astating. Cattle and wild ruminants of all ages were
Transmission of virus from the dam to the embryo, fetus,
susceptible, and the mortality was so high that in Tanza-
or newborn, as described earlier, can be important in
nia the ground was so littered with the carcasses of cattle
 virus survival in nature: all arenaviruses, several herpes-
that a Masai tribesman commented that “the vulturcs
 viruses, parvoviruscs, and retroviruses, some orbiviruses
had forgotten how to fly.*" The development of vaccines 
 and togaviruses, and a few bunyaviruses and coronavi-
beginning in the 1920s changed the epidemiology of ruses may be transmitted in this way. Indeed, if the
256
14. Fpidemiotogy of Viral Diseases
consequence of vertical transmission is lifelong pcrsistent
 alternately in vertebrate and invertebrate hosts. A puzzle
infection, as in the case of arenaviruses and retroviruses,
 that has concerned many investigators has been to under.
the long-term survival of the virus is assurcd. Virus trans-
 stand what happens to these viruses during the winter
mission in the immediate perinatal period, by contact or
months in temperate climates when the arthropod vec-
via colostrum and milk, is also important.
tors are inactive. One important mechanism for "over-
wintering” is transovarial and transstadial transmission.
Transovarial transmission occurs with thc tick-borne
flaviviruses and has been shown to occur with some
Arthropod-Borne Virus
mosquito-borne bunyaviruses and flaviviruses. Some bu-
Transmission Pattern
 nyaviruses are found in high northern latitudes where
 Several arthropod-borne diseases are discussed in appro-
the mosquito brecding season is too short to allow virus
priate chapters of Part I of this book; this chapter consid-
survival by horizontal transmission cycles alone; many
ers some common features that will he useful in under-
of the frst mosquitoes to emerge each summer carry
standing their epidemiology and control. Over 500
virus as a result of transovarial and transstadial transmis-
arboviruses are known, of which some 40 cause disease
sion and the pool of virus is amplified rapidly by hori-
in domestic animals and many of the same cause zoonotic
zontal transmission in mosquito-vertebrate-mosquito
diseases (Table 14.2). Sometimes arthropod transmis-
cycles.
sion may be mechanical, as in myxomatosis and fowlpox,
Vertical transmission in arthropods may not ex-
plain overwintering of all arboviruses, but other possi-
monly, transmission involves replication of the virus in
bilities are still unproven or speculative. For example,
the arthropod vector, which may be a tick, a mosquito, a
hibernating vertebrates have been thought to play a
sandfly ( Phlebotomus spp.), or a midge (Culicoides spp.).
 role in overwintering. In cold climates, bats and some
The arthropod vector acquires virus by feeding on
small rodents, as well as snakes and frogs, hibernate
 the blood of a viremic animal. Replication of the ingested
during the winter months. Their low body temperature
virus, initially in the insect gut, and its spread to the
has been thought to favor persistent infection, with
salivary gland take several days (the extrinsic incubation
recrudescent viremia occurring when the tcmperature
period); the interval varies with different viruscs and is
rises in the spring. Although demonstrated in the
influenced by ambient termperature. Virions in thc sali-
laboratory, this mechanism has ncvcr been proven to
vary secretions of the vector are injected into new animal
Occur in nature.
hosts during blood meals. Arthropod transmission pro-
Many human activities disturb the natural ecology
vides a way for a virus to cross species barriers, as the
 and hence the natural arbovirus life cycles and have
same arthropod may bite birds, reptiles, and mammals
 been incriminated in the gcographic spread or increased
that rarely or never come into close contact in nature.
 prevalence of the diseases caused by these viruses:
 Most arboviruses have localized natural habitats
in which specific receprive arthropod and vertebrate
1. Population movements and the intrusion of hu-
hosts are involved in the viral life cycle. Vertebrate reser-
mans and domestic animals into new arthropod habitats
voir hosts are usuaily wild mammals or birds; domestic
have rcsulted in dramatic epidemics. Some have had
animals and humans are rarely involved in primary trans-
 historic impact: the Louisiana Purchase came about be-
mission cycles, although thc exceptions to this general-
cause of the losses Napoleon's army experienced from
ization are important (e.g., Venezuelan equine encephali-
yellow fever in the Caribbean. Several decades later thc
tis virus in horses, yellow fever, and dengue viruses in
 same disease affected the huilding of the Panama canal.
humans). Domestic animal species are, in most cases,
 Ecologic factors pertaining to unique environments and
infected incidentally, e.g., by the geographic extension 
 geographic factors have contributed to many new, emer-
of a reservoir vertebrate host and/or a vector arthropod.
 gent disease episodes. Remote econiches, such as islands,
 Most arboviruses that cause periodic epidemics
free of particular species of reservoir hosts and vectors,
have ecologically complex endemic cycles, which often
 are often particularly vulnerable to an introduced virus.
involve different arthropod as well as different vertebrate
2. Deforcstation has been the key to the exposure
 hosts from those involved in epidemic cycles. Endemic
 of farmers and domestic animals to new arthropods-
cycles, which are generally poorly understood and inac-
thcrc are many contemporary examples of the impor-
cessible to effective control measures, provide for the
tance of this kind of ecological disruption.
amplification of virus and thereforc arc critical in dictat-
3. Increased long-distance travel facilitates the
 ing the magnitude of cpidemics.
carriage of exotic arthropod vectors around the world.
When arthropods are active, arboviruses replicate
Thc carriage of the eggs of the Asian mosquito, Aedes
Varntions in Disease Incidence Associated with Seasons tmd Aninal Management Practices
257
albopictus, to the United States in used tires represents
Japan and southeastern Asian countries, swine may
an unsolved problem of this kind.
become infected with Japanese encephalitis virus and
 4. Increased long-distance livestock transporta-
become important amplifying hosts when they are birten
tion facilitates the carriage of viruses and arthropods
by mosquitoes that breed in rice felds.
(especially ticks) around the world. Ecologic factors per-
Tick-borne flaviviruses illustrate two features of
taining to water usage, i.e., increasing irrigation and the
epidemiologic importance. First, transovarial infection
expanding reuse of water, are becoming vcry important
in ticks is often sufficient to ensure survival of the virus
factors in virus disease emergence. Thc problem with
independently of a cycle in vertebrates; vertebrate infec-
primitivc water and irrigation systems, which are devel-
 tion amplifcs the population of infected ticks. Second,
oped without attention to arthropod control, is exempli-
for some of these viruses, rransmission from one verte-
fied in the cmcrgence of Japanese encephalitis in ncw
brate host to another, once initiated by the bitc of an
areas of southeast Asia.
 infccted tick, can also occur by mechanisms not involving
 5. New routings of long-distance bird migrations
an arthropod. Thus, in central Europe and the eastern
brought about by new man-made water impoundments
part of Russia, a variety of small rodents may be infected
represent an important yet still untested new risk of
with tick-borne encephalitis viruses. Goats, cows, and
introduction of arboviruses into new areas. The cxten-
sheep are incidental hosts and sustain inapparent infec-
sion of the geographical range of Japanese encephalitis
tions, but they excrete virus in their milk. Adult and
virus into ncw areas of Asia has likely involved virus
juvenile ungulates may acquire virus during grazing on
carriage by birds.
tick-infested pastures, and newborn animals may be in-
 6. Ecologic factors pertaining to environmental
fected by drinking infected milk. Humans may be in-
pollution and uncontrolled urbanization are contribut-
fected by being bitten by a tick or by drinking milk from
 ing to many new, emergent disease episodes. Arthropod
an infected goat.
vectors breeding in accumulations of watcr (tin cans,
old tires, etc.) and sewage-laden water are a worldwide
problem. Environmenral chemical toxicants (herbicides,
Variations in Disease Incidence
pesticides, residues) can also affect vector-virus relation-
ships dircctly or indirectly. For example, mosquito resis-
Associated with Seasons and
 tance to allicensed insecticides in parts of California is
Animal Management Practices
a known direct effect of unsound mosquito abatement
programs; this resistance may also have been augmented
Many viral infections show pronounced seasonal varia-
indirectly by uncontroled pesticide usage against crop
tions in incidcnce. In temperate climates, arbovirus infec-
pests.
tions transmitted by mosquitoes or sandflies occur
 7. Global warming, affecting sea levcl, estuarine
mainly during the summer months, when vectors are
wetlands, fresh water swamps, and human habitation
 most numerous and active. Infections transmitted by
patterns, may be affecting vector-virus relationships
ticks occur most commonly during the spring and early
throughout the tropics; however, data are scarcc and
 summier months. Other biologic reasons for seasonal
many programs to study the effect of global warming
disease include both virus and host factors. Influenza
have not included the participation of infectious dis-
viruses and poxviruses survive better in air at low rather
ease experts.
than at high humidity, and all viruses survive better at
lower temperatures in aerosols. It has also been sug-
The history of the European colonization of Africa
 gested, without much supporting evidence, that there
is replete with examples of new arbovirus diseascs re-
may bc seasonal changes in the susceptibility of the host,
sulting from the introduction of susceptible European
 perhaps associated with changes in the physiological sta-
livestock into that contincnt, e.g., African swine fever,
tus of nasal and oropharyngeal mucous membranes.
African horse sickness, Rift valley fever, Nairobi sheep
More important in veterinary medicine than any
disease, and bluetongue. Thc viruses that cause these 
natural seasonal cffects are the changes in housing and
diseases are now feared in thc industrialized countries as
 management practices that occur in different seasons.
exotic thrcats that may devastatc thcir livestock. Another
 Housing animals such as cattle and sheep for the winter
example of the importance of ccologic factors is the
 often incrcases the incidence of respiratory and enteric
infection of horses in the eastern part of North America
 diseascs. These diseases often have obscure primary etiol.
with eastern equine cnccphalitis virus when their pastur-
 ogies, usually viral, followed by secondary infections
 caused by opporrunistic pathogens (see Chapter 9). In
quito-bird-mosquito cycle of this virus. Similarly, in such cases, infectious disease diagnosis, prevention, and
258
14. Epideniology of Virat Diseases
treatment must be integrated into an overall system for
uncommon. Preexisting antibody, whether derived pas-
the management of facilities as well as husbandry prac-
sively by maternal transfer or actively by prior infection,
tices. In areas where animals are moved, e.g., to feedlots
 does not prevent viral replication and excretion, al-
or seasonally to distant pasturage, there are two major
though clinical signs are usually mild where the antibody
titer is high. Not surprisingly, vaccination is not very ef-
tation and they are brought into contact with new popu-
fective.
lations carrying and shedding different infectious agents.
Often summer pasturage is at high altitude, adding the
stress of pulmonary vascular dysfunction and pulmonary
Further Reading
cdema to the insult of respiratory virus infections. Sec-
ondary Pasteurella pneumonia is not limited to animals
Anderson, R. M. (1998). Analytic theory of epidemics. In
subjected to the stress of transportation to feedlots.
"Emerging Infections" (R. Krause and A. Fauci, eds.),
In areas of the world where cattle are moved hun-
pp. 23-50. Academic Press, New York.
dreds of miles cach year, such as in the Sahel zone 
Anderson, R. M., and May, R. M. (1985). Hcrd immu-
of
nity. Nature (1.ondon) 318, 323-325.
Africa, viral diseases such as rinderpest are associated
Berg, E. (1987). *Methods of Recovering Viruses from
with the contact betwcen previously
y separate popula
the Environment." CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
tions brought about by this traditional husbandry prac-
Black, F. L., and Singer, B. (1987). Elaboration versus
simplification in refining mathematical models of infec-
rice. In southern Africa, the communal use of waterholes
during the dry season promotes the exchange of viruses 
tious disease. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 41, 677-698.
Coyne, M. J., Smith, G., and McAllistcr, F. E. (1989).
such as foot-and-mouth disease virus berween different
Mathematical model for the population biology of ra-
species of wildlife and, in certain circumstances, between 
bies in raccoons in the mid-Atlantic states. Am. J. Vet.
wildlife and domestic animals.
Res. 50, 2148-2153.
Gibbs, E. P. J., ed. (1981). "Virus Diseases of Food Ani-
mals. A World Geography of Epidemiology and Con-
trol," Vols. 1 and 2. Academic Press, London,
Epidemiologic Aspects
Gloster, J. (1983). Forecasting the airborne spread of
foot-and-mouth disease and Newcastle disease. Philos.
of Immunity
Trans.R.Soc.London. Ser.B.302, 535-545.
James, A. D. and Rossiter, P. B. (1989). An epidemiologi-
Immunity acquired from prior infection or from vaccina-
cal model of rindcrpest. I. Description of the model.
Trop. Anim. Health Prod. 21, 59-68.
tion plays a vital role in thc epidemiology of viral dis-
Kramcr, M. S. (1988). “Clinical Epidemiology and Biosta-
eascs; in fact, vaccination (sce Chapter 13) is the single
tistics." Springer-Verlag, New York,
Most effective method of controlling viral diseases. Ca-
Miller, W. M. (1979). A state-transition model of epi-
nine distemper, caused by a single, antigenically stable
demic foot-and-mouth disease. In "A study of the Po-
virus, is associated with a very effectivc immune re-
tential Economic Impact of Foot-and-Mouth Disease
in the United States' (E. H, McCauley, N. A. Aulaqi,
sponse. In industrialized countrics, thc widespread vacci-
J. C. New, W. Sundquist, and W. M. Miller, eds.).
nation of puppies with attenuated virus canine distemper
U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
vaccine has sharply decreased the incidence of both ca-
Mims, C. A. (1981). Vertical transmission of viruses. Mi-
nine distcmper and its complications, old dog encephali-
crobiol. Rev. 41, 267-275.
tis, and hard pad disease.
Pech, R. E., and Hone, J. (1988). A model of the dynam-
For sone viruses, immunity is relatively ineffctive
ics and control of an outbreak of foot-and-mouth dis-
ease in feral pigs in Australia. J. Appl. Biol. 25,
because of the absence of antibodies at the site of infec-
63--67.
tion (e.g., the respiratory or intestinal tract). Respiratory
Rossiter, P. B. and James, A. D. (1989). An cpidemiologi-
syncytial viruses cause mild to severe respiratory tract
cal model of rinderpest. Il. Simulations of the behav-
disease in cattle and sheep. Infections usually occur dur-
ior of rinderpest in populations. Trop. Anim. Health
Prod. 21, 69-78.
ing the wintcr months when the animals are housed in
Sinith, G., and Grenfell, B. T. (1990). Population biology
confined conditions. The virus spreads rapidly by aerosol 
of pseudorabies in swine. Am. J. Vet. Res. 51,
infection and reinfection of the respiratory tract is not
148-156.
Chapter 15
Surveillance, Prevention, (
Control
and Eradication of Viral Diseases
Principles of Disease Prevention, Control, and Eradication 
259
Disease Surveillance.....
260
Investigation and Action in Disease Outbreaks
261
 Disease Control through Hygiene and Sanitation
262
Disease Control through Eliminating Arthropod Vectors ..
264
Disease Control through Quarantine..
264
Disease Control through Vaccination..
265
 Influence of Changing Patterns of Animal Production on Disease
Control .....
266
Biocontrol of Pest Species Using Viruses....
267
Eradication of Viral Diseases....
268
Emerging Viral Diseases......
272
Bioterrorism and Emergence of Viral Diseases..
273
Furthcr Reading...
273
Principles of Disease
time-honored investigative and disease prevention and
control actions must expand in scope and scale.
Prevention, Control,
Good preventive medicine starts with the local
and Eradication
practitioner, on the farm, ranch, feedlot, or poultry
housc and in the veterinary clinic. In this rcspect, littlc
A new political and economic paradigm is emerging with
the turn of the century that is affecting the prevention,
has changed: the basic principles of good husbandry,
 control, and eradication of veterinary and zoonotic dis-
 knowledge of the prevalence of specific diseases and how
 they are transmitted, and thc best methods for disinfec-
eases. Ever more complex and intertwincd global politi-
 tion and vaccination and vcctor control still apply. With
cal systems are exemplifed by the European Union. Ever
 more complex and intertwined trading patterns are ex-
the turn of the century, however, it seems clear that
knowtedge-based practice, whether private practice with
emplified by the North American Free Trade Agreement
 and other similar agreements. Ever morc complex and
 producers as clients or public practice with the public
interrwined food production, processing, and distribu-
as constituent, will become more demanding. Depth of
knowledge of the scientific base underpinning preventive
 medicine practicc will advance rapidly—in many in-
meat and poultry, dairy products, and seafood and shell-
stances it will be the prevention and control of viral
fish. These trends are leading to increased public aware-
 diseases that will lead the way for other veterinary medi-
ness of diseasc risks and to a rising public expectation
 cal risk assessment and risk management activities.
of the veterinary mcdical profession as the global steward
of animal health and the related areas of environmental
quality, food safety, animal welfare, and zoonotic disease
control. All these responsibilities will require the appli-
Prevention Strategies
cation of the principles of preventive medicine: sur-
Nowhere in veterinary medicine is the adage "an ounce
veillance, particularly on the international scene, and
1  of prevention is better than a pound of cure’' more appro-
259
260
I5.Discuse Smrveillance,Prevention,Controt,and Fradication
priate than in viral diseases. Apart from therapeutic re-
agreement, national authorities may elect, or be obliged,
gimes for ameliorating clinical signs of disease, such as
 to inform other countries immediately of even the suspi-
the administration of fluids in viral diarrhea or using
 cion, let alone confirmation of disease in their country.
antibiotics to prevent secondary bacterial infections after
Clearly the list of "notifiable' diseases must not be to0
viral respiratory discases, there are no effective and prac-
large; if so, notification will be ignored. However, data
tical treatments for most viral diseases of domestic ani-
provided by a system of notification influence decisions
mals. Ncvertheless, there are many well-provcn
1ap
on resource allocation for the control of diseases and
proachcs to the prevcntion, control, and cven the
the intensity of follow-up.
regional eradication of many important viral diseases of
 Many countries collect data on diseases that are
animals. Progress indicates thar some viral discases of
 not notifable. Such data provide useful information on
 animals will be eradicated globally in the next century.
 strategies of prevention, especially by allowing calcula-
 Viral disease prevention and control is based on 
tions of cost-beneft equations and indices of vaccine
diverse strategies, each chosen in keeping with the char-
efficacy. Dependenr on the characteristics of the disease,
 acteristics of the virus, its transmission pattern(s) and
 the availability of effective vaccines, and sensitivity and
environmental stability, and its pathogenesis and threat 
specifcity of the diagnostic tests, progressive eradication
(to animal health, productivity, and proftability, zoo-
 programs can be planned and implemented over a time
notic risk, etc.). When available, the most valuable pre-
 period of several years through access to this informa-
ventive measure is the comprehensive use of vaccines,
tion. The ongoing eradication of pseudorabies in the
 not solely for the protection of the individual animal,
United States and several European countries is an cxcel-
 but to build up a level of population immunity suff-
lent example of this approach.
icient to break chains of transmission (see Chapter 13).
 Hygiene and sanitation measures are important methods
of controlling fecal-oral infections in kennels and catte-
Sources of Surveillance Data
ries, on farms and ranches, and in commercial aquacul-
ture facilities. Arthropod vector control is the key to
The methods of surveillance used commonly for animal
regional prevention of several arthropod-borne viral dis-
diseases are (1) notifiable disease reporting, (2) labora-
eascs. Test-and-rcmoval programs continuc to be used
tory-based surveillance, and (3) population-based sur-
 On regional and country-wide bases to eradicate several
veillance. The key to surveillance is the veterinary prac-
viral diseases of livestock and pouitry. The importation
titioner. Although any one practitioner may see only
of exotic diseases (thc tcrm foreign animal diseases is
a few cases of a particular disease, data from many
used officially in some countries) into countries or rc-
practitioners can be accumulated and analyzed to reveal
gions is prevented by surveillance and quarantine pro-
trends in the occurrence of diseases. One key to effective
grams. Finally, following the lead taken in human medi-
surveillance, especially for exotic or unusual animal dis-
cine to globally eradicarc smallpox (accomplished in
 eases, is a sense of heightened awareness among veteri-
1977) and polio (expected to be accomplished in 2002),
 oq u n um, sd um
the global eradication of rinderpest is now considered at-
horses, not zebras" may be good diagnostic advice to
tainable.
clinicians in general, but heightened awareness means
that one should not totally dismiss the possibility that
the hoofbeats may be, indeed, zebras.
Disease Surveillance
Each country has its own system for collecting and
collating data. Inteinational agencies such as the Food
The implementation of disease control programs and
 and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations
regulatory policy is critically dependent on accurate in-
and the Office International des Epizooties coordinate
telligence on disease incidence, prevalence, transmission,
information exchange between countries. For example,
endemic presence, epidemic spread, and so on. Surveil-
the United States Department of Agriculture has its Cen-
lance of viral diseases provides this basic information; 
ters for Epidemiology and Animal Health, with three
it is the systematic and rcgular collection, collation, and
units: (1) the Center for Animal Disease Information
analysis of data on disease occurrence. Irs main purpose
 and Analysis, which collects, manages, analyzes, and
is to detect trends-changes in the distribution of dis-
 disseminates epideimiological information; (2) the Center
eascs.
for Animal Health Monitoring, which operates the Na-
The need for data on the occurrence of infectious 
 tional Animal Health Monitoring System (NAHMS) and
diseases has led to the concept of “notifiable” diseases,
 DxMonitor, an animal health report covering ongoing
whereby veterinary practitioners are required to report
 monitoring and surveillance; and (3) the Center for
to central authorities such as state or national veterinary
Emerging Issues, which identifes emerging issues and
authorities. In turn, through regional or international
provides risk assessment studies.
261
Inucstigation and Action in Disease Outbreaks
There are several sources of information on disease  d
 disease occurs in a new setting. Investigation and actions
incidence that are used by veterinary authorities in most 
may be described in the form of a discovery-to-contro!
developed countries, not all of which are pertinent in 
 contimuum. The continuum involves three major phases,
any particular disease:
each with several elemcnts.
1. Morbidity and mortality data assessed through
information submitted to national, statc, and local diag-
Early Phase
nostic laboratories and made available, with varying de-
grees of access, through national, regional, and interna-
 Initial investigation at the first sign of an unusual disease
tional agencies. Some of these data are published through 
episode must focus on practical characteristics such as
 annual reports, scientific journals and so on.
mortality, severity of disease, transmissibility, and re-
2. Information from case and outbreak investiga-
 mote spread, all of which are important predictors of
tions, again often linked to diagnostic laboratories and e
 epidemic potential and risk to animal populations. Clini-
state and national veterinary investigations vnits.
cal and pathologic observations often provide key
 3. Monitoring of virus activity by clinical, patho-
early clues.
logic, serologic, and virologic exanination of animals
 Discovery. The precise recognition of a new disease
presented for slaughter at abattoirs, tested for legal
 in its host population is the starting point. For diseases
movement, examined in pathology laboratories, or ex-
 that are identified as endemic or prescnt sporadically in
 posed as sentinels to detect virus activity.
a given animal population, ourbreaks are usually han-
 4. Monitoring of arthropod populations and virus
 dled by veterinary practitioners working directly with
infection rates and sentinel animal monitoring to detect
 producers and owners. For diseases that are identifed
arbovirus activity.
as exotic or as having epidermic potential, most further
 5. Specific serologic and virologic surveys.
investigation and action depends on specialized expertise
6. Analyses of vaccine manufacture and use.
and resources.
 7. Reviews of local media reports of disease.
Epidemiologic field investigation. Many of the
 8. List servers, special interest group communica-
 early investigative activities surrounding a disease epi-
tions, and other Internet resources.
 sode must be carried out in the feld, not in the labora-
tory. This is the world of "shoe-leather epidemiology."
Having collcted data, it is imporrant that they
Etiologic investigation. Identification of the etio-
should be analyzed quickly enough to influence nccessary
logic virus is crucial--it is not enough to find a virus,
follow-up measures. If action is intended, the accuracy
 its causative role in the cpisode must be established.
of the information needs to be evaluated carefully. For
Diagnostic development. It is often diffcult to
example, data available from national databases are
 move from identifying a causative virus to adapting it
likely to be reliable and annotated but often reflect infor-
to sensitive, specifc, and practical diagnostic tests (tests
mation collected several weeks or even several months
for the presence of virus, viral nucleic acids, antigens,
earlier. In contrast, information gleaned from reviews of
 and antibodies) that can be used in epidemiologic investi-
local media and from individual reports of unconfirmed
 gations. Here, there is need for controlled sensitivity,
disease on the WorldWide Web, may represent the earli-
specificity, reproducibility, rapidity, simplicity, and
est warning of an impending epidemic. However, such
 economy. There is also a need for proof-testing of the
sources may provide well-intended, but false, informa-
 diagnostics system in the field in the setting of the disease
tion. Quick action when necessary and dissemination of
episode at hand.
information, particularly to local veterinary prac-
titioners, is a vital component of effective surveillance
systems. Caution must be exercised, however, to avoid
Intermediate Phase
unnecessary public alarm. Having to retract false infor-
mation undermines credibility severely.
The continuum progresses to the general area of risk
management, the area reprcsented not by the question,
"What's going on here?,"' but by the question, "What
are we going to do about it? This phase may include
Investigation and Action
expansion of many elements.
in Disease Outbreaks
Focused research. The importance of focused re-
 search, aimed at derermining more about the etiologic
When there is a disease outbreak, it must first be recog-
virus, the pathogenesis and pathophysiology of the infec-
nized, hopefully at the level of primary veterinary care.
 tion, and related immunologic, ecologic (including vec-
This is not always easy when a new disease occurs or a tor biology, zoonotic host biology, ctc.), and epidemio-
262
I5. Disease Surreilfance, Prevention, Controt, and Fradication
logic sciences, plays a major role in disease control
the World Health Organization. The public infrastruc-
programs.
ture systems developed in the United Kingdom to control
Training, outreach, continuing education and pub-
 the epidemic of bovine spongiform encephalopathy is
lic education. Each of these elements requires profes-
exemplary in this regard. The systems developed in Hong
sional expertise and adaptation to the special circum-
Kong and elsewhere in China to deal with HsN1 avian
stances of the disease locale.
 influenza provide further lessons.
 Communications. Risk communications must be
 Of course not all of these elements are appropriate
 of an appropriate scope and scale, employing the tech.
in every viral disease episode—decisions must be made
nologies of the day, including newspapers, radio, televi-
 q 's op n a,s aq s sd 
 sion, and the Internet.
need not do that""what is the minimum that must be
Technology transfer. Diagnostics development,
done to deal with this viral disease outbreak in this given
vaccine development, sanitation and vector control, and
circumstance?'
many veterinary care activities require the transfer of
 information and specialized knowledge to those in need.
This is especially true regarding transfer from national
Disease Control through
centers to local disease control units.
Commercialization or governmental production.
Hygiene and Sanitation
Where appropriate, the wherewithal for the production
 of diagnostics, vaccines, and so on must be moved from
Intensive animal husbandry leads to a buildup in the
research-scale sites to production-scale sites. This differs
local environment of feces, urine, hair, feathers, and so
in different countries and with different viral diseases.
on that may be contaminated with viruses. For viruses
that are thermostable, the buildup of such contamination
 provides a ready source of virus for infecting newly intro-
Late Phase
duced animals. To avoid this, many pork, veal, and poul-
try farmers operate an "al in, all out'’ management
As one goes further and further along the continuum,
system, by which the aniinal houses are emptied, cleaned,
actions become morc and more complex. More and more
and disinfected between cohorts of animals.
expensive, specialized expertise and resources come
Hygiene and disinfection are most effective in the
into play.
control of fecal-oral infections; they have much less
Animal bealth systems development. This includes
effcct on the incidence of respiratory infections. In gen-
rapid case/herd reporting systems, ongoing surveillance
 eral, attempts to achieve “air sanitation" have failed
systems, and records and disease registers. This also in-
 and respiratory viral infections constitute the single most
cludes staffing and staff support and logistical support
important group of diseases in intensive animal produc-
such as facilities, equipmcnt, supplies, and transport.
tion systems. Respiratory viral infections are probably
 This often requires the development of legislation and
 more common now than they have ever been because of
regulation. The systems needed to control a foot-and-
 growing animal populations and increasing population
mouth disease cpidemic in an otherwise disease-free
 densities in many settings. For example, the typical poul-
country or region is exemplary of these elements.
try broiler facility, operating as a single ecosystem, expo-
Special clinical systems. In some cases, isolation
 ses thousands to tens-of-thousands of birds equally when
of cases by quarantine (usually requiring legal authoriza-
avian influenza virus is introduced by a wild bird.
tion and enforcement) and special clinical care and herd/
flock management are necessary.
Public infrastructure systems. In some cases, new
 Nosocomial Infections
 Or additional sanitation and sewage systems, clean water
supplies, environmental control, and reservoir host and
 Nosocomial infections are less common in large animal
vector control are needed on a long-term basis. These
veterinary practices, as animals are usually treated on
elements usually require new or modified government 
 the farm, than in companion animal practices. The use
organizational structures. The largest epidemics may re-
 of appointment systems in veterinary practices reduces
quire incredible resources, e.g., limiting the movement 
 the risk of disease transmission in the waiting room;
Of animals on a national or regional scale, test-and-
 further, the preference of many clients to wait in their
slaughrer programs, and similar actions often require
 cars so that their animals become less excited also cuts
special ncw funding and the involvement of international
 down the risk of discase transmission. Veterinary clinics
agencies such as the Offce International des Epizooties 
 should require that all inpatients have current immuniza-
(OIE), the Food and Agriculture Organization, and/or  tion records or receive booster immunization. Clinics
Disease Contrrl tbrough Iiygiene and Sanitation
263
should be designed for easy disinfection, with wash-
Viruses of different families vary greatly in their
 down walls and flooring and as few permanent fixtures
resistance to disinfectants, with enveloped viruses usu-
as possible. They should also have efficient ventilation
ally being much more sensitive than nonenveloped vi-
and air conditioning, not only to minimize odors, but
ruses. However, most modern disinfectants inactivate
also to reduce the aerosol transmission of viruses. Fre-
most viruses rapidly. Their effective action is influenced
quent hand washing and decontamination of contami-
by access; viruses trapped in heavy layers of mucus or
nated cquipment are essential.
fecal material are not inactivated easily. Standard re-
quirements by the United States Environmental Protec-
tion Agency specify that test viruses must be suspended
Disinfection and Disinfectants
 in 5% serum and dried on a hard surface before testing
the efficacy of a disinfectant. There are special problems
Disinfectants are chemical germicides formulated for usc
when surfaces cannot be cleaned thoroughly or where
on inanimate surfaces, in contrast to antiseptics, which
cracks and crevices are relatively inaccessible, as in old
are chemical germicides designed for use on the skin
 timber buildings or the fence posts and railings of cattle
or mucous membranes. Disinfection of contaminated
and sheep yards.
premises and equipment plays an important role in the
Table 15.1 sets out some common disinfectants
control of diseases of livestock.
and their potential uses. The frst five compounds listed
Table 15.1
 Commercially Available Disinfectants Used to Inactivate Viruses
DISINFECTANT
UsEs
REMARKS
Sodium hypochlorite (Chlorox,
Drinking water, food and utensils,
Highly effective, but high protein
Chlorize)
dairies, spot disinfeclion
concentrations interfere; inexpensive
nontoxic, rapid action
Detergent iodophores Betadine,
Same as sodium hypochlorite
Action based on slow release of
Wescodyne,Redene!
iodine and detergent action; less 
 affected by high protein concen-
Irations than sodium hypochlorite;
expensive
Formaldehyde (formalin]
Laundry, bedding surfaces, and as
Low power of penetration except as
vapor for surfacesterilization
vapor, but useful for terminl
disinfection; irritating,
hypersensitivily develops
Phenol derivatives (lysol, Dettol.
2.5% aqueous solution for hands,
 Efficacy depends on concentration
 Staphene, Sudoll 
examination tables, cages, hospital 
and temperature; high protein 
surfaces
concentrations interfere
Chlorohexidine (Hibitane, Nolvasan)
Wide range, examination tables,
Litleaffected by bodyfluids, soap,
 cages, hospital surfaces
organic compounds; expensive
Ethylene dioxide
 For heat-sensitive medical supplies,
Toxic and explosive except as
plastic isolators
mixture, 10% with 90% CO2, which
is available commercially as
compressed gas
Glutaraldehyde (Cidex)
Cold sterilization of instruments with
 2% solution buffered with sodium
lenses
bicarbonate is virucidal in 10
minutes at pH 7.5-8.5; expensive
 Alcohol (ethanol and 2-propanoll
Hands, thermometers 
 Moderately virucidal only in high
concentralions (70-80%); ethanol
preferable to methanol or 2-
propanol; nontoxic
 Quaternary ammonium compounds 
Zephiran (benzalkonium chloride)
Not very effective against many
(Zephiran, Roccal, Savlon)
used for cleansing wounds
viruses; high protein concentrations 
interfere
"Based on dala supplied by J. Storz.
264
15.IDisease Surveillance,Prevetion,Control, and Lradication
can be used in animal quarters, although some are too
 arbovirus infections, vector arthropods breed over to0
expensive for large-scale use. The last four are of use 
wide an area to make vector control feasible.
primarily in the consulting room, hospital, or laboratory.
Lye (2% NaOH) is incxpensive and has been the tradi-
tional disinfectant for large-scale disinfection of farrm
premises following outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease
Disease Control
and other exotic viral diseases. Hot water containing
through Quarantine
detergent and steam sterilization are also useful for the
decontamination of livestock premises.
Movement of domestic animals across international and
even state borders can be regulated, at least in thc indus.
trialized countries, where there arc appropriate veteri-
nary services and regulatory infrastructure. Quarantine
Disease Control through
remains a cornerstone in many animal disease control
Eliminating Arthropod
Vectors
programs. A period of quarantine, with or without spe-
cifc etiologic or serologic testing, is usually a require-
Control of arbovirus infections relies, where possible, on
 ment for the importation of animals from another coun-
the use of vaccines because the large areas and extended
 try and similar requirerments may be enforced within a
periods over which vectors may be active make vector
 country or local area to assist in the control or eradica-
control difficult. However, surveillance of vector popula-
 tion of specific infectious agents.
tions (e.g., mosquito larval counts) and/or the climatic
As international movement of live animals for
conditions conducive to vector transmissions over wider 
breeding purposes and exhibition has increased, so has
geographical areas (e.g., remote sensing by satellite imag-
the risk of introducing disease. Before the advent of air
ery for Rift Valley fever in East Africa; see Chapter 30)
 transport, the duration of shipment usually exceeded the
provide the justification for local vector control both as
 incubation period of most diseases, but this is no longer
a preventive and as control strategy. For example, aerial the case. With the ever-increasing value of livestock,
spraying with ultra-low-volume insecticides has been
national veterinary authorities have tcnded to adopt
used to prevent the establishment of mosquito popula-
stricter quarantine regulations to protcct their livestock
tions carrying eastern and western equine encephalitis
 industries. Complete embargoes on importation are im-
and St. Louis encephalitis viruses in some parts of North
 posed for some animals by some countries. The concept
America. The widespread use of insecticides is a contro-
of quarantine {Italian, quarantina: originally 40 days
versial issue: (1) mosquito resistance is increasing and
 during which, in medieval times, ships arriving in port
(2) there are mounting environmental objections. Policy
were forbidden to land freight or passengers if there was
on insecticide use should be decided on a basis of a
 a suspicion of a contagious disease), where animals were
risk-benefit analysis on a situation-by-situation basis.
 simply isolated and observed for disease for a given pe-
Some countries have based their emergency arbovirus
 riod of time, is now augmented by extensive laboratory
control program plans on aerial insecricide spraying.
 testing designed to detect previous exposure to selected
This strategy is aimed at rapid reduction of the adut
viruses or a carrier state. Laboratory testing require-
female mosquito population in a defined area for a very
 ments are set down in detailed protocols and are sup-
short time.
 ported by national legislation.
Organophosphorus insecticides such as malathion
While historically the quarantine of dogs and cats
 Or fenitrothion are delivered as an ultra-low-volume
 has been a successful method for preventing the introduc-
 tion of many diseases, such as rabies into Australia, New
mounted on backpacks, trucks, or low-flying aircraft.
 Zealand, and Great Britain (and only now, in light of
Spraying of the luggage bays and passenger cabins of 
 the development of effective vaccines and diagnostic
aircraft with insecticides reduces the chances of intercon-
technology, is being reviewed), other diseases may be
tinental transfer of exotic arthropods, whether infected
 introduced in animal products (e.g., foot-and-mouth dis-
or noninfected.
ease in meat products) or by virus-infected arthropods
 Elimination of cracks and crevices in pig pens (in
(e.g., biuetongue). It must also be recognized that most
which soft ticks can hide) has been inportant in the
 countries have land boundaries with their neighbors and
control of African swine fever in Spain (see Chapter 17).
cannot control human and wildlife movement easily
A similar approach has been found to be successful in
(e.g., the movement of fox rabies in Europe). For coun-
South Africa, where swine are often double-fenced to
 tries with long land borders, quarantine is difficult to
avoid contact with wart hogs. In the case of many other  enforce. To help overcome this problem, most countries
Disease Comtrof throngh Vaecinaticon
265
have agreed to notify each other through the Office Inter-
As outlined in Chapter 13 and discussed at length
national des Epizooties in Paris, France, of the disease
in the chapters of Part II of this book, there are now
status of their livestock. Although the recognition of
effective vaccines for many common viral diseases of
animals. They are especially effective in diseases with a
ence of specific disease remains a problem, the system
necessary viremic phase, such as canine distemper and
usually provides countries with an opportunity to take
 feline panleukopenia. It has proved much more difficult
appropriate action, such as increased vigilance along a
to immunize effectively against infections that localize
national boundary and maintenance of vaccine stocks.
 only in the alimentary or respiratory tracts. The effect
However, there is still a long way to go in developing
 of vaccination programs in reducing the incidence of
standards for testing animals and controlling animal
foot-and-mouth disease in northcrn European livestock
movement. The problems are often social, economic,
was dramatic from 1960 to 1990 (Figure 15.1). The
and political rather than scientific e.g., smuggling of ex-
 penalty for prematurely discontinuing herd vaccination
 otic birds may play a significant role in the introduction
 against foot-and-mouth disease, before disease is truly
 of Newcastle disease and fowl plague viruses.
under control, is illustrated by events in southern Europe
and Turkey over the last 10 years. To understand recent
events, the history of foot-and-mouth disease must first
Disease Control
be reviewed. A vaccination belt (buffer zone) was estab-
lished in adjoining border areas of Turkish Thrace (Eu-
through Vaccination
rope), Greece, and Bulgaria in 1962-1964 in response
to the threat of foot-and-mouth disease (South African
Each of the foregoing methods ofcontrol of viral diseases
Territories type 1) virus from the Middle East. The Tri-
 is focused on reducing the chances of infection. The most
 partite Group (European Commission for the Control
generally effective method of control, vaccination, is di-
of Foot-and-Mouth Disease, together with the Food and
rected primarily at making animals exposed to particular
 Agricultural Organization of the United Nations and the
viruses resistant to infection and unable to participate
 Office International des Epizooties) took responsibility
in the transmission and perpetuation of such viruses in 
for overseeing the program of annual vaccination in the
thc population at risk.
zone. Vaccine was obtained from Western European
FigurE 15.1
32
 Outbreaks
28.
Countries
24
24
20
20
16
16
12
12
sa
D
untri
8
CoL
4
0
40
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
Year
Foot-andmouthdisease inEurope, 1960-1990,showing numbers ofoutbreaks andnumbersof countres reportin caseseachyearThereduction
since the mid-1960s is due to the effective use of trivalent inactivated vaccines (types A, O, and C). Since 1977 [with the exception of an epidemic
in ltaly in 1986-87) over hwo-thirds of the outbreaks each year have occurred in rhe Anatolian (Asian] region of Turkey. In 1990, only Turkey
and Russia reported Foot-and-mouh disease; of the 547 outbreaks, 542 were in Analolian Turkey. (Data from the European Commission for the
Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease, in Animal Health Yearbook, FAO, Rome, 1990.)
266
15. Disease Surveillance,Prevention, Controt,and Fradication
manufacturers. During the following 25 years there were
being vaccinated annually prior to the epidemic; the
a few occasions when Middle Eastern strains of virus
 epidermiological picture was further complicated by the
penetrated the buffer zone and caused outbreaks within 
 conclusion that a disproportionate number of cases
it; however, disease did not spread further and so the 
occurred in dogs vaccinated with the vaccine having
 zone was effective in protecting the southeastern part
the largest market share ar the beginning of the out-
of Europe.
break. As a result of the epidemic, this vaccine was
In the late 1980s, the European Union, followed
withdrawn from sale in Finland. For comparison, it is
by the countries of the former Eastern Bloc, decided
considered that 95% of children need to be vaccinated
-      
against the related virus, measles virus, to provide
mouth disease. A consequence was that vaccination
adequate herd immunity.
ceased in the Greek and Bulgarian parts of the buffer
The introduction of recombinant DNA vaccines,
zone. The Tripartite Group considered what should
 designed in many very innovative ways, has opened up
be done about vaccination in Turkish Thrace and
 a new arena whereby vaccination and elimination pro-
decided, in 1989, that vaccination should be discon-
 grams may be conducted concurrently (see Chapter 13).
tinued forthwith and that a new strategic vaccination
For example, recombinant DNA-based, live-virus pseu-
zone corresponding to approximately 12 provinces in
dorabies vaccines containing genomic deletions and
the Marmara area of Asiatic Turkey be established.
thereby rendered nonpathogenic have become the basis
The modified strategy proved to be a failure. Foot-
 for regional and national virus elimination programs.
and-mouth disease has remained widespread in Asiatic
 These vaccines, together with corresponding enzyme im-
Turkey with several hundred outbreaks being reported
 munoassay test kits for differentiating vaccinated from
most years (predominantly type O1 Middle East and
naturally infected swine, are available commercially and
Occasionally A22). Outbreaks have also occurred every
 are in use in Europe, New Zealand, and the United States.
year in the strategic vaccination zone. Of concern to
They are being used in very successful virus elimination
Europe is that since 1989 there have been several
 programs. Similarly, recombinant DNA-based vaccinia
occasions when strains of type O1 virus (with nucleo-
virus-vectored rabies vaccines are currently being used
tide sequences typical of Middle Eastern strains) have
 in Europe, Canada, the United States, and some countries
caused outbreaks in Bulgaria and Greece. In Bulgaria,
in Africa to control rabies in wildlife species.
singlc type O1 outbreaks occurred in 1991 and in
1993 near the border with European Turkey. In Greece,
an epidemic with 95 outbrcaks 0ccurred in 1994 due
Influence of Changing Patterns
to type O1 virus (closely related to the Bulgaria 1991
of Animal Production on
and 1993 strains, and to those from Anatolia).
 In 1996 an epidemic due to type O1 occurred
Disease Control
in Greece and Bulgaria. In light of this experience, the
European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-
During the latter part of the present century there has
Mouth Disease at its general session in Rome in April
 been a revolution in systems of food animal management
1997 recommended that a vaccination zone should be
and production, and these changes have had profound
rcestablished in Turkish Thrace. This was accepted by
 effects on disease patterns and control. Throughout some
the Turkish veterinary services and the policy has been
of the industrialized and nearly all of the developing
implemented using vaccine produced at the national lab-
world, systerms of animal production for food and fber
oratory in Ankara. It is of interest that Europe was free
are traditional or extensive, typified by the grazing of
of foot-and-mouth disease during 1997, but obviously
sheep and cattle across vast areas, as in the Americas
it is too soon to conclude that the reestablished buffer
 and Australia, or by the movement of srmall herds of
zone has been successful in reducing the threat from the
 cattle or goats across the Sahel by nomadic tribes in
Middle East and Turkey.
 Africa. Chickens and swine were penned and housed
Another examplc of the consequences of ineffec-
 centuries ago, but intensive animal production systems,
tive vaccines and failure to maintain herd vaccination
 particularly for chickens and swine and, to a lesser ex-
was demonstrated by an epidemic of canine distemper
 tent, for cattle and sheep, were established in the middle
in dogs in Finland in 1994-1995. Canine distemper
Of this century. In the industrialized world since Worid
rcappcared in 1990 in Finland after a 16-year absence;
War II, they have bcen almost the only economically
initially the disease was of low incidence, but in 1994
viable method of production for these species, but cur-
and 1995 it is estimated that over 5000 cases 0ccurred
 rent conccrns over the welfare of animals in these inten-
 in areas with high densities of dogs. Analysis of vaccine
sive units is promoting the reintroduction of more tradi-
sales indicated that fewer than 50% of dogs were 1
 tional husbandry. For example, the rural landscape of
Biocontrot of Pest Species Uising Virrses
267
England now features large numbers of pigs being reared
3. These conditions favor multiple infections working
in fields and so-called free-range chickens and eggs are
synergistically, further complicating diagnosis, pre-
preferred by some consumers.
vcntion, and therapy.
 Infectious diseases, particularly viral diseases, havc
often been the rate- and proft-limiting step in the devel.
Disease is a component of the current conceins
opment of intensive systems. Significant aspects of inten-
over welfare in intensive systems, but none of the basic
 sive animal production include the following:
characteristics of intensive livestock production systems
are'going to changc because of discase constraints per
se--the economics of these systems is such that losses
1. The bringing together of large numbers of animals,
often from diverse backgrounds, and confining
due to diseases are generally small relative to gains, due
them to limited spaces, at high density.
mainly to feed and labor effciency. Nevertheless, there
is great merit in improving thcse production systems by
2. Asynchronous turnoff of animals for sale and the
Iminimizing disease losses, thereby increasing yields and
introduction of new animals.
lowering costs. The chief constraint is management, with
3. The care of large numbers of animals by few, some-
the solution requiring the introduction of modern epide-
times inadequately trained, personnel.
4. Elaborate housing systems with complex mechani-
miologic methods into the training and experience of
cal services for ventilation, feeding, waste disposal,
veterinarians and other animal scientists concerned with
and cleaning.
livestock production.
 5. Limitation of the husbandry system to one species.
 Traditional extensive farming methods continue
for all species in most developing countries, but particu-
6. Manipulation of natural biologic rhythms (artificial
daylight, estrus synchronization, etc.).
larly sub-Saharan Africa. In the latter, husbandry is often
primitive, but requirerments for animal products have
7. Use of very large batches of premixed, easily digcst-
increased greatly because of the continually expanding
ible foodstuffs.
 8. Improved hygienic conditions.
human populations. For example, in the Sahel, installa-
 9. Isolation of animal populations.
tion of watering points has led to a build-up of herds
 in good seasons, with disastrous results when droughts
 occur or when epidcmic diseascs entcr the region.
Some figures from North America illustrate the
More frequcnt and extensive movement of domes-
 scale of operations of intensive animal production units.
tic livestock, wildlife species, and people exacerbates the
A large cattle feedlot operation in Alberta may have at
spread of infectious diseases, especially in Africa, where
any one time 100,000 cattle held in 1-acre pens of 400
thc large populations of wildlife harbor several viruses
animals each, with 2.5 cohort groups processed each
 that affect domestic livestock (e.g., malignant catarrhal
year. A single farrowing facility in Iowa may house 5000
 fever). These are matters of national and international
sows; using a fully integrated “farrow-to-finish" system
 concern, not only for humanitarian reasons, but because
there may at any one time be 50,000 swinc in such a
 of the risk of the intcrnational transfer of exotic viruses
facility, of which 45,000 are sold and replaced 2.2 timcs
of livestock and the disastrous consequences such impor-
a year. A dairy farm in California may milk 8000 cows,
 tations could have on animal production industries in
using dry lot technology for feed and waste management.
industrialized countries.
A single broiler house in Georgia may house 50,000
The situation with companion animals is very dif-
birds, and a single farm may comprise many such houses.
ferent, but the risk of infectious diseases varies greatly
Further, many such farms are often located in close prox-
 betwecn the single, mature-age household dog, cat, or
imity. The growing time for a broiler is 9 weeks, so that
pony and the large, sometimes disrcputable, breeding
several million birds may be produced on a singie farm
establishments for these species (" puppy farms," for ex-
each year. There are also intensive systems for producing
ample) in which several hundred animals, of all ages,
veal calves and lambs. Three consequences follow upon
are kept and bred.
these situations:
1. The conditions favor the emergence and spread of
Biocontrol of Pest Species
endemic infectious diseases, as well as opportunis-
tic infections.
Using Viruses
 2. The introduction of nonendemic viruscs poses a
great risk to such populations; although many
The use of recormbinant DNA “vaccines" expressing
farms are designed to provide reliable barriers
 genes to control the reproduction of wildlife and feral
u  sio u 's s s
species is technically feasible. These products have been
268
IS. Disease Strveillance,Prevention,Control,and Eradication
proposed as an adjunct to disease eradication programs.
tant: Japan, United Kingdom, United States, Mexico,
One cxample in support of the national program for the
 and the countries of Central America. An outbreak in
eradication of pseudorabies from the domestic swine
Taiwan in March 1997 has illustrated vividly the impact
population in the United States features the possible use
 of this disease on thc agricultural exports of a small
Of a swinepox vector expressing genes affecting the devcl-
 country and is a salient reminder of the importance of
opmcnt of the reproducrive system of feral swine. Thc
this disease. Capitalizing on its geographical advantage
prevalence of anribody to pseudorabies virus in feral
 of being an island, Taiwan had been free of foot-and-
swine populations in the southern states often exceeds
mouth disease since 1929, while most neighboring coun-
30% and is considered by some to be a major impedi-
 tries of continental Asia remaincd infected with the dis-
ment to the national eradication program. This approach
 ease. Prior to March 1997, Taiwan had a robust cxport
    r    
s (es no sid u i) ude on yod go na 
duced species to North Amcrica; they are not indigcnous
represented 70% of its pork exports, approximately
and trace their ancestry to the early European voyages
 60% of its pig production, and approximately 10% of
of discovery.
its entire agricultural production. The prcsence of the
In contrast to the proposed usc of rccombinant
 disease on the island went unnoticed initially, as the
products to reduce populations through rcproductive
virus was pathogenic only for pigs and not for cattle or
control,the use of viruses as pathogcns, such as myxoma-
other ruminants. Only when the authorities observed
tosis virus and rabbit calicivirus to control pest popula-
 increasing mortality in piglets was the true nature of the
tions of rabbits in Australia, has alrcady been established.
 problem suspected. By time the diseasc was confirmed as
The use of these viruses can be justified ecologically as
foot-and-mouth discase, the epidemic had sprcad widely
the rabbit is an introduced species to the continent (see
throughout the island. Records indicate that on March
Chapter 36). While rabbits are nor considered to be a
29, 1997, 1106 farms were affected, by April 22, a total
reservoir of any diseases of importance to Australian
of 4394, and by May 17, over 6100. When confronted
wildlife or agriculture, thcy are an important component
with the extent of the epidemic, the Taiwanesc govern-
 in endangering thc long-term survival of sevcral indige-
ment had little option but to ban all exports of pork.
nous spccies of marsupials and rare plant species on the
 Fortunately, Taiwan has a broad-based export rade be.
Australian continent through competitive grazing.
yond agriculture and, whilc such a ban causes substantial
economic hardship, it is not likely to have long-term
 adverse effects on the economy of Taiwan.
Eradication of Viral Diseases
With hindsight, various factors contributcd to the
txtremely rapid sprcad of the virus. Most important
Discase control, whether by vaccination alone or by vac-
were a high density of pigs and ineffective control of
cination plus the various other methods described earlier,
animal and product movemcnt until the epidemic was
is an ongoing process that must be maintained as long
 well into its course. There was no legislation against the
as the disease is of economic importance. If a diseasc
feeding of wastc food and several outbreaks probably
can be eradicated within a country so that the virus is
 originated from infected pig products. The procedures
no longer present anywhere except in microbiologically
used for the disposal of pigs were chaotic and probably
secure laboratorics, control measures within that coun-
resulted in the dissemination of virus. The rate of spread
try are no longer rcquired and costs are lowercd perma-
 during the first 100 days of the epidemic was at a rate
nently. Surveillance to prevent the reintroduction of the
 of around 60 reported outbreaks per day-—quite a chal-
disease into the country is still necessary. Eradication
lenge for any veterinary service!
of a disease that is endemic demands major financial
The eradication of a specific disease from a region,
commitments for a long period, often decades, if success
through the combined efforts of several countries, brings
 is to be achieved. Close cooperation berween veterinary
 with it incremental advantages. The experience of the
services and agricultural industries is essential. To
 United States with Canada, Mexico, and the countrics
achievc such cooperation, disease eradication programs
of Central America in eradicating foot-and-mouth dis-
must be justified by cost-benefit analyses and risk-
 ease is a good cxample. So far, global eradication has
been achicved for only one disease, and that a disease
As programs proceed, they must ensure feedback of in-
 of humans. The last endemic case of smallpox occurred
formation on progress (or problems) directly to those
 in Somalia in October 1977. Global eradication was
involved and to the public via the media.
achieved by an intensified effort led by the World Health
Foot-and-mouth diseasec has now been eradicated
 Organization that involved a high level of international
from a number of countries in which it was once impor-
 cooperation and made use of a potent, inexpensive and
Eradieation of Virat Diseuses
269
very stable vaccine. However, mass vaccination alone 
 on made nccessary by the existence of smallpox. This
could not have achieved eradication of the disease from
equation takes no account of the deaths, misery, and
the densely populated tropical countries where it re-
costs of smallpox itself or of the complications of vacci-
mained endemic in the 1970s because it was impossible
nation.
to achieve the necessary very high level of vaccine cover-
More reccntly, the World Health Organization has
age in many rcmote settings. A revised strategy was im-
 organized a campaign to globally eradicate the three
 plemented in the last years of the cradication campaign 
 polioviruses. Massivc vaccination campaigns and labo-
involving surveillance and containment. That is, cases
ratory-based surveillance for the presence of thc viruses
and niches where transmission was ongoing were ac-
 in sewage have eliminated wild-type polioviruses from
Jo uoea unuita u, pue ino qnos aian
the western hemisphere and all the developed countries
 evcryone in the area, frst in the household and then at
 of the eastern hemisphere. Global eradication is expected
increasing distanccs from the index casc). The global
in about the year 2002. Many lessons have been learncd
 smallpox eradication campaign was a highly cost-effec-
from these programs, which are applicable in veterinary
tive operation. Thc expenditure by the World Health
medicine. For example, rabies was eliminated from the
 Organization for the campaign between 1967 and 1979
 United Kingdom in 1901 and again in 1922 after reintro-
was $81 million, to which could be added about $32
duction of the disease during World War I. The cost
 million in bilateral aid contributions and some $200
savings following upon this success have been very large
 million in serviccs provided by the endemic countries 
indeed—the usual four-pronged rabies control infra-
involved in the campaign. Against this expenditure
structure required in countries where rabies is endemic,
of abour $313 million over the 11 years of the cam-
i.e., surveillance, diagnostics, animals control and quar-
paign may be set an annual global expenditure of about
antine, and vaccination, has been replaced by an infra-
$1 billion for vaccination, airport inspections, and so
 structure focused on control over the importation of
TaBlE 15.2
 Biological Characteristics of Viruses That Might Enhance Their Vulnerability to Eradication
VARIOLA
CANINE
NEWCASTlE
[SMALLPOX]
DISTEMPER
DISEASE
RINDERPEST
FOOT-AND-MOUTH
CHARACTERISTIC
VIRUS
VIRUS
VIRUS
VIRU5
DISEASE VIRUSES
...
Host species 
Humans
Dogs
Chickens
Cattle
Cattle
Reservior host in wildlife
Na
No
Yes
Not self
Yes, in Africa
perpetuating
Persistent infeclion occurs
No
No
No
No
Yes, especilly in 
African buffalo
[Syncerus caffer)
Subclinical cases occur
No
Zo
Yes
Unusual
Yes
 Number of serotypes
One
One
One
One
Many
 Infectivity during prodromal stage
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes, very infec-
tious
Vaccine
Effective
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Usually but type
 specific polya
lent formulation
used
Heat stable
Yes
Moderately
Moderately
No°
Yes
Number of doses
One
One
Two
One
Two, then annu-
ally or more offen
Early containment of outbreak possible
Yes
No
 Sometimes
Yes
Difficult
High level of public concern
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Vacina and cpripox virus recombinant vacines are availble that overcome this problem but neither is in commercial use.
270
15.IDisease Surveillance.Prevention, Control,and Eradication
unvaccinated animals. The same kind of cost-benefit 
made a rapid comeback in many areas. The lessons
value has been obtained in several European countries, 
, learned from these vaccination programs, additional les-
including Switzerland and France, and regionally in 
1 sons from the success in eradicating smallpox and polio,
southern Germany and Belgium. Nevertheless, rabies is t
the availability of very good vaccines and the technology
not a candidate for global eradication—-its entrenchment
 to maintain a cold chain for assuring vaccine potency,
 in wildlife species in many countries makes this impos-
and an improving sense of "public will have all been
sible.
used in the last decade to bring us to the point where
 The first animal disease that should be a target 
 rinderpest may well be eradicated globally. Success in
for global eradication is rinderpest. Rinderpest was a (
 eliminating rinderpest from India has been remarkable
finally eliminated in 1949. It has been a scourge in sub-
Sudan, Afghanistan, Somalia, and northern Iraq, stil
Saharan Africa ever since livestock farming was intro- present nidi of infection.
duced in the late 1800s; remarkably, it was very nearly
Conventional veterinary vaccination campaigns,
eliminated from Africa in the 1980s by massive cattle through central government, are often impossible to im-
vaccination programs, but regional wars and violence F
plement in such areas, which has led to community-
fable 15.3
Sore Important New, Emerging, and Reemerging Animal Viruses
African horse sickness viruses [mosquito-borne; a historic problem in southern Africa; now entrenched in the
lberian peninsula; a major threot to horses worldwide)
African swine fever virus tick borne and also spread by conlact; an extremely pathogenic virus; recenlly present in
Europe and South America; α potential threat to commercial swine industries)
Avian influenza viruses (spread by wild birds; epidemics in the United States in 1983 and Mexico in the 1990s; a major
threat to commercial poulry industries of all countries)
Bluetongue viruses {Culicoides spp.-borne; the isolation of several strains in Australia led to an important nontariff trade
barrier issue]
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy prion (the cause of a major epidemic in catle in the United Kingdom, resulting in
major economic loss and trade embargo]
Canine parvovirus (a new virus, having mutated from feline panleukopenia virus; the virus has swept around the world
rapidly, causing α pandemic of severe disease in dogs]
captive breeding herds in the United States and recently in feral animals in the United States and Canada)
Equine morbillivirus (recognized in Queensland, Australia, in 1994; the cause of fatal acute respiratory distress syndrome
in horses and humans; bats serve as reservoir host]
Feline immunodeficiency virus (a rather newly recognized major cause of morbidily and mortaliy in cats globallyl
Footandmouth-disease viruses (sill considered the most dangerous exotic viruses of animals in the world because of their
ble of emergence in any commercial calfle industry)
Malignant catarrhal fever virus (the African form is an exolic, lethal herpesvirus of cattle; its presence is an important non-
torifftrade barrier issue)
Marine mammal morbilliviruses (epidemic disease first identified in 1988 in European seals; now realized as several im-
portant emerging viruses, endangering several species of marine mammals)
Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome vrus (also called Lelystad virus-rather recentlyrecognized as an impor-
tant cause of disease in swine in Europe and the United Statesl
Rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus (rabbit biocontrol agent, newly released in Australia and New Zealand; emergent in
the sense that purposeful release mimics a virgin-soil epidemicl
Rinderpest virus (potential for causing substantiol economic loss; entrenched in one region of Africa; copable of reemer-
gence, requiring wide-area surveillance]
Simian immunodeficiency virus (significance of these viruses increasingly recognized as important models in AIDS re
search,
Fradication of Virat Diseases
271
nizations) sometimes linked to paraliel vaccination pro- cheitis, pseudorabies, and bovine leukemia raises the 
grams for children against measles, polio, etc. This can  question of whether there are other animal diseases that
ularly that of maintaining the cold chain. Interestingly, acteristics of the viruses and diseases that have been
 in southern Sudan, some pastoral groups have been more eradicated from individual countries, and in some cases
enthusiastic to have their cattle vaccinated than their 
regions, are set out in Table 15-2.
children, a feature that has led to increased childhood
The viruses that cause these diseases share several
vaccination. In eastern Africa, there is an additional  c
 cssential characteristics: (1) they have no uncontrollable
 problem: recent isolates from game animals in Kenyan
 reservoirs, (2) they do not cause persistent infection and
wildlife parks are virulent for eland, kudu, and buffalo,
 chronic or rccrudescent disease where long-term or inter-
but not for cattle, thus unrecognized spread has probably
 mirtent viral shedding would occur, (3) they exist as one
occurred among domestic livestock.
 or few stable scrotypes, and (4) they have been amenable
 Successfui regional/country eradication of velo-
to efficacious vaccine development. In addition to the
genic Newcastle disease, fowl plague, hog cholera, foot-
biologic properties of smallpox virus being particularly
    n    e a    
Table 15.4
Some Important New, Emerging, and Reemerging Zoonotic Viruses
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy prion (recognized in 1986; the cause of a major epidemic in cottle in the United
Kingdom,resulting inmajoreconmic lossandtradeembargo;idenified asthe causeofhumancentanerous systm
disease: new-variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease]
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus fick borne; reservoir in sheep; severe human disease with 10% mortality; wide-
spread across Africa, the Middle East, and Asia}
Ebola? and Marburgg viruses (natural animal reservoirs unknown; Ebola and Marburg viruses are the causes of the most
lethal hemorrhagic fevers known]
Equine morbillivirus (recognized in Queensland, Australia, in 1994; the cause of fatal acute respiratory distress syndrome
in horses; spread to humans causing similar also fatal disease; bats serve as reservoir hostl
Guanarito virus" (rodent borne; the newly discovered cause of Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever)
Hantaviruses" (rodent borne; the cause of important rodent-borne hemorrhogic ever in Asia and Europe; Sin Nombre vj-
rus and related viruses are the cause of hantavirus pulmonory syndrome in the Americas]
Influenza viruses (reservoir in birds, especially sea birds, with intermediate evolution in swine, and viral species umping
bringing new viruses to human populations eachyear; the cause of the single most deadly human epidemic ever re
corded—the pandemic of 1918 in which 25-40 million people died; tha cause of panic in Hong Kong in 1997 as an
H5N1 avian influenza virus for the first fime appeared inhumans, causing severe disease and several deaths;the cause
of thousands of deaths every winter in the elderly
Japanese encephalitis virus (mosquito borne; swine seve s amplifying reservoir hosts; very severe, lethal encephalitis in
humans; now spreading across southeast Asia; great epidemic potentioll
Junin virusa (rodent borne; the cause of Argentine hemorrhagic fever)
Lassa virus* (rodent borne; a very important, severe disease in West Africa)
Machupo virus rodent borne; the cause of Bolivian hemorrhagic fever, recent outbreaks after many years of quiescence)
Rabies virus ftransmitted by the bite of rabid animals; raccoon epidemic shillspreading acrossthe northeastern United
Stales; coyote/dog epidemic in south Texas; thousands of deaths everyyear in lndia,Sri Lanka,the Philppines, and else
where)
 the most explosive epidemics ever seen when the virus first oppeared in 1977 in Egypt!
Ross River virus (mosquito borne; cause of human epidemic arthritis has moved across the Pacific region several times)
gi yuaai om iizog ui laa siooway lpi uae saas jo esnoo palaosip Amau ruig juapoij sn os
tory-acquired cases]
a sy ui sss p so au o uo ss jes s as sauo uiq sui   moa
potential for urban reemergence]
Viruses that cause hemorrhagic fevers in humans
272
15.Disease Surveillance,Prevention,Control.and Eradication
industrialized countries to promote the global eradica-
Organization in 1966 to describe several viral diseases
tion of smallpox because of the costs associated with of veterinary importance, such as African swine fever,
vaccination of international travelers, port inspections, t
that appeared to have the potential to spread beyond
etc.
 their known geographical distribution. In 1992, the Insti-
tute of Medicine, a branch of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States, in response to the recogni-
Emerging Viral Diseases
tion of the emergence of AIDS and nosocomial virus
diseases such as Ebola hemorrhagic fever, but also to
The term emerging diseases was used with remarkable t
 the reemergence of several bacterial diseases such as tu-
 prescience as a book title by the Food and Agricultural  berculosis, issued a report in which emerging infectious
Table 15.5
New, Emerging, and Reemerging Viruses in Endangered /Threatened Species (and Species
Involved in Captive Breeding and Translocation Programs)
species (threat of quarrantine and slaughter loconlrol risk ofimportation of exotic virusesthat cre a threat to poulry in-
dustries]
Avian poxviruses in endangered avian species in Hawai (hreat of fatal disease in highly susceptible species]
Calitrichid arenavirus in goldenion tmarins inBrazil and incaptivebreeding/release programs thevirus sindistin
guishable from lymphocylic choriomeningitis virus; a universally lethal disease; a major problem in many endangered
tamarin species)
Canine distemper virus inlions and leopards in the Serengeti and elsewhere in Kenya and Tanzania (threat of fatal dis
ease in highly susceptible species; verylarge numbers of lions have suffered fatl infection in the pasf 10years
Canine distemper virus in the red panda in zoos [threat of fatal disease in highly susceptible species; atenuated virus cq
nine vaccine causes disease and immunosuppression--inactivated vaccine used]
Canine distemper virus in the blackfooted ferret (lthal disease;its control remains crucial to the survival of this endan
 gered North American species; canine aenuated virus vaccine causes disease and immunosuppression—inactivated voc-
cine used]
Canine avirus in teredwlf incaive breedin/ele programs oestenUnidSatesthret of fatls
ease in highly suscepible species-pups now recaptured each year and vaccinated with canine vaccinej
Eastern equine encephalitisvirus in the whooping crane (lethal disease; its control is crucial to the survival of this endan
gered North American species—-chicks now captured and vaccinated with human vaccine)
Ebola virus in chimpanzees in Cole d'lvoire and Gabon and gorllas in Gabon threat of fatal disease in susceptible en-
dangered species)
Encephalmyocardis virusnelephantsintheKrugerPark,SouthAfricathreat offatadiseaseinsusceptiblesignatre
species that is imporant in the rising tourist industry, which in turn is the funding base for most African willife conserv
tion programs!
Equine morbilivirus andAustralianbat lyssavirus inbats (flying foxes)in Australia (threatened bat species, the reseroir
hosts of these viruses, face unwarranted kiling to remove the threat of these zoonotic viruses]
Feline infectious peritonitis virus in the cheetah,the snoweopard,and smllspoled felids lethal disease;its conl is
Marine mammal morbillviruses jepidemic disease first identified in 1988 in European seals; a complex of lethal diseases
in several species of seals, sea lions, dolphins, porpoises, ond whales caused by relaled morbiliviruses; control is crucial
to the survival of several endangered species such as the monk seall
Psiticine beak and feather disease virus(in captive and freeliving parrots, in Australia and South America, a progres-
sive,ulimately fatal disease in threatened and endangered speciesj
Rabies in endangered freeliving wild canid species (lethal disease; its control is crucial to the survival of several endan-
gered African wild canid species)
Rinderpest virus in endangered freeliving ungulate species in Africa {several wild African ungulate species, such as buf
falo inTsavo West NationalPark,Kenya, are considered by farmers as reservoir hosts of this virus, the source of epidem-
ics in catle; control is crucial lo the acceptance of cohabitation of domestic and wild animals by farmers)
Simian hemorrhagic fever virus in captive macaques (silent infeclion in several simian species serves as the reservoir of
virus that cause lethal disease in macaques; α problem in macaque breeding programs)
Further Readng
273
diseases werc defned as diseases whose incidence has
Ladnyi, I. D. (1988). "Smallpox and its Eradication.,"
increased within the past two decades or threaten to
World Hcalth Organization, Geneva.
increase in the near future. It was this 1992 report that
Food and Agriculturc Organization of the United Na-
drew the public's artention to infectious diseases and
tions. (published annually). "FAO-WHO-OIE Animal
Health Yearbook." Food and Agriculture Organiza-
the concept of emergence. Because of their rapidity
of
tion, Rome.
spread, viral diseases feature prominentily in any listing of
Hanson, R. P., and Hanson, M. G. (1983). "Animal Dis-
emerging discasc. Their prominence has been highlighted
casc Control. Regional Programs." Iowa Statc Univcr-
further by recognition of epidemics throughout the
sity Press, Ames.
1990s of Ebola hemorrhagic fever in central Africa
Lederherg, J., Shope, R. E., and Oaks, S. C., eds. (1992).
(Chapter 28), by an outbreak in 1994 of a new para-
“Emerging Infections: Microbial Threats to Heaith in
the United Statcs. Institute of Medicine, National
myxovirus disease in horses and humans in Australia
Academy of Scicnces of the United States of America,
(Chapter 26), and by identification in 1997 of a zoonotic
National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
 outbreak of H5N1 avian influenza in Hong Kong (Chap-
Morris, R. S., ed. (1991). "Epidemiological Information
ter 30).
Systems." Rev. Sci. Technol., vol. 10, No. 7. Office In-
If the definition used by the Institute of Medicine
ternational des Epizooties, Paris.
Murphy, F. A., and Nathanson, N., eds. (1994). New
is applied to veterinary medicine, numerous viral diseases 
and emerging viral diseases. Semin. Virol. 5, 85-187.
- 'ssess srs se aenb ans yooq s u
Office International des Epizooties (1995). *"Disinfectants:
bles 15.3, 15.4, and 15.5 list some of these diseases and
Actions and Applications, OIE Sci. Tech. Rev. 14 (1)
the viruses that cause them.
and 14 (2). Office International Epizooties, Paris.
 It hardly needs to be added that the principles
Office International des Epizooties. (1998). "Disease In-
 Outlined in this and preceding chapters of Part I of this
formation (information and articles available by coun-
try and by disease)."' Offce International des Epizoot-
book are key to any study of emerging diseases. Further
jes, Paris. Available also at: http://www.oic.org/info/
information about these diseases and viruses may be
info_a.htm
found in the relevant chapters in Part II of this book.
Offce International des Epizootics." International Animal
Several have already been referred to when illustrating
Health Code for Mammals, Birds and Bees and Intcr-
nationa! Aquatic Animal Health Code." (published an-
specifc points in this and prcvious chapters.
nually) Offce International des Epizooties, Paris. Avail-
able also at: http://www.oie.org/a_code.htm
Offce International des Epizooties. "World Animal
Bioterrorism and Emergence
Health." (published annually) Office International des
Epizooties, Paris.
of Viral Diseases
Quinn, P. J. (1991). Disinfection and disease prevention
in veterinary medicine. In“Disinfection, Sterilization
and Preservation," (S. S. Block, ed.), 4th ed., Pp. 846-
The new world order has led to revised attitudes to
855. Lca & Febiger, Philadelphia, PA.
biological warfare. In comparison to nuclear weapons
Radostits, O. M., and Blood, D. C. (1985). “Herd
and, to a lesser extent, chemical agents of mass destruc-
Health. A Textbook of Health and Production Man-
 tion, biological agents combine relatively easy availabil
agement of Agricultural Animals." Saunders, Philadel
ity with maximum potential for destruction and terror.
phia, PA.
Russell, A. D., Hugo, W. B., and Ayliffe, G., A. J. eds.
 Many governments anticipatc greater use of infectious
(1992). "Principles and Practice of Disinfection, Preser-
agents by terrorists in the future with the focus on in-
vation, and Sterilization, 2nd ed. Blackwell, Oxford.
flicting human casualties. Economic and/or ecological
Schnurrenberger, P. R., Sharman, R. S., and Wise, G. H.
catastrophes in animal populations are possible as well
(1987). “Attacking Animal Diseascs: Concepts and
Strategies for Control and Eradication." lowa State
through the orchestrated use of several viruses discussed
University Press, Ames.
in this book. While it would be possible to provide exam-
Truyen, U., Parrish, C. R., Harder, T. C., and Kaaden,
ples of several scenarios where viruses of veterinary im-
O. R. (1995). There is nothing permanent except
portance might be used by terrorists, the authors will
changc. The emergence of new virus diseases. Vet. Mi-
leave further consideration of this subject to the reader.
crobiol.43,103-122.
Watson, W. A., and Brown, A. C. L. (1981). Legislation
and control of virus discases. In "Virus Diseases of
Food Animals" (E. P. J. Gibbs, cd.), vol. 1, Pp. 265-
Further Reading
306. Academic Press, London.
World Health Organization. (1991). “Safe Use of Pesti-
Block, S., ed. (1991). "Disinfection, Sterilization, and
cides. Fourteenth Report of the WHO Expert Commit-
Preservation," 4 cd. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, PA.
tee on Vector Biology and Control,' WHO Tech.
Fenner, F., Henderson, D. A., Arita, I., Jezek, Z., and
Rep. Ser. 813. World Health Organization, Geneva.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
PART II
Veterinary and Zoonotic Viral Diseases
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
chapte r 16
Poxviridae
Properties of Poxviruses ...
278
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS ORTHOPOXVIRUS..
282
Vaccinia Virus Disease (and Buffalopox).
282
Cowpox...
282
Camelpox
283
Ectromelia (Mousepox) .
283
Monkeypox
284
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS CAPRIPOXVIRUS....
284
Sheeppox and Goatpox ..
284
Lumpyskin Disease of Cattle ...
285
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS SUIPOXVIRUS..
286
Swinepox..
286
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS LEPORIPOXVIRUS..
286
Myxomatosis
286
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS MOLLUSCIPOXVTRUS.
287
Molluscum Contagiosum..
287
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS YATAPOXVIRUS...
287
Yabapox and Tanapox....
287
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS AVIPOXVIRUS..
288
Fowlpox and Other Avian Poxvirus Diseases
288
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS PARAPOXVIRUS .,
289
Orf (Contagious Pustular Dermatitis)..
289
Pseudocowpox
290
Bovine Papular Stomatitis
291
Further Reading
291
The family Poxviridae includes several viruses of veteri-  tle, the origins of modern vaccinia virus, the smallpox
nary and medical importance. Poxvirus diseases occur
vaccine virus, are unknown. In his Inquiry published in
in most animal spccies and are of considerable economic
1798, Jenner described the clinical signs of cowpox in
importance in somc regions of the world. Diseases such
cattle and humans and how human infection provided
as sheeppox have becn eradicated in developed countries, 
 protection against smallpox. At the time smallpox was
but are still a causc of major losses in some devel-
responsible for more than 10% of all deaths in childrcn.
oping countries.
 Jenner's discovcry soon led to the establishmcnt of vacci-
 The history of poxviruses has been dominated by
 nation programs around the world. Howevcr, it was
smallpox. This diseasc, once a worldwide and greatly
 not until Pasteur's work nearly 100 years latcr that the
feared disease of humans, has now been eradicated by
 principle was used again—in fact it was Pasteur who
use of the vaccine that traccs its anccstry to Edward
suggested the general terms vaccine and vaccination
 Jenner and the cowsheds of Gloucestershire in England.
(from vacca, Latin for cow) in honor of Jenner. Other
Although Jenner's first vaccines probably camc from cat- 
 landmark discoveries came from early work on poxvi-
277
278
16.Poxviridae
domestic rabbits, described frst by Sanarellin 1896, was
 ing to either icosahedral or helical symmetry found in
the first viral pathogen of a laboratory animal. Rabbit
 most other viruses (see Chapter 1); hence poxviruses are
fbroma virus, described in 1932 by Shope, was the first
said to have a "complex"' structure.
virus proven to cause tissue hyperplasia (which was at
Virions of most poxviruses are composed of an
the time considered to be related to tumor formation).
outer layer of tubular structures, arranged rather irregu-
With the eradication of smallpox, use of the small-
larly, giving them a characteristic appearance; in con-
pox vaccine was discontinued throughout the world,
trast, virions of the members of the genus Parapoxvirus
but it is possible that it may be widely used again, as
 are covered with long thread-like surface tubules, which
recombinant DNA vaccines using vaccinia virus as a
because of the superimposition of features on the tops
vector for delivering a wide range of viral and microbial
S  p aq on iedde s yo sg e
 antigens are the subject of intensive research (see Chapter
 cross fashion resembling a bali of yarn. Virions of some
13). The use of other poxviruses as vaccine vectors is
ungrouped viruses from reptiles are brick shaped but
also being investigated vigorously
have a surface structure similar to that of parapoxviruses
(Figure 16.1B). Interestingly, recent cryoelectron micro-
scopic studies have suggested that all these virion surface
Properties of Poxviruses
structures, which have been used to identify poxviruses
ever since the development of negative-contrast electron
Classification
microscopy, may actually represent dehydration (shrink-
age) artifacts. The outer layer encloses a dumbbell-
The farmily Poxviridae is subdivided into two subfami-
shaped core and two lateral bodies of unknown nature.
lies: Chordopoxvirinae (poxviruses of vertebrates) and
The core contains the viral DNA together with several
Entomopoxvirinae (poxviruses of insects). The subfam-
proteins. Virions that are released from cells by budding.
ily Chordopoxvirinae is subdivided into eight genera
rather than by cellular disruption, have an extra envelope
(Tabie 16.1). Each of the genera, except Molluscipox-
that contains ceilular lipids and several virus-specified
virus, includes species that cause diseases in domestic or 
proteins.
laboratory animais. There are other poxviruses that have
The genome consists of a single molecule of linear
 not yet been classified; indeed new poxviruses are being
double-stranded DNA varying in size from 130 kbp (para-
discovered constantly, including viruses isolated from
poxviruses), 280 kbp (fowlpox virus), up to 375 kbp
lizards, frogs, deer, and kangaroos, among others. Fur-
(entomopoxviruses). The genomes of vaccinia virus
ther, because of the large size and distinctive structure
(191,636 bp) and several other poxviruses have been
of poxvirus virions, negative stain electron microscopic
sequenced complerely. Poxvirus genomes have cross-
 examination of lesion material is used in many veterinary
links that join the two DNA strands at both ends; the
and zoonotic virology laboratories for diagnosis—this 
ends of each DNA strand have long inverted tandemly
 method allows rapid visualization of poxviruses in vari-
 repeated nucleotide sequences that form single-stranded
ous specimens, but it does not allow specific verification 
loops (Figure 16.2).
of viral species or variants. Hence, many specimens are
 Poxvirus genomes have the capacity to encode
left with a diagnosis of "poxvirus," “"orthopoxvirus,"
 about 200 proteins, as many as 100 of which are con-
 tained in virions. Only relatively few viral proteins have
taining to the species of origin. If further characteriza-
been assigned functions; the majority with known func-
tion, including molecular methods, was used to follow
 tions are enzymes involved in nucleic acid synthesis and
up on such diagnoses, it is presumed that many more
virion structural components. Examples of the former
poxvirus species would be recognized as animal patho-
are DNA polymerase, DNA ligase, RNA polymerase,
gens. For example, entomopox-like virions, previously
enzymes involved in capping and polyadenylation of
 only associated with insects, have been found in lesions
 messenger RNAs, and thymidine kinase. Several poxvi-
in fish raised commercially.
rus genes encode proteins that are secreted from infected
cells and affect the response of the host to infection.
Among these virokines is a homologue of epidermal
Virion Properties
growth factor, a protein that down-regulates comple-
ment, virokines confeiring resistance to interferon, and
 Most poxvirus virions are brick shaped, about 250 X
yet others suppressing the immune response by inhibiting
200 × 200 nm in size; in contrast, virions of the members 
certain host cytokines.
of the genus Parapoxvirus are cocoon shaped and
 Poxviruses are transmitted berween animals by
260 X 160 nm in sizc (Figures 16.1A, 16.1B, 16.1C,
several routes: by introduction of virus into small skin
Properties of Poxuirnses
279
Table 16.1
Poxviruses: Host Range and Geographic Distribution
Host
GEOGRAPHIC
GenUS
VIRUS
MaJOR HoSts
RANGE
NOWEMSIG
Orthopoxvirus
Variola (smallpox]
Humans
Narrow
Eradicated globally
virus
Vaccinia virus
Numerous: humans, cattle,
Broad
Worldwide
buffalo," swine," rabbits"
Cowpox virus
Numerous: catle, humans, rats,
Broad
Europe, Asia
cats, gerbils, lorge felids,
elephants, rhinoceros, okapi
Camelpox virus
Camels
Narrow
Asia, Africa
Ectromelia virus
Mice, voles
Narrow
 Monkeypox virus
Numerous: squirrels, monkeys, 
Broad
Western and central
anteaters, great apes, humons
Africa
Uasin Gishu disease
Horses
Broad
Eastern Africa
virus
Tatera poxvirus
Gerbils (Tatera kempi)
Western Africa
Raccoon poxvirus
Raccoons
Broad
 North America
Vole poxvirus
Voles (Microtus californicus)
California
Seal poxvirus
Grey seals [Halichoerus grypus]
North Sea
xos
 Sheeppox virus
Sheep, goals
Narrow
Africa, Asiα
Goatpox virus
Goats, sheep
Narrow
Africa, Asia
Lumpyskin disease
Cattle, Cape buffalo
Narrow
Africa
virus
Suipoxvirus
Swinepox virus
Swine
Narrow
Worldwide
leporipoxvirus
Myxoma virus
Rabbits (Oryctolagus and Sylvi-
Narrow
Americas, Europe,
lagus spp.)
 Australia
Molluscipox-
virus
Molluscum contagio-
Humans
Narrow
Worldwide
sum virus
Yatapoxvirus
Yabapox virus and
 Monkeys, humans
Narrow
West Africa
tanapox virus
Avipoxvirus
Fowlpox virus
Chickens, turkeys, other birds
Narrow
Worldwide
Parapoxvirus
Orf virus
Sheep, goals, humans
Narrow
Worldwide
Pseudocowpox virus
Catle, humans 
Narrow
Worldwide
Bovine papular 
Catle, humans
Narrow
Worldwide
stomatitis virus
Ausdyk virus
Camels
Narrow
 Africa, Asia
Seal parapoxvirus 
 Seals, humans
Narrow
Worldwide
"lnfecte rmmns; nwhatsmalxvacinatonhsbendisnidfheivianpoplaonsfllcounes suchinfectins
unlikely to be seen.
Figure l6.1.
B
C
Lateral
body
Envelope
Lateral
Surface
Surfacemembrane
Surface
bqdy
tubules
Enyelope
filament
Surface
membrane
Nucleoprotein
100nm
Core
Nucleoprotein
membrane
Coremembrane
genus:Orthopoxvirus
genus:Parapoxvirus
Poxviridae (bar =100 nm}.(A)Negalively stained vaccinic virus virions showing surface tubules characteristic of memberviruses of all genera
exep the gens ParapoxvirusNegatively stained orf vius vrionshowing characterisic surface tubles of themembervirseso thegens
[C, right Schemalic diagram, genus Parapoxvirus. Part of the two diagrams shows the surface strucure of an unenveloped virion, whereas the
Preperties of Poxviruses
281
Figure 16.2.
Inverted repeat
Inverted repeat
10 kbp
10 kbp
Tandem repeats
Tandem repeats
0.9 kbp
1.3 kbp
1.3 kbp
0.9 kbp
Schematic representation of theDNA of vacinia virus.TpLineardoublesranded DNAmoleculewith terminal hairpins and inverted repeats
composed of short sequences richinAT. (From FFenner,RWitek,and KRumbell,TheOrthopoxviruses.AcdemicPress,NewYork,199.)
abrasions or directly or indirectly from a contaminated
 occurs in the cytoplasm. To achieve this total indepen-
environment. For example, orf virus is transmitted by
 dence from the cell nucleus, poxviruses, unlike other
the respiratory routc via droplets from infected animals.
DNA viruses, have evolved to encode all of the enzymes
Sheeppox, swinepox, fowlpox, and myxomatosis are
 required for transcription and replication of the viral
transmitted mechanically by biting arthropods. The vi-
 genome, several of which must be carried in the virion
ruses generally have narrow host ranges. Poxviruses are
itself. After fusion of the virion with the plasma mem-
resistant in the cnvironment under ambicnt temperatures
 brane or after endocytosis, the viral core is released into
and may survive for many years in dried scabs or other
the cytoplasm (Figure 16.3).
virus-ladcn material.
Transcription is characterized by a cascade in
which the transcription of each temporal class of genes
("early, “intermediate,” and “late"” genes) requires the
Viral Replication
 presence of specific transcription factors that arc made
by the preceding temporal class of genes. Intcrmediate
Most poxviruscs, except for parapoxviruses, swincpox
virus, and molluscum contagiosum virus, grow readily
whereas late transcription factors are cncoded by inter-
in cell culture. They also produce pocks on thc chorioal-
 Mediate genes. Transcription is initiated by the viral tran-
lantoic membrane of embryonated hen's eggs, the ap-
scriptase and other factors carried in thc core of the
 pearance of which has been used to differentiate ortho-
virion that enable the production of mRNAs within min-
poxviruses from each other. Replication of poxviruses
utes after infection. Proteins produced by translation of
FiGure 16.3.
2-12 hous
ngenneda
Late 1ransactivalors
Envelope
RNA polymerase
Transcriptlon taclo
Poly(A) polymeras
Lateenzymes
appng enzyme
Earfy enzymes
Earlytranscriptiontad
Methylating erizyt
Slructuralprotelns
Growlh factor
Nuceus
Cleavage
? Nuclear
Glycosylaion
Acylation
nesls·420 hotu
Diagram illustrating the replication cycle of vaccinia virus. (Courtesy of B. Moss.]
282
16.Poxviridae
these mRNAs complete the uncoating of the core and
 Diseases Caused bY Members
transcription of about 100 early genes; all this occurs
 Of the Genus Orthopoxvirus
before viral DNA synthesis begins. Early proteins include
DNA polymerase, thymidine kinase, and several other
Vaccinia Virus Disease
enzymes required for replication of the genome.
Poxvirus DNA replication involves the synthesis of
(and Buffalopox)
long concatemeric intermediates, which are subsequently
Because of its widespread use and its wide host range,
cut into unit-length genomes--the details of this process
vaccinia virus sometimes has caused naturally spreading
remain unknown. With the onset of DNA replication
diseases in domestic animals (e.g., teat infections of cat-
there is a dramatic shift in gene expression. Transcription
tle) and also in laboratory rabbits ("rabbitpox"). In the
Netherlands in 1963, before human vaccination against
ing of specifc viral proteins to promoter sequences in
smallpox had been discontinued, 8 out of 36 outbreaks
the viral genome. Some early gene transcription factors
 of disease first thought to be cowpox were found to
are made late in infection, packaged in virions, and used
 be caused by vaccinia virus and the rest by authentic
in the subsequent round of infection.
Because poxviruses are composed of a very large
cowpox virus.
Outbreaks of buffalopox have occurred in water
number of proteins, it is not surprising that viral assem-
buffalo (Bubalis bubalis) in Egypt, the Indian subconti-
bly is a complex process, which is still poorly understood
and which requires several hours to be completed. Virion
 nent, and Indonesia, where buffalo are used for mik
production. The disease is caused by an orthopoxvirus
formation involves coalescence of DNA within crescent-
that is related so closely to the vaccinia virus that is it
shaped imrmature core structures, which then mature
by the addition of outer coat layers. Replication and
 not clear whether it should be considered a separate
virus on not. By restriction endonuclease mapping, the
assembly occur in discrete sites within the cytoplasm
causative virus is indistinguishable from vaccinia virus,
(called viroplasm or viral factories), and virions are re-
although it is slightly different from laboratory strains
leased by budding (enveloped virions) or by exocytosis,
of vaccinia virus and strains that had been used for
or cell lysis (nonenveloped virions). Most virions are not
 simallpox vaccination in the same regions. The disease
enveloped and are released by cell lysis. Both enveloped
 is characterized by pustular lesions on the teats and ud-
and nonenveloped virions are infectious, but enveloped
virions are taken up by cells more readily and appear
ders of milking buffalo; occasionally, especially in calves,
 a generalized disease is seen. Outbreaks still occur in
to be more important in the spread of virions through
India (even though vaccinia virus is not used for any
the body of the animal (Table 16.2).
type of vaccination in the country), sometimes producing
lesions on the hands and face of milkers who are no
longer protected by vaccination against smallpox.
Tabte 16.2
Properties of Poxviruses
Virions in most genera are brick-shaped, 250 x 200 x
Cowpox
Virions of members of the genus Parapoxvirus are ovoid,
260 × 160 nm, with regular spiral arrangement of surface
 Despite the name, the reservoir hosts of cowpox virus
tubules
 are rodents, from which the virus occasionally spreads to
 domestic cats, cows, humans, and zoo animals, including
Virions have α compiex structure with a core, lateral bod-
ies, outer membrane, and sometimes an envelope
large felids (especially cheetahs, ocelots, panthers, lynx,
Gernome is composed of a single molecule of lineor dou-
lions, pumas, and jaguars) and anteaters, rhinoceroses,
ble-stranded DNA, 165-210 kbp (genus Orthopoxvirus),
okapis, and eiephants. During an outbreak at the Mos-
-xodod snueb) dqy Otl Jo (snjaxodiy snuab) dqx 087
cow zoo the virus was also isolated from laboratory
virus] in size
rats used to feed the big cats, and a subsequent survey
Genomes have the capacity to encode about 200 proteins;
demonstrated infection in wild susliks (Spermophilus ci-
as mony as 100 of which ore contained in virions. Unlike
tellus and S. suslicus) and gerbils (Rhombomys opimus)
other DNA viruses, poxviruses encode all of the enzymes re
in Russia. In the United Kingdom, the reservoir species
quired for transcription and replication, many of which are
are bank voles (Clethrionomys glareolus), field voles (Mi-
carried in the virion
crotus agrestis), and wood mice (Apodemus sylvaticus).
Cytoplasmic replication, enveloped virions released by exo-
 Cowpox virus has been found only in Europe and
cytosis; nonenveloped virions released by cell lysis
adjacent regions of Russia. The virus produces lesions
Fetrowmefia (Motsepox)
283
on the teats and the contiguous parts of the udder of (
 China. Mousepox has never been endemic for prolonged
cows and is spread through herds by the process of
 periods in mouse colonies in the United States, but acci-
milking. Currently, infection with cowpox virus is more
dental importations have occurred from European labo-
commonly seen among domestic cats, from which it is
ratories, e.g., via mouse tumor material, with devastating
 Occasionally transmitted to humans. Lesions in humans
 consequences. In recent years, stringent steps have been
usually appear as single maculopapular eruptions on the
taken to prevent its entry into modern laboratory col-
hands or the face; infection is accompanied by systemic
onies
signs such as nausea, fever, and lymphadenopathy. Chil-
Clinically, there arc two forms of mousepox: (1)
dren are oftcn hospitalized but while human death is
 a rapidly fatal form in which there is extensive necrosis
rare, it has occurred.
 Of the liver and spleen with death occurring within a
Cowpox virus infection in domestic cats is often
few hours of the first signs of illness and (2) a chronic
a more severe disease than in cartle or humans. There
form characterized by ulcerating lesions of the feet, tail,
is often a history of a single primary lesion, generally
 and snout. Frank Fenner studied the natural history and
on the head or a forelimb, bur by the time the car is
epidermiology of mousepox during an epidemic in the
presented for veterinary attention, widespread skin le-
 colonies at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda,
sions have usually developed. The primary lesions vary in
Maryland. He found that when the virus is first intro-
character, and secondary bacterial infection is common.
 duced into a colony, most mice develop a primary lesion,
The widespread secondary lesions first appear as small
usually on the snout, feet, or belly. Subsequently, the
red macular eruptions, which develop into papules and
virus multiplies to high titer in the liver and spleen. Some
ulcers over several days. These scab over, and the cat
 mice die at this stage, but if they survive they almost
usually recovers within 6 to 8 weeks. More severe disease
 s a  pa e d a
with large nonhealing lesions or pneumonia usually, but
 mortality in suckling mice than in adults. Only after this
not always, resulrs from secondary bacterial infection or 
form of disease has been established in a colony for
immunosuppression (e.g., by concurrent feline lcukemia
 some time, with widespread partial active and passive
virus or feline immunodeficiency virus infection). In
 immunity prevailing, does the chronic form become
cheetahs, pneumonia is common, and cowpox virus in-.
dominant.
fection in cheetahs has a high mortality rate.
 The consequences of the introduction of ectromelia
virus into a mouse colony are so serious that definitive
diagnosis is an urgent matter. Mousepox can be diag.-
Camelpox
nosed by the histopathologic examination of tissues of
suspected cases, its diagnostic features being distinctive
 Camelpox causes a severe generalized disease in camels,
 eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies, especially at
with extensive skin lesions. Ir is an important disease,
 the edges of skin lesions. Electron microscopy is also a
especially in countries of Africa, the Middie East, and
valuable diagnostic adjunct: distinctive virions may be
southwestern Asia where the camel is used as a beast of seen in any infected tissue. Virus may be isolated in
burden and for milk. The more severe cases usually occur  mouse ermbryo cell cultures and identifed by immuno-
in young animals, and in epidemics the case-fatality rate  logical means.
may be as high as 25%. The causative virus is a distinc-
The usual mode of transmission of the virus in
tive orthopoxvirus species and its restriction endonucle- mouse colonies is via minor abrasions of the skin,
ase map differentiates it from other viruses. It has a which become contaminated from bedding or during
narrow host range, and despite the frequent exposure 1
 manipulations by animal handlers. Infection may also
of unvaccinated lhumans to florid cases of camelpox,
human infection has not been seen. A parapoxvirus also
 between mice in close proximity to each other. Because
infect camels producing a disease that can be confused
 mice are infected readily by inoculation, virus-contami-
with camelpox (Ausdyk virus; Table 16.1).
nated mouse serum, ascites fluid, tumors, or tissues
constitute a risk to laboratory colonies previously free
of infection. Analysis of epidemics in mouse colonies
Ectromelia (Mousepox)
has shown that C56BL6 and AKR mice are highly
resistant to mousepox and that BALBc, DBA, and
Ectromelia virus has been spread around the world inad-
 C3H mice are highly susceptible. Although there is no
vertently in shipments of laboratory mice and mouse
 disease in CS7BL/6 mice, serial transmission occurs
products and has been repeatedly reported from labora-
 and these mice may serve as silent sources of contagion
tories in several countries of Europe and froin Japan and  for susceptible mouse strains.
284
I6.Poxriridae
Prevention and control are based on quarantine
strains of sheeppox and lumpyskin disease viruses are
and regulation of thc importation and distribution of 
 related more closely to each other than sheeppox virus
ectromelia virus, mice, and materials that may be car-
is to goatpox virus. However, whereas sheeppox and
rying the virus. However, because such regulations offer
 goatpox are considered to be host specifc, in parts of
no protection against unsuspected sources of infection,
Africa where shccp and goats are herded together both
animal species may show clinical signs during an out-
valuable animals.
break, indicating that some strains may affect both shccp
 Clinical signs vary in diffcrent hosts and in differ-
Monkeypox
ent geographical areas. Sheep and goats of all ages may
be affected, but the disease is generally morc severe in
Human infections with monkeypox virus are scen in
young animals. An epidemic in a susceptible flock of
villages in the tropical rain forests of west and cntral
sheep can affect over 75% of the animals, with mortality
Africa, espccially in the IDemocratic Republic of Congo.a
as high as 50%; case-fataliry ratcs in young sheep may
The disease was discovered in the early 1970s, after 
 approach 100%. After an incubation pcriod of 4 to
and symptoms are very like those of smallpox, with a r
 rcspiratory rate, edema of the eyelids, and a mucous
generalized pustular rash, fever, and toxemia.
.Mon-(
 discharge from the nose. Affected sheep may losc their
keypox virus is a zoonotic agent; it is acquired by humans a
 appetite and stand with an arched back. One to 2 days
by direct contact with wild animals killed for food, espe- I
later, cutaneous nodules about 1 cm in diamcter develop,
cially squirrels and monkeys. There is some evidencc 
which may be distributed widely over the body. Thesc
that squirrels are the true reservoir host of the virus. A
lesions are most obvious in the areas of skin where the
few cascs of person-to-person transmission have becn
woolhair is shortest, such as the head, neck, ears, axillae,
reported, but the secondary attack rate scems too low
and under the tail (Figure 16.4A). These lesions usually
for the disease to become established as an endemic
scab and persist for 3-4 weeks, healing to leave a perma-
human infection.
nent depresscd scar. Lesions within the mouth affect the
The human diseasc had bcen rather rare, with only
tongue and gums and ulcerate. Such lesions constitute
 400 or so cases diagnosed in the 1980s; however, in the
 an important source of virus for infection of other ani-
1990s there have been simmering outbrcaks involving
mals. In some sheep, lesions develop in the lungs, as
more and more people. More than 500 human cases
multisite consolidation. Goatpox is similar clinically to
were reported in the Congo in 1996-1997, the largest 
shceppox (Figure 16.4B).
outbreak cver of the disease. Vaccination with smallpox
 Shccppox and goatpox are notifable diseascs in
vaccine (vaccinia virus) immunizcs against monkeypox,
 most countries of the world, with any clinical suspicion
and vaccination may be reintroduced in some villages
of disease requiring disclosure to appropriate authorities.
in Africa to deal with zoonotic monkcypox infections.
Apart from occasional outbreaks in partly immune
flocks—where the disease may be mild—or whcn the
 presence of orf complicates the diagnosis, sheeppox and
DIsEaSEs CauSED BY MEMBErs
goatpox present lile diffculty in clinical diagnosis. For
OF tHe GENUS CAPRIPOXVIRUS
presumptive laboratory diagnosis, ncgative-contrast
electron microscopy can be used to demonstrate virions
Sheeppox and Goatpox
 in clinical material, as thc virions are indistinguishable
from those of vaccinia virus. The viruses can be isolated
 I jo juiiodui sou u are xodieo pue xoddus
in various cell cultures derived from shecp, cattle, or
 pox diseascs of domestic animals, causing high mortality
 goats; the presence of virus is indicated by cytopathology
in young animals and significant economic loss. They
 and cytoplasmic inclusion bodies.
Occur as cndemic infections in southwcstern Asia, the
 In common with most poxviruses, environmental
Indian subcontinent, and most parts of Africa, except
contamination can lead to the introduction of virus into
southern Africa.
small skin wounds. Scabs that havc been shed by infccted
Although the geographic distribution of sheeppox,
sheep remain infective for several months. The common
goatpox, and lumpyskin disease is different, suggesting
 practice of herding shecp and goats into enclosures at
that they are distinct viruscs, they are indistinguishable
 night in countrics whcre the disease occurs provides ade-
 quate cxposure to maintain endemic infection. During
by restriction cndonuclease DNA analysis. The African  an outbreak, the virus is probably transmitted between
I.unpyskin Disense of Cattle
285
Figure 16.4.
[A} Sheeppox and [B] goatpox in native breeds in Ghana. [Courtesy of M. Bonniwell.
sheep by respiratory droplets; there is also evidence that
  rq   ri i e 
 mechanical transmission by biting arthropods, such as
 ondarily. Ulcerated lesions may be prcsent in the mouth
stable flies, may be important.
and nares; postmortein, circumscribed nodules may be
In countries where thc diseases are endemic, atten-
found in lungs and the alimentary tract. Healing is slow
uated virus and inactivated virus vaccines are used. Re-
and affcctcd cattle often remain debilitated for sevcral
combinant vaccines, with these viruses as vectors, arc
months.
under devclopment for the control of rinderpest.
Morbidity in susceptible herds can be as high as
100%, but mortality is rarely more than 1-2%. The
economic importance of the disease relatcs to the pro-
Lumpyskin Disease of Cattle
 longed convalescence and, in this respcct, lumphyskin
disease is similar to foot-and-mouth disease; indeed, in
Lumpyskin disease affects cattle breeds derived from
South Africa, it is regarded as economically more im-
both Bos taurus and Bos indicus and was first recognized
portant.
in an extensive epidemic in Zambia in 1929. An epidemic
The clinical diagnosis presents few problems to
in 1943-44, which involved other countries, including
clinicians familiar with it, although the early skin lesions
South Africa, emphasized the inportance of this disease,
 can be confused with generalized skin infections of
which remained restricted to southern Africa until 1956,
 pseudo-lumpyskin disease, caused by bovine herpesvi-
when it spread to central and castern Africa. Since the
rus 2.
1950s,it has continued to spread progressively through-
It is likely that the virus is rransmitted mechanically
out Africa, first north to the Sudan and subsequently
betwcen cattle by biting insects, with the virus being
westward, to appear by the mid-1970s in most countries
perpetuated in a wildlife reservoir host, possibly the Afri-
of western Africa. In 1988, the disease was confirmed
can Capc buffalo. Control is by vaccination. Two vac-
in Egypt, and in 1989 a single outbreak occurred in 
 cines are currently available: in South Africa an attenu-
 Israel, the first report outside the African continent.
atcd virus vaccine (Neethling) is used and in Kenya a
Lumpyskin disease is characterized by fevcr, fol-
 strain of sheep/goatpox virus propagated in tissue cul-
lowed shortly by the development of nodular lesions in
turc has been uscd.
the skin thar subsequentiy undergo necrosis. Generalized
Lumpyskin disease has shown the potential to
lymphadenitis and cdema of thc limbs are coinmon. Dur-
 spread outside continental Africa. Because it is transmit-
ing the early stagcs of the discasc, affected cattle show
 ted principally by insect vectors, the importation of wild
lacrimation, nasal discharge, and loss of appetite. The 
ruminants to zoos could establish new foci of infection,
skin nodules involve the dermis and epidermis; they are  if suitable vectors were available.
286
16. Poxviridae
Diseases Caused by Members
hygiene. As with other poxviruses of livestock, swinepox
OF The GEnUS SuIpOxviRUS
virus is being devcloped as a vaccine vector.
Swinepox
DiSEaSEs CaUSED BY MEMBErS
Swinepox is scen sporadically in swine-raising areas
throughout the world. Many outbreaks of poxvirus dis-
OF The GEnuS LEpoRipOxViRuS
ease in swine havc been caused by vaccinia virus, but
swinepox virus, which belongs to a different genus, is
Myxomatosis
now the primary cause of the disease. Swinepox is usually
a mild disease with lesions restricted to the skin (Figure
Myxoma virus causes only a localized benign fbroma
16.5). Lesions may occur anywhere, but are most obvi-
in wild rabbits in the Americas (Sylvilagus spp.) in con-
 ous on the abdomen. A transient low-grade fever may
trast, it causes a severe generalized disease in the Euro-
precede the development of papules which, within 1 to
2 days, become vesicles and then umbilicated pustules,
mortality rate (Figurc 16.6). The characteristic early
1-2 cm in diameter. The pocks crust over and scab by
signs of myxomatosis in the European rabbit are blepha-
7 days; healing is usually complete by 3 weeks. The
 roconjunctivitis and swelling of the muzzle and anogeni-
clinical picture is characteristic; it is seldom necessary
 tal region, giving animals a leonine appearance. Infected
to seek laboratory confirmation of the clinical diagnosis.
rabbits become febrile and listless and often die within
Swinepox is transmitted most commonly between
 48 hours of onset of cinical signs. This rapid progression
swine by the bite of the pig louse, Hematopinus suis,
and fatal outcome are seen especially with the California
which is common in many herds; the virus does not :
 strain of myxoma virus. In rabbits that survive longer,
replicate in the louse. No vaccines are available for :
 subcutaneous gelatinous swellings (hence the name myx-
swinepox, which is controlled most easily by elimination
 omatosis) appear all over the body within 2 to 3 days.
of the louse from the affected herd and by improved  The vast majority of rabbits (over 99%) infected from
Figure 16.5.
Swinepox. (Courtesy of R. Miller.)
xodrrl.purxudwu
287
Figure 16.6.
MyxomatosisA}LocalizedfbrmainSyvilgusbochniB}SeveregeneralizeddiseaseinOryctolaguscniculs showingalargemora
the site of intradermal inoculation on the llank, generalized lesions, and blepharoconjunctivis. (A, courtesy of D.Regnery.)
a wild (Sylvilagus spp.) source of myxoma virus die I
less. The discase may last for several months before re-
within 12 days of infection. Transmission can occur via
 covery occurs. Cells in the nodule are hypertrophied
respiratory droplets, but more often via mechanical8
 greatly and contain large hyaline acidophilic cytoplasmic
transmission by arthropods (mosquitoes, fleas, black
masses called molluscum bodies. These consist of a
flies, ticks, lice, mites).
spongy matrix divided into cavities, in each of which
Diagnosis of my xomatosis in European rabbits can
 are clustercd masses of viral particles that have thc same
be made by the clinical appearance, or virus isolation in 
 general structure as those of vaccinia virus. The disease
rabbits, on the chorioallantoic meimbrane of em-
bryonated hen's eggs or in cultured rabbit or chicken
wide, but is much more common in some localities, e.g.
cells. Electron microscopy of exudates or smear prepara-
parts of thc Democratic Republic of Congo and Papua
tions from lesions reveal virions morphologically indis-
New Guinea. The virus is transmitted by direct contact,
tinguishable from those of vaccinia virus.
 perhaps through minor abrasions and sexually in adults.
Laboratory or hutch rabbits can be protectcd
 In developed countries, communal swimming pools and
against myxomatosis by inoculation with the related rab-
 gymnasiums have been sources of contagion.
bir fbroma virus or with attenuatcd myxoma virus vac-
cines developed in California and France.
 Myxoma virus was the frst virus ever introduced
DIsEasEs CaUsED bY MEmBErS
into the wild for the purpose of eradicating a vertebrate
pest, namely the feral European rabbit in Australia in
Of the GEnus YaTapoXvirUs
1950 and in Europe 2 years later (see Chapter 4).
Yabapox and Tanapox
[idon ui xuo Aeineu msso xodeuei pue xodeqe1
DiseasEs CausED BY MEMbers OF
Africa. Thc yabapox virus was discovercd because it
produced large benign tumors on the hairless areas of
ThE GENUS MOLLUSCIPOXVIRUS
the face, on the palms and interdigital areas, and on the
Molluscum Contagiosum
mucosal surfaces of thc nostrils, sinuses, lips, and palate
 of Asian monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops) kept in a
Molluscum contagiosum is specifically a human disease,
laboratory in Nigeria. Subsequent cases occurred in pri-
but it is often confused with zoonotic poxviruses. Infec-
 mate colonies in California, Oregon, and Texas. Yaba-
tion is characterized by multiple discrete nodules 2 to 5
 pox is believed to be cpidemic in scopc in African and
mm in diameter, limited to the epidermis, and occurring  Asian monkeys. The virus is zoonotic, spreading to hu-
anywhere on the body except on the soles and palms.
 mans in contact with diseased monkeys and causing simi-
The nodules are pearly whitc or pink in color and pain-
 lar lesions as in affected monkeys.
288
16.Poxviridae
Tanapox is a relatively common skin infection of
 o     d 
humans in parts of Africa, extending from eastern Kenya  I
DNAs has yet been made. Mechanical transmission by
to the Democratic Republic of Congo. It appears to be
 arthropods, especially mosquitoes, provides a mecha-
spread mechanicaly by insect bites from an unknown 
nism for transfer of the viruses between a variety of
wild animal reservoir, probably a species of monkey. 1n (
 different species of birds.
humans, skin lesions start as papules and progress to
Fowlpox is a scrious disease of poultry that has
vesicles but pustules do not occur. There is usually a(
Occurred worldwide for centuries. The fowlpox virus is
febrile illness lasting 3 to 4 days, sometimes with severe 
highly infectious for chickens and turkeys, rarely so for
headache, backache, and prostration.
 pigeons, and not at all for ducks and canaries, but rur-
keypox virus is virulent for ducks.
There are two forms of fowlpox, probably associ-
DisEasEs CauseD BY MemBErs
ated with different routes of infection. The most com-
mon, which probably results from infection by biting
OF The GENus AvipoxViRuS
arthropods, is characterized by small papules on the
comb, wartles, and around the beak (Figure 16.7); lesions
Fowlpox and Other Avian
occasionally develop on the legs and feet and around
Poxvirus Diseases
thc cloaca. The nodules become yellowish and progress
to a thick dark scab. Multiple lesions often coalesce.
Poxviruses that are relared serologically to each other
 Involvement of the skin around the nares may cause
 nasal discharge, and lesions on the eyelids can cause
lesions found in all specics of poultry and many specics 
 excessive lacrimation and predispose poultry to second-
 of wild birds. Viruses recovered from various species of 2
 ary bacterial infections. Irn uncomplicated cases, healing
birds are given names related to their hosts, such as occurs within 3 weeks.
fowlpox, canarypox, turkeypox, pigconpox, and mag-
 The second form of fowlpox is probably duc to
picpox. As judged by their pathogenicity in various avian (
droplet infection and involves infection of the mucous
hosts, there seems to be a number of different species of membranes of the mouth, pharynx, larynx, and some-
Figure 16.7.
C
Avian poxvirus diseases. [A] Fowlpox. (B ancd C) Poxvirus infection in an Australian magpie. [B} Lesions at the base of the beak and under he
eye. (C) Lesions on the Foot. (B and C, courtesy of K. E. Harrigan.)
Orf fContagions Prstrlar Dernatitisi
289
times the trachea. This is often referred to as the diphthe-
 poxviruses also infect several species of terrestrial and
ritic form of fowlpox because the lesions, as they co-
 marine wildlife (e.g., chamois, red deer, seals), but their
alesce, result in a necrotic pseudo-membrane, which can 
 clinical importance in these species is morc diffcult to
cause death by asphyxiation. The prognosis for this form
 assess. These viruses are zoonotic; farmcrs, sheep shear-
X yoon e un uooi saisxg 'rod si xodmo jo
 ers, vcterinarians, butchers, and others who handle in-
cause a slow decline in egg production. Cutaneous infec-
fected livestock or their products can develop localized
tion causes little mortality and these flocks return to
 lesions, usually on the hand (Figure 16.8E). Lesions,
normal production on recovery. Recovered birds are
 which are identical irrespective of the sourcc of the virus,
immune.
begin as an inflammatory papule, then enlarge to become
Under natural conditions there may be breed dif-
granulomatous before regressing. Lcsions may persist
ferences in susceptibility; chickens with large combs ap-
for several weeks. If the infection is acquired from milk-
 pear to be more affected than breeds with small combs.
ing cows, the lesion is known as “milker's nodule"; if
The mortality rate is low in healthy flocks, but in laying
from sheep it is known as *orf."
flocks and in chickens in poor condition or under stress,
the disease may assume serious proportions with a mor-
tality rate of 50% or higher.
Orf (Contagious Pustular
The cutaneous form of fowlpox seldom presents
a diagnostic problem. The diphtheritic form is more dif-
Dermatitis)
ficult to diagnose because it can occur in the absence
of skin lesions and may be confused with vitamin A
 Orf (contagious pustular dermatitis, scabby mouth) is a
 deficiency and several other respiratory diseases caused
 more important disease in sheep and goats than either
by viruses. Hlistopathology and electron microscopy are
 pseudocowpox or bovine papular stomatitis in cattle and
used to confirm the clinical diagnosis. The virus can be
is common throughout the world. Orf, which is Old
isolated by the inoculation of avian cell cultures or the
English for “rough,"' commonly involves only the muzzle
chorioallantoic membrane of embryonated eggs.
and lips (Figure 16.8D), although lesions within the
Fowlpox virus is cxtremcly rcsistance to dcsicca-
mouth affecting the gums and tongue can occur, cspe-
tion: it can survive for long periods under the most ad-
 cially in young lambs. Thc lcsions can also affcct the
vcrse environmcntal conditions in exfoliated scabs. The
 eyelids, fcct, and the teats. Human infection can occur
virus is transmitted within a flock through minor wounds
 among pcrsons exposed occupationally (Figurc 16.8E).
and abrasions, by fighting and pecking, mechanically by
Lesions of orf progress from papulcs to pustules
mosquitoes, lice, and ticks, and possibly by aerosols.
and then to thick crusts. The scabs are often friable and
Several types of vaccinc are available. Nonattenu-
mild trauma causes the lesions to bleed. Orf may prevent
 ated fowlpox virus and pigeonpox virus vaccines pre-
lambs from suckling. Severely affected animals may lose
pared in embryonated hen's eggs and attenuated virus
weight and be predisposed to secondary infections. Mor-
vaccines prepared in avian cel cultures are widely used
 bidity is high in young sheep, but mortality is usually
for vaccination. Vaccines are applied by scarification of
low. Clinical differentiation of orf from other diseases
the skin of the thigh. One vaccine can be administered
 seldom presents a problem, but electron microscopy can
in drinking water. In flocks infectcd endemically, birds
be used if necessary to confrm the diagnosis.
arc vaccinated during thc first few weeks of life and
 Sheep are susceptible to reinfection and chronic
again 8 to 12 weeks later. Recombinant vaccines for
 infections can occur. These features, and the resistance
poultry are in development using both fowlpox and ca-
 of the virus to desiccation, explain how the virus, once
narypox viruses as vectors. As discussed in Chapter 13,
 introduced to a flock, can be diffcult to eradicate. Spread
       n
of infection can be by direct contact or through exposure
specics as vaccine vectors.
to contaminatcd feeding troughs and similar fomites,
including whcat stubble and thorny plants.
Ewcs can be vaccinated several weeks before lamb-
DIsEaSEs CaUSED BY MEMBERS
 ing, using commercial nonattenuated virus vaccines de-
rived from infected scabs collected from sheep or from
OF The GEnuS PaRApoXViRUS
virus grown in cell culture. Vaccines are applied to scari-
fied skin, prcferably in the axilla, where a localizcd lesion
 Parapoxviruscs infect a wide range of species, generally
 develops. A short-lived immunity is generated; ewcs are
causing only localized lesions. Disease in sheep, cattle,
thus lcss likely to develop orf at lambing time, thereby
goats, and camels can be of economic significance. Para-
 minimizing the risk of an epidemic of orf in the lambs.
290
16. Poxviridae
Figure 16.8.
Parapoxvirus infections: pseudocowpox, bovine popular stomalitis, and orf in animals and humans. [A] and (B) Pseudocowpox lesions on teats
owsndsabeilaisDcyocedbyrirsillenn
of a human. (A and B, courtesy of D. C. Blood; D, courtesy of A. Robinson; E, courtesy of J. Nagington.]
 Orf virus is zoonotic; infections are frequent in
Pseudocowpox
humans, especially when they are in contact with sheep
(c.g., during shearing, docking, drenching, slaughtering)
 Pseudocowpox occurs as a common endemic infection
 or wildlife. In humans, after an incubation period of
in cattle in most countries of the world. It is a chronic
2 to 4 days, the following stages may be observed: (1)
 infection in many milking herds and occasionally occurs
 macular lesions, (2) papular lesions, and (3) rather large
in beef herds. The lesions of pseudocowpox are charac-
 nodules, becoming papillomatous in some cases. Lesions 
terized by "ring" or "horseshoe' scabs, the latter being
arc, as a rule, solitary, although multiple lesions have
 pathognomonic for the diseasc (Figure 16.8B). Similar
 been described. The duration of lesions ranges from 4
lesions can occur on the muzzles and within the mouths
to 9 weeks. Healing takes place without scarring, but 
 of nursing calves, Infection is transmitted by cross-suck-
secondary infections may retard healing. Sevcre compli-
ling of calves, improperly disinfectcd teat clusters of
cations, such as fevcr, regional adenitis, lymphangitis, milking machines, and probably by the mechanical trans-
or blindness when the eye is affectcd, arc seen only rarely. fer of virus by flies. Attcntion to hygiene in the milking
Further Reading
291
 shed and the use of teat dips reduce the risk of trans-
buffalopox in Maharashtra State, India between 1985
mission.
and 1987. Arch. Virol. 128, 2s7-267.
Fenner, F. (1993). Poxviral zoonoses. In "Handbook Se-
ries in Zoonoses: Viral Zoonoscs" (G. W. Beran and
J. H. Stecle, eds.), 2nd ed. Vol. 2, pp. 485-503. CRC
Bovine Papular Stomatitis
Press, Boca Raton, FL,
Fenner, F. (1996). Poxviruses. In "Fields Virology."*
 -u pe a no knn si ss nd auog
(B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Cha-
 portance, but occurs worldwide, affecting cattle of all 
nock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and
S.E. Straus, cds.), 3rd cd.,pp.2673-2702.Lippin-
 se n  i  e  s
cott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
than 2 years of age. The development of lesions on the
Fenner, F., and Buller, M. L. (1997). Mousepox. In "Vi-
muzle, margins of the lips, and the buccal mucosa is
ral Pathogenesis" (N. Nathanson, R. Ahmed, F. Gon-
similar to that of pseudocowpox (Figure 16.8C). Immu-
zalcz-Scarano, D. E. Griffin, K. V. Holmes, F. A. Mur-
nity is of short duration and cattle can become reinfected.
phy, and H. L. Robinson, eds.), Pp. 535-554.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
 Demonstration by electron microscopy of the character-
Fenner, F., Henderson, D. A., Arita, I., Jezek, Z., and
 istic parapoxvirus virions in lesion sctapings is used
Ladnyi, 1. D. (1988). "Smallpox and its Eradication."
for diagnosis.
World Health Organization, Gencva.
Moss, B. (1996). Poxviridae: The viruses and their repli-
cation. In *Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M.
Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, I. L. Melnick,
Further Reading
T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd
cd., Pp. 2637-2672. Lippincor-Raven, Philadelphia,
Buller, R. M. L., and Palumbo, G. J. (1991). Poxvirus
PA.
pathogenesis. Microbiol. Rev. 55, 80-122.
Paoletti, E. (1996). Applications of poxvirus vectors to
Dumbell, K, and Richardson, M. (1993). Virological in-
vaccination: An update.Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S.A.
vestigations of specimens from buffaloes affected by
93, 11349-11353.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Chapter 17
Asfarviridae and Iridoviridae
 Properties of Asfarviruses and Iridoviruses .
293
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE FAMILY ASFARVIRIDAE ...
295
African Swine Fever....
295
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE FAMILY IRIDOVIRIDAE ..
298
Lymphocystis and Related Diseases of Fish
298
Further Reading.....
299
 Although there have been no major epidemics of African
but their evolutionary relationship is probably very
swine fever in recent years, the disease remains a serious
distant.
threat to swine industries throughout the world. Since
The family Iridoviridae is large and complex and
its recognition in 1921 in east Africa, the disease has
several iridoviruses have been associated with disease in
emerged on several occasions, causing the death of many
fish and amphibians. This family of viruses may emerge
hundreds of thousands of domestic swine. In 1957 the
 as important pathogens in commercial fish production.
disease spread for the frst time outside Africa, frst to
 Of these, lymphocystis virus is the best known. It causes
 Portugal, then in 1960 to Spain. In the 1960s and 1970s 
 tumor-like lesions on the skin of fish, which make them
it occurred in France, Italy, Sardinia, and Malta and in 
 unmarketable. Because the virus has been reported to
the Americas in Cuba, Brazil, the Dominican Republic,
 cause disease in more than 90 different species of marine
and Haiti. In 1985 there was an outbreak in Belgium
 and freshwater fish, it is an important pathogen.
and in 1986 in The Netherlands. Today, the disease is
endemic only in sub-Saharan Africa and Sardinia.
African swine fever virus had been classifed for
many years as a member of the family Iridoviridae, a
Properties of Asfarviruses
family containing mostly viruses of insects, fish, and
and Iridoviruses
amphibians. The virus resembles iridoviruscs morpho-
logically, but there are major differences in the structure
Classification
 Of its DNA and its mode of replication. When these
properties were discovered, thc virus was classified as
 As the only member of the family Asfarviridae and its
the only member of the family Asfarviridae and the ge-
 single genus Asfivirus, the classification of African swine
nus Asfivirus.
fever virus is straightforward. Restriction endonuclease
 African swine fever virus is transmitted by soft
 analysis of the DNA of isolates of African swine fever
ticks of the genus Ornitbodoros; it is the only DNA virus
virus from Africa, Europe, and the Americas permits
that can be called an arbovirus. Interestingly, its DNA
classification into five groups. All European and Ameri-
resembles linear plasmids of bacteria of the genus Bor-
can isolates fall within one group, whereas African iso-
relia in structure, size, and sequence. African swine fever
 lates show greater variation. This is probably because
virus and Borrelia duttoni, one cause of relapsing fever 
in Africa the virus has been circulating for a long time
in Africa, share the same tick vector, Ornithodoros mou-
and has diverged extensively, whereas only one or a few
bata; similarities between the virus and the Borrelia plas-
 genotypes have been introduccd into Europc and thc
mid have suggested to some investigators a common
 Americas. Isolates are also categorized according to their
ancestry or perhaps more likely some kind of horizontal
virulence for swine, with somc strains causing sevcie
genetic transfer. The genomic DNA of African swine
 disease and near 100% mortality and others causing
fever virus also resembles somewhat that of poxviruses, transient disease or even silent infection.
293
294
17.Asfarvirrdae and Iridoviridae
Virion Properties
repeats and hairpin loops and encodes up to 200
 proteins (34 structural proteins have been detected in
Asfarvirus virions are enveloped, 175-215 nm in diam-
purified virions and about 100 proteins have been
eter, and contain a complex icosahedral capsid, 180
detected in infected Vero cells). The entire DNA se-
nm in diameter (Figure 17.1). The capsid consists of
quence of the virus has been determined.
a hexagonal arrangement of structural units, each of
Virions of the iridoviruses of vertebrates are mor-
which appears as a hexagonal prism with a central
phologically rather similar to African swine fever virus
holc. Capsids have been estimated to contain between
virions; they are enveloped, 160-200 nm in diameter,
1892 and 2172 structural unirs. Thc genome consists 
and have an icosahedral capsid that is 120 nm in diame-
of a single molecule of lincar double-stranded DNA,
ter (Figure 17.2). The genomes of iridoviruses rangc from
170-190 kbp in size, depending on the isolate. The
95 to 190 kbp in size and their termini are different
 DNA has covalently closed ends with inverted terminal
from those of African swine fever virus, being circularly
FIgure 17.1.
D
Family Asfarviridoe, genus Asivirus, Afican swine fever virus. (A)Negatively stained virion showing the hexogonal outline of the capsid enclosed
beweend1sliskpsidTnfinshinlilelesoin
cores. Bars: 100 nm. [Courtesy of J. L. Carrascosa.l
African Steine Fever
295
FIgurE 17.2.
Frog virus 3, a typicalmember of thefamily lridoviridoe, in the cytoplasm ofa frog embryo cell.Thin section electronmicroscopy,magnification
×18,000. (Courtesy of A. Kirn.}
permuted and terminaily redundant and containing
 origin at temperatures between 12 and 32°C. Their repli-
methylated bases like the DNAs of bacteria.
cation is similar to that of African swine fever virus, but
African swine fever virus and the iridoviruses of t
there arc rwo interesting differences: (1) thc viruses do
vertebrates are thermolabile and sensitive to lipid sol-
 not encode an RNA polymerase but instead use cellular
vents. However, the viruses are very resistant to a wide
 RNA polymerase II, which their structural proteins mod-
rangc of pH (several hours at pH 4 or pH 13), and i
 ify to favor viral mRNA synthesis; and (2) the stages of
African swine fever virus survives for months and even
 replication are compartmentalized—the frst round of
years in refrigerated mcat.
 DNA replication takes place in the nucleus, the second,
in which replicating DNA is present as large concatemers
 (more than 10 times genome size), takes place in the cyto-
Viral Replication
plasm.
 Late in infection, both African swine fever virus
Primary isolates of African swine fever virus replicate in
 and vcrtebrate iridoviruses produce paracrystalline
swine monocytes and macrophages. Ater adaptation,
 arrays of virions in the cytoplasm. Infected cells form
some isolates can replicate in cultured cells such as pig
many microvillus-like projections through which virions
kidney cells (PK 15), Vero cells, or other monkey kidney
bud; however, acquisition of an envelope is not necessary
cells. Replication occurs primarily in the cytoplasm, al-
for virus infectivity (Table 17.1).
though the nucleus is needed for viral DNA synthesis.
Viral attachment is via a specific receptor and entry into
host cells is via endocytosis. Like the poxviruses, virions
contain genes for all the machinery necessary for tran-
DIseasEs CauseD BY MEmBErs
scription and replication; after entry into the cytoplasm,
 OF THE FAMILY ASFARVIRIDAE
virions are uncoated and their DNA is transcribed by
a virion-associated, DNA-dependcnt RNA polymerase
African Swine Fever
(transcriptase). DNA replication is believed to be similar
to that of poxviruses; parental genomic DNA serves as
African swine fever virus infects domestic swine and
the template for the first round of DNA replication,
other mcmbers of the family Suidae, including warthogs
the product of which then serves as a template for the
(Potamochoerus aethiopicus), bushpigs (P. porcus), and
synthesis of large replicative complexes that are cleaved
wild boar (Sus scrofa ferus). All efforts to infect other
to produce mature virion DNA.
 animals have been unsuccessful. The virus may be pri-
The iridoviruses of vertebrates grow in a wide vari-
 marily a virus of ticks: in Africa, numerous isolates have
ety of cells of piscine, amphibian, avian, and mammalian
 been made from the soft tick Ornithodoros moubata
296
17.Asfarviridae and Iridoviridae
cutaneous ulcers, pneumonia, pericarditis, pleuritis,
TaBle 17.1
and arthritis.
 Properties of Asfarviruses and Iridoviruses
 If infection is acquired via the respiratory tract,
of Vertebrates
the virus replicates first in the pharyngeal tonsils and
Asfarvirus virions are enveloped, 175-215 nm in diameter,
lymph nodes draining the nasal mucosa before being
and contain a complex icosahedral capsid, 180 nm in di-
disseminated rapidly throughout the body via a primary
ameter
viremia in which virions are associated with both eryth-
The genome of African swine fever virus is a single mole
rocytes and leukocytes. A generalized infection follows
cule of linear double-stranded DNA, 170-190 kbp in size.
with titers up to 10' IDso/ml of blood or/gram of tissue.
It has covalently closed ends with inverted terminal repeats
Consequently, all secretions and excretions contain large
and hairpin loops and encodes up to 200 proteins (at least
34 virion structural proteins]
amounts of infectious virus.
Experimental studies have shown that African
swine fever virus replicates in several cell types of the
genome is a single molecule of linear double-stranded
DNA, 95-190 kbp in size. It is permuted circularly and
reticuloendothelial system and causes a severe leukope-
 has terminally redundant ends and methylated bases
nia. Infected swine probably die through the indirect
The nucleus is involved in DNA replication; late functions
effects of viral replication on platelets and complement
and virion assembly occur in the cytoplasm
functions instead of by the direct cytolytic effect of
the virus.
 In infected macrophages, the virus effectively in-
hibits secretion and synthesis of antiviral immunomodu-
collected in warthog burrows. In Spain the virus has
 latory and pro-inflammatory cytokines, including inter.
been associated with O. erraticus.
ferons, tumor necrosis factors, IL-1, and IL-8. This
inhibition is mediated by the viral gene A238L, which
encodes a protein that is similar to an inhibitor of the
Clinical Features
cellular transcription factor NFB. The viral protein has
been shown to inhibit activation of NFkB and thus
After an incubation period of S to 15 days, swine develop
 down-regulate the expression of all the antiviral cyto-
high fever (40.5-42°C), which persists for about 4 days.
kines that are controlled by NFxB. Mechanistically, the
Starting 1 to 2 days after the onset of fever, there is
A238L protein acts as an analog of the immunosuppres-
inappetence, diarrhea, incoordination, and prostration.
 sive drug cyclosporin A. This seems to represent a novel
 Swine may die at this stage without other clinical signs.
viral evasion strategy; further,this protein may be the key
In some swine there is dyspnea, vomiting, nasal and
in explaining how the virus causes a fatal hemorrhagic
conjunctival discharge, reddening or cyanosis of the ears
disease in domestic pigs while at the same time causing
and snout, and hemorrhages from the nose and anus.
 a temperate, persistent infection in its natural host, the
Pregnant sows often abort. In eastern and southern Af-
African warthog.
rica, mortality is often 100%, with domestic swine dying
 Swine that survive may appear healrhy or chroni-
within 1 to 3 days after the onset of fever. In many
cally diseased, but both groups may remain persistently
geographic extensions of the disease, such as that into
infected. Indeed, swine may become persistently infected
Europe and the Americas in the 1970s and 1980s, the
without ever showing clinical signs. The duration of the
course of disease was usually rapid and fatal at first, but
persistent infection is not known, but low levels of virus
the severity of disease diminished rapidly until finally
have been detected in tissues over a year after exposure.
cases were predominantly subclinical and persistent.
Viremia has been induced in such animals by injection
Adult warthogs do not develop any signs of disease,
of corticosteroids.
although virus has been found in their tissues.
 One of the most striking aspects of African swine
fever virus infection is that sera from swine inoculated
with the virus do not neutralize the virus. Although these
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
animals produce virus-specific antibodies thar bind to
virus, the humoral immune response does not seem to
 In acutely fatal cases in domestic swine, gross lesions are
 have any substantial protective value. This phenomenon
most prominent in the lynphatic and vascular systems.
has been attributed to the character of the virus rather
Hemorrhages occur widely, and the visceral lymph nodes
than to the host, as pigs that have recovered from infec-
may resembie blood clots. The spleen is often large and
tion or are chronically infected respond normally to
friable and there are petechial hemorrhages in the cortex
 other immunogens, producing normal levels of neutraliz-
of the kidney. The chronic disease is characterized by
 ing antibodies. It has been suggested that the absence of
African Stueine Fever
297
neutralizing antibodies may be due to (1) the presence 
and a cytopathic effect seen within a few days after
of a dominant epitope on the virus that suppresses the
 inoculation. From this point, the virus can be adapted
response to critical epitopes, (2) the induction of
 to grow in various cell lines such as pig kidney (PK 15)
blocking antibodies that interfere with recognition of
and Vero cells. Antigen detection is done by immunoflu-
the virus by the immune system, or (3) the synthesis of
orescence staining of tissue smears or frozen sections,
very little antibody with very low avidity (actually, low-
by immunodiffusion using tissue suspensions as the
level neutralization has been obtained with high-avidity
 source of antigen, and by enzyme immunoassay.
 monoclonal antibodies and massive transfer of immuno-
globulins from recovered pigs). Whatever the reason,
efforts to produce a vaccine for African swine fever have
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
been fruitless so far. There is, however, an extensive
repertoire of both T and B cell responses to the virus in
Two distinct epidemiologic patterns occur: a sylvatic
infected pigs. Accordingly, it has been considered that 
cycle in warthogs in Africa and epidemic and endemic
the best strategy for developing a vaccine might be to
cycles in domestic swine.
use nonreplicating whole virus rather than a single re-
combinant protein.
Sylvatic Cycle
 In its original ecologic niche in southern and eastern
Africa, African swine fever virus is maintained in a syl-
Laboratory Diagnosis
vatic cycle involving asymptomatic infection in wild pigs
(warthogs and, to a lesser extent, bush pigs) and argasid
The clinical signs of African swine fever are similar to
ticks (soft ticks, genus Ornithodoros), which occur in
those of several diseases such as erysipelas and acute
the burrows used by these animals. Ticks are biological
salmonellosis, but the major diagnostic problem is in 
vectors of the virus (Figure 17.3). Most tick populations
distinguishing it from hog cholera. Any febrile disease
 in southern and eastern Africa are infected, with infection
 in swine associated with hemorrhage and death should
rates as high as 25%. After feeding on viremic swine,
raise suspicion of African swine fever. Laboratory con-
the virus replicates in the gut of the tick and subsequently
firmation is essential and samples of blood, spleen, and
 infects its reproductive system, which leads to transovar-
visceral lymph nodes should be collected for virus isola-
 ial and venereal transmission of the virus. The virus is
tion and for detection of antigen. Virus isolation is done
also transmitted between developmental stages of the
 in swine bone marrow or peripheral blood leukocyte
tick—-transstadial transmission—-and is cxcreted in tick
cultures, in which hemadsorption can be demonstrated
 saliva, coxal fluid, and Malpighian excrement. Infected
FIGURE 17.3.
Overall
N4
N3
N2
Meat products
infection rate
Transstadial
<5%
transm ission
Ornithodoros
N1
Waste food
moubata
E99s
Fomites
Persistent
Trans-ovarial
infection
transmmission
Direct contact
Secretions
Blood loss
ngestion of
Excretion:20d
riremicblaqc
Warthog
0.m
Juvenile
Adult (no viremia)
8
Africa
Spain and Portugal
4
[A} Syvatic transmission cycle of African swine fever virus between warthogs and Ornithodoros moubala ficks. In ticks there is Iransovarial
[hroughheggenereathrough sex)an transsdilthroughdeelopmentesof thefickansmissionofthvinus)Transisson
cycle indesticwineby directcontact,meat productsand scrapsnd fomites and throughOithodoros sppficks.CourtesyofP.J.Wikinson.
298
17.Asfarvividac and Iridowiridae
ticks may live for several years and are capable of trans-
sible to break the sylvatic cycle of the virus. However,
mitting disease to swine at each blood meal.
domestic swine can be reared in Africa if the management
 Serologic studies indicate that many warthog pop-
 system avoids feeding uncooked waste food scraps and
ulations in southern and eastern Africa are infected. After
prevents the access of ticks and contact with warthogs,
prinary infection, young warthogs develop viremia suf-
usually by double fencing with a wire mesh perimeter
ficient to infect at least some of the ticks feeding on 
 fence extending beneath the ground.
them. Older warthogs are persistently infected but are
 Elsewhere in the world, countries that are free of
seldom viremic. It is therefore likely that the virus is
 African swine fever maintain their virus-free status by
 maintained in a cycle involving young warthogs and
 prohibiting the importation of live swine and swine prod-
ticks.
ucts from infected countries and by monitoring the de-
struction of all waste food scraps from ships and aircraft
Domcstic Cycle
 involved in international routings.
Primary outbreaks of African swine fever in domestic
 If disease does occur in a previously noninfected
swine in Africa probably result from the bite of an in-
 country, control depends frst on early recognition and
fected tick, although tissues of acutely infected warthogs,
rapid laboratory diagnosis. The virulent forms of African
if eaten by domestic swine, can also cause infection.
swine fever cause such dramatic mortality that episodes
Introduction of the virus into a previously nonin-
 are brought quickly to the atrention of veterinary author-
fected country may result in indigenous ticks becoming
ities, but the disease caused by less virulent strains that
infected and acting as biological vectors and reservoirs 
has occurred outside Africa in the past can cause confu-
 of disease--a feature of great epidemiologic significance.
 sion with other diseases and therefore may not be recog-
Several species of soft tick found in association with
nized until the virus is well established in the swine popu-
domestic and feral swine in the western hemisphere (the
lation,
United States and the Caribbean islands) have been
Once African swine fever is confirmed in a country
shown in experimental studies to be capable of biological
that has hitherto been free of disease, its importance
transmission of the virus, although there is no evidence 
 necessitates prompt action to first control and then eradi-
that they have become infected naturally during the epi-
 cate it. All non-African countries that have becomc in-
dcmics in the Caribbean islands and South America.
fected have elected to attempt eradication; in many cases,
Once the virus has been introduced into domestic
C such countries have received fnancial assistance from
swine, either by the bite of infected ticks or through
 international agencies such as the Food and Agricultural
infectcd meat, infected animals form the most important
 Organization of the United Nations. Thc strategy for
source of virus for susceptible swine. Disease spreads 
 eradication involves slaughter of infccted swine and
rapidly by contact and within buildings by aerosol. Me-
 swine in contact with them and disposal of carcasses,
chanical spread by people, vehicles, and fomites is possi-
preferably by burning. Movement of swine between
ble because of the stability of the virus in swine blood,
farms is controlled and feeding of waste food prohibited.
feces, and tissues.
Where soft ticks are known to occur, infested buildings
The international spread of African swine fever
 are sprayed with acaricides. Restocking of farms is al-
o s   p aq a  s
lowed only if sentinel swine do not become infected.
uncooked meat from infected swine. When the virus
 Using this approach, elimination has been successful,
appeared in Portugal in 1957 and in Brazil in 1978, it
except in Sardinia.
was first reported in the vicinity of international airporrs,
among swine fed on food scraps. Virus spread to the
Caribbean and Mediterranean islands in 1978 may have
Diseases Caused By Members
arisen from the unloading of infected food scraps
from ships.
OF THE FAMILY IRIDOVIRIDAE
The prevention and control of African swine fever
are difficult because of several features; the lack of an
Lymphocystis and Related
effective vaccine, the transmission of virus in fresh meat
Diseases of Fish
and some cured pork products, the cxistence of persistent
infection in some swine, the clinical similarity to hog
Lymphocystis Disease
cholera, and the recognition that soft ticks in some parts
of the world are involved in the transmission of the
Lymphocystis, caused by a typical vertebrate iridovirus,
disease. The presence of the virus in ticks and warthogs
occurs worldwide, affecting a wide variety of fish--
in many countries of sub-Saharan Africa makes it impos-
freshwater, saltwater, wild, cultured, warm water, and
Fitrthey Rereling
299
Figure 17.4.
Lymphocyslis in plaice. (Courtesy of P. van Banning.)
cold water specics. It is a probleim in aquarium fish and
 levels, there may bc anemia, abnormal blood clotting,.
in commercial aquaculture, most notably in striped bass
 increased susceptibility to bacterial diseases, a decreased
along the cast coast of North America. Infection rarely,
 tolerance to low oxygen, and a decreased osmoregula-
if ever, causes mortality; rather it produces unsightly
 tory ability. The incidence of infection may be very high
external lesions that make fish unmarketable. 'Transmis-
but mortality is usually low. Lcsions are only seen micro-
sion from fish to fish is probably via contact through
 scopically; apparently only red blood cells are infcctcd-
abrasions and therefore the disease is seen more where
thesc cells become distorted, exhibit karyorrhexis, and
there is crowding. The disease is seen most commonly
have basophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies. As
in brackish water or sea water with a slow circulation.
with the lymphocystis virus, there is some indication that
Peak incidence is recorded in summer and local pollution
 there may be different strains of the virus.
may predispose fish to infection.
 Lesions appear as raised white to gray nodules,
usually on fins and skin, but internal organs and tissues
 Frog Virus 3 Disease
may be affected as well (Figure 17.4). Histologically,
lesions are remarkable: there is massive hypertrophy of
Frog virus 3 is not known to cause any disease in natu-
fbroblasts, individual cells may reach 2 mm in diameter.
rally occurring populations of frogs; however, the virus
Infected cells become vacuolated, necrotic, and contain
causes the death of frog embryos and causes edema of
basophilic cytoplasmic inclusions. Infection does not
the tail in tadpoles. The significance of this virus in nature
usually elicit an inflammatory response. Infection is usu-
remains unknown.
ally self-limiting, with lesions disappearing spontane-
ously as infected cells are sloughed.
Further Reading
Anonymous. (1998). "African Swine Fever Virus. Insti-
Viral Erythrocytic Necrosis
tute for Animal Health, Compton, UK. Available at:
http://www.iah.bbsrc.ac.uk/reports/1996/asfv.html
Viral erythrocytic necrosis (also called piscine erythro-
Costa, J. V. (1990). African swine fever. In *"Molecular
cytic necrosis) was first described in wild oceanic fish
Biology of Iridoviruses" (G. Darai, ed.), pp. 247-270.
along the northeastern coast of thc United States and
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA.
Canada but is now recognized in a wide variety of fresh-
Dixon, L. K., Wilkinson, P. J., Sumpton, K. J., and Ekue,
F. (1990). Diversity of the African swine fever virus ge-
water fish as well. Wild oceanic fish may exhibit no signs
nome. In Molecular Biology of Iridoviruses (G. Darai,
of disease; however, in cultured fish, especially salmonid
ed.), pp. 271-296. Kluwer Acadcmic Publishers, Bos-
species raised in crowded conditions with lower oxygen
ton, MA.
300
17.Asfarviridae and fridoviridae
Plowright, W., Thomson, G. R., and Neser, J. A. (1994).
Vinuela, E. (1985). African swine fever. Curr. Top. Mi-
African swine fever. In "Infectious Diseases of Live-
crobiol. Immunol. 116, 151-170.
stock with Special Reference to Southern Africa"
Wilkinson, P, J. (1989). African swine fever virus. In *Vi-
(J. A. W. Coetzer, G. R. Thompson, and R. C. Tustin,
rus Infections of Vertebrates" (M. B. Pensacrt, ed.),
eds.), Vol. 1, pp. 568-599. Oxford University Press,
Vol. 2, pp. 15-36. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Cape Town.
CHapter 
18
Herpesviridae
Properties of Hcrpesviruses
303
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE SUBFAMHY ALPHAHERPESVIRINAE .
309
 Infectious Bovine Rhinotracheitis (Caused by Bovine Herpesvirus 1)...
309
Bovine Mammillitis/Pseudo-Lumpyskin Disease (Caused by Bovine
Herpesvirus 2) .
311
Bovine Herpesvirus Encephalitis (Caused by Bovine Herpesvirus 5)
312
Caprine Herpesvirus Disease (Caused by Caprine Herpesvirus 1) .
312
 Pseudorabies (Caused by Porcine Herpesvirus 1).
312
Equine Abortion (Caused by Equine Herpesvirus 1)..
314
Equine Rhinopneumonitis (Caused by Equine Herpesvirus 4)
314
Equine Coital Exanthema (Caused by Equine Herpesvirus 3).
315
Canine Herpesvirus Disease (Caused by Canine Herpesvirus 1) ...
315
 Feline Herpesvirus Disease (Caused by Feline Herpesvirus 1).
316
 B Virus Disease of Macaques (Caused by B Virus/Cercopithecine
Herpesvirus 1) ...
316
Simian Varicella (Caused by Cercopithecine Herpesviruses 6, 7, and 9).
317
Avian Infectious Laryngotracheitis (Caused by Gallid Herpesvirus 1) .
317
Marek's Discase (Caused by Gallid Herpesvirus 2).
318
Duck Plaguc (Caused by Anatid Herpesvirus 1)
321
Alphaherpesvirus Diseases of Other Species.
321
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF SUBFAMILY BETAHERPESVIRINAE..
322
Porcine Cytomegalovirus Discase (Caused by Porcine Herpesvirus 2) .
322
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF SUBFAMILY GAMMAHERPESVIRINAE...
322
Bovine Malignant Catarrhal Fever (Caused by Alcelaphine Herpesvirus 1)
322
Bovine Herpesvirus Infection (Caused by Bovine Herpesvirus 4) .
323
Equine Herpesvirus Infection (Caused by Equine Herpesviruses 2 and 5) ..
324
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF UNNAMED SURFAMILY COMPRISING
CHANNEL CATFISH HERPESVIRUS......
324
Channel Catfish Herpesvirus Disease (Caused by Ictalurid Herpesvirus 1).
324
DISEASES CAUSED BY UNCLASSIFIED HERPESVIRUSES .
324
Herpesvirus Diseases of Fish and Mollusks
324
Further Reading...
325
Herpesviruses have been found in insects, reptilcs, am-
 pseudorabies, and Marek's disease. About 100 herpesvi-
 phibians, and mollusks as well as in virtually every spe-
- ruses have been at lcast partially characterized and the
cies of bird and mammal that has been investigated. At gcnomes of at least 19, including equine herpesviruses
least one major disease of each domestic animal species, 1, 2, and 4, bovine herpesvirus 1, alcelaphine herpesvirus
except sheep, is caused by a herpesvirus, including such 1, and channel catfsh herpesvirus, have been se-
iniportant diseases as infectious bovine rhinotracheitis,  qucnced completely.
301
302
18.lerpesviridae
Herpesvirus virions are fragile and do not survive
Herpesviruses can survive from one generation to
well outside the body. In general, transmission requires
the next via persistent, often latent, infections, from
close contact, particularly mucosal contact (e.g., coitus,
which virus is periodically reactivated and shed. In some
licking and nuzzling as between mother and offspring
infections, shedding may be virtually continuous. Molec-
or between foals or kittens). In large, closely confined
 ular phylogenetic studies suggest that, with few excep-
populations, such as found in cattlc fecdlots, modern
tions, each virus is unique because it has arisen and
swine farrowing units, cafterics, or broiler facilities,
coevolved with its host species. Latency has allowed
 sneezing and short-distance droplet spread arc major
hcrpesviruses to be perpetuated, cven in very small iso-
modes of transmission.
lated host groups.
Table 18.1
Herpesviruses That Cause Diseases in Animals
VIRUS
DISEASE 
Subfamily Aiphaherpesvirinae
 Bovine herpesvirus 1
Infectious bovine rhinotracheiis, infectious pustular vulvovaginitis,
infectious balanoposthitis, abortion
Bovine herpesvirus 2
Bovine mammilitis, pseudolumpyskin disease
Bovine herpesvirus 5
Encephalitis
Caprine herpesvirus 1
 Conjunctis, respiratory and enteric disease
 Porcine herpesvirus 1
In young swine generalized disease; in older swine abortion;in
secondary hosts neurologic disease (pseudorabies)
Equine herpesvirus l
Abortion, perinatal foal mortality, respiratory disease,
neurologic disease
Equine herpesvirus 3
Coital exanthema
Equine herpesvirus 4
 Rhinopneumonitis
Canine herpesvirus 1
Hemorrhagic disease in pups
Felid herpesvirus ]
Feline viral rhinotracheitis
B virus (Cercopithecine
Herpes simplex-like diseuse in macaques, fatal encephalitis in humans
herpesvirus 1)
Simian varicellavirus
Varicella-like disease in monkeys 
Gallid herpesvirus 1
Infectious laryngotracheitis of chickens
Gallid herpesvirus 2
Marek's disease of chickens
 Analid herpesvirus 1
Duck plague
Subfamily Betaherpesviringe
 Porcine herpesvirus 2
Inclusion body rhiniris, generalized cytomegalovirus infection
Subfamily Gammaherpesvirinae
 Alcelaphine herpesvirus 1
 Bovine malignant catarrhal ever
Equine herpesvirus 2
 Equine gammaherpesvirus infection
Equine herpesvirus 5
Equine gammaherpesvirus infection
 Subfamily, unnamed, channel cafish
herpesvirus-ike viruses
lctalurid herpesvirus 1
 Systemic disease in channel caifish
 Unclassified herpesviruses
 Salmonid herpesviruses I and 2
Systemic disease
Properties of tferpesviruses
303
Properties of Herpesviruses
primarily in sensory ganglia. Some alphaherpesviruses
have a broad host range.
Classification
Subfamily Betaberpesvirinae
The family Herpesviridae is divided into four subfamil.
This subfamily comprises the cytomegaloviruses of many
ies:Alphaherpesvirinae,Betaberpesvirinae,Gammaber-
species; the prototype of the subfamily is human herpes.
pesvirinae, and an unnamed subfamily comprising the
virus 5 (human cytomegalovirus). Individual cytomega-
channel catfish herpesvirus-like viruses. This division
loviruses have a restricted host range. Their replicative
was originally based on biological properties, but in gcn-
 cycle is slow and cell lysis does not occur until several
eral it has accorded well with subsequent molecular char-
 days after infection. The viruses may remain latent in
acterizations, including nucleotide sequence and phylo-
secretory glands, lymphoreticular tissues, kidneys, and
genetic analyses (Table 18.1). The subfamilies have been
other tissucs.
divided into gcnera, but at this level classification is in-
complete and large numbers of viruses, including many
Subfamily Gammaberpesvirinae
important animal pathogens, have been classified only
This subfamily comprises the herpesviruses that are
to the subfamily level or have been left unclassified. For
lymphotropic; the prototype is human herpesvirus 4
example, the newly established subfamily comprising the
(Epstein-Barr virus; genus Lymphocryptovirus). All vi-
channel catfish herpesvirus-like viruses only inciudes one
virus at this time—-several other important herpesviruses
ruscs of veterinary importance are in the genus Rhadi-
 novirus, from the Greck word for fragile (prototype,
 of fish and mollusks have been sequenced completely
 and now await classification.
 ateline herpesvirus 2). Members have a narrow host
range and become latent in iymphocytes; some are linked
Antigenic relationships among the herpesviruses
t0 oncogenic transformation of lymphocytes (e.g., Bur-
are complex; there are some shared antigens within the
kitt's lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma in hu-
family, but different species have distinct envelope glyco-
 mans) and some also cause cytocidal infections in epithe-
proteins. A notable example of the difficulty in correlat-
 lial and fbroblastic cells. The nonhuman primate and
ing biological and molecular properties of the herpesvi-
 ungulate gammaherpesviruses are not recognized as sig-
ruses for the purpose of completing a useful taxonormic
nifcant causes of disease in their natural hosts wherc
hierarchy of the family is that of Marek's disease virus.
 these are identifed, but often cause lymphoproliferativc
This virus was originally classified as a gammaherpesvi-
rus because of its tropism for T lymphocytes and its
disease in heterologous, not too distantly, related hosts.
Oncogenic capacity. Subsequent sequence analysis, how-
Unnamed Subfamily Comprising Channel
ever, indicated that the virus is an alphaherpesvirus and
Catfish Herpesvirus-like Viruses
so it has been placed in its own genus in this subfamily.
 At present this subfamily comprises only channel catfish
The molecular basis for the earlier confusion has come
herpesvirus, but additional herpesviruses of fish and mol-
from the discovery that Marek's disease virus carries onc
lusks will undoubtedly be added. Channel catfish herpes-
gene sequences that are similar to and probably derived
virus has been sequenced completely and found to be
 from those of avian retroviruses or thc ccllular homo-
the most different in genomic structure of any herpesvi-
logue of these onc gcnes. Also, bascd on sequence analy-
rus yet studied.
sis, two equine hcrpesviruses, equinc herpesvirus 2 and
equine herpesvirus 5, formerly classified as betaherpesv-
 iruses, have been reclassifed as gammaherpesviruses.
Virion Properties
Subfamily Alphaberpesvirinae
Herpesvirus virions are enveloped, about 150 nm in di-
The protorypic viruses of the genera of this subfamily
 ameter, and contain an icosahedral nuclcocapsid about
are human herpesvirus 1 (herpes simplex virus 1; genus
 100 nm in diameter, composed of 162 hollow capsom-
Simplexvirus) and human herpesvirus 3 (varicella-zoster
 ers— 150 hexamers and 12 pentamers (Figure 18.1). The
virus; genus Varicellovirus). Gallid herpesvirus 1 (infcc-  DNA genome is wrapped around a fbrous spool-likc
tious laryngotracheitis virus) and Marek's disease virus (C
 core, which has the shape of a torus and appears to be
are the prototypcs of two new, as yet unnamed, genera in
 suspended by fibrils that are anchored to the inner side
this subfamily; aithough having a genomic organization
 of the surrounding capsid and pass through the hole of
similar to that of the mammalian viruses of thc subfam-
 the torus, Surrounding the capsid is a layer of globular
ily, these viruses exhibit significant differences in thcir
 material, known as the tegument, which is enclosed by
biological propertics. Most alphaherpcsviruses grow
rapidly, lyse infected cells, and establish latent infections
 Coprotein peplomers. Because of the variable size of the
304
18. Herpesviridae
Frgure 18.1.
Herpesviridae. Negatively staind preparafions of the protolype herpesinus, herpes simplex virus type 1. (leh) Enveloped virions. Rightl Unen
veloped capsids. Bar: 10O rm. (Courtesy of E. L. Palmer.)
envelope, virions can range in diameter from 120 to
infectious under appropriate experimental conditions
200 nm.
(Figure 18.2). Thc complete sequences of at least 19
The genome consists of a single linear molecule of
 herpesviruses, including representatives of each of the
double-stranded DNA, 125-235 kbp in size, which is
 three subfamilies, have been determined.
Figure 18.2.
<
S
TR,
IR, iRs
TRs
A
U,
U,
Herpes simplex virus
152 kbp
Bovineherpesvirus2
ab
b' a'a' c'
ca
Bovine herpevirus 1
~145 kbp
 Pseudorabies virus
Equine herpesviruses 1, 3, 4
8
192kbp
Equine herpesvirus 2
C
Bovine herpesvirus 4
11141369
145 kbp
[TR] and internol repeat (R) sequences may bracket unique sequences [U., Us) of both l and S or only S. Repeat sequences are shown as boxes
au joisl au o aa iu o laq  a ay mo suans ady s ai jo p  q piu s pa a p
genome such that where both U and U are brackeled by repeat sequences,four somers are made and packaged in equimolar amounts into
virions. Where only Sis bracketed by repeat sequences, wo equimolar isomers are nade (B)The genome ofequineherpesvirus 2, a betaherpesvirs,
contains terminal direct repeat structures. (C) The genome of bovine herpesvirus 4, a gammaherpesvirus, contains muliple direct terminal repeaf
sequences [small boxes) in a nonequal, variable number of copies.
Properties of Hterpesrirases
305
There is a remarkable degree of variation in the
As an example of the complex arrangement and
composition, size, and organization of the genomes of
content of a herpesvirus genome, thc genome of equine
the herpesviruses: (1) thc percentage of guanine plus 
 herpesvirus 1 is shown in Figure 18.3 and a brief descrip-
cytosine (G+C ratio) varies between 32 and 74%, a
tion of somc of the proteins enicoded by the gcnome is
range that far exceeds that found in DNAs of all cukary-
 provided in Tablc 18.2.
 Otes; (2) the size of hcrpesvirus genomes varics between
In broad terms, hcrpesvirus gcnes fall into three
125 and 235 kbp; and (3) the organization of genomes
 categories: (1) those encoding proteins concerned with
varies in complex fashion. Reiterated DNA sequences 
viral replication (immediate carly and early genes), (2)
 gencrally occur at both ends (and in sone viruses also
those encoding structural protcins (late genes), and (3)
internally), dividing the genome into two unique sec-
a heterologous set of optional genes in the sense that
tions, designated large (U,) and small (U). When these
they are not found in all herpesviruses and are not
rciterated sequences are inverted in thcir orientation, the
 essential for replication in cultured cells. Herpesvirus
unique L and S components can invcrt, relative to one 
virions contain over 30 structural proteins, of which
another, during replication, giving rise to rwo or four
 6 are present in the nucleocapsid, 2 being DNA associ-
different isomers of the genome, present in equimolar 
ated. The glycoproteins, of which there are about 12,
 proportions. Furthcr, intragenomic and intergenomic re-
are located in the envelope, from which most project
combination events can alter the number of any parricu-
 as peplomers. One of the peplomer glycoproteins (gE)
lar reiterated sequence polymorphism.
 possesses Fc receptor activity and binds normal IgG.
Figure 18.3.
Y
1234
8 9 10 11 12
13
14
15161718
2品
35
40
45
50
L
1920
21
22
23
24
25 2627 28
65
70
75
29
30
31
32
33
34 35.5 35 36
40
85
00
41
42
43 44
45
46 47 4849
5051 52
53
54
55
100
105
110
115
■
2
A
56
57 58 59606162
63
64
656667
125
130
135
140
*oris,
145
6869 70
717273747576676665
64
Schematic diogram of the genome of equine herpesvirus 1 as an examle of he complexity of herpesvirus genomes.The 150,223-bp sequence
has been determined: GenBank Data Library Accession No. M86664. The thinner and hicker bars denote the unique regions [U, Us) and inverted
repedts TR, IRTRs, IR,respectively Th predited arrngement of open reading frames ORFs) is shwn as open arrows wih thehedof te
arrowindicting theirectionof transcriptionORFs arenumbered sequenfially fremleftrightVerticalarrows inicate candidatepolyadenylation
sitesThelocationsofretetonsndcandidateoriginsfreplictionareinicatedaboveeenmeaslosedndopnboxesresetivel
The scale above the genome is in kbp. [From E. A. Telford, M. S., Watson, K. McBride, and A. J. Davidson. The DNA sequence of equine
herpesvirus 1. Virology 189, 304-316 (1992).]
306
18. Herpesviridae
cells, with the viruses acting as natural cloning vectors
Table 18.2
for the capture of cellular genes. Latent herpesvirus
Some Proteins Encoded by Genome of
Equine Herpesvirus 1 (an Alphaherpesvirus)
genomes are believed to be maintained in host cells
in a circular episomal (extrachromosomal) form.
ZIS
GENE
NOO
[M)
PROPERTES OR FUNCTIONS
Viral Replication
5
470
51,318
 Transcriptional aclivator
7
1081
118,956
DNA helicase/primase
Herpesvirus replication has been studied most exten-
complex
sively with hunan herpesviruses 1 (herpes simplex virus
9
326
35,207
 Deoxyuridine triphosphatase
1). Betaherpesviruses and gammaherpesviruses probably
11
304
33,239
Tegument protein
follow a similar pattern, but replicate more slowly. Fol-
16
469
50.887
Membrane glycoprotein (gC)
lowing attachment via the binding of virion glycoprotein
19
497
56,540
 Host shutoff factor
 peplomers to host cellreceptors, one of which is heparin
22
sulfate proteoglycan, the nucleocapsid enters the cyto-
465
51,304
Capsid protein 
plasm either by fusion of the virion envelope to the cell
24
3421
367,061
Tegument protein
membrane or by endophagocytosis. The DNA-protein
30
1220
135,949
DNA polymerase
complex is then freed from the nucleocapsid and enters
33
980
109,800
Membrane glycoprotein (gB)
the nucleus, quickly shutting off host cell macromolecu-
38
352
38.748
Thymidine kinase
lar synthesis.
39
848
92,837
Membrane glycoprotein (gH)
Three classes of mRNA, α, β, and y, are tran-
scribed in sequence by cellular RNA polymerase II (Fig-
42
1376
152,175
 Major capsid protein
ure 18.4). Thus, α (immediate early) RNAs, when pro-
49
594
65,244
Virion protein kinase
 cessed appropriately to become mRNAs, are translated
50
508
56,064
 Deoxyribonuclease
to form α proteins, which iniriare transcription of β
61
312
34.776
Uraci-DNA glycosylase
(early) mRNAs, the translation of which produces β
62
218
24,424
Membrane glycoprotein (gl)
(early) proteins and suppresses the transcription of fur-
65
293
32,115
In viro host-range factor
ther α mRNAs. Viral DNA replication then commences,
Protein kinase
utilizing some of the α and β proteins as well as host
69
382
42,541
 cell proteins. The transcription program then switches
70
411
45,267
Membrane glycoprotein (gG)
again, and the resulting y (late) mRNAs, which are fran-
72
452
51,097
Membrane glycoprotein (gD)
scribed from sequences situated throughout the genome,
73
424
46,390
Membrane glycoprotein (gl)
 are translated into y proteins. Over 70 virus-coded pro-
74
550
61,180
teins are made during the cycle, with many of the α and
 β proteins being enzymes and DNA-binding proteins,
°A genome map to match these genes and proteins is shown in Figure
whereas most of the y proteins are structural. Intricate
18.3.Thuntionsof the prteinsareinferredfrmhmlgywihth
 controls regulate expression at the level of both tran-
sequences deposited in GenBank. Twenly-three of the 76 proteins iden
scription and translation. Viral DNA is replicated in
tified in squine herpesvirus 1 have no known homologues. Many of
 the nucleus and newly synthesized DNA is spooled into
the proteins not lisled here have unknown functions. [From E. A. R.
Teftord, M.J. Studdert, C. T. Agius, M.S. Warson,H.C.Aird, and
preformed immature capsids.
A.J.Davison.Equine herpesirus2 and herpesvirus5 are gmmaher
Maturation involves the completion of encapsida-
pesviruses. Virology 195, 492-499 [1993].]
 tion of virion DNA into nucleocapsids and the associa-
tion of nucleocapsids with altered patches of the inner
layer of the nuclear envelope, followed by envelopment
 Some of the growth-regulating and irmmune modulation 
by budding (Figure 18.5). Mature virions accumulate
proteins that are not necessary for viral replication
within vacuoles in the cytoplasm and are released by
and maturation in cultured cells are homologues of
exocytosis or cytolysis. Virus-specific proteins are also
cellular genes that are known to be involved in growth
 found in the plasma membrane, where they are involved
rcgulation and modulation of the imrmune response.
in cell fusion, may act as Fc receptors, and are presumed
It is likely that these virus-coded proteins play
a
 to be targets for immunc cytolysis.
significant role in the pathogencsis of herpesvirus infec-
Intranuclcar inclusion bodies are characteristic of
tions. Bccause they are clustered at the initiation sitc
herpesvirus infections and can usually bc found both in
for viral DNA replication, it has been proposed that
 appropriately fxed and stained tissues from herpesvirus-
the genes for these proteins were acquired from host
infected animals and in cell cultures (Figurc 18.6).
PropertiesofHlerpesviruses
307
Figure 18.4.
Immediate early
Early
Late
Cytoplasm
αProteins
BProteins
y Proteins
88868
mp
(pA)
(pA)
(pA)
Transcription,
α mRNAs
8mRNAs
Y mRNAs
post-transcriptional
processing:
.
Nucleus
号
DNA replication↓
Diagram representing transcription, iranslation, and DNA replication of a typical herpesvirus (see tex). Transcription and postranscriptional
processing occur in the nucleus, translarion in the cytoplasm, and some of the α ond β proteins are invoved in urher transcription and some β
proteins in DNA replication. [From B. Roizman. Herpesviruses. in Microbiology (B. D. Davis, R. Dulbecco, H. N. Eisen, and H. Ginsberg, eds.)
4th ed. pp. 929-945. Lippincolt-Raven, Philcdelphia, PA. 1990.]
Figure 18.5.
Thin section electron microscopy ofl a herpesvirus-infected cell showing the formation of capsids and their primary envelopment by budding
through the nuciear envelope (arrow). Magnification: X65,000.
308
18. Herpesviridae
Figure 18.6
D
Cytopathiceffectsinducedbyherpesviruses. [A) AlphaherpesvirusinHp-2cellshowing early focol cytopathologyhematoxylinand eosin stin;
magnification: ×100j. (B} Alphaherpesvirus in bovine kidney cells showing mulinuclealed giant celcontcining acidophilic intranuclear inclusions
{unstained, magniication: X35). D) Cytomegalovirus in fibroblasts showing giant cells with acidophilic inclusions in the nuclei (small arrow) and
cytoplasm (large arrow], the latterbeing characteristically large and round (hematoxylin and eosin stain, magnilication: X450]. (Courtesy of I. Jack.]
(Characteristics Common to Many
Chapter 11). Betaherpesviruses and gammaherpesvi-
H lerpesvirus Infections
ruses are not highly lytic for infected cells, they typically
Collectively and individuaily the herpesviruses exhibit
cause chronic infections lasting several months before
many extraordinary infection characteristics thar make
 clinical recovery. Some of the primate rhadinoviruses
 them versatile pathogens. Transmission is generally asso-
ciated with mucosal contact, but droplet infection is also
Chapter 11).
common. Many alphaherpesviruses produce localized
 Persistent infection with periodic or continuous
lesions, particularly in the skin or on the mucosae of the 
shedding occurs in all herpesvirus infections. In alpha-
respiratory and genital tracts. Generalized alphaherpes-
herpesvirus infections, multiple copies of viral DNA
virus infections, characterized by foci of necrosis in al-
are demonstrable either as cpisomes or more rarely
most any organ or tissue, are seen when animals less
integrated into the chromosomal DNA of latently in-
 than 3 months of age are infected without the protection
 fected neurons. The latent genome is essentially silent
 providcd by maternal antibody. In pregnant animals, a
 except for the production of a latency-associated tran-
mononuclear cell-associated viremia may result in the
script. This RNA transcript is not known to code for
transfer of virus across the placenta, leading to abortion,
 any protcin (bovine herpesvirus 1 may be an exception);
with focal necrotic lesions being found throughout the
its mechanism of action in the establishment, mainte-
fetus. Marek's disease virus (alphaherpesvirus) causes a
nance, and reactivation of latent infection is not yet
 polyclonal T lymphocyte tumor—the genetic basis for
known. Reactivation is usually associated with strcss,
this resides in oncogenic genes carried by the virus (see caused by intercurrent infections, shipping, cold, or
Infecticus Bouine Rbinotracheitis (Cansed by Bovine llerpesvirus l)
309
of vulvovaginitis in dairy cattle in eastern United States
Table 18.3
Properfies of Herpesviruses
indicated that the viruses were indistinguishable. Bovine
herpesvirus 1 and the diseases it causes are now known
Virions are enveloped, about 150 nm in diameter, con-
to occur worldwide.
taining an icosahedral nucleocapsid that is 1O0 nm in diam-
eter and composed of 162 capsomers
Genome is linear double-stranded DNA, 125-235 kbp in
Clinical Features
size
Replication occurs in the nucleus, with sequential transcrip-
Genital Disease
tion and translation of immediate early (@), early (8), and 
 Infectious pustular vulvovaginitis is recognized most
late [}genes producing α, β, and  proteins, respectively;
commonly in dairy cows. Affected cows develop fever,
the earlier genes and their gene products regulate the tran-
scription of later genes 
deprcssion, anorexia, and stand apart, often with the
DNA replication and encapsidation occur in the nucleus;
tail held away from contact with the vulva; micturition
the envelope is acquired by budding through the inner
 is frequent and painful. The vulval labia are swollen,
layer of the nuclear envelope
there is a slight vulval discharge, and the vestibular mu-
Infeclion results in characteristic eosinophilic intanuclear in-
cosa is reddened with many small pustules (Figure
clusion bodies
18.7A). Adjacent pustules usually coalesce to form a
Infection becomes latent, with: recrudescence and intermitf-
fibrinous pseudomembrane that covers an ulcerated mu-
tent or continuous viral shedding
cosa. The acute stage of the disease lasts 45 days and
uncomplicated lesions usually heal by 10 to 14 days.
Many cases are subclinical or go unnoticed.
Lesions of infectious balanoposthitis in bulls and
crowding. Shedding of virus in nasal, oral, or genital
the clinical course of disease are similar (Figure 18.7B).
secretions provides the source of infection for other
Where lesions are extensive and acute there is reluctance
animals, including transfer from dam to offspring. In
 Or complete refusal to serve. Semen from recovered bulls
domestic animals, reactivation is usually not noticed,
 may be contaminated with virus as a result of periodic
partly because lesions on nasal or genital mucosac are
shedding. However, cows may conceive to the service
not seen readily. Some betaherpesviruses and gamma-
 or artificial insemination from which they acquire infec-
herpesviruses are shed continuously from epithelial
tious pustular vulvovaginitis, and pregnant cows that
surfaces (Table 18.3).
develop thc infection rarely abort. Bovine herpesvirus 1
has bcen isolated occasionally from cases of vaginitis
and balanitis in swine, from stillborn piglets, and from
DIseases CausEd By MemBers
aborted equine fetuses.
OF THE SuBFAMILY
Rcspiratory Disease
ALPHAHERPESVIRINAE
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis occurs as a subclinical,
mild, o1 severe disease. Morbidity approaches 100% and
Infectious Bovine
mortality may reach 10%, particularly if complications
occur. Initial signs include fever, depression, inappe
Rhinotracheitis (Caused by
tence, and a profuse nasal discharge, initially serous and
Bovine Herpesvirus 1)
later mucopurulent. The nasal mucosa is hyperemic and
lesions within the nasal caviry, which may be diffcult
Bovine herpesvirus 1 (infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
 to see, progress from focal pustular necrosis to large
virus; infectious pustular vulvovaginitis virus) causes a:
 areas of shallow, hemorrhagic, ulcerated mucosa covered
variery of diseases in cattle, including rhinotracheitis,
 by a cream-colored diphtheritic membrane. The breath
pustular vaginitis, balanoposthitis, conjunctivitis, abor-:
 may be fetid. Dyspnea, mouth breathing, salivation, and
tion, enteritis, a generalized diseasc of newborn calves, a deep bronchial cough are common. Acutc, uncompli-
and possibly encephalitis.
 cated cases last 5--10 days.
The rapid expansion of feedlots in the United States
Unilateral or bilateral conjunctivitis, often with
during the 19s0s led to the recognition of several new
 profuse lacrimation, is a common clinical sign in cattle
diseasc syndromes, including rhinotracheitis, from which
 with infectious bovine rhinotracheitis but may occur in
 a herpesvirus was isolated. Comparison of the herpesvi-
 a herd as an almost exclusive clinical sign. Gastroenteritis
rus isolated from cases of rhinotracheitis and from cases1
 may occur in adult cattle and is a prominent finding in
310
18.Herpesviridae
Figure 18.7.
Genital disease caused by bovine herpesvirus 1. (A) Infectious pustular vulvovaginitis. (B) Infectious pustular balanoposthitis. IA, courtesy of
D. F. Collings.1
the generalized disease of neonatal calves, which is often
Laboratory Diagnosis
fatal. Abortion may occur at 4-7 months gestation, and
the virus has also been reported to be cause mastitis.
Rapid diagnostic methods include electron microscopy
of vesicular fluid or scrapings and immunofluorescence
staining of smears or tissue sections and detection of
viral nucieic acid by the polymerase chain reaction. Viral
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
isolation and characterization provide a definitive diag
nosis. Herpesviruses are grown most readily in cell cul-
Genital disease may result from coitus or artificial insem-
turcs derived from their natural host. As with other
ination, although some outbreaks, particularly in dairy
alphaherpesviruses, there is a rapid cytopathic effect,
cows, may occur in the absence of coitus. Respiratory
with syncytia and characteristic eosinophilic intra-
disease and conjunctivitis result from droplet transmis-
nuclear inclusion bodies. The polymerase chain reaction
for virus detection and specific enzyme immunoassays
sion. Within the animal, dissemination of the virus from
the initial focus of infection probably occurs via a cell-
for antibody detection have been developed and arc
associated viremia.
available in reference laboratories in many countries.
Lifelong latent infection with periodic virus shed-
ding occurs affer bovine herpesvirus 1 infection; the sci-
 atic and trigeminal ganglia are the sites of latency follow-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
ing genital and respirarory disease, respectively. The
administration of corticosteroids results in reactivation
Genital and respiratory disease are rarely diagnosed in
 of the virus and has been uscd as a means of detecting and
the same herd at the same time. Infectious bovine rhino-
 climinating carrier bulls in artificial insemination centers.
tracheitis is an uncommon disease in range cattle, but is
In both the genital and the respiratory forms of
 of major significance in feedlots. In cattle not in feediors,
thc disease the lesions arc focal areas of epithelial cell
the incidence of antibody varics betwccn 10 and 35%.
necrosis in which there is ballooning of epithelial cells;  I
 Primary infcction often coincides with transport and in-
typical hcrpesvirus inclusions may be present in nuclei  troduction to a feedlot of young, fully susceptible cattle
at the periphcry of necrotic foci. There is an intensc f
 from divcrse sources. Adaptation from range to feedlot
 inflammatory response. Gross lesions are not observed conditions and dietary changes, including the high pro-
in aborted fetuscs, but microscopic necrotic foci are  t
 tein diet, contribute to a stressful environment that may
tently.
Bouine Mammnlitis/Pserdo-Iumpyskin Disease (Caused by Bowine Ilerpesvirus 2)
311
these factors are minimized, with a corresponding re-A
 Africa and subsequently from similar lesions in carttle in
duced incidence of severe disease. The damaged necrotic
many countries of the world.
mucosa provides a substrate for bacterial infection in
 Bovine herpesvirus 2 is related antigenically to hu-
stressed cattle and contributes to the complex syndrome
man herpes simplex virus and the DNAs of these viruses
called shipping fever (see Chapter 9). Transmission has
 show 15% homology, compared with less than 6% ho-
occurred among buils in artificial insemination centers 
 mology, between bovine herpesvirus 2 and bovine her-
when a common sponge has been used for washing the
 pesvirus 1.
prepuce prior to semen collection. Virus may also be
 spread by artificial insemination.
 Bovine herpesvirus 1 vaccines (mostly attenuated
Clinica! Features
virus vaccines) are used extensively, alone or in multiple
virus formulations. Recombinant DNA vaccines have
 Pseudo-lumpyskin disease has an incubation period of
been constructed in which the thymidine kinase and
S to 9 days and is characterized by a mild fever, followed
other glycoprotein “marker" genes have been deleted.
by the sudden appearance of skin nodules: a few, or
Although they do not prevent infection, vaccines sig-
 many, on the face, neck, back, and perineum. The nod-
nificantly reduce the incidence and severity of disease.
ules have a flat surface with a slightly depressed center
Experimental vaccines produced by recombinant meth-
 and involve only the superficial layers of the epiderrmis,
ods have been tested: they are based on single glycopro-
which undergo necrosis. Within 7-8 days, the local
tein genes, particularly gD, that have been expressed
 swelling subsides and healing, without scar formation,
in plasmid vectors for delivery as DNA vaccines.
 In many countries, the generalized skin disease
o i     s  i  q n s   a
1 infections in cattle in Switzerland and Denmark, suc- only as a cause of mammillitis, but virus isolated
cessfuleradication programs based on test and slaughter, experimentally from cases of mammillitis can cause
combined with control of cattle movements, were initi-
 generalized skin disease. Lesions usually occur only on
ated in the early 1980s. Vaccines were not used, so as t
the teats, but in severe cases most of the skin of
to avoid problems of masking latently infected animals.t
 the udder may be affected. Occasionally, heifers may
With the probable commercial introduction of better (
 develop fever, coinciding with the appearance of le-
vaccines that enable distinction between vaccinated and sions. Milk yield may be reduced by as much as 10%
infccted cattle in the near future, other countries in Eu-:
 as a result of difficulty in milking the affected cows
rope are now considering eradicating the virus by an
 and intercurrent mastitis.
 integrated program involving vaccination, movement
control, and slaughter of al cattle with serologic evi-
dence of exposure to wild type virus.
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
The distribution of lesions in mammilltis suggests local
spread. The generalized distribution of lesions in pseudo-
lumpyskin disease suggest viremic spread, but viremia
Bovine Mammillitis /Pseudo
is difficult to demonstrate.
Lumpyskin Disease (Caused
by Bovine Herpesvirus 2)
Laboratory Diagnosis
Two clinical forms of bovine herpesvirus 2 infections
are known: lesions localized to the teats, occasionally
The benign nature of pscudo-lumpyskin disease, the
spreading to the udder (bovine mammillitis), and a gener-
characteristic central depression on the surface of the
alized skin disease (pseudo-lumpyskin disease). Bovine
 nodules, the superfcial necrosis of the epidermis, and
herpesvirus 2 was first isolated in 1957 from cattle in
 the shorter course of the disease are helpful in differenti-
 South Africa with a generalized lumpyskin diseasc. Thc
 ating the condition from true lumpyskin disease in coun-
disease was mild and its major signifcance lay in the 
tries where both occur.
 need to differentiate it from a more serious lumpyskin
The clinical differentiation of the various condi-
disease found in South Africa caused by a poxvirus (see t
tions that affect the teats of cattle can be difficult; other
 Chapter 16). A similar herpesvirus was isolated from
virus diseases causing tcat lesions are warts, cowpox,
cattle with extensive erosions of the teats elsewhere in pseudocowpox, vesicular stomatitis, and foot-and-
312
18. Hlerpesviridae
mouth disease. For this reason it is advisable to examine
 signs, including conjunctivitis and disease of the respira-
the whole herd, as a comparison of the early develop-
 tory, digestive, and genital tracts, including abortion.
mental stages helps considerably in the diagnosis. Ad-
 Caprine herpesvirus 1 is related antigenically to bovine
vanced lesions are often similar, irespective of the cause.
herpesvirus 1 in a one-way cross-reaction but it is not
Demonstration of virus in scrapings or vesicular fluid
 infectious for cattle or lambs and its restriction endo-
 by electron microscopy, coupled with virus isolation, are
 nuclease map is quite different from that of bovine her-
used for confirming a diagnosis.
pesvirus 1.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Pseudorabies (Caused by
Pseudo-lumpyskin disease occurs most commonly in 【
Porcine Herpesvirus 1)
southern Africa, in moist low-lying areas, especially
along rivers, and has its highest incidence in the summer
This disease (syn., Aujeszky's disease) is primarily a dis-
months and early fall. Susceptible cattle cannot be in-
 ease of swine, which serve as a reservoir and the principal
fected by placing them in contact with diseased cattle if s
 source of natural infection for a diverse range of second-
housed in insect-proof accommodation. It is therefore 
ary hosts, including horses, cattle, sheep, goats, dogs,
assumed that mechanical transmission of the virus occurs cats, and many feral species. Humans are refractory. The
by arthropods but attempts to identify the vectors have diverse host range is also demonstrated in vitro; cell
failed, Buffalo, giraffe, and other African wildlife may culrures derived from almost any animal species support
be naturally infected with bovine herpesvirus 2.
 the replication of pseudorabies virus.
Although milking machines were initially thought
Pseudorabies is endemic in swine in most parts of
to be responsible for the transmission of mammillitis in  
 the world. The eradication of hog cholera from the
dairy herds, there is evidence that this is rarely the case.
 United States and the United Kingdom (see Chapter 36)
The infection may spread rapidly through a herd, but  1
 has brought pseudorabies to greater prominence and is
in some outbreaks discase is confined to newly calved 1
 now economically the most important viral disease of
heifers or heavily pregnant cattle. Serologic surveys sug-
 swine, causing multimillion dollar losses each year in
gest that many infections are subclinical.
countries where it is found.
Bovine Herpesvirus
Clinical Features
Encephalitis (Caused by
Clinical Fcatures in Swine
 In herds in which the disease is endemic, reactivation of
Bovine Herpesvirus 5)
virus occurs without obvious clinical signs, but the
Encephalitis due to bovine herpesvirus 5 has been recog-
 spread of the virus within a nonimmune herd may be
nized in several countries. It is believed to result from 
rapid, with the consequences of primary infection being
direct neural spread from the nasal caviry, pharynx, and influenced markedly by age and, in sows, by pregnancy.
tonsils via the maxillary and mandibular branches of the
 Pruritus, which is such a dominant featurc of the disease
trigeminal nerve. Lesions initially occur in the midbrain in secondary hosts such as cattle, is rare in swine.
 and later involve the entire brain. The natural history
 Pregnant Sows. In nonimmune herds, up to 50%
of the causative virus, which is related to bovine herpesvi-
 of pregnant sows may abort over a short period of time
rus 1, is obscure. Although frequently stated to cause 
 due to rapid spread of infection from an index case or
encephalitis, bovine herpesvirus 1 has not been con-
carrier. Infection of a sow before the 30th day of gesta-
frmcd as a cause of this disease.
tion results in death and resorption of embryos and after
that time in abortion. Infection in late pregnancy may
terminate with thc delivery of a mixture of mummified,
Caprine Herpesvirus Disease
macerated, stillborn, weak, and normal swine, and some
of these pregnancies may be prolonged for 2-3 weeks
(Caused by Caprine
beyond the normal gestation period. Up to 20% of abort-
ing sows are infertile on the first subscquent breeding
Herpesvirus 1)
 but do eventually conccive.
Herpesviruses have been isolated from goats in several
 Piglets. Mortality rates among piglets born to non-
parts of the world in association with a variety of clinical
immune dams depend somewhat on their age, but ap-
Psenrdorabies fCansed hy Porcine Ferpesuinus !!
313
proaches 100%. Maternal antibody is protective, and
The relativc lack of gross lesions even in young
 diseasc in piglets born to recovered or vaccinated sows
swine is notable. Tonsillitis, pharyngitis, tracheitis, rhini-
is grcatly diminished in severity, with recovery the
tis, and esophagitis may be evident but arc mild. Occa-
usual outcome.
sionally, small necrotic foci may be found in the liver
Weaned, Growing, and Mature Swine. The incuba-
and spleen. Microscopically the principal findings in
tion period is about 30 hours. ln younger pigs the course
both swinc and secondary hosts arc in the central nervous
is typically about 8 days but may be as short as 4 days. systen. There is a diffusc nonsuppurative meningoen-
 Initial signs include sneezing, coughing, and moderate
 cephalitis and ganglioneuritis, marked perivascular
fever (40°C), which increases up to 42°C in the ensuing 
 cuffing, and focal gliosis associated with extensivc necro-
48 hours. Thcre is constipation during the fevcr, the
 sis of neuronal and glial cells. There is a correlation
feces are hard and dry, and vomiting may occur. Pigs
between the site and severity of clinical signs and the
are listless, depressed, and tend to remain recumbent.
histologic findings. Typical intranuclear herpesvirus in-
By the fifth day there is incoordination and pronounced
clusions are rarely found in the lesions in swine.
muscle spasm, circling, and intermittent convulsions ac-
Some swine that have recovered from pseudorabies
companicd by excess salivation, By the sixth day swine
may shed virus continuously in their nasal secretions.
become moribund and die within 12 hours. In mature
Others from which virus cannot be isolated by conven-
swine the mortality rate is low, usually less than 2%,
 tional means may yield virus when explant culturcs of
but therc may be significant weight loss and poor growth.
 tonsillar tissue are made. Pseudorabies virus DNA can
rates after recovery.
be demonstrated in the trigeminal ganglia of recovered
swine by DNA hybridization and the polymcrase chain
Clinical Features in Secondary Hosts
reaction, but there is debate about the relative signifi-
Important secondary hosts include cattle ("mad itch"),
cance of lymphoreticular cells and nerve cells as a site
dogs ("pscudorabies"), and cats. Disease in secondary
for latency.
hosts is sporadic and occurs where there is direct or
indirect contact with swine. Infection is usually by inges-
tion, lcss commonly inhalation, and possibly via minor
Laboratory Diagnosis
wounds. In cattle thc dominant clinical sign is intense
pruritus. Particular sitcs, often on thc flanks or hind
The history and clinical signs often suggest the diagnosis.
limbs, are licked incessantly; therc is gnawing and rub-
 Enzyme iminunoassay has bcen approved as a standard
 bing such that the area becomcs abraded. Cattle may
become frenzied. There is progrcssive involvement of
vaccination and cradication programs. Fluorescent anti-
the central nervous system; following the first signs, the
 body staining of frozen tissuc sections, virus isolation,
coursc lcading to dcath may be as short as a few hours?
 and serum neutralization tests are used for confirmation.
 and is never longer than 6 days.
 In dogs, the frenzy associated with intense pruritus
and paralysis of the jaws and pharynx accompanied by
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
drooling of saliva and plaintive howling simulates true
rabics; however, therc is no tendency for dogs to attack
Swine are the primary host and reservoir for pseudora
other animals. In cats, the disease may progrcss so rap-
bies virus, and the virus causes a uniformly fatal disease
idlly that frenzy is not observed.
when transmitted to a wide variety of secondary hosts.
Virus is shed in the saliva and nasal discharges of swinc,
so that licking, biting, and acrosols could result in trans-
Pathogenesis, Pathology and Immunity
mission. Virus is not shed in the urine or feces. The
contamination of livestock feed or the ingestion of in-
Following primary oral or intranasal infection of swine,
 fected carcasscs by swine is common, and ingestion of
virus replicates in the oropharynx. There is no viremia
 virus-contaminated material, including pork, is probably
during the first 24 hours and it is dliffcult to demonstrate
 the most common sourcc of infection for sccondary
at any time. However, within 24 hours virus can be
hosts. Rats may contribute to farm-to-farm transfer, and
isolated from various cranial ncrve ganglia and the mc-
 sick or dcad rats and other feral animals are probably
dulla and pons, to which virions have traveled via the
the source of infection for dogs and cats. Bccausc of
axoplasim of the cranial nerves. Virus continues to spread
1
 their scavenging habits, raccoons in the United Statcs
within the central nervous system; therc is ganglioneu-
 have received particular attention, but they probably
litis at many sites, including those controlling vital func-
play a minor role in the natural spread of pseudora-
tions.
bies virus.
314
18.Herpesviridae
Management practices influence epidemiologic
vary from mild ataxia to complete recumbency with
 patterns of infection and disease in swine. Losses from 
forelimb and hind limb paralysis, leading to death.
 severe disease occur when nonimmune pregnant sows
 In fetuses aborted before 6 months there is diffusely
or swine less than 3 months old, born to nonimmune 
scattered cell necrosis with inclusion bodies and a lack
sows, are infected. Such a pattern is likely to be seen
of an inflammatory celi response. Gross lesions are some-
when the virus is newly introduced into a hcrd or unit
times present in fetuses aborted after 6 months and may
within a farm. When breeding sows are immune with
 includc small necrotic foci in the liver. Characteristic
adequate antibody levels, overt disease in their progeny
 microscopic lesions include bronchiolitis, pneumonitis,
is not observed or is reduced greatly. Where breeding and
 severe necrosis of splenic white pulp, and focal hepatic
 necrosis, accompanied by a markcd inflammatory cell
significant losscs from pscudorabies occur when weaned
 response. Typical herpetic intranuclear inclusion bodies 
swine from several sources are brought together in the  are demonstrated readily in these lesions.
growing/fnishing unit, bur the disease in these older
Only certain strains of equine herpesvirus 1 cause
swine is less severe than that in piglets. If care is taken
 encephalitis, which is characterized by vasculitis leading
 to prevent the entry of pseudorabies, the move toward
 to thrombosis and hypoxic degeneration of adjacent neu-
complete integration of swinc husbandry, so-called "far-
 ral tissue. In contrast to alphaherpesvirus encephalitis
 in other species, it is usually diffcult or impossible to
which to produce and maintain pseudorabies-free herds
 isolate virus from neural tissues; it is thought that the
and thus avoid the costs of disease losses and the prob-
vasculitis is caused by virus-antibody complexes.
lems associated with vaccination.
Abortion, perinatal mortality, and, less commonly,
Vaccination of swine in areas where the virus is
 encephalitis affecting up to 70% of horses in a herd may
 cndemic and spreading can reduce losses. Both recombi-f
follow the occurrence of abortion in the index casc,
nant DNA delction mutant and inactivated vaccines are
usually a recently introduced mare. The incidence of
uscd, but they do not prcvent infection or the establish-
mares that are latent carriers of equine herpesvirus 1 is
ment of latent infection by the wild-type virus. A pseudo-
 lower than for equine herpesvirus 4 and hence circum-
rabies vaccine from which both the thymidine kinase
 stances arise where an equine herpesvirus 1 carrier mare
and a glycoprotein gene have been deleted, and thc E1
 can reactivate virus and infect a large number of nonim-
 gene of hog cholera virus inserred, provides protection
mune contact mares, leading to devastating “abortion
against both pseudorabies and hog cholera. Vaccination
storms.”
Vaccination with an inactivated combined
of secondary hosts is rarcly undertaken because of the 
 equine herpesvirus vaccine can minimize losses. Manage-
sporadic incidence of thc disease.
 ment practices and adherence to well-established codes
Eradication programs have been established in sev-
 of practice will also minimize losses. While equine her-
eral countries,including the United Kingdom and United
 pesviruses 1 and 4 share many antigens, a recombinant
 States, and in 1991 the national herd in the United King-
 antigen based on a variable region at the C terminus of
dom was considered frec of pseudorabies.
glycoprotein G is available to detcct antibody that is
specifc for each virus and where vacine is not used the
test may be used as a means of separating known equine
hcrpesvirus 1 carricr mares from noncarrier mares.
Equine Abortion (Caused by
Equine Herpesvirus 1)
Equine Rhinopneumonitis
Following respiratory infection, usually accompanied by
(Caused by Equine
clinical signs similar to those caused by equine herpesvi-
Herpesvirus 4)
rus 4, abortion may occur as early as the fourth month
of gestation, although most occur during the last 4
 Equine herpesvirus 4 is the most important of the several
months. It occurs without premonitory signs and there
viruses that cause acute respiratory disease of horscs.
are usually no complications. The fetus is usually horn
Acute respiratory disease due to cquine herpesvirus 4
dead.
occurs commonly in foals over 2 months old, weanlings,
Perinatal infcction may result in a fatal generalized
and yearlings. Therc is fever, anorexia, and a profuse
 serous nasal dischargc that later becomes mucopurulent.
 pneumonia is the dominant clinical featurc. Fncephalitis
 Most affccted foals recover completely and mild or sub-
Occurs sporadically or as epidemics, usually in associa-(
 clinical infections are conmon. More severe disease in-
tion with respiratory disease and abortion. Clinical signs cluding bronchopneumonia and death may occur when
Canine lferpesuirus Discase (Cansedl by Canine Herpesvirus I)
315
there is crowding, stress, poor hygiene, and sccondary
 Equine herpesvirus 3 can cause subclinical respira-
infcction. The source of virus is thought to be from
tory infection in yearling horses and has been isolated
older horses in which inapparent virus shedding occurs,
from vesicular lesions on the muzzles of foals in contact
following reactivation of the latent virus. Reactivation
with infected mares.
of latent virus is probably responsible for some of the
many episodcs of febrile respiratory disease that occur
throughout life that disrupt training and performancc
Canine Herpesvirus Disease
schedules. Combined jnactivated equine herpcsvirus 1
and 4 vaccines are used to control respiratory disease
Caused by Canine
and abortion.
Herpesvirus 1)
Canine herpesvirus 1 was first recognized in the United
Equine Coital Exanthema
States in 1965 as the cause of a highly fatal, generalized
hemorrhagic disease of pups under 4 weeks of age. This
(Caused by Equine
syndrome is rare, and the prcvalence of the virus, based
Herpesvirus 3)
0n antibody surveys, is low (<20%). It probably occurs
worldwide. In sexually mature dogs, canine herpesvirus
 A disease that was probably equine coital exanthema
 1 causes genital disease, although this is rarely diag-
has long been known, but its causative agent was not 
 nosed clinically.
shown to be an alphaherpesvirus (equine herpesvirus 3)
until 1968. Equine herpesvirus 3 shows no serologic
cross-reactivity with other equine herpesviruses by neu-
Clinical Features
tralization tests, but shares antigens with equine herpes-
virus 1, demonstrable by complement fixation and im-
The incubation period varies from 3 to 8 days and in
 munofluorescnce. Equine herpesvirus 3 grows only in
fatal disease the course is brief, 1-2 days. Signs include
cells of equine origin and produces largc plaqucs. Al-
painful crying, abdominal pain, anorcxia, and dyspnea.
though rapidly cytopathic, the virus tends to rcmain
In oldcr dogs there may be vaginal or prcpucial discharge
cell associated.
and, on careful examination, a focal nodular lesion of
 Equine coital exanthema is an acute, usually mild
the vaginal, penile, and prepucial cpithelium may be
discase characterized by the formation of pustular and
sccn. The virus may also cause rcspiratory disease and
ulcerativc lesions on the vaginal and vestibular mucosa,
may be part of the kennel cough syndrome.
on the skin of the penis, prepuce, and thc perineal region,
especially of the mare, and occasionally on the teats,lips,
 and the respiratory mucosa. The incidence of antibody in
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
sexually active horses is much higher (about 50%) than
the rcported incidence of disease. The incubation period
 Pups born to presumably seronegative bitches are in-
 may bc as short as 2 days and, in uncomplicated cases,
fected oronasally either from their dam's vagina or from
healing is usually complete by 14 days. Wherc thc skin of
 other infected dogs. Pups less than 4 weeks old that
the vulva, penis, and prepuce is black, white depigmcnted
becomc hypothermic develop the gcncralized, often fatal
spots mark for life the site of earlier lesions and identify
discasc. There is a cell-associated viremia followed by
potential carriers.
viral replication in blood vessel walls. The optimal tem-
 Although genital lesions may be extensive, there
perature for viral replication is about 33°C, i.e., the tem-
are no systemic signs and unless the affected areas are
perature of the outer genital and upper respiratory tracts.
examined carefully cascs are missed readily. Ahortion
 The hypothalamic thermoregulatory centers of the pup
or infertility is not associated with equine herpesvirus 3 3
 are not fully opcrative until about 4 weeks of age. Ac-
infetion; indeed mares usually conceive to the service cordingly, in the context of canine herpesvirus 1 infec-
in which they acquire the discasc; although abortion 
 tion, the pup is critically dependent on ambicnt tempcra-
 Occurs following experimental in utero inoculation.
ture and matcrnal contact for the maintcnancc of its
Affected stallions show dccrcased libido and the
e normal body temperature. The more sevcrc the hypo-
presence of the disease may scriously disrupt breeding
thermia, thc more severe and rapid is thc course of
schedules. Recurrent diseasc is morc likely to occur when
the diseasc.
stallions arc in frequent use. Management of the discasc
Gross findings in pups arc frequently dramatic.
consists of the removal of stallions from service until all 
Large ecchymotic hemorrhages are particularly obvious
lesions have healed and symptomatic treatment.
 in the kidney, adrenal, and gastrointestinal tract. Micro-
316
18. Herpesviridae
scopically they are secn as necrotic foci, however, not
 infection, Pregnant queens may abort, although there is
all such necrotic foci are marked by gross hemorrhage,
no evidence that the virus crosses the placenta and fatally
and inflammation is conspicuously absent.
infects fetuses, and virus has not been isolated from
aborted placenta or fetuses; abortion is thought to be
secondary to fever and toxemia.
Laboratory Diagnosis
There is necrosis of epithelia of the nasal cavity,
pharynx, epiglottis, tonsils, larynx, and trachca and in
This sporadic disease is rarely diagnoscd during life.
extreme cases, in young kittens, a bronchopneumonia.
Gross postmortem findings, particularly the ecchymotic
Typical intranuclear inclusion bodies may be detected if
hemorrhages of the kidney and gastrointestinal tract, are
death occurs within 7 to 9 days after infection.
characteristic. Inclusion bodies may be present in liver
Inactivated virus and attenuatcd virus vaccines are
cells and the causative virus can be isolated readily in
used for the control of infections due to feline herpesvirus
canine cell cultures.
1; they reducc disease but do not prevent infection. An
cxperimental gcnetically engineercd vaccine has been de-
veloped; comprised of a gene deletion mutant of feline
herpesvirus 1 into which the gene cncoding the capsid
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
 protein of felinc calicivirus has becn inserted. This vac-
cine candidate has been shown to be protective against
The low incidencc of severe disease in pups and the mild
both virus infcctions.
nature of infcctions in older dogs have not warranted
the development of vaccines. Losses may be prevented
or arrested if the ambient temperature minimizes the risk
B Virus Disease of Macaques
of hypothermia. Raising the body temperature by putting
pups under an infrared lamp early in the coursc of infec-
(Caused by B Virus/
tion may have thcrapeutic value.
Cercopithecine Herpesvirus 1)
Macaques suffer from a herpcsvirus infection causcd by
Feline Herpesvirus Disease
B virus (cercopithecine herpesvirus 1),the natural history
of which in these animals is very like that of herpcs
(Caused by Feline
simplex type 1 infcction in humans. A numbcr of fatal
Herpesvirus 1)
cases of ascending paralysis and encephalitis in humans
have occurred, with infcction bcing transmitted directly
About half of the cats presenting with respiratory disease
by monkey bite and indirectly by monkey saliva. Most
have feline herpesvirus 1 infection, about half calicivirus
 cases have occurred among animal handlers and biomed.
infection, and a few Chlamydia psittaci infection. The
i
 ical researchers who had occupational cxposure to ma-
incidence of feline herpesvirus antibody in colony cats  (C
 caques, although trarsmission has also been documented
is over 70% whereas for household cats the figure is less
 among laboratory workers handling macaque central
than 50%. All species of the family Felidae are believed
nervous system and kidney tissues. The risk presented
to he susceptible.
 to owners by pet macaques and to tourists visiting exotic
Feline herpesvirus 1 causes acute disease of the
wild-animal parks where there are free-ranging ma-
 uapns e si araqn sinoq st-t jo poad uneqnoui ue
 B virus infection is common in all macaques, with
onset of bours of sneezing, coughing, profuse serous I
 rhesus, Japanese, cynomolgus, pig-tailed, and stump-
anorexia, weight loss, and fever. Occasionally there may
 in biomedical research.  Neutralizing antibodies arc
 be ulcers on the tongue. Keratitis associated with punc-
 found in 75 to 100% of adult macaques in captive popu-
tate corneal ulccrs is common. In fully susceptible kittcns
lations. Like many herpes simplex virus infections in
up to 4 weeks old the cxtensive rhinotracheitis and an
humans, primary B virus infection in monkeys is often
associated bronchopncumonia may be fatal. Clinically,
 minor, but is characterized by lifelong latent infection
thc acute disease is vcry similar ro that caused by calicivi-
 in trigeminal and lumbosacral ganglia with intermittent
ruscs. Profuse frothy salivation and corneal ulccrs sug-
reactivation and shedding of the virus in saliva or genital
gest feline herpesvirus infection, whercas ulcers of the
secretions, particularly during periods of strcss or immu-
tongue, palate, and pharynx are encountered more fre-
nosuppression. The virus is transmitred among free-
quently in calicivirus infections. Infection of cats over
ranging or group-housed monkeys, primarily through
six months of age is likely to resut in mild or subclinical  sexual activity and bites.
Avian lnfectiems Laryngotracheitis (Cased by Galfid Herpesvirus 1)
317
 B virus disease in humans usually results from ma-
including fever, lethargy, and vesicular rash on the face,
caque bites or scratches, but a case has been reported 
 abdomen, and extremities. Disseminated infection often
in which exposure was via saliva contact with the eye.
 results in life-threatening pneumonia and hepatitis. Epi-
 Incubation periods may be as short as 2 days, but more
demics have occurred in captive African green (vervet)
commonly are 2 to 5 weeks. In some cases, the frst
monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops), patas monkeys
1
clinical signs are the formation of vcsicles, pruritis, and
(Erythrocebus patas), and several species of macaqucs
hypcresthesia at the bite site. This is followed quickly
(Macaca spp.). The causative herpesviruses isolated in
by ascending paralysis, frank cnccphalitis, and death. In
several epidemics were originally given distinct names,
 some case there are no suspect clinical symptoms prior
 but molecular genetic characterization has indicated that
to the onset of encephalitis. In a scrics of 24 cases, 19
thcsc viruses are virtually identical. Thus the namcs cer-
(79%) died. Most surviving patients have had moderatc 
copithecine herpesvirus 6, 7, and 9, cach with synonyms
to severe ncurologic impairment, sometimes requiring
 as well,should give way to a common name,the vernacu-
lifelong institutionalization; however, the use 
of
lar of which is simian varicella virus. Like human vari-
 Acyclovir or Gancyclovir has prevented progression of
 cella-zoster virus, the simian virus establishes latency in
the disease, even reversing neurologic symptoms. Rapid
 sensory ganglia and is reactivated to cause recrudescent
diagnosis and initiation of therapy are of paramount 
 discase and shedding. Reactivation leads to transmission
importance in preventing death or permanent disability
of the highly contagious virus to susceptible monkeys
in surviving patients.
and is the basis for epidemics. In recent years there have
 In most developed countries,there are strict regula-
 been several rather large epideimics in primate colonies,
tions regarding the importation, breeding, and handling
 some involving hundreds of monkeys and causing sub-
 of nonhuman primates, in many cases prohibiting their
 stantial morbidity.
ownership as pets. Further, the American Vcterinary
Medical Association has issued guidelines to dcal with
the dangers of keeping primate species as pets. HowevcI,
 macaque and other primate species continue to be mar-
Avian Infectious
keted and kept as pets.
In the United States, occupational safety guidelines
Laryngotracheitis (Caused by
are in place, based on evidence that all macaque species
Gallid Herpesvirus 1)
are inherently dangerous because of thc risk of B virus
transmission, as well as the likelihood of serious physical
 Idcntifed as a specifc viral diseasc of chickens in the
injury from bite wounds. Following occupational expo-
United States in 1926, infectious laryngotracheitis,
sure of a hunan to a macaque monkcy by bite, scratch,
causcd by gallid herpesvirus 1, occurs among chickenns
or necdle-stick injury, the macaquc should be evaluated
worldwide. This virus rarely causes disease in other avian
for possible B virus shedding: (1) thc monkey is exam-
 species. Strains of the virus vary considerably in viru-
ined, paying particular attention to any signs of ulcer-
lence.
ation of oral and genital mucosa and or neurologic ab-
normalities; (2) oral swab specimens are collected for
viral antigen and/or nucleic acid testing and blood/serum
is collected for serology at a special refercnce laboratory
Clinical Features
(enzyme immunoassays and immunoblot assays have re-
placed virus isolation and serum neutralization in thesc
 Chickens of all ages are susceptible, but disease is most
laboratorics);(3) a physician specializing in such occupa-
 common in those aged 4-18 months. After an incubation
tional risks is contacted to treat the person. Following
period of 2-8 days, mild coughing and sneezing are
evaluation, prophylactic Acyclovir or Gancyclovir
followed by nasal and ocular discharge, dyspnea, loud
should be started immcdiately.
gasping and coughing, and depression. In severe cases 
the neck is raised and the head extended during inspira-
tion—"pump handle respiration." Head shaking with
Simian Varicella (Caused by
coughing is characteristic and may be associated with
cxpcctoration of bloody mucus and frank blood that
Cercopithecine Herpesviruses
appcar on the beak, face, and feathers. Morbidity ap-
6, 7, and 9)
proaches 100% and for virulent strains the mortality
may be 50-70% and for strains of low virulence, about
Simian varicclla is a naturally occurring disease of Old
20%. Strains of low virulence are associated with con-
World monkcys (superfamily Cercopithecoidea). The
junctivitis, ocular dischargc, swollen infraorbital and na-
disease is characterized by varicella-like clinical signs, sal sinuses, and lowered cgg production.
318
18. Herpesviridae
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
and in the United Kingdom of $40 million. Vaccination
has reduced the incidence of disease dramatically, but
There is severe laryngotracheitis characterized by necro-
not of infection, Because of continuing losses from dis-
sis, hemorrhage, ulceration, and the formation of diph-
ease and the costs of vaccination, it remains a most
theritic membranes. The extensive diphtheritic mem-
important disease of chickens. The virus is slowly cyto-
brane formation and death from asphyxia have led to
pathic and remains highly cell associated so that cell-
the use of the term *fowl diphtheria.* The virus probably
free infectious virus is virtually impossible to obtain,
 persists as a latent infection and has been recovered from
 except in dander from feather follicles.
tracheal explant cultures over 3 months after infection.
Clinical Features
Laboratory Diagnosis
Marek's disease is a progressive disease with variable
Clinical and postmortem findings are characteristic. Flu-
signs; four overlapping syndromes are described. In its
orescent antibody staining of smears and tissues and (
clinical presentation the disease bears several similarities
isolation of the virus either by inoculation on the chorio-a
 and some key differences to avian leukosis (Table 18.4).
allantoic membrane of embryonated eggs or cell cultures
are also used. The neutralizing antibody may be detected
Neurolymphomatosis
by pock or plaque reduction assays and enzyme immuno-
Neurolymphomatosis or so-called classical Marek's dis-
assays have been developed.
ease is associated with an asymmetric paralysis of one
or both legs or wings (Figure 18.8). Incoordination is a
cormmon early sign; one leg is held forward and the other
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
backward when stationary because of unilateral paresis
or paralysis. Wing dropping and lowering of the head
 Infectious laryngotracheitis virus is usually introduced
 and neck are common. If the vagus nerve is involved
into a flock via carrier birds and is transmitted by droplet
 there may be dilation of the crop and gasping.
and inhalation, less commonly by ingestion. Although
it spreads rapidly through a flock, new clinical cases may
Acute Marek's Disease
occur over a period of 2 to 8 weeks; thus it spreads
 Acute Marek's disease occurs in explosive outbreaks in
somcwhat more slowly than Newcastle disease, influ-
which a large proportion of birds in a flock show depres-
enza, and infectious bronchitis.
sion followed after a few days by ataxia and paralysis
 It is feasible to establish and maintain flocks free
of some birds. Significant mortality occurs without lo-
 of infectious laryngotracheitis, and where management 
calizing neurologic signs.
systems allow, this practice is increasingly adopted, par-
ticularly in the broiler industry where birds are harvested
Ocular Lymphomatosis
at 9 weeks of age and where“all-in-all-out"'management (
 Ocular lymphomatosis leads to graying of the iris of one
is possible. However, for breeding and egg production  or both eyes because of lymphoblastoid cell infltration;
flocks vaccination is still widely practiced, using attenu-  the pupil is irregular and eccentric and there is partial
ated virus vaccine. This protects birds against diseast,
 or total blindness.
but not against infection with virulent virus or the devel-
opment of a latent carrier status for either the virulent
Cutaneous Marek's Disease
or the vaccine viruses.
Cutaneous Marek's disease is recognized readily after
plucking, when round, nodular lesions up to 1 cm in
diameter are seen, particularly at feather follicles.
Marek's Disease (Caused by
Gallid Herpesvirus 2)
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
The herpesvirus etiology of Marek's disease, which oc-
 Enlargement of one or more peripheral nerve trunks is
curs worldwidc, was establishcd in 1967. Prior to the thc most constant gross finding. In the vast majority
introduction of vaccination in 1970, ir was the most of cases a diagnosis can be made if the celiac, cranial,
common lymphoproliferative disease of chickens, caus- intercostal, mesenteric, brachial, sciatic, and greater
ing annual losses in the United States of $150 million splanchnic nerves are examined. In a diseased bird, the
Marek's Disease (Caused by Gallid Herpesuirus 2)
319
Tabte 18.4
Clinical and Histologic Differentiation of Marek's Disease and Avian Leukosis
DISEASE PARAMETER
 Marek's DISEaSE
AVIAN LEUKOSIS
Etiology
Herpesvirus
Retrovirus
Target cells
T lymphocytes
Various hemopoietic cells
 Age of onset of signs
4 weeks
16 weeks
Paralysis
Yes
No
Gross lesions
Liver, spleen, kidney
Yes
Yes
Gonads, lungs, heart 
Yes
Rare
Nerve trunks
Yes (neural form)
Rare
Iris
Yes (ocular form)
Rare
Skin
Yes (cutaneous form]
Rare
Bursa of Fabricius
Rare
Yes (nodular)
Microscopic lesions 
Sizeof affectedlymphoblas
Varied
Uniform
Intranuclear inclusion bodies
Yes
No
Figure 18.8.
Marek's disease of chickens. (A) Paralysis. [B} Enlargement of sciatic nerves. [C) Ocularlesins. Lower eye is normal, with dilated pupil; pupil f
upper eye failed to dilete and has an irregulor outline due o the inflrtion of transtormed lymphocytes.
320
18. Herpesviridae
nerves are up to three time their normal diaineter, show
 Many apparently healthy birds are lifelong carriers
loss of striations, and are edematous, gray, or yellowish
 and shedders of virus, but the virus is not transmitted in
and somewhat translucent in appearance. Because en-
 ovo. When fully susceptible 1 day-old chicks are infected
largement is frequently unilateral, it is especially helpful
with virulent virus, the minimum time for detection of
to compare contralateral nerves.
microscopic lesions is 1-2 weeks, and gross lesions are
Lymphomatous lesions, indistinguishable from
 present by 3 to 4 wecks. Maximal virus shcding occurs
those of avian leukosis, are usually small, diffuse, gray-
 at 5-6 wecks after infcction.
ish, and translucent. They are most common in acute
Marek's disease and occur in the gonads, particularly
the ovary, and other tissues.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The outcome of infection of chickens by Marek's
disease virus is influenced by the virus strain, dose, and
Where suffcient numbers of birds are examined, history,
route of infection and by the age, sex, immune status,
 age, clinical signs, and gross postmortem findings are
and genetic susceptibility of the chickens. Subclinical
 adequate for the diagnosis, which can be confirmed by
infection with virus shedding is common. Infection is
histopathology. Detection of viral antigen by immuno-
acquired by inhalation of dander. Epithelial cells of the
fluorescence is the simplest reliable laboratory diagnostic
respiratory tract are infected productively and contribute
 procedure. Gel diffusion, indirect immunofluorescence,
t0 a cell-associated virermia involving macrophages. By
 or virus neutralization is used for the detection of vi-
the sixth day there is productive infection of lymphoid
ral antibody.
cells in a variety of organs, including the thymus, bursa of
A variety of methods can be used for virus isola-
Fabricius, bone marrow, and spleen, resulting in immune
tion: inoculation of cell cultures, the chorioallantoic
suppression. During the second week after infectionI
 membrane, or the yolk sac of 4-day-old embryonated
there is a persistent cell-associated viremia followed by
 eggs with suspensions of buffy coat or spleen cells. The
a proliferation of T lymphoblastoid cells, and a week
 presence of virus can be demonstrated by immunofluo-
later deaths begin to occur, although regression may also
resccnce or electron microscopy.
occur from this time.
Marek's disease and avian lenkosis arc usually
The discovery that the genomc of Marck's disease
 present in thc same flock and both diseases may occur
virus has incorporated onc genes that resemble those
in the same bird. The two diseases were long confused,
found in avian retroviruses provides a more rational
 but can be differentiated by clinical and pathologic fca-
basis for explaining thc pathogenesis of the disease,
 tures or by specifc tests for virus, viral antigens, or
which is considered in morc detail in Chapter 11.
viral antibody.
T lymphocytes arc transformed by the virus, and
up to 90 genome equivalents of Marek's disease virus
DNA can be demonstrated in transformed cells in both
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
plasmid and integrated forms.
The lesions of Marek's disease result from the in-
Most chickens have antibody to Marek's disease virus
filtration and in situ proliferation of T lymphocytes,
by the time they are mature; infection persists and virus is
which may result in leukemia, but in addition there is :
 released in dander from the feather follicles. Congenital
often a significant inflammatory cell response to the lysis  infection does not occur and chicks are protected by
of nonlymphoid cells by the virus. Lesions of the feather
maternal antibody for the first few weeks of life. Thcy
follicle are invariably a mixture of lymphoblastoid and then become infected by the inhalation of virus in the
inflarnmatory cells. Epithelial cells at the base of feather dust. Epidemics of Marek's disease usually involve sexu-
follicles are exceptional in that productive infection of  ally immature birds 2 to 5 months old; a high mortality
these cells is also associated with the release of cell-free  (about 80%) soon peaks and then declines sharply.
infectious virus.
Isolates of Marek's disease virus vary considerably
 The basis for genetic resistance is not fully defined
 in virulence and in the types of lesions different strains
but has been correlated with birds that carry the B21
 produce. Avirulent strains are recognized and used for
alloantigen of the B red blood cell group. Maternal anti-
vaccine, although the antigenically related turkey herpes-
body may persist in newly hatched chicks for up to 3
3virus is preferred as a vaccine strain, primarily because
weeks, and infection of such chicks with virulent Marek's
s it infects cells productivcly. Marek's, disease virus and
discase virus may not produce disease but may lcad to
turkey herpesvirus are about 95% homologous by
an active immune response. Chickens that are bursec-
DNA hybridization.
tomized and then actively immunized also survive chal-
Vaccination is the principal method of control.
lenge infection.
The standard method has been to vaccinate 1-day-old
Atphsberpesrirns Iiseuses of Cotber Species
321
chicks parenterally; however, more than 80% of thc 8
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
billion birds vaccinated annually in the United Statcd
 Ingested virus causes enteritis and viremic spread leads
arc vaccinatcd in ovo at 18 days with a robotic machinc
to vasculitis and widespread focal necrosis. Blood is pres-
(Inovoject). Thc vaccine is available as either a lyophi-
lized cell-free prcparation or a ccll-associatcd prepara-
ent in thc body cavities, including gizzard and intestinal
lumens, and petechial hemorrhages are present in many
tion. The cell-frcc vaccine docs not takc in chicks with
 tissues. Therc may be elevated crusty plaques of diphthe-
maternal antibody whereas cell-associated vaccincs do.
ritic membranc in the esophagus, cecum, rectum, cloaca,
Protcctivc immunity develops within about 2 wccks.
Vaccination decreases the incidence of disease, particu-
and bursa. Herpesvirus inclusions are demonstrated
larly of lymphomatous lesions in visceral organs, and
 most readily in hepatocytes, intestinal cpithelium, and
has been most successul in the control of acute Marek's
 lymphoid tissues.
 disease. Peripheral ncurologic discase continues to occur
in vaccinated flocks, but at reduccd incidencc.
A further levcl of control can bc achieved if flocks
Laboratory Diagnosis
are built up with birds carrying the B21 alloantigen. It.
 Clinical and gross postmortem findings may be con-
is possible to establish flocks frec of Marek's disease,
 disease-free status. Thc production of chickens on the
positive immunofluorescence. Duck plague needs to be
"all-in-all-out' principlc, whcrcby they are hatched,
differentiated from duck hepatitis (due to a picornavirus)
started, raised, and dispersed as a unit, would improve
 and from Newcastlc disease and influenza.
the effcacy of vaccination as a control measure.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Duck Plague (Caused by
Ingestion of contaminated water is thought to be the
Anatid Herpesvirus 1)
major mode of transnission, although the virus may also
be transmitted by contact. Virus has been isolated from
Duck plaguc occurs worldwide among domestic and
wild ducks up to a ycar after infection. A chick embryo-
wild ducks, gccsc, swans, and other water fowl, with
 adapted attenuatcd virus vaccine has becn used in the
migratory waterfowl contributing to spread within and
 United States. However, despite the continued threat
betwccn continenrs. Major epidemics have occurred in
 of reintroduction from wild birds, the diseasc has been
duck farims in the United States.
climinated from the duck farms of Long Island, New
Strains of virus vary in virulence, although only a
York, and vaccination is not now practiced routinely.
single antigenic type has been recognized. Thc virus
grows rcadily on the chorioallantoic membrane of cm-
bryonated duck eggs and in duck embryo fibroblast cell
Alphaherpesvirus Diseases
cultures, but only poorly or not at allin similar substrates
of chicken origin, although it may be adapted to grow
of Other Species
in chickcn cells.
A few species of alphaherpesviruscs of other animals
warrant brief mention. They have been associated with
Clinical Features
fatal diseases in hedgehogs, kangaroos, wallabies, wom-
bats, and harbor seals. Two species of phocid herpesvirus
Attention is drawn to the disease by the occurrence of
f have been isolated from pinniped species: phocid herpes-
a suden and persistent increased mortality within focks  virus 1, classfed in the genus Varicellovirus, causes sig-
of ducks. The incubation period is 3-7 days. There is nifcant mortalities in neonate seal pups and phocid
anorexia, depression, nasal discharge, ruffled, dull feath-  hcrpesvirus 2 is a gammaherpesvirus of unccrtain patho-
ers, adherent eyelids, photophobia, extreme thirst, ataxia
 genicity. Major epidemics of fatal ilness due to alphaher-
leading to recumbency with outstretched wings with
 pesviruses have occurred in a variety of tortoise species
head extended forward, tremors, watery diarrhea, and
in captivity and are rccognized as significant causes of
soiled vents. Egg production drops 25 to 40%. Morbid-
 mortality in channel catfish and salmonid species. Alpha.
ity and mortality vary from 5 to 100%. Most ducks
herpesviruses related antigenically to bovine herpesvirus
that develop clinical signs die. Sick wild ducks conceal
 1 have been isolated from several ruminant species, in-
themselvcs and die in vegetation at the water's cdge.
 cluding red deer, reinder, and buffalo. Equine herpesvi-
322
18. llerpesviridae
rus 1 or viruses related very closely to it have not infre-
virus is transmitted both transplacentally and horizon-
quently been the cause of abortion and/or encephalitis
 tally. In herds in which the virus is endemic, transmission
in ruminant species, including cattle, llama, alpaca, ga-
 is predominantly horizontal but because young swine
zelles, and camels. A fatal herpesvirus disease of un-
 are infected when maternal antibody is present, the infec-
known origin or classification has caused the death of
tion is subclinical. Disease occurs when the virus is intro-
young elephants in zoos.
duced into susceptible herds or if susceptible swine are
mixed with carrier swine. Virus-free swinc can be pro-
duced by hysterotomy; however, because the virus
DISEASEs CaUSED BY MEMBERS OF
crosses the placenta, swine produced in this way must
 be monitored carefully for antibody for at least 70 days
SUBFAMILY BETAHERPESVIRINAE
after delivery.
 Betaherpesviruses replicate more slowly than alphaher-
pesviruses and often produce greatly enlarged cells, hence
 DIsEasEs CausEd BY MEmBErs OF
the designation cytomegalovirus. Their host range is nar-
row, and in latent infections, viral DNA is believed to be
SUBFAMILY GAMMAHERPESVIRINAE
sequestered in cells of secretory glands, lymphoreticular
organs, and kidney. Rather than being subject to periodic
 Gammaherpesviruses are characterized by replication in
reactivation, betaherpesviruses are often associated with
lymphoblastoid cells, with different members of the sub-
continuous viral excretion. They have been associated
family being specific for either B or T lymphocytes. In
with diseases of economic importance in swine.
lymphocytes, infection is arrested frequently at a prelytic
stage, with persistence and minimum expression of the
viral genome. Herpesvirus saimiri and human herpesvi-
Porcine Cytomegalovirus
rus 8 (human Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus)
have viral genes that code for cyclins that regulate the
 Porcine
cell cycle at a restriction point between G1 and S phases
Herpesvirus 2)
by phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein. By
 overriding normal cell cycle arrest, these viral-encoded
First recognized in 1955, porcine herpesvirus 2 is en-
 proteins induce the lymphoproliferativc responses char-
demic in many swine hcrds worldwide. In the United
acteristic of these rhadinoviruscs. Gammaherpesviruses
Kingdom, some 50% of hcrds are infected, while a survey 
 may aiso enter a lytic stage, causing cell death without
 in Iowa indicated infection in 12% of herds. Within a production of virions, Latent infection can be demon-
herd, up to 90% of swine may carry the virus. Often strated in lymphoid tissue.
the disease is not seen in herds in which the virus is
 Epstein-Bar virus causes the human disease glan-
endemic; it is more likely to be associated with recent 
 dular fever/infectious mononucleosis and is the proto-
introduction of the virus or with environmental facrors type of the genus Lymphocryptovirus. Several viruses of
such as poor nutrition and intercurrent disease. Virus-
 primates, including herpesvirus saimiri, are members of
free herds have been established.
the genus Rbadinovirus, which also includes bovine ma
Rhinitis occurs in swine up to 10 weeks of age,
 lignant catarrhal fever virus caused by alcelaphine her-
after which infection is subclinical, and it is most severe
 pesvirus 1 and bovine herpesvirus 4 and equine herpesvi-
in swine less than 2 weeks old. There is sneezing,
ruses 2 and 5. Marek's disease virus has been removed
coughing, serous nasal ahd ocular discharge, and depres-
from the subfamily, even though it produces lymphoblas-
sion. The discharge becomes mucopurulent and may
 toid tumors, because the genome architecture of virus
block the nasal passages, which interferes with suckling;
 resembles that of alphaherpesviruses.
such piglets lose weight rapidly and die within a few days.
Survivors are stunted. A generalized disease following
viremic spread is also recognized in young swine. Porcine
Bovine Malignant Catarrhal
herpcsvirus 2 crosses the placenta and may cause fetal
death or result in generalized disease in the first 2 weeks
Fever (Caused by Alcelaphine
after bith or there may be runting and poor weight
Herpesvirus 1)
gains. L.arge basophilic intranuclear inclusions are found
in enlarged cells of the mucous glands of the turbinate
Malignant catarrhal fever is an almost invariably fatal,
mucosa (hence the synonym "inclusion body rhinitis").
 generalized lymphoproliferative disease of cattle and
When newly introduced into a susceptible herd,
some wild ruminants (deer, buffalo, antelope), primarily
Bowie Herpesvirts hnfection (Cased by Borine Hlerpesvirus 4)
323
affecting lymphoid tissues and epithelial cells of the respi-
- and hemorrhage throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
ratory and gastrointestinal tracts. Three distinct epidemi- 
 There is a generalized lymphadenopathy; all lymph
ologic patterns are recognized, from only one of which nodes are enlarged, edematous, and sometimes hemor-
has a herpesvirus been isolated. In Africa (and zoos), rhagic. The lymphoproliferative response involves Th
epidemics of the disease occur in catle (and captive, and Tccells. Frequently there are multiple raised necrotic
susceptible wild ruminants) following transmission of lesions accompanied by ecchymotic hemorrhages in the
thc virus from wildebcest (Connochaetes gnu and C. kidney and erosions of the mucosa of the turbinates,
taurinus) and, to a lesser extent, from hartebeest (Al- larynx, and trachea. Histologically there is widespread
cephus buselaphus) and topi (Damaliscus korrigum), lymphoid cell proliferation and multifocal areas of ne-
 particularly at calving time. A herpesvirus (alcelaphine  crosis, centered on small blood vessels. Death occurs
herpesvirus 1) has been isolated from this African form about a week after the onset of clinical signs. There is
      
 evidence that a small number of affected cattle and deer
to reproduce the disease; it has been tentatively classified
that develop clinical signs of disease survive, at least for
as a gammaherpesvirus.
a short time, with evidence of ocular disease, arterioscle-
Outside Africa and zoos, a disease described as
 rosis, and persistence of the virus as detected by polymer-
malignant catarrhal fever in cattle and deer occurs when
 ase chain reaction.
these species are kept in close contact with sheep, espe-
cially during lambing time. This sheep-associated form
can be transmitted by inoculation of cattle or deer with
Laboratory Diagnosis
blood from known carrier sheep. It has been shown
that sheep have an antibody that is cross-reactive with
The history and clinical signs, particularly the presence of
alcelaphine herpesvirus 1. Although the virus (ovine her-
bilateral ophthalmia, suggest the diagnosis of malignant
pesvirus 2) responsible for the ovine form of the disease catarrhal fever. The virus can be isolated when washed
has not been isolated, a DNA clone with a sequence  peripheral blood leukocytes are inoculated incalfthyroid
corresponding to a gammaherpesvirus and similar to  cells. Cell-free inocula do not yield virus. The cytopathic
alcelaphine herpesvirus 1 has been characterized.
as p reade on shp  isea ie abai sa
A third epidemiologic form of the syndrome de-
 passages in cell culture are often nccessary. They are
scribed as malignant catarrhal fever is recognized in feed-
 characterized by syncytia and by the presence of typical
lot cattle in North America, in the absence of contact
 herpesvirus intranuclear inclusion bodies.
with sheep. It occurs as minor epidemics; the identity
and sourcec of virus in this third form is unknown. Both
alcelaphine herpesvirus 1 and the putative sheep-associ-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
ated herpesviruses produce a disease resembling malig-
nant catarrhal fever in rabbits. The description that fol-
The virus does not appear to be pathogenic for wilde
lows refers to the African form of the disease.
beest and in this species it appears to be transmitted
from mother to offspring in the immediate postcalving
period, via nasal secretions. Cattle are believed to be
Clinical Features
infected via the relatively large amounts of virus present
 in the nasal secretions of wildebeest calves. The virus is
After an incubation period of about 3 weeks, malignant 
 not transmitted between cattle, which appear to be
catarrhal fever is characterized by fever, depression, leu-
"dead-end" hosts. Attempts to develop a vaccine have
kopenia, profuse nasal and ocular discharges, bilateral
 been unsuccessful.
ophthalmia, generalized lymphadenopathy, extensive
mucosal erosions, and central nervous system signs. The
ophthalmia is associated with corneal opacity, which
Bovine Herpesvirus Infection
begins peripherally and progresses centripetally, often
leading to blindness. Erosions of the gastrointestinal mu.
(Caused by Bovine
cosa lead to diarrhea.
Herpesvirus 4)
Bovine herpesvirus 4, which has a genome organization
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
similar to that of Epstein-Barr virus, has been isolated
throughout the world from cattle suffering from a variery
Postmortem findings vary according to the duration of of diseases, including conjunctivitis, respiratory disease,
the disease. There are usually extensive erosions, edema, vaginitis, metritis, skin nodules, and lymphosarcoma.
324
18. Herpesuiridae
 However, therc is no proven etiologic association be-
The lack of scquence similarity underlines the carly
tween the diseases and thc virus isolated occasionally
 origin and long coevolutionary virus/host association
from cases. When inoculated experincntally into suscep-
of hcrpesviruses in general.
tible cattle, these viruses produce no disease. Strains of
 bovine herpesvirus 4 have been isolated when cell cul-
tures are preparcd from tissues of apparently normal
cattle; they have also been isolated from semen of nor-
Channel Catfish Herpesvirus
mal bulls.
Disease (Caused by lctalurid
Herpesvirus 1)
Equine Herpesvirus Infection
Ictalurid hcrpesvirus 1 (channel catfish herpesvirus) was
the first fish herpesvirus to be isolated. It has a greater
(Caused by Equine
economic impact on the commercial rcaring of its host
Herpesviruses 2 and 5)
 species in North America than any other virus and has
bccn studied more extensively than other herpesviruses
The gammaherpesvirus, equine herpesvirus 2, may be
 of fish. The virus can be remarkably virulent in suscepti-
isolated froim nasal swab fitrates or from buffy coat
 ble populations of channel catfish. The incubation period
cells of up to 70% of horses, with rates of isolation
can be as short as 3 days; signs of infection include
increasing with age. Horses may be infected in the
first weeks of life even in the presence of maternal
convulsive swimming, including a "hcad-up” posture,
 lethargy cxophthalmia, distended abdomen, and hemor-
antibody. Neutralization tests suggest that several anti-
rhages. Mortality can rise rapidly to 100%. Lesions in-
genic typcs exist; more than one antigenic type may
clude hemorrhage and necrosis of visceral organs, partic-
be rccovcrcd at different times, or at the same time,
ularly the liver and digestive tract.
from the same horse.
Thc lack of reported virus isolations from wild
Equinc herpesvirus 2 has been recovered from
horscs with respiratory disease sometimes charactcrized
channel catfish strongly indicates that factors such as
dense stocking and poor environmental conditions may
by coughing, swollen submaxillary and parotid lymph
 predispose farmed fish stocks to outbreaks of discase. A
 nodes and pharyngeal ulceration, from conjunctivitis,
key factor is tcmperature; most outbreaks occur in the
and from the genital tract. While the role of the virus
 in thesc and other diseases is uncertain, the virus is bccn
summer months when water is as warm as 30*C. The
 investigatcd for a causative role in these various syn-
acute disease occurs only in young channel catfish usually
up to about 6 months of age, with the degrec of mortality
dromes, which are common and costly, particularly
among horscs in racing. A second, distinctly different,
dcpending on the strain of fish. The virus is transmitted
readily from fish to fish; virus shcdding is probably via
slowly growing gammaherpesvirus (equine herpesvirus
the urine and virus entry is probably through the gills.
5) has been isolated from nasal swabs and from buffy
Attempts to vaccinate channel catfish against chan-
 coat cells; its pathologic significance is unknown.
 nel catfish virus have shown promise. An attenuated
virus vaccine prepared by serial passage in fish cells has
been shown to protect rccipients against lethal challengc.
DISEaSEs CaUSED BY MEMBERS
OF UNNAMEd SuBFAMIlY
COMPRiSING CHANNEL
Diseases Caused by UNclassified
Catfish HERpesViruS
HERPESVIRUSES
Channel catish herpesvirus and an oyster (mollusk)
Herpesvirus Diseases of Fish
herpesvirus gcnomcs have been sequenced completely.
and Mollusks
The striking discovery from the sequence information
is that while the viruses are morphologically and biolog-
Herpesviruses of fsh, like those of higher vertcbrates,
ically similar to other herpesviruses the scqucnces bear
 are highly species specific, suggesting that they have co-
almost no similarity with those of mammalian and (
 ccvolved over all evolutionary time with their hosts.
avian herpesviruses. This has led to the construction :
 Some cause high mortalities in young fish and some causc
of a separate subfamily, but at prescnt only channel epidermal hyperplasia or neoplasia. Some have been in-
catfish herpesvirus has been placed in this subfamily.
. vestigated to such a limited extent that causal links with
Further Reading
32.5
the disease whose occurrence led to their recognition
Agius, C. T., and Studdert, M. J. (1994). Equine herpesvi-
have not yet been fully established.
ruses 2 and 5: Comparisons with other members of
the subfamily gammaherpesviruses. Adv. Virus Res.
44, 357-379.
Babiuk, L. A., and Rouse, B. T. (1996). Herpesvirus vac-
Herpesvirus Infections in Salmonids
cines, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 21, 63-76.
{Caused by Salmonid Herpesviruses
Babiuk, L, A., van Drunen Little-van den Hurk, S., and
Tikoo, 5. K. (1996). Immunology of bovine herpesvi-
1 and 2)
rus 1 infection. Vet. Microbiol. 53, 31-42.
Bagust, T. J., and Guy, J. S. (1997). Laryngotracheitis. In
Two salmonid herpesviruses have been shown to cause
"Diseases of Poultry' (B. W. Calnek, ed.), 10th ed.,
Pp. 527-531. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
scvere disease: salmonid herpesviruses 1 and 2. These
Bernard, J., and Bremont, M. (1995). Molecular biology
viruses have been shown to be distinct on the basis of
of fish viruses: A review. Vet. Res. 26, 341-351.
 serological data and DNA sequence studies.
Calnek, B. W., and Witter, R. L. (1997). Marek's disease.
 The frst of these viruses was isolated on several
In "Diseases of Poultry" (B. W. Calnek, ed.), 10th ed.,
occasions from rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri) in a
Pp. 369-378. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
hatchery in the United States. The virus causes disease
Carmichael, L. E., and Greene, C. E. (1990). Canine her-
pesvirus infection. In "Infectious Diseases of the Dog
when inoculated into young rainbow trout maintained
and Cat" (C. E. Greene, ed.), Pp. 252-261. Saunders,
 at 6-9°C, but not in other salmonid species.
Philadelphia, PA.
 Salmonid herpesvirus 2 has a slightly wider host
Crabb, B. S., and Studdert, M. J. (1995). Equine herpesvi-
range, causing disease in the young of several members
ruses 4 (equine rhinopneumonitis virus) and 1 (equine
of the genus Oncorhynchus (Pacific salmon) as well as
abortion virus). Adv. Virus Res. 45, 153-190.
Edington, N. (1992). Porcine cytomegalovirus. In *Dis-
rainbow trout. The virus causes disease when inoculated
eases of Swine,"' (A, D. Leman, B. Straw, W. L.
 into young fish maintained at 15°C and has the interest-
Mengeling, S. D'Allaire, and D. J. Taylor, cds.), 7th
ing property of causing epithelial turmors in survivors of
ed., Pp. 250-252. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
experimental infection.
Holmes, G. P., Chapman, L. E., Stewart, J. A., et al.
(1995). Guidelines for the prevention of B-virus infec-
tions in exposed persons. Clin. Infect. Dis. 20,
421-439.
Other Herpesvirus Infections of Fish
Kit, S. (1989). Recombinant-derived modifed-live herpes-
virus vaccines. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 251, 219-236.
Three other fish herpesviruses have bcen described: per-
Mettenleiter, T. C. (1997). Immunobiology of pseudora-
bies (Aujeszky's) disease. Vet. Immunol. Immunopa-
cid herpesvirus 1 (wallye herpesvirus), which is associ-
thol. 54, 221-229.
ated with epidermal hyperplasia in the walleye (Stizoste-
O*Toole, D., Li, H., Miller, D., Williams, W. R., and
-adiy xod de) snsadu padas (uan u
Crawford, T. B. (1997). Chronic and recovered cascs
rus), implicated as the cause of transmissible epithelial
of shcep-associated malignant catarrhal fever in cattle.
hyperplasia in the common carp (Cyprinus carpio); and
Vet. Rec. 140, 519-524.
Povey, R. C. (1990). Felinc viral rhinotracheitis (FVR).
pleuronectid herpesvirus (turbot herpesvirus), which has
In "'Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat" (C. E.
been found in association with episodes of substantial
Greene, ed.), Pp. 346-351. Saunders, Philadelphia,
mortality among farmed fry.
PA.
Roizman, B., and Sears, A. E. (1996). Herpes simplex vi-
ruses and their replication. In "Fields Virology" (B. N,
Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock,
Further Reading
J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E.
Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 2231-2296. Lippincott-
Ackermann, M., Edwards, S., Keil, G., Pastoret, P.-P.,
Ravcn, Philadclphia, PA.
van Oirschot, J. T., and Thiry, E. (1996). Infectious
Wolf, K. (1983). Biology and properties of fish and reptil-
 bovine rhinotracheitis and other ruminant herpesvi-
ian herpesviruses. In *"The Herpcsviruses (B. Roizman,
ruses. Vet. Microbiol. 53, 1-231.
ed.), Vol. 2, pp. 319-325. Plenum, New York.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Chapter 19
Adenoviridae
Properties of Adenoviruses
327
Infectious Canine Hepatitis
331
Equine Adenovirus Disease...
332
Adenovirus Disease of Deer.....
333
Avian Adenovirus Diseases..
333
Further Reading...
334
In 1953 Wallace Rowe and collagues, having observed  bovine adenoviruses, and egg drop syndrome virus of
that explant cultures of human adenoids degenerated (C
 chickens. The genome of the latter virus, which had been
spontaneously, isolated a new virus that they named t
 the sole member of avian adenovirus group IHl, has been
adenovirus. The next year Cabasso and colleagues dem-S
 sequenced completely and found to be exceptional—its
onstrated that the etiological agent of infectious canine  hexon gene shows greatest similariry to that of ovint
hepatitis was an adenovirus. Subsequently, many adeno-  adenovirus 287, but is missing several genes found in
viruses, each appearing to be highly host specific, were (
 other adenoviruses.
isolated from humans and many other mammals and
 The number of adenoviruses known to infect each
birds, usually from the upper respiratory ract, but some-
 animal species is shown in Table 19.1. Some 50 different
times from feces. Most of these viruses produce subclini-
 adenoviruses are recognized in humans. There is a sense
cal infections, with occasional upper respiratory disease,
that there are many more adenoviruses of animals yet
but avian adenoviruses are associated with a variety of
 to be discovered—this is just a matter of the level of
clinically important syndromes. Since their discovery,
activity of reference diagnostic laboratories,from where
adenoviruses have been at the core of significant basic
 new viruses usually emerge.
discoveries, including many concerning virus structure,
Genera and complexes within the genus Mastade-
eukaryotic gene expression and organization, RNA splic-
 novirus have been defined by antigenic and genome char-
ing, and apoptosis. Adenoviruses have also been used as
 acteristics. The individual viruses assigned to each are
vectors for rccombinant DNA vaccines and as vectors (
 designated by their host species and a serial number (e.g..
in gene therapy.
canine adenovirus 1). Restriction endonuclease mapping
 and sequencing of the genomic DNA has proven useful
for the precise categorization of viral strains, and in
Properties of Adenoviruses
general, results have accorded well with previous catego-
rizations based on serological cross-reactions.
Classification
After the general structuring of the family had been
redone on the basis of molecular characteristics of the
The family Adenoviridae comprises two genera: the ge-
viruses, the bases for the immunologic relationships
nus Mastadenovirus comprising viruses that infect mam-
among the viruses became clear. For example, antigenic
malian species and the genus Aviadenovirus comprising
 determinants associated with the inner part of hexons,
viruses that infect birds. A third genus, Atadenovirus,
 i.e., the structural units making up the bulk of the capsid,
has been proposed, but had not been accepted by the
 contain the epitopes that were frst used to antigenically
International Committe on Taxonomy of Viruses as of
 define the two genera. Genus-specifc epitopes were
the date of publication of this book. This genus would
1 found to be located on pentons, i.e., structural units
comprise certain animal adenoviruses with distinct geno- t
 that are located at the vertices of capsids. Type-specific
mic structure, including ovine adenovirus 287, several epitopes, which were frst defined in neutralization and
327
328
19. Adenoviridae
1'61 3a41
Diseases of Domestic Animals Associated with Adenoviruses
NUMBER OF
ANIMAL SPECIES
SEROTYPES
DISEASE
Dogs
2
Infectious canine hepatilis (canine adenovirus l)
Infectious canine tracheobronchiris (canine adenovirus 2)
Horses
2
Usually asymptomatic or mild upper respiratory disease. Bronchopneumonia
and generalized disease in foals with primary severe combined immunodefi.
ciency disease
Caltle
10
 Usually asymptomatic or mild upper respiratory disease
Swine
Usually asymptomatic or mild upper respiratory disease
Sheep
b
Usually asymptomatic or mild upper respiralory disease
Goats
2
Usually asymptomatic or mild upper respiratory disease
Deer
1
 Pulmonary edema, hemorrhage, vasculis
Rabbits
Diarrhea
Chickens
12
Egg drop syndrome, inclusion body hepatitis
Turkeys and pheasants
E
Hemorrhagic enteritis (urkey);marble spleen disease (pheasantj; egg drop
syndrome in both
Quail
Bronchitis
Ducks
2
Rarely, duck hepatitis 
Geese
3
Isolated from liver, intestines
hemagglutination-inhibition assays, were found to be
 DNA, 36 to 44 kbp in size, with inverted terminal re-
located on the outward-facing surface of the hexons.
 peats. The complete sequence of the genomic DNA of
The penton fibers were found to contain other type-
several adenoviruses, including canine adenovirus 1, has
specifc epitopes, which were also important in neutral-
been determined. Virion DNA, in association with a
ization assays. Unexpectedly, although the distal knobs 
 5SK protein linked covalently to each 5'-terminus, is
on the penton fibers contain the cell-binding ligands that
infectious. About 40 proteins are coded for by the viral
are responsible for viral attachment to specific cellular
 genome and are transcribed following complex RNA
receptors, antibody to these knobs or to the penton fibers
 splicing. About one-third of the proteins are structural
was found to be only weakly neutralizing. All in all, the 
 proteins. Structural proreins inciude those that make
 merits of the serological structuring of the family were
 up the hexons, pentons, and penton fibers and others
based more on the relative dominance of certain epitopes
associated with the virion core.
in particular serological tests than on their location in
 Many adenoviruses agglutinate red blood cells,
the virion
with hemagglutination occurring when the tips of penton
fbers bind to cellular receptors and form bridges be-
tween cells. The optimal conditions and species of red
VirionF
Properties
blood cells for demonstrating this phenomenon with
each adenovirus have been determined as hemagglutina-
tion-inhibition has been a major serologic diagnostic
 nal in outline, with icosahedral symmetry, 80-100 nm 
 method for many years.
in diameter (Figure 19.1). Virions are composed of 252
Adenoviruses are rather stable in the environment,
capsomers:2
240 hexons that occupy the faces and
 but are inactivated easily by common disinfectants. All
edges of the 20 equilateral triangular facets of the icosa-
 of the viruses have narrow host ranges. Many cause
 hedron and 12 pentons that occupy the vertices. From
acute respiratory disease or gastroenteric disease and
each penton projects a penton fiber 20 to 50 nm in
 some cause persistent infections with long periods of
length, with a terminal knob (Figure 19.2). Avian adeno-
latency that may be reactivated by immunosuppres-
virus penton fibers are bifurcated, giving the appearance
 sion—-some viruses, such as equine adenovirus 1, cause
 of two fbers extending from each vertex. The genome
 severe disease in immunocompromised hosts. Some of
consists of a single linear molecule of double-stranded
the adenoviruses of humans, cattle, and chickens cause
329
Properties tof sAedenrorirrtses
Figure 19.1.
C
FamilyAidnsiirihwinnnrjcinmeicirinhwinh
aayfeeinrdbigrlhhxixli
ofvirionsinsfrlsnBegliveonrastlcrnmicspy;Cinsctionlnicosopya0
and B, courtesy of R. C. Valentine and H. G. Pereira.]
tumors when inoculated into newborn hamsters and 
late (L.) unit from which five families of late mRNAs (L.1
have been used in experimental oncogenesis studies, but
to L5) are transcribed. Each early region is under the
none cause tumors in their natural hosts.
control of a separate prormoter whereas the late region
 uses a single promoter called the major late promoter.
The E1A region of the viral genome encodes proteins that
 are essential for three main outcomes of early adenovirus
Vira! Replication
transcription: (1) induction of cell cycle progression
Adenoviruses replicate in the nuclens and their replica-
 (DNA synthesis) to provide an optimal environment for
tion is facilitated by extensive modulation of the host 
viral replication; (2) protection of infected cells from host
immune response. Viruses bind to host cell receptors via
 antiviral immune defenses, such as from tumor necrosis
their penton fibers and enter the cell by endocytosis via
factor (TNF) activity or from apoptosis; and (3) synthesis
clathrin-coated pits. The outer capsid is then removed
 Of viral proteins necessary for viral DNA replication.
and thc core comprising the viral genome with its associ-
E1A and E1B gene products are also responsible
 ated histoncs enters the nucleus where mRNA transcrip-
for cell transformation and hence for the oncogenicity
tion, viral DNA replication, and assembly of virions
(experimental) of some adenoviruses. Both proteins in-
occur.
teract with the cellular tumor suppresser gene p53, com-
In the nucieus the genome is transcribed by cellular
 promise its normal activity, and thus deregulate cell cycle
RNA polymerase Ⅱ according to a complex program
 progression. The E3 region is not essential for adenovirus
involving both DNA strands (see Chapter 3). Therc arc
replication in cell cultures and can be deleted or replaced
five early (E) transcriptional units: E1A, E1B, E2, E3
without disrupting viral replication in vitro. It is there-
and E4, two intermediate units, IX and IVa2, and one
 fore one of the insertion sites for foreign DNA when
330
19. Adenoviridae
constructing adenovirus vectors. E3 proteins are known
Figure 19.2.
to interact with host immune defense mechanisms, thus
modulating the host response to adenovirus infection.
 s  a s r n
 expression by infected cells and inhibition of tumor ne-
crosis factor are two examples of immune evasion medi-
ated by E3-encoded proteins.
Viral DNA replication, using the 5'-linked 55K
 protein as primer, proceeds from both ends by a strand
口
displacement mechanism. The repeat sequences form
panhandle-like structures of single-stranded DNA that
serve as origins of replication. Following DNA replica-
tion, late mRNAs are transcribed; these are translated
into structural proteins, which are made in considerable
excess. All adenovirus late-coding regions are transcribed
from a common promoter, the major late promoter. The
primary transcript is about 29 kb; at least 18 distinct
Model of an adienovirus virion showing constituents. Hexons [ll and
mRNAs are produced by alternative splicing of the late
pentons Ill are packed together t orm the copsid. Pentonfibers (IV)
primary transcript. Shutdown of host cell macromolecu-
hexonsXwhreasthersareloctdnthinteriorurae
lar synthesis occurs progressively during the second half
of the capsid (M, VIl. The core consists of the genomic DNA com-
of the replication cycle. Virions are assembled in the
plexed with four proteins (V, VIl, X, and teminal).,[From P. L. Stewar,
R.MBCklffdDullegeren
nucleus, where they f
form crystalline arrays (Figure
reveals he complexmolecular organizationof adenovirus.Cell 67,
19-1C). Many adenoviruses cause severe condensation
145-154 (1991).]
and margination of the host cell chromatin, making nu-
clei appear abnormal (Figure 19-3); this is the basis for
the inclusion bodies seen characteristically in adenovi-
rus-infected cells. Virions are released by cell lysis.
Figure 19.3.
Avicnaenvirus1netioninhepleenfchickThenuclesee coninsdisersedvirinsndlymarginationf chrm,
wheresthnleshrghconainsmanyvirinsndexmelycondensecrinhnsectinelcnmicroscopyniftn
X16,000. [Courtesy of N. Cheville.!
Infections Cianine Heputitis
331
Adenoviruses as Vectors for Delivery
Clinical Features
of Forcign DNA
 Adenoviruses are being studied extensively as vectors for
Most infections with canine adenovirus 1 are asymp-
the delivery of foreign DNA. Examples of the expression
tomatic or are seen as undifferentiated respiratory
of foreign genes in recombinant adenovirus vectors in-
disease. In some cases, however, the infection proceeds
 clude pseudorabies virus gD protein, Epstein-Barr virus
from the initial respiratory site to cause systemic dis-
glycoprotein 340/220, vesicular stomatitis virus struc-
ease. The systemic disease may be divided into three
tural glycoprotein, rotavirus VP4, rabies virus glycopro-
overlapping syndromes, which are usually seen in pups
tein, bovine parainfluenza virus 3 glycoprotein, feline 
less than 6 months of age: (1) peracute disease in
immunodeficiency virus envelope glycoprotein, porcine
which the pup is found dead either without apparent
respiratory and reproductive syndrome virus glycopro-
preceding illness or after an illness lasting only 3 or
tein, human hepatitis B virus surface antigen, polyo-
4 hours; (2) acute disease, which may be fatal, marked
 mavirus T antigen, and measles virus fusion protein
by fever, depression, loss of appetite, vomiting, bloody
diarrhea, petechial hermorrhages of the gums, pale
(Table 19.2).
mucous membranes, and jaundice; and (3) mild disease,
which may actually be a vaccine-modifed disease, i.e.,
the result of partial immunity.
Infectious Canine Hepatitis
The incubation period of the acute disease is 4 to
 9 days. Clinical signs include fever, apathy, anorexia,
The two diseases caused by canine adenoviruses are
thirst, conjunctivitis, serous discharge from the eyes and
the most important adenovirus infections of ani-
 nose, and occasionally abdominal pain and petechiae
mals woridwide. Infectious canine hepatitis, caused by
 of the oral mucosa. There is tachycardia, leukopenia,
canine adenovirus 1, is also an important pathogen 
prolonged clotting time, and disseminated intravascular
Of foxes, wolves, coyotes, skunks, and bears. In fact,
coagulopathy. In some cases there is hemorrhage (e.g.,
the virus was first recognized as the cause of fox
bleeding around deciduous teeth and spontaneous hema
encephalitis. In dogs, as weil as causing acute hepatitis,
 tomas). Although central nervous system involvement is
the virus may cause tespiratory or ocular disease,
 not common, dogs affected severely may convulse. Upon
encephalopathy, chronic hepatitis, and interstitial ne-
 recovery, dogs tat wel but regain weight slowly. Seven
phritis. Canine adenovirus 2 causes respiratory disease:
 to 10 days after acute signs disappear, about 25% of
tonsillitis, pharyngitis, tracheitis, bronchitis, and bron-
 dogs develop bilateral corneal opacity, which usually
chopneumonia.
disappears spontaneously.
 In foxes, canine adenovirus 1 causes primarily cen
tral nervous system disease; infected animals may exhibit
intermittent convulsions during the course of their illness
and tcrminally may suffer paralysis of one or more limbs.
Table 19.2
Properties of Adenoviruses
Two genera, Mastadenovirus and Aviadenovirus
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Virions are nonenveloped, hexagonal in outline, with icos
The virus enters through nasopharyngeal, oral, and
 Mastadenovirus) or two (genus Aviadenovirus) fibers (glyco-
conjunctival routes; initial infection occurs in tonsillar
protein} projecting From each vertex of the capsid
crypts and Peyer's patches. There is viremia and infec-
The genome consists of a single linear molecule of double-
tion of endothelial and parenchymal cells in many
stranded DNA, 36-44 kbp in size, with inverted terminal
tissues, leading to hemorrhages and necrosis, especially
repeats
in the liver, kidneys, spleen, and lungs. Canine adenovi-
Replication takes place in the nucleus by a complex pro-
rus 1 is also one of the several causes of kennel cough,
gram of early and late transcription (before and aHer DNA
although it is probably less important than canine
replication); virions are released by cell lysis
adenovirus 2. The syndrome that gave the disease its
Intranuclearinclusionbodies areformed,containing large
name, infectious canine hepatitis, involves the massive
numbers of virions, ffen in paracrystalline arrays
destruction of hepatocytes, resulting in peracute death.
Viruses agglutinale red blood cells
Invariably in such cases, histologic examination reveals
Some viruses are oncogenic in rodents
 characteristic inclusion bodies in hepatocytes (Figure
19.4A).
332
19.Atenoriridae
Figure 19.4.
B
Canine adenovirus 1 finfectious canine hepatitis] infection, [A} Intranuclear inclusion bodies wihin hepatocytes in peracute infectious canine
hepatitis [hematoxylin and eosin stain, magnification X400). (B) "Blue eye" in: α pup 9 days affer vaccination with canine adenovirus 1 vaccine.
{Courtesy of L. E. Carmichael.}
 In the convalescent stages of natural infection and
 Both inactivated virus and attenuated virus canine
8-12 days after vaccination with canine adenovirus 1-
 adenovirus 1 vaccines had been in general use for many
attenuated virus vaccine, corneal edema ("*blue eye') is years. The antigenic relationship between canine adeno-
occasionally observed (19.4B). Although clinically dra-
viruscs 1 and 2 is sufficiently close for canine adenovirus
matic and alarming, especially after vaccination, the
 2 vaccine to be cross-protective; it has the advantage that
cdema usually resolves after a few days without conse-
 it does not cause corneal edema. Annual revaccination is
quence. The edema is due to virus-antibody complexes,
 recommended by many manufacturers. Maternal anti-
deposited in the small blood vessels of the ciliary body,
 body interferes with activc immunization until puppies
interfering with normal fluid exchange within the cornea.
are 9 to 12 weeks of age.
A similar pathogenesis underlies glomerulonephritis due
 One of the most remarkable phenomena in veteri-
to canine adcnovirus 1.
nary practice has been the virrual disappearance of infec-
tious canine hepatitis from rcgions where vaccination
had been performcd for many years. This has been a
Laboratory Diagnosis
result of the shedding of vaccine virus by vaccinated
dogs, thereby "seeding" the environment with attenu-
Diagnosis of canine adenovirus infections is done by
ated virus, immunizing many dogs secondarily, and
either virus isolation or serology using an enzyme immu-
 building up a high level of hcrd inmunity.
noassay, hemagglutination-inhibition, or ncutraliza-
tion. The polymerasc chain reaction is becoming a useful
assay as well. Virus isolation is performed in any of
Equine Adenovirus Disease
several cell lines of canine origin (e.g., Madin-Darby
canine kidney cells). Cytopathology occurs in most cases
Clinical Features
in 24 to 48 hours and the identification of the cause of
this is determined immunologically.
 In horses, most adenovirus infections are asymptomatic
O1 present as mild upper or lower respiratory tract dis-
easc. The latter are marked by fever, nasal discharge, and
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
cough. Secondary bacterial infections, which produce a
mucopurulent nasal discharge and exacerbate the cough,
Infection of the kidney is associated with viruria, which
arc not uncommon,
is a major mode of transmission, along with feces and
Certain Arabian foals that have primary severe
saliva. Rccovered dogs may shed virus in their urine for
combined immunodeficiency disease, an autosomal in-
up to 6 months.
herited defect in which there is a total absence of both
Arian Adewouirus Diseuses
333
 T and B cells, are particularly susceptible to equine ade-
Adenovirus Disease of Deer
novirus 1. As maternal antibody wanes, these foals be-
come extremely susceptible to adcnovirus infection. In-
In 1993 an epidemic of severe systemic disease in mule
fection is progressive and these foals invariably die
deer (Odocoileus bemionus) in California was found to
within 3 months of age.
be caused by an adenovirus. Since then there have been
"die-ofs" in other deer specics, and evidence has accu-
mulated that this may be a rather common disease. The
disease is markcd by pulmonary edema and erosions,
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
ulcerations, hemorrhage, and absccsses of the intestinal
Little is known about the pathology or pathogenesis of
tract. Histologically, therc is widespread vasculitis with
 endothelial intranuclcar inclusions. Laboratory diagno-
adenovirus infections in horses, primarily because infec-
sis is based on the detection of viral antigen in tissues
tions are usually self-limited. Much research has been
 done on adenovirus infections in foals with primary se-
by immunofluorescence and by the detection of virions
by electron microscopy.
vere combined immunodeficiency disease. Among all the
potentially important opportunistic pathogcns that may
take advantagc of the immune incompetence of these
foals, the dominant role of cquine adenovirus 1 in the
Avian Adenovirus Diseases
overall pathogenesis of this syndrome is intriguing. In
addition to bronchiolitis and pncumonia, the virus de-
Egg Drop Syndrome
stroys cells in a wide range of other tissues in these foals,
particularly the pancrcas and salivary glands, but also
 Egg drop syndrome, frst reported in 1976, is character-
ized by the production of sof-shelled and shel-lesseggs
renal, bladder, and gastrointestinal cpithelium.
by apparently healthy chickens. The disease has bcen
recognized in fowl and both wild and domestic ducks
and geese worldwide, except in the United States. The
Laboratory Diagnosis
 disease is caused by three avian adenoviruses that agglu-
tinate avian red blood cells: one is associated with classi-
 A diagnosis of adenovirus infection can, in most cases,
 cal egg drop syndroime in many countries, another with
be made by virus isolation, serology, or detection 
ducks in the United Kingdom, and a third with egg drop
and analysis of viral nucleic acid. Adenovirus antigen
syndrome in Australia. The viruses grow to high titers
detection using enzyme immunoassay and monoclonal
 in embryonated cggs or cell cultures derived from ducks,
antibodies may also be used. Virus isolation (from
 geese, or chickens (e.g., chick kidney or chick embryo
nasal swabs of suspect cases or tissues of foals with
liver cells}.
primary severe combined immunodeficiency disease) is
 In chicken flocks withour prior experience with
performed in any of sevcral cell lines of equine origin.
these viruses the first clinical signs of infection are loss
Cytopathology  typical  of  adenovirus  infections
 of color in pigmented eggs and soft-shelled and shell-
(rounding and grape-like clustering of infected cells)
less eggs. Because birds tend to eat the shell-less eggs,
occurs in most cases in 24 to 48 hours. Serological
 they may be missed. In flocks in which there is antibody
-unn q o ansn si sisos
 the disease is seen as a failure to achieve production
inhibition or neutralization tests. DNA restriction endo-
targets. There is also an endemic form of the disease,
nuclease mapping (fingerprinting), Southern, dot-blot,
 similar bur more diffcult to detect. Major lesions in
and in situ hybridization and, rmost recently, polymerase 
 infected birds are seen in the pouch shell gland and
chain rcaction assays are also available. Of these the
 oviduct where epithelial cells become necrotic and con-
 polymerase chain reaction is becoming the most widely
 tain intranuclear inclusion bodies. There is associated
 applicable assay.
inflammatory infiltration. These findings are virtually
 pathognomonic, but diagnosis may be confirmed by vi-
rus isolation or scrology (hemagglutination-inhibition
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
or neutralization assay)
The main route of transmission is through contam-
Like most other adenoviruses, equine viruses are most i
 inated eggs. Droppings also contain virus, and contami-
likely transmitted by oral and nasopharyngeal routes. 1
 nated fomitcs such as crates or trucks can spread virus.
Nothing is done to prevent or control infections, given
The virus is also transmitted by needles used for vaccina-
their sclf-limiting nature.
tions. At one time these viruses were spread by the con-
334
19. Adenoviridae
tamination of Marek's disease vaccine, which was pro-
weeks) may vary according to the level of antibody in
duced in duck embryo fibroblasts. Breeding flocks were
the flock.
infected and the viruses were spread widely through fer-
tile eggs. Because infection usually remained latent until
birds reached sexual maturity and because the viruses
Quail Bronchitis
are transmitted vertically in eggs, the detection of this
sourcc of contagion was very diffcult. Sporadic out-
Quail bronchitis is an important disease of wild and
breaks have also been traced to contact of chickens with
 captive-bred bobwhite quail worldwide; in young birds
 domestic ducks or geese and to water contaminated with
it is seen as respiratory distress, coughing, sneezing, ralcs,
wildfowl droppings.
lacrimation, and conjunctivitis. In older birds thcre is
This disease has been cradicated from primary
also diarrhea. Mortaliry may be 100% in young birds,
breeder flocks in most countries. Its entry into layer
 but falls to less than 25% in birds more than 4 weeks
flocks is further managed by (1) preventing contact with
 of age when infected. The disease is marked by tracheitis,
other birds, especially waterfowl; (2) disinfecting all
air sacculitis, and gaseous, mucoid enteritis. The etio-
equipment regularly; and (3) chlorination of water. Inac-
 logic agent is avian adenovirus 1, which can be isolated
tivated vaccines are available for use in chickens before
readily from the respiratory tract of acutely affected birds
they begin laying cggs, but they only reduce rather than
and from the intestinal tract of mildly affected birds. The
eliminate virus transmission.
virus is highly contagious and spreads rapidly through
flocks. Control is based on strict isolation, quarantine
of introduced birds, and regular decontamination of
 premises and equipment. In some instances, recovered
Hemorrhagic Enteritis of Turkeys
birds are retained as breeders, as there is no long-teim
shedding and immunity is long lasting.
and Marble Spleen Disease
of Pheasants
Hemorrhagic enteritis is a common acute infection of
 Further Reading
turkeys older than 4 weeks of age; it is characterized by
splenomegaly and intestinal hemorrhage. Clinically, the
Horwitz, M. 5. (1996). Adenoviruses. In *Ficlds Virol-
ogy” (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley,
disease is characterized by acute onset, depression,
R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roiz-
bloody droppings, and death. Infection causes both hu-
man, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 2149-2172.
 moral- and cell-mediated immunosuppression, so oppor-
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
tunistic bacterial infections are often an intercurrent
McFerran, J. B. (1997). Adenovirus infections. In *“Dis-
eases of Poultry, (B. W. Calnek, ed.), 10th ed., Pp.
 problem. Flock mortality may reach 60%, although the
607-610. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
usual mortality is 1 to 3%. The disease is caused by
McGuire, T. C., and Perryman, L. E. (1981). Combined
turkey adenovirus 2, a virus that is serologicaily indistin-
immunodeficiency of Arabian foals. In “Immunologic
 guishable from the virus that causes marble spleen dis-
Defects in Laboratory Animals" (M. E. Gershwin and
tase of pheasants.
B. Merchant, eds.), vol. 2, pp. 185-191. Plenum, New
The lesions are pathognomonic: there is prominent
York.
Morrison, M. D., Onions, D. E., and Nicholson, L.
reticuloendothclial hypcrplasia and intranuclear inclu-
(1997). Complete sequence of canine adenovirus 1.
sion bodics in the spleen. Diagnosis may be confirmed
J. Gen. Virof. 78, 873-878.
by virus isolation (with identifcation of isolates by neu-
Shenk, T. (1996). Adenoviridae: The viruses and thcir rep-
tralization assay) or by serology using an enzyme immu-
lication, In “Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M.
Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Mclnick,
noassay.
T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd
The virus is transmitted readily by contact and
ed., pp. 2111-2148. Lippincotr-Raven, Philadelphia,
fomites and is very stable in contaminated droppings,
PA.
litter, etc. Control of the disease in turkeys or pheasants
Studdert, M. J. (1996). Equine adenovirus infections. In
is based on vaccination, using an attenuated virus pro-
Virus Infections of Vertebrates" (M. J. Studdert, cd.),
duced either in turkey spleen cells or in turkey B lymph-
vol. 4, pp. 65-80. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Timoney, J. F., Gillespie, J. H, Scott, F. N, and Bar-
oblastoid cells. Vaccine is administered via drinking
lough, J. E. (1988). *Hagan and Bruner's Infectious
water. Because maternal antibody interferes with vacci-
Diseases of Domestic Animals, 8th ed. Cornell Uni
nation, the optimum age for vaccination (usually 4 to 5
versity Press, Ithaca, NY.
CHapter
20
Papovaviridae
Properties of Papovaviruses.
335
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS PAPILLOMAVIRUS .,
339
Bovine Papillomatosis...
339
Equine Papillomatosis and Sarcoids .
341
++b
Canine Papillomatosis
341
Papillomatosis in Other Mammalian Species...
341
Papillomatosis in Birds.
341
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS POLYOMAVIRUS ...
342
Bovine Polyomavirus Infection...
342
Budgerigar Fledgling Disease...
342
Further Reading...
342
Papillomas or warts havc been recognized in animals for
Properties of Papovaviruses
centuries; a stable master for the Caliph of Baghdad
 described equine warts in the 9th century. That papillo-
Classification
 mas have a viral etiology was recognized as long ago as
The family Papovaviridae comprises two rather dispa-
1907, but it was not until 1978 that it was realized that
ae sads roo u sded pue seded suaog
rate gencra: (1) the genus Papillomavirus, containing the
caused by sevcral different viruses. In 1935, Peyton Rous
many papillomaviruses of mammals and birds, (2) thc
 observed that benign rabbit papillomas occasionally pro-
 genus Polyomavirus, containing a few pathogens of ani-
 mals and humans. The frst rwo syllables of the name
gressed to carcinomas; this was one of the earliest associ-
ations of viruses with cancer. Today, bovinc papillo-
Papovaviridae refer to thc genera Papillomavirus and
 Polyomavirus; "va” alludes to "vacuolating agent,"' an
matosis, canine oral papillomatosis, and equine sarcoid
old name for the prototype polyomavirus, simian virus
may present significant clinical problems.
40 (SV40).
 With few exceptions, papillomaviruses cannot bc
Papillomaviruses are distinguished on the basis of
grown in cell culture; nevertheless, DNAs of many of
 host range and DNA sequence rclatedncss. Types are
the viruses that infect animals and about half of the
designated by numbers following the chronological or-
many viruscs that infect humans have been purified,
der of thcir identification. By convention, a new virus
cloned, and sequenced completely. This work was stimu-
type must have less than 50% overall DNA sequence
lated by the discovery in the 1980s that certain papillo-
homology with other viruscs from thc same species
maviruses cause cervical, anogenital, and laryngeal carci-
(greater than 50% but less than 100% homology defines
nomas in humans. This discovery, in turn, has prompted
 new subtypes, which are designated by serial letters).
 much research on the nature and mechanisms of papillo-
Using this system, 6 types of bovine, 2 types of equinc,
mavirus oncogenesis, which is now advancing our under-
and more than 77 types of human papillomaviruses have
standing of papiliomas in animals.
been identified (Table 20.1). Papillomaviruses have also
 Polyomaviruses are also highly species specific. Hx-
been found in chimpanzccs, colobus and rhesus mon-
 cept for rare neurologic and urologic diseases in immu-
keys, deer, dogs, elephant, elk, opossum, mice, turtles,
nologically incompetent humans and a disease in budger- C
 chaffnches, and parrots. There is little sequcnce homol-
igars, these viruses are of little concern as pathogens (
 ogy betwecn DNAs of papillomaviruses from different
in nature.
species.
33.5
336
20. Paporairidae
TaBLE 20.1
Diseases Caused by Papillomaviruses
PRINCIPAL SPECIES
VIRUS
AFFECTED
Disease
Bovine papillomaviruses 1 and 2
Catfle
Cutaneous fibropapilloma
Horses
Sarcoid
Bovine papillomavirus 3
Catle
Culaneous papilloma 
 Bovine papillomavirus 4
Catle
Intestinal tract papilloma (may become
malignant! 
Bovine papillomavirus 5
Cattle
Teat fibropapilloma I'rice grain
papilloma"]
 Bovine papillomavirus 6
Cattle
Teat papiloma ('frond papiloma')
 Ovine papilomavirus
Sheep
Cutoneous fibropapilloma
Equine papillomaviruses l and 2
Horses
 Cutaneous papilloma
Porcine genital papillomavirus
Swine
Cutaneous papilloma
 Canine oral papillomavirus
Dogs
 Oral papilloma 
Deer papillomavirus
Deer
Fibropapilma, papiloma, fibroma 
Cottontail rabbit papillomavirus° and
Rabbits
 Cutaneous papilloma (may become
rabbit papillomavirus
malignant!
Human papillomavirus [>77 types]
Humans
 Cutaneous and mucosal papillomas (may
become malignant]
Fringilla (finch) papillomavirus
Finches
 Papilloma
Avian papillomavirus
Parrots
 Papilloma
"Also called Shope papilomavirus, much used in early studies of oncogenic viruses.
 Bovinc papillomaviruses have been divided further
Papillomavirus) or 45 (genus Polyomavirus) nm in dia-
"7 *1 ssnuiaeuoded suaoq (l) isdnos, omi ou
meter. Virions are constructed from 72 hexavalent (six-
and 5 are related immunologically, have the same ge-
sided) capsomers arranged most unusually in pentameric
nome size, and share nucleotide scquence homologies
due, yog '(7'oz put I'0z sinlg) saee (apis-aag)
and (2) bovine papilomaviruses 3, 4, and 6 have smaller
and "full virus particles and tubular and other aberrant
 genoines and sharec DNA sequence homologics. The Iwo
forms are secn by clcctron microscopy. The genome con-
groups are related only distantly.
sists of a single molecule of circular double-stranded
 Papillomaviruses can also be categorized according
DNA, 8 (genus Papillomavirus) or 5 (genus Polyomavi-
to their tissue tropism and the histologic character of
rus) kbp in size. The DNA has covalently closed cnds,
the lesions they cause: group I (bovine papillomaviruses
is supercoiled, and is infectious. Six polypeptides have
types 3 and 6 and cottontail rabbit papillomavirus) in-
been identified, two forming the capsid (Figure 20.3).
duce cutaneous neoplasia; group II (bovine papillomavi-
The viruses are resistant to diverse environmcntal insults:
rus type 4) induce hyperplasia of nonstratifed squamous
infectivity survives lipid solvents and detergents, low pH,
epithelium; group Ill (bovine papillomaviruses types 1,
 and high temperatures.
2, and 5) induce suhcutaneous fibromas in addition to
cutaneous papilomas; and group IV (decr papillomavi-
rus) induce primarily fibromas with minimal cutanc-
Viral Replication
 ous hypcrplasia.
Papillomavirus replication is linked tightly to thc growth
and differcntiation of cells in stratificd squamous and
Virion Properties
mucosal cpithelium from their origin in basal layers to
their shedding at the epidermal surface of the skin or
Papovavirus virions are noncnveloped, spherical in out-
mucous membranes. Actively dividing basal cells in thc
line, with icosahedral symmetry. Virions are SS (genus
 stratum germinativum are infected initially and are be-
Properties of Paprorerirnses
337
FIGURE 20.1.
avirus, SV40 virus. (C) Genus Polyo
SV40 capsids. Bar: 100 nm. [Courtesy of E. A. Follett.]
lieved to maintain the virus in a proviral, possibly latent,
 are most pronounced in the stratum granulosum. Virions
state throughout ccllular differentiation. Virus-induced
 are shcd with exfoliated cells of the stratum corneum
hyperplasia, induced by early viral gene products, leads
of the skin or nonkeratinized cells of mucosal surfaces
to increased basal cell division and delayed maturation of
(Figure 20.4).
cells in the stratum spinosum and stratum granulosum.
Virions attach to celular receptors, cnter via recep-
These cells become massed into nascent papillomas. Late
 tor-mediated endocytosis, and are transported to the
viral genes encoding capsid proteins arc cxpressed, first
nucleus where they arc uncoated, releasing their DNA.
in cels of the stratum spinosum. Virions arc frst seen
 During productive infcction, transcription of the viral
at this stage of cellular differentiation. The accumulation
 genome is divided into early and late stages. Transcrip-
of large numbers of virions and associated cytopathology
tion of early and late coding regions is controlled by
separate promoters and occurs on opposite DNA strands
in the casc of polyomaviruses and on the saime strand
with papillomaviruses. First, the half of the genome that
: Figure 20.2.
contains the early gencs is transcribed, forming mRNAs
that direct the synthesis of enzymes involved in viral
replication. Late mRNAs that direct the synthesis of
virion structural protcins are transcribed from the other
half of the viral genome after DNA synthesis has begun.
 Progeny DNA molecules serve as additional template,
amplifying the production of structural proteins greatly.
Several different translational strategies are employed to
enhance the limited coding capacity of the viral genomes.
 Papovavirus DNA replication begins at a single
unique origin of replication and proceeds bidircctionally,
terminating about 180° away on the circular DNA. An
initiation complex binds to the origin and unwinds a
region (thc replication bubble and fork); nascent DNA
chains are formed; one strand synthesized continuously
SV40 virus struchure at 3.8-A resolution, determined using Xray
in the dircction of unwinding, the other synthesized dis-
crystallography. [From J. S. Butel, Papovaviruses. in Encyclopedia
continuously in the opposite direction. As replication
of Virology (R. G. Webster and A. Granoff, eds.), 2nd ed. ICD-
ROMj. Academic Press, London, 1998.]
 proceeds the torsional strain created by the unwinding
338
20.Papovauiridae
FIGuRe 20.3.
Bovine papillomavirus 1
1]
E2
2
E
E1
A
A
0
1000
2000
3000
0000
5000
0009
7000
7946
 Cottontail rabbit papillomavirus
四
E2
L2
2
1
E1
A
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
70007868
The genomic organizalion of wo papillomaviruses, bovine papillomavirus 1 and coltontail rabbit papilomavirus (Shope papillomgvirus, decduced
fromDNAsequencedata.Athoughthegenomesarecircular,theyhavebeenlinearizedbycutingatastndardsiteAllpapillmavirusopen
reading frames are located on one of the DNA strands and only hat strand is transcribed. Transcriplion is compiex, invalving the use of seven
different promoters ond altemate and muliple splicing palterms and producing over 20 diferent mRNAs. The E [for earlyl genes encode mainly
proteins with regulatory functions concerned with persistence, DNA replication, cnd activation of the lytic cycle; the L (for late] genes encode
structlural proteins. A, polyadenylation sites. [From P. M. Howley, Popillomaviruses: The viruses and their replication. In *Fields Virology" [B. N.
Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, 1. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.1, 3rd ed., Pp. 2045-2076.
Lippincot-Raven, Philadelphia, 1996.]
of the parental strands of DNA is released by the action
Bovine papillomaviruses 1 and 2 and DNA isolated
of a specifc viral enzyme. Bidirectional replication pro-
from them can transform cells in vitro. In contrast to
cceds around the full genomic DNA circle, at which
 other transforming DNA viruses, papillomavirus DNA
 point the progeny DNA circles separate.
remains episomal and is rarely integrated into the cellular
Virions are assembled in the nucleus and are re-
 genome. The genes expressed in such cells encode pro-
leased on cell death, often just as a consequence of cellu-
tcins concerned with replication and regulation of viral
lar replacement in epithelia. Some cells cxhibit a charac-
 transcription as well as proteins that affect cellular trans-
teristic cytopathic effect, marked by cytoplasmic
formation directly. In association with cofactors, bovine,
vacuolization. An infected cell may prodnce 10,000 to
rabbit, and human papillomaviruses may produce carci-
100,000 virions.
nomas in vivo (Table 20.2).
Figure 20.4.
B
Schematic representation of the events in papilomvirus infction of keratinocytes.A) The primary infection occurs in a cell f the sratum
germinatvum,wih he virus gaining entry viaanrasin,et.B}Thisresults inaproliferaing clone f infected celstha spreods lalerally in
ssaciation with virus-induced delay in the maturation of infecled cells. (C) Cellular diferentiation occurs eventually and large numbers of virions
are producedin associction wih e Formation of a popilma. Thisismost pronouncedinthe straum granuloumVirions are shed wih exfoliated
cells of the stratum corneum. (Courtesy of H. zur Hausen.)
Bouinc Papillontatosis
339
TaBle 20.2
TABLE 20.3
Properties of Papovaviruses
Host Responses to Papillomavirus Infections
Host RESPONSE
VIRUS
Two genera, Polyomavirus and Papillomavirus
Virions are nonenveloped, spherical in outline, with icosahe
Group 1
dral symmelry. Virions are 55 (genus Papillomavirus) or 45
 Neoplasia of cutaneous
(genus Polyomovirus] nm in diameter
Bovine papillomaviruses 3
stratified epithelium (cuta-
and 6, equine, and cotton-
The genome consiss of a single molecule of circular double-
neous papilloma]
tail rabbit papillomaviruses?
stranded DNA, 8 (genus Papillomavirus] or 5 Igenus Poly-
omavirus) kbp in size. The DNA has covalently closed
Group 2
ends, is circular and supercoiled, and is infectious
Hyperplasia of normal non- Bovine papillomavirus 4b
Members of both genera replicate in nucleus; members of
stralified squamous epithe- 
 and canine oral papillomavi-
the genus Polyomavirus grow in cultured cells; most mem-
lium or metaplastic squa-
ruses
bers of the genus Papillomavirus have not been grown in
mous epithelium
culture, but will transform cultured cells; infectious virions
Group 3
produced only in terminally differentiated epithelial cells 
Cutaneous papilloma with  Bovine papillomaviruses 1,
During replicalion, polyomavirus DNA is transcribed from
underlying fibroma of con- 2, and 5 
both strands, whereas papillomavirus DNA is transcribed
nective tissue
From ona strand
Integraled (genus Polyomavirus) or episomal (genus Papillo
"May progress to squamous carcingmg.
mavirus) DNA may be oncogenic
bWith cofactors, alimentary tract and bladder papilomas may progress
lo carcinomas.
Diseases Caused by Members OF
to abrasion and may bleed. Fibropapillomas are common
The GEnuS PApilloMavirUS
on the udder and teats and on the head, neck, and shoul-
ders; they may also occur in the omasum, vagina, vulva,
Bovine Papillomatosis
penis, and anus (Figure 20.5A).
 In contrast, bovine papilomaviruses 3, 4, and 6
 Papillomas or warts are seen more commonly in cattle
 induce epithelial and cutaneous lesions without fibro-
e a se r e r r e  
 blast proliferation. Lesions caused by bovine papillo-
but the incidence is highest in calves and yearlings.
mavirus 3 have a tendency to persist and are usually
Bovine papillomaviruses 1 and 2 exhibit a some-
flat with a broad base in contrast to the more usual
what broader host range and tissue tropism than other
fibropapillomas that protrude and are often peduncu-
types, causing fbropapillomas in cattle and sarcoids in
lated. In upland areas of Scotland and northern England,
horses. Bovine papillomaviruses 3 to 6 have been shown
 papillomas due to bovine papillomavirus 4 occur only
by both natural and experimental infection to be re-
in the alimentary tract and in the urinary bladder and
stricted to cattle. Transmission from cattle to humans
 may progress to squamous cells carcinomas (Figure
was suspected from the high incidence of cutaneous
20-5B) (see Chapter 11). Ingestion of bracken fern ( Pteri-
warts in butchers; however, the virus isolated from these
dium aquilinum) is a major contributing factor (both
 people docs not appear to be rclated to any known
 cocarcinogen and immunosuppressive agent) in the tran-
bovine virus.
sition from benign papilomas to invasive carcinoma of
the alimentary tract (type 4) or bladder (type 2), the
latrer leading to so-called chronic endemic hematuria.
Clinical Feafures
The various papillomaviruses rccognized in cattle arc
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
associated with distinct lcsions (Table 20.3); bovine pap-
illomaviruses 1, 2, and 5 cause “teat frond” warts, com-
Papillomas develop after the introduction of virus
mon cutaneous warts, and "rice grain" fibropapillomas,
 through abrasions of the skin. Infection of epithelial
respectively. These papillomas have a fbrous core cov-
 cells results in hyperplasia with subsequent degenera-
ered to a variable depth with stratified squamous epithe-
 tion and hyperkeratinization. These changes begin usu-
lium, thc outer layers of which are hyperkeratinized. The ally 4 to 6 weeks after exposure. In gencral, fibropa-
lesions vary from small firm nodules to large cauliflower-
 pillomas persist for 4 to 6 months before spontaneous
like growths; they are grayish to black in color and rough
1regression; multiple warts usually regress simulta-
and spiny to the touch. Large fibropapillomas are subject neously. Stages in the pattern of papilloma develop-
340
20.Papowmriridele
FIGURE 20.5.
D
Papillomas of various host species. (A} Bovine ibropopilloma-
-teat warts—-caused by bovine papillomavirus 5. (B) Bovine bladder papilloma
caused by bovine papillomavirus 4. (C) Equine papillomalosis. (D) Canine oral papillomalosis.
ment can be discerned. Thus, stage 1 papillomas appear
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
as slightly raised plaques, starting at about 4 weeks
after exposure. Stage 2 papillomas are characterized
Virus is transmitted between animals by contaminated
by cytopathology, virus replication, and crystalline
halters, nose leads, grooming and earmarking equip-
aggregates of virions in lesions, starting at about 8
ment, rubbing posts, and other articles contaminated
by contact with discased cattle. Cattle that have been
wecks. Stage 3 papillomas are characterized by fbrotic,
pedunculatcd bases and rough, lobate, or fungiform
groomed for show may have extensive lesions. Sexual
transmission of warts in cattle is likely as such lcsions
surfaces, starting after about 12 weeks. The level of
neutralizing antibody appears to be correlated with
are rarc in animals that are artificially inseminated. The
the regression of lesions and with protection against re-
 discase is more common in housed cattle than in cattle
infection.
 On pasture. Narural bovinc papillomavirus infection of
horses generally occurs after housing animals in stalls
that previously held cattle.
Laboratory Diagnosis
 Prevention and treatment of papillomas are diffi-
cult to evaluate because the disease is self-limiting and
The clinical appearance of papillomas is characteristic,
 its duration varics. Bovine interferon α has been used to
and laboratory diagnosis is seldom necessary. Virions
 treat cattle, but rarely seems indicated. Psoralen-based
ran be secn by electron microscopic examination. Hy-1
 photodynamic therapy has been used, but again appro-
bridization assays and the polymerase chain reaction 1
 priate clinical circumstances are rarely encountered. In-
can be used to detect papillomavirus DNA, but these 
 oculation with homogcnizcd, autologous wart tissue,
 methods are seldom uscd for routine diagnosis in veteri-
treated with formalin, has been used for many years,
llary medicine.
 a u seme  ra si g
Papillomatosis in Birds
341
Vaccination with viral capsid proteins produced by re-
The variable success and hazards of several at-
combinant DNA technology has been encouraging, but
tempted therapies (surgery, laser surgery, radiation, topi-
vaccines must contain multiple virus types because there
cal drugs) have led to an interest in immunotherapy.
is no cross-protection.
 Stimulation of cell-mediated responses by the injection
of immunopotentiators has been somewhat successful.
Ocular sarcoids have regressed following the injection
Equine Papillomatosis
of viable Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) mycobacteria.
and sarcoids
Canine Papillomatosis
sionally as small, elevated, keratinized papillomas
Warts in dogs usually begin on the lips and can spread
around the lips and noses of horses (Figure 20.5C). They
 to the buccal mucosa, tongue, palate, and pharynx before
generally regress after 1 to 9 months. Warts that interfere
 regressing spontaneously (Figure 20-5D). The lesions 0c-
with the bit or bridle can be removed surgically. Congeni-
casionally become extensive, requiring veterinary at-
tal equine papillomas have been recorded on several oc-
tention.
casions.
 Sarcoids are naturally occurring skin tumors of
 horses that have the histological appearance of fbrosar-
Papillomatosis in Other
comas. Although they do not metastasize, they persist
for life and are locally invasive, often recurring after
Mammalian Species
 surgical removal or treatment with radioactive implants.
 Transmission trials with sarcoid material have usually
Classic studies on viral oncogenesis were carried out in
been unsuccessful. Sarcoids have not been observed to
the late 1930s with the Shope rabbit papillomavirus.
spread from affected horses to other horses by direct
Papillomas caused by this virus often progress to carcino-
contact.
mas in both their natural host, the cottontail rabbit (Syl-
On the basis of thei appearance, sarcoids have
vilagus spp.), and in laboratory rabbits infected experi-
been classifed into type 1 (verrucous type, usually hair-
mentally.
pnond, 'snsqoy) 7 ad (ona kmos pe sss
 Oral papillomatosis occurs naturally in domestic
flesh' type, comprising an intradermal fibroblastic pro-
rabbits (Oryctologus cuniculus); the tumors are small,
liferative response, often growing rapidly and ulcerat-
 gray-white, fliform or pedunculated nodules (5 mm in
ing), type 3 (mixed type, showing features of types 1
diameter) and are localized mostly on the underside of
and 2), and type 4 (occult type, flat with rough thickened
the tongue. The causative papillomavirus is distinct from
skin and a surrounding area of alopecia). Types 1 to
 the Shope rabbit papilloma virus (cottontail rabbit papil-
3 may be either sessile or pedunculated. Subcutaneous 
lomavirus). Experimentally, oral papillomatosis has
fibrous nodules beneath apparently normal skin have 
 been reproduced in various rabbit species, and in nature
been observed in association with sarcoids, particularly
it is widespread among domestic rabbirs, particularly in
 in the periorbital region, and may represent a fifth cat-
older animals. Virus spread in animal rooms seems not
egory.
to occur, but transmission from the mother to offspring
 Horses are susceptible to experimental infection
during the suckling period is common. Oral papillomas
with bovine papillormaviruses 1 and 2, and the tumors
 of rabbits show no tendency to malignancy and may
 produced are similar to sarcoids. Bovine papillomavirus
persist for many months.
DNA sequences have been detected in high copy number
by hybridization in both experimental and natural le-
 sions. Also, bovine papillomaviruses have been shown
Papillomatosis in Birds
to be able to transform cquine fbroblasts in vitro. These
data, together with thc observation that sarcoids can
A member of the genus Papilomavirus has been identi-
occur in epidemic form, suggest that bovine papillomavi-
fed in birds: the Fringilla (finch) papillomavirus. Infec-
ruses may be the cause of equine sarcoids. However,1
 tion with a second papillomavirus-like virus has been
unlikc their natural counterparts, the induced tumors described in African green parrots. Both viruses have
regress spontaneously, and horses infected experimen-  been demonstrated in papillomatous lesions in their re-
tally devclop antibodies against bovine papillomavi-
 spective host spccics. In finchcs, papillomas occur exclu-
ruses, which are absent in horses with naturally oc-
 sively on the legs and show stages of development from
curring sarcoids.
a slight node on a digit to heavy involvement of the
342
20.Papowaviridae
foot and tarsometatarsus, often obscuring the individual i
 ies ranging between 30 and 80%. Affected birds have
digits and resulting in overgrowth and distortion of the f
 full crops, die acutely, and exhibit abdominal distention
claws. In severe cases the tumor may account for up to
 and reddening of the skin. Postmortem examination re-
 5% of the bird's total body weight, but affected birds
veals viscerai changes such as hydropericardium, en-
seem to remain in good condition otherwise.
larged heart and liver, and swollen congested kidneys.
On histologic examination, cells with enlarged nuclei
containing inclusions are seen along with necrotic foci
Diseases Caused by Members Of
in several organs. By electron microscopy, polyomavirus
virions can be visualized in the nuclei of epithelial cells,
The GENUS POLYOMAVIRUS
e.g., in renal tubules.
The virus has been isolated in budgerigar embryo
 Polyomaviruses cause inapparent infections in most
fibroblasts inoculated with tissue homogenates from af-
hosts; they have restricted host ranges and their onco-
fected birds and can be adapted easily to growth in
genic potential has often only been revealed when inocu-
chicken embryo fibroblasts. The virus is similar to poly-
lated experimentally into heterologous hosts. Several
omaviruses of mammals, having a similar genome but
polyomaviruses have been found in rodents and lago-
 a smaliler large T antigen and a different organization
 morphs in addition to murine polyoma virus, the virus
of its origin of replication. Little similarity was observed
that gave this genus its name: K virus of mice, latent
 by physical mapping with restriction endonucleases.
hamster virus, and rabbit kidney vacuolating virus. Poly-
 omaviruses of interest in veterinary medicine occur in
cattle and birds.
Further Reading
Campo, M. S. (1997). Bovine papillomavirus and cancer.
Vet. J. 154, 175-188.
Bovine Polyomavirus Infection
Howley, P. M. (1996). Papillomaviruses: The viruses and
their replication. In "Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields,
About 60% of bovine sera, including fetal and neonatal
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. I..
calf sera, contain a bovine polyornavirus, which grows
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
well in monkey kidney cells. A construct containing its
eds.), 3rd ed., Pp. 2045-2076. Lippincott-Raven, Phil-
ea1ly genes transforms rodent cells, and these cells induce
adelphia, PA.
 Olson, C. (1987). Animal papillomas: Historical perspec-
fumors in immunocompromised rats. In a survey done
in The Netherlands, about 60% of veterinarians were
tives. In "The Papovaviridae" (N. P. Salzman and
P. M. Howley, eds.), vol. 2, pp. 39-49. Plenum, New
found to have antibodies to this virus. Despite this preva-
York.
lencc, the possible significance of this virus remains un-
Osterhaus, A. D. M. E., and Moreno-Lopez, J. (1993).
known.
Papovaviruses, In "Virus Infections of Vertebrates'
(J. B. McFerran and M. S. McNulty, eds.), vol. 4, pp.
147-151. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Shah, K. V. (1996). Polyomaviruses. In "Fields Virology'
Budgerigar Fledgling Disease
(B. N. Fields, D, M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Cha.
nock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and 
An avian polyomavirus has been identifed as the cause
S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 2027-2044. Lippin-
Of an acute generalized disease in fledgling budgerigars
cott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Shah, K. V., and Howiey, P. M. (1996). Papillomavi-
(Melopsittacus undulatus). The same virus may also be
ruses. In *Fields Virology (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe,
responsible for *“French molt,” which is a milder disease
P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P.
of budgerigars that results in chronic disorders of feather
Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed.,
formation, and it is also widespread among chickens as
PP. 2077-2110. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Vanselow, B. A., and Spradbrow, P. B. (1997). Equine
a subclinical infection.
 Budgerigar fledgling diseasc has been reported
and bovine papillomavirus infections. In "Virus Infec-
tions of Vertebrates" (M. J. Studdert, ed.), vol. 6, pp.
from various aviaries in the United States, with mortalit-
83-94. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Chapter 21
Parvoviridae
Properties of Parvoviruses .
343
Feline Panleukopenia.
348
 Canine Parvovirus Disease..
351
 Porcine Parvovirus Disease ..
354
Mink Enteritis
355
Aleutian Disease of Mink.
355
Rodent Parvovirus Diseases...
355
Goose Parvovirus Disease....
356
Duck Parvovirus Disease...
356
Further Reading.
356
 Feline panleukopenia has been recognized for about 100
Properties of Parvoviruses
years, mink enteritis was frst described in 1947, and
canine parvovirus disease was recognized as a new noso-
Classification
logic entity in 1978. The parvoviruses that cause these
diseases are closely related, the mink and canine viruses
The family Parvoviridae comprises two subfamilies: the
 y s n is se us  s
subfamily Parvovirinae, which contains viruses of verte.
feline virus. The diseases in cats, mink, and dogs are
 brates, and the subfamily Densovirinae, which contains
remarkably similar, particularly in causing leukopenia
viruses of insects that will not be discussed further. There
and enteritis. In animals infected in utero or in the perina-
are three genera in the subfamily Parvovirinae: the genus
tal period, there may be generalized disease and sequelae;
 Parvovirus, the members of which infect vertebrates and
for example, when the feline virus infects the fetus or
replicate autonomously; the genus Erythrovirus, which
 newborn kitten it produces cerebellar hypoplasia and
 includes human parvovirus B19 and a related virus of
whcn the canine virus infects the newborn pup it pro-
 cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis), which also
duces myocarditis.
replicate autonomously; and the genus Dependovirus,
Porcine parvovirus infection is usually subclinical
the members of which are callcd adeno-associated vi-
in adult swine but causes important disease in the ferus.
ruses because they are defective and unable to replicate
 Goose parvovirus causes a lethal disease in goslings and
 except in the presence of a helper virus, usually an adeno-
there is another parvovirus that causes lethal disease in
muscovy ducklings. Rodent parvoviruses, particularly
virus.
Member viruses of the genus Parvovirus cause
minute virus of mice, are used as models in studies of
 the pathogenesis of certain fetal abnormalities and are
important diseases in swine, cats, dogs, mink, mice,
rats, hamsters, geese, and ducks (Table 21.1). The
common contaminants of cultured rodent cells and tu-
original canine virus, called canine parvovirus 1 or
mors. A human parvovirus, parvovirus B19, is the cause
of a common exanthematous disease of children, ery-
minute virus of canines, is taxonomicaily distinct. The
thema infectiosum, also called ffth disease, and hemo-
other canine virus, called canine parvovirus 2, is related
lytic crisis in people with sickle cell disease. Parvoviruses
closely to feline and mink viruses: (1) the canine virus
have becn isolated from chickens, rabbits, and an equine
 can replicate in both canine and feline cells but the
a sas ss u ssd se sae  inq s
feline virus replicates only in feline cells; (2) feline
not clear.
and mink viruses are indistinguishable antigenically by
343
344
21. Parowiridae
Table 21.1
Manifestations of Parvovirus Diseases in Animals*
VIRus
DISEASE
Feline panleukopenia virus
Generalized neonatal disease, cerebellar hypoplasia, panleuko-
penia, enteritis
Canine parvovirus 1 (minute virus of canines)
Mild diarrhea
 Canine parvovirus 2 (subrypes 2a and 2b)
Generalized neonatal disease, enteritis, myocardis, leukopenia
 Porcine parvovirus
Stillbinth, abortion, fetal death, mummification, infertility
Mink enteritis virus
Panleukopenia, enteritis
 Aleutian disease virus of mink
Chronic immune complex disease, encephalopathy
Minute virus of mice
 Congenital fetal malformations
Rat virus
Congenital fetal malformalions
H-1 virus of rats
Congenital fetal malformations
Goose parvovirus
 Hepatitis, myocarditis 
Duck parvovirus
Hepatitis, myocarditis
* Parvoviruses have also been recovered from cattle and from rabbirs, but under natural conditions are not known to cause disease in
these species.
hemagglutination-inhibition and serum neutralization t
tionships are as depicted in Figure 21.1. Since its
tcsts (canine  parvovirus  is distinguishable by  these
 emergence in 1978, canine parvovirus 2 has undergone
methods); and (3) the three viruses are distinguishable f
further mutations affecting its antigenic and genetic
by genomic DNA sequencing. When parvoviruses are
properties-these changcs are recognized as subtypes
compared by scquencing, their phylogenetic interrela- 2
2a and 2b and arc depicted in Figure 21.2.
. Figure 21.1.
Human parvovirus (B19)
Adeno-associated virus 2
Bovine parvovirus
 Porcine parvovirus
 Canine parvovirus 2
Feline panleukopenia virus
 Raccoon parvovirus
Minute virus of mice
Hamster parvovirus
Aleutian mink disease virus
Densovirus (insects)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Index of Similarity
omicDNA sequences.[Courtesy ot
A. Simpson and M. G. Rossmann.]
Properties of Parrowirses
345
Figure 21.2.
A
FPV.b
CPV-d} CPV type-2
CPV-31} cPV type-2a
FPV-193
CPV-39
CPV-133
 CPV type-2b
MEV-a
BFPV
'FPV-24"
B
FPV
CPV type-2
RPV
Ancestral
1978-1981
<1900-present
CPV
BFPV
mld-1970s
CPV type-2a
(? Host Range)
MEV
1940s-preaent
CPV type-2b
~1984-preaent
The evlunf  carvreirsling mree nnavirss  a, nd 2b (AGeneiciveiyof hdiferent
virsndisrinisrnrristeb
voccines) are founded in point mutations [nucleotide substitutions)—the length of the branches of the tree and the small numbers indicate the
number of nucleotide differences behween adiacent viruses. (B) This evolutionhas taken pface in recent times; the latest, involving the emergence
of canine parvovirus 2b from2a, occurred around1984.FPV,eline panleukpenic virus nmbers cndlettes indicate strins);MEV,mink
enleritis virus; RPV, raccoon parvovirus; BFPV, blue fox parvovirus [an isolate made in Finland from an arctic fox); CPV, canine parvovirus; "FPV-
24"', a canine parvovirus 2b-like virus Irom a cat. (Courtesy of C. R. Parrish.!
Virion Properties
(M, 84,000). VP1 and VP2 are formed by alternative
splicing of the same mRNA, and the entire sequence of
 Parvovirus virions are nonenveloped, 25 nm in diameter,
VP2 is encoded within the VP1 gene. A third structural
 and have icosahedral symmetry (Figures 21.3). The sur-
 protein, VP3, is formed only in "full" (DNA-containing)
face features of the capsid revealed by X-ray crystallogra-
capsids by cleavage of 15-20 amino acids from the
phy include a hollow cylinder at each fvefold axis of
amino terminus of VP2. As determined by X-ray crystal-
symmetry that is surrounded by a circular depression
lography, the central structural motif of VP2 of canine
(called the canyon), a prominent protrusion at each
 parvovirus has an eight-stranded, antiparallel β-barrel
threefold axis of symmetry (called the spike), and a de-
motif as found in several other icosahedral viruses. The
pression at each twofold axis of symmetry (called the
strands of the B-barrel are linked at each turn by four
dimple) (Figure 21.4). The determinants of the host range
extensive loops; these loops form most of the outer sur-
difference between feline and canine parvoviruses have
facc of the virus particle and are responsible for the
been mapped to the spike, where there are just two amino
environnental stability of these viruses. Indeed, parvovi-
acid differences berween the two viruses.
ruses are extremely stable to environmcntal conditions
The genome consists of a single molecule of linear
(extremes of heat and pH); disinfection of contaminared
single-stranded DNA, 5.2 kb in size (Figure 21.5). The
 premises using commercially available disinfectants is a
 complete nucleotide sequences of all important parvovi-
 major challenge.
 ruses are available. Some parvoviruses encapsidate only
the negative-sense DNA strand (e.g., canine parvovirus
2, minute virus of mice), whereas others encapsidate
 different proportions of either strand. The genome has
Viral Replication
6 to 10 terminal palindromic sequences, enabling each
end to form hairpin structures.
Viral replication takes place in the nucleus and requires
The capsid is composed of 60 molecules of VP2
host cell functions of late S phase or early G2 phase of
protein (M, 65,000), along with a few molecules of VP1
the cell division cycle. This requirement for cycling cells
346
21.Parvouiridue
Figure 21.3.
Family Parvoviriae, genus Parvovirus, canine parvovirus. [lff Virions, negtive stain elecron microscopy. Bar 100nm). Righ Feline embryo
cells infected with feline panleukopenia virus; he appearance of inranuclearinclusion bodies varies, becoming more dense as infection progresses.
Hematoxylin and eosin. Magnification: X800.
for viral replication is the basis for many aspects of the
The requirement for cycling cells for viral replica-
pathogenesis of parvovirus infections. In infections of
tion indicates a viral requirement for host DNA replica-
the fetus (pig or cat) or ncwhorn (dog or cat) where
tion machinery. Specifcally, there is no polymerase en-
there is considerable cell division in many organs, the
zyme in the vition itself nor does the virus encode any
infcction may be widespread; in older animals a nar-
such enzyme. Instead, cellular DNA polymerase II is
rower range of tissucs is affected. Thus, the cerebellum
cimployed to transcribe viral DNA into a double-
is destroyed selectively in felinc fcruscs or kittens infected
stranded DNA intermediate, which is then used as a
 in the perinatal period, and the myocardium is damaged
 template as other cellular enzymes catalyze the transcrip-
 in pups and goslings. At all ages, the continuous division 
tion of viral mRNAs. Alternative splicing paterns give
 of cells in lymphoid tissues and the intestinal epithelium
 rise to several mRNA species that are translated into a
leads to the common occurrence of leukopenia and cn-
greater numbcr of different proteins than the limited
teritis.
coding potential of the small genome might suggest. The
Properties cof Parveouirses
347
Figure 21.4.
Depressionbetween
axesof3-fold symmetry
(dimple)
rotrusionataxis
of3-foldsymmetry
(spike)
Hollowcylinderataxis
of5-foldsymmetry
Depressionsurrounding
(canyon)
canyon, (3) a prominent protrusion al each axis of three-fold symmetry [called the spike), and (4} a depression at each axis of two-fold symmetry
deteminantiscatednearby).Hostrangedifferencesbetweenfeline panleukopeniavirusndcanine parvovirushovebeenmapped tohe spike,
where there are just wo amino acid differences behween the wo viruses. [Adapted from the work of C. R. Parrish, U. Truyen, 1. S. Parker, and
J.-Y. Sgro.
most abundant mRNA, which is encoded in the 3'-half
pins on the ncgative-sense DNA genome serve as a self-
of thc genome, dirccts the synthesis of the structural
primer for the initiation of synthesis of a double-stranded
 proteins. The nonstructural protein (NS1), encoded in
 circular DNA replicative intermediate. The detection of
the 5'-half of the genome, is also produced in very largc 
a dimeric form of the replicative intermediate, i.e., a
 amounts and serves a numbcr of functions: (1) it binds
 concatemcr of two covalently linked double-stranded
to DNA and is requircd for viral DNA replication, (2)
 forms, has led to a model in which the growing DNA
it serves as a helicasc, (3) it serves as an endonucleasc,
 strand replicates back on itself to produce a tetrameric
 and (4) it interferes with clular DNA replication by
 form from which two complete positive strands and two
producing nicks in cellular DNA. This latter activity
 complete negative strands are generated by a complicated
leads to the arrest of the cell division cycle in S phase.
 series of reopening of circular forms, reinitiation of repli
Thc mechanism of replication of the genome is
 cation at transiently formed hairpins, and repeated sin-
amazingly complex (Figure 21.6). The 3'-terminal hair-
gle-strand endonuclease cleavages (Table 21.2)
Table 21.2
Properties of Parvoviruses
Three gener: avirus, rlcainnmous; Dpendvirus, dfective,reqirs hlper denvirus; and Densvirs,
infects insects
Virions are icosahedral, 25 nm in diameter, and composed of 60 protein subunits
The genome is α single molecule of negative-sense, single-stranded DNA, 5.2 kb in size
Replication occurs in the nucleus of dividing cells; infection leads to large intranuclear inclusion bodies
Viruses are very stable, resisting 60'C for 60 minutes and pH 3 to pH 9
Most viruses hemagglutinale red blood cells
348
21. Parvoviridae
Figure 2l.5.
Canineparvovirusgenomeand transcriptionstrategy
NS1andNS2
VP1andVP2
5'
NS1
NS2
An
2
reading
VP1
frames
An
VP2
An
3
2
3
4
5kb
hairpin strutures; hese struchures serve as the origin of DNA replication and also focilitate encapsidation packaging} of viral DNA within nascent
virions. The 5' ends of RNA transeripts are capped (block circles) and the 3' ends are polyadenylated (A. VP1 and VP2, which are produced
in very large amounts, are encoded in the same mRNA. They are formed by altemative initiation codons (arrowheads)—the enlire sequence of
sd
binds loDNA and is required for viral DNA replication,(2]it seves os a helicase,(3) ir serves as an endonuclease, and (4}it interferes wih
cellular DNA replication, causing the arrest of he cell division cycle in the S phase. NS2, which is encoded in two open reading frames and is
formedyiinglsreultsvirnexpresionThersremrkbldesityinasiioneilsrmshifinplicing.d
products among the different parvoviruses hat cannot be shown using any one virus as a model. (Courtesy of C. R. Parrish.)
Feline Panleukopenia
fever (greater than 40°C), which persists for about 24
hours and during which, in the peracute form of
It is thought that all members of the family Felidae are
the disease, death occurs. The temperature returns to
 susceptible to infection with feline panleukopenia virus,
which occurs worldwide and is arguably the most impor-
normal and rises again on the third or fourth day of
illness, at which time there is lassitude, inappetence,
tant of all feline viral diseases.
a rough coat, and repeated vomiting. A profuse, persis-
tent, frequently bloody diarrhea develops on the third
or fourth day of illness. Dehydration due to severe
Clinical Features
enteritis is a major contributing factor in the fatal
outcome of the disease in many cats. Where the clinical
 Feline panleukopenia is most common in kittens at
course is more prolonged, dehydration is a major factor
about the time of weaning, but cats of all ages are 
contributing to death, but most cats given adequate
susceptible (Table 21.3). The incubation period is about
fluid therapy will recover.
5 days (range 2 to 10 days). At the onset of clinical
 Kittcns that are infected from 2 weeks before to
signs, there is a profound leukopenia-there may be
about 2 weeks after birth may develop cercbella1 hypo-
fewer than 100 white blood cells per cubic millimeter
plasia. Affected kittens are noticcably ataxic whcn they
of blood. The severity of the disease and the mortality
bccome ambulatory at about 3 weeks of age; they have
rate parallcl the severity of the leukopenia—prognosis
a wide-based stance and move with exaggerated steps,
is grave if the white blood cell count falls below 1000
 tcnding to overshoot the mark and to pause and oscillate
 cells per cubic millimeter of blood. Clinical signs include
about an intended goal.
Feline Pautekopenia
349
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Figure 21.6.
Monomrer ss DNA.
Following viral entry in the oropharynx, initial viral
replication occurs in pharyngeal lymphoid tissuc. From
herc thc virus is distributed to other organs and tissucs
via the bloodstream. Cells that have appropriate recep-
 Monomer
tors and are in the S phase of the cell cyclc arc infected
duplex DNA
 and killed or prevented from entering mitosis. The char-
acteristic profound leukopenia involves all white blood
cell clcments: lymphocytes, neutrophils, monocytes, and
platelcts. Thcse cells are destroyed, both those present
 in the circulation and those in lymphoid organs, includ-
 ing the thymus, bonc marrow, lymph nodes, spleen, and
Peyer's patches. Resting peripheral lukocytes may be
Dimer duplexDNA
stimulated to proliferate, thcreby bccoming permissive
for viral replication. Alternatively, thc presence of virus
bound to the surface of clls may rcnder them targets
ndonuclease
for cytotoxic lysis.
cleavage
 Rapidly dividing intestinal epithelial cells in the
crypts of Lieberkuhn are very susceptible to infection.
The loss of ceils from villus tips conrinues in normal
fashion, but the failure in rcplacing these cells with cells
from the crypts leads to greatly shortened, nonabsorptive
villi and hence to diarrhea. At necropsy, lesions in the
Parvovirus DNA replicalion—a highly simplified model. DNA repli-
cation involves a single-strand displacement mechanism. First, the
small intestine are usually patchy in their distribution;
 3'-terminal hairpins serve as a prirmer to initiate DNA synthesis;
the entire simall intestine nust be examined for evidence
elongaloneadsdoblesrndedreplicativeintermeditem-
of congestion and thickening, which is visible from the
nomer duplex DNA) that is cros-linked covalently at one end by the
terminalhairpin.Adimericduplexformof thereplicativeintermedi
serosal as well as the lumenal surface. Where enteritis has
ate, i.e., α concatemer of two covalenty linked double-slranded
been present for several days before death the intestinal
Forms, is synthesized from which two complete posirive strands and
lesions are usually obvious, consisting of scgmental
two complele negative srands are generaled by a complicared series
of steps {reopening of circular Formsreinifiation ofreplication at
thickening and necrosis; histologically, in addition to
transiently formed hairpins, repected single-strand endonuclease
shortened and blunted intestinal vill,the crypts are di-
cleavage,c.hepresencef3minlhirpinsnpreny
lated and distended with mucus and cell debris. Rarely,
negalive-sense DNA strands favors their encapsidation.
intranuclear inclusions may be found in cells near the
base of the crypts. The lymph nodes may be cnlarged
and edematous and the bone marrow pale and fluid;
histologically, there is evidence of widespread destruc-
TaBLe 21.3
 Relationship between Age of Host and Occurrence of Various Syndromes in Feline
Panleukopenia and Canine Parvovirus Infection
SYNDROME
ANIMAL SPECIES
AGE
Generalized neonatal disease
 Cat and dog
2 to 12 days
Leukopenia/enteritis
 Cat and dog
 2 to 4 months
Enteritis
 Cat and dog
4 to12 months
 Cerebellar hypoplasia
Cat
2 weeks before to 4 weeks affter birth
Myocarditis
Dog
Acute
3 to 8 weeks
Chronic
After 8 weeks
350
21. Parvoviridae
tion of lymphoid cells and massive neutrophil infiltra
reaction assay for the detection of viral DNA in tissues.
tions into lymphoid tissues.
Serologic diagnosis is done by enzyme immunoassay or
In fetuses infected during the last 2 weeks of preg
indirect immunofluorescence.
nancy and the frst 2 weeks of life, dramatic lesions are
found in the external granular layer of the cerebellum-
this is the basis for the cerebellar hypoplasia seen grossly
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
at nccropsy (Figure 21.7). During this period, cells of
the external granular layer of the cerebellum normaily
 Feline panleukopenia virus is highly contagious. The vi-
undergo rapid division and migrate to form internal
rus may be acquired by direct contact with infected cats
granular and Purkinje cell layers; this migration is ar-
 or via fomites (bedding, food dishes); fleas and humans
rested and affected kittens remain permanently ataxic.
 May act as mechanical vectors. Virus is shed in the feces,
Following natural infection in previously healthy
 vomitus, urine, and saliva. Recovered cats may excrete
cats there is a rapid immune response. Neutralizing anti-
 small amounts of virus for many months. Neither the
body can be detected within 3 to 5 days of infection and
 exact duration of such excretion nor the underlying basis
may rise to very high levels. The presence of high titer
 for persistent infection has been determined.
antibody is correlated with protection, and immunity
The stability of the virus and the very high rates
after natural infection appears to be lifelong. The titer 
of viral excretion (up to 10* IDso/g of feces) result in
of passively acquired antibody in kittens parallels the
 high levels of environmental contamination, hence it may
maternal antibody titer and is therefore quite variabie,
be extremely difficult to disinfect contaminated premises.
providing protection and compromising active immuni-
 The virus may be acquired from premises following the
zation for only a few weeks or for as long as 22 weeks.
introduction of susceptible cats many months, even up
to a year, after previously affected cats have been re-
moved. The virus may also be carried a considerable
Laboratory Diagnosis
distance on wind-blown fomites.
Vaccination is practiced universally with both at-
Clinical signs, hematological examination, and postmor-
tenuated virus and inactivated virus vaccines being used.
tem findings are characteristic and are used for a pre-
When there are vaccine breaks, the usual problem is
sumptive diagnosis. Confrmatory tests include (1) direct
 interference caused by maternal antibody (see section on
hemagglutination of swine or rhesus monkey red blood (C
canine parvovirus vaccination).
cells by virus present in suitably prepared fecal samples;
 In large catteries, strict hygiene and quarantine
(2) virus isolation in cell culture; (3) antigen-capture
 of incoming cats are essential if the virus is to be
enzyme immunoassay or immunofluorescence for the
 excluded; cats should be held in isolation for several
detection of antigen in tissues;(4) and polymerase chain  weeks before entry and sick cats should be removed
Figure 21.7.
[A) Normal brain of a 3-month-old kiten. (B} Cerebellar hypoplasia caused by Feline panleukopenia virus infection in α 3-monh-old kiten. (C)
Canine parvovirus myocarditis showing scar tissue throughout the myocardium. [Courtesy of C. Lenghaus.]
Canine Parvovirus Disease
351
and isolated. For disinfection, 1% sodium hypochlorite
 emerged in 1978-1979. Today, the widespread use of
applied to clean surfaces will destroy residual contami-
vaccine and its induction or boosting of maternal anti-
nating virus, but it is ineffective in the presence of
body has made the generalized neonatal disease syn-
much organic matter. Organic iodine-, phenolic, and 
dromc and the myocarditis syndrome less common.
glutaraldehyde-based disinfectants, together with thor-
The leukopenia/enteritis syndrome parallels that
 ough cleaning with detergent-based cleanscrs, are used 
seen in cats precisely (however, the ccrebcllar hypoplasia
in these circumstances.
seen in cats has not been recognized in dogs). The inci-
dence of the leukopenia/enteritis syndrome has fallen
since the virus first emcrgcd, but is still an important
Canine Parvovirus Disease
cause of morbidity. This syndrome is seen most com-
monly in pups at 8 to 12 weeks of age. Vomiting is often
Canine parvovirus diseasc, caused by canine parvovirus
the initial sign and can be severe and protracted. Thcre
2, was first described in several countries in mid-1978.
is anorexia, lethargy, and diarrhea leading to rapid dehy-
In one of the most dramatic events in the history of
dration. The feces are often streaked with blood or
infectious diseases, the virus spread rapidly around the
frankly hemorrhagic and remain fluid until recovery or
world, causing a virgin-soil pandemic that was marked
death. Death is uncommon except in young pups.
by high incidence rates and high mortality rates. Rctro-
spective serologic studics have indicated that the appar-
ent immediate ancestor of the virus began infecting dogs
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and lmmunity
in Europe during the early or mid-1970s; this conclusion
is based on the finding of antilbodies in sera from dogs
The pathogenesis of canine parvovirus infection in the
 in Greece, The Netherlands, and Belgium in 1974, 1976,
 dog is similar to that of feline parvovirus infection in
and 1977, respectively. During 1978, antibodies were 
the cat, but the absence of cerebellar hypoplasia and the
found in Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and the United
 Occurrence of myocarditis are somewhat surprising, as
States, suggesting that the virus spread around the world
 myocardial cells are not normally considered as rapidly
in lcss than 6 months. The stability of thc virus, its
 dividing and thereby susceptibie to viral infection (see
efficicnt fecal-oral transmission, and the near-universal
 Chaprer 10). In the myocarditis syndrome, pulmonary
susceptibility of thc dog population of thc world ac-
 edema is a prominent fnding (Figure 21.7). Histologi
counted for this pandemic.
cally, there is focal myocardial necrosis with fber loss
All members of the family Canidae (dogs, wolves,
 and intranuclear basophilic inclusions in cardiac muscle
coyotes} are known to be susceptible to natural infec-
 cells. In animals that survive for some time, there are
tion. In fact, canine parvovirus 2 has been a major
 extensive lymphocytic infltrations and fibrosis in the
problem in gray and red wolf conservation and captive  myocardium.
brceding/release programs. In these programs, pups
 In the panleukopenia/enteritis syndrome, there is
 i snd u  r soo rs srd m nnq ea p pn oq a
are aimed at reintroducing wolves into very remote:
 acutely. When pups live longer the small intestines are
areas, this becomes unfeasible and represcnts an un-
thickened and inelastic and the serosal surface has a
solved dilemma.
granular appearance. Histologically, thcre may be thy-
Canine parvovirus 2 is distinct genetically from a
 mic atrophy and rarefaction of lymphoid follicles in the
previously described parvovirus of dogs, minute virus of
spieen and lymph nodes as well as necrosis of intestinal
 canines, which is now called canine parvovirus 1.
 epithelial cells in the crypts of Lieberkihn with associ-
 ated villus blunting.
 Following natural infection there is a rapid im-
Clinical Feafures
mune response. Neutralizing antibodies can be detected
within 3 to S days of infection and may rise rapidly to
Three distinct age-related canine parvovirus disease syn-
very high titers (Figure 21.8). Immunity after natural
dromes have bcen recognized in dogs (Table 21.3). The
 infection appears to be lifelong. Some maternal antibody
generalized neonatal disease syndrome is rare. The myo-1
 may be transferred transplacentally but most is trans-
 -pns aq sdnd u pozuosu alensn si suopus sres
 ferred with colostrum. The titer of natural passive anti-
though damage to the myocardium may bc extensive,i
 is therefore quite variable, providing protection for only
somc pups may survive with lifelong cardiac problems.
 a few weeks or for as long as 22 wceks (see later). Cyto-
oou oq ie pu oe ae so  oixn  o t e snd ui ad usas si suss s
weeks of age and was common when the virus first and vaccination.
3.52
21. Parroviridue
Figure 21.8.
10240
5120
10-
VIRUS IN FECES
2560
HI Ab
YCID
-1280
SERUM
640
C
or
6
320
FECES
CIRCULATING WBC
5
160
(000's/mm3)
4-
80
3-
40
, clinical
2
disease
-20
-10
1
3
5
B
1011
12
13
DAYS POST INFECTION
Overview of the pathogenesisof canine parvovirus enteritiseukopenia syndrome The fime beween infection and he onset of clinical signs s
variablendmaybdelaydil7 dys osinction,bywhichienantbodyresponse,whichriseveryrpilyhighir, sdewy
and the virs canno longerbe detectedi fecesSeveredisease and leukopenia oremorelikely tooccur in pups 36months ofage thatcomletly
lack maternal antibody and are maintained under stressful condirions, such as may occur with early weaning, poor diet, and unhygenic conditions
[e.g., in large breeding kenrels, pet shops, shelters).
Laboratory Diagnosis
rare, as passively acquired maternal antibody usually
protecrs pups beyond the period when they are most
The simplest procedure for the laboratory diagnosis of
susceptible. The leukopenia/enteritis syndrome is now
canine parvovirus infcction is hemagglutination of pig
endemic worldwide.
 or rhesus monkcy red blood cels (pH 6.5, 4°C) by virus 
 Problcms in parvovirus disease prevention and
present in fecal cxtracts. Thc specifciry of this hemagglu-
control are encountered commonly in large, crowded
tination is determined by titrating thc fecal specimen in
brecding colonies where hygiene is diffcult to maintain.
 parallel in the presence of normal and immune dog se-
 Subclinical infection is more common in single dog
rum. Fecal samples from dogs with acutc cnteritis may
 households where pups are well carcd for, again ermpha-
contain up to 20,000 hemagglutinating units of virus,
 sizing the importance of hygiene and general good health
equivalent to about 10? virions, pcr gram. Electron mi-
 in mitigating disease incidence and severity.
croscopy, virus isolation, enzyne iminunoassay, and am-
Attenuated virus vaccines and inactivated virus
plification of viral DNA using the polymerase chain rcac-
vaccines are used universally. Matcrnal antibody inter-
tion are also used for laboratory confirmation of clinical
ference during immunization is the most common cause
diagnosis. Serologic diagnosis is also used in some set-
 of vaccine failure in wcanling pups. Pups receive about 
tings, with the IgM-capture enzyme immunoassay uscd
10% of their maternal antibody via transplacental
to determine recent infection.
transfer and 90% through colostrum (the half-lifc of
canine IgG is 10 days). It has been determincd that
an antibody titer of 80 or grcater is protective (as
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Contro!
mcasured by the hemagglutination-inhibition assay);
thus pups born to bitches with low antibody titers
When canine parvovirus discase was first recognized in
 may become susceptible to wild-type virus as early as
1978 the canine population throughout the world was
 4-6 wceks after birth whereas pups born to bitches
 completely susceptible. Gencralized neonatai disease was
with high titers may be immune to infction for 12-20
recognized  rarcly  but  myocarditis  and  leukopenia/
wecks. Of course, pups born to seronegativc bitches
enteritis syndromes were common.Myocarditis is now
 arc susceptible at birth.
(amine Parvorirus Disease
353
The Jevel of maternal antibody that is able to pro-
approach is to administer pups a series of vaccinations
 tect pups against infection by the wild-type virus is differ-
at 2- to 3-week intervals, starting at 6 to 8 weeks of age
ent than that which interferes with an attenuated vaccine
and continuing through 18 to 20 weeks of age. Another
virus. In addition to the difference in their intrinsic prop-
 approach has been to use very high-titered vaccine,
 erties, the wild virus may be introduced in a much larger 
thereby partially overcoming immune interference. Yet
dose. In effect, as maternally acquired immunity wanes,
 another approach has been to use vaccine containing a
there is a 2- to 10-wcck time period when antibody titers
lower passage "hotter' virus, favoring more virus repli-
have declined to levels where pups are susceptible to
 cation in thc recipient and a better chance to overcome
wild virus but are still refractory to immunization (Figure
interference (Figure 21.9B).
21.9A). This gap can be determined precisely for each
 Along with any vaccination strategy, it is also im-
 'pue saisudxa si sya nq 'dusan sionoos Aq dnd
 portant to isolate pups to minimize their chances of
most instances, impractical (see Chapter 13). The usual
becoming infected during their vulnerable period. It is
Figure 21.9.
640.
320
protected by
susceptible
responsiveto
maternal antibody
to infection
vaccination
titer
160
otective
paa poue bujiaau
A
2
10
12
14
16
18
weeks of age
A
A
A
A
A
vaccinations
640
320
protected by
susceptible
responsive to
maternal antibody
toinfection
vaccination
u
160.
faaal Apognue bugiogiaju
B
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
weeks of age
A
A
A
vaccinations
areno longer protectivebut silinteferewithvacinationA)Decineofmalernal ntibodyrmusuallevelfalling alevel whereif is n
longer protective (80] ot 9 weeks of age and to a level where it no longer interferes with vaccination [10) at 18 weeks. To deal with this, six
doses of vaccine, given at the rimes indicated (arrowheads], are recommended by some vacine manufacturers. [B) With a high-titered or low-
susceptibility is shortened and, as indicated, some vaccine manufacturers recommend only three doses of vaccine.
3.54
21.Parvouiridae
 especially important in kennels to isolate pups from other
1  occurring later in gestation is evidenced at farrowing by
dogs beginning at 4 to 6 weeks of agc and continuing
 smaller than normal litters and mummified fetuses. This
tintil their vaccination series is complete. In household
is because only a proportion of fetuses are infected and
settings, if true isolation is not possible, pups should at
 the course of infection in those infected is variable (Figure
least be kept from areas where dogs congregate, such as
 21.10). In addition, some piglets at birth may be smaller
parks and recreational sites.
than normal or so weak that they do not survive. In
young pigs, infection has been associated with a vesicular
disease of the feet and mouth.
Porcine Parvovirus Disease
 Porcine parvovirus disease is the most important infec-
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
tious cause of reproductive failure in swine throughout
the world. When the virus is introduced into a fully
 It has been shown cxperimentally that it takes about 15
susceptible breeding herd it can have devastating effects.
days after maternal infection for the virus to rcach the
Some manifestations of the disease are captured in its
fetus. When infection occurs less than 30 days after con-
acronym, SMEIDI (stilbirth, mummification, embryonic 
ception the fetus dies and is resorbed; when infection
death, infertility). Infection has also been associated with
 occurs between 30 and 70 days after conception the fetus
rcspiratory disease and vesicular disease, neonatal sys-
is usually affected severely and is likely to die. Fetuses
temic disease, and low fertility in boars. A single serotype
 infected 70 or more days after conception, although fre-
of porcine parvovirus is recognized.
quently developing lesions, are affected less sevcrely and
 mount an immune response (immunocompetence of
swinc fetuses starts at 55-70 days). The virus replicates
Clinical Features
 in lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, lungs, salivary
glands, and other organs. It replicates well in peripheral
The stage of gestation at which infection of gilts or sows
 blood lymphocytes (T, B, and null cells) and stimulates
occurs determines the particular clinical signs seen. The
 these cells to proliferate, thereby increasing the viral
first sign of infection in a herd is frequently an increase  load. Monocytes and macrophages phagocytose virus,
in the number of gilts or sows returning to estrus 3 to  but then become infected and are destroyed, again con-
8 weeks afterreeding.Some sows may remain“endocritributing tothe viralload and, inthis case,tothe eukope-
nologically pregnant, not returning to estrus until afer nia. More than with the othcr parvoviruscs, swine par-
the expected time of farrowing. These clinical fcaturcs  vovirus  causes pcrsistent infection  with  chronic
are caused by fetal infection and resorption. Infcction shedding.
Figure 21.10.
Porcine parvovirus infection. Infected fetuses in various stages of mummification compared with normal fetuses. [Courtesy of R. H. Johnston and
H. S. Joo.}
Rodent Partrouirus Diseases
35.5
Laboratory Diagnosis
appears to have been due to the introduction of feline
 panleukopenia virus into commercial mink farms in On-
Frozen-section immunofluorescence of fetal tissucs us-
 ing standardized reagents is rapid and reliable and thc
tario, Canada, in about 1946.
preferred diagnostic test. Hemagglutination of guinea
pig red blood cells by virus contained in extracts of
fetal tissues may also be used. The polymerase chain
Aleutian Disease of Mink
reaction is also used in some settings. Serologic tests
Aleutian disease of mink is characterized by chronic
are of limited value because the virus is so widespread.
plasmacytosis, hypergammaglobulinemia, splenomeg-
 Diagnosis is difficult if infection occurs in the frst few
 aly, lymphadenopathy, glomerulonephritis, arteritis, fo-
wecks of gestation; commonly, fetuses are resorbed
cal hepatitis, anemia, and death. Lesions are the result
completely and there may be no suspicion of the
of chronic infection in which there is a sustained produc-
presence of the virus and hence no specimcns collected
tion of virus and a failure to eliminate virus-antibody
for laboratory diagnosis.
complexes. Despite extremely high levels of virus-specific
antibody, the virus is not neutralized and infectious virus
can be recovered from circulating immune complexes.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Plasmacytosis, antibody-specific hypergammaglobuli-
Hemia and immune complex-mediated disease follow.
 Porcine parvovirus occurs worldwide and is endemic in
The disease occurs primarily in mink that are homozy-
many herds. Because the virus is so stable, premises may
gous for thc recessive genc for a commercially desirable
remain infected for many months even where hygiene
 pale ("Aleutian'") coat color. This gene is linked to a
appears satisfactory. Losses are most extreme if the virus
 gene associated with a lysosomal abnormality of the
is introduced into a seronegative herd at a time when
Chediak-Higashi type, whereby following phagocytosis
 many sows are prcgnant. There is a possibility that some
 immune complexes are not destroyed. The level of the
 pigs infected in utero may survive as long-term immuno-
hypergammaglobulincmia is cyclical, with death oc-
tolerant carriers, but this is unproven. A large proportion
 curring during a peak response, between 2 and 5 months
of gilts are infected naturally before they conceive and
 after infection. Immunization of mink carrying the Aleu-
hence are immune. Passively acquired maternal antibody
 tian gene with inactivated virus vaccine increases the
 can persist for up to 6 months or more, which interferes
 severity of the disease. Convcrsely, immunosuppression
with active immunization following either natural infec-
diminishcs thc severity of the discasc.
tion or vaccination. Conscquently, some gilts may con-
 ceive and then, when thcir residual maternal antibody
levels decline to unprotectivc levels, their pregnancy is
 Rodent Parvovirus Diseases
at very high risk. Boars play a significant role in the
 dissemination of virus in that they may shed virus in
Over 30 distinct parvoviruses, falling into 13 serogroups,
semen for protracted periods
have bcen isolated from laboratory rodents; of these, 3
Vaccination is practiced widely as the only means
occur endemically in rodent colonics: rat virus (also
 of assuring that all gilts are protecred. Inactivated and
called Kilham's rat virus), H-1 virus of rats, and minute
 attenuated virus vaccines are used. There is often only
 virus of mice. Serological surveys have indicated that
a brief window of opportunity to immunize gilts that arct
 these viruses are very common in laboratory colonies
 bred before 7 months of age. The duration of inmunity is
and that once they are prcsent they are cxtremely difficult
 ooun poo aq oi ssss ar nq ‘uan
1  to eliminate. For example, in one survey, 38 of 44 con-
 memory, and infection in vaccinated pigs rarely leads to
 ventional mouse colonies, 3 of 8 specific pathogen-frec
fetal disease.
colonies, and none of 5 germ-free colonies were found
to harbor minute virus of mice. There is also a high
prevalence of minute virus of mice, rat virus, and
Mink Enteritis
H-1 virus in wild mice and rats, respectively. The major
importance of these viruses is their confounding effect
Mink enteritis is caused by a parvovirus that is related
 on research, especially immunology and cancer research.
very closely to felinc panleukopenia virus. In mink, the
 They are infamous for contaminating tumor cell lines
virus produces a syndrome similar to that caused by
and tumor virus stocks.
feline panleukopenia virus in cats, except that cercbellar
 Rodent parvoviruses most commonly cause sub-
hypoplasia has not been recognized. The disease in inink (
clinical infection; they are, however, also the cause of
356
21. Parvoviridae
fetal and neonatal abnorimalities. As with the other par-
vaccine; maternal antibody persists in goslings for at
yoviruses, they destroy dividing cells—the result may be
least 4 weeks, the period of maximum vulnerability.
fetal death, runting, cerebellar hypoplasia and ataxia (as
seen in kittens infected with feline panleukopenia virus!,
 periodontal deformities, hemorrhagic encephalopathy
Duck Parvovirus Disease
(rat virus in rats), hepatitis, and cnteritis.
 One consequence of rodent parvovirus infections
A seemingly new disease affecting muscovy ducklings
seems ro be persistent viral carriage cven in the presence
was described in France in 1989. Surprisingly, the virus
 of high titers of neutralizing antibody. This is important
is related most closely to adeno-associated virus 2. Mor-
becausc some experimental manipulations, especially
tality has been high and clinical and postmortcm findings
those that are immunosuppressive, may cause viral reac-
have resembled those found in geese infected with goose
tivation and recrudescent shedding. In turn, infecrion can
 parvovirus. Ducks that survive are stunted and feath-
be immunosuppressive (e.g., abrogating Tc lymphocyte
ering is delayed. Effective vaccines, including one derived
 responses and Th-dependent B cell responses), again af-
from VP2 and VP3 antigens expressed in a baculovirus
fecting experiments in which infected animals are used
 system, are available.
unknowingly.
Diagnosis is based on serology (hemagglutination-
inhibition, indirect immunofluroescence, neutralization,
Further Reading
or enzyme immunoassay) and virus isolation in rodent
cell cultures. Reference reagents are used to identify par-
Berns, K. 1. (1996). Parvoviridae: The viruses and their
replication. In *Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M,
ticular virus strains.
Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick,
 In laboratory colonies, these viruses are transmit-
T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd
 ted horizontally by contact and fomites. Young animals
ed., Pp. 2173-2198. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia,
are protected by maternal antibody for thc first few
PA.
weeks of life, but then are infected via the oronasal route.
Le Gall-Recule, G., Jestin, V., Chagnaud, P., Blanchard,
P., and Jestin, A. (1997). Expression of muscovy duck
As with other parvoviruses, rodent viruses are extremely
parvovirus capsid proteins (VP2 and VP3) in a bacu-
stable and resistant to desiccation and may be carried
lovirus expression system and demonstration of imumu
betwcen rodent colonies by unsuspected fomites (such
nity induced by the rccombinant proteins. J. Gen.
as the shoes of laboratory animal veterinarians)—
Virol. 77, 2159-2163.
accordingly, the strictness of facility quarantine must be 
Mengcling, W. L. (1992). Porcine parvovirus infection.
rigorous. When virus is detected, the colony must be
In "Diseases of Swine" (A. D. Leman, B. Straw, W. L.
Mengeling, S. D'Allaire, and D. J. Taylor, eds.), 7th
depopularcd, the premises disinfected meticulously, and
ed., pp. 299-325. lowa State University Press, Ames.
new founding stock screened for the presence of virus
Parker, J. S. L., and Parrish, C. R. (1997). Canine parvo-
 and/or antibody. Unlike the situation in rebuilding a
virus host range is determined by the specific confor-
colony after eliminating some other rodent viruses, colo-
mation of an additional region of the capsid. J. Virol.
nies that have had parvovirus infections cannot be repop-
71,9214--9222.
Parrish, C. R. (1990). Emergence, natural history, and
ulated by cesarcan section and use of foster mothers.
variation of canine, mink and feline parvoviruses.
Importantly, serological surveillance is required to moni-
Adv. Virus Res. 38, 403-450.
tor the presence of rodent parvoviruses this is required
 Parrish, C. R. (1994). The emergence and evolution of ca-
in the United States for mice and rats used in federally
nine parvovirus--an example of recent host range mu-
funded biomedical research.
tation. Semin. Virol. 5, 121-132.
Parrish, C. R. (1995). Pathogenesis of feline panleuko-
penia virus and canine parvovirus. Bailliere's Clin.
Haematol. 8,57-71.
Tijssen, P., ed. (1990). "Handbook of Parvoviruses,"
Goose Parvovirus Disease
Vol. 1 and 2. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Truyen, U., Gruenberg, A., Chang, S. F., Obermaier, B.,
 Goose parvovirus causes a lethal disease in goslings 8
Veijalainen, P., and Parrish, C. R. (1995). Evolution
t0 30 days of age that is characterized by focal or diffuse
of the feline subgroup parvoviruses and the control of
hepatitis and widespread acure degeneration of striated,
canine host range in vivo. J. Virol. 69, 4702-4710.
smooth, and cardiac muscle. Inclusion bodies are found
Tsao, J., Chapman, M. S., Agbandje, M., Keller, W.,
Smith, K., Wu, M. L., Smith, T. J., Rossman, M. G.,
mainly in the liver, but also in the spleen, myocardium,
Compans, R. W., and Parrish, C. R. (1991). The
thymus, thyroid, and intestines. Control is achieved by
thrcc-dimensional structure of canine parvovirus and
the vaccination of laying geese with attenuated virus
its functional implications. Science 251, 1456-1464.
ChaPter 22
Circoviridae
 Properties of Circoviruses.
357
Psittacine Beak and Feather Disease...
359
Chicken Anemia Virus Disease...
359
Porcine Circovirus Infection...
361
Further Reading...
361
several previously unclassified viruses  wcrc found to
 circovirus is quite similar to a hoimofogue in somc plant
share common physicochemical and genomic properties.
circoviruses that have multipartitc genomes, i.e., viruses
The family prcsently includes psittacine beak and feather
 that encapsidate each of their genomic segments in sepa
disease virus, porcine circovirus, and chicken anemia
rate particles. This observation raises qucstions as to the
virus. Curiously, several plant viruses share the same
 origin of the circoviruses.
 properties and are included in the family. These are the 
 smallest known viruses of vertebrates and of plants.
Virion Properties
Properties of Circoviruses
Circovirus virions are nonenveloped, spherical in out-
linc, with icosahedral symmetry, 17-22 nm in diameter
Classification
(psittacine beak and feather disease virus and porcinc
circovirus are 17 nm in diameter and are the smallest
Thc mcmber viruses of the family Circoviridae have
viruses of vertebrates known; chicken anemia virus is 22
 somewhat similar virion and genome properties, but are
nm in diameter) (Figure 22.1). Characteristically, virions
ecologically, biologically, and antigcnically quite dis-
tinct—in fact, there are no common antigenic determi-
mens in rather stable linear arrays--"strings of pcarls."
 nants and no sequence homology between the viruses.
 The genome consists of a single molecule of circular
Presently, the family contains one genus, Circovirus,
(covalently closed ends) single-stranded ambisense or
with chicken anemia virus as the type virus and psittacine
positive-sense DNA, 1.7-2.3 kb in size (Figure 22.2).
bcak and feather disease virus and two porcine circovi-
The complete sequences of porcine circovirus (1759 nu-
ruscs as members. Howevcr, it is being suggested on the
cleotides), psittacine beak and feather disease virus (1993
basis of recent sequencing studies that there should be
nucleotidcs), and chicken anemia virus (2319 nucleo-
at least rwo genera—porcine circovirus and psittacine 
tides) have been determined.
beak and feather disease virus employ an ambisense tran-
Psittacinc beak and feather disease virus and
scription strategy but chicken anemia virus, which is also
 porcine circovirus, but not chicken anemia virus, cn-
larger, does not. Virus-like particles resembling circovi-
ploy an ambisense transcription strategy, i.c., some
ruses have been visualized by electron microscopy in
 genes are encoded in the viral sense DNA and others
diagnostic specimens from other host species, e.g., in
 in the complementary strand (Figure 22.2). Chickcn
cattle feces. They have not been isolated and their role
 anemia virus genes are all encoded in the positive-
in animal disease is unknown.
sense strand. Chicken anemia virus has three open
 Although the viruses of vertebrates share no com-
 reading frames, each encoding a protein found in
mon antigenic determinants or genomic sequence homo-
virions; one is the major capsid protein (M, 52,000)
3.57
358
22. Circoviridae
FIGuRe 22.1.
[A) Virions of chicken anemia virus as seen by negalive staining. Bar 100 nm. (B) Kleinschmidt preparation showing the circular DNA of chicken
anemia virus. Bor 5O nm. (Courtesy of R. Lurz and H. Gelderblom.)
and another (called apotin, M, 13,000) by itself induces
Viral Replication
apoptosis of T lymphocytes and is considered an impor-
tant factor in the pathogenesis of infections in chickens.
Viral replication occurs in the nucleus and, similar to
 Psittacinc beak and feather disease virus has three open
 parvoviruses, probably depends on cellular proteins pro-
reading frames and porcine circovirus has four; in each
duced during the S phase of the cell cycle. The double
case therc is one major capsid protein. The viruses
stranded DNA replicative intermediates of porcine cir-
are very stable in the environment; thcy resist heating
 covirus and chicken anemia virus are infectious. Replica-
at 60°℃ for 30 minutes.
tion of the genome is believed to occur via a rolling
Figure 22.2.
Beak and feathe
1gisease iruses
758nucleotides
The genome of three circoviruses, psitacine beak and feather disease virus, porcine circovirus, and chicken anemia virus. The outer circles
represent the genomes; stem-loop struclures, represented by boxes at the lop of the circular DNAs, are concerned with the iniliation and temination
of transcription. Open reading frames on the viral sense DNA strands are labeled as V1, V2, and sa on; those on the complementary strands as
transcriptinstarsisfrhehreeprotinsretnucleotides386486nd53,respecivelyandtpsionsofthstopcodonsareo
leather disease virus and porcine circovirus genomes:lnlermediates beween the geminivirses and plant circoviruses.Arch.Virol. (1998)
143,1723-1744.]
Chicken Anemia Virns Iisease
359
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
TaBlE 22.1
Properties of Circoviruses
The disease can be reproduced experimentally by
exposing psittacine birds to homogenates of feather folli-
Virions are nonenveloped, spherical in outline, with icosahe
cles from affected birds. Basophilic intracytoplasmic in
drai symmelry, 17-22 nm in diameter (psiltacine beak and 
feather disease virus and porcine circovirus are 17 nm in di-
clusions are found in follicular epithelium, which by
ameter; chicken anemia virus is 22 nm: in diometer)
tlectron microscopy contain masses of virions. The dis-
ease is relentlessly progressive; some birds die after the
o sus,-s iu ais aui ui suisadss
first appearance of malformed feathers or beak whereas
pearis'"
others may live for years in a featherless state. Immuno-
The genome consists of a single molecule of circular [cova
suppression is part of the syndrome, so affected birds
lently closed ends) single-stranded ambisense or positive
are often also infected and damaged by opportunistic
sense DNA, 1.7-2.3 kb in size
pathogens.
Chicken anemia virus codes for a protein that induces
apoptosis in T lymphocytes of chickens
Replication takes place in the nucleus of cycling cells, pro
ducing large intranuclear inclusion bodies
Laboratory Diagnosis
Virions are very stable, resisting 60°℃ for 30 minutes and
Diagnosis is based on gross appearance of the bird and
pH 3 to pH 9
biopsy of affected feather follicles, which by histopatho-
logic examination contain basophilic intracytoplasmic
inclusion bodies. Electron microscopy is used for con-
circle that originates at a stem-loop structure. In chicken
firmation of the diagnosis.
anemia virus, one product of translation is a polyprotcin
that is cleavcd to form mature proteins (Figure 22.2)
(Table 22.1).
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
The contagious nature of psittacine beak and feather
Psittacine Beak and
disease and its persistent, progressive course may lead to
requests for euthanasia of infected birds. Strict hygiene,
Feather Disease
screening protocols, and lengthy quarantines are used
in cockatoo breeding colonies to prevent introduction
It had long been known that many species of Australian
of the virus.
 parrots undergo permanent loss of feathers and develop
beak and claw deformities when in captivity. In 1984,
thin section electron microscopy of affected tissues from
such birds revealed large numbers of virions that were
Chicken Anemia Virus Disease
later found to resemble those of porcine circovirus in
Chicken anemia virus discasc was first recognized in
size and genome structure.
Japan in 1979; it is now known to occur worldwide
and is a problem in all countries with industrial poultry
industries. The virus is not known to infect birds other
Clinical Features
than chickens and only a single serotype has been recog-
Psittacine beak and feather diseasc is a debilitating dis-
nized.
ease of cockatoos, parots, and budgerigars. Although
principally a disease of cockatoos, many other psittacine
species are susceptible. The natural infection occurs pri-
Clinica! Features
marily in birds less than 5 years of age, most often in
young birds during first feather formation. Typical find-
Chicken ancmia virus disease is an acute, immunosup
ings include feather loss, abnormal pin feathers (con-
 pressive disease of young chickens characterized by an-
stricted, clubbed, or stunted), abnormal maturc feathers
orexia, lethargy, depression, anemia, arophy or hypo-
(blood in shaft), and various beak abnormalities (Figure
 plasia of lymphoid organs, cutaneous, subcutaneous and
22.3). Beaks are described as shiny, overgrown, broken,
intramuscular hemorrhages, and increased mortality.
or with palatine necrosis. Birds may have feather lesions,
beak lesions, or both.
breeder hens that have been infected as adults. At 2-3
360
22. Circoviridae
FiGURE 22.3.
Psittacine beak andfeaher diseaseThereis lossof feathers and beak abnormalies due to the destruction ofrapidly dividing cells at thebase
of these sructures that are responsible for the continuous replacement and form of the beak and feamhers throughout life. (Courtesy of D. Pass.]
weeks of age chicks become anorectic, lethargic, de- about 10%, but may be higher than 50%. Histologi-
 pressed, and pale. They are ancmic and develop bone 
 cally, there is depletion of lymphoid cells in all
marrow aplasia and atrophy of the thymus, bursa of l
 lymphoid organs. Secondary bacterial infection is com-
Fabricius, and spleen. Disease is most severe in chicks 
 mon. Age resistance to disease (not infection) begins
that are also infected with other viruses such as avian
at about 1 week of age and is complete by 2 weeks after
reoviruses, avian adenoviruses, reticuloendotheliosis vi-
 hatching. However, the protective effects of matcrnal
rus, Marek's diseasc virus, or infectious bursal disease
antibody and age resistance can be overcome where
virus. There is usually no ilness or loss of egg production
there is coinfection with immunosuppressive viruses.
when adult chickens are infected.
Infection with chicken anemia virus has been shown
to suppress the irmmune system of chickens, a finding
that heips explain why dual infections involving the
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
virus and other avian pathogens are often more severe
than would otherwise be expected.
When 1-day-old susceptible chicks are inoculated with
the virus, viremia occurs within 24 hours and virus
can be recovered from most organs and recral contcnts
Laboratory Diagnosis
for up to 35 days. Anemia resuts from decreased
crythropoiesis. Packed cell volumes are low and blood
 A presumptive diagnosis is based on history, clinical
smears often reveal anemia and leukopenia. Blood may
 signs, and gross and microscopic pathologic findings.
be watery and clot slowly. Mortality rates usually are
 Confirmatory diagnosis requires virus isolation, which
Furtber Reading
361
is usually done in MDCC-MSB1 cells (a Marek's disease
Porcine circovirus 2, an antigenically distinct virus
tumor-derived lymphoblastoid cell line) or in 1-day-old
originaily isolated in France in 1997, has been isolated
chicks or chick embryos (which must be virus and anti-
 from young pigs with wasting disease syndromes in Can-
body negative). Because the virus is noncytopathic in
ada, the United States, Spain, Denmark, and Northern
low passage, immunologic methods must be used to de-
 Ireland. By sequence analysis, isolates of this virus from
termine the presence of virus. Serologic methods include
different countries are 96% similar but less than 80%
indirect immunofluoresccncc and virus neutralization.
 similar to porcine circovirus 1.
 Electron microscopy is also used to detect virions in
chick tissues or blood.
Further Reading
Allan, G., Meehan, B., Todd, D., Kennedy, S., McNeilly,
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
F., Ellis, J. Clark, E. G., Harding, J., Espuna, E.,
Botner, A., and Charreyre, C. (1998). Novel porcine
Chicken anemia virus is transmitted horizontally by di-
circoviruses from pigs with wasting desease syn-
rect contact and contaminated fomites and vertically
dromes. Vet. Rec. 142, 467.
through the egg. Breeder flocks may become infected
Calnek, B. W., and Barnes, H. J., eds. (1998). "Diseases
before they begin to lay fertile eggs in this case the virus
of Poultry," 10th ed. Iowa State University Press,
Ames.
is transmitted vertically for as long as the hen is viremic.
McNulty, M. S., Mcllroy, S. G., Bruce, D. W., and
 If hens are seropositive, maternal antibody generally pro-
Todd, D. (1991). Economic effects of subclinical
tects chicks from disease but not from infection. Many
chicken anemia agent infection in broiler chickens.
flocks of otherwisc specific pathogen-free chickens carry
Avian Dis.35,263-268.
Meehan, B. M., Greelan, J. L., McNuty, M. S., and
chicken anemia virus.
Todd, D. (1997). Sequence of porcinc circovirus
A vaccine has been developed and is available in
DNA: Affinities with plant circoviruses. J. Gen. Virol.
Germany, but not in many other countries. In some
78, 221-227.
 arcas, young breeder hens are infected deliberately with
Niagro, F. D., Forsthoefel, A. N., Lawther, R. P., Kama-
wild virus by adding crude homogenates of tissues from
lanathan, L., Ritchie, B. W., Latrimer, K. S., and Luk-
ert, P. D. (1998). Beak and feather disease virus and
affected chickens to drinking water—this ensures infec-
porcine circovirus genomes: Intermediates between the
tion and seroconversion before hens begin to lay eggs-
geminiviruses and plant circoviruses. Arch. Virol. 143,
 but this procedure is not recommended by most authori-
1723-1744.
ties. Because severe disease results from coinfection
Notehorn, M. H. M., de Boer, G. E., van Roozelaar,
with immunosuppressive viruses, control of each of such
D. J., Karreman, C., Kranenburg, O., Vos, JI. G., Jeu-
rissen, S. H. M., Hoeben, R. C., Zanlema, A., Koch,
pathogens is important.
G., van Ormondt, H., and van der Eb, A. J. (1991).
Characterization of chicken anemia agent virus DNA
that contains all elements for the infectious replication
cycle. J. Virol. 65, 3131-3138.
Porcine Circovirus Infection
Ritchie, B.,Niagro, F., Lukert, P., Steffens, W., and Lati-
mer, K. (1989). Characterization of a new virus from
Porcine circovirus 1 was first isolated in Germany in
cockatoos with psittacine beak and feather disease. Vi-
1974 from a pig kidney cell line (PK15) infected persis-
rology 171, 83-88.
Tischer, I., Gelderblom, H., Vetterman, W., and Koch,
tently with this virus. Serologic evidence indicates that
M. (1982). A very small porcine virus with circular
the virus is widespread in swine populations wherever
single-stranded DNA. Nature (London) 295, 64-66.
 it has been searched for. Of various animals tested, only
Todd, D. (1995). The genome of chicken anemia virus.
domestic swine, minipigs, and wild boars have antibod-
Avian Pathol. 24, 349-363.
ies. Although early investigation suggested that the virus
Todd, D., Niagro, F., Ritchie, B., Curran, W., Alan, G.,
may be nonpathogenic for pigs, recent isolation of the
Lukert, P., Latimer, K., and McNulty, M. (1991).
Comparison of three animal viruses with circular sin-
virus from stillborn piglets implicates the virus as a possi-
gle-stranded DNA genomes. Arch. Virol. 117,
blc fetal pathogen.
129-135.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Chapter 23
Retroviridae
Properties of Retroviruses...
364
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS ALPHARETROVIRUS...
373
Avian Leukosis and Sarcoma...
375
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS BETARETROVTRUS ...
378
Ovine Pulmonary Adenomatosis (Jaagsiekte) ..
378
Type D Retrovirus Disease of Macaques ...
378
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS GAMMARETROVIRUS
(INCLUDING AVIAN RETICULOENDOTHELIOSIS VIRUSES) -
379
 Feline Leukemia and Feline Sarcoma...
379
Murine Leukemias/Sarcomas ..
381
 Porcine Lymphosarcoma
381
Avian Reticuloendotheliosis.
381
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS DELTARETROVIRUS ...
382
Bovine Leukemia.....
382
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS EPSHLONRETROVIRUS....
383
Retrovirus Diseases of Fish.
383
383
Maedi/Visna (Ovine Progressive Pneumonia)
383
Caprine Arthritis-Encephalomyelitis
385
Equine Infectious Anemia..
386
Feline ImmunodeficicncyVirus Disease.........
387
Simian Immunodeficicncy Virus Disease..
388
Bovine Immunodeficicncy Virus Disease .....
389
Further Reading.
389
 Diseases caused by retroviruses havc long been impor-
veterinary importance. The name retro (reverse, back-
tant in veterinary medicine. The veterinarians Ellerman
ward) derives from the reverse transcriptase (RNA-
and Bang in Dcnmark in 1908 and the medical patholo-
dependcnt DNA polymerase) that is found within the
gist Rous in the United States in 1911 demonstrated
virions of all members of the family. Because the
that avian leukosis and avian sarcoma could be trans-
recognition that a number of human diseases, including
 mitted from one chicken to another by inoculation of  1
leukemias and, most notably, acquired immunodcficic-
cell-free filtrates derived from tumor tissues obtained  n
ncy discasc (AIDS), arc caused by retroviruscs, no
from discased birds. Thc two related viruses—avian 
 group of animal viruscs has been the subject of such
leukosis and avian sarcoma viruses—-are prototypic of  i
intense study. The enormous tragedy of human AIDS
the etiologic agents of similar infectious malignant necessitates that such intcnse study be continucd and,
tumors now recognized in many other animal species, as begun by Ellerman and Bang. the comparative
are now classified as members of the family Retroviri- in such studies continue to be utilized for the advance
dae, a largc family that includes many viruses of of veterinary as well as medical science (see Chapter 1).
363
364
23. Refroriricdne
Properties of Retroviruses
The fist classification of the retroviruses was based
on their host specics and on virion morphology and
Classification
 morphogenesis. Four types of particle, designated A, B,
C, and D, were recognized and the viruses were classified
The family Retroviridae is subdivided into seven genera:
accordingly—elements of this classifcation are still
the genus Alpharetrovirus, comprising the avian type 
found in the way the various viruscs are dcscribed. For
C retroviruses, such as avian leukosis virus; the genus
cxamplc, type C rctrovirus morphogenesis involvcs the
 Betaretrovirus, comprising the mammalian typc B and
formation at the ccll membranc of distinctivc crescent-
type D retroviruses, such as mouse mammary rumor 
shaped nascent nucleocapsids (hence thc namic type C
virus and Mason-Pfzer monkey virus; the genus Gam-
retrovirus). More rcccntly, the characterization of virion
maretrovirus, comprising the mammalian and reptilian
 RNA has bcen uscd in the classification of the viruses:
type C retroviruses, such as murine leukemia virus; the
virion RNAs of different oncogenic rctroviruscs from
genus Deltaretrovirus, comprising the bovine leukemia
the same specics of animal show extcnsive homologics,
and human T lymphotropic viruses; the genus Epsilonre-
whereas those of different species (e.g., chicken, cow,
trovirus, comprising the fish retroviruses, such as walleye
cat, and mouse) show virtually no sequence identity.
epidermal sarcoma virus; the genus Lentivirus, com-
The antigenic relationships berween different rc-
prising several important pathogens, including human
 troviruses are complicated. Various envelope glycopro-
immunodeficiency viruses 1 and 2, several simian immu-
 tein epitopes arc type specifc, whereas others are strain
nodefciency viruses (African green monkey, soory man-
 specific; antibodies to the envelope glycoproteins ncu-
gabey, stump-tailed macaque, pig-tailed macaque, Rhe-
sus, chimpanzee, and mandrill viruses), equine infectious
the gag gene arc common to the retroviruses of particular
anemia virus, maedi/visna virus, caprine 
arthritis-
 animal species, i.c., they are group specific. Some epi-
 encephalitis virus, feline immunodeficiency virus, and
 topes (e.g., those of reversc transcriptases) arc shared by
bovinc immunodeficiency virus; and the genus Spumavi-
viruses associatcd with several animal species (interspc-
rus, comprising the foamy viruses (Table 23.1). The
 cies antigens), but are distinguishable between avian and
spumaviruses are not known to be pathogenic and have 
 mammalian type C retroviruses. The internal proteins
been recognizcd only when they are found in culrured
of different lentiviruses (gag and pol gene products) show
cells.
extensive, but again complex patterns of cross-reactivity.
Table 23.1
Retrovirus of Animals
GENUS
VIRUS
Alpharetrovirus
Avian leukosis viruses, avion carcinoma viruses, avian sarcoma viruses, avian myelo-
blastosis viruses, Rous sarcoma virus, duck spleen necrosis virus
Befaretrovirus
Mouse mammary tumor virus, ovine pulmonary adenomatosis virus {Jaagsiekte), Mason-
( ad Aau pnbs 's  ad nul 'I sn a ad us 'sna au zd
virus
Gammaretrovirus
Feline leukemia virus, feline sarcoma viruses, porcine type C virus, many murine leukemid
viruses, many murine sarcoma viruses, gibbon ape leukemia virus, woolly monkey sarcoma
virus, guinea pig type C virus, viper lype C virus (and avian reticuloendotheliosis viruses)
Deltaretrovirus
 Bovine leukemia virus, human T lymphotropic viruses 1 and 2, simian T lymphotropic vi-
ruses
Epsilonrefrovirus
Walleye dermal sarcoma virus, wallye epidermal hyperplasia viruses l and 2
Lentivirus
 Human immunodeficiency viruses 1 and 2, simian immunodeficiency viruses (African green
monkey, sooly mangabey, stump-tailed macaque, pig-tailed macaque, rhesus macaque,
chimpanzee, and mandrill viruses), maedi/visna virus, caprine arthritis-encephalitis virus,
felicnyirqintodfi
virus
Spumavirus
 Bovine, feline, simian, and human foamy viruses [which are a problem when they contami-
nate cultured cells but are not known to cause disease]
Properties of Retroviruses
365
Virion Properties
glycoprotein peplomers project. The lentiviruses bear
approximately 72 knob-like peplomers, each about 10
Retrovirus virions are enveloped, 80-100 nm in diame-
nm long with an ovoid distal knob.
ter, and have a unique three-layered structure (Figures
The genome is diploid, consisting of an invcrted
23.1, 23.2, and 23.3). Innermost is the genome-
dimer of two molecules of linear positive-sense, single
nucleoprotein complcx, which includes about 30 molc-
stranded RNA; each monomer is 7-11 kb in size and
cules of reverse transcriptase, and has helical symmetry.
has a 3'-polyadenylated tail and a 5'-cap; details of the
This structure is enclosed within an icosahedral capsid,
 organization of the genomes of the various viruses vary
about 60 nm in diamcter, which in turn is surrounded
widely, as shown in Figure 23.4.
 by a host cell membranc-derived envelopc from which
The retrovirus genome is unique in several respects:
FiGURe 23.1.
FamilyReirieensGamrervirus cmprisingmmmalinndrpinerervirses:mrinelekemiairusAudingf
picalinirindgiliwin
isibrelnfirineedriddshasxnlrrngsitsfll
around the nucleocapsid is recognizable. Bars: 100 nm. (Courtesy of H. Frank and W. Schafer.]
366
2.3.
Retroriridae
Figure 23.2.
a
b
0.1um
ncy virus HI} showing heprogressionof thebuddingprocesnd the continuing maturation of thecore structure of the virus aerbudding.
(f to jl Maedi /visna virus showing the same progression. If was this precise similarity in morphology thot first suggested rhat HIV is a lentivirus.
Thin section elecron micrascopy. (Courtesy of M.A.Gonda.)
FIGURE 23.3.
Envelope
RNAGenome
Receptor-binding
Integrase
Transmembrane
Protease
ReverseTranscriptase
Matrix
Capsid
Nucleoprotein
Schematic diagrar of a retrovirus virion indicating various strucures and proteins. [From J. M. Coffn, Retroviridae: The viruses and their replication.
In "Fields Virology' (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.1,
3rd ed., p. 1767-1848. Lippincot-Raven, Philadelphia, PA, 1996.]
Properties of Retrowiruses
367
 Figure 23.4.
Avian leukosis virus
prok
pa!
env
Murine leukemia virus
1
gag
pro
por
env
Mouse mammary tumor virus
gag
ori
pro
AUB
pof
Mason-Pfizermonkeyvirus
4
L
gag
env
pro 
Po!
Human T-lymphotropic virus / bovine leukemia virus
自
gag
pro
tax
pol
口
rex
Human immunodeficiency virus 1
■18
口
产
gag
env
vpr
12
pro
por
nof
vpu
Human foamy virus
1
pro
Aua
bel2 
po!
口
bel3
bel1
2
6
8
10
kb
Underrenggnwihxrndingnreinfeizwniatef
ofranstngnrwsditffrshinndshdlinielirdingndbyplingvns
J.M.CofinSrucure and classictionof reroviruses inTheRevirideJLeyd.,ol1.pp1950enumNewYork992]
(1) It is the only diploid gcnomc. (2) It is the only viral single-stranded RNA gcnome that does not serve as
 RNA that is synthesized and processcd by host cel mRNA soon aftcr infection. (5) It is the only gcnome to
 mRNA-processing machinery. (3) It is the only genome  encode a reversc transcriptase, which in itself is unique.
associated with a specific transfer RNA whose function Among its many functions, the revcrse transcriptase
is to prime replication. (4) It is the only positive-sense,  serves as an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase, a DNA-
368
23.Retroviridae
The genome of nondefective retroviruses contains
FIgure 23.5.
thrce major genes, each encoding two or more proteins.
p66
The gag gene (standing for group-specifc antigen) en-
Polymerase
codes the virion core (capsid) proteins, the pol genc en-
codcs the reverse transcriptase (polymerase), and the env
RNA
RNAseH
genc cncodes the virion peplomer proreins (envelopc).
template
Gcnome termini have several distinctive components,
5
cach of which is functionally important.
p51
The genome of the rapidly transforming retrovi-
ruses contains a fourth gene, the viral oncogenc (v-onc)
(sec Chapter 11, Table 11.5). The presence of the v-onc
tRNAprimer
gcne is usually associated with deletions elsewhere in thc
genome, usually in the env gene, so that most v-onc-
Schematic diogram ofa reverse transcriptase molecule showing is
 containing viruses are unable to synthesize a complete
multiple Functional domains. The virion reverse transcriptase is coded
far as a component of the Gag-Pol precursor and is processed by
envelope and are therefore replication defectivc. They
 viral-coded protease to yield a homodimer of p66 molecules; a
are always found associated with nondcfective viruses
portion of the C terminus is subsequently cleaved from one subunit
that are replication competent; the latter act as helpers
to produce a heterodimer, composed of one molecule of p66 and
one of p51. Because of irs three-dimensional structure the molecule
(see later). Rous sarcoma virus is an exception; its gc-
has been compared to a clenched right hand—specific domains cre
nome contains the viral oncogene v-src, but it also con-
designated as the palm, thumb, and fingers. A short connection jqins
tains complete gag, pol, and env genes and is therefore
the reverse transcriptase domain to the RNase H domain. The viral
dd
replication competent.
[From J. M. Cofin, Retroviridae: The viruses and their replication.
 In addition to encoding gag, pol, and env genes,
"Fields Virology(B.N.Fields,D.M.Knipe,
P.M.Howey, R.M.Chanock,J. L.Melnick,T.P.Monath, 8.Roizman,
which are common to all retroviruses, lentiviruses cn-
and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1767-1848. Lippincot-Raven,
code several other genes, referred to as accessory genes
Philadelphia, PA, 1996.]
(Figure 23.6). These include (1) tat, which encodes a
 potent fransactivator that, in association with celular
factors, cnhances the efficiency of transcription by cellu-
depcndenr DNA polymcrasc, an integrase, and
an
la1 RNA polymerase 1000-fold, mainly by preventing
 RNase, with each distinctivc function being carried out
 premature termination of transcription; (2) rev, which
by a different part of the protein molecule (Figure 23.5).
encodes a protein that is involved in the splicing of viral
The enzymatic activities of the reverse ranscriptase also
RNA transcripts and their export from the nucleus to
work with various nonviral substrates hence reverse
the cytoplasm, making the full range of mRNAs available
transcriptase is an important tool in many recombinant
for translation; (3) nef, which is not required for viral
DNA technologies.
replication in cultured lymphocytes but is essential for
Figure 23.6.
Viral-coat proteins
mediating CD4
binding and
Promotes
Required for
Nucleocapsid-
infectivity of
membrare fusion
efficient
core proteins
cell-free virus
virion budding
nef
U3RUS
BeD
vif
ypu
5'LTR
3'LTR
tal
Binding sites
Reverse transcriptase.
forhost
Weak transcriptional
 Regulator of structural
Rev response
protease, integrase,
 transcription factors
 and ribonuclease
activator
 gene expression
element
 Potent transcriptional
TARelement
activator
Genomic orgonization of human immunodehiciency virvs 1, with an overview of some of the known functions of each gene product. [From
W. C. Greene, The molecular biology of human imunodeficiency virus type 1 infection.N.Engl.J. Med. 324, 308-317 (1991).]
Properties of Retrorirnses
369
 replication in macrophages and also for the devclopment  i
 ing the transcription of full-length genomic RNA and
of disease in simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)-in-
various mRNAs. The essential features in the replication
fected rhesus monkeys; the Nef protein also down-regu-
cycle of a nondefective retrovirus are shown in Figure
lates expression of CD4 and IL-2 and may also alter the
 23.7. Aspects of rctrovirus replication that relate to the
state of activation of target cells in vivo; and (4) vif,
role of the integrated provirus in oncogenesis are dis-
which encodes a protein (viral infectivity facror) that
cussed in Chapter 11.
is required for some step in virion morphogcnesis that
 Depending on the virus, virions attach to a num-
determines infectivity. vpu, vpr, and vpx are found in
ber of different specific cellular receptors via their
 primate lentiviruses: Vpu prormotes maturation of the
envelope glycoproteins. In most instances the virus
viral glycoprotein and 1elease of virions by budding; Vpr
cnvclope and the cell membrane fuse, allowing the
is a weak transcriptional activator; and Vpx seems to
virion corc to enter the cytoplasm; in fewer instances,
 be required for effcient replication in T lymphocytes
cntry involves receptor-mediated endocytosis. In the
 and macrophages.
 cytoplasm, but still within the capsid, a double-stranded
Retroviruses are inactivated by lipid solvents and
DNA copy of the virion RNA is synthesized by the
 detergents and by heating at 56°C for 30 minutes, but 
virion-associated reverse transcriptasc. In thc process,
are more resistant than other viruses to UV- and X-
 300 to 1300 bp are added to each end of each genomic
irradiation, probably because of their diploid genomcs.
RNA moleculc—these termini, calld long terminal
repeats (LTRs), have a complex secondary structure
formed by base pairing and are central in the replication
Viral Replication
strategy of all retroviruses (see Chapter 11). The capsid
is rcmoved and the double-stranded DNA moves to
 Retrovirus replication is unique and complex: in over-
the nucieus; it circularizes by noncovalent binding of
view, replication starts with reverse transcription of vi-
the LTRs, and several such molecules become integrated
rion RNA into double-stranded DNA by the revcise
as provirus at different sites in the cellular DNA.
transcriptase. These linear double-stranded DNA inter-
Transcription by cellular RNA polymerase, initiated
mediates are circularized, integrated into the host chro-
in the 5'-LTR and ending in the 3'-LTR, generates
mosomal DNA, and then used for transcription, includ-
new virion RNA.
Figure 23.7.
Attachm
to specific
cellular
receptor
Rever
Budding
An overview of the replication cycle ofrtroviruses.Virnons ener their hst cell either by fusion orby recepormdigted endocytosis top and
mature by budding hrough the plasmga membrane (botom, right. [From J. M. Coffin, Retroviridae: The viruses and their replication. In "Fields
Virology" (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Hawley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.1, 3rd ed.
pp. 1767-1848. Lippincot-Rtven, Philadelphio, PA. 1996.]
370
23. Retroviridae
Synthesis of viral proteins occurs at the same time envelope, but their progeny behave according to thcir
as virion RNA synthesis. Two major mRNAs are tran-
 genome specificity—this may be one basis for retrovirus
scribed: (1) a 35S RNA, which is probably the same as
 species jumping (see Chapter 4).
full-lcngth virion RNA, encodes the Gag protein; the
same RNA is translated in a different reading frame to
Exceptional Aspecrs
produce the Pol protein. (2) a 25S mRNA, spliccd from
of L.cntivirus Replication
the 35S RNA, is translated to produce a precursor of
 Because human immunodeficiency virus 1 has been stud-
Env protcin; this translation also involves a different
ied in such dctail, further review of its replication cycle
reading frame. The pol and env genes are separate in
 is instructive for understanding the replication of the
lentiviruses. The major polyproteins are cleaved post-
lentiviruses of animals (Figure 23.8).
translationally by a viral protease to yield mature viral
proteins.
1. CD4 T lymphocytes support human immuno-
The Env protein enters the cisternae of the endo-
deficicncy virus replication only when dividing, yet most
plasmic reticulum during synthesis and moves to the
 T lymphocytes in the body are at rest at any particular
Golgi complex where it is glycosylated. It then moves to
time; therefore, many human immunodeficiency virus-
the plasma membrane. A fraction of the Gag polyprotein
host ce!l interactions result in a long-standing subclinical
follows the same pathway and is glycosylated and
 infection that takes years to progress to clinical disease.
reaches the plasma membrane. Together with viral RNA,'
T lymphocyte proliferation is stimulated by mitogens,
Gag and Gag-Pol precursors begin to assemble nucleo-
 cytokines, antigenic stimulation, and transactivating
capsids on the inncr side of the plasma membrane; the 
 proteins encoded by certain other viruses; hence, the
 polyproteins arc clcaved during the proces. Budding
 onset of clinical disease is often precipitated by seemingly
proceeds with nuclcocapsids binding to Env proteins
unrelated infections or other stimuli. The same phenom-
already fixed as peplomers in the plasma membrane.
ena explain the long preclinical course and triggering
Many retroviruses, including lentiviruses, replicate only
 events seen in many animal lentivirus infections.
in dividing cells. Many retroviruses are not cytopathic
2. Human immunodefciency virus ligands, con-
and do not dramatically alter the metabolism of the cells
tained on exposed loops on their gp120 peplomers, des-
that thcy infect; others, such as the lentiviruses, cause
ignated V1, V2, V3, V4, and V5 (Figure 23.9), bind to
cell death in a number of ways, including syncytium
 CD4, which is the primary viral rcceptor. CD4 is ex-
formation (an inherently unstable event) and apoptosis.
 pressed on cells of the macrophage lincage, including
In some instances, infecred cells may continue to divide
 bonc marrow precursors and dendritic clls in the skin,
while budding large numbers of virions.
 lymph nodes, and spleen, and on astroglia in the brain.
 Replication of retroviruses is accompanied by a
B lymphocytes, colonic epithelial cels, and some other
high mutation frequency--one in 10 4 to 10- of progeny
 lymphocytes also carry CD4 receptors and are also tar-
virions per replication cycle—suggesting frcquent errors
 gets of initial infection. In many of the lentivirus infec-
by reverse transcriptase. The sites of mutation are distrib-
 tions of animals (e.g., maedi/visna virus infection of
uted unevenly; gag, pol, and onc genes are conserved
 sheep, caprine arthritis-encephalitis virus infection of
as are certain parts of env genes; other parts of env,
goats, equine infectious anemia virus infection of horses)
particularly those regions coding for sites to which anti-
 macrophages are lot only the essential initial target in
body binds, are highly variable. There is also a high
 the pathogenesis of systemic infection, but are also the
frequency of recombination between retrovirus genomes
 central target throughout the entire course of infection.
in doubly infected cells. Recombination is an early event 
 In other lentivirus infections of animals (e.g., feline im-
occurring prior to integration during reverse transcrip-
munodeficiency virus infection in cats and simian immu-
tion to form viral DNA. Together, the mutation and
 nodeficiency virus infection of nonhuman primates), the
recombination frequencies far cxceed those of any othcr 
 main target cells are CD4+ T lymphocytes. Macrophage-
animal virus. ‘This genetic instability accounts for the
 tropic viruses are present carly and late in infection and
variation in the types of tumors produced by the acutely
 are primarily responsible for animal-to-animal trans-
transforming oncogenic retroviruscs. It makes classifica-
mission.
tion of retrovirus specics and subrypes difficult, a reality
 3. The recognition of human immunodeficiency
that is compounded by the occurrcnce of phenotypic
virus coreceptors or secondary receptors has provided
mixing of envelope proteins, producing pseudotypes,
 important advances in our understanding of the patho-
which have the genomc of one virus or subtype and
 gencsis of lentivirus infections. Such rcccprors broaden
thc cnvelope antigens of another. Pseudotypes havc the
 the tropism of the lentiviruses and, when acting together
ability to invade cells via the receptor specificity of their
 with thc primary receptor, serve to increase thc strcngth
Properties of Retrorirnses
371
Figure 23.8.
Virion budding
HIV-1
,+0+
V3 loop of HIv-1 (gp120)
Cell free HIV-1
HO1
envelopedetermines
+O
HOH
infection
cellular tropism
requires Vif
S
？
puooes
 cD4
Vpu maybe
receptor
00-0
required'for
CCR5
complete budding
●
Cytoplasm
Virion assembly
Internalization
 and morphogenesis
by fusion
(Vpu may be_required for gpt60
processing and miembrane display)
Single
RU5
stranded
Translation
Nef
RNA
Reverse transcription
U3R
 gag-pol mRNA Multiply spliced RNAs
07
Rusltat, rey, nef U3 R
Double
U5
stranded
env mRNA
DNA
Translation
tntegration
Rev-dependent
Rev-independent
(incomplete in esting T cells)
 Cytoplasmic expression
Cytoplasmic expression
/amplification
Tat-mediated
Tat
Hiv-1
U3RU5
U3 R U5
Rev
provirus
F
Nucleus
Proviral
transcription
V3
R
5'LTR
K B Sp1 TATA*
>>
Inducible
000
Constitutive
host factors
NF-xBSpt
host factors
Antigens
Cytokines
Heterologous
(IL-1, TNF, IL-2) virai proteins
mitogens
T-cell activation
An overview of the replication cycle of human immunodeficiency virus I in α CD4+ T cell Infection begins top, leff) with atachment of the virion
Bg jodaa agnop aul 'a 'odai euyoaus Aouoas sl at ns jo bupug ay Aa pmolot 'ta 'odau olou s o ozide oi
ofSUexposes thetransmembrane subunit andbringsitintdirect contactwiththecellmembrane,allowing itlopenetrate thecellmembrane
and create α chonnel through which the virus penetrales into the cytopiasm of the cell Following enlry the genome is released from the core and
becomes available for reverse transcription to produce α double-stranded DNA with added long lerminal repeats (LTRs) composed of sequences
duplicated from the 3 [U3) and. 5' (U5] endis of the viral RNA. Complete reverse ranscription and integration of the DNA provirus into a
chromosome occur efficiently only in aclivated, proliferaing cell. Transcriptional activity of the HV provirus is regulated by constitutive host cell
theboomle of thediagrmThevirucoded reulatory protinTat isoneof theeorlyene produtsTt binds to theTARregionin thR
and greatly mplies tanscription f alltheviral genes boom, right). Following synthesis ofa llength RNA transcript, anarray ofallernatively
spliedddxsdisifnl
Early in inection, when e level of Reis low, only temuliply splicemAs fr the regulatory proteinsTat, Rev, and Nf are exported toe
cytoplasm for translalion. Once a suficient level of Rev accumulates, the unspliced and singly spliced mRNAs that drive he synthesis of new viral
genomes and structural proteins re exported to the cytoplasm and ranslaled. These inclde mRNAs that encode Gag, Env, Pol, and the remaining
accessory proteins Vif, Vpr, and Vpu. Encapsidation of the viral genome into the virion core structure is follwed by budding from the plasma
membrane (lop, right). [From M. B. Feinberg and W. C. Greene, Molecular insights into human immunodeficiency virus type I pathogenesis.
Curr. Opin. Immunol. 4, 466-474 (1992).]
372
2.3.Retrozirrdaie
FIGURE 23.9.
gp120
V3
V5
N
N
?
virionorcellmembrane
TM
gp41
ww-ww
LLP-2LLP-1
Thhinnyirgln0nhwingpdidinsndj
on gp120, cdesignated V1, V2, V3, V4, and V5, which contain epilopic sites that bind to CD4, the primory receptor on T lymphocytes. These
loops are hypervariable, accounting for much of the serologichelerogeneity between strains of the virus. [From P. A. Luciw, Human immunodeficiency
B. Roizman, and S. E. Shraus, eds.1, 3rd ed., pp. 1881-1952. Lippincot-Raven, Philadelphia, PA, 1996.]
 of viral binding to target cells. First, it was found that retroviruses. Both cellular and viral proteins are involved
the infection of CD4+ lymphocytes was not sufficient to
 in complex pathways regulating every step in the replica-
explain dynamic patterns of HIV infection in humans.
tion cycle. Transcriptional events are modulated by the
Next, two coreceptors, CXCR-4 and CCR-5, were
binding of certain regulatory proteins (e.g., Tat and Rev),
found. Early in infection, mildly virulent viruses use 
 not to the DNA provirus but to their RNA transcripts.
CCR-5 to gain entry into cells and these viruses evolve
There are multiple splicing arrangements that, in the
slowly into more highly virulent variants that prefer the
 case of human immunodeficiency virus and the primate
CXCR4 receptor. Then another receptor, CCR8, was
lentiviruses, yield over 30 distinct RNA species. This
discovered—-this molecule is abundant on the surface
extra complexity contributes to the success of human
of thymocytes and it has been hypothesized that it is
immunodeficiency virus and the animal lentiviruses as
important in infection in babies and children. Subse-
 pathogens, but the viral genes and proteins that direct
quently, more than a dozen coreceptors have been de-
this modulation also represent unique targets for anti-
scribed, with two obvious consequences: (1) it seems
viral chemotherapy. Inhibitors of viral reverse tran-
clear that the pattern of human immunodeficiency virus
scriptase and protease have proven their worth in treat-
infection in various target tissucs and over time is far
ing AIDS patients and inhibitors of some accessory genes
more complex than earlier appreciated and (2), it seems
and their encoded proteins seem promising in non-
clear that the development of therapeutic agents that
 human primate experiments; however, although reverse
block viral binding to receptors is a much more unlikely
transcriptase inhibitors are already in use in veterinary
 notion than it was when CD4 secmed to be the only
medicine, such therapies are unlikely to be adopted very
receptor human inmunodefciency virus employed.
widely because of their very high cost.
4. Human immunodeficiency virus transcription
5. Contrary to an earlier view which held that
 and translation are more complex than that of other
 during their long incubation period lentiviruses remained
Properties of Retrouiruses
373
latent, it is now known that rates of viral replication and
cell destruction in lymphoid tissues are extraordinarily
Table 23.2
high. Throughout most of its incubation period, human
Properties of Retroviruses
immunodeficiency virus RNA can be detected in only a
Virions are enveloped, 80-100 nm in diameter, and have
small fraction of peripheral blood leukocytes, typically
α three-layered structure: an innermost genome-
about 1 in 10,000; however, 1010 or more virions may
nucleoprotein complex with helical symmefry, surrounded
be produced and cleared from the plasma each day. As
by an icosahedral copsid, in turn surrounded by an enve-
noted earlier, triggers of lymphoid cell proliferation are
lope with glycoprolein peplomers
of critical importance in determining the level of viral
The genome is diploid, consisting of a dimer of two mole
replication and hence the onset and progression of dis-
cules of linear posilive-sense, single-slranded RNA, each 
7-11 kb in size. Genomic RNA has a 3'-polyadenylated
ease. The close confinement of Icclandic sheep that facili-
tail and α 5'cap
tated the spread of respiratory pathogens provided the
All rtroviruses have gag, poi, and env genes; some oc-
antigenic stimulus for the replication of maedi/visna vi-
quire an oncogene and are usually defective in their own
rus and the consequent sprcad of the virus until it became
replication as a consequence; lentiviruses have a complex
a major problem. Coinfection with feline leukemia virus
array of up to six accessory genes
is a major precipitating factor in the progression of feline
Viral reverse Iranscriplase tronscribes DNA from virion RNA
immunodeficiency virus infection to clinical immunode-
following the Formation of long termina! repeats; circular
ficiency disease. Some lentiviruses, such as bovine immu-
double-stranded DNA is formed and integrates into cellular
nodeficiency virus and equine infectious anemia virus,
chromosomal DNA as a provirus
may remain silent throughout the life of their host ani-
In productive infections, virions assemble at and bud from
mal, creating a major dilemma for "test-and-slaughter?
plasma membrane
eradication programs, especially when individual ani-
Some retroviruses produce lumors, particularly leukemias
mals may have high monetary value. In all animal lentivi-
and sarcomas; members of the genus Lentivirus produce
slow dmyelinating neurologic disease,arhritis,genera
rus infections the difference between events pertinent to
ized chronic debilitating disease, or acquired immunodefi
the health of the individual animal and the health of the
ciency syndromes
population are such that clinicians and disease control
specialists may be at odds.
 6. Human immunodeficiency virus and other len-
tiviruses spread efficiently by cell-cell fusion, forming
DisEasEs CauseD BY MemBErs OF
syncytia as they spread; however, most of our knowledge
of the ceill biology of lentivirus infections comes from
THe GENUS ALPHARETROVIRUS
cell culturc studies involving conventional infection by
free virions—there are probably important differences
Much of our understanding of the biology of oncogenic
between the two that must be taken into account in
retroviruses derives from research on the viruses affect-
future vaccine and antiviral drug research aimed at pre-
 ing birds. Retrovirus infections of chickens fall into two
venting and treating the important lentivirus infections
distinct groups: (1) the avian leukosis, myeloblastosis,
of animals as well as humans.
and sarcoma viruses, which belong to the genus Aipba-
 7. In common with other retroviruses, the muta-
retrovirus, and (2) the avian reticuloendotheliosis vi-
tion rates of human immunodefciency virus arc very
ruses, which belong to the genus Gammaretrovirus, com
high—point, deletion, and insertional mutations occur 
prising mostly mammalian type C retroviruses (Table
frequently. Rates are estimated to be 3 × 10- mutations
23.1). Each of these groups of viruses, especially the frst,
per nucleotide per replication cycle and rates arc likely
 is large and complex, and the diseases they cause are of
similar in animal lentivirus infections. Given the chronic-
considerable economic importance.
ity of lentivirus infections, these mutation rates become
There are three classes of avian viruses involved
a central fearure in the pathogenesis of the diseascs
(sce Chapter 11): endogenous, exogenous replication
caused by thesc viruses, influencing tropism, transmissi-
competent, and exogenous replication defective. Endog-
bility, and the immunological control of opportunistic
enous avian lcukosis viruses occur in the genome of every
infections, as well as the progression of lesions per se.
 chicken as DNA proviruscs. They are rarely expressed,
Mutations occur randomly across the whole genomc,
 but if induccd by various manipulations they are non-
but only those that confer replicative advantages or es- B
 pathogcnic. Exogenous avian lcukosis viruses are repli-
cape from host immune reactions become fixed into the
 cation competent and have a standard complement of
 prevailing genotype—the largest number of mutations
 gag, pol, and env genes. For the most part they arc
are found in the env gene where they give rise to immune-
nonpathogenic, but in the course of lifetime infection a
escape variants (Table 23.2).
small percentage of infected birds develop leukemia or
374
23. Retroviridae
lymphoma. Finally, some exogenous viruses acquire an
routes of transmission occur, although germ plasm trans-
oncogene (v-onc) from a celular onc (c-onc) gene and 
 mission is restricted to nonpathogenic endogenous vi-
 then induce malignant tumors rapidly. The great major-
ruses.
ity of such rapidly transforming viruses lose part of their
With most of the avian retroviruses, if chickens
 genome when they acquire their oncogene, so that they
are infected horizontally when more than S or 6 days
become replication defective and dependent on the
 of age they are unlikely to develop leukemia; instead they
helper activity of a replication-competent virus. A few
 develop a transient viremia and produce neutralizing
viruses, howeve1, like Rous sarcoma virus, have a full
 antibody. If virus is transmitted congenitally via the egg
 complement of viral genes plus a v-onc gene—-they are
 or within the first few days of life, the chicken becomes
rapidly oncogenic while at the same time capable of
viremic. The viremia persists for life because of the induc-
replication without a helper virus.
 Oncogenic retroviruses may be transmitted from 
to grow normally but they frequently develop leukemia
 one chicken to another horizontally or vertically, and
and associated diseases and are a major source of exoge-
vertical transmission may occur through infectious virus
nous virus that is shed continuously and transmitted
(complete virions) or through provirus integrated into
horizontally. Genetic (germ line) transmission occurs
the DNA of the host germplasm (Figure 23.10). All
1 when germ cells, ova and sperm, contain endogenous 
Figure 23.10.
Infectious virus RNA genome
Layer or &
Transient virermia,
immunity. leukemia rare
HORIZONTAL TRANSMISSION
Congenital infection
Genetic transmission
LayerQord
Infectious virus
Viral DNA genome
RNA genome
integrated in gamete
DNA
Chronic viremia, tolerance,
Usually latent, no viremia,
leukemia common
no leukemia
Horizontal and vertical ransmission of avian leukosis viruses. (Courtesy of R. A. Weiss.)
Auian Leukosis amd Sarcoma
375
virus. Presumably this infection pattern is initiated when ness occur and the abdomen may be enlarged. Tumors 
the provirus is integrated into thc genome of germ line 
may be present for some time before clinical illness is
cells following horizontal transmission.
recognized, although the course may be rapid from the
 onset of disease. Hematological changes are inconsistent;
leukemia is uncommon and lymphoblastoid cells are
rarely seen in the circulating blood. Tumors are usually
Avian Leukosis and Sarcoma
present in the liver, spleen, and bursa of Fabricius and
inay occur in other internal organs. Microscopically the
Clinical Features
lesions are focal multicentric aggregates of lympho-
 blasts--these cells express B lymphocyte markers. They
Avian leukosis viruses are endemic in virtually all flocks
 may secrete large armounts of IgM, but their capacity to
of chickens and most chickens in a flock will have been
infected within a few months of hatching. If rapidly
differentiate into IgG-, IgA- or IgF-producing cells is
transforming viruses are not present, disease occurs spo-
arrested. The primary target cells are poststem cells in
radically in birds over 14 weeks of age, with an overall 
the bursa of Fabricius, from where transformed cells
 invade blood vessels and metastasize. Bursectomy, even
incidence of about 3%, but sometimes the incidence of
discase may be as high as 20%. The variety of syndromes
up to 5 months of age, abrogates the development of
 produced by avian leukosis/sarcoma viruses is shown in
lymphoid leukosis.
Tablc 23.3.
Osteopetrosis (syn., Thick I.cg)
 In this form of the disease the bones are affected by a
Discases Due to Exogenous
uniform or irregular diaphyseal or metaphyseal thick-
Nondefective Viruses
ening. In advanced cases, osteoma, osteogenic sarcoma,
Lymphoid Lcukosis (syn., Visceral I.ynphomatosis)
and chondrosarcoma may occur. Lesions are usually
This is the commonest forim of avian leukosis and occurs
 most obvious in the long bones of the leg, but may also
in chickens 14 to 30 weeks of age. Clinical signs are
 be present in the pelvis, shoulder girdle, and ribs. Birds
nonspecific. The comb may be pale, shriveled, and occa-
with osteopetrosis frequently also have anemia and often
sionally cyanotic. Inappetence, emaciation, and weak-
have lesions of lymphoid leukosis.
Table 23.3
Syndromes Produced in Chickens by Avian Retroviruses
RAtE OF TuMOR
ViRaL
Virusa
SYNDROME
DEVELOPMENT
ONCOGENE
CELL FIRST AFFECTED
TYPE OF LESION
Replication-competent (avian leukosis viruses)
 Lymphoid leukosis
Slow
Lymphoblast
一
Lymphoid cell infiltrations
of various organs
Osteopetrosis
Slow
一
Osteoclast or osteoblast
Thickened long bones
Renal tumors
Slow
一
Renal cells
Nephroblastoma, car-
cinoma
Replication-defective [avian erythroblastosis, avian myeloblastosis, avian myelocytomatosis viruses)
Erythroblastosis
Rapid
v-erbB
Erythroblast
Anemia
Myeloblastosis
Rapid
v-myb
Myeloblast
Anemia, leukemia
Myelocytomatosis
Rapid
v-myc
Myelocyte
Carcinoma, sarcoma
Hemangioma
 Rapid
Capillary endothelium
Hemangioma
Sarcomas
Rapid
v-fps, v-yes
Yarious mesenchymal
Sarcoma, carcinoma
cells
Replication-compelent rapidly ransforming (Rous sarcoma virus]
Sarcoma
Very rapid
v-src
 Various mesenchymal 
Sarcomas
cells
auee iau jo jod so na iiaones snousoua Aoo suayo lo 'sas snousoxa asa o uoio ul
376
23. Retroviridae
Renal Iumors
Hemangioma
These are usually found coincidentally at slaughter, but
 In this form of disease, after an incubation period of less
 may be associated with emaciation and weakness before
1
than 3 weeks, a hemangioma develops, usually as a single
death. Two forms occur: nephroblastomas, which origi-
 tumor in the skin or on the surfacc of the viscera. The
nate from embryonic nephrogenic buds in the kidneys,  [
lesion rakes the form of a “"blood blister," which may
and carcinomas, which originate from tubular epithe-
rupture, causing death from acute hemorrhage. The visi-
lium. In this disease, by electron microscopy, numerous
bility of these lesions in the skin encourages cannibalism.
typical retrovirus virions are seen budding from trans-
The target in this case is endothelial cells.
formed renal cells.
Conncctive Tissue Tumors
Diseases due to Defectivc Viruses
A variety of malignant tumors, including fibrosarcoma,
fbroma, myxosarcoma, myxoma, histiocytic sarcoma,
Erythroblastosis
 In this form of disease the incubation period may be
osteoma, osteogenic sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma, are
as short as 21 days. Two patterns are recognized: a
caused by avian retroviruses containing v-onc genes,
 proliferative form characterized by the presence of many
such as defective viruses acting in concert with a helper
erythroblasts in the blood and an anemic form in which
virus or Rous sarcoma virus.
the predominant feature is anemia with few circulating
erythroblasts. The primary target cells are erythroblasts,
which resemble normal erythroblasts in appearance cx-
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and lmmunity
cept that retrovirus particles can be demonstrated either
within cytoplasmic vacuolcs or budding from their
In chickens infected with exogenous tondefective vi-
 ruses, tumors occur only when infection occurs congeni-
plasma membrancs. Lesions are mainly attributable to
hemostasis because of the accumulation of erythroblasts
tally and there is persistent viremia. Over the course of
in the blood vessels, particularly capillaries and sinu-
the life of the chicken proviral DNA is integrated into
soids.
 many different kinds of cells, sometimes, by chance, in
a location where the activity of a c-onc gene is disrurbed
in such a way as to initiate tunor production (see Chap-
Myeloblastosis
.ter 11). Because lymphoid cells represent 10% of all the
In this form of disease, clinical signs are similar to those
cells in the animal and have a very high rate of cell
 of erythroblastosis and develop after an incubation pe-
division, particularly in the early weeks of life, the proba-
riod that may be as short as 10 days. The target cells
 bility that lymphoid cells that have appropriate receptors
arc myeloblasts in the bone marrow. The fearures of
will become infected and transformed by leukosis viruses
mycloblastosis and crythroblastosis overlap. In myclo-
 is higher than for most other cell types.
blastosis, leukemia is a major feature; up to 10? myelo-
A variety of neoplasms are generated by replica-
blasts per milliter are present in the blood—when a
 tion-defective leukemia viruses propagated by coinfec-
hematocrit is done there may be more buffy coat cells
tion with a nondefective helper, which is usually an exog-
 than red cells. Bone marrow displacement may result in
 enous avian leukemia virus. These defective viruses, for
secondary anemia.
the most part, arise as a rare event in each individual
bird in which they arc found; because they are defective
Myelocytomatosis
in their own replication and are so rapidly fatal, they
In this form of discase, signs similar to those seen in
are seldom, if ever, transmitted horizontally or from
crythroblastosis develop after an incubation period of
 generation to generation. They can be divided into three
3 to 11 wecks. Target celis, which are nongranulated
 groups—avian erythroblastosis, avian myeloblastosis,
myelocytes (morphologically distinct fron myeloblasts),
 and avian myelocytomatosis--on the basis of the nature
proliferate to occupy much of the bone marrow, and
 of the causative virus and the character of the tumors
tumor growth may extend through the bone and perios-
 produced. The different pathogenic potential of the vari-
teum. The tumors are distinctivc and characteristically
 ous viruses is due to the different v-onc genes they carry
occur on the surface of bonc, in association with the
(Table 23.3).
periosteum, and near cartilage, although any organ or
tissuc may be affccted. Visceral organs may be infltrated
with myclocytes. Histologically, the tumors consist of
Laboratory Diagnosis
 s  s  ss 
very little stroma, similar to normal bone marrow myelo-
History, clinical signs, the location of tumors, and gross
cytes.
and histopathologic postmortcm findings are usually
Auin fekosiswnd Surcoma
377
enough to make a diagnosis of avian leukosis. As far as
Most 1-day-old chicks have maternal antibody ti-
differential diagnosis is concerned, the most important 
ters between 1 and 10% of those of their dams. Thus
disease is Marek's disease, a distinction that is important
the efficiency of passive antibody transfer is low, and
becausc Marek's disease can be controlled by vaccina-
the titer declines so that chicks are seronegative by 4 to
tion. Viral isolation is rarely required in veterinary prac-
7 weeks of age. Then, if they have not been infected
tice, but is used for rcsearch purposes.
congenitally, they become infected by horizontal trans-
When an unusual episode of oncogenic disease
 mission and develop a transient viremia followed by high
 occurs in chickens, specialized reference diagnostic pro-
levels of antibody; virus is usually eliminated and the
cedures are undertaken in specialty laboratories. Rous
 antibody persists for life. However, some birds remain
sarcoma virus and other rcplication-competent, acutely
 persistently infected and act as a source of virus for both
 transforming avian retroviruses are assayed directly by
 horizontal and vertical transmission. Roosters may be
proliferative focus formation assays in chick embryo fi-
 involved in the germ line transmission of endogenous
broblast cell cultures. Because they produce infectious
 (nonpathogenic) retroviruses, but play no part in congen-
virions, these are recovered readily and can then be char-
 ital infection as sperm cells are acytoplasinic.
acterized in detail. Replication-defective rapidly trans-
Hygiene is imporrant in minimizing the level of
forming viruses, which carry v-onc genes, can also be
 virus contamination, parricularly in the immediate post-
assayed by focus formation, but virions can only be 
 hatching period when the age, population density, and
 obtained in cells carrying a replication-competent leuko-
 levels of virus are highly conducive to horizontal trans-
 sis virus; the yield always consists of a mixture. Replica-
 mission, The “all-in-all-out" managenment system, with
tion-competent leukosis viruses do not transform cells
thorough cleaning and disinfection of incubators, hatch-
in vitro; because they interfere with transformation by
 eries, brooding houses, and equipment, is standard prac-
viruses that carry a v-onc gene, interference assays are
tice. The risk of introducing additional strains of virus
used. Assays for the presence of leukosis viruses can
 is minimized if stock are obtained from a single source.
also be carried out by serologic methods using enzyme
md ia p r  s  
immunoassay or radioimmunoassay.
 duction were introduced in the 1940s, there was an un-
witting selection of genetically susceptible chicken lines.
Today, most commercial flocks consist of genetically
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
 resistant lines and, accordingly, there has been a sharp
reduction in the incidence of leukosis. Resistance corre-
Transmission may occur horizontally or vertically (Fig-
 lates with the viral subgroup and with the absence of
ure 23.10). Horizontal transmission is relatively ineffi-
receptors for viral envelope glycoproteins; the genes for
cient, requiring prolonged, close contact, and was not
virus receptors are located on an autosomal chromo-
of major significance in the natural transmission of the
some. It is possible to select for genetically resistant birds
disease until intensive chicken production began in the
 by challenging chorioallantoic membranes or chick em-
1940s. This led to the appearance of lymphoid leukosis
bryo fibroblast cell cultures derived from leukosis-free
as an economically important disease, as horizontal
 birds with appropriate pseudotypes of Rous sarcoma
 transmission via saliva led to conditions that promoted
 virus. Failure to produce foci of ccll transformation cor-
egg-borne vertical transmission. Individual infected hens
 relates with resistance, and lines of chickens can be bred
may transmit virus via ova either continuously or inter-
 that are homozygous for the resistance allele. Viral mu-
mittently, although some known infected hens do not
 tants able to bypass resistance emerge frequently, so
transmit virus at all, and transmission is less efficient in
that in practice genetic resistance as a basis for control
hens more than 18 months of age. Congenitally infected
 requires an ongoing selection program.
chickens may be immunologically tolerant and their
Eradication of horizontally transmitted virus has
blood may contain up to 10" IDso pcr milliliter. They
 been accomplished in poultry flocks, especially those
excrete virus in saliva and feces, but are otherwise 
 used as a source of eggs for vaccine production. This
healthy, although some eventually dcvelop leukosis.
. is the case whether the eggs are for human, domestic
These hens transmit virus horizontally throughout their
: mammal, or avian virus vaccines. Establishment and
lives and, more importantly, they also transmit virus I
 maintenance of leukosis-free flocks, which still carry en-
vertically, the virus infecting cells of the blastocyst from
 dogenous avian retrovirus genes, is expensive, but is
 the eight-cell stage onward. During embryogenesis the
 being developed more and more. In addition to eliminat-
pancreas is particularly favored as a site of replication,
 ing the occurrence of tumors, eradication has a number
and large amounts of virus accumulate in the albumen.
of other benefits, including reduced mortality from other
At hatching, large amounts of virus are shed in the meco-
causes, improved growth rate, and improved production,
 nium, resulting in heavy environmental contamination. 
 quality, fertility, and hatchability of eggs. Using either
378
23. Retroviridae
inactivated or attenuated virus vaccines, immunization
 an infected sheep and the appearance of new cases, but
has met with limited success.
in range-reared sheep the interval may be years. Infected
animals shed virus in saliva and respiratory secretions;
infection is presumed to be acquired via the respira-
DIsEasEs Caused bY MemBers OF
tory route.
Eradication in lceland involved the near depopula-
The GEnuS BEtarETrovIruS
tion of the entire sheep population of the country; in the
absence of a sensitive test to detect preclinical cases,
Ovine Pulmonary
cradication in other countries has proven unfeasible.
Nevertheless, the incidence of the disease can be reduced
Adenomatosis (Jaagsiekte)
greatly by strict isolation of flocks and removal of sick
animals (ewes and their lambs) immediately upon the
The most studied retrovirus diseases of sheep are those
 onset of clinical signs.
due to lentiviruses (maedi/visna virus, also known as
ovine progressive pneumonia virus; see later), but onco-
genic retroviruses belonging to the genus Deitaretrovi-
Type D Retrovirus
rus, comprising bovine leukemia and human T-lympho-
tropic viruses, also occur. In fact, some ovine retroviruses
Disease of Macaques
are related antigenically to bovine leukemia virus. How-
ever, littie is known about these ovine viruses and there is
 The first type D retrovirus described was Mason-Pfzer
 no evidence that they are transmitted naturally between
anbeseu e wo c8hl u! Paneqosi sem yl sn1a Aayuou
sheep and cattle.
and is now recognized as the cause of a severe, often
 A more common retroviral disease in sheep, ovine 
fatal, immunosuppressive disease (as well as a severe
pulmonary adenomatosis (also called ovine pulmonary
retroperitoneal fbromatosis). This disease was the frst
carcinoma), produces signs similar to those of maedi
to be called simian-acquired immunodeficiency syn-
(ovine progressive pneumonia; see later). The causative
 drome (SAIDS), but because simian immunodeficiency
virus is a type D retrovirus (or a B/D retrovirus chimera),
viruses (lentiviruses) also cause a similar syndrome, the
but little is known of its molecular biology because the
term has become too vague to be useful.
virus cannot be cultivated in cell cuiture. Originally de-
 The type D retroviruses seem to be restricted to
scribed in South Africa, where it was called Jaagsiekte,
 various species of the genus Macaca (subfamily Cerco-
the disease occurs worldwide except in Australia where
it has never occurred and Iceland where it was eradicated 
 and langurs (Presbytis obscurus). There are seven recog-
in 1952. It occurs sporadically in the Americas and in  nized viruses, each named for the primate center of origin
some countries in Europe. In Peru it is responsible for 
(e.g., SAIDS-D/CA, from the California Regional Pri-
about a quarrer of the annual mortaliry in adult sheep.
 mate Research Center). Sequence data have been used
There is also evidence that the virus infects and causes
for a more comprehensive naming system [e.g., SAIDS-
disease in goats in southern Africa.
D/CA has become simian retrovirus 1 (SRV 1)]. Mem-
The incubation period varies from 1 to 3 years—-it
 bers of the group include exogenous and endogenous
may be shorter when young lambs are infected. The viruses. At present, primate type D retrovirus disease is
Onset of disease is insidious, with progressive respiratory
 seen mainly in primate research centers in the United
distress, bouts of spasmodic coughing, and the produc-
 States. The viruses are undoubtedly more widespread,
tion of large ammounts of surfactant-containing viscous
 although their distribution has not yet been fully investi-
fluid (produced by tumor cells), leading to blockage of
gated.
small airways and death from anoxia and secondary
Transmission of these exogenous viruses requires
bacterial pneumonia. In affected sheep, pea-sized nodu-
close contact, with virus being present in saliva and blood
lar lesions are found scattered through the lungs. Histo-
 and spread occurring via biting, grooming, and fighting.
logicaily, these lesions are adenomas and adenocarcino-
 lnfection leads to viral replication and damage in several
mas; they represent neoplastic transformation of type II organs, including lymph nodes, salivary gland, spleen,
secretory epithelial cels and possibly nonciliated bron-
 thymus, and brain. When infected as juveniles, rhesus
chiolar epithelium. There are also mctastascs to regional 
 macaques may die within 1 year, although other infec.
lymph nodes. Diagnosis is made by histopathology.
tion courses are also seen (fulminant infection and death,
 Outbreaks occur whcn infected sheep are intro.
 self-limiting infection and chronic immunodeficiency
duced into uninfected flocks; where sheep are confined,
with wasting, chronic diarrhea, splenomegaly, general-
about 5 to 8 nonths elapse between the introduction of
1
ized lymphadenopathy, and anemia).
Feline Leukemia and Fefine Surcona
379
Effective inactivated virus vaccines have been pro-
Clinical Features
duced against three of the viruses; their use has been
limited, but in any case would be complementary to
The feline retroviruses are responsible for a variety of
strict isolation of colonies, serological screening, removal
disease syndromes, some neoplastic and others relating
of infected animals, and good sanitation.
to effects on hematopoietic cells and the immune system.
Three types of neoplasia are recognized—lympho-
sarcoma, myeloproliferativc disease and fibrosarcoma,
along with two types of nonneoplastic disease—anemia
DIseases Caused bY MemBers OF
and an immunopathologic disease.
the Genus GaMmARETrovirus
Felinc Lymphosarcomas
INCLUDING AVIAN
Feline lymphosarcoma is the most common naturally
REtIculOenDOThelioSiS VIruses)
occurring mammalian lymphosarcoma and accounts for
some 30% of all feline tumors. About one-third of all
Feline Leukemia and
cats with lymphosarcoma have no demonstrable feline
leukemia virus antigens and, as noted earlier, the virus
Feline Sarcoma
can rarely be isolated. However, epidemiological evi-
dence supports the view that feline leukemia virus causes
 Feline retroviruses may be endogenous, exogenous repli-
cation competent (feline leukemia virus), or exogenous
the vast majority of cases of feline lymphosarcoma.
Four major forms of lymphosarcoma are recog-
defective (feline sarcoma virus)—they may be nonpatho-
genic or the cause of leukemia and sarcona, respectively.
nized based on the location of the primary tumor: (1)
multicentric lymphosarcoma, in which tumors occur in
Neoplastic and nonneoplastic diseases due to feline leu-
various lymphoid and nonlymphoid tissues; (2) thymic
kemia virus occur worldwide and are the most common
lymphosarcoma, occurring particularly in kittens; (3)
nonaccidental cause of death in cats. In a survey in Cali-
fornia, the incidence of feline leukemia virus neoplasms
alimentary lymphosarcoma, usually occuring in older
cats in which lymphoid tissues of the gastrointestinal
was found to be 41 per 100,000 cats per year, and it
tract and/or mesenteric lymph nodes are affected; and
has been estimated that deaths from all feline leukemia
(4) unclassified lymphosarcomas, an uncommon finding
virus-related diseases are 250 per 100,000 cats per year.
The prevalence of antibody to feline leukemia virus var-
 in which tumors are seen in nonlymphoid tissues such
ies from 6% in isolated populations to 50% in urban
 as the skin, eyes, and central nervous system. The lymph-
 osarcomas are predominantly T lymphocyte tumors, ex-
and colony cats.
 cept the alimentary tract form, which is a B lympho-
The feline leukemia virus was frst recovered in
1964; remarkably only a few other isolates have been
cyte tumor.
obtained—-it has proved impossible to isolate the virus
from the majority of tumors that would be expected to
Feline Myeloproliferative
contain it. However, the presence of the viral genome is
Diseases and Anemia
demonstrable by hybridization and transfection. It has 
In this group of diseases, transformation of one or a
therefore been suggested that viral replication and release
combination of bone marrow cell types is induced by
are not required to produce diseasc.
feline leukemia virus. Four types are recognized: (1)
Feline sarcoma virus is known to be defective, car-
erythromyelosis, in which the target is an erythroid cell;
rying the v-onc gene v-fms and lacking an env gene. All
(2) granulocytic leukemia, in which a granulocytic my-
strains that have been recovered from fibrosarcomas are
cloid cell, usually a neutrophil, is targeted; (3) erytbroleu
 pseudotypes with cnvelopes provided by feline leukemia
kemia, in which both erythroid and granulocytic myeloid
virus and all feline sarcoma virus stocks contain feline
 precursors become neoplastic; and (4) myelofibrosis, a
Ieukemia virus. Besides being important as pathogens
proliferation of fibroblasts and cancellous bone resulting
of cats, several aspects of feline leukemia virus/feline
 in medullary osteosclerosis and myelofbrosis. These dis-
sarcoma virus have attracted the attention of research
 eases, which are similar to those produced by the acutely
workers concerned with human oncology and immuno-
transforming avian retroviruses, are characterized by the
 deficiency diseases. There is no evidence that the feline
 presence of large numbers of neoplastic cells in the bone
viruses can infect humans, but in many places, women
marrow, a llonregenerative anemia and immunosuppres-
of child-bearing age, children, and immunocompromised
 sion. Transformation of erythropoietic cells may produce
persons have been advised that thicy should avoid close
erythroblastosis, erythroblastopenia, or pancytopenia,
contact with cats showing signs of disease.
all of which are associated with anemia.
380
23. Retrowiridie
Immunopathologic Discase
leukemia virus-related disease. Persistently infected cats
This group of diseases includes both immune complex
shed virus in secretions and represent the most important
 diseases and immunodeficiency diseases. Sometimes per-
source for the dissemination of feline leukemia virus.
sistent high levels of feline leukemia virus antigens are
 Immunosuppression is the most common scquel to per-
produced, which, when bound in immune complexes, 
sistent feline leukemia virus viremia and accounts for
produce glomerulonephritis. In other cases, lymphoid 
 most feline leukemia virus-related deaths. Strains of virus
cells are depleted greatly, in part by antibody-depcndent 
 from immunosuppressive ilncss infect CI4+ and CD8+
cytotoxicity, with feline oncovirus membrane-associated
T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, and myeloid cells. Vire-
antigens (FOCMA) being the target. This leads to a vari-
 mic cats have suppressed blastogenic responses to T cell
ety of secondary infections in which the cat fails to thrive,
growth is stunted, the hair coat is harsh, there is intercur- 1
 lograft rejcction times, hypocomplementemia, thymic at-
rent and repeated infection, chronic stomatitis, and gin- 1
 rophy, depletion of paracortical zones of lymph nodes,
givitis, nonhealing skin lesions, subcutaneous abscesses,  and an almost total failure of interferon production. Age
chronic respiratory disease, and a high incidence of feline 
 appears to have some influence on the disease pattern,
infectious peritonitis (see Chapter 33). Toxoplasmosis
 perhaps because of an association between the virus and
and infection with Hemobartonella felis are much more 
 dividing cells.
common in feline leukemia virus-infected than in normal 
The vast majority of cats exposed to infection with
cats. Poor reproductive performance, including infertil-
feline leukemia virus develop a self-limiting infection.
ity, fetal deaths, and abortions, is also attributed to feline
 They remain nonviremic, develop neutralizing and
leukemia virus infection.
 FOCMA-specifc antibodies, do not shed virus, and do
not develop leukemia. Sometimes there is a transient
Feline Fibrosarcoma
viremia, which disappears with the development of neu-
Feline fibrosarcoma accounts for 6 to 12% of all feline 
 tralizing and FOCMA-specific antibodies.
tumors, usually scen as solitary tumors in older cats.
 Finally, in some cats persistent viremia is initially
In young feline leukemia virus-infected kittens, feline
 accompanied by high FOCMA-specifc antibody. This
sarcoma virus may, on rare occasions, induce a multifo-
is an unstable condition; such cats either develop neu-
cal subcutaneous fbrosarcoma, which is anaplastic, rap-
tralizing antibody or the FOCMA-specifc antibody de-
idly growing, and frequently metastatic. Onc strain of 
clines and the cats devclop feline leukemia virus-
feline sarcoma virus induces melanoma as wel as fibro-
related disease.
sarcoma. There is no evidence that feline sarcoma virus
is transmitted horizontally; the tumors and the virus
appear to arise de novo following feline leukemia vi-
Laboratory Diagnosis
rus infection.
Viral isolation is rarely possible, but a number of diag-
nostic tests have been developed based on detecting viral
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
 proteins in cels in the blood, either by indirect immuno-
fluorescence or enzyme immunoassay. The indirect inm-
There are three antigenic types of feline leukemia
 munofluorescence test is perforrmed on blood smears on
virus—-A, B, and C—based on differences in envelope
glass slides, which may be mailed to an appropriate
antigens. Cells transformed by either feline leukemia vi-
 laboratory. Enzyme immunoassay is performed on
rus or feline sarcoma virus, unlike infected, nontrans-
 plasma or buffy coat cells and is available commercially
formcd cells, express a novel viral antigen (FOCMA)
in kit form that can be used in the veterinary clinic. Both
in their plasma membrane, antibodies to which, like
 tests detect a group-specific antigen within the viral core.
antibodies to envclope antigens, protect cats against dis-
ease. Antibodies to the internal proteins and the reverse
transcriptase are not protective but may be involved in
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
immune complex discase.
Within 6 weeks of infection with feline leukemia
 Only thc nonpathogenic endogenous type of feline leuke.
virus, one of two host-virus relationships develops: per-
mia virus is transmitted vertically, via the germ plasm.
sistcnt active infection or a self-limiting infection. Persis-
 Although many cats are exposed to horizontally trans-
tent active infection is recognized by the presence of mitted, pathogcnic feline leukemia virus, relatively few
persistent viremia. The serum of persistently infected cats  become infected, despite the fact that the saliva of persis-
lacks both neutralizing and FOCMA antibodies. Viremia  tently infected and viremic cats may contain 106 infec-
persists for months and is usually terminated by feline 
C  tious virions per milliliter. Prolonged, direct exposure is
Auian.Reticulocndotheliosis
381
usually rcquired for transmission, which may occur by
 mousc strains (e.g., AKR) express replication-competent
mutual grooming or possibly via fleas. Circumstantial
cndogenous viruscs spontaneously. Murine lcukemia/
evidence suggests that biting, such as occurs during 
 sarcoma viruses induce tumors with latencies ranging
fighting, is probably the most important method of trans-
from 2 to 18 months, depending on the strain of virus
mission, which may also occur iatrogenically via blood
 and strain of mouse. Nconatal infection is most efficient
transfusion, reused syringes and needles, and surgical in-
for leukemogcnesis, whcreas infcction of adults usually
struments.
docs not lead to diseasc.
The prevalence of feline leukemia virus infction
Murinc leukemia/sarcoma viruses are widely dis-
and disease parallels the opportunities for exposure. The
 tributed in laboratory and wild mice. The wild mouse
prevalence of infection in singlc, confined, household 
 viruses have been important because they have shown
cats is about 1%; infection rates rise progressively if cats 
new receptor specificities and distinct lesion patterns;
 also go outside, particularly to shows, live in a multiple
the laboratory mouse viruses have been the cause ovcr
cat household, or in breeding colonies. Infection rates 
the years of many compromised experiments, cspecially
may be as igh as 33% in colonies in which the virus
 long-term experiments and experiments in which mouse
is endemic.
strains that express high levels of virus must be used
 Using immunofluoresccnce or enzyme imnunoas-
(e.g., AKR, C58, PL, HRS, CWD). The effect on experi-
say procedures for detecting viral antigens, it is possible
 ments of the immunosuppression caused by somc murine
with a test and removal program to establish feline leuke-
leukemia/sarcoma viruses has not been as well appreci-
mia virus-frce cat colonies. Such programs may be under-
ated, but is another reason for choosing, where possible,
taken by large catteries, particularly where the incidence
strains of mice that express low levels of virus for experi-
of infection is high and there is clinical evidence of disease
 ments. Unlike the situation with other important murine
due to fcline leukeimia virus. Laboratory tests aid in
viruscs, thcre is no way to eliminate raurine leukemia/
 identifying preclinical or subclinical infections and in 
 sarcoma viruses from a colony; nevertheless, in some
confirming clinical diagnosis.
circumstances, testing is warranted to assess virus load.
At least two inactivatcd whole virus vaccines de-
rived from infected culturcd cells are available. Clinical
trials have indicated that these vaccines reducc thc inci-
Porcine Lymphosarcoma
dcnce of disease by about 70%. A subunit vaccine based
on a nonglycosylated subunit (p45) of the SU (gp70)
A retrovirus has been isolatcd from porcine lymphosar-
cnvelope protein of a subgroup A virus, cxpressed in
comas, which occur at a ratc of 0.3 to 5 per 100,000
Escherichia coli and administered with two adjuvants,
animals at slaughter and account for 25% of all porcine
 is also available. Various antiviral drugs, including azi-
tumors known. Most porcine cell lines contain this virus,
dothymidine, which is used in cancer therapy in humans,
a host-specific typc C retrovirus. There is evidence of
have bccn tried in particularly valuable cats, with lim-
the prcsencc of thc genome of this virus in wild Old
ited success.
World but not in Ncw World species of the family Sui-
 dae, suggesting that the virus originated as an cndogc-
 nous virus in Old World wild pigs. Two porcinc endoge-
Murine Leukemias/Sarcomas
nous retrovirus have been described recently, which will
havc to be accounted for in the breeding of retrovirus-
Murine leukemia/sarcoma viruses were identified origi-
frce pigs for human xenotransplantation purposes.
nally in the 1920s and 1930s; several viruses wcrc is0-
lated and passaged in mice, each somewhat different,
each given the name of the person identifying it—-Gross,
Avian Reticuloendotheliosis
Friend, Moloney, Rauscher, and many othcr murine
leukemia/sarcoma viruses. The different viruscs induce
 Reticulocndotheliosis viruscs arc pathogenic avian re-
distinct tumors: Gross and Moloney viruscs induce T
troviruses that are antigenically and genctically unrelated
cell lymphomas, whcrcas Friend and Rauscher viruscs
 to the avian lcukosis/sarcoma rctroviruses, but gcneti-
inducc erythroleukcmia. Some viruses are immunosup-
 cally similar to thc mammalian and reptilian type C
pressive—infected animals may develop both B and T:
 Ietroviruses. Five viruses have been recognized. The pro-
murine acquircd immunodeficiency syndrome (MAIDS).:
isolated from an adult turkey that dicd of visceral reticu-
 All mice carry endogenous murine lcukcmia/sar-
loendotheliosis and nerve Icsions. Reticulcendotheliosis
coma virns sequences in their chromosomes. Most of
f virus-T is replication defective and carries a v-onc genc,
these arc rcplication defective, although some inbred v-rel. The other avian reticuloendotheliosis viruses are
382
23.Retrouiridae
reticuloendotheliosis-associated virus, duck infectious
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
anemia virus, Trager duck spleen necrosis virus, and
chick syncytial virus. These viruses are replication com-
 Oncogenesis probably depends on the integration of a
bovine proviral v-onc gene(s) into cellular DNA. The
petent.
course of infection suggests a multistage process. The
When inoculated into 1-day-old chicks, reticuloen-
 dothcliosis virus-T produces severe hepatosplenomegaly
 major target cells are B lymphocytes. In an animal des-
with cither marked nccrosis or lymphoproliferative le-
 tined to develop disease, infection is at first inapparent,
sions. Reticuloendotheliosis virus-T pseudotypes with
then may progress to a persistent lymphocytosis, and
avian leukosis virus envclopcs are produced in chickens 
finally to neoplasia. The latter is marked by enlarged
that carry thc later viruses. Some major outbrcaks of
lymph nodes and leukemic infiltrations into a variety of
reticuloendotheliosis virus-T disease, involving 
organs and tissues. Some tumors, particularly those from
the
deaths of several million chickens, have occurred as a
terminal cases, do not contain the virus or viral antigens.
However, cocultivation of lymphocytes with susceptiblc
consequence of contamination of turkey herpesvirus
Marek's disease vaccine with reticuloendotheliosis virus-
cells, with or without mitogens, results in the production
T virus. There is some evidence that the virus may be
of infectious virus.
 transmitted mechanically by mosquitoes.
Laboratory Diagnosis
DIsEasEs CauSED BY MemBErs OF
Enzyme immunoassay, agar gel diffusion, and syncy-
The GENUS DELTARETRovIRUS
tium-inhibition assays are used for diagnosis. Test and
removal programs have been adopted by several Euro-
Bovine Leukemia
pean countries, including Denmark and Germany, and
-ias aq ao piodi ne aeai soo s
Bovine leukemia (syn., enzootic bovine leukosis) at-
cally negative using standardized rests. In other coun-
tracted attention early in this century in several European
 tries, including the United States and Canada, individual
countries, notably Denmark and Germany, where clus-
 Owners have undertaken test and removal programs on
ters of herds with a high incidence of disease suggested
 a voluntary basis, but national programs are not in place.
a viral etiology. Herds and areas characterized by a high
prevalence are rccognized in most countries. Overall
 prevalence figurcs for particular countries vary between 
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
4 and 165 per 100,000 cattle per year, reflecting the
grcat difference between low and high prevalence herds.
Bovine leukemia virus, like other retroviruses, is not
 Shcep and goats can be infected with bovine leuke-
highly transmissible. Virus is transmirted horizontally
mia virus, with most shecp developing lymphosarcoma.
 within herds but does not extend readily to neighboring
 All evidence indicates that the virus does not spread
 herds, suggesting that close and prolonged direct expo-
from cattle to sheep (or from sheep ro cattle) by normal
sure is required. Overall national incidence rates seldom
contact. Neither is there any evidence that the bovine
 exceed a few percent. For particular herds the incidence
virus is transmissible to humans.
may be much higher, which should signal the possibiity
of iatrogenic transmission. The high incidence of infec-
tion in Denmark earlier in the 20th century was probably
Clinical Features
iatrogenic, linked to whole-blood vaccines used for the
control of babesiosis and anaplasmosis.
 Most bovine leukemia virus infections are asymptom-
 Transmission of bovine leukemia virus occurs pri-
atic and are recognized only by serological testing. Of
marily by the transfer of lymphocytes between animals
infected cattle, about 30% develop persistent lymphocy-
via trauma, restraint devices, gloves used for rectal exam-
tosis, but this is not associated with any clinical signs.
 ination, reuse of needies and surgical instruments, and
ln those few animals that do develop disease, clinical[
rarely by insects acting as mechanical vectors. The virus
signs are seen at 4 to 8 ycars of age; there are lymphoid (
 can be transmitted to the fetus, but usually less than
rumors (i.e., lymphosarcomas or malignant lymphomas)  10% of calves born to infected dams are infected at birth.
in lymph nodes, abomasum, heart, spleen, kidneys,
Virus may be eliminated from a herd if all cattle
uterus, spinal meninges, and brain, but not any consis-2
 are tested serologically at 2- to 3-month intervals and
tent presence of large numbers of malignant cells in F
 positive animals removed immediately. The length of
the blood as suggcsted by the name of the disease and
timc required to obtain a virus-free herd varies, de-
the virus.
pending on the initial prevalence of infection, but in
Maedi/Visna(Orine Progressive Pneumonia)
38.3
 most herds the elimination can be accomplished in 1
even involves the surrogate testing of drugs and vaccines
year. If the prevalence of infection is too high to permit
 in primate and feline models with the aim of developing
removal of allserologically positive animals, segregation
preventive and therapeutic regimens for animals as well
of seropositive and seroncgative animals may be at-
 as humans. In this regard all of the aninal lentiviruses
tempted. Calves from infected dams should be isolated,
 and the diseases they cause are of intcrest, each providing
tested, and only allowed to entcr the seronegative cohort
 particular lessons and particular experimental advan-
if seronegative at 6 months of age. An inactivated vac-
tages. The complex interrclationships among thesc vi-
cine, which has been shown to prevent disease following
 ruses are shown in Figure 23.11.
virus challcnge in clinical trials, has been used on an
experimental basis.
Maedi /Visna (Ovine
DIsEasEs CauseD BY MemBeRs OF
Progressive Pneumonia
The GEnus EpsilonReTrovirUS
In 1933, 20 karakul sheep were imported into Iceland
from Germany, and within 2 years two diseases, called
Retrovirus Diseases of Fish
maedi (dyspnea) and visna (wasting) emerged, which in
the following years were responsible for the deaths of
Walleye dermal sarcoma virus is a newly described retro-
-s  ds    'ds c
virus that is associated etiologically with a multifocal tered in 1965, when the diseases were declared eradi-
skin tumor of the walleye (Stigostedium vitreum), an  cated. These diseases have an incubation period of over
important North American spor fish. Tumor prevalence 2 years, an insidious onset, and a protracted clinical
 sn e es i sg   od pe sm  
lated lake, Oneida Lake, New York,to 1% in less popu-
 nated by intercurrent discase. Sigurdsson, who demon-
lated waters. Phylogenetic analysis of isolates from dif- strated that both Icelandic diseases were transmissible
ferent regions of North America has indicated that there with cllfree filtratcs, described the diseases as “slow
are distinct genotypic clusters matching geographic ori-virus infcctions,”" thus introducing into virology a term
association with fsh in various lakes. Two other retrovi-
Visna, in which thc lesions occur in the ccntral
ruses have been isolated from walleyes, walleye epider-
 nervous systcn, has rarely been described in sheep out-
mal hyperplasia viruses 1 and 2, and other retroviruses s
 side Iccland, although a fcw cases have been reported
have been isolated from snakehcads, sea bass, and i
 in Thc Netherlands. However, maedi occurs in scveral
salmon. The sea bass virus has bcen associated with an
 Countries in Europe (where in The Netherlands it is called
erythrocytic discase and the salmon virus with leukemia.
 Zwoegerzickte and in France La Bouhite), in South Af-
 Because the discovery of these viruscs occurred only rc-
rica (where it is called Graaf Reinet), and in the United
cently, little is known of their overall importance,
anq
 States (where it is called ovine progressive pneumonia).
already there is a sense that there are many more fish
Maedi does not occur in Australia or New Zealand. It
retroviruses awaiting discovery and cpidemiologic study.
is now clcar that maedi and visna are caused by the same
 or very closely related lentiviruses.
DIsEasEs Caused BY MemBers OF
Clinical Features
The Genus Lentivirus
Maedi (Progressive Pneumonia)
Since the discovery in 1983 that human acquired immu-
The onset of clinical signs in maedi is insidious and
nodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is caused by human im-
is seldom detected in sheep less than 3 years of age.
munodeficicncy virus (HIV) and that this virus is a lentiv-
 Incubation periods of up to 8 years have bccn recorded.
irus, these viruses have become the most intensively
 There is progrcssive weight loss, and dyspnea, initially
studied viruses of all timc. There has been remarkable 
e  detectable only after exercise, becoming progressively
 progress in defining their basic properties and the patho-I
 more apparent ovcr time. Affectcd shecp stragglc when
genesis of the diseases they cause. Human acquired im- t
 the flock is driven. The head may jerk rhythmically with
 munodeficiency syndrome now scrves as a model for  each inspiration, nostrils are flared, there may be a slight
the lentivirus diseases of veterinary importance, and the nasai discharge and a cough. Severely dyspneic sheep
lentivirus diseases of animals are used as models for thc
spend much time lying down. The clinical course may
study of the human disease. This “cross-fertilization"
last 3 to 8 months; it may be prolonged by careful nursing
384
23. Retroviridae
FIguRE 23.11.
HIV-2
SIVSMM
SIVSYK
I1
HIV-1
III
SIVcPZ
SIVAGM
IV
SIVMND
V
AWA
CAEV
EIAV
BIV
FIV
 1% difference
The close phylogenetic relctionship among animal lentiviruses.Representalive viruseswere compared using pol gene nucleotide sequencesive
1;HIdyrsmdcinigse
vins fromSykesmonkeyVcpz,simianimmunodeficiencyvirusfromhimpanzeeSIVagmsimianmmunodeficiencyvirusromAricangeen
monkeynd iindcincyvisfmanrilMadisiEinaiencephalis vrsEq
infectiouseiirsovinedeciencyirusndinnodienyirThbrnchingrde thpritentivir
iscnihlnrgdinilidqeninrwdefi
viruses and rheir replication. in "Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath,
B.Roizman, and S. E Straus, eds., 3rd ed., p. 1881-1952. Lippincot-Raven, Philadelphia,PA, 1996.]
 Or shortened by pregnancy, stress such as occasioned
that there may be a genetic predisposition to lentivirus
by inclemcnt weather or poor nutrition, or intercurrent
 disease, especially visna. The virus is probably acquired
 disease, particularly pneumonia due to Pasteurella spp.
most commonly by droplet infection via the respiratory
 Pregnant ewes may abort or deliver weak lambs.
tract. A lymphocyte-associated viremia occurs, in which
about 1 in every 106 peripheral blood leukocytcs is in-
Visna
fected.
The incubation period of visna varies from a few months
Apart from neurogenic muscle atrophy, no gross
to 9 years. The onset of clinical signs is insidious and
 lesions are found in visna and histologicaly lesions
usually begins with slight weakness of the hind legs.
are usually confined to the central nervous system,
Affcted sheep may not be able to keep up with the flock
although occasionally minor lesions are seen in the
and may stumble and fall for no apparent reason. There
lungs. The characteristic lesion in the central nervous
is progressive weight loss and trembling of facial muscles
 system is a demyelinating leukoencephalomyelitis. Thc
and lips. The paresis eventually leads to paraplegia.
 meninges and subependymal spaces are infltrated with
There is no fever, appetite is maintained, and sheep re-
mononuclear cells, mainly lymphocytes, with some
main alert. The clinical course may last several years,
 plasma cells and macrophages. There is perivascular
with periods of remission. The cerebrospinal fluid con-
cuffing, neuronal necrosis, malacia, and demyelination
tains up to 200 mononuclear cclls per milliliter (normal:
scattered patchily throughout the central nervous
50 per milliliter).
system.
 Gross findings in maedi are restricted to the lungs
and associated lymph nodes. The lungs show extensivc
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
 consolidation and do not collapse when the thoracic
 cavity is opened. Bronchial and mediastinal lymph
Prior to 1933, Icelandic sheep werc genetically isolatcd
 nodcs are enlarged greatly. Histologically therc is hy.
for 1000 ycars and it has been suggested, but not proven, perplasia of thc fbrous tissue and muscle of the al-
Caprine Artbritis-Fncepbalowmyelitis
385
veolar septa and a mononnclear cell inflammatory infil-
diagnostic test. Test and removal programs are used in
tration.
Norway and The Netherlands. Enzyme immunoassays,
Lentiviruses are exceptionally resistant to inter-
agar gel diffusion, and a syncytial plaque reduction assay
feron, and despire a diverse range of immune responscs,
are used for antibody detection in support of these pro-
 including the production of neutralizing antibodies and
grams.
a cell-mediated immune response, neither virus nor in-
 fected cells are eliminated. immune suppression abro-
gates or delays the progress of degenerative changes,
Caprine
indicating that thcre is an immunopathologic element in
lesions in both the lungs and central nervous system.
Arthritis-Encephalomyelitis
In infected shecp, antigenic variation in the envelope
 antigens of the virus occurs over time---this may be an
 First recognized in the United States in 1974, caprine
important mechanism for circumventing viral elimina-
arthritis-encephalomyelitis is now known to occur
tion and a key in the pathogenesis of the disease.
worldwide. In the United States, the disease is now the
most important disease of goats; infection rates as high
as 80% have been reported in some herds and the eco-
Laboratory Diagnosis
nomic loss from the disease is substantial. The virus is
most closely rclatcd to North American isolates of
The most widcly used diagnostic·tests for the detectionr
maedi/visna virus. Two syndromes are recognized: en-
of antibody are enzyme immunoassays in which either
 cephalomyelitis in kids 2 to 4 months of age and more
 or both core and surface antigens are present. Western
 commonly arthritis in goats from about 12 months of
 blots are more sensitive and are used frequently to con-
 age onward. The virus is not known to be transmitted
firm a diagnosis. Antigen may be detected in peripheral
 naturally to other animal species. Experimentally, the
virus infects shecp and causes arthritis; however, despite
DNA may be detccted in these cells by in situ hybridiza-
the high incidence of infection in goats in Australia and
tion, dircctly or following viral RNA amplification using
New Zealand, infection of sheep has not been reported
thc revcrse-transcriptase polymerasc chain reaction. Vi-
in these countries.
rus can be isolated by cocultivation of gradient-purified
periphcral blood leukocytes with mitogen-stimulated pu-
lified sheep peripheral blood leukocytes in the prescnce
Clinical Features
of interlcukin 2. Reverse transcriptase assays performed
at various times on the supcrnatants from these cultures
Thc central nervous system disease is a progressive
provide an indication of virus growth and are uscd to
leukoencephalomyelitis associated with ascending pa-
guide virus isolation methods.
ralysis. Affected goats also show progressive wasting
and trembling and the hair coat is dull, but they remain
afebrile, alert, and usually maintain good appetite and
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
sight (Figure 23.12). Terminally there is paralysis,
deviation of the head and neck, and paddling. The
Macdi/visna virus is present in a variety of body fluids,
 onset of arthritis is usually insidious and progresses
including blood, semen, bronchial secretions, tears, sa- S
 slowly over months to ycars, but in some cases disease
liva, and milk. Droplet transmission is facilitated by f
 may appear suddenly and remain static. The joints are
housing and closc confinement and was important in
swollen and painful, particularly the carpal joints but
 Iceland, where shecp arc housed for 6 months of the 
also hock, stifle, shoulder, ferlock, and vertebral joints.
 year. Transmission is usually direct, afthough infection
Cold wcather exacerbates the signs. Bursae, particularly
via drinking water or from fecal or urine contamination
the atlantooccipital, and tendon sheaths are thickened
seems to occur as well. Asymptomatic sheep are rarely
and distendcd with fluid. Thickening of the joint cap-
a source of virus for infection of other sheep, with the
sulcs results in restricted movcment and flcxion con
possible exception of ewe to lamb transmission via milk.
tracture.
 Evidencc for transplacental infection is conflicting but
virus may be shed in semcn of rams with a high virus
load. Biting arthropods and surgical equipment readily
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
transinit virus mechanically from vircmic shecp.
Macdi/visna was eradicated from Iceland by a
At autopsy, central nervous system lesions may be
drastic slaughter policy, before the availability of any visible as focal malacia in white matter, but are identi-
386
23. Retroviridae
FIGure 23.12.
CaprinehritsnhlmelisAKidgtwialyedhinqers,bl nainggrazeBElgedcl  
α 5-year-old goal. [Courtesy of J. R. Gorharm and T. H. Crawford.]
fied more reliably microscopically as foci of mononu-
Equine Infectious Anemia
clear cell inflammation and demyelination. The basic
joint lesion is a proliferative synovitis; tendon sheaths
Equine infectious anemia is an important disease of
and bursae are characterized by villus hypertrophy,
horses that occurs worldwide. The disease may vary
synovial cell hyperplasia, and infltration with lympho-
from an acute syndrome that ends fatally within a month
cytes, plasma ceils, and macrophages. Progression is
of onset to a chronic relapsing disease. It may also rcmain
accompanied by degenerative changes including fibro-
silent for the life of the infected horse.
sis, nccrosis, mineralization of synovial membranes,
and osteoporosis. Mild intcrstitial pncumonia and hy-
perplasia of pulmonary lymphoid tissuc may be seen
Clinical Features
at necropsy.
Following primary infection, most horses develop fever
after an incubation period of 7-21 days. The disease is
recognized as four interchanging, overlapping syn-
Laboratory Diagnosis
dromes, In acute equine infectious anemia there is a
marked fever, weakness, severc anemia, jaundicc, blood-
Antibodies can be detected by agar gel diffusion, indirect
 stained feces, tachypnea, and petechial hemorrhages of
inmunofluoresccnce, or enzyme immunoassays and 
the mucosae. As many as 80% of acute cases are fatal;
form the basis of voluntary control programs based on 
others pass into the subacute form, in which continuing
test and removal.
moderate fever is followed by recovery. Recovery from
cither the acute or the subacute disease is followed by
lifelong persistent infection. Recovered viremic horses
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
may appear and perform well, but some experience re-
current episodes of disease whereas others develop
Virus is acquired during thc neonatal period, via colos-
chronic disease that varies from mild signs of illness and
trum or milk. The rate of infection of newborn goats 
failure to thrive to episodic or persistent fever, cachexia,
can be reduced by more than 90% by removing kids
 anemia, and ventral edema.
from infected does as they pass from the birth canal,
providing them with colostrum that has been heated to
56°C for 1 hour, feeding them pasteurized goat or cow's
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
milk, and raising them in isolation from infected goats.
Serological tests such as the agar gel immunodifusion
The discase is due to initial infction of macrophages and
test can be used to monitor herd status.
then lymphocytes, in which degenerative or proliferative
Fetine Inimunodeficiency Virus Disease
387
responses may occur. Lifelong, cell-associated viremia  partment of Agriculrure introduced regulations relating
develops in all infected horses. It is uncertain whether  to the licensing and operation of laboratories authorized
anemia develops as a consequence of bone marrow sup-  to conduct the agar gel diffusion test, and horses im-
pression, increased clearance of red cells from the circula-
 ported into the United States and some other countries
tion, or autoimmune destruction of erythrocytes. Vascu-
are now required to have a negative test certificate from
litis, including glomerulonephritis, is mediated by
 an authorized laboratory. For horses remaining within
immune complexes. Hemorrhages may be a consequcnce
a state, testing is not compulsory nor is it compulsory
 of thrombocytopenia. During the course of infection and
for an owner to destroy a horse giving a positive test.
linked to recurent episodes of disease, significant gcno-
 A reportedly efficacious vaccine has been used in China
mic variations, including deletions, have been mapped
since 1983.
to the principal neutralizing domain of the SU (gp90)
cnvelope protein.
Feline Immunodeficiency
Virus Disease
Laboratory Diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis is confirmed by the immunodiffusion Since its first isolation in California in 1987 and the
p si  sss aa o sa os ee  pe as e isn s, s
cal test to detect infcction. Foals nursing infected dams
 feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) has been identified
test positive temporarily, and recently infected horses
 in many countries, It probably has a worldwide distribu-
may test negative.
tion. Most isolates have come from domestic cats; how-
ever, related but distinguishable isolates have also been
 made from lions, puma, Pallas' cat, and bobcat; antibod-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
ies have been found in the sera of more than 18 different
 feline species. The seroprevalence varies from 1% in
Tabanid flies and stable flies (Stomoxys spp.), mosqui-
Mou s 1 'sieo snsaop yIs u! %oe on sisains uopue1
tocs, and possibly Culicoides spp. can serve as mechani-
 clear that many of the signs of disease in cats formcrly
cal vectors for equine infectious anemia virus. Trans- associated with aging more recently, with feline leukemia
mission occurs particularly in the summer months in virus infection may be due to FIV infection. As noted
low-lying, humid, swamp areas such as occur in thecarlier,itislikely that the clinical features of felineleuke-
Mississippi delta region of the United States and in parts
 mia virus infection given earlier in this chapter may re-
of South and Central America, South Africa, and north-
quire furthcr revision as the two infections are berter dis-
 ern Australia. National prevalence fgures are geographi-
tinguished.
cally uneven and reflect the importance of insect trans-
mission. On farms where infection has been endemic
for many years the prevalence may be as high as 70%.
 Clinical Features
Iatrogenic transmission by the use of nonsterile equip-
ment has been responsible for some major outbreaks.
The clinical disease may be described as having three
Transplacental infection has been recognized; colostrum
 stages: an acute stage marked by lymphadenopathy and
and milk, saliva, urine, and semen are other unproved f
 fever, a long subclinical stage, and a terminal stage
but possible modes of transmission.
 marked by degenerative disease and opporrunistic infec-
 In endemic areas the rate of transmission may be
 tions. Common presenting clinical signs include an insid-
reduced by insect-proof stabling of horscs during those
 ious onset of recurrent fever of undetermined origin,
times of the year (summer) and that time of the day
 lymphadenopathy, leukopenia, anemia, weight loss, and
(dusk) when insects are most active. latrogenic transmis-
 nonspecific behavioral changes.
 sion is avoided by careful hygiene.
In the terminal stage, opportunistic bacterial and
The development in 1970 of the agar gel diffusion f
 fungal infections are especially common in the mouth,
test for detecting antibodies to equine infectious ancmia periodontal tissue, cheeks, and tongue. About 25% of
virus was followed in the United States by regulations,
, cats have chronic respiratory disease, and a lesser num-
promulgated by federal and state agencies and some ber have chronic enteritis, urinary tract infection, derma-
 horses. In some instances a negative test has been re- bles advanced human AIDS. Terminally, about 5% of
quired as a condition of entry to racetracks, sale yards, cats have serious neurologic disease, although histology
and shows. Buyers of horses have also increasingly
 studies reveal that a higher proportion have central ner-
sought negative test certification. The United States De-
 vous system lesions at necropsy.
388
23.Retroviridae
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and immunity
virus vaccine is in wide clinical use. A fully infectious
DNA clone of FIV has been made and will enhance
The incubation period of FIV infection may last for sev-
vaccine development and other research. No human pub-
eral years; progression of the disease that follows paral-
lic health risks have been identified in association with
lels the decline in CD4+ T lymphocytes. Infected cats
the infection in cats.
have a higher than expected incidence of feline leukemia
virus-negative lymphomas, usually of the B cell type, and
myeloproliferative disorders (neoplasias and dysplasias).
Of affected cats, about 5% have central nervous system
Simian Immunodeficiency
lesions that are associated with behavioral abnormali-
Virus Disease
ties, psychomoror disturbances, dementia, and convul-
sions. Cats remain infected for life; the presence of serum
There is a high prevalence of persistent infection of sev-
antibodies is correlated directly with the ability to isolate
eral African nonhuman primate species with lentiviruses
virus from blood cells and saliva.
that seem to have evolved separately with their host
species (Table 23.1). For example, a high proportion of
African green (Cercopithecus aethiops) monkeys in the
Laboratory Diagnosis
wild in Africa (as well as in colonies in other areas) are
infected. In most cases these viruses do not cause overt
Virus antigen can be detected by enzyme irmmunoassay
disease in their natural hosts; however, when some of
 Or proviral DNA by the polymerase chain reaction in
these viruses gain entry into other species of monkeys,
peripheral blood leukocytes of infected cats. In experi-
 there may be severe, even fatal, disease. For example,
mental infections, antibodies can be detected within 2
when virus from African grcen monkeys (simian immu-
t0 4 weeks of infection using enzyme immunoassay, im-
 nodeficiency virus SIVagm) infects rhesus macaques (Ma-
munofluorescence, or Western blorting. False-positive
caca mullata), it causes an AIDs-like disease.
enzyme immunoassay results range from 2 to 20%, prob-
Simian immunodeficiency virus SIV a has not been
ably because of the use in cats of vaccines that have been
identifed in rhesus monkeys in the wild in Asia but it
produced in feline cell cultures and the presence in these
is transmitted among animals in colonies where it causes
products of allotypic antigens; vigorous attempts are
an AIDS-like disease. Months affer exposure, the frst
under way to improve the specificity of enzyme immuno-
 signs of infection are an inguinal rash and lymphadenop-
assays.
athy. This progresscs to a wasting syndrome, chronic
enteritis, and the onset of opportunistic infections caused
by organisms such as Toxoplasma gondi, Pneumocystis
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
carini, Cryptosporidium spp., Salmonella spp. and ad-
cnoviruses, 
 papovaviruses, and cytomegaloviruses.
Feline immunodeficiency virus is shed mainly in the sa-
There is often an encephalopathy with neural lesions
liva, and the principal imode of transmission is through
similar to those seen in humans with AIDs dementia.
bites. Because of this, free-roaming (feral and pet), male,
Following the discovery of a similar virus (SIVsta)
and aged cats are at the greatest risk of infection. Felinc
in stump-tailed macaques (Macaca arctoides) in the Cali-
immunodefciency virus infection is uncommon in closed
fornia Regional Primate Research Center in the 1970s,
purebred catteries. Neither sexual contact nor maternal
 infected animals were found to develop lymphomas, pro-
grooming appears to be significant modcs of transmis-
 gressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (a fatal disease
sion, although virus may be shed in semen. However,
 of the central nervous system caused by any of several
the virus is transmitted to kittens from acutcly infected
 papovaviruses), tuberculosis, and other diseases seen
queens through colostrum and milk.
typically in human AIDS patienrs.
 Drugs directed against the viral reverse tran-
scriptase, such as azidothymidinc, have been used with
 modest success. Appropriate test and removal programs
Human Infection
and certification at the point of sale can be applied to
control the infection. A wide range of experimental vac-
Two workers have been reported as having developed
cines have been developed, including products made 
 antibodics to simian immunodcficicncy viruses following
from whole inactivated virus, whole inactivated infected exposures in the laboratory and in the course of handling
cells, a variety of recombinant DNA-produced antigens
 monkcys (one via a needle stick, one from bleeding an
[SU protein, peptides to the VR3 region, p24 (capsid)i
infected monkey). Recommendations for workcrs are
protein], and “"rnaked DNA." Some of these vaccines now the same as for working with nonhuman primates
Further Reading
38.9
Bovine Immunodeficiency
Cheevers, W. P., and McGuire, T. C. (1985). Equine in-
Virus Disease
fectious anemia virus: Immunopathogenesis and persis-
tence. Rev. Infect. Dis. 7, 83-88.
Cheevers, W. P., and McGuire, T. C. (1988). The lentivi-
ruses: Macdi/visna, caprine arthritis-encephalitis, and
ripheral blood leukocytes in 1972 and for the next 20
equine infectious anemia. Adv. Virus Res. 34,
189-215.
years received little attention. It causes a nonacute dis-
Coffin, J. M. (1996). Retroviridae: The viruses and
 ease and can be grown in monolayer cell cultures from
their replication. In "Fields Virology' (B. N. Fieids,
a variety of bovine embryonic tissues, producing a cyto-
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock,
J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and
pathic effect characterized by syncytium formation. The
S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1767-1848.
 genome is the most complex of the nonprimate lentivi-
Lippincort-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
ruses in that in addition to tat, rev, and vif, the genome 
Coffn, J. M., Hughes, A. H., and Varmus, H, E, eds.
 also contains three other accessory genes designated vpy,
(1997). “Retroviruses." Cold Spring Harbor Labora-
vpw, and tmx. When transmitted to calves by intrave-
tory Prcss, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
 nous inoculation there is an immcdiate leukopenia fol.
Fauci, A, S. (1996). Host factors and the pathogenesis of
HIV-induced disease. Nature (London) 384, 529-534.
lowed within 15-20 days by lymphocytosis that persists.
Hoover, E. A., Mullins, J. I., Quackenbush, S. L., and
 The virus infects a wide spectrum of cells; proviral DNA
Gasper, P. W. (1987). Experimental transmission and
has been detected in CD3+, CD4', and CD8' cells as 
pathogenesis of inmunodeficiency syndrome in cats.
Blood 70, 1880-1892.
well as y/ 8 and B lymphocytes, null cells, and monocytes.
 Jarrett, O. (1996). The relevance of felinc retroviruses to
Virus persists in naturally infccted cows for at least 12
the development of vaccines against HIV. AIDS Res.
months, but neither the prevalence of the infcction nor
Hum.Retroviruses 20, 385-387.
its economic significance has been determined.
Joag, S. V., Stephens, E. B., and Narayan, O. (1996).
Lentiviruses. In "Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields,
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L.
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
Jembrana Disease
eds.), 3rd ed., Pp. 1977-1996. Lippincorr-Raven, Phil.
adelphia, PA.
 In contrast to the somewhat benign naturc of bovine
Levy, J. A. (1997). “HIV and the Pathogenesis of AIDS,"
immunodeficiency virus infection in European cattle, a
2nd ed. American Society for Microbiology Press,
related virus has been established as the causc of a per-
Washington, DC.
Luciw, P. A. (1996). Human irmmunodeficiency viruses
acute disease of Bali cattle (Bos javanicus) in Indonesia.
and their replication, In *Fields Virology” (B. N.
The disease, called Jembrana disease for the district,
Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock,
was recognized in 1964. Within 12 months, 26,000 of
J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E.
300,oo0 cattle in the area died. The disease remains
Straus, eds.), 3rd ed.,pp. 1881-1952. Lippincott-
endemic on Bali and has spread to Sumatra, Java, and
Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Neil, J. C., Fulton, R., Rigby, M., and Stewart, M.
Kalimantan. The origin of the virus has not been estab-
(1991). Feline leukemia virus: Generation of patho-
genic and oncogenic variants. Curr. Top. Microbiol.
high mortality rates. After a very short incubation period
Immunol.171,67-93.
 of 5 to 12 days there is fever, lethargy, anorexia, and
Payne, L. N., and Fadly, A. M. (1991). Lcukosis/sarcoma
group. In *Diseases of Poultry” (B. W. Calnek, ed.),
pronounced sweling of lymph nodes and panleuko-
10th ed., Pp. 414-420. Iowa State University Press,
penia. About 17% of acutely ill cattle die. Postmortem
Ames.
findings include widespread hemorrhages, lymphade-
Pedersen, N. C., Ho, E. W., Brown, M. L., and Yama-
nopathy, and splenomegaly. H
Histologically, many
moto, J. K. (1987). Isolation of a T-lymphotropic vi-
Iymphoblastoid cells are found in thc lymphoid tissues.
rus from domestic cats with immunodeficiency-like
The viral genome has bccn sequenced completely and is
syndrome. Science 235, 790-793.
Sparkes, A. H. (1997). Feline leukaemia virus: A review
similar to, but distinguishable from, other isolates of
of immunity and vaccination. J. Small Anim. Pract.
bovine immunodefciency virus.
38, 187-194.
van der Marten, M. J., and Miller, J. M. (1990). Bovine
leukosis virus. In "Virus Infections of Vertebrates"
(Z. Dinter, and B. Morein, eds.), vol. 3, pp. 419-425.
Further Reading
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Wilcox, G. R. (1997). Jembrana discase. Aust. Vet. J. 75,
Anonymous. (1991). Colloquium on feline leukcmia
492-493.
virus/feline immunodeficiency virus: Tests and vaccina-
Willett, B.,Flynn, J. N., and Hosic, M. J. (1997)., FIV in-
tion. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 199, 1271-1485.
fection of the domcstic cat: An animal model for
Biggs, P. M. (1991). Lymphoproliferative diseases of tur-
AIDS. Immunol. Today 18, 182-189.
keys. In *"Diseases of Poultry" (B. W. Calnek, ed.),
Witter, R. L. (1997). Reticuloendotheliosis, In *Diseases
10th cd., pp. 485-489. Iowa State University Press,
of Poultry" (B. W. Calnek, ed.), 10th ed., pp. 467-
Ames.
470. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Cha p te r 24
Reoviridae
Properties of Reoviruses .
392
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS ORTHOREOVIRUS....
396
 Orthoreovirus Infections of Mammals and Birds..
396
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS ORBIVIRUS ..
398
Bluetongue...
398
African Horse Sickness ..
400
Equine Encephalosis
402
 Ibaraki Disease of Cattle and Epizootic Hemorrhagic Disease of Deer.
402
Palyam Virus Disease of Cattle
402
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS ROTAVIRUS ..
402
 Rotavirus Infections of Mammals and Birds
402
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS COLTIVIRUS....
404
Colorado Tick Fever ...
404
Further Reading...
404
The family Reoviridae is one of the most complex in  Orbivirus, as is typical of arthropod-borne viruses, is
all of virology, comprising nine genera that variously
 much more circumscribed than that of other genera; each
contain viruses of mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians,
virus is limited by the distribution of its particular vector.
fish, invertebrates, and plants. The root term reo, an
There is much diversity in vectors, however, with some
o   o as, r e
 viruses being transmitted by mosquitoes, some by Culi-
because the first members of the family were found in
coides spp., and some by black flies, sandflies, and ticks.
the respiratory and the enteric tracts of animals and
 The most important members of this genus, bluetongue
humans as "orphans," i.c., not associated with any dis-
viruses and African horse sickness viruses, have been the
ease. These viruses are now members of the genus Ortho-
cause of economically important diseases in South Africa
reovirus. The later inclusion in the family of the genera
 since the early days of European settlement—-in recent
Orbivirus, Coltivirus, Rotavirus, and Aquareovirus
 years bluetongue has been recognized as a rontarif trade
added important animal and human pathogens. The di-
barrier in North and South America and Australia, and
versity of the hosts infected and the variety of transmis-
 African horse sickness has been recognized as a substan-
 sion patterns ermployed by the member viruses raise, but
tial problem in the Iberian peninsula.
do not answer, the question of where these fascinating
 Rotaviruses are also widespread; essentially every
viruses might have originated.
species of domestic animal and bird has been found to
The distribution of the member viruses of the genus
 harbor at least one indigenous rotavirus, in most cases 
 Orthoreovirus is ubiquitous. Although their host rangc 
causing diarrhea ("scours") in newborn animals. Con-
includes catle, sheep, swine, humans, monkeys, bats,
sidering all animal species and humans together, rotavi-
 and birds, associated diseases are usually rather insig-
rus diarrhea, which is ofren more severe than diarrhea
 nificant—some diarrhea, some respiratory illness, and 
 caused by other viruses, is one of the most important
 some neurologic disease. Only the infection of laboratory
diseascs in the world. It is the proximal cause of death
rodents, chickens, and turkeys is of clinical signifcance. of millions of children in developing countries and the
The distribution of the member viruses of the genus  cause of grcat economic loss in many livestock industries.
391
392
24. Reouiridae
Properties of Reoviruses
antigen demonstrable by serologic tests. Low-level sero-
 logical cross-reactions do occur between individual vi-
Classification
ruses in different subgroups, but the confusion that this
once caused has now been obviated by genotyping (e.g.,.
All viruses of animals with segmented double-stranded
 partial sequencing).
RNA genomes, except the birnaviruses (see Chapter 25),
The classification of the member viruses of the
have been placed in the family Reoviridae. Consequently,
genus Rotavirus is based on genotypic and serologic
the family is quite complcx (Table 24.1). The genus
 analyses. Variance in the group-specifc capsid antigen
Orthoreovirus comprises 3 viruses of mammais, reo-
on VP6 is used to define major groups. Rotavirus group
viruses 1, 2, and 3, a few other viruses of mammals that
 A includes important pathogens of humans, cattle, and
will not be mentioned further, and 11 avian viruses,
 Other animals; group B includes only pathogens of hu-
which are designated by serial numbers.
 mans; groups C and E include only pathogens of swine;
The genus Orbivirus is divided into 14 distinct
 and groups D and F include only pathogens of fowl.
subgroups, of which 5 include viruses that cause disease 
 Differentiation into serotypes is based on neutralization
in domestic animals. Separate subgroups encompass
 tests, Because both outer capsid proteins (VP4 and VP7)
bluetongue viruses 1 to 25, African horse sickness viruses
 carry type-specific epitopes recognized by neutralizing
1 to 9, epizootic hemorrhagic disease of deer viruses 1
 antibodies, a binary system of classification of serotypes
and 2, Ibaraki virus, equinc encephalosis viruses 1 and 
has been developed, akin to that used for influenza vi-
2, and other viruses affecting various animal species.
ruses. For example, in group A, 14 serotypes have been
The subgroups have been defined serologically and geno-
defined on the basis of different VP7 antigens and 8
typically—viruses within each subgroup have a common
 serotypes on the basis of different VP4 antigens. Mono-
Table 24.1
 Diseases Caused by Members of the Family Reoviridae
GENUS
VIRus
 PRinCiPal Species aFFECtED
DISEASE
Orthoreovirus
 Mammalian reoviruses I-3
Isolated from many species of
Hepatoencephalomyelitis
mammals
in mice
Avian reoviruses 1-11
Chickens, turkeys, and geese
Arthritis, nephrosis, enteri-
His, chronic respiratory dis-
ease, myocarditis
Orbivirus
 Bluetongue viruses 1-25
Sheep, catle, and deer
Bluetongue
African horse sickness viruses
Horses, donkeys, mules, and zebras 
African horse sickness 
6-1
 Equine encephalosis viruses 1-5 
Horses
Abortion and encephalitis
Epizoolic hemorrhagic disease
Deer
 Epizootic hemorrhagic
of deer viruses 1-7
disease
Ibaraki virus
Cattle
Acute febrile disease simi-
lar to bluetongue
Palyam viruses 1-6
Cattle
 Abortion, congenilal abnor-
malities
Rotavirus
Rotaviruses: many different vi-
Virtually all animals
Enteritis
ruses, offen host specific
Coltivirus
Colorado tick fever virus, Eyach
Zoonotic, smali mammals, and
Colorado tick fever
virus
humans
Aquareovirus
Many viruses of fish, shelfish
Fish, shellfish
Not certain
Properties of Reoriruses
393
 clonal antibodies, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of  (
( bass, catfish), and oysters and other shellfish. The patho-
viral RNA segments, and partial sequencing can be used  genic and economic signifcance of many of these viruses
 to make even finer distinctions as may be necessary in
1 remains unknown
molecular epidemiology studies.
There are only a few members of the genus Coltivi-
rus—in fact for many years Colorado tick fever virus
Virion Properties
had no relatives. Eyach virus is the European counterpart
 of the prototype virus, and other distinct coltiviruses
Reovirus virions are nonenveloped, nearly spherical in
 have been isolated in California, Indonesia, and China.
 outline, and have a diameter of 80 nm. Virions consist of
The genus Aquareovirus contains a large number
 an outer, middle, and inner capsid, each with icosahedral
 of viruses isolated from saltwater fish (various species
 symmetry, the precise morphology varying with the ge-
 Of Atlantic and Pacific salmon, smelt), freshwater fish nus (Figure 24.1). The genome consists of linear double-
Figure 24.1.
B
Family Reoviridae; representative viruses visualied by negative contrast elecron microscopy. (A) Genus Orthoreovirus, mammalian reovirus 3.
(B) Genus Roitavinus, simian rotavirus SA11. (C) Genus Orbivinus, bluetongue virus 11. Bars: 100 nm.
394
24. Reoviridae
stranded RNA divided into 10 (genus Orthoreovirus and
-od ui snd sis    so
Orbivirus), 11 (genus Rotavirus and Aquareovirus), or
 amide gel electrophoresis that can be used to type iso-
12 (genus Coltivirus) segments. The overall genome size
lates.
is 23 (genus Orthoreovirus), 18 (genus Orbivirus),
Genus Rotavirus: The outer capsid forms a nearly
16-21 (genus Rotavirus), 27 (genus Coltivirus), or 15
 spherical icosahedron; it consists of the glycoprotein VP7
(genus Aquareovirus) kbp. The positive strands of each 
 from which dimers of VP4 extend. The outer capsid
double-stranded segment have 5'-terminal caps (type 1
 and the middle capsid, which is composed of VP6, are
structure), and the ncgativc strands havc phosphorylated 
dissociated readily from the core, which is composed of
S'-termini. The 3'-termini of both strands lack 3'-
 three proteins, VP1, VP2, and VP3. The 11 genome
 poly(A) tails. Each RNA segment is present in equimolar
 segments of the rotaviruses encode 13 proteins, 2 of
proportion in virions. Further detail requires separate
which are formed by postranslational cleavage. Again,
 mention of each genus.
tach genome segment can be differentiated by size, using
Genus Orthoreovirus: The outer capsid forms a
 polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and thesc patterns
nearly spherical icosahedron, consisting predominantly
are used to type isolates (Figure 24.2).
of complexes of the proteins o3 and μ1C (see Figure
Genus Coltivirus: The outer and middle capsids
7.3). In addition to intact virions, there are two stable
 appear nearly smooth, with faint markings showing their
subviral particles. The first of these is missing only its
 icosahedral symmetry. The inner capsid resembles that
outer capsid (i.e., it is lacking o3 and contains cleaved
 of the orbiviruses. Virions are nearly always associated
forms of μ1 protein); this particle is called the infectious
 with hosr cell membranes, prominent intracytoplasmic
subviral particle (ISVP). The second subviral particle
filaments, and granular inclusion bodies.
is missing both its outer and its middle capsids and
Genus Aquareovirus: Virions resemble thosc of the
is called the core particle. The protein by which virions 
 orthoreoviruses.
attach to host cells, ol, forms spikes that project
Orthoreoviruses and rotaviruses are resistant to
through the outer capsid at each of the 12 vertices of
lipid solvents and are stable over a wide pH range, but
the virion. Most importantly, when the outer capsid
 orbiviruses and coltiviruses have a narrower zone of pH
layer is removed, ol protein molecules remain attached
 stability (pH 6-8) and lose some but not all infectivity
to the infectious subviral particle and form extended
 on exposure to lipid solvents. Proteolytic enzymcs in-
fbers containing the cellular attachment domain at
 crease the infectivity of orthoreoviruses and rotaviruses
their tips. The core contains the viral RNA polymerase
(e.g., chymotrypsin in the small intestine removes the
(transcriptase) and consists of three major proteins
outer capsid, thereby enhancing infectivity). Orbiviruses
(A1, A2, o2) and two minor proteins (A3, μ2). The
are remarkably stable in the presence of protein--
10 genome segments of the orthoreoviruses fall into
 bluetongue viruses have been reisolated frorm blood held
three size classes: large, medium, and small. Each
for 25 years at room temperature.
segment encodes a single protein, except for one that
is cleaved corranslationally to form two proteins. Each
genome segment can be differentiated by size, using
Viral Replication
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, forming reprodnc-
ible gel patterns. These patterns are used to type
Orthoreovirus virions or infectious subviral particles at-
isolates of mammalian and avian viruses.
tach to sialylated glycoprotein receptors on cells via the
Genus Orbivirus: The outer capsid consists of a
 spikes ar each of their 12 vertices (Figure 24.3). Varia-
l   z 'sd omn aq p aae s
 tions in the ol protein making up the spikes derermine
 is dissociated readily from the middle and inner capsids.
the cell and tissuc tropism of each virus. Virions or infcc-
The main capsid layer is constructed from VP7 molecules
tious subviral particles enter cells by receptor-mediated
 arranged in ring-like structures. Both VP2 and VPS are
 endocytosis. In the cytoplasm, virions are degraded to
attached to VP7, which in rurn is associated with a sub-
 core particles, within which virion-associated RNA poly-
core composed of VP3 and the genomic RNA segments.
merase (transcriptase) and capping enzymes repctitively
As with the orthoreoviruses, the core contains an RNA
 transcribe S'-capped mRNAs, which are extruded into
 polymerase and other proteins involved in transcription.
 the cytoplasm through channels at core particle vertices.
Surface projections are only observed on virions that
 RNA polymerase (transcriptase) utilizes the negativc
have been stabilized (e.g, frozen for cryoelectron micros-
 strands of each of the double-stranded RNA segments
copy). Otherwise, the surface of virions appears rather
 as templates; only certain genes are transcribed initially,
smooth and unstructured. The 10 genome segments of
 four mRNAs appearing before the other six. The propor-
the orbiviruses are all monocistronic; as with the orthore-
 tion of the various mRNAs found in infected cells varies
Properties of Renuiruses
395
Figure 24.2.
1
2
3
4
6
5
8
Ralovirustyping byelectrophoresis of theRNAfrom isolatesSevenFecalisoletesofrotavirus wereanalyzedbypolyacrylamidegel eectrophores
of theirRNAracks5 and7conaintwo somples of thesamelype.Thiskind of analysisisrather simpletdoandis usedwidely fo suport
molecular epidemiology studies, such as those done to trace the origin of virus newly oppearing in a herd or lock. (Courtesy of G. Ponon and
1. H. Holmes.}
and the cfficiency of the translation of each also varies
tures, termed viroplasms or virus factories, form in local-
(over a 100-fold range). How this regulation is mediated
ized areas of the cytoplasm -—-in many cases these intracy-
is not known.
toplasmic inclusion bodies can be dramatic in size and
 After early inRNA synthesis, genomic RNA repli-
 number of associated virions (Figure 24.4). Inclusion
cation takes place in the cytoplasm within nascent prog-
 bodies have a granular and moderately electron-densc
cny subviral particles. The mechanism of genomic RNA
 appearance in thin section electron microscopy. Progeny
replication is complex and not fully understood. Newly
virions tend to remain cell associated but are eventually
synthesized, double-stranded RNA in turn serves as a
relcased by cell lysis.
template for thc transcription of more mRNAs, which
While the replication of orbiviruses and rotaviruses
this time are uncapped. These mRNAs are translated
 has not been studied in as much detail as that of orthoreo-
preferentially to yield a large pool of viral structural
viruses, it is apparent that the processes are quite similar.
 protcins that self-assemble to form virions. Thc mecha-
 Rotaviruses requirc that their outer capsid be removed
nism that esures that one copy of cach double-stranded
before attachment—their outer capsid protein, VP4, is
RNA segment is encapsidated into nascent virions is
cleaved by chymotrypsin in the small intestine, increasing
not known.
their infectivity greatly. Rotavirus progenitor particles
 Shortly after viral entry, host-cell protein synthesis
bud into cisternae of the endoplasmic reticulum of in-
decrcases; one proposed mechanism is that the cap-
fccted cells, acquiring a temporary envelope, which then
 dependent host-cell mRNAs are less efficient in driving 
 breaks down, allowing VP7 to form the outer capsid
prorcin translation than uncapped viral mRNAs. Struc-
(Table 24.2}.
396
24. Reowiridae
Figure 24.3.
DIRECT
BY ISVP
RELEASE
PARTICLE
LATE
Synth
TRANSCRIPTION
二t
WITHIN
Uncapped
：
VIRAL. PROTEIN
SYNTHESIS
MORPHOGENESIS
ENDOCYTOSI
MEDIATED
NETRATION
DSORPTION
RNAase
REPLICATION
Particke
Synfhesis
Schemafic diagram of he reovirus replication cycle. Afer entry by receptor-medicted endocytosis of an intact virion or an infectious subviral
particle [ISVP] produced outside the cellby intestinal proleases, the viral core paricle is released. Within cores mRNAs are transcribed and
mRNAs are produced-these direct the synhesis of the slructural proteins. Mauration occurs by self-assembly and virions are released by cell
Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Meinick, T. P. Monah, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1557-1596. Lippincon-Raven, Philadelphia,
PA,1996.]
DISEaSES CAUSED
BY Members OF
The GenuS ORthoreovirus
TaBlE 24.2
Properties of Reoviruses
Orthoreovirus Infections
Virions are nonenveloped, spherical in outline, 80 nm in di-
of Mammals and Birds
ameter
Virions are composed of three concentric capsid layers, all
The host range of reoviruses includes a variety of verte-
with icosahedral symmetry: the outer capsid differs in ap-
brate species (cattle, sheep, swine, humans, monkeys,
pearance in the various genera
 bats, chickens, turkeys, and gccse). Only infections in
Genome is composed of double-stranded RNA, divided into
laboratory rodents and chickens and turkeys are clini-
10-12 segments, tolal size 18-27 kbp: genus Othoreovi-
rus, 10 segments, 23 kbp; genus Orbivirus, 10 segments,
cally significant, but respiratory or cnteric infections in
18 kbp;genus Rotavirus, 11 segments, 16-21 kbp; genus
 other species may prescnt diagnostic difficulties.
Colivirus, 12 segments, 27 kbp; genus Aquareovirus, 11
segments, 15 kbp
Cytoplasmic replication
Clinical Features
Genetic reassorment occurs between viruses within each ge
nus or serogroup
 Orthorcoviruses, especially reovirus 3, cause a disease
syndrome in laboratory mice that is characterized by
rthboreovirus lnfections of Manmats and Birds
397
FIGURE 24.4.
Cytoplasm of acelinfectedwith simian rotavirusSA1l showing a granularintracytoplasmic inclusion body (viroplasmorvirus factory) wih a
large number of virions sel-assembling at its margin.In many cases these inclusions canbe dramatic in size and number of asociated virions.
Virions are largely cell associaled and are relec
used by cellysis. Thin section electron microscopy. Magnilication: X25,000.
jaundice, diarrhea, runting, oily hair and skin, and neu-
 In some turkey flocks infection may be indicated only
rologic signs (e.g., ataxia). There is hepatitis, myocardi-
by enteritis.
tis, and pancreatitis. In horses, these viruses cause upper
and lower rcspiratory illness (laryngitis, rhinitis, con-
junctivitis, and cough) and in cattle, sheep, swinc, and
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
dogs the same and also diarrhea. In monkeys thcre may
also be hepatitis and meningitis.
Although the pathogencsis of orthoreovirus infections
 The outcome of avian orthoreovirus infection in
in mice has bcen studied extensively as a model system,
birds ranges from inapparent to fatal. Infection in some
 lirtle is known of the pathogenetic events in the disease
chicken, turkeys, and goose flocks may be subclinical,
 secn in naturally infected mouse colonies. Virus is ac-
whcrcas in others there may bc chronic respiratory
quired via a fecal-oral transmission cycle and infection
discase, feathering abnormalities, gastroenteritis, mal-
 is systemic, but lesions are rather nondescript, often ap-
absorption syndrome, hepatitis, myocarditis, tenosyno-
 pearing as focal necrosis and inflammatory infiltrations
vitis, arthritis, weight loss, stunted growth, and excess
 into the parcnchyma of organs. Avian orthoreovirus in-
mortality. Tenosynovitis and arthritis usually occur in
fections causc similar lesions in the bursa of Fabricius
meat-producing birds over 5 wccks of agc. Morbidity
and othcr lymphoreticular tissues, the intestine, heart,
is often 100%, and mortality is usually less than 2%.
kidney, liver, pancreas, and tendon sheaths.
398
24. Reoviridue
Laboratory Diagnosis
initially serous but becoming mucopurulent and speckled
with blood, is common. The tongue may become cya-
Orthoreovirus infections in mice are diagnosed serologi-
 e s a nn,   s
 cally, usually by euzyme immunoassay. Such assays are
 loss of condition and the sheep may die, often through
included in the battery of tests done regularly as part of
aspiration pneumonia. The coronary bands of the feet
the surveillance programs used to assure that mice used
 may exhibit hyperemia and may be painful. Edema of
in research are free of intercurrent infections. Similar
the head and neck is not uncommon; animais with coro-
 assays as well as immunofluorescence are used for avian
nitis are often reluctant to waik and tend to be recumhent
 Orthoreoviruses; in addition, virus isolation using avian
(Figures 24.5A-24.5C).
cell cultures is employed when serology proves inade-
Hyperemia of the skin may occur, lcading to "wool
quate. Isolates produce vacuoies and syncytia and are
break" some wecks later. Muscle degcneration occurs
typed by neutralization assay.
bidity may be as high as 80% and in Africa the mortality
rate may reach 30%, but in the United States the disease
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Controi
is usually not associated with death. Convalescence
'd q a m poom pe pnd sq ke
The practices used in mouse colonies to maintain specific
 Some bluetongue virus strains (possibly of attenuated
 pathogen-free status are adequate to prevent the intro-
virus vaccine origin, but transmitted by arthropod
duction of orthoreovirusesthe key is good sanitation,
 vectors) may cause abortion and congenital abnormalit-
rcgular serologic testing, quarantine and testing before
ies (arthrogryposis, hydranencephaly, ataxia) (Figure
introducing new stock, and rodent control to prevent 
24.5D).
contact with wild mice. Similar methods are effective in
Infection in cattle and goats is usually subclinical,
preventing the introduction of avian orthoreoviruses into
 but again, in Africa, some cattle develop clinical signs
breeder and layer flocks.
similar to those seen in sheep. In white-tailed deer ( Odo-
coileus virginianus) and pronghorn antelope (Antilo-
capra americana), the North American bluerongue vi-
DIsEASEs CaUSED
ruses often cause a peracute fatal hcmorrhagic disease.
BY MEMBERS OF
The GEnuS ORBIvIRUS
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Bluetongue
Bluetongue viruscs replicatc in hematopoictic cclls and
endothelial cells of the blood vessels. Adult shecp some-
Until the 1940s bluctongue was recognized only in Af-
times remain viremic for 14 to 28 days, and in cattle the
rica; then following a major epidemic in 1956-1957 in viruses can persist for as long as 10 weeks. Rarely, and
Portugal and Spain the disease was recognized in the
 only when the bull is viremic, bluetongue viruses may
United States, the Middle East, Asia, and later in Austra-
 he recovered from semen. The notion that this might lead
lia. Today it is recognized that the viruses are present 
 to the transmission of virus to cows and their offspring in
in most,if not all, countries in the tropics and subtropics.t
 the absence of arthropod transmission and the additional
 Bluetongue is of most importance in sheep, in which its 
 notion that such infections might be persistent, even
severity varies, depending on the virus, the breed of 1
lifelong and tolerogenic (infection in the absence of an
sheep, and environmental stresses. Economic losses re-
immune response), were the bases for severe limits oll
sult from death and loss of conditioning in sheep that
the inoveinent of sheep and cattle (mostly breeding bulls)
survive, but more importantly the disease has emerged
from bluetongue cndemic countries. However, it has
as a major non-tariff trade barrier, i.e., suspicion of its been shown that transmission via semen is a very rare
 presence is used at the convenience of importing coun- @
event and that there are no lifelong shedders or tolero-
tries to limit live sheep, lamb, and mutton imports.
genic infections.
Clinical Features
Laboratory Diagnosis
 In sheep, bluetongue is characterized by fever that may
 Bluctonguc viruscs are often diffcult to isolatc in the
last several days before hyperemia, excess salivation, and 
 laboratory. The success of virus isolation is enhanced if
frothing at the mouth are noticed; a nasal discharge, b
blood is collected from animals showing early clinical
Btuetongtte
399
 Figure 24.5.
D
Bluetongue in sheep. (A) The mzzle is swollen and has erosions B) Erosion of the laterai morgins of he tongue, which is swollen grealy and
cyanosed. (C) Lameness due to hyperemia of the coronary bond of the hoofs. (D) Mummihed fetal lambs aborted at 135 days geslation. The ewe 
was infected about the 6Oth day of gestation. (A, B, and D, courtesy of B. Erasmus; C, courtesy of Ihe Uniled States Department of Agricolrure.1
 s qo sss sid p s a  i o aq e   a  t r ss
used as the specimen of choicc. Virus isolation is done  based on antigcns produced by recombinant DNA tech-
in embryonated eggs or in cell culrures (usually by  nologies and the polymerase chain reaction (with specific
blind passage) but both systems are quite insensitive. i
identification of amplified products), should prove use
Viremia is primarily associated with red blood ceils
ful. However, such methods to date are only available
and leukocytes, and the viruses can coexist in infected
at a few national refcrence diagnostic centers and their
animals with high concentrations of neutralizing anti-
 use in the certification of animals for international move~
body. Therefore, washed blood cells are often used 
 ment is still uncertain.
for virus isolation.
 Serologic techniques, most notably enzyme immu-
noassays, based on the detection of a group antigen have
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
 been used where rcquired in the certification of animals
as *bluetongue free."' However, indeterminate serologic
Bluetongue viruses arc transmitted by Culicoides spp.
rcactions have been a major problem—such reactions
(no-see-ums, midges; different species serving as vectors
led to the use of terms such as "positive for bluetongue-
in different parts of the world). The epidemiology and
like virus" and “"suspected positive for bluetongue-
 natural history of the discase depend on interactions of
related virus."' Such results have been especially trouble-
vector, host, climatc, and virus. Disease occurs most
some when testing has been done for regularory purposes  commonly in late summer when vectors are most nu-
involving international livestock trade. This is a situation  mcrous.
400
24. Reoviridae
Culicoides spp. breed in many habitats, particu-
viral discasc of horses. Epidemics of African horse sick-
larly in danip muddy areas and in cow dung, bur 
 ness have been recognized in South Africa since 1780.
some species may be found in apparently arid areas
 More recently, major epidemics have occurred in the
and others can breed in highly saline water. Female 
 Middle East, the Indian subcontinent, North Africa,
Culicoides take a blood meal every 3-4 days through-
 Spain, and Portugal. African horse sickness viruses were
out their life, which can be as long as 70 days. If (
 considered endemic only in sub-Saharan Africa, but since
onc blood meal contains virus the arthropod becomes
1987 they havc also become endemic in the Iberian pen-
infccted and after an extrinsic jncubation period of 7
insula. In this latter area the number of horses dying has
t0 10 days virus is shed in saliva in every subsequent 
been relatively low, due, in part, to thc widespread use
blood meal. Therc is no evidence of transovarial viral
 of vaccines. However, the true epidemic porential of
transmission in arthropods and not all species of Culi-
 these viruses may be secn in carlier epidemics; for exam-
coides in a given area serve as vectors; nevertheless,
 ple, in one epidemic in the Middle East and Indian sub-
because Culicoides may reach incredible densities, sheep  (
 continent, over 300,000 horses, donkeys, and mules 
and cattle are oftcn bitten many times cach day. Over
were reported to have died. African horse sickness has
time, nearly every animal in a flock or herd becomes
never been recognized in the Western Hemisphere, east-
infected in such circumstanccs. When the climate
ern Asia, or Australasia.
changes, the vectors may no longcr be able to survive
Nine African horse sickness viruses are recognized
and the viruses may “die out." Long-range, wind-
 in South Africa and additional viruses are suspected to
borne dispersal of infected Culicoides may occur, intro-
 Occur elsewhere in Africa. There is no significant sero-
ducing or reintroducing the viruses to distant areas.
logic or genetic relationship between African horse sick-
The attenuated virus vaccines available for the con-
- a p s   s s
trol of bluetongue in South Africa have several disadvan-
tance.
tages: (1) they have been associatcd with fetal death and
cerebral abnormalities in sheep in the United States and
(2) their use may lead to the emergence of genetic reas-
Clinical Features
sortants. In addition, Culicoides transmission of vaccine
viruses can occur, with possible reversion to virulencc.
The severity of clinical discase in horses, donkeys, and
Research on various rccombinant DNA-based vaccincs
mules varies with the strain of virus. Horses are generally
has progressed to a stage that suggests that a safe vaccine
the most susceptible, with high morbidity and mortality
that will protcct shcep and cattle from infection can
rates; there is also substantial morbidity in mules but
be developed.
mortality is low, whereas donkcys are the least affected,
Control by vaccination is neccssary where virulent
usually developing only a mild febrile illness. In acute
bluetongue viruses are endemic; however, it is important
 cases, the diseasc is characterized by severe and progrcs-
to minimize the use of vaccines in nonendemic areas. In
sive respiratory diseasc leading to death. After an incuba-
view of the widespread distribution of bluetongue viruscs 
tion period of 3 to 5 days, horses develop fever for 1 to
in the tropics and subtropics, the control of their move-
 2 days, the respiration rate then increases, often to 70
ment berween countries by testing and certification of
 per minute, and affected animals stand with their forclcgs
livestock and germ plasm may not appear, at first glance,
 apart, head extended, and nostrils dilated. Spasmodic
to have becn effective. HIowever, this impression is prob-
 coughing may occur terminally, accompanicd by profuse
ably erroncous. In retrospect, most of the geographic
sweating and a discharge of frothy fluid from the nostrils.
expansion of bluetongue viruses probably occurred be-
This pulmonary form is seen most commonly in com-
forc aninals were certified by other than clinical exami-
pletely susceptible horses infected with a highly viru-
 nation. The limited number of different bluetongue vi-
lent virus.
ruses in the United States, a country that until recently
 In contrast, some cascs are mild and easily over-
 has had a very restrictive policy regarding the importa-
looked. Apart from fever, which may last for 5 to 8 days,
tion of livestock, testifes to the probable success of
there are few other clinical signs other than conjunctival
the policy.
injection. This form of disease, often called the cardiac
form, is seen most commonly in donkeys and in vacci-
nated horscs infected with a virus not covered by the
African Horse Sickness
vaccine. Diseasc of intermediate severity is secn in some
animals. The incubation period is 7 to 14 days, followed
African horse sickncss occurs in horses, mules, and don-
by fcver, which persists for 3 to 6 days. As thc rcmpera-
keys with up to 95% mortality. Apart from Venczuelan
 ture falls, characteristic edema appcars involving the su-
cquinc encephalitis, this is the most important and lethal 1
 praorbital fossae and eyclids (Figure 24.6). Subsequently
Africa Horse Sickness
401
FIGURE 24.6.
African horse sickness. (A) Respiratory Form, with profuse fohy nasal discharge. (B) Characleristic ecema of the supraorbital fossae and eyelids.
[Courtesy of B. Erasmus.]
the edema extends to affect the lips, tongue, interman-
 sia a s  p s  
dibular space, and the laryngeal region. Subcutaneous having a longer clinical course, there are yelow, gelati-
edema may also track down the neck toward the chest.
nous infltrations into subcutaneous tissues, especially
Mortality rates for such cases may be as high as 50%;
 along the jugular veins and ligamentum nuchae. The
death occurs within 6 to 8 days of onset of fevc1. Termi- pulmonary form is occasionally seen in dogs.
nally, affected animals have signs of colic.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
African horse sickness is considered an exotic disease
After the bite of an infective arthropod, the virus repli-  outside Africa. Clinical diagnosis of the pulmonary and
s a go a  a nu si s i  e d q u     s
sient primary viremia, which leads to infection of other bital fossae is characteristic of the diseasc. Excess pleural
then a secondary viremia. As with bluetongue, the precise 
 reason to suspect the disease, especially in cndemic areas
mechanisms by which the viruses cause disease are un-
 and in the appropriate season. The viruses are isolated
known, but the vasculitis of small- and medium-sized
most casily by intracerebral inoculation of 2- to 6-day-
blood vessels is clearly central to the development of
old mice with blood or a spleen suspension from the
clinical signs and lesions.
suspect animal, using washed cell fractions to remove
At necropsy, in horses infected with thc most viru-
 any early antibody. Idcntification of the particular virus
Icnt viruses there is pulmonary edema, which is especially
(e.g, African horse sickness viruses 1 to 9) is done by
visiblc in the intralobular spaces. The lungs are distended
 neutralization assays in mice or cell culture.
and hcavy, and frothy fluid may be found in the trachea,
bronchi, and bronchioles. This frothy exudate may oozt
from the nostrils. There may be pleural effusion. Tho-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
racic lymph nodes may be edematous, and the gastric
fundus congested. Petechial hemorrhages are found in
 African horse sickness is usually seasonal, occurring in
thc pericardium and there is an increasc in pcricardial  t
 the late summer on swampy low-lying farms and espc-
402
24. Reoviridae
cially affecting horses that are not stabled at night. This
Ibaraki Disease of Caftle and
indicates that crepusculid and night-flying insects are the
Epizootic Hemorrhagic Disease
vectors. The viruses can infect mosquitoes, but Culi-
coides spp. are thought to be the principal vectors. The
of Deer
original reservoir host of African horse sickness viruses
may be the zehra, in which clinical diseasc is unusual,
Viruscs rclated closely to bluetongue viruses, Ibaraki
but virus persists longer than in horses.
virus and cpizootic hemorrhagic disease of deer viruses
Attenuated virus vaccines have been used in South
1 and 2, have been isolated from cattle and deer, respec-
Africa for many years. The polyvalent accine containing
tively, affected with a disease clinically indistinguishable
all nine viruscs is generally unsatisfactory as it fails to
 from bluetongue. Epizootic hemorrhagic disease viruses
protect all horses and can cause neurologic disease. An
have also been isolared from cattle, which appear to be
 inactivated vaccine containing some of the viruses is
their reservoir host. Bluetongue and epizootic hemor-
available.
rhagic disease are regarded as the most important dis-
Vigilance in monitoring the worldwide incidence
cases of Cervidae in North America.
 of African horse sickness is important. The explosive
Ibaraki disease was frst recorded as an acute, fe-
epidemics of the disease outside continental Africa in
brile disease of cattle in Japan in 1959; the virus is now
the 1960s and its reintroduction into Spain and Portugal
 known to be present in many parts of South East Asia.
have demonstrated its invasive potential. Recognition
 Epizootic hemorrhagic disease of deer was first
that bluetongue viruses have established endemic infec-
 shown to have a viral etiology in 1955 in the United
tion cycles in the Americas, Asia, and Australia serves S
States and in 1964 in Alberta, Canada. The viruses have
as a reminder that, contrary to previous experience in l
 been isolated from cattle and arthropods in the United
the Middle East and Mediterranean areas, African horse States and Canada and arthropods in Africa. Similar
sickness viruses could become endermic if introduced into  viruses exist in Australia.
a new area such as the Americas.
Palyam Virus Disease of Cattle
Human Disease
Abortions in cattle in southern Africa and an epidemic
Very rarely, African horse sickness can be zoonotic. The
 of congenital abnormalities in calves in Japan, character-
frst evidence of this came when laboratory workers,
ized by hydranencephaly and cerebellar hypoplasia, have
 exposed to the virus during vaccine manufacture, devel-
been shown to be caused by Palyam virus. Similar dis-
oped encephalitis, chorioretinitis, and disseminated in-
eases associated with related viruses have been recorded
travascular coagulation.
in Australia.
Equine Encephalosis
DiseAsEs CaUSED
BY MemBers Of
 Prior to 1967, African horse sickness viruses were the
only orbiviruses known to cause clinical disease in
ThE GENUS ROTAvIRUS
horses. In that year, sporadic cases of peracute deaths,
 preceded by alternating periods of hyperexcitement and
Rotavirus lnfections
depression, hence the name encephalosis, occurred in
of Mammals and Birds
horses in various parts of South Africa. At necropsy,
general venous congcstion, fatry liver degeneration, cere-
 Rotaviruses have been recovered froin diarrheal feces of
bral edema, and enteritis wcre observed, and isolations
a multitude of animal spccies, including bovine, ovine,
of orbiviruses were made from various organs and blood
porcine, equine, canine, feline, lapine, murine, simian,
collected from affected horses.
and avian species. Rotaviruses are a major cause of diar-
 Serum neutralization tests have shown that there
 rhea in intensively reared farm animals throughout the
arc at lcast five viruscs involved; serologic surveys have V
 world. The clinical signs, diagnosis, and epidemiology
indicated a high incidence of infection with cach of C
 of disease are similar in al species; the severity of disease
thcm. Encephalosis viruscs have been recognized only r
 ranges from subclinical, through enteritis of varying se-
in South Africa; further work is needed to define their V
verity, to death. Discase is usually seen only in young
 origin, geographic distribution, and veterinary impor-
animals, 1 to 8 weeks of age, but only rarely during the
tance.
first week of life. Rotaviruses isolatcd from animals, even
Rotarirus lnfertions of Mewmats and Birds
403
those indistinguishable from human viruses, rarely infect f
 from feces. For example, polyacrylamide gel electropho-
humans in nature.
resis can distinguish rotavirus groups A, B, and C by
RNA pattern alone. Finally, the polymerase chain reac-
tion can be used to amplify viral RNA extracted from
Clinical Features
feces; the RNA is purified and then used as a template
for reverse transcription and polymerase amplification
Rotavirus diarrhea in calves, piglets, foals, and lambs is
 using primer pairs appropriate for the degree of specific-
often referred to as "white scours"' or "milk scours." The
ity desired.
incubation period is 16 to 24 hours. Affected animals are
 Rotaviruses are difficult to isolate in cell culture.
only moderately depressed and often continue to suckle
 One secret of success is that trypsin must be incorporated
 or drink milk. The feces are voluminous, soft to liquid,
in (serum-free) medium to cleave the relevant outer cap-
and often contain large amounts of mucus. Ingestion of
 sid protein (VP4) and thus facilitate entry and uncoating
a large volume of milk is a contributory factor to the 
 of the virus; immunofluorescence is used to identify ro-
severity of the diarrhea as the reduced production of tavirus antigen in infected cells. Most bovine, porcine,
lactase caused by rotavirus infection exacerbates osmotic
 and avian rotaviruses are not cytopathic initially, but
dysregulation. Other factors, particularly reduced colos-
 can be passaged serially if grown in epithelial cells of
trum intake, but also pathogenic E. coli, poor hygiene,
 intestinal or kidney origin in media containing trypsin.
chilling, and overcrowding, may contribute to the sever-
Neutralization tests using appropriate polyclonal anti-
ity of disease. Young animals may die as a result of
 sera or monoclonal antibodies can be used to determine
dehydration or secondary bacterial infection but most 
the serotype of isolates. Serum antibodies can be mea-
recover within 3 to 4 days.
 sured by enzyme immunoassay or neutralization tests.
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
The pathogenesis of rotavirus infection was discussed in  H
 Rotaviruses are excreted in the feces of infected animals
Chapters 9 and 10—infection leads to the destruction
 in high titer (101l viral particles per gram); maximum
of epithelial cells at the apices of villi in the small intes- S
 shedding occurs on the third and fourth days postinfec-
tine. Villi become shortened and covered with cuboidal
 tion. Rotaviruses survive in feces for several months so
epithelial cells that migrate from the crypts. These cells
 gross contamination of rearing pens can occur, which
secrete reduced levels of disaccharidases such as lactase 6
 explains why intensively reared animals are commonly
and are less able to carry out glucose-coupled sodium  affected. Some rotaviruses are highly resistant to chlori-
transport. Undigested lactose in the milk promotes bacte- 1
 nation and can survive for long periods in water, so that
rial growth and exerts a further osmotic effect; both 1
waterborne transmission is also a risk.
 mechanisms contribute to the diarrhea.
Although the management of intensive rearing
units can be improved to reduce the incidence of
disease, there is little likelihood that improved bygiene
Laboratory Diagnosis
alone can completely control rotavirus infections. Local
immunity in the small intestine is more important than
 Rotaviruses were discovered by electron microscopy and
 this remains a satisfactory approach to rapid diagnosis
In domestic mammals, rotavirus antibodies present
(see Chapter 12); the virions are plentiful in feces and
 in colostrum are particularly important in protecting
are so distinctive that they cannot be mistaken for any-
 neonatal animals. Although much of the colostral anti-
thing else. The main disadvantage is that a high concen-
 body enters thc circulation, serum antibody levels are
tration of virions is required (at least 10 per gram of 1
 not critical for protection; far more important is the
feces), but this can be offset somewhat by using immu-
 presence of antibody in the gut lumen. Ingestion of
noelectron microscopy. Howevel, enzymc immunoassay
large volumes of colostrum for a short period gives
is a more practicable and more sensitive mcthod for the 1
 protection for only 48 hours after suckling ceases,
detection of rotaviruses in feces in most laboratories.
whereas continuous feeding of smaller amounts of
The spccificity of enzyme immunoassays can be manipu-  (
 colostrum can provide protection for as long as it is
lated by selecting either type-specific or broadly cross-8
 available. Inoculation of the dam with inactivated virus
reactive antibodies as capture and/or indicator antibod- 
vaccine promotes higher levels of antibody in the
ies in an antigen-capture assay. Recently, attention has (
 colostrum and milk and a longer period of antibody
turned to improving the sensitivity of diagnostic tests by
secretion, with a corresponding decrease on the inci-
identifying the viral genome in RNA extracted directly
dence of disease in neonates.
404
24. Reoviridae
Recovery in affected calves can be helped by feed-
R. C. Tustin, eds.), Vol. 1, pp. 460-479. Oxford Uni-
ing them water instead of milk for 30 hours at the onset
versity Press, Cape Town.
of diarrhea. Antibiotics to control secondary bacterial
Desselberger, U. (1997). Viral factors determining rotavi-
diarrhea and oral electrolyte solutions containing glu-
rus pathogenicity. Arch. Virol. Suppl. 13, 131-139.
Estes, M. K. (1996). Rotaviruses and their replication. In
cose to offset dehydration may also be useful.
"Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M.
Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Mo-
nath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp.
DISEaSEs CAUSED
1625-1665. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Gibbs, E. P. J., and Greiner, E. C. (1989). Bluetongue
BY MEMBERS OF
and epizootic hemorrhagic disease. In "The Arbovi-
ruses: Epidemiology and Ecology” (T. P. Monath,
the Genus Coltivirus
ed.), Vol. 2, Pp. 39-60. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Gibbs, E, P. J., and Greiner, E. C. (1994). The epidemiol-
Colorado Tick Fever
ogy of bluetongue. Comp. Immunol. Microbiol. In.
fect. Dis.17, 207-220.
 Colorado tick fever is a zoonotic disease that occurs in
Kapikian, A. Z., and Chanock, R. M. (1996). Rotavi-
forest habitats at 1000 to 3000 m elevation in the Rocky
ruses. In *Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe,
 Mountain region of North America. The vector is the
P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P.
Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed.,
wood tick, Dermacentor andersoni; virus is transmitted
pp. 1657-1708. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
transstadially and overwinters in hibernating nymphs
Laegrid, W. W. (1996). African horsesickness. In "Virus
and adults. Some rodent species have prolonged viremia
Infections of Vertebrates" (M. J. Studdert, ed.), Vol.
(more than 5 months), which may also facilitate virus
4, pp. 101-123. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Laegrid, W. W. (1996). Equine encephalosis. In "Virus
persistence. Nymphal ticks feed on small mammals such
 as squirrels and other rodents, which serve as the reser-
Infections of Vertebrates" (M. J. Sruddert, ed.), Vol.
4, Pp. 125-135. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
voir for the virus. Adult ticks feed on larger mammals,
MacLachlan, N. J. (1994). The pathogenesis and immu-
including humans, during the spring and early summer.
nology of bluetongue virus infection of ruminants.
Eyach virus fills the same niche in Europe: it is wide-
Comp. Immunol. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 17, 197-206.
spread in ticks and antibodies have been reported in
Monath, T. P., and Guirakhoo, F. (1996). Orbiviruses
and coltiviruses. In "Fields Virology”" (B. N. Fields,
patients with meningoencephalitis and polyneuritis as
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L.
well as a syndrome resembling that caused by Colorado
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
tick fever virus.
eds.), 3rd ed., Pp. 1735-1766. Lippincott-Raven, Phil-
The disease in humans is characterized by an incu
adelphia, PA.
bation period of 3 to 6 days, followed by a sudden onset
Nibert, M. L., Schiff, L. A., and Fields, B. N. (1996). Re-
oviruses and their replication. In *Fields Virology"
of illness. There is “"saddle-back” fever, headache, retro-
(B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R, M. Cha-
orbital pain, severe myalgia in the back and legs, and 
nock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and
leukopenia; convalescence can be protracted, particu-
S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1557-1596. Lippin-
larly in adults. More serious forms of the disease, notably
cott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
meningoencephalitis and hemorrhagic fever, occur in
Ramig, R, F. (1997). Genetics of the rotaviruses. Annu.
perhaps 5% of cases, mainly in children. Virus can be
Rev.Microbiol. 51, 225-255.
 Roy, P. (1996). Orbiviruses and their replication. In
isolated from red blood cells or detected inside them by
*"Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M.
immunofluorescence cven several weeks after symptoms
Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Mo-
have disappeared. This is a remarkable situation,
nath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., Pp.
as
erythrocytes have no ribosomes and cannot support viral
1709-1734. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
replication; however, the virus replicates in erythrocyte
Saif, L. J., and Thiel, K. W. (1989). "Viral Diarrheas of
Man and Animals." CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
precursors in bone marrow, then persists in mature
Tyler, K. L., and Fields, B. N. (1996). Reoviruses. In
erythrocytes throughout their life span, protected from
"Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M.
 antibody during a viremia that can be as long as 100
Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Mo-
days.
nath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., Pp.
1597-1624. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Verwoerd, D. W., and Erasmus, B. J. (1994), Bluetongue.
In "Infectious Diseases of Livestock with Special Refer-
Further Reading
ence to Southern Africa (J. A. W. Coetzer, G. R.
Thompson, and R. C. Tustin, eds.), Vol. 1, pp. 443-
Coetzer, J. A. W., and Erasmus, B. J. (1994). African
459. Oxford University Press, Cape Town.
horsesickness and equine encephalosis. In "Infectious
Walton, T. E., and Osburn, B. I., eds. (1992). "Blue-
Diseases of Livestock with Special Reference to South-
tongue, African Horse Sickness and Related Orbivi-
ern Africa" (J. A. W. Coetzer, G. R. Thompson, and
ruses." CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
CHAPTER 25
Birnaviridae
Properties of Birnaviruses..
405
 Infectious Bursal Disease of Chickens
406
Infectious Pancreatic Necrosis of Fish
409
Further Reading...
409
The family Birnaviridae was established to bring to-
tious bursal disease virus is the sole member of the genus
gether viruses with two segments of double-stranded
Avibirnavirus. Members of the genus Aquabirnavirus
RNA. There are two important member viruses: infec-
include infectious pancreatic necrosis virus of salmonid
tious bursal disease virus of chickens and infectious pan-
fish and related viruses of oysters and crabs. Members
creatic necrosis virus of fish.
 of the genus Entomobirnavirus infect only insects. The
 Infectious bursal disease was first recognized in
 classification of the "picobirnaviruses," i.e., viruses that
1962 in an outbreak in Gumboro, Delaware; further
 resemble birnaviruses but are smaller (35-nm diameter
outbreaks were subsequently referred to as "Gumboro
 compared with 60 nm for the birnaviruses), has not
disease." The most prominent lesion was found in the 
been resolved.
bursa of Fabricius, hence the present name of the disease.
 Initial attempts to identify the causative virus involved
electron microscopy—large numbers of virions were ob-
Virion Properties
served in the bursa of infected birds, bur for some years
they were classifed improperly as picornavirus, adenovi-
Birnavirus virions are nonenveloped, hexagonal in out-
rus, or reoviruses. In retrospect, given the morphological
line, 60 nm in diameter, with a single shell having
differences among these viruses, it is hard to imagine
 icosahedral symmetry (Figure 25.1). The genome con-
how this happened.
sists of two molecules of linear double-stranded RNA,
 Infectious pancreatic necrosis was first described
designated A and B (Figure 25.2), 6 kbp in overall
in Canada in 1940; today the disease is rccognized as
size. Segment A is 3.2 kbp in size and contains two
the cause of considcrable cconomic loss in salmonid
 open reading frames, the largest of which encodes a
aquaculture in many regions of the world.
polyprotein that is processed to form rwo structural
Birnavirus-like virions have been observed in fecal
 proteins, VP2 and VP3, and a putative viral protease,
samples of humans, rats, guinea pigs, and swine. Differ-
VP4. VP2 contains the major antigenic site responsible
ences from true birnaviruses have been noted in size,
 for eliciting neutralizing antibodies and VP3 contains
length of genomc scgments, and so on; the designation
 group-specific antigenic determinants and a minor neu-
"picobirnaviruses" has therefore been proposed. The
 tralizing site. Segment B is 2.8 kbp in size and encodes
role of thesc agents as the cause of diarrhea is still un-
VP1, which is the RNA polymerase. VP1 exists as a
certain.
 genome-linkcd protein (VPg) circularizing segments A
and B by tightly binding to their ends. Termini of the
 genome segments resemble those of other segmented
Properties of Birnaviruses
RNA viruses such as reoviruses and influenza viruses
wherc both 5' and 3' ends are homologous bctween
Classification
the segments. At both ends of both scgments there
arc direct terminal and inverted repeats that are pre-
The family Birnaviridae comprises three genera: Avibir-
 dicted to form stem and loop secondary structures
navirus, Aquabirnavirus, and Entomobirnavirus. Infec-  and likely contain inportant signals for replication,
405
406
25. Birnaviridae
Figure 25.1.
FamilyBiirigsiis.insfitiusbldisvisg stnlermic0
transcription, and encapsidation—-it is possible that
pressing cellular RNA or protein synthesis. The viral
virulence variations are due to mutations in these re-
 mRNA is transcribed by a virion-associated RNA-depen-
gions.
dent RNA polymerase (transcriptase). RNA replication
Virions are relatively heat stable, and their infecti-
is thought to be initiated independently at the ends of
viry is resistant to exposure at pH3 and to ether and chlo-
the segments and to proceed by strand displacement,
roform.
with the inverted terminal repeats at the ends of cach
segment playing a role in replication (Table 25.1).
Viral Replication
Infectious bursal diseasc virus replicates in both chicken
Infectious Bursal Disease
and mainmalian ceils; however, highly pathogenic
 strains are often difficult to cultivate. Infectious pancre-
of Chickens
atic necrosis virus replicates in fish cell lines incubated
below 24°C. Both viruses grow to high titer and produce 
Infectious bursal disease occurs worldwide and few com-
cytopathic effects 1 to 2 days after inoculation. Birnavi-
 mercial flocks are free of the virus. It is of considerable
ruses replicate in the cytoplasm without greatly de-
 economic importance and is of scientific interest because
FigUre 25.2.
GenomicRNA,segmentA
GenomicRNA,segmentB
ORF2
ORF3
5'VPg
5'VPg
ORF1
?
17K
106Kpolyprotein
94KVP1(VPg)
P3
VP2
Genome of inlectious pancreafic necrosis virus: its organization and transcription strategy.
Infectious Burrsat Disetse of Cbickenns
407
of virus in the bursa of Fabricius, which early in infection
Table 25.1
Properties of Birnaviruses
becomes edematous, hyperemic, and cream colored, with
Virions are nonenveloped, hexagonal in outline, 60 nm in
prominent longitudinal striations (Figures 25.3A and
diameterwith a single shellhaving icosahedral symmetry
 25.3B). Lymphoid follicles of the bursa become totally
The genome consists of two molecules of linear double
nccrotic as a consequence of both necrosis and apoptosis,
stranded RNA, designated A and 8, 6 kbp in overall size
and in surviving birds they are devoid of lymphoid cells
(A, 3.2 kbp; B, 2.8 kbp)
Very virulent virus strains also produce depletion of cells
d al ud pnu a sad ins io
 in the thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. Hemorrhages
merase (transcriplase)]
occur beneath the serosa and there are necrotic foci
Cytoplasmic replication
throughout the bursal parenchyma. At the time of death
Survives at 60°℃ for 60 minutes; stable at pH 3 to pH 9
the bursa may be atrophied and gray and the kidneys
Member viruses occur in chickens (infectious bursal disease
are usually enlarged, with accumulation of urates due
virus), fish [infectious pancreatic necrosis virus), molluscs,
 t0 dehydration and possibly with immune complexes in
and insects
the glomeruli.
Following oral infection, the virus replicates in gut-
associated macrophages and lymphoid cells from which
 it enters the portal circulation, leading to primary vire-
of the nature of the virus and its affinity for replicating
mia. Within 11 hours of infection, viral antigen is detect-
 in dividing pre-B lymphocytes in the bursa of Fabricius,
 able in the bursal lymphoid cells, but not in lymphoid
leading to acquired B lymphocyte deficiency in af-
cells of other tissues. Large amounts of virus released
fected birds.
from the bursa produce a secondary viremia, resulting
 Two serotypes of the virus show minimal cross-
in localization in other tissues.
protection; only serotype 1 is pathogenic. Beginning in
The central role of the bursa in these events is
1990 in the United States, western Europe, and parts of
made clear by the fact that bursectomized birds survive
southeast Asia, variant strains of serotype 1 virus
 otherwise lethal infection without any clinical manifesta-
 emerged that are more virulent than older strains. These
 tions at all. The stage of differentiation of B lymphocytes
have been officially designated in Europe as very virulent t
 that occurs in the bursa is crucial in supporting maxi-
strains and have caused mortality rates of over 50%.
 mum viral replication—stem cells and peripheral B cells
 These viruses have been isolated from flocks vaccinated
 do not support replication of the virus. Interestingly,
with classical strain vaccines.
when lymphoid cells from the bursa are maintained in
culture, only a fraction can be infected, but when the
bursa is examined directly (by frozen section immuno-
Clinical Features
fluorescence or electron microscopy), nearly every cell
is found to be infected productively (Figure 25.3C). This
When infectious bursal disease virus is newly introduced
 phenomenon has been interpreted as indicating that the
into a flock, morbidity approaches 100% and mortality
 microenvironment of the bursa is important in main-
may be up to 90%. Disease is most severe in chicks 3t
 taining just the right level of differentiation of B lympho-
t0 6 weeks of age, when the target organ, the bursa of
cytes to support viral replication. It is this exquisite viral
Fabricius, reaches its maximal stage of development.
 tropism for only lymphocytes at a certain stage of differ-
Accordingly, chicks 1 to 14 days of age are less sensitive;
entiation that accounts for the age-dependent clinical
 in addition they are usually protected by maternal anti-
disease in chicks.
bodies. Birds older than 6 weeks rarely develop signs of
The predilection of the virus for bursal lympho-
 disease, although they produce antibodies to the virus.
cytes leads to an important immunopathological mani-
 After an incubation period of 2 to 3 days, chicks show
 festation in birds that recover from the infection. What
distress, depression, ruffed feathers, anorexia, diarrhea,
has been called "viral bursectomy' results in a dimin-
trembling, and dchydration; usually 20 to 30% die. The
ished antibody response and increased susceptibility to
clinical disease lasts for 3 to 4 days, after which surviving
a wide range of opportunistic infectious agents, including
birds recover rapidly.
Salmonella spp. and Escherichia coli. In addition, the
immunosuppression leads to diminished antibody pro-
duction after vaccinations so that outbreaks of other
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
viral diseases may occur. These effects are most obvious
 in the weeks immediately following recovery from infec-
The most striking feature of the pathogenesis and pathol-
tion with the virus. There is a correlation between the
ogy of infectious bursal disease is the selective replication
variety and severity of opportunistic infections and the
408
25.Birnaviridae
FIGURE 25.3.
B
Inlectious bursal disease. (A) Normal bursa ofFabricius. [B] Enlarged, hemorrhogic bursa ofFabricius of a diseased chick. (C) Specilic immunofluo
rescence in the folicles of the bursa of Fabricius in α chick infecied with infectious bursol disease virus at 24 hours postinfection. (C, courtesy of
H. Becht.]
age of bird at the time of the viral infection: younger
The virus is extremcly stable and persists for ovcr
birds are affectcd more severely. Paradoxically, recov-
 4 months in pens and for some 7 weeks in feed. Usual
ered birds devclop high levels of antibody to the virus
 clcaning and disinfection measures often do not lead to
itself because their mature peripheral B lymphocytes are
elimination of the virus from contaminated premises,
still functional.
hcnce indirect transmission via contaminated feed, wa-
ter, dust, liter, and clothing or mechanical spread
through insects may reintroduce the virus. Vertical trans-
Laboratory Diagnosis
mission probably occurs via the egg.
No fully satisfactory regimen of vaccination is
Immunofluoresccnce of impression smears of bursal tis-
yet available. Breeding stock is vaccinated by adding
sue, gcl diffusion tests with infected bursal tissue as the
vaccine virus to drinking water in the hope that pas-
antigen, electron microscopy of bursal specimens, and
 sively transferred maternal antibody will prevent infec-
viral isolation in embryonated eggs ate all useful in con- t
 tion of the newly hatched chicks at thc time of their
firming the clinical diagnosis. The presence of virus or t
 maximum susceptibility. An increasingly common prac-
viral antigen can be detected in bursal tissue by immuno-
tice is to follow oral live-virus vaccination of breeding
fluorescence for 3 to 4 days after infection, for 5 to 6
stock, after thcy have reached the age of about 18
days by immunodiffusion, and for up to 14 days by viral 
weeks, with an injection of inactivated vaccine in oil
isolation. Neutralization tests and enzyme immunoas-
 adjuvant just before they begin laying. Vaccination is
says are reliable methods for serodiagnosis.
rcpeated a year later. This results in a well-maintained
high level of neutralizing antibody throughout the
laying life of the birds. Maternal antibody provides
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
effectivc protection for chicks for bctween 4 and 7
wecks after hatching. In situations where chicks have
 Infectious bursal disease virus is excrcted in the feces for
low or inconsistent levels of maternal antibodies, vacci-
2 to 14 days; it is highly contagious and transmission
 nation is carried out with an attenuated virus vaccinc,
occurs directly through contact and oral uptake. Thc
 starting at 1 to 2 weeks of age.
discase is most severe when the virus is introduced into
 The gene for VP2 has been expressed in yeast, in
an uninfected flock. If the disease then bccomes endeinic,
 a baculovirus system, and in a recombinant fowlpox
its course is much milder and its spread is slower.
virus; these experimental products induce high titers of
Further Reading
409
 neutralizing antibody but they have not yet displaced
used diagnostically, with large amounts of viral antigen
conventional vaccines. A major challenge is to continue
si aa o i  sd 
to modify vaccines so that they are effective against anti-
genic variants as they emerge.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Infectious Pancreatic Necrosis
 Surviving fish become lifelong carriers of the virus, which
they shed in feces, eggs, sperm, and genital fuids. Th
of Fish
virus is highly stable under various environment condi-
tions; for example, it can survivc for months in fresh
 Infectious pancreatic necrosis is a highly contagious and
 water or sea watcr. Control is based on hygiene, water
lethal disease of salmonid fsh (e.g., brook trout, rainbow
 disinfcction with iodophores, and, if an outbreak occurs,
 trout) reared in hatcheries. Considerable cconomic loss  complete destocking.
can occur mainly in fsh less than 6 months of age. The 
Vaccine development has been hampered by the
virus has also been isolated from Atlantic salmon, but (
circumstance that during their most susceptible period,
its pathogenic significance for this fish remains uncertain.
 young fish are not protected by maternal antibodies or by
Other subclinically infected fish species such as pike,
 effective active immunocompetence (young fish become
carp, and barbels are considered as carriers and a poten-
immunocompetent to some extent by 30 days of age).
tial source of contagion. First recognized in North 1
Further, the lack of cross-protection between serotypes
America in 1941, the disease now occurs in many coun-
 makes thc requiremcnts for an effective vaccine even
tries, probably because of the worldwide shipment of
 morc demanding.
eggs and live fish. There are three serotypes of infectious
 Bccause international commerce in live fish and
pancreatic necrosis virus, all pathogenic.
eggs is an important mode of spread of infection, the
Code Zoosanitaire International has established guide
lines for export that specify freedom from clinical disease
Clinical Features
or pathologic changes in the farm of origin for at least
12 months, and negative results from attempts to isolate
Disease is usually observed in trout fingerlings shortly
 infectious pancreatic necrosis virus from pond watcr,
after they commence to feed. With increasing age, the
eggs, sperm, and fish.
 infection becomes subclinical. Affected fish are dark in
color, with a swollen abdomen, exophthalmus, ventral
cutaneous hemorrhages, and are described as frantically
 Further Reading
whirling on their long axis and then lying quietly on the
bottom. Mortality varies between 10 and 90%.
Bernard, J., and Bremont, M. (1995). Molecular biology
of fish viruses: A review. Vet. Res. 26, 341-351.
Dobos, P., Hill, B. J., Hallet, R., Kells, D. T. C., Becht,
H., and Teninges, D. (1979). Biophysical and biochem-
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and lmmunity
ical characterization of fivc animal viruses with biseg-
mented, double-stranded RNA gcnomcs. J. Virol. 32,
Affccted fish havc a pale liver and spleen and visceral
S93-605.
 Organs are often covered with multiple petechiae. A clear
Lasher, H. N., and Davis, V. S. (1997). History of infec-
or milky mucus is seen in the stomach and anterior
tious bursal disease in the U.S.A.—the first two de-
cades. Avian Dis. 41, 11-19.
intestine. Histologically, there are necrotic foci in acinar
Lukert, P. D., and Saif, Y. M. (1997). Infectious bursal
and islet tissue of the pancreas.
disease. In "Diseases of Poultry" (B. W. Calnek, ed.),
10th ed., Pp. 721-728. Iowa State University Press,
Ames.
Nagarajan, M. M., and Kibenge, F. S. B. (1997). Infec-
Laboratory Diagnosis
tious bursal disease virus: A review of the molecular
basis for variations in antigenicity and virulence. Can.
Clinical diagnosis is confirmed by virus isolation in stan-
I. Vet. Res. 61, 81-88.
dard fish cell cultures; high-virus titers are usually present
Sharma, J. M., Karaca, K., and Pertilc, T. (1994). Virus
in kidney tissue so this organ is preferred as inoculum.
induced immunosuppression in chickens. Poult. Sci.
Virus can be titrated in fsh cells by plaque assay. Immu-
73, 1082-1086.
Wolf, K. (1988). “Fish Viruses and Fish Viral Diseases.""
nofluorescence (frozen sections or tissue smears) is also
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Chapter 26
Properties of Paramyxoviruses..
412
 DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF SUBFAMILY PARAMYXOVIRINAE, GENUS
RESPIROVIRUS.......
416
Bovine Parainfluenza Virus 3 Disease ..
416
Canine Parain.luenza Virus Disease .......
418
Murine Parainfluenza Virus 1 (Sendai Virus) Disease ....
418
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF SUBFAMILY PARAMYXOVIRINAE, GENUS
RUBULAVIRUS....
419
Newcastle Disease ...
419
Other Avian Rubulavirus Diseases .
421
Porcine Rubulavirus Disease (La-Piedad-Michoacan-Mexico).
421
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF SUBFAMILY PARAMYXOVIRINAE, GENUS
MORBILLIVIRUS....
421
Rinderpest.
421
Peste des Petits Ruminants ........
423
Canine Distemper.
423
Equine Morbillivirus Disease...
425
Phocine, Dolphin, and Porpoise Distemper.
426
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF SUBFAMILY PNEUMOVIRINAE, GENUS
PNEUMOVIRUS....
426
 Bovine Respiratory Syncytial Disease.
426
Pneumonia Virus of Mice Disease..
427
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF SUBFAMIL.Y PNEUMOVIRINAE, GENUS
METAPNEUMOVIRUS ......
428
Turkey  Rhinotracheiti..........
428
Further Reading..
428
 Several of the most devastating viral discase of animals
Moreover,important new, emerging diseases of animals,
and humans are caused by members of the family Para-
 such as equine morbillivirus disease and phocine, dol.
myxoviridae, Rindcrpest, canine distemper, Newcastle
 phin, and porpoise distemper, have raised the question
 disease, measles, and mumps have arguably caused more
 of whether additional new discascs will be found.
 morbidity and mortality than any other group of related
The family Paramyxoviridae, together with the
diseases in recorded history. Howcvcr, these diseases are
families Rhabdoviridae, Filoviridae, and Bornaviridae,
 only part of the threat represented by the member viruses
form the order Mononegavirales. This order was estab-
of this family: bovine parainfuenza virus 3 disease and
lished to bring together viruses with distant, ancient phy-
bovine respiratory syncytial disease are major contribu- 
 logenetic relationships that are reflected in some con-
tors to the bovine pneumonia complex known as ship- S
 served genomic domains, similar strategies of gene
 ping fever and murine parainfluenza virus 1 (Sendai vi-
 expression and replication, and similar gene order. All
rus) disease is a major problem in mouse colonies. the viruses are enveloped, covered with peploners, and
411
412
26.1
Paramyxoviridae
TABLE 26.1
Distinguishing Characteristics of Four Families of the Order Mononegavirales
FAMILY
FAMILY
CHARACTERISTIC
PARAMYXOVIRIDAF
RHABDOVIRIDAF?
FAMILY FLOVIRIDAE
FAMILY BORNAVIRIDAE
Genome size (kb)
15-16
11-15
19
9
Morphology
 Pleomorphic virions
Buller-shaped virions
 Filamentous virions
 90-nm-diameter spher-
ical virions
Site of replication
Cytoplasm
Cytoplasm
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
Mode of transcription
Polar with nonover-
Polar with nonover-
Polar with nonover-
Complex with mRNA
lapping signals [ex-
lapping signals and
lapping signals and 
 splicing and overlap-
cept pneumoviruses)
stepwise altenuation
 stepwise altenuation
ping start/stop
and stepwise attenu-
signats
ation
Host range
Vertebrates
Vertebrates
Humans, unknown
Horses, sheep, cats,
ostriches, (humans?]
 Pathogenic potential
Mainly respiralory
Mild febrile to fatal
Hemorrhagic fever
Immune-mediated 
disease
neurological disease
 neurological disease
Vertebrate virus members.
all have genomes consisting of a single molecule of nega-
diameter (Figure 26.2). Virions are enveloped, covered
tive-sense, single-stranded RNA. The features that differ-
entiate the individual families of the order are summa-
a "herringbone-shaped" helically symmetrical nucleo-
rized in Table 26.1. These include genome size,
capsid, 600-800 nm in length and 18 (Paramyxovirus,
nucleocapsid structure, site of genome replication and
Rubulavirus, Morbillivirus) or 13 (Pneumovirus) nm in
transcription, manner and extent of mRNA processing.
diameter. The genome consists of a single linear molecule
virion morphology, tissue specifcity, host range, and
 of negative-sense, single-stranded RNA, 15-16 kb in
pathogenic potential.
size. There are 6 to 10 genes separated by conservcd
noncoding sequences that contain termination, polyade-
nylation, and initiation signals. The gene order is gener-
Properties of Paramyxoviruses
ally conserved within the family, although member vi-
ruses of the genera Paramyxovirus and Morbillivirus
Classification
contain 6, Rubuiavirus contain 7, and Pneumovirus con-
 tain 10 genes. Whereas the 10 pneumovirus genes encode
 The family Paramyxoviridae is subdivided into the sub-
families Paramyxovirinae and Pneumovirinae, the for-
10 proteins, the 6 or 7 genes of the other genera encode
10 to 12 proteins (Figure 26.3). Most of the gene prod-
mer containing the genera Respirovirus, Rubulavirus,
and Morbillivirus, the latter containing the genera Pneu-
ucts are structural protcins found in virions.
The peplomers are composed of two glycoproteins:
movirus and Metapneumovirus (Table 26.2) (see Figure
 26.1 for an cxample of how some important members
a hemagglutinin-neuraminidase protein (HN) (the
equivalent protein of pneumoviruses, G, lacks neuramin-
of the family are relared). In addition to the
viruses
idase activity) and a fusion protein (F) (Table 26.3).
covered in more detail in this chapter, there are several
Both proteins play key roles in the pathogenesis of all
members of the family that have not been characterized
fully: for example, fer-de-lance virus of reptiles, Mapuera
paramyxovirus infections. Cell attachment is mediated
virus of chiropteran bats, Nariva virus of rodents, and
via the hemagglutinin-neuraminidase protein. This gly-
coprotcin elicits neutralizing antibodies that inhibit ad-
 several viruses of penguins that are distinct from avian
sorption of virus to cellular receptors.
paramyxoviruses 1-9.
The fusion protein is present on newly formed
virions in an inactive precursor form that is activated
Virion Properties
by proteolytic cleavage by a cellular protease. After
clcavagc, the ncwly generated amino-terminal sequence
 Pararuyxovirus virions are pleomorphic in shape (spheri-
of the protein has a hydrophobic domain and it is postu-
cal as well as filamentous forms occur), 150-300 nm in
lated that this is involved directly in fusion. Cleavage of
Properties of Paramyxoriruses
41.3
TaBlE 26.2
 Paramyxoviruses and the Diseases They Cause
 Subfamily/genus aNd viRus
ANIMaL SpECIEs aFFECtED
DISEASE
Paramyxovirinae/ Respirovirus
Bovine parainfluenza virus 3
Calle, sheep, other mammals
Respiratory disease in cattle and
sheep
 Murine parainfluenza virus 1
Mice, rats, rabbits 
 Severe respiratory disease in labora-
[Sendai virus]
tory rats and mice
 Human parainfluenza viruses 1
Humans
Respiratory disease
and 3
Paramyxovirinae/Rubulavirus
 Newcastle disease virus [avian
 Domestic and wild fowl
Severe generalized disease with cen-
paramyxovirus 1)
 tral nervous system signs
Avian paramyxoviruses 2-9
Fowl
Respiratory disease
Canine parainfluenza virus 2 (SV5]
Dogs
Respiratory disease
 Porcine rubulavirus (la-Piedad-
Swine
Encephalitis, raproduclive failure, cof-
Michoacan-Mexico virus]
neal opacities
 Mumps virus
Humans
Parotitis
Human parainfluenza viruses 2, 
Humans 
Respiratory disease
4a, and 4b
Paramyxovirinae/ Morbilivirus
Rinderpest virus
Catle, wild ruminants 
Severe generalized disease
Peste des petitsruminants virus
Sheep, goats
Severe generalized disease such as
rinderpest
Canine distemper virus
Dogs and members of families Procyo-
 Severe generalized disease with cen-
nidae, Mustelidae, Felidae
 tral nervous system signs
Phocine distemper virus
Seals and sea lions
 Severe generalized disease with respi
ratory system signs
 Dolphin distemper virus 
Dolphins
 Severe generalied disease with respi-
ratory system signs
 Porpoise distemper virus 
Porpoises
 Severe generalized disease with respi-
ratory system signs
 Bovine morbillivirus (MV-K1}
Cattle
 Poorly characterized—significance un-
known
Measles virus
Measles, severe systemic disease with
respiratory and central nervous system
signs
 Possible genus, equine morbilivirus
Equine morbillivirus
Horses and humans
Acute respiratory distress syndrome in
horses and humans
Pneumovirinae/Pneumovirus
Bovine respiratory syncytial virus
Catle, sheep
Respiratory syncytial disease
 Pneumonia virus of mice
Mice
Respiratory syncytial disease
Human respiratory syncytial virus
Humans
Respiratory syncytial disease
Pneumovirinae/Metapneumovirus
Turkey rhinotracheilis virus
Turkeys, chickens
 Severe respiratory disease in turkeys,
swollen head syndrome of chickens 
414
26. Paramyxoviridae
Figure 26.1.
dolphindistempervirus
porpoise distempervirus
measlesvirus
rinderpestvirus
pestedespetitsruminantsvirus
phocinedistempervirus
caninedistempervirus
bovine morbillivirus(MV-K1)
equinemorbillivirus
parainfluenzavirus3
parainfluenza virus1(Sendai)
humanrespiratorysyncytialvirus
bovinerespiratorvsvncvtialvirus
Phylogenetic relationships amongmember virusesof thefmilyParamyxoviridaebasedonthenucleolidesequencesof theirmatrxprotein ond
hemagglutinin genes. Member viruses of the subfamily Pneumovirinoe are most distant from the others. Members of the genus Respirovirus and
morbilivirus and bovine morbilivirus are most dislant. Not to scale—the relationships beween the subfamiles are more distant than indicated.
Adapted rm tewrkf D.EGrifn,W.eii,AGol,BEton,PYog,n PKM
the fusion protein is essential for viral infectivity; when  cell-to-cell spread via fusion, it plays a key role in the
a host cell does not contain appropriate proteases the
 pathogenesis of paramyxovirus infections, including
virus formed is not infectious. Further, viral virulence has P
 persistent infections. To be maximally effective, para-
 been correlated with the presence or absence of specific
 myxovirus vaccines must elicit antibodies against the
amino acid protease recognition motifs. Because the fu-
 fusion protein as well as against the hemagglutinin-
sion protein is essential for viral infectivity and for direct
 neuraminidase protein.
Figure 26.2.
FamilyParamyxoviridesbfmilyParamyxvirine,genus Resirovirs,parinenzavirs 3.A single partilly disrptedvirionwihpplomes
visible at its edge and is herringbone-shaped nucleocapsid spilling out. Negative stain electron microscopy. Magnificalion: × 50,000.
Properties of Paraumvxetirrses
415
Figure 26.3.
genus:Respirovirus
/
1682
1173
1846
189
6799
NP
PICN
M
F
HN
L
genus:Rubulavirus
623
1787
1298
1371
17092921869
NPPN
M
FSHHN
L
genus:Morbillivirus
1688
1
1473
1657
2377
1:949
5639
N
PIC/V
M
H
L
genus:Pneumovirus
1899
957
6570
1C1BNPM1AG
22K
L
B
10
Kilobases
sss
TheirsendrrlioninFielVirlBNFids,D.MiPMyMhk,J.Mlick,T.P
TaBle 26.3
Functions and Terminology of Virion Proteins in the Family Paramyxoviridae
GENUS RESPIROVIRUS AND
FUNCTION
RUBULAVIRUS
GENUS MOREILLIVIRUS
 GENU5 PNEUMOVIRUS
Attachment protein: hemagglutinin, in-
HN
H
G
duction of productive immunity
Neuraminidase: virion release, destruc-
HN
None
None
lion of mucin inhibitors
Fusion protein: cellfusion, virus pene-
F
F
F
tration, cell-cell spread, contribution to
induction of protective immunity
Nucleoprotein: protection of genome
NP
N
N
RNA
Transcriptase: RNA genome tran-
L and P
L and P
Land P
scription
Matrix protein: virion stability
M
M
M
Other
(HS)
SH, 22 K
oNo hemaggfutinating activity.
416
26.Parayxouiridae
Viruses have narrow host ranges and have only
 mRNA copy of the completc gcne, thc smaller C protein
been identifcd in vertebrates, primarily in mammals and
is read in a different reading frame following initiation
 birds. They are labile to the effects of heat or desiccation
of translation from an internal initiation codon. Quitc
and are destroyed easily by comimon disinfectants and
separatcly, the transcription of the V gene involves the
lipid solvents.
insertion of an extra G nucleotide into its mRNA by
polymcrase site-specific stuttcring ("cditing")—this rc-
sults in the production of a protein that displays N-
Viral Replication
terminal homology with thc P protcin but downstream
 has a distinct armino scquence. Because the reading frame
Several different cell types are used to grow different
used to transcribe the V gene is also distinct, all three
paramyxoviruses. Cell cultures derived from homolo-
reading frames are utilized in the transcription of the
gueous species are usually used for morbilliviruses and
 P/C/V gene complex. In the case of parainfluenza virus
pneumoviruses, but these viruses are not cultivated
3, a fourth protein, D, is translated by insertion of two
readily and adaptation by passage is usually necessary.
 nontemplated G residues. In the genus Rubulavirus there
Viral replication in cell cultures is usually lytic, but car-
are additional variations in the transcription of the
rier cultures arise readily in many virus-host cell systems.
 P/V/C gene complex and the products formed, and in
Syncytium formation in cell cultures and in vivo is a
the genus Pneumovirus each of the 10 genes encodes a
characteristic feature of infection, as is the formation of
single protein with little sense of genormic coding
acidophilic inclusions in the cytoplasm. Even though 
economy.
their replication is entirely cytoplasmic, morbilliviruses
During infection, as the concentration of N protein
also produce acidophilic intranuclear inclusions. Hem-
 builds up in the cell, these molecules are believed to
adsorption is dcmonstrated readily with parainfluenza
associate either with the viral RNA polymerase (tran-
viruses and sonc morbilliviruses, but not with pneumo-
scriptase) or with nascent positive-sense RNA intermedi-
viruses.
ates, thereby preventing the polyadenylation, termina-
 Paramyxoviruses replicate within the cytoplasm,
tion, and reinitiation events that characterize the
indeed some have been shown to replicate in enucleated
transcription mode of the infcction cycle. This enables
cells. Virions attach via their hemagglutinin-
a switch to a replication mode in which more ful-length
neuraminidasc protein to cellular sialoglycoprotein or 1
 positive-sense intermediates are synthesized. Thesc, in
glycolipid receptors. The fusion protein then mediates 
turn, serve as a template for RNA replication. Ncwly
fusion of the viral envelope with thc plasma membrane, 
synthesized negative-sense RNA associates with N pro-
at physiologic pH. The liberated nuclcocapsid remains 
tein and transcriptase to form nucleocapsids. Virion mat-
intact, with all three of its associated proteins (N, P,
 uration involves (1) the incorporation of viral glycopro-
and L) being rcquired for transcription by the virion-
teins into patches on the host cell plasma membrane,
associated, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (tran-
(2) the association of matrix protein (M) and other non-
glycosylated proteins with this altered host cell mem-
some 6 or 10 discrete unprocessed mRNAs by sequential
brane, (3) the alignment of nucleocapsid beneath the M
interrupted synthesis from a single promorer. Full ge-
protein, and (4) the formation and release via budding
nome-length positive-sense RNA is also synthesized and
of mature virions (Table 26.4).
serves as a template for the replication of negative-sense
 genomic RNA. Control of these processes is mainly at
the level of transcription.
Whereas most gencs encode a single protein, thc
DISEaSEs CaUSED BY MEMBERS OF
P genc of the menber viruses of the subfamily Paramyxo
SUBFAMILY PARAMYXOVIRINAE,
virinae encodes two to five distinct P/V/C proteins (see
Figurc 26.3 and Table 26.3). Remarkably, different strat-
Genus Respirovirus
egies for maximizing the coding potential of this gene
complex have evolved in the different genera of the sub-
family. For example, the gene complex of the member
Bovine Parainfluenza
viruses of the genera Morbilliirus and Paramyxovirus
Virus 3 Disease
encodcs four proteins, the production of which entails
two distinct transcription mechanisms: (1) internal initia-
Whether bovine parainfluenza virus 3 causes diseasc in
tion of translation and (2) insertion of nontemplated G
cattlc and sheep indepcndently of its role of predisposing
residues into mRNA to shift the reading frame to that
to secondary bacterial infections of the respiratory tract
of an otherwise inacccssible open reading frame.
has been debated for many years. However, it is its role
Whereas the P protein itself is translated from a faithful
 in shipping fever that has prompted most aftention and
Boxrine Pearainfluena Virns 3 Disease
417
ary bacterial infection, cspecially Pasteurella hemolytica
TaBle 26.4
 infection. This syndrome is marked by purulent nasal
Properties of Members of the Farmily
discharge, cough, rapid respiration, anorexia, fever, and
Paramyxoviridae
general malaise. Poor hygiene, crowding, transport,
Two subfamilies: Paramyxoviringe containing the genera Re
harsh climatic conditions, and other causes of stress ex-
spirovirus, Rubulavirus, and Morbillivirus, and Pneumoviri-
 acerbate this syndrome (see Chapter 10).
nae containing the genera Pneumovirus and Metapneu
movirus
Virions qre enveloped, pleomorphic [spherical as well as
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
filamentous forms occur), and 150-300 nm in diameter.
(4bual u! wu oz-g) sawoldad sbio 4u!m palaaos ain Aaul
Under farm conditions, clinical signs of infection are
Virions contain a "'herringbone-shaped" helically symmetri-
cal nucleocapsid, 600-800 nm in length, and 18 (genera
usually distorted by intercurrent infections with several
Respirovirus,ublovirusMorbiivirusor13genera e-
different agents. Upon intranasal or intratracheal inocu-
movirus and Metapneumovirus) nm in diameter
lation of parainfluenza virus 3 alone, calves show only
Virion envelope contains two viral glycoproteins and one or
mild fever and serous nasal discharge, whereas cattle
two nonglycosylated proteins
infected with a mixture of virus and bacteria and vari-
Genome consists of a single linecr malecule of negative
 ously stressed develop pneumonia that is often intracta-
sense, single-stranded RNA, 15-16 kb in size, with seven
ble in regard to economically feasible managcment. In
to eight open reading frames encoding 10 to 12 proteins,
shipping fever, the lesions arc those of lobular pncumo-
including NP (or N),. P, M, F, L, and HN lor H or G), which
nia; there is massive inflammatory infiltration, necrosis,
dre common to all genera
and caseation and marked lobar hepatization (lungs re-
Cytoplasmic replication, budding from the plasma mem-
sembling liver). Syncytium formation and intracytoplas-
brane
 mic inclusion bodies are encountered in bronchiolar and
Syncytium formation, intracytoplasmic and inranuclear incl-
alveolar epithelial cells.
sion bodies Igenus Morbilivirus] 
Convalescent animals devclop a strong immunc
responsc, evidenced by the presence of hemagglutination
inhibition, neuraminidase inhibition, and neutralizing
antibodies. These antibodies are all directed against the
controversy. Shipping fever occurs as a consequence of
henagglutinin-neuraminidase prorein. The role of the
transportation and other stressful situations; the term
cellular immune system has not been determined. Imm-
refers to an ill-defined respiratory syndrome caused by
nity is short lived, and animals become susceptible to
a variety of agents acting in concert or in sequence.
reinfection after several months.
The syndrome is an economically important problcm,
particularly in feedlots and large-scale breeding facilitics
in regions where climate provides additional stress. Thc
virus can infect many other species, including dogs,
Laboratory
 Diagnosis
horses, monkeys, and humans; it is found worldwide.
 Because of the variety of agents that can cause shipping
fever and the common occurrence of the virus without
disease, diagnosis is diffcult. Virus can be recovered
Clinical Features
from the nasal discharges for 7 to 9 days after infection
In calves and lambs, infection is marked by fever, lacri-
by cultivation in bovine cell cultures or it may be identi-
fed in nasal discharges or respiratory tissues by inmuno-
mation, serous nasal discharge, depression, dyspnca, and
fluorescence or enzyme immunoassay, but interpretation
coughing. Many animals rnay exhibit minimal clinical
signs, but some may develop interstitial pneumonia, in
of rcsults requires an assessment of the overall clinical
 condition in the individual animal and the herd.
which inflaminatory consolidation is usually present
only in the anterior lobcs of thc lungs.
The uncomplicated respiratory infection caused by
parainflucnza 3 runs a clinical course of 3 to 4 days
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
with complcte recovery thc rulc. However, in stressfu!
circumstances, many cattle and sheep develop interstitial
 The most important transmission routes are by aerosol
pneumonia, i.c., shipping fevcr. In this case the infection
 and fomites contaminated with nasal discharges. Thc
alone or in concert with other viral infections (adenovi-
virus has been recovered also from intestinal contents,
rus, infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus, bovine respi-
milk, and aborted fetuses but the importancc of these
ratory syncytial virus infections) predisposes to second-
sources of contagion is unknown.
418
26. Paramyxoviridae
Several attenuated virus vaccines for intranasal and
1
 nies of laboratory mice and rats used for biomedical
parenteral use are available that are able to induce pro-
 research. In this setting it is a substantial problem, partic-
tectivc mucosal IgA antibodies. Typically, combined vac-
ularly difficult to control or eliminate because of cross-
cincs are formulated, containing infectious bovine rhino-
infection between different rodent species.
tracheitis virus, bovinc adenovirus, and bovine viral
diarrhea virus antigens. However, it is widely acknowl-
edged that better vaccines are nceded—vaccines that
Clinical Features
provide longer-lasting immunity. Even morc important
is the need for good vaccines against Pasteurella hemoly-
 In epidemics, affected mice are characterizcd by a rough-
tica. In the absence of the latter, antibiotics are uscd to
 cned hair coat, crusting of the eyes, neonatal mortality,
treat thc pneumonia, but with limited success. Many I
 retarded growth, weight loss, and prolonged gestation.
cattle surviving the acute and subacute manifestations
 In endemic situations, where there is some background
 of shipping fcver becorme unthrifty and are eliminated
immunity, most animals are infected subclinically shortly
from production units.
after weaning. Nude mice develop a chronic wasting
disease characterized by decreased activity, weight loss,
sniffling, and wrinkled skin; there is no evidence of
Canine Parainfluenza
chronic or persistent infection in immunocompetent
mice, but in nude mice virus has been demonstrated for
Virus 2 Disease
up to 27 days postinfection.
Canine parainfluenza virus 2 is closely related to if
not identical to simian virus 5 (SV5); the virus causes
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
inapparent infections or mild respiratory diseasc in
dogs and may be the cause of central ncrvous systcm
After natural infection, the virus replicates for 6 to 7
disease as well. The prevalence of antibodies indicates C
days primarily in respiratory epithelium. In mice, the
its worldwide distribution in dog populations. Infec-
 epidemic form is generally acute, morbidity is high, and
tions play a role in the kenncl cough syndrome, and
mortality varies between 0 and 100%, depending on
more serious, chronic respiratory discase may devclop
thc mouse strain. Following recovery, virus is no longer
when additional microbial or viral agents, poor hygicnc,
detectable and antibodies persist throughout life. In the
or stress complicate infections. Infection is characterizcd
 absence of clinical signs, there are no gross lesions, with
by the sudden onset of serous nasal secrction, cough,
the exception of adhesions betwecn the serosa of lung
and fevcr, lasting 3--14 days. In severe cases (mostly
 and pleura (as a result of secondary bacterial infection).
in malnourished or young dogs) there is also conjuncti-
In ill animals, areas of congestion and consolidation are
vitis, tonsillitis, anorexia, and lethargy. Because a num-
 seen throughout the lungs, which are replaced by grayish
ber of other infections can induce similar clinical signs,
 fbrotic tissue upon recovery. Histologically, there arc
defnitive diagnosis depends on virus isolation from
 n s  e    i
nasal or throat swabs. Vaccines are available; they
rhinitis with focal ulcerativc lcsions, epithelial necrosis
are usually used in various combination formulations
 in the trachea). Intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusion
containing antigcns of other canine viral and microbial
bodies surrounded by a clear halo are present in epithelial
pathogens. Thc virus also infects humans, monkeys,
cells of the trachea.
probably cattle, sheep, swine, and cats, and an antigeni-
cally related virus has been isolated from chickens.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Murine Parainfluenza Virus 1
Of the serological tests available to diagnose Sendai
virus infections in laboratory rodent colonies, enzyme
(Sendai Virus) Disease
immunoassays are most often used. Antibodies arc
detected as early as 7 days postinfection but their
 Parainfluenza virus 1, also known as Sendai virus, pro-
 presence may not be indicative of an ongoing outbreak
duccs natural infections in micc, rats, guinea pigs, ham-i
 in a colony unless regular, serial testing is done and
sters, rabbits, monkeys, and humans. Whereas in most t
the colony is otherwisc negativc. Histologic demonstra
species infection remains subclinical, severe rcspiratory tion of lesions and electron microscopic demonstration
disease with high mortality can occur in breding colo- of virions in lung homogenates are used to confrm
Newcastle Disease
419
diagnoses. The use of sentinel animals is useful: mice cause disease in wild species including cockatoos, cocka-
 put in contact with bedding material develop antibody
 tiels, parakcets, and finches, which are transportcd
if the virus is present.
around the world legally and illegally.
The virus can be isolared in numerous cell culture
systems (monkey kidney, Vero, and BHK-21 cells) and
eimbryonated eggs; the presencc of virus is demonstrated
Clinical Features
by hemadsorprion of guinea pig erythrocytes to infected
cell monolayers and/or by hemagglutination of type O
 In chickens, respiratory, circulatory, gastrointestinal,
human red blood cells by the supernatant fluids from
 and nervous signs arc seen; the particular set of clinical
such cultures. Immunofluorescence staining of tracheal
manifestations depends on thc age and immunc status
sincars collected from suspect animals bcrwccn 48 hours
 of the host and on the virulcnce and tropism of thc
and 12 days after infection is also a convenient method
infecting strain. A combination of inspiratory dyspnca
of detecting the prescnce of virus in a colony.
(gasping), cyanosis of comb and wattles, and clonic mus-
cular spasm is indicative. The average incubation period
is 5 days. There is a loss of appetite, listlessness, abnor-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
 mal thirst, huddling, weakness, and somnolencc. Intesti-
nal symptoms may include crop dilatation, presence of
Sendai virus disease has a worldwide distribution in labo-
foamy mucus and fbrinous exudate in the pharynx, a
ratory mice and rats. In colonies,thc infection is perpetu-
 similar discharge from thc beak, and yellow-green diar-
ated by the introduction of susccptible animals, which
 rhea. Nervous system involvement is indicated by paraly-
becomc infectcd from animals in the colony that are
sis of wings and/or legs, torticollis, ataxia or circular
infected either acutely or inapparently. The same infec-
 movements, bobbing-and-weaving movements of the
tion pattern can occur in rat colonics. When epidemic
head, and clonic spasms. In layers there is a sudden
Of cndemic infection has been diagnosed, elimination
 decrease in egg production togethcr with depigmentation
of affccted animals, disinfection of the prcmises, and
 and/or loss of shell and reduction in the albumen quality
scrccning of incoming animals are necded for control.
of eggs.
Infccted colonies must be reestablishcd, either by cesar-
The discase in turkeys is siinilar; there are signs of
ean section and foster mothers or by embryo transfcr.
respiratory and neryous systcm involvement. Airsaccul-
Importantly, serological surveillance is required to moni-
itis rather than tracheitis is the nost common lesion. In
tor the success of such efforts-this is required in thc
United States for mice used in federally funded biomedi-
cal research.
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
DIsEasEs CauSeD BY MEmBers OF
 Initially the virus replicates in thc mucosal epithelium
 of the upper respiratory and intestinal tracts; shortly
SUBFAMILY PARAMYXOVIRINAE,
after infection, virus spreads via the blood to the spleen
GENUS RUBULAVIRUS
and bone marrow, producing a secondary viremia. This
Jeads to infection of other target organs: lung, intestine,
Newcastle Disease
 and central nervous system. Respiratory distress and dys-
 pnea result from congestion of the lungs and damage
 Newcastlc disease has been one of the most inportant 
 to the respiratory center in the brain. Gross pathologic
diseases of poultry worldwide ever since the advent of I
findings include ecchymotic hemorrhages in the larynx,
high-density, confinement husbandry systems. The dis- trachea, esophagus, and throughout the intestine. The
ease was first observed in Java in 1926 and in the same
 most prominent histologic lesions are necrotic foci in
year it spread to England, where it was frst recognized
 the intestinal mucosa and the lymphatic tissue and hyper-
in Newcastle, hence thc name. The disease is one of the
 cmic changes in most organs, including the brain.
most contagious of all viral diseases, spreading rapidly
Strains of Newcastle disease virus differ widely in
virulence, depending on the cleavability and activation
terious fashion. As threatening as most strains of thc
 of their hemagglutinin-neuraminidase and fusion glyco-
virus are, the threat of exotic velogenic (viscerotropic)
 proteins. Avirulent strains produce inactive precursor
strains represents another order of magnitude of risk.
 protcins; in virulent strains these prccursors are cleaved
Newcastle disease virus and perhaps related viruses also :
 and activated readily. Cleavage activation must occur in
420
26. Paramyxoviridae
the same tissues in which initial viral replication occurs
 only in unvaccinated flocks; hemagglutination inhibition
if the infection is to be progressive--the prescnce of
 is the test of choice. The hemagglutination-inhibition
cellular proteases as well as the strain-based cleavability
1
test is also used for survcillancc of chronic Newcastle
of the viral glycoprotein precursors defines the tissue
 disease in countries where this form of the disease is en-
tropism of various viral strains and their capacity to(
demic.
spread rapidly.
 Determination of virulence is csscntial for field
The terms velogenic (visccrotropic), mesogenic,
 isolates. In addition to the “"neuropathic index" and the
and lentogenic are applied to Newcastle disease virus
mcan death time of chicken embryos, plaquc formation
strains of high, intermediate, and low virulencc. Whereas
in chicken cells in the presence or abscnce of trypsin is
velogenic strains kill virrually 100% of infected fowl,
used as an index for virulence determination.
naturally avirulcnt strains have even been used as vac-
cines. Virulcnt velogenic strains cause predominantly
hemorrhagic lesions, in particular at the esophagus/pro-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
ventriculus and proventriculus/gizzard junctions and in
the posterior half of the duodenum, the jejunum, and 
In addition to chickens, turkeys, pheasants, guinea fowl,
ileum. These lesions are virrually pathognomonic for
ducks, geese, and pigeons, a wide range of captive and
velogenic strains. In severe cases, hemorrhages are also
free-ranging semidomcstic and free-living birds, includ-
present in subcutaneous tissues, muscles, larynx,
ing migratory waterfowl, are susceptible but the role of
tracheal/esophageal tissues, serous membranes, trachea,
 the latter in long-distance transmission is not clear.
lungs, airsacs, pericardium, and myocardium. In adult
In birds that survive, virus is shed in all secretions
hens, hemorrhages are present in ovarian follicles. Le-
 and excretions for at least 4 weeks. Transmission occurs
 sions can develop into diphtheroid inflammatory foci
by direct contact between birds by the airborne route
 and later into nccrotic foci. In the central nervous system,
via aerosols and dust particles and via contaminated feed
lesions arc those of encephalomyelitis—neuronal necro-
 and water. Mechanical spread between flocks is favored
sis, perivascular cuffing, and interstitial inflammatory in-
by the relative stability of the virus and its wide host
filtration.
range. With lentogenic strains, transovarial transmission
 Antibody production is rapid. Hemagglutination-
 is important, and virus-infected chicks may hatch from
 inhibiting antibody can be detected within 4 to 6 days
virus-containing eggs.
of infection and persists for at least 2 years. The level
 Trade in infected avian species and products plays
 of hemagglutinating-inhibiting antibody is a measure of
 a kcy role in the spread of Newcastle discase from in-
inmunity. Maternal antibodies protect chicks for 3 to
fected to noninfected areas. Caged or aviary birds im-
4 wceks after hatching. IgG is confined to the circulation
 ported from endemic regions constitute a risk for the
and does not prevent respiratory infection, but it does
 introduction of cxotic vclogenic strains of the virus into
block viremia; locally produced IgA antibodies play an
 areas where there are commercial poultry industries.
important role in protection in both the respiratory tract
 Some psittacine species may become persistently infected
and the intestinc.
with velogenic virus and excrete it intermittently for
more than 1 year without showing clinical signs. Virus
may also be disseminated by frozen chickens, uncooked
Laboratory Diagnosis
kitchen refuse, foodstuffs, bedding, manure, and trans-
port containers.
Because clinical signs are relatively nonspecifc and be-
Because Newcastle disease is a notifiable disease in
cause the diseasc is such a threat, diagnosis must be
 most developed countrics, legislative measures constitute
confirmed by virus isolation and serology. The virus
the basis for control. Where the diseasc is endemic, con-
may be isolated from spleen, brain, or lungs by allantoic
 trol can be achieved by good hygiene combined with
inoculation of 10-day-old embryonated eggs, with the
 immunization, both live-virus vaccines containing naru-
virus being differentiated from other viruses by hemads-
 rally occurring lentogenic virus strains and inactivated
Orption- and hcmagglutination-inhibition tests. Diag-
virus (injectable oil cmulsions) being commonly used.
nosis can be attcimpted about 1 week after onset of the
 These vaccines are effective and safc, even in chicks, and
symptoms and repcated 1 week later in case of inconclu-
 may be administered via drinking water or by aerosol,
sive results. Virus can be isolated from the gut when 
 eye or nostril droplets, or beak dipping. Laying hens are
circulating antibodies are already present. Immunofluo-
 revaccinated cvery 4 months. Protection against disease
rescence on tracheal sections or smears is rapid although 
 can be expected about a week after vaccination. Vacci-
lcss sensitive. Demonstration of antibody is diagnostic
 natcd birds excrete the vaccine virus for up to 15 days
Rinderpest
421
after vaccination, hence in some countrics birds cannot
be moved from vaccinated flocks until 21 days after 
 isolated from mummified and stillborn deformed piglets
vaccination. Furthermore, infected birds can shed wild-
 in Australia. Abnormalities included arthrogryposis and
a q re  s t o d  sa sda
 craniofacial deformitics, including undershot jaw. Sera
and may thus represent an important virus reservoir.f
 from two humans on the propcrty who had cxpericnced
Inactivated vaccine, administercd subcutaneously, is
undiagnosed febrile illnesscs coincidcntally with the rcc-
usually used for pigeons.
ognition of the disease in the pigs wcrc positivc for anti-
body to the new virus.
Human Disease
Diseases Caused by MemBers OF
Newcastle disease virus can produce a transitory con-
SUBFAMILY PARAMYXOVIRINAE,
junctivitis in humans; thc condition has been seen pri-
marily in laboratory workers and vaccination teams ex-
GENUS MORBIllIVIRUS
posed to large quantities of virus and, before vaccination
Rinderpest
 proccssing plants. The discase has not been reportcd in
individuals who rear poultry or consume poultry
Rinderpest is one of the oldest recorded plagues of
products.
livestock. It is of Asiatic origin, first described in the
4th century. In the 18th and 19th centuries it was the
cause of devastating epidemics that swept across Europe
and in the early part of the 20th century across sub-
Other Avian
Saharan Africa. The 1920 outbreak in Europe led to
Rubulavirus Diseases
the founding of the Offce International des Epizooties,
in Paris, the organization that today brings togethcr
animal infectious disease authoritics globally, especially
 Serologically distincr rubulaviruses have been isolated
to facilitate international trade. Today, it is still the
from birds; their signifcance is usually not made clear
cause of great economic loss in Africa, the Middle
 by the circumstances. One was isolated in the 1960s, in
 East, and parts of Asia.
Yucaipa, California, where it caused outbreaks of serious
 The causative agent was first shown to be filterable
systemic disease in turkeys. Another was isolated from
virus in 1902. On the basis of phylogcnetic analysis, it
turkeys in Canada in 1967 and the United States in 1968,
has been suggestcd that rindcrpest virus is thc archetype
again causing systemic disease. In the following decades,
morbillivirus, having given rise to canine distempcr and
many isolations of serologically distinct viruses were re-
human mcaslcs viruscs somc 5000 to 10,000 years ago.
 ported worldwide, most as a consequence of testing asso-
ciated with the quarantine of imported birds that was
implemented after the 1970-1974 Newcastle disease
pandemic.
Clinical Features
In its typical manifestation, rinderpest is an acute fehrile
Porcine Rubulavirus Disease
proaching 100% and mortality 90-100%. Indigenous
cattle brecds in Africa have a lower mortality, up to
(La-Piedad-Michoacan-Mexico)
50%. After an incubation period of 3-5 days, a rapid
rise in temperature is seen, called the prodromal phase.
A rubulavirus has been isolated from numerous out-
This is followed by the mucosal phase in which nasal
breaks of adiseasein youngpigs inMexicothatischarac.
and ocular mucopurulent secretions caused by severe
terized by encephalomyelitis, reproductive failure, and
 mouth lesions (erosions) are observed. Depression and
corneal opacity, which may be the only clinical sign in a
 anorexia characterize this stage. This is followed by a
older pigs, hence the common nanic for the disease, "blue 
 phase of severe bloody diarrhea and prostration, during
which animals may die from dehydration and shock
paramyxovirus, but analysis of the gcnomc suggests that
Convalescence may takc many wccks during which
it is related most closely to mumps virus.
 pregnant animals may abort. Strains prevalent in eastern
422
26.Paramyxoviridae
 Africa are generally mild and there may be no clinical
 mary bovine kidney cell cultures. A marimoset lymph-
signs, only seroconversion,
oblastoid cell line (B95a) and a Tbeileria parva-trans-
formed bovine lymphocyte cell line are also used. The
best specimens for virus isolation are tissues from muco-
sal lesions or lymph nodes; cocultivation of washed buffy
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
coat cells from suspect animals with bovine kidney cells
After nasal entry, virus replicates in tonsils and mandibu-
may be used to avoid the effects of the presence of early
lar and pharyngeal lymph nodes. Viremia develops
antibody. Cytopathology is evident in 3 to 12 days. Neu-
within 2 to 3 days, after which virus can be demonstrated
tralization and enzyme iminunoassays are used to con-
in lymph nodes, spleen, bone marrow, and mucosa of
firm the identity of isolates and for serologic diagnosis.
the upper respiratory tract, lung, and the digestive tract.
Thereafter, virus replicares in the nasal mucosa, causing
necrosis, erosions, and fbrinous exudation. Leukopenia
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Controi
 is profound as a result of viral replication and destruction
 of lymphoid organs, especially the mesenteric lymph
The host range includes domestic cattle, water buffalo,
nodes and gut-associated lymphoid tissue. The immuno-
sheep, and goats. Domestic pigs can develop clinical
deficiency that develops often results in the activation of
signs and are regarded as an important virus reservoir
in Asia. Among wild animals, wildebeest, deer, antelope,
latent or intercurrent viral jnfections and opportunistic
bacterial infections.
 and hippopotamuses are susceptibie.
 In endemic areas the disease spreads from animal
Virulent virus strains also infect the epithelial
layers of the upper respiratory, urogenital, and alimen-
to animal by contact, with infection occurring through
tary tracts. Less virulent strains induce less extensive
aerosol droplets. Virus is shed in secretions from the
mucosal lesions, which may account for their reduced
nose, throat, and conjunctiva as well as in feces, urine,
ability to transmit by contact. In the cecum, colon,
and milk. Infected cattle excrete virus during the incuba-
and rectum, “zebra" stripes are commonly found;
tion period, before clinical signs occur, and in Africa
these are caused by distended capillaries packed with
and Asia such animals are an important source for the
 erythrocytes. Intracytoplasmic and intranuclear eosino-
introduction of rindcrpest into discase-frce areas. The
disease is also introduced into new areas by inmportation
 philic inclusion bodies are found commonly in infected
of live, subclinically infected sheep, goats, and possibly
epithelial cells.
 Dehydration in acute infections due to profuse di-
othcr ruminants. Subclinically infected swine may act as
 arrhea causes changes in hematological findings and
a source of infection for cattle; oniy Asian breeds of
blood chemistry. As a consequence, total serum proteins
swine and warthogs show clinical signs, although all
and serum chloride levels drop. There is an apparent
 species of pigs are susceptible. Because the virus is ther-
molabile, indirect spread via fresh meat and meat prod-
increase in the packed cell volume of 40 to 6s%. At
death the blood is dark, thick, and slow to coagulate.
ucts, food, and transport vehicles is unusual.
Cattle that survive rinderpest have lifelong immu-
Outbreaks have often followed wars and civil dis-
nity. Ncutralizing antibodies appea1 6 to 7 days after the
turbance where movements of troops and refugees with
 onsct of clinical signs, and maximum titers are reached
live food animals disseminates the virus. A recent out-
 during the third and fourth weeks postinfection.
break in Sri Lanka followed 40 years of freedom from
the disease; the likely source was live goats introduced
from India by soldiers. Rinderpest also reappeared in
Turkey in the 1990s, possibly a consequence of the
Laboratory Diagnosis
Gulf War.
 In rinderpest-free countries, veterinary public
 In countries where rinderpest is endemic, clinical diagno-
health measures are designed to prevent introduction
sis is usually considered sufficient. In countries free of (
of the virus. Importation of uncooked meat and meat
the disease but subject to occasional importations, it can
 products from infected countries is forbidden, and zoo
bc confused with other diseases affecting thc mucosa,
 animals must be quarantined before being transported
such as bovine viral diarrhea and malignant catarrhal
to such countries. In countries with endemic rinderpest
fever. In the carly stages, differentiation from infectious
 and where the disease has a high probability of being
bovine rhinotracheitis and foot-and-mouth disease is dif-
introduced, attenuated virus vaccines are used.
ficult. The virus infects a wide range of cells, but isolation
Early rinderpest vaccine strains were produced by
for laboratory diagnosis is carried out routinely in pri-
 virus passage in rabbits (lapinized vaccine), embryonated
(anine Distemper
423
 eggs (avianized vaccine), or goats (caprinized vaccine). (
 clinical features of the disease in 1809; its viral etiology
The latter vaccine, attenuated inadequately may have
was demonstrated in 1906 by Carre. It is now compara-
been responsible for the circulation of rinderpest in small
 tively rare in many industrialized countries, being well
ruminants in India.
controlled by vaccination. However, in recent years it
 In the 1960s an attenuated virus vaccine produced
 has emerged as a signifcant pathogen of the large species
 in cell culture (Plowright vaccine) was developcd and
 in the family Felidae. In the 1990s, thousands of African
used throughout Africa in a program that almost suc-
lions have died, contracting the virus via contact with
ceeded in eliminating the disease from the continent.
free-roaming canids (hyenas, feral dogs).
However, political instabiliry, lack of funds, and the
pcrsistence of relatively avirulent strains resulted in a
resurgence of disease in the 1980s. This vaccine is effica-
Clinical Features
cious because it induces lifelong immunity and it is inex--
pensive to produce. In fact, it is still one of the best 
The disease occurs in several forrms. In the rare peracute
vaccines available for any animal disease, but it is ther-f
form of the disease there is sudden onset of fever and
molabile and requires a well-maintained "cold chain,S
 sudden death. In the most common acute form of the
a difficult practical problem in many areas where rinder- (
 disease, after an incubation period of 3 to 6 days, infected
 pest occurs. To remedy this, a vaccinia virus recombinant (
 dogs develop a biphasic rise of temperature up to 41°℃,
carrying the genes for the rinderpest virus hemaggluti-
with the second peak corresponding to the onset of severe
nin-neuraminidase and fusion proteins is currently in  1
 leukopenia and other clinical signs. Anorexia, catarrh,
field trials in Africa; it is very thermostable.
conjunctivitis, and depression are common during this
 stage. Some dogs show primarily respiratory signs,
 others gastrointestinal signs. The pulmonary disease is
Peste des Petits Ruminants
 characterized by catarrhal inflammation of the larynx
and bronchi, tonsillitis, and a cough. Later, bronchitis
or catarrhal bronchopncumonia develop, sometimes
Peste des petits ruminants is a highly contagious, sys-
with pleuritis. The gastrointestinal disease is character-
temic disease of goats and sheep very similar to rinder-
ized by severe vomiting and watery diarrhea. After the
pest and caused by a closely related morbillivirus. Unlike
rinderpest, however, many infections are subclinical. It
onset of the disease, central nervous system signs may
occur: behavioral changes, forced movements, local my.
occurs mainly in West Africa, although outbreaks have
also been described elsewhere. After an incubation pe-
 oclony, tonic-clonic spasms, epileptic-like attacks,
 ataxia, and paresis. The duration of disease varies, de-
riod of 5 or 6 days, clinical signs develop, including
fever, anorexia, a necrotic stomatitis with gingivitis, and
 pending on complications caused by secondary bacte-
rial infections.
diarrhea. Bronchopneumonia is a frequent complication.
The subacute neurological form of the disease may
The course of the disease may be peracute, acute, or
follow any of the acute manifestations of infection or
chronic; however, the virus does not persist. Peste des 
 may appear after subclinical infection: there is frank
petits ruminants has economic consequences, in that
encephalitis with convulsions and seizures and most sur-
mortality in goats can reach 95% and in sheep only
viving dogs have permanent central nervous system st-
slightly less. Transmission of the virus is similar to that
 of rindcrpest. Wild animals are not believed to play a
quelae such as nervous *"ticks" or involuntary leg move-
role in the spread of virus. Primary lamb kidney cells
ments.
are used for virus isolation. Rindcrpest vaccine has been
 Finally, there are two late forms of the disease seen
in old dogs, one called old dog encephalitis in which.
used to control spread of the disease, but an homolo-
there is slowly progressive loss of neurologic functions,
gueous vaccine is now being field tested in West Africa.
the other called bard-pad disease, in which hyperkerato-
sis of foot pads and the nose occurs. These late manifesta-
tions of canine distemper may occur in dogs with no
Canine Distemper
history of earlier acute or subacute disease. Neurological
signs include (1) localized rwitching of a muscle or group
Canine distemper is the most important viral disease of
 of muscles (chorea, flexor spasm, hyperkinesia), such as
dogs, producing high morbidity and mortality in unvac-  i
 in the leg or facial muscles; (2) paresis or paralysis, ofren
cinated populations worldwide. It is a highly contagious
beginning in the hind limbs and evident as ataxia, fol-
acute or subacute, febrile disease, which has been known 
lowed by ascending paresis and paralysis; and (3) convul-
since 1760. Edward Jenner frst described the course and
sions characterized by salivation and chewing move-
424
26.Paranryxoviridae
ments (petit mal). The seizures may become more
 are useful for demonstrating the presence of viral antigen
frequent and severe, and the dog may then fall on its 
 in impression smears of the conjunctiva or in peripheral
side and paddle its legs, with involuntary urination and
blood lymphocytes (antemortem) or in lung, stomach,
defecation (grand mal). Both of these late diseases may
intestinal, and bladder tissue (postmortem).
occur together and both may end in death. The mortality
rate of all forms of the disease, taken together, ranges
between 30 and 80%.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
The host range of canine distemper virus embraces all
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
species of the families Canidae (dog, dingo, fox, coyote,
jackal, wolf), Procyonidae (raccoon, coati mundi,
The first pathogenetic event is the local replication of 
 panda), Mustelidae (weasel, ferret, mink, skunk, badger,
the virus for 2 to 4 days in cells of the upper respiratory
marten, otter), the large members of the family Felidae
tract or in conjunctival epithelium. After further multi-
(lions, leopards, cheetahs, tigers), and the collared pec-
plication in regional lymph nodes, the virus enters the 
cary (Tayassu tajacu). The highly publicized outbreak
bloodstream, carried within lymphocytes, to produce a
 of distemper in lions in the Serengeti National Park in
primary viremia (synchronous with the frst bout of fe-
Tanzania and cases in the Chinese leopard and other
ver) that spreads the virus to the reticuloendothelial sys-
large cats in zoos have underlined the capacity of the
tem. The effects of viral replication at these sites are
virus to invade new hosts.
manifested by hyperplasia and by the presence of multi-
The virus is shed in all secretions and excretions
nucleated giant cells in lymphoid organs. Virions formed  f
 from the fifth day after infection, which is before the
 in these sites are carried by lymphocytes and monocytes  C
 onset of clinical signs, and continues, sometimes for
to produce a secondary viremia, coincident with the sec-
weeks. Transmission is mainly via direct contact, droplet
ond peak of fever.
 and aerosol. Young dogs are more susceptible than older
 In acute distemper a serous inflarmmation of respi-
 dogs, with the highest susceptibility being between 4 and
ratory mucosal membranes associated with interstitial
6 months of age, after puppics have lost their mater-
pneumonia occurs. Intestinal and neurologic (nonsuppu-
nal antibody.
rative encephalitis) signs also characterize the pathology
 There are differences between urban and isolated
of this disease.
dogs with respect to the epidemiologic pattern of canine
 For protection and survival, cell-mediated immu-
 distemper. In the absence of vaccination, infections are
nity is important in morbillivirus infections in general.
 frequent in urban dogs, in kennels, and in other situa-
In human measles, persons with agammaglobulinemia
tions where close contact between dogs occurs. This
can overcome the infection but those with inherited or 1
leads to a high level of herd immunity. For example,
acquired deficiencies in their cel-mediated immune sys- sS
 serologic studies have show that 80% of puppies born
tem are at extreme risk. However, animals with any t
 to vaccinated urban bitches have antibodies to distemper
detectable neutralizing antibody are immune and immu-
virus at 8 weeks of age; this rate decreases to 10% by
nity following morbillivirus infections is lifelong.
4 or 5 months of age. This percentage then increases
slowly, reaching 85 % at the age of 2 years. In rural areas
the number of dogs is too small to support a continuing
Laboratory Diagnosis
chain of infection, so that highly susceptible dog popula-
tions develop, a situation that leads to catastrophic epi-
Clinical diagnosis of canine distemper has been made
demics affecting dogs of all ages.
diffcult by its rarity where vaccination is widely prac-
Control is based on adequate diagnosis, quaran-
ticed. Laboratory diagnosis is neccssary to exclude infec-
tine, sanitation, and vaccination. The virus is extremely
tious canine hepatitis, canine parvovirus disease, lep- f
 fragile, and disinfection of premises is achieved easily
tospirosis, toxoplasmosis, and rabies. Virus isolation is  with any standard disinfectant. Successful immunization
done by cocultivation of lymphocytes from suspect ani- 
 of pups with canine distempcr attenuatcd virus vaccines
mals with mitogen-stimulated canine or ferret lympho- (
 depends on the absencc of interfering maternal antibody.
cytes. After passage the virus can then be adapted to T
 The age at which pups can be immunized can be pre-
grow in MDCK, Vero, or primary dog lung cells. Typical
 dicted from a nomograph if the serum antibody titer of
cytopathic effecis such as the formation of stellate cells
the mother is known; this service is available in some
and syncytia can be observed 3 to 12 days after infection. (C
 diagnostic laboratories. Variations in colostrum uptake
 Several blind passages may be necessary before cyto-
 among pups in a litter limit the value of this procedure.
 pathic changes are observed. Immunohistologic methods  
 Alternatively, pups can be vaccinated with modified live-
Igine Morbilfirirus Disease
425
virus vaccine at 6 weeks of age and then at 2- to 4- nasal discharge, and collapse occurred as the disease
week intervals until 16 weeks of age. For treatment,
 progressed. The clinical course was short, with 10 of the
hyperimmune serum or immune globulin can be used 1
 20 naturally infected horses dying within 36 hours of
prophylactically immediately after exposure. Antibiotic
 onset of clinical signs; 7 of these deaths occurred within
therapy generally has a beneficial effect by lessening the  12 hours of onset. The incubation period in experimen-
effect of secondary opportunistic bacterial infections.
 tally infected horses was from 6 to 10 days.
Equine Morbillivirus Disease
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
The most important lesions involved the lungs; they
 In 1994 an outbreak of scvcrc respiratory disease oc-
were congested, frm, and fluid flled with dilated
curred in thoroughbred horses stabled in Brisbanc,
lymphatics, and some had fbrin tags on the pleura.
Queensland, Australia; within 2 weeks, 14 horses had
 Naturally occurring cases had a thick, foamy hemor-
died. Two pcrsons at the stable developed a severc influ-
rhagic exudate in the airways; the pericardial sac
cnza-like discasc and one died after 6 days in intensivc
 contained serous fluid. Therc was histological evidence
care. A new virus was isolatcd from both the horses (
 of interstitial pneumonia with proteinaceous alveolar
and the trainer, and the syndrome could be reproduced
 edema associated with hemorrhage, dilated lymphatics,
experimentally in horses using this isolate. Another hu-
 alveolar thrombosis and necrosis, and necrosis of the
 man case was reported a year later: at about the time 
walls of small blood vessels. Syncytial giant cells were
of the outbreak in Brisbane, 2 horses died on a farm in(
 detected in the endothelium of lung capillaries and
Mackay, 1000 km north of Brishane. The owners, a
 arterioles; within these, cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
veterinarian and her husband, performed necropsies on
 consistent with the ultrastructure of massed viral nu-
 the 2 horses; soon afterward the husband became ill with
 cleocapsids were observed by electron microscopy. Sera
 a mild meningoencephalitis and then seermed to recover.f
 from horses surviving the disease had high neutralizing
However, 12 months later he developed severe encepha-
antibody titers. Cats and guinea pigs but not rabbits
litis and died. Serum stored from the time of his first
 and mice were found to be susceptible to experimental
illness contained a low riter and serum from the time of
infection, with cats developing a fatal pneumonia iden-
his fatal illness contained very high titers of antibody
tical to that seen in the equine disease.
to the equine virus. The diagnosis was confrmed by
immunofluorescence and polymerase chain reaction
assays on postmortem tissues from the human and stored
Laboratory Diagnosis
tissues from the 2 horses.
 Antibody was detected in all recovered horses and
Virus isolation is done by inoculating Vero monolayer
humans, but not in other persons, horscs, or a variety
 Or primary cquine fetal kidney cell cultures with filtered
of tcrrestrial animals tested in the course of an extensive
 lung homogenates from fresh cases. A syncytial cytopa-
serological survey. Remarkably, in 1996, neutralizing
 thology develops in about 3 days, and the virus can be
antibody was found in four species of fruit bats (flying
identified by serological and molecular biologic rmethods.
foxes, suborder Megachiroptera) collected along the
Serological testing involves virus neutralization and flu-
whole of the eastern coast of Queensland, from Cairns
 orescent antibody blocking tests, and an enzyme immu-
 to Brisbane. Later, virus was isolated from a bat. Studies
noassay is available for routine screening and surveil-
 are underway to unravel the context of these findings.
lance.
The virus is the first morbilli-like virus found to infect
and cause disease in horses. Although related most
closcly to the morbilliviruses, this virus is different
enough to possibly warrant placement in a new genus
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
within the family Paramyxoviridae.
Transmission rcquires dircct contact, e.g., with saliva or
nasal secretions. The first outbrcak was controlled by
euthanasia and decp burial of all infected horses, quaran-
Clinical Features
tine and control of the movemcnt of horses within a
defined zone, and serological surveillance to determine
Affected horses were anorectic, depressed, febrile, had the extent of infection. Surveillance indicated that the
pu oz leussjo au puokaq peids iou peu sseas -ied pey auos pue saien ireaq pue aoiedsar paseau!
  u s a o s r s s  t ssd  n oo yo ss
426
26.Paramyxoviridae
(flying foxes) raises many questions in regard to possible
 ocean regions. In a recent study, serological evidence of
future prevention and control strategies.
morbillivirus infection was found in 11 of 15 cetacean
species in the western Atlantic. Neutralizing antibody
-a asidod pue uuip  ise ra arem si
Human Disease
ruses than the seal (phocine) virus. A high prevalence
of antibody was found in two species of pilot whale
Equinc morbillivirus is clearly a dangerous zoonotic
(Globicephala melas and G. macrorhynchus); of interest
 pathogen. Carc must be taken when its presence is sus-
 is the notion that pilot whales might serve as long-dis-
pected and adcquate biocontainment facilities, equip- t
 tance vectors between America and Europe, carrying
ment, and practices must bc used in the laboratory.
viruses to otherwise isolated populations of marine
mammais.
 Pathological changes in these diseases are similar
Phocine, Dolphin, and
to those observed in distemper virus-infected canids. The
-nd s ane re si au rd iso
Porpoise Distemper
monia with interstitial edema and emphysema. As also
observed in influenza virus infections, many seals show
In 1987 and 1988, serious disease outbreaks were ob-
 swollen necks due to the escaping of air from the dam-
served among the seal populations of Lake Baikal and 2
 aged lung parenchyma. Demyelinating encephalitis with
along the sea shores of the Baltic and North Sea (western necrotic degeneration of neurons in the cerebral cortex
conspicuous by the appearance of large numbers of phages is also common. Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
stranding of many adolescent and adult animals. Clinical croglia cells, and above all in the urinary bladder. In
signs resembling those of distemper in dogs, such as(
 demyelinated areas, astrocyte proliferation and syncytia
serous nasal discharge, conjunctivitis, gastrointestinal
 are seen. In the spleen, bronchial lymph nodes and Pey-
disturbances, cutaneous lesions, and central nervous 
 er's patches, lymphocyte depletion, and necrosis are
signs, gave the first clues as to the nature of the etiological
prominent.
agent. The animals died within 2 weeks of disease onset 
 Diagnosis has been made using immunofluores-
from respiratory distress or central nervous system dis-
 cence on sections of the rcspiratory tract and other in-
tase. Virologic investigations that followed upon these1
 fected organs of suspect anirmals. Morbillivirus RNA
episodes uncovered a diverse global morbillivirus disease has becn demonstrated in spleen and liver samples from
 problem involving many marine mammal species. Sev-
 affected animals by hybridization techniqucs using mo-
eral closely related morbilliviruscs have been shown to be
 lecular probes.
involved in disease episodes in pinnipeds and cetaceans.
 Phocine distemper virus has been associated not
only with massive cpidemics in harbor seals in Europe,
DIsEaSEs CaUSED BY MEMBERs OF
but also in harbor porpoises ( Phocoena phocoena) along
the Irish coast and in striped dolphins (Stenella coeru-
SuBFAMIlY PNEUmovIRINAE,
leoalba) in the Mediterranean Sea. Phocine distemper
virus has been shown by molecular biologic methods to
GEnuS PNEumOvIRUS
be a new member of the genus Morbillivirus. The virus
Bovine Respiratory
infecting Lake Baikal seals (Phoca sibirica) has been
shown to be very similar, if not identical, to canine
Syncytial Disease
distemper virus (Figure 26.1).
 Dolphin distempcr virus has been associated with
 Bovine respiratory syncytial virus was first detected in
a massive epidcmic in bottlenose dolphins along the At-
 Japan, Belgium, and Switzerland in 1967, and was iso-
lantic coast from New Jersey to Florida. More than half
 lated a littlc later in England and the United States. It
 of the inshore population of this species may have dicd
d is now known to occur worldwide in all bovine species
in the carly 1990s. Deaths have occurrcd along the coast
t  as well as in sheep, goats, and other animals. The virus
of Alabama, Mississippi, and Texas as well. Porpoise
e  is related closely to human respiratory syncytial virus.
distemper virus is related very closely to the dolphin
n  In many settings the bovine virus causcs inapparent infec-
virus, so in many cases a distinction is not made, except tion, but espccially in recently weaned calves and young
in recording the species involved. In any case, disease
cattle it is the cause of pneumonia, interstitial pulmonary
has been seen in several species of dolphins in several 
 edema, and emphysema. Therc is also evidence that,
Pncumonia Virus of Mice Disease
427
like bovine parainfluenza virus 3, the virus is a major
 pretation of virus isolation data is so difficult and because
 initiating factor in the development of shipping fever.
viral infectivity is very labile, virus isolation is not at-
tempted very often. The virus may be isolated in a variety
of bovine cell cultures, best in those derived from the
Clinical Features
respiratory tract. The cytopathic effect is similar to that
of parainfluenza virus 3; syncytia and intracytoplasmic
a d si as is s
inclusions are prominent. Immunofluorescence on nasal
 in recently weaned calves and young cattle, espccially
 swab matcrial has rarely been successful, whereas cells
when they are maintained in closely confined conditions.
 obtaincd by lung lavage and at necropsy are more useful.
Infcction is characterized by a sudden onset of fever,
 The classical retrospective method to diagnosc the infec-
hyperpnea, abdominal breathing, lethargy, rhinitis,nasal
tion has been serology on paired scrum samples, but
discharge, and cough. Bronchiolitis and multifocal and
 again, interpretation of findings is difficult.
interstitial pneumonia may be associated with interstitial
edcma and emphysema, and cases progressing to severe
bronchopneumonia may end in death. Secondary bacte-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
rial pneumonia, especially that caused by Pasteurella
hemolytica, is common. The highest mortality often oc-
Most commonly, the infection occurs during the winter
curs in calves on a high plane of nutrition, leading to
 months when cattle and sheep are housed in confincd
thc speculation that certain feedstuffs such as corn silage
 conditions. However, there have bccn substantial out-
 may predispose cattle to the effect of infection. In gen-
breaks in cow-calf operations in summer as well. The
erai, in outbreak situations morbidity is high but mortal-
virus spreads rapidly, probably through aerosols or
ity is low.
droplets of respiratory tract excretions. Reinfection of
the respiratory tract is nor uncormmon in calves with
antibody. Preexisting antibody, whether derived pas-
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
sively from maternal transfer or actively by prior infec-
tion or vaccination, does not prevent viral replication
 In calves infccted experimentally, the virus causcs com-
and cxcrction, although clinical signs may be lessened
plete loss of thc ciliated epithelium 8 to 10 days after
 Or inapparent if the antibody titer is high. The virus
infection so that pulmonary clearance is compromised,
 persists in herds, most probably through continuous sub-
with consequcnt secondary infections. At necropsy, pleu-
 clinical rcinfections or in carriers; stress of transport and
ral and interstitial emphysema may be seen in all lobes 
 So On may trigger acute disease in such circumstances.
 of the lungs; if secondary bacterial infection is present
 Scveral inactivated and attenuated virus vaccines
there may be areas of consolidation. A characreristic
 have been developed, but information on their effcacy
finding is the presence of syncytial cells in the lungs,
 in calvcs with maternal antibodies and about the dura-
which are usually larger than those seen in parainfluenza
tion of the immunity they evoke is lacking. Experimen-
virus 3 infection.
tally, a novel recombinant vaccine employing a bovine
 After a primary narural infection, protection is 
herpesvirus as the vector for the G protein of bovinc
short lived and reinfections are common. In vaccination
 respiratory syncytial virus has been found to induce mu-
studies, increased lung pathology was observed aftcr ap-
cosal inminunity and to protect cattle. A DNA vaccine
plication of formalin-inactivated preparations, an obser-
 has also shown promise in the experimental seting.
vation following similar findings in humans. An Arthus-
type reaction, antibody-mediated enhancement of mac-
rophage infection, complcinent activation, and hyper-
Pneumonia Virus of
sensitivity reactions havc all been postulated to play a
role in the pathogenesis of thc respiratory disease. Dis-
Mice Disease
ease may be a consequencc of a predominant Th2 re-
sponse of helper cells with thc preferential release of
Pneumonia virus of micc is widespread in mouse colo-
inflammatory cytokines.
nies; it also infects rats, cotton rats, hamsters, gerbils,
and guinea pigs. However, for many years it was not
clear what cffect infection has on the health of these
Laboratory Diagnosis
species other than whcn it is introduced experimentally
 into the respiratory tract. More recently, studies have
Diagnosis is made difficult by the common presence of s
 shown that the virus is capable of causing signifcant
 the virus in many calves—interpretation of clinical and
 lesions in the lungs of infected mice, thereby interfering
laboratory data must be done prudently. Becausc inter-  with a wide range of scientific investigations. Control is
428
26.Partmyxoviridae
based on depopulation, disinfection of the premises, and
Collins, P. L., Chanock, R. M., and Mclntosh, K. (1996).
screening of incoming animals. Serological surveillance
Parainfluenza viruses. In “Fields Virology" (B. N.
is required in the United States for mice used in federally
Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock,
funded biomedical research.
J. L. Melnick, 'T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E.
Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1205-1242. Lippincott-
Ravcn, Philadclphia, PA.
Collins, P. L., Mclntosh, K., and Chanock, R. M. (1996).
Diseases Caused by Members Of
Respiratory syneytial virus. In “Fields Virology”
(B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M.,
SUBFAMILY PNEUMOVIRINAE,
Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman,
and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1313-1352. Lip-
GENUS METAPNEUMOVIRUS
pincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Descoteaux, J.-P. (1994). Myxovirus parainfluenza type 1
Turkey Rhinotracheitis
(Sendai). In "Virus Infections of Vertebrates"
(A. D. M. E. Osterhaus, ed.), Vol. 5, pp. 285-291.
First described in South Africa in 1978, turkey rhinotra-
Elsevicr, Amsterdan.
cheitis or coryza has now been recognized in many coun-
Kimman, T. G., and Westenbrink, F. (1990). Immunity
to human and bovine respiratory syncytial viruses,
tries. In young turkeys the disease is characterizcd by
brief review. Arch. Virol. 112, 1-25.
catarrh, rales, sneezing, frothy nasal discharge, foamy
Kouwenhoven, B. (1993). Newcastle disease. In "Virus In-
conjunctivitis, swelling of the infraorbital sinuscs, and
fections of Vertebrates" (J. B. McFerran and M. S.
submandibular edema. These signs are exacerbated by
McNulty, eds.), Vol. 4, Pp. 341-361. Elsevier, Am-
secondary infections. In laying birds, a drop in egg pro-
sterdam.
Lamb, R. A., and Kolakofsky, D. (1996). Paramyxoviri-
 duction is associated with slighr respiratory distrcss.
dae: The viruses and their replication. In "Fields Virol-
Morbidity is often 100%; mortality ranges from 0.4 to
ogy” (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley,
 90% and is highest in young poults. A milder form of
R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roiz-
man, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1177-1204.
the disease occurring in chickens is termed “"swollen head
syndrome." This diseasc is characterized by swelling of
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Murray, K., Rogers, R., Selvey, L., Selleck, P., Hyatt, A,.
the infraorbital sinuses, torticollis, disorientation, and
Gould, A., Gleeson, L., Hooper, P., and Westbury, H.
general depression, sometimes also with respiratory dis-
(1995). A novel morbillivirus pneumonia of horses
tress.
and its transimission to humans. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 1,
Histologically, thc disease is distinguished hy de-
31-33.
Rossitcr, P. B. (1994). Rindcrpest. In "Infectious Diseases 
struction of the tracheal epithelium beginning about 48
of Livestock with Special Reference to Southern Af-
hours after infection, followed by mucosal thickening,
rica' (J. A. W. Coetzer, G. R. Thompson, and R. C.
 congestion, and infltration with lymphocytes, plasma
Tustin, eds.), Vol. 2, pp. 733-757. Oxford University
 cells, and neutrophils. Cytoplasmic eosinophilic inclu-
Press, Cape Town.
sions are seen in epithelial cells of the airways and na-
Rossiter, P. B., and Taylor, W. P. (1994). Peste dcs petits
ruminants. In “Infcctious Diseascs of Livcstock with
sal cavities.
Special Referencc to Southern Africa" (J. A. W.
Diagnosis of both the turkey and the chicken dis-
Coetzer, G. R. Thompson, and R. C. Tustin, eds.),
ease is based most commonly on enzyme immunoassay.
Vol. 2, pp. 758-765. Oxford University Press, Cape
Virus isolation is difficult, but can be achieved by serial
Towl.
Shibuta, H, (1998). Animal parainfuenzaviruscs, In "En-
 passage in 6- to 7-day-old turkey or chicken embryos
cyclopedia of Virology” (R. G. Webster and A. Gran-
 or in chicken embryo trachcal organ cultures. Antibodies
off, eds.), 2nd ed. (CD-ROM). Academic Press,
can be measured by enzyme immunoassay. Attenuated
London.
virus vaccincs are available commercially.
Westbury, H. A., and Murray, P. K. (1996). Equine mor-
billivirus pneumonia (acute equine respiratory syn-
dromc). In "Virus Infections of Vertebrates" (M. J.
Studdert, ed.), Vol. 6, Pp. 225-233. Elscvicr, Am-
Further Reading
sterdam,
Wright, P. F. (1997). Viral respiratory discases. In "Viral
Barrett, T. (1998). Rinderpest and distemper viruses. In
Pathogenesis" (N. Nathanson, R. Ahmed, F. Gonza-
"Encyclopedia of Virology” (R. G. Webster and
lez-Scarano, D. E. Griffin, K. V. Holmes, F. A. Mur-
A. Granoff, eds.), 2nd ed. (CD-ROM). Academic
phy, and H. L, Robinson, eds.), Pp. 703-712. Lippin-
Prcss, London.
cott-Raven, Philadelphia,PA.
CHaPter
27
Rhabdoviridae
Properties of Rhabdoviruses ..
429
Rabies...
432
Vesicular Stomatitis .....
439
Bovine Ephemeral Fever...
441
RHABDOVIRUS DISEASES OF FISH.......
442
Viral Hemorrhagic Septicemia....
442
Infectious Hematopoietic Necrosis
444
Spring Virenmia of Carp .....
444
Other Rhabdovirus Diseases of Fish .
444
Further Reading...
444
 Thc family Rhabdoviridae encompasses more than 175
epidemics have continued to occur in the United States
viruses of vertebrates, invertcbrates (mostly arthropods),
on an approximiatcly 5- to 10-year cycle.
and plants. Virions have a distinctive buller-shaped mor-
 Bovine ephemeral fevcr was first recognized in Af-
phology. The family comprises several important animal
rica in 1867 and is now known to bc widespread across
pathogens, including rabies virus, vesicular stomatitis
Africa, most of southeast Asia, Japan, and Australia.
viruses, bovine cplicmeral fevcr virus, and several rhab-
Several rhabdoviruses arc the cause of serious losses in
doviruses of fish.
the aquaculture industries of North America, Europe,
Rabies is the cause of one of the oldest and most
and Asia.
feared diseases of hurnans and animals—it was recog-
nized in Egypt before 2300 B.c. and in ancient Greece,
where it was wcil dcscribcd by Aristotle. Perhaps the
ties of Rhabdoviruses
most lethal of all infectious diseases, rabies also has the
distinction of having stimulated one of the great early
Classification
discoveries in biomedical science. In 1885, before the
nature of viruses was comprehended, Louis Pasteur de-
Bascd on virion properties and serologic relationships,
veloped, tested, and applied a rabies vaccine, thereby
four genera containing animal viruses have been recog-
opening the modern era of infectious disease prevention
nized in the family Rhabdoviridae, the genera Lyssavi-
by vaccination.
rus,Vesiculovirus, Fphemerovirus, and Novirhabdovi-
Vesicular stomatitis of horses, cattle, and swine
 rus. There are also several importanr viruses, mostly of
was fist distinguished from foot-and-mouth disease
fish, that have not yet been placed in gcnera (Table
 carly in the 19th century—-it was recognized as thc cause
 27.1). Rhabdovirus species are distinguishcd genetically
of pcriodic cpidemics throughout the Western hemi-
(by partial sequencing) and serologically, most impor-
sphere. The disease was a significant problem in artillery
tantly by neutralization tests.
and cavalry horses during the American Civil War. The
The genus Lyssavirus comprises rabies virus and
frst large epidemic to be described in detail occured in
closely related viruses, including Mokola virus, Lagos
1916; the disease spread rapidly from Colorado to the
 bat virus, and Duvenhage virus from Africa, Europcan
east coast of the United States, affccting large numbers
 bat viruses 1 and 2, and Australian bat lyssavirus. Each
of horscs and mules and, to a lesser extent, cattle. Large 
 of these viruses is considered capable of causing rabies-
429
430
27. Rbabdopiridae
TaBle 27.1
 Rhabdoviruses That Affect Animals
ViRus
Geographic Distrigution
Genus lyssavirus
Rabies virus
All continents except Antarclica
Mokola virus
Central Afica
lagos bat virus
Central and southern Africa
Duvenhage virus
South Africa
European bat lyssoviruses l and 2
Europe
Australian bat lyssavirus
Australia
Genus Vesiculovirus
Vesicular stomatitis-Indiana virus
North, Central, and South America
Vesicular stomatitis-New jersey virus
North, Central, and South America
Vesicular stomatitis-Alagoas virus
Argentina, Brazil
Cocal virus
Trinidad, Brazil
Piry virus
Brazil
 Chandipura virus
India, Nigeria
Isfahan virus
lran
Pike fry rhabdovirus
Europe
Spring viremia of carp virus 
Widespread
Genus Ephemerovirus
Bovine ephemeral fever virus
Asia, Africa, Australia
Genus Novirhabdovirus
Infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus
North America, Europe, Asia
Ungrouped fish rhabdoviruses
Viral hemorrhagic septicemio virus of salmon (Egtved
Europe, North America
virus}
likc disease in animals and humans. Rabies virus and
virus of fish. Among the ungrouped rhabdoviruses is the
the rabies-like viruses, including European bat viruses 1
inportant fish pathogen, viral hemorrhagic septicemia
and 2, Lagos bat virus, Duvenhage virus, and Australian 
virus (Egrved virus) of salmon.
 bat lyssavirus use bats as reservoir hosts; several other
memhers of the family Rhabdoviridae have been isolated
from bats. The genus Vesiculovirus contains about 35
Virion Properties
serologically distinct viruses, most importantly vesicular
stomatitis-Indiana virus and vesicular stomatitis-New
Rhabdovirus virions are 70 nm in diameter and 170 nm
Jersey virus, as well as six other viruses that are known
long (although some are longer and some shorter) and
to cause vesicular disease in horses, cattle, swine, and
 consist of an envelope with large peplomers within which
humans. Several ish and eel rhabdoviruses are also mem-
is a helically coiled cylindrical nucleocapsid. The precise
bers of this genus, including pike fry rhabdovirus (also
cylindrical form of the nucleocapsid is what gives the
called grass carp rhabdovirus) and spring viremia of
viruses their distinctive builet or conical shape (Figure
carp virus. The genus Ephemerovirus contains bovine
27.1). The genome is a single molccule of linear, nega-
ephemeral fever virus and many other serologically dis-
tive-sense, single-stranded RNA, 11 to 15 kb in size. For
tinct viruses, including several that can cause bovinc
example, 11,932 nucleotides makc up the genome of
ephemeral fever-like disease in cartle. The genus Novir-
rabies virus. The genome encodes five genes in the order
babdovirus contains infectious hcmatopoietic necrosis
 3'-N-NS-M-G-L-S'; some viruses have additional genes
Properties of Rhabetoriruses
431
FiGure 27.1
FamilyRdiidgensVesulrusndvis.AVesculmisIinvi hwing rerisicbllshapedvri. B}
Rabies virus. Negative stain electron microscopy. Bar: 100 nm.
or pseudogenes interposed (Figure 27.2). The viruscs
 RNA replication; G (505 amino acids), the glycoprotein
 generally have five proteins (the following values are for
that forms trimers that make up the peplomers (spikes);
rabics virus): L (2142 amino acids), the RNA-depcndent 
 N (4s0 amino acids), the nucleoprotein, the major com-
 RNA polymerase that functions in transcription and
ponent of the viral nucleocapsid; Ns (297 amino acids)
FiGure 27.2.
mRNA transcripts (+)
Transcription
Input virion RNA(-)
le
NS
M
G
1
 Replication
5'
3
RNA (+)
 Replication
 Replicative intermediate (+/-)
 Replication
3
888885
Progeny virion RNA (-)
Genome scre fvesicui stmtis virusnditsmdefreplictionWidebrsidicae genesnderreliveizeReplint
didd 
posiidhdfii
fivesubgenmicmNAseciesphNprnRNAlapsidplsthSandprotinsmrisetrasripioncmexh
onlyasinglpre iloatdaenf tirlenmepereransripehesegnmic
thissitelnrssilrifhirenl
counsfrdifpolAtilsnhndsfmNeade;ptein;mnfialp
M, matrix protein; G, peplomer glycoprotein; L, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (transcriptase).
432
27. Rhabdoviridae
(also called P or M1), a component of thc viral polymer-
 place mostly on intracytoplasmic membranes of infected
ase; and M (202 amino acids) (or M2 for rabies virus),
 neurons, but almost exclusively on plasma membranes of
a protein that facilitates virion budding by binding to
salivary gland cpithelial cells. Vesicular stomatitis viruses
the nucleocapsid and to the cytoplasmic domain of the
bud from basal plasma rmembranes. Vesicular stomatitis
glycoprotein. Three protcins (N, NS, and L), in associa-
aui sdead-roouedoi pidei snes Aensn sasna
tion with viral RNA, constitutc the nuclcocapsid. The
 most rapid of any viruses, but the replication of rabies
glycoprotein contains neutralizing cpitopes, which are
 and bovine ephcmeral fever viruses is slower and usually
targets of vaccine-induced immunity; it and thc nuclco-
 noncytopathic because these viruses do not shut down
 protein have cpitopcs involved in cell-mediated immu-
 host cell protein and nucleic acid synthesis. Rabies virus
nity. Virions also contain lipids, thcir composition re-
 produces prominent cytoplasmic inclusion bodies ( Negri
flecting the composition of host cel membranes, and 
bodies) in infected cells.
carbohydratcs as side chains on the glycoprotein. Rhab-
 Laboratory-adapted ("fixed") rabies virus and ve-
dovirus infectivity is rathcr stable in the environment,
 sicular stomatitis viruses replicate well in many kinds of
especially whcn the pH is alkaline—vcsicular stomatitis 
 cell cultures: Vero (African green monkey kidney) cells
viruses can contaminate water troughs for many days-
and BHK-21 (baby hamster kidney) cells, which are the
but the viruses are thcrmolabile and sensitive to thc UV
 most common substrate for animal rabies vaccines. Ra-
irradiation of sunlight. In clinical practice, rabies and
bies and vesicular stomatitis viruses, as well as adapted
vesicular stomatitis viruses are inactivared easily by dc-
      ae  
tergent-based disinfectants.
 suckling mousc and suckling hamster brain.
 During rhabdovirus replication, defective interfer-
ing (Dl) virus parricles are commonly formed. These
Viral Replication
are complex deletion mutants, having greatly truncated
 genomic RNA, which interfere with normal viral replica-
Viral entry into its host cell occurs via fusion of the viral
tion processes (sce Chapter 4) (Table 27.2).
envelope with the cell membrane; all replication steps
occur in the cytoplasm. Replication first involves mRNA
transcription from the genomic RNA via the virion poly-
Rabies
merase; later, using the protcin products of this transcrip-
tion, there is production of full-length, positive-stranded
 Rabies virus can infect all warm-blooded animals, and
templates, which in turn are used for the synthesis of
in nearly all instances the infection ends in death.
genomic RNA. Using virion RNA as a remplate, the viral
Thc disease occurs throughout the world, with certain
transcriptasc transcribes fivc subgenomic mRNA species
(Figure 27.2). There is only a single promoter site, lo-
cated at the 3' cnd of the viral genomc; the polymerase
attachcs to the genomic RNA template at this site and
TaBle 27.2
as it moves along the viral RNA, it encounters stop/start
 Properties of Rhabdoviruses
signals at the boundaries of each of the viral genes. Only
Virions are enveloped, bullet shaped, 70 nm in diameter
a proportion of polymcrase molccules move past cach
and 170 nm long (although some are longer, some
junction and continue the transcription process. This
shorter], and consist of an envelope with iarge peplomers
 mechanism, called attenuated transcription (or stop-start
within which is a helically coiled cylindrical nucleocapsid
transcription, or stuttering transcription) results in more
The genome is a single molecule of linear, negative-sense,
mRNA being made from genes that are located at the
singlestranded RNA, 11 to 15 kb in size
 3' end of the genome and a gradient of lcss and less
Cytoplasmic replication
 i<<<<    
Viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (transcriptase] tran-
s yons suiid jeinsns sui jo suoe slel smo
scribes five subgenomic mRNAs, which are translated into
the N (nuclcocapsid) protein to be produced relative to
five proteins: L,the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (Iran-
thc amount of the I. (RNA polymerase) protein.
scriptase); G,the glycoprotein that forms ihe peplomers; N,
Attachment of nucleoprotein molecules to newly
the nucleoprotein, the major component of the viral nucleo
capsid; NS, a component of the viral polymerase; and M,
formed genomic RNA molecules leads to the self-assem-
the protein that facilitates virion budding
bly of hclically wound nucleocapsids. Through the action
Maluration is by budding through the plasma membrane
of M protein, nucleocapsids are in turn bound to cell
Some vifuses, such as vesicular stomatifis viruses, cause
meinbrancs at sites where viral peplomers are inserted.
rapid cytopathology, whereas others, such as street robies
Virions are formed by the budding of nucleocapsids
virus strains, are noncytopathogenic
through cell meinbranes. Rabies virus budding takes
Relbies
433
exceptions: (1) there is no rabies in Japan, the United
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Kingdom, New Zealand, Antarctica, and many smaller
The proportion of animals that develop rabies after ex-
islands such as Hawaii and most of the islands of the
Caribbean basin; (2) there had been no rabies in
 posure depends on the location and severity of the bite
Australia until recently when a lyssavirus, called Austra
and the species of animals involved (foxes can carry up
lian bat lyssavirus, was discovered; and (3) there is
to 10° infectious units of virus pcr milliliter of saliva).
no rabies in Switzerland and large areas of France
Thc bitc of a rabid animal usually delivers virus dccp
and southern Gcrmany as a result of recent wildlife
into striated muscles and connective tissue, but infection
vaccination programs. The number of human deaths
can also occur, albeit with less certainty, after superfcial
causcd cach year by rabies is cstinated to be 40,000-
abrasion of the skin. From its entry site, virus must gain
50,000 worldwide. An estimated 10 million people
entry into peripheral nerves; recent evidence indicates
 receivc postexposure treatments cach year after being
that this miay happen directly, but in many instances
cxposcd to rabies-suspect animals. Dog rabies is still
virus is amplified by first rcplicating in muscle cells. It
 most important in many parts of the world and the
invades the peripheral nervous systerm through sensory
cause of most human rabics cases. Cartle rabies is
or motor ncrve endings. The virus binds specifically to
important in Central and South America. In many
the rcceptor for the neurotransmitter acetylcholine at
countries, wildlife rabics has become of increasing
neuromuscular junctions, facilitating its entry into nerve
importance as a thrcat to domestic animals
and
endings. The virus also employs other receptors (ganglio-
humans.
sides, phospholipids). Neuronal infection and centripetal
 passive movement of the viral gcnome within axons de-
liver virus to the central nervous systcm, usually via the
Clinical Features
spinal cord. An ascending wave of neuronal infection
and neuronal dysfunction then occurs. Virus reaches the
The clinical features of rabics are similar in most species,
limbic system of the brain, where it replicates extensively,
but there is great variation between individuals. Follow-
and causes the releasc of cortical control of behavior-
ing the bite of a rabid animal the incubation period is
this leads to the fury seen clinically. Spread within the
usually betwcen 14 and 90 days, but may be considcrably
central nervous system continues, and when replication
longer. Human cases have been observed in which thc
occurs in the neocortex, the clinical picture changes to
last opportunity for exposure occurred from 2 to 7 ycars
the dumb or paralytic form of the diseasc. Depression,
 before the onset of clinical disease. In each of thcsc hu-
 coma, and death from respiratory arrest follow.
man cases the virus was shown to be a dog gcnotype
In animal species that serve as reservoir hosts of
 from a developing country. Such data are not generally
rabies virus, late in infection viral genome moves centrif-
available for domestic animals, but an incubation period
ugally from the central nervous system through periph-
 of 2 years has been reported in a cat.
eral nerves to a variety of organs: the adrenal cortex,
 There is a prodromal phase prior to overt clinical
pancreas, and, most importantly, the salivary glands. In
disease that often is overlooked in animals or is recalled
 the nervous system most virus is formed by budding on
 only in retrospect as a change in temperament. Two
 intracytoplasmic membranes; however, in the salivary
clinical forms of the disease are recognized: furious and
 glands, virions bud on plasma membranes at thc apical
 dumb or paralytic. In the furious form, the animal be-
(lumenal) surface of mucous celis and are released in
comes restless nervous, aggressive, and often dangerous
high concentrations into the saliva. Thus, at the time
as it loses all fear of humans and bites at anything that 
when viral replication within the central nervous system
gains its attention. The animal often cannot swallow
 causes the infected animal to become furious and bite
water, giving rise to the old name for the disease, *"hydro-
indiscriminately, the saliva is highly infectious,
phobia." There is often excessive salivation, exaggerated
 On histopathologic examination there is only mod-
responses to light and sound, and hypcresthesia (animals
est evidence of a level of neuronal damage that would
commonly bite and scratch themsclvcs). As the encepha-
 correspond to the lethality of the infection. Electron mi-
litis progresses, fury gives way to paralysis, and the ani-
 croscopy, immunofluorescencc, or immunohistochemis-
mal presents the same clinical picture as seen in thc
try prove that many neurons arc infected, but there is
dumb form of the disease. Terminally, therc are often
 no frank cytopathology and little inflammatory cell infl-
convulsive seizures, coma, and respiratory arrest, with
tration—this has always been considered a great para-
death occurring 2 to 14 days after the onset of clinical
 dox—-minimal target damage but lethal neurologic dys-
signs. A higher proportion of dogs, cats, and horses 
function.
exhibit fury than is the case for cattle or other ruminants
 Although rabies proteins are highly immunogenic,
Or laboratory animal species.
neither humoral nor cell-mediated responses can be de-
434
27. Rbabtoviridae
tected during the stage of movement of virus from the  which reservoir hosts are present and the level of infec-
site of the bite to the central nervous system, probably
tion in such hosts.
because very little antigen is delivered to the immune
system—most is sequestered in muscle ceils or within 
Rabies-Free Countries
nerve axons. However, this early stage of infection is Rigidly enforced quarantine of dogs and cats for various
accessible to antibody, hence the cfficacy in exposed periods before entry has been used effectively to exclude
humans of the classical Pasteurian postexposure vaccina-
 rabies from Japan, the United Kingdom, Australia, New
tion, especially whcn combined with the administration7
 Zealand, Hawaii, and several other islands. Rabies had
 of hypcrimmune globulin. Immunologic intervention is 1
 never become endemic in wildlife in the United Kingdom
effective for some time during the long incubation period
 and was eradicated from dogs in that country in 1902
because of the delay between the initial viral replication
 and again in 1922 after its reestablishment in the dog
in muscle cells and the cntry of virus into the protected
 population in 1918. Since then, there had bcen no rabies
environment of the nervous system.
in the United Kingdom until recently when a single bat
was found infected with European bat virus 1—this iso-
latcd incident has not changed the rabies-free status of
Laboratory Diagnosis
that country. In contrast, rabies had not been recognized
in Australia until recently when a lyssavirus, called Aus-
 In most countries, laboratory diagnosis of rabies is done
 tralian bat lyssavirus, was discovered. The virus has been
found to be endemic in several areas and there have been
 personnel. The most common request is to determine
 two human deaths. In this case, the maintenance of strict
whether an animal known to have birten a human is
quarantine for imported dogs and cats is still key to
rabid. If rabies is suspected, the suspect animal must be
 preventing the virus from becoming endemic in terrestrial
killed and brain tissue collected for testing. Postmortem
wild and domestic animals.
 diagnosis involves direct immunofluorescence to demon-
strate rabies antigen in touch impressions of brain tissue
Developing Countrics
(medulla, cerebellum, and hippocampus). In some labo-
 In most countries of Asia, Latin America, and Africa,
ratories, under some circumstances, postmortem diagno-
endemic dog rabies is a serious problem, marked by
sis can also be performed using the reverse transcription--
 significant domestic animal and human mortality. In
polymerasc chain reaction (RT-PCR) to test for the
thcse countries, very large numbcrs of doses of human
 presence of viral RNA in thc brain of the suspect animal;
vaccincs are used and therc is a continuing need for
this is done with primers that amplify both genomic
comprchensive, professionally organizcd and publicly
RNA and viral mRNA sequences. The method is 100-
 supported rabies control agencies. That such agencies
 to 1000-fold more sensitive than standard methods and
are not in place in many developing countries is a reflec-
 is a great benefit when specimens are unsuitable for other
tion of their high cost; nevertheless, progress is being
testing (c.g., when the suspect animal has been buried
 made. For example, a substantial decrease in rabies inci-
for some time). Using immunofluorescence or RT-PCR
 dence has been reported in recent years in China, Thai-
assays, antcmortem diagnosis is only done in suspected
land, and Sri Lanka following the implementation of
human rabies cases. For this, skin biopsy, corneal impres-
 programs for the yaccination of dogs and improved post-
sion, or saliva specimens are used. Only positive results
 exposure prophyiaxis of humans. Similarly, the number
are of diagnostic value, as the choice of specimens for
 of rabies cases in Latin America is declining significantly;
these procedures is never optirmum and sites of infection
 the Pan American Health Organization has implemented
may be missed.
a vaccination program to eliminate urban dog rabies
from the hemisphere by the year 2000.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Developed Countries
In most developed countries, even those with modcst
In usual circumstances the only risk of rabies virus trans-
 diseasc burden, publicly supported rabics control agen-
mission is by the bite or scratch of a rabid animal, al-
cies operate in the following areas: (1) stray dog and cat
though in bat caves, where the amount of virus may be
 removal and control of the movement of pets (quarantine
very high and thc cxtremely high humidity may stabilize
 is used in epidemic circumstances, but rarely); (2) immu-
the virus, transmission may occur via aerosol.
nization of dogs and cats so as to break the chain of
The control of rabies in different regions of the
virus transmission; (3) laboratory diagnosis to confrm
world poses very different problems,depending on (
 clinical observations and obtain accurate incidence data;
Rabies
435
(4) surveillance to measure the effectiveness of all control
1North American Countrics
 measures; and (5) public education programs to assure
In North America, there are six rabies virus genotypes
cooperation.
in terrestrial animals (and many more in various species
of bats): (1) a skunk genotype in north-central states 
of the United States and south-central Canada; (2) a
European Countries
second skunk genotype in south-central states and
Historically, in developed countries, rabies control in 
California; (3) an arctic fox and red fox genotype in
wildlife was based on animal population reduction by
 Alaska and Canada; (4) a gray fox genotype in Arizona
 trapping and poisoning, but in recent years the immuni-
and western Texas; (5) a dog/coyote genotype in south-
zation of wild animal reservoir host species, especially
ern Texas and northern Mexico; and (6) a raccoon
foxes, by the aerial distribution of baits containing arten-
 genotype in eastern states extending to the Canadian
uated virus vaccine has become the method of choice.
 border. These genotypes reflect the evolutionary conse-
Since 1990, fox rabies, the only endemic rabies in much
 of Europe, has been eliminated from Switzerland and
bite-raccoons,"' and after an unknown nurmber of pas-
large areas of France and southern Germany and is being
sages the virus becomes a distinct genotype, still able
dealt with rapidly in Belgium and other western Euro-
r   n s o  
 pean countries (Figure 27.3). Extending this approach
within its own reservoir host population (Figure 27.4).
to eastein European countries poses a much more diffi-
 In recent years, there has been a significant increase
cult problem.
in the numbers of animal rabies cases reported in the
Figure 27.3.
A
Occurrence of lox rabies in Europe during the (A) last quarter of 1983 (6606 cases reported to WHO).
436
27.Rhabdoviridae
FIGuRE 27.3. (continued)
B
(B) Fox rabies during the first quarter of 1997 (1583 cases reported]. During this interval, endemic rabies was eliminated from Switzerland,
inthese
counlries rom tociin easter
Europe. (Courtesy of W. W. Muller, World Healh Organization Collab
Republic of Germany.)
United States (Figure 27.5), mostly bccause of the epi-
Fox rabics had been a problem in eastern United
demic of raccoon rabies, but also because of increases
States and Canada, but since the mid-1990s, especially
in coyote rabies in southern Texas and arctic fox rabies
in Ontario, aerial distribution of vaccine-containing
in Alaska. Rabies in arctic foxes is an endemic, refractory
baits has largely eliminated the problem. The great merit
 problem extending across most areas of the northern
of this approach over animal population reduction is
polar regions of the world; it periodically extends into
that the econiche remains occupied, in this case by an
regions of Canada and the United States inhabited by
immune population, and is not subject to the sort of
the red fox, resulting in wavefront epidemics. Skunk
edes si xag a ie oeq uonendod, aaonpoida
rabies in central North America, from Texas to Saskatch-
 of when faced with an empty niche. The same approach
ewan, is the principal cause of rabies in cattle. The epi-
has also been very successful in intercepting the northern
demic of raccoon rabics in castern United States has been
 movement toward large population centers of the coyote
traced to the translocation of raccoons from an old rabies
rabies epidemic in southern Texas. Arttenuated virus ra-
endemic area in Florida to West Virginia in 1977. Its
bies vaccinc is quite immunogenic in foxes and coyotes
continuing spread, by 1997 as far as the Canadian border 
when administered per os in baits, but not so in raccoons
and across the Appalachian mountains into Ohio, is the
 or skunks. Further, the habits of the latter two species
cause of massive prevention and control efforts (Fig-
requires use of much higher baiting densities, thereby
ure 27.6).
greatly increasing the cost of control programs. Never-
Rahies
437
Figure 27.5.
Figure 27.6.
10,000
9,000 
1977-1979
8,000
1980-1884
7,000
1985-1989
6,000
1990-1993
1994-1997
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000 -
Actual and projected increasing incidence of rabies in animals in
the United States, cumulatively due to epidemics in raccoons in the
east, coyotes in Texas and endemic increases in cases in skunks in
the Midwest, and arctic and red Foxes in Alaska. [Data from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.]
theless, raccoon vaccination programs are now in prog-
ress in New York, New Jersey, Massachusetts, and
Florida, employing novel vaccinia or canarypox-rabies
 glycoprotein recombinant virus vaccines that have been
 proven in the laboratory to be cffective.
Spccial Casc of Bat Rabies
In the United States and Canada, bat rabics represents
The raccoon rabies epidemic in the United States from its beginning
a unique problem: (1) a total of 700-800 cases are re-
in1977,caused by translocation of animals from Florida toWest
Virgini,oils extensiontoheCanadian borderand intoOhiin
 ar () siq jo saoads ie u a p
1997. (Dala from the Centers for Disease Conlrol and Prevention.)
40 species of insectivorous bats are involved; and (3)
distribution is wide, indeed, being documented in all 48
contiguous states of the United States and most provinces 
of Canada. Bat rabies occurs in areas where there is no
 Germany, The Netherlands, and Russia, mostly involv-
other rabies transmission. Moreover, bats have been the
ing serotine bats (especially Eptesicus serotinus) and
source of most human rabies cases in rccent years, and
 causing at least three human deaths. A single isolate of
in many of these cases thcre has been no history of a
 European bat virus 1 has been reported from the United
bite. Of 38 human rabies deaths in the United States
Kingdom in 1996, while 1800 other bats tested were
between 1976 and 1995, an animal bite was reported
negative.
in only 13—of the other 27 more than half were attrib-
 In several countries of Latin America, vampire bat
uted (by viral genome sequcnce analysis) to various bat
rabies is a problem for livestock industries (and humans).
 genotypes. Further, an inordinate number of the most
There are three species of vampire bats, the most impor-
recent cascs have been attributed to a genotype carried
tant being Desmodus rotundus. Here, control efforts
by the silvcr-haircd bat (Lasionycteris noctivagans), a
 have depended on the use of bovine vaccincs and on the 
 species that is uncommon and submitted infrequently
use of anticoagulants such as diphenadionc and warfa-
for rabics diagnosis. It has been suggested that this viral
lin. These anticoagulants are either fed to cattle as slow-
 genotype might have enhanced invasiveness, causing in-
release boluses (cattle are vcry insensitivc to their antico-
fection even after the most trivial, unrecognized bite (bat
 agulant effcct) or mixed with grease and spread on thc
incisors may leave a wound as invisible as a 30-gauge
 backs of cattle. When vampire bats fced on the blood
necdle puncture).
 of treated cattle or preen themselves and each other to
In the past 20 years, more than 500 cases of bat
 remove the grease they suffer fatal hemorrhages in their
rabies have been reported in Europe, mostly in Denmark,
wing capillaries.
438
27.Rhabdoriridae
In 1996, a new virus was discovered in a black
 sure involves bats—-bat exposures are treated as if the
flying fox (fruit bat, Pteropus alecto) in Queensland,
bat is rabid (until proved negative by laboratory tests)
Australia. The virus, called Australian bat lyssavirus,
and extra consideration is given to the possibility that
now appears to extend along the entire east coast of
exposure may have occurred even when a bite wound
Australia and has been found in three of the four species
is not evident. In areas where there is little or no rabies,
of flying foxes (gray-headed flying fox, Pteropus polio-
the decision to treat or not is adjusted accordingly, but
cephalus; little red flying fox, Pteropus scapulatus). Thc
 again extra consideration is given to bat exposures, given
virus has also been found in an insectivorous bat, the
the fact that hat rabies may occur in the absence of rabies
yellow-bellied sheath-tailed bat (Saccolaimus flaviven-
 in terrestrial species and the fact that rabies surveillance
trus). The virus is a lyssavirus, closely related to rabies 
in bats is not commonly done. Exposure to rodents,
virus, exhibiting only an 8% sequence difference in its
 rabbits, and hares seldom, if ever, requires specific anti-
N gene. There have been two human infections which
rabies trcatment.
were fatal, both in people who had been exposed to a
Postexposure propbylaxis consists of hyperim-
number of bats.
mune globulin and a course of vaccine. In the United
States, human rabies immune globulin (HRIG) is used
Vaccines and Their Use
at 20 IU/kg of body weight, half infltrated around the
Animal rabies vaccines (either inactivated virus vaccines
wound, half injected intramuscularly. In the United
or attenuated virus vaccines) are efficacious and safe.
 States there are two licensed human rabies vaccines: hu-
 Many different formulations are available. A compen-
man diploid cell-culture vaccine (HDCV) and rhesus kid-
 dium, updating the indications and contraindications for
ney cell-culture adjuvanted vaccine (RVA)—these vac-
the use of each of these vaccine, is published annually
cines are used in many other developed countries as well.
in the United States by the National Association of State
The vaccination regimen consists of five 1.0-ml doses
 Public Health Veterinarians (see Further Reading).
given intramuscularly in the deltoid area, one each on
days 0, 3, 7, 14, and 28. If the exposed person has
been vaccinated previously, no human rabies immune
Human Disease
globulin is used and only two doses of vaccine are given,
one each on days 0 and 3. Slightly different regimens
 Public heaith vcterinarians are called on regularly to
 are recomumended in different countries. Remarkably,
 provide advice on rabies postexposure prophylaxis, pre-
these regirmens have reduced the mortality from this
exposure vaccination, and other matters pertaining to
frightening disease virtually to zero. A comprehensive
the risk of rabies in humans. Further, practicing veteri-
 guide on human postexposure treatment is provided by
 arians represent a major risk group for rabies infection 
the World Health Organization (see Further Reading).
in many areas of the world. Therefore, this section is
Preexposure vaccination of veterinarians and other
 More extensive than might otherwise be expected in a
individuals occupationally or orherwise at risk (e.g., lab-
book on veterinary and zoonotic virology.
 oratory personnel working with rabies virus, animal con-
The first step in dcaling with a possible human
trol and wildlife workers in rabies-endemic areas, and
rabies exposure is thorough cleansing of the wound—
 certain international travelers) has become a standard
inmmediare vigorous washing and flushing with soap and
 of practice in developed countries. Because of several
water is crucial. The next step is an appraisal of the 
yariables in the level and nature of risk and the likelihood
nature of the exposure (Table 27.3). In a rabies endemic
 of immediate availability of postexposure prophylaxis,
 area, if the individual has simply touched the suspect
 an algorithm is used to guide recommendations for pri-
 animal treatment is not recommended. If the individual
 mary vaccination and boosters (Table 27.4), The vacci-
has been scratched or bitten or if there are skin abrasions
nation regimen consists of three 1.0-ml doses given intra-
present, treatment is started. Where possible exposure
muscularly in the deltoid area, one each on days 0, 7,
involves a dog or cat, treatment may be stopped if the
and 28. Because of the high cost of human vaccines,
animal remains healthy throughout a 10-day observation
there is an alternate regimcn consisting of four O.1-ml
period or if the animal is euthanized and found to be
doses given intradermally, onc cach on days 0, 7, 21,
negative by appropriate laboratory testing. Where possi-
 and 28. Boosters (or serologic confirmation of adequate
ble cxposure involves any other domestic or wild animal,
antibody level) are given depending on the individual's
the animal is euthanized immediately and its brain cxam-
continuing risk category.
ined using appropriate laborarory techniques. In the
Biohazard: Laboratory and clinically associated
United States, because of recent experiences, more con-
rabies infections are extremely rare. Nevertheless, in-
servative recommendations have been made when expo-
fected animals, their tissues, and their excretions contain
Vesicntar Stomatitis
439
TaBle 27.3
Rabies: Guide for Human Postexposure Prophylaxis
EVALUTION AND DISPOSITION
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR TREATMENT OF
ANIMAl SPECIES
OF ANIMAL
EXPOsED PERSONa
Dog, cat
Healthy and available for 10 days of
None, unless animal deveiops signs of
observation
rabiesb
Rabid or suspecied rabid
Immediate rabies immune globulin and
vaccined
Unknown (escaped)
Consult public healh official. if treatment 
is indicated, give rabies immune globu-
lin and vaccine
Bat
Regard as rabid and consider that ex-
Rabies immune globulin and vaccined
posure may have occurred even if a
bite wound is not evident, unless
proved negative by laboratory testse
Skunk, fox, coyote, raccoon,
Regard as rabid unless proved nega-
Rabies immune globulin and vaccined
bobcat, woodchuck, other carni
tive by laboratory tests or from geo
vores
 graphic area known to be rabies Free
Livestock, rodents, rabbits, hares
Consider individually. Public health officials should be consulted about the need for
rabies prophylaxis. Bites of squirrels, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, chipmunks,
rals,mice,other rodents,rabbits,and hares almost never call for anlirabies prophy
laxis
These recommendations derive rom those used in the Uniled Slates; there are some differences in other counties. In applying these
recommendations, take into account the animol species involved, the circumstances of the bite or other exposure, the vaccination siatus of the
animal, and presence of rabies in the region. Public health offcials should be consulted ifquestions arise about the need for rabies prophylaxis.
Allbiendhldrhdwidwib
globulinandvaine sholdbegivenassoonasposibleregardlessof thinlevalomexpue.
drinynriddgaillifrbihlidd
ol the exposed individual withhumonrabiesimmune globulin HRIG} and vaccine should be sared
possible need to treat for serum sickness.
dFive 1.0-ml intramuscular doses to be given on days 0, 3, 7, 14, and 28. WHO recommends an optimgl sixth dose at 90 days. Local
reacionsvacinesrecommnanddnotcnrindicateconiningtremenDiscontinevaineifflresentntibodyestfth
animal are negative.
ehe animal should be killed and tested as soon as possible; holding for observation is not recommended.
virus and should be handled only with gloves. Decontam-
Clinical Features
ination of pens, stalls, and cages should be done with
 standard disinfectants and suspect carcasscs should be
The clinical features of vesicular stomatitis infection vary
incinerated or buricd after diagnostic specimens have
 greatly among animals in a herd. Lesions develop quickly
bcen obtained.
 after an incubation period of 1 to 5 days. Excess saliva-
tion and fever often are the first signs of infection in
cattle and horses, and lamcness is often the first sign in
Vesicular Stomatitis
swine. Vesicular lesions on the tongue, the oral mucosa,
teats, and coronary bands of cattle may progress to total
Originally, vesicular stomatitis was considered of inter-
epithelial denudation with secondary bacterial infection.
est only bccause of its role in the differential diagnosis
Lesions may cause profuse salivation and anorexia,
 of foot-and-mouth disease in cattle and the debilitating
lameness, and rejection of the suckling calf. In horses,
lameness it can cause in horscs. More recently, however,
tongue lesions are most pronounced, often progressing to
 the diseasc has been recognized as thc cause of economi-
complete sloughing of the epithelium. In swine, vesicular
 cally important losses in conditioning and milk produc-
lesions are most common on the snout and coronary
tion in cattle, especially as more dairying is undertaken
bands. Lesions usually heal within 7 to 10 days and
in warmer climates.
there are no sequelae.
440
27.Rhabdoviridae
Table 27.4
Rabies: Guide for Human Preexposure Prophylaxis
TYPICAL
PREEXPOSURE
RisK CAtEGORY
NATURE OF RI5K
populations at risk
YACCINATION
Continuous
Virus present continuously, of
Rabies research laboratory
Primary course. Serologic
ten in high concentrations.
workers;: rabies biologics
testing every 6 months:
Aerosol, mucous membrane,
 production workers
booster vaccination when
bite, or nonbite exposure. Spe
antibody level falls below
cific exposures may go unrec-
acceplable levelb
ognized
Frequent
Exposure usually episodic, with 
Veterinarians and staff, ani-
 Primary course. Serologic
source recognized, but expo
 mal-control and wildlife
testing or booster vaccina-
sure may also be unrecog-
workers, rabies diagnostic
tion every 2 years
nized. Aerosol, mucous mem-
laboratory workers, spe.
brane, bite, or nonbite
lunkers in rabies endemic
exposure
areas. Certain travelers vis-
iting areas of endemic
rabies
Infrequent (but greater
Exposure nearly always epi-
Veterinarians and staff, ani-
Primary course. No sero-
than the populalion at
sodic with source recognized.
ma-control and wildlife
logic testing or booster
large)
Mucous membrane, bite, or
workers in areas of low ra-
vaccination
nonbite exposure
bies endemicily. Veterinary
students
Rare (population at large)
Exposure always episodic. Mu-
Developed countries, popu-
 No vaccination necessary
cous membrane, bite, or non-
lations at large, including 
bite exposure
persons in rabies epidemic
areas
ln labortories, jugment of relaiveisk nd extmonitoring of voccination statusisarespnsibilty of the labratory sueisr.
Standrsfiimcplbdwhtsediidttesclevirlizi
dilution by the oficial rabies immunofluorescent focus-inhibition lest (RIFFiT) assay is considered adequate—-a booster dose of vaccine should 
 be adminislered if the tier falls below this level.
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
 protective effect. This may be explained by the majority
 Of viral replication being localized in the epithelium.
The virus probably enters the body through breaks in
There is little heterologous immunity (e.g., between ve-
the mucosa and skin, due to the minor abrasions caused,
 sicular stomatitis-New Jersey and vesicular stomatitis-
for example, by rough forage or by the bites of arthro-
 Indiana viruses).
pods. There does not seem to be a systemic, viremic
 phase of infection except in swine and small laboratory
animals. Local vesiculation and epithelial denudation
Laboratory Diagnosis
 follow epithelial cell desrruction and interstitial edema,
which separates the epithelium from underlying tissues.
Virus can be recovered from vesicular fluids and tissue
Spread of such lesions occurs by extension, such that it
is coinmon for the entire epithelium of the tongue or
culture (or in embryonated eggs or in suckling mice by
intracerebral inoculation). Virus isolates are usuaily
teat to be sloughed. High titers of infectious virus are
identified by conventional serologic methods. Because
present, usually for a short time, in vesicular fluids and
in tissues at the margins of lesions. From this source,
diagnosis involves differentiation from foot-and-mouth
 disease, these procedures should be carried out in an
virus may be transmitted by fomites, such as contami-
nated food, milking machines, and restraint devices. The
authorized reference laboratory.
virus may also be transmited mechanically by arthro-
 pods. Despite the extent of epithelial damage, healing
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
is usually rapid and complete. Cartle with high levels
 of neutralizing antibodies are often susceptible to rein-
Epidemics of vesicular stomatitis occur in the United
fection, suggesting that such antibodies have a limited
 States, Canada, Mexico, regions of the Caribbean, Cen-
Bowine Ephenertt Ferer
441
tral America, Panama, Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador,
Several lines of evidence suggest that vesicular sto-
Peru, Brazil, and Argentina. Epidemics occur annually
 matitis viruses are arthropod-borne in nature. In tropical
Or at intervals of 2 or 3 years in tropical and subtropical
 and subtropical areas, there is evidcnce for transmission
countries and at intervals of 5 to 10 years in temperate
 by sandflies (Lutzomyia spp-), with transovarial trans-
zones. Vesicular stomatitis--New Jcrsey virus is thc most
 mission in sandflies contributing to the perpetuation of
common and has the widest distribution, with isolations 
 the viruses in cndemic foci—transovarial transmission
as far north as Canada and as far south as Peru. Vesicular
is considered cvidence of a long-standing evolutionary
stomatitis-Indiana virus has a similar wide gcographical
relationship. Sandflics have also been incriminated in
 distribution but is encountered less frequently.
maintaining the endcmic focus of vesicular stomatitis-
Genomic analysis of large numbers of vesicular
 New Jcrsey on Osabaw Island, Georgia. Isolates have
stomatitis-New Jersey and vesicular stomatitis- Indiana
 also been made from Simulidae (black flies), Culicoides
isolates has indicated that temperate zone epidemics are
(midges), Culex nigripalpus (mosquitoes), Hippilates
caused by a single viral genotype, suggesting spread from
spp. (eye gnats), Musca domestica (houseflies), and Gi-
a common origin. For cxample, vesicular stomatitis-
 gantolaelap spp. (mites). There has also been seroconvcr-
Indiana isolates from the United States and Mexico al-
 sion of caged sentinel animals placed in endemic areas.
ways derive from a rccent common ancestor. Epidemic
 In a large epidemic of vesicular stomatitis-New Jerscy
isolates from different geographic areas, such as the tem--
 that occurred in the western United States in 1982, many
perate zones of North and South America, have been
virus isolates were made from flies, mostly from the
shown to be distinct, indicating spatial genetic isolation.
 common house fly, M. domestica, but it is not clear how
lsolates from different endemic foci in the tropics are
flies might fulfill known patterns of virus transmission
also distinct, but they reflect a more complex genetic
 between hcrds and between individual animals. The
diversity, including multiple phylogcnetic lineages. For
 manner by which vesicular stomatitis viruses are trans-
example, multiple genotypes of vesicular stomatitis--
mirted over long distances also rcmains controversial
 Indiana virus coexist in Costa Rica, Panama, and adja-
 despite years of study. Arthropod involvement is also
cent countries of South America. Within even small en-
 suggested here.
demic foci thcse variants may bc maintaincd over an
Outbreaks of disease may be explosive, so avoid
cxtended period of time. Endemic foci of vesicular sto
ance of pastures known as sites of transmission may help
matitis-Indiana and-New Jcrsey occur in southcastern
 avoid infection, but in general litle is usually done even
Mexico, Vcnezuela, Colombia, Panama, and Costa Rica,
 in the face of an epidcmic. In temperate zones, epidemics
mostly in wct lowland areas. In thc United Statcs, a band
 Occur at such infrequent intervals that the index of suspi-
 Of endemic vesicular stomatitis-New Jersey formerly ex-
 cion falls to a low level during interepidemic periods.
isted across the coastal plains of South Carolina, Geor-
 Both inactivated and attenuated virus vaccines are avail-
gia, and Florida; currently, only one focus remains, on
 able, but neither is used much.
Ossabaw Island, Gcorgia.
 Even though the geographic range of the vesicular
 stomatitis viruses is large, discasc problems are restrictcd
Human Disease
to favorable habitats: for exainple, in the uppcr Missis-
sippi valley in the United States, disease appears regularly
Vesicular stomatitis viruses are zoonotic, being transmis-
in aspcn park lands, the narrow zoe separating hard-
 sible to human (typically, farmcrs and veterinarians)
wood forest from open prairies. In the western moun-
from vesicular fluids and tissucs of infected animals, but
tainous regions of the United States, disease secms to
there are no practical measurcs for preventing occupa-
move up and down valleys, not along roads, rarely reach-
tional exposure. The diseasc in human resembles influ-
ing higher pastures. Seasonally, outbreaks begin in the
enza, presenting with an acute onset of fever, chills, and
late spring, peak in the late summer, and cease with
muscle pain, It resolves without complications within 7
thc first frosts of late fall/early winter. The disease may
to 10 days. Human cases are not uncommon during.
appear almost simultaneously over large areas or in mul-
 cpidemics in cattle and horses, but because of lack of
tiple sprcading foci, suggesting that the virus might bc
 awareness, few cases are reported. Human cases can be
arthropod-borne. In more tropical regions, outbreaks
diagnosed rctrospectively by serologic methods.
appear frcqucntly at the cessation of rainy scasons.
Vesicular stomatitis viruses can be stable in the
environment for days, e.g., on milking machine parts
Bovine Ephemeral Fever
where transmission results in teat and udder lesions, in
water troughs, in soil, and on vegetation where transmis-
Bovine ephemeral fever, also called 3-day sickness, is
sion results in mouth lesions.
a widespread disease of cattle, spanning tropical and
442
27.Rhabdouiridae
subtropical zones of Africa, Australia, and Asia. From
1  tralization assays, which are virus specific, or by immu
these endemic sites the disease extends intermittently
 nofluorescence or agar gel precipitin tests, which are
into temperate zones in major or minor epidemics. The
 cross-reactive with related rhabdoviruses.
disease has never been reported in North or South
America or in Europe.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Clinical Features
Bovine ephemeral fever virus is transmitted by two types
of arthropod vectors, Culicoides and culicine and anoph-
Clinical signs in cattle are characteristic but all are not 
 eline mosquitoes: endemic and epidemic spread is limited
 seen in an individual animal. Onset is sudden; the disease  to the distribution of vectors. There is epidemiologic
is marked by a biphasic or polyphasic fever with an 
 evidence that more arthropod vector species remain to
immediate drop in milk production. Other clinical signs
 be identifed. Prevention by vector control is impracticat
are associated with the second and later febrile phases: j
 in the areas of the world where this disease is prevalent.
these include depression, stiffness, and lameness, and  I
 In Japan, South Africa, and Australia, inactivated and
less often nasal and ocular discharges, cessation of rumi-
 attenuated virus vaccines have been used. Problems with
nation, and constipation. Infrequently there is diarrhea
 conventional vaccines stem from lack of potency-
and temporary or permanent paresis. Usually, recovery
inactivated vaccines require more antigenic mass than it
is dramatic and complete in 3 days (range 2 to 5 days).
 has been possible to achieve economically, and aftenu-
Morbidity rates often approach 100%, and the mortality
 ated virus vaccines suffer from a loss in immunogenicity
rate in an outbreak is usually 1 to 2%, but can reach
 linked with the attenuation process. A recombinant
10 to 20% in mature, well-conditioned beef cattle and
 DNA-derived G protein vaccine has also been developed.
high-producing dairy cattle. Subclinical cases do occur,
but their relative rate is unknown because antibody test-
ing is confounded by intercurrent infections in the same
RhaBdoVIrus DIsEaSEs OF FisH
 areas by related but nonpathogenic rhabdoviruses.
At least nine distinct rhabdoviruses cause economically
important diseases in fish (Table 27.5). These viruses are
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
antigenically distinguishable by neutralization tests. The
The pathogenesis of the disease is complex; it seems clear
viruses may be propagated in a variety of piscine cell
that pathophysiologic and immunologic effects on host
 lines and also in mammalian, avian, and reptilian ceils,
 inflammatory response, mediated by the release of lym-
with the optimal growth temperatures and the tempera-
phokines, are involved in the expression of disease. There
ture range for growth differing from one virus to another.
is no evidence that the virus causes widespread tissue
destruction. In all cases there is an early neutrophilia
with an abnormal level of immature neutrophils in the
Viral Hemorrhagic Septicemia
circulation ("left shift'). There is a rise in plasma fibrin-
 ogen and a significant drop in plasma calcium. Therapeu-
Viral hemorrhagic septicemia, a systemic infection of
tically, there is a dramatic response to nonsteroid anti-
various salmonid and a few nonsalmonid fishes, is caused
inflammatory drugs and often to calcium infusion. Infec-
 by viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus. The infection oc-
tion results in solid immunity; because outbreaks tend
juyuis u nsan Ae pue sle Aue jo ysy un sas
 to involve most animals in a herd, repeat clinical episodes
cumulative mortality. Fish that survive may become car-
usually involve young animals born since previous out-
 riers. Viral hemorrhagic septicemia has been reported
breaks.
under various names, of which Egtved disease is the
best known.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Clinical Features
Laboratory diagnosis is diffcult; the "gold standard""
is virus isolation by blind passage in mosquito (Aedes
There are acute, chronic, and latent forms of infection.
albopictus) cells or suckling mouse brain. Detection of a
 Acutely infected fish are lethargic, dark in color, exoph-
rise in antibody is the most practical diagnostic technique thalmic, anemic, and there is a high mortality rate. Hem-
available; this is done by enzyme immunoassay or neu-
- orrhages are evident in the eyes, skin, and gills and at
Virat Hlenorrhagie Septicenia
443
TaBte 27.5
Rhabdoviruses of Fish
GROWTH
TeMperaTuRe? ("C)
ViRus
SPECIES AFFECTED
GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION
RANGE
OPTIMUM
Viral hemorrhagic septicemica
Salmonids, pike, sea bass,
Europe, west coast of United
6-20
10-15
virus (Egtved virus)
turbot, Pacific and Atlantic
States
cod
Infectious hematopoietic necro-
Salmonids
Western North America, France,
4-20
13-18
sis viruses
Italy, Japan, China, Taiwan 
Hirame rhabdovirus
Japanese flounder
Japan
5-20
15-20
 Spring viremia of carp virus
Cyprinids
Europe
4-32
Variableb
Pike fry rhabdovirus
Northern pike, guppies,
 Europe, including Russia
10-31
21-28
 cyprinids, pike
 Eel rhabdovirus
American, European eels,
Japan and Europe
15-20
15
rainbow trout fry<
Perch rhabdovirus
Perch
Europe
10-20
15
Rio Grande cichlid rhabdovirus
Rio Grande cichlid
 United States
23-30
？
 Ulcerative syndrome and
Snakehead
 Southeast Asia
18-35
24-30
snakehead rhabdovirus
*Measured in culrured piscine cells.
bDepends on celline.
"Experimental infections only.
 the bases of the fins. Internally, hemorrhages are evident 
 grown in mammalian cells such as BHK 21 (baby ham-
and the liver appears mottled and hyperemic. Chroni-
ster kidney) and Wl 38 (human diploid fibroblasts) main-
cally infcctcd fish have a markedly distended abdomen
tained at low temperature. Fluorescent antibody, immu-
due to edema of the liver, kidneys, and spleen, but there
nodiffusion, and enzyme immunoassays are available.
is little hemorrhage.
 There are at least thre virus serotypes distinguishable
by neutralization assay.
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
The virus is transimissible readily to fsh of all ages, and
survivors of infection can become lifelong carriers that
Viral hemorrhagic septicemia is endemic in most coun-
shed virus in urine and semen and on the surface of eggs.
tries of continental eastern and western Europe, and
In aquaculture sertings, virus transmission occurs by co-
the virus has been isolated in the Puget Sound area
habitation or by fomites. The virus has been isolated
 of Washington in the United States. In Europe, epidem-
from wild fish in waters receiving hatchery efluent. Epi-
ics occur primarily in rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus
 demic losses occur at temperatures below 12°C (mortal-
mykiss, and brown trout, Salmo trutta. In the United
ity is greatest at 3 to 5°C); mortality and the proportion
 States, infection is most common in chinook salmon,
 of fish that become virus carriers decrease at higher tem-
O. tshawytscha, coho salmon, O. kisutch, and steelhead
pcratures. Dearhs rarely occur at temperatures above
(which is actually a sea-run rainbow trout). Isolation
15°C.
of fish in hatcheries and aquaculture facilities is the
most effective method for preventing infection-
hatchery disinfcction, followed by restocking with spe-
Laboratory Diagnosis
cific pathogen-free fish and eggs, has been successful
 in breaking the transmission chain. There are several
 Diagnosis is based on virus isolation in any of several
experimental vaccines under study, including attenuated
regularly used piscine cell lines. The virus may also be
virus vaccines.
444.
27.Rhabdoviridae
Infectious Hematopoietic
but certain isolates are pathogenic for rainbow trout
Necrosis
fry. In Japan, hirame (a flounder-like flatfish) and ayu
(a trout-like species) have suffered severe hemorrhagic
This disease of salmonids is caused by a group of serolog-
disease with pathologic characteristics resembling viral
ically related viruses, each infecting particular species of
hemorrhagic septicermia and infectious hematopoietic
salmon or trout. The diseasc causes frequent losscs in
necrosis in salmonids. The disease is caused by hirame
hatcheries along the Pacific coast of North America from
rhabdovirus, which is isolated readily in piscine cell
Alaska to northern California, in France and Italy, and
culture. Perch and Rio Grande cichlid rhabdoviruses
 in Japan and Taiwan. Epidemics usually involve juvenile
have been isolated from fish cell lines and induce
fish at water temperatures below 15°C; mortality may
clinical diseases similar to those occurring naturally.
reach 50 to 90%. Survivors become lifclong carriers and
Thc perch rhabdovirus appcars to be serologically
shed large amounts of virus in urine and feces and in
distinct from any other known fish rhabdovirus. Rhab-
ovarian and seminal fluids at spawning. Fish infected
doviruscs belonging to the genus Vesiculovirus and
others as yet ungrouped have been isolated from
acutely are dark in color, lethargic, and show anemia,
exophthalmia, distention of the abdomen, and hemor-
snakeheads, an important food fish in Thailand. How-
rhages at the basc of fns. Diagnosis is made by virus 
cver, it has yet to bc demonstratcd whether they have
isolation and serology. Control mcasures center on isola-
 a role in the chronic ulcerative syndrome often suffered
tion of premiscs and are similar to thosc for viral hemor-
by this species.
rhagic septicemia. Elevation of water temperature to at
least 18°C is very cffective in controlling the disease,
but is usually not fcasible economically. Inactivated and
Further Reading
attenuated virus vaccines have been developed, but the
Baer, G. M., ed. (1991). “The Natural History of Ra
most promising control measure for the furure is selective
breeding for resistance.
bies, 2nd Ed., 2 vol. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Banerjee, A. K., and Barik, S. (1992). Gene expression of
vesicular stomatitis virus genome. Virology 188,
417-428.
Spring Viremia of Carp
Bernard, J., and Breamont, M. (1995). Molecular biology
of fish viruses: A review. Vet. Res. 26, 341-351.
Calisher, C. H., Karabatsos, N., Zeller, H., Digoutte,
 This disease occurs in European countries when the wa-
J.-P., Tesh, R. B., Shope, R. E., Travasoos da Rosa,
ter temperature rises in spring. Diseased fish excrete large
A. P. A., and St. George, T. D. (1989). Antigenic rela-
amounts of virus and the virus can be spread by a blood-
tionships among rhabdoviruses from vertebrates and
hematophagous arthropods. Intervirology 30,
sucking ectoparasite, Argils spp. Infected fish become
lethargic, havc abdominal swelling indicative of visceral
241-257.
Dietzschold, B., Rupprecht, C. E., Fang Fu, Z., and
Organ edema, and hemorrhages. Control is possible by
Koprowski, H. (1996). Rhabdoviruscs. In "Ficlds Vi-
isolation of premises. A vaccine has been developed, but
rology” (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley,
must be injected.
R. M. Chanock, J. I.. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roiz-
man, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1137-1159.
Lippincotr-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Jackson, A. C. (1997). Rabics. In "Viral Pathogenesis'
Other Rhabdovirus
(N, Nathanson, R. Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano,
D. E. Griffn, K. V. Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L.
Diseases of Fish
Robinson, eds.), Pp. 57S-592. Lippincott-Raven, Phil-
adelphia, PA.
Leong, J.-A., and Munn, C. B. (1991). Potential uscs of
 Pike fry rhabdovirus causes a disease similar to spring
recombinant DNA in the development of fish vaccines.
viremia of carp virus in hatchery-reared pike fry in The
Bull. Eur. Assoc. Fish Pathol. 11, 30-35.
Netherlands, where it is controlled primarily by isolation
National Association of State Public Health Veterinari-
and by iodophor treatment of eggs to removc surface
ans. (1997) (published annually). Compendium of ani-
virus contamination. Rhabdoviruses with similar sero-
mal rabies control. Morbid. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. Rec-
ommend.Rep. 46, RR-4.
 logic propertics to the pike fry rhabdovirus have bcen 
Rupprecht, C. E., and Smith, J. S. (1994). Raccoon ra-
found in several species of cyprinids, including the grass
bies: Thc re-emcrgencc of an epizootic in a densely
carp. Fivc rhabdoviruscs have been isolatcd from eels
populated area. Semin. Virol. 5, 155-164.
Rupprecht, C. E., Smith, J. S., Fckadu, M., and Childs,
that are serologically distinct from other known fish
J. E. (1995). The ascension of wildife rabies: A cause
rhabdoviruses. None of the eel viruses has been demon-
for public health concern or intervention? Emerg. In-
strated to cause disease in the freshwatcr stages of eel
fect. Dis. 1, 107-114.
Further Reading
445
Smith, J. S. (1989). Rabies virus cpitopic variation: Use
nock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and
in ecologic studies. Adv. Virus Res. 36, 215-254.
S. E.Straus, eds.), 3rd cd., pp. 1121-1135. Lippin-
St. George, T. D. (1988). Bovine ephemeral fever. In
cott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
The Arboviruses: Epidemiology and Ecology” (T. P.
Wandeler, A., Nadin-Davis, S. A., Tinline, R. R., and
Rupprecht, C. E. (1994). Rabies epizootiology: An eco-
ton, Fl,
logical and evolutionary perspective. In "Lyssaviruses"
Tsiang, H. (1993). Pathophysiology of rabies virus infec-
(C. E. Rupprecht, B. Dietzschold, and H. Koprowski,
tion of the nervous systeim. Adv. Virus Res. 42,
eds.), pp. 297-324. Springer-Verlag, New York.
375-412.
World Health Organization. (1997). “WHO Recommen-
Wagner, R. R., and Rose, J. K. (1996). Rhabdoviridae:
dations on Rabies Post-Exposure Treatment and the
The viruses and their replication. In “Fields Virology”
Correct Technique of Intradermal Immunization
(B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Cha-
Against Rabies." World Health Organization, Geneva.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Chapter 28
Filoviridae
Properties of Filoviruses
447
Marburg and Ebola Hemorrhagic Fevers ..
450
Further Reading....
453
 In 1967, 31 cases of hemorrhagic fever, with 7 deaths, 
 as having substantial epidemic potential; (3) the viruses
Occurred among laboratory workers in Germany and C
 cause a most devastating clinical disease in humans, with
Yugoslavia who wcre proccssing kidneys from African
 extremely rapid and florid tissue damage and with a very
green monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops) that had been  high mortality rate; and (4) most intriguing of all, the
imported from Uganda. A new virus was isolated from viruses, although clearly zoonotic, occupy a still un-
patients and monkeys; it was named Marburg virus, now  known ecologic niche(s) involving a still unknown reser-
thc prototype member of the family Filoviridae. Nine voir host(s). In fact, the family Filoviridae is the only
years later two further extraordinary epidemics of hem-virus family containing pathogens of domestic animals
orrhagic fever occurred, one in villages in the rain forest 
 or humans for which the ecologic niche(s) and reservoir
of Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo) and host(s) reinain unknown.
the other in southern Sudan, 700 km away. Altogether
therc were more than 550 cases and 430 deaths. A virus
morphologically identical to but antigenically distinct
Properties of Filoviruses
from Marburg virus was isolated; it was named Ebola
virus. Later, the viruses from Zaire and Sudan were
Classification
found to be genetically distinct and are now designated
Ebola virus, subtypes Zaire and Sudan. Since 1976, there
 All nonsegmented negative-scnse RNA viruses share sev-
have been more than 18 episodes of Ebola hemorrhagic
 eral characteristics: (1) a similar genome organization
fever, caused by three genetically distinct viruses (sub-
 and roughly the same gene order, (2) a virion-associated
types Zaire, Sudan, and Cote d'Ivoirc), representing an
 RNA polymerase (transcriptase),(3) a helical nucleocap-
ever-increasing geographic range within Africa. In 1989
sid, (4) transcription of mRNAs by sequential inter-
and 1990, monkeys imported from the Philippines into
 rupted synthesis from a single promoter, and (5) virion
an import quarantine facility in Reston, Virginia, were
 maturation via budding of preassembled nucleocapsids
found to have been infected with a another new virus,
 from plasma membrane at sites containing patches of
now called Ebola virus, subtype Reston. Infected mon-
 viral glycoprotein peplomers. These characteristics and
keys at the facility became ill and many died. Four animal(
 conserved ancient domains found in genomic nucleotide
caretakers were infected but there was no clinically ap-
 sequences support the notion of a common ancestry as
parent disease. This virus reappeared in imported mon-
 reflected in the establishment of the order Moronegavir-
keys in Italy in 1992 and Texas in 1996.
ales. Conserved domains in nucleoprotein and polymer-
The member viruses of the family Filoviridae in-
asc gcnes suggest that the family Filoviridae is rclated
trigue us for several reasons: (1) the viruses, although
most closely to the genus Pneumovirus in the family
 similar in genomic organization and mode of replication
 Paramyxoviridae rather than to the family Rhabdoviri-
to other members of the order Mononegavirales (the
dae as might be expected from their similar helically
viruses comprising the families Paramyxoviridae, Rhab-
wound nucleocapsid structures.
doviridae, Filoviridae, and Bornaviridae) are morpho-
The family Filoviridae contains two gencra, both
logically the most bizarre of all viruses; (2) the viruses 
 unnamed, one comprising the Marburg-like viruses, the
have caused large outbreaks and therefore are recognized
d  other the Ebola-like viruses, the latter with four subtypes,
447
448
28.Filoviridae
 Ebola virus subtypes Zaire, Sudan, Cote d'lvoire, and 1000 nm for Ebola virus). Virions are composed of a
 Reston. The degree of genetic stability of the filoviruses  lipid envelope covered with peplormers, surrounding a
overall and the absencc of generic variability among helically wound nucleocapsid (50 nm in diameter)
Ebola virus isolates obtained within an outbreak match (Figure 28.1). The genome is composed of a single
the character of othcr member viruses of the order molccule of negativc-sense, single-stranded RNA, 19.1
Mononegavirales (scc Chaprer 26, Table 26.1). Ebola kb in sizc, the largcst of all ncgative-sense RNA viruses.
outbrcaks in Gabon are very similar to isolates from
the Dcmocratic Republic of Congo.
(membrane-associated matrix protein)-Gl (the glyco-
brane-associated protein)—L (the RNA polymerase or
Virion Properties
 transcriptase)—-5'-untranslated region. Genes arc sepa-
rated either by intergenic sequences or by overlaps, i.e.,
Filovirus virions are plcomorphic, appearing as long fil-  short (17-20 bases) regions where the transcription start 
amentous, sometimes branched forms, or as "U'- signal of the downstream genc overlaps the transcription
shaped, “6"-shapcd, or circular forms. Virions havc a stop signal of the upstream gene. Ebola virus has three
(particles may bc up to 14,0o0 nm long, but have unit whercas Marburg virus has a single overlap (Figure
nucleocapsid lengths of about 800 nm for Marburg and 28.2).
Figure 28.1.
Family Filoviridae, genus, unnamed, comprising the Ebola-like viruses, Ebola virus [sublpe Zaire]. Virions in α dignostic specimen thuman tissue
passaged once in Vero calls for 2 days; negative stain electron microscopy. Magnification: X62,000.
Preperties of Fitoriruses
449
Figure 28.2.
MARBURG(Musoke Strain)
NP
VP40
VP24
VP35
GP
VP30
3
5
←
←
↑
←
←
Leader
IR
IR
IR
Trailer
EBOLA(Zaire Subtype)
VP40
GP
VP30VP24
NP
VP35
5
3口
K
↑
个
Trailer
》
IPOverlap
IR
EditOverlap
IROverlap
Leader
Site
8910111213141516171819
Genm organiztionfEbolandMarburgviruses.Genesorthe structurl protin asocited wihthevirion RNAareidentled s
begindsinidndirippletingee
nonstructural secreted glycoprotein. At the extreme 3' and 5' ends of the genomes ore complementary leader and trailer sequences. Scale: kb.
[Courtesy of A. Sanchez.]
The Marburg virus glycoprotcin is encoded in a
 mic inclusion bodies (composcd of masses of viral nu-
single open reading frame, whereas the Ebola virus glyco-
 clcocapsids).  Virions cnter cells by endocytosis and
protein in encoded in two reading frames. Expression
replication occurs in the cytoplasm.
of Ebola virus glycoprotein involves site-specifc RNA
Transcription is initiated at a single promoter
transcriptional editing and translational frame-shifting
sitc, located at the 3' cnd of the viral genome. Tran-
that joins the two open reading frames.
scription yields monocistronic mRNAs, i.e., separate
Filovirus virions contain seven proteins. The
mRNAs for each protein. This is accomplished by
Ebola virion glycoprotein (M, 120,000-170,000) forms 
conserved transcriptional stop and start signals that
the surface peplomers, whereas a second glycoprotein
are located at the boundaries of each viral gene. As
(M, 60,000), nade in large amounts, is secreted extra-
 the viral polymerase moves along the genomic RNA,
cellularly. Thc nature of thc participation of this soluble
these signals cause it to pause and sometimes to fall
 glycoprotein in the pathogenesis of Ebola virus diseasc
 off the tcmplatc and terminate transcription (called
 is unknown, but it may serve as some sort of immune
stuttering or stopstart transcription). The result is that
 decoy, minimizing the irmmune response to the virus,
 more mRNA is made frorm genes that are located close
 and/or it may be immunosuppressive, affecting the host 
to the promoter and less from downstream genes.
response to infcction. Virions also contain lipids, their
This regulates the expression of genes, producing large
coinposition reflecting the composition of host cell
 amounts of structural proteins such as the nucleopro-
membranes, and large amounts of carbohydrates as
 tcin and smaller amounts of proteins such as the RNA
side chains on the glycoproteins. Virat infectivity is
polymerase. Replication of the genome is mediated by
 quite stable at room temperature, but sensitive to UV.
the synthesis of full-length complementary-sense RNA,
 and y-irradiation, detergents, and common disinfec-
which then serves as the template for the synthesis of
tants.
virion-scnse RNA. This requires that the stop'start
signals needcd for transcription bc overridden by the
viral polymcrase-—-the immediatc envelopmcnt of newly
Viral Replication
formed viral-sense RNA by nucleoprotein seems to
 mcdiate this. Maturation of virions occurs via budding
Filoviruses replicate well in cell culturcs, such as Vero
 of prcassemblcd nuclcocapsids from the plasma mem-
(African green monkcy kidney) cells; infcction is charac-
brane at sites already containing patches of viral glyco-
-seidosenu sauei pue ooudo piden Aq pazuan
 protein peplomers (Table 28.1).
450
28. Filoviridae
Table 28.1
 Properties of Filoviruses
Virions are pleomorphic, appearing as long ilamentous forms and other shapes; virions have a uniform diameter of 80
nm and vary greatly in length {unit nucleocapsid lengths of about 800 nm for Marburg and 1000 nm for Ebola virus)
Virions are composed of a lipid envelope covered with peplomers surrounding a helically wound nucleocapsid
 jo ysabii ay 'azis u qy I'el ' papuselus 'ssuseu jo alnaows aus o yo pasodwos s! awas a
negative-sense RNA viruses
Infeclion is extremely cytopathic in cultured cells and in target organs of host
Cytoplasmic replication, large intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies, budding from the plasma membrane
Marburg and Ebola
the reticuloendothelial systen (especially Kupffer cells
Hemorrhagic Fevers
 and macrophages in lymph nodes and spleen), endothe-
lium, liver, and lungs; there is severe necrosis of these
target organs, which is most evident in liver, and there
There has been an increasing incidence of Ebola hemor-
 is interstitial hemorrhage, which is most evident in the
rhagic fever in West Africa since the mid-1990s, evidcnt
 gastrointestinal tract (Figure 28.3). Virus shedding fron
as large and small outbreaks, involving an ever-increas-
 infected primates occurs from all body surfaces and ori-
ing geographic range. Because the reservoir host(s) is not
 fces, including the skin and mucous membranes, and
known, ecological, environmental, and human bchav-
especially from hemorrhagic diatheses. Of all the hemor-
ioral changes that might have increased the opportunities
rhagic fever agents, filoviruses cause the most severe
for ermergencc are still matters of speculation, matters
 hemorrhagic manifestations and the most pronounced
needing more study.
liver necrosis (the latter perhaps matched only by Rift
Valley fever virus infection in target species). There is an
early and profound leukopenia, followed by a dramatic
Clinical Features
neutrophilia with a shift to the leff, and very little in-
flammatory infltration in sites of parenchymal necrosis
Because the reservoir host(s) of the filoviruses remains
 in the liver. There is no cvidence for latency or persistencc
 unknown, nothing can be said about the clinical features
 in any filovirus infcction in any experimental animal.
of infections in nature. Nevertheless, many experimental
The filoviruses outmaneuver specific host defense
animals have been studied, including guinea pigs and
mechanisms of experimental animals by (1) their speed--
hamsters and several species of monkeys, in most in-
animals often die before it might be expected that an
stances with infection ending ini death. In rhesus ( Macaca
effective primary specific inflammatory/immune re-
mulatta), cynomolgus (Macaca fascicularis), African
green monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops) and baboons
reticuloendothelial and lymphoid tropisms likely mini-
(Papio spp.) inoculated with Marburg virus or the Zaire
 mize the response that might be elicited otherwise. Ab-
subtype of Ebola virus, the incubation period is 4 to 6
 normalics in coagulation parameters include the ap-
days, followed by an abrupt onset of clinical disease
pearance of fibrin split products in the blood and
marked by petechiae, ecchymoses, hemorrhagic pharyn-
gitis, hematemesis, melena, and prostration. Infection
 times; disseminated intravascular coagulation is a com-
nearly always ends in death. There is considerable simi-
larity in the way floviruses artack these nonhuman pri-
 mon terminal event.
mates and humans. The Sudan and Reston subtypes of
Ebola virus are lcast pathogcnic for primates and guinea
pigs, killing only a fraction of animals inoculated with
Laboratory Diagnosis
unpassaged virus---serial passage increases the virulence
of these viruses for these hosts.
Diagnosis of flovirus infections has been based on virus
isolation from blood or tissues in cell culture, such as
Vero (African green monkey kidney) cells or MA-104
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
(fetal rhesus monkey kidney) cells, with detection of
the presence of virus by immunofluorescence or electron
In experimentally infected rhesus, cynomolgus, and Afri-
 microscopy. Diagnosis is also based on the direct detec
Marhurg and Ehota Ftemorrbagic Fevers
451
FIGUrE 28.3.
il.Thistwheiinsfebinl
x  ou a s  s
or antigen-capture enzyme immunoassay. A reverse tran-
nized that within the ecosystems under consideration,
scriptase-polymcrase chain reaction assay has proven
 there is great micro-niche isolation and ccologic insular-
useful as well. Serological diagnostics have been fraught
ity, i.e., there are many sites within larger geographical
with problems-—indirect immunofluorescence suffers
areas in which the filoviruses may coexist invisibly with
from many false positives, especially when used for sero-
 their reservoir host(s). Candidate reservoir hosts include
surveys of filovirus infection rates in captive monkeys.
all mammals (particularly monkeys and rodents), birds,
An IgM capture enzyme immunoassay has proven much
reptiles, amphibians, and arthropods. Particular atten-
more reliable than other serological methods and has
tion is being given to bats; following experimentat virus
become the standard for human and primate serologi-
inoculation, several species of bats have been found to
cal diagnosis.
support the growth of Ebola virus very well, sustaining
virus in their tissues and blood for as long as 3 weeks.
 In all Ehola hemorrhagic fever outbreaks, second-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
a uaq aau d sieade s uamq peas e
principally to contact with body fluids from an acute
The fact that the Ebola virus subtypes thar have caused
 case. In the major African epidemics in 1976, spread
human disease episodes have been different from each
was largely within hospitals due to the reuse of blood-
other makes it clear that a common source transmission
 contaminated syringes and/or needles and, more recently,
chain extending across sub-Saharan Africa is not the
due to close contact without gloves, mask, or protcctive
case—rather, virus subtypes lodged at or near each site
clothing. Recent episodes, including those in Zaire in
of human disease episodes have been responsible (Figure
1995 and Gabon in 1996, were controlled with relatively
28.4). Human index cases have often occurred in or near
 simple sanitary measures: strict barrier nursing practices
the end of the tropical rainy season and all have becn
 patient isolation, and rigorous decontamination of all
associated with the tropical forcst or the marginal zone
 materials and equipment used in patient care.
between tropical forest and savanna. This puts the search
 Filovirus disease prevention and control strategies
for the reservoir host(s) of the viruses in the most biologi-
 have not been widely adopted in Africa—in fact, there
cally diverse of all econiches. Further, it must be recog-
are still arguments about approaches, resources, and
452
28. Filoviridae
Figure 28.4.
Gabon '96(0ct.)
1
(100)
(9)1 96, 10qe9
(86)
Gabon '94
47
Zaire '95
[100)
412
Zaire '76
(06)
961
Cote d'lvoire '94
 Sudan '79
{100]
1065
(100)
Sudan '76
523
 Reston '92
(97)
(Slena)
1102
Reston'92
(100)
(Phllipplnas)
Reston '89
Marburg '80
made over long intervals and from dislant geographic locals, are remarkably similar ond yet different enough to indicate that each subtype exists
separately in is locleThe enire coding region for the glycoprotein gene of he virses shown was used inmaximum parsimony analysis and
a single mast parsimonious free was obtained. Numbers in parentheses indicate bootstrap conlidence values for branch points and were generated
from 500 replicates. Branch length values are also shown. (Courtesy of A. Sanchez.)
training. In contrast, the episodes in the United States and
virus), there is an abrupt onset of illness with initial
Italy from 1989 onward, involving thc Reston subtype
 nonspecific signs and symptoms, including fever, severe
Of Ebola virus, have refocused attention on the risk of
frontal headache, malaise, and myalgia. Thcrc is a pro-
importation of filoviruses into countries outside endemic
found leukopenia, bradycardia, and conjunctivitis and
 zones in West and Central Africa and the Philippines.
 there may be a macropapular rash. Deterioration over
Despite export prohibitions established by source coun-
the following 2 to 3 days is marked by pharyngitis,
tries for conservation purposes, large numbers of wild-
 Hausea and vomiting, prostration, and bleeding, which
caught monkeys are still imported into many countries,
 is manifested as petechiae, ecchymoses, uncontrolled
primarily for vaccine production and medical research,
 bleeding from venepuncture sites, and melena. Abortion
Today, most importing countries operate import quaran-
is a common consequence of infection, and infants born
tine facilities and adhere to international primate trans-
to mothers dying of infection invariably die. Death usu-
port and import standards. These standards include test-
ally occurs 6 to 9 days after the onset of clinical disease
ing for the presence of floviruses
s and protocols to
a uoq sy i A su (se iz oi I aa)
prevent infection in primate facility workers. Similarly,
high: 25% with Marburg virus, 60% with the Sudan
 i  i s  d i a ss
subtype of Ebola virus, and 88-90% with the Zaire
filovirus hemorrhagic fever patients in hospitas in non-
 subtype of Ebola virus. Convalescence is slow and
endemic areas.
 marked by prostration, by weight loss, and often by
amnesia for the period of acute illness.
 Marburg and Ebola viruses cause similar patholog-
Human Disease
ical changes in humans. The most striking lesions arc
found in liver, spleen, and kidney. These lesions are
Marburg and Ebola virus subtypes Zaire, Sudan, and
characterized by focal hepatic necrosis with little in-
Cote d’Ivoire cause severe hemorrhagic fever in hu-
flammatory response and by follicular necrosis in lymph
 mans—it has been said that “the evolution of diseasc 
nodes and spleen. Treatment of patients is nonspecifc
 oftcn seems inexorable and invariable." Following an
and supportive: therapeutic approaches such as conva-
incubation period of usually 4 to 10 days (extreme range 
lescent human plasma, interferon cα, and antiviral drugs
2 to 21 days for infection by the Zaire subtype of Ebola
such as Ribavirin have proven ineffective. Recently, hy-
Further Reading
453
 perimmune equine globulin has been developed in Russia
Wherc does it come from and where is it going? In
and use of whole blood from convalescent patients has
“Emerging Infections" (R. Krause and A, Fauci, eds.),
 been tried in Zaire, but these therapeutic modalities are
Pp. 37s-410. Academic Press, New York.
still under investigation.
Nathanson, N., and Murphy, F. A. (1997). Evolution of
viral diseases. In "Viral Pathogenesis" (N. Nathanson,
Biohazard: Marburg and Ebola viruses are re-
R. Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. E. Griffn, K. V.
stricted pathogens and their importation or possession
Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L, Robinson, eds.),
is rcgulated by most national governmcnts. The viruses
Pp. 353-370. Lippincott-Ravcn, Philadelphia, PA.
are restricted to certain national laboratories for all re-
Pattyn, S. R., ed. (1978). Ebola Virus Hemorrhagic Fe-
 search and diagnostic procedures; thc viruses are also
ver." Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Peters, C. J. (1997). Pathogenesis of viral hemorrhagic fe-
 Biosafcty Level 4 pathogens; they must be handled in
vers., In "Viral Pathogenesis" (N, Nathanson, R.
 the laboratory under maximum containment conditions
Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. E. Griffin, K. V.
 to prevent human exposure.
Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L. Robinson, eds.),
pp. 779-800. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Peters, C. J., Sanchez, A., Feldmann, H., Rollin, P. E,
Nichol, S., and Ksiazek, T. G. (1994). Filoviruses as
emerging pathogens. Semin. Virol. 5, 147-154.
Further Reading
Peters, C. J., Sanchez, A., Rollin, P. E., Ksiazek, T. G.,
and Murphy, F. A. (1996). Filoviridae: Marburg and
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (1995). Up-
Ebola viruses. In "Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields,
date: Management of patients with suspected viral
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. I.
hemorrhagic fever—United States. Morbid. Mortal W.
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
Rep. 44, 475-479.
eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1161-1176. Lippincott-Raven, Phil-
 Johnson, K. M., Webb, P. A., Lange, I. V., and Murphy,
adelphia, PA.
F. A. (1977). Isolation and characterization of a new
Swanepoel, R., Leman, P. A., Burt, F. J., Zachariades,
virus, Ebola virus, causing acute hemorrhagic fever in
N. A., Braack, I.. E., Ksiazek, T. G., Rollin, P. E.
Zaire. Lancet 1, S69-571.
Zaki, S. R., and Peters, C. J. (1996). Experimental in-
Murphy, F. A., and Nathanson, N. (1997). An atlas of vi-
oculation of plants and animals with Ebola virus.
ral disease pathogenesis. In "Viral Pathogenesis"
Emerg. Infect, Dis. 2, 321-325.
(N. Nathanson, R. Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano,
Zaki, S., and Kilmarx, P. (1997). Ebola virus hcmor-
D. E. Griffin, K. V. Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L.
rhagic fever. In "Pathology of Emerging Infections""
Robinson, eds.), pp. 433-463. Lippincott-Raven,
(C. R, Horsburgh and A. M, Nelson, eds.) pp. 299-
Philadelphia, PA.
312. American Society for Microbiology Prcss, Wash-
Murphy, F. A., and Peters, C. J. (1998). Ebola virus:
ington, DC.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Cha p t e r 29
Bornaviridae
 Properties of Borna Disease Virus.
455
Borna Disease...
456
Further Reading...
458
 Borna disease is named for the town of Borna in Saxony,
 polymerase readthrough and posttranscriptional RNA
Germany, where at least since 1895 devastating epidem--
 splicing. Virion proteins are of the following sizes: M.
ics of a naturally occurring, infectious, usually fatal,
190,000, 57,000, 40,000, 23,000, 18,000, and 16,000.
neurological disease of horses and occasionally sheep
The M, 190,000 protein is the RNA-dependent RNA
have occurred. The viral etiology of the disease was
 polymerase and the M, 18,000 protein is a glycoprotein.
 established as early as 1925. With improved understand-
The virus is sensitive to heat, acid, lipid solvents, and
ing of the virus and increased surveillance there is evi-
usual disinfectants (Table 29.1).
dence that the virus may have a very wide, perhaps
worldwide, distribution and there are suggestions that
infection of humans with Borna disease virus may be
linked to specifc neuropsychiatric illnesses.
Viral Replication
Borna disease virus differs from other members of the
order Mononegavirales in that transcription and replica-
of Borna
tion occur in the host cell nucleus. The virus is also
unusual in its transcriptional strategy. The genome is
Disease Virus
transcribed into six primary transcripts, two of which
are modifed posttranslationally by splicing to yield two
Classification
additional mRNA species. Three transcription initiation
The virus is the sole member of the genus Bornavirus,
and four transcription termination signals have been
family Bornaviridae, order Mononegavirales. A disease
identified in the genome and these differ from other
 of horses of unproved etiology, termed Near East en-
 negative-stranded viruses in the configuration of their
 cephalitis and possibly transmitted by ticks, is similar in
 initiation and termination signals, their intergenic re-
 many ways to Borna disease.
gions, and overlaps at gene boundaries.
Primary embryonic brain cell cultures including
neural cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes prepared
Virion Properties
from various animal species can be infected. In cell cul-
tures the virus spreads mainly by cell-to-cell contact;
Borna disease virus virions are spherical, enveloped,
infectivity remains highly cell associated. The virus can
about 90 nm in diameter and contain a core that is about
 be adapted to canine kidney and Vero (African Green
 50-60 nm in diameter (Figure 29.1). The genome is a
 monkey kidney) cells; infection becomes persistent in
single molecule of negative-sense, single-stranded RNA,
these celis. Virus replication can be detected by immuno-
8.9 kb in size (Figure 29.2). The genome contains five
 fluorescence as brightly fluorescent granules of various
open reading frames that code for six proteins through
 sizes in the nucleus of infected cells.
455
456
29.Bornaviridae
Figure 29.1.
Familyonviridgens omvinsorna disease virus virinsegative stain,mmnogold lbel; bcousevirionsare snondesript, seific
antibody conjugated lo gold microspheres was used to identify them. (Courtesy of H. Lucwig.)
Borna Disease
remain crossed for long periods while the horse stands
motionless with its head down (Figure 29.3). Many
Clinical Features
horses refuse to eat or may suddenly stop chewing
and swallowing and there may be constipation 01
The incubation period is usually about 4 weeks but 
diarrhea. Early neurological signs are mainly attribut-
varies from a few days up to 12 months or even
able to dysfunctions in the limbic system, whereas
longer. Initial clinical signs in the horse are variable
 during later stages of the disease dysfunctions of motor
and may include general fatigue, attacks of colic,
systems causing paralysis and pareses predominate.
coughing, icterus, and mild fever. This prodrome is
 Ophthalmologic disorders including nystagmus, pupil.
followed by alternating phases of excitability and som-
lary reflex dysfunction, and blindness may occur in
nolence, ataxia, hyperesthesia, and diffculty in coordi-
 advanced stages. The course of the disease is 3 to 20
nation. There is often an abnormal positioning of the 
days and usually ends in death; surviving horses usually
fore and hind legs—legs may be spread apart or
have permanent sensory and or motor deficits.
Figure 29.2.
Genome of Borna disease virus. There are five open reading frames in the negative-sense, single-stranded RNA genome; reading frame IV
overlaps with Il and V. (Courtesy of S. Briese and i. Lipkin.)
Borna Disease
457
Tabte 29.1
Properties of Borna Disease Virus
Virions are 90 nim in diameter, enveloped with an inner core, 50-60 nm in diameter
The genome is a single molecule of negative-sense, single-stranded RNA, 8.9 kb in size
uapuadapny uo puo ualodooio o buoui 'suralod xi roy bupo sawny bupoai uedo uiou xis sy soua au
RNA polymerase
Viral replication takes place in the nucleus
Infection in cell culture characteristically produces intranuclear inclusion bodies
Pathogenesis, Pathology and Immunity
the olfactory bulbs of the brain from olfactory nerve
endings in the nares. In the brain the virus infects neu-
 Natural infection has been shown to occur in horses,
rons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes.
sheep, cattle, and rabbits. Recently, ostriches have been
There is a severe encephalomyelitis but no neu-
identified as possible hosts as well. Experimentally, the
host range is wide, from chickens to primates. The most
ronal necrosis; histologically, there is perivascular
cuffing consisting mainly of lymphocytes and plasma
 thoroughly investigated experimental model infection is
cells. Intranuclear eosinophilic inclusions, called Joest-
 in the rat. The intranasal route seems to be most likely
 Degen bodies, are characteristic, even pathognomonic
 in natural infection, with virus passing intraaxonally to
of Borna disease, although they cannot be demonstrated
in all cases. Lesions are prominent in the gray matter of
the olfactory bulb, basal cortex, caudate nucleus, and
hippocampus. The necrotic process results in a dilatation
 Figure 29.3.
of the lateral ventricles, resulting in marked hydrocepha-
lus accompanied by severe cortical atrophy, most proba-
bly due to a progressive loss of neurons.
 Infection does not elicit a protective immune re-
sponse, but rather a cell-mediated immunopathological
reaction. Experimentally, whereas infection of adult im-
 munocompetent animals regularly results in disease, in-
fection of neonatal or immunocompromised animals
leads neither to encephalitis nor disease, despite the per-
sistence of the virus. Antibodies do not paticipate in
this pathogenetic process: antibodies lack neutralizing
capacity and adoptive transfer of immunoglobulins from
infected animals to immunocompromised recipients does
not induce pathological changes or disease.
Laboratory Diagnosis
 more than the suspicion of Borna disease. Rabies, teta-
nus, equine herpesviruses, and other diseases have to
be considered in the differential diagnosis, Diagnosis is 
usually confirmed by the demonstration of antibodies in
the serum or preferably in the cerebrospinal fluid. This
 is done routinely by indirect immunofluorescence, where
persistently infected Madin-Darby canine kidney cells
An advanced case of Borng disease, characterized by an abnomal
are used as substrate. Antibody titers are relatively low,
positioning of the fore and hind legs-legs may be spread apart or
ranging from 1:10 to 1:64.
with is head down. [Courtesy of S. Herzog.]
Other methods are also used in reference labora-
458
29.Bornaviridae
tories. Virus isolation in sensitive cultured cells can be 
in the control of the disease is the identification and
used to confrm infection. The presence of virus is
quarantine of carrier animals.
usually detected by direct immunofluorescence. Enzyme
immunoassay methods are sensitive and reliable
if
Human Disease
purified antigen is used and monoclonal antibodies are
used for antigen capture. The reverse transcriprase-
When the tree shrew (a primate, Tupaia glis) was infected
polymerase chain reaction, using standard Borna dis-
 experimentally with Borna disease virus, the only change
ease virus primers, has become a valuable tool for
 noted was aberrant social behavior and reduced reac-
diagnosis—viral RNA may be detected in conjunctival
tions toward environmental stimuli. This fnding moti-
 of nasal secretions or saliva. Postmortem diagnosis
vated the search for evidence of infection in human pa-
relies on immunohistochemistry to demonstrate viral
tients with behavioral or neuropsychiatric disorders.
antigen in the brain.
Antibodies were found in the serum and cerebrospinal
fluid of up to 7% of patients with specific behavioral
and cognitive dysfunctions in Germany, the United
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
States, and Japan, with the highest incidence in regions
where Borna disease was known to be endemic in horses.
 For many years Borna disease was considered sporadi-
Antibody prevalence has been found to be highest in
cally endemic only in certain areas of central Europe.
 patients with recurrent bipolar disorder (depression) and
However, recent seroepidemiological investigations have
schizophrenia. Although it is still premature to call Borna
indicated that infection in horses is much more wide-
 disease a zoonosis, appropriate care is indicated when
spread. Antibodies have been found in about 12% of
handling infected animals.
horses in Germany, Switzerland, and The Netherlands
and antibodies have also been found in horses in the
Further Reading
 United States. Most of the animals surveyed were with-
out clinical signs, but most exhibited disease within 1
Becht, H., and Richt, J. A. (1996). Borna disease. In "Vi-
year. Because the opportunity for contact between horses
rus Infections of Vertebrates" (M. J. Studdert, ed.),
has been expanded tren
emendously in recent years by inter-
Vol. 6, pp. 235-244. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
national racing and other activities, the virus may just
Briese, T., de la Iorre, J. C., Lewis, A. J., Park, Y. S.,
 now be spreading after many years of relative confine-
Kim, S., Ludwig, H., and Lipkin, W. 1. (1994). Geno-
mic organization of Borna disease virus. Proc. Natl.
ment in traditionally endemic areas. Equine vaccination
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 4362-4367.
has been attempted but its value has been questionable
Briese, T., Lipkin, W. I., and de la Torre, J. C. (1995).
and, given the immunopathologic nature of the disease,
Molecular biology of Borna disease virus. Curr, Top.
it may even be dangerous.
Microbiol. Immunol. 190, 1-16.
No data are available on reservoirs that might
Daubney, R., and Mahlau, E. A, (1967). Viral encephalo-
 transmit the virus to horses on a regional or international
myelitis of equines and domestic ruminants in the
Near East. Res. Vet. Sci. 8, 375-397.
basis. Whether the only important source of virus is
Lipkin, W. I., and Koprowski, H., eds. (1995). Borna dis-
inapparently infected horses or whether other species
ease. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 190, 1-134.
may contribute, such as sheep, is unknown. Because
Ludwig, H., Bode, L., and Gosztonyi, G. (1988). Borna
 persistent-tolerant infections can be established in rats
disease: A persistent virus infection of the central ner-
vous system. Prog. Med. Virol. 35, 107-151.
and these animals shed virus continuously, it seems clear
Rott, R., Herzog, S., Bechter, K., and Frese, K. (1991).
that the question of an inapparently infected reservoif
Borna disease, a possble hazard for man? Arch. Virol.
host must be pursued. In any case, an essential step
118, 143-149.
CHaPter
30
Orthomyxovirdae
Properties of Orthomyxoviruses ...
460
Equine Influenza......
463
Swine Influenza....
464
Avian Influenza...
466
Further Reading...
468
 Influenza viruses are important pathogens of animals,
humans. The lineagcs in swine and humans arc closely
hut only rarely are they zoonotic, i.e., they are not trans-
rclated, derived from a common avian ancestor. In
 mitted directly fron animals each time there is a human
fact, thc viruscs currently circulating in swinc in Europe
infection, Instead, they are the ultimate species jumpers,
 and horscs in China derived all of their eight genomic
forever evolving host range variants in animals that be-
segmcnts from avian viruses. The dates when some
come epidemic and even pandemic when they invade
lincagcs divergcd from their ancestors can also be
humans. For this reason, vetcrinary and human concerns 
estimated: the ancestor of the human virus that caused
over influcnza are tightly linked.
the 1918 pandemic diverged from a classic swine
The reservoir of influenza A viruses is in aquatic
virus between 1905 and 1914. Avian viruses, unlikc
birds, especially ducks, shorebirds, and gulls; the viruses
mammalian viruses, show low evolutionary rates; in
replicate in intestinal epitheliumn and are excreted in high
fact, viruses in aquatic birds appear to be in evolution-
concentrations in feces, resulting in an effcient fecal-
ary stasis. Nucleotide changes have continued to occur
As s sne uni und uosssn no
 at a similar rate in avian and mammalian infuenza
viruses between the continents and thereby play a kcy
viruses, but these changes no longer resulr in amino
role in the continuing proccss of virus evolution. Thcre
 acid changes in avian viruses. This suggests that avian
are periodic cxchanges of viral genes or whole viruses 
viruses are approaching or have reached a state of
between thesc reservoirs and orher species: domestic
 adaptation where further changes provide no selective
fowl, especially ducks, and mammals such as swinc,
advantage. This also means that the source of genes
horses, mink, seals, whales, and humans. Domcstic swinc
for future epidemics in domestic fowl, horses, and
are important intermediate hosts (in the Unitcd States,
humans already exist in the aquatic bird reservoir.
turkeys may also serve as intermediate hosts) and China
 Given our new undcrstanding of the natural his-
 is the epicenter for viral movement from reservoir hosts
tory of influenza viruses as species jumpers, prevention
through intermediate hosts and inro horses, swine, and
efforts might become more focused: for example, live-
humans. There are human epidemics nearly every year
 bird markets that bring together a wide variety of avian
 and pandemics whenever a major antigenic variant virus
species (chickens, ducks, turkeys, pheasants, guinea
 idams i sapd n useds, au 'saa
fowl, and chukars) and provide opportunity for genetic
world in 1918, just as World War I ended, killed 25-40
 mixing might be monitored to reduce the emergence of
 million people—more than the war itsclf.
reassortant viruses. Changes in agricultural practices to
Phylogenetic analyses have indicated that influ-
separate swine and turkeys from aquatic birds and other
 enza viruses have evolved into five host-specific lineages:
 species might break the evolutionary progression of new
an old equine lineage, which has not been seen in 
variants. Of course, such measures are not likely to be
over 15 years, a separate recent equine lineage, a
feasible on a global scale--instead, new variant influenza
lincage in gulls, another in swine, and another in viruses wil continue to emerge.
459
460
30. Orthomyxoriridde
Properties of
(previously designated equine influenza viruses 1 and 2)
Orthomyxoviruses
cause respiratory disease in horses; (2) H1N1 and HI3N2
viruses are isolared often from swine; (3) H7N7 and
Classification
H4N5 viruses cause respirarory and systemic disease in
seals; (4) H10N4 viruses cause respiratory disease in
The family Orthomyxoviridae comprises the genera In- 1
mink; (5) H1N1, H2N2, H3N2, recently H5N1, and
fluenzavirus A, Influenzavirus B, Influenzavirus C, and 
 possibly H3N8 viruses cause respiratory disease in hu-
Thogotovirus. Influenza A viruses are pathogens of r
 mans; and (6) nearly ail combinations occur in birds,
horses, swine, mink, seals, whales, fowl, and humans.
 particularly H5N2 and H7N1 (the major causes of avian
 Infuenza B viruses are pathogens of humans only, and
 influenza, also called fowl plaguc, in chickens).
 although influenza C viruses infect humans and swine,
they rarcly causes serious disease. The thogotoviruses are
a little-known group of tick-borne arboviruses infecting
Virion Properties
livestock and humans in Africa, Europe, and Asia. The
name of the family is derived from the Greek myxa,
Orthomyxovirus virions are pleomorphic, often spheri-
meaning mucus, and orthos, meaning correct or right.
cal bur predominantly filamentous in fresh isolates, 80-
The name originated to distinguish these viruses from
120 nm in their smallest dimension (Figure 30.1). Virions
the paramyxoviruses. Influenza is the Italian form of
 consist of an envelope with large peplomers surrounding
Latin, from influentia, “influence,” so used because epi-
eight (genera Infuenzavirus A and Influenzavirus B),
dermics were thought to be due to astrological or other
seven (genus Influenzavirus C), or six (genus Thogotovi-
occult influences.
rus) helicaly symmetrical nucleocapsid segments of dif-
Thc classifcation of the influenza viruses is influ-
ferent sizes. There arc two kinds of glycoprotein peplom-
enced greatly by the practical need for asscssment of the
 ers: (1) homotrimers of the hemagglutinin protein and
risk represented by the emergence of new variant viruses
(2) homoterramers of the neuraminidase protein (Figure
 and the question of whcther herd immunity against pre-
 30.2). Influenza C viruses have only one type of glycopro-
viously circulating strains will dampen spread and
tein peplomer, consisting of multifunctional hemaggluti-
whcther existing vaccines will need to be reformulated.
nin-esterase molecules (HE). Genomic segments have a
The emergence of variant viruses not only depends on
loop at one end and consist of a molecule of viral RNA
genetic drift, i.e., point mutations (nucleoride substitu-
 enclosed within a capsid composed of helically arranged
tions, insertions, deletions), but also on genetic shift, i.e.,
nucleoprotein (NP). Associated with the RNA are three
genomic segment reassortment. Drift and shift of two
 proreins that make up the viral RNA polyinerase (PB1,
genes, the viral hemagglutinin and the neuraminidase 
 PB2, and PA). Virion envelopes are lined by the matrix
are most important—in the classification system, influ-
jo iaqunu jeus e Aq pauueds aie pue (in) uaond
enza A viruses are categorized inro 15 hemagglutinin and
ion channels composed of tetramers of a second matrix
9 neuraminidase types. Viruses are further categorized by
 protein, M2. The genome in eight, seven, or six segments
their host (swine, horses, birds, etc.), geographic origin,
consists of linear negative-sense, single-stranded RNA,
strain number, and year of isolation. Thus, the full identi-
10-13.6 kb in overall size. The genome segments have
fication of an influenza virus looks like a secret code but
terminal repeats at both ends, with those on the 3' ends
 is precise and informative:
being identical on all segments.
 Influenza viruses are sensitive to heat (56°C, 30
 Influenza virus A/equine/Prague/1/S6 (H7N7), the pro-
minutes), acid (pH 3), and lipid solvents and are thus
 totypic cquine influenza virus 1
very labile under ordinary environmental conditions.
 Influenza virus A/equine/Miami/1/63 (H3N8), the pro-
totypic equine influenza virus 2
 Influenza virus A/swine/lowa/15/30 (H1N1),the proto-
Viral Replication
typic strain of swine influenza virus
 Influenza virus A/Hong Kong/1/68 (H3N2), the virus I
 In permissive cells, the viral hemagglutinin is activated by
that caused the human pandemic of 1968 (when the
cleavage into rwo parts——HA1 and HA2—-which remain
host of origin is not spccified it indicates human
linkcd by disulfide bonds. Virions attach to cells via the
origin)
binding of their activatcd hemagglutinin to sialic acid
receptors on the plasma mcmbrane (different ortho-
Although any gene consteltion and any combina-
myxoviruses use sialic acid molecules with differcnt car-
tion of H and N genes can arise by genctic reassortment,
bohydrate sidc chains as their receptors). Entry is via
 only a limited range of combinations are recognized as
receptor-mediated endocytosis; transcription complexes
important as pathogcns: (1) H7N7 and H3N8 viruses 
(nucleocapsids with associated RNA polymerase) arc re-
Preperties of Orthomyxoviruses
461
FIGURE 30.1.
Family Orhmxviidenus innzavirus A inenzarusAngKng/168HN2)Virns hwing disinct pmers, whiche
octually of wo kinds: hemagglulinin ond neuraminidase. Negative stain electron microscopy. Magnification: X70,000.
leased into the cytoplasm after fusion between the viral
FIgure 30.2.
envelope and the cndosomal membrane (Figure 30.3).
This fusion is triggercd by the low pH in the endosome,
NA
which causes another conformational activation of the
HA
hemagglutinin. Transcriptional complexes are trans-
MI-
ported into the nucleus where transcription and RNA
replication take place.
Lipid
 As with all other viruses with negative-sense RNA
envelope
genomes, the genome of orthormyxoviruses serves two
NP
RNA-
functions; (1) a template for the synthesis of mRNAs
and (2) a template for the synthesis of positive-sense
replicative intermediate RNA, which serves as template
for progeny gcnomic RNA synthesis. Primary transcrip-
Pproteir
tion involves a unusual phenomenon known as cap-
M2
snatching: the viral endonuclease (PB2) cleaves the S'.
methylguanosine cap plus about 10-13 nucleotides from
heterogeneous cellular RNAs, and these caps are then 
 Schematic representation of an influenza A virion showing the enve-
uscd by the virus as primers for transcription by the viral
lope in whichthree different types of transmembrane proteins are
 RNA polymerase (transcriptase; PB1). Of the primary
anchored: the hemogglutinin [HA} and the neuraminidase (NA} Form
thecharacterisieplomerndtheMproeinwhichishorand
RNA traiscripts produced from the eight gene segments
of influenza A and B viruses, six are monocistronic and
layer of M1 protein that surounds eight ribonucleoprotein (RNP)
arc translated directly. The other two undergo splicing,
structhureseachfwhichnsistsfnRNAsegmentovered wih
nucleoprotein (NP) and associated with the three polymerase (P)
cach yielding two mRNAs, which are translated in differ-
proteins. The RNA segments exist in a circular conformalion stabi-
ent reading frames, each producing fwo proteins. Influ-
lizedbybaspiringeweeind5endAdr
enza B virus uses a different strategy, involving alterna-
P. Palese and A. Garcia-Sastre. Infuenza viruses. In "Encyclapedia
of Virology" (R. G. Webster and A. Granoff, eds.), 2nd ed. (CD-
tive translation start sites and reading frames. Viral
ROM. Acadiemic Press, London, 1998].
mRNAs are 3'-polyadenylated and lack the 5'-terminal
462
30.Ortboryxoririadae
Figure 30.3.
coated pit
ne protein
BUDDING
coated vesicle
ribosomes
TRANSLATION
80
NP.P'
Golgi
sertionofenvelope proteinsinto
endosome
completion of glycosylation
endoplasmicreticulum
of envelope proteins
synthesis and glycosylation
Replicationofinfuenza virus.l)Adsorption:the virusinteracts with sialicacid-containing cellreceplorsviaitshemagglotinin andentersvi
endcsiininglneenchngdbyidnirnfn
whichlssifirebllilernr
ndreplionvirRAisnscribdndreplicatdinthnclesbyvirlRNApolrewdifernteisfNAr
hemaggltininermidsen}renspedelasmmmrnheviralprteinsossesinglearsignals
transorlidsmlsinclsmwhereinrtwiirbaeprinledeipahin
theplasmamembrane.Virionsbudfromhehost celmembraneFromRA.Lab,ndR.MKrug.Orhomyxoviridae:Thevirsesand her
replictonnFielsVirology BNFiels,D.M.Knipe,P.M.Hwey,R.M.Chnck,. LMelnick,T. PMonth,.Rizman, nd S.E
16 nucleotides of the corresponding genomic RNA
RNAs. Late in infection, the matrix protein M1 enters
segment.
the nucleus and binds to nascent genomic RNAs, thereby
Viral protein synthesis occurs in the cytoplasm
 down-regulating transcription and permitting export
using cellular translation machinery. Interestingly, the
from the nucleus and assembly into virions.
orthomyxoviruses have evolved several mechanisms to
Virions are formed by budding, incorporating M
 increase their coding capacity: splicing of mRNAs, cou-
 protein and nucleocapsids that have aligned below
pled stop-start translation of tandem genes, and frame
 patches on the plasma membrane in which hemaggluti-
shifting. The proteins associated with the virion RNA
 nin and neuraminidase have bcen inserted. It is not
arc transported to the nucleus during the first hours
known by what mechanism one copy of each RNA seg-
 postinfection, then migrate to the cytoplasm.
 ment is incorporated into each virion. One possibility is
Replication of genomic RNA segments requires 
that the segments are linked loosely by RNA/protein
the synthesis of full-length, positive-sensc RNA interme-
 recognition signals. Alternatively, the scgments may bc
diates, which unlike the corresponding mRNA tran-
 packaged almost at random, with most virions encapsi-
scripts, must lack 5'-caps and 3'-poly(A) tracts. Newly
 dating extra segments to ensure viability. As virions bud,
synthesized nucleoprotein binds to thcse RNAs, facilitat-
the neuraminidase peplomers facilitate the “pinching
ing their use as templates for the synthesis of genomic
 off" and release of virions by destroying receptors on
Ficgttine Infuent
463
TaBle 30.1
Properties of Influenza Virus
Four generα: influenzavirus A, influenzavirus B, Infuenzavirus C, and Thogotovirus
Virions are pleomorphic, spherical, or filamentous, 80-120 nm in diameter, and consist of an envelope with large
peplomers surrounding eight (genera Influenzavirus A and Influenzovirus B), seven (genus influenzavirus C), or six
The genome consis of linear negtive-sense,singlestranded RNA, divided into eight or seven or six segments, 10-13.6
kb in overall size
There are two kinds of peplomers: rod shaped, consisting of homotrimers of he hemagglutinin glycoprotein, and mush-
room shaped, consisting of homctetramers of the neuraminidase prolein
for mRNA transcription; budding takes place on the plasma membrane
Defective interfering partices and genetic reassortment occur frequently
the plasma membrane that would otherwise recapture discharge. The serous nasal discharge develops at the
virions and hold them at the cell surface. Transmission  same time as a characteristic harsh, dry paroxysmal
is by aerosol, droplets, and fomites and is water borne cough that may persist for up to 3 weeks. Infected horses
 among ducks. Thogoto and Dhori viruses are transmit-
 develop fever (39.5 to 41°C) lasting for 4 to 5 days and
ted by ticks and replicate in both ticks and mammals
become inappetent and depressed. Mortality is rare, but
(Table 30.1).
prolonged fever in pregnant mares may result in abor.
tion. Clinical diagnosis of acute cases is straightforward,
but diagnosis in partially immune horses is more diffcult,
Equine Influenza
 as the disease must be differentiated from other respira-
tory infections, including those caused by equine herpes-
The differcntiation of equine influenza from other equine viruses 1 and 4, equine adenoviruses, and rhinoviruses.
respiratory diseases was established in 1956 when influ-S
 Secondary bacteriai infections may occur, characterized
enza virus A/equine/Prague/1/56 (H7N7) (equine influ- by purulent nasal exudates and bronchopneumonia. In
enza virus 1) was isolated in an epidemic in central Eu-
 the absence of such complications the disease is self-
rope and subsequently in the United States; a second
limiting, with complete recovery occurring within 2 to
virus, A/equine/Miami/1/63 (H3N8) (equine influenza
 3 weeks after infection.
virus 2), was frst isolated in 1963. Since then,the disease
p sap u oe pe sisio u pai aq su
mules in all parts of the world except Australia, New
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Zealand, and Iceland. H3N8 virus has been identifed in
all recent outbreaks; the last outbreak caused by subtype
 Equine influenza viruses replicate in epithelial cels of
H7N7 virus was in 1979, but antibody has been detected
 the upper and lower respirafory tract. Infection causes
 in unvaccinated horses since then, suggesting that the inflarnmation, which leads to serous nasal discharge. The
virus still circulates. H3N8 virus has undergone only
 most important changes occur in the lower respiratory
modest genetic drift since it was fist isolated, yet it
 tract and include laryngitis, tracheitis, bronchitis, bron-
 continues to cause disease and to affcct the performance
chiolitis, and interstitial pneumonia accompanied by
of racehorses.
congestion and alvcolar edema. Myocarditis has been
reported rarely. Secondary infections may result in con-
junctivitis, pharyngitis, bronchopneumonia, chronic pul-
Clinical Features
 monary disease, gutural pouch infections, purpura,
and strangles.
 In susceptible horses, influenza spreads rapidly and
 Factors contributing to innate resistance include
causes disease of high morbidity 24 to 48 hours after 
(1) the mucus blankct that protects the underlying epithe-
 infcction; the rapid spread is a valuable diagnostic indica-
lium and the continuous beating of cilia that clears virus
tor. The clinical signs are due to infection of the respira-
 from the respiratory tract; (2) soiuble lectins, lung surfac-
tory tract: there is reddening of the nasal mucosa, con-t
 tants, and sialoglycoproteins present in mucus and tran-
junctivitis, and serous, later mucopurulent nasal sudates that bind virions; and (3) alveolar macrophages.
464
30. Orthomyxouiridae
 If the horse has been infected previously, antihemaggluti-
influenza is caused by the year-round transport of horses
 nin antibodies may intercept and neutralize invading
fo1 racing and breeding purposes between Europe, North
virions—secretory IgA is generally believed to be the
 America, Japan, Hong Kong, and elsewhere. Although
 most relevant antibody, in the upper respiratory tract at
clinical manifestations normally begin in the cold season,
least, but serum IgG may providc protection in the lung
 epidemics occur mostly during the main racing season,
especially after infection and the inflammatory response 
i.e., between April and October in the northern hemi-
 have progressed. In laboratory aninal models, it has
sphere.
been shown that activated macrophages and natural
 Apart from one outbreak in China that was derived
killer cells, plus rwo important cytokines, interferon-y
 froin an avian source, equids are the only known reser-
and interleukin-2, as well as immunologically-specific
voir of equine influenza viruscs; however, that outbreak
CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes, are crucial in clearing
 provides insight into the pathogenic potential of these
virus from the lower respiratory tract. Class I-rcstricted
viruses. In 1989 a severe outbreak of influenza A oc-
CD8 cytotoxic T cells are most effective in ensuring
curred in horses in northeastern China, with morbidiry
cross-protection when long-lived memory T cells are re-
of 80% and mortality of 20%. In a second outbrcak a
activated by a ncw infection caused by a different strain
year later, the morbidity was about 50% and there was
 of virus. Class Il-restricted CD4 T cells arc important
 no mortality, probably because of the immune status
in secrering cytokines that attract and activate macro-
of horses in the region. Of particular intcrest was the
phages, NK cells, and other T cells.
discovery that although the causative virus had the same
antigenic composition as viruses circulating among
horses in other parts of the world, its genes were of
Laboratory Diagnosis
recent avian origin. Serological studies indicated that the
virus was not present in China before 1989; thus, it
The best material for viral isolation from horses is nasal
 represents the transfer of an avian influenza virus to
 mucus taken early in the course of the infection or lung
 mammals without reassortment. Of course, predicting
 Material obtained at necropsy. The viruses replicate well
the epidemic potential of viruses like this is impossible
in 10-day-old embryonated eggs, using, either the amni-
only ongoing surveillance can indicate spread.
otic or the allantoic route of inoculation, and incubating
Control involves isolation and vaccination. Stables
at 35°-37°C for 3 to 4 days. The samc may be done in
and courses where equine influenza outbreaks occur are
 cell culrure systems, including chick embryo fbroblasts
put under quarantinc for at least 4 weeks. After all horses
and the canine kidncy cel line, MDCK. Viral rcplication
havc recovercd, cleaning and disinfection of boxcs and
is dctccted by the deinonstration of hemagglutinating
 stablcs, equipment, and transport vehicles is necessary.
activity in the harvested amniotic or allantoic fluid or
Vaccination is done with inactivated vaccine con-
 cell culture fluid and isolates are identified by hemagglu-
taining Aequine (H7N7) and A/equine (H3N8) viruses,
tination-inhibition, using a panel of subrype-specifc ref-
the latter preferably also including strains to match the
crcnce antisera. Retrospective serologic diagnosis can
 prevalent feld virus. Oil and polymer-adjuvanted prepa-
 be donc using hemagglutination-inhibition and paired
rations and Quil-A-based inmune-stimulating com-
serum samples; sera must be suitably treated to eliminate
plexes (ISCOMs) have resulted in more durable re-
nonspecific inhibitors.
sponses as compared with previous whole virus and
subunit vaccines. Vaccine is given in multiple doses ac-
cording to risk; for example, some racehorses are revacci-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Contro!
nated every 3 to 9 months. The 1989 epidemic in Europe
highlighted an additional problem: while vaccination re-
Equine influenza viruscs are highly contagious and are
duced the severity of disease, it failed to limit transmis-
sprcad rapidly in stables or studs by infectious exudate
sion—after many years of genetic stability, antigenic
that is aerosolizcd by frequent coughing. Virus is ex-
cretcd during the incubation period and horses remain
effective vaccination policy rcquires the regular updating
infectious for at least 5 days after clinical disease bcgins.
of vaccinc; howcvel, some vaccine manufacturers have
Close contact between horses secms to be necessary for
continucd to use only prototypc strains.
rapid transmission; however, contaminated clothing of
 sa ds pe sia uosid as
also contribute to virus distribution. Equine populations
Swine lnfluenza
that are moved frequcntly, such as racehorscs, breeding
stock, show jumpers, and horses sent to sales, are at
Swine influenza was first observed in the north central
special risk. The rapid international spread of equine
United States at the time of the catastrophic 1918 pan-
Steine tnffuenrd
465
demic of human influenza, and for a long timc was this necrosis may plug small bronchioles. This may prog-
reported only from this area where annual outbreaks ress to alveolar atelectasis, interstitial pneumonia, and
lent respiratory diseases in swine in North America. In
Europe, the disease was observed in the 1950s in Czecho-
slovakia, the United Kingdom, and West Germany; then
Laboratory Diagnosis
 the virus apparently disappeared. It reappeared again in
1976 in northern Italy and spread to Belgium and south-
Traditionally, the chick embryo was the standard host
ern France in 1979; sincc thcn it has occurred in Europe
for cultivation of influenza viruses and is still used in
rather regularly.
addition to cell culture (MDCK cells) by some reference
Two distinct variants of swine influenza virus,
laboratories. Cytopathology is usually not conspicuous,
both H1N1, are presently circulating in thc world: (1)
 but growth of virus may be recognized after 3 to 7 days
the variant found in Europe (excepr Italy) since 1979
 by hemadsorption and thc isolate identified immunologi-
and (2) the variant found in the United States (and
cally (immunofluorescencc or enzyme immunoassay us-
Italy) that is similar to classical strains. Swine may
 ing enzyme-labelcd monoclonal antibodies specifc for
also be infected with H3N2 strains, either from humans
influenza types and subtypes).
or birds, but such infections are inapparent. Reas-
sortauts have been detected in parts of Japan where
both H1N1 and H3N2 strains occur among swine,
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
but so far these have not spread among humans or
caused serious disease in swine.
The coincidence of the frst swine influenza outbreaks
with the 1918 human influenza pandemic has led to
suspicion that the causative viruscs might be related.
Clinical Features
Recent phylogcnetic studies based on sequence analysis
of polymerasc chain reaction products from formalin-
After an incubation period of 24 to 72 hours, the onset f
fixed, paraffin-embedded archival lung tissue from hu-
of disease is abrupt, often appearing in many animals
 man paticnts who dicd during the 1918 pandemic have
in a hcrd at the same tine. There is fever (>42°C),
 confrmcd that the human virus was related most closely
apathy, inappetence, huddling and a reluctance to move,
 to swine influenza virus. Apart from classical H1N1-like
and signs of respiratory distress: paroxysmal coughing,
 viruses, H3N2 strains also cocirculate in swine popula-
sneezing, rhinitis with nasal discharge, labored breath-
tions.
ing, and bronchial rales at auscultation. After 3 to 6
Outbreaks arc observed mostly in late fall and
days, swinc usually recover quickly, cating normally by
winter, after the introduction of new swine into suscepti-
7 days after appearancc of the first clinical signs. If sick
 ble herds. Frequently thc disease appears simultaneously
swine are kept warm and frcc of stress the course of
 on scveral farms within an area; outbreaks are cxplosive,
disease is benign with very few complications and a case-
 with all swine in a herd becoming sick at the same time.
fatality rate of less than 1%, but some animals develop
The problem of the interepidemic survival of swine in-
severe bronchopneumonia, which may result in death.
fluenza virus has been a matter of intensive investigation
Even when they recover, the cconomic consequences of
 for many years, but is still unsolved. Rccent investiga-
swine influenza are considerable in that sick swine either
tions suggest that the virus circulates in swine throughout
lose weight or their weight gains are reduced.
the year and that some swine become carriers, manifest-
 ing discase only when the weather becomes colder. Vac-
cines have been developed, but have not been widely
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
applied. Swine influenza virus aiso infects turkeys: there
can be respiratory diseasc or a decline in egg production
The infection follows the usual pattern for respiratory
 and an increase in the number of abnormal eggs.
infections: viral cntry is via aerosol and there is a rapid
 progression of infection in thc epithelium of the nasal,
 tracheal, and bronchial airways. Infection may progress
Human Disease
to involve all airways in just a few hours. Sharply demar-
catcd lung lesions are encountered, mostly in apical and
 Infection of humans with swine influenza virus is rcla-
cardiac lobes, with hypercmia, consolidation, and the
tivcly common, espccially among abattoir workers, and
presence of exudates in airways. Histologically, epithe-
 may cause respiratory disease, but cases in other settings
lial surfaces may be totally denuded and the debris of
 are rare and person-to-person spread is limited. How-
466
30.Orihomyxouiridae
 ever, the fear of another pandemic like that of 1918 has  and the avirulence of others were unraveled through the
always made human cases the subject of public concern. outstanding work of Rudolf Rott, Christof Scholtissek,
For example, the isolation of swine influenza virus from  and collagues at the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine of
military recruits at Fort Dix in the United States in 1976t
the Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany. They
led to a massive human immunization campaign in the
 found that although the viral hemagglutinin is of para-
United States.
mount importance in determining virulence, a combina-
tion or constellation of genes contributes, including the
 nucleoprotein and polymerase genes.
Avian Influenza
Virions with uncleaved hemagglutinin are nonin-
fectious. Hemagglutinin clcavability is dependent on its
The devastating form of influenza in chickens known as
primary structure at the site where cleavage occurs and
"fowl plague” was recognized as a distinct disease entiry 
the presence of the right proteases in target tissues that
as early as 1878. The isolation of an avian influenza
can carry out that cleavage. In epithelial cells lining the
virus in 1901 preceded the discovery of mammalian and
 respiratory and intestinal tracts, the hemagglutinin of
human influenza viruses, but it was not until 1955 that
 all incoming avian infhuenza viruses is cleaved by host
it was recognized that avian and mammalian inflnenza
proteases, thereby activating its fusion activity and
viruses are closely related. From the 1970s onward, avian
 allowing its entry; however, in other tissues, only the
influenza came into ecological focus when surveillance
 hemagglutinin of virulent viruses is cleaved, leading to
 indicated the ubiquitous presence of viruses in waterfowl
 systemic disease and death. This phenomenon accounts
and the risk these birds pose to commercial chicken  not only for viral strain differences but also for the sus-
industries. A very large epidemic centered in the broiler
 ceptibility or resistance of different avian species. For
industry of Pennsylvania in 1983, which cost $61 million example, A/chicken/Scotland/59 (H5N1) virus is more
to control, brought substance to this risk. A repeat of 1
virulent for chickens whereas A/turkey/Ontario/7732/
this kind of epidemic in the commercial broiler industry
 66 (H5N9) virus is more virulent for turkeys. In nature,
of Mexico in the 1990s showed that the risk continues.
ducks are refractory to even the most virulent viruses.
The pathogenesis of avian influenza is quite differ-
 ent from that in mammals in that viral replication occurs
Clinical Features
in the intestinal tract as well as the respiratory tract. In
infections with the most virulent strains there is viremia
 The disease caused in chickens and turkeys by highly
 and multifocal lymphoid and visceral necrosis, leading
 pathogenic avian influenza viruses has historically been
to pancreatitis, myocarditis, myositis, and encephalitis.
called "fowl plague.*" Today, the term should be avoided 
Chickcns and turkeys succumbing after several days of
except where it is part of the name of well-characterized
 illness exhibit petechial hemorrhages and serous exu-
strains [e.g., A/fowl plague virus/Dutch/27 (H7N7)].
dates in respiratory, digestive, and cardiac tissues. Tur-
Highly virulent strains cause sudden death without pro-
 keys may also have air sacculitis and pulnionary conges-
dromal symptoms. If birds survive for more than 48
 tion. In all avian species, neutralizing antibodies are
hours (which is more likely in older birds), there is a
 detectable within 3 to 7 days after the onset of disease,
cessation of egg laying, respiratory distress, lacrimation,
reaching a peak during the second week and persisting
sinusitis, diarrhea, edema of the head, face and neck,
for up to 18 months.
 and cyanosis of unfeathered skin, particularly the comb
and wattles. Less virulent viruses may also cause consid-
erable losses, particularly in turkeys, because of an-
Laboratory Diagnosis
orexia, decreased egg production, respiratory disease,
and sinusitis. Clinical signs in chickens and turkeys may
Clinical diagnosis is usually not possible except in an
be exacerbated greatly by concurrent infections (e.g.,
epidemic because of the variability of clinical signs. Virus
 Newcastle disease and various bacterial and mycoplasma
isolation is essential not only to establish the cause of
infections), the use of live-virus vaccines, or environmcn-
an outbreak but to assess objectively the virulence of the
tal stress (e.g., poor ventilation and overcrowding).
causative virus. Virus is best isolated from cloacal swabs;
 specimens are inoculared into the allantoic cavity of 8-
to 10-day-old embryonated eggs and the presence of
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
virus is indicated by hemagglutinating activity using al-
lantoic fluid and chicken red blood cells. Isolates are
The pathogenic mechanisms responsible for the extraor-
roughly identified using hemagglutination-inhibition,
 dinary virulence of some avian influenza virus strains
cnzyme immunoassay, or single radial diffusion and
ArviaInffuenza
467
broadly reactive antisera. Finally, isolates may be typed
1 or avian products from countries not declared "virus
and subtyped using hemagglutination- and neuramini-
free."' In the United States, Australia, and most European
dase-inhibition assays; due to antigenic drift, a broad (
 countries, virulent avian influenza virus is handied as an
range of antisera is used in reference laboratories. To
 exotic pathogen: once diagnosed, quarantine and re-
assess the virulence of isolates, intracerebral and intrave-
 moval programs are implemented. To minimize second-
nous pathogenicity indices are determined using 1 day-
 ary spread, strict hygienic measures are required, which
old chicks and 6-week-old chickens, respectively. The
include cleaning and disinfection, an interval between
cleavability of the hemagglutinin of isolates is assessed
 slaughter and repopulation, and controlled movement
by the production of plaques in celi cultures that are
of humans and animals.
permissive for virulent viruses but not permissive for
3. At the local farm-based level, efforts are aimed
avirulent viruses.
at preventing virus introduction into chicken and turkey
flocks from wild birds. Today, commercial chicken facili-
ties are always made wild bird proof but turkeys are
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
often still raised in the open.
Avian influenza virus is shed in high concentrations in
Vaccination has not been used to control outbreaks
the feces and survives for long periods, especially in
 in most developed countries because of traditional con-
water at low temperature. The virus is introduced into 
 servatism and problems pertaining to international
trade. In fact, the real potential of vaccination has not
sion, i.e., between chickens and turkeys and from wild
 really been tested: criticisms leveled at vaccines in the
birds, especially wild ducks. Influenza in turkeys is seen
 past, such as failure to prevent shedding and transmis-
principally in countries where they are raised in facilities
sion, failure to match the antigenic profle of current viral
where wild birds have access.
variants, high cost, and failure to be able to adequately
It is unclear how all of the subtypes of avian influ-
 measure vaccine potency and efficacy, still prevail. Po-
enza A viruses are maintained in wild birds from year
   d e  e 
to year; it is hypothesized that the viruses are maintained
 assessed for any product based on modern vaccine design
by circulation at low levels in large wild bird populations
 strategy. Nonetheless, in the epidemic that swept the
even during migration and overwintering. Studies of wild
 commercial broiler industry of Mexico in the early
ducks in Canada have shown that up to 20% of juvenile
 1990s, conventional vaccines were used and after po-
 birds are already infected silently as they congregate
 tency assays were standardized they proved very val-
prior to their southern migration. Avian influenza viruses
uable.
have also been isolated in many countries from imported
caged birds. The epidemiologic importance of live bird
markets should not be underestimated: a H5N2 virus
Human Disease
similar to that responsible for the epidemic in chickens
It is now clear that avian influenza viruses are zoonotic.
in Pennsylvania in 1983 reappeared later in caged bird 
After a massive epidemic in chickens in China in 1997,
markets in New York City.
a child who had contact with pet chickens died in Hong
 Avian influenza control activities operate at inter-
 Kong with influenza-like clinical signs. An H5N1 virus
national, national, and local levels:
 subtype, previously known to occur only in birds, was
1. At the international level, countries must be
 isolated at autopsy. Within a short time additional cases
willing to report disease outbreaks. The *"fowl plague"
were reported and by the time the episode ended in early
form of avian influenza appears in list A of the Interna-
1998 there were 18 confrmed cases, many of which
tional Animal Health Code of the Offce International
 involved severe disease and 6 of which were fatal.
des Epizooties; the disease is thereby notifiable and re-
Epidemiological investigations indicated that there
strictions apply to the movement of birds or avian prod-
was widespread transmission in the area among chick-
ucts. In addition, the code defines freedom from fowl
 ens, ducks, and geese. Investigations also showed that
plague, Of course the success of international oversight
 there was some human-to-human transmission, but most
depends on the willingness of countries to report out-
 human infections occurred through contact with infected
breaks.
chickens. Surveillance in the area was increased, all 1.2
2. At the national level, many countries have regu-
million chickens in Hong Kong were slaughtered, prem-
lations aimed at preventing the introduction and spread
 ises were disinfected, and strategies were developed for
 of virus; these regulations are often primarily concerned
 production of a human vaccine.
with Newcastle disease. Policies usually involve trade
The hemagglutinin of the virus was found to con-
embargoes to guard against importation of infected birds
 tain multiple basic anino acids adjacent to its cleavage
468
30.Orthonryxoviridae
site and an insert at the same site, a feature characteristic
Klenk, H.-D., and Rott, R. (1988). The molecular biol-
 of highly pathogenic avian influenza A viruses; experi-
ogy of influenza virus pathogenicity. Adu. Virus Res.
34, 247-282.
mentally, the virus was found to be highly pathogenic
Lamb, R. A., and Krug, R. M. (1996). Orthomyxoviri-
for chickens. The fact that the virus remained lethal to
dae: The viruses and their replication. In *Fields Virol-
chickens even after it had passed through a human raised
ogy" (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley,
the possibility that a few infected people traveling be-
R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath,
 yond Hong Kong could spread this virus to chickens in
B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp.
other countries-—intense surveillance of poultry flocks
1353-1395. Lippincott-Ravcn, Philadelphia, PA.
Mumford, J. A., and Hannant, D. (1996). Equine influ-
 at possible risk was initiated quickly.
enza. In "Virus Infections of Vertebrates" (M. J.
Studdert, ed.), Vol. 6, pp. 285-293. Elsevier,
Amsterdam.
Mumford, J. A., Jessett, D., Dunleavy, U., Wood, J.,
Further Reading
Hannant, D., Sundquist, B. and Cook, R. F. (1994).
Antigenicity and immunogenicity of experimental
Alcxander, D. J. (1993). Orthomyxovirus infection. In
equine influenza ISCOM vaccines. Vaccine 12,
"Virus Infections of Vertebrates* (J. B. McFerran and
857-863.
M. S. McNulty, eds.), Vol. 4, pp. 287-316. Elsevier,
Murphy, B. R., and Webster, R. G. (1996). Orthomyxovj-
Amsterdam.
ruses. In *Fields Virology (B. N. Fields, D. M.
Bachmann, P. A. (1989). Swine influenza virus. In *Virus
Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick,
Infections of Vertebrates" (M. B. Pensaert, ed.), Vol.
T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd
2, pp. 193-207. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
ed., pp. 1397-1446. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia,
Easterday, B. C., Hinshaw, V. S., and Halvorson, D. A.
PA.
(1997). Influenza. In "Diseases of Poultry" (B. W.
Webster, R. G., and Kawaoka, Y. (1994). Influenza—an
Calnek, ed.), 10th ed., pp. 583-589. Iowa State Uni-
emerging and re-emerging disease. Semin. Virol. 5,
versity Prcss, Ames.
103-111.
Chapter 31
Bunyaviridae
Properties of Bunyaviruses ...
469
Rift Valley Fever.....
473
Akabane Disease (Arthrogryposis-Hydranencephaly).
476
 Nairobi Sheep Disease ...
477
Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever...
477
Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome....
478
Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome...
481
California (La Crosse Virus) Encephalitis.
482
Further Reading....
482
The family Bunyaviridae is the largest virus family, with
 all research and diagnostic procedures;they are Biosafety
more than 350 member viruses. The common features
 Level 4 pathogens and must be handled in the laboratory
of the viruses pertain both to the nature of the virions and
only under maximum containment conditions to prevent
to their biological properties. Nearly all of the viruses are
human exposure.
arboviruses, maintained in arthropod-vertebrate-
arthropod cycles, which have great specificity in regard
to both arthropod vectors and vertebrate reservoir hosts.
Properties of Bunyaviruses
This specificity is the basis for the usually narrow geo-
graphic and ecologic niches occupied by each virus. The
Classification
important exception is the hantaviruses, which are trans-
mitted in vertebrate-vertebrate cycies without arthropod
 The very large number and diversity of the bunyaviruses
vectors; still, the hantaviruses also exhibit great specific-
 offer a taxonomic challenge. Genomic features are used
ity in vertebrate reservoir hosts and therefore also have
 to define genera, particularly the organization of each
narrow geographic and ecologic niches.
 RNA genome segment and the sequences of conserved
 Particular bunyaviruses are transmitted by specific
 nucleotides at the termini of each segment. Classical
mosquitoes, ticks, culicoides, or flies and particular han-
 serological methods are used to define serogroups within
taviruses by specific rodents. The viruses cause transient 
 each genus. In general, antigenic determinants on the
infection in their vertebrate hosts, whether this be a
 nucleocapsid protein are rather conserved and so serve
mammal or bird, and lifelong persistent infection in their
r to define broad groupings among the viruses, whereas
arthropod vectors—-again, hantaviruses are exceptional  s
 shared epitopes on the envelope glycoproteins, which
in that infection in their rodent reservoir hosts is persis-
 are the targets in neutralization and hemagglutination-
tent and often lifelong. Most bunyaviruses never infect
 inhibition assays, define narrow groupings. Unique epi-
domestic animals or humans, but those that do cause
 topes on envelope glycoproteins, also determined by neu-
 important discases, varying from encephalitis to hepati-
 tralization assays, defne individual viruses. With few
tis, nephritis, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and
 txceptions, viruses within a given genus are related anti-
undifferentiated multiorgan syndromes.
Three impor-
 genically to each other but not to viruses in other genera.
tant zoonotic bunyaviruses, Rift Valley fever virus, Cri-
 Genetic reassortment occurs when cultured cells
mean-Congo hemorrhagic fcver virus, and Nairobi sheep
 Or mosquitoes are coinfected with closely related bunya-
disease virus, command particular attention from na-
 viruscs and this has probably played some part in the
tional and international disease control agencies. These 
e  evolution of the family in nature. Within its particular
viruses are restricted to certain national laboratories for
1 ecologic niche, each bunyavirus evolves by genetic drift
469
470
31. Buyriridae
and Darwinian selective forces; for example, isolates of 
hosts via urine, feces, and saliva; the same transmission
 La Crosse virus from different regions in the United
 pattern has occurred among rats in laboratory colonies.
 In humans, several of these viruses cause hemorrhagic
tions and nucleotide deletions and duplications, such
fever with renal syndrome whereas others cause acute
mutations are stabilized by niche isolation. The evolution 
respiratory distress syndrome (hantavirus pulmonary
of La Crosse virus has also involved genome segment
syndrome).
reassortment—reassortant viruses have been isolated
 Genus Phlebovirus contains two serogroups (and
from mosquitoes in the feld.
 many serologic subgroups) and at least 50 viruses, all
The more than 350 distinct bunyaviruses are
 of which are transmitted by sandflies or mosquitoes.
 grouped into more than 30 serogroups, which in turn 
 The genus contains important pathogens, including Rift
fall into four genera of interest (a fth genus, Tospovirus;
Valley fever virus and the sandfly fever viruses.
contains plant viruses). Additionally, more than 80 vi-
Genus Nairovirus contains seven serogroups and
ruses have not yet been assigned to a genus o1 serogroup
at least 33 viruses, nearly all of which are tick borne,
(Table 31.1),
including the pathogens Nairobi sheep disease, Crimean-
Genus Bunyavirus contains 18 serogroups and at
 Congo hemorrhagic fever, and Dugbe viruses.
least 160 viruses, most of which are mosquito borne,
 but some of which are transmitted by sandflies or Culi-.
 coides spp. The genus includes more than 30 pathogens
Virion
 Of domestic animals and humans, including Akabane,
Cache Valley, La Crosse, Bunyamwera, and Oro-
 Bunyavirus virions are spherical, approximately 80-120
pouche viruses.
 nm in diameter, and are composed of an envelope with
Genus Hantavirus contains 22 viruses, many of
 glycoprotein peplomers inside of which there are three
which have been discovered just in the past few years. All
circular, helical nucleocapsid segments (Figure 31.1).
are transmitted by persistently infected reservoir rodent
 Nucleocapsid circles are formed by panhandles, i.e., non-
Table 31. 1
Family Bunyaviridae: Pathogens of Animals and Humans
TARGET HOST
GEoGRapHIC
ARTHROPOD
 SPECIES OR
DISEaSE IN
DISEASE IN
GenUs
Virus
DISTRIBUTON
VEcTOR
AMPUFIER HOST
ANIMALS
HUMANS
 Phlebovirus
Rift Valley fever
Africa
 Mosquitoes
Sheep, catle, buf.
 Systemic disease,
Flu-like illness,
virus
falo, humans 
hepatitis,
hepatitis, hemor-
abortion
rhagic fever, reti-
nitis
Nairovirus
Nairobi sheep
Eastern
Masquitoes
 Sheep, goats,
Hemorrhagic en-
Hepalitis, hemor-
disease virus
Africa
humans
teritis
rhagic fever
Crimean-Congo
Africa, Asia
Ticks
Sheep, catle,
Ni-zoonosis
Hemorrhagic fe-
hemorrhagic fe
goats, humans
ver, hepatiis
ver virus
Bunyavirus
Akabane virus
Australia,
Mosquitoes
Calle, sheep
Arthrogryposis,
None
Japan, lsrael,
hydranencephaly
Africa
Cache Valley
United States
Mosquitoes
Calle, sheep
Arthrogryposis
Very rarely con-
virus
hydronenceph-
 genital infection
aly rarely
La Crosse
North
Mosquitoes
Mammals,
Nil-zoonosis
Encephalitis
Jeyo puo
America
humans
California en-
cephalitis
group viruses
Hantavirus (see Table 31.3)
Propertiesof Bunyauirtises
471
Figure 31.1.
C
FamilunyviidAefin wiiVllyfeershwinirinsininGoliesilhnef
mousenintdwiCalenhlsirhwingxelirinetivytnenvirvironhwin
patterfmlenqresrrisicflhirusDtielysdiriirinswn
th delicate pelomer ringe,Bars: 0Onm.(A,courtesy ofT.W.Geisbert;CandD,coutesy of . L.Palr and J.MDalymle.)
covalent bonds betwecn palindromic sequences on the 3'
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (transcriptase). The
and 5' ends of each RNA genome segment. The terminal
M RNA encodes a polyprotcin that is processed to form
sequences are identical for all three RNA segments for all
two glycoproteins (G1 and G2) and a nonstructural pro-
 members of each genus, but they differ among the genera.
tcin (NSm). The S RNA encodes the nucleocapsid (N)
Thc genome consists of three segments of negative-
 protein and a nonstructural (NSs) protein-its transla-
sense (or ambisensc), single-stranded RNA, designated
 tion strategy differs among the gencra. In the genera
large (L), medium (M), and small(S). The RNA segments
Bunyavirus and Pblebovirus the S RNA encodes two
diffcr in size among the genera: the L RNA scgincnt
 Overlapping reading frames for the N and NSs proteins,
ranges in size from 6.3 to 12 kb, the M RNA scgmcnt
 but in the genera Nairovirus and Hantavirus the S RNA
from 3.5 to 6 kb, and the S RNA segment from 1 to 2.2
cncodes only one open reading framc; the N and NSs
kb. Complete (or M and S segment) nucieotide scqucnces 
 proteins are formed by cotranslational processing (Fig-
have been determined for many viruses, including repre-
ure 31.2).
sentative viruses of each genus.
 An exception to the usual coding strategy of nega-
The L RNA encodes a single large protein, the tive-sense RNA viruses occurs in the S RNA of the mem-
FIGURE 31.2.
Bunyavirus, Hantavirus, Phlebovirus, Nairovirus: L Genome Segment
CRNA5'
3
Areplication
VRNA3'
5
transcription
mRNA5
3
pec
translation
Bunyavirus,Hantavirus,Phlebovirus,Nairovirus:MGenomeSegment
CRNA5'
3
Areplication
VRNA3'
5'
transcription
mRNA5'
3'
camped
?
translation
Bunyavirus
G2
NSM
G1
Hantavirus
G1
G2
Phlebovirus
NSM
G1/G2
G1/G2
Nairovirus
G2
G1
Bunyavirus,Hantavirus,Nairovirus:SGenomeSegment
CRNA5'
3
Areplication
VRNA3'
5
transcription
mRNA5'
3'
orimer
translation
Hantavirus&
Nairovirus
Bunyavirus
Phlebovirus:SGenomeSegment
NSS
translationA
mRNA3'
5
transcription
carimer
CRNA5'
3
Areplication
VRNA3'
transcription
mRNA5'
3'
translation
N
Coding, tronscripion, translation, and replication strategies empioyed inthe vorious genera of the fmily Bunyaviride. Most of the steps are
es  asio au y sd pa uo a u si s o s ann  iq sa a su a yo pia
ils 3' end) by the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (transcriptase] to produce a subgenomic mRNA of complementary sense that is capped
ct its 5′-terminus byα primer obtained from celllar mRNAs (viral cap snatchingl; (2) his mRNA is translated into the nucleoprotein (N); (3) genomic
replication produces fullength, comlementarysense RNA [cRNA); 4) the open reoding rame in the complementary-sense RNA then seves as
a lemplate for transcription, from its 3' end, of mRNA that is trenslated to produce the nonstruchural protein (NSs). [Adapted fom C. S. Schmaliohn,
Bunyaviridae: the viruses and heir repliction.InFilds Virology(B. N.Fields,D. M.Knipe, PM.Howley,R.M, Chanock, J. L.Melnick, T.P.
Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.1, 3rd ed., pp. 1447-1471. Lippincot-Raven, Philadelphia, PA, 1996.]
Rift Vatley Ferer
47.3
ber viruses of thc genus Phlebovirus. The S RNA encodes 
Viral entry into its host cell is by receptor-mediated
 the N and NSs proteins, each translated from a separate
 endocytosis; all subsequent steps take place in the cyto-
subgenomic mRNA. The N protein is encoded in the 3'p
 plasm. Because the genome of the single-stranded, nega-
half of the S RNA, as usual its mRNA is transcribed using  tive-sense RNA viruses cannot be translated directly, the
genomic RNA as template; however, the NSs protein,
first step after penctration of the host cell and uncoating
occupying the 5' half of the same S RNA, is encoded in 
 is the activation of the virion RNA polymerase (tran-
the complencntary-sense RNA species and is translated
 scriptase) and its transcription of viral mRNAs from
only after thc synthesis of full-length RNA intermedi-
each of the three virion RNAs (the exception, as noted
ates--the S RNA is therefore said to exhibit an ambi-
 carlier, is that in the genus Phlebovirus the 5' half of
sense coding strategy.
the S RNA is not transcribed directly; instcad, the mRNA
 The four major virion protcins differ in size among
for the NSs protein is transcribed following synthesis of
the gencra: the L protein [the RNA-dependcnt RNA
full-length complementary RNA). The RNA polymerase
polymerase (transcriptase)l has an M, of 150,000 to a
also has endonuclease activity, cleaving 5'-methylated
200,000, the N protein (nucleoprotein) has an M, of 
 caps from host mRNAs and adding these to viral mRNAs
25,000 to 50,000 and G1 and G2, the two glycoproteins
to primc transcription (this is called cap snatching). Aftcr
have M, values of 40,000 1o 120,000. Virious also con-
 primary viral mRNA transcription and translation,repli-
tain lipids, with their composition reflecting thc composi-
cation of the virion RNA occurs and a second round of
tion of host cell mermbranes and carbohydrates as side
 transcription begins, anplifying in particular structural
chains on the glycoproteins.
 proteins for virion synthesis.
 The viruses are quite sensitive to heat and acid
Virions mature by budding through intracytoplas-
conditions and are inactivated readily by detergents, lipid
mic vesicles associated with the Golgi complex and arc
solvents, and common disinfectants.
released by the transport of vesicles through the cyto-
plasm and release by exocytosis from the basolateral
plasma membrane (Table 31.2).
Viral Replication
Bunyaviruses replicate well in many kinds of cells: Vero
Rift Valley Fever
E6 (African grcen monkey) cells, BHK-21 (baby hamster
kidney) cells, and mosquito (Aedes albopictus) cells.
Rift Valley fever virus, a member of the genus Phiebo-
Hantaviruses do not replicatc in mosquito cells. The virus, is one of the most important veterinary pathogcns
viruses are cytolytic for mammalian cells (except for
r in the world—it has great potential to cause lethal epi-
hantaviruses and somc nairoviruses), but are noncyto-
 demic diseasc in shecp and cattle far beyond its usual
lytic for invertebrate cells. Most of the viruses also repli-
 habitat in sub-Saharan Africa and great potential to
cate to high titer in suckling mouse brain.
 cause severe human disease in such epidemics.
Tabte 31.2
Properties of Bunyaviruses
Four genera infect verlebrates: Bunyavirus, Phlebovirus, and Nairovirus, all arthropod-borne; Hantavirus, nonarthropod-
borne
Virions are spherical, enveloped, 80-100 nm in diamter
Virions have glycoprotein peplomers but no matrix protein in their envelope
Three nucleocapsid segments with helical symmetry
Segmented negalive-sense, single-stranded RNA genome; three segmenis: I, 6.3 to 12 kb; M, 3.5 to 6 kb; and S, 1 to
2.2 kb in size
The S segment of the genomic RNA of the member viruses of the genus Phlebovirus has an ambisense coding strategy
 Capped S'-termini of cellular RNAs cannibalized as primers for mRNA transcription
Cytoplasmic replication; budding into Golgi vesicles
Generallialfreeratecesbtnncocidlersistent infectininertbrtes
Genetic reassortment occurs between closely related viruses
31.Buryauiridae
Clinical Features
exercise caution to not become infected during postmor-
tem examination of animals or processing diagnostic
Infected sheep develop fever, inappetence, mucopurulent 
materials in the laboratory. There is an inactivated vac-
 nasal discharge, and bloody diarrhea. Under field condi-
 cine available for laboratory and field workers at high
tions, 90-100% of pregnant ewes aborr ("abortion 
risk of infection.
storm') and there is a mortality rate of 90% in lambs
and 20-60% in adult sheep. The clinical disease and
outcome are similar in goats. In cattle the disease is
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
somewhat less severe, with mortality rates in calves and
cows of 10-30%, but again, 90--100% of pregnant 
 Epidemics in sheep, goats, and cartle have been recog-
cows abort.
nized in southern and eastern African countries from the
time when intensive livestock husbandry was introduced
at the beginning of the 20th cenrury. Between 1950 and
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
1976 there were at least 16 major epidemics in livestock
at various places in sub-Saharan Africa. An exceptionally
Rift Valley fever virus is one of the most prolifc viruses
 devastating epidemic occurred in Egypt in 1977 and
 a s hi sss ra  
 1978, resembling the biblical description of one of the
 plagues of ancient Egypt. There were many hundreds of
through the oropharynx, there is an incubation period
thousands of cases in sheep and cattle and more than
of 30 to 72 hours, during which virus invades the paren-
 200,000 human cases with 600 deaths. The extent and
chyma of the liver and reticuioendothelial organs, lead-
 severity of this epidemic may have been due to the high
 ing to widespread severe cytopathology. At necropsy of
population densities of fully susceptible animals and hu-
terminally affected sheep, it is not uncommon to find
 mans. In 1988-1989, further virus activity was detected
nearly total hepatocellular destruction. The spleen is en-
 in eastern Africa and in western Africa, with hundreds
larged and there are gastrointestinal and subserosal hem-
 of human deaths in Senegal and Mauritania. In 1993,
orrhages. Encephalitis, evidenced by neuronal necrosis 
 epidemic Rift Vally fever returned to Egypt—-molecular
and perivascular inflammatory infiltration, is a late
 epidemiologic studies suggest that the virus was reintro-
event, seen in a small proportion of animals surviving
  duced from an unknown habitat in the Sudan.
the hepatic infection. In sheep, hepatic necrosis and hem-
 In late 1997 and 1998 a major epidemic spread
 orrhagic complications are the primary cause of death.
from Somalia through Kenya into Tanzania, causing the
 In survivors, recovery is rapid and immuniry is long-
 death of many thousands of sheep, goats, and camels.
lasting. Experimentally, the virus infects a wide variety
 By March of 1998 therc had been more than 90,000
of laboratory and domestic animals and is often lethal.
 human cases and more than 500 deaths. This epidemic,
In experimentally infected animals thc two most frequent
 considered the largest ever seen in eastern Africa, was
syndromes are hepatitis and encephalitis.
 blamed on exceptional rainfall as a result of an El Nino
weather pattern.
 In eastern, western, and southern Africa, Rift
Laboratory Diagnosis
Vailey fever virus survives in a minimally evident
 endemic cycle for years; then, when there is a period
Because of its broad geographic distribution and its ex-
 of cxceptionally heavy rainfall, the virus explodes in
plosive potential for invading new areas where livestock
 epidemics of great magnitude. Although such epidemics
husbandry is extensive, the laboratory confrmation of
 had been studied for many years, it was not until the
   S       
 late 1980s that the mechanism of this phenomenon was
diagnostic emergency. Diagnosis depends on virus isola-
 discovered. It was found that the virus is transmitted
tion in mice or in cell culture. The virus replicates in a
 transovarially among floodwater Aedes spp. mosqui
variety of cell cultures such as Vero E6 (African green
 toes; thc virus survives for very long periods in mos-
monkey) and BHK-21 (baby hamster kidncy) cells—the 
quito eggs laid at the edges of usually dry depressions,
virus is rapidly cytopathic and causes plaques. Immuno-
logic methods are used to prove the identity of isolates.
platcau regions. When the rains come and these dambos
 Serologic diagnosis is donc by IgM capture enzyme
 flood, the egs hatch and infected mosquitoes emcrge
immunoassay on singlc acute sera or by usual enzyme
and infect nearby wild and domestic animals. This
immunoassays, neutralization, or hemagglutination-
discovery involved onc of the frst successful applica-
inhibition assays on paired sera from surviving animals.
. tions of satellite remote sensing and geographic infor-
Veterinarians and ficld and laboratory workers need to
 mation system technology.
Rift Valfey Ferer
475
In an epidemic, virus is amplified in wild and 
 tions of viral activity (as determined by sentinel surveil-
domestic animal populations by many species of Culex
lance). However, after an epidemic has been detected,
spp. and other Aedes spp. mosquitoes. These mosqui-
viral movement is so rapid that itis diffcult to administer
toes become very numerous after heavy rains or when
 enough vaccine fast enough. Even when vaccine is deliv.
improper irrigation techniques are used; they feed
 ered quickly,there is often not enough time for protective
indiscriminately on viremic shcep and cattle (and hu-
 immunity to develop. Thus, disease control is expensive,
mans). A very high levcl of vircmia is maintained for
 rather ineffective, and very dcmanding in terms of fiscal
 3 to 5 days in infccted sheep and cattle, allowing many
 and human resources-these rcalities have led to resis-
mosquitoes to bccome infcctcd. This amplification,
 tance to vaccination among farmcrs and ranchers in most
togcther with mechanical transmission by biting flies,
 arcas of southern Africa. Because of the great risk of
results in infection and disease in a very high proportion
introduction of the virus outside Africa, veterinary vac-
of animals (and humans) at risk. In its epidermic cycles,
 cine should be stockpiled, but this has not been done in
Rift Valley fever virus is also spread mechanically by
 any developed country.
fomites and by blood and tissues of infected animals.
Infected sheep have a very high level of viremia and
Vector Control
transmission at the time of abortion via contaminated
 Mosquito larvicide and insecticide use is virtually impos-
placentae and fetal and maternal blood is a particular
sible in most areas of Africa —the invelvement in epidem-
problem. Abattoir workers and veterinarians (especi-
ics of a wide range of vector species with different habits
ally those performing necropsies) are often infected di-
 and econiche preferences, the usual wide geographic dis-
rectly.
tribution of epidemics, and the need to intervene
The capacity of Rift Vally fever virus to be
throughout long vector breeding seasons contribute to
transmitted without the involvement of an arthropod
this reality. However, vector control would be a major
vector raises concerns over the possibility for its impor-
element in control programs were the virus to be intro-
tation into nonendemic areas via contaminated materi--
duced outside Africa.
als, anitnal products, viremic humans, or nonlivestock
animal species. Although thc virus has never appcared
outside Africa, it poses a great threat to the Tigris-
Human Disease
Euphrates basin, other areas of the Middle East, and
everywhere else whcre livestock are raised. As was the
 Rift Valley fever virus is zoonotic and causes an impor-
case in Egypt in 1977-1978 and morc recently, many
tant human disease that occurs coincidentally with out-
mosquito species capablc of cfficient virus transmission
breaks in sheep, cattle, and camcls. The human disease
are present in most of the livestock-producing areas
begins after a very short incubation period (2 to 6 days)
of the world; for example, experimental mosquito
with fever, severe headache, chills, "back-breaking" my-
transmission studies have shown that more than 30
 algia, diarrhea, vomiting, and hemorrhages. Usually the
common mosquitoes in the United States could serve
clinical disease lasts 4 to 6 days, followed by a prolonged
as effcient vectors.
 convalescence and complete recovery. A small pcrcent-
Control is based primarily on livestock vaccina-
 age of infected humans develop more severe disease, with
tion, but vector control (via mosquito larvicide and insec-
liver necrosis, hemorrhagic pneumonia, meningoenceph-
ticide use) and environmental management play roles
 alitis, and retinitis with vision loss. The case-fatality rate
too: agricultural development projects in Africa must 
 is about 1-2%, but in patients with hemorrhagic disease,
take into account the danger of creating new larval habi-
 it may reach 10%. Prevention of disease in humans at
tats (water impoundments, artificial dambos).
 particular risk, such as veterinarians and livestock and
 abattoir workers, can be achieved with vaccine. An im-
Vaccination
 proved inactivated virus vaccine has been produced by
Attenuated virus Rift Valley fevcr vaccines for use in
the U.S. Army, but it has not been commercialized and
sheep, produced in mousc brain and in cmbryonated
 supplies are limited.
eggs, are effective and inexpensive, but they cause abor-
Biobazard: Rift Vallcy fever virus is a restricted
tions in pregnant ewes. Inactivated virus vaccines pro-
animal pathogen and its importation or possession is
duced in cell cultures avoid thc problcm of abortion, but
 prohibited by law or regulation by most national govern-
are expensive. Both typcs of vaccines have becn produced
 ments. The virus is restricted to certain national labora-
in Africa in large quantitics, but to bc cffective vaccines
tories for all research and diagnostic procedures; the
must be delivered in a systematic way to entire animal
virus is a Biosafety Level 4 pathogen; it must be handlcd
populations, preferably on a regular schedule before the
 in the laboratory under maximum containment condi-
start of the mosquito season or at least at the first indica-
tions to prevent human exposure.
476
31. Bumyaviridae
Akabane Disease
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
(Arthrogryposis-
 Following the bite of an infected mosquito, the virus
Hydranencephaly)
infects the pregnant cow without producing clinical signs
and reaches the fetus from the maternal circularion. The
Seasonall, in some years, in Australia, Japan, and
primary fetal infection is an encephalomyelitis and poly-
Israel, there are epidemics in cattle of fetal or newborn
 myositis. Severely affected fetuses usually die and are
arthrogryposis and hydranencephaly, abortions, and
aborted; survivors often develop large cavitations of thc
fetal death caused by Akabane virus, a mosquito- and
cerebrum, hydranencephaly, and neurogenic arthro-
Culicoides-borne member of the Simbu serogroup in
gryposis (Figure 31.3).
the genus Bunyavirus. The virus can cause the same
disease in sheep and goats. Evidcnce shows that the
virus is also present in other countrics of the southwest
Laboratory Diagnosis
Pacifc region and in Turkey, Kenya, and South Africa.
A less common related virus, Aino virus, is known to
Diagnosis may bc suggested by clinical, pathologic, and
cause similar disease in thc same areas. In the United
epidemiologic observations, but most often by gross
States, outbreaks of arthrogryposis-hydranencephaly in
 pathologic examination. Diagnosis is confrmcd by thc
sheep have been associated with another related virus,
detection of a specifc neutralizing antibody in serum
Cache Vailey virus.
taken from aborted fetuses or from newborn caives be.
fore suckling. Alternatively, diagnosis may be made by
detecting a titer lise between paired maternal sera. Virus
is diffcult to isolate after calvcs are born, but can be
Clinical Features
recovered from the placenta or fetal brain or muscle of
Bovine fetuses infected early in pregnancy (second tri-
calves taken by cesarean section or after slaughter of
mester) are ofren born with rigid fixation of the limbs,
the dam. Virus isolation is done in cell cultures or by
usually in flexion due to a loss of spinal motor neurons-
 intracerebral inocuiation of suckling mice.
this is called arthrogryposis. They also exhibit neuro-
genic torticollis, kyphosis, and scoliosis. Fetuses infected
 Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
earlier (late first trimestcr) often die shortly after birth,
and thosc that survive exhibit sensory, motor, and opti-
In Japan, Akabane virus is transmitted by Aedes spp. and
cal nerve damage.
Culex spp. mosquitoes, and in Australia by the midge,
FIgure 31.3.
Akabane virus infection.(A) Arthrogyposisin a lomb born during an outbreak of Akabane infetion in Austrlia.(BMicroencephaly involing
mainly the cerebral hemispheres. (C) Normal brain for comparison with B [partof the cerebellum has been removed}. (C, Courtesy of I. M. Parsonson.]
Crimnean-Congo Henorrbagic Fever
477
Culicoides brevitarsis. An inactivated virus vaccine pro-
is known to extend from China through central Asia to
 duced in cell culrure has proved safe and efficacious and
 India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, other countries
is used widely in Japan and Australia.
of the Middle East, eastern Europe, and most of Saharan
and sub-Saharan Africa. In recent years, there have been
repeated outbreaks in the countries of the Persian Gulf,
Nairobi Sheep Disease
especially in connection with traditional sheep slaughter-
 ing and butchering practices.
Nairobi sheep disease virus, a member of the genus Nair-
ovirus, is possibly the most pathogenic virus known for
shccp and goats. lt is endemic in eastern Africa and
Clinical Features
related viruses occur in Nigeria (Dugbe virus in cattle)
and India (Ganjam virus in sheep and goats). The virus
There is no evidence that there is any clinical disease in
is transmitted by all stages of the brown ear tick, Rhipi-
 animals other than humans, but the infection in domestic
cephalus appendiculatus, in which there is transovarial
 animals is the basis for the overall importance of this
and transstadial infection and very long-term carriage
disease.
in adulr ticks (up to 2 years). The verrebrate reservoir
host of the virus remains unknown; the virus has not
- ui sieuue oqo no suun pm u puno uq
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
demic areas.
 In Kenya, sheep and goats acquire the infection
 The virus is maintained by a cycle involving transovarial
when they are transported from northern districts to the
 and transstadial transmission in Hyalomma spp. and
Nairobi area. Ater a short incubation period there is
 many related ticks, Larval and nymphal ticks become
high fever, hemorrhagic enteritis, and prostration. Af- i
 infected when feeding on small mammals and ground-
fected animals may die within a few days and pregnant dwelling birds and adult ticks when feeding on wild and
ewes abort. Mortality in sheep is 30-90%. Subclinical domestic ruminants (sheep, goats, and cartle). Infection
infections also occur and recovered animals are immune. in wild and domestic ruminants is very productive, re
Diagnosis is madc clinically and by gross pathologic sulting in viremia levels high enough that ticks become
examination and may be confirmed by virus isolation in  infected when feeding.
cell culture and identification of isolates immunologi-
cally. Control depends primarily on dipping to control
the vector tick, which is also the vector of the economi-
Laboratory Diagnosis
cally important protozoan disease, East Coast fever. Vac-
 cines are effective in preventing the disease in sheep.
 Diagnosis is made by the detection of antigen in tissues
Although the virus is zoonotic, human infections are
(usually by immunofluorescence) or IgM antibody (by
rare.
 antigen-capture enzyme immunoassay). A recently devel-
Biohazard: Nairobi sheep disease virus is a re-
 oped reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
stricted animal pathogen; its importation or possession
 assay is also valuable. Virus isolation has proven diffi-
is prohibited by law or regulation by most national gov- cult: the virus is very labile, shipping of diagnostic speci-
ernments. The virus is restricted to certain national labo- mens from usual sites of disease is offen less than satisfac-
ratories for all research and diagnostic procedures; the
etory, and all laboratory work must be done under
virus is a Biosafety Level 4 pathogen; it must be handled  maximumi containment conditions (see Chapter 12).
 in the laboratory under maximun containment condi-
tions to prevent human exposure (see Chapter 12).
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Crimean-Congo
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever is an emerging prob-
lem, with more and more cases being reported each year
Hemorrhagic Fever
from many parts of the world and more and more anti-
body being found in animal populations. For example,
the genus Nairovirus, is the cause of an important zoo-  of Africa have been shown to be seropositive. There is
notic disease that had been recognized for many years no vaccine, and prevention based on vector control is
nition was just the tip of the iceberg—today, the disease  tick habitat involved. One important prevention ap-
478
31. Bunyaviridae
proach would be the enforcement in endemic areas of 
 rus pulmonary syndrome, also known as acute respira-
Asia, the Middle East, and Africa of occupational safety
 tory distress syndrome). The pathogenicity of some of
standards on farms and in livestock markets, abattoirs,
 the newly discovered viruses has not yet been deter-
and other workplaces wherc there is routine contact with
 mined. Some viruses also infect other mammalian spe.
sheep, goats, and cattle.
cies, such as horses, but this is uncommon and does not
contribute to the life cycle of the viruses or to human
disease risk (Table 31.3).
Human Disease
One distinction of the hantaviruses has been the
level of difficulry surrounding their discovery. For exam-
The disease in humans is a scverc hemorrhagic fcver.
ple, during the Korean war of 1950-52, thousands of
The incubation period is 3 to 7 days; onset is abrupt
 United Nations troops developed a disease marked by
with fever, severe headache, myalgia, back and abdomi-f
 fever, headache, hemorrhagic manifestations, and acute
 nal pain, nausea and vomiting, and marked prostration.
 renal failure with shock; the mortality rate following
It is the most dramatic of all human hemorrhagic fevers  i
 infection was 5-10%. Despite intense research, the etio-
 in the amount of hemorrhaging and the extent of subcu- I
logic agent of this disease remaincd a mystery for 28
taneous, mucosal, gastroenteric, and genitourinary ec-
 years when the prototype hantavirus, Hantaan virus,
chymoses. There is a necrotizing hepatitis and damage
was isolated from the striped field mouse Apodemus
to the heart and central nervous system; the case-fatality
agrarius. Hantaviruses discovered since then have also
rate is commonly 1$-40%. The disease affects primarily
been so difficult to isolate in cell culture or experimental
farmers, veterinarians, slaughter-house workers and
 animals that reverse rranscriptase-polymerase chain re-
butchers and others coming in contact with livestock,
action assays have become a key tool for obtaining diag-
and woodcutters and others coming in contact with in-
 nostic sequences from clinical materials (including acute-
fected ticks. The virus is also transmitted by direct con-
 phase blood) and rodent tissues. More than 200,000
tact with subclinically infected viremic animals, e.g., dur-
cases of hemorrhagic fevcr with renal syndrome are re-
ing sheep docking, shearing, anthelminthic drenching.
ported each year throughout the world, with more than
and vcterinary procedures. The virus is also transmited
half in China. Russia and Korea report hundreds to
from human to human, especially in hospitals. Not un-
thousands of cases; fewer are reported from Japan, Fin
commonly, nosocomial outbreaks are traced to surgical 
land, Sweden, Bulgaria, Greece, Hungary, France, and
intervention when a patient presents with extensive gas- t
the Balkan countries.
 tric hemorrhaging--a lack of precautions leaves the sur-
gical team at great risk.
Biohazard: Crimcan-Congo hemotrhagic fever vi-
Clinica! Features
rus is a restricted animal pathogen; its importation or
possession is prohibited by law or regulation by most
There is no evidence that there is any clinical disease in
national governments. The virus is restricted to certain
animals other than humans; however, the infection in
national laboratories for all research and diagnostic pro-
reservoir host animals is the key to dealing with hu-
cedures; the virus is a Biosafety Level 4 pathogen; it must 
man diseases.
 be handled in the laboratory under maximum contain-
 ment conditions to prevent human exposure (see Chap-
ter 12).
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
The pathogenesis of hantavirus infection of rescrvoir
Hemorrhagic Fever with
rodent hosts is not well understood. The hallmark of
 infection is persistent, usually lifelong, inapparent infec-
Renal Syndrome
tion and shedding in saliva, urine, and feces. Hurman
disease involves contact with contaminated rodent ex-
Thc 22 member viruses of the genus Hantavirus comprise
 crcta, usually in winter when human-rodent contact is
thc only viruses in the family Bunyaviridae that are not
 maximum. In a landmark pathogcnesis study, H. W.
arthropod-borne—they are transmitted among rodents 
Lec inoculated the reservoir rodent, Apodemus agrarius,
 by long-term shedding in saliva, urine, and feces. Several
with Hantaan virus and followed the course of infection
 of the viruses are zoonotic, the cause of severe human
 by virus titration of organs, serology, and immunofluo-
disease. Four Old World hantaviruses cause multisystem
rescencc. Viremia was found to be brief and disappeared
 diseasc centered on the kidneys (hemorrhagic fever with
 as neutralizing antibodies appeared. However, virus per-
renal syndrome) and several New World hantaviruses
sisted in several organs, including lungs and kidncys.
cause multisystem disease centered on the lungs (hantavi-
Virus titers in urinc and throat swabs were about 100 to
Crimean-Cronge flenrorrbagie Ferer
479
Tabte 31.3
Family Bunyaviridae, Genus Hantavirus
VIRUS
PRINCIPAL RESERVOIR
DISTRIBUTION
DISEASE
Hantaan
Apodemus agrarius
China, Russia, Korea
HFRS
(striped field mouse)
Dobrava
Apodemus flavicollis
Balkans
HFRS
(yellow-neck mouse]
Seoul
Rotus norvegicus
Worldwide
HFRS
[Norway rat)
Puumala
Clethrionomys glareolus
Scandinavia, Europe, Russia
HFRS
[bank vole}
[NE]b
Sin Nombre
Peromyscus manicularus
United States, Canada
HPSa
[deer mouse)
New York
Peromyscus leucopus
Unifed Sfates
HPS
[white-footed mouse]
Bayou
 Oryzomys palustris
United States
HPS
[rice rat)
Black Creek Canal
 Sigmodon hispidus
United States
HPS
[cotton rat)
Andes
 Oligoryzomys longicaudalus
Argenlina
HPS
(long-tailed pygmy rice rat
To be named
Calomys laucha
Paraguay
HPS
[vesper mouse)]
Bloodland Lake
 Microtus ochrogaster
 United States
Unknownd
(prairie vole)
El Moro Canyon
Reithrodontomys megalotis
 United States
Unknown
(Western harvest mouse)
Isla Vista
 Microrus californicus
United States
Unknown
(California vole)
Khabarovsk
 Microtus forris
Russia
Unknown
{reed vole)
Muleshoe
Sigmodon hispidus
United States
Unknown
(cotton rat)
Rio Mamore
 Bolivia
Unknown
[smalleared pygmy rice rat]
Rio Segunda
Reithrodonfomys mexicanus
Costa Rica
Unknown
(Mexican harvest mouse)
 Thailand
 Bandicota indica
Thailand
Unknown
(bandicoot rat)
 Thottapalayam
Suncus murinus
India
Unknown
[musk shrew)
Topografov
Lemmus sibiricus
Siberia
Unknown
[Siberian lemming)
Tula
Microtus arvalis
Europe
Unknown
[European common vole)
 Prospect Hill
 Microtus pennsylvanicus
United States, Canada
None
[meadow vole)
Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome in humans.
Nephropahia epidemicamild form ofHFRS in humans.
CHantovirus pulmonary syndrome in humans.
No disease documenred.
480
31. Buryauiridae
1000 times higher during the first wceks after inoculation l
 bution and presence in seaports. A major scicntific chal-
than subsequently and animals were much more infec-
lenge is to understand the Darwinian forces that drive
tious for cage mates or nearby mice during this period.
the long-standing maintenance of these relationships.
From the veterinary point of view, the most impor-
tant disease pattern is that involving laboratory rats (and
Laboratory Diagnosis
wild rodents brought into laboratories) and transmission
to animal caretakers and research personnel. There havc
 Diagnosis is made by the detection of antigen in tissues
been episodes of human disease in Belgium, Korea, the
(usually by immunofluorescence) or serologically by IgG
United Kingdom, and Japan, totaling more than 100
 and IgM capture cnzyme immunoassays. The IgM cap-
cases and one dcath. Prcvention of introduction of virus
ture enzyme immunoassay is the primary diagnostic tool
 pb san s r t o
in reference diagnostics centers, but recently developed
of new stock (or entry only of known virus-free stock),
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assays
 prevention of access by wild rodents, and regular sero-
are being added and are likely to become widely available
logic testing. Cesarean derivation and barrier rearing of
in the future. Virus isolation has proven very difficult:
 valuable rat strains can eliminate the virus from infected
the viruses must be blind-passaged in cell culrure (most
 colonies. Prevention of viral spread should also involve
commonly Vero E6 cells) and detected by immunologic
the testing of all rat-origin cell lines before their release
 Or molecular means. Shipping of diagnostic specimens
 from cell culture collections or other laboratories.
from sites of disease is often less than satisfactory and
Control of the wide-ranging rodent reservoirs of
all laboratory work on Hantaan, Dobrava, Sin Nombre,
 Hantaan, Seoul, and Puumala viruses is not possible in 
and other highly pathogenic viruses must be done under 
 most sertings where disease occurs, but in some situa-
maximum containment conditions (see Chapter 12).
tions their entry into dwellings can be minimized. Vac-
cine development has been hampered by the lack of
animal models of disease. Nevertheless, a vaccinia virus
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
vector, containing the two glycoprotein genes of Han-
taan virus, has been developed and is currently in phase
A matrix of four characters is needed to define the global 
 Il clinical trials. Korean and Chinese investigators have
context of the disease hemorrhagic fever with renal syn-
developed inactivated whole virus vaccines that are also
drome (Table 31.1): (1) the viruses, per se; (2) their
currentiy in human trials.
reservoir rodcnt hosts; (3) the locale of human cases;
and (4) thc severity of human cascs. Four viruses are
involved: Hantaan, Dobrava, Seoul, and Puumala vi-
Human Disease
ruses. Hantaan and Dobrava viruses cause severe disease
with mortality rates of S-15%; Seoul virus causes less
The clinical course of severe hemorrhagic fever with
severe disease and Puumala virus causes the least severe
renal syndrome in humans involves five overlapping
form of the disease (mortality rate less than 1 %), which is 
stages: febrile, hypotensive, oliguric, diuretic, and conva-
known in Scandinavia as nephropathia epidemica. There
lescent stages, not all of which are seen in every case.
are three disease locale patterns: rural, urban, and labo-
The onset of the disease is sudden with intense headache,
ratory acquired. Rural disease is caused by Hantaan
backache, fever, and chills. Hemorrhage, if it occurs, is
virus, which is widesprcad in China, Asian Russia, and
 manifesred during the febrile stage as a flushing of the
 Korea, and Dobrava virus in the Balkans and Greece.
face and injection of the conjunctiva and mucous mem-
 Rural disease is also caused by Puumula virus in northern
branes. A petechial rash may also appear. Sudden and
Europe, especially in Scandinavia and Russia. Urban dis-
cxtreme hypotension, albuminuria, and nausea and vom-
ease is caused by Seoul virus; it occurs in Japan, Korea,
iting around day four are characteristic of severc discase.
China, and South and North America. Each virus has a
 One-third of deaths occur during this stage because of
 specific reservoir rodent host: Hantaan virus, the striped
vascular leakage and acute shock. Deaths also occur
feld mouse, Apodemus agrarius; Dobrava virus,the yel-
during the subsequent (oliguric) stage because of hypcl-
low-neck mouse, Apodemus flavicollis; Seoul virus, the 
volemia. Patients who survive and progress to the di-
Norway rat, Rattus norvegicus; and Puumala virus, the
ureric stage show improved renal function but may still
bank vole, Clethrionomys glareolus. The rclationship
die of shock or pulmonary complications, The convales-
 bctween each virus and its host defines the geographical
cent stagc can last wecks to months before recovery is
limits of disease and confirms ancient virus-host rela-
complete. The disease is believed to be mediated immu-
tionships. For example, the relationship between Seoul
 nopathologically as antibodies are present usually from
virus and the Norway rat explains its worldwide distri-
the first day that thc patient presents for medical care.
Hantauirus Pitmonary Syndroyne
481
Supportive therapy, with particular constraint in the use 
lated, serologic tests (using surrogate antigens from re-
of fluids and, in some cases, the use of hemodialysis, has J
 lated hantaviruses) and molecular biologic tests were
resulted in a decline of the mortality rate from 15 to 5%
 developed and used to prove that the etiologic agent was
or less. The antiviral drug Ribavirin has resulted in a
 a previously unknown virus. Viral RNA was amplified
further fall in mortality.
from human autopsy tissues and peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells using the reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction, followed by partial sequencing of ampli-
Hantavirus Pulmonary
fied producrs. Where specimens were unsuitable for the
reversc transcriptasc-polymcrase chain rcaction, immu
Syndrome
nohistochemical staining was used to detect viral anti-
gens in fxed lung tissues. Later, polymerase chain reac-
 In 1993 a new zoonotic hantavirus disease was recog-
 tion-amplified products were extended, i.e., overlapping
nized in the southwestern region of the United States.
amplifed products were sequenced and aligned until the
The disease was manifest not as hemorrhagic fevcr with
 entire genome of the new viruses had been determined.
 renal syndrome, but rather as an acute respiratory dis-
Sequences encoding the G1 glycoprotein of Sin Nombre
tress syndrome. Through Dccember 1997, a total of 172
virus were then used in expression systems to produce
cases had bcen reported in 28 states of the United States
homologous antigens and in turn to produce reference
with a mortality rate of 45%. About 75% of patients
antisera for further diagnostic studies and services. The
were residents of rural areas. At least six viruses have
  ss m pe r spa as
been associated etiologically with the pulmonary syn-
 numbers of rodents collected in the areas where patients
drome, with more than 400 cases reported from Canada,
, lived. This proved that at least eight species of rodents
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Paraguay.
were involved, the primary reservoir host in the south-
Peru, and Uruguay as well as the United States. Other 
west being Peromyscus maniculatus, the deer mouse (10
New World hantaviruses have been discovered rccently;
 to 30 and even up to 50% of these animals were found
their pathogenicity has not yet been determincd.
to harbor Sin Normbre virus in areas where there was
human disease). Comparing sequenccs obtained from
specimcns from diffcrent arcas indicatcd that scveral
Clinical Features
different variant viruses, all previously unknown, were
 There is no evidence that there is any clinical disease in
active in the United States (Table 31.1). Thcse diag-
anirnals other than humans; however, the infection in
 nostic methods havc now been standardized and made
reservoir host animals is the key to dealing with the
 availablc in regional laboratories scrving populations
human disease.
at risk.
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Lirtle is known about the pathogenesis of New WorldS
 Sin Nombrc virus and other New World hantaviruses
hantavirus infections in rescrvoir rodent hosts. Similarly,
have becn present for eons in the large area of western
little is know abour the pathology of infection; the viruses
United States inhabited by P. maniculatus and other
seem to be minimally deleterious to the survival or repro-
 reservoir rodent species; they were recognized in 1993
 duction of thcir reservoir rodent hosts, but virus is shed
 only because of the number and clustering of human
 in saliva, urine, and feces of these animals for at least 
 cases. A grcat increase in rodent numbers following two
 many weeks and likely the lifetime of the animal. Trans-
 especially wet winters and a consequent increase in pinon
mission from rodent to rodent is believcd to occur after
seeds and other rodent food contributed to the number
weaning by contact, perhaps aggressive contact, biting,
of human cases. The temporal distribution of human
and scratching. Transmission (and human infection)
 disease reflects a spring-summer seasonality (although
likely also occurs by the inhalation of aerosols or dust
 cases havc occurred throughout the year), again match-
 containing infected dried rodent saliva or excrcta.
ing rodcnt rescrvoir host bchavior. Just as with Old
World hantaviruscs, each New World virus has a specifc
reservoir rodent host: Sin Nombrc virus, the deer mouse,
Laboratory Diagnosis
P. maniculatus; New York virus, the white-footed
mouse, P. leucopus; Black Creek Canal virus, the cotton
 During 1993, before the virus causing the human disease
rat, Sigmodon hispidus; Bayou virus, the rice rat, Oryzo-
outbreak in southwestern United States had been iso- mys palustris; Andes virus, the long-tailed pygmy rice
482
31.Bunyaviridae
from Paraguay, the vesper mouse, Calomys laucha.
in reservoir host animals and mosquito hosts is the key
Extensive public education programs have been  to dealing with human diseases. The most important
developed to advise people about reducing the risk of
 Zoonotic pathogen in the California serogroup is La
infection, mostly by reducing rodent habitats and food  (
Crosse virus, which is maintained by transovarial trans-
supplies in and near homes and taking precautions when
 mission in Aedes triseriatus, a tree-hole brceding wood-
cleaning rodent-contaminated areas. The latter involves
land mosquito, and is amplifed by a mosquito-
 Suidden 'sisureuos pooy nnd pue poog suyooid quspoi
 vertebrate-mosquito cycle involving silent jnfection of
and poisoning rodents in and around dwellings, eliminat-
woodland rodents, such as squirrels and chipmunks. The
ing rodent habitats ncar dwellings, use of respirators, 
virus occurs throughout the eastern and midwestern
and wetting down areas with detergent, disinfectant, or
 United States, whereas a closely related virus, snowshoe
hypochlorite solution before cleaning areas that may
harc virus,occupies a similar niche in Canada.Most
contain rodent excreta. Recommendations have also
 cases occur during the summer months in children and
been developed for specific equipment and practices to
young adults who are exposed to vector mosquitoes in
reduce risks when working with wild-caught rodents,
wooded areas. Humans are dead-end hosts, and there
especially when this involves obtaining tissue or blood
 is no human-to-human transmission. The encephalitis
specimens: these include use of livc-capture traps, protec-
caused by La Crosse virus is relatively benign; about 10%
tive clothing and gloves, suitable disinfectants, and safe
 of children develop seizures during the acute disease, a
transport packaging.
few develop persistent paresis and learning disabilities,
 and the mortality rate is about 0.3%.
California encephalitis caused by La Crosse virus
Human Disease
is a classical example of a disease that was not recognized
until the development of laboratory methods permitting
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome typically starts with
 a specific etiologic diagnosis. The virus was first isolated
fever, myalgia, headache, nausea, vomiting, nonproduc-
 in 1964 from a fatal case of encephalitis in a 4-year-old
tive cough, and shortness of breath. As disease prog-
child. Using this isolate as a source of antigen, retrospcc-
rcsses, there is radiological evidence of bilateral intersti-
tive serological surveys showed that the virus was an
tial pulmonary edema and pleural effusions. There is
 important causc of disease previously listed under the
thrombocytopenia, a lefr shift in the myeloid series, and
heading "viral meningitis of undetermined etiology."' It is
large immunoblasts in the circulation. Thc course of the
 now estimated that annually therc are well over 100,000
disease progresses rapidly, with death often following
 human infections and at least 100 cases of encephalitis
in hours to days. Recovery can be as rapid as the develop-
in the United States—this disease had been occurring
ment of life-threatcning clinical signs. Functional impair-
 regularly for many decades, long before the time when
ment of vascular endothelium and shock are central to
the virus came to light.
the pathogencsis of the disease. Histopathologic lesions
include interstitial pneumonitis with congestion, edema,
and mononuclear cell infiltration. Current therapy in-
Further Reading
cludes aggressive management of cardiovascular abnor-
 malities and the pulmonary edema. Investigation of an
Gonzalez-Scarano, F., and Nathanson, N. (1996). Bunya-
epidemic in Argentina in 1995 provided strong evidence
viridae. In "Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields, D. M.
Knipe, P, M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick,
for person-to-person transmission; strict barrier nursing
T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd
techniques are now recommended for management of
cd, pp. 1473-1504. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia,
suspected cases.
PA.
Johnson, K. M. (1997). Hantaviruses. In *"Viral Infec-
tions of Humans: Epidemiclogy and Control" (A. S.
Evans and A. Kaslow, eds.), 4th ed., Pp. 341-355.
California (La Crosse Virus)
Plenum, New York.
Karabatsos, N., ed. (1985). “International Catalogue of
Encephalitis
Arboviruses Including Certain Other Viruses of Verte-
brates," 3rd Ed. American Society of Tropical Medi-
The California serogroup in the genus Bunyavirus in-
cinc and Hygiene, San Antonio, TX.
Kolakofsky, D., ed. (1991). Bunyaviridae. Curr. Top. Mi-
cludes 14 viruses, each of which is transmitted by mos-
crobiol. Immunol. 169, 1-256.
quitoes, has a narrow range of vertebrate hosts, and a
Lee, H. W., and van der Groen, G. (1989). Hemorrhagic
limited geographic distribution. There is no evidence that
fever with rcnal syndrome. Prog. Med. Virol. 36,
there is any clinical disease associated with these viruscs
62-102.
Furthey Reading
483
Meegan, J. M. (1979). The Rift Valley fever epizootic in
their replication. In “Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields,
Egypt 1977-78. I. Description of the epizootic and vi-
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L.
rological studies. Trans. R. Soc.Trop. Med. Hyg. 73,
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
618-623.
eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1447-1471. Lippincott-Raven,
Monath, T. P., ed. (1988). "The Arboviruses: Epidemiol-
Philadelphia, PA.
Ogy and Ecology," S vol. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
Schmaljohn, C. S., and HHjelle, B. (1997). Hantaviruses: A
Parsonson, I. M., and Patterson, J. L. (1985). Bunyavirus
global disease problem. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 3,
_ pathogenesis. Adv. Virus Res. 30, 279-316.
9.5-104.
Schmaljohn, C. S. (1996). Bunyaviridae: The viruses and
 This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Cha p te r 32
Arenaviridae
Properties of Arenaviruses ..
485
Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis Virus Infection .
488
Lassa Fever ....
491
Argentine, Bolivian, Venezuelan, and Brazilian Hemorrhagic Fevers.
492
Further Reading..
494
The fundamental determinant in the ecology of the mem-
 epitopes and cytokine and lymphokine modulation of
ber viruses of the family Arenaviridae and their impor-
viral infections.
 tance as zoonotic pathogens is their ancient coevolutio-
nary relationships with their reservoir rodent hosts. The
risk of transmission of each virus to humans relates to
the nature of the infection of its rodent host {usually
Properties of Arenaviruses
persistent asymptomatic infection with lifelong viral
shedding), as well as to rodent population dynamics and
Ciassification
behavior and human occupational and other risk factors
The family Arenaviridae contains a single genus,
that lead to exposure to virus-laden rodent excreta. The
Arenavirus, which is divided into two evolutionary
consequences of human exposure include some of the
most lethal hemorrhagic fevers known: Lassa, Argentine,
subgroups based on genetic and serologic characteris-
tics. The first subgroup includes lymphocytic chorio-
Bolivian, Venezuelan, and Brazilian hemorrhagic fevers.
meningitis virus, which is allied with the common
The viruses that cause these diseases are Biosafety Level
house mouse, Mus musculus, in North and South
4 pathogens; they must be handled in the laboratory
 America, Europe, and perhaps elsewhere, and the Old
under maximum containment conditions to prevent hu-
World arenaviruses, which are associated with Masto-
man exposure (see Chapter 12).
mys spp. and Paromys spp. in Africa. This subgroup
The prototype arenavirus, lymphocytic chorio-
contains Lassa virus, which produces severe disease in
meningitis virus, has over many years played rwo dispa-
 humans and a few other viruses that infect humans but
rate roles in comparative virology: wild-type strains are
 are not known to cause disease. The second subgroup
zoonotic pathogens and the subject of public health sur-
includes the New World arenaviruses (also called the
veillance in some countries, whereas laboratory strains
 Tacaribe complex), which are associated with particular
have provided much of the conceptual basis for our
cricetids (many different rodents, muskrats, and gerbils)
understanding of viral immunology and pathogenesis,
in North, Central, and South America. This subgroup
including: (1) immunological tolerance, (2) virus-
contains the inportant human pathogens Junin, Ma-
induced immunopathology, (3) immune complex dis-
chupo, Guanarito, and Sabia viruses and several other
ease, (4) virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes as media-
tors of viral clearance and immunopathology, (5) major
viruses that are not known to be pathogenic for humans
histocompatibility complex (MHC) restriction in T lym-
(Table 32.1).
phocyte recognition, (6) natural killer cell activation and
 proliferation, and (7) infection-induced pathophysio-
logic impairment of specialized cell functions. Concep-
Virion Properties
tual advances continue to fow from research with the
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus model, including
Arenavirus virions are pleomorphic in shape, ranging in
vaccine development based on antiviral T lymphocyte
 diameter from 50 to 300 nm, although most virions have
485
486
32.
Arenariridae
Table 32.1
 Natural History and Zoonotic Disease Potential of Arenaviruses
GEOGRaPHKC
ViRus
NaTURal HoSt
DISTRIBUTION
HUMAN DISEASE
 Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
Mus musculus
Western hemisphere,
Grippelike disease, meningitis,
virus
Europe,
meningoencephalitis
perhaps worldwide
Old World arenaviruses
lassa virus
Mastomys natalensis
West Africa
Hemorrhagic fever (lassa fever)
 Mopeia virus
 Mastomys natalensis
Southern Africa
Infection, no disease 
Mobala virus
 Praomys jacksoni
Central African Republic
Infechion, no disease
Ippy virus
Arvicanthus spp.
 Central African Republic
Infection, no disease
New World arenaviruses
Junin virus
Argentina
Hemorrhagic fever
C. laucha,
[Argentine hemorrhagic fever)
Akodon ozarae
Machupo virus
Calomys callosus
Bolivia.
Hemorrhagic fever
[Bolivian hemorrhagic fever)
Guanarito virus
Zygodontomys
Venezuela
Hemorrhagic fever
brevicauda,
(Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever)
Oryzomys spp.
Sabid virus virus
Hemorrhagic fever
[Brazilian hemorhagic fever)
Tacaribe virus
Artibeus literatus and
Trinidad
 None, except for one laboratory-
A. jomaicensis (bats]
acquired
case of systemic disease
 Pirital virus
Sigmodon alstoni
Venezuela
Unknown
El-Arroyo virus
 United States
Unknown
Oliveros virus
 Bolomys obscurus
 Argentina
Unknown
Amapari virus
Oryzomys goeldi,.
Brazil
None
Neacomys guinae
Flexal virus
Oryzomys spp.
Brazil
None
Latino virus
Calomys callosus
Bolivia
None
Parana virus
Oryzomys
Paraguay
None
buccinatus
Pichinde virus
Oryzomys aibigularis
Colombia
None
Tamiami virus
 Sigmodon hispidus
Florida, United States
None
a diameter of 110-130 nm (Figure 32.1). Virions are
 single-stranded RNA, designated large (L) and small (S),
composed of an envelope covered with club-shaped gly-
 7.2 and 3.4 kb in size, respectively. Virions may contain
coprotein peplomers 8-10 nm in length, within which
 multiple copies of the two genome segments, often with
are two circular helical nucleocapsid scgnents, each
more copies of the S RNA segment.
looking like a string of beads. The nucleocapsids are
Most of the genome is of negative sense, but the
circular as a consequence of forming panhandles, i.e.,
 5' half of the S segment and the 5' end of the L segment
noncovalent bonds between conserved complementary
are of positive sense; the term ambisense is used to de-
nucleotide sequences at the 3' and 5' ends of each RNA
 scribe this unusual genome arrangement, which is also
genome segment. The family derives its name from the
found in some members of the faanily Bunyaviridae (see
 presence within virions of cellular ribosomes, which by
Chaprer 31 and Figure 32.2). Specifically, the nucleopro-
thin section electron microscopy resemble grains of sand
tein is encoded in the 3' half of the complementary-
(arena, sand). The genome consists of two segments of
sense S RNA, whereas the viral glycoprotein precursor
Properties of Arenaviruses
487
Figure 32.1.
A
B
Familyesrsiitncirpf
host celbmswiinirnsichrcrisifllareirseseinniccpyr0.
is encoded in the 5' half of the viral-sense S RNA. The
 ing protein mRNAs and the synthesis of more full-length,
L protein is encoded in the 3' end of the complementary-
negative-sense RNA. Budding of virions occurs from
 sense L RNA and a zinc-binding protein is encoded in 
the plasma membrane (Figure 32.3). Arenaviruses have
the 5' end of the viral-sense L RNA. RNAs contain
limited lytic capacity, usually producing a carrier state
 hairpin configurations berween the genes that function 
 in which defective-interfering particles are produced.
to terminate transcription from viral and viral-comple-
 After an initial period of active viral transcription, trans-
 mentary RNAs. The mRNAs are capped--5'-methylated
lation, genome replication, and production of progeny
caps are cleaved from host mRNAs by the viral RNA-
virions, viral gene expression is down-regulated and cells
 dependent RNA polymerase (transcriptase), which also
enter a state of persistent infection wherein virion pro-
has endonuclease activity, and are added to viral mRNAs
 duction continues for an indefinite period but at a greatly
 to prime transcription (called cap snatching).
reduced rate (Table 32.2).
The viruses are quite sensitive to heat and acid
 srp aq aei ea ae e s
 solvents, and common disinfectants.
TabLe 32.2
Properties of Arenaviruses
Viral Replication
One genus, Arenavirus, with two subgroups, one for ld
World andone for NewWorld Tacaribe complex)viruses
o s  i r  n  sr
Virions are pleomorphic, enveloped, 50-300 (generally
cells: Vero E6 (African green monkey) cells and BHK-
110-130j nm in size
 21 (baby hamster kidney) cells. They replicate in the
Virion contains nonfunchional host cell ribosomes
cytoplasm, Because the genome of the single-stranded,
Virions contain two circular helical nucleocapsids with asso-
negative-sense RNA viruses cannot be translated di-
ciated RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (transcriptase)
rectly, the first step after attachment to yet unknown
Genome consists of two segments, large (l, 7.2 kb) and
cellular receptors and penetration of the host cell and
smali (S, 3.4 kb), of single-stranded RNA, both ambisense
uncoating, is the activation of the virion RNA polymer-
Viral proteins: nucleoprotein, RNA-dependent RNA polymer-
ase (transcriptase). Because of the ambisense coding
ase, hwo glycoproteins, zinc-binding protein, plus minor pro-
strategy, only nucleoprotein and polymerase mRNAs
teins
are transcribed directly from genomic RNAs prior t0
Replication occurs in the cytoplasm, generally noncytocidal,
translation. Newly synthesized polymerase and nucleo-
persistent infections
capsid proteins facilitate the synthesis of full-length,
Maturation occurs by budding from the piasma membrane
complermentary-sense RNA, which then serves as tem-
Genelic reassoriment occurs between closely related viruses
 plate for the transcription of glycoprotein and zinc-bind.
488
32.Arenaviridae
Figure 32.2.
Arenaviridae:LGenomeSegment
translation
mRNA5
5
transcription
CRNA5'
3
replication
VRNA3'
5
?
transcription
mRNA5'
3
translation
Arenaviridae:SGenomeSegment
N
Atranslation
mRNA3'
5'
Atranscription
CRNA5'
3'
Areplication
VRNA3'
5
transcription
mRNA5'
3
translation
GPC
The transcripion,translation, and replication of arenvirus S and L RNA segmentsBoh segments emply an ambisense franscriplion stralegy.
d ii s s  ps  uad ye fo sisus jon pu auas au suoe doe   jojonid e
encoded in complementary RNAs (cRNA) are produced immediately (Z, which functions early in rhe replication cycle, and N, which binds to
nascent RNAs); [2) the cRNAs direct the synthesis of more viral RNAs [vRNA); and (3} proteins encoded in the viral sense RNAs (l and GPC) are
synthesizedlterGPCsclevedpostansonallfmingthare plomerglycoproteinsP1andGP2.AdptedrmPJ.outhe
Arenaviridae: The viruses and their replication. in *Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L, Melnick, I. P.
Monathmsddnph
Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis
implicated in infections of laboratory workers. Mice and
Virus Infection
hamsters are the only species in which long-term, asymp-
tomatic infection is known to exist, but guinea pigs,
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus presents two zo0-
rabbits, rats, dogs, swine, and primates may also become
infected in laboratory settings.
notic disease problems. First, the virus causes human
disease when infected wild mice invade dwellings and
farm buildings where dried virus-laden excreta may be
transmitted by aerosols or fomites. Second, the virus
Clinical Feafures
causes major problems when it becomes established in
 mouse and hamster colonies, where it then poses a zoo-
Clinical signs of lymphocytic choriomeningitis in mice
 notic threat and confounds research results dependent
depend on age, route of infection, and immunological
on virus-free animals or cell cultures derived from these
 status at the time of infection (Figure 32.4). Most labora-
animals. For example, infected mouse tumors have been
tory mouse strains infected in utero or during the first
Lympbocytic Cboriomeningitis Virus Infection
489
Figure 32.3.
Prolific budding of Lassa virus from the plasma membrane of an infected Vero cel. Magnification: X70,000.
48 hours after birth develop a persistent tolerant infec-f
few days of life may overcome the infection or may show
tion. This infection may be asymptomatic, or over the
 decreased growth, rough hair coat, hunched posture,
course of several weeks to a year may becorme evident
 blepharitis, weakness, photophobia, tremors, and con-
by weight loss, runting, blepharitis, and impaired repro-
vulsions over a period of weeks. The visceral organs of
ductive performance. Terminal immune complex glo-
 these animals, including the liver, kidneys, lungs, pan-
merulonephritis is a common result of the breakdown
 creas, and major blood vessels, become infltrated by
of tolerance. Aninals infected peripherally after the fist
 large numbers of lymphocytes. Animals inoculated intra-
Figure 32.4.
Adultmouse
ntrace
erebral
Killed
inoculation
Adultmouse
Killed
Viruscleared
Immunosuppressed
intracerebral
mous
Persistentinfection
inoculation
Newbornmouse
intracerebra
Persistentinfection
inoculation
Variousfhiciingrtnnmicnnfitindlics
time of infection.
490
32.Arenaviridae
cerebrally (such as when the virus contaminates marerials 
 hormone synthesis is associated with runting in young
being used in research) usually develop an acutely fatal
mice.
choriomeningoencephalitis, marked by florid accumula-
tions of lymphocytes at all brain surfaces (meninges,
choroid plexus, epcndyma, and ventricles). Clinical dis-
Laboratory Diagnosis
ease is rare in hamsters, again depending on age at time
 of infection. As in mice, infection of young hamsters
 For many years, the serological diagnosis of lymphocytic
may lead to growth retardation, unthriftiness, weakness,
choriomeningitis was done by indirect immunofluores-
conjunctivitis, dehydration, occasional tremors, and
 cence, using inactivated cell culture “"spot slides"’' as anti-
prostration. Lesions include vasculitis, glomerulonephri-
gen substrate. Such tests were also set up to measure
tis, choriomeningoencephalitis, and lymphocytic infil-
 IgM antibody so as to indicate recent infection. In recent
trations in visceral organs.
 years, in national refercnce laboratories, IgM capturc
enzyme immunoassays have become the standard to de-
tect recent infection and IgG capture enzyme immunoas-
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
says to detect the presence of the virus in mouse and
hamster colonies. Virus is cultivated easily in a wide
Because the lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus has been
variety of mammalian cells, particularly Vero E6 (Afri-
such an important model, a great deal is known about
 can green monkey kidney) cells and BHK-21 (baby ham-
the pathogenesis, pathology, and immunology of the
ster kidney) cells. Primary isolates often do not produce
infection in mice. Burnet and Fenner frst postulated the
 a cytopathic effect so cultures are assayed for antigen
concept of immunological tolerance after studying the
 by immunofluorescence or enzyme immunoassay. With
infection in mice: they concluded that exposure to viral
 proper sampling, virus isolation may also be used to
 antigens before the maturation of the immune system
confirm the presence of virus in animal colonies.
results in mice becoming tolerant and thus unable to clear
the infection. Subsequent work showed that persistently
infected mice do make antiviral antibodies; most of these
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
antibodies are complexed with virus and complement
and contribute to the progressive degenerative disease
 Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus is maintained in.
in mice, including glomerulonephritis, arteritis, and
 nature by persistent infection of mice with long-term,
chronic inflammatory lesions.
 even lifelong virus shedding in urine, saliva, and feces.
 Persistently infected mice were eventually shown
Vertical transmission occurs by transovarial, transuter-
to have split-tolerance to the virus; although they mount
ine, and various postpartum routes, including milk,
an antibody response, they do not generate specific cyto-
 saliva, and urine. Human infections derive from con-
toxic T lymphocytes that are needed to clear the infec-
taminated food and dust, the handling of dead mice,
tion. In contrast, in acutely infected mice, both the clear-
 and mouse bites. The distribution of human cases is
ance of virus and the lethal choriomeningoencephalitis
focal and seasonal, probably because mice move into
are due to an overly exuberant cytotoxic T lymphocyte
houses and barns in winter. Wild mice may also
response, The accumulation of T lymphocytes results in
 introduce the virus into laboratory and commercial
neuronal dysfunction and osmotic disturbances, often
mouse, rat, hamster, guinea pig, and primate colonies.
ending with fatal convulsions. In fact, antiviral cytotoxic
 In the United States, the virus has been a particular
T lymphocytes were first dermonstrated in the lympho-
 problem in hamster colonies and immunocompromised
cytic choriomeningitis virus model; Doherty and Zinker-
(nude, SCID, etc.) mouse colonies, resulting in contami-
nagel earned the Nobel Prize in medicine for work using
 nated diagnostic reagents, failed research protocols,
this model to demonstrate the concept of major histo-
      p 
compatibility complex (MHC) restriction in antigen rec-
personnel. Infection can be eradicated by cesarean
ognition by T lymphocytes.
derivation of mouse and hamster breeding stock and
One additional pathogenetic  characteristic  of
 by the modification of facilities to prevent the entry
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus is its ability to cause
 of wild mice. Animals, cell cultures, and tumors and
the loss of specialized cellular functions, i.e., functions 
 tumor cell lines derived from them must be subjected
required not for cell survival but for homeostasis of the
 to regular testing so as to recognize any reintroduction
whole animal. For example, persistent infection in mice
of the virus. The increasing popularity of hainsters as
results in reduced neurotransmitter activiry and reduced
 pets has also resulted in many human disease episodes,
levels of growth and thyroid hormones. Reduced growth
 some involving hundreds of cases. Again, similar atten-
Laisser Ferer
491
tion to brceding stock, facilitics, and testing is necessary
another of whom became severely ill but survived follow-
to prevent this zoonotic problem.
ing transfusion with immune plasma from the surviving
 Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus poses a partic-
 nurse. In succeeding years, Lassa fever, caused by Lassa
ular threat to the golden lion tamarin (Leontopithecus virus, was found to be a rather common zoonotic disease
rosalia), an endangered primate currently found only in  in West Africa. The only known reservoir of the virus
a small area of Brazil. There are only about 600 of is the multimammate mouse, Mastomys natalensis, one
these animals left in the wild and, because of habitat 
t of the most commonly occurring rodents in Africa.
destruction, the number keeps declining. A global cap-
 tive-breeding, habiruation, and reintroduction program
had becn developed, involving zoos in several countries,
Clinical Features
but for several years cpisodic mortality due to a disease
There is no evidence that there is any clinical discase
success. It was found that this mortality was due to
 in animals other than humans, but the infection in the
the exquisite susceptibility of these tamarins (and other
reservoir rodent host, M. natalensis, is the basis for the
tamarins and marmosets) to virus that was introduced
 Overall importance of this disease.
into primate facilities by wild mice. Rodent-proofing
facilities has succccded in stopping this mortality; re-
cently 140 captive-bred tamarins have been released into
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
the reserve in Brazil where the habitat will be maintained
in perpetuity.
Lassa virus infection in M. natalensis is similar in charac
ter to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection in
mice—it is persistent and leads to chronic viral shedding
Human Disease
in urine, saliva, and feces. In experimentally infected
 rhesus monkeys there is anorexia, progressive wasting,
 Of the many latent viruses present in mice, only lympho-
vascular collapse, and shock, with death occurring af
cytic choriomeningitis virus infects humans naturally.
10-15 days postinfection. The pathophysiologic basis
Human infection may be asymptomatic or may present f
 for the disease is not well understood, although there is
as one of three syndromes: (1) most commonly as an
 some hepatocellular necrosis, platelet dysfunction, and
influenza-like illness with fever, headache, myalgia, and
 endothelial damage. Antibodies are found in recovered
malaise; (2) less often as an aseptic meningitis; and (3)
 humans and experimental animais, but they usually do
rarely as a scvcre encephalomyelitis. Most rare, intra-
not neutralize the virus in standard assays—it is pre-
uterine infection has resulted in fetal and nconatal death,
 sumed that cell-mediated immunity is key in recovery
as well as hydrocephalus and chorioretinitis in infants.
and protection against reinfection.
 Because it is uncommon, nothing is done to prevent or
 control human exposure, except in laboratory animal
facilities.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Biobazard: Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
isolates from nature (wild-type isolates), including those
 Diagnosis is now based on the demonstration of IgM
from laboratory rodent colonies, rcquire adequate con-
antibodies using an IgM capture enzyme immunoassay.
laboratory-adapted strains, such as the Armstrong 
cases by immunofluorescence or enzyme immunoassay
strain, which is used in immunology and pathogenesis 
 and virus may be isolated from blood or lymphoreticular
research, usually require Biosafety Level 2 containment.
 tissues using Vero E6 cells and immunological detection
of viral growth.
Lassa Fever
Epidermiology, Prevention, and Control
 In 1969, a nurse from a missonary hospital in Lassa,
Nigeria, died, a nurse who attended her also died, and R
 Risk factors for human infection include contact with
another nurse who had assistcd at her autopsy became rodents (practices such as catching, cooking, and eating
desperately ill but recovered after evacuation to the rodents), the presence of rodents in dwellings, direct
 United States. A new virus was isolated from her blood
 contact with patients, and reuse of unsterilized needles
 by virologists at Yalc University, one of whom died and and syringes. Serologic surveys have shown that millions
492
32.Arenaviridae
of people in west Africa have antibody; there are over t
 urine, saliva, and feces. The natural history of each hu-
100,000 new human infections per year, and at least man diseases is determined by the pathogenicity of the
1000 to 3000 deaths. Ecologic changes account for much  virus, its geographic distribution, the habitat and habits
Of the increasing occurrence of the disease; for example, of the rodent reservoir host, and the nature of the hu-
 in Sierra Leone, diamond mining has led to the building
 man-rodent contact. Human disease is usually rural and
 Of primitive villages in which M. natalensis populations
 often occupational, reflecting the relative risk of expo-
 flourish. In several areas of West Africa, demonstration
1 sure to virus-contaminated dust and fomites. During thc
projccts have shown the value of rodent elimination in
1  past few years several other newly recognized rodent-
villagcs; however, these prograns have been difficult to
） borne arenaviruses havc bccn identified in South
sustain. Similarly, demonstration projects have shown 
 America, including some that have been associated with
the effcacy of Ribavirin in the treatment of patients, but
1
 human discase. Changes in ecology and farming prac
unfortunately the drug is not usually available for use in
tices throughout the region have increased concerns over
endemic areas. Finally, a vaccinia virus-vectored vaccine
 the potential public health threat posed by these viruses
carrying the genes for the glycoproteins and nucleopro-
(see Table 32.1).
tein of Lassa virus has been shown to be protective in
experimental animals; unforrunately, there are no plans
for its commercialization and use in west Africa.
Clinical Features
 Unlike lymphocytic choriomeningitis and Lassa viruses,
Human Disease
Junin and Machupo viruses are pathogenic in thcir reser-
voir rodent hosts. Junin causes up to So% mortality
Lassa fever is variable in its presentation, making it diffi
 among infected suckling Calomys musculinus and C.
cult to diagnose, whether in endemic areas or in returning
laucha and stunted growth in others. Machupo virus
travelers. It usually starts with fever, headache, and mal-
induces hemolytic anemia, splenomegaly, and fctal death
aise and progresses to sore throat, back, chest and joint 
in its rodent host, Calomys calilosus. Nothing is known
pain, and vomiting. In severe cases, there is conjunctivi-
 about the nature of the infection in reservoir hosts caused
tis, pncumonitis, carditis, hepatitis, encephalopathy,
by Guanarito or Sabia viruses.
nerve deafness, and some hemorrhages; death occurs
 in about 20% of hospitalized cases, usually following
cardiovascular collapse. Mortaliry is very high in preg-
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
nancy and fetal loss is almost invariable.
 Biohazard: Lassa virus is a restricted pathogen and
As with other arenavirus pathogens, the pattern of infec-
its importation or possession is regulated by most na-
tion in reservoir hosts caused by the South American
tional governments. The virus is restricted to certain
 viruses differs with age, host genetic determinants, route
national laboratories for all research and diagnostic pro-
 of exposure and viral entry, and the dosc and genetic
cedures; the virus is a Biosafety Level 4 pathogen; it must 
character of the virus. Transmission from rodent to ro-
be handled in the laboratory under maximum contain-
 dent is horizontal, not vertical, and occurs through con-
 ment conditions to prevent human exposure (see Chap-
taminated saliva, urine, and feces. Junin and Machupo
ter 12).
viruses not only cause disease in their reservoir hosts,
they also induce sterility in neonatally infected females,
thereby minimizing their role in producing offspring that
Argentine, Bolivian,
are chronic viral shedders. Conplex cyclic fluctuations
in infection rates and popuiation densities are thought
Venezuelan, and Brazilian
to be a consequence of this. Again, nothing is known
Hemorrhagic Fevers
about the pathogenesis of Guanarito or Sabia virus infec-
tions in their reservoir hosts.
Each of the four South American arenavirus hemorrhagic
fevers occupies a separate geographical range, each is
associated with a different reservoir host, and cach repre-
Laboratory Diagnosis
sents an expanding zoonotic diseasc threat. The four
viruses have similar natural histories: they cause persis-
 Diagnosis of Junin and Machupo virus infections is now
tent, lifelong infcctions in their reservoir rodent hosts, 
 based on the demonstration of IgM antibodies using an
with long-term shedding of large amounts of virus in1
 IgM capture enzyme immunoassay. Virus antigen may
Argentine, Bofhian. Venertetan, and Braziian Itemorrbagic Fevers
493
also be detected in liver tissue in fatal human cases, and
 As in the past, disease prevention could be facilitated by
virus isolation may be done using Vero E6 cells and
 rodent trapping; however, such programs are difficult
immunological detection of viral growth. Mcthods for
 to sustain except for short periods in villages with excep-
the diagnosis of Guanarito or Sabia virus infections are
tional transmission rates.
the same, but reagents are still under developmcnt.
Venezuelan Ilemorrhagic Fever
Venezuelan hemorrhagic fevcr was first recognized in
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
rural areas of Venezuela in 1989; it appeared to result
 from clearing of forest and subsequcnt preparation of
Argentine Hemorrhagic Fcver
land for farming. In 1990-1991, a total of 104 cases
Argentine hemorrhagic fever, caused by Junin virus,
was seen, with 26 deaths, but fewer cases have been seen
was first recognized in the 1950s in a grain-farming
 since then. An arenavirus, Guanarito virus, was isolated
region of Argentina. Most commonly affected are farm
from cases and traced to a reservoir rodent host, Zygo-
workers, which is explained by the behavior of the
dontomys brevicauda. In the same area another new
rodent hosts, Calomys musculinus and C. laucha. These
 arenavirus, Pirital virus, was isolated from the rodent
rodents arc not peridomestic, but rather occupy grain
Sigmodon alstoni; its association with human disease is
felds, cxposing humans through contact with virus-
under investigation. Given the similarities between the
infected dust and grain products. Virus is acquired
 natural history of Guanarito and Machupo viruses, dis-
through cuts and abrasions or through airborne dust
 ease prcvention in Venezucla might be facilitated by ro-
generated primarily when rodents are caught up in
 dent trapping, but this has not been done to date.
harvesting machinery. Since the 1950s thc discase has
spread from an area of 16,000 km² to 120,000 km2
Brazilian Hemorrhagic Fever
containing a population of over 1 million persons.
 Sabia virus was isolated from a fatal case of hemorrhagic
Thcre is a 3- to 5-year cyclic trend in thc incidence
fever in Sao Paulo, Brazil, in 1990; subsequently there
of human cases, which exactly parallcls cyclic changes
 have been two additional cases, one a narurally acquired
in thc density of Calormys spP.
fatal infection in an agricultural engineer and the second
Strategies for the prevention and control of Argen-
 a nonfatal infection in a virologist who was working
tine hemorrhagic fever through rodent control are unre-
with the virus. The latter suffered a severe illness charac-
alistic; human exposure during grain harvesting will in-
tcrized by 15 days of fever, headache, chills, myalgia,
crease as more and more rodents thrive in grain fields.
 sore throat, conjunctivitis, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
Howcver, much progress has heen made using vaccine;
 bleeding gums, and leukopenia. Given the lack of knowl-
all attenuated virus vaccine is now in use throughout
edge of the natural history and epidemiology of Sabia
the endemic area in Argentina and has been a great
 virus, nothing can be said in regard to disease prevention
success. Administered intravenously in high dosage, Ri-
and control.
bavirin is used as a secondary complement to this
vaccine.
Human Disease
Bolivian Hemorrhagic Fever
Machupo virus emerged in Bolivia in 1952 when a revo-
The South American hemorrhagic fevers are typical
lution forced people to attempt subsistence agriculture
 hemorrhagic fcvers; prominent features are hemor-
at the borders of tropical grassland and forest; by 1962
 rhage, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, hemoconcentra-
more than 1000 cases of Bolivian hemorrhagic fever had
 tion, and protcinuria; some cases are associated with
been identificd, wirh a 22% casc-fatality rate. Calomys 1
pulmonary edema, with some cases culminating in
callosus, a forest rodent and the reservoir host of Ma-
 death from hypotension and hypovolemic shock. Le-
chupo virus, adapts well to human contact—invasion of S
 sions are confined largely to the circulatory system.
villages rcsulted in clusrers of cases in particular houses 
 Isolation and barrier nursing are required to prevent
in which substantial numbers of infccted rodents were 1
 nosocomial spread of the viruses to other patients and
subsequently trapped. Control of C. callosus in dwellings nursing staff.
 in the endemic area by trapping resulted in the disappear-
Biohazard: Lassa, Junin, Machupo, Guanarito,
 ance of the diseasc for many years, but in the 1990s and Sabia viruses are restricted pathogens and their
cascs reappcared, again starting on farims and then mov-:
 importation or possession is regulated by most national
ing into villagcs. In onc instance there was secondary
 governments. The viruses are restricted to certain na-
spread to six of eight family members, all of whom died.
tional laboratorics for all research and diagnostic proce-
494
32.Arenaviridae
dures; the viruses are Biosafety Level 4 pathogens;
Arenaviridae" (M. S. Salvato, ed.) pp. 331-373. Ple-
they must be handled in the laboratory under maximum
num, New York.
containment conditions to prevent human exposure.
Peters, C. J. (1997). Pathogenesis of viral hemorrhagic fe-
vers. In *Viral Pathogenesis” (N. Nathanson, R.
Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. E. Griffin, K. V.
Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L. Robinson, eds.),
pp. 779-800. Lippincotr-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Further Reading
Peters, C. J., Buchmeier, M., Rollin, P. E., and Ksiazek,
T. G. (1996). Arenaviruses. In "Fields Virology,"
Borrow, P., and Oldstone, M. B. A. (1997). Lymphocytic
(B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Cha.
choriomeningitis. In "Viral Pathogenesis" (N.
nock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and
Nathanson, R. Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. E.
S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1521-1552. Lippin-
Griffn, K. V. Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L. Rob-
cott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
inson, eds.1, Pp. 593-628. Lippincott-Raven, Philadel-
Salvato, M. S., ed. (1993). "The Arenaviridae." Plenum,
phia, PA.
New York.
Buchmeier, M. J., and Zajac, A. J. (1998). Lymphocytic
Southern, P, J. (1996). Arenaviridae: Thc viruscs and
their replication. In “Ficlds Virology” (B. N. Fields,
(R. Ahmed and I. Chen, eds.) pp. 575-605. Wiley,
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L.
Chichester, Sussex.
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
Childs, J. E., and Peters, C. J. (1993). Ecology and epide-
eds.), 3rd ed., Pp. 1505-1520. Lippincort-Raven, Phil-
miology of arenaviruses and their hosts. In "The
adelphia, PA.
ChaPter 33
Coronavirdae
Properties of Coronaviruses...
495
Transmissible Gastroenteritis of Swine...
499
Porcine Hemagglutinating Encephalomyelitis Virus Disease.
501
Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea.....
501
Bovine Coronavirus Enteritis (and Winter Dysentery) .
501
Feline Infectious Peritonitis...
502
Canine Coronavirus Diarrhea.
503
Mouse Hepatitis (Lethal Intestinal Virus Disease of Infant Mice)..
504
Sialodacryadenitis of Rats
505
Avian Infectious Bronchitis
505
Turkey Bluecomb Disease....
507
Torovirus Diseases.
507
Further Reading.
508
The family Coronaviridae comprises two genera: one,
 ilarities in genome organization and replication strategy.
the genus Coronavirus, contains over a dozcn major
 In infected cells, all these viruses employ a nested set
pathogens of mammals and birds causing rcspiratory
 transcription strategy, i.e., the expression of their genes
disease (e.g., avian infectious bronchitis virus), enteritis
s is mediated via a set of several 3'-coterminal subgenomic
(transmissible gastroenteritis virus of swine), polysevo-
 mRNAs. This unique strategy has been recognized by
sitis (feline infectious peritonitis virus), myocarditis (rab-
 the establishment of the order Nidovirales (from the
bit coronavirus), sialodacryadenitis (sialodacryadcnitis  I
Latin nidus, nest), encompassing two families: the family
virus of rats), hepatitis (mousc hepatitis virus), encepha-(
Coronaviridae with two genera, Coronavirus and Toro-
lomyelitis (mouse hepatitis virus), nephritis (avian infec-
virus, and the family Arteriviridae, with one genus, Ar-
tious bronchitis virus), immunopathologic diseasc (feline
terivirus. Although conspicuous only in one of the open
infectious peritonitis), and various other disorders. In
 reading frames encoding the viral RNA-dependent RNA
humans, coronaviruses are part of the spectrum of vi-
 polymerase (transcriptase), the 1b gene, sequence simi-
ruses that cause the coinmon cold. The second gcnus,
larities confirm that the member viruses of the order
Torovirus, contains two viruses of animals: Berne virus,
likely evolved from a common ancestor. Extensive ge-
which was frst isolated from a horse with diarrhca, and
nome rearrangements through heterologous RNA re-
Breda virus, which was first isolated from neonatal calves 
combination have resulted in the variations seen, i.e.,
with severe diarrhea. Torovirus-likc particles have also
viruses with similar replication and transcription strate-
 been observed by electron microscopy in feces of swine,
 gics but disparate structural features.
cats, and humans.
The genus Coronavirus can be subdivided into
three groups on the basis of genetic and serologic proper-
ties (Table 33.1). Group I includes transmissible gastro-
Properties of Coronaviruses
enteritis virus of swine, porcine respiratory coronavirus,
canine coronavirus, feline infectious peritonitis virus,
Classification
feline enteric coronavirus, and human coronavirus
 229E. Group II incindes mouse hepatitis virus, bovine
 Despite differences in virion structure and genomc size,
 coronavirus, sialodacryadenitis virus of rats, rabbit
coronaviruses, toroviruses, and arteriviruscs cxhibit sim-
coronavirus, turkey bluecomb coronavirus, and human
495
496
33. Coronaviridae
Table 33.1
Antigenic Groups and Diseases Caused by Coronaviruses'
 ANTIGENIC GROUP
VIRUS
DISEASE
 Group I (mammalian viruses)
Transmissible gastroenteritis virus of
Gastoenteritis
swine
 Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus
Gastroenteritis
Feline infectious peritonitis virus
 Peritonitis, pneumonia,
meningoencephaliis,
panophthalmitis, wasting syndrome
 Feline enteric coronavirus
Diarrhea in kitens
Canine coronavirus
Enteritis
Human coronavirus 229 E
Common cold
Group lil (mammalian and avian)
Mouse hepatitis virus (many types)
Hepalitis, enterilis, encephalomyelitis
Sialodacryadenitis virus [rats]
 Sialodacryadenitis
Bovine coronavirus
Gasroenteritis (winter dysentery)
 Porcine hemagglutinating
Vomiting, wasting, and
encephalomyeliris virus
encephalomyelis
Human coronavirus OC43
Common cold
Bluecomb virus of turkeys
Enteritis
Group Il(avian)
Infectious bronchitis virus [at least
Tracheobronchitis, nephritis
eight serotypes!
Ungrouped
 Rabbit coronavirus
Enteritis
Coronaviruses have been associated with infections of the respiratory and enteric tacts and with central nervous system disease in monkeys,
rats, and other species.
coronavirus OC43. Group Ill includes avian infec-
the latter bcing the largest RNA virus genomes known.
tious bronchitis virus.
The genomic RNA is 5'-capped and 3'-polyadenylated
and is infectious.
 The major virion proteins of the member viruses
Virion Properties
of the genus Coronavirus include a nucleocapsid protein
(N, M, 50,000) and several envelopc/peplomer proteins:
Mcmber viruses of the family Coronaviridae are envc-
(1) thc major peplomcr glycoprotein (S, M, 180,000 to
lopcd, 80-220 nm in size, and roughly spherical in shape
200,000); (2) a triple-spanning transmembrane protein
(coronaviruses) or 120-140 nm in size and disc, kidney,
(M, M, 2s,000 to 30,000); and (3) a minor transmem-
or rod shaped (toroviruses). Coronavirus virions have
branc protein (E, M, 9,000), which together with M is
large (20 nm long) club-shaped peplomers enclosing
essential for virion assembly. The secondary, smaller
what appcars to be an icosahedral internal core structure
peplomers, seen in group ll coronaviruses, consist of a
within which is a helical nucleocapsid (Figure 33.1).
dimer of a class 1 membrane protein (M, 65,000), a
Somc coronaviruses also have a second fringe of shorter
hemagglutinin-esterase (HE) that shares 30% sequence
(5 nu long) peplomers. Toroviruses also have large club-
identity with the N-terminal subunit of the hemaggluti-
shaped peplomers but they are more pleoinorphic and
nin-esterase fusion protein (HEF) of influenza C virus.
have a tightly coiled tubular nucleocapsid bent into a
Torovirus virions also havc a nuclcocapsid protein
doughnut-shape (Figure 33.2A). By thin section electron
(N, M, 19,000), a major peplomer glycoprotein (S, M,
microscopy, becausc of various planes of section, toro-
180,000), and a triple-spanning transmembrane protein
virus nucleocapsids appear as kidney-, disc-, or rod-
(M, M, 26,000). Although there is no sequence similarity
shaped forms (Figure 33.2B).
berween these proteins and their coronavirus countcr-
The genome conusists of a single molecule of linear
parts, thcy are similar in structure and function and
 positive-sense, single-stranded RNA, 27-32 kb in size,
seem to be related phylogenetically. Toroviruses lack a
Properties of Coronauiruses
497
Family Coronaviridae, genus Coronavirus. Negatively stained virions. Bar: 100 nm.
homologue of the coronavirus E protein--this may relate
 polymerase. The two large open reading frames (total.-
to thc structural differences berween the viruses. Bovine
 ing 20 kb in size) encoding the units of the polymerase
toroviruses contain a third transmembrane protein, a
arc translated, the larger via ribosomal frame shifting,
hemagglutinin-esterase (M, 65,000). Sequence comipari-
 as a single polyprotcin that is thcn cleaved. These
sons indicate that the HE gene in coronaviruses, torovi-
proteins then asscmblc to form the active RNA poly-
ruses and orthomyxoviruses has been acquired by inde-
merasc.
pendent,
recombination
 events
This enzyme is then employed to transcribe full-
(probably from the host cell).
length complementary (negative-sense) RNA, from
which in rurn is transcribed not only full-length genomic
RNA, but also a 3'-coterminal nested set of subgcnomic
Viral Replication
 mRNAs. The nested set comprises five to sevcn (differing
 in the various viruses) overlapping mRNAs that extend
The strategy of expression of the coronavirus genome
for different lengtlis from common 3' ends and share a
is complex (Figure 33.3). First, the viral RNA serves
 common 5'-leader sequence. They are generated by a
 as mRNA for synthesis of the RNA-dependent RNA  leader-primed mechanism of discontinuous transcrip-
Figure 33.2.
Family Coronaviridae, gens Torovirus.[A}Negalively stoined virions. (B) Thin-sectioned virions in an infected cellBar: 00 nm
498
33.Coronaviridae
Figure 33.3.
Mouse hepatitisvirusgenomicRNA(and openreading frames)
rep1a
2HE
M
rep1b
+++
444intergenicregions
A"
mRNA1
A”
mRNA2
HE
A"
mRNA2.1
S
A”
mRNA3
Nested set
transcripts
丰
A"
mRNA4
5a
丰
A”
mRNA5
IE
A”
mRNA6
丰
A"
mRNA7
N
1012141618202224262830kb
Thegenmeandtrasripinsralegfmouseheatis irus picmmbeof he gesCornirs trganizlonof thegene f
ssas
nucleotides encoded by the 3' end of the negative strand template], and are polyadenylated [A"). After release of he posive-sense genomic
RNAnlirenrsyizerrrifl-lene
sense)NAmwhicewgenmicNA2）nelapping efsbgnomicmRNAsnd③lederNAreshsiedhmA
hemaliinseegptinmrgptMmaegtnpnl
nonstructural proteins. [Adapted from S. G. Siddell and E. J. Snijder. Coronaviruses, toroviruses and arteriviruses. in *Topley and Wilson's
Microbiology and Microbial Infections' (B. W. J. Mahy and L. H. Collier, eds.), Vol. 1, pp. 463-484. Edward Arnold, London, 1998.]
tion: the polymerase frst transcribes the noncoding
present in coronavirus- infected cells. The fact that these
leader sequence from the 3' end of the complermentary
subgenomic RNAs contain 5'- and 3'-terminal sequenccs
(negative-sense) RNA. Then, the capped leader RNA
that are identical to those of genomic RNA implies that
dissociates from the template and reassociates with a
they may function as replicons.
complementary sequence at the start of any one of the
 The synthesis, processing, oligomerization, and
genes to continue copying the template right through to
 transport of the several envelope glycoproteins of coro-
its 5' end. Only the unique scquence that is not shared
naviruses display some unusual features. For example,
with the next smallest mRNA in the nested set is trans-
the envelope protein M, which in some coronaviruses
lated; this strategy yiclds the various viral proteins in
contains O-linked rather than N-linked glycans, is di-
regulated amounts. Intergenic sequences serve as pro-
rected exclusively to cisternae of the endoplasnic reticu-
moters and attenuators of rranscription.
lum. As a result of this, virions bud only therc and not
 Torovirus transcription and replication seems to
from the plasma membrane. Virions are then transported
bc similar to that of coronaviruses, except that there
in vesicles to the plasma mcmbrane and are released by
are no common 5'-leader scquenccs on the mRNAs. A
exocytosis (Figure 33.4). Following their rclcase, many
 puzzling finding is that subgenomic negative-sense RNAs
 of the mature enveloped virions remain adherent to the
complementary to the nested set of mRNAs are also
outside of the cell. The whole of the replication cycle is
Transinissible Gastroenteritisof Sueine
499
Figure 33.4.
Mouse hepatitis virus infectlion in the duodenum of a l-week-old mouse. Virions are transported lo the plasma membrane from their site of
formationinendoplasmicreticulminvesiclesandrerelesedbyexocyosisFolowingtheirreleseanyvionsremainaherenttothe
outside of the cell.Thin section electron microscopy. Mognification: × 30,000.
confined to the cytoplasm, indeed it can occur in enucle-
ated cells.
herds in countries (e.g., Denmark) known to be free
 Genetic recombination occurs at high frequency
of porcine coronaviruses; the virus causing this disease
between the genomcs of different but relatcd coronavi-
 pattern has been shown to be a deletion mutanr that
ruses. This may bc an important mechanism for the
pbse seu pue usidonaa si so kia sey
 generation of the gcnetic diversity scen with these viruses
 a respiratory tropism and transmission pattern. When
in nature (Table 33.2).
this mutant appeared it served as a reminder of the
pathogenic potential of continuing coronavirus cevo-
lution.
Transmissible Gastroenteritis
of Swine
Clinical Features
Thcrc are four distinct coronavirus discase pattcrns in(
 Clinical signs are most severe in very young piglets. Most,
swinc, referred to as (1) vomiting and wasting disease,
if not all, neonates succumb, whereas fcw dcaths occur
(2) porcine epidemic diarrhea, (3) transmissible gastro-
 in animals more than 3 weeks of age. Piglets present
enteritis, and (4) respiratory disease. The respiratory
with vomiting followed by profuse yellowish diarrhea,
variant of transmissible gastroenteritis virus was discov-
weight loss, and dehydration. Time until death is 2 to
500
33.Coronaviridae
in water transport from tissues into the intestinai lumen.
TaBle 33.2
The consequence is diarrhca. Crypt epithelial cells re-
Properties of Coronaviruses and Toroviruses
main uninfected so recovery of the integrity and function
Virions are pleomorphic or spherica! (genus Coronavirus] or
of villi is rather rapid.
disc, kidney, or rod shaped (genus Torovirus]; 80-220 (ge
Gross pathology (except for the dehydration) is
nus Coronavirus] or 120-140 (genus Torovirus nm in diam-
restricted to the gastrointestinal tract and consists of a
eter. Virions are enveloped with large club-shaped
distended stomach and small intestine, often containing
peplomers
yellowish undigested milk. The destruction of villi, which
Virions have an icosahedral internal core slruchure within
 can be best seen when the gut is submerged in isotonic
which is a helical nucleocapsid (genus Coronavirus] or a
tightly coiled tubular nucleocapsid bent into a doughnut
buffer, results in a thinning of the intestinal wall.
shape (genus Toravirus]
Maternal IgA antibodies, passed to piglets in colos-
The genome consists of a single molecule of linear positive.
trum and milk, provide protection against infection; sys-
sense, singlestranded RNA, 27-32 kb in size; the genome
temic IgG antibody does not protect. IgA antibodies
is 5'-capped, 3'polyadenylated, and infectious 
 are also more resistant to proteolytic degradation in the
Coronavirus virions contain three or four structural proteins:
intestine and adhere more frmly to the gut epithelium.
a major peplomer glycoprotein (S), ransmembrane glyco
The gut-mammary link of lymphocyte traffcking results
proteins (M and E), a nucleoprotein (N), and, in some vi-
in local IgA production in the mammary gland. Immunity
ruses, a hemagglutinin-esterase (HE). Torovirus virions con-
cannot be stimulated by parenteral immunization, only
loid g ou s aiay inq 'suaod snooouo uii
by mucosal immunization.
Viruses replicate in the cytoplasm; the genome is tran-
scribed,forming a fullength complementary RNAfrom
which is transcribed a 3'-coterminal nested set of mRNAs,
only the unique sequences of which are Iranslated
Laboratory Diagnosis
Virions are formed by budding into the endoplasmic reticu.
lum and are released by exocytosis
 Mucosal impression smears or cryostat sections of intes-
tinal tissue prepared from piglets in early stages of the
disease may be cxamined by immunofluorescence or im-
 munoperoxidasc staining—these methods provide rapid
resulrs. Virus isolation is carried out in porcine thyroid
 7 days after thc onset of clinical signs in piglets less than
or testicle cells; thcre is cytopathology and isolates are
1 week of age. In oldcr animals, the duration of diarrhea
identified by serology, usually using an enzyme immuno-
is shorter and vomiting is secn only rarely. Exceptions to
 assay. Using paired serum samples and either serum neu-
 these disease patterns pose important clinical diagnostic
 tralization or enzyme immunoassay, serology allows
problems: in some outbreaks there is high mortality in
retrospective diagnosis and is also valuable in epidemio-
adult swine, in others sows may show anorexia, fever,
logical investigations.
voniting, diarrhea and agalactia, and in yet others infec-
tion may be inapparent.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Berween epidemics, transmissible gastroenteritis virus
probably persists in some swine, as a reservoir in another
The virus enters the body by ingestion, and after an
host species seems unlikely. When the virus is introduced
incubation period of 18 to 72 hours it causes clinical
 into a nonimmune herd there is epidcmic spread among
signs thar vary according to thc age of the animal in-
animals of all ages with 100% mortality in newborn
fected. There are several rcasons for the susceptibility of
 piglets and variable, usually less severe disease in older
very young piglets: (1) their gastric secretions are not
animals. When no susceptible swine are left and no new
yet as acid as those of older animals and the virus is
animals are reintroduced, the epidemic terminates, usu-
rather acid labile and (2) their diet of milk buffers gastric
ally within a few wccks.
acid, thereby protecting the virus. Virus is therefore free
Another epidemiologic pattern occurs in intense
to reach and infect villous enterocytes of thc small intes-
 production facilities where the farrowing systcm makcs
tine. Thesc ccils are destroyed by the infection, resulting
susceptible piglets available continuously. Endcmic in-
in shortening and blunting of villi. Villous enterocytes arc
fcction and background immunity usually lead to low
the source of lactase and other disaccharidases needed in 
mortality that is miost pronounced shortly after weaning
the digestion of milk—abscnce of cnzyimes results in an
when matcrnally acquired IgA-based immuniry has
increased osmolarity of the intestinal contents, resulting
waned.
Botite Coronavirus Enteritis (ant Winter Dysentery!
501
Protection of swine by attenuated virus vaccines
vaccines are available, good husbandry is essential for
has not been very effective: the best protection has been
the prevention and control of the disease.
obtained when virulent virus has been administered to
pregnant sows, thereby boosting lactogenic immunity
in piglets. Control also involves good sanitation and
 management practices: for example after an outbreak in
Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea
a 650 sow farrowing unit in Ireland, which supplied
 Porcine epidemic diarrhea, described in several countries
piglets to a 12,000 head fattening unit, endemic disease
of western Europe, is clinically similar to transrnissible
was eliminated by depopulation of all pens where clinical
gastroenteritis, but spreads more slowly. The virus that
cases had occurred and all pens housing seropositive
causes this disease is unrelated to the other porcine coro-
 sows. Control was maintained by extensive serological
naviruses. The main clinical sign in piglets is watery
monitoring.
diarrhea, sometimes preceded by vomiting. In adult
swine the infection may remain asymptomatic or may
be limited to depression, anorexia, and vomiting. The
Porcine Hemagglutinating
mortality rate in piglets is usually about 50% but may
be as high as 90%. Older pigs recover after about 1
Encephalomyelitis Virus
week of illness. A diagnosis may be confirmed by the
Disease
isolation of virus in primary porcine cell culture or by
 Porcine hemagglutinating encephalitis virus causes vom-
the demonstration of antibodies in convalescent swine.
Vaccines are not available.
iting and wasting disease. This disease was first reported
in Canadian swine in 1958, but it is now recognized in
the United States and Europe as well.
Many of the clinical and pathologic features of
Bovine Coronavirus Enteritis
this disease are indistinguishable from those of porcine
polioencephalomyelitis, which is caused by a picornavi-
(and Winter Dysentery)
rus. The disease, seen principally in piglets under 2 weeks
of age, is characterized by anorexia, hyperesthesia, mus-
Coronaviruses are second to rotaviruses as the major
cle trermors, paddling of the legs, vomiting, and depres-
 cause of diarrhea in young calves. Coronaviruses were
sion, often leading to emaciation and death. In contrast
first reported as a cause of diarrhea in calves in the
to transmissible gastroenteritis, diarrhea is not common.
United States in 1973, and since then they have been
Mortality in young piglets is high; older animals often
recognized worldwide. Initially, diagnosis was based on
survive but remain permanently stunted. Serologic sur-
 the detection of virus by electron microscopy, but subse-
veys indicate that the virus is present in many herds
quently the addition of trypsin to bovine cell cuiture
in many countries; in many setings the disease is not
 medium was shown to facilitate the isolation of virus.
diagnosed and gots unrecognized while causing substan-
Today, for many virus strains, a variety of bovine cells
tial morbidity and economic loss.
and human HRT-18 ceils are used for primary isolation.
The virus multiplies first in the nasal mucosa, ton-
Viral growth may be recognized by hemadsorption.
sils, lung, and small intestine and then spreads to the
The pathogenesis of bovine coronavirus enteritis
central nervous system via peripheral nerves. Viremia is
 is similar to that of rotavirus diarrhea. Disease is seen
not important in the pathogenesis of this disease. In
 most commonly in calves at about 1 week of age, the
the central nervous system, virus is frst detected in the
time when antibody in the dam's milk starts to wane
sensory nuclei of the rigeminal and vagus nerves, with
 and exposure is maximal. The diarrhea usually lasts for
subsequent spread to the brain stem, cerebrum, and cere-
 4 or S days. The destruction of the absorptive cells of
bellum. The infection of other organs does not contribute
 the intestinal epithelium of the small intestine and, to a
significantly to the pathogenesis of the disease. One char-
 lesser extent, the large intestine leads to the rapid loss
acteristic clinical sign, vomiting, is due to virus replica-
 of water and clectrolytes. Glucose and lactose metabo-
tion in the ganglion distale vagi; the other, wasting, is
lism are affected; hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, and hyp-
due to neurologic disturbance of the vomition center.
 ervolemia can lead to acute shock, cardiac failure, and
Severe, unremitting vomiting leads to malnutrition.
 death. Bovine coronaviruses may causc diarrhea in
 A clinical diagnosis of porcine hemagglutinating
humans.
virus encephalomyelitis may be confirmed by the isola-
Available vaccines are not effective because thcy
tion of virus in primary porcine cell culture; growth of
 do not appear to contain sufficient antigenic mass and
the virus is detected by hemagglutination. Because no
 they cannot be given early enough to evoke protection at
502
33. Coronaviridae
the time of maximum risk. One alternative to vaccinating
navirus has been correlated with their ability to infect
calves is to immunize the dam, thereby promoting ele-
 cultured peritoneal macrophages, avirulent isolates in
vated antibody levels in the colostrum. Another alterna-
fecting fewer macrophages and producing lower virus
tive is to feed calves colostrum and milk from hyperim-
titers than virulent isolates. Avirulent isolates are also
munized cows used as donors.
less able to sustain viral replication and spread between
Winter dysentery is a sporadic acute disease of
 macrophages. This is a quantitative phenomcnon, seen
adult cattle that occurs in many countries throughout
 as a gradient from rather benign isolates to cxccptionally
the world. It is believed to be caused by one or more 
virulent isolates.
coronaviruses, but this is stil debated. The syndrome is
The ubiquitous avirulent feline enteric coronavirus
characterized by explosive, often bloody diarrhea ac-
 is not confned to the digestive tract; rather, it spreads
companied by decreased milk production, depression,
 beyond the intestinal epithelium and regional lymph
and anorexia.
nodes. Therefore, the mutations that transform this virus
into pathogenic feline infectious peritonitis virus can oc-
cur in several organs and tissues, each the basis for some
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
variation in the clinical manifestations of the disease.
Gross lesions in feline infectious peritonitis appear
 Feline infectious peritonitis is arguably the most enig-
 as multiple grayish-white nodules (<1 to 10 mm in diam-
matic coronavirus disease of all Irs pathogenesis involves
 eter) in the serosa of the liver, lungs, spleen, omentum,
immunopathologic mechanisms such as antibody-depen-
 intestines, and kidneys. Microscopically, the primary le-
dent enhancement of infection and immune complex-
 sion is an acute, immune-mediated, perivascular necro-
 induced lesions (see Chapter 10). Feline enteric coronavi-
 sis, which progresses to a chronic pyogranulomatous
rus has been proven to play a crucial role in the pathogen-
 lesion (foci of macrophages, neutrophils, and lympho-
csis of this disease. The sporadic occurrence of the disease
 cytes). Lesions may appear in various tissues, but omen-
is the result of in vivo mutations of the enteric virus,
 tum, peritoneal serosa, liver, kidney, pleura, lung paren-
resulting in an acquired macrophage tropism. Two scro-
 chyma, pericardium, meninges, brain, and uvea are
types of feline enteric coronavirus have been identified,
common sites.
both being able to cause feline infectious peritonitis via
Although the vascular and perivascular lesions in
this mechanism. Type 2 is a recombinant with genetic
feline infectious peritonitis are clearly immune mediated,
information acquired from canine coronavirus, which is
 there is uncertainty about the actual pathogenetic mecha-
 nisms involved. Some vascular injury may be attributed
to the immune-mediated lysis of infccted white blood
cells; such events have been detected in the lumen, intima,
Clinical Features
and wall of veins and in perivascular tissues. Further-
 more, inflammatory mediators such as cytokines, leuko-
Feline infectious peritonitis is a progressive, debilitating
trienes, and prostaglandins that are released by infected
lethal disease of domestic and wild members of the family
 macrophages may play a role in the development of
Felidae. The initial clinical signs are not very distinguish-
 perivascular inflammatory lesions. These host-response
ing. Affected cats present with anorexia, chronic fever,
 molecules may induce changes in vascular permeability
and malaise. Occasionally, ocular and neurological man-
 and provide chemotactic stimuli for neutrophils and
ifestations are seen. In classical “"wet”’ or effusive feline 
monocytes. In response to the inflammation, the at-
infcctious peritonitis, these signs are accompanicd by a
tracted cells may release additional mediarors and cyto-
 gradual abdominal distention due to the accumulation 
 toxic substances. Invading monocytes may also serve
of a viscous yellow ascitic fluid. The quantity of fluid
 as new virus targets, thereby amplifying the infection
can vary from a few milliliters to well over a liter. There
further. The end result is enhanced local virus production
is also a ^dry” or noneffusive form of disease with little
 and increased tissue damage.
or no exudate. The wet and dry forms are different
 Deposition of immune complexes and subsequent
manifestations of the same infection.
complement activation exacerbate thc inflammatory re-
sponse that extends across involved blood vessel walls.
The resulting vascular damage permits leakage of fuid
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
 into perivascular spaces and leads to the accumulation
 of thoracic and abdominal transudates/exudates. Mor-
The key pathogcnic event in feline infectious peritonitis
 phologic features of the vascular lesions (necrosis, neu-
is the infection of monocytes and macrophages. Experi-
 trophil infltration around small veins and venules) indi-
mentally, the virulence of strains of feline enteric coro-
 cate an Arthus-type reaction. The lesions contain focal
Canine Choronuirus Dirrbea
503
deposits of virus-IgG-C3 complexes. There is comple- mediated immune response that keeps infected macro-
ment depletion and circulating immune complexes in phages and monocytes in check. In a small, socially stable
cats with terminal feline infectious peritonitis.
cat community, this animal may remain healthy. How-
 Although feline infectious peritonitis virus does
ever, problems occur when the kitten is stressed or when
not infect T cells, depletion and prograrmmed cell death
there is another cause of immunosuppression. Infections
(apoptosis) have been observed in lymphoid organs of
with feline leukemia virus or feline immunodeficiency
 infected cats. Apoptosis is mediated by the immune com-
virus are the most common immunosuppressive events.
 plexes present in the serum and ascitic fluid of diseased 
However, crowding, displacement to a new location,
cats. T cell destruction and consequent immunosuppres-
 and social/territorial factors (e.g., changes in group hier-
sion lead to the opportunistic infections that characterize
 archy, dominance) are becoming tecognized as impor-
the late stages of this disease.
 tant stressors as well. Failing immune surveillance allows
Humoral immunity is not protective: cats that are
viral mutants to flourish—more macrophage-tropic mu-
seropositive to feline enteric coronavirus, when chal-
 tants emerge. Among these mutants and some that grow
lenged experimentally with virulent feline infectious peri-
 to high titers and out-compete less pathogenic viruses.
tonitis virus, develop an accelerated, fulminant disease,
This is the point when immunopathogenetic events
leading to an "“early death syndrome."' Clinical signs and
begin.
lesions develop earlier, and the mean survival time is
Feline infectious peritonitis is not controlled easily;
reduced as compared to seronegative cats. Direct evi-
control requires the elimination of the virus from the
 dence for the involvement of antibodies in this phenome-
local environment, whether this be the household or
 non was obtained in experiments in which purified IgG
the cattery. This requires a high level of hygiene, strict
from cats infected with feline enteric coronavirus was
quarantine, and immunoprophylactic measures. Because
transfused into uninfected cats, which where then chal-
 kittens acquire the infection from their queens, early
 lenged with virulent virus. These cats developed an accel-
weaning programs have also been used in attempts to
erated, fulminant disease identical to that seen naturally.
interrupt virus transmission.
The only commercially available feline infectious
 peritonitis vaccine contains a temperature-sensitive mu-
tant virus. The vaccine is applied to the nasal mucosa
Diagnosis
where conditions favor a low level of viral replication
Serology, usually done using indirect immunofuores-
without antibody formation. Under these conditions, a
 cellular immune response is favored, and somc protec-
cence or enzyme immunoassay, generally shows moder-
ate to high antibody titers in infected cats. However,
 tion is achieved. Vaccination of infected, seropositive
 some cats with the disease remain seronegative or have
adult cats (and these are most cats) is not effective.
 only a very low antibody titer, and some healthy cats
with no clinical signs of disease have high titers. There-
fore, interpretation of serology data is not possible for
an individual cat. Biopsy of affected organs not only
Canine Coronavirus Diarrhea
confirms the diagnosis, but also reveals the extent and
stage of the diseasc.
Canine coronavirus usually produces a mild gastroenter-
itis. Although originally described before the first occur-
rence of canine parvovirus enteritis in 1978, the disease
 now commonly occurs in association with canine par-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
vovirus infection, which causes a more severe and some-
times fatal diarrhea. The virus commonly infects pups
 The scenaric leading to fatal feline infectious peritonitis
 and is probably worldwide in distribution. Epidemics of
may be described as follows: a kitten, suckled by its
 coronavirus enteritis have also been recorded in wild
seropositive queen, is protected by colostral antibody
dogs. The disease is similar to that caused by enteric
during the first few weeks of life. As maternal antibody
coronaviruses in other species, such as calves. Although
wanes, mucosal protection ebbs and, during an episode
 canine coronavirus does not infect swine, transmissible
 of maternal feline enteric coronavirus shedding, the kit-
 gastroenteritis virus can infect dogs.
ten becomes infected. A bout of diarrhea may be the only
 Because there are many causes of diarrhea in dogs,
sign that this has happened. The kitten now develops an
clinical suspicion of canine coronavirus infection should
 active immune responsc, but in most cases not a steriliz-
be confirmed by laboratory-based procedures. The virus
ing response. Virus and antibodies continue to coexist
 may be visualized by electron microscopy or may be
in the kitten's tissues, modulated by an efficient cell-
isolated in primary canine cell culture. Detection of anti-
504
33. Coronaviridae
 body in the sera of pups is of limited value because it
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
may be of maternal origin and unrelated to the cause of
the diarrhea. An inactivated vaccine is available for the
Gross lesions in infected suckling mice dying of enteritis
 control of canine coronavirus diarrhea, but its protective
 are characteristic: their intestines are distended flaccidly
value is doubtful.
with bright yellow fluid and, as a result of stasis, there is
an accumulation of bile pigments, epithelial destruction,
and osmotic diarrhea (Figure 33.5). The pathophysio-
logic effects of viral diarrhea are a consequence of rapid
Mouse Hepatitis (Lethal
infection and destruction of epithelial cells and their
Intestinal Virus Disease
replacement by immature, transitional cells that cannot
carry out normal absorptive, resorptive, and enzyme se-
of Infant Mice)
cretory functions. Glucose-coupled sodium transport is
The various diseases caused by mouse hepatitis virus
impaired, disaccharidase (lactase, sucrase) activities are
represent the most important infectious disease problems
diminished, and, in some cases, adenylate cyclase and
cyclic AMP levels are increased (the latter causing a
encountered in mouse colonies throughout the world.
 Mouse hepatitis virus is extrermely contagious, in some
hypersecretion of water and chlorides). The osmotic dis-
equilibrium is most severe in infant mice because of the
settings causing explosive epidemics and high mortality
normal presence of high concentrations of milk lactose
and in others causing endemic infection that may go
unrecognized. There are many different virus strains,
in the intestinal lumen. Osmotic equilibrium returns
each with characteristic tissue tropisms, resulting in vary-
when the regenerating intestinal epithelium matures suf-
ing clinical manifestations. The nature and severity of
ficiently to produce lactase and to absorb the hexoses
disease are also influenced greatly by the strain of mouse.
produced by the enzyme's action.
 Mouse hepatitis virus infection aiters a wide variety of
Histological lesions are characteristic: intestinal
immunological and other physiological parameters—it
villi are blunted and club shaped and there is massive
 syncytium formation (seen as large clumps of nuclei of
can be a major confounding factor in research under-
epithelial cells) (Figure 33.6). This status gives way t0
taken using mice from infected colonies.
cytonecrosis and massive desquamation of epithelium.
Infection is nearly universally lethal. Even in infections
caused by enteropathogenic strains of virus, there is also
Clinical Features
evidence of acute hepatitis (focal hepatocellular necrosis
and inflammatory infltration).
Although mouse hepatitis virus strains have been charac-
terized very wel, both antigenically and genetically, the
various patterns of disease caused by each strain are
Laboratory Diagnosis
complex, not easily predicted, subject to overlap, and
dependent on the age and strain of the mouse. Infection
A presumptive diagnosis may be made on the detection
with different virus strains can cause enteritis, hepatitis,
 of characteristic gross lesions and confrmed by histopa-
 demyelinating encephalomyelitis, and nephritis. Disease
 thology, immunohistochemistry, and serology using an
 may be precipitated by any immunosuppressive drug or
enzyme immunoassay. Most strains of the virus can be
procedure or by concomitant infection with K virus (a
 grown in any of several mouse cell lines. Characteristi-
 papovavirus) or Eperythrozoon coccoides.
cally, infection is evidenced by the formation of large
 Most important in mouse colonies are virus strains
 syncytia. Laboratory-based diagnostics are a key element
that are enteropathogenic: infection of suckling mice
 in surveillance systems for many mouse viruses, includ-
with rhese strains produces a syndrome known pre-
ing mouse hepatitis virus; such diagnostic systems are
viously as lethal intestinal virus (disease) of infant mice.
required in all research protocols funded in the United
When thcse strains first gain entry into a mouse colony
States by the National Institutes of Health.
there is widespread diarrhea, which may spread through-
out the colony in a few days, with nearly 100% mortality.
Older mice lose weight, cease breeding, often exhibit
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
jaundice, and many die. Other clinically important
strains of mouse hepatitis virus are the cause of respira-
 Epidemic mouse hepatitis virus disease in a mouse colony
tory and central nervous system diseases in mouse colo-
typically follows the introduction of new mice, say a
 nies. The latter may be seen as paralysis, caused by demy-
shipment of inbred mice from a new source. Epidemics
elination.
are devastating, resulting in the rapid death of a high
Auian Infectious Bronchitis
50.5
proportion of animals at risk. Following this epidemic
 transmissible respiratory disease of poultry in the United
phase, surviving mice may maintain the virus and contin-
 States. It has now been found in almost every country
ually infect new, susceptible mice, either those intro-
of the world and is one of the most important viral
duced from outside or bred in the colony. If new suscepti-
 diseases of chickens. The virus is the prorotype of the
ble mice are introduced into this setting as weanlings,
family Coronaviridae; it occurs in many antigenic vari-
they may sustain subclinical infection, contributing to
ants as a conscquencc of mutations in its large genome.
the endemic persistencc of thc transmission chain and
scrving as the source of virus when removed to other
rooms or to other colonies.
Clinical Features
Control is achieved by breaking the transmission
cycle, but this is very difficult. Often, after unsuccessful
 Thc clinical presentation of infectious bronchitis depends
efforts based on cessation of breeding, quarantinc, and
 on the age of the bird at the time of infection, the route
care in introducing new mice, the decision is made to
of exposure, the bird's immune status, and the strain
 depopulate, thoroughly decontaminate the facility, and
 of virus. Outbreaks may be explosive, with the virus
repopulate from clean sources. When valuable inbred
spreading rapidly to involve the entire flock within a few
strains of mice are involved, less drastic methods are
 days. In chicks 1 to 4 weeks of agc, virulcnt virus strains
often tried, usually unsuccessfully. When a colony is produce gasping, coughing, rales, nasal exudate, and
returned to a virus-free status, the prcvention of any
1
respiratory distrcss (Figure 33.7).
reintroduction of virus is a matter of the strictest quaran-
Chicks demonstrate plaintive, high-pitched cheeps,
tine systcms, rigorous testing of micc before introducing
 become lethargic, lose appetite, and may die suddenly.
them into the colony (this requires totally separatc hold-
Mortality in young chicks is usually 25-30%, but in
ing quarters), prevention of the entry of wild mice, and
some outbreaks can be as high as 75%. Less virulent
control of personnel access. In some cases, mice from
strains cause few respiratory sigus; whcther clinical signs
infected colonies are used for experimental purposes;
are seen or not, infection usually results in retarded
this decision, of course, must depend on the nature of
growth (stunting).
the studies to be done and thc risk of sprcad of the virus.
When uncoimplicated by opportunistic bacterial
superinfection, respiratory signs last for 5 to 7 days and
disappear from the flock in 10 to 14 days. Cessation of
Sialodacryadenitis of Rats
growth for several days can still occur at this age, how-
ever. High mortality can occur in broilers due to sec-
ondary infection with Escherichia coli or pathogenic
Sialodacryoadenitis is a common disease of laboratory
mycoplasmas. There appears to be no effect on the repro-
rats marked by scvere, self-limiting inflammation and
necrosis of the salivary and nasolacrimal glands. It is
 ductive system of birds near sexual rmaturity, provided
cgg production has not started. Birds in eg production
especially severe in young rats. The etiologic agent, sialo-
dacryoadenitis virus, is highly contagious; when the virus
show respiratory rales and coughing with prominent
 involvemcnt of the reproductive tract and a decline or
 invades a rat colony thcre is a high incidence of morbid.
cessation of cgg production. When laying is resumed,
ity, but litle mortality. During epidemics there may be
a high incidence of ancsthetic deaths. Clinical signs of
many eggs show abnormalities: no shells, thin shells,
infection include excessive lacrimation, exophthalmus,
shclls with deposits, distortions, dimples, depressions,
 or ridging; eggs that should be colored are often pale or
squinting, excessive blinking, and swollen face and neck.
Lesions in the lacrimal duct may result in corneal drying
white. There is loss of albumen quality, sometimes the
thick white disappearing almost completely. An addi-
with severe secondary ocular lesions. The disease is self-
tional clinical feature (caused cspccially by strains of low
limiting, and most lesions resolve within 2 weeks. Trans-
virulence) is "pasting,"" i.c., the accumulation of a white,
mission is by direct contact, by fomites (such as inade-
sticky exudate around the vent that can plug the cloaca;
quately sterilized cages and water bottles), and by aero-
after a few days, the plug may slough, leaving a bare
sol. Control is the same as for mouse hepatitis virus in
patch.
mouse colonies.
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and lmmunity
Avian Infectious Bronchitis
Thc virus replicates to high titer first in the respiratory
Infectious bronchitis was the term coined in 1931 to
tract (ciliated cpithelial cells); this is followcd by viremia
describe the principal clinical-pathological feature of a
(within 1 to 2 days of infection), which distributes the
506
33.Coromuuiridae
FIgure 33.7.
Avin inectious bronchitis (Al One synonym for he diseose is "gasping disease." B) Thick mucopurulent exudate in the trachea. (C) Nephros.
Thekidney is pale and eniarged toabout five times normal size.(D)Embryos fromembryonated hen's eggs inoculated via the allantoic cavily
wih serial dilutions of virus when 9 days old and exomined 11 days laler. Amounts of virus diminish in pairs from right to left in he top row
and from left to right in the bottom row. (Courtesy of R. J. H. Wells.]
virus to many organs. Eventually the virus causes major  cavity. Desquamation of respiratory epithelium, edema,
damage to the reproductive system and the kidneys. The
 epithelial hyperplasia, mononuclear cell infiltration of
intestinal tract is another site of primary infection. Infec-
the submucosa, and regeneration are seen in a various
tions originating in the upper respiratory tract may result
combinations. Repair processes begin after 6 to 10 days,
in less severe disease than when primary infection occurs 
and a rerurn to normal is achieved in 14 to 21 days. Virus
in the lower respiratory tract.
strains affecting the kidney occur mostly in Australia, but
Infectivity declines rapidly and isolation of virus
some degree of nephrotropism (interstitial nephritis) is
 beyond 10 days postinfection is uncommon (except from
found worldwide.
chicks). Rarely, virus may persist for up to 50 days after
 Infection induces IgM, IgG, and IgA antibodies.
primary infection. Virus can be isolated from many or-
 In immune laying hens, the ovum begins to acquire IgG
gans, including the kidneys and bursa of Fabricius (which
 antibody (some of it virus specifc) from the blood about
may be the rcason for the immunosuppressive effects
 5 days before the egg is layed. As it becomes surrounded
 noted). Some strains produce permanent anatomical
with albumen during passage down the oviduct, the
 damage to the immature oviduct.
 ovum acquires both IgM and IgA antibodies, which find
The most frequent gross pathological finding is
 their way into the amniotic fluid about halfway through
mucosal thickening with scrous or catarrhal exudate in
 development. During the last third of embryonation, IgG
the nasal passages, trachea,bronchi and air sacs Invey
cnters the circulation from the yolk; antibody can inhibit
young chicks, the main bronchi may be blocked with
virus replication at this time. The chick hatches with a
caseous yellow casts, which may bc the main cause of
circulating IgG level similar to that of the hen. IgG anti-
death. Pneumonia, conjunctivitis, and swollen sinuses
body is mctabolized with a half-life of approximately 3
 are sometimes seen. In laying birds, ova can be congested
 days and may persist for 3 to 4 weeks. The virus may
and somctimes ruptured, with free yolk in the abdominal
survive until passive immunity declines to a level where
Torovirns Diseases
507
it can replicate again, at which time the chicken mounts 
scribed in pheasants in England, racing pigeons in Aus-
an active immune response.
tralia, and guinea fowl in South America.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Turkey Bluecomb Disease
 Direct immunofluorescence staining of tracheal tissue
Bluecomb disease was frst recognized in turkeys in the
smears is useful in the diagnosis of carly cases before
 United States in 1951 and has now been recorded in
secondary bacterial infection has occurred. For virus iso-
other countries. The disease affects turkeys of all ages
lation, embryonated eggs are inoculated via the intra-
but is most severe in 1- to 6-week-old poults. The onset 
allantoic route. Changes suggestive of the presence of a
 is characterized by loss of appetite, constant chirping,
coronavirus include congestion of the main blood vessels 
diarrhea, weight loss, and depression. The skin of the
 in the chorioallantoic membrane and embryo stunting.
head and neck may become cyanotic. Younger poults
Identification of virus in the chorioallantoic membrane
may die. Lesions in the digestive tract are very similar to
is usually donc by immunofluorescence, gel difusion, or
those seen in coronavirus infections in mammals. Some
electron microscopy. In some laboratories the polymcr-
 turkeys may shed virus in their feces for several months.
 ase chain reaction (with appropriate identifcation of
 Only one serotype of bluecomb virus is recognized;
amplified products) or DNA probes are being used. Iso-
the virus can be isolated in embryonated eggs of turkeys
lates are usually typed and subtyped by scrologic
and chickens or in turkey embryo intestinal organ cul-
methods.
ture. An inactivated virus vaccine is available, but is
 generally considered to be rather ineffective.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Torovirus Diseases
aerosol and by ingestion of food contaminated with fe-
Thus far, only two toroviruses have been recognized:
 the equine and bovine toroviruses, better known as Berne
ces. In the environment thc virus can survive on fomites
for several days and possibly for weeks, especially at
virus and Breda virus, respectively. The existence of a
torovirus of swine (porcine torovirus), genetically closely
low cnvironmental temperatures. Outbreaks of infec-
tious bronchitis have declincd in recent years due to the
related to the equine and bovine viruses, has been demon-
wide use of vaccines; however, the disease may occur
strated by molccular techniques.
cvcn in vaccinated flocks following the introduction of
infected replacement chicks. To minimize this risk, most
poultry producers obtain 1-day-old chicks from certifed
Clinical Features
Attenuated virus vaccines are widely used to pro-
Little is known of the disease potential of Berne virus
tect chicks. These vaccines are derived either from aviru-
in horses—only a single case has been described, this
lent field isolates or by passagc in ermbryonated eggs.
in a horse with diarrhea that died. Upon postmortem
They are administered in drinking water, by coarse
 examination, pseudomembranous enteritis and miliary
spray, or by deposition on the conjunctiva. The vaccine
 granulomas and necrosis in the liver were seen. Breda
is usually given between 7 and 10 days of age and again
virus causes diarrhea in, calves and has been recognized
at 4 weeks. Vaccination earlier than 7 days may bc unsuc-
as a serious problem in some herds. In swine, torovirus
cessful because of passivcly acquired maternal antibody.
 infection has been associated with diarrhea at the time
Vaccination breaks arc common because of the variable
of weaning.
prcsence of new antigenic variants. Such variants will
continue to emerge and spread, posing continuing prob-
lems for poultry producers.
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
 Control of infectious bronchitis is difficult because
of the presence of persistently infected chickens in many
Breda virus, the bovine torovirus, is pathogenic for ncw-
flocks. Eggs have becn found to contain virus for approx-
 born gnotobiotic and nonimmune conventional calves;
imately 50 days after infection. The doinestic chicken is
these animals develop watery diarrhea lasting for 4 to
the most important but not the only host for infcctious
65 days with virus shedding occurring for another 3 to
bronchitis virus; infections and disease have been dc- 4 days. In calves with a normal intestinal flora, diarrhea
508
33. Coronaviridete
is more severe than in gnotobiotic calves. Histological
1lands and Costa Rica. In view of their variable role as
 examination of the intestines has shown villous atrophy
 pathogens, vaccines have not been developed against tor-
and epithelial desquamation from the midjejunum
oviruses.
through to the lower small intestine and areas of necrosis
in the large intestinc. Epithelial cells of crypts and villi
arc infected. Infection of the former may affect the dura-
 Further Reading
tion of diarrhea, as regencration of epithelium starts in
the crypts. The germinal centers of the Peyer's patches
Bohl, E. H., and Peusaert, M, B. (1989). Transmissible
become depleted of lymphocytes and occasionally de-
gastroenteritis virus. In *Virus Infections of Verte-
velop hemorrhages. Dome epithelial cells, including M
brates" (M. B. Pensaert, ed.), Vol. 2, pp. 139--165.
Elscvicr, Amsterdam.
 cells, exhibit the same cytopathic changes that occur
de Vries, A. A. F., Horzinek, M. C., Rottier, P. J. M.,
in villi.
and de Groot, R. J. (1997). The genome organization
of the Nidovirales: Similarities and differences be-
tween arteri-, toro-, and coronaviruses. Semin. Virol.
Laboratory Diagnosis
8,33-47.
Hombcrgcr, F. R. (1997). Enterotropic mouse hepatitis vi-
rus. Lab. Anim. 31, 97-115.
 Using immunofluorescence, Breda virus antigen can be
Horzinek, M. C. (1993). Toroviruses—members of the
detected in epithelial cells of the small intestine. Fluores-
coronavirus superfamily? Arch. Virol. Suppl. 7,
cence is cytoplasmic and is generaily most intense in
75-80.
areas of the intestines with the least tissue damage. The
Koopmans, M., and Horzinek, M. C. (1994). Torovi-
ruscs of animals and humans: A review. Adv. Virus
midjejunum is the frst site to be infected, with viral
Res. 43, 233-273.
 infection progressing down the small intestine and even-
Lai, M. M. C., and Cavanagh, D. (1997). The molecular
tually reaching the large intestine. Given this course of
biology of coronaviruses. Adv. Virus Res. 48, 1-100.
the infcction, tissue specimens must be obtained at sev-
McMartin, D. A., and Faragher, J. T. (1993). Infectious
eral levels and as early after the onsct of diarrhea as
bronchitis. In *"Virus Infections of Vertcbrates" (J. B.
McFerran and M. S. MeNulty, eds.), Vol. 4, Pp. 249--
 possiblc. Scrum neutralization and enzyme immunoas-
275. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
says arc available, using as antigcn the equine torovirus,
Pederscn, N. C. (1995). An overview of feline enteric co-
Berne virus.
ronavirus and infectious peritonitis virus infections. Fe-
line Pract. 23, 7-20.
Pedersen, N. C., Addie, D., and Wolf, A. (1995). Recom-
mendations from working groups of the international
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
feline enteric coronavirus and feline infectious peritoni-
tis workshop. Feline Pract. 23, 108-111.
Torovirus infections are common. In cattle, 90-95%
Sirinarumitr, T., Paul, P. S., Halbur, P. G., and Kluge,
J. P. (1997). An overview of immunological and ge-
of randomly sampled cattle have antibodies. Antibody-
netic methods for detecting swine coronaviruses, trans-
positivc cattle have been identified in every country
missible gastroenteritis virus, and porcinc respiratory
where tests have been done. Most adult horses in Switzer-
coronavirus in tissues. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 412,
land possess neutralizing antibodies to Breda virus,
37-46.
which is also true for goats, sheep, pigs, rabbits, and
Vennema, H., Poland, E., Floyd Hawkins, K., and Ped-
some species of wild mice. Epidemiological surveys have
ersen, N. C. (1995). A comparison of the genomes of
feline enteric coronaviruses and feline infectious perito-
 indicated that torovirus infections are involved in two
nitis viruses and whar they tell us about the relation-
disease entities in cattle: diarrhea in calves up to 2 months
ships between feline coronaviruses and their evolution.
 of age and winter dysentery of adult cattle in The Nether-
Feline Pract. 23, 40-44.
Cha pter 34
Arteriviridae
Properties of Arteriviruses ...
509
Equine Viral Arteritis ....
511
Porcine Respiratory and Reproductive Syndrome .
513
Lactate Dehydrogenase-Elevating Virus Infection of Mice ....
514
Simian Hemorrhagic Fever....
515
Further Reading..
515
The name of the recently established family Arteriviridae
2 set transcription strategy-—-this common feature was the
is derived from the disease caused by its type species, basis for the establishment of the order Nidovirales see
equine arreritis virus. Apart from horses, arteriviruses Chapter 33) to bring together the families Coronaviridae
infect swine, causing “mystery swine disease," which and Arteriviridae. The family Arteriviridae comprises
was first detected in North America in 1987 and in
1 a single genus, Arterivirus, which contains all member
Europe in 1990 and has since then become a major threat
viruses (Table 34.1).
to swine industries in many counties. This disease had
also been called swine infertility and respiratory syn-
drome, and porcine epidemic abortion and respiratory
Virion Properties
syndrome, before being offcially named porcine respira-
tory and reproductive syndrome—-it is clear that consen-
 Arterivirus virions are 50-70 nm in diameter and consist
sus in naming this disease and its causative virus was of an isometric (probably icosahedral) nuclcocapsid,
only reached with diffculty. Other arteriviruses infect 35 nm in diameter, surrounded by a closely adherent
mice (lactate dehydrogenase-elevating virus) and mon-
 envelope with honeycomb-like surface structures (Figure
keys (simian hemorrhagic fever virus). All arteriviruses 
 34.1). The genome consists of a single molecule of linear
have the capacity to establish asymptomatic persisrent
 positive-sense, single-stranded RNA, 13 to 15 kb in size.
 infections in their natural hosts and to cause severe dis-
Virion RNA has a 5'-type 1 terminal cap and a 3'.
ease in certain circumstances.
terminal poly(A) tract and is infectious, The RNA poly-
rmerase gene takes up about 75% of the 5' end of the
genome; genes that encode the viral structural proteins
are located in the 3' end of the genome (Figure 34.2).
Properties of Arteriviruses
Virions are composed of a nucleocapsid protein, N (M.
Classification
12,000), a nonglycosylated triple-membrane spanning
integral membrane protein, M (M, 16,000), and at least
Member viruses of the family Arteriviridae have a ge-
two N-glycosylated peplomer proteins (Gs, M, 25,000
nome organization and replication strategy similar to
and G,, M, 42,000).
that of member viruses of the family Coronaviridae.
However, there are major differences: arterivirus virions
and genomes are only about half the size of those of
Vira! Replication
coronaviruses. Arterivirus nucleocapsids are isometric,
whereas those of coronaviruses are helical, and arteri-
Arteriviruses replicate in the perinuclear cytoplasm of
virus peplomers are inconspicuous whereas those of co-
their host cells, usually macrophages, Equine arteritis
ronaviruses are the largest of any virus. The major fea-
virus replicates to high titer in equine cells. The lactate
ture in common betwcen the two families is their nested-
dehydrogenase-elevating virus replicates to very high ti-
509
510
3+.Arteriviridae
Table 34.1
Arteriviruses of Animals
VIRUS
Host
DISEaSE
Equine arteritis virus
Horse
Systemic disease, areritis, abortion, fetal death, pneumonia
in foals
Porcine respiratory and
Swine
reproductive syndrome
disease characterized by abortion, stillbirth, mummufied
virus
fetuses, and respiratory disease in newborn (Europe)
VR2332 virus
Swine
Similar to porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome
[United States)
Lactate dehydrogenose-
Mice
Usually none, but the presence of the virus may confound
elevating virus
research using infected mice
Simian hemorrhagic
Macaques
Systemic disease, death
fevervirus
Figure 34.1.
FailyAividesAsTernleingshinpidinviris pbs.
BomEqineiishwingringshedctentufirinsNegtiinlenicspyMaitn
x190,000.
Epune Virat Arteritis
511
Figure 34.2.
EquinearteritisvirusRNAgenome(andopenreadingframes)
rep1a
ep1b
AmRNA1
AmRNA2
AmRNA3
Nested set
AmRNA4
transcripts
AmRNA5
mRNA6
RNA7
12kb
(block circles, have leoder sequences (vertical lines), and are polyodenylated (Ar). Afer releose of th positive sense genomic RNA in the
cytoplasm, he viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase is synthesized; it directs the transcription of a full-lengih compiemenlary [negative-sense)
RNA,from whichare synhesized (1ewgenomicRNA,(2)anoverlapping seof subgenomicmRNAs,and (3)laderRAhmNAtranscripts
form a nested set wih common 3' ands and common leader sequences on heir 5' ends. Only the unique sequences at the 5' end of the mRNAs
dre translated, producing the various proteins: repla and rep1b, the two units of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (synthesizad as one lorge
precursor via frameshiftingl: Gs and G, Ihe wo N-glycosyloted surface proteins; M, a transmembrane glycoprotein; N, the nucleoprotein; and
several nonstructural proteins. [Adapted from S. G. Siddell and E. J. Snijder. Coronaviruses, toroviruses and arteriviruses. in "Topley and Wilson's
Microbiology and Microbial Infections" (B. W. J. Mahy and L. H. Collier, eds.), Vol. 1, p. 463-484. Edward Arnold, London, 1998.]
ter in mice, reaching a titer of 10l'IDsu/ml in plasma
The genome of the prototypic virus, equine arteritis
within the frst few days of infection.
virus, contains eight open reading frames. The 5'-three-
 Full-length genomic RNA is synthesized via a full-
fourths of the viral genome is occupied by two large
length, negative-scnsc replicative intermediate. Tran-
open reading franmes, which together encode the viral
scription involves the synthesis of a nested set of seven
replicase. The products of both open reading frames are
 Or eight 3'-coterminal mRNAs, each reflecting a single 
multidomain polyproteins, which are cleaved by viral
 opcn reading frame (Figure 34.2). These subgenomic
and host proteases to form the subunits of the mature
RNAs are composed of a common leader sequence
 replicase. Open reading frames 2, 5, and 6, expressed
shared by all mRNAs linked to the unique sequence for
from the subgenomic mRNAs, encode the large and
each individual mRNA. Thus each protein is not encoded
small glycoproteins and the transmembrane protein, re-
contiguously on the viral genome—the leader sequence
spectively. Open reading frame 7 encodes the phosphory.
of each mRNA is identical and derived from the extreme
lated nucleocapsid protein. Virions bud through mem-
5' end of the genome. Conserved sequence motifs define
 branes of the endoplasmic reticulum into intracellular
the junctions where the leader sequence joins the unique
vesicles; from there they move to the surface of the cell
part of cach subgenomic mRNA. It is not known whether
 in vesicles and are relcased by exocytosis (Table 34.2).
the unique part of each mRNA is derived from a subgen-
omic negative-strand template or is transcribed individu-
ally froin a gcnome-sized negative-stranded template.
Equine Virai Arteritis
Some adjaccnt genes encoded in each
1  subgenomic
mRNA are in different reading frames; ribosomal frame-
Historical documents suggest that the disease now caled
shifting is employed to assure that only the 5'-terminal
equine viral arteritis had been recognized in the 19th
 cncoded protein is translated from each of the subgeno-
 century. In 1953 the causative virus was isolated from
mic mRNAs.
lung tissue of aborted fetuses during an epidemic of
512
34.Arteriviridae
and quantiry is probably due to scrotal hyperthermia
Table 34.2
Properties of Arteriviruses
associated with pyrexia; long-term effects on semen qual-
ity have not been observed in naturally infected car-
Virions are spherical, 50-70 nm in diameter, with an iso-
rier stallions.
adherent smooth-surfaced envelope
The genome consis of a single molecule of linear positive
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
sense, single-slranded RNA, 13 to 15 kb in size. Virion
RNA has a 5' cap and its 3' end is polyadenylated; the ge
 Initial virus replication takcs placc in alveolar macro-
nomic RNA is infeclious
phages, and by the second day the bronchial lymph nodcs
Replication takes place in the cytoplasm; the genome is tran-
arc infected. From there the virus is disseminatcd
scribed to form fullength negalive-sense RNA, from which
is transcribed a 3'-coterminal nested set of mRNAs; only the
throughout the body via the bloodstream, probably both
unique sequences at the 5' end of each mRNA are trans-
as extracellular virions and infected macrophages. By
lated
the third day viremia reaches a high titer, and the virus
Virions are formed by budding into the endopiasmic reticu-
can be found in practically all body fluids and tissues,
lum, from where they are released by exocytosis
with the probable exception of the brain. The primary
targets of infection are macrophages and the endothe-
lium and mesothelium of vessels throughout the body;
secondary infection targets include the adrcnal glands,
thyroid gland, kidneys, liver, and seminiferous tubules.
 abortion and respiratory disease on a breeding farm mear
The most conspicuous gross lesions are edema,
Bucyrus, Ohio. The disease is usually observed only on
 congestion, and hemorrhage in many tissues. The termi-
 breeding farms; however, serologic studies indicate that
nal stage of disease is characterized by infarctions of thc
 intestine, lung, and spleen and by fluid accumulations
equine populations worldwide.
in the peritoneal and pleural cavities. Infarctions follow
on segmental necrosis of smal arteries throughout the
body. The ultimatc consequencc of this vascular damage
Clinical Features
may be the development of fatal hypovolemic-
hypotcnsive shock.
 Most natural infections with equine arteritis virus are
 Aborted fetuses are usually expelled together with
asymptomatic. For mares bred to persistently infcctcd
the fetal membranes and without premonitory clinical
stallions the ratio of clinical to inapparent infections 
signs. Aborted fetuses exhibit mild edema in many tis-
may vary widely bctween epidemics. After an incubation
sues, excess fluid in peritoneal and pleural cavities, and
period of 3 to 14 days the onset of frank disease is marked
 petechial hemorrhages in peritoneal and pleural muco-
by fever (greater than 41°C), leukopenia, depression,
sal surfaces.
excessive lacrimation, anorexia, conjunctivitis, rhinitis
 Most acurcly infected stallions shed virus continu
and nasal discharge, urticaria of the head, neck, and 
ously in semen, annd a long-tcrm cairicr state has been
trunk, and edema, which is most pronounced over the 
identified. The persistent infection has no obvious ncga-
 eyes, the abdomen, including the prepuce, scrotum, and 
tive effect on fertility. The ejaculates of chronic carriers
 mammary glands, and the hind limbs (often resulting in
contain virus for years, perhaps even for lifc. An interme-
a stiff gait).
diate carrier state lasting for 3 to 8 months has been
 Although naturally infected horses usually recover
found in both adult horses and prepubertal colts. Virus
 after cessation of viremia, dcath as a result of a rapidly
 concentration is highest in the accessory sex glands and
progressive bronchointerstitial pneumonia and intestinal
in the vas deferens. Virus output appears to be testoster-
necrosis has been reported occasionally in both foals and
 One dependent; chronic virus shedding has not been ob-
yearlings. From 40 to 80% of infected pregnant mares
served in geldings, and persistently infected stallions that
may abort ("abortion storms"). Ahortion generally oc-
are castrated stop secreting virus.
curs 10 to 30 days after infection and is linked closely
Antibodies may be dctccted by virus neutralization
with the late febrile or early convalesccnt phase of dis-
 or enzyme immunoassay within a week after infection,
ease, but can occur even if no clinical signs are noticed.
coinciding with virus elimination from the circulation.
Fertility problems aftcr infection have not been
Vaccination experiments have confrmed the close rela-
observed in marcs, but stallions may undergo a pcriod
 tionship betwcen neutralizing antibodies and protection.
 of temporary infertility. The reduction of sperm quality
Neutralizing antibodies persist for years, and protection
Porcine Respiratory and Reprodnctive Syndrome
513
is long-lasting, if not lifelong. Colostrum from immune
ae poad auueenb e Aq pamon sosnon p!
mares moderates or prevents arteritis in young foals.
recovery, (3) good hygiene, including assignment ofsepa-
rate personnel to work with infected and uninfected ani-
 mals, and (4) laboratory-supported surveillance.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Virus isolation was first accomplished in primary equine
Porcine Respiratory and
kidney cell culrures but rabbit kidney cells are used rou-
tinely now; not all virus strains cause cytopathology
Reproductive Syndrome
in thesc cells so the presencc of virus must be assayed
indirectly (e.g., by immunofluorescence). Virus can be
When porcine respiratory and reproductive syndrome
po ko inq snss pun sp Apoq au o pos
frst emerged in the United States and Canada in 1987
a few wceks after infection. To detect virus in semen the
 and in Europe in the carly 1990s it spread quickly-—-in
sperm-rich fraction of full ejaculates is culrured. Because
Europe, reports came from Germany, The Netherlands,
the revcrse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction is
England, and Spain in quick succession. Thc scarch for
as sensitive as virus isolation and has the advantages of
a viral etiology resultcd in several early falsc starts until
being rapid, specific, and applicable to a wide variety of
specimens, it is becoming thc method of choice for thc
 and reproductive syndrome is recognized as an cconomi-
 detection of the virus. For measuring antibodies, most 
 cally important disease of domesticated and wild pigs
laboratories use virus neutralization tests in microtiter
 in many countries.
plates; the sensitivity of this method can be increased by
 The question remains where the virus originated.
the addition of complement and for some virus strains
 Genetic analyses of the viruses now linked together in
its presence is required.
the order Nidovirales have shown that coronaviruses
and toroviruses (fanily Coronaviridae) arc only distantly
related phylogenetically to the arteriviruses. Among the
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Contro
arteriviruses, porcine respiratory and reproductive syn-
Despite its worldwide distribution, cquinc artcritis virus
dromc virus and lactate dchydrogenase-elevating virus
 of micc are more closely rclated to each other than cither
causes discase outbreaks only occasionally, thc most con-
is to equine arteritis virus. From such data it has been
suggested, with no further substantiation, that the swine
cur where horscs are congrcgated from multiple sources,
such as at salcs and shows and on breeding farms. Trans-
virus may represent the consequence of a species-jump-
ing evcnt of a rodent virus. In any case, the swine virus
mission occurs through rcspiratory, scxual, and transpla-
 occurs as two genotypes, European (Lelystad virus) and
ccntal routes. Sources for aerosol transmission are
North Amcrican genotypes (VR2332 virus), clearly re-
aborted fctuses, fetal membranes and amniotic fluids of
flecting another phylogenctic split that perhaps is indica-
mares, and genital fluids of infectcd stallions. Infcction
may lead to a carricr state, with stallions transnmitting
tive of rccent transimission patterns.
the virus chronicaily via semen.
Imnunization of horses with an attenuated virus
Clinical Features
vaccine or an inactivated virus vaccine prepared from
cell cultures produces long-lasting inmunity and no un-
Thc disease is characterized by anorexia, fever, a blue
toward effects. In view of the very rare occurrencc of
 discoloration of thc ears, snoul, and vulva, agalactia, and
clinical outbreaks of discasc, the need to immunize is:
 abortion late in gestation (around day 110). Premature
still disputed; nevertheless, because of the impact of the
births, stillbirths, and mummifed fetuses are observed
disease on reproductive outcome, immunization of valu-
and, if born alive, piglets are weak, half of them dying
able breeding animals is commonly undertaken. To prc-
 during the first week postpartum, often with respiratory
vent the establishment of persistent infections in stallions
 distress. Many of these clinical manifestations of infec-
that will be used for breeding, vaccination of colts may
 tion can also be secn in older swine.
be donc at 6 to 8 months of age (i.e., aftcr matcrnal
 antibody has waned but before puberty). To prcvent
abortions, mares may be vaccinated before or aftcr be-F
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
coming pregnant.
During outbreaks the spread of virus is best con-
trolled by (1) movement restrictions, (2) isolation of the presence of antibody. Antibody-dependent enhance-
514
34. Arteririrdae
ment of infection has been demonstrated, and subneu-(
drogenase-elevating virus. For example, the infection can
tralizing concentrations of IgG antibody may contribute
 transiently alter the immune response of mice ro all kinds
to the pathogenesis of the disease in other ways as well.
 of antigens and thereby distort the results of immunolog-
Transplacental infection of piglets leads to gross lesions 
ical experiments.
in the umbilical cord, usually segmental hemorrhagic
lesions. Histologicaily, a nccrotizing umbilical arteritis
with periarterial hemorrhagc is scen. In sows, endometri-(
Clinical Features
tis and myometritis have been observed.
 Infected mice usually exhibit no clinical evidence of infec-
tion and live a normal life span; however, the virus can
induce a poliomyelitis in C58 and AKR mice if thcsc
Laboratory Diagnosis
strains are immunosuppresscd during the initial stage of
In aborted fetuses the virus is inactivated rapidly so mori-
the infection.
bund live piglets should be used for virus isolation at-
tempts. The virus is quite fastidious, having been shown
to replicate in only a few cell types. The virus grows
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
well in swine lung macrophages and in an African green
 Lactate dchydrogenase-elevating virus replicates in all
monkey kidney cell line (MA-104) and its descendant
strains of inbred laboratory mice. Even though thc virus
clones. As in equine arteritis virus diagnosis, the sensitiv-
replicatcs only in early developmental stage cells of the
ity of neutralization tests can be increased by the addition
monocyte/macrophage lineage, it reaches about the
of guinea pig complement.
highest titers known in animal virology (1oul infectious
unirs/ml of plasma) in the first few days postinfection.
Viremia persists for the lifetime of the infected mouse;
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
 after a week or so of infection the virus circulatcs as
infectious immune complexes.
The virus spreads quickly in naive swine populations,
One isolate (designated LDV-CZ) differs from
with up to 95% of swine in a herd becoming seropositivc
 other strains in its ability to infect the ventral motor
within 2-3 months after an introduction. The virus has
 neurons of the two most susceptible mouse strains, C58
reached high levels of endemicity in many swine-produc-
 and AKR. This neurovirulent variant cmerged as a "pas-
ing countries. At low ambient temperatures the virus
senger'’ whcn transplantable leukemia cells were pas-
survives parricularly well in the environment, so epi-
saged serially in C58 mice.
demic spread is especially efcient in winter months.
Contact transmission, airborne, and sexual transmission
via scmen have been documented. The virus is main-
Laboratory Diagnosis
tained in persistently infected healthy swine—-it has been
isolated from the oropharynx more than 5 months
It is important for investigators working with laboratory
aftcr infection.
mice or primary murinc cell cultures to know whether
this virus is present as a contaminant. Lactatc dehydroge-
nase plasma levcls increase in all mice infected with this
Lactate Dehydrogenase-
virus, with maximum level being reached about 4 days
postinfection. Therefore, virus-free micc are inoculated
Elevating Virus Infection
with material from suspect mice and 4 days later hemoly-
of Mice
sis-frcc plasma samples arc assayed for the enzyme. Usu-
ally an 8- to 10-fold incrcase over the normal concentra-
The discovery of lactatc dehydrogenasc-elevating virus
tion of the enzyme is observed in infected mice.
was a chance evcnt that occured during experiments on
tumors in mice. The virus generally causes persistent
infcctions that reveal themselves only by elevated levels
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
of certain plasma enzymes, including lactate dehydroge-
nase. Not only does this characteristic allow virus detcc-
The infection was widespread in laboratory mouse colo-
tion, it has also been used as the end point indicator 1
 nies but is now rather rare. Natural infections are limited
for virus infcctivity titrations. The inportance of this to wild Mus musculus; other rodents and lagomorphs
 are unknowingly infected intercurrently by lactate dehy- and biting (saliva contains high titers of virus). Given
Further Reading
515
these facts, prevention of infection in mouse colonies
 obviously, natural transmission of the virus from persis-
can be accomplished by (1) preventing entry of wild
 tently infected African monkeys, such as Patas monkeys,
mice, (2) use of barrier-specifc, pathogen-free breeding
 to macaques, which come from Asia, is not a factor in
and housing systems, and (3) laboratory test-based sur-
the natural history of the virus. Control is based on
vcillance. The virus can be eliminated from valuable
 species separation in colonies and on proper containment
 r i sd   s   s
facilities and practices.
 dent species or by maintcnance of the cells in culture.
Cells must be passaged scveral times in order to eliminate
    r  
cells that support the replication of the virus.
Further Reading
Brinton, M. A. (1994). Lactate dehydrogenase-elevating
virus. In "Virus Infections of Vertebrates"
Simian Hemorrhagic Fever
(A, D. M. E. Osterhaus, ed.), Vol. 5, pp. 269-279.
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Simian hemorrhagic fever virus was first isolated in 1964
den Boon, J. A., Snijder, E. J., Chirnside, E. D., de Vries,
A. A. F., Horzinck, M, C., and Spaan, W. J. M.
during devastating epidemics in macaques imported
(1991). Equine arteritis virus is not a togavirus but be-
from India into Russia and the United States. Nearly all
longs to the coronavirus-like superfamily. J. Virol. 65,
infected animals died. Similar epidemics have occurred
2910-2920.
frequently since then; for examplc, in the United States
de Vries, A. A. F., Rotticr, P. J. M., Glaser, A. L., and
in 1989 there were epidemics at three primate colonies
Horzinek, M. C. (1997). Equine viral arteritis, In "Vi-
rus Infections of Vertebrates" (M. J. Studdert, ed.),
resulting in the death of more than 600 cynomolgus
Vol. 6, Pp. 171-200. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
macaques (Macaca fascicularis).
MacLachlan, N. J., Balasuriya, U. B., Rossitto, P. V., Hul-
The onset of disease in macaques is rapid, with
linger, P. A., Patton, J. F., and Wilson, W. D. (1996).
early fever, facial edema, anorcxia, dehydration, skin
Fatal experimental cquinc arteritis virus infection of a
 petechiac, diarrhea, and hemorrhages. Death occurs be-
pregnant mare: Imnunohistochemical staining of viral
antigens. J. Vet. Diagn. Invest. 8, 367-374.
“%ool saqoeoadde Aeiou pue siep s7 pue s uaami
Meulenberg, J. J., Hulst, M. M., de Meijer, E. J.,
Within a colony, infection spreads rapidly, probably via
Moonen, P. I. J. M., den Besten, A., de Kluyver,
contact and aerosol. Lesions include hemorrhages in the
E. P., Wensvoort, G., and Moormann, R. J. M.
dermis, nasal mucosa, lungs, intestines, and other vis-
(1994). Lelystad virus belongs to a ncw virus family,
 ceral organs. Shock is suspected as the underlying cause
comprising lactate dehydrogenasc-elevating virus,
 of death. All species of macaques (genus Macaca) are
rus. Arch. Virol., Suppl. 9, 441-448.
highly susceptible and macaques are the only animals
Mculenbcrg, J. J., Petersen den Besten, A., de Kluyver, E.,
that devclop severe or fatal disease. Epidemics in ma-
van Nieuwstadt, A., Wensvoort, G., and Moormann,
caque colonies originate from accidental introduction of
R. J. (1997). Molecular characterization of Lelystad vi-
the virus from other primatc species that are infected
rus. Vet. Microbiol. 55, 197-202.
Plagemann, P. G. W., and Moennig, V. (1992). Lactate
 persistently without showing clinical signs. In captivity,
dehydrogcnnase-elevating virus, equine arteritis virus,
Patas monkeys (Erythrocebus patas) have often been
and simian hemorrhagic fever virus, a new group of
implicated as the sourcc of virus, but African green mon-
positive strand RNA viruses. Adv. Virus Res. 41,
99-192.
keys (Cercopithecus aethiops) and baboons (Papio anui-
bus and P. cyanocephalus) may also carry the virus per-
Thiel, H.-]., Meyers, G., Stark, R., Tautz, N., Ruumcn-
apf, T., Unger, G, and Conzelmann, K. K. (1993).
sistently.
Molecular characterization of positive-strand RNA vi-
 Transmission in primatc colonies is facilitated by
ruses: Pestiviruses and the porcine reproductive and re-
 poor managemcnt and improper veterinary practiccs,
spiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV). Arch. Virol.,
such as reusing syringes and needles and tattooing equip-
Suppl.7,41-52.
 ment and inadequatc cagc sterilization. It is not known
Timoney, P. J., Klingeborn, B., and Lucas, M. H. (1996).
A perspective on cquinc viral arteritis (infectious arteri-
how thc virus is transmitred among nonmacaques or
tis of horses). Rev. Sci. Tech. 15, 1203-1208 (in
whcther the virus cxists in nature in macaques-
English).
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Chapter 35
Picornaviridae
Properties of Picornaviruses...
518
DISEAsEs CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUs Aphthovirus
521
Foot-and-Mouth Disease ...
521
Equine Rhinovirus 1 Infection....
528
DISEASEs CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUs Enterovirus .
528
Swine Vesicular Disease...
528
Porcine Polioencephalomyelitis (Caused by Porcine Enterovirus 1) ...
529
 Other Porcine Enterovirus Diseases (Caused by Porcine Enteroviruses 2
to 11).
529
Avian. Encephalomyeliti..........
530
Duck Hepatitis .
530
Turkey Hepatitis
531
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS CardioviruS.....
531
Encephalomyocarditis Virus Infection ..
531
Theiler's Murine Encephalomyelitis Virus Infection........
531
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUs RhinoviruS ....
531
DISEASES CAUSED BY UNCLASSIFIED PICORNAVIRUSES....
531
Equine Rhinovirus 2 Infection...
531
Further Reading..
532
 Over 230 viruses in six genera are classifed in the family
 vent reintroductions as well as to deal with ongoing
Picornaviridae, making it one of the largest virus fami-
epidemics. For example, in 1884, the United States Con-
lies; each genus contains viruses causing disease in do-
 gress created the Bureau of Animal Industry (BAl) within
mestic animals.
the Department of Agriculture; its mission was to deal
Picornaviruses have played an important role in
with foot-and-mouth disease and two other diseases,
the history of virology and in the history of veterinary
contagious bovine pleuropneumonia and hog cholera.
medicine. In 1897, Loeffler and Frosch showed that 
 From its beginning, this agency pioneered in the develop-
foot-and-mouth disease was caused by an agent that
 ment of veterinarians with special skills in disease con-
passed through filters that held back bacteria; this was
 trol. In 1914, the largest epidemic of foot-and-mouth
the firsr demonstration that a disease of animals was 
 disease ever recorded in the United States occurred; the
caused by a filterable virus. A century later the same
 epidemic spread rapidly after gaining entry into the Chi-
virus was among the first animal viruses to have
 cago stockyards—more than 3500 herds in 22 statcs
its structure resolved at the atomic level by X-ray
were involved. This episode served to accelerate epidemi-
crystallography.
ologic and disease control programs and the training of
In the second half of the 19th century and the 
more staff veterinarians; eventually, this evolved into the
first half of the 20th century, repeated rapidly spreading 
 complex feld- and laboratory-based systems needed to
epidemics of foot-and-mouth disease resulted in great
assure the freedom of domestic livestock industries from
losses as increasingly intensive livestock production sys-
 foreign animal diseases. Similar developments occurred
tems were developed in many countries. Producers de-
 in other countries with rising intensive livcstock indus-
manded of their governments control programs to pre-
 tries, in each case advancing the scope of the veterinary
517
518
35.Picornwiridae
 medical profession from its roots in equine medicine
Hepatovirus, and Parechovirus. Important member vi-
and surgery.
ruses of each genus are listed in Table 35.1 and the
phylogenetic relationships between representative men-
bers of each genus are shown in Figure 35.1.
Properties of Picornaviruses
An important difference hetween viruses of the six
genera is their stability at low pH; such differences had
Classification
been used as a factor in the classification of new picorna-
viruses at one time. The aphthoviruses are unstable be-
The family Picornaviridae is divided into six genera:
low pH 7, the rhinoviruses tose infectivity below pH 5,
Aphthovirus, Enterovirus, Cardiovirus, 
Rhinovirus,
and the enteroviruses, hepatoviruses, cardioviruses, and
Figure 35.1.
SimianhepatitisAvirus
Hepatovirus
HumanhepatitisAvirus
Echovirus23
Parechovirus
Echovirus22
Equinerhinovirus2
unclassified
Equinerhinovirus1
B
Foot-and-mouthdiseasevirusSAT2
A
Foot-and-mouthdiseasevirusO
Aphthovirus
Foot-and-mouthdiseasevirusA
Foot-and-mouth disease virus C
Theiler'smurineencephalomyelitisvirus
Vilyuiskvirus
B
Cardiovirus
Mengovirus
A
Encephalomyocarditisvirus
Swinevesiculardiseasevirus
B
Echovirus6
CoxsackievirusB4
CoxsackievirusB5
CoxsackievirusB1
CoxsackievirusA9
Echovirus12
.CoxsackievirusB3
Enterovirus70
D
Enterovirus
Bovineenterovirus1
E
Enterovirus71
A
Coxsackievirus A16
Poliovirus3
C
Poliovirus1
Poliovirus2
CoxsackievirusA24
CoxsackievirusA21
Rhinovirus14
Rhinovirus9
Rhinovirus85
Rhinovirus
Rhinovirus16
Rhinovirus89
Phylogeneticteeshowing the complex interrelationshipsamong he picmaviruses and howthis is refected inthe taxonomicsructureof the
inreeeewenssciaewiwisilderuswhiceldele
toimancxsackeBirusestharemanpahgensmepirnviresrmnnclssidwiinersnt sixgenstxnmc
strulsiqriqli
thefirenslmsticlbrisidwinageeea
GenerandtaxncclsterswithingenerdesignatedbyletrA}aretheesignatdbyhPicairusudyGroupofteertinl
Commitee on Taxonomy of Viruses. [Compiled and analyzed by A. Palmenberg and N. Knowles, using dala from many sources. 
Properties cof Picormairuses
519
Table 35.1
Picornviruses of Animals and Humans
PRINCIPAL SPECIES 
GENUS
ViRus
AFFECTED
DISEASE
Aphthovirus
Foot-andmouth disease viruses
Cattle, sheep, goats.
Foot-and-mouth disease
A, O, C, SAT 1, SAT 2, SAT 3,
swine, ruminant
in ruminants and swine
Asia
wildlife species
Equine rhinovirus 1
Horses
Systemic disease, with
respiratory signs
Enterovirus
Swine vesicular disease virus
Swine
Swine vesicular disease 
Porcine enterovirus 1
Swine
 Polioencephalomyelitis 
 Porcine enteroviruses 2-11
Swine
Diarrhea, pericarditis,
 asymptomatic infection
 Bovine enteroviruses 1-7
Cattle
Usually asymptomatic
infection 
Simian enteroviruses 1-18
Monkeys
Usually asymptomatic
infection
Avian enteroviruses
Chickens
Avian encephalomyelitis
Ducks
Hepatitis
Turkeys
Hepatitis
 Polioviruses 1, 2, and 3
Humans
 Poliomyelitis
Coxsackieviruses A1-22 and
Humans
Aseptic meningilis.
A24 and B1-6
poliomyelitis,
myocarditis, pleurodynia,
hand-foot-and-mouth 
disease, and other syndromes
Human echoviruses 1-7, 9,
Humans
 Aseptic meningitis and
11-27, and 29-33
other syndromes
Human enteroviruses 68-71
Humans
Poliomyeliis, epidemic
keratoconjunctivilis, nd
other syndromes
Cardiovirus
Encephalomyocarditis virus
Swine, elephants,
Rarely;
other mammals in
 encephalomyocardlitis in 
contact with rodents
swine and elephants
 Theiler's murine
Mice
 Murine poliomyelitis
encephalomyelitis virus
Rhinovirus
Bovine rhinoviruses 1-3
Catle
Mild rhinitis
Human rhinoviruses 1-100+,
Humans 
Common cold
1A, 1B
Hepofovirvs
Simian hepatitis A virus 
Monkeys
Hepatitis
Human hepatitis A virus
Humans
Hepalitis
 Parechovirus
Human echoviruses 22 and 23
Humans
Aseptic meningilis
Unclassified viruses
Equine rhinovirus 2
Horses
Rhinitis
520
35.Picornaviridae
parechoviruses are stable at pH 3. A number of other 1
 been reported to occur in the virions of many picornavi-
major differences are recognized. The 5'-untranslated r
 ruses. VP1, VP2, and VP3 are structurally rather similar
region (5'-UTR) of cardioviruses and aphthoviruses con-
 to one another, each being composed of a wedge-shaped,
 tains a long poly(c) tract that is absent in enteroviruses,
a u ad ap pue j d papuns-rn
parechoviruses, hepatoviruses, and rhinoviruses. Cardi-
size and conformation of the loops that occur between
oviruses and aphthoviruses are further distinguished by
the strands and also in the extensions of their amino
the presence of a leader protein encoded upstream of
and carboxyl termini. Amino acid substitutions correlat-
the capsid proteins.
 ing with antigenic variation occur in the surface-oriented
Aphthoviruses are unique in having three simila1,
loop regions. The VP1 proteins are located around the
 but not identical, VPg-encoding sequences. Equine rhi-
fivefold axes of icosahedral symmetry, and VP2 and VP3
novirus 1 has been moved into the genus Aphthovirus;
alternate around the two- and threefold axes; the amino-
it shares many genomic characteristics with the aphthov-
terminal extensions of these three proteins form an intri-
iruses, but its genome encodes only a single copy of the 
 cate network on the inner surface of the protein shell.
VPg gene.
The small, myristylated protein, VP4, is located entirely
at the inner surface of the capsid, probably in contact
with the RNA.
Virion Properties
 In poliovirus and rhinovirus virions the packing
together of VP1, VP2, and VP3 results in the formation
Picornavirus virions are nonenveloped, 27 nm in diame-
of a “"canyon" around the fivefold axes of the virion
ter, and have icosahedral symmetry. Virions appear
(Figure 1.11). The amino acids within the canyon, partic-
smooth and round in outline in electron micrographs;
 ularly those on the canyon floor, are conserved but the
they appear the same in images reconstructed from X-ray
 amino acids on the rim of the canyon are variable. The
crystallographic analyses (Figures 35.2 and 35.3). The
conserved amino acids on the floor of the canyon are
 genome consists of a single molecule of linear positive-
believed to form the points of attachment of the viruses
sense, single-stranded RNA, 7.2-8.4 kb in size. The ge-
to cell surface receptors and it was proposed that this
nomic RNA is polyadenylated at its 3' end and has a
location might shield attachment sites from immune sur-
protein, VPg, linked covalently to its 5' end. Genomic
veillance because antibody molecules cannot fit into the
RNA is infectious.
 canyon. Beneath the floor of the canyon in rhinoviruses
 The atomic structure of representative viruses of
is a hydrophobic pocket accessible from the surface via
 all genera has been solved; virions are constructed from
 a small opening; this pocket has been considered a poten-
60 copies each of four capsid proteins, VP1, VP2, and
 tial target for chemotherapeutic drugs.
VP3 (M, approximately 30,000 for each), and VP4 (M.
The role of the canyon has been challenged, how-
7-8000) and a single copy of the genome linked protein,
ever. Crystallographic studies suggest that the canyon
VPg (M, variable; aphthoviruses encode three VPgs). Ad-
 does not protect the receptor-binding site from antibody
ditionally, minor proteins of unknown function have
binding; indeed it has been shown that the Fab fragment
Of IgG can penetrate deep into the canyon. In these
studies it was concluded that it is unlikely that the viral
structure evolves merely to evade immune recognition.
Figure 35.2.
Rhinoviruses may resemble foot-and-mouth disease vi-
ruses in this respect, with the shape and position of their
cellular receptor-binding sites being crucial for binding
to cellular receptors but not involved in concealing these
sites from immune surveillance. Foot-and-mouth disease
viruses have a comparatively smooth surface with no
canyon structure; attachment sites for host cell receptors
are located at the tips of protuberances on the virion
surface, These sires are strongly antigenic, but it seems
that nearby structures serve to camouflage them—these
sites also have serotype and subtype antigenic specifici-
ties that differ among the various foot-and-mouth dis-
ease viruses.
The stability of picornaviruses to environmental
Picornaviridae. Negatively stained foot-and-mouth disease virus viri-
conditions is important in the epidemiology of the dis-
ons. Bar: 100 nm. (Courtesy of S. H. Wool.)
eases they cause and in the selection of methods of disin-
Foot-and-Mouth Disectse
521
fection. For example, if protected by mucus or feces sis of viral protein and RNA. This segment has been
and shielded from strong sunlight, picornaviruses are
 recognized as a determinant of the phenotype and neu-
relarively heat stable at usual ambient temperatures.
rovirulence of some viruses. All picornavirus genomes
Enteroviruses may survive for several days and often 
 have 3'-poly(A) tails that are encoded by the virus rather
wecks in feces. Aerosols of rhinoviruses and aphthovi-
 than added by host cell polyadenylation enzymes. The
ruses are less stable, but under conditions of high humid-
 function of these poly(A) tails is not know, but their
ity they may remain viable for several hours. Because of
length seems to correlate with infectivity, i.e., viruses
differences in their pH stability, only certain disinfectants
with shorter tails may be less infectious than viruses with
are suitable for use against each virus: for example, so-
longer tails.
dium carbonate (washing soda) is effective against foot-
The RNA genome of picornaviruses comprises a
and-mouth disease viruses but is not effective against 
single open reading frame that is translated into a single
the swine vesicular discase virus.
polyprotein. The polyprotein is cleaved posttransla-
tionally by virus-encoded proteinases to produce 11 or
12 proteins (Figure 35.4). The 5'-terminal region of the
Viral Replication
genome encodes the structural proteins VP4, VP2, VP3,
and VP1, in that order. The middle region encodes non-
Polioviruses, which in nature only infect humans and 
structural viral proteins including one viral protease.
 nonhuman primates, have been the principal models for
The 3' end of the genome encodes other nonstructural
studying the replication of RNA viruses. The poliovirus
 proteins, including a second protease and the RNA-de-
model serves for understanding the replication of all
pendent RNA polymerase.
picornaviruses. The replication of foot-and-mouth dis-
Viral RNA synthesis takes place in a replication
tase viruses, which have also been studied in consider-
complex, which comprises RNA templates and the virus-
able detail, parallels that of poliovirus and provides addi-
coded RNA polymerase and several other viral and cellu-
tional lessons.
lar proteins, tightly associated with newly asseinbled
The cellular receptors for many picornaviruses are
 smooth cytoplasmic membrane structures. Synthesis of
known and are surprisingly diverse. The receptors for
the complementary strand is initiated at the 3'-terminus
polioviruses, coxsackie B viruses, echoviruses, and some
 of the virion RNA and uses the protein VPg as a primer.
 human rhinoviruses are members of the immunoglobulin
 The completed complementary strand in turn serves as
superfamily. Many other cell surface molecules serve
 a template for the synthesis of virion RNA. Most of the
 as receptors of other picornaviruses, including heparan
 replicative intermediates found within the replication
sulfate, low-density lipoproteins, cxtracellular matrix-
 complex consist of a full-length complementary (nega-
binding proteins, and integrins. Some picornaviruses,
tive-sense) RNA from which several nascent plus-sense
 including some foot-and-mouth disease viruses, employ
strands are transcribed simultaneously by viral RNA
two receptors: initial binding involving heparan sulfate
polymerase.
followed by high-affnity binding via integrins. Foot-
 Because of the absence of a S' cap on picornavirus
and-mouth disease viruses can also enter cells via Fc
mRNAs, these viruses have been able to evolve an un-
receptors if virions are complexed with nonneutralizing
usual mechanism for shutting down the translation of
IgG molecules. This pathway, termed the antibody-
cellular mRNAs; one of the picornavirus proteases inac-
 dependent enhancement of infection pathway, is of un-
tivates the cellular cap-binding complex that is needed
known significance, but may be important in the long-
for the binding of cellular mRNAs to ribosomes. Thus,
term carrier state that may occur in certain ruminants.
 picornavirus replication is not only cytocidal but also
 Following adsorption, penetration, and intracellu-
 very efficient, producing new virions after an eclipse
lar uncoating, VPg is removed from the virion RNA
 period of less than 3 hours at yields of up to 106 virions
by cellular enzymes. Picornaviruses have evolved a cap-
per cell (Figure 35.5; Table 35.2).
independent mechanism of translation; normal cellular
cap-dependent translation is shut off and viral cap-inde-
 pendent translation takes over. Initiation of translation
does not proceed by the well-established Kozak scanning
DIsEasEs CauseD BY MemBers
 model. Instead, ribosomal binding to viral RNA occurs
OF The GEnus ApHThOvIRUS
in a region of the 5'-untranslated region of the genome
known as the internal ribosome entry segment (IRES).
This segment of the viral genomic RNA is folded into
Foot-and-Mouth Disease
cloverleaf-like structures that bind specifically to host
Foot-and-mouth disease is still a major global animal
cell proteins, which play key roles in initiating the synthe-
health problem, but its geographic distribution has been
522
35.Picornaviridte
FIgurE 35.4.
Coatproteingenes
Genesforcleavage&RNA synthesis
5
3
VPOVP3VP1h
pol
AAAA
VPg
TRANSLATIONPRODUCTS
N-terminus
C-terminus
-polyprotein-
-P1-
-P2-
P3-
1ABCD
2ABC
3ABCD
1ABC
2A
2BC
3AB
3CD
VPO
1CD
2B
2C
3A3C
3D
VP4VP2VP3VP1
VPg
Orgnizatnexpreingenfpolivirs piclpiciuriztnenmgs
is essenial forRNAreplictionb theRNAsinfectusifiisrevedbecauseit canbe sysizedmreionB(blckdotThtems
is polyadenyted and herereshort nonranslated seqences at eachend(hinlinesBotom}ponentryinte cell theviricnRNA aing
smessengeris ranslatedintapolyprotenThe polyprotin is cleaved rapidlyintoproteinsP1P,andP3byhreevruscoded proteinase:
tMihqdi
pirhwiedinbdp
duringcapsidflnsPadcmristharecapsidrgniztionof thgennclavageats
are slighty different in different genera of picoraviruses.[From R.R.Rueckert, Picoraviridae:the viruses and theirreplication.inFieldsVirology
(B. N.Fields, D. M,Knipe, P.M.Howley, R. M, Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P.Monath, B.Roiman, and S. E. Straus, eds.1, 3rd ed., pp. 609654.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA, 1996.]
Figure 35.5.
Coxsackievirsinylafstriadmuslellfmuseshwingicllgparrystinaryfvirionsnsad
destrucin of contracile fibers. Thin secion eleciron microscopy.Magnificalion: X67,000.
Forot-ef-Mofh IDisease
523
ity is low but morbidity is high; convalescence and virus
TaBle 35.2
shedding from affected animals may be protracted and
 Properties of Picornaviruses
it is these features that make foot-and-mouth disease so
Virions appear smooth and round in outline, are nonenve
 important, especially when the virus is introduced into
loped, 27 nm in diameter, and have icosahedral symmetry
countries previously free of disease (see Chapter 15).
The genome consists of a single molecule of linear positive
During the 19th cenfury, foot-and-mouth disease
sense, single-stranded RNA, 7.2-8.4 kb in size
was widely reported in Europe, Asia, Africa, and South
Genomic RNA is polyadenylated at its 3' end and has a
and North America and occurred on one occasion in
protein, VPg, linked covalently to its 5' end; genomic RNA
Australia. From 1880 onward, the control of rinderpest
is infectious
and the improved husbandry in the livestock industries
Virion RNA acts as mRNA and istfranslated into a polypro-
in Europe focused attention on foot-and-mouth disease.
tein, which is then cleaved to yield some 1l individual pro-
Its sequelae wcre found to be more important than thc
teins
acute illness. In dairy herds, the febrile disease resulted
Cytoplasmic replication
in the loss of milk production for the rest of the lactation
period and mastitis often resulted in a permanent loss
of more than 25% of milk production; the growth of
shrinking in recent ycars as control and elimination pro-
beef cattle was retarded. Today, many countries havc
either eliminated foot-and-mouth disease by compulsory
 grams have been established in more and more countries.
slaughter of infected animals or have reduced its inci-
Seven serotypes of foot-and-mouth disease virus have
dence greatly by extensive vaccination programs.
 been identified by cross-protection and serologic tests;
Historically, each virus type has been further sub-
they are designated O, A, C, SAT 1, SAT 2, SAT 3, and
typed on the basis of quantitative differences in cross-
Asia 1. At one time or another, these viruses occurred
 protection and serologic tests. Antigenic variation within
 in most parts of the world, often causing extensive epi-
a type occurs as a continuous process of antigenic drift
 demics in domestic cattle and swine (Table 35.3). Sheep
without clear-cut demarcations between subtypes. This
and many species of wildlife are also susceptible. Mortal-
antigcnic heterogeneity has important economic implica-
tions for vaccine development and sclection, as immunity
 acquired through infection or use of current vaccines is
TablE 35.3
strictly type specific and, to a lesser degree, subtype spe-
Geographic Distribution of Foot-and-Mouth
cific. Difficulty in defining the thrcshold at which a new
Disease"
isolate should be given subtypc status has always been
 a problem and current atirudes reflect a pragmatic ap-
REGION
Virus
proach. New strains are now compared with the estab-
South America
lished vaccine strains of commercial producers, thereby
O,A. C
Europe
avoiding the complexity of classifying new isolates
O, A. C
within an ever increasing catalogue of subtypes, many
Africa
O, A, C, SAT 1, SAT 2, SAT 3
of which have little relevancc to current problems in
Asia
O, A, C, Asia 1
thc field.
North and Central
Virus free
America
Caribbean
Virus free
Clinical Features
Oceania
Virus free
Aphthoviruses infect a wide variety of cloven-hoofed
*Foot-and-mouth diseasefree countries where vaccination is not prac-
domestic and wild animal species. Although the horsc
ticed: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
is refractory to infection, cartle, water buffalo, shcep.
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmork, Eshonia, Finland,
France,my,G,Hit,Hdra,Hgary  
 goats,lamas, camels, and swine are susceptible and de-
sia, Ireland,Italy, Japan, Korea, lihuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
velop clinical signs, and more than 70 species of wild
Maltai
 mammals belonging to more than 20 families are suscep-
Panama, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Singapore, Slovakia, Spain, Swe
tible. In gencral, clinical signs are most severe in cattle
den, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, and Vanu-
atu. Countries having foot-and-mouth disease-free zones where vacci-
 and swine, but outbreaks havc been reported in swine
nalion is not practiced: Colombia, Namibia, and South Africa.
while cattle in close contact with thcm did not develop
Countries having foo-and-mouth disease-free zones where vaccination
 clinical discase, such as 0ccurred in Taiwan in 1997
is practiced: Argentina and Paraguay. Data from the Office Interna-
tional des Epizooties.
(see Chapter 15). Sheep and goats usually experience
524
35.Picormuviridue
subclinical infections. Wild animals show a spectrum ofSwine
responses ranging from inapparent infection to severe
In swine, lameness is often the first sign. Foot lesions
disease and even death.
can be severe and may be sufficiently painful to prevent
the pig from standing. Denuded areas berween the claws
Cattle
usually become infected with bacteria, this causes suppu-
 After an incubation period of 2 to 8 days, there is fever,
ration and, in some cases, loss of the claw and prolonged
loss of appetite, deprcssion, and a marked drop in milk
lameness. Vesicles within the mouth arc usually less
production. Within 24 hours, drooling of saliva com-
 prominent than in cattle, although largc vcsiclcs, which
mcnces and vesicles develop on the tongue and gums
quickly rupture, often develop on thc snout.
(Figure 35.6A). The animal may open and close its mouth
with a characteristic smacking sound. Vesicles may also
Other Animals
bc found in the inrerdigital skin and coronary band of
 The clinical disease in sheep, goats, and wild ruminants
the feet (Figure 35.6B) and on the tears. The vesicles
is usually milder than in cattle and is characterized by
soon rupture, producing large, denuded ulcerative le-
foot lesions accompanied by lameness.
sions (Figure 35.6C). Thosc on the tongue often hcal
within a few days, but those on the feet and within the
nasal cavitics often become infected secondarily with
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
bacteria, resulting in prolonged lamencss and a mucopu-
rulent nasal discharge. In calves up to 6 months of age,
The main route of infection in ruminants is through the
foot-and-mouth disease virus can cause death through
inhalation of droplets, but ingestion of infected food,
myocarditis. The mortality in adulr cattle is very low,
inoculation with contaminatcd vaccines, insemination
but although the virus does not cross the placenta, cattle 
with contaminated semen, and contact with contami-
may ahort, presumably as a consequence of fever. Also,
nated clothing, veterinary instruments, and so on can all
affected animals become nonproductive or poorly pro-
produce infection. In animals infected via the respiratory
ducrive for long periods. They may eat little for a week
tract, initial viral replication occurs in the pharynx, fol-
after the onset of clinical signs and are often very lame,
lowed by viremic spread to other tissues and organs
and mastitis and abortion further lower milk production.
before the onset of clinical disease. Viral excretion com-
 In endemic areas, where cattle may have partial immu-
  s   d sr t  s
nity, the disease may be mild or subclinical.
disease and continues for several days. Aerosols prO-
FsGure 35.6.
B
Foot-and-mouth disease. (A) Profuse salivation by a diseased cow. (B) Ruplured vesicles on the tongue of a steer. [C) Vesicular lesions on the foof
of a deer.
fonot-and-Memth Disease
525
duced by infectcd animals contain large amounts of vi-
rus, particularly those produced by swine. Large
Table 35.4
 Differential Diagnosis of Vesicular Diseases
amounts of virus are also excreted in the milk. The cxcre-
Based on Naturally Occurring Disease in
tion of virus in high titer in droplets and in milk has
Different Domestic Animal Species?
epidemiologic significancc and is important for the con-
trol of disease (sce later)
DISEASE
SHeEP
SWINE
HORSE
Foot-and-mouth discase virus may persist in the
pharynx of some animals for a prolonged period after
Foot-and-mouth disease 
S
S
S
R
recovery. In cattle, virus may be detectable for periods
 Swine vesicular
R
R
S
R
up to 2 years affer exposurc to infection, in sheep for
disease
about 6 months. Viral persistence does not occur in
Vesicular stomatitis
S
S
S
S
swine. This carrier state has also been observed in wild
Vesicular exanthema
R
R
S
R
animals, particularly the African Cape buffalo (Syncerus
of swineb
caffer), which is commonly found to be infected with
more than one of the SAT virus types even in areas where
nsdxe iiu Aa susisa 'y ansodxa pinu Aq aldssn 'ss
 bNow extinct in swine, but virus occurs in marine mammals.
foot-and-mouth disease docs not occur in cattle.
The mechanisms by which the virus produces a
 persistent infection in ruminants are unknown, The virus
is present in the pharynx in an infectious form, for if
of the diseasc and the involvement of different species
 pharyngeal fluids are inoculated into susceptible animals
can be valuable pointers to the diagnosis (Table 35.4).
they develop foot-and-mouth disease. Attempts to dem-
 Foot-and-mouth disease is a notifiable disease in most
onstrate that carrier cattle can transmit disease by placing
countries, thus whenever a vesicular diseasc of domestic
them in contact with susceptiblc animals have given
 animals is seen, it must be reported immediately to the
equivocal results, but transimission of virus fron persis-
 appropriate government authority.
tently infected African Cape buffalo to cattle has been
Specimens for diagnosis are collected by govern-
observed.
ment officials from animals with clinical signs; the exact
 Recovery from clinical foot-and-mouth disease is
procedure differs in different countries. Usually, samples
correlated with the development of antibody. The ea1ly
include vesicular fuid, epithelial tissue from thc edge of
IgM antibodies neutralize the homologous type of virus
 ruptured vesicles, blood in anticoagulant, scrum, and
and may also be effective against hetcrologous types. In
 csophageal/pharyngeal fluids collected with a cup-pro-
contrast, the IgG produced during convalescence is type
 bang. These samples are diluted immediately with an
specifc and, to varying degrees, subtypc specific. Little
 equal volume of cell culturc medium containing 10%
information is available on the role of cell-mediated im-
fetal calf serum. From dead animals, addirional tissue
 munity in recovery from foot-and-nouth disease, but as
 samples may be collected from lymph nodes, thyroid,
in other picornavirus infections, it has becn assuimed to
 and heart. Samples should be frozen (prefcrably at
be of minor importance.
-70°C, i.e., the temperature of dry ice) and sent immedi-
Cattle that have recovercd from foot-and-mouth
 ately to the laboratory in the frozen state. In places where
disease are usually immune to infection with the same
naintenance of the “cold chain'" is difficult, duplicate
virus type for a year or more, but immunity is not consid-
 samples should be collected and transported in glycerol
ered lifelong. Recovered animals, howevcr, can be in-
buffer at pH 7.6.
fected immediately with one of the other types of foot-
A range of diagnostic tests is available for the dif-
and-mouth disease virus and devclop clinical disease.
ferentiation of the vesicular diseases, but an cnzyme im-
 munoassay is available commercially and standardized,
whercby if vesicular fluid or tissues contain adequate
Laboratory Diagnosis
amounts of antigen, a diagnosis is available within a few
Jo yum xupi on pasn sq ose us isn siui 'sinon
Rapid diagnosis of foot-and-mouth disease is of para-
thc seven types of foot-and-mouth diseasc virus is the
mount importance, especially in countries that are usu-
cause of the disease. Sensitive enzyme immunoassays are
ally free of infection, so that quarantine and eradication
also available for specific antibody determinations.
programs can be implermented as quickly as posible.
Cell cultures and, on occasion, cattle and swine
Because three other viruses can produce clinically indis-
 are used to isolate virus when the concentration of virus
tinguishablc lesions in domestic animals, confrmation
 in the vesicular epithelium or fluid is low. Cel cultures
by laboratory diagnosis is essential, although the history
 are generally used to isolate the virus from other tissucs,
526
35. Picornetwirdate
 blood, and esophageal or pharyngeal fluids. The isolated
In contrast to humans, who are generally free to
virus is identifed by the enzyme immunoassay or the
move from country to country without extensive health
neutralization test.
checks, the international movement of domestic food
animals and their products is carefully controlled (see
Chapter 15). Nowadays, most introductions of foot-and-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
mouth disease virus to nonendemic countries can be
traced either to meat on the bone being fed to swine or
The recognition of foor-and-mouth disease as the most 
rarely to long-distance spread of virus by aerosols.
important viral disease constraining effcient animal pro-
The use of polymerase chain reaction and partial
 duction in many parts of the world has resulted in inten-
sequencing of VP1 to compare an isolate causing discase
sive study of its epidemiology.
in one country with a possible source of infection in
another country can provide strong evidence to link the
Countries Free of Endemic Discase
two events. Using oligonucleotide RNA fingerprinting
In countries where foot-and-mouth disease either has
 and sequencing, scientists investigating the 1981 out-
not existed previously or has been eliminated, a virgin
 break in England showed that the outbreaks in England
soil epidemic can develop rapidly from introduction of 
 and France were caused by a virus that was identical to
virus on one farm. Within a short period, often measured
a strain used in the preparation of inactivated virus vac-
in days rather than weeks, the outbreak can extend to
cine in France.
 S0 many farms that veterinary authorities have difficulty
 in controlling its spread (see Chapter 15). Reasons for 
Countrics with Endemic Disease
the rapidity of spread in such fully susceptible popula-
 The introduction of a virus type not present previously
tions are the highly infectious nature of the virus, the
in a country may cause a virgin-soil epidemic because
production of high titer virus in respiratory secretions
livestock wil not have acquired immunity either through
and the large volumes of droplets and aerosols of virus
natural infection or through vaccination. For cxample,
shed by infected animals, the stability of virus in such
 in 1961, the spread of SAT 1 from Africa through the
droplets, the rapid replication cycle with very high virus
countrics of the Near East—where different types of
yields, and the short incubation period.
foot-and-mouth disease virus are cndemic—was more
 Foot-and-mouth disease is spread rapidly within
dramatic than any recorded spread of this type in Africa.
a localiry by movement of infected animals to market
 In some countries, particularly those in temperate
 and by mechanical transmission on items such as cloth-
zones with European breeds of cattle, the sevcriy of
 ing, shoes, vehicles, and veterinary instruments. The ex-
diseasc is modified by vaccination. In subtropical and
cretion of virus for up to 24 hours prior to the onset of
tropical countries, with predominantly local breeds of
clinical signs means that virus dissemination may have
cattle, the endemic strains produce only mild disease in
Occurred from a farm before any suspicion of disease is
 indigenous cattle, but cause severe disease in introduced
raised. Foot-and-mouth disease is commonly shortened 
European breeds. There is a greater varicry of antigenic
to FMD. This abbreviation can also be considered as a
types in Africa and Asia than in Europe and South
America and, in Africa particularly, there is a large wild-
rapidity of spread and the consequent need for immedi-
life population that can become involved in the epidemi-
ate regulatory action.
ology. The African Cape buffalo (Syncerus caffer) is the
 It was not until a dramatic epidemic of 1967-1968
 natural host for SAT 1, 2, and 3 types of foot-and-mouth
 in England, in which approximately 634,000 animals
disease virus. Transmission of virus occurs between buf-
were slaughtered before the disease was successfully
falo but clinical disease has not been recorded; the Afri-
eradicated, that the importance of long-distance airborne
can buffalo does not seem to transmit discase readily to
transmission was realized. Long-distance spread is de-
domestic cattle.
pendent on wind direction and speed and is favored
 Foot-and-mouth disease, more than any other dis-
by low temperature, high humidity, and overcast skies.
ease, has influcnced the development of international
Long-distance spread is thcrefore more likely to occur
regulations designed to minimize the risk of introducing
in temperate rather than tropical climates. So detailed
animal diseases into a country. Some countries have suc-
is the knowicdge of the characteristics of aerosols of
cessfully avoided the introduction of foot-and-mouth
foot-and-mouth disease virus that computer modeling
 disease by prohibiting the importation of all animals and
was used in 1981 to predict the likelihood of spread
animal products from countries where disease exists.
 of disease from Francc across the English Channel to
The Unitcd Statcs adopted such a policy from 1929 to
England (Figure 35.7).
1980; only recently in the light of improved diagnostic
Foot-tmd-Month Diseuise
527
FIGurE 35.7.
March7
March 10
Isle of Wight
lsle of Wight
Mesnil
Mesnil
Jersey
Jersey
Henansal, Brittany
Henansal,Brittany
Airbome spread of foot-and-mouth disease. Between March 4 and 26, 1981, French veterinary authorities reported 13 outbreaks of foot-and-
mouth disease,virus ype O,inBritony.On March 6,aeam of meteorologists and virologists in theUnitedKingdom began analyses to determine
whetherweather condionsmighbefvorablefor he airbornespreadofthevirs fromFrancetoEnglondFromthis analysis iwas considered
on the island of Jersey and on the Ise of Wight. Analysis of wind direclion based on data obtained in Jersey revealed that there were wo periods,
each 24 hours long, on March 7 and 10 that were ideal for the transmission of virus rom Britany lo Jersey and the lsle of Wight. The distonce
belween Henansal, Brittany, and the Isle of Wight is approximately 250 km. (Courtesy of A. I. Donaldson.)
procedures, has it relaxed this embargo to allow small
vaccines, many countries in Europe have now sufficiently
numbers of cattle to be imported, through quarantine,
controllcd foot-and-mouth disease to discontinue vacci-
for breeding purposes.
nation and adopt an eradication policy whenever clinical
For many countries such as Australia, Canada,
discase occurs (see Chapter 15). However, it is difficult
 United Kingdom, and the United States that have a recent
to produce a vaccine of consistent potency, and much
history of freedom from foot-and-mouth disease, cost--
rcsearch continues with peptide and various recombinant
Ium asod eanoudus, e ansn sseue yuq
 DNA-based strategies, including vectored, virus-like par-
disease occurs or is suspected. This is based on slaughter
ticle, and DNA vaccines.
 of affected animals and exposed animals and rigid en-
Although less immunogenic than intact inactivated
 forcement of quarantine and restrictions on movement.
virions, preparations of purified VP1 elicit neutralizing
Varrinatinn ie nntucedTacinnartcurhnalicieelanirla
catikad adirrauary that hae nraurided a mninr imnatus
528
35. Picornaviridae
are subclinical, whereas others resemble infcction in ani-
Clinical Features
mals. Clinical signs include fever, anorexia, and vesicula-
 tion on the skin and/or mucous membranes. There may
 Disease is often detected by the sudden appearance of
be primary vesicular lesions at the site of viral exposure
lameness in several swine in a herd. Affected swine have
a transient fever, and vesicles appear at the junction
(e.g., abrasion of skin) and secondary vesicular lesions
in the mouth and on the hands and feet. Most cascs
 between the heel and the coronary band and spread to
Icported over the years have been in persons in close
 encircle the digit. In severe cases, the swine are very lamc
contact with infected animals and in laboratory workers.
 and recovery is protracted. In about 10% of cases, lesions
Laboratory diagnosis is required to confirm human
are found on the snout, lips, and tongue. Occasionally,
cases. Prevention of human infection is based on control
some infected swine develop signs of encephalomyelitis,
of the disease in animals and use of Biosafety Level 2
 such as ataxia, circling, and convulsions. Subclinical in-
 practices and equipment in laboratory facilities.
fections also occiur.
Equine Rhinovirus 1 Infection
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Ir has long been known that equine rhinovirus 1 has
 Initial infection with swine vesicular disease virus proba
physicochemical properties (e.g, acid lability) unlike
 bly occurs through damaged skin, particularly abrasions
those of human rhinoviruses, but similar to foot-and-
around the fcet. Infection can also occur if swine eat
mouth disease viruses. Scquencing of the genome of
 infected garbage, but the titer of virus required to estab-
equine rhinovirus 1 has rcvealed many other molecular
lish infection is higher. Following infection, there is vire.
characteristics shared only with the foot-and-mouth dis-
 mia and largc quantities of virus are excreted in the feces,
ease viruses and a few charactcristics thar are unique.
but persistent infection does not occur. Swine that have
After assessing these data, in 1998 the International
recovered from disease develop antibody that protects
Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses placed equine rhi-
them from reinfection.
novirus 1 in the genus Aphthovirus and divided the genus
into two “clusters," one for the equine virus and the
Other for the foot-and-mouth disease viruses. The patho-
Laboratory Diagnosis
genicity of equinc rhinoviruses 1 resembles that of foot-
 Because swine vesicular disease cannot be differentiated
and-mouth disease viruses in cattle in that infection by
 some strains produces quite severe systemic and respira-
clinically from the other vesicular diseases of swine, in-
 cluding foot-and-mouth diseasc, laboratory diagnosis is
tory signs. In such infections, there is viremia and the
essential. A variety of rapid laboratory tests are available
virus can be isolarcd from feces.
tO distinguish the vesicular diseases. If suffcient vesicular
fluid or epithelium is availablc, an enzyme immunoassay
Diseases Caused By MemBers
can be used to detect antigen and establish a diagnosis
within 4 to 24 hours; the polymerase chain reaction can
Of the Genus Enterovirus
also be used for the rapid detection and differentiation
Of all vesicular diseases. The virus grows well in cultures
Entcroviruses are ubiquitous and probably occur in all
 of swine kidney cells, producing a cytopathic effect,
vertebrate species. However, only in swine and poultry
sometimes as early as 6 hours after inoculation. The
do they cause diseases of economic significancc. A num-
virus can also be isolated by the intracerebral inoculation
ber of enteroviruses havc bcen rccovered from swine, but
of newborn mice, which develop paralysis and die.
only rwo cause diseases of any importance: one causing
swinc vesicular disease, the major inportance of which
is its clinical rcsemblance to foot-and-mouth diseasc,
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
and the other causing porcine polioencephalomyelitis
(Teschen/Talfan disease).
There is no evidence that swine vesicular disease virus
 ported. Because of its resistance to low pH and ambient
Swine Vesicular Disease
temperatures, it is transmitted easily between countries
in infected meat. Various pork products that are pre-
Swine vesicular disease was first recognized in Italy in
 pared without heat treatment, such as salami, can harbor
1966 and since 1972 has been reported sporadically in 
 virus for several months. Fresh pork infected with swine
many other European and Asian countries.
vesicular disease virus can be an additional hazard within
(ther Porcine Fnterouirus Diseases {Caused by Porcine Fnterouiruses LtoIt)
529
a country and delay eradication of disease, as infected  paralysis occurs, leading to prostration followed by con-
carcasses may be placed unknowingly in cold storage
 vulsions, coma, and death. There may be enhanced re-
for months or years; when released, such infccted meat S
 sponses to touch and sound, paralysis of facial muscles,
can give rise to new outhreaks.
 and loss of voice. In severe outbreaks the mortality may
At neutral pH and 4°C,the virus has been reported reach 75%. In milder forms of disease the clinical signs
to survive for over 160 days without loss of titer. The
 are limited to ataxia associated with hind limb paresis
conditions found on many swine farms are therefore
 from which swine often recover completely in a few days.
conducive to gross and persistent contamination of the
cnvironment. Because the virus is so stable, it is extremely
difficult to decontaminatc infectcd premises, particularly
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
where swine have been housed on soil. The virus has
been isolatcd from thc surface and gut of earthworins
The pathogenicity of strains of porcine enterovirus 1
collected from soil above burial pits containing carcasses
 varies and the severity of the disease is also influenced
of swine slaughtered because of swine vesicular disease.
 by age, being most severe in young swine. The virus
Swine vesicular disease is not an economically iin-
 replicates initially in the alimentary tract and associated
 portant disease, but it must be controlled so that diagnos-
lymphoid tissues, followed by viremia and invasion of
tic confusion with foot-and-mouth disease can be t
 the central nervous system. Histologically the lesions
avoided. For this reason, swine vesicular discase is a t
 resemble those of other viral encephalomyelitides, with
notifiable disease and most countries have clected to
perivascular cuffng, neuronal degeneration, and gliosis.
eliminate the virus by a slaughter program, but this may
The extent of the lesions parallels the severity of clinical
be difficult.
disease and, in extreme cases, involves the entire spinal
cord, brain, and meninges.
Human Disease
Laboratory Diagnosis
Swine vesicular disease virus occasionally causes an “in-
fluenza-fike' illness in humans and is closcly related sero-
Polioencephalomyelitis due to porcine entcrovirus 1
 logically and by RNA hybridization tests to human cox-
 must be differentiated from other viral encephalomyeliti-
sackievirus B5.
des, including African swine fever, pseudorabies, hemag-
glutinating encephalomyelitis, rabies, and hog cholera.
The virus is isolated readily in porcine cell cultures, with
Porcine Polioencephalomyelitis
neutralization assays being used for typing. immunoflu-
orescent staining of the infected cell culture is preferred
(Caused by Porcine
for rapid, definitive diagnosis.
Enterovirus 1)
 Porcine polioencephalomyelitis was first rccognized in 
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
the town of Teschen in 1930 in what is now the Czech
Republic. The disease was described as a particularly
 Infection is acquired by ingestion. Inactivated and atten-
virulent, highly fatal, nonsuppurative encephalomyelitis
uated virus vaccines, comparable to the Salk and Sabin
in which lesions were present throughout the central
vaccines for human poliomyelitis, are available commer-
nervous system. This severe form of the disease is still
cially. Universal vaccination is not practiced as control
recognized, although less severe forms, referred to origi-
in intensive swine units is often achieved satisfactorily
nally as Talfan disease in the United Kingdom and as
 by quarantine and hygiene.
endemic posterior paresis in Denmark, are more com-
mon and occur worldwide.
Other Porcine Enterovirus
Clinical Features
Diseases (Caused by Porcine
Enteroviruses 2 to 1 1)
After an incubation period of 4 to 28 days, the initial
signs include fever, anorcxia, and depression, followed
These viruses are isolated frcquently from the feces of
by tremors and incoordination usually beginning with
1
normal swine, from swine with diarrhea or pericarditis,
the hind limbs. Initially the limbs may be stiff, then  and from aborted and stillborn fetuses. Several isolates
530
35.Picornaviridae
 of porcine enteroviruses 2-11 have been shown to cause
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
encephalomyelitis following experimental infection of
High morbidity and mortality occur when avian enceph-
swine.
alomyelitis virus is frst introduced into a flock. Thc
' lnog e q si ussn jo apo o
although transmission via the egg may occur in associa-
Avian Encephalomyelitis
tion with the brief viremic phase of the discase in laying
Avian encephalomyelitis was frst described in the New
hens. Once established in a flock, losses continue at a
England states of the United States in 1932 and is now
 greatly reduced incidence because maternal antibody
recognized worldwide. Its natural history parallels
 provides protection for chicks during the critical first 21
closely that of poliomyelitis of humans and polioenceph-
days after hatching.
The choice for control is either depopulation or
alomyelitis of swine. Avian encephalomyelitis is an im-
portant disease of chickens 1 to 21 days of age, but the
vaccination. Attenuated virus vaccines administered in
virus is not pathogenic in older chickens. When the virus
thc drinking water are available. The vaccines are admin-
is newly introduced into a flock the mortality rate may
istcred afrcr chickens reach 10 weeks of age and are
 designed to provide protection for chicks during the first
exceed 50%. There is only a single antigenic type, but
21 days after hatching by ensuring that adequate levels
strains vary in virulence. Avian encephalomyelitis virus
produces relativcly mild encephalomyelitis in quail, tur-
Of specific antibody are transferred from hens to progeny
keys, and phcasants; other avian specics are susceptible
chicks. They are not administered to chicks because they
following experimental infection.
are not suffciently attenuated, nor is there suffcient time
to provide protection for chicks hatched into a heavily
contaminated environment. Inactivated vaccines are also
available and are preferred when immunized birds are
Clinical Features
housed in close proximity to nonimmunized chickens.
After an incubation period of 1 to 7 days, disease occurs,
Vaccines are also used to control avian encephalomyelitis
in quail and turkey.
which is characterized by dullness, progressive ataxia,
tremors particularly of the head and neck, weight loss,
blindness, paralysis, and, in severe cases, prostration,
coma, and death. Birds allowed to recover have deficits
Duck Hepatitis
of the central ncrvous system and are usually destroyed.
 Duck hepatitis was first recognized in 1945 among ducks
reared on Long Island, New York. There is only one
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
serotype, and the natural history of the virus is similar
to that of avian cncephalomyelitis virus. Goslings, turkey
No obvious macroscopic lesions are seen at postmortem.
poulrs, and chicks of guinea fowl and quail, but not
Histologic lesions typical of viral encephalitis, but not
chickens, are susceptible to experimental infection.
diagnostic of avian cncephalomyelitis, are found
throughout thc central nervous system, with perivascular
cuffing, neuronal dcgeneration, and gliosis.
Clinical Features
Disease occurs in ducks less than 21 days of age, after
Laboratory Diagnosis
an incubation period of 1 to 5 days. The course of the
disease in a clutch of ducks is often dramatically swift,
Clinical signs and histopathology are suggestive and im-
 occurring over a 3-day period with a mortality rate ap-
munofluorescence is widely used for definitive diagnosis.
 proaching 100%. Affected ducks tend to stand still with
The virus may be isolated either in cell culture or by
partially closed eyes, fall to one side, paddle spasmodi-
inoculating 5- to 7-day-old embryonated hen eggs ob-
cally, and die. There may be some diarrhea.
 s    s o  
chicks are allowed to hatch and are observed for 7 days
for signs of encephalomyelitis. The disease needs to be
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
differentiatedi from Newcastle disease as weli as from a
range of nonviral causcs of central nervous system dis-
At postmortem, the liver is enlarged, edematous, and
ease in chickens.
mottled with hemorrhages. Histologically there is exten-
Eguine Rhiorirus 2 Ifection
531
sive hepatic necrosis, inflammatory cell infltration and
Theiler's Murine
proliferation of the bile duct epithelium, and encephalitis
Encephalomyelitis Virus
with neuronal necrosis, gliosis, and perivascular cuffng.
Infection
Laboratory Diagnosis
Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus, actually a com-
 plex (quasispecies) of related viruses, is a common enteric
The history, clinical signs, and characteristic postmortem
pathogen of mice and rats that can spread to the central
fndings are suggestive; immunofuorescence provides
 nervous system where it causes several neurological syn-
 dromes. The most common manifestation is poliomyeli
rapid, definitive diagnosis. The virus may be isolated in
cell culture or by allantoic inoculation of 10-day-old 
tis, but depending on the age and strain of mouse, there
embryonated hen eggs. When subsequently candled, in-
is also a chronic inflammatory demyelinating syndrome.
fected eggs, often show characteristic greenish discolor-
This virus is an important problem in mouse colonies
ation of the embryonic fluids and most are dead within
where its presence can interfere with research protocols.
4 days after inoculation. Duck hepatitis nceds to be dif-
 It is diagnosed along with other important mouse viruses
ferentiated from duck plague (a herpesvirus infection),
in the usual viral diagnostic panel that is required in
influenza, and Newcastle disease.
the United States for all mice used in federally funded
research. Diagnosis involves serology (hemagglutina-
tion-inhibition, neutralization, cnzyme immunoassay),
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
 sa  a pos q  
in murine cell culture. Control involves a high level of
Recovered ducks are immune. Hyperimmune serum has
 sanitation, diagnostic surveillance, and prevention of en-
been used successfully to reduce losses during outbreaks.
try into colonies of feral rodents.
Attenuated virus vaccines are available commercially
and are used following the same principles as already
outlined for avian encephalomyelitis vaccines.
DIseases Caused by MemBers
Of the GEnus Rhinovirus
Turkey Hepatitis
Among domestic animals, rhinoviruses are recognized
Turkey hepatitis was first recognized in 1959 in Canada
only in cattle. In cattle, only three serotypes have been
and the United States. The virus is related antigenically
 identified, compared with over 150 serotypes of human
to duck hepatitis virus and the natural history of the
rhinovirus. Bovine rhinoviruses are unrelated antigeni-
disease resembles that of duck hepatitis.
cally to the human rhinoviruses. They are highly host
specific and have been isolated from cattle with mild
respiratory discasc similar to the common cold in hu
Diseases Caused by Members
 mans, but they may predispose to more severe forms of
Of the GEnus CardIoviruS
respiratory disease such as shipping fever.
Encephalomyocarditis Virus
DIsEaSEs CaUSeD BY
Infection
UNCLASSIFIeD PICORNAVIRUSES
 The natural hosts of encephalomyocarditis virus are ro-
dents, including the water rat, Hydromys chrysogaster.
Equine Rhinovirus 2 Infection
The virus is transmitted from rodents to humans, mon-
keys, horses, cattle, and swine. Severe epidemics of myo-
Four picornaviruses have becn identified in horses.
carditis, with fatalities, have occasionally been reported
Equine rhinovirus 1 has becn classified as a member
in swine and other species, such as elephants—-notably
of the genus Aphthovirus; two other viruses seem to
in Florida, Australia, and South Africa—-usually in asso-
 bc acid-stable enteroviruscs of unknown significance
ciation with severe mouse or, less commonly, rat infesta-
as pathogens. The genomc of equine rhinovirus 2 has
tions. In recent years there have been significant losses
 been sequenccd and found to be somcwhat similar to
of clephants in the Kruger National Park in South Africa
 the cardioviruses, bur more or less unique and possibly
attributed to encephalomyocarditis virus infection.
warranting the construction of another genus. Equine
532
35. Picornaviridae
rhinovirus 2 causes respiratory disease in horses; its
ular and biological properties. J. Gen. Virol. 78,
importance as a pathogen has not been assessed ade-
1-11.
quately.
Institute of Animal Health. Picornaviridae web site. Avail-
able at: http://www.iah.bbsrc.ac.uk/virus/picornaviri-
dae/index.htm
Joo, H. S. (1992). Encephalomyocarditis. In “Diseases of
Swine' (A. D. Leman, B. Straw, W. L. Mengeling, S.
Further Reading
D'Allaire, and D. J. Taylor, eds.), 7th ed., Pp. 257-
260. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
Brown, F. (1992). New approaches to vaccination
Li, F, Browning, G. F., Studdert, M. J., and Crabb, B. S.
against foot-and-mouth disease. Vaccine 10, 1022-
(1996). Equine rhinovirus 1 is more closely related to
1026.
foot-and-mouth disease virus than to other picornavi-
Calnek, B. W., Luginbuhl, R. E., and Helmboldt, C. F.
ruses. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93, 990-995.
(1997). Avian encephalomyclitis. In “Diseases of Poul-
McNulty, M. S., and McFerran, J. B. (1996). Diseases as-
try” (B.W. Calnek, ed.), 10th ed., Pp. 571-574.Iowa
sociated with Picornaviridae. In *Poultry Diseases"
State University Press, Ames.
(F. T. W. Jordan and M. Pattison, eds.), 4th cd., Pp.
Carillo, C., Wigdorovitz, A., Oliveros, J. C., Zamarano,
187-195. Bailliere Tindall, London,
P. 1., Sadir, A. M, Gomez, N., Salinas, J., Escribano,
Rueckert, R. R. (1996). Picornaviridae: The viruses and
J. M., and Borca, M. V. (1998). Protective immune re-
their replication. In *Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields,
sponse to foot-and-mouth diseasc virus with VP1 ex-
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L.
pressed in transgenic plants. J. Virol. 72, 1688--1690.
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
Derbyshire, J. B. (1992). Porcine enteroviruses. In *Dis-
eds.), 3rd ed., Pp. 609-654. Lippincott-Raven, Phila-
eases of Swine," (A. D. Leman, B. Straw, W. L.
delphia, PA.
Mengeling, S. D'Allaire, and D. J. Taylor, eds.), 7th
Thomson, G. R. (1994). Foot-and-mouth disease. In *In-
ed., pp. 263-267. lowa State University Press, Ames.
fectious Diseases of Livestock with Special Reference
Doel, T. R. (1996). Natural and vaccine induced immu-
to Southern Africa" (J. A. W. Coetzer, G. R. Thomp-
nity to foot-and-mouth disease: The prospects for im-
son, and R. C. Tustin, eds.), Vol. 2, pp. 823-852. Ox-
proved vaccines. Sci. Tech. Rev. Off. Int. Epizoot. 15,
ford University Press, Cape Town.
883-911.
Woodcock, P. R., and Fabricant, J. (1997). Duck virus
European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-
hepatitis. In "Diseases of Poultry" (B. W. Calnek,
Mouth Disease. Available at: http://www.fao.org/
ed.), 10th ed., Pp. 661-664. Iowa State University
waicent/faoinfo/agricult/aga/agah/eufmd/default.htm
Press, Ames.
Hunter, P. (1998). Vaccination as a means of control of
Wutz, G., Auer, H., Nowotny, N., Grosse, B., Skern, T.,
foot-and-mouth disease in sub-Saharan Africa. Vac-
and Kuechler, E. (1996). Equine rhinovirus serotypes
cine 16,261-264.
1 and 2: Relationship to cach othcr and to aphthovi-
Hypia, T., Hovi, I., Knowles, N. J., and Stanway, G.
ruses and cardioviruses. J. Gen. Virol. 77, 1719.
(1997). Classifcation of enteroviruses based on molec-
1730.
Chapter 36
Caliciviridae
Properties of Caliciviruses ....
533
Vesicular Exanthema of Swine .....
535
San Miguel Sea Lion Virus Disease ......
536
Feline Calicivirus Disease ...
536
Rabbit Hemorrhagic Disease.......
538
Other Calicivirus Diseases..........
540
Further Reading.....
540
The family Caliciviridae includes several viruses of veter-
 calicivirus (Pan-1), skunk calicivirus, and reptile calicivi-
inary importance: vesicular exanthema of swine viruses
s rus (Cro-1). The genus Lagovirus contains rabbit hemor-
and the closely related San Miguel sea lion viruses, feline
 rhagic disease virus and European brown hare syndrome
calicivirus, rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus, European
virus. One of the unnamed genera contains important
brown hare syndrome virus, and caliciviruses of several
 viruses of humans and swine: (SRSV group 1) Norwalk
other species. Caliciviruses are associated with systemic
 virus, Southampton virus, Snow Mountain virus, Hawaii
diseases and gastroenteritis, but one from dogs has been
virus, Taunton virus, and (SRSV group 2) Toronto virus,
associated with a vesicular genital disease. Probable cali-
- Lordsdale virus, and several swine caliciviruses. The
civiruses have also been recovered from monkeys, cattle,
 other unnamed genus contains the classical human en-
mink, dogs, chickens, reptiles, amphibians, and insects.
 teric caliciviruses such as Sapporo virus and Manchester
Vesicular exanthema of swine was first recognized
virus. Many animal caliciviruses are as yet unclassified:
in southern California in 1932 and caused concern be-
 bovine enteric caliciviruses, canine calicivirus, mink cali-
cause the disease it caused was similar to foot-and-mouth
 civirus, porcine enteric calicivirus, walrus calicivirus,
disease; the virus, still the prototype of the family, was
lion calicivirus, chicken calicivirus, and other calicivi-
eradicated in 1956. Feline calicivirus is one of the two
 ruses of birds. Human hepatitis E virus and a similar
major causes of viral upper respiratory tract disease in
 virus that causes enteric infection in swine had been
cats and has been reported to cause glossitis in dogs.
included in the family but were removed recently and
Rabbit hemorrhagic disease frst emerged in China in placed in a floating genus, which is as yet unnamed.
1984 as an apparently new, usually fatal disease in do-
mestic rabbits; this virus has been introduced into Aus-
tralia and New Zealand as a biocontrol agent.
Virion Properties
Calicivirus virions are nonenveloped, 40 nm in diameter,
Properties of Caliciviruses
and have icosahedral symmetry. Virions are composed
 0f 180 identical protein molecules (M, 60,000) arranged
 in dimers forming 90 arch-like structural units, which
Classification
in turn form 32 cup-shaped surface depressions that give
The family Caliciviridae comprises four genera, two of
 the viruses their unique appearance (Figure 36.1, top;
which contain viruses of veterinary importance. The ge-
Figure 36.2). Some calicivirus isolates lack this character-
nus Vesivirus contains the marine animal caliciviruses
 istic surface structure and have a fuzzy appearance-
and the vesicular disease viruses: vesicular exanthema
a  enteric caliciviruses having such an appearance have been
of swine viruses 1-13, San Miguel sea lion viruses 1-17,
, referred to as “"small round structured viruses" (Figure
feline calicivirus, cetacean calicivirus (Tur-1), primate  36.1, bottom).
533
534
36.Caliciviridae
FIGURE 36.1.
FamilyCaliciviridaTopVesiculrexanema of swineins shwingecup-shaped depressionsthtarecharaerisicofmanyfth
cliivirus.Bnnriclirhwinglkfsfcedishersfstthsrsesenn
Fecal specimens.Negative sain electron microscopy.Bars: 100 nm. (Top, courtesy of 5. 5. Breese.
The genome consists of a single molecule of linear
positive-sense, singlc-stranded RNA, 7.4-7.7 kb in size.
FiGurE 36.2.
The 5' end of the genome is capped by a covalently
bound protein (VPg) and the 3' cnd is polyadenylated.
The viruses are relatively resistant to heat and detergent-
acidic conditions (>99% inactivated at pH 3).
Viral Replication
Caliciviruses replicate in the cytoplasm. Vesicular exan-
 thema of swine virus and feline calicivirus grow well
and are rapidly cytopathic in cultured cells derived from
tissues of their respective hosts; vesicular exanthema of
swine virus also grows well in Vero (African green mon-
Caliviruscapsidstrcteresledsingcryelectrnmicrsp
key kidney) cells. Of the growing list of probable calicivi-
and computer analysis of images.The characteristic cup-shaped
ruses, those from gastroenteritis in swine and from vesic-
depressionsare seenorelect th placement of theproteinsubunits
ular genital discase in dogs have been grown in cell
on the surface of the capsid. (Courtesy of J.-Y. Sgr.
culture whereas most others have proven uncultivable.
Vesicutar Eixanthena of Stwine
535
Figure 36.3.
Feline calicivirus
ORF1
ORF2
ORF3
5'VPg
AAAA3'
Rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus
5'VPg
ORF1
ORF2
ORF3
AAAA3
Genome orgnizationfeline clicivirusandrabbithemorhgicdisasevirusThe genmesfll aliciviruseshave a5covalenty linked
clevedtrmhelicaseprfsendhRNendentNAplraseRFncodessingecapsidprotinFnce
proleinofnkwfnctionORFand2areindiffeentreadingframesinfelinecalivirusndinesmeamenrobbithmrhai
disease virus.
The various caliciviruses use two different tran-
 one corresponds to the cntire genome and the second is
scriptional schemes, as exemplified by feline calicivirus
a subgenomic species 2.4 kb in size. The lattcr is bicis-
and rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus (Figure 36.3). In 
 tronic, encoding reading frames 2 and 3. Similar RNA
rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus the nonstructural pro-
 species (7.5 and 2.2 kb) arc recognized for rabbit hemor-
teins and the structural protein are encoded in a single
 rhagic disease virus and it has been shown that both
 open reading frame, producing a single polyprotein that
 species are probably packaged into either the same or
is cleaved posttranslationally. In feline calicivirus the
separate virions.
nonstructural proteins and the structural protein are en-
 Open reading frame 2 has a minus-1 frame shift
coded in two separate open reading frames. The tran-
 relative to open reading frame 1. Open reading framc 3
scription of feline calicivirus (and probably also vesicular
 encodes a basic protein of 116 amino acids of unidenti-
exanthema of swine virus) results in two mRNA species:
fied function that is translated from the 2.4-kb inRNA
with a minus-1 frame shift relative to open reading frame
2; it is not necessary for capsid assembly but may itself be
a capsid protein. The M, 10,000 to 15,000 VPg protein is
bound to the 5'-terminus of both RNA species. The
Table 36.1
nonstructural proteins, a 2C helicase, a 3C trypsin-like
Properties of Caliciviruses
serine proteasc, and a 3D polymerase, are similar to those
found in picornaviruses. The individual nonstructural
Virions are nonenveloped, 35-40 nm in diameter, with ico-
sahedral symmetry
 proteins arc released frorm the polyprotein by specific
 Some virions have α characterishic appearance, wilh 32
viral protease activity in a cascade similar to that of
 picornaviruses. Genomic RNA is replicated via a nega-
cup-shaped depressions on their surface
tive-sense RNA intermediate. Virions accumulate in the
Virions dre assembled from one capsid protein (M, 60,000)
cytoplasm, either scattcred or as paracrystalline arrays
Genome is composed of a single molecule of linear posi-
 or as characteristic lincar arrays associated with the cy-
tive-sense, single-stranded RNA, 7.4-7.7 kb in size
toskeleton; they are released by ceil lysis (Table 36.1).
Genomic RNA is polyadenylated at its 3' end and has a
protein linked covalently to its 5' end; genomic RNA is in-
fectious
Cytoplasmic replication. Genomic RNA and several subgen-
Vesicular Exanthema of Swine
omic mRNAs are produced during replication; mature pro-
teins are produced both by processing of a polyprotein and 
Vesicular exanthema of swine is now an extinct disease,
by translation of subgenomic mRNAs
although the virus is still present in marine mammals.
536
36. Caticiriridte
 Its importance derived from the fact that it was indistin-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Controi
guishable clinically from the three other vesicular dis-
Initially, in the United States, because of the risk of
cascs of swine: foot-and-mouth disease, swine vesicular
 missing an introduction of foot-and-mouth disease, a
discasc, and vesicular stomatitis. First recognizcd in
slaughter policy was implemented. Although there was
swine in southcrn California in 1932, by 1956 the disease
 a clear link between garbage feeding and outbreaks of
was eradicated from the United States and has not re-
the disease, ordinances requiring that all garbage fed to
curred there or been recognized anywhere elsc.
swine should be cooked were not enforced rigorously.
However, in 1952 the disease was diagnosed outside
California for the frst time, initially in Nebraska, and
Clinical Features
 by September 1953 the disease had occurred in 42 states.
These experiences led to the rigorous enforcement of
Vesicular exanthema of swine was an acute, febrile dis-
 infected herd quarantine, garbage cooking laws, and a
ease of swine characterized by the formation of vesicles
slaughter program that resulted in a rapid decline in thc
On the snout, tongue, teats, within the oral cavity, and
incidence of disease, such that by 1956 it had disap-
on the feet (between the claws and on thc coronary
 peared.
band). In addition, the virus also caused encephalitis,
myocarditis, fever, diarrhea, and failure to thrive. Preg-
nant sows often aborted. Morbidiry was often high but
San Miguel Sea Lion
mortality low and in uncomplicared cascs recovery oc-
Virus Disease
curred after 1 to 2 weeks. However, high mortality was
associated with infection by some strains of the virus.
Although sometimes listed as scparate viruses and for
epidemiological reasons usefully considered as such, it
is now clear that these viruses are the same as vesicular
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
cxanthema of swine viruses and were indeed thc source
of thc disease in swinc. Virus was first isolated in 1972
The virus was transmitted by contact and by contami-
 from material obtained from California sea lions inhab-
nated fomites, especially fecd products derived from con-
iting San Miguel Island, which showed several signs of
taminated swine mcat and offal. The incubation period
 disease, including abortion and vesicular lesions of the
was as short as 18 to 48 hours, followed by fever, lane-
flippers. Although serologically distinguishable from the
ness, rapid weight loss, and other signs of systemic infec-
13 known vesicular exanthema of swine virus scrotypes,
tion; recovery was rapid and without sequelae. Patho-
thcse viruses produced lesions when inoculated into
logic changes sccm to have been limited to the involved
swine. In California, dead carcasses of seals and sea lions
cpithclia, whcre therc was vesiculation, necrosis,
 an arm sa p n dn pm
sloughing, and rapid healing.
 to swine, thus providing the opportunity for infection.
Immunity was solid following infection, but be-
 Retrospective evidence suggested that the multiple anti-
cause of the large number of non-cross-protective viral
 genic types of vesicular cxanthema of swine viruses were
variants, heterologous reinfection was possible.
generated in the natural hosts of the viruscs, sea lions,
rather than in swine. Seventccn antigenic typcs of San
Miguel sea lion virus have been isolated since 1972 and
Laboratory Diagnosis
these have come froin a variety of sea mammals, includ-
ing northern fur scal, northern elephant seal, Pacific wal-
In most countries, suspected cases of vesicular exan-
rus, Atlantic bottle nosed dolphins, and northern sea
thcima must be rcportcd to regulatory authorities. Prc-
lion as well as from opal eye fish and sea lionu liver fluke.
sumptive diagnosis is based on fever and the presence
 In some of these marine mammals the viruses have been
of typical vcsicles, which rupture in 24 to 48 hours and
isolated from vesicular lesions.
form erosions. Diagnosis if confrmed by virus isolation
in swine cell cultures, various serologic tcsts, and electron
 microscopy. Vesicular exanthema of swinc virus showed
Feline Calicivirus Disease
a remarkable degree of antigenic heterogeneity; at least
13 distinct antigenic types were identifed. Even when
Clinical Features
rccovered concurrently from different swine within a
single herd, individual isolates were rarely antigeni-
Felinc calicivirus is one of the two major causes of respi-
cally identical.
ratory disease in cats and produces an acute or subacute
Feline Calicivirus Disease
537
disease characterized by conjunctivitis, rhinitis, trache- cats remain persistently infected and shed virus from the
itis, pneumonia and vesiculation, and ulceration of the
 oropharynx for several years, possibly for life. When
oral epithelium (Figures 36.4 and 36.5). Other common
 antisera raised in rabbits were used for neutralization
signs are fever, anorexia, lethargy, stiff gait, and some-
 assays, feline caliciviruses seermed to show a high degree
times nasal and ocular discharge. Morbidity is high, mor-
 Of antigenic heterogeneity. However, when specific
tality may reach 30% in very young kittens, and recovery
 pathogen-free cat sera were used and a reasonably large
is followed by a prolonged carrier state.
collection of viruses analyzed, a pattern of extensive
cross-reactions was found, a finding which paved the
way for the development of monotypic vaccines. The
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
 molecular basis for these observations is being explored.
For control, attenuated virus and inactivated virus feline
Natural transmission occurs via aerosol and fomites;
 calicivirus vaccines are widely used, usually in combina-
the virus is often carried to susceptible cats by human
 tion with feline herpesvirus 1 vaccine.
handlers. The incubation period is 2 to 6 days. Lesions
are usually confined to the respiratory tract, oral cavity,
sos u pue eaa Aq pamoly s uosaauos isaka pue
cases, by epithelial ulceration, especially in the mouth.
In severe disease, there may be pulmonary edema and
interstitial pneumonia.
Virus is shed in large amounts from infected cats;
convalescent cats may continue to shed virus for rmany
Figure 36.4.
months. Stress may precipitate recrudescent disease and
further shedding. Different strains of feline calicivirus
vary greatly in virulence; some strains are associated
mainly with subclinical infection or upper respiratory
disease; highly virulent strains regularly produce pneu-
 monia, especially in young kittens.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Presumptive diagnosis is based on clinical presentation;
definitive diagnosis is based on isolation of the virus in
feline cell culture and its identification by immunofluo-
rescence or enzyme immunoassay. Clinically, feline cali-
civirus infection cannot be differentiated from feline rhi-
notracheitis caused by feline herpesvirus 1 (see Chapter
18); these two viruses can be differentiated readily by
electron microscopy or lipid solvent sensitivity as well
as by immunologic methods.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Feline calicivirus occurs worldwide and although all Fe-
lidae are probably susceptible, natural infection has been
reported only in domestic cats and cheetahs. Economic
losses caused by the death of valuable kittens and the
costs of providing supportive treatment for sick cats
are substantial. Feline calicivirus can be recovered from
about S0% of cats presenting with clinical signs of acute
upper respiratory disease, but by the age of 1 year virru-
ally al cats have antibodies to it, and clinical disease is
Felinecalicivirus infectioninacat showing lesions[A}onthemuzle
rare in cats over this age. A high percentage of recovered
and (8) on the tongue. (Courtesy of V. P. Studdert.)
538
36.Caliciviridae
FIGURE36.5.
Feline calicivirus infection in a cat showing (A} unruptured and (B) rupturec
d vesicles on the tongue. (Courtesy ot E. A. Hoover and D. E. Kahn.]
Rabbit Hemorrhagic Disease
called European brown hare syndrome had been recog
nized in the early 1980s affecting Lepus europaeus and
 In 1984 a new, highly infectious disease of the European
subsequently some other Lepus spp. Rabbit hemorrhagic
rabbit, Oryctolagus cunicuius, was identifed in China.
 disease is caused by a calicivirus that is different from
It was characterized by hemorrhagic lesions particularly
 the virus that causes European brown hare syndrome.
affecting the lungs and liver and has been called rabbit
hemorrhagic disease. It killed some 470,000 rabbits in
the first 6 months and by 1985 had spread throughout
China. By 1988 it had spread throughout eastern and
Clinical Features
western Europe and had reached North Africa. In De-
cember 1988, cases 0ccurred in Mexico City. Both wild
Rabbit hemorrhagic disease affects rabbits over 2
 and domestic O. cuniculus were affected, but all other
 months of age; curiously, rabbits less than 2 months of
species of mammals except the European hare appear
 age do not develop clinical disease following infection.
to be resistant to infection. The disease was unknown
 The disease is often peracute, characterized by sudden
in Europe before 1984; however, a very similar disease death following a 6- to 24-hour period of depression
Rabbit Hemorrhagic Disease
539
FIGURE 36.6.
Rabbit hemorrhagic disease. (A} Spleen of an infected rabbit (rop), several times larger than normal (botom), and extremely dark and friable.
(B] Massive liver necrosis—midzonal areas are nearly devoid of intact cel. (C) Lung with rhrombosis (arrows indicate occlusive thrombi in
pulmonary vessels), thereslf of disseminated intrvscularcoagulation, riggeredbythemassivelivernecros.Courtesyof C.Lenghaus.
and fever. In acute and subacute forms of thc discase,
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
 rabbits have a serosanguinous nasal discharge and de-
velop a variery of nervous signs. Morbidity rates of
At postmortem there is congestion and hemorrhage in
100% and mortality rates of 90% are observed in rabbits
the lungs, which produces accentuated lobular markings;
older than 2 months.
 grossly there is marked splenoinegaly and massive necro-
540
36. Caliciviridae
sis of the liver (Figure 36.6). Large blood clots may be 
 of the virus until more was known about the virus,
 present in major blood vessels on gross examination and
 particularly in relation to its potential host range. In
evident throughout all tissues on histological examina-
Australia, in many areas, rabbit numbers have declined
tion. The pathogenesis of the disease is linked to disserm-
sn a  aa si ar  (g) sdi
inated intravascular coagulation, presumably triggered
 ration of original habitats and species in unfarmed areas.
by the massive liver necrosis.
It is too early to assess the long-term effectiveness and
benefits following the introduction of the virus into Aus-
tralia and New Zealand, but it is likely that it, together
Laboratory Diagnosis
with other established methods of control, including
myxomatosis (in Australia), will bring long-term beneft.
Rabbit hemorthagic disease virus has not yet been grown
As in much of the rest of the world it is now essential
in cell culture, but high concentrations of virus occur in
 to have effective vaccination programs in place to protect
 tissues of infected rabbits and this source has been used
farmed, pet, and laboratory rabbits.
to obtain viral antigens for diagnostic tests. The virus
 The emergence of a possibly nonvirulent form of
hemaggiurinates human erythrocytes; enzyme inmmuno-
rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus in Europe, presumably
 assay and immunofluorescence are also used for diag-
as a rmutation rather than a phenotypic change due to
nosis.
enzymatic digestion of outer peptide residues of the vi-
rion surface, may be one of many factors that in the
long term will diminish the effectiveness of rabbit hemor-
rhagic disease virus as a biological control agent.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Infection is via the fecal-oral route. Preventing entry of
Other Calicivirus Diseases
virus into commercial rabbit husbandry units, either via
fomites or via infected wild rabbits, creates a major chal-
lenge in control. Vaccines for the control of the disease
Bovine enteric calicivirus and porcine enteric calicivirus
 infections result in diarrhea and anorexia in young ani-
are prepared as an inactivated homogenate of infected
rabbit tissue mixed with adjuvant. Virus-like particles
mals. Chicken calicivirus produces stunting and high
produced by recombinant DNA technology in baculovi-
 mortality in chicks. Primate calicivirus produces vesicles
 and persistent infections. Norwalk virus and other hu-
rus expression systems are effective as a vaccine follow-
 ing parenteral or oral administration but are not yet
man caliciviruses cause diarrhca, vomiting, fever, nausca,
available commercially.
colic, and malaise.
Biocontrol of Rabbits in Australia
Further Reading
and Ncw Zealand
Rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus was brought into a
Berke, T., Golding, B., Jiang, X., Cubitt, D. W., Wol-
high security laboratory in Australia in 1991. Australian
faardt, M. Smith, A. W., and Matson, D. O. (1997).
native animal species susceptibility studies were con-
Phylogenetic analysis of the caliciviruses. J. Med.
ducted prior to detcrmining whether the virus would be
Virol. 52, 419-424.
a safe and effective biocontrol agent. In Australia, rabbits
Clarke, I. N., and Lambden, P. R. (1997). The molecular
are in plague numbers, perhaps as many as 100 million,
biology of caliciviruses. J. Gen. Virol. 78, 291-301.
Crandell, R. A. (1988). Isolation and characterization of
and are estimated to cause $600 million in annual losses;
a calicivirus from dogs with vesicular genital disease.
some losses, including native species and habitat destruc
Arch. Virol. 98, 65-71.
tion, may be permanent. The virus was transferred from
Geissler, K., Schneider, K., Platzer, G., Truyen, B.,
the high security laboratory to Wardang Island for fur-
Kaaden, O. R., and Truyen, U. (1997). Genetic and
a on padess ii sie asu up pue sien ud 
antigenic heterogeneity among feline calicivirus iso-
lates from distinct disease manifestations. Virus Res.
mainland, possibly by insect vector transmission (mos-
48,193-206.
quitoes, bush flies) or carrion-eating birds (crows, ea-
Kapikian, A. Z., Estes, M. K., and Chanock, R. M.
gles). Subsequently, it spread to many areas prior to any
(1996). Caliciviridae: Norwalk group of viruses. In
official release as a biocontrol agent.
Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M.
 In New Zealand the virus was introduced illegally
Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Mo-
nath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., Pp.
 and spread probably by farmers, irate following a deci-
783-810. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia. PA.
sion of the government not to allow legal importation
Meyers, G., Wirblich, C., and Thiel, H.-J. (1991). Rabbit
Furrther Retding
541
hemorrhagic disease virusmolecular cloning and nu-
Nowotny, N., BascuOana, C. R., Ballagi-Pordny, A., and
cleotide sequencing of a calicivirus genome. Virology
Gaimier-Widen, D. M. (1997). Phylogenetic analysis of
184, 664-676.
rabbit hemorrhage diseasc and European brown hare
Morise, J.-P. (1991). Viral hemorrhagic disease of rabbits
syndrome viruses by comparison of sequences from
 and European brown hare syndrome. Rev. Sci. Tech-
the capsid protein gcnc. Arch. Virol. 142, 657-673.
nol.Off.Int.Epizoot.10,263-270.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Chapier 
37
Astroviridae
Properties of Astroviruses..
543
Astrovirus Gastroenteritis..
544
Further Reading...
545
        e ses
observed by electron 1nicroscopy in thc feces of children
1 stranded RNA, 6.8 kb in size. The RNA 5'-terminus is
with diarrhea. Using the samc electron microscopic
C  linked covalently to a protein, VPg, and the 3'-terminus
 of domestic animals, including cattle, shcep, decr, pigs,
, not clear—there are two major capsid proteins (M,
 dogs, cats, mice, turkeys, and ducks. Astroviruses appcar
90,000 and 27,000 to 30,000) and several minor or
to be virtually ubiquitous in young animals and a fairly
 nonstructural proteins. Virions are resistant to pH 3 and
 common contributor to the ovcrall burden of gastrocn-
to 60°C for 5 minutes.
teritis, but in contrast to soinc other viruscs, thcy rarely
 ifever cause severc disease or death, with ducks an appar-
ent exception.
Viral Replication
Bovinc, porcine, and human astroviruses have been
Properties of Astroviruses
grown in cell cultures, usually in primary embryonic
kidney cells of the homologous host. In each case, trypsin
(10 μg/ml) is required to activate virion cell-binding
Classification
ligands. Virus replication takes place in the cytoplasm,
The family Astroviridae comprises one genus, Astrovi-
and mature virions accumulate in the cytoplasm in crys-
 rus, with distinct species-specifc viruses identifed in hu-
tallinc arrays. Virions are released by cell lysis.
mans (seven serotypes), cattle (three serotypes), sheep
The genomes of astroviruses are unique among the
(onc scrotype), swine (one serotype), dogs, cats, deer,
 positivc-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses of animals
mice, turkeys, and ducks (one serotype). Astroviruses
in their use of ribosomal frameshifting to express the
are so namcd because the surfaces of some particles have
 RNA polymerase and their possession of a serine prote-
a distinctive five- or six-pointed star-like appearance
are similar only to the luteoviruses, which
(astron, star). Astroviruses share some properties with
are plant viruses.
. There is some evidence for nuclcar
caliciviruses and picornaviruses but are distinguished in
localization of viral protcin and RNA during the replica-
their virion size, structurc, the coding content of their
tion of bovine astrovirus and possibly other astrovi
 genomes, and replication strategy.
ruses—-if confirmed, this would represent another major
 difference between these viruses and picornaviruses
and caliciviruses.
 Thc astrovirus genomc contains three sequential
Virion Properties
 open reading frames; the two closest to the 5' end are
Astrovirus virions are nonenveloped, 28-30 nm in diam-
 linked by a ribosomal frameshifting motif and contain
eter, and have icosahedral symmetry. As few as 10% of
 scquence motifs indicative of nonstructural virus pro-
particles in negatively staincd preparations have a five-
 teins, the serine protease and an RNA-dependent RNA
or six-pointed star across their surface (Figure 37.1 ); the
 polyinerase. A nuclear addressing sequence is also lo-
remaining particles appear smooth. The genome consists (
 catcd here. The 3'-rcading frame encodes the virion
543
544
37.Astroviridae
FiGURe 37.1.
Famlsiisilwdistipsn
different species of animals with diorrhea. Negative stain eleciron microscopy. Bor: 100 nm.
structural proteins as a polyprotein precursor (Figure
 proteins. Both are cleaved posttranslationally (Table
 37.2). Other coding scqucnces found in picornaviruses
37.1).
and caliciviruses, including an RNA helicase, a methyl-
transferase, a papain-like protease, and a VPg cap pro-
tein, have not been idcntifed in astrovirus genomes.
Astrovirus Gastroenteritis
 During infection, two species of RNA are pro.
duced, the larger corresponding to full-length genomic
Clinical Features
RNA, the smaller to a 2.4-kb subgenomic RNA, which
encodes the major capsid protein and is produced in 
The predominant feature of astrovirus infection in ani-
large amounts. There in no cvidence that the subgeno-
 mals is a self-limiting gastroenteritis. Many infections
 mic RNA species is incorporated into virions, as is the
case with some caliciviruses. The three open reading
restricted, so in settings where there are more than one
frames overlap and there are frame shifts allowing the
 animal species in close contact, infection is manifest as 
production of additional proteins. Translation yields at
diarrhea in only one species. The incubation period is
least two polyproteins, one incorporating the nonstruc-
usually 1 to 4 days, followed by watery diarrhea lasting
tural proteins and the second incorporating the structural
1 to 4 days or more. There is often vomiting (in species
Figure 37.2.
GenomicRNA
ORF1
口
ORF2
5'
AAAA3'
ORF1b
protease
SubgenomicRNA
ORF2
AAAAA3'
encodes the viral serine protease, α nuclear localization signal, and other nonstruclural proteins. ORF lb encodes the viral RNA-dependent RNA
polmeiAdmMMrAsviriAsirFii
B.N.FiDik.kBn.s.dd
Lippincol-Raven, Philadelphio, PA, 1996.]
Furthier Reading
545
 Detectable numbers of virions drop off by about 5 days
Table 37.1
 postinfection and frequently several different viruses (in-
Properties of Astroviruses
cluding bacteriophage) are present in the same sample.
s o ym ou o sm
Immunoelectron microscopy is feasible, but requires
28-30 nm diameter
considerable experience to discriminate among parvovi-
Some, but not all,virions have a characteristic appearance
ruses, picornaviruses (enteroviruses), caliciviruses, and
with: five- or six-pointed stars on their surface
the smooth forms of astroviruses. An enzyme immunoas-
Genome is composed of a single molecule of linear posi-
say using polyclonal antibody for antigen capture is feasi-
tive-sense, singlestranded RNA,6.8kb in size,Genomic
ble, but must be established for each host species of
RNA is polyadenylated at 3'terminus and is infectious
 jnterest. Reverse transcriptase polymmerase reactions us-
A subgenomic mRNA is produced during replicalion; virion
ing primer sets to the morc conserved virion polymerase
structural proteins are produced by translation of subgeno-
 gene are available: this assay is becoming the method of
mic mRNA and processing and cleavage of precursor poly
choice in major reference laboratories. Bovine, feline,
protein[s] 
porcine, and human astroviruses have been isolated in
Single genus, Astrovirus; seven human, three bovine, one
primary embryonic kidney cells, but only the human
ovine, one porcine, and one duck viruses; viruses from dif-
 and porcine viruses have been adapted to growth in
ferent host species are unrelated antigenicaily
 established cell lines. Trypsin is required in the growth
Mmedium for serial propagation. Duck astrovirus grows
in embryonated chicken eggs following blind passage in
 the amniotic sac. Infected embryos appeared stunted and
where this occurs). A rapidly fatal hepatitis in ducklings
have greenish, necrotic livers in which virions have been
less than 6 weeks of age has been reported in the United
identified. The occurrence of duck astrovirus hepatitis
 Kingdom-—-mortality rates of up to 50% have been re-
 needs to be differentiated from duck hepatitis caused by
ported.
a picornavirus.
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Scen principally in young animals, astrovirus gastroen-
Astroviruses are distributed worldwide and are probably
tcritis resembles a mild form of rotavirus enteritis. In
 endemic in many animal husbandry settings. They are
cxpcrimentally infected lambs, the astrovirus destroys
mature enterocytes on the apical two-thirds of villi, lead-
transmitted by the fecal-oral route, but also probably via
 ing to villus atrophy and crypt hypertrophy. In experi-
contaminated feed and water. The generally moderate
 mentally infected calves, astrovirus infection is localized
nature of enteric infections is presumably the reason
to specialized M cells and absorptive enterocytes overly-
vaccines have not been developed.
ing the dome villi of Peyer's patches. In human volunteer
studies involving virus challenge and duodenal biopsics,
virions have been detected in epithelial cells in the lower
Further Reading
part of villi. In ducks dying of hepatitis there is wide-
spread hepatocellular necrosis; by thin section electron
Aroonpraser, D., Fagerland, J. A, Kelso, N. E., Zheng,
 Imicroscopy, large numbers of virions are seen in hepato-
S., and Woode, G. N. (1989). Cultivation and partial
cytcs. Immunity probably lasts for years; anamnestic
characterization of bovine astrovirus. Vet. Microbiol.
responses develop following subsequent exposure to a
19, 113-125.
Belliot, G., Lavcran, H., and Monroe, S. S. (1997). Detec-
heterologous virus. Most older animals are immune. The
tion and genetic differentiation of astroviruses: Phylo-
viruses of diffcrent species are antigenically unrelated to
genetic grouping varies by coding region, Arch. Virol.
each other.
142, 1323-1334.
Gough, R. E., Collins, M. S., Borland, E., and Keymer,
I. F. (1984). Astrovirus-like particles associated with
hepatitis in ducklings. Vet. Rec. 114, 279.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Greenberg, H. B., and Matsui, S. M. (1992). Astroviruses
and caliciviruses: Emerging enteric pathogens. Infect.
Although more astrovirus virions are found in feces (up
Agents Dis. 1, 71-91.
to 10' particles per gram) than is the case in calicivirus
Jiang, B., Monroe S. S., Koonin, E. V., Stine, S. E., and
Glass, R. J. (1993). RNA sequence of astrovirus: Dis-
infections (usuaily <10° particles per gram), electron
tinctive genomic organization and a putative retrovi-
microscopy is still not optimally sensitive or convenient.
rus-like ribosomal frameshifting signal that directs the
546
37.Astroviridae
viral replicase synthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
Monroe, S. S., Jiang, B., Stine, S. E., Koopmans, M., and
90, 10539-10543.
Glass, R. I. (1993). Subgenomic RNA scqucnce of hu-
Matsui, S. M., and Greenberg, H. B. (1996). Astroviri-
man astrovirus supports classification of Astroviridae
dae: Astroviruses. In "Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields,
as a new family of RNA viruses. J. Virol. 67, 3611-
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L.
3614.
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
Willcocks, M. M., Carter, M. J., and Madeley, C. R.
eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 811-824. Lippincott-Raven, Phila-
(1992). Astroviruses. Rev. Med. Virol. 2, 97-106.
delphia, PA.
Chapter 38
Togavirdae
Properties of Togaviruses ..
547
Equine Encephalitides....
549
Further Reading.....
554
Epidemic equine encephalitis was first recorded in 1831
Properties of Togaviruses
when an outbreak in Massachusetts resulted in the death
of 75 horses. Since then, encephalitis in horses caused
Classification
 by eastern equine encephalitis virus has been described
 Based on virion properties and serologic relationships,
all along the Atlantic seaboard of North America. A
similar disease caused by western equine encephalitis
two genera have been recognized in the family Togaviri-
dae, the genera Alphavirus and Rubivirus, the later con-
virus has been described widely across western North
taining only one virus, rubella virus, which infects only
America. This virus was first isolated from the brain of
humans. There are 30 member viruses of the genus
a horse in the San Joaquin Valley of California in 1931
 Alphavirus; 6 of which cause disease in horses and, to
by K. F. Meyer and colleagues, who early on appreciated
the role of mosquitoes in the viral transmission cycle
 a lesser extent, in other domestic animals (Table 38.1)---
 these 6 viruses and another 7 cause disease in humans.
and the risk to humans as well—in 1938 both viruses
were isolated from human cases of encephalitis occurring
Individual alphaviruses are distinguished serologically,
 most importantly by ncutralization tests and, more re-
 in the same regions as equine cases. In 1936 an epidemic
 of equine encephalitis occurred in Venezuela; the virus
cently genetically, by sequencing.
isolated was not neutralized by antibodies to the two
known viruses and was named Venezuelan equine en-
Virion Properties
cephalitis virus. In succeeding years many other arbovi-
ruses were characterized; those similar to eastern, west-
Togavirus virions are spherical, uniform in appearance,
ern, and Venezuelan equine encephalitis viruses were
 enveloped, and 70 nm in diameter. Virions consist of an
brought together in the family Togaviridae, genus
 envelope with fine peplomers surrounding an isometric
Alphavirus.
nucleocapsid that is 40 nm in diameter (Figure 38.1).
 The togaviruses exist in geographically limited
 Enveloped virions and nucleocapsids have icosahedral
 habitats in which specific mosquitoes and vertebrate
(T = 4) symmetry. The peplomers are arranged as 80
 hosts play roles in virus survival, geographic extension,
 trimers, each a heterodimer composed of two glycopro-
overwintering, and amplification (see Chapter 14). Ver-
teins, E1 and E2.
tebrate reservoir hosts include wild birds and mammals;
 The genome is a single molecule of linear, positive-
 domestic animals and humans are usually not involved 
sense, single-stranded RNA, 9.7-11.8 kb in size. The
in primary transmission cycles in nature, although they
 RNA has a 5'-methylated nucleotide cap and its 3' end
may play roles in geographic extension and amplification i
 is polyadenylated. The 5' two-thirds of the genome en-
events that lead to epidemics. For example, in Venezue-
codes nonstructural proteins; the 3' one-third is not
lan equine encephalitis epidemics, a mosquito-horse-
 translated from genomic RNA itself but is expressed as
mosquito transmission cycle is responsible for explo-
 a subgenomic mRNA molecule, which is transcribed
sive spread.
from a full-length, negative-sense interrmediate. The 26S
547
548
38. Togaviridae
Table 38.1
Togaviruses That Cause Disease in Domestic Animals and Zoonotic Disease in Humanso.t
Arthropod
DOMESTIC
GEOGRaPhIC
Virus
VECTOR
 ANIMAL HOST
DISEASE
DISTRIBUTION
Eastern equine encephalitis virus
Mosquitoes
Horses
 Encephalitis
 Americas
[humans]
Western equine encephalitis virus
 Mosquitoes
Horses
Encephalitis
Americas
(humans)
Highlands 」 virus
Mosquitoes
Horses
Encephalitis
Americas
Venezuelan equine encephalitis
Mosquitoes
Horses
Febrile disease,
Americas
(humans)
encephalitis
Getah virus
 Mosquitoes
Horses
Febrile disease
Southeast 
Asia
Semliki Forest virus
Mosquiloes
Horses
Febrile
Africa
disease
"All viruses listed are members of the genus Alphavirus; tha only member of the second genus, Rubivirus, is rubella virus, which infects
only humans.
bThe alphaviruses Sindbis virus (ond variants Ockelbo and Babanki viruses], chikungunyc virus, o'nyong-nyong virus, Igbo Ora virus, Ross
River virus, Mayaro virus, and Barmah Forest virus also cause zoonotic human disease, rarely causing encephalitis, but offen causing fever,
malaise, arthralgia, ond arthrilis.
subgenomic mRNA encodes five structural proteins, in-
Viral Replication
cluding a nucleocapsid protein (C, M, 30-33,000) and
Alphaviruses replicate to very high titers and cause severe
two cnvelope glycoproteins (E1 and E2, M, 45-58,000),
 Some alphaviruses have a third envelope protein, E3 (M.
cytopathic changes in many kinds of cells: Vero ( African
10,000). Virions contain lipids that are derived from
 green monkey kidney), BHK-21 (baby hamster kidney),
 host cell membranes and carbohydrates as side chains
and primary chick and duck embryo cells. They also
on the glycoproteins. The viruses are not very stable in
 grow, but do not cause cytopathic changes in mosquito
the environment and are inactivated easily by com-
cells, such as C6/36, derived from Aedes albopictus. In
mon disinfectants.
mammalian and avian cells, infection causes a complete
FIGuRe 38.1.
Family Togaviridoe, genus Alphavirus, eastern equine encephalitis virus. Negative stain electron microscopy. Bar: 1 O0 nrm.
Egune Encepbalitides
549
FIGURE 38.2.
5'
Genomic RNA
Cap
Nonstructural proteins
Virion proteins
A(n)
Translation
Stop codon
Polyprotein
NSP1
NSP2
NSP3
NSP4
Transcription
3'
5'
Complementary(negative-sense) RNA
Transcription
Cap
Subgenomic mRNA
A(n)
Translation
Polyprotein
C
Cotranslational
processingof
virionproteins
PE2
6K
E1
Diagramofthe genmeofanalphviru andis transcriptionand translatiostrtegies.The posivesensevirion RNAiscaped and polyodenyled
q 26S subgenomic mRNA. The laler is identical to the 3' one-third of the virion RNA; it is translated into a polyprotein that is then cleaved to
Form the viral struchural proteins E1, E2, E3, 6K, and C.
shutdown of host cell protein and nucleic acid synthesis.
RNA for amplification of the infection in the cell and
 In mosquito cells there is no shutdown and cell division
for inclusion in progeny virions and 26S subgenomic
is unaffected by infection.
 mRNA. Translation from the subgenomic RNA template
Viral attachment to the host cell frst involves inter-
results in the production of large amounts of a polypro-
action between the viral E1 glycoprorein with phospho-
tein that is cleaved to form the individual structural
lipid receptors on the cell surface; entry involves binding
 proteins. Nucleocapsids are assembled in the cytoplasm,
of viral E2 glycoprotein to cellular proteins. This is fol-
upon endoplasmic reticulum membranes, and move to
lowed by receptor-mediated endocytosis. Entry of viral
 the plasma membrane where they align under patches
nucleocapsids into the cell cytoplasm occurs by fusion
containing viral glycoprotein peplomers. Finally, virions
 of the viral envelope with the endosomal membrane.
are formed by budding of nucleocapsids through the
Upon entry into the cytoplasm, the virion RNA
 peplomer-studded plasma membrane patches (Table
 characteristically directs two rounds of translation (Fig-
38.2).
ure 38.2). First the 5' end of the genomic RNA, serving
as mRNA, is translated to produce a polyprotein that is
then cleaved to form four nonstructural proteins,two of
which form the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.
Equine Encephalitides
This enzyme directs the transcription of full-length, nega-
tive-sense (complementary) RNA, which is the template
Several alphaviruses cause encephalitis in horses and hu-
for further positive-sense RNA synthesis. Two positive-
 mans; some also causc nonneurotropic systemic diseasc
 sense RNA species are synthesized; full-length genomic
in horses, pheasants, and humans (see Table 38.1).
5.50
38.Togaviridae
 Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
TaBle 38.2
 Properties of Togaviruses
 Following viral entry via the bite of a mosquito vector,
viral replication occurs in cells near the entry site and/or
Two genera: Aiphavirus, arthropodborne viruses, and Rubi-
in regional lymph nodes. The resulting primary viremia
virus, rubella virus (human pathogen only)
allows virus to invade specific extraneural tissues where
Virions are spherical, uniform in appearance, enveloped,
further viral replication provides the high titer secondary
70 nm in diameter, and consist of an envelope with fine
peplomers surrounding an icosahedral nucleocapsid,
viremia, which is key to the infection of further mosqui-
40 nm in diameter
toes and key to the invasion of the central nervous sys-
The genome is a single molecule of linear, positive-sense,
tem. The viruses replicate primarily in musclc, connective
single-stranded RNA, 9.7-11.8 kb in size; the 5' end of
tissue, and the reticuloendothelial system (especially den-
the genomic RNA is capped whereas the 3' end is polyade 
dritic reticulum and lymphoid cels). In the central ner-
nylated 
vous system, infcction involvcs neurons, but also the
Genomic RNA is infectious
choroid plexus, ependyma, and meninges. Vcnezuelan
The 5' twothirds of the genome encode nonsiructural pro-
cquine encephalitis virus also infects the upper respira-
teins; the 3' one-third encodes the structural proteins, which
tory tract, pancreas, and liver.
are transcribed from a 26S subgenomic mRNA
Encephalitis due to alphaviruses is due to thc hema-
Virions contain two (or three) envelope glycoproteins, E1
togenous spread of virus and subsequent entry of the
(M, 45-53,000], E2 [M. 53-59,000], and E3 (M, 1000],
 central nervous system by one of several possible routes:
which form the peplomers, and one nucleocapsid protein, 
(1) passive diffusion of virus through the endothelium
C (M, 29-36,000)
 of capillaries in the central nervous system; (2) viral
Replication occurs in the cytoplasmic, and maturation oc-
replication in vascular endothelial cells and release of
curs via budding from the plasma membrane
progeny into the parenchyma of the central nervous sys-
tem; (3) viral invasion of the ccrebrospinal fluid with
infection of the choroid plexus and ependyma; or (4)
 s  s  sa jo s
Clinical Features
may migrate into the parenchyma of the central nervous
system. An alternative possibility, supported by cxperi-
Infection of horses with eastern, western, or Venezuelan
 rmcntal data, is that virus may replicate extensively in
cquine encephalitis viruses produces a range of clinical
manifestations—infection may be subclinical or may
the olfactory epithelium in the nares, leading to invasion
 of the brain parenchyma via axonal spread to the olfac-
present with only fever, anorexia, and depression. Pro-
tory bulbs. Once in the parenchyma of the brain there
gressive systemic disease leading to death with only mi-
are no anatomic or physiologic impediments to viral
nor neurologic manifestations is most common in Vene-
spread throughout the central nervous system. Typical
zuelan equine encephalitis.
 pathologic features include widespread neuronal necro-
Neurologic disease, which is most severe in eastern
sis with neuronophagia, intense perivascular and intersti-
equine encephalitis, presents after a 5-day incubation
period with fever and signs of drowsiness and incoordi-
tial mononuclear inflammatory infiltration, and intersti-
 nation. The diseasc progresses rapidly to profound de-
tial edema. The pathology of Venezuelan equinc
encephalitis in horses includes cellular depletion of bone
pression (typically with wide stance, hanging head,
marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes, pancreatic necrosis,
drooping ears, flaccid lips, irregular gait, wandering) and
and, in cases where the animal survives long enough,
clear signs of cncephalitis (impaired vision, photophobia,
inability to swallow and other reflex impairment, cir-
encephalitis. The immunity that follows clinical or sub-
 clinical infection with an alphavirus probably lasts for
cling, yawning, grinding of teeth). Consrant head press-
life. Partial protection may also be conferred against
ing against a corner of the stall or fence is a typical
presentation. In terminal stages of disease, there is an
antigenically related viruses.
inability to rise, paralysis, and occasionally convulsions.
In horses, the case-fatality rate of eastern equine enceph-
alitis virus infection is 50-90%, western equine encepha-
Laboratory Diagnosis
litis virus infection is about 20-40%, and Venezuelan
equine encephalitis virus (epidemic types) infection is
 Diagnosis of the equine encephalitides usually involves
about 50-80%. Mildly affected animals may recover
serology only—viremia is transient and is usnally termi-
slowly in a few weeks but may have neurological se-
nated by the time blood specimens would be drawn
quelae (dullness, dementia); such horses have been re-
for virus isolation. IgM capture enzyme immunoassay
ferred to as “dummies." Highlands J virus can cause
 is employed routinely to detect IgM antibodies in a single
fatal encephalitis in horses, but this is unusual.
serum sample; the presence of IgG antibodies is much
Eeuine Encepbalitides
551
less predictivc of recent infection, especially given the
and produce high-titered viremia and severe clinical dis-
 background of antibody elicited by cquine vaccination.
ease in horses, donkeys, and mules. In contrast, type ID,
 IgM antibodies are almost always detectable before the
 and I-IV viruses are equine avirulent. Type IE had been
second week of illness. Where necessary, confirmation
 considered equine avirulent, bur in 1993 and 1996 this
of positive results is done by neutralization in cell culture,
type was isolated from horses with encephalitis in
using paired sera.
Mexico.
 The suckling mouse is a particularly sensitive host
for virus isolation from clinical specimens (blood, brain)
 and is still used in some laboratorics in the tropics. How-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
ever, for practical reasons, in most instances cel cultures
 are used: Vero (African green monkcy kidney) or BHK-
Eastern Eguine Encephalitis
21 (baby hamster kidney) cells and C6/36 (Aedes albopi-
Eastern equine encephalitis virus is endemic in North
ctus mosquito) cells are most popular. Isolates are identi-
America along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts. The virus
fied by enzyne immunoassay. Where more than one
is also endemic in the Caribbean, Central America, and
alphavirus may be circulating in an area, isolate identifi-
along the northeastern coast of South America. Less
cation is confirmed by neutralization using reference
commonly, equine disease occurs inland east of the Mis-
 monoclonal antibodies. This is extremely important in
sissippi River. In northern regions, cases occur in late
 one particular circumstance: becausc Venezuelan equine
summer and up until the time of the frst frost, whereas
 encephalitis virus occurs as epidemic and endemic types.
cascs can occur throughout the year in southern regions.
the identifcation of isolates to this level of specificity
In the United States the virus is maintained in freshwater
has great epidemiological importance. The types may
marshes by Culiseta melanura. This mosquito, which
be differentiated by special hemagglutination-inhibition
 feeds almost exclusively on birds, is also responsible for
 assays, by neutralization assays, and now most often by
amplification of the virus during the spring and summer
partial sequencing. Types IAB and IC are equine virulent 
(Figure 38.3). In areas near coastal salt marshes, Aedes
Figure 38.3.
Wildbird
Epidemic
cycle
(Wildbirdsand
Aedes spp.
andother
mosquitoes)
Penned pheasants
Dead-end hosts:
(then bird-to-bird
horses&humans
by pecking)
Primary
summertime
endemic
Culiseta melanura
cycle
Culisetamelanura
Mammals
Marshbirds
&reptiles
(rarely)
Trnmisfeqnhlirwilistr
hmanllnglgilirr
Cyclekscesynfehwalemahepidmicyclieneerediresesuchmarhlhoughhrsndns
areconsieddedendhssmanpideilgieretivemrsproceviremilevelshighnughnmitir
mosquitoes that fed on them. The mode of overwintering of this virus is unknown.
552
38. Togaviridae
Figure 38.4.
Wildbirds
Natural cycle
(Nestlingand juvenile
wildbirdsand
Culextarsalis
mosquitoes)
Dead-end hosts:
Amplifyingcycle
horses&humans
(Domestic and
wildbirdsand
mammalsand
Culexspp
mosquitoes)
Mammals
Wildbirds
Transmisson cycle of westem equine encephalisvirus in North America.The cycle inCuleax farsalis and nestling and juvenile birds maybe
amplified by infection of domestic birds and wild and domestic mammals. Because
at cooler temperatures than other arboviruses, epidemic disease in horses and humans may occur early in he summer and may extend north
into Canada later in the summer and earty fall.
sollicitans and A. vexans are responsible for transferring
Eastern Equine Encephalitis Infection
the virus from its endemic habitat to nearby horses; these
 in Pheasants, Chickcns, Emu, and
   se sisor   a soss
Whooping Crancs
birds and occasionally infect humans as well. In some In eastern North America, many outbreaks of eastern
other settings in eastern North America, the mosquito(es)
 equine encephalitis virus infection have occurred in com-
responsible for outbreaks remains a mystery. Coquilliti-
 mercial pheasant flocks, resulting in a mortality rate of
dea perturbans has been implicated in some settings by
 50-70%. Introduced into the southern regions of the
virus isolation and determination of a feeding preference
United States from Australia for commercial husbandry,
for horses and birds; however, this mosquito does not
 emu have also succumbed to infection. The virus is intro-
 exist in all sites where equine disease occurs. The mystery
 duced into flocks by mosquitoes and is spread when
is deepened by several lines of evidence opposing an old
 healthy birds peck on sick, viremic birds. Mortality has
notion thar virus is reintroduced from the tropics each
 also been observed in other domestic fowl, such as young
year by migrating birds. Similarly, there is evidence
 broilers and Pekin ducks. Young broilers exhibit somno-
against transovarial transmission and overwintering of
lence, abdominal distention, and retarded growth; the
virus in mosquitoes. Other notions, such as persistent 
mortality rate is about 80%. Lesions include multifocal
infection of reptiles, amphibians, or birds, also seem
 necrosis in the heart and liver, lymphoid depletion, and
flawed.
 necrosis in the thymus, spleen, and bursa of Fabricius.
Highlands J virus is endemic on the east coast of
 Prevention has been attempted by the use of environmen-
the United States in the same areas as eastern equine
 tal insecticides and vaccine (equine vaccine) in valuable
encephalitis virus.
 birds, but because of the sporadic occurrence of the
Fquine Lncephalitides
553
disease, usually nothing is done to prevent loss in pheas-
 of formalinized vaccines containing residual infectious
ants or chickens. However, the occurrence of eastern
virus may have been responsible in the past for initiating
equine encephalitis virus infection in whooping cranes,
！
 some type IAB epidemics.
an endangered species, has led to the systematic vaccina-
 Immunization of horses with inactivated cell cul-
tion of all chicks at breeding grounds in Texas and Flor-
ture vaccines for eastern, western, and Venezuelan
ida—the value of these birds is such that human, not 
equine encephalitides is the basis of control programs.
equine, vaccine has been used.
Inactivated bivalent or trivalent vaccines are given annu-
ally in the spring in two doses 7 to 10 days apart. In
Wcstern Equinc Encephalitis
areas where mosquitoes are active year round, foals are
Western equine encephalitis virus is distributed widely
 yaccinated when 3, 4, and 6 months of age and annually
throughout the Americas, but especially in the western
thereafter. In Venezuelan equine encephalitis epidemics,
plains and valleys of the United States and Canada,
 an attenuated virus vaccine (TC-83) is also available. In
where it is maintained year round in an endemic cy-
 many areas, mosquito control programs are also in place;
cle involving domestic and passerine birds and Culex 
in short-term ermergency situations, such as during an
tarsalis, a mosquito particularly adapted to irrigated
epidemic or when sentinel surveillance indicates the like-
agricultural areas (Figure 38.4). Isolations have been 
lihood of an epidemic, vaccination programs are supple-
made from Culex stigmatosoma, Aedes melanimon, and
 mented by aerial spraying with ultra-low volume insecti-
A. dorsalis, also competent vectors. Culex tarsalis mo-
cides, such
1 as malathion or synthetic
pyrethrins.
squitoes may reach great population densities when
 Prohibition of the movement of horses is also used in
climatic conditions or irrigation practices are suita-
the face of outbreaks.
ble. For example, in the 1930s, equine epidemics of an
 In an unprecedented event in the history of veteri-
enormous scale occurred in western United States: be-
 nary medicine, an epidemic of Venezuelan equine en-
tween 1937 and 1939 more than 500,000 cases were
 cephalitis, which had started in northern South America
reported along with thousands of associated human in-
in 1962-1964 and reemerged in 1969, moved north
fections.
across Central America and Mexico in 1970 and reached
Texas in 1971. There were hundreds of thousands of
Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis
deaths of horses, mules, and donkeys and a threat of
 The endemic types of Venezuelan equine encephalitis
 spread further north into the equine industries of the
virus, which are equine avirulent, are perennially active
southern United States. There were also many thousands
in subtropical and tropical areas of the Americas: type
 of human infections and many deaths, mostly in children.
II (Everglades virus) in Florida, and types ID in Central 
The epidemic was brought to a halt by an integrated
America, and types IF, Hl, IV, V, and VI in South 
 international disease control program that included (1)
America. Endemic types occur in silent, stable transmis-
 a surveillance system to target control activities; (2) wide-
sion cycles primarily involving Culex (Melanoconion)
 spread use of the then experimental attenuated virus
spp. mosquitoes and small mammals in tropical swamps
vaccine (TC-83); (3) widespread use of ultra-low volume
in Central America and northern South America.
aerial spraying of insecticides; and (4) quarantine and
Types IAB and IC are equine virulent, producing 
prohibition of the movement of horses. With the end of
high-titered viremia in horses, donkeys, and mules-
the 1971 vector season, the virus disappeared. The con-
 these viruses have been isolated only during epidemics.
The epidemic types have been found primarily in Venezu-
 of human resources; however, much was learned that
ela, Colombia, Peru, and Ecuador, causing major prob-
 has been assimilated into veterinary disease control pro-
lems at approximately 10-year intervals. In all equid
grams everywhere.
species, these viruses cause severe disease, with survivors
The initial stages of a repeat of these events OC-
 oftcn having serious neurological sequelae. During epi-
 curred in 1995: a major epidemic occurred in Venezuela
 demics, horses are an important amplifying host and
and Colombia, involving an unknown but very large
 because nearly every horse in an area becomes infected
number of horses, mules, and donkeys and an estimated
 and thcre is always substantial associated human disease,
75,000 to 100,000 humans. This epidemic was remark-
the overall consequences may be devastating.
ably similar in geographic localization and dynamics of
 Although the interepidemic maintenance of the ep-
spread to an earlier epidemic—one that occurred in the
idemic types of the virus had been a long-standing mys-
 same regions of Venezuela and Colombia in 1962-1964.
tery, recent evidence suggests that they emerge each rime
Viruses isolated during 1995 were antigenically and ge-
de novo from the mutation of endemic types—the genetic
 netically nearly identical to those obtained during 1962-
 difference between endemic and epidemic viruses is very
1964. The lack of genetic change between the 1962-
small indeed. Separately, there is evidence that the use 
1964 and the 1995 outbreaks is consistent with the slow
554
38. Togaviridae
rate of evolution of endemic alphaviruses. These “'molec-
 horses or performing equine necropsies when there is
ular epidemiology’ findings are consistent with the con-
 suspicion of these infections. Decontamination of pens,
 cept that epidemic type viruses emerge and reemerge via
stalis, and cages should be done with standard disinfec-
the mutation of endemic types circulating constantly in
 tants and suspect carcasses should be incinerated or bur-
northern South America and Central America.
ied after diagnostic specimens have been obtained (see
Chapter 12).
Human Disease
Further Reading
 Equine encephalitis viruses are zoonotic and cause sig-
nificant human disease. Eastern equine encephalitis virus
Johnston, R. E., and Peters, C. J. (1996). Alphaviruses.
infection in humans is characterized by fever, drowsi-
In "Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M.
ness, and nucal rigidity. The disease may progress to
Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Mo-
nath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., Pp.
confusion, paralysis, convulsions, and coma. The overall 
843-898. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
fatality rate among clinical cases is about 50-75% and
Karabatsos, N., ed. (1985). “"International Catalogue of
 many survivors are left with permanent neurologic se-
Arboviruses Including Certain Other Viruses of Verte.
quelae, such as mental retardarion, epilepsy, paralysis,
deafness, and blindness. Western equine encephalitis vi-
cine and Hygiene, San Antonio, Texas (and updates
published occasionally in the American fournal of
rus is usually less severe: a high proportion of infections
Tropicat Medicine and Hygiene).
are silent and the case-fatality rate is about 3-10%.
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (epidemic types)
between vertebrate and invertebrate cells. Adv. Virus
causes a systemic febrile illness in humans and about
Res. 38, 343-403.
 1% of those affected develop clinical encephalitis. There 
Monath, T. P., ed. (1988). "The Arboviruses: Epidemiol-
 is also abortion and fetal death when pregnant women
Schlesinger, S., and Schlesinger, M. J. (1996). Togaviri-
are infected. In the absence of adequate medical care in
dae: The viruses and their replication. In *Fields Virol-
less developed areas, case-fatality rates as high as
ogy"' (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley,
 20-30% have been reported in young children with
R. M. Chanock, J. L. Meinick, T. P. Monath, B: Roiz-
man, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 825-841.
encephalitis.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
 Zoonotic diseases caused by other alphaviruses are
Scott, T. W., and Weaver, S. C. (1989). Eastern equine
important in various regions of the world, mostly in the
encephalitis virus: Epidemiology and evolution of mos-
tropics and subtropics. Fever, rash, and arthritis form a
quito transmission. Adu. Virus Res. 37, 277-328.
triad of clinical features in infections caused by chikun-
Strauss, E. G., Strauss, J. H., and Levine, A. J. (1996). Vi-
gunya, o'nyong-nyong, Ross River, Mayaro, Igbo Ora,
rus evolution. In "Fields Virology" (B. N. Fields,
D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L.
and Sindbis viruses (and Sindbis virus strains Ockelbo
Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,
from Scandinavia and Babanki from Africa). Indeed,
eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 153-172. Lippincott-Raven, Phila-
chikungunya and o'nyong nyong are African terms de-
delphia, PA.
scribing the agony of affected joints.
Weaver, S. C. (1997). Vector biology in viral pathogene-
Biobazard: Laboratory and clinically associated
sis. In *"Viral Pathogenesis" (N. Nathanson, R.
Ahmed, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, D. E. Griffn, K. V.
 infections are rare, but care should be taken to avoid
Holmes, F. A. Murphy, and H. L. Robinson, eds.),
contact or droplet exposure when working with sick
Pp. 329-352. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
Cha pter 39
Flaviviridae
Properties of Flaviviruses...
556
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS FLAVTVIRUS.
559
Japanese Encephalitis..
559
Murray Valley (Australian) Encephalitis
559
St. Louis Encephalitis .....
560
Wesselsbron Disease...
560
Dengue.
561
West Nile and Kunjin Virus Infections..
561
Yellow Fever....
561
Tick-Borne Encephalitides..
562
Louping Ill.
563
DISEASES CAUSED BY MEMBERS OF THE GENUS PESTTVIRUS ...
563
Bovine Viral Diarrhea ..
563
Border Disease...
566
Hog Cholera.
567
Further Reading.
568
The family Flaviviridae comprises three genera, the  (
 Of investigating epidemic yellow fever in Havana in
members of which although similar in genomic and
 1900, Walter Reed, James Carroll, and collagues
physicochemical properties are biologically quite differ-
showed that the etiologic agent was a "filterable virus"
ent. The genus Flavivirus contains more than 69 viruses;
and that it was transmitted by the mosquito Aedes ae-
of these about 10 are of veterinary importance, includ-
 gypti. Reed acknowledged the role of earlier discoveries
ing louping ill, Wesselsbron, and Japanese encephalitis
 by veterinary scientists in this achicvement: Loeffler,
viruses. About 30 of the members of this genus are
 Frosch, and Koch for their discovery of thc first virus
 arthropod-borne zoonotic human pathogens, the caus-
of animals, foot-and-mouth disease virus, and Salmon,
ative agents of diseases varying from fevers with rash
 Smith, Kilborne, and Curtice for their discovery that
to life-threatening hemorrhagic fevers, encephalitides,  a
 arthropods can transmit infectious disease among ani-
and hepatitides. Members such as yellow fever virus,
, mals (the agent, Babesia bigemina, the etiologic agent
the four dengue viruses, St. Louis encephalitis virus,
of Texas fever of cattle; the vector, the tick Boopbilus
Japanese encephalitis virus, Murray Valley encepha-
 annulatus). Yellow fever was one of the great scourges
litis virus, and several tick-borne encephalitis viruses 
 of humankind during the 18th and 19th centuries, with
rank among the most important human viral pathogens
 epidemics repeatedly affecting coastal cities in the Ameri-
in the world. The genus Pestivirus contains three vi-
 cas, Europe, and West Africa. Following the discovery of
ruses, each an important vctcrinary pathogen: bovine 
the virus and its vector, mosquito eradication programs
viral diarrhea virus, border diseasc virus of shccp, and
 quickly eliminated the disease from cities in the westcrn
hog cholera virus. The genus Hepacivirus contains
hemisphere. Hemispheric eradication was envisioned,
only the human pathogens hepatitis C and hepatitis
 but in 1932 the zoonotic jungle cycle was discovered,
G viruses.
involving monkeys and jungle-canopy mosquitoes, pro-
 Yellow fever virus, the prototype of the genus Flav-
 viding uncontrollable potential for initiating urban cpi-
ivirus, was the first human virus discovered. In the course
demics.
555
556
39.Flaviviridae
Members of the genus Pestivirus occur worldwide
 closely. Experimentally, the viruses have an overlapping
as economically important pathogens. Hog cholera
a host spectrum: hog cholera virus can be transmited to
 (known in Europe as swine fever or classical swine fever
 cattle and bovine viral diarrhea virus can infect swine,
 01 European swine fever) was first recognized in Ohio
sheep, and goats as well as a wide range of other ungu-
in 1833; it has been conjectured that the virus might
lates. However, in nature the viruses are quite species
have emerged at that time by species jumping, i.e., by a
specific.
host-range mutation of another pestivirus. Early in the
 A new variant of bovinc viral diarrhea virus has
 20th century, as intensivc swine production expanded,
 been identified as the cause of severe thrombocytopenia
hog cholera became the most important swine disease
 and a hemorhagic syndrome in adult cattle—-its overall
in ali developcd countries--subsequently, cradication 
 significancc is being assessed. Among Border disease vi-
 programs were implemented that have bccn so successful 
rus isolates from sheep, it has been shown that there are
that today it is breaks and rcintroductions rather than
two very similar viruses: true Border disease virus and
 endemic disease that attract attention. Bovine viral diar-
a bovine viral diarrhea-like virus.
rhea was first described in New York in 1946 as an
apparently new cattle disease; then in the 1950s another
clinical entity, mucosal disease, was described as some-
Virion Properties
what similar yet different in its severity and herd inci-
dence pattern. Viruses isolated from both diseases
Flavivirus and pestivirus virions are spherical, S0 nm in
 proved to be virtually identical (see later).
diameter, and consist of a tightly adherent lipid envelope
Hepatitis C virus was discovered in 1989 by a tour
 covered with indistinct peplomers surrounding a spheri-
de force of modern molecular biology; even though the
 cal nucleocapsid with probable icosahedral symmetry
virus has never been visualized by elcctron microscopy
(Figure 39.1). The genome consists of a single molecule
Or grown in cell culture, its complete genomic nucleotide
of linear positive-sense, single-stranded RNA, 10.6-10.9
 sequence has been determined, its taxonomic placement 
(flaviviruses), 12.5 (pestiviruses), or 9.5 (hepaciviruses)
in the family Flaviviridae decided, and its diagnosis made
kb in size. Genomic RNA is infectious. The complete
routine using recombinant DNA-produced
I reagents.
nucleotide sequence of scvcral of the viruses has been
This success now serves as a model for the detection,
determined. The 5' cnd of thc gcnomc is capped and,
characterization, and diagnosis of other uncultivable vi-
except for a few of the tick-borne flaviviruses, the 3' end
ruscs of any animal species.
 is not polyadenylated—instead therc is a 3'-hairpin loop
(Figure 39.2).
 The viral gcnome contains a single long open read-
Properties of Flaviviruses
ing frame encoding about 10 proteins, which are formed
by co- and posttranslational processing and cleavage.
Classification
Virions contain thrce (genus Flavivirus) or four (genus
 Pestivirus) proteins which are encoded in the S' end of
The genus Flavivirus, with more than 69 members, in-
the genome; the nonstructural proteins are encoded in
cludes the veterinary pathogens Japanese cncephalitis
the 3′ end. Proteins include: C, the nucleocapsid protein;
virus, Wesselsbron virus, and louping ill virus. The genus
prM, a glycosylated precursor that is cleaved during
also includes many important human pathogens (Table 
virus maturation to yield M, the transmembrane protein;
39.1). Members of the genus are grouped by genomic
and E (E1 and E2 in the genus Pestivirus), the major
similarities (determined by genomic sequencing and par-
 peplomer glycoprotein(s). There are seven or eight non-
 tial sequencing) and shared neutralization epitopes into
 structural proteins, including NS5, the RNA-dependent
eight complexes, such as the mosquito-borne encephali-
RNA polymerase, and NS3, which functions as a helicase
tis complex and the tick-borne virus complex; there are
and protease and as part of the RNA polymerase com-
 also several ungrouped viruses, including the prototype,
 plex. NS3 is responsible for most of the cleavages of the
yeilow fevcr virus. Most members of the genus are main-
 polyprotein, while host cell proteases are responsible for
taincd in nature in arthropod-vertcbrate-arthropod cy-
the rest.
cles, but a few are transmitted directly among bats or ro-
The viruses are not very stable in the environment
dents.
and are inactivated easily by heat and by common disin-
The genus Pestivirus comprises three important
fectants. However, the stability of hog cholera virus in
veterinary pathogens: bovine viral diarrhea virus, Border
meat products and offal for weeks or even months has
 disease virus, and hog cholera virus. Genomic sequence
 contributed importantly to its spread and reintroduction
analysis indicates that these three viruses are related very
into virus-free arcas.
Bavine Viral Diarrbea
557
Table 39.1
Flaviviruses That Cause Disease in Domestic Animals and Zoonotic Disease in Humans*
ARthrOPoD HoST
DISEasE IN DOMESTIC
HosT OF CONCERN
(MODE OF
ANIMALS
GEOGRAPHIC
ViRus
(ResERvoIR HOST)
TRANSMISSION}
(oR HumaNS)
DISTRIBUTION
Genus Flavivirus
Japanese encephalitis
Swine, humans
Mosquitoes: Culex
Abortion, neonatal
Asia
virus
(birds)
tritaeniorhynchus
disease (encephalis]
Murray Valley
Humans (birds)
Mosquitoes: Culex
(Encephalitis)
 Australia, New
encephalitis virus
annulirostris
Guinea
 St. Louis encephalitis
Humans (birds)
Mosquitoes: Culex
(Encephalitis)
United States,
virus
tarsalis, C. Pipiens
 Canada, Central
and South 
America
Wesselsbron virus
Sheep
Mosquitoes
Generalized 
Africa
infection, abortion
Dengue 1, 2, 3, 4
Humans
Mosquitoes: Aedes
(Fever and rash,
Tropics worldwide
viruses
(humans and 
aegypti, other
arthralgia myalgia,
monkeys!
Aedes spp.
hemorrhagic fever!
West Nile virus
Humans (birds)
 Mosquitoes: Culex
(Fever with rash,
Mediterranean,
spp. (rarely ticks)]
rarely arthralgia or
France, Portugal,
encephalitis)
Cyprus, Russia,
CiS,Asia, Africa
Yellow fever virus
Humans
 Mosquitoes: Aedes
[Hepatilis,
Tropical Africa and
(humans and
oegypi, Aedes spp.
hemorrhagic fever)
Americos
monkeys]
Russian spring--
Humans
Ticks: Ixodes spp.
(Encephaliris)
Eastern Russia, CIS
 summer encephalis
(rodents, birds)
virus
 Central European
Humans
Ticks: Ixodes spp.
{Encephalitis)
Europe:
encephalitis virus
[Rodents, birds) 
and via ingestion 
 Scandinavia to
of raw milk 
Greece
Omsk hemorrhagic
Humans
Ticks: Dermacenior
(Hemorrhagic fever,
Central Russia, CIS
fever virus
[muskrats]
spp.
 gastrointestinal 
disease]
Kyasanur Forest
Humans
Ticks: Haemaphysalis
[Hemorrhogic fever,
India (Mysore)
disease virus
(monkeys,
spp.
encephalitisj
rodents]
Powassan virus
 Small mammals
Ticks: Ixodes spp.
Encephalitis
Canada, United 
States, Russia
 Louping ill virus 
Sheep
Ticks: Ixodes ricinus
Encephalitis
Europe
Genus Pesti-
virus
Bovine viral diarrhea
Catfle
Contact
 Mostly inapparent
Worldwide
virus
Calves
Congenital 
Congenital disease:
generalized persistent
infection, mucosal
disease
 Border disease virus 
Sheep
Contact
 Mostly inapparent 
Worldwide
Lambs
Congenital
Congenital disease—-
hairy shaker disease
Hog cholera virus
Swine
Contact
 Systemic disease
Worldwide, but 
Congenital disease
eradicated in some
countries
The genus Hepacivirus contains hepalis C virus, an important cause of human hepolis.
558
39.Flaviviridae
Figure 39.1.
FamilyFlviviridae,gnusFlaviviruscentralEuropenick-bomeencephalis virus.egative stainelectronmicroscopy.Bar:10nm
Viral Replication
Toxorbynchites spp. The viruses infect and kill newborn
mice; in fact, most of the flaviviruses were first isolated
Mermbers of the genus Flavivirus replicate welland cause
in newborn mice.
cytopathic changes in many kinds of cells: Vero (African
Members of the genus Pestivirus replicate well in
green monkey kidney) cells, BHK-21 (baby hamster kid-
primary and continuous cell cultures derived from the
ney) cells, and primary chick and duck embryo fibro-
principal host species: bovine viral diarrhea virus in bo-
blasts. Some of the viruses also replicate well in Fc recep-
vine embryonic fbroblast or kidney cells and hog cholera
tor-bearing macrophages and macrophage cell lines
virus in porcinc lymphoid or kidney cells. Pestiviruses
where yield is enhanced by the presence of antiviral anti-
isolated from naturally infected animals are often noncy-
body (called antibody-dependent enhancement). The vi-
topathic in cell culture but yield cytopathic variants dur-
ruses also rcplicate in but do not cause cytopathic
ing passage; however, cytopathic strains of bovine viral
changes in mosquito cells, such as C6/36 cells, derived
diarrhea virus may be isolated directly from cattle with
from Aedes albopictus and AP-61 cells, derived from A.
mucosal diseasc.
 pseudoscutellaris. The mosquito-borne viruses are also
Virus attachment is mediated by ligands on the E
grown in certain species of very large mosquitocs, such as
 glycoprotein(s); cellular receptors have not been identi-
Figure 39.2.
Genomic RNA
5
virion proteins
nonstructural proteins
3'
cap
cotranslational processing
CPrME
AISN4
NS3
NS5
NS2A NS2B
NS4A NS4B
Golgiprotease
Pr M
Sructurendtrnlatinof tfviigenmeVirinprtis arecdedin5endof thegenmeensrurlprtinsin3
end.TheRNAiscapedthe5endbtthe3endisntplyadenyltedhrereshornanslted sequenceateochteminusingle
inesThgenme isthonlymNAfoundinifectedelsandisrnlatedinanglepolyprotinthatisclevedoransionallbyiol
and cellular proteases to form the struchural proteins C, M, and E and seven nonstructural proteins.
Murray Valley(Australian)Encephalitis
559
rus, Murray Valley encephalitis virus, and West Nile
Table 39.2
virus. Each represents an important human disease prob-
Properties of Flaviviruses
lem in a different part of the world, but only Japanese
Genera: Flavivirus, mostly arthropod-borne viruses; Pesti-
encephalitis causcs significant disease in domestic ani-
virus, nonarthropod-borne, includes several veterinary patho-
 mals. A number of animals such as swinc, horses, dogs,
gens; Hepacivirus, human hepatitis C virus
chickens, ducks, and reptiles are infected in nature.
Virions are spherical, 50 nm in diameter, and consist of a
Horses may develop fatal encephalitis, whereas infection
tighly adherent lipid envelope covered with indistinct
in swine is generally inapparent, except for stillbirths and
peplomers surrounding a spherical nucleocapsid with proba-
abortions when pregnant sows are infected and aspermia
ble icosahedral symmelry
when boars are infected.
Genome is a single molecule of linear positive-sense, single
Japanese encephalitis virus is the most important
stranded RNA, 10.6-10.9 (flaviviruses), 12.5 (pestiviruses),
or 9.5 (hepaciviruses) kb in size; 5' end capped, but 3'
 mosquito-borne human pathogen in China (where there
end usually is not polyadenylated
are 20,000-50,000 cases per year), Korea, Thailand,
Genomic RNA is infectious
Indonesia, and other countrics of southcast Asia and in
the past 20 years it has extended its range westward into
Cytoplasmic replication; a single polyprotein is translated
From genomic RNA; it is cleaved colranslalionally to yield
India, Nepal, Myanmar, and Sri Lanka and eastward
nonstructural proteins and three or four struclural proteins
into the Pacific islands of Saipan and the northern Mari-
Maturation occurs on intracytoplasmic membranes without
anas. The human disease is devastating; although there
evidence of budding
are many silent infections, the casc fatality rate is 10-
40% and 40-70% of survivors have permanent neuro-
logic sequclac. The mosquito Culex tritaeniorhynchus,
fied except in the case of antibody-dcpendent enhance-
which breeds in fresh water and irrigated rice fields and
 ment where Fc receptors mediate viral attachment. The
feeds on birds, swine, and humans, is the most common
viruses enter cells via receptor-mediated endocyrosis and
vector. Swinc are the most abundant species of domestic
 animal in many parts of Asia; they have a short life
replication takes place in the cytoplasm. The viruses
only partially shut off protein and RNA synthesis of
span and continuously provide generations of susccptiblce
hosts. The mosquito-swine-mosquito transmission cy-
mammalian host cells and do not shut off host cell func-
cle serves as an efficient mode of virus amplification. In
tions in arthropod cells at all. Infection commonly is
accompanicd by a characteristic proliferation of perinu-
tropical areas, outbrcaks occur at the end of the wet
 season and sporadic cases throughout the ycar. In tcm-
clear membranes.
Replication involves the synthesis of complemen
perate zones, outbreaks tend to occur in late summer
and early autumn.
tary negative-sense RNA, which in turn serves as a tem-
 plate for positive-sense (genome-sense) RNA synthesis.
Japanese encephalitis was a very important disease
 in Japan; control has involved several integrated ap-
 Positive-sense synthesis is favored, suggesting complex
regulatory mechanisms involving host cell constituents.
proaches, including the draining of rice paddies at the
The only viral mRNA is the genome—-franslation yields
time when C. tritaeniorbynchus normally breeds, Ie-
a single polyprotein that is cleavcd and processed to
moval of the principal amplifer host, swine, from areas
form virion structural and nonstructural proteins (Figure
of humian habitation, and widespread vaccination of
39.2). Virion assembly occurs on membranes of the en-
swine, horses, and children with inactivated virus vaccine
 produced in mouse brain. Inactivated virus and attenu-
doplasmic reticulum (and in mosquito cells also on
ated virus vaccines produced in ceil culture are being
plasma membrane), but preformcd capsids and budding
 used effectively in humans and swine in China. Such
are not seen. Instead, fully formed virions appear within
 low-cost vaccines may be suitable for use in the large
the cisternae of the endoplasmic reticulum and are re-
areas of southeast Asia where the expensive Japanese
leased via exocytosis or cell lysis (Table 39.2).
vaccines are unaffordable.
DiseasEs Caused By MemBers
Murray
Of the GEnuS FlavIviruS
(Australian) Encephalitis
Japanese Encephalitis
Murray Vallcy encephalitis, another member of the mos
 Japanese encephalitis virus is a member of a complex
quito-borne encephalitis complex, is endemic in Papua
containing thrce other viruses: St. Louis cncephalitis vi-
New Guinea and northern Australia whcrc cascs of
560
39.Flavinviridae
encephalitis occur sporadically. The encephalitis in hu-S
 States involves Culex tarsalis and nesting and juvenile
mans is similar to that caused by Japanese encephalitis
 passerine birds; in epidemics the virus is amplificd by
virus; thc case-fatality rate is similar and neurologic se-
infection of domestic birds. In eastern and southern
quelae arc common in those who recover. Epidemics 
 regions of the United States, Culex pipiens and Culex
involving humans occur in the Murray River Valley of 
 quinquefasciatus, respectivcly are the most important
southeastern Australia only in occasional summers, fol-v
vectors, although othcr mosquitoes may become in
lowing heavy rainfall with extensive flooding. These con- y
volved as well (Figure 39.3). Thc virus remains cndemic
ditions encourage explosive increases in numbers of wa-
in some regions, producing cpidemics when tempera-
ter birds, which are the principal vcrtcbrate reservoirs 
fure, moisture, and breeding conditions favor vcctor
of the virus, and its mosquito vectors, notably Culex an-
 mosquito species. Breeding sites, such as automobile tire
nulirostris.
dumps and tree holes, influence vector population den-
sity but do not seem to be amenable to vector elimina-
tion programs.
St. Louis Encephalitis
St. Louis encephalitis, a member of the mosquito-borne 
Wesselsbron Disease
encephalitis complex, is the most potentially explosive
mosquito-borne viral disease in the United States—-it has
Wesselsbron virus is the cause of an important disease of
a history of sporadic large epidemics involving hundreds
sheep in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa. The clinical
to thousands of human cases. The discase in humans 
disease and its epidemiology resemble Rift Valley fever.
may present as aseptic meningitis or encephalitis or even
The discase in shccp is marked by fever, depression,
as a benign fcbrile ilness. The overall casc-fatality rate  hepatitis with jaundice, and subcutaneous edema. Abor-
is about 8%, but may reach 20% in thc elderly. The  tions are frequent and mortality is high in pregnant ewes
natural cycle of the virus in western regions of the United  and newborn lambs. Carttle, horses, and swine are in-
FIgure 39.3.
St.Louisencephalis virus in the salivary gland of a Culexpipiensmosquito 26 days postinfecionMassve mountsof virus, some inparacrystaline
array, may be seen within the salivary space—transmission to the next vertebrale host occurs when the mosquito injects its saliva [which contains
anlicoagulants] when taking α blood meal, Magnification: ×21,000.
Yellone Fever
561
fected subclinically. The virus is transmitted in summer
West Nile and Kunjin
and autumn by Aedes spp. mosquitoes; the disease is
Virus Infections
a particular problem in low-lying humid areas where
mosquito density is greatest. Control involves immuniza-
West Nile virus is maintained in a mosquito-bird-
tion of lambs with an attenuated virus vaccine that is
 mosquito cycle, involving Culex spp. mosquitoes; it also
often combined with Rift Valley fever vaccine. Wessels-
infects ticks. It is endemic in rural Africa, southern Eu-
 bron virus is zoonotic, causing in humans a febrile dis-
rope, central Asia, India, and the Far East. In humans,
 ease with headache, myalgia, and arthralgia.
the virus causes a dengue-like illness, very rarely enceph.
alitis. The related Kunjin virus is quite cormmon in Aus-
tralia and occasionally causes encephalitis in humans
Dengue
and, like West Nile virus, can be lethal in horses.
Dengue has become the most important human arthro-
pod-borne viral disease in the world, with over two bil-
Yellow Fever
lion people at risk and millions of cases annually. The
original natural reservoir of the dengue viruses appears
Yellow fever has been one of the great plagues through-
to have been African monkeys; reservoirs have also been
 out history, transported together with its mosquito vec-
estabfished in monkeys in southeast Asia. However, the
tor, Aedes aegypti, from west Africa to the New Worid
important life cycle of the dengue viruses is mosquito--
 on slave ships. In the 18th and 19th centuries the disease
human-mosquitro, involving the urban mosquito Aedes
 decimated tropical and subtropical cities of South, Cen-
aegypti. Aedes albopictus and A. scutellaris also serve
tral, and North America: Thousands of workers died
as efficient vectors. Although dengue has been known 
during the construction of the Panama Canal. In its clas-
for over 200 years, prior to the 1950s outbreaks were
 sical form the human disease begins abruptly, with fever,
rare because of little movement of viremic persons be-
headache, muscle and back pain, and nausea. The disease
tween tropical countries. In recent decades, improve-
 is biphasic and, after a short period of remission, there
ments in transportation and the growth of large cities 
 js abdominal pain, jaundice, rcnal failure, and hemor-
in the tropics with ubiquitous brecding sites for A.
 rhages, most notably the vomiting of blood. Approxi-
aegypti have led to major epidcmics involving hundreds
 as s oi ssd u aod o  
of thousands of peoplc. Epidemics have occurred in the
 7-10 days after onset, with decpening hepatic and renal
Caribbean, South Amcrica, Pacifc islands, and China as
failure, shock, delirium, and convulsions.
well as in southeast Asia and Africa. Because of the
 In its jungle habitat, yellow fever virus is main-
widespread occurrencc of A. aegypti and the recent ex-
tained in a mosquito-monkey-mosquito cycle. Old
tensive spread of A. albopictus, dengue is also a thrcat
World monkeys develop only subclinical infections but
to southern regions of the United States.
New World monkeys often die, reflecting the more recent
There are four dengue viruses; infection with any
introduction of the virus to the Americas. Various species
one gives lifelong homologous immunity, but there is
 of jungle canopy mosquitoes serve as vectors—Aedes
little cross-protection. The simultaneous circulation of
 spp. in Africa and Haemagogus spp. in the Americas.
multiple serotypes has led to the appcarance of an essen-
These mosquitoes can also ransmit the virus to humans;
tially new disease, dengue hemorrhagic fever. This shock
however, it is a mosquito--human-mosquito cycle, in-
 syndrome has become one of the leading causes of hospi-
volving A. aegypti in the Western Hemisphere and A.
talization and death among children in southeast Asia
 africanus in Africa, that is responsible for urban epidem-
and now is becoming common in the Americas. The 
ics. Some 100-300 cases of jungle yellow fever are re-
prospects for dengue control are poor, although an atten--
 ported annually in the Western Hemisphere and a few
uated virus vaccine containing all four dengue viruses is
 thousand in Africa, but the true incidence is much
undergoing clinical trials in southeast Asia, its global use 
higher-—in Africa, major epidemics occur frequently, in-
is years away. Mosquito control is the only tool now
volving many thousands of cases with thousands of
available, but insccticides sprayed from airplanes or (
 deaths, but such epidemics oftentimes go unnoticed in-
trucks are ineffective because of devcloping insecticide
ternationally. In recent years the numbers of A. aegypti
resistance and because A. aegypti lives inside dwelings
 have increased greatly throughout much of Central and
and is not reached casily by usuai environmcntal spray-
 South America and southern regions of the United States,
ing methods. Elimination of mosquito brceding sites is
 and it is now coming to be appreciated that urban epi-
theoretically feasible, but increasingly difficult, especially
 demics could recur at any time. Despite this risk, surveil-
 in expanding tropical cities.
lance and diagnostic systems are not well developed-
562
39.Flaviviridae
rapid tests for the detection of antigen and antibody
zoonotic pathogens, including Russian spring-summer
(antigen capture enzyme immunoassay, IgM capture en- encephalitis virus, central European encephalitis virus,
zyme immunoassay, polymerase chain reaction with
 and Omsk hemorrhagic fever virus, all in Eurasia, Kyasa
assay of amplified products) have been developed but
nur Forest disease virus in India and recently in the
are not available readily in regions at risk. Yellow fever
 Middle East, and Powassan virus in North America (see
prevention starts with vaccination, using an artenuated
Table 39.1). Infected dogs and livestock such as cattle,
virus vaccine, 17D, one of the very best human vaccincs 
sheep, and goats are important in the spread of thcse
ever developed. Prevention also involves A. aegypti con-
viruses to humans in Europc and eastern and central
 trol—-despite proof of the value of this approach gained
 Asia; these animals may serve as amplifying hosts for
early in the 20th century in all urban centers of thc
ticks and may also transmit soine of the viruses to hu-
Western Hemisphere, such programs have proven diffi-
mans via raw milk (Figure 39.4). The epidemiology of
cult to sustain in recent years because of cost.
tick-borne flaviviruses is more complex than that of mos-
quito-borne viruses, as ticks serve as reservoirs of infec-
tion as well as acting as vectors. Unlike mosquitoes, ticks
Tick-Borne Encephalitides
live for several years, often longer than the generational
time of their rescrvoir hosts. Ticks are often active from
Tick-borne encephalitis viruses constitute a complex of
 spring through autumn in temperate climates. Ticks de-
15 related faviviruses that includes several important
FIGURE 39.4.
Yiemic nfectio
e
Ixodes
persucohus
Tronsstodia!
fxodes
EO
ricinus
Cofeeding
Tic
OrolIntectiar
succeecingfickstgesdringmolingndispassedtrnrillyprogenyBthmleandmalficksareinvlvdinansmissionFrm
T.P.Month and F. X.Hein,Flaviviruses. In Fields Virclogy (B. N.Fields,D.M.Knipe, P.M.Howey,RM.Chanock,J L.Melnick,T. P
Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus,eds.1, 3rd ed.,pp. 961-1034. Lippincon-Raven, Phildelphico, PA, 1996.]
Bovine Viral Diarrhea
563
adult) and a blood meal is generally required at each
 important cause of morbidity, mortality, and economic
stage. Tick-borne flaviviruses are passed from one devel-
loss worldwide in dairy and beef cattle.
opmental stage to another (transstadial transmission) as
well as from one generation of tick to the next (transovar-
ial transmission). Some species spend their whole lives
Clinical Features
on one vertebrate host, whereas others fall off, molt,
and then find a different host after each meal. Larvae
The clinical and pathologic manifestations of infection
and nymphs generally feed on birds or smail mammals 
 in individual cattle vary with age and pregnancy status.
such as rodents, whereas adult ticks prefer larger ani-
Three situations are considered: postnatal infection in
mals. Inactivated virus vaccines for humans are available
 nonpregnant cattle, infection in pregnant cows, and per-
for use against tick-borne encephalitis in Europe and :
 sistent infection in calves and mucosal disease.
 eastern Asia, but they are expensive.
Postnatal Infection in Nonpregnant Cattle
Cattle of all ages are susceptible, but infection is most
common in animals 8-24 months of age. Although
calves may receive antibodies in colostrum, antibody
levels decline by 3-8 months of age and animals can
Louping illis an infectious encephalomyelitis of sheep
then become infected. After an incubation period of S
 that occurs in the British Isles and the Iberian peninsula.
 to 7 days there is fever and leukopenia, but otherwise
 Louping ill virus is a typical member of the tick-borne t
 the infection is usually trivial. However, some cattle in
virus cormplex (see earlier discussion). The viral life cycle a susceptible herd may have diarhea, which may be
ricinus, with occasional involvement of horses, cattle,
 discharge and an erosive stomatitis, and in dairy cows
 deer, and grouse. The disease occurs in spring and sum--
 there may be a considerable drop in milk yield. Because
mer. Infected sheep develop a prolonged viremia and
 of the inmunosuppression associated with infection, the
 a biphasic febrile response, the second peak of which
o a ps q a sinn  asi
coincides with the development of nervous system dys-
respiratory and intestinal infections.
function: cerebellar ataxia, tremors, hyperexcitability,
 and paralysis. The disease gains its narme from the pecu-
 Infection in Pregnant Cows.
liar leaping gait of ataxic sheep. Few animals that de
 Even though infection of susceptible adult cattle is usu-
velop ncurologic signs survive, and most of those that
 ally of little consequence, fransplacental spread of virus
 do exhibit neurologic deficits as sequelae. Control of
to the fetus occurs at a high frequency (Figure 39.5),
the disease involves immunization of lambs, using an
which may result in any one of several outcomes de-
inactivated virus vaccine produced in cell culture, dip--
 pending on the age (immunologic maturity) of the fetus
 ping of sheep with acaricides, and environmental control
and the strain of virus.
 of ticks. Louping ill virus is zoonotic, being transmitted
 Infection very early in pregnancy often results in
to humans by ticks or occupationally by contact with
 embryonic death and resorption. Infection at 80-125
 infected sheep and sheep tissues. The human disease is 
days of gestation (before the development of immuno-
biphasic; the frst phase is influenza like and the second
logic competence at about 125 days) often results in
 phase is a menigoencephalitic syndrome that usually re-
destructive fetal lesions and retardation in growth, re-
solves without sequelae in 4 to 10 days.
sulring in fetal death or low birth weight ("weak calf
syndrome''). Fetal lesions are often manifestations of
viral effects on organogenesis and are often most evident
as congenital defects in the eye (e.g., retinal dysplasia)
DISEASES CaUSED BY MEMBERS
 and the central nervous system (e.g-, cerebellar hypopla-
 Of the Genus PestiviruS
sia, cavitation of the cerebrum). Surviving calves that
have been infected in utero remain infected for life. They
Bovine Viral Diarrhea
never mount an effective immune response to the virus-
this is persistent tolerant infection. Such calves, which
 Bovine viral diarrhea and mucosal disease are clinically
 remain seronegative in all tests, shed large amounts of
 dissimilar disease syndromes, yet have a common viral V
 virus in all body secretions and excretions and are very
etiology. The acute disease is called bovine viral diarrhea; effcient in transmitting the virus to susceptible cattle in
the term mucosal disease is reserved for the chronic dis- the herd. These animals also have a high probability of
ease associated with persistent infection. The virus is an developing clinical mucosal disease. Fetuses infected
564
39.Flaviviridae
Figure 39.5.
A
Cow and fetus infected with
non-cytopathic BVDV in early
pregnancy.
Cow becomes immune. Fetus
becomes tolerant and unable to
make antibody.
Calf remains infected with virus
C
for life.
D
Mutation of virus to cytopathic
form may occur.
E
Superinfection of this and other
viremic animals with
cytopathic virus causes fatal
mucosal disease.
The pathogenesis of mucosal disease in catle. (A) In utero infection. (B) Immune tolerance. (C) Persistent viremig, [D) Mutation. (E) Superinfection.
[F} Mucosal disease. [Adapted from J. Brownlie, Pathogenesis of mucosal disease and molecular aspects of bovine virus diarrhed virus. Vet.
Microbiol. 23, 371-382 {19901.]
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
after about 125 days of gestation usually survive,
whether manifesting pathologic damage or not, and usu-
In those few cattle that die of acute bovine viral diarrhea
ally develop neutralizing antibody and eliminate the
virus infection, gross lesions characteristically include
virus.
erosive or ulcerative lesions extending from the mouth
Persistent Infection in Calves and
through the esophagus, forestomachs, abomasum, and
Mucosal Disease
 intestine (Figure 39.6). In the intestine, discoloration of
 mucosal folds due to hyperemia and hemorrhage may
In susceptible herds in which the virus has been recently
introduced, a very high proportion of calves born in the
 occur, giving a striped appearance to the lumenal surface.
next calving season become persistently infected. Mor-
 Histologic examination confrms the epithelial necrosis
 iy a  o si o s as  i
seen visibly and also indicates a massive destruction of
of life due to various manifestations of mucosal disease.
 lymphoid tissue. Necrosis of lymphoid tissues occurs,
Mucosal disease only occurs when two biotypes of bo-
particularly in the intestine—Peyer's patches become
vine viral diarrhea virus are present (see later). The clini-
hemorrhagic and necrotic. Destruction of the epithelium
cal features of mucosal disease mirror bovine viral diar-
 Of the crypts of Lieberkihn in the small intestine, cecum,
rhea, but with much greater severity. The onset of
 and colon is also characteristic of the disease.
mucosal disease may be sudden or may extend over
Our understanding of the pathogenesis of mucosal
several weeks or months with recurrent overt signs.
disease has been advanced greatly by molecular virology/
There is fever, anorexia, profuse watery diarrhea, nasal
 pathology studies. The usual biotypes of virus isolated
discharge, erosive or ulcerative stomatitis, dehydration
when infection occurs for the frst time in a herd are
and emaciation, and death in a few weeks to a few
 noncytopathic. The same biotypes are regularly isolated
months.
from persistently infected immunologically tolerant cat-
Bovine Viral Diarrbea
565
Figure 39.6.
B
Characterisric lesions in mucosal disease in catle. (A) Erosive lesions on the dental pad. (B) Large Ffocal necrotic lesion extending through all
layers of the duodenum. (Courtesy of V. Moennig and P. Plagemann.]
tle, i.e., cattlc that were infccted in utero before thc
tions, deletions, and rearrangemcnts). The mutations all
development of immunologic competence. However, in 
lead to the production of a viral protein that is responsi-
cattle with mucosal diseasc, both noncytopathic and cy-
 ble in a yet unknown way for cytopathology in cell
topathic viral biotypes can bc isolated. The very closc
culturc and mucosal discase in calves that are already
genetic relationship between thc rwo viral biotypes sug-
 immunologicaly tolerant to a noncytopathic biorype.
gested that cytopathic biotypes might be arising de novo
by mutation from noncytopathic biotypes. Molecular
characterization (genomic sequencing or partial sequenc-
laboratory Diagnosis
ing) of pairs of cytophatic and noncytopathic viral iso-
lates from the same calves revealed this to be the case-
A presumptive diagnosis can be madc on the basis of
remarkably, cytopathic biotypes are generated from  clinical history, examination of herd reproduction re-
noncytopathic biotypes by various mutational events (re-
cords, clinical signs, and gross and microscopic lesions.
combination, insertions of cellular sequenccs, duplica-
When present, oral lesions are especially suggestive of
566
39.Flaviviridae
this disease. Laboratory diagnosis is based on virus isola-
virus vaccines produccd in cell culture have met with
tion in cell culture, viral antigen detection in tissues, 
only limited success. Attenuatcd virus vaccines, also pro-
detection of viral RNA in tissues by the reverse transcrip-
duced in cell culture, are widely used, but there is evi-
tion-polymerase chain reaction, and seroiogy. Speci-
dence that vaccination of persistently infected immuno-
mens for virus isolation include feces, nasal exudates,
 logically tolerant animals can result in sevcrc mucosal
blood and tissues collcted at necropsy, and aborted
disease in some cases.
fetuscs. Imununofluorescence may bc used to detect viral
antigen in cell cultures and tissues. Paired acute and
convalescent sera may be tested by a ncutralization test,
Border Disease
 but interpretation of negative results must be made with
an appreciation of the immunologically tolerant state of
Border disease exists worldwide in sheep. It was first 
some cattle.
described on farms on the border between England and
Wales--hence the name used in Great Britain and North
America. Because of its clinical signs, it is known in
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Australia and New Zealand as "hairy shaker disease."
Thcre has been controversy whether the etiologic agent
Bovine viral diarrhca virus is transmitted easily from
 of this disease is a unique pestivirus or reaily just bovine
animal to animal and from herd to herd by indirect
viral diarrhea virus; it has been shown that among viral
means through fced and fomites contaminated with
isolates from sheep there are two very similar viruses: a
urine, oral and nasal secretions, feces, or amniotic fluid
    s   ao
from infected cattle. The virus is transmitted rather
case virus.
poorly from acutely affected cattle, but very efficiently
from persistently infected animals. Because many persis-
tently infected heifers survive to breeding age and give
Clinical Features
birth to infected, immunologicaily tolerant calves that
are lifelong sheddcrs, viral transmission in a herd may
 Border disease appears as a congenital disorder of lambs
go on for years if husbandry practices remain unchanged.
characterized by low birth weight and poor viability,
Where infection has been present in a herd for some
 poor conformation, tremors, and an excessively hairy
time and the majority of cattle are immune, the introduc- 
 birth coat in normally smooth-coated wool breeds. Kids
tion of susceptiblc animals, typically heifers, results in
 may also be affected, and a similar condition occasion-
sporadic losses, again continuing for years in some cir-
 ally occurs in calves.
cumstances. In virus-free herds, the introduction of a
persistently infected animal is often followed by dramatic
losses. Because the infection also occurs in sheep and
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
 goats, as well as swine, deer, bison, and other wild rumi-
nants, these species may also bc sources of virus for the
In adult sheep thc infcction is always subclinical, but
initiation of infection in cattle herds.
infection of pregnant ewes results in fetal death or the
 The economic importance of bovine viral diarrhea
delivery of dead, deformed, or mummified lambs. Clini-
is clear, especially in feedlots and in dairy herds, but
cal neurologic signs are due to defective myelination of
control is far from satisfactory. The major objective of
nervc fibers in the ccntral nervous system. In some lambs
control measures is to prevent the further occurrence of
 an immune response to the virus starrs in utero, while
persistently infected cattle in the herd. This requires the
 in others there is persistent infection, immunological tol-
identification and elimination of such animals and the
trance, and permanent seronegativity. The lattcr ani-
avoidance of further introductions by quarantine—this
mals, whether exhibiting clinical signs of infection or
is expensive, as it requires a serological survey of the
 not, may become long-term carriers and shed virus con-
herd and atrempted virus isolation from seronegative
tinuously in all body secretions and excretions, includ-
animals. The use of nuclcic acid probes and the reverse
ing semen,
transcription-polymerase chain reaction may be more
sensitive, but is more expensive. An alternative is to
allow the introduction of immune adult animals only
Laboratory Diagnosis
into the herd.
 In mosr herds, immunization is the only control
As with bovine viral diarrhea virus infection, a presump-
strategy used (vaccines are administered at 6-10 months
tive diagnosis can be made on the basis of clinical history
of age when colostral immunity has wancd). Inactivated
 and clinical signs. Laboratory diagnosis is based on virus
Hog Cholera
567
isolation in cellculture, viral antigen detection in tissues,
 herd, clinical signs are usually seen first in a few pigs;
 or serology, the latter done with an appreciation that
 then over the course of about 10 days nearly all swine
 seronegative animals may be infected and irmmunologi-
in the herd become sick. Young swine may die peracutely
cally tolerant.
without clinical signs and older pigs may die within
a week of onset or later from opportunistic bacterial
superinfection. Hcrd mortality rate may reach 100%.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Less dramatic, subacute and chronic forms of dis-
ease have bcen recognized in which there is a prolonged
 In flocks in the frst breeding season after the introduc-
incubation period, an extended or intermittcnt course
spoe aq ke sql jo %os oi dn sna jo uon
of clinical disease with runting, chronic diarrhea, derma-
thercafter, the incidence of clinical diseasc declines while
 titis, purpura, secondary bacterial infections, and death
infcction becomes endemic, especiaily when clinically
occurring weeks or months afterward. These forms of
 recovered lamhs are retained for breeding (in surviving
disease have been associated with virus strains of moder-
lambs neurologic signs often disappcar within 3-4
 ate virulence. Swine infected with virus strains of low
 months of age). Control has been attempted using either
virulence exhibit few clinical signs or remain healthy.
inactivated or attenuated virus bovine viral diarrhea vi-
 Infection of pregnant sows leads to fetal infection and
rus vaccines, but in most settings no control measures
embryonic death, abortion, fetal mummification, or still-
are cconomically worthwhile
birth. Newborn piglets may die or survive with tremors,
runting, and progressive disease leading to death weeks
 or months after birth.
Hog Cholera
Hog cholera (classical swine fever) is economically the
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
most important contagious disease of swine worldwide.
The most common route of viral entry is by ingestion,
Where the disease is present losses are severe and where
with the tonsils the site of primary viral replication.
immunization or eradication prograims are in place there
Secondary replication occurs in endothelial cells,
 are substantial costs for maintenance of disease control
lymphoid organs, and bone marrow, leading to hemor-
agencies. Hog cholera is diagnosed regularly in Africa,
 rhages and profound leukopenia and thrombocytopenia.
Asia, and South and Central America. The disease has
 In peracute cases there may bc no gross changes noted
 been eliminated from the United States, Canada, Austra-
lia, New Zealand, Scandinavian countries, Great Britain,
at necropsy. In acute cases there are submucosal and
 subserosal petechial hemorrhages, congestion, and in-
 Ireland, and Switzerland, but it still recurs intermittently
 farction in spleen, liver, bone marrow, and lungs. Infarc-
 in many European countries. In the 1990s, there have
 tion of the spleen is considered almost pathognomonic.
 been repeated large outbreaks in Thc Nerherlands, Bel-
 There is disseminated intravascular coagulation, throm-
 gium, Germany, and Spain-—hundreds of thousands of 
bosis of small vessels, and inflammatory infiltrations into
swine have been destroyed either to control transmission
 the parenchyma of many organs. Encephalitis with peri-
 or because of quarantines and prohibitions of swine
 vascular cuffing is often observed. In subacute or chronic
movement and export.
cases there is necrotic ulceration of the mucosa of the
large intestine and opportunistic bacterial pneumonia
and enteritis. Perhaps the most prominent lesion in swine
Clinical Features 
 dying from chronic hog cholera is a general exhaustion
 of the lymphoid system--complete atrophy of the thy-
 In its classical form, hog cholera is an acute infection
 mus and germinal centers in the spleen and lymph nodes
accompanied by high fever, depression, anorexia, and
Live-born piglets, whether healthy or abnormal, are per-
conjunctivitis. Thcse signs appear after an incubation
 sistently infected, immunologically tolerant, and life-
period of 2-4 days and are followcd by vomiting, diar-
 long virus shedders. In immunocompetent swinc that
rhea and/or constipation, opportunistic bacterial pneu-
survive acute infection, immunity develops quickly.
monia, and nervous system dysfunctions such as paresis,
paralysis, lethargy, circling, tremors, and occasionally
convulsions. Light-skinned swine exhibit a diffuse hyper-
Laboratory Diagnosis
emia and purpura on the abdomen and ears. There is
severe leukopenia, occurring early and reaching levels
 A diagnosis of hog cholera is difficult to make without
unmatched in any other disease of swine. In a susceptible
laboratory confirmation. This is particularly true of the
568
39. Flaviviridae
subacute and chronic forms of the disease. In most coun-
1. Hog cholera virus infection has been restricted
tries there are regulations in place that require that dis-
in those countries to domestic swine; the virus has not
ease control authorities be notified when the disease is
suspected. In such circumstances, tissue specimens (pan-
or wild pig species. Therefore, reintroduction of virus
crcas, lymph nodes, tonsil, spleen, blood) are submitted
from uncontrollable sources has not been a problem-
to an authorized laboratory. Immunofluorescence or im-
wild boar in Europe are infected and represent a potential
 munoperoxidase staining and antigen capture enzyme
source of reinfection.
immunoassay allow rapid detection of viral antigens in
 2. Effective herd immunity induced by vaccines
tissucs. Monoclonal antibodies can be used to distin-
had reduced the incidence of infection to a level where
guish hog cholera virus from other pestiviruses. Virus
the amount of slaughtering needed to achieve eradication
isolation and neutralizing antibody assays are done in
has been economically feasible.
swine cell cultures, but because the virus is not cyto-
 3. Surveillance of swine populations has been sup-
pathic, such assays require immunological assays to de-
 ported by adequate diagnostic techniques and reliable
rect the presence of virus. Serologic methods include
clinical diagnosis.
neutralization and enzyme immunoassay, with reagents
4. Producers have understood that persistent in-
chosen in some cases to differentiate hog cholera virus
fections with chronic virus shedding, masked by the pres-
from bovine viral diarrhea virus. Such differentiation is
ence of vaccine viruses, would always present a risk of
important in areas where hog cholera eradication pro-
reintroductions with consequent great costs; they have
grams are in place.
therefore supported programs on simple economic
grounds.
 5. Eradication programs were initiated in many
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
countries in the era when responsibility was assumed by
 government agencies as a matter of due course--public
Hog cholera virus is transmitted by direct contact be-
funding was not a question. Whether such programs
rween swine or indirectly via virus-laden excretions, se-
could have been started in today's climate of "the user
cretions, and fomites (such as shoes, clothing, and vehi-
(the producer) pays" is uncertain.
cles). Carriage of virus between herds by inapparently
infected swine is also important. Garbage and kitchen
scrap feeding was at one time an important mode of
Further Reading
virus transmission between herds; this was especially
Calisher, C. H. (1994). Medically important arboviruses
important because many swine were slaughtered when
they showed the first signs of disease and pork scraps
of the United States and Canada. Clin. Microbiol.
Rev. 7, 89-116.
containing high titers of virus were then fed to swine.
Collrt, S. (1992). Molecular genetics of pestiviruses.
Garbage-feeding prohibitions and garbage-cooking reg-
Comp. Immunol. Microbiol. Infect. Dis.15, 145-154.
 ulations are now in place in many countries to deai with
Gresikova, M., and Kaluzova, M. (1997). Biology of
this risk. Hog cholera virus can also survive in frozen
tick-borne encephalitis viruses. Acta Virol. 41,
pork and pork products for years; the virus can thus be
115-124.
Karabatsos, N. ed. (1985). "International Catalogue of
transported over long distances and can reappear in areas
Arboviruses Including Certain Other Viruses of Verte-
otherwise virus free.
brates," 3rd Ed. American Society of Tropical Medi-
cine and Hygiene, San Antonio, Texas (and updates
Regional Eradication Programs
published occasionally in the American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene).
 For many years, control of hog cholera involved quaran-
Mackenzie, J. S., and Broom, A. K. (1995). Australian X
tine and immunization. The first immunization schemes
disease, Murray Valley encephalitis and the French
tmployed virulent virus inoculated together with im-
connection. Vet. Microbiol. 46, 79-90.
mune serum to prevent clinical disease. Starting in the
McMinn, P. C. (1997). The molecular basis of virulence
1960s artenuated virus vaccines produced in rabbits
Of the encephalitogenic flaviviruses. J. Gen. Virol. 78,
10
cell culture were introduced and were widely used in
2711-2722.
Monath, T. P., ed. (1988). "The Arboviruses: Epidemiol-
 many countries, Today, in many deveioped countries
ogy and Ecology,"' 5 vol. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
this control strategy has given way to a srrategy of eradi-
Monath, T. P. (1991). Yellow fever: Victor, Victoria?
cation—-by use of "'test and slaughter' hog cholera has
Conqueror, conquest? Epidemics and research in the
been eradicated from the United States, Canada, Austra-
last forty years and prospects for the furure. Am. J.
lia, New Zealand, and several European countries. Erad-
Trop. Med. Hyg. 45, 1-43.
Monath, T. P., and Heinz, F. X. (1996). Flaviviruses. In
ication programs have been expensive, but very success-
"Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M.
ful. Several factors have contributed to their success:
Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Mo-
FurtherReading
569
nath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp.
Theil, H.-J., Plagemann, P. G. W., and Moennig, V.
961-1034. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
(1996). Pestiviruses. In “Fields Virology,”(B. N.
Rice, C. M. (1996). Flaviviruses: The viruses and their
Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock,
replication. In *Fields Virology," (B. N. Fields, D. M,
J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E.
Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. I. Melnick,
Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 1059-1073. Lippincott-
T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd
Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
ed., Pp. 931-959. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
CHaPter
40
f Transmissible
gents
ot
pongiform Encephalopathies
Properties of Prions ....
572
Scrapie ....
575
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy.
576
Transmissible Mink Encephalopathy.
578
 Chronic Wasting Disease of Deer and Elk ...
578
Human Prion Diseases.....
578
Further Reading.....
579
The term transmissible spongiform encephalopathy is
a disease indistinguishable from the human counter-
used for several neurodegenerative diseases: scrapie of
 part—for this discovery Gajdusek was awarded the No-
sheep and goats, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, fe-
 bel Prize in Medicine. The importance of this discovery
line transmissible encephalopathy, transmissible mink
bccame clear when it was shown that more common
encephalopathy, chronic wasting diseasc of deer and elk
human diseases, such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and
 and four human diseascs, kuru, Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis-
other animal diseases, such as chronic wasting disease
ease (including new-variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease),
 of deer and elk, are also transmissible in the same way.
Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome, and fatal
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy was first de-
familial insomnia. These uniformly fatal diseases are
tected in 1986 in the United Kingdom. Epidemiological
anloi, ro sond snoau, "ai suod Aq psnes
 observations suggest that the cattle disease originated in
-d   ue si d au au 'd
s, e a sd aes m sa  
aceous infectious particlc. In each of these diseases the
cies jump' and becamc established in cattle; rendered
basic lesion is a spongiform degeneration in the gray
meat-and-bone meal produced from sheep carcasses and
 matter of the brain and astrogial hypertrophy and prolif-
offal and fed to cattle is considered the probable source.
eration.
A less likely alternative is that the cattle disease origi-
 The prototypc of the prion diseases, scrapie, was
 nated with a spontaneous mutation in a single bovine
first described after the importation of Merino sheep
animal. In any case, as more and more diseased cattle
from Spain into England in the 15th century. The name
were slaughtered and rendered to produce meat-and-
reflects the characteristic scratching behavior of diseased
 bonc meal, a massive mulriple point source epidemic
animals. Scrapic is endemic in sheep in all countries
followed. Export of meat-and-bone meal from the
except Australia and New Zealand.
 United Kingdom introduced the disease into Northern
 In 1963, William Hadlow, a veterinarian working
 Ireland, the Republic of Ireland, Switzerland, France,
at the Rocky Mountain Laboratory in Montana, United
Germany, The Netherlands, Belgium, and scveral other
States, proposed that the human discase kuru was similar
European countries, and the same source introduced thc
to scrapie in shecp and that it might be transmissiblc.
 disease into zoo animals and cats in the United Kingdom.
Kuru, a fatal neurological disease, occurred only in the
 In 1996 the British government announccd that
Fore tribe in the New Guinea highlands where ritualistic
10 people had likely become infected with the bovine
cannibalism was practiced on deceased relatives. Had-
spongiform encephalopathy prion through exposure to
low's idea led to the discovery by Carleton Gajdusek
beef: *. . .although there is no direct evidence of a link,
that kuru could be transmitted to chimpanzees, causing
on current data and in the absence of any credible alter-
571
572
40.Prioms
native, the most likely explanation is that these cases are 
 example, when brain specimens were treated with pro-
linked to exposure to bovine spongiform encephalopa-
 teinase K and their protease-resistant residues were sub-
thy. . . . This is a cause for great concern." By the end
 jected to Western blot analysis, four different blot pat-
of 1998 the number of cases of what is now called new-
 terns were found. Three patterns represented genetic,
sporadic, and iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in
epidermiologic, pathologic, and molecular studies had 
 humans; the fourth represented all cases of new-variant
strengthened the causative association between the bo-
Creutzfeldt- Jakob disease, bovine spongiform encepha-
vine prion and the human disease. At the heart of this
 lopathy in cattie, and the similar feline and exotic ungu-
association were research breakthroughs on the nature
late diseases.
 of prions and the mechanisms of their pathogenicity—in 
 Prions from animals and humans can also be trans-
1997, for his discovery of the bizarre nature of prions
 mitted to various other animals (hamsters, rats, ferrets,
and their exceptional pathogenetic pathways, Stanley
 mink, sheep, goats, pigs, cattle, monkeys, and chimpan-
 Prusincr was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine.
zees), and again a kind of strain variation is seen. Some
donor-recipient pairs lead to shorr incubation disease,
others to longer incubation disease, and yet others no
Properties of Prions
disease even after very long periods of observation or
blind passage.
Classification
 Prions have not been classifed like viruses--there are
Prion Properties
no families, genera, or species. They frst are identifed
by their host species and disease association ( Table 40.1).
 Prions are normal cellular proteins that have undergone
Then, they are characterized by their molecular and bio-
conformational change as a resut of posttransiational
 processing of a normal cellular protein and thereby have
mainly reflects the host from which they were isolated,
become pathogenic. The normal protein, called Prlc
but also registers mutations that define inherited vari-
(term for the normal celiular isoform of the prion pro-
ants, c.g., in familial Creutzfeldt- Jakob discase in hu-
tein),is composed of about 208 amino acids (M, 27,000-
mans. Full amino acid sequences of virtually all impor-
30,00o). It is encoded in the genome of most mammals
tant prion variants have been determined.
and is expressed in many tissues, especially in neurons
 Certain biological properties are used to distin-
 and lymphoreticular cells. The function of PrPc is un-
clear; it has been found to bind copper, bur knockout 
lowing intracerebral injection of prion-containing mate-
mice lacking the gene for the protein appear normal. The
rial into multiple strains of inbred mice, the following
 amino acid sequence of PrP and the abnormal isoform of
parameters are recorded: (1) incubation period and mor-
the protein, called Prps (term derived from the scrapie
tality pattern; (2) distribution and extent of spongiform
 isoform of the prion protein, but in generai use for all
lesions and prion protein (PrP) plaques in brains (assayed
 prion diseases), in a given host are identical. Oniy the
 by immunohistochemistry using labeled anti-PrP anti-
conformation of PrPs is changed, from a structure made
bodies); and, in some cases, (3) titer of infectivity in
 up predominantly of α helices to one made up predomi-
oda aia a'ann p, sns ud s
nantly of β sheets (Figure 40.1). A monoctonai antibody
 resulrs in this kind of biological assay system.
has been developed that can discriminate between nor-
 For example, prions from cattle, nyala, kudu, and 
 mal and disease-specific forms of PrP. It specifcally pre-
 domestic cats behave the same when subjected to this 
cipitates bovine, murine, and human Prsc, but not PrPC,
strain characterization protocol, indicating that all have
d  o da  go sd  
been derived from the same source, namely catle. Fur-
from different species linked to disease but different from
ther, mice inoculated in the same way with material
the normal isoform of the protein.
from cattle with bovine spongiform encephalopathy and
When a given animal prion is passaged in mice or
humans with new-variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
 hamsters the amino acid sequence of the recipient PrPsC
have behaved the same, yet differentiy from rnice inocu--
 is that of the PrPc of the recipient, not the donor. In a
lated with material from sporadic cases of Creutzfeldt-
particular host, there may be many different mutations
Jakoh disease or farmers who died of the same disease
after working with cattle with bovine spongiform en-
conformation, each rcsulting in a different lesion pattern
cephalopathy.
and different incubation and mortaliry pattern—this is
 Similar results have been recorded by biochemical
the basis for the different prion strains. For example,
analysis of prions recovered from various sources: for
 prions from new-variant Creutzfeidt-Jakob disease in
Properties of Prions
573
TaBle 40.1
 Prion Diseases of Animals and Humans
DI5EASE
Host
SOURCE Of InfECTON
Scrapie
 Sheep, goats
Not certain, possibly scrapie prion
contained in feed, but more likely by direct 
contact and contamination of pastures by
 placentas and fetal tissues 
 Bovine spongiform
Calfle
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy prion
 encephalopathy
 contamination of meat-and-bone meal; some
vertical transmission from cow to calf
 Transmissible mink
Mink
Scrapie prion contamination of sheep
encephalopathy
 carcasses and offal fed to mink
 Chronic wasting disease
Mule deer, elk
 Unknown in feral animals, possibly scrapie
prion contamination of feed or
contamination of paddocks in captive
animals
 Feline spongiform
Cats, felids in zoos
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy prion 
encephalopathy
 contamination of meat fed to animals
Exolic ungulate spongiform
Greater kudu, nyala, oryx,
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy prion
encephalopathy
and others in zoos
contaminalion of meat-and-bone meal 
Kuru
 Riual cannibalism in Fore people
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Humons
latrogenic--human prion contamination of
dura mater grafs, therapeutic hormones,
etc., all derived from cadavers
Familil—-germ line mutation in PrP gene
 Sporadic--unknown cause, perhaps
somatic mutation in PrP gene or
spontaneous conversion of PrpC into PrpsC
New-variant Creutzfeld-Jakob
Humans
Transmission of bovine spongiform
disease
encephalopathy prion to humans, unknown
route, possibly by eating beef products
Gerstmann-Strausser-
Humans
 Familial—-germ line mutation in PrP gene 
Scheinker syndrome
Fatal familial insomnia 
Familial—germ line mutation in PrP gene
humans have characteristics distinct from those in other
reach titers of 1011 IDs/g of brain; (2) as measured by
types of Creutzfeldt- Jakob disease, but similar to prions
ultrafltration their size seems to be about 30 nm; (2)
isolated from cattle, mice, cats, and macaques infected
they are very resistant to UV- and y-irradiation, having
 during the bovine spongiform encephalopathy epidemic
a very small radiation target size (Figure 40.2); (3) they
in the United Kingdom.
polymerize, forming helically wound filamentous rods
PrPsc protein is very resistant to many environmen-
4-6 nm in diameter, called SAF, which are visible by
tal insults, chemicals, and physical conditions that would
 electron microscopy and which make up the plaques
destroy any virus or microorganism (Table 40.2). Prpsc
seen in neurons (Figure 40.3); and (4) they evoke no
 is also resistant to endogenous proteases, which is the 
 inflammatory or immune response in their host.
Thcre are investigators who do not believe that
 associated fbrils (SAF; term derived from scrapie but in 
the etiologic role of prions in the spongiform encephalop-
general use for all prion diseases), that form neuronal
athies has
becn proven.
They cite 'alternate, but un-
 plaques and cause spongiform damage and neuronal dys-
 provcn, hypotheses to explain experimental findings: (1)
function.
the virino theory, suggesting that a nucleic acid genome
Other notable characteristics of prions include: (1)
is present that does not code for any protein but regulates
they can reach very high titers in the brains of their
the synthesis of a host-coded protein component of the
hosts-—-laboratory strains passaged in hamsters can 
agent, i.e., Prpsc; and (2) the virus theory, suggesting 
574
40.Prions
Prion Replication
Figure 40.1.
It is the presence of horizontally or perhaps vertically
transmitted PrPsc that catalyzes the conversion of nor-
mally encoded PrP molecules into more PrPs molecules.
While PrPsc acts as the template, the "seed crystal, for
thc abnormal folding and polymerization of PrPc.
forming a heterodimcr with normal cellular PrPcthere
is evidence that another molecule, called protein X, is
needed for prion replication when transmission occurs
between distant host species. In any case, the process
cascades exponentially, with newly formed Prpsc in turn
serving as a catalyst for the convcrsion of morc and more
PrP' nolecules as they are produced in target cells such
as neurons (Figures 40.4A and 40.4B). Eventually, so
 much Prpsc builds up that it polymcrizes, forming fibril-
lar masses that become visible as plaques and cause neu-
ronal degeneration and ncurological dysfunction via
 mechanisms that are as yet poorly understood. In a like
 Struchure of normol prion protein (PrPC, the normal isoform of PrP
ae pue  paaq, sdd jo sos sa ru
protein} wih prominent α helices (leff) and Prps (the abnormal iso-
perpetuated even in mixed infections (Figure 40.4C).
Fonm) with prominent (3 sheets (right). [From F. Cohen, Structural
clues to prion replication. Science 273, 184-189 (1996).]
 Much of our understanding of the prion replicative
process has been confirmed by elegant studies using
knockout and transgenic mice, i.e., mice lacking the PrP
that because there are viruses that have not yet been
gene or mice containing only the PiPc gene of another
visualized or cultivated or had their nucleic acid isolated
species. For example, mice lacking the PrP gene do not
and characterized it is reasonable that efforts to find a
 get sick when inoculated with the scrapie prion and mice
conventional virus may fail despite intcnsive research ef-
cxpressing reduced levels of the protein have very long
forts.
incubation periods. Further, when normal brain explants
are grafted into the brains of such knockout mice they
 develop lesions only in the normal graft tissue. Even
 more remarkable, transgenic mice, carrying mutated PrP
TaBlE 40.2
 genes mimicking those in human familial spongiform
Effects of Physical and Chemical Treatments
on Scrapie Prion Infectivity
REDUCTION OF
INFECTIVITY
Figure 40.2.
HODN W 1
>10-
100
 Scrapie prion
Phenol extraction
>10
0.5% sodium hypochlorite
104
10.0
Histopathologic processing
1026
Origi
3% formaldehyde
1.0
Cellular DNA
102
1% β-propiolactone
101
 Ether extraction
102
0.1
Bacterium
Autoclave 132Cfor 90 minutes
>107.4
Autoclave 132°℃ for 60 minutes
0.0
Bacteriophage
106.5
Autoclave 121°C for 90 minutes
105.6
Uv dose
Boiling 100°C for 60 minutes
103.4
Healing 80°℃ for 60 minutes
101
Ullraviolet irradiation decay curves for cellular DNA, a bacterium, a
Composite of several studies; therelore no untreated control value
das
given.
athies are not like microorganisms or viruses.
Scrapie
575
Figure 40.3.
Elcronmirapfxnivrifedsieitdfilsmdofpriprtntivlystne wihrnyf
Bar: 100 nm. (Courtesy of S. B. Prusiner.]
encephalopathies, show the neuronal degeneration typi-
 Or movement. Shortly thereafter, animals develop intense
cal of these diseases even without inoculation of exoge-
 pruritus, with wool loss and skin rubbed raw, After 1-6
nous prions. Finally, transgenic/knockout mice carrying
months of progressive deterioration, characterized by
human PrPe, but not mouse PrP', when inoculated with
emaciation, weakness, weaving gait, staring eyes, ataxia,
 the bovine spongiform encephalopathy prion develop
and hindquarter paralysis, animals invariably die.
neurologic disease and lesions, starting at about 500
days. This finding has been considered a key element in
the association of new-variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
with the bovine spongiform encephalopathy prion.
Remarkably, although scrapie spreads within flocks its
natural route of infection has not been proven—it is
widely considered that sheep acquire the disease by the
Scrapie
oral route or from superfcial wounds in pastures con-
taminated by placental tissuc or body fluids. Vertical
Although recognized as a distinct disease of sheep in
transmission is still disputcd—transmission from ewes
many countries for many centuries, scrapie was not un-
to lambs may be due to transplacental or postpartum
derstood to be transmissible until an episode in Scotland
infection. Under experimental conditions, peripheral
in 1935. Over 1500 cases of iatrogenic scrapie followed
routes of inoculation (intraperitoneal, subcutaneous, or
the use of a formalin-inactivated louping ill vaccine pre-
intravenous) only produce disease after prolonged incu-
 pared from sheep brain. Scrapie is distributed widely in
 bation periods, whereas intracerebral inoculation leads
Europe and North America and occurs sporadically in
to disease after a much shorter incubation period.
some countries in Africa and Asia. Typically, only a few
sheep in a flock are diseased at any given time, but
infected flocks suffer losses continuously over many
mentally infected lambs occurs in the intestines, tonsils,
spleen, and lymph nodes. Sequential infectivity titrations
years. In the United Kingdom, some 90 to 95% of cases
of organs have suggested that following the ingestion of
occur in Suffolk and Hampshire breeds; in the United
 prions, infection is initiated in gut lymphoid tissues and
States, disease occurs almost exclusively in purebred Suf-
 prions produced in these tissues then move to the central
folks. Goats seem to be incidental hosts, with infecrion
nervous system. At death, lesions in the gray matter of
following commingling with scrapic-infected sheep or
the brain include neuronal vacuolation and degeneration
exposure to contaminated pastures.
and astrocytic hypertrophy and hyperplasia (Figure
40.5). There is no inflammatory reaction or evidence of
an immune response.
Clinical Features
 The incubation period of scrapie in sheep is 2-5 years
Laboratory Diagnosis
and the onset of clinical disease is insidious. Affected
sheep become excitable and develop fine tremors of the
 Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, flock history, and
head and neck, which may be elicited by sudden noise
 histopathologic examination of the brain of suspect ani-
576
40.Prions
mals. Anti-PrP antibodies are used for immunohisto-i
 in 1947 and again in 1952, a scrapie eradication program
chemical staining of suspect brain specimens and for
was established. At frst, this involved the identification
Western blot assays of solubilized brain extracts and
of affected animals and the destruction of involvcd flocks
cerebrospinal fluid. The presence of PrP-containing
as well as other exposed flocks, with owner indemnifica-
plaques or PrP protein in the cerehrospinai fluid is con-
tion from public funds. However, the long incubation
sidered diagnostic. No method is presently available for
 period of the disease and the extensive interstate move-
use on any practicably obtainable antemortem specimen,
ment of sheep made this program unrcalistic. At present,
nor is any method useful in animals before the develop-
a  sn hq si uerad o pyo, e
ment of frank clinical signs of disease. However, sevcral
 of sheep among certified flocks can be done without risk,
promising tests are under study.
while the movement of sheep among other flocks is not
constrained. Under the European Union, scrapie has be-
 come a notifiable disease, subject to control regulations.
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
Given the expense and lack of success of these
national programs and regulations, programs to exclude
Because the exact mode of transimission of scrapie among
scrapie from Australia and New Zealand, with their
sheep in a flock or between flocks is not known, preven-
 large sheep populations, based on strict quarantine and
 tion and control strategies remain unproven and, in most 
 control of importations, have been very worthwhile in-
places, untried. Most discouraging has been the fact that
vestments.
sheep have developed the disease just by being pastured
in fields occupied previously by scrapie-affected sheep.
In Iceland, in the most successful eradication program
Bovine
ever attempted, infected flocks have been destroyed and
 pastures left empry for several years. Scrapie-free sheep
Encer
have been reintroduced, and in a few instances have
developed disease-—in these areas the process has been
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy was first recognized
repeated, with an even longer interval before restocking
in the United Kingdom in 1986. By 1989, an alarming
(in some instances land has been turned over to other
increase in the number of cases reported led to a ban
uses). Ater years of using this strategy, with fewer and
on the feeding of mcat-and-bone meal derived from rumi-
fewer breaks seen, the country is just about to become
nant meat or offal; however, the ban was only minimally
scrapie free. The question is asked whether this strategy
 enforced until some years later. The epidemic, as mea-
would be feasible in other countries,especially those with
sured by numbers of cascs reported and confirmed,
large numbers of sheep and a high prevalence of scrapie.
 peaked in 1993, at which time morc than 300 cases were
 Following its introduction into the United States
identifed per weck. By the end of 1997, more than
Figure 40.6.
4000
3500
3000
2500
Feedban
2000
1500
1000
500
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
19931994
1995
MonthofClinicalOnset
The epidemic cuve of bovine spongifom encephalopathy in the United Kingdom, Dala are recorded by month of onset of clinical signs;the
epidemiccurvelooksquite differentif plotted byquarer oryearfonsetofclinical signs.Data fromMinistry ofAgriculture,Fisheries andFood,
United Kingdom.
Bovine Spongiform Fncephatopathy
577
s si a sisu p 's su s g rao   q py sss o1
of all dairy farms and 14% of beef cow/calf herds (Figure
 evidence of vertical transmission in cattle.
40.6). Worse still, the number of reported and confirmed
cases was dwarfed by the actual number of animals in-
fectcd and entered into the human food chain because
Laboratory Diagnosis
 of slaughter before the onset of clinical disease—Roy
Anderson and colleagues at Oxford University back-
 Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, herd history, and
calculated this number to be about 1 million cattle, with
 histopathologic cxamination of the brain of suspecr ani-
a peak in 1988.
mals. Standard coronary sections of the most commonly
 Initial studics in the United Kingdom indicated a
 affected areas, i.e., midbrain, brain stem and cervical
multiple common source epidemic. It was soon realized
spinal cord, are examined for routine diagnosis. Anti-PrP
that the epidemic was caused by contamination of meat-
 antibodies are used for immunohistochcmical staining of
and-bone meal with a scrapie-like agent. The incidence 
 suspect brain specimens and for Western blot assays of
of the disease has now subsided to a point where its s
solubilized brain extracts and cerebral spinal fluid. The
disappearance is predicted to occur by 2005. The ec0-1
 presencc of PrP-containing plaques or PrP protein in the
nomic and social impact of this cpidemic has been ex-(
 cerebrospinal fluid is considered diagnostic. As in the
traordinary, involving not only the United Kingdom but case of scrapie in sheep, no established method is pres-
many European countries. When one realizes that the ently available for use on any practicably obtainable
value of the national cattle herd of the Unitcd Kingdom
-ue un rnasn posu Ae si rou uwods uan
has been estimated to be UKf 13 billion, the scale of
 mals before the development of frank clinical signs of
this epidemic becomes all the more clear.
 disease. However, several methods are in development:
for example, an immunoassay for a brain protein (14-
 3-3, p130-p131) found in the cerebrospinal fluid in hu-
Clinical Features
 man and well as animal spongiform encephalopathies is
being advanced for antemortem diagnosis.
The onset of disease is insidious, with tremors, hyper-
aesthesia with kicking during milking, abnormal posture,
hindlimb ataxia, progressive apprehcnsive bchavior, ag-
Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control
gression and even frenzy, reduced milk yicld, and wcight
loss. The disease is inevitably fatal after a clinical course
The bovine spongiform encephalopathy epidemic began
ranging from 2 to 3 weeks to ovcr a year. Onsct is
 simultaneously at many geographic locations and was
independent of season or stage of lactation. Most cattle
 traced solely to contamination of meat-and-bone meal
affected have been 3-5 years of age; older cattle have
 produced from meat and offal from slaughtered and
been affected and the youngest recorded case was 22
 dead shecp. As the epidemic progressed, it was amplified
months of age.
by the feeding of more and more of the same product
produced from infected cattle. As noted earlier, several
lines of evidence indicate that the source of the bovine
Pathogenesis, Pathology, and Immunity
 prion was the scrapie prion. It is thought that the reason
that this species jump occurred at this place and time
Pathologic changes are seen only in the brain. At death,
was that the rendering process was changed in the early
lesions in the gray matter include neuronal vacuolation,
1980s, the use of organic solvents to extract fats being
neuronal degeneration and loss, and astrocytic hypertr0-
 abandoned because of great increases in the cost of petro-
phy and hyperplasia. There is no inflammatory reaction
 leum-based solvents. It is thought that the disease was
or evidence of an immune response. Lesions are most
 confined mainly to the Unitcd Kingdom because of a
prominent in the nuclei of the midbrain, brain stem, anid
unique combination of risk factors: (1) a high ratio of
cervical spinal cord with minimal changes in cerebralS
 sheep to cattle, (2) a relatively high rate of endemic
cortcx, cerebcllum, hippocampus, and basal nuclei.
 scrapie, and (3) the practice of heavy feeding of meat-
Scveral lincs of evidcnce indicate that there is only
 and-bone rmeal of cattle and sheep origin to dairy cattle.
a single strain of the bovine spongiform encephalopathy
The spread of the disease from the United Kingdom
 prion; it is unusually spccies nonspecifc, having been
to Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ircland, Switzer-
shown to cause disease in cats and other ungulates and
 land, France, Germany, and other European countries
ro be transmitted easily by oral or intracerebral routes
was via exported meat-and-bone meal and breeding cat-
to sheep, goats, mink, marmosets, squirrel monkeys, cy-
tle. Between 1986 and 1990, more than 57,900 breeding
578
40. Prions
cattle were cxported from the United Kingdom to Euro-
Chronic Wasting Disease
 pean Union countries, along with thousands of tons of
of Deer and Elk
meat-and-bone meal. The spread of the disease to cats
(more than 80 cases) and certain exotic zoo animals
(greater kudu, eland, nyala, gemshok, oryx,puma, che-
Chronic wasting disease is a progressive, fatal neurologi-
tah, ocelot, rhesus monkey) was via the same means,
cal disease of captive mule deer, mule deer hybrids,
with protein supplements derived from rendered cattle
black-tailed deer, white-tailed deer, and Rocky Moun-
 products being added to animal feed products,including
tain elk. Ir was frst recognized in captive mule deer in
 1980 in Colorado; in 1996 a surveillance program in
commercial cat food. For example, authorities in Austra-
lia, the United States, and other countries initiated sur-
Colorado based on histopathologic examination of
yeillance when it was realized that large cats, ungulates,
hunter-shot animals indicated that 6.5% of deer and
 and other zoo animals were being imported from the
1.5% of the elk were infected. The disease has also been
 United Kingdom. Concern folowed upon knowledge
recognized in many other areas of western North
 America. In recent years the disease has also been found
that meat originating from the death of animals in zoos
 in wild animais that seemingly have lived for many gen-
is fed regularly to other animals. This surveillance did
not turn up any evidence of infection in any country.
crations far from captivc deer and clk facilities. The
The control of bovine spongiform enccphalopathy
disease is characterized by abnormal bchavior, teeth
in the United Kingdoin has rested solely on thc cxclusion
grinding, polyuria and polydipsia, and marked loss of
Of all meat, offal, and other materiais derived from cattle
weight. Death usually occurs within a fcw months of the
in all cattle feed products. Means to prevent the transfer
 appearance of clinical signs. Lesions include widesprcad
of the disease into other countries, especially countries
spongiform change of the brain, i.e., neuronal vacuola-
of the European Union, have centered on bans against
tion and astrocytic hypertrophy and hyperplasia. The
epidemiology of the disease in deer and elk is unknown;
the importation of beef, live bovine animals and em-
these species are rarely fed meat-and-bone meal suppie-
bryos, meat-and-bone meal, and other products derived
from cattle from the United Kingdom. Beyond this, much
 ments but captive animals are often held in facilities
of the new international regulation of exportimport of
 previously used for sheep and it is possible that wild
beef and other products derived from cattle pertains to
animals have occupied land where sheep have grazed in
concerns over thc bovine spongiform encephalopathy
prior years.
prion entering the human food chain.
 Biobazard: In 1997, the government of the United
 Kingdom declared that "the bovine spongiform encepha-
Human Prion Diseases
lopathy agent should be considered a human patho-
gen.. .those intentionally working with infected material
Kuru, Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, Gerstmann-Strauss-
 Or preparations. .. should use the same laboratory safety
ler-Schcinker syndrome, and fatal familial insomnia are
precautions as for Creutzfeldt- Jacob disease."
human prion diseases that are manifested predominantly
in middle-aged and older individuals. Usually their onset
is indicated by sensory disturbances, confusion, inappro-
Transmissible Mink
priatc behavior, and severe sleeping disorders. Disease
progress is marked by myoclonic jerking movements and
Encephalopathy
within 6 nonths to 1 year progression to frank dementia
and ultimately a comatose state and death. There are
This disease was first recognized on mink ranches in
three major classes of these diseases: sporadic, familial,
Wisconsin in 1947. Carcasses of scrapie-infected sheep
and iatrogenic:
were fed to mink, initiating an infection chain that then
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease occurs  in all three
 involved mink-to-mink transmission via fghting and the
forms: (1) 85% of cases are sporadic, seemingly with
feeding of mink carcasses back to mink. There seems no
quite long incubation periods, cause unknown; (2) 15%
doubt that the mink discase was due to the scrapie prion.
of cases are familial, with very long incubation periods,
Clinical signs included hyperirritability, ataxia, compul-
caused by autosomal dominant mutations in the PrP
sive biting, somnolence, coma, and death. Histologic 
 gene, more than 18 of which have been mapped; and
lesions in the brains of affected mink were similar to
(3) a few hundred cases have been transmitted iatrogeni-
those in scrapic in sheep. This disease has largely disap-
 cally via contaminated neurosurgical instruments (e.g.,
peared as mink ranchers have learned not to feed mink
implanted
stereotactic
tlectroencephalograin
elec-
any foodstuff derived from sheep or other mink.
trodes), dura matter and cornea grafts, and hormones,
Further Reading
579
especially growth hormone derived from human ca-
 they develop typical spongiform encephalopathy disease
davers.
and lesions.
New-variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease was first
described in the United Kingdom in 1996. Ten individu-
 als exhibited features not normally associated with Creu-
Further Reading
tzfeldt-Jakob disease: (1) they were between 19 and 45
years of agc when diagnosed (vs average age of 63 years
Anderson, R. M., Donnelly, C. A., Ferguson, N. M.,
for sporadic cases); (2) the course of their disease was
Woolhouse, M. E. J., Watt, C. J., Udy, H. J.,
longer than usual (mean 14 months vs 6 months for
MaWhinney, S., Dunstan, S. P., Southwood, T. R. E.
 sporadic cascs); (3) their lcsions were different than those
Wilesmith, J. W., Ryan, J. B. M., Hoinville, L. J., Hil-
Ierton, J. E., Austin, A. R., and Wells, G. A. H.
seen in sporadic cases (prominent florid plaques vs spon-
(1996). Transmission dynamics and epidemiology of
 giform changes); (4) they initially presented with psychi-
BSE in British cattle. Nature London 382, 779-788.
atric problems (personality changes, depression, fear-
Chesebro, B., and Fields, B. N. (1996). Transmissible
fulness, paranoia), as well as signs of weakness and
spongiform encephalopathies. In *Fields Virology"
 dementia as seen in sporadic cases; and (5) late in the
(B. N. Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Cha-
nock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and
course of their disease they exhibited ccrebellar syn-
S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 2845-2850. Lippin-
 drome, ataxia, cognitive impairment, and myoclonus as
cort-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
well as dementia and coma as seen terminally in sporadic
Donnelly, C. A., Ghani, A. C., Ferguson, N. M., and An-
cases. By the end of 1998, 34 such cases had been
derson, R. M. (1997). Recent trends in the BSE epi-
recorded.
demic. Nature (London) 389, 903.
Hill, A. F., Desbruslais, M., Joincr, S., Sidle, K. C., Gow-
 As described earlier in this chapter, several lines
land, I., Collinge, J., Doey, L. J., and Lantos, P.
of molecular evidence have linked variant Creutzfeldt-
(1997). The same prion strain causes vCJD and BSE.
 Jakob discase to bovine spongiform encephalopathy and
Nature (London) 389, 448-450.
 putatively to eating beef or possible other exposure from
 Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food of the United
infected cattle. There are additional epidemiologic and
Kingdom. BSE Information. Regularly updated. Avail-
able at: http://www.maff.gov.uk/animalh/bse/
 pathogenetic linkages: (1) the variant disease has not
Nathanson, N., Wilesmith, J, and Griot, C. (1997). Bo-
been seen in countries other than the United Kingdom
vine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE): Causes and
(except for one case in France), the same place where
consequences of a common source epidemic. Am. J.
the epidemic of bovine spongiform encephalopathy had
Epidemiol. 145, 959-969.
Occurred; (2) the variant disease was first seen about
Prusiner, S. B. (1996). Prions. In *Fields Virology" (B. N.
 10 ycars after the largest numher of infected cattle had
Fields, D. M. Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock,
J. L. Melnick, T. P, Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E.
cntered the human food chain; (3) the prion causing
Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 2901-22949. Lippincott-
 bovine spongiform encephalopathy has proven unusu-
Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
 ally able to infect other species by the oral route; and
Prusiner, S. B. (1997). Prion diseases and the BSE crisis.
(4) when transmitted to macaques, the bovine prion has 
Science 278, 245-251.
Wells, G. A. H., Hawkins, S. A. C., Green, R. B, Austin,
caused the same kind of florid plaques as seen in the
A. R., Dexter, I., Spencer, Y. I., Chaplin, M. J., Stack,
variant human disease. Taken together, these observa-
M. J., and Dawson, M. (1998). Preliminary observa-
tions have been considered to add up to a compelling
tions on the pathogenesis of experimental bovine spon-
case for an etiologic relationship between the bovine
giforrm encephalopathy (BSE): An update. Vet. Rec.
 prion and the variant human disease.
142,103-106
Wilesmith, J. W. (1994). Bovine spongiform encephalopa-
Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome and
thy: Epidemiological factors associated with the emer-
fatal familial insomnia are very rare familial diseases
gence of an important new animal pathogen in Great
caused by autosomal dominant mutations in the PrP
Britain. Semin. Virol. 5, 179-187.
 gene. In the former there is a singie point mutation at
Will, R. G., Ironside, J. W., Zeidler, M., Cousens, S. N.,
codon 102 in the PrP gene that leads to a single amino
Estibeiro, K., Alperovitch, A., Poscr, S., Pocchiari, M.,
acid substitution in the normal PrP protein. When this
Hofman, A., and Smith, P. G. (1996). A new variant
of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in the UK. Lancet 347,
point mutation is introduced into the PrP gene of mice
921-925.
 This Page Intentionally Left Blank
ChaPter
  41
Other Viruses: Hepadnaviridae.
Deltavirus
Family Hepadnaviridae...
581
Floating Genus Deltavirus (Hepatitis D Virus) ..
582
Unclassified. Arboviruses.......
582
Further Reading.....
582
Family Hepadnaviridae
molecule covalently attached to its 5' end; the positive-
sense strand has a 5'-19-nucleotide cap.
Although the prototype virus, hepatitis B virus, is of
 Hepadnaviruses have a unique and complex mode
major importance in human medicine, the viruses of
 of replication involving a reverse transcriptase. In the
the family Hepadnaviridae are of limited importance in
 nucleus of hepatocytes the virus genome is converted
veterinary medicine. Viruses closely related to hepatitis
into a complete circular double-stranded DNA by the
B virus have been discovered in Pekin and other ducks,
 DNA polymerase carried in the virion nucleocapsid. The
herons, woodchucks (Marmata monax), and tree and
 negative-sense strand of this DNA is used as the template
ground squirrels (Spermophilus beecheyi), and there is
for the synthesis of a full-length positive-sense RNA tran-
less well-documented evidence of similar viruses in mar-
script, which is packaged in viral core particles in the
supials, rodents, and cats. There is also a suspicion that
cytoplasm of the infected cell. Then, the viral reverse
there is a similar virus and associated hepatocellular
 transcriptase transcribes negative-sense DNA from the
carcinoma of dogs. Given this diversity of member vi-
positive-sense RNA template. As this occurs the positive
ruses and molecular differences between the viruses, the
sense template is degraded simultaneously. Next, the
family has been divided into two genera: Orthobepad-
viral DNA polymerase utilizes the newly formed nega-
navirus, for the mammalian members, and Avibepadnav.
tive-sense DNA as the template for the synthesis of posi-
irus, for the avian members.
tive-sense DNA. Newly synthesized double-stranded
 Although hepadnaviruses are extremely diffcult to
 DNA is packaged into virions before this last step is
propagate in cell culture, a great deal is known of their 
complete-—this is why virion DNA is only partially dou-
structure and mode of replication, thanks to recombi-
 ble stranded. Virion DNA is integrated into the DNA
nant DNA technology. Hepadnavirus virions are 42-48
of the host cell, leading to persistent infection and in a yet
nm in diameter and are composed of a 27- to 30-nm
unknown way to the eventual development of primary
icosahedral nucleocapsid (core) surrounded by an enve-
hepatocellular carcinoma in humans, ducks, and wood-
lope (Figure 41.1). The genome consists of a single mole-
chucks.
cule of circular (via base pairing of cohesive ends), par-
 Hepadnavirus genomes have three (avian viruses)
tially double-stranded, partially single-stranded DNA.
or four (mammalian viruses) open reading frames. The
The complete strand is negative sense and 3.0-3.3 kb
nucleocapsid is made up of one antigenically distinct
in size; the other strand varies between 1.7 and 2.8 kb,
protein (expressing HBcAg antigenic specificity); it can
leaving 15-50% of the molecule single stranded. The
be modified, thereby expressing a second antigenic speci-
complete strand contains a nick at a unique site that is
ficity (HBeAg). The envelope is composed of three pro-
different in the orthohepadnaviruses and avihepadnavi-
teins and some host cell lipid. These constituents also
ruses. The negative-sense genomic strand has a protein form noninfectious spherical (22 nm in diameter) or
581
582
41.Other Viruses
Figure 41.1.
Family Hepadinaviridae, genus Orthohepadnavirus, hepotitisB virus. Negctively stain electron microscopy. Bar: 100 nm.
called hepatitis B surface antigen particles (expressing
 RNA genome, 1.7S kb in size. The genome structure
 at least five HBsAg antigenic specificities). Extraordinary
and autocatalytic activities involved in the replication of
numbers of these particles are formed and circulate in
hepatitis D virus closely resemble those of some viroids
the blood of chronically infected humans or wood-
and satellite viruses found in plants. In humans infected
 po y  po s d i i d-
 simuitaneously with hepatitis B virus and hepatitis D
antigenic specifcities is used in diagnostic tests and in
viruses, disease is more severe with an increased inci-
tests to judge the status of human patients in regard to
dence of cirrhosis and increased mortality. The mecha-
persistent virus carriage, the presage of chronic liver
nisms involved in this interaction are unknown. Hepati-
disease and hepatocellular carcinoma. HBsAg, now pro-
tis delta virus has been transmitted experimentally to
duced by recombinant DNA technology in yeast or mam-
woodchucks infected simultaneously with woodchuck
malian cells, is the basis for all hepatitis B vaccines.
hepatitis virus.
 Hepatitis B virus in humans causes acute hepatitis,
chronic hepatitis, liver cirrhosis, and primary hepatocel-
lular carcinoma. Hepatocellular carcinoma is the most
Unclassified Arboviruses
common human cancer in the world. Woodchucks in-
fected with the virus specifc to this species develop acute
Dozens of viruses have been isolated in the course of
 hepatitis and, commonly, hepatocellular carcinoma, but 
 arbovirus investigations that have been characterized
 not cirrhosis. Pekin ducks infected with the virus specific
only partially; in most cases they have been passaged in
to this species show few signs of acute hepatitis but
tmammalian cell cultures and, in some cases, in experi-
do develop hepatocellular carcinoma. Infected ground
mental animals (mice, hamsters) and in all cases they
squirrels rarely develop hepatitis or hepatocellular car-
are available in reference collections. Some molecular
cinoma.
data are available as well. However, in general, little is
being done to determine whether any of these viruses
Floating Genus Deltavirus
be done in the wake of substantial disease episodes in
domestic or important wild animals in settings where
(Hepatitis D Virus)
 public notice is taken and field investigation is feasible
and fundable.
Hepatitis D virus, also called hepatitis delta virus, is a
satellite virus in that it requires the simultaneous pres-
cnce of hepatitis B virus for its replication and assermbly.
Further Reading
This virus is unique among the viruses of vertebrates.
On the basis of its unique biological and molecular prop-
Ganem, D. (1996). Hepadnaviridae: The viruses and their
erties, the virus has been accorded distinct taxonomic
replication. In “Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, D. M.
Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick,
status in the floating genus Deltavirus. Hepatitis D virj-
T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd
ons are 36-43 nm in diameter and consist of a shell
ed., pp. 2703-2737. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia,
 made of HBsAg surrounding a core containing delta
PA.
furtherReading
583
Gerin, J. L., Purcell, R. H., and Rizzetto, M., eds. (1991).
Taylor, J. M. (1996). Hepatitis delta virus and its rep-
"The Hepatitis Delta Virus. Progress in Clinical and
lication. In *Fields Virology” (B. N. Fields, 1D. M.
Biological Research." Wiley-Liss, New York.
Knipe, P. M. Howley, R. M, Chanock, J. L. Melnick,
Hollinger, F. B. (1996). Hepatitis B virus. In *Fields Vi-
T. P. Monath, B. Roizman, and S. E. Straus, eds.),
rology," (B. N. Fields, D. M, Knipe, P. M. Howley,.
3rd ed., pp. 2809-2818. Lippincott-Raven, Philadel-
R. M. Chanock, J. L. Melnick, T. P. Monath, B. Roiz-
phia, PA.
man, and S. E. Straus, eds.), 3rd ed., pp. 2738-2808.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
CHaPIER
42
Viral Diseases
Animal
 Species
Viral Diseases of Cattle (Tables 42.1, 42.2)..
587-588
Viral Diseases of Sheep and Goats (Tables 42.3, 42.4)..
589-590
Viral Diseases of Swine (Tables 42.5, 42.6).
591-592
Viral Diseases of Horses (Tables 42.7, 42.8)
593-594
Viral Diseases of Dogs (Table 42.9).
594
Viral Diseases of Cats (Table 42.10)..
595
Viral Diseases of Poultry (Table 42.11) .
596
Viral Diseases of Fish (Table 42.12) ...
597
Viral Diseases of Laboratory Rodents and Lagomorphs (Table 42.13)...
598
Viral Diseases of Nonhuman Primates (Table 42.14)
599
Further Reading...
600
 In the preceding chapters the contribution of individual
 which it does not currently occur because of its potential
viruses to veterinary and zoonotic disease has been exam-
 impact on beef and dairy product exports and the rapid-
ined in the context of the families of viruses. In this final
ity with which this virus can spread from herd to herd. In
chapter important diseases and syndromes caused by
 contrast, rinderpest, although one of the most important
viruses in animal species are listed together with their (
disease of ruminants in countries where it has not been
etiologic associations. The aim is to provide a "bid's
eliminated, is only given a ++ rating because there is
eye” view of the commonest viral diseases and syn-
little chance of the virus being reintroduced into coun-
 dromes in each animal species. A practicable way of
 tries with modern veterinary services and, even if it were
doing this in a concise form is to provide one or two
 to be introduced into these countries, its elimination
tables for each major domestic animal species and onc 
would present few difficulties.
table each for laboratory animals, fish, and non-
Had these tables been written from the perspective
human primates.
of the developing countries, then some diseases consid-
 Such a tabulation inevitably involves oversimplifi-
cation, but page numbers have been provided to direct
tems predominate would have been rated as inconse-
the reader to appropriate pages for detailed coverage of
 quential. For example, infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
each of these viral infections. Nevertheless, these tables
deserves a high rating in the intensive cattle production
have attempted to ascribe to each disease a measure
environment (dairy or beef), but is not as important
of its importance (+ to ++++), as viewed from the 
 in developing countries where herd sizes are small and
perspective of clinical veterinary medicine in countries
 management systems less intensive.
with modern agricultural practices and veterinary ser-
Some diseases are very (
difficult to categorize
vices. When considering diseases that have been elimi-
within the context of clinical importance worldwide.
 nated from these countries, we have incorporated into
 The public focus on bovine spongiform encephalopathy
our assessment the relative risk of these exotic diseases
and related transmissible encephalopathies of other
should they be introduced/reintroduced. For example,
 species is currently intense. The reality is that only in
foot-and-mouth disease, which is given a ++++ rating 
 the United Kingdom is bovine spongiform encephalopa-
in cattle, is an important disease even in countries in
thy a significant clinical problem. The implications of
585
586
42.Viral Diseases by Animat Species
the epidemic, however, extend far beyond that country
 certain infections are allocated. For example, most gener-
because of the worldwide presence of related encepha-
 alized skin diseases result from blood-borne infection,
lopathies in other species and the implications of a
 but they have been listed as skin diseases. Where viruses
potential epidemic of new-variant Creutzsfeldt-Jacob
 cause generalized signs and also signs of particular im-
disease in humans. The restrictions generated in the
 portance in some system, or in the newborn, they have
international tradc of animals and animal products
been entered in both categories. The other headings in
 have been enormous, and the ripple effect of the current 
the tables have been selected to draw attention to the
epidemic in the United Kingdom wil almost certainly
classification of the causal virus and whether it is persis-
continue for many years.
tent, the geographic distibution of the disease, and the
There is an arbitrary clcment in relation to the
availability of vaccines.
 group of diseascs (generalized, rcspiratory, etc.) to which
ViralDiseasesbyAnimalSpecies
TABLE 42.1
Generalized and Respiratory Viral Diseases of Cattle
FAMILY {SUBFAMILY
NUMBER
GEOGRAPHICAL
DISEASE
OR GENUS]
VIRUS
OF TYPE5
DISTRIBUTON
VACGINE
PAGES
Generalized diseases [including diseass
Bluetongue
++
Reoviridoe
 Bluekongue viruses
25
Tropics and sublropics,
Altenuated bul
No, but viremia *
398
[Orbivirus]
lemperate areas of
quo pesn
may lost for
North America
 in sheep
shnp 0o1 noqo
Bovine ephemeral
+1
Rhabdoviridae
Bovine ephemeral
1
Africa, Asia, and Australia
inaclioled and
No
441
fever
tEphemerovirus)
fever virus
attenualed
Bovine leukemia
+1
Retroviridae
Bovine leukemid
Worldwide, Conirol and
None
Yes
382
[Deltaretrovirus]
viru5
 eradication programs in 
some European
countries
Bovine viral
-—-
Flaviviridae
Bovine viral
Worldwide
 Inoctivaled and 
Yes
563
diarrhea
[Pestivirus]
diarrhen virus
altenuated
Faat-and-mouth:
·+++
Picornaviridae
Foot-and-mouth
Eradicated in Europe.
Inactivated
Yes
521
disease
[Aphhovirus]
disense viruses
North and Cental
America. Austrolia, Japen.
ond most island nalions;
controlled in several South
American countries;
common elsewhere
Malignant
Herpesviridce
Ovine
Worldwide
None
Yes
322
catarrhal fever
[Gommaherpesvirinae
herpesvirus 2
(associaled with
Ideus
Malignant
Herpesviridoe
Alcelaphine
Africa ond elswhere in
None
Yes
322
catarrhal fever
[Gommaherpesvirince]
herpesvirus 1
associalion with zoo
lassocialed with
onimals
wildebeest]
Bovine
BSE prion
BSE prion
NA
Europe, paricularly ihe
None
Yes
576
spongifarm
United Kingdom
encephalopaihy
Rabies
Rhabdoviride
Rabies virus
Several
 Predominanty in Ceniral
Inoctivaled and 
Yes
432
[lyssavirus]
genotypes
and South America
oltenuoled
in association with
vampire bat rabies
Rift Vvlley fever
+++
Bunyaviridoe
Rif Valley fever
Africo
Attenualed ond
No
473
[Phlebovirus]
virus
inachivaled
Rinderpest
++
Paramyxoviridae
Rinderpest virus
Eradicated except for
Altenualedi
No
421
[Morbillivirus]
in Africa and parts
some counlries
of Asia
Respiratory dise
Bovine respiratory
Paromyxoviridae
Bovine respiratory
1
Worldwide
Alfenuated
No
426
[Pneumovirus]
syncytial virus
Infectious bovine
Herpesviridae
Bovine
Worldwide
Altenuated
Yes
309
rhinolracheilish
[Alphaherpesvirinae]
herpesvirus 
Parainfluenza
Paramyxoviridae
 Parainfluenze
lnaclivaled and
Na
416
virus 3 infeclion
[Respirovirus]
virus 3
ottenvaled
Khinoviruses and adenoviruses have been associated with respiratory diseose in cattle, but are of lile clinical imporlonce.
bCaused by same
e virus (bovine herpesvirus I] os inlechious pustular vuhvovaginis.
588
42.Virat Diseases by Aninal Species
TabLE 42.2
Viral Diseases of Cattle Affecting Intestinal Tract, Reproductive. System, and Skin
FAMMLY ISUBFAMULY
NUMBER
GEOGRAPHICAL
LMPORTANCE
OR GHENUS}
ViRus
OF TYPES
DISTRBUTION
VACCINE
PERSISTENCE
PAGES
DISEASE
Enteric diseasesa
Bovine
Coronaviridae
Bovine
Warldwide
Ingctivaled,
No
501
coronavirus
[Coronavirus]
coronavirus
given to dam
diarrhea
 Bovine rotavirus
+++
Reoviridae
Bovine
Several
Worldwide
Attenuated,
Na
402
diarrhea
[Ratavirus]
roloviruses
wop Q ueAb
Bovine viral
+++
Flaviviridae
Bovine viral
2
Worldwide
Inactivated and
Yes
563
[Pestivirus]
diarrhea virus
allenuated
Reproduchive and neonatol diseoses 
Akabane disease
Bunyaviridce
Akabane virus
Africa, Asia, Australia
Inactivaled 
No
476
+
[Bunyavirus)
Bluetongua
Reoviridae
Bluelongue
25
Tropics and subtropics, 
+
Altenuated, but
 No, but viremia
398
[Orbivirus]
viruses
temperala areas of North
 vsad only in
may last For
America
sheep
qbout 100 days
Bovine viral
+++
Flaviviridoe
Bovine viral
1
Worldwide
Inaclivated and
Yes
563
diarhea
[Pestivirus]
diarrhea virus
Infectious 
+++
Herpesviridos
Bovine
Worldwide
Attenuated
Yes
309
pushular
[Alphoherpesvirinoe]
herpesvirus 1
vulvavaginitisb
 Skin disease [including stomalitis)l
Bovine
Herpesviridce
Bovine
Worldwide
None
Yes
311
mammillis
[Alphaherpesvirinae]
herpesvirus 2
[pseudolumpyskin
diseasel*
Bovine
Papovaviridoe
Bovine
6
Worldwide
Inacrivated,
Yes
65
papillomatosis
[snjaowogrdog)
aulogenous
Cowpox
Poxviridae
Cowpoxvinus
1
Europe
 None in use
No
282
[Orthopoxvirus]
Lumpyskin
Poxviridae
Lumpyskin
1
Africa
Altenuated
Na
285
disedse
[Capripoxvirus]
disease virus
Mucosal diseasec
Flaviviridoe
Bovine virol
1
Worldwide
lnacrivated and 
Ye5
563
[Pestivirus]
diarrhea virus
attenvaled
Pseudocowpox
Poxviridoe
Warldwide
None
1
Na
292
[milker's nodule]
[Poropoxvirus]
SA
Vesicular
++
Rhabdoviridae
Vesicular
Several
Americas
Inactivated and
No
439
stomalitis
[Vesiculovirus]
slomatilis viruses
allenuated
"Aslroviruses, caliciviruses, and toroviruses have been associated with diarrhea in cathe.
bCaused by the some virus as infectious bovine rhinotacheitis.
cPart of tha bovine viral diorrhea / mucosal disease complex.
Vireat Diseaises by Aninal Species
589
TaBle 42.3
 Generalized and Respiratory Diseases of Sheep and Goats
FAMILT [SUBFAMILT
NUMBER
LEOGRAPHBCAL
DISEASE
INPORTANCE
(SΛN30 *0
ViRUS
OF TYPES
DISTRIBUNON
VACCINE
PERSISTENCE
PAGES
s systerm invoivement
Bluetongue
++
Reoviridoe
Bluetongue viruses
25
Trapics and subtropics, 
Attenuated, but
No, but viremia 
B6
[Orbivirus)
temperale areas of North
used only in 
sheep
America
about I00days
Caprine arthrilis
÷—:+
Retroviridae
Caprine arihrilis-
None
Yes
385
encephalilis
[Ientivirus]
encephaliris virus
Faatondmouth
++
Picornoviridoe
Foot-and-mouth
7
Eradicated in Europe,
Inaclivated
Yes
521
disease
[Aphthovirus]
disease viruses
North and Cenlral
America, Auslralia, Japan,
and most island nations:
controlled in several South 
American countries:
common elsewhere
Goatpox
Poxviridae
Goatpox virus
Africa and Asia
Inactivated and
No
284
[Capripoxvirus)
Louping ill l
Flaviviridae
Louping ill virus
United Kingdom
Inactivated
No
563
(Flavivirus)
Nairobi sheep
Bunyaviridae
 Nairobi sheep
1
Africa
None used
Na
477
disease
[Noirovirus]
Pesle des pelits
+
Paramyxoviridae
Paste des petits
Africa, Indian
AHenuated
Na
423
ruminanls
[Morbillivirus]
ruminants virus
subcanhinent, and Middle
East 
Rift Valley fever
++
Bunyoviridae
Rift valley Faver
Africa
Alfenuated and
473
[Phlebovirus]
virus
inaelivated
Scrapie
++
 Scrapie prion
Scrapia prion
NA
Most countries
None
Yes
575
xodaeuss
Poxviridae
Sheeppox virus
1
s p 
Inactivaled ond
No
284
[Capripoxvirus]
aiffe nucted
Respiratory diseasasa
DUs!A/1panw
++
Relroviridoe
Maedi/visna
1
Most countries
None
Yes
lovine progressive
[Lenlivirusl
virus
pneumonial
Ovine pulmonary
Retroviridoe
++
Ovine pulmonary
1
Most counlries
None
Yas
378
odenomatosis
[Betaretrovirus]
adenomotosis
[Jaagsiekte]
virus
Parainfluenza
Paramyoviridae
Parainfluenza
Worldwide
Inachivaled and 
No
416
virus 3 infection
[Respirovirus]
virus 3
attenvaled
Adenoviruses ond respiratory symcytidl viruses hove bee
590
42.Viral Diseases by Animal Species
Table 42.4
Viral Diseases of Sheep and Goats Affecting Intestinal Tract, Reproductive System, and Skin
FAMULY (SUBFAMILY
NUMER
GEOGRAPHTCAL
DISEASE
IMPORTANCE
Ck QENUS}
VIRus
QF TYPES
NOUARLSO
VACCNE
PERSISTENCE
PAGES
Enteric diseases4b
Nairobi sheep
Bunyaviridoe
Nairobi sheep
1
Africa
None used
ON
477
disegse
[Nairovinus]
diseose
Peste des petitis
Paramyxoviridae
Peste des pelis 
1
Africo, Indian
Altenuoted
No
423
ruminonts
[Morbillivirus]
ruminants virus
subcontinent,and Midde
East
Reproductive
Akabanec
diseqse
Bunyaviridae
Africa, Asid, and Australia
Inactivated
476
[Bunyavirus]
Bluetongue
++
Reoviridae
Bluetongue
25
Tropics ond sublropics,
Altenuoled but
No, but viremia
398
[Orbivirus]
temperate areas of North
used only in 
may last For
America
sheep
领op 001 Inoqp
Border disease
Floviviridoe
Border disease
None in use
Ye5
566
(Pestivirus)
virus and bovine
viral diarrheo
virus
Rift Valley Fever
Bunyoviridae
Rifi Valley fever
1
Africa
Attenuated and
473
[Phlebovirus]
virus
inaclivated
Wesselsbron
Flaviviridae
Wesselsbron
1
Africo
Altenuated
No
560
disease
[Flavivirus]
virus
Skin diseases
xodipog
Poxviridae
Goatpox virus
Africa and Asia
Inactivaled and 
No
284
(Capripoxvirus)
altenuated
Orf (contagious
++
Poxiridae
1
Wild-type virus,
No
289
pustular
[(Parapoxvirus
alypical site
dermatilis]
Poxviridoe
Sheeppox virvus
Africo and Asia
Inactivated and
No
284
++
[Capripoxvirus]
attenvaled
Rolaviruss, soviruses, andodenvirses have benasociad wih nric disease in sheep and goalsbt ore oflie cliniclmporane.
bTwo generalied diseases, which offen presenl as enteric diseases.
Viral Diseases by Animat Species
591
TABLE 42.5
 Generalized and Respiratory Viral Diseases of Swine
FAMILY (SUBFAMILY
NUMBER
GEOGrAPHICAL
DISEASE
IMPORTANCE
OR GENUS)
VIRUS
OF TYPES
VACCINE
PAGES
Generalizddiseses{ncldingdiseswihceneous sysleminven
African swine fever
+-÷+
Asfoarviridoe
Africon swine fever
Several
Sub-Saharan Africa
None
Yes
295
[Asfivirus]
virus
genotypes
and Sardinid
Encepholomyocardis
Picornaviridoe
Encephalomyocarditis
1
Worldwide
None
No
[Cardiovirus]
viru5
Foot-and-mouth
++
Picornaviridoe
Foot-and-mouth
Eradicated in Europe,
 Inactivaled
N
521
[Aphthovirus]
disease viruses
 Norih ond Cenlral
Americo, Auslrolia.
Japan, and most
island nations; 
controlled in severol
South American
countries; common
elsewhere
Hog cholera
Flaviviridae
Hog cholera virus
 Eradicated in North 
Altenuoted
567
[Pestivirus]
and Central America,
Australia,and Japan;
generally under
conlrol in European
countries; common
elsewhere
Porcine
Coronaviridae
Porcine
Worldwide
None
No
501
hemagglulinoling
[Coronavirus)
hemagglutinaling
encephalomyelilis
encephalomyelis
virus
Porcine
Retroviridoe
Porcine
Worldwide
None
Yes
381
lynphosorcoma
[Gammoretrevirus]
ymphosarcoma
vinus
Porcine
Picornoviridoe
Porcine
Worldwide
Inaclivated,
No
529
polioencephalomyelis
[Enterovirus]
polioencephalomyelitis 
vsed in easlern
Europe
Porcine
+++
Arteriviridae
Lelystad virus porcine 
Worldwide except
Attenuated
513
reproduclive and
[Arterivirus]
reproduclive ond
Australia
respirolory syndrome
respiratory syndrome
jsnA
Postweaning
Emerging
Circoviridae
Porcine circovirus
 North America and
None
361
mullisystemic
[Circovinus]
Europe
wasting syndrome
Pseudorabies
- ++
Herpesviridae
Suid herpes
virus 1
Worldwide, except
Inactivated and
泊人
312
[Alphaherpesvirinae]Ipseudorabies virus]
Australia
attenuated
Swine vesicular
+
Picornaviridae
 Swine vesicular
1
 Sporadic in Asid and 
None used 
No
528
disease
[Enterovirus]
disease virus
Europe
Vesicular
NA
Caliciviridae
Vesicular exanhema
Mony
Eradicated
NA
exanthema of swine
ON
535
[Vesivirus] 
of swine virus
Vesicular stomatitis
Rhabdoviridae
Vesicular stomalis
Severol
Americas
Inactivated
ON
439
[Vesiculovirus]
viruses
Respiratory diseases
Cytomegalic
Herpesviridae
Swine
1
Worldwide
None
Yes
322
inclusion body
[Betaherpesvirinoe)
cytomegalovirus
disease of swine
Porcine
+++
Arterivirus
lelystad virus
1
Worldwide except
Afenuated
Yes
513
reproduclive ond
[porcine
Australia
respiratory syndrome
reproductive and
respiratory
syndrame virus]
Swine infuenza
++
Orthomyxoviridge
Swine inAuenza
Several
Worldwide
Inactivated
ON
464
[nfuenzovirus A]
viru5
592
42.Virat Diserses by Animal Species
TablE 42.6
Viral Diseases of Swine Affecting Intestinal Tract, Reproductive System, and Skin
FAMLY (SUBFAMLY
NUMBER
GEOGRAPHICAL
VRus
OF TYPES
DISTRIBUTION
VACCINE
PERSISTENCE
PAGES
DISEASE
IMPORTANCE
OR GENUS)
Enteric diseases
Rolavirus
+++
Reoviridae
Swine
Auow
Woridwide
 Attenualed,
No
402
gaslroenteritis
[Rotavirus]
rotaviruses
given to dam
Transmissible
Coronaviridde
Transmissible 
1
Worldwide
 Attenuated, 
Yes
499
++
gastroenteritis
[Coronavirus]
gastroenteritis
given fo dom
sA
Reproductive and neonatal diseases
Hog chalera
++++
Flaviviridae
Hog cholera
Eradicated in North
Atenvaled
Yes
567
[Pestivirus]
virus
ond Central Americo,
Australia, and Japan;
generally under
control in European
countries; common
elsewhere
Flaviviridae
Japonese
Asid
Inactivated and 
No
559
lapanese
encephalis
[Flavivirus]
encephalitis
attenuated
virus
Porcine
+++
Arterivirus
lelysiad virus (porcine
Warldwide excepf
Attenuated
Yes
513
reproductive and
[Arterivirus]
teproductive ond
Aushralia
respiratory syndrome
respiratory
Herpe
esviridae
Suid herpesvirus
Worldwide, except
Pseudorabies
+++
Inactivated and 
Yes
312
[Alphaherpesvirinae] 1 Ipseucdorabies
Australio and Japan
oltenuated
Parvoviridoe
Swine
Worldwide
Inactivaled
Yes
354
Swine parvovirus
[Parvovirus]
parvovirus
Skin diseases [including slomolis]
Swinepox
Worldwide
 None vsed
No
286
Poxviridae
[Suipoxvirus]
Swine vesicular
Picornaviridoe
Swine vesicular
Sporadic in Asia and
 Nore used
No
528
1
disease virus
Europe
disease
[Enterovirus]
Vesicular
NA
Caliciviridae
Vesicular
Many
Eradicated
NA
No
535
exanthema of swine
[Vesivirus]
exanthema of
swine virus
Vesicular
Rhabdoviridae
Yesicular
Several
Americas
Inactivaled
No
439
stomatitis
[Vesiculovirus]
stomogtis
viruses
ViralDiseases byAninatSpecies
593
TABLE 42.7
Generalized and Respiratory Viral Diseases of Horses
FANULY (SUBFAMILY
NUMBER
GEOORAPHICAL
DISEASE
IMPOKTANCE
(SNN29 80
VIRUS
OF TYPES
DISTRIBUTION
VACcINE
PeRSISTENCE 
PAGES
Ge
eralized diseoses including diseases with central nervous syslem involvement]
African horse
++
Reoviridae
African horse
Attenualed
No
400
sickness
[Orbivirus]
sickness viruses
Borna disease
Bornaviridoe
Borna disease
edon
None
Yes
456
[Bornavirus]
Eastern equine
+一
Togaviridoe
Eashern equine
Americas
Inactivated
No
549
encephalilis
[Alphavirus]
encephalitis
virus
Equine arteritis
Arteriviridae
Equine orterilis
Altenuated
Yas
511
[Arterivirus]
SRUIA
Equine
Reoviridae
Equine
Several
 South Africa
None
No
402
encephalosis
[Orbivirus]
encephalosis
viruses
Equine infectious
Retroviridoe
Equine infectious
Worldwide
None
Yes
386
[lentivirus]
anemia
Venezuelan
Togoviridae
Venezuelan
7
South ond Central America
Inactivaled and
No
549
equine
[Alphavirus]
equine
aftenvatled
oncephalis
encephalis
viruses
Weslern equine
Togaviricdae
Westerm equine
Americas
lnactivaled
No
549
encephalitis
[Alphavirus]
encephalilis
virus
Respiratory dise
Aclenovirus
Adenoviridae
Equine
2
Worldwide
None
Yes
332
pneumonia
[Masiadenovirus]
Equine influenza
+++
Orthomyxoviridoe
Equine inlenza
2
Worldwide
lnactivated
No
463
flnfluenzavirus A}
viruses
Eqvine
+++
Herpesviridae
Equine
Worldwide
nactivaled and
Yes
314
rhinapneurnonitis
[Alphaherpesvirinae]
herpesvirus 4
alfenuated
Equine iborlion
++1
Herpesviridae
Equine
Worldwide
Inactivated and 
314
[Alphoherpesvirinoel
herpesvirus 1
oltenuated
Rhinaviruses and equine herpesvirus 2 have been isolatedfom horses with respiralory disease,but are of uncertain clinical imporance.
594
42. Viral Iiseases by Aninal Species
TabLE 42.8
Viral Diseases of Horses Affecting Intestinal Tract, Reproductive System, and Skin 
NUARER
GEOGRAPIHCAL
DESEASE
INUORTANCE
OR GENUS}
ViRUS
OF TYPE5
DHSTRIMUTION
VACCTNE
PERSISTENCE
PAGES
Entric diseases
Rotavirus
+++
Reoviridae
Equine
Several
Wordwide
No
402
gastroenteritis
[Rotovirus]
rolaviruses
Reproduchive and neonatal diseases
 Equine abortion
+++
Herpesviridae
Equine
1
Worldwide
Inactivated and
314
[Alphaherpesvirinae)
herpesvirus 1
attenuated
Eqvine
Herpesviridoe
Equine
1
Inaclivated and
Yes
314
rhinopneumonitis
[Alphaherpesvirinoel
herpesvirus 4
Equine orteritis
Areriviridae
Equine arteris
1
Warldwide
Attenualed
Yes
511
[Arterivirus]
virus
Equine coitol
Herpesviridoe
Equine
1
Warldwide
None
Yes
315
exonthema
[Alphaherpesvirinae]
herpesvirus 3
Equine
Equine
Several
None
Papovaviridae
Yes
341
+
papilomalosis
[Papilomavirus]
papillomoviruses
Equine sarcoid
Papovaviridoe
Bovine
2
Worldwide
None
Yes
341
[Papillomavirus)
papillomavirus
2 puo I sas
Vesicular
Rhabdoyiridae
Vesicular
Several
Americas
Inactivated
No
439
+
[Vesiculovirus]
shomotiis viruses
TaBlE 42.9
Viral Diseases of Dogs
FAMILY GSUB AMHY
NUMBER
GEOGRAPHICAL
DISEASE
LMPORTANCE
ViRus
DHSTRIBUTION
VACCINE
PERStSTENCE
PAGES
OR GENUS]
sidA1 10
Generalized diseases tincluding disases with centol nervous system invoivemen
Canine distemper
+++
Paramyxoviridae
Canine
1
Attenuated
423
[Morbillivirus
Canine povovirus
++++
Parvoviridae
Canine
Worldwide
Anenuated and
Yes
351
disease
[Parvovirus]
porvoviruses
inactivated
Infectious canine
Adenoviridos
Canine
1
Worldwide
Altenualed and
Yes
hepatis
[Masfadenovirus]
adenovirus 1
inactivated
Rabies
Rhabdoviridoe
Rabies viruses
Several
Worldwide except
Inactivated and
Yes
432
[lyssavirus]
some island countries
altenuated
Respiralory disease
Canine
Adenoviridoe
Canine
Worldwide
Attenuated
Yes
182
hacheobronchis
[snouapaysow]
adenovirus 2
Parainfluenza
Paramyxoviridae
Parainfluenza
None
1
No
418
virus 2 infection
[Rubulovirus)
virus 2
Enteric diseases
Canine coronavirus
++
Coronoviridoe
Canine
Worldwide
Inactivated
503
diarrhea
[Coronovirusl
coronavirus
Canine parvovirus
+ + + +
Parvoviridae
Canine
2
Worldwide
Attenuated and
351
disease
[Parvovirus]
parvoviruses
inoclivated
Reproductive and neonatal diseases
Herpesviridae
Canine
1
Warldwide
None
Yes
315
sdnd yo asoasp
++
[Alphaherpesvirinae]
Skin diseases
Canine
Papovaviridae
Canine
Severol
Worldwide
None
Yes
341
papilomatosis
[Papillomavirus)
papillomavinuse5
Virat Diseases by Animal Species
595
Tabte 42.10
Viral Diseases of Cats
FAMULY [SUBFAMILY
NUMBER
GEOGRaPHICAL
DISEASE
IMPORTANCE
SNN30#
ViRUs
OF TYPES
DISTRIBUTON
VACCNE
PIRSISTENCE
PAGES
Generalized diseases (including disea
 with central nervous system involvemenn
Feline ocquired
+-+
Retroviridoe
Feline
Worldwide
1
None
Yes
immunodeficiency
[lentivirus)
immunodeficiency
virus
Feline infectious
+++
Coronaviridae
Feline infeclious
Worldwide
Altenualed (bu)
Yes
502
s
[Coronavirus]
peritonitis virus
of questioned
value)
Feline leukemia
++++
Retroviridae
Feline leukernia
Fnoctivated
379
[Gammarelrovirus]
virus
tunqns
Feline
Panvoviridae
Feline
Workdhwide
Attenuated and
Yes
348
+++
panleukopenia
[Parvovirus]
panleukopenia
inaclivaled
virus
Rabies
Rhabdoviridae
Rabies viruses
Several
Warldwide except
 Inaclivated and
Yes
432
[lyssavirus]
some island counlries
attenualed
Respiratory diseses
Faline calicivirus 
+++
Caliciviridae
Feline
Several
Warldwide
Attenvaled ond
Yes
536
disease
[Vesivirus]
caliciviruses
ingctivaled
Feline
+++
Herpesviridae
Feline
1
Attenvualrsd and
Yes
316
rhinotracheitis
[Alphaherpesviringe]
herpesvirus 1
inactivaled
Enteric diseases
Feline
÷-+
Parvoviridae
Feline
1
Worldwide
Atenuated and
348
ponleukopenia
[Parvovirus)
panleukopenia
inaclivated
virus
Rotavirus
+
Reoviridae
Feline
Several
Worldwide
None
No
402
goslroenteritis
[Rotavirus)
rotaviruses
Reproductive and neonotal diseases
Feline
+++
Parvoviridoe
Feline
Worldwide
Attenvaled
pUD
Yes
348
panleukopenia
(Parvovirus]
ponleukopenia
inactivaled
virus
Skin diseases
Cowpox virus
Poxviridae
Cowpox virus
Europe
None
No
282
infechion
[Orthopoxvirus]
596
42.Viral Diseases by Animal Species
Table 42.11
Viral DiseasesofPoultry
Host
FAML SUBFAMit Y
NUMBER
GEOGRAPHICAL
DISEASE
VIDIe
rV TYRK9
Adenovirnus
Chickans,
Adenoviridae
Avian
12
Inactivated
Yas
333
infection legg
ducks, and
[Aviodenovirnus]
odenoviruses 1-12
drop syndromel
turkeys
Avian
Chickens,
Picornaviridae
Avian
1
Atenuvaled
No
530
encephalomyelis
ducks, and
[Enterovirus]
encephalomyelitis
turkeys
Avian influenza
 Chickens and
++
Orthonyxoviridae
 Avian influenza
Mony
Worldwidea
Inaclivated
No
466
turkeys
[nfluenzovirus A]
viruses
Avion leukosis
Chickens
++
Retroviridoe
Avian leukosis
1
Warldwide
 Inaclivated and
Yes
375
virus
aftenuated
Eastem equine
Pheasonts
Togaviridce
Eoslern equine
1
Americas
Inaclivated
549
encephalitis
[Alphavins]
encephalitis
 Infectious bursol
Chickens
++
Birnaviridae
Infectious bursaf
1
Worldwide
Inaclivated
No
406
[Birnavirus]
disease virus
Chickens
+++
Herpesyiridoe
Gallid
2
Worldwide
Altenuated
Yes
318
[Alphaherpesvirinoe]
herpesvirus 2
[Marek's disease
virus]
Newcastle
Chickens
++++
Paramyxoviridae
Newcastle
Worldwidea
Altenuated and
No
419
pigeons, and
[Rubulcvirus]
inactivated
pther avian
species
Respiratory diseases
Avian infeclious
Chickens
+1+
Coronaviridae
Avian infecrious
Several
Worldwide
Anenuated
Yes
505
bronchitis
|Coronavirusl
bronchitis virus 
Avian reovirus
Chickens and
Reoviridae
Avian reoviruses
11
Worldwide
None
2
396
disease
olher avian
[Ormhoreovirus]
species
Infectious
Chickens
+++
Herpesviridae
Gallid
Worldwide
Attenuated
Yes
317
laryngotracheitis
(Alphaherpesvirinael
herpesvirus 1
linfectious
laryngotracheiis
virus]
Enteric disease
Duck hepatis
Ducks and
Picornaviridae
Duck hepatitis
2
Worldwide
Attenualed
?
530
rurkeys
[Enterovirus)
viruses l and 3
nBod xpna
Ducks
Herpesviride
Anotid
Worldwide
PLON
Yes
321
[Alphaherpesvirinae]
herpesvirus 1
Iduck plague
herpesvirus]
Skin diseoses
Avian pox
 All species 
+
Poxviridae
Fowlpox and
Several
Worldwide
Attenuated
288
IAviDoxvirus)
other Doxviruses
"Fowl plogue favian inluenzal and velogenic Newcstle disease are regarded as exolic vinuses in most developed countries.
Viral Diseases by Anmat Species
597
TaBLE 42.12
Viral Diseases of Fish
Host
NUMBER
GEOGRAPHICAL
DUSEASE
IMPORTANCE
FAMY
VIRUS
OP TYPes
DSTRIBUTON
VaccnE
Paass
Channel cafish
Colfish
-++
Herpesviridae
Iclalurid
1
North and Central America
324
herpesvirus
herpesvirus 1 
Eel rhabdovirus
Eels, trout
Rhabdoviridae
Eel rhabdovirus
America, Japan, and Europe
No
444
disease
Hirame disee
Japonese
Rhabdoviridae
Hirame disease 
uodor
444
Hlounder
rhabdovirus
Infectious
 Salmonids
-++
Rhabdoviridoe
Infectious
North America, Japan, Chind,
Yes
444
hemalopoielic
hematopoielic
Fronce and Ikaly
necrosis
necrosis virus
Infectious
 Salmonids
+++
Birnaviridae
Infectious
Yes
409
pancreatic
pancreatic
necrosis
necrosis virus
Lymphocyslis
Mony species
++
Iridoviridae
Lymphocyshis
Worldwide
No
298
virus
Perch
Perch
Rhabdoviridae
Perch
Europe
N
444
rhabdovirus
 rhabdovirus
disease
Pike fry
Northern
Rhabdoviridoe
Pike fry
Europe and Russia
444
rhabdavirus
pike,
rhabdovirus
disease
cyprimids
Rio Grande
Rio Grande
Rhabdoviridae
Rio Grande
United States
No
444
cichlid
rhabdovirus
cichlid
cichlid
rhabdovirus
disease
Salmon
Salmonids
Herpesviridae
Salmonid
North: America
324
herpesvirus
herpesviru
uses 1 -2
diseose
Snakahead
 Snakehead
Rhobdoviridoe
Snakehead
Soulheast Asia
No
444
rhobdovirus
rhabdovirus
diseose
Spring viremia
Cyprimids
++
Rhabdoviridae
Spring viremia
Europe
No
444
of carp
oF carp virus
Viral
Salmonids
++
Rhabdoviridae
Viral
Europe and wesf coast
Yes
442
hemorhagic
hemarrhogic
ofUnited States
seplicemia
septicemia virus
598
42.
Viral Diseuses by Aninal Species
Tabte 42.13
Viral Diseases of Laboratory Rodents and Lagomorphs
Hosr
FAMILY SUBFAMULY
NUMABER
VISI
SPICES
IMPORTANCE
YRus
OF TYPES
PAGES
essipspaa
Cowpox
++
Poxviridae
Cowpox vinus
No
282
[Orthopoxvirus)
Encephalomyocarditis
Mouse
Picornaviridae
Encephalomyocarditis
ON
129
[Cardiovirus]
virus
Hantovirus infection
Rat
++
Bunyaviridae
Seoul virus
Yes
478
[Hantovirus]
Laclate dehydrogenase
Mouse
Arteriviridae
Lactic dehydrogenase
1
Yes
514
elevaling virus
[Arterivirus]
elevating virus
infecliona
Lymphocytic
Mouse
++
Arenoviridae
Lymphocytic
1
Yes
488
choriomeningitis
[Aronavirus]
choriomeningilis
virus
Minute virus of
Mouse
++
Parvoviridae
Minute vinus of
355
mice infeclion
[Parvovirus)
mice
Mouse hepoatis
++++
Coronaviridae
Mouse hepalis
Severol
Yes
504
[Coronavirusl
viruses
Mousepox [ecromelia)
asnow
+++ +
Poxviridae
Eclromelia virus
1
No
[Orthopoxvirus]
Murine polyomavirus
Mouse
Papovoviridae
Murine
1
Yes
342
infeclion
[Polyomavirus]
polyomavirus
Myxomalosis
Rabbit
+++
Poxviridae
SUJIA OWoxAW
1
No
286
[leporivirus]
Pneumonig virus
Mouse
+
Paramyxoviridoe
Pneumonia virus
1
Yes
427
of mice infection
[Pneumovirus]
of mice
Rabbit hemorhagic
Rabbit
++++
Caliciviridae
Rabbit hemorrhagic
1
No
lagovirus]
disease virus
Rabbitpox
++
Poxviridae
Rabbitpox virus
1
ON
282
[Orthopoxvirus)
Rat coronavirus
Rat
++
Corongviridoe
Rat coronavirus
：
Yes
505
infection
{Coronavirusl
Sendai virus
Mouse and other
++++
Paramyxoviridae
Parainfluenza
No
418
infeclion
species
[Respirovirus]
virus 1 
Sialyldacryo
Ral
+++
Coronaviridae
Sialyldacryoode
Yes
505
adenilis
[Coronavirus]
nitis virus
Enteric diseoses
Mouse hepalitis
Mouse
++·一
Coranaviridoe
Mouse hepatis
Saveral
Yes
504
[Coronavirus]
SOSAA
Reovirus 3
Mouse and other
++
Reoviridog
Reovirus 3
1
Yes
396
infection
species
[Orthoreovirus]
Rotavirus infection
Mouse
++++
Reovinidoe
Rolaviruses
Several
No
402
lepizootic diorrhea
[Rolavirus]
of infont micel
oUsualy subcinical; potenticl conlaminants of material collcted trom rodenls and used for experimental studies
Viral Diseases by Aninat Species
599
TaBlE 42.14
Viral Diseases of Nonhuman Primates
Hosr
FAMILY SUBFAMILY
NUMBER
DISEASE
SPECTE5
IMPORTANCE
OE QENUS]
VRus
S 0
PERSISTENCE
PAGES
Adenovirus
All spaecies
Adenoviridas
Adenovinuses
Many
Yes
328
disease
[Mastadenovirus)
Aleline
rapids
Herpesviride
Ateline
Yes
321
herpesvirus
monkey
herpesvirus 2
infecion
B virus infeclion
Macoco spp
+++
Herpesviridoe
B virus
Yes
316
[Aiphgherpesvirinae,
[Cercopithecine
Varicellovirus
herpesvirus 1
Baboon
Baboont
Herpesviridae
Cercopihecine
Yes
321
herpesvirus
[Gommaherpesvirinae]
herpesvirus 12
infection
Chimpanzee
Chimpanzee
Herpesviridde
 Pongine
Yes
321
herpesvirus
[Gammaherpesvirinoe)
herpesvirus I
infection
Cytomegalic
All species
Herpesviridde
Cylomegaloviruses
Species specific
Yes
322
[Betaherpesvirinae]
All species
+++
Poxviridoe
Monkeypox
284
[Orthopoxvirus]
virus
 Simian varicella
PIOM PIO
+·+
Herpesviridoe
Cercopithecine
Yes
317
mankeys
[Alphaherpesvirinae,
herpesviruses 6,
reloted}
Varicellovirus)
7, and 9
Many other
 All species 
++
Herpesviridde
Many species
Many
Yes
321
herpesvirus
specific
diseases of captive
herpesviruses
nonhuman primates
600
42. Virat Diseases by Animal Species
Further Reading
Howard, J. L., ed. (1992). "Current Veterinary Therapy
3, Food Animal Practice." Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Bhatt, P. N., Jacoby, R. O., Morse, H. C., and New,
Hugh-Jones, M. E., Hubbert, W. T., and Hagstad, H. V.
A. E. (1986). “"Viral and Rickettsial Infections of Labo-
(1995). "Zoonoses: Recognition, Control, and Preven-
ratory Rodents." Academic Press, Orlando, FL.
tion." Iowa State University Press, Ames.
Blood, D. C., and Radostits, O. M. (1994). *"Veterinary
Johnson-Delaney, C., ed. (1997). "Exotic Companion
Medicine: A Textbook of the Diseases of Cattle,
Medicine Handbook for Veterinarians." Wingers Pub-
Shecp, Pigs, Goats and Horses,” 8th ed. Saunders,
lishing, Lake Worth, FL,
Philadelphia, PA.
Leman, A. D., Straw, B. E., Mengeling, W. L., D'Allaire,
Blowey, R. W., and Weaver, A. D. (1991). *A Colour
S., and Taylor, D. J., eds. (1992). "Diseases of
Atlas of Diseases and Disorders of Cattle." Wolfe,
Swine." lowa State University Press, Ames.
London.
Martin, W. B., and Aitkin, I. D., eds. (1991). “Diseases
Calnek, B. N., Barnes, H. J., Beard, C. N., McDougald,
Of Sheep," 2nd Ed. Blackwell, London.
L. R., and Saif, Y. M., eds. (1997). *Diseases of Poul-
 National Research Council, National Academy of Sci-
try,"' 10th ed. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
ences of the United States of America. (1991). "Infec-
Castro, A. E., and Heuschle, W. P., eds. (1992). “Veteri-
tious Diseases of Mice and Rats." Narional Academy
nary Diagnostic Virology--A Practitioner's Guide.
Press, Washington, DC.
Mosby, New York.
Pedersen, N. C. (1988). "Feline Infcctious Diseases."
Coetzer, J. A. W., Thompson, G. R., and Tustin, R. C,
American Veterinary Publications, Goleta, CA,
eds. (1994). *"Infectious Diseases of Livestock with Spe-
Randall, C. J. (1991). *A Colour Atlas of Diseases and 
cial Reference to Southern Africa,"' 2 Vol. Oxford Uni-
Disorders of the Domestic Fowl and Turkey,' 2nd ed.
versity Press, Cape Town.
Wolfe, London.
Darai, G., ed. (1987). "Virus Diseases in Laboratory and
Ritchie, B. W. (1995). "Avian Viruses: Function and Con-
Captive Animals.” Kluwer, Boston, MA.
trol" (Book and CD-ROM). Wingers Publishing, Lake
Ettinger, S. J., and Feldman, E. C. (1995). *Textbook of
Worth, FL.
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 4th ed., 2 vols. Saun-
Ritchie, B. W., Harrison, G. J., and Harrison, L. R., eds.
ders, Philadelphia, PA.
Fowler, M. E., ed. (1986). "Zoo and Wild Animal Medi-
(Book and CD-ROM). Wingers Publishing, Lake
cine," 2nd Ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Worth, FL.
F1aser, C. M. (1998). "Thc Merck Veterinary Manual: A
Smith, W. J., Taylor, D. J., and Penny, R. H. C. (1990).
Handbook of Diagnosis, Therapy, and Disease Preven-
"A Colour Atlas of Diseases and Disorders of the
tion and Control for the Veterinarian, 8th ed.
Pig." Wolfe, London.
Merck, Rahway, NJ.
Timoney, J. F., Gillespic, J. H., Scott, F. N, and Bar-
Gaskell, R. M., and Bennett, M, (1996). “Feline and Ca-
lough, J. E. (1988). *Hagan and Bruner's Infectious
nine Infectious Diseases." Blackwell, London.
Diseases of Domestic Animals,’ 8th Ed. Cornell Uni-
Gorman, N., ed. (1998). “Canine Medicine and Thera-
versity Press, Ithaca. NY.
peutics," 4th ed. Blackwell, London.
Wolf, K. (1988). *"Fish Viruses and Fish Viral Diseases."
Grecne, C. E., ed. (1998). "Infectious Diseases of the
Comstock Publishing Associates (Cornell University
Dog and Cat, 2nd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Press), Ithaca., NY.
Horzinek, M. C., ed. (1987-1996). *Virus Infections of
Vertebrates," Book Series, Vols. 1-6. Elsevier, Am-
sterdam.
lossary
abortive infectionViral infectioninwhich some viral genes are expressed butnoinfectiousvirusisproduced
acetylethyleneimine （orethyleneimine）Oneofagroupofrelatedalkylatingagentsusedinthe preparationofinactivatedvacines
acquired immunitySeeimmunity
acquiredimmunodeficieney syndrome(AIDS）Disease caused byhumanimmunodeficiencyviruses1or2(HIV1or2）andresulting
inawiderange of adverseimmunological and clinical conditions
active immunizationSpecific acquiredimmunityresultingfromimmunizationwitha vaccine(ascontrastedwith passiveimmunization
resultingfrom the transfer of antibodies)
AcyclovirApotentandspecificantiviralagentagainstherpesvirusesitsinhibitoryactionresultsfromitsselectivephosphorylation
bythevirus-induced thymidinekinaseandsubsequentinhibition of thevirus-encodedDNApolymerase
adjuvant Substance administered with antigen that enhances the immune response nonspecifically
adoptivetransferThe transferofcellscommonlylymphocytesfrom animmunizeddonor toanonimmunerecipient
adsorption See attachment
affinityThermodynamicmeasure of the strengthof bindingof anindividual Fabfragment of an antibodymolecule toanantigenicdeter
minant
afinitymaturationIncreaseinaffnityofantibodiesassociatedwithmutationselectionof thehypervariableregionsof immunoglobu
lin genes
agammaglobulinemia Complete absence of immunoglobulins(antibodies)in theblood
agaroseOneof thepolysaccharide constituents of agar that iswidely used as asupportmedium for electrophoresis
alleleOneof twoormore alternativeformsof agene at thesame siteorlocusineachof apair of chromosomes that determine
alternativecharactersininheritance
asin the classical pathway;does notrequire antibody
ambisense（applied to single-strandedRAviralgenomes)Part of thenucleotidesequenceisof positivesensepartisof negativesense
amino acidBasicbuildingblock ofproteins thatcontains aminoandcarboxyl groups plus a variable sidechain that determines the
properties of the individual amino acid;20 amino acids occur commonly innature
amino acid sequenceLinearorderof the aminoacidsinapeptideorprotein
amino group (-NH)A chemical group,characteristically basicbecause it tends tobind a proton to form-NH;the aminoterminus
ofapolypeptideis the endwithafreeα-aminogroup
anamnestic（secondary)response Rapidrise inantibody and/or cellmediated immunity following second or subsequent exposure
toantigen
anchorageindependenceAbilityofacelltransformedbyanoncogenicvirustogrowinsuspensioninliquidorsemisolidagarmedium
Angstrom0.1nm(10-10m)
antibody （immunoglobulin)A protein producedby B lymphocytes(plasma cells)following exposure to an antigen.Antibody binds
specifically to the antigen(or hapten)that elicited its synthesis
antibody-complement-mediatedcytotoxicityCelllysismediatedby antibody andcomplement,usuallyvia thealternatecomplement
activationpathway
antibody-dependent cellmediated cytotoxicity(ADCC)Lysis of target cells thatexpress viral antigen on their surface,to which
anticodon Group of three bases in a tRNA molecule that recognizes(via base pairing)a codon in an mRNA
antigenubstanceuallfreignhatndueanmuereponsewheninrduedntnanimalantienbindsseically
tothe antibody soproduced
MHCproteins
antigenidrif（genetidrift）ointmutations）inagene（s）specifyingthesufaceprotein（s）favrusresultingenoughantigeni
change to allow immune escape
antigenic shift (genetic shift)Geneticreassortment or recombination between viruses resulting in major antigenic change and the
emergenceof a newvariant
antigen-presentingcellDendriticcellsLangerhanscellsmacrophagesorBlymphocytesthatprocessandpresentantigenicepi
inassociationwithMHCproteins
ManyfavwielgydnfvilgForli.M
Dictionary ofVirology,AcademicPress,SanDiego,1997;D.C.Blood andV.P.Studdert,Saunders ComprehensiveVeterinaryDictionary,”nd
ed.W.B.aundersPhiladelphiaPA,1999R.C.King,andW.DStanseld,ADitionaryof Genetics”thEd,OxfordUniversityPressOxfrd,
1996;W.J.Herbert,P.C.Wilkinson,andD.1.Stott,eds.,Dictionary of Immunology,”4thEd.,AcademicPress,NewYork,1995;J.Swinton,
ed.,ADictionary ofEpidemiology,http://epidem13.plantsci.cam.ac.uk/~js/glossary/gloss98.htm
601
602
Glossary
antisense gene
transcribedfrom sucha gene canhybridizewithmRNAstranscribedfromthenormal gene,therebyinhibitingitsultimate
translation intoprotein
antiseptic
Chemical antibacterial or antiviral substance for use on skin or mucousmembranes
antiserum
Serum from an animal exposed to an antigen andcontaining specific antibodies
apoptosis (programmed cell death)
of chromosomal DNA thatleads to death of cells;may occur as aresult ofvirus infection
alsoreplicates
assembly units (and subassemblies)
Assemblages of structural proteins,forming themostcomplexunitsused to assembleviral capsids
attachment (adsorption)
Specificadsorption of virusto itsreceptor on the plasmamembrane of the host cell
attenuated Reduced invirulence
autoimmunity
Productionof an immune response against an organism’s own tissues:may involveboth humoral and cell-mediatedre-
sponses
autologous.
Related to self:belonging to the same organism
autoradiography
A techniquefor thedetectionofradioactivityincytologicalandbiochemicalpreparations,such asgels ormembranes,
avidity
Measure of the firmness of the binding of antigen to antibody:influenced by afinity andvalence
avirulent Lacking in virulence
axenie (Greek,xenos, stranger)
Totallyfreeof infectionwithviruses ormicroorganisms
bacteriophage (or phage)A virus thatreplicates in a bacterium
base pairA pair of nucleotides held together by hydrogen bonding:double-strandedDNA contains G-CandA-T base pairs and
double-strandedRNA containsG-CandA-U basepairs:highlystructured,single-strandedRNAs suchas tRNA may also contain
a variety of additional "non-Watson-Crick"base pairings
or metastasis
bicistronic mRNA
A messenger RNA containing two ribosome-binding sites
bioassay
Determinationof theamount of avirusoraviral productbymeasuring a biological activity suchas infectivity orimmunoge-
nicity
biolisties
UseofDNA-coated pellets,fired athigh speed,usuallywith anairgun（Gene Gun）toplaceDNA into animal cellsas
withDNA vaccines
biological controlUseof parasites,predators,orpathogensincludingviruses,to control pests
biologieal transmission
Transmission of avirusby an arthropod afterit hasreplicatedinthetissues of the arthropod
biotechnology
Application forindustrial purposes of scientific of biological principlesincluding the useofrecombinant DNA
technology andgenetic engineering tomanufacture a widevariety of biologicallyuseful substances such asvaccines,hormones,
and cytokines
lymphocytes differentiateinto antibody-producingplasma cells
booster
Second or subsequent dose of vaccine given to enhance the immune response
with anareaof the plasmamembranemodifiedbytheinsertionofviralglycoproteinpeplomersandsometimes otherviral proteins
fromwhich themature envelopedvirus particle is eventually released from the cell
buoyant density
Density at which a virus or othermacromoleculeneither sinks nor floats when suspended ina density gradient (e.g
CsCl or sucrose)
bursa of Fabricius
Lymphoidorgan in thecloaca of birds that controls theontogeny of B lymphocytes
burst size
Yieldof infectious virus particles obtained during the infectionof a single host cell
Cparticle
Abuddingformofretrovirusescontaininga central core and lipoproteinenvelopecoveredwithknob-like peplomers;
associatedwith leukemias and lymphomas and named for theCshapeofvirionsin thin sectionelectronmicroscopy
cachectin Tumor necrosis factor
cancerVernacular term covering all typesofmalignant tumors thatif untreated,cause the death of the host
cap（5-cap）Amoleculeof7-methylguanosine present on the 5’terminus of the genome of somepositive-sense,single-stranded
RNAviruses oradded to the 5terminus of RNA transeripts aspartof their processing intomRNAs
earboxyl group
carboxy terminus of a polypeptide is the end that carries a free q-carboxyl group(C terminus)
carcinogen
Agent (usually chemical) causing cancer
carcinoma
Malignant tumor of epithelial cell origin
carrierAn individual animal that is infected persistently with a virus but may have no clinical signs of disease:virusmay be shed
continuously.intermittently,or not at all
case-control study
An epidemiological studyinwhich theriskfactors ofanimalswith a disease are comparedwith those without
the disease
catalystSubstancethatcanincreasehratofachemicalreactionwithoutbeingconsumedegenzymesarebiologicalcatalysts）
CD4Aprotein complex first identified on humanT helper lymphocytes usingmonoclonal antibodies and subsequently found on
and certain other cells
cellcultureInvitrogrowthofcelinsuspensionorasamonolayernasolid sufacesuchastheinsidesurfaceofaplasticuturefask
celleyceCyclicalseqenceofeventsincell divisionthatincludesGl,arestingphase(Gisforgap）:S,duringwhichthechromosomes
are duplicated(S is forDNA synthesis):G2:and M(which is formitosis）;highly differentiated nondividing cells are said to be
inG0
Glossary
603
cell fusion
Formationof a hybridcell containingnucleiand cytoplasm from different cells:inducedby inactivatedparamyxoviruses,
viral fusion proteins,or chemicals such as polyethyleneglycol
cell-free extract
particulatecomponentsby centrifugation
cell-mediated immunity
byantibody
chemoprophylaxis
Drug treatment designed toprevent future occurrencesof disease
chemotherapy
Drug treatment of a diseased animal
chromosomeSelf-replicatinggeneticstructureofcellscontainingthecellularDNAthatbearsthelineararrayofgenesinitsnucleotide
sequence.Eukaryotic genomes consistofanumber of chromosomes whoseDNA is associated with differentkinds of proteins.
Inprokaryotes,chromosomalDNA is circular and the entiregenome iscarriedononechromosome
chronie infection
Infectioncharacterizedby continuedpresenceofviruswithorwithoutcontinuingsignsof disease
cis andrans-actinggenetiandmoleularctionsIngeneticscisreferstolinkedmarkersand transtosparatedmarkersInmolecular
biology.the terms distinguish intermolecular(trans)from intramolecular （cis)actions.A trans-acting controlling effect of a
chromosomeorona differentchromosome):a cis-actingcontrollingeffect of aregulatorygenerefers to an action ona structural
gene that is adjacent toit
cisternaeMembrane-oundchannesofvesiclespresentinnormalcellsorthatproliferateinthecytoplasmofsmevirus-infectedces
cis-trans testA genetic complementation test used to establishwhether twomutations are in the same gene;this testwas first used
in thegeneticmapping ofbacteriophageT4andrequiresthat the wild-typealllebedominant
cistronBasicunitof geneticfuntionusuallyageneorprotin-odingsequnce
classical complement pathwaySeries of sequential enzyme-substrate interactions activatedby antibody-antigen complexes and
involving all complement components
clathrin-coated pits
Depresonsnplasmamembranecoatedwithclathrinabrousproteinthatcontaintherecptorsforvirus
undergoingreceptor-mediated endocytosis
clone
Apopulationofcellsorviral particles derivedfroma singleprecursorcellorvirion and thus havingessentially the same
genetic constitution
cloning(molecular)
Termdenotingtheisolationandpropagationofforeigngenesnprokaryoticoreukaryoticcellsbyrecombinant
DNAtechnology
cloning vector
coat protein
External structural protein(s)of avirus
cocarcinogen
coding redundaney
Codingof the same amino acid following substitution of one of the four nucleotidesfor another as the third
nucleotide of the triplet(codon)
coding sequence
That portion ofa nucleic acid that directly specifies the amino acid sequenceof a protein product:noncoding
sequencesmay containvariousregulatory sequences
codon
Triplet ofnucleotides that codesfor a single amino acid or a translation stop
cohort A subsection of an animal population with a common feature,such as age
ohortstudyAttempt toidentify thecause ofadisease bycomparingexposedandnonexposed(control)populationsna prospective
epidemiological study
cold-adaptedmutantVirus thatreplicatesbest atlower thanbody temperature
complement systemSeriesof serumproteinsthefirstofwhichbindstoanyantibody-antigencomplextrigeringacascadereation;
cleavage components of thecomplement proteins either aspart of an antibody complexor as soluble components exert avariety
ofeffectsincludinglysis ofmicroorganisms andinfectedcells.phagocytosis,chemotaxis,and inflammation
complementary base sequeneePolynucleotide sequencesthat areabletoform perfect hydrogen-bonded duplexeseveryGbase
pairedwitha CandeveryAbasepairedwitha TorU
complementary determining regionsSee hypervariableregions
complementaryDNA (eDNA)A single-strandedDNA molecule thatiscomplementaryto thebase sequenceof the single-stranded
templatefromwhichitwastranscribed;often applied toDNAtranscribedfromRNAusingreverse transcriptase
complementationOccursncelsthataredoublyinfectedinwhichoneof thevirusesprovidesageneproductthattheotherrequires
but cannot make
concatemerLongmolecules containing anumber of identical monomers linked ina head-to-tail fashion such asDNA or RNA
moleculesformedasintermediates in thereplication of someviruses
conditional lethal mutant
Virusthatwillnotreplicate under conditionsinwhich thewild-typevirusreplicates,butwill replicate
under permissive conditions,such as a different temperature orin another cell line
conformationOverall shapeofmacromoleculesresulting frommultipleweakinteractions among charged sidechainsandfewer
strong interactions,such as S-S bonds
conformational epitope
Epitopecomposed ofnonadjacent amino acids in the sameor different polypeptidechains thatarebrought
intoproximityin thenativeprotein byfolding
congenital infection
Infection occurring at or before birth
consensus sequence
Archetypal amino acidsequencewithwhichall variants arecompared
conserved sequence
A nucleotide sequence in aDNAor RNAgenome（or an amino acid sequence in a protein)that hasremained
essentially unchanged throughout evolution
contact inhibition
Phenomenoninwhich cells stop dividingwhen their cell membranesmake contact
coreInnermost structures）ofavirusthepartremaningonremovalof theenvelopeandoutercapsid shells
insects,and birds. Contrasts with animals that are nocturnal and diurnal.
critical population sizeMinimum size of populationneeded to ensure the endemic status of aninfection
cross-protection
Protection againstvirusinfectionresultingfromprevious inoculation of thehostwith acloselyrelatedvirus
crystallgnwistdyfryaluthbartanfafi
andmorecomplexsubstructures
604
Glossary
Cterminus Endof the peptidewith a free α-carboxyl group(traditionally written as theright end)
cupprobangCup on endof flexiblerod usedfor obtaining samples of pharyngeal or esophageal mucus orcells from large animals
thesis
cytocidal (noneytocidal) infectionVirus infection resulting in(or notproducing)destructionof theinfectedcell
the same,nearby,or distant target cells (e.g.interferon y,interleukin 2)
cytolytic Causing celllysis
cytopathiceffectMorphologic changes incellsresulting from viral infection
cytopathogenieRefers toavirus that causesa cytopathiceffect
cytoplasmThat part of the cell within the cellmembranebut outsidethe nucleus and other organelles
cytoskeleton Intracellular scaffolding and transport systemconsisting largely of two proteins,tubulin and actin
eytosolSubstance of thecytoplasm
cytotoxic Having a deleterious effect on cells
cytotoxie Tcell (CTL;Te)Subset ofTlymphocytes capable of antigen-specificlysis of virus-infected cellsthat express a viral peptide(s)
on their surface in associationwithMHCclassI protein
dalton Unit ofmass equal to that of a single hydrogen atom.See molecular mass
defective interfering virus (or particle)
Virusparticlewithan incomplete genome thatmayinterferewith thereplication of infec
tiousvirus
defective virus
Avirus that cannotreplicate because it is defectivein someway,usually lacking some essentialgene;some defective
viruses can replicate inmixed infectionswitha helpervirus
delayed hypersentivityT lymphocyte-mediated,antibody-independent,antigen-specific infammatory reaction:particularly involves
Th1 lymphocytes andactivatedmacrophages
demyelinationDestruction of themyelin sheathformedbySchwanncellssurroundingperipheralnerveaxonsor themyelin sheath
formedby oligodendrocytes surroundingneuronal processes in the brain
denaturationLossof the nativeconformationof a macromolecule due to the breakage ofweak bonds(H bonds,etc.);usually results
fromheat treatment or exposure to extreme pHorcertainchemicals
dendritllninldrganinluandtthancsinfan
densitygradient ultracentrifugationMethod for separatingmacromoleculesor organellesbased ondifferencesin their density through
use of a density gradient (usually CsCl or sucrose)
deoxyribonucleoside
deoxyribonucleotide
Adeoxyribonucleosidecarryingaphosphategroup at the3'or5'positionon theribose sugar
dimerStructureresultingfromcovalentbonding oraggregationof two subunitsif subunits areidenticalahomodimer isformed
if different,a heterodimer is formed
diploid genome Genome that contains two copies of each gene
disinfectantAntibacterial and/or antiviral chemical substancefor use on inanimate surfaces
bonds between the complementary bases adenine and thymine or cytosine andguanine:carries thegeneticinformation inall cells
and some viruses;capable of self-replication and directing the synthesis ofRNA
DNA polymeraseIEscherichia colienzyme abletocatalyze theformation of 3'→5'phosphodiester bonds inDNA:alsopossesses
3'→5'proofreading activity and 3'→5’double-strand exonuclease activity;it repairs and finishes the replication of DNA
DNApolymerase Ill Escherichia colienzyme that catalyzes theformationof 3’→5'phosphodiesterbondsat averyrapid rate;also
possesses 3'-5'exonuclease activity for proofreading:its chief role isinDNAreplication
DNA-dependentRNApolmerase Enzyme that transcribesRNAfromaDNA templateineukaryotic celsDNA-dependentRNA
polymeraseI directs the synthesis of ribosomal RNAs,mRNAs,and tRNAs
DNA-RNA hybrid
Double helixcontainingonestrandofDNA hydrogenbonded toone strandof RNA
double-strandedNucleic acid that occurs as a two-stranded helix
early viral genes
Genes that are transcribed beforeviral nucleic acidreplication occurs
ecologyFieldof science dealingwiththemutualrelationsbetweenorganisms,includingviruses,and their environment
ecotropic viruses
Retroviruses thatreplicate onlyincellsfrom the host speciesfromwhichtheywere isolated originally
efficacy An index of the effectiveness of a vaccine or drug （e.g.the percentage of animals that are protected by the vaccine)
clectronmicroscopeInstrument thatuses abeam of electrons focused by clectromagnets toobtainmagnified images of specimens;
the shorterwavelengthof electrons permits greater magnification than is possible with an optical (light）microscope;resolution
below 1nm is attainable
electrophoresisAmethodof separating largemolecules（suchasDNA fragments or proteins）fromamixture of similarmolecules.
An electriccurrent is passed through a medium containing themixture,andeachkindofmolecule travels through the medium
at a differentrate,depending onitselectrical charge and size.Separation isbasedon these differences.Agarose and acrylamide
gels are themedia commonly usedfor electrophoresis of proteins andnucleicacids
electroporation
Treatmentofcellswithahighvoltageelectriccurrentthat producestransient poresthroughwhichDNAisintroduced
into thecell
elimination
Total controlofan infectious disease,usuallyonaregional scale.Contrastwith eradication,which isusuallyusedto
denote elimination on a national or global scale
endemie （disease)(1）A term to describealevel ofinfectionin a defined popuation that doesnotexhibit wide fuctuations in
incidence over time and/or(2)a termto indicate an infection persistingina population overa long timewithoutreintroduction
from outside
endocytosisUptake by a cell ofvirus or othermaterial from the environment by invagination of the plasma membrane;itincludes
both phagocytosis andpinocytosis.Commonly.thefulltermreceptor-mediated endocytosisisusedwhenreferring totheentry
ofviruses into cells
viralpolypeptidesand theirassociationwithMHCclassIproteinsandpresentationonthecellsurface
Glossary
605
endogenousirusViruswhosegenomeisintegratedintothegermcellDNAandisthusabletospreadbyverticaltransmissione
certainretroviruses)
endonucleaseEnzyme thatcleavesDNA or RNA at internal sites in thenucleotide sequence
endoplasmicreticulumCytoplasmicmembrane systemofcellsinvolvedin the synthesis andintracellular distribution ofproteins
enhancer
Sequencesin genomicDNA that increase therate of transcription
glycoprotein peplomers (some viral envelopes also contain avirus-coded matrix protein)
enzootie Same asendemic,but referring to nonhuman host populations;not usedin this book
enzymeAprotein（or occasionally anRNAmolecule）that acts asacatalyst,speeding therate atwhichabiochemical reaction
proceedsbutnot altering the direction ornature of thereaction
enzyme immunoassay(EiA)or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) Widely used sensitive immunoassay thatuses an
methods areagent antigen(or antibody) is immobilized on a solid matrix(often amicrotiterwell) and thetest specimen containing
antibody （or antigen)is added.Binding of the antibody(or antigen) to the matrix is recognized by the addition of a detector
to anenzymethatproduces acoloredproductwhenits substrateis added.Thiscoloredproductindicatesapositivereaction
eosinophilic Stainingreadilywith eosin,producing a pink color
epidemieMajorincreaseindiseaseincidence affecting eitheralargenumber ofanimalsorspreadingoveralargearea
episomeAutonomous extra-chromosomal genetic element(whichmay later become integratedinto chromosomal DNA ormay
remain separate).See plasmid
epithelial tissue Cellsmakingup the exterior and interior surfaces of tissues and organs
epitope See antigenic determinant
eradicationElimination of aninfectious disease,usually onanational orglobal scale
etiology Cause(s)of disease
eukaryote Organisms that have(1)a genome divided among multiple chromosomescontained withinanuclear envelope.(2）a
cells (i.e.,bacteria and blue-green algae)
evolutionGradual change oforganisms andviruses overtimedue totheselectionof favorablegeneticmutations
excisonReleaseofanintegratedprovirusreversalofintegration(alsocalledinductionoractivation):alsoremovalofmismatched
ordamagednucleotidesfromDNA molecules
exocytosisDishargefromacellofparticlesthataretoolargetodiffusethroughthe plasmamembranetheoppositeofendocytosis
exogenous pathway (ofviral antigenprocessing)Production of antigenic peptides by degradation of antigens that are phagocytosed
by antigen-presenting cells and their associationwithMHCclassIproteins andpresentation on the cell surface
exonA sequenceofnucleotidescontiguous ornotnDNA thatencodesa proteins）IneukaryoticcellstheDNA sequences
encodingprimarytranscriptsareusuallynotcontiguounsteadcodingequencesmustbesplicedtogether（introns
must beexcised)to form functional mRNA
animal diseases"
explant Tissue takenfromthebody andgrown in an artificialmedium without dissociation of individual cells
expressionvector Seecloningvector
extrinsie Of external origin
extrinsiencubationperiodIntervalbetweenthefeedingbyanarthropodonaviremichostandthedevelopmentofinfectiousvirus
in the arthropod so that itmay then transmitvirus to anotherhost
variable domains of thelight and heavy chains(containing the antigen-binding site),aswellas the constant domain of the light
chain andpart of theconstant domain of theheavy chain
Fe(fragmentcrystallizable)That portionof animmunoglobulinmolecule producedbypapaindigestionthatcomprisesthemajor
part of the constant domains of theheavy chains;thisfragment doesnotbind to antigen butisresponsiblefor effectorfunctions
Fcreceptor Receptor present onvariousleukocytesthat bindsimmunoglobulinviaitsFesegment
flamentousHavingalong thread-like structureused todescribe some viruses suchasfloviruses
owcyometryTechiqueusedtidentifyandeparatedifferenttypesofcllbasedndetecting（andinsomecasessparaing)
cellswith bound fluorescent labels usinga laser light beam (anda high throughput droplet collector)
fuorescent antibody (immunofluorescence)Antibody conjugated to a fuorescent dye andused in combination with a fluorescence
microscope to detect the presence ofviral antigens in cells
focusClusterfmorphologicallytransformedordamagedcellsinaonolayeculturenitiatedbyasinglevirusparticleFocimay
be quantitated(e.g.,focus-forming units)
transcription,the effect ofwhich istochange thereadingframe starting at the affected codon
frameworkregionFourrelatively conservedregionslocated on either sideof the hypervariableregionsin thevariabledomains of
immunoglobulins andTcell receptors
freeze fractureTechniquefor the preparation of specimensfor electronmicroscopy inwhichrapidlyfrozen samples arebrokenand
the exposedsurfacesareetchedtoreveal structuraldetails
fusion Processby which some envelopedviruses become incorporated into thecellmembrane and thus enterthecell.Also the
mechanism bywhich suchvirusesbring about thefusionof adjacent cellmembranes to formmultinucleatedcells or syncytia
P-galactosidase
Enzymecatalyzing the hydrolysis of lactose intoglucose plusgalactose:its absence isakeyelement inthe pathophysiol-
ogy ofviral diarrhea
606
Glossary
gamma globulin Fraction of serum proteins that contains antibodies
gelfltration
Type ofcolumn chromatography that separatesmoleculeson the basisof size
genetic code Sequence ofnucleotides,coded in triplets(codons）along the mRNA,that determines the sequence of amino acids in
protein synthesis.TheDNA sequence of agene can be used topredict the mRNA sequence,and the genetic code can,in turn,
be used to predict the amino acid sequence
genetiedrit（antigenic drif）Pointmutations）gene（）specifying the suface protein（s）favirusresultinginenoughantigenic
change to allow immuneescape
geneticmapGraphicrepresentation of thelineararrangementof genes withinagenome orchromosomeinvirologyusuallydetermined
genetie shift (antigenie shift) Genetic reassortment or recombination between viruses resulting in major antigenic change and the
emergence ofa new variant
genome Complete set of genes of avirus or organism
genomiclibraryAcollectionof clonesmade from a setofrandomly generatedoverlappingDNA fragmentsrepresenting the entire
genome of a virus or organism
genotypeGenetic constitution of avirus or organism,as distinguished from its physical appearance orphenotype
germ-line transmissionTransmission ofavirus by eggor sperm
glycolipidsLipids that are linked covalently to polysaccharides
glycoprotein
Polypeptide towhich at leastone carbohydrateresidue isattachedcovalently
Golgi complex(or Golgi apparatus）Subcellular organelle consisting of flattened,parallelmembranes derived from the endoplasmic
reticulum andplaying a role in intracellular transport
group-specific antigenAntigenspecificto （shared by)agroupof viruses
Guarnieri bodiesInclusion bodies in vacciniavirus-infected cells
hairpinDouble-helicalregionsresultingfromthe base pairingofcontiguous,largelycomplementary stretchesofnucleotidesonDNA
orRNAstrands
HeLa cellsAnestablished line of human cervical carcinoma cells often used in research and diagnostics-susceptible toinfection
by many viruses
helical symmetryConfiguration ofaviralnucleocapsid inwhichthenucleicacid andprotein structural units are arranged asahelix
helicase Anenzyme involvedin DNA replication,responsible forunwindingthe double helix
helixSpiralstructurewitharepeatingpattern;it isthenatural conformation ofmanyregularbiological polymers（e.g,polypeptides
DNA,RNA,and the nucleocapsids of some viruses)
are able to enhance thefunction of themselves,other lymphocytes.and other cells,notablymacrophages;there are two classes
of suchcells,Thl andTh2,distinguished by their cytokineprofiles
hemadsorptionAdsorption of erythrocytes to the surfaceofvirus-infected cels(mediated by boundviral proteins orvirions)
hemagglutinationAgglutination ofredbloodcells(mediatedbyboundviral proteins orvirions)
hemagglutinin
One of theviral glycoprotein peplomersoforthomyxoviruses andmost paramyxoviruses
herd immunity
Immune status of a population that affects viral transmissionrates. Often used in describing theelimination of a
heteroduplex
Double-strandednucleicacid inwhichthetwo strands arenotcompletelycomplementary
heterologous
Derived from a species with a differentgenetic constitution
histonesProteins richin basic amino acids(e.g.,lysine and arginine)found in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells in association withDNA
holoenzyme
Active(complete)form of anenzyme
homologyDegree of relatedness between twonucleic acid or amino acid sequences
horizontal transmissionTransfer of infectiousvirusfromone animal to another byanymeans otherthanvertical transmission
hot spotsSites in a genome atwhichmutations occur and are selected for with exceptionallyhigh frequency
humoral immunityImmunitymediatedby antibodies
hybrid cellCell createdby the fusionof two unrelated cells through the action of certainviruses or other substances
hybridization Formationof stable duplexes between complementary RNA or DNA sequences by means of Watson-Crick base
pairing:inclassical genetics and breeding,the formation of anovel diploid organismby normal sexual processes orcellfusion
hybridomaAntibody-secretingcell line formed by the fusion ofa non-antibody-producingmyeloma tumor cell witha particular
clone of antigen-primed Blymphocytes
hydrophilChemicalgroupswithabilitytoformhydrogenbondsthushavinganafinityforwaterandsimilarsolventseOH
=O,-NH)
hydrophobiChemicalgroupsunable toformhydrogenbondsthuslackingaffnityforwater(e.gbenzeneandotheraromaticring,
aliphatic hydrocarbons)
hyperimmunizationRepeated immunization againsta particular virus or antigen
heavy andlightchainand thevariableregionsofthandβchainsof theTellreceptorsubjecttomostvariationand
contributesmost to antigen specificbinding
iatrogenicPertaining toa disease caused directlybyprofessional veterinary ormedicalintervention
faces and12vertices
idiotype An epitope(immunogenic site)on the variableregions of anantibody molecule-antibodies may beraised against such
sites that can bind specifically to the particular antibodymolecule (antidiotypic antibody)
immune complexes Antibody-antigen complexes
immuneresponse(Ir）genesGenesinfluencingtheimmuneresponse toagivenantigen;theymap withinthemajor histocompatibility
complex (MHC)genetic locus
Glossary
607
immune surveillanceMonitoringfunction of the immune systemwhereby it recognizes and reacts against aberrant cells arisingwithin
thebody
immunity (1)A state in which a host is not susceptible to infection or disease or (2) the mechanism（s)by which this is achieved.
Immunityis achievedby one of threemeans:natural orinnate (genetically inherited) immunity,passively acquiredimmunity(via
transferofantibody,usually from dam tooffspring)and actively acquired immunity（throughvaccination)
immunofuorescenceAmethod of determiningthelocationof antigen(orantibody）ina tisue section orsmearusinga specific
antibody（or antigen) conjugated to a fluorochrome
immunogen Anantigen that stimulates a protective immuneresponse
imunogenicityCapacityofavaccine tostimulate animmuneresponseasmeasuredbytheproportionofindividualanimalsina
population that produce specific antibody orTcells
immunoglobulinSet of proteinsproduced byB lymphocytes（plasma cells)during theimmuneresponse;inmany species,nine classes
ofimmunoglobulins aredistinguishedonthebasisofdifferencesintheirheavychains:IgG,234IgA1,2,IgM,IgD,andIg
immunologicmemoryCapacityofananimal thathasbeenexposed toaparticularantigentorespondmorerapidlyandeffectively
onreexposure to that antigen
immunologyStudyof theimmune systemandimmunity
immunopathologyDamage to thehostcaused by its own immuneresponse
infections),dugs,irradiationregnancymalnutrition,etc.mmunosuppressedanimalsarealsoreferredtoasmmunocompromisd
inapparent infection Subclinical infection
incidencerateorattackrate）measureoftheccurrenceofinfctionordiseaseinapopulationovertmeiferstoheroporton
of a population contractinga particular disease duringa specifiedperiod
inclusion bodiesMicroscopically distinct sites ofvirus synthesis(viral factories)or accumulation ofvirions or viral products in
virus-infected cells
ineubationperiodIntervalbetween the time of infectionand the onsetof clinical signs
inductionInitiation ofvirus production in a lysogenic or latently infected cell
infectionInvasion andreplication ofavirus within a hostwhere it may cause disease
infection cycleTime between infection of a celland the shedding ofvirions
infectious dose50（IDs)Dose ofvirusrequired toinfect50%ofinoculated hostsor cells
infectiousperiodTimeperiodduringwhichinfectedanimalsare ableto transmit avirus toasusceptible hostorvector;theinfectious
periodmaynotnecessarilybe associatedwithclinical signs
initiation(start)codonTrinucleotide inamRNA atwhichribosomesbeginthe processof translation,therebyestablishing thereading
frame;usuallyAUG（which encodesmethionine),but may be GUG （valine)in prokaryotecells
initiationfactorsSpecificproteinsrequiredforribosomebinding and the initiation ofmRNA translation
in situ hybridizationUse ofaDNAorRNAprobeto detectthepresence of the complementaryDNA sequence ina preparation
of clonedvirus or other specimen of interest
intohostcellchromosomalDNA
integrationInsertionof a smallerDNAintoa largerDNA:integration of aviral DNA into thehost genomeusuallyrequires avirus-
encoded enzyme,integrase
intercalation
Insertionof planarmolecules(e.g.,ethidium bromide) between adjacentbase pairs inDNA or RNA
interference
Prevention of thereplication of onevirusby anothervirus or by products（e.g.,interferons)produced by cellsasaresult
ofviral infection
interferonsFamily of cellular proteins （cytokines)produced and secreted inresponse to foreignnucleicacid(especiallyviral RNA
intergrinsAgroupofheterodimericcelladhesionmoleculespresentonthe surface ofendothelialcell;some serve asreceptors
forviruses
interleukins(acting between leukocytes")Soluble substances(cytokines)produced by leukocytes that stimulate the growth or
activities of other leukocytes
produce mRNA
in vitro Literally,in glass:a biologic or biochemical process occurring outside a living organism.For example,a virological
experiment done incell culturerather thaninliving animal hosts
in vivoLiterally,in lifeabiologic orbiochemical process occurringwithin a livingorganism.Forexample,avirological experiment
done in an experimental animal model.
isoelectrie pointpHvalue of a solution inwhichamacromolecule hasnonetsurfacecharge and fails to move in an electricfield
isolateSample of avirus(or other infectious gent)from a single defined source
isometric Of equal dimensions
isometrieyirionsVirions that are symmetricalin threedimensions;some isometricvirionsmay appear sphericalbut their capsids
have icosahedral symmetry
kappa chain
Oneof the twolightchains（the otherislambda)ofimmunoglobulin molecules
killer(K)cellNon B,nonT,lymphocyte-likecell(also callednull cell);lacking BandTcellsurfacemarkers,but havingFcreceptors;
responsiblefor antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
kinaseAnyenzyme catalyzing a phosphorylationreaction
Kleinschmidt techniqueMethodinwhichnucleicacidmolecules are spreadon anair-water interface in a monolayer;after heavy
metal shadowing,the molecules arevisualized by electron microscopy
diseashriginalstulatareftndifutovirafionadionalriraaventablidbya
(see Chapter 2).
lambda chainOne of the two lightchains（the other iskappa）of immunoglobulin molecules
608
Glossary
Langerhans'cell
Dendritic cellin the skin that functionsin the processing of antigen.See dendritic cell
late viral genes
Genes transcribed afterviralnucleic acidreplication
latent infection
Persistentinfectioninwhichlittleornoinfectiousvirusisdetectable,despitethecontinuedpresenceoftheviralgenome
leader sequence
leadersequence peptideSequenceof 15-20aminoacids attheNterminusofeukaryotic proteinsthatdeterminesitsultimatedestination
lectins.
Plant glycoproteins that bind specifically to sugarresidues incell membrane glycoproteins and thereby act as mitogens
lethal dose 50(LDs)Dose ofvirus required tokill 50%of inoculated animals or cells
leukemia
Neoplastic proliferationofleukocytesmanifestby anncreasednumberof leukocytes intheblood
leukosisNeoplasia inwhich there is an abnormal increase in the number of leukocytes
ligand
(1)Receptor-bindingmolecule on the surface of a virion or(2）nonviral molecules involved inreceptor-ligand interactions
ligase
AnenzymethatrepairssinglestrandnicksinduplexDNAandcovalentlyjoinsDNAfragmentswithcomplementaryoverlaping
（called also cohesive orsticky）endsorlessefficiently，withbluntend
ligationProcessof joining the5’and3'termini of linear nucleic acidmoleculeviaa phosphodiester bond
lipid bilayerModel forthe structure of cellmembranes andviralenvelopesbased onthehydrophobicinteractionsbetweenphospholip-
ids:the polar head groupsface the inner and outer surface of themembrane,whereas the hydrophobic tails are containedwithin
the body of themembrane
lipidsHydrophobicbioorganicmoleculesincludessteroid,fats,fatty acidsphospholpidsandwater-insolublevitamins
lipopolysaccharides
Molecules rich in lipids and sugars
liposomeArtificially constructed lipidvesicle intowhichviralproteins or other substancesmaybeincorporated
long terminal repeats(LTRs)Sequencesat the termini of thegenomeandproviral DNA of retroviruses,containingpromoters and
enhancersnecessary for efficientviralreplication
lymphocytes
antibodies andT lymphocytes areresponsibleforcell-mediated immunity
lymphokine
Soluble mediator produced by lymphocytes that influences the function ofother cells;a subclass of cytokines
lymphoma
Solidtumor of lymphoid tissue
lyophilizationAstablepreparationof abiologicalsubstanceproducedbyrapid freezinganddehydrationof thefrozenproductunder
high vacuum,also called freeze-drying
lysisRupture of a cell caused by the destruction of the cellmembrane
lysogenic virus
Virus (generally a bacteriophage）that can become stably established within its host:either by integration into the
host cell genome or by plasmid formation
lysosome
Cytoplasmic organell containing hydrolytic enzymes that play an important role in the degradation of material ingested
byphagocytosis or endocytosis
lytic infection
See cytocidal infection
macromolecule
Moleculewithmolecular weightranging from a few thousand tohundredsofmillions of daltons
macrophage
onitssurfacein associationwithMHCclassII protein
major histocompatability complex (MHC)
Chromosomalregioncontaining thegenes for histocompatibility antigens and some other
genes involved in the immune response
Invasivetumorresultingfrom uncontrolledproliferationof abnormal(transformed)cells
Marek's disease
A lymphoproliferative disease of birdscaused by an avian alphaherpesvirus
marker rescue
Phenomenoninwhichcells thatareinfected/transfectedmixedlywith activevirus and inactivatedvirus orviral DNA
yield progeny thatcontain some gene(s)from the inactivatedvirus orviral DNA
maternal immunity
Transfer of maternal antibody to the fetus,the embryonating egg,or the newborn
mathematical model (epidemiological)
Ameans toconvey quantitativeinformation aboutahost-virusinteraction,suchasanepidemic
or an emerging diseaseepisode,by the constructionofa set ofpredictivemathematical algorithms.Modelsmay provide（l）an
indication of the dynamicsof theinteractionbetweenthevirus and the host,(2）anindicationof themode andrate of transmission
ofthevirus betweenindividual animalsand(3）anindicationof the hostpopulation atrisk（numbersofanimalspopulation
density.age distribution,etc.)and the possiblefuture spreadof infection and disease
matrixproteinProteinlining the inner surface of the envelopeofmany envelopedviruses
maturation phasePeriod toward theend of theviralreplicationcycle duringwhich progenyvirions arebeingassembled
mechanical transmission
Transmissionof avirus by anarthropod,without replication of thevirus in thevector-likened toa
"flying needle"
melting temperature (TM)
Temperature atwhich a double-stranded DNAorRNA molecule denaturesinto separate single strands
or the temperature at which the secondary structure ofa single-stranded nucleic acidis lost:influenced by the G+Ccontent of
thenucleic acid and the salt concentration of the solution
memory cells
Expanded clonesT andB lymphocytes that persist after primaryand subsequent immunization
messenger RNA （mRNA)A single-stranded.positive-sense molecule of RNA produced by transcription from the viral or host
genome,which,afterprocessing,is translated onribosomes to make protein;the genome of certainRNA viruses canact directly
asmRNA
metastasisSpreadof cellsfroma primarymalignant tumor to otherparts of thebody,usuallyviathebloodstreamor lymphatic system
MHCrestriction
Recognition of foreign antigen by T lymphocytes occurs only when that antigen is presented on a cell surface as a
peptide in association with anMHC protein
microsomes
Fractionof a cell homogenateobtainedbyultracentrifugation thatcontainsribosomes andsmall vesiclesderivedfrom
therough endoplasmic reticulum
mitogenA substance that induces cell proliferation
mitomycin C
Antibioticthat selectivelyinhibitsDNAreplication by cross-linking the strands
mitosisThat part of thecell cycle（Mphase）of eukaryotic somaticcellsthat endswithcelldivision
molecular cloningSee cloning
molecular mass(M,)Molecular mass (relative) is a dimensionless number representing theratio of the mass of an entity to one-
kindsofmoleculesthemolecularmassnotmolecularweight,shouldbeused.Whenindicatingthemassof proteinscarbohydrates,
orother largemoleculesthe termM,isalsopreferred,butmolecularweight(Mw)maybeused.Itisacceptable touse themass
Glossary
609
unit,the dalton,with thetermmolecular mass,butnotwith the termmolecular weight orrelativemolecularmass (M.）.For
example,the M,of poliovirus proteinVP1 is33,521
monocistronic mRNA AmRNA encodinga single polypeptide
monoclonal antibody Highly specific antibodiesproduced by specifically selected cell clones (hybridoma cells) obtained by fusing
monolayercellsAnimalcellsgrowninculturewhile attached toasolidsurfaceincontrast tocellsgrownin suspensionculture
monomerBasisubunitfromwhich,byreetitonofasingletyefreactionpolymersaremadeegaminoacids（monomers）e
linked toyield polypeptides or proteins （polymers)
morbidityratePercentage ofanimalsinapopulation thatdevelopclinical diseaseattributable toaparticularvirus over a defined
periodoftime
fatalityraterepresentsthe percentageofanimalswitha particular disease that diefromthedisease
M,See molecular mass
multicistronicmRNAmRNAcarryingtheinformationfor the synthesisof twoormoreproteins
multiplex polymerase chainreactionAmodification of the polymerase chainreactionin whichthe detection ofmore than onenucleic
acidsequenceinamixtureis accomplishedina singlerunby theadditionofmore thanoneset of oligonucleotide primer pairs
multiplicity ofinfection (Moi)Number of infectious units ofvirus inoculatedper cell
mutagenPhysicalorchmicalagents（e.g,radiationheatand alkylatingrdeaminatingagentsthatraisethefrequencyofgent
mutation abovethe spontaneousrate
mutationHeritablechangein the nucleotide sequence of thegenomeofan organismorvirus
myeloma Blymphocytetumor
Nterminus End of the polypeptide chain that carries a free α-amino group (by convention the left end)
natural killer (NK)cell Non B,non T,lymphocyte-like cell (null cell);lacking B and T cell surface markers and lacking antigen-
occurs inmanyviral infections);this is importantin the early removal ofvirus-infected cells andprobablyin theelimination of
manypotentiallyneoplasticcells
such as potassium phosphotungstate tostainthe background around particles of interest.Used to visualize virions and viral
subunits in exquisite detail
negative sense Nucleotidesequence that iscomplementary to that ofmRNA,whichby conventionrepresents thepositive sense
neoplasm Cellular proliferationleading tomalignant tumors
of subgenomicmRNAsaregenerated havinganidentical5'leadersequenceandacommon3'terminus,butbecause of discontinuous
transcription,each mRNA has a unique coding sequence and is transcribed into a unique viral protein
firstroundofamplification arereplacedwithdifferentprimersforthesecondandsubsequentroundsofamplification;thisincreases
the specificity of thereaction
neuraminic acidNine-carbon sugar derivative thatispart of the cellularreceptorrecognizedby the orthomyxovirushemagglutinin
nonionic detergent
Detergent with nonet charge (e.g.Triton X-100 and Nonidet P-40)
nonpermissive cells
Cells that do not allow a complete virusreplication cycle
nonsensemutationMutation thatproduces one of the three stopcodonsresultingin premature termination of thegrowingpolypep-
tide chain
nonstructural proteinVirus-codedproteinfound ininfectedcellsbut notpart of the structure of thevirion.Some so-callednonstructu-
ralproteins,such aspolymerases,maybeincorporated in the virion.
Northern blot (laboratory jargon derived by analogy with Southern blot)Amethod in whichRNAfragments of interest are transferred
from a polyacrylamidegel toa membrane byblotting;themembrane is thenprobed with labeledcomplementary DNA to
determine thenatureof theRNA fragments
notifiable diseaseDiseaseswhose occurrence isrequiredby lawtobemadeknowntoa government authority
nucleases Enzymes that cleave thephosphodiester bonds ofnucleic acid chains
nucleocapsid
Viral nucleic acid surroundedbyitsprotein coat
nucleoproteinVirion protein thatis tightly associatedwith theviralnucleicacid;in the case ofhelically symmetrical RNA viruses,
thenucleoprotein coats theRNA forming the nucleocapsid
guanine,uracilor cytosine in RNA）a phosphate molecule,anda sugar molecule (deoxyribose inDNA andribose in RNA).
Thousandsofnucleotides are linked to forma DNA orRNAmolecule
nude mouseStrain of hairlessmouse that is congenitally without a thymus gland
Okazaki fragments Short(1000-2000nucleotide)DNA fragments madein the course of discontinuousDNAreplication and later
joined togethertoform anintact strand
oligonucleotideA polymer made up of a few nucleotides
oligopeptide Short chain of amino acids
oligosaccharideShort sugar polymers that,inviruses,are usually attached to asparagineresidues in proteins and containmannose,
glucosamine,fucose,sialic acid,etc.
oncogeneCellular（c-onc)orvirus(v-onc)gene whose products are able to transform eukaryotic cells so that they begin to grow
like tumor cells
oncogenesis(earcinogenesis,tumorigenesis)Multistepprocessleading to the development of a tumor
oncogenic Givingrise to tumors or causing tumor formation;saidespeciallyof tumor-inducingviruses
openreadingframe (ORF)Nucleicacidsequence between start and stopcodons thatencodes a protein ora polyprotein
610
Glossary
oranlPatiuatllattreuaryilhaslucniaGgaparandrbom
orphan virusUsually enteroviruses or reoviruses thathavenoknown disease attributed to them
palindromDquencethatsthesamewhenonestrandisreadlefttorightandtheotherisreadrighttolefaequence
consisting of adjacent inverted repeats
pancreatieribonucleaseAEndonuclease that cleaves RNA only at the3site of pyrimidinenucleotides
pandemie
Worldwideepidemic
papilloma
A small neoplasm on the skincaused by a papilloma virus:alsocalled a wart
passageSerial transferandrecoveryofavirusincellculturesoranimals:oftendonetoadaptanewisolatetogrowfasterandto
higher titer in the laboratory
passive immunization(passive protection)Transfer of antibodies to a nonimmune animal,either by maternal transfer(via the placenta
or in colostrum andmilk)or by administration ofplasma or serum
pathogen Any disease-causing virus or microorganism
pathogenicity
An expression of the absolute harm done to a host by a virus. Contrasted with the term virulence,which is used to
express therelative levelof harm done to a host
penetration Entry of a virus particle into a host cell
penton(pentamer)Twelve structuralunitslocatedat theverticesof icosahedral virionseachhasfiveneighbors
peplomer (spike)
Oligomerofviralglycoproteinsforming theprojections that typically extend fromaviralenvelope;usually contains
the ligand that isresponsibleforviral attachment to the host cell
peptide
Twoormoreamino acidsjoinedby apeptidebond
peptidoglycan
Glycopeptide constituent of thebacterial cellwall
structurally andchemically toC9protein ofcomplement,whichperformsasimilarfunction
perivascular cuffing
Infiltrationof lymphocytes aroundbloodvessels:mostnotablein thebrainbutcan occurin any organ,classic
evidence of an inflammatoryresponse to certainviralinfections
permissive temperature (orpermissive cell)Temperature or celltype that permits the replication of a conditional lethal viral mutant
persistentinectionIanmalsandcellinectonthatrsstsforaprolongedperiodmonthsyears）afrthprmaryfcton
phage displayA method for defining antibody-binding epitopes on a proteinby cloning fragments of the gene encoding the protein
phenotypeiologicpropertiesofanorganismorvirusresultingfromexpressionofitsgenotypebutmodifiedbyenvironmentalfactors
phenotypie mixing
Aphenomenon in whichviruses exchange their outside envelopes or coats,thus the genome of one virusmay
be encapsidated in the externalmembrane orcoatof the other
phosphodiester hondLinkage ofphosphoric acidwith the 3'-hydroxyl group of one ribosomeor deoxyribosemolecule and the 5'
hydroxyl group of thenextribose or deoxyribose molecule in apolynucleotide
phosphokinase
See kinase
phospholipidsLipidsthatcontaincharged phosphategroupthusshowing bothhydrophobicandhydrophilic propertietheyarea
primary component of cell membranes
phosphoproteins
Proteinscontainingphosphategroupsmost commonly attachedtoserine,threonine,ortyrosineresidues
phosphorylation
Process ofesterifying a molecule with phosphoric acid:generally catalyzed by akinase usingATP
pinocytosis
Uptake ofwater,solutes.orparticles byinternalizationof fluid-filledvacuoles:alsocalledviropexis
plaque assay
Assay based on the number of plaques producedwhen aviral suspension is inoculated ona cellmonolayer
plasma cellAntibody-secreting celthe end stage of differentiation of a Blymphocyte
plasma membrane
Membrane thatmakes up the cell surface and encloses the cytoplasm:itis semipermeable and composed largely
of phospholipids and proteins
plasmid Autonomouslyreplicating,extrachromosomalcircular DNAmolecule,nonessential forcell survival undernonselective
particular plasmids.Anumber of artificially constructed plasmids areusedas cloningvectors
plating efficiency
Proporionfappulationofvirionsthatsuesfulynectsparticularcelulturesuallydtctedbylaqueassay
pointmttiontrationdltionsubstittiont.）ina singlenulotideinagenm
sense(comlmentarynsrflrringtdiffrnceweenapicalandbaslaterasurfacefpitl
viruses or addedenzymatically to the 3’ terminus ofRNA transcripts in the process of formationofmRNA
poly(A）poly（U）poly(G)Polyribonucleotides containinga single type of base;the3ends ofmosteukaryoticmRNAscontain up
to300 adenosine nucleotides that are addedenzymatically after transcription
polyacrylamidegelelectrophoresisPAGE)Electrophoresisinahydrophilic polyacrylamidematrix:separationusually dependson
themolecular size ofmolecules:used commonly to estimate therelativemolecular sizes ofproteins andnucleic acids;denaturation
of proteinswith sodiumdodecylsulfate(SDS-PAGE）providesauniformcharge toallmoleculesandfavors separationsbased
onsizealone
polycistronie Representing several genes
animals are alwayspolyclonal
polyhedrinMatrixproteincomprisingthemajorcomponent ofocclusionbodiesproducedbynuclearpolyhedrosisvirusandcytoplasmic
polyhedrosis virus
polyhedrosis
Diseasecausedbyinvertebrate（e.g.,insect)virusesthat lead to tissue breakdown and accumulationofvirionsembedded
inpolyhedral crystals in the cytoplasm ornucleus
polykaryoeyteCell withmultiple nuclei （synonyms:syncytium or syncytial cellmultinucleate giant cell)
polymer Regular covalently bonded chain ofmonomeric subunits
Glossary
611
polymerase （DNA polymerase,RNA polymerase)An enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of nucleic acids from preexisting nucleic
acid templates,assemblingRNA fromribonucleotidesorDNAfromdeoxyribonucleotides
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)A method for amplifying a DNA nucleotide sequence using a heat-stable polymerase and two
oligonucleotide primers,one complementary to the positive DNA strand at oneend of the sequence tobe amplified and the
other complementary to thenegative DNA strandat the other end.The DNA of interest(template)and primers are subjected
torepeated cycles of heating to separate(melt) double-stranded DNA and cooling in the presence of nucleotides and DNA
polymerase such that the template sequence iscopiedover andover.There aremanyvariationsinuse,some ofwhich are used
todetect theexistenceofviralgenome sequencesindiagnosticspecimens
to the5’position on the sugar of the adjacentmolecule
polynucleotide phosphorylase
Enzyme catalyzing the polymerization ofribonucleoside diphosphates toyieldfreephosphate and
polynucleotides (e.g.,RNA)
polypeptidePolymer of amino acids linked together by peptide bonds
polyploidMorethanone copy of the genome presentacharacteristicof someneoplasticcells
polyproteinLargeprimary translationproduct fromwhichindividualmature functionalproteinsare subsequentlyformedbypostrans-
lational or cotranslationalproteolyticcleavage
polysaccharide Carbohydrate（sugar)olymer;nviruses oftenmannose,galactose,fucose,sialic acid,and glucosamine
polysome (or polyribosome)Complex that contains a mRNA molecule andattachedribosomes actively engaged in polypeptide
synthesis;thenumber of attachedribosomes depends on the size of themRNA
prevalence Ratio,ata particular point in time,of the number ofcases currently present in the population divided by the number
of animals in the population;it isa snapshot of the occurrenceof infection or diseaseat a given time
primary eellcultureCulture of celldirectly obtained from amulticellular organism without passage
primary immune responseImmuneresponse following the first contact of an animal with an antigen
primary structureNucleotide sequenceof anRNA or DNA molecule or the amino acid sequence of a polypeptide
for theinitiation ofDNA（and occasionallyRNA)synthesis
prion Infectious agents composed ofabnormally folded protein,with no nucleic acid.Prions are the cause of the spongiform
used to detectthecomplementarybasesequencebyhybridization
processing(1) Of RNA transcripts:seriesof posttranscriptional alterations to primaryRNA transcripts,whichleadto theformation
ofmRNA.(2)Ofproteins:changes subsequentto translationof polypeptide,such ascleavage,glycosylation,orphosphorylation.
(3) Of antigens:cleavage ofpolypeptides within cells to form peptides that arepresented on the surface of cells in association
withMHCmolecules
prodrugChemotherapeutic agent that dependsonaviralenzyme to convert it toits active form
productive（ornonproductive) infectionInfection ofa permissive（ornonpermissive)cell bya virus resulting in theproduction（or
failure of production)of infectious progenyvirions
prokarytUicellaorganismsuhabacteraorbl-reenalgaethalcksanuleambraneandmmbraneboundrgaell
promoterRegionofnucleicacidmoleculetowhichRNApolymerasebindsin ordertoinitiate transcription
oftime
protein subunitsThemost elemental units of folded polypeptide chains specifiedby theviral genome that begin toform themajor
structural units of theviral capsid
proteosomeA iargemultifunctional protease complexresponsiblefor intracellular proteolysis,ie.the sequential degradation of pro-
teins
protomer Single polypeptide chains(either identical or nonidentical) of amultimeric protein
protooncogeneA genein a normal eukaryotic cell that is believed to have given rise to an oncogene ina transformingvirus
provirisViral genome integrated covalently into a host cell chromosome and thus transmissible froma cell to its daughter cells
pseudoreplica techniqueMethod usedin negative stainelectronmicroscopywherevirions orviral substructuresare captured in a
very thinplasticfilm
pseudotypeVirus particle containing the genome ofonevirus and the capsidor envelopeof another.See phenotypicmixing
pulse-chase experimentExperimental technique inwhich a radioactively labeledcompound is added toliving cells ora cellextract
（pulse）and then,ashort timelater,anexcessofunlabeledcompound is added todilute out the labeledcompound andsamples
are then collected atvarious times afterthe pulse tofollow the course of the labelasthe compoundismetabolized （chased)
and guanine
puromycin An antibiotic thatmimics a charged tRNA and inhibits protein synthesis
pyknosis Shrinkage and condensation of thenucleus of a cell
pyrimidineAnitrogen-containing,double-ingbasicompound thatccurinnucleicacids.yrimidinesinDNA arecytosineand
thymine;in RNA.cytosine and uracil
be differentiated,usually by size,at the endof thereaction
quarantineAperiodoriginally40days）ofdetentionforanimalsplantsorpeoplecomingfromaplacewhereadiseaseisknown
toexist
quasi-speciesAcluster（orcloudorswarm)ofvariantvirusesthatarisefrommutationsovertimewithinaviral isolate,evena cloned
isolate.SeenparticularlywithRNAvirusesbecause of theinherentlyhighmutationrate causedby copy errors duringreplication
by RNA-dependent RNA polymerase and the absence of proofreading in RNA replication
radioimmunoassay
Very sensitive assayforviral antigen or antibody thatutilizes radioactive labelingof either the antigen or
theantibody
reactivationActivation of a virus(e.g.,herpesvirus)from a latent stage
612
Glossary
reading frameA nucleotide sequence that startswith an initiation（start) codon,partitions the subsequentnucleotidesinto amino
acid-encoding triplets,and endswitha termination(stop)codon
readthrough
Translation of mRNA through a stopcodon
reannealing
Reassociationof single-strandednucleicacidsafterdenaturationtorestore theH-bondeddouble-strandedstruture
reassortment
Geneticrecombination betweenviruseswith segmented genomeswhereby some progeny of a doubly infected cell
acquire genome segments fromeachparentalvirus
receptorStructureonsurfaceofcellthatisrecognizedbyaspecificextracelularmoleculeorstructure(ligand）orvirusthatbinds
toit
membrane and subsequent endocytosis through clathrin-coated pits
recombinantDNAmolecule
A combinationof DNAmoleculesof different originthatarejoinedusingrecombinant DNA technologies
recombinant DNA technologyThemany procedures used to join togetherDNA segments to produce genes ofinterest and the
procedurestointroducesuchrecombinantDNAmoleculesintoexpressionsystemssuchasbacterialculture systemscellculture
systems,or transgenic animal systems)for the large-scale production of proteins (or DNA)of interest
recombination (intramolecular) Exchange of nucleic acid sequences between molecules derived from different parents.giving rise
toprogenywith a differentgenotype
repeat (reiterated) sequence Nucleotide sequence present in more than one copy (usually many copies)
replieaseEnzymenvolvedinthereplicationoftheviralgenomicnucleicacidseNA-dependentRNArelicaseorolymerase）
replicationDuplication of the genomicDNA orRNAof avirus
replication forkY-shapedregion ofa DNA genome that is the growingpoint duringDNAreplication
helical intermediates in thereplication of single-strandedDNA and RNAviruses
replicative intermediate（Ri)Intermediate inthereplicationofviralnucleic acid,consisting of one complete(template) strand on
which oneor severalnascent strands ofopposite sense are beingreplicated simultaneously byapolymerase molecule at each
growingpoint
into RNA
period ina definedpopulation consistingsolely ofsusceptible animals
reservoir hostAnimal speciesconstituting the source ofvirusin nature
restriction endonuclease
Enzyme thatrecognizes short specific palindromic sequences in double-stranded DNA and cleaves the
that protect the bacterial cell against invasion by foreign nucleic acids
sizes cut by specific restriction enzymes.Different RFLPprofiles are caused by mutation at restriction enzyme cutting sites.In
animal genetics.polymorphic sequences thatresult in RFLPs are used as markers to build physical maps and genetic linkage
maps,includingmaps pertaining tovariationinsusceptibility/resistance toviral diseases
reticulocyteImmature redblood cell(orerythrocyte) that is able to synthesize hemoglobin:cell-freerabbit reticulocyte extracts are
retrospective study
Attempt toidentify thecause of a disease by comparing thepresence or absence of suspectedetiologicfactors
in animalswith a certain disease to their occurrenceinanimalswithout that disease
reverse genetiesGenetic studies that proceed from therecognition of a gene to the function of its product
ribonuclease Enzyme that hydrolyzes(cleaves)the phosphodiester bonds of RNA
ribosomes Small(~20 nmin diameter)subcellular ribonucleoprotein particles thatare made up of two subparticles and areresponsible
forthe translation ofmRNAs intoproteins
ribozymes
rifampicin
Synthetic antibiotic that binds to certain prokaryoticRNA polymerases,therebyinhibitingRNA synthesis
RNArbonleiidlyrfnltidesoundnallivingelandmanyviruseconsiingflnguallysn
strandedchainofalternatingphosphate andriboseunitswiththebases adenineguanine,cytosine,anduracilbondedtotheribose
rolling circle replication
Mechanism for nucleic acidreplication inwhich the template is a circularmolecule (eitherDNAorRNA);
thenewly synthesized strandmay eitherbereleased as a singlecopy or,more commonly.continue on to form a concatamer of
progenymolecules before cleavage to unit lengthmolecules for packaging intoviral capsids
SphaseStage of cell cycle when DNA synthesis occurs
SimappingAmethod formapping precursor ormaturemRNA toparticular DNA sequences using the enzyme Si nuclease
sarcomaMalignant tumor of cells ofmesenchymal origin
secondary cells Cells arising from proliferation of cultured primary cellsunless they become transformed,such cells are able to
divide only a finitenumber of times
secondary immune responseSee anamnesticresponse
secondary structureFeaturesof a macromolecular structure that are maintained by hydrogen bonds andotherweakinteractions:
forproteins.secondary structural features include α helixes andβ-pleated sheets:for nucleic acids.the G-Cand A-T（U) base-
pairing interactions
secular trend (distribution)
Trend(occurrence)ofa disease over time(usually years)
sedimentation coefficientRate atwhich a macromolecule sediments under a defined gravitational force:influenced by both the
molecular weight and the shape of a macromolecule;the basic unit is the Svedberg(S)
semiconservativereplicationDNAreplication mechanism inwhichboth strands ofa double-strandedDNA are used as templates
and the tworesulting progeny duplexes each containone parental and one newly synthesized strand
sense Polarity ofa nucleic acid:positive senseis that found in messenger RNA,negative sense is that which is complementary to
that in messenger RNA
sensitivity(ofa test)
Ability of a test togive positiveresults onanimalsknown to have the infection-in contrast tofalsepositives
sentinel studyInvestigation of the circulation of arboviruses by testing for specific antibodies in exposed“sentinelanimals
sequencingDeterminationof the order ofnucleotides（base sequences）ina DNA or RNA molecule or the order of amino acids in
aprotein
Glossary.
613
seroprevalence rateProportion of animals in a population that are seropositive
serotypeAsetofvirusesormicroorganismsthatcanbedistinguishedfromallothersonthebasisofantigenicproperties
shadow casting
Techniqueusedtopreparevirusspecimensforelectronmicroscopyshadowsoutlining thevirionsarecreatedby
the accumulation of heavymetal atoms(e.g.,platinum)deposited in a vacuum
sigla （acronym）Nameformed fromafewletters,ofteninitial lettersof descriptivewords（e.g,Reoviridae=respiratory,enteric,
orphanviruses)
signal sequence
N-terminal sequenceof16-30 amino acidsofaprotein that initiates transport acrossmembranes:subsequently
cleavedoff
signal transductionAcascadeof biochemical events triggered at the cell surface by thebinding of a ligand to a cell surfacereceptor
that is transmitted to thenucleus andresultsin altered patternsof gene expression
silent gene(message)Gene that isnot expressedbecause a potentialribosome-binding site isblocked/unavailable
single strandedNucleic acid that occurs as a single-stranded helix
site-directedmutagenesisIntroduction of aparticular pointmutation or deletion ata predeterminedposition
slowinfectionInfection witha prolonged preclinical phase (incubation period）that isfollowed bya slowly progressivedisease
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDs) A strong anionic detergent,often used to disrupt envelopedviruses and to denature proteins
somatimutation（）A changeintheDNA sequence thatoccursin somaticcellnotgametes.(2）hemechanismunderlying
thegeneration of diversity of antigenrecognition by immunoglobulins andTcell receptormolecules.(3)Thefundamental cause
ofcancernichtmttinoccursntanuslyrisduedbycainogensuhassulightchmicarirus
Southern blot
thatfragmentscanbe detected andanalyzedbyhybridizationwithradioactivelylabeledcomplementarynucleic acidprobes;
named afteritsinventor,EdwardSouthern
speciesjumingReferringtoavirusthat derivesfromanancientreservoirlifecycleinnehostuthassubsequentlyestablished
anewlife cycle in another andnolonger uses thefirsthost as itsreservoir
splicingProcessofexcision of introns and splicing of exonsfrom RNA transcripts toformmRNA
spongiform encephalopathy(or transmissible spongiform encephalopathy,TSE)
Term describing the disease and degenerative changes
that occurin the brains of animals（orhumans）infectedwith prions:e.g,scrapie,bovine spongiform encephalopathy,chronic
wasting disease of deer andelk,and so on
start (initiation) codon Group of three adjacent ribonucleotides(AUG)inamRNA where translation is initiated;precededby base
sequences thathave a high affinity for ribosomes
steady-stateinfectionPersistent infectioninwhich all cells are infected and producenoncytocidalvirus
stop（termination）codon Ribonucleotide triplet(UGA,UAG,UAA）in anmRNA signaling the termination of translationofa
polypeptidechain
structural proteinsViru-coded proteinsthatareaneentialpartofthestructureofavirion
structuralunitsAssemblagesofprotein subunits,usually forming structures of intermediatecomplexity，whichare then assembled
intoviralcapsids
subclinical infeetionAninfection in which clinical signs are inapparent;diagnosis involves laboratorymethods
subgenomicRNALess than genome lengthRNA foundin infectedcells thatmay serve asmRNA andis occasionally encapsidated
sucrose density gradient centrifugationTechnique inwhich particles having different sedimentation coefficients are separated by
sedimentation through a continuous or discontinuousgradientof sucrose solution
superoilinCoilingfcovalentlyloedcirculadouble-strandedDNAmolculesuchthairossesoveritswnaxisthstutue
resultsfromtheactionofDNAgyrase and otherproteins
superinfctionAttemptonfectaostwithasecondvirumayresutnnterferencesynergismrecombinationorphenotypicmixing
suppressormtafionCompensatingmutationgenerallyinanothr genethatrestoreswild-tyephenotypewitoutaffectingh
mutant gene
suppressor-sensitivemutationPointmutationcreatinga terminationcodon that tends to bemisreadby a suppressor tRNA
surveillanceOrganizedcollection,collation,andanalysisof data ondiseaseincidence orprevalence
susceptibilityMeasure of sensitivity of ahostcell or organism to infection
symptomAconditionreportedby anindividual when sufferingfrom a disease;because animalscannot expressobjectivelyhowthey
feel,this term snotusedinveterinarymedicine.Instead,thetermclinical signisused
syncytium
Amultinucleate cellularmass producedby the fusing of cells
synergismAsituationinwhichtheclinical signscaused bycoinfectionwithtwoviruses aremore severe than the sumof those caused
by the individual viruses
systemicinfectionInfectionresultingfrom the spreadofvirusfrom the siteofinfection tomost orallpartsof thebody
TcellreceptorAntigen（peptide)-specificheterodimer,either α/βor/8receptormolecule on the surface ofTcell thatrecognizes
the antigenic peptideinassociationwithMHCprotein
Taq polymerase
Apolymerasesuchasthatobtainedfrom thebacteriumThermus aquaticus;usedcommonlyinthepolymerasechain
reaction andDNA sequencingreactions
tobegin synthesis at the cap site
temperature-sensitive mutationMutationresultinginagene product that isnonfunctional ata certainnonpermissive temperature
butfunctional at apermissive temperature
templateNucleic acidmolecule fromwhich acomplementary nucleic acidmoleculeis synthesized
terminalredundaney Presence of identical sequences at bothends of aDNA orRNAmolecule,such as aviral genome
termination(stop)codonRibonucleotide triplet （UGA,UAG,UAA) ina mRNA signaling the termination of translation of a
polypeptidechain
tissue culture infectious dose50（TCIDso)Median tissue culture infectious dose;that amount of a pathogenic agent thatwill produce
rrans and cis-actinggenetic andmolecular actionsSee cis-and trans-actinggenetic andmolecular actions
transcapsidationSee phenotypic mixing
transcriptase RNA polymeraseresponsiblefor transcription
614
Glossary
transeriptionSynthesis of a complementary RNA strand from a DNA or RNA template;the first stepin gene expression
transeription unit Regionofa genome extending from the transcriptioninitiation site to transcription termination siteincluding all
introns and exons:may include more than one gene
transduction
Transfer bya virus of cellular genesfrom one organismor cell to another
transfectionIntroduction of foreignDNA orRNA into a cell
transfer RNA (IRNA)Small(-75nucleotide)RNAsresponsible for decoding the geneticinformation inmRNA;each species of
transformation
hostcell,but inducesgenetic changesin it that lead to changes in growth characteristics and sometimes totumor formation
transgenesis
Transferofgenesfromoneindividualinto thegenome ofanother,whichmay thentransmit them tosuccessivegenerations
transgenic Product of transgenesis
transitional mutationMutation inwhich one pyrimidine(purine）issubstituted for the other(in contrast to transversion)
translatiouProcesswhereby thegeneticinformation presenl in amRNA molecule directsthe synthesis of proteinsfrom amino acids
fransloeationMovement ofmaternal immunoglobulins across thewall of the intestinal tractofnewborn animals
translocation cutoff
Timeatwhich translocationofmaternal immunoglobulins across thewall of theintestinal tractof thenewborn
animal ceases
IransmissionProcess bywhicha pathogen is shedfrom one host and infeets the next
transovarial transmission
Transmission ofvirus from one generation to thenext through theegg
transpositionMovement ofgenes from one chromosome site to another or to an extrachromosomal genetic element(episome,
ransposonADNA molecule that is able toinsert itselfinto unrelated DNA sequences within the cellthe ends of transposons
usually contain invertedrepeat sequences
transstadial transmission
Transmission ofvirusfromonedevelopmental stageof an arthropod to the next stage
transversional mutationMutation inwhicha purine isreplaced by a pyrimidineor viceversa
irypsiProteolyticenzymethaissecretedbythepancreasandcleavesonlyonthecarboxylsideofthebasicminoacidargnine
and lysine;its nonenzymatic precursor is trypsinogen
tubulinImportantproteincomponent of the cytoskeleton,aggregating in the form of microtubules that are essential in many cellular
functions (e.g.,mitosis)
tumor (T) antigensVirus-specificproteins foundin transformed cells;some arerequired to maintain transformation
tumor-associated transplantation antigenAntigens found on the surface of tumor cells that are undetectable onnormal cells ofadult
individuals and that act as transplantation antigens
fumor necrosis factors （tumor neerosis factors a and β,TNF a and β) Two related cytokines produced by macrophages (TNFα)
and someTlymphocytes(TNFβ):theyarecytotoxicfortumorcellsbutnotfornormalcellsandplayaroleininflammatoryresponses
tumor promoter
Substance or agent that helps the progressionof a transformed cell
tumor virus
Virus thar induces the formation of a tumor,also calledoncogenicvirus
ultracentrifuge
High-speedcentrifuge thatcanattainspeedsinexcessof70000rpmandcentrifugalfeldsup to500.00 timesgravity
and thusis capable ofrapidly sedimentingviruses andmacromolecules
ultraviolet(UV) light Electromagnetic radiationwith wavelengths of 40-400nm;damages nucleic acids,thus causingmutations and
chromosome breaks;alsoused inchemical analyses and in fuorescencemicroscopy
vaccinationAdministration ofavaccine:immunization
vaeuole
Intracytoplasmic liquid-containingvesicle
vector
(1) Intermediate host (e.g.arthropod) that transmits the causative agent of disease from infected to noninfected hosts.(2)
Virusused toincorporateagene for a protective antigen from anothervirus to studyof itsfunctionoruse asavaccine （e.g
vaccinia-vectoredrabiesvaccine)
vertical transmission
Transmission ofvirus from parent toprogeny through the genome,sperm,or ovum or extracellularly（e.g
through colostrum or across the placenta)
vesicleIntracellularcompartment enclosedbymembranes derived from theendoplasmicreticulum
viralcoreInnermost structure of complexvirions containing theviral nucleic acid and associated proteins
viremiaPresence ofvirusinthe bloodstreameitherfree（plasma viremia）orininfected leukocytes(cell-associated viremia）
virgin-soil epidemic
Epidemic occurring ina totallynonimmune（naive)population
virion
Complete virus particle
The smallest knownnucleicacid-containing infectious agent,consistingof a small circular RNAmolecule only300-400
nucleotides in size.Viroidsreplicate entirely bymeans of host cellmachinery.Viroids cause anumber of important diseases of
plantsbut they have not beenidentified in animals
virokineCytokine coded for by aviral gene
viroplasm (virus faetory)Intracellular focus of active virus synthesis and/or maturation
virulenceAnexpression of therelative level of harm done to ahostby avirus as opposed to the term pathogenicity,which is used
to express an absolute level of harm done to a host (e.g.virus A is more virulent than virus B")
wirulent virusA virus causing particularly severe disease
viruriaPresence ofvirus in the urine
virus factory (viroplasm)Intracellular focus of active virus synthesis andormaturation
VPgSmall virus-encoded protein attached through aphosphodiester linkage to the 5' terminus of a viral genome:abbreviation for
virion protein genome-linked;found on the genome of picornaviruses
Western blot(laboratory jargon derived by analogywithSouthern blot）Method for detectingand identifyingindividual proteinsin
amixtureof proteinsfollowingelectrophoretic separation.Proteinsare transferred from a gel to asubstrate(usuallyanitrocellulose
sheet)which is then flooded withradiolabeled-or enzyme-conjugated antibody to the protein（s)of interest.Thisis a valuable
method for assessing the presence of individual proteins ofviruses
wild typeThe putative original strain ofvirus circulating innature,theparent type fromwhich mutants arise
xenotrnsanttinTranslantationofrgansortissuesfromonesecistoanothrg,thetransplantationoftheliverfpig
into ahuman
xenotropie viruses
Retroviruses thatreplicateonly incellsfrom animals other than the speciesfromwhichtheywerederived
zoonosisDiseasetransmittednaturallytohumansfromanongoingreservoirlifecyclenanimasorarthropodswithoutthepemanent
establishment of a new life cycle in humans
D
EX
Abortion, equine, 314
monoclonal, 203
Abortive infections, 81
recovery from viral infection and, 141
Abortive transformations, 189
transfer of matermal, 142-144
Acetylethyleneimine (ethyleneimine), 228, 527
Antibody-binding groove, 136
Acquired immunity, See lmmunity
Antibody-complement-mediated cytotoxicity, 140
Acquired immunodefciency syndrome (AIDS), 41-42, 154
Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), 140 
Acquired resistance, 111
Antibody-dependent cytotoxic reactions, 157
Activation of cellular oncogenes, 184
Antibody escape mutants, 62
Active immunization, 225
Antigen-binding fragment. See Fab (fragment antigen-binding)
Acute infections, with late clinical manifestations, 153
Antigenic characterization, 213
Acute self-limiting infection pattern, 255
Antigenic determinants, 127
Acyclovir, 243
Antigenic drift. See Genetic drift
ADCC. See Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytoroxicity
Antigenic shift. See Genetic shift
Adeno-associated viruscs, 32, 343
Adenoviridae, classifation,virin prpeties, replicatin, 32734
Antigenic sites (epitopes), 8
Antigen-presenting cells (APCs), 130, 133
Adenovirus diseases, 328
Antigens, 86, 127, 177, 188. See also Viral antigens
avian, 330, 333-334
Antigen-specifc receptors, 129
of dcc1, 333
Anti-idiotypic antibodies,232
cquine,332-333
diseases of domestic animals from, listed, 328
Antiscptics, 263
Antiviral agents, strategy for development of, 243
oncogenes of, 188
Antiviral antibodies, detection and quantitation of, 216219
tumors induced by, 188-189
Adenoviruses as vectors for delivery of foreign DNA, 334
Aphthovirus,521-528
Adhesins, 139
diseases caused by mesmbers of genus, 521-528
Adjuvants, 233
Apical surfaces, 58
Adsorption. See Arttachment
Apoptosis, 90. See also Virus-induced cell death
Affinity maturation, 129
Aquabirnavirus,34
African horse sickncss, 400-402
Aquareovirus, 394
African swine fever, 295-298
Arboviruses,41,97, 582
Agammaglobulinemia, 141
Arenaviridae, classification, virion properties, replication, 485-494
Agc
Arenavirus,485
optimal for vaccination, 238
Argentine, Bolivian, Venezuelan and Brazilian hemorrhagic fevers,
and resistance/susceptibility to viral infections, 119, 349
492-494
Agencies. See International agencies
Arteritis. See Viral arteritis
Arteriviridalasifcatin,ionpie,liatin
Agglutination, latex particle, 205
AIDS.See Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Arterivirus,509
Airborne transmission, 250-251
Arthritis-encephalomyelitis, caprine, 385-386
of foot-and-mouth disease, 527
Arthrogryposis-hydranencephaly,476-477
Arthropod-borne viruses, 4, 251252
Alcelaphine herpesvirus, 322-323
 disease control through eliminating as vectors, 264
Aleutian disease of mink, 355
listed, 252
Alphaherpesvirinae, 31
transmission pattern of, 256-257
Alpharetrovirus (avian type C retroviruses), 373-378
Artifcial insemination, screening for viruses in,197
Alphavirus,547-554
Asfarviridae and Iridoviridae, classification, virion properties, replica-
Alternate complcment pathway, 138
tion, 293-300
Ambisense, applied to single-stranded RNA viral genomes, S0, 473,
Asfwirus,293
487
Assay methods, 202--205, 216-219
Amplification. See Gene amplification
Assembly and release, 57-59
Amplified products, methods for detection of, 210
Assembly units (and subassemblies), 12
Anamnestic (secondary) response, 139, 142
Assessment of viral virulence, 112
Anaphylactic reactions, 156-157
Astroviridae, classification, virion properties, replication, S43-546
Anatid herpesvirus 1, causing duck plague, 321
Astrovirus gastroenteritis, 544-545
Anemia, See Chicken anemia virus disease; Equinc infectious anemia
Astrovirus,543
Animal health systems development, 262
Asymptomatic infections, 111
 Animal management practices. See also National livestock industries
Atadenovirus,32
changing patterns of, 266-267
Attachment (adsorption), 46-47, 116
variations associated with, 257-258
natural inhibitors of, 122
Antagonism, cytokine, 137
Attack rate. See Incidence rate
Antibodies, 127, 136-138
Attenuation of viruses, 226-227. See aiso Underattenuation
anti-idiotypic, 232
by gene deletion, 228
antiviral, 216-219
 by selection of cold-adapted mutants and reassortants, 227
fluorescent, 194, 201-202
by serial passage in cultured cells, 227
615
616
Index
by serial passage in heterologous host, 227
Bovine coronavirus enteritis (winter dysentery), 501-502
by site-directed mutagenesis, 228
Bovine ephemeral fcver, 441-442
Australian encephalitis, 559-560
Bovine herpesvirus encephalitis (causcd by bovine herpesvirus 5),
Australian equinc morbillivirus disease, 425
312
Autoimmune disease, 155-156
 Bovine herpesvirus infection (caused by bovine herpesvirus 4),
Available and recommended vaccines, 240
323-324
Aviadenovirus, 32
Bovine immunodefciency virus discase, 389
Avian adenovirus diseases, 333-334
Bovine leukemia, 382-383
Avian encephalomyelitis, 530
Bovine malignant catarrhal fever (caused by alcelaphine herpesvirus
Avian infectious bronchitis, 505-507
11, 322-323
Avian infectious laryngotracheitis (caused by gallid herpesvirus 1),
Bovine mammillitis/pseudo-lumpyskin disease (caused by bovine her-
317-318
pesvirus 2),311-312
Avian influenza, 79-80, 121-122, 466-468
Bovine papillomatosis,339-341
Avian leukosis and sarcoma, 375-378
Bovine papular stomatitis 291
Avian papillomatosis, 341-342
Bovine parainfluenza virus 3 disease,416-418
Avian reticuloendotheliosis, 379-382
Bovine pneumonia162163
Avian retroviruses, syndromes produced in chickens, listed, 375
Bovine polyomavirus infection, 342
Avian rubulavirus diseases, 421
Bovine respiratory syncytial disease, 426-427
Avian sarcoma, 319, 375-378
Bovine rhinotracheitis, infectious,309311
Atibirnavirus,34
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy, 576-578
Avibepadnavirus,33
Bovine viral diarrhea, 563-566
Avipoxvinus, 288-289
B particles, 63
AZT (azidothymidine), 243
Brazilian hemorrhagic fever, 492-494
Bronchitis. See aiso Infectious bronchitis, 505
quail, 334
B19 virus disease, 32, 343
Budding, 14
Bacteria
from cellular membranes, 58
 physical properties of, 7
sites of, 89
as vectors for expresson of viral antigens, 229-230
Budgerigar fledgling disease, 342
Bacterial cells, cxpression of viral proteins in, 228-229
Buffalopox, 282
Basolateral sutfaces, 58
Bunyavirie,lasifcation,irionpetie, lication,4943
Bat rabies, 437
Bunyavirus,469
B cells. See B lymphocytes
Bursal disease. See Infectious bursal disease
Benign tumors, 177
Bursa of Fabricius, 407
Berne virus diseasc, 507
B virus disease of macaques, 316-317
Betaberpesvirinae, 31, 303, 322
Betaretrovirus (mammalian type B and type D retroviruses), 33
Biocontrol of pest species using viruses, 378-379
Caliciviridae, clasifcation, virion properties, replication, 533541
Biohazards. See Biosafety levcls; Restricted aninal viruscs
Calicivirus discases, 540
Biological control of pest species using viruses, 77-78, 267-268,
Califormia (La Crosse virus) encephalitis, 482
540
Camelpox, 283
Biological transmisson, 256
Cancers, 177
Biosafety levels, listed by infectious agent, 222
Caninc coronavirus diarrhea, 503-504
Bioterrorism and the cmergence of viral diseases, 273
Canine distemper, 167-169, 423-42$
Bird migrations, 257
Canine hepatitis, infectious, 331-332
Birds. See also Poultry
Canine herpesvirus disease, 315-316
avian adenovirus diseases, 333-334
Canine papillomatosis, 341
avian encephalomyelitis, 530
Canine parainluenza irus 2 disease,48
avian infectious bronchitis, 505-507
Canine parvovirus disease (CPV), 122-123, 169-170, 346-347,
avian infectious laryngotracheitis, 317-318
351-354
avian influenza, 79-80, 122-123, 150, 273, 466-468
Caprine arthritis-encephalomyelitis, 385-386
avian leukosis and sarcoima, 319, 375-378
Caprine herpesvirus diseas,12
avian papillomatosis, 341-342
Capripoxvirus,284-285
avian reticuloendotheliosis viruses,379-382
Capsids, 12
avian rubulavirus diseases, 421
formation of, 307
fowlpox and other avian poxvirus diseases, 288-289
structure of, 10-12, 125, 534
orthoreovirus infections of, 34, 394, 396-398
Cap snatching, 53
psittacine beak and teather disease, 358-360
Capsomers, 12
rotavirus infections, 402-404
Captive breeding, species involved in, 272
Birnaviridae, classification, virion properties, replication, 405-409
Carcinogenesis, 177. See also Oncogenesis
Blood and tissues, viral shedding via, 107
Carcinomas, 177
Bloodstream,viemiapreadvia9910
Cardiovirus,38
Blood transfusions, screening for viruses,197
diseases caused by members of genus, 531
Bluecomb disease. See Turkey bluecomb disease
Carp, spring viremia of, 444
Bluetongue, 398-400
Carricrs,172-173
B lymphocytes, 129
Case-control studies,247
Bodily surfaces, and entry of viruses, 94
Case-fatality rate, 246
Bolivian hemorrhagic fever, 492-494
Catarrhal fever. See Malignant catarrhal fever
Border disease, $66-567
Cats
Borma disease, 456-458
feline calicivirus disease, 536-538
Bornaviridae, classification, virion propertics, replication, 45S-458
feline enteric coronaviruses, 170-171
Bornavinus,455
feline fbrosarcoima, 380
Index
617
feline herpesvirus disease, 316
Certification of freedom from specific infections, 197
feline immunodefciency virus discase, 387-388
Channel catish virus disease, 303, 324
felinenusnit7
Chemical composition of virions, 15
feline leukemia and feline sarcoma, 379-381
anomalous features of vital genomes, 19
 fcline lymphosarcomas, 379
viral envelope lipids,19
feline mycloproliferative diseases, 379-380
viral genomic DNA, 16
feline panleukopenia, 348-351
viral genomic RNA, 18
optimum times for vaccinating, 238
viral glycoproteins, 19
vaccination schedule, 241
viral nucleic acids, 16
viral diseascs of, 595
viral proteins, 19
Cattle
Chemotherapy for viral diseases, 240-243
bovine coronavirus enteritis (winter dysentery), 501-502
Chickcn anemia virus disease, 358-361
bovine ephemeral fever, 441-442
Chickens. See also Poultry
bovine hrpesvirus ncphaliis312
eastern equine encephalitis in, 552-553
bovine herpesvirus infction,34
syndromes produced by avian retroviruscs, 375
bovine immunodeficiency virus disease, 389
vaccinatign methods for, 235-236
bovine leukemia, 382-383
Chlamydiae, physical propertics of, 7
bovine malignant catarrhal fever, 322-323
Cholera; hog, 567-568
bovine mammillitis, 311-312
Chordopoxvirinae, 24
bovinc papilomatosis, 337, 339-341
Choriomeningitis. See Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
bovine papular stomatitis,291
Chromatography. See Immunochromatography
bovine parainfluenza virus 3 disease, 416-418
Chronic viral disease, 170-174
bovine pneumonia, 162-163
Chronic wasting discase of deer and elk, 578
bovine polyomavirus infection, 342
Circoviridae, lassfcation,virion properties, replication, 35761
bovine respiratory syncytial disease, 426-427
Circoviruses,33,50,357-359
bovine rhinotracheitis, infectious, 309-311
Circovius infection, porcine, 31
bovine spongiform encephalopathy, 576-578
Cis-acting retroviruses, 187
bovine viral diarrhea, 563-566
Classical complement pathway, 138
cowpox,282-283
Clathrin-coated pits, 47
foot-and-mouth disease, 173, 521-528
Clinical disease,111,123-125,153-154
Ibaraki disease of, 402
Clinical systenis, 262
lumpyskin diseasc of, 285
Clonal expansion, 127
palyam virus disease of, 402
Cloning, molecular, 73
vaccination schedule of, 239
Cloning vectors, 73
viral diseases of, 587-588
Cloudy swelling, 90
Causal rclationship bctween virus and discase, 41
L9g suonaar suo
Cause-specihc mortality rate, 246
Coevolution, of virus and host, 76-78
CD4 molecules, 47, 140-141
Cognate interaction,133
Cell culture methods, 212-213
Cohort studies, 247-248
Cell cycle, 181
Coital cxanthema, equine, 315
Cell cycle control proteins, 180
Cold-adapted mutants, 63
Cell cycle targets, 181
live-virus vaccines from,227
Cell damage, mechanisms of, 828
Collection, packaging and transport of specimcns, 198
Cell death, programmed (apoptosis), 90
initial processing in the laboratory, 199
Cell differentiation, and resistance/susceptibility to viral infections,
Colorado tick fcver, 404
121
Coltivirus, 34, 404
Cell fusion, 85
Comparative medicine, 42
Cell-mediated hypersensitivity reactions, 158
Complement activation sequence, 139
Cell-mediated immunity, 127
Complementary determining reions,136
Cell membrane fusion, and syncytium formation, 85-86
Complementation, 67, 69
Cell membranes, cytopathic changes involving, 85-86
Complement pathway, See Alternate complement pathway; Classical
Cell surface proteins, 118
complement pathway
Cell-to-cell spread, 147
Complemcnt system,138139
Celltransformation, 82,1719
Complcx transcription units, 51
Celular components of the immune system, 127
Computations and databases, 245-247
antigen secifc reptors9
C-onc gcnes, 179
B lymphocytes, 129
Conditional lethal mutants, 63
cytotoxic T (Te) lymphocytes, 130
Conformation, 140
monocytes, macrophagcs and dendritic cells, 131
Conformational epitope, 140
natural killer cells, 131
Congenital immunodeficiencies, 141-142
T lymphocytes, 129
Congenital infections, 106
T helper (Th) lymphocytes, 130
Connective tissue tumors, 376
Cellular membranes, budding from, 58
Constant scrum-variable virus method, 217
Cellular oncogenes, 68
Constant virus-variable serum method, 217
activation of, 184-185
Contact inhibition, 179
Cellular receptors. See Receptors
Contagious pustular dermatitis, 289-290
Central European tick-borne cncephalitis virus, 558
Containmrent, 269
Central nervous system
Contaminating viruses,234-235
infections of, 104-105
Control. See Biological control; Disease control
routes of viral invasion of, 105
Coronaviridae, classification, virion properties, replication, 495-508
viral diseases of, 165-167
Coronavirus diseases, 37, 50-51, 163-165
Cercopithecine herpesviruses, 316-317
listed, 496
618
Index
Cost-benefit factors, 236-237
 Disease outbreaks, investigation and action in, 261-262
Cottontail rabbit papillomavirus, 335-336
Disease surveillance, 260-261
Cowpox,282-283
Disinfectants, 263-264
C particles, 364
DNA (deoxyribonncleic acid), 17-18, 177, 179
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, 477-478
DNA vaccines, 232-233
Critical population size, 254
DNA viruses, 48, 50
Cross-reactivation, 69
illustrated, 30
Cross-sectional studies, 248
replication of, 48
Cytocidal changes in virus-infected cells, 82-86
tumor induction by, 187-191
Cytokines, 91, 119, 127, 133-137
as vectors, 230-231
antagonism,137
Dogs
evasion of, 147
canine coronavirus diarrhea, 503-504
induction and function of, 136
canine distemper,167-169,423-45
listed, 120
canine hepatitis, 331-332
canine herpesvirus disease, 315-316
sources,targets,and ffects,listed15
canine papillomatosis, 341
Cytolysis, by immunologic mechanisms, 86
canine parainfluenza virus 2 disease, 418
Cytolytic infections, 81
canine parvovirus disease,346-347
Cytomegalovirus, 31
old dog encephalitis, 169, 173
Cytomegalovirus disease, porcine, 322
vaccination schedule for, 241
Cytopathic changes, 85-86
viral diseases of, 594
involving the cytoskeleton, 86
Dolphin distemper, 426
Cytopathic effects (CPEs), 82--85
Domestic animals, viral diseases of, listed by species, 585-600
Cytoskelcton, cytopathic changes involving, 86
Dot blot hybridization, 207
Cytotoxicity, 130. See also Antibody-complement-mediated cytotoxic-
Double-stranded nucleic acids, 16
ity; Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC)
Down-regulation of MHC antigen expression, 147
Cytotoxic T cells (CTL; Te), 130
Duck hepatitis, 530-531
Duck hepatitis B virus, 581
Dam vaccination, 238-240
Duck parvovirus disease, 356
Deer
Duck plague, 321
adenovirus disease of, 333
chronic wasting disease of, 578
Easterm equine encephalitis, 548, 552-553
epizootic hemorrhagic disease of, 402
Eastern equine encephaltis infection in pheasants, chickens and
Defective interfering mutants, special case of, 63
Defective viruses, 40, 376
whooping cranes, 552
Ebola hemorrhagic fever, 170, 273, 450-453
Deforestation, 256
Echoviruses 22 and 23, 38
Delayed hypersensitivity, 158
Deltaretrovirus (bovine leukemia and human T-lymphotropic vi
Eclipse period, 43, 45
Fctromelia (mousepox), 98, 283-284
ruses),382-383
Deltavirus, 581-583
Effcacy, vaccine, 225
Dendritic cells, 131. See also Langerhans' clls
Egg drop syndrome, 333-334
Electron microscopy
Dcngue, 561
Dependovirus,33
detection of viruscs by, 200-201
 Detection and quantitation of anti-viral antibodies (serologic diagno-
negative stain electron microscopy,6,359
sis), 216-219
thin-section, 10
enzyme immunoassay (EIA; enzyme linked immunosorbent assay,
of viruses, 7-8
ELISA1, 216
Electrophoresis, 217, 395
serum neutralization assay, 216-217
Elk, chronic wasting disease of, 578
hemagglutination-inhibition assay, 218
Embryos, infections of, 106-107
IgM class-specific antibody assay, 218
Embryo transfer screening for, 197
immunoblotting (western blotting), 217
Emerging viral discases, 270, 272-273
immunodiffusion, 218
Encephalitis
indirect immunofluorescence assay, 218
California (La Crosse virus) encephalitis, 482
Detergents, 20. See aiso Nonionic detergents
eastern equine, 549, 552-553
Determinantsofhostresistance/susetibility115119
Japanese, S59
cellular receptors and resistance/susceptibility, 116
Murray Valley (Australian), S59-560
 tumor necrosis factors, interfcrons and othcr cytokines and
old dog, 169, 173
resistance/susceptibility, 119
tick-borne, 562-563
Determinants of viraf virulence, 113
Venezuelan equine, 165
Diagnosis of viral infections, 193-224
western equine,553
Diarrhea viruses causing, 164
Encephalomyelitis
Direct identification of viral antigens, 201
avian,530
Direct identifcation of viral nucleic acids, 206
porcine hemagglutinating, 501
Direct idcntification of viruses, 200-206
Encephalomyocarditis virus infection, 531
Discovery-to-control continuum, 261
Encephalosis, equine, 402
Disease control through eliminating arthropod vectors, 264
Endangered species, 272
Disease control through hygiene and sanitation, 262
Fndemic disease, 246
Disease control through quarantine, 264
 geographical distribution of, 257, 266
Disease control through vaccination, 265
Endocytosis, 47. See also Receptor-mediated cndocytosis
 Disease incidence, seasons and animal managemcnt practices,
Endogenous pathway, 132-134
257-258
Endogenous retroviruses, 186-187
Index
619
Endonucleases, 70, 72. See aiso Restriction endonucleases
of reversc-transcribing viruses, 33-34
Enhancers, 53, 114
of RNA viruses, 34-40
Enteric viruses, 41
Fc (fragment crystallizable) fragments, 136
Enteritis, 151, 163
Fc receptors, 102
hemorrhagic, of turkeys, 334
Feline calicivirus disease, 536-538
torovirus, 163-165
Feline enteric coronavirus infection, 170-171
Enterovius,38
Feline fbrosarcoma, 380
Enterovirus diseases, 528-531
Felnehpsirusease
Lntomopoxvirinae, 28
Feline immunodefciency virus disease, 387-388
Entry routes, 93-97
Feline infectious peritonitis,170-172, 502-503
Lnvclope lipids, viral, 19
Feline leukemia and feline sarcoma, 379-381
Envelope proteins, glycosylation of, 54-55
Feline lymphosarcoma, 379
Envelopes, viral, 12-14
Felinemyeloprolifrative diseases,37930
Environmental pollution, 257
Feline oncovirus membrane-associated antigens (FOCMA), 380
Enzyme immunoassay (EIA), 193, 202-205, 216
Feline panleukopenia,123,3431
Enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 193, 202-205, 216
Fetus, infections of, 106-107
Ephcmeral fever, bovine, 441-442
Fever, and resistance/susceptibility to viral infections, 121
Ephemerovirus,35
Field investigation, 261
Epidemic diarrhea, porcine, 501
Filoviridae,classifcation, virion properties,replication,447-453
Epidemic disease, 246
Filter hybridization methods, 207
Fpidemiologic and economic awareness, 197
Filtration of viruses, 7
Epideniologie criteria, grouping viruses on the basis of, 41
Fingerprinting, oligonucleotide, 211-212
Epidemiology, 245
Fish
mathematical modeling,249
channcl catfish virus disease, , 303, 324
molecular, 72, 247
herpesvirus diseases of, 324-325
of viral diseases, 245-258
infectious pancreatic necrosis of,409
Episomes, 82
lymphocystis and related diseases of, 298-299
Epithelial surtaces, localized infection spreading on, 98
pancrcatic necrosis of, 409
Epitopes, 8, 127. See also Antigenic determinants
retrovirus diseases of, 383
tmasking of, 147-148
rhabdovirus diseases of, 440, 444
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease of deer, 402
spring viremia of carp,444
Epsilonretrovirus, diseases caused by members of genus,34,383
viral discases of, $97
Fpsilonretrovirus [fish rctroviruses), 33
viral erythrocytic necrosis, 299
Equine abortion, 314
Flaviviridae, 39-40, 555-569
Equine adenovirus disease, 332-333
Flaviviridae, classification, virion propcrties, replication, 555-569
Equine arteritis virus, genome and transcription strategy of, 511
Flaviviruscs,39-40,51,76, 556-559
Fquine coital exanthema, 315
Floating genus Deitavirus (hepatitis D virus), 582
Equine encephalitides, 549-554
Fluorescent antibodies (immunofluorescence), 201-202
Fquine encephalosis, 402
 FOCMA. See Feline oncovirus membrane-associated antigens
Equine herpcsviruses, 305-306,324
Fomites, 250
Equine infectious aneimia, 386-387
Foot-and-mouth disease, 173, 521-528
Equine infuenza, 161-162,463-464
airborne transmission of, 527
Equine morbillivirus disease, 425-426
model of an epidemic of, 250
Fquine papilomatosis and sarcoids, 341
"Forcign animal diseases,” 260
Equine rhinopneumonitis,314-315
68-8sp axd uepe xo
Equine rhinovirus 1 infection, $28
Frog virus 3 disease, 299
Equine rhinovirus 2 infection, 531-532
Functional genomics, 72
Equine viral arteritis, 511-513
Fusion of virus with plasma membranc, 47
Fradication of viral discases, 259-273
Fusion proteins, 14
Erythroblastosis, 376
Erythrovirus,33
Ethylencimine. See Acetylethyleneimine
Gallid herpesviruses, 317-321
Etiology, 42, 248, 261
Gammaherpesvirinae,31,303
Fukaryotes, cxpression of viral proteins in, 228-229
diseases caused by members of subfamily,31,322-324
Evolution
tumors caused by members of subfamily, 190
coevolution of virus and host, 76-78
Gammaretrovirus, diseases caused by members of genus, 34,
of infuenza A viruses, 78-80
379-382
viral genetics and, 61-80
Gastroenteritis of swinc, transmissible, 499-501
Exocytosis,58-59
Genc amplification
Exogcnous nondefective viruses, 375-376
 by isothcrmal amplification, 211
Exogenous pathway, 132-134
oncogene activation via,185
Exogenous retroviruses, 186-187
by polymerase chain reaction, 208
Exotic disease research and control, 197
Gene constellation, 123
Exotic viruses, 255
Gene deletion, attenuation of viruses by, 228
Expression of viral proteins, 228-229
Genetic drift/antigenic drift, 79, 149
Expression vectors, 147. See aiso Cloning vectors
Genetic engineering, 73
Eye, infective viruses, listed, 96-97
Genetic instability, 234
Genetic recombination berween viruses, 67-69
Genetic shift/antigenic shift, 78-79
Fab (fragment antigen-binding) fragments, 136
Genctie variation
Factors affecting vaccine efficacy and safety, 233
 and viral evolution, 78-80
Families
Genital tract, infected viruses, listed, 96-97
of DNA viruscs, 24-33
viral shedding from, 108
620
Index
Genome rescue, 69
nosocomial, 252
Genomics, functional, 72
z0onotic,252-253
Genotype, classifcation of mutants by, 62
Hormone receptors, retroviral oncoproteins acting as, 182-183
Geographic distribution
Hormones, and resistance/susceptibility to viral infections, 121
of endemic diseases, 526-527
Horses
investigating, 248-249
African horse sickness, 400-402
Global warming, 257
eastern equine encephalitis, 548, 551-552
Glycoproteins, 14, 19
equine abortion, 314
Glycosylation, of envelope proteins, 54-55
equine adenovirus disease, 332-333
Glycosylation sequences, 72
equine coital exanthema,315
Goats
equine encephalitides, 549-554
caprine arthritis-encephalomyelitis, 385-386
equine encephalosis, 402
caprine herpesvirus disease, 312
cquine herpesvirus infection, 306, 324
goatpox,284-285
equine infectious anemia,386-387
vaccination schedule for, 239
equine influenza, 161-162, 463-464
viral diseascs of,589-590
equine morbillivirus disease, 425-426
Good manufacturing practices (GMP), 233
sesp sdd 
Gouse parvovirus discase, 356
equine rhinopneumonitis, 314-315
Groupings of viruses on the basis of cpidemiologic criteria, 41
equine rhinovirus infection, 528
Growth curve, one-stey, 43-44
cquine viral arteritis, 511-513
Growth factor reccptors, retroviral oncoproteins acting as, 182-183
vaccination schedule for, 240
Venezuelan equine encephalitis, 165, 553-554
viral diseases of, 593-594
Hlantavirus, 36-37
western cquine encephalitis, 553
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, 481-482
Host cell genome, viral genomes integrated into,148
Heat lability, 234
Host cell mRNAs, inhibition of processing of, 83
Helical symmetry, 13
Host cell nucleic acid synthesis, inhibition of, 83
Helper T' cells (Th cels), 130
Host cell protein synthesis, inhibition of, 83, 85
Hemadsorption, 86, 213
Host cell RNA transcription, inhibition of, 83
Hemagglutination, 86, 213
Host defense mechanisms, and viral strategies, 145-159
Hemagglutination-inhibition,218-219
Host range, mutations in, 63, 169
Hemagglutinin, inftuenza, 12
Host resistance/susceptibility
Hemangioma, 376
determinants of, 115-119
Hematopoietic system, infections of, 105-106
interplay with viral virulence, 111-112
Hemorrhagic enteritis of turkeys, 334
physioiogic factors affecting, 119-122
Hemorrhagic fevers, 271, 492-494
Hosts, virus coevolving with, 76-78
Bolivian, 492-494
Host specificity and tissue tropism, 97
Brazilian, 492-494
Human disease, 458. See aiso zoonoses
Ebola, 170, 450-453
African horse sickness, 402
Marburg, 450-453
Argentine hemorrhagic fever, 493-494
Hermorrhagic fever with renal syndrome, 478-481
avian influenza, 467-468
Hemorrhagic septicemia, viral, 442-443
Bolivian hemorrhagic fever, 493-494
Henle-Koch postulates, 42
borna disease, 458
Hepacivirus,40
Brazilian hemorrhagic fever,493-494
Hepadnaviridae,33,581-583
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, 478
Hepatitis
Ebola hemorrhagic fever, 452-4.5.3
duck,530-531
equine encephalitides, S54
infectious caninc, 331-332
equine morbillivirus diseasc, 426
Hepatitis B virus, 582
foot-and-mouth discase, 527-528
Hepatitis D virus, 582
hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, 482
Hepatovirus,38
hermorrhagic fever with renal syndrome, 480-481
Flerd immunity, 265
simian inmunodeficiency virus discase, 388
Herd-level diagnosis, 197
swine influenza, 465-466
lerpesridae,classifcationirion propeti,elication
Venczuelan hemorrhagic fever, 493-494
Herpesvirus diseases
vesicular stomatitis, 439
bovine, 312, 323-324
Human Genome Project, 71
canine, 315-316
Human inmunodefciency virus (HIV), 368, 371-372
caprinc, 312
Humoral immunity, 136, 141
equine, 324
Hybridization, 206-208. See also In situ hybridization
fish and mollusks, 324-325
Hybridoma cells, 86
recurrent, 172-173
Hygiene and sanitation, disease control through, 262-264
unclassified, 324--325
Hyperimmunization, 236
Hexons (hexamers), 12
Hypersensitivity reactions, in viral infections, 156-158
Histopathology, diagnosis of viral infections by, 199
Hypervariable regions, 138
Hog cholera, 567-568
Horizontal transmission, 249-253
airborne, 250-251
Iatrogenic sources of infection, 97, 252
arthropod-borne, 251-252
Ibaraki disease of cattle, 402
common vehicle, 250
Icosahedral symmctry, 12-13
by direcr contact, 249-250
Icosahedrons, 14
iatrogenic, 252
Ietalurid herpesvirus 1, 324
by indirect contact, 250
IgM class-specic antibody assay, 218-219
Index
621
Immune complcx-mediated cytotoxic reactions, 157-158
Infectious anemia, equine, 386-387
Immune cytolysis, of virus-infected cells, 140
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis, 309-311
Immune decoy, 147-148
Infectious bronchitis,avian,05507
Immune effector cells, destruction of, 147
Infectious bursal discasc of chickens, 406-409
lmmune response (ir) genes, 11s-116
Infectious canine hepatitis, 331-332
lmmunc response to viral infcctions, 127-144
Infectious dose 50 (IDso), 112
Immune surveillance, 127
Infectious hematopoietic necrosis444
Immune system
Infectious laryngotracheitis, avian, 31738
cellular components of, 127-131
Infectious pancreatiecrosisffish409
infeetion-induced damage to,154155
interactions following virus infection, 128
Infectivity,period of,246247
subcellular components of, 131-139
Inflamnatory T cells, 130
viruses that infect, 114
Influenza
Immunity
avian, 79-80, 122-123, 150, 273, 466-468
cell-mediated, 127
cquine, 161-162,463-464
epidemiologic aspccts of, 258
Influenzavirus A,36
herd, 265
Influenzavirus B,36
humoral, 136
Influenzavirus C.36
maternal, 142
Inhibition, 83, 85
passivc, 142-144
lnnate resistance, 111
to reinfection, 142
Inoculation site rcactions, 235
Immunoassays, 193,202-205,216,219
In ovo vaccination for chickens, 235-236
Immunoblotting, 217-218
Insertional mutagenesis, oncogenc activation via, 184
Immunochromatography, 203,205
In situ hybridization, 207
Imnunodeficiencies, congenital, 141-142
Interference, 90
Imnunodiffusion, 20s-206, 218
Interferons, 90-92, 119
Immunoelectrnmicrosopy,detectionofvirusesby01
Interlcukins, 127
Immunofluorescence assay, 201-202
International agcncies,20,225,260-262,421
Imnunogenicity,233,249
 International-level diagnosis, 197-198
Immunoglobulin A (IgA), 138
Intestinal tract
Immunoglobulin G (lgG), 136, 138
direct damage to, 151
Immunoglobulin M (lgM), 138
discascs of cattle, 588
lmmunoglobulins, 127, 136
diseases of goats, 590
conccntrations in mammalian colostrum and milk, 143
diseases of horscs, $94
structure of, 138
diseases of shcep, S90
Immunohistochemistry, 202
diseascs of swine, 592
 Immunologically privilegcd tissues, sequestration in, 148
cntry via,94-9S
 Immunologic mechanisms, cytolysis by, 86
infcctions of, 103-104
Irmtnunologic memory, 127, 139
viruses, listed, 95
Immunologic tolerance, 148
viral shcdding from, 107
Immunopathology, 15S-156
 Intracellular signal transducers, retroviral oncoproteins acting as,
Immunoperoxidase staining, 202
183
Immunosorbent assay, enzyme-linked, 202-203
In utero infection, 148, 158, 173-174
Immunostimulating complexes (ISCOMs), 233
Investigation and action in disease outbrcaks, 26122
Immunosuppression, 147
lonic environment, and pH, 20
Inapparcnt infections,111
Iridoviridae,claifcation,virin properties, relication,29300
Incidence rate (attack rate), 245, 246
Iridoviruses,48,50,293-295
Inclusion bodies, 87, 397
ISCOMS. See Immunostimulating complexes
Incubation period, 246
lsothcrmal amplifcation, gene amplification by, 211
Index cases, 246
Indirect immunofuorescence, 202
Intection-induced damage, to immune system, 154-155
Jaagsiektc, 378
Infections. See also Viral infections
Japanesc encephalitis, S59
abortive, 81
Jernbrana disease, 389
certifying freedom from,197
chronic,153
congenital, 106
Knockout mice, 134
cytocidal, 81
Knowledge-based practiccs, 259
inapparent, 111
Koch's postulates, 41
latent,82,153,172-173
Kupffer cclls, 101
Imechanisms of, 93-109
multiple, 122
multiplicity of infection (MOl), 43
Laboratory animals
noncytocidal, 86, 87, 145
viral adaptation in, 66-67
persistent, 82,153-154,255
viral diseases of, 598
productive, 81
Laboratory hazards, 222
slow,153,155
Laboratory diagnosis
subclinical, 111
initial, 199
superinfection, 152--153
interpretation of fndings,215, 220-221
systemic, 167
safety in, 221-223
with viral shedding, 107-108
La Crosse virus, 482
without shedding, 107-108
Lactate dchydrogenase-elevating virus infection of mice, 514-515
622
Index
Lagomorphs, viral diseases of, 598
Maturation and rclcase
Iugovirus, 39
of envcloped viruses, 58-59
Langerhans' cells, 131
 of nonenveloped viruses, 57-58
Lassa fever, 489, 491-492
Maximum containment laboratory, 221
 Late irmmunopathologic consequences, with chronic infections, 156
Measles virus, 255, 411
Latency associated transcripts, 172
Mechanical transmission, 256
Latent infections, 82, 153, 172-173
Mechanisms of infection of major target organs and tissues, 102
Latcx particle agglutination, 205
Mechanisms of survival of viruses in nature, 253
I.entivirus, 59, 366
Mechanisms of viral entry into the body, 93
close phylogenetic relationship among, 384
 Mechanisms of viral oncogenesis, 177
diseases caused by members of genus, 34, 383-389
Mechanisms of viral spread in the body, 97
replication of, 370, 372-373
 Mechanisms of virus shedding, 107
Leporipoxvirus, diseases caused by members of genus, 28, 286-287
Membrane fusion, 147
Lethal dose 50 (1.Dso), 112, 115
Memory T cells, 139
Lethal intestinal virus disease of infant mice, 504-506
Metapneumovirus,35
Leukemias, 177
Metastasic tumors, 177
bovine, 382-383
MHC class I molecules, 132, 133
murine, 381
MHC class II molecules, 132, 133
Leukoses, 177
MHC restriction, 131
avian, 319, 375-378
Mice. See also Rodents
Lifelong carrier status, 172-173
lactate dehydrogenase-elevating virus infection of, 514-515
Ligands, 15, 113
nudc, 141
L.ipid solvents, 20
pneumonia virus of, 427-428
Liposomes, 233
transgenic, 75
Livestock transportation, increased long-distance, 257
viral diseases of, 598
Live-virus vaccines, 226-227
Milk
Longitudinal studies, 247
transfer of natural immunity via, 143
Long-term herd studies, 248
viral shedding in, 108
Long terminal 1epeats (LTRs), 57, 181
Mink
Louping ill, 563
Alcutian disease of, 355
Lumpyskin disease of cattle, 285
mink cnteritis, 355
Lymphatic spread of infection, 99
transmissible encephalopathy of, 578
Lymphocryptovirus. 31
Molecuiar chaperones, 54
Lymphocystis and related discases of fish, 298-299
Molecular epidemiology, 72, 247
Lymphocystivirus, 31
Molecular mass [M,), 608
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis viral infection, 173-174, 488-491
Molecular mimicry, 155-156
Lymphoid leukosis, 375
Molecular pathogenesis, 113
Lymphokines, 91, 127, 134
Molluscipoxvirus, diseases caused by members of genus, 28, 287
Iymphomas, 177
Molluscum contagiosum, 287
Lymphomatosis
Mollusks, herpesvirus diseases of, 324-325
ocular, 318
Monkeypox, 284
visceral, 375
 Monkeys. See Nonhuman primates
Lymphoreticular system, infections of, 10s-106
Monoclonal antibodies, 203
Lymphosarcoma, porcine, 381
Monocytes, 131
Lyssavirus, 35,431
Monolayer of cells, 83
confluent, 83
Mononegavirates, order, 35-36, 76
Macaques
distinguishing characteristics of families of, 412
B virus diseasc of, 316-317
Monopartite nucleic acids, 16
type D retrovirus disease of, 378-379
Morbidity rate, 245-246
Macrophages, 116, 131
Morbillivirus,35
destruction of, 147
Morbillivirus disease, equine, 425-426
viral interactions with, 101-102
Morphological units, 12
Maedi/visna disease, 175-176, 383-385
Mortalityrate245-246
Major histocompatability complex (MHC) proteins, 115, 129,
Motifs, short sequence, 72
131-133
Mouse hepatitis, 504-506
Malignant catarrhal fever, bovine, 322-323
Mouse hepatitis virus, 498, 499
Malignant tumors, 177
Mouscpox, 98, 283-284
Mammillitis, bovine, 311-312
Mucosal diseasc, 564-565
Mapping. See aiso Genetic mapping
 Multifactorial deteriminants, 111
recombination, 72-73
Multigenic determinants, 111
resriction endonuclease, 72, 211-212
Multipartite nucleic acids, 16
viral genomes, 70-73
Multiple infections, 122
Marble spleen disease of pheasants, 334
Multiplex polymerase chain reaction methods, 209
Marburg hemorrhagic fever, 450-453
Multiplicity of infection (MOI), 43
Marburg virus, 451, 452
Multiplicity reactivation, 69
Marek's disease, 318-321
Multistep oncogenesis, 191
Mastadenovirus, 32, 329
Multistep signal transduction pathways, 184
Matcrnal antibodics, 142-144
Murine leukemias/sarcomas, 381
Maternal immuaity, 142
Murine lcukermia virus, 365
Mathematical modeling, epidemiological, 249
Murine parainfluenza virus 1 (Sendai virus) disease, 418-419
Matrix proteins, 14
Muromegalovirus, 31
Index
62.3
Murray Valley (Australian) encephalitis, 559-560
 Nonspecifc pathophysiologic changcs in viral diseases, 158
Mutagenesis, 64-65
Nonspecifc resistance, 111
insertional, 184
 Nonstructural proteins, 19
site-directed, 65-66, 228
Nontariff trade barriers, 248
Mutants
Nosocomial transmission, 252, 262-263
 antibody escape, 62
 Notifiable diseascs, 247
cold-adapted, 63
Novirhabdovirus, 35
conditional lethal, 63
Nuclear transcription factors, retroviral oncoprotcins acting as, 183
genotype classification of, 62
Nucleic acid synthesis, 83
host range, 63
Nucleocapsids, 12
phenotype classification of, 62-63
Nude mice, 141
plaque,62
Nutritional status, susceptibility to viral infections and, 119, 121
temperature-sensitive, 63
Mutation rates, 63-64
Mutations, 62-67
Ocular lymphomatosis, 318
 deletion mutations, 64
Okazaki fragments, 56
 oncogene activation via, 185
Old dog encephalitis, 169, 173
point mutations, 62
suppresser mutations, 62
 Oligonucicotide fingerprinting and restriction endonuclease mapping.
temperature-sensitive mutations, 63, 227
211-212
Oncogene activation, 184-185
typcs of, 62-63
Mycoplasmas, physical properties of, 7
Oncogencs, 179-184
Myeloblastosis, 376
celllar ncogenes,68,1845
Myelocytomatosis,376
protooncogenes, 179, 611
Myxomatosis, 76-78, 286-287
viral oncogcnes, 68
Oncogenesis, 177. See also Viral oncogenesis
mechanisms of, 187
Nairobi sheep disease, 477
multistep, 191
Nairovirus,37
Oncogenic viruses, 41
National livestock industries, security for,223
Oncology, 177
Oncoproteins, 179-181
Natural killer (NK) cells, 131
cell cycle targets of, 181
Natural passive immunity, 142-143
retroviral, 181-184
Natural resistance, 111
One-step growth curve, 43
Necrosis, 90
attachment, 46
Negative sense, 19
fusion with the plasma membrane, 47
Negative stain (negative contrast) clectron microscopy, 9, 359
receptor-mediated endocytosis, 47
Neoplastic consequences, with chronic infections, 156
uncoating, 47
Nerves. See aiso Central nervous system
uptake (penetration), 47
viral infection via, 102
Oral mucosa, infective viruses, listed, 96
 Nested-sct polymerase chain reaction methods, 209
Orbivirus,34
Nested-set transcription, 497, 509
diseases caused by members of genus, 34, 394, 398-402
Neuraminidasc, 116-117
Orf, 289-290
Neurolymphomatosis, 318
Oropharynx
Neutralization
entry via, 94~95
of viral infectivity, 140, 214
viral shedding from, 107
serum neutralization assay, 216-217
Neutralizing antibodies, 147-148
Orphan viruses, 391
Orthohepadnavirus,33
Newcastle disease, 419-421
Orthomyxoviridae, classification, virion propcrties, replication,
New viruses, 270
Nidovirales, order, 37-38, 76
459-468
Orthomyxoviruses, 50, 460-463
Nomenclaturc, 24, 40-41
Nonarthropod-borne zoonotic viruses, listed, 253
Orthopoxvirus
Noncultivableirusesgeneticaasisf6
diseases caused by memmbers of genus, 28, 282-284
Noncytocidal changes, in virus-infected cells, 86-87
illustrated, 280
Noncytocidal infection. See aiso Cytocidal infections
Orthoreovirus, 34,394,396-398
effects on cell function, 86-87
Osteopctrosis, 375
evasion by, 145
Ovine progressive pneumonia, 175-176, 383-385
Nonhuman primates
Ovine pulmonary adenomatosis Jaagsiekte), 378
B virus disease of macaques, 316--317
monkeypox, 284
simian hemorrhagic fever, 515
Packaging sequenccs, 57
simian immunodeficiency virus diseasc, 388
 Packaging signals, 12
simian varicella, 317
Packaging specimens, 198
type D retrovirus disease of macaques, 378-379
Palindromic sequenccs, 72
viral discascs of, 599
Palyam virus discase of cattle, 402
Nonneutralizing antibodies, induction of, 148
Pancreatic necrosis of fish, infectious, 409
 Nonpathogenic viruses, 111
Pandemic diseasc, 246
Nonpermissive cells, 81
Papillomas, 340
 Nonproductive (abortive) infections, 81
Papillomatosis, 339-342
Nonreplicating virus vaccines
Papillomavirus, 32
adverse cffects from, 235
discases caused by members of genus, 32, 338-342
native antigen, 227-228
host responses in, 339
624
index
listed, 36
Polarity of viral budding, 87
tumors induced by, 189
Polioencephalomyelitis, porcine, 529
Papovaviidae, clasifcation irion prperies, reication, 3334
Pollution, environmental, 257
Papules, 104
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods, 193, 208-211. See also
Parainfluenza virus 2 disease, canine, 418
Multiplcx polymerase chain reaction methods; Nested-sct poly-
Paraintlucnza virus 3 diseasc, 414
merase chain reaction methods
bovine, 416-418
Polyomavirus, 32
Paramyxoviridae, classifcation, virion propcrties, replication,
 bovine infection, 342
411-428
diseases caused by meinbers of genus, 32, 342
Paramyxovirinae,35
tumors induced by, 188-189
Paramyxoviruses, 50, 273, 412-417
Polyploidy, 68-69
Parapoxvirus,24
Polyproteins, 51
diseases caused by members of gcnus, 28, 289-291
P1/eIF-2a kinases, 91
illustrated, 280
Population movements, 256
Parechovirus,38
Porcine circovirus infection, 358, 361
Parvoviridae, classfcation, virion ropertis, replication, 3436
Porcine cytomegalovirus disease, 322
Parvovirus diseascs
Porcine enterovirus diseases, 529-530
canine,122-123,169-170,346-348,351-354
Porcine epidemic diarrhea, 501
duck,356
Porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus diseasc, 501
goose,356
Porcine lymphosarcoma, 381
manifestations of, 344
Porcine parvovirus disease, 354-355
porcine, 354-355
Porcine polioencephalomyelitis, 529
Passive immunity, 142-144
Porcine respiratory and reproductive syndrome, 513-514
Passive immunization, 142, 236
Porcine rubulavirus discase (La-Piedad-Michoacan-Mexico),
Pasteur's influcnce, 4
421
 Pathogenesis of viral diseases: representative model diseases,
Porpoise distemper, 426
161-176
Posttranseriptional processing, 53-54
Postranslational cleavage, 55
nisms,145-159
Potency issues, 249
Pathogenicity, 111
Poultry
Pathophysiologic basis of discase, 145
chicken anemia virus diseasc, 359-361
Pathophysiologic changes in viral discases
chickens, eastern equine encephalitis in, 552-553
nonspeciic,158
duck hepatitis, 530-531
without tissue and organ damage, 151-152
duck parvovirus disease, 356
Penctration, 47
duck plague, 321
Pentons (pentamers), 12
fowlpox and other avian poxvirus diseases, 288-289
Peplomers (spikes), 14, 19
goose parvovirus disease, 356
Period of infectivity,246-247
hemorrhagic enteritis of turkeys, 334
Peritonitis, feline infectious, 170-172, 502-503
infectious bursal disease of, 406-409
Permissive (nonpermissive) cells, 81
marble spleen disease of phcasants, 334
Permissive temperature, 63
orthoreovirus infections of, 396-398
Persistent infections, 82
quail bronchitis, 334
and chronic damage to tissues and organs, 153-154
schedule for vaccination of, 242
partern of, 255
table of viral diseases of, 596
Peste des petits ruminants, 423
turkey bluecomh disease, 507
Pestivirus, 40
turkey hepatitis, $31
diseascs caused by members of gcnus, 563-568
turkey rhinotracheitis, 428
Phcasants
vaccination methods for, 235-236
eastern cquine encephalitis in, 552-553
Poxviridae, aiatin, vinn rerte, reiatin, 279
marble splcen disease of, 334
Predictive value (of a test), 220
pH effects, 20
Prcgnancy
Phenotype classification of mutants by, 62-63
adverse effects, 235, 241
Phenotypic mixing, 68-69
and resistance/susceptibility to viral infections, 121
Phiebovirus,37
Prevalence rate, 245
 Phocine, dolphin, and porpoise distemper, 426
calculating,246
Physiologic factors affecting host resistance/susceptibilty,119122
Prevention of viral diseases, 259-273
Picornidlafctinirinprperislica,
Primary viremia, 100
Pigs. See Swine
Primates. See Nonhuman primates
Plague, duck, 321
Primcrs, 208
Plaque assays, 215
Prion protcin (PrP), 575
Plaque mutants, 62
Prions, classifcation, properties, replication, 571579
Pleiotropy, cytokine, 137
Privileged tissues. See Immunologically privileged tissues
Pneumonia
Probes, 207
bovine, 162-163
Procapsids, 57
ovine progressive, 175-176, 383-385
Productive (nonproductive) infections, 81
progressive,383-384
Programmed cell death. See Apoptosis
Pneumonia virus of mice, 427-428
Progressivc pneumonia, 383-384
Pneumovirinae, 20,35
Promoters, 53, 114
genus Metapneumovirus, 35, 428
Proofreading, 63-64
gcnus Pneumovirus, 35, 426-428
Prospective studies, 247
Pneumovirus,3.5
Proteins
Point mutations, 62
nonstructural proteins, 19
Index
62.5
oncoproteins, 179-184
diseases of goats, listed, 590
structural proteins, 19
diseascs of horses,listed,594
subunits of, 12
diseasesfhelist
synthesis of, 83, 85
diseases of swine, listed, 592
viral, 19
Research, surveilance in suppott f97
Protooncogenes, 179
Reservoir hosts, zoonoses, 252, 271
Proviral DNA, 177, 179
Resistance, 111, 113-122
Proviruses, 186
host resistance/susceptibility, 115-122
Pseudocowpox, 290-291
interferons, 90-92, 119
Pscudo-lumpyskin disease, 311-312
Respiratory and reproductive syndrome, porcine, 513-514
Pseudorabies, 103, 312-314
Respiratory syncytial disease, bovine, 426-427
Psittacine beak and feather disease, 358-360
Respiratory tract
Pulmonary adenomatosis, ovine (Jagsickte), 378
direct damage to,149, 151
diseases of cattle, 587
diseases of goats, 589
Quail bronchitis, 334
diseascs of horses, 593
Qualitative virus strain differcnces, 111
discases of sheep, 589
Quantitation
diseases of swine, 591
of antiviral antibodies, 216-219
entry via,93-94
viral, 214-215
infections of, 102-103
Quantitative polymerase chain rcaction methods, 210, 611
viruses, lisred, 95
Quantitative virus strain differences, 111
viral shedding from, 107
Quarantine, disease control through, 264-265
Respirovinus,35
Quasispccies, 64
Responsive elements, 53
Restricted animal viruses, 223, 478, 493-494
Restricted viral gene expression, 147
Rabbit hemorrhagic disease, 535, 538-540
Restrictinndonleas,mappin72,1
Rabbits
Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), 211-212
in Australia and New Zealand, 76-78, 540
Reticuloendotheliosis, avian, 379-382
viral diseases, 598
Retrospective studies, 247
Rabies, 125-126, 165-167, 432-439
Retroviral oncoprotcins, 181-183
Raccoon rabics epidemic,437
Retroviridae, classification, virion properties, replication, 363-389
Radioimmunoassay, 205-206
Retrovirus genomes, 185
Ranavirus, 31
Reverse gcnetics, 65
Rats. See aiso Rodents
Reverse-transcribing viruses, S0
sialodacryadenitis in, 505
Reverse transcriptase, 368
Reactivation, 67, 69
polymcrase chain reaction, 209-210
Reassortment, 67, 69
Rbabdoviridae, classification, virion properties, replication, 429-445
live-virus vaccines from, 227
Rhadinovirus, 31-32,190
Receptor-destroying enzyme, 116-117
Rhinopneumonitis, cquine, 314-315
Receptor-mediated endocytosis, 47
Rhinotracheitis, infectious bovine, 309-311
Receptors, 15, 116-119
Rhinovirus, 38, 88
antigen-specifc, 129
diseases caused by members of genus, 531
Fc receptors, 102
equine, 528,531-532
 Rickettsiae, physical properties of, 7
listed for animal viruscs, 117
1' cll receptors, 129
Rift Valley fever, 473-475
Recombinant DNA technology, 73-75
Rinderpest, 270, 421-423
Risk communications, 262
practical achievements of, 75
RNA (ribonuclcic acid), viral genomic RNA, 18-19
transgenic mice and, 75
RNA transcription, inhibition of host cell, 83
Recombinations (intramolecular), 67-68
RNA viruses, 50-51
mapping,72-73
illustrated, 30
Recurrent herpesvirus diseases, 172-173
replication of, 49
Redundancy, cytokine, 137
as vectors, 231
Reemerging viruses, 270
Rodents. See aiso Lagomorphs
Regulatory gcnes, 53
lactate dehydrogenase-elevating virus infecrion of mice, 514-515
Reinfection and immunity, 142
lethal intestinal virus diseasc of infant mice, 504-505
Release, S7-59
mouse hepatitis, 504-50.5
Reoviridae, clasifcation, virion properties, eplication, 391404
mousepox,283-284
Reoviruses, 392-396
pneumonia virus of mice, 427-428
Replication. See also Viral replication
rabbit hemorrhagic discasc, 538-540
strategies of, 44-45, 48-51
rodent parvovirus diseases, 35s-356
of viral DNA, 56
sialodacryadenitis of rats, 505
of viral RNA, S6-57
viral diseases of, 598
Replication-competent retroviruses, 185-186
Roseolovirus, 31
Replication complexes, 57
Rotavirus diseases, 34, 163-165, 394
Replication cycle, of retroviruses, 369
Rotavirus infections, of mammals and birds, 402-404
Replication-defective retroviruses, 185-186
Rotavirus typing, 395
Replicative interrmediate (RI), S6-57
Routes of entry, 93-97
Reproductive ratio (R), 236-237
Rubivirus,39
Reproductive system. See also Genital tract
Rubulavirus, 3S
diseases of cattle, listed, 588
Rubulavirus disease, 421
626
Index
Sanitation, disease control through, 262-264
cntry via, 95-98
San Migucl sea lion virus disease, 536
infections of, 104
Sarcoids, equine, 341
viruses, listed, 96
Sarcomas, 177
viral shedding from, 108
avian, 319, 375-378
Slow infections, 153, 155
murine, 381
Slowly progressive viral diseases, 174-176
Satellites, 28
Southern blot hybridization, 207-208
Serapie, 575-576
Speccies jumping, 272
Scasons, variations associated with, 257-258
Specificity [of a test), 220
Sccondary attack rate, 246
Specifc resistance, 111
Secondary hosts, clinical disease in, 313
Specimens, 198-199, 216
Secondary inmune response. See Anamnestic response
S phase, 181
Secondary viremia, 100
Spikes. See Peplomers
Secretory lgA (sIgA), 138
Splicing,53
Security for national livestock industries, 223
Spongiform cncephalopathy
Self-asscmbly, 12, 229
bovine,576-578
Sendai virus diseasc, 418-419
prions as agents of transmissible, 571-579
Sense
transimissible spongiform cncephalopathy (TSE), 571
ambisense, 50, 473, 487
Spring viremia of carp, 444
negative sense, 19
Spumavirus,34
positive sense, 18
St.Iouis encephalitis,560
Sensitivity (of a test), 220
Staining,immunoperoxidase,202
Sentinel studies, 248
Start-stop transcription, 52-53
Sequence analysis, 70-71
State-levcl diagnosis, 197-198
Sequences
Structural proteins, 19
complement activation, 139
Structural units, 12
glycosylation sequences, 72
Sturtering. See Start-stop transcription
mucleic acid, sequences, 70
Subassemblies, 12
packaging sequences, 57
Subclinical infections, 111
palindromic sequences, 72
Subepithelial surfaccs, lymphatic spread on, 99
Subviral agents, dfctive viruses, satellies, and prions,40
protein-nucleic acid, 72
protein-protein-binding,72
Suipoxvirus, diseases caused by members of genus, 28, 286
Surveillance, 260, 269
signal sequences, 72
disease surveillance, 260-261
 transmembrane sequcnces, 72
Sequence space, 65
for viral diseases, 197, 259-273
Susceptibility, 113-122. See also Host resistance/susccptibility
Sequcncing,70
SV40 virus, 67,337
uses in virology, 72
of viral genomes, 211
Swine
African swine fever, 295-298
Serocpideniology, 247
hog cholera, 567-568
Serologic diagnosis, 216-221
Seroprevalence, 216, 220
porcine circovirus infection, 361
porcine cytomegalovirus disease, 322
Serotypes, 216
Serum neutralization assay, 216-217
porcine enterovirus diseascs, 529-530
porcine epidemic diarrhea, 501
 Serum specimens, 216
Sheep
porcine hemagglutinating cncephalomyclitis virus disease, 501
porcine lymphosarcoma, 381
Nairobi sheep disease, 477
porcine parvovirus disease, 354-355
ovine progressive pneumonia, 175-176, 383-385
porcine polioencephalomyelitis, 529
ovine pulmonary adenomatosis (Jaagsiekte), 378
porcine respiratory and reproductive syndrome, 513-514
schedule for vaccination of, 239
porcine rubulavirus disease (La-Piedad-Michoacan-Mexico),421
shceppox, 284-285
swinepox, 286
tables of viral discases of, 589-590
transmissible gastroenteritis of, 499-501
Shipping fever. See Bovine pneumonia
vaccination schedule for,240
Short scquence motifs, 72
viral diseases of, 591-592
Shuttle vectors, 73
vesicular exanthema of, 535-536
Sialodacryadenitis of rats, 505
Swine infuenza, 464-466
Signal sequences, 72
Swine vesicuardiseas,29
Signal transduction, 183, 184
Syncytium, formation of, 85-86
Simian hemorrhagic fever, 515
Synthesis, of nucleic acids, 83
Simian immunodeticiency virus diseasc, 388
Synthetic peptide vaccines, 231-232
Sinian rotavirus SA11, 397
 Simian varicella, 317
Sumple transcription units, 51
Tanapox,287-288
Simplexvirus,31
Taq polymerases, 71
Single stranded nucleic acids, 16
Taxonomy, 41-42
Site-directed mutagenesis, 6S
terininology of, 24, 40-41
 attenuation of viruses by, 228
universal system of viral taxonomy, 25-28
Skin
T ecell receptors, 129-130
diseases of cattle, listed, 588
T cells, 129
dliseases of goats, listed, 590
Technology transfer, 262
diseases of horses, listed, 594
Temperature, affecting infectivity of viruses, 20
diseases of sheep, listed, $90
Teniperature-sensitive (ts) mutations, 63, 227
diseases of swine, listed, 592
Terniinology, 24, 40-41
Index
627
Test and removal programs, 197
 Ultrastructural changes in virus-infected cells, 89-90
Th cells. See Helper T cells
Unclassifed viruses
Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus infection, 531
arboviruses, 582
T helper (Th) lymphocytes, 130
herpesviruses, 324-325
Thick leg, 375
picornaviruses,S31
Tick-borne encephalitides, 562-563
Uncoating, 47-48
 Tissue and organ damage
Underattenuation, 234
direct, 149-151
Undifferentiated cells, 147
predisposing to secondary bacterial infection, 152-153
Unicellular microorganisms, physical properties of 
Tissue culture infectious dose 50 (TCIDsa), 217
Uptake (penetration), 47
Tissues, viral shedding via, 107
Urbanization, uncontrolled, 57
Tissue tropism, 97, 111
Urinary tract, viral shedding from, 108
T lymphocytes, 129-131, 141
TNF α and β, 119
Togavirilasfioniitlictn4
Vaccination
Togaviruses, $1,76,497,547-550
disease control through, 265-266
Torovirus diseases, 507
and inoculation site reactions, 235
Torovirus,37
against viral discases, 225-244
Toxic viral proteins, cytopathic effects of, 85
Vaccination methods, for chickens, 235-236
T particles, 63
Vaccination policy, 236-237, 270-272
Trans-acting retroviruses, 187
Vaccination schedules, 237-240
Trans and cis-acting genetic and molecular actions, 53
Vaccines
Transcapsidation. See Phenotypic mixing
approaches to design of, 226
Transcription, 51-54, 114
available and recormmended, 237-240
host cell RNA, S1-52
efficacy and safety of, 233-235
latency associated transcripts, 172
live-virus, 226-227
nuclear transcription factors, 183
nonreplicating native antigen, 227-228
regulation by viral DNA, 51-52
rabies, 438
by recombinant DNA, 228-233
regulation by viral RNA, S2-S3
start-stop,S2-53
trials, 249
Transcription maps, 52
Vaccinia virus, 230,281
Vaccinia virus disease (buffalopox), 282
Transcription units, S0-51
Transducrion, 187. See aiso Signal transduction
Variable domain, 136
Transformation, 82
Varicellovirus, 31
Vascular endothelial cells, viral interactions with, 102
Transgenesis, 75
Transgenic mice, and recombinant DNA technology, 75
Vectors
adenoviruses as, 331
Transgenic vectors, 73
cloning vectors, 73, 603
Translation, 54-56
DNA viruses as, 230-231
Translocation, 143, 272
poxviruses as, 73-75
Translocation cutoff, 143
in Rift Valley fever, 475
Transmembrane sequences, 72
recombinant DNA technology and, 73-75
Transmissible gastroenteritis of swine, 499-501
RNA viruses as, 231
Transmissible mink encephalopathy, 578
shuttle vectors, 73
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE). See Spongiform en-
 transgenic vectors, 73
cephalopathy
Venezuelan equine encephalitis, 165, 553-554
Transmission of disease, 251, 263
Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever, 492-494
Transovarial transmission, 256
Vertical transmission,25325256
Transporting specimens, 198
Vesicular diseases, differential diagnoses of, S25
Transstadial transmission, 256
Vesicular exanthema of swine, 534-S36
Travel, increased long-distance, 256-257
Vesicular sromatitis, 431, 439-441
Tropism. See Tissuc tropism; Viral tropism
Vesiculovirus, 35,431
Tumor (T) antigens, 188
Vesivirus,38-39
Tumor-associated transplantation antigens, 86, 177
Veterinary and zoonotic discases
Tumorigenesis, 177. See also Oncogenesis
universal taxonomy system for, 25-28
Tumor induction
viruses as etiologic agents of, 3-21
by DNA viruses, 187-191
Veterinary and zoonotic virology,as infectious disease sciences,
by retroviruses, 185-187
Viral adaptation, to cell culures or laboratory animals,667
Tuinor necrosis factors α and β, 119
Viral antigens
Tumors
bacteria as vectors for expression of, 229-230
benign, 177
direct identifcation of, 201-206
connective tissue, 376
processing (See Exogenous pathway)
malignant, 177
viruses as vectors for expression of,230-231
renal, 376
Viral arteritis, equine, S11-513
Tumor suppresser genes, and cell cycle control proteins, 180
Viral assembly and release, 57
Tumor viruses, 177
budding from celiular membranes, 58
Turkey bluecomb diseasc, 507
exocytosis, 58-59
Turkeys
maturation and release of enveloped viruses, 58
hermorrhagic enteritis of, 334
maturation and relcase of nonenveloped viruses, S7
hepatitis in, 531
Viral attachment proteins45116
rhinotracheitis in, 428
Viral central nervous system disease, 165-167
Turkeys, viral diseases of, 596
Viral chimeras, 231
Type D retrovirus diseasc of macaqucs, 378-379
Viral diarrhea, bovine, 563-566
628
Index
Viral diseases by domestic animal species, 585-600
Viral replication, 43-59
Viral diseases. See aiso Viral infections
adenoviruses,329-331
and bioterrorism, 273
arenaviruses, 487
of cats,595
arteriviruses, 509, 511
of cattle, 587
asfarviruses, 295
chemotherapy of, 240-243
astroviruses, 543-544
chronic, 170-174
birnaviruses, 406
controlling, 259-273
borna disease virus, 455
of dogs, 594
bunyaviruses, 473
by domestic animal species, 585-600
calciviruses, 534-535
emerging, 272-273
circoviruses, 358-359
epidemiology of, 245-258
coronaviruses, 497-499
eradication of, 259-273, 605
floviruses, 449
of fish, 597
flaviviruses, S58-559
of horses, 593
herpesviruses, 306-309
laboratory diagnosis of, 193-224
iridoviruses, 295
of laboratory rodents, 598
orthomyxoviruses, 460-463
of lagomorphs, 598
papoviruses,336-339
multisystem, 167-170
paramyxoviruses, 416
new and emerging, 197-198
parvoviruses, 345-347
of nonhuman primates, 598
picornaviruses, 521
nonspecific pathophysiologic changes in, 158
poxviruses, 281-282
pathogenesis of, 161-176
reoviruses, 394-396
of poultry, 596
retroviruses, 369-373
slowly progressive, 174-176
rhabdoviruses, 432
of swine, 591
togaviruses, 548-549
Viral dissemination, and resistance/susceptibility, 113-114
Viral replication cycle, 43-48
Viral DNA, 177, 179
Viral respiratory discase, 161-163
vaccines utilizing, 232-233
Viral shedding, 107-108
Viral envelope lipids, 19
Viral raxonomy, 23-42
Viral erythrocytic necrosis, 299
Viral tropism, and resistance/susceptibility, 113-114
Viral gcne expression, restricted, 147
Viral vaccines. See Vaccines
Viral genes interactions hetween products of, 69
Viremia
Viral genetics and evolution, 61-80
maintenance of, 102
Viral genomes
primary, 100
anomalous features of, 19
secondary,100
 integration into host cell genome, 148
spread via the bloodstrearm, 99-102
mapping,70-73
Virgin-soil epidemics, 255
proteins encoded by. 55
Virion properties, 7-20
scquencing,211
adenoviruses,328-329
structure of, 17
arenaviruses, 485-487
Viral genomic DNA, 17-18
arteriviruses, 509
Viral genomic RNA, 18-19
asfarviruses, 294-295
Viral hemorrhagic septicemia, 442-443
astroviruses, $43
Viral infections
birnaviruses, 405-406
diagnosis by histopathology, 199
 borna discase virus, 455
iceberg concept of, 112
bunyaviruses, 470-473
immune responses to, 127-144
calciviruses,S33-534
obligatory steps in, 94
circoviruses, 357-358
recovcry from, 141-142
coronavinuses, 496-497
serologic diagnosis of, 216-219
floviruses, 448-449
Viral infectivity, stability of, 19-20
flaviviruses, S56
Viral interactions
herpesviruses, 303-306
with macrophages, 101-102
iridoviruses, 294-295
with vascular endothelial cells, 102
orthomyxoviruses,460
Viral intestinal discase, 163-165
papoviruses, 336
Viral isolates, identification of, 213
paramyxoviruses, 412, 414-416
Viral lymphoreticular and hematopoietic discasc, 165
parvoviruses,345
Viral multisystem diseases, 167
picornaviruses, 520-521
Viral nomenclature, 40
poxviruses, 278,281
Viral nucleic acids, 16-19
reoviruses, 393-394
direct identification of, 206-211
retroviruses, 365-369
replication of, 56-57
rhabdoviruses, 430-432
Viral proteins, 19
togaviruses, 547-548
classes of, 55-56
Virions, 7-20
expression of, 228-229
chemical composition of, 15-19
postranslational cleavage of, 55
inactivated whole, 227-228
purified native, 228
inhibitors of attachment to cells, 122
purified naturally occurring, 228
symmetry of, 12
toxic, 85
Virion structure/function relationships, 14
Viral quasispecies. See Quasispecies
Viroids, 7
Index
629
Virokines, 113-115
x-ray crystallography of, 810
Virology
Virus factory (viroplasm), 24
as an infectious diseasc science, 3-6
Virus families, 16
founders of, 4-6
DNA viruses, 24-33
terminelogy of, 24, 40-41
properties distinguishing, 29
Viroplasm (virus factory), 24, 87, 397
reverse-transcribing viruses, 33-34
Virulence, 111. See also Viral virulence
RNA viruses, 34-40
Viruria, 108
Virus-induced cell death, apoptosis versus necrosis, 90
Virus-cell intcractions, 81-92
Virus-infected cells
Viruses
noncytocidal changes in, 86-87
arthropod-borne, 256
ultrastructural changes in, 89-90
-9 e'a jo aapa ai se,
Virus isolation
biccontrol of pes species using, 267268
 in animals and chick cmbryos, 214
characteristics of cells transformed by, 179
in cultured cells, 212-214
coevolving with host, 76-78
Virus-like particles (VLPs), 229
contaminating、234-235
Virus shedding, 107~108
damaging to tissues and organs, 149-153
Virus transmission, 249-253
defective, 40, 376
horizontal, 249-253
direct identifcation of, 200-201
vertical,253
electron microscopy of, 7-8
Visceral lymphomatosis, 375
as ctiologic agents of vcterinary and zoonotic diseases, 3-21
Visna, 384
exotic,255
V-onc gencs, 179, 181-183
genetics, 61-80
VPg,614
genomes. See Viral genomes
glycoproteins, 19
grouping on the basis of epidemiologic criteria, 41
Wesselsbron disease, 560-561
inclusion bodics, 85
Western blotting tests, 217-218
inducing tumors, listed, 178-179
Western equine encephalitis, 553
infections. See Viral infections
West Nile and Kunjin virus infections, S61.
mechanisms of infection and spread of, 93-109
Whooping cranes, eastern equine encephalitis in, $52-553
mechanisms of survival in nature, 61-62, 253-257
Winter dysentery. See Bovine coronavirus enteritis
morphology, 7-15
new,emerging, and recmerging,listed, 270272
nomenclature of, 40-41
Xenotransplantation, 197
noncultivable, 65-66
X-ray crystallography, of viruses, 810
nucleic acids, See Viral nucleic acids
oncogenes, 68
oncogenesis, 177-191
Yabapox, 287-288
orphan viruses, 391
Yatapoxvirus, diseases caused by members of genus, 28, 287-288
perspective on size of, 8
Yellow fever, 561-562
physical properties of, 7
proteins. See Viral proteins
proviruses, 186
Zoonoses, 115
quantitation of, 214-215
carly warning of, 197
replication. See Viral replication
universal taxonomy system for, 25-28
survival mechamisms, 61-62, 253-257
viruses as etiologic agents of, 3-21
taxonomy,23-24
Zoonotice transtmission, 252-253
as vectors for cxpression of viral antigens, 230-231
Zoonotic virology, as an infectious disease science, 3-6
virulence, 111-115, 122-126
Zoonotic viruses, 271
This Page Intentionally Left Blank