OPHTHALMIC
DISEASE
EIN
VETERINARY
MEDICINE
CHARLESL.MARTIN
UPDATED
ANDREVISED
TEXTAND
REFERENCES
MANSON
HPUBLISHING
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ltahc.taobao.co m
OPHTHALMIC
DISEASEIN
ETERINARY
MEDICINE
Charles L. Martin DVM, MS, DAcVO
Emeritus Professor
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Visiting Professor
Auburn University, Alabama, USA
MANSON PUBLISHING/THE VETERINARY PRESS
Softcover edition, with revisions, 2010
Copyright @ 2005, 2010 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 978-1-84076-118-4
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means without the
written permission of the copyright holder or in accordance with the
provisions of the Copyright Act 1956 (as amended], or under the terms of any
licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency.
33-34 Alfred Place, London WC1E 7DP, UK.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication
 may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A ClP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
Website: www.mansonpublishing.com
Commissioning editor: Jill Northcott
Project manager: Paul Bennett
Copy-editors: Ruth Maxwell and Peter Beynon
Cover and book design: Cathy Martin, Presspack Computing Ltd
Colour reproduction: Tenon &t Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed by: Grafos SA, Barcelona, Spain
Contents
Preface
5
4
 Problem-Based Management of Ocular
Emergencies
93
Contributors
6
Introduction
93
Blindness
94
Abbreviations
8
Principles of Ophthalmic Surgery
105
 Anamnesis and the Ophthalmic Examination
11
Introduction
105
Anamnesis
11
 Patient preparation for surgery
105
Ophthalmic examination
12
Anesthesia/sedation
105
References
38
Preparation of the surgical field
106
 Patient positioning and exposure of the globe 
107
2 Ophthalmic Pharmacology
41
Instrumentation
108
Routes of administration
41
 Postoperative care
112
Antimicrobial agents
45
References
112
Antiviral agents
48
Miotics (cholinergic agonists)
49
6
 Orbit and Globe
113
Mydriatics
51
Anatomy
113
 Beta adrenergic blockers
53
Vision in domestic animals
115
Diuretics
54
 Diseases of the orbit
116
Artificial tears
55
Diseases of the globe
131
Dyes
55
References
141
Topical anesthetics
56
Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors
56
Eyelids
145
Glucocorticoids
57
Introduction
145
Prostaglandin inhibitors (NSAIDs) and 
Anatomy
145
prostaglandin analogs
59
 Physiology
147
Antihistamines and decongestants
60
Diseases of the eyelids
148
Immunosuppressive drugs
61
References
179
Antifibrin agents
62
Viscoelastic agents
62
 Conjunctiva and Third Eyelid
183
References
9
Anatomy and physiology
183
Examination of the conjunctiva
184
3 Basic Ocular Pathology
71
Diseases of the conjunctiva: conj unctivitis
185
Overview of inflammation
71
Trauma-associated conditions
200
Acute inflammation
71
Miscellaneous conjunctival conditions
203
Chronic inflammation
80
 Congenital diseases of the third eyelid
204
Immune-mediated inflammation
84
Acquired diseases of the third eyelid
205
 Abnormal cell growth and neoplasia
86
Infectious causes of inflammation of the
References
91
third eyelid
210
Lacerations of the third eyelid
210
 Foreign bodies of the third eyelid
211
References
214
9   Lacrimal System
219
13 Lens
369
Anatomy and physiology
219
Anatomy and physiology
369
Diseases of the lacrimal apparatus
222
Diseases of the lens 
373
References
237
References
395
10 Cornea and Sclera
241
14 Vitreous and Ocular Fundus
401
 Anatomy and physiology
241
Vitreous
401
Diseases of the cornea
245
 Diseases of the vitreous
402
Diseases of the sclera
286
Ocular fundus
405
References
288
 Diseases of the retina and choroid 
413
 Diseases of the optic nerve
449
11 Anterior Uvea and Anterior Chamber
298
References
460
Anatomy and physiology
298
Diseases of the iris and ciliary body
303
15 Presumed Inherited Ocular Diseases
471
Altered aqueous humor
325
Introduction
471
Neoplasia of the iris and ciliary body
326
Acknowledge ments
472
References
330
References
484
12 Glaucoma
337
Appendix 1 - Systemic Disease Rule Outs
Introduction
337
Based on Ocular Lesions
489
 Anatomy and physiology
337
Clinical signs of glaucoma
340
Appendix 2 - Glossary
491
 Diagnosis of glaucoma
344
Classification of glaucoma
345
Appendix 3 - Additional References for
Therapy of primary glaucoma
356
Softcover Edition
495
 Therapy of secondary glaucoma
361
Therapy of absolute glaucoma 
362
Index
503
 Prophylaxis
364
References
364
Preface
This text is not meant as an encyclopedic answer to all
to point out deficiencies in our knowledge or point out
 veterinary ophthalmology questions, but rather to cover 
conflicting views of which the reader may not be aware.
the vast majority of questions which are likely to arise in
It is frightening to realize how little *hard data? are avail-
veterinary practice. The intent is not to make specialists
able in clinical veterinary medicine. We are reminded of
out of all who read this text, but to help the generalists
this by our clients who daily ask specific questions which
to make better informed decisions regarding their
we cannot answer. The latest journal article or the most
patients. That information may allow the practitioner to
recent continuing education program does not
handl the problem with more confidence, refer the
automatically take precedence over previous data and
patient with a better workup in a more timely manner, or 
clinical views.
may simply allow more accurate client education
In addition, I wish to salute those many individuals
regarding an ocular condition or treatment.
who over the years have dedicated their careers to basic
While a small number of ophthalmologists feel they
 and clinical ophthalmic research and publication of
should see all patients with eye problems, the reality is
scholarly work upon whose shoulders this book rests. I
that the general practitioner can competently manage a
hope to have done justice to their endeavors and
variety of ocular conditions if well informed. The
 apologize to any whose work of origination of data
and/or theories have inadvertently been omitted.
additional help. Having worked in a referral institution
 Lastly, I wish to thank Manson Publishing for having
my entire career, I have come to realize the best referrals
enough faith in the project to pursue it to completion,
come from the best informed general practitioners.
 Jill Northcott for her encouragement to publish it, and 
Dogma regarding clinical conditions becomes easily
Paul Bennett and Ruth Maxwell whose meticulous
esta blished, often without good scientific validation. At
attention to detail and patience with my response to
times the busy practitioner may find more information in
queries in the copy editing process made the manuscript
this book than he/she wanted to know about a subject. I
infinitely better.
realize that we are all looking for one or two sentence
answers to all of our questions, but it is also important
Charles L. Martin
Contributors
K. PAIGE CARMICHAEL DVM, PHD, Dm. ACVP, DACVP
Associate Professor
 Department of Veterinary Pathology
 College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia
Athens, USA
KRISTINA R. VYGANTAS DVM, Dip. ACVO
Staff Ophthalmologist
Veterinary Eye Care
Bessemer, Alabama, USA
R. DAVID WHITLEY DVM, MS, Dip. ACVO
Professor and Head of Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
DEDICATION
I would like to dedicate this book to my wife, Marilyn, and to my family.
A special acknowledgment is due to my patients and their owners who have endured my life-long learning curve.
It is hoped that this text can shorten the learning curve for others.
8
Abbreviations
ACAM anterior chamber-associated immune
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
deviation
DNP disophenol
ACTH adrenocorticotropic hormone
DSH domestic shorthaired (cat)
ACVO American College of Veterinary
 ECM extracellular matrix
Ophthalmologists
ECVO European College of Veterinary
ADCC antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
Ophthalmologists
ADS aquired immunodeficiency syndrome
EDTA ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid
ANA antinuclear antibody
ELISA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Ara-A adenine arabinoside
ERD early retinal degeneration
ASD anterior segment dysgenesis
ERG electroretinogram
BCG bacillus Calmette Guérin
ERU equine recurrent uveitis
BIO binocular indirect ophthalmoscope
ESE eye scheme examiners
BUT (tear) break-up time
FDA Food and Drugs Administration
BVD bovine virus diarrhea
 FeLV feline leukemia virus
CA carbonic anhydrase
FeSV feline sarcoma virus
CAI carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
FHV feline herpesvirus
CAV-1,2 canine adenovirus-1,2
FP feline infectious peritonitis
CBC complete blood count
FV feline immunodeficiency virus
CCC continuous circular capsulorrhexis
FNA fine needle aspiration
CE corneal endothelium
5-FU 5-fluorouracil
CEA Collie eye anomaly
GAG glycosaminoglycan
CERF Canine Eye Registry Foundation
GME granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
CNS central nervous system
GMP guanosine monophosphate
CPC cyclophotocoagulation
GM1, GM2 gangliosidosis
CPK creatine phosphokinase
GSD German Shepherd Dog
CPRA central progressive retinal atrophy
H&E hematoxylin and eosin
CRH chorioretinal hypoplasia
HETE hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid
CSF cerebrospinal fluid
HMG-CoA hydroxymethyglutaryl-CoA
CT computed tomography
IBK infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
D diopter
IBR infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
DD disk diameter
ICH infectious canine hepatitis
DLH domestic longhaired (cat)
MU idoxuridine
DMSO dimethyl sulfoxide
IFA indirect fluorescent antibody
ABBREVIATIONS
9
 IFN interferon
PFM preiridal fibroblastic membrane
IL- interleukin-
PLD pectinate ligament dysplasia
i.m. intramuscularly
PLR pupillary light reflex
IOL intraocular lens
PMMA polymethyl methacrylate
IOP intraocular pressure
PMN polymorphonuclear neutrophil
IRBP interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein
p.o. per os
iv. intravenously
PPM persistent pupillary membrane
 KCS keratoconjunctivitis sicca
PRA progressive retinal atrophy
 KP keratic precipitate
prcd progressive rod-cone degeneration
LE lupus erythematosus
(photoreceptor degeneration)
LIU lens-induced uveitis
PTVL persistent tunica vasculosa lentis
MAC membrane attack complex
PVP polyvinylpyrrolidone
MCF malignant catarrhal fever
RBC red blood cell
MG Marcus Gunn (pupil)
 rcd rod-cone dysplasia
MLV modified live vaccine
rd rod dysplasia
MMP matrix metalloproteinase
RMSF Rocky Mountain spotted fever
MOC multiple ocular coloboma
RPE retinal pigmented epithelium
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
SARDS sudden acquired retinal degeneration
MSH melanocyte-stimulating hormone
syndrome
NCL neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
s.c. subcutaneously
NGESK nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis
SCC squamous cell carcinoma
NMDA N-methyl D-aspartate
SEM scanning electron microscopy
NSAIMD nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
 SLE systemic lupus erythematosus
OD oculus dexter; right eye
SNB stationary night blindness
OP oscillatory potential
SPF specific pathogen-free
OS oculus sinister; left eye
SPL subpalpebral lavage
OU oculus uterque; each eye
STT Schirmer tear test
PAF platelet activating factor
TCTL cytotoxic T-cell
PAS peripheral anterior synechia
TFT trifluorothymidine
 PCO posterior capsular opacification
TH tyrosine hyroxylase
PCR polymerase chain reaction
TIMP tissue inhibitor of matrix
PCV packed cell volume
metalloproteinases
PD pupillary distance
TNF tumor necrosis factor
PDE phosphodiesterase
tPA tissue plaminogen activator
PDGF platelet-derived growth factor
UV ultraviolet
PDT parotid duct transposition 
VEP visual evoked potential
PE pigmented epithelium
VKH Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome
PERG patterned electroretinogram
YAG neodymium:yttrium, aluminum, and garnet
PG prostaglandin
laser
PGAG polysulfonated glycosaminoglycan
PHPV persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
PHTVL persistent hyperplastic tunica
vasculosa lentis
This page intentionally left blank
11
Anamnesis and the
Ophthalmic Examination
ANAMNESIS
adnexal disease, intraocular disease and the systemic
In a busy general practice the gathering of historical data
history should not be overlooked.
pertaining to ocular complaints is often neglected or
limited to what the owner volunteers. Although many
Ocular color changes
ophthalmic diagnoses are anatomic diagnoses, based on
Color changes may be due to conjunctival and episcleral
direct visual inspection and augmented by known breed-,
hyperemia associated with conjunctivitis, scleritis,
age-, and species-related syndromes, the importance of
uveitis, or glaucoma. Bulbar conjunctival hyperemia may
the history should not be minimized. Not only should the
be diffuse, involving capillaries and large vessels as with
ocular history be scrutinized but the general medical
conjunctivitis, or selective, involving mainly the larger
history should be included, as many systemic states may
conjunctival vessels and deeper episcleral vessels with
be manifest in the eye and its adnexa.
uveitis, glaucoma, and scleritis. 
 Subconjunctival
With experience, the breed, age, and occasionally the 
hemorrhage also produces a red bulbar conjunctiva,
 aue sawoupurs iejnoo Aueu se 'riep sueliodui aie xas
 either in a sector or, occasionall, involving the entire
inherited or at least have a breed predisposition (see
circumference of the conjunctiva. The normal variation
Chapter 15: Presumed inherited ocular diseases).
 Of a unilateral or bilateral nonpigmented third eyelid
The owner's complaints are usually among the
margin may make the eye look redder and, indeed, a
following: decreased vision or blindness, ocular
non-pigmented third eyelid is probably more susceptible 
discharge, ocular color changes, pain, an opacity or film,
 to irritation than the pigmented conjunctival surface.
pupillary changes, and exophthalmos/enlarged eye(s).
Corneal opacities may produce red (granulation,
These complaints form the basis for the problem-
intense neovascularization, hemorrhage), white (lipids,
oriented approach to ophthalmology, and are discussed
calcium, scar, edema, fungal plaques), or black (melanin 
in more detail in subsequent cha pters.
pigment, corneal sequestrum in cats, demetiaceous fungi)
color changes.
Problems
 Intraocular color changes may arise from the aqueous
Decreased vision or blindness
humor, iris, or lens. Aqueous humor color changes may
Depending on the function of the dog, the environment,
be red with hyphema, white to gray with hypopyon,
the amount of vision lost, unilateral versus bilateral loss,
fibrin, or lipids, and brown to black when filled with
and the rapidity of development, the historical data may
free-floating iris cysts. Iris color changes are usually most
be accurate or misleading. Insidious loss of vision such as
dramatic with unilateral involvement and with lightly
progressive retinal atrophy in the house dog
1S
 pigmented irides. The brown iris becomes darker and the
notoriously late in its course when the animal
is
presented. Dogs that work by sight are more critically
with pigmented tumors. Iridal redness may be observed
(sialqo A1guoneis snsiaa guaow) adki ol se paieniea2
with intense neovascularization and engorgement and
and degree of deficiency Nonleading questions should be
with petechial/ecchymotic hemorrhage in the blue irides.
asked regarding night vision, day vision, and ability to
 The latter changes are not often obvious in the darker
see moving objects as opposed to stationary objects, and
compact irides. Occasionally, a blue iris may turn green
the circumstances under which the visual loss was noted.
in an icteric animal.
This information must then be interpreted in light of the
 Lens color changes are typically in shades of gray-
animal's function and environment and the owner's
white with aging and white with cataract formation.
ability to discriminate. Most animals are not presented
 Rarely, hemorrhage may occur into the lens associated
with a complaint of decreased vision unless the condition
with congenital vascular anomalies such as persistent
is bilateral and relatively severe.
hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV).
Ocular discharge
Ocular pain
The type of discharge should be noted and historical data
Blepharospasm and rubbing the eye(s) are obvious signs
regarding chronicity, progression and modification by
of pain noted by owners but ocular pain often manifests
therapy, season, and environment should be obtained.
in a subtle manner with general malaise, depression,
12
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
excessive sleeping, and a worsening of the temperament.
with instructions. Asking to see the remaining
These signs are often not noted by the owners until
medication may allow an assessment of whether the
improvement occurs and retrospective comparisons are
medication has been given as frequently or for as long as
made. In humans, conjunctival pain is described as a
was claimed.
foreign body sensation, corneal pain as a sharp ocular
 Many ocular problems are breed related and it is often
pain, and intraocular pain is often a headache pain
desirable to establish possible inheritance, although the
radiating over the trigeminal nerve distribution. Para-
necessary information is often not available. In most
doxically, superficial corneal ulceration is often more
painful than deep ulceration due to the concentration of
occurrence of a known syndrome in a particular age and
nerve fibers under the corneal epithelium'. Species
breed of animal (see Chapter 15, p.471).
 variations also exist, as cats and horses are typically
As the eye often manifests systemic illness, it is
more symptomatic with conjunctivitis and corneal
imperative that possible systemic ramifications be
disease than dogs.
considered. In addition, topical medications may have
systemic side-effects and, conversely, systemic drugs may
Opacities
have ocular side-effects. Candidates for ocular surgery
Opacities or films over or in the eye may result from
need to be evaluated preoperatively for systemic disease.
 prolapse of the third eyelid; tenacious ocular discharges; 
Historical data pertaining to environmental factors
corneal opacities; fibrin; blood; inflammatory cells, or
Suppaq sussnou jo adki 'aunsodxa leuue se yons
masses in the anterior chamber; and cataracts. Historical
fenced yard, dusts, irritants such as fumes and fiberglass,
data regarding chronicity, laterality, constant or inter-
and function of the animal may help to establish an
mittent occurrence, progression, and precipitating
etiologic diagnosis for a previously unresolved problem.
factors should be obtained. Protrusion of the third eyelid
is often described by owners as 'the eye rolling up into
With experience, the clinician will note that many
the head'.
ocular syndromes have predictable histories but
he/she should always be on the lookout for 'red
Pupillary changes
herrings', which are common with historical data.
Alterations in pupil size are usually noted when
unilateral or when accompanied by another ocular
complaint such as blindness, which draws the owner's
attention to the eye. Alterations in pupil size are most
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
easily observed in eyes with lightly pigmented irides, or
against the background of a white cataract. Ocular
RESTRAINT
disease should always be ruled out as the cause for
The best restraint for ophthalmic examination is
altered pupil size, shape, and mobility before proceeding
usually the least amount possible. The inexperienced
to neurologic ca uses.
examiner usually mistakenly assumes that chemical
sedation will facilitate the examination and make up for
Exophthalmos/buphthalmos
deficiencies in technique. While sedation is routine in
Enlarged or prominent eyes are most dramatic when
large animal ophthalmic examinations, it is rarely
unilateral. The condition may be acute or chronic in
necessary in small animals.
nature, and is often accompanied by another complaint
One of the most formidable obstacles to a good
such as red eye, pain, ocular discharge, or a film over the
ophthalmic examination is protrusion of the third eyelid.
eyes. Differentiation  between _ exophthalmos  and
Protruding third eyelids can usually be circumvented by
buphthalmos is usually not difficult but in brachy-
keeping the animal alert, off balance, or anxious.
cephalic breeds and animals with only one eye, mild
Movement of the head, positioning over the edge of the 
degrees of the problem may be difficult to detect for even
table, or making noises to attract the patient's attention
the experienced examiner.
will change the mental status sufficiently so that the eye
will be exposed for short periods. These maneuvers,
General comments
combined with exposing the eye to short bursts of light
The initial clinical appearance of the problem and its
that is no brighter than necessary, will allow the
modification with time, therapy, and environmental
experienced clinician enough of a “window of oppor-
change should be documented. Measurement of corneal
tunity' to complete most examinations.
diameters or ultrasonography for measuring globe
 In the dog the muzzle is often held with one hand and
dimensions may be used to determine subtle differences
this serves to manipulate the head as well as afford
between eyes. Information on the administration of prior
protection to the examiner. Most dogs do not require
"home' or professional remedies should be obtained,
additional restraint for routine examination but if there
particularly for chronic cases. With new clients it is
is any doubt as to the examiner's safety, muzzling or, in
necessary to obtain historical data on previous ocular
extreme cases, chemical sedation, is indicated. The
 au deraui oi asuodsau pue asinoo haue pue saqoid
ahiq ol Aul shop Ajuanbajui moy Aq passaudwl si 1ouine
disease process may have been modified and the
during the course of an ophthalmic examination. The
interpretation of the ocular examination, such
as
authority with which the head is moved and the dazzle of
pupillary light reflexes and intraocular pressures, may be 
the lights seem momentarily to take the aggressiveness 
 complicated by prior therapy (such as atropine). Failure
out those dogs so inclined. Students are frequently
of response to previously prescribed therapy should
paouauadxa ue uiim si aned e lanb mou aq paizznd
provoke questions to determine the owner's compliance
examiner when they had struggled with the patient only
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
13
 minutes earlier. In the dog, most sedatives or general
easily performed, and facilitate examination even if
anesthesia only make the ophthalmic examination more
sedation is used. Blockage of the palpebral branch of the
difficult due to protrusion of the third eyelid and
auriculopalpebral nerve (branch of Vllth cranial nerve)
infraversion (rolling down) of the eyes.
may be performed at several locations but the most
 In the cat, restraint in a *cat bag' may be necessary for
complete akinesis with the least amount of local anesthetic
an unruly patient. Ketamine sedation (10 mg/kg) will
 can be produced by injection at the dorsal margin of the 
provide ideal conditions for examination, producing a
highest point of the zygomatic arch (1.1)2. Firm palpation
dilated pupil, eyes straight ahead, and immobilization.
 of the dorsal rim of the arch will usually cause the nerve to
snap under the examiner's finger. An alternative site is at
In small animals, speed and utilization of short bursts
the base of the ear between the ear and the zygomatic
of light will enable an ophthalmic examination to be
process (1.2). A 25 gauge needle is placed at the site, a
 performed without chemical sedation in the vast 
syringe is then attached, and 1-3 ml of a local anesthetic is
majority of uncooperative patients.
injected. The resultant block will give sufficient akinesis of
the orbicularis oculi muscle such that the lids can be
In the horse, whether presented with or without ocular
 opened with minimal force but the animal will still be able
pain, sedation and palpebral nerve akinesia is routinely
to blink. The dorsal branches of the palpebral nerve can
performed for a thorough examination. Xylazine
also be blocked at the supraorbital foramen where it
(0.5-1.1 mg/kg) intravenously {i.v.) will quieten the animal
mingles with the supraorbital nerve {sensory, Vth cranial
and drop the head for examination. This not only
nerve). The supraorbital foramen can be identified by
facilitates the examination but is safer for the examiner. If
grasping the margins of the dorsal orbital rim and moving
ocular pain is present, palpebral nerve blocks are routine,
medially until it widens (1.3). At this point the foramen 
can be palpated in the middle of the rim?. Palpebral nerve
blocks do not affect the intraocular pressure {IOP) but
attempting to measure the IOP in a blepharospastic horse 
without a nerve block may result in an artificially elevated
1.1
IOP. Xylazine sedation may lower the intraocular pressure 
{IOP) by up to 27%4.
DIFFUSE ILLUMINATION WITH
HEAD UNRESTRAINED
Examination  with diffuse illumination  without head
restraint is the initial step in ophthalmic examination and
'242 aul 1e yool asop e pg 0i ysn1 aui u1 paoua1 uayo s1
This is the time to evaluate conformation and symmetry of
the eyes and adnexa. It is important to keep the head
unrestrained, as simply touching the side of the head will
modify lid conformation. In addition, manipulation of the
head will often precipitate blepharospasms in a dog that is
"eye shy' by nature, in pain, or has received prior ocular
medication. If some restraint of the head is necessary, the
head should be supported under the mandible.
1.1 A needle placed subcutaneously above the zygomatic arch for a
palpebral nerve block in a horse.
1.2
1.3
1.2 Injection at the base of the ear to block the palpebral branch of
1.3 A needle in the supraorbital foramen to block the palpebral
the facial nerve in a horse.
(motor] and supraorbital (sensory)] nerves in a horse.
14
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Comparison of ocular and adnexal symmetry is
unilateral, cultures of both eyes are preferred for
important and should be performed from various angles
comparative purposes but due to the additional expense
of observation, i.e. frontal and dorsal. Palpebral fissures,
this practice is usually not followed. Stapbylococcus spp.
third eyelid position, globe size and position, iris color,
and Streptococcus spp. are the most consistent flora of
and pupil size should be evaluated for symmetry. This is
the normal and diseased conjunctiva-10, The swab may
the time when the orbit should be evaluated, retropulsion
be moistened with sterile nutrient broth or saline before
of the globes into the orbit compared (1.4), and the
use to make the procedure more comfortable and
patient examined for exophthalmos by comparing the
increase the growth ratell. Calcium alginate swabs have
corneal vertices from a dorsal vantage point. Ocular
sqems 'aieu yimoa rauay e pieia oi pauodai uag
discharges and lid dermatologic lesions such as swellings,
should be placed in a transport medium or immediately
alopecia, and erythema should be noted. The cornea
plated to prevent drying of the small samples.
should be inspected for its luster, surface irregularities,
Commercial culturettes with transport media and fine
and opacities. The specular light reflection off the cornea
ws uo aoeid oi Asee pue juauaauoo aie sqems padd
superimposed on the pupils allows accurate assessment
lesions and avoid contamination from adjacent
of ocular alignment, and gross opacities in the anterior
structures (1.5).
chamber and lens may be noted.
EVALUATION FOR ANISOCORIA
MICROBIOLOGIC CULTURES OF
CONJUNCTIVA/CORNEA
[UNEQUAL PUPILS] AND THE PUPILLARY
If the type of discharge, history of chronicity, lack of
LIGHT REFLEX [PLR]
response to therapy, or severity of the problem indicates
The presence of static anisocoria {consistently unequal
serious or resistant infectious agents are involved,
pupils under varying light conditions) is determined by
cultures should be obtained early in the examination
directing a light at the stop or base of the nose from a
before the use of topical anesthetics. Topical anesthetics
distance of 60-90 cm (2-3 feet) in a darkened room. This
may be bacteriocidal. Ideally, even if the problem is
will outline both pupils simultaneously against the
retroillumination of the tapetal reflection. Hetero-
chromia will result in a mild anisocoria with the larger
pupil in the eye with the blue iris, and is considered
physiologic.(
Other forms of anisocoria should be
evaluated further.
1.4
The PLR is frequently described by authors as either
clearly present or absent but in reality it is a subjective
evaluation that has a great deal of interpretive variation
between clinicians of different levels of experience.
Pupillary light reflexes should be performed in a
darkened room with a bright light, such as a Finoff
transilluminator, to produce maximum excursions {1.6).
1.4 Bilateral retropulsion of the globe into the orbit to compare
compressibility between orbits. This is different from digital tonometry.
1.5
1.6
1.5 Fine- and course-tipped culture swabs with transport media.
1.6 Finoff transilluminator used for gross ocular examinations,
PLR testing, and monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
15
The swinging light test employs a bright light shown
13 mm/min15, 16. Schirmer values in the cat may be quite
 alternately in each eye for 3-4 seconds at a time. Initial
variable and often a reading of 0 will be found in a
stimulation of the eye elicits the direct response, and the
perfectly normal eye. Unless there are clinical signs to
light is quickly shifted to the contralateral eye and the
reinforce the finding, of a low Schirmer value, it is
 pupil size observed. The initial observation is evaluation
prudent to repeat the test at a later time before
of the indirect or consensual reaction but as it is
prescribing medication for a tear deficiency. Berger and
maintained it becomes the direct reflex. This is repeated
King17 found a statistical difference over time and
back and forth at 3-4+ second intervals.
between breeds in the Schirmer values of dogs, but while
Normally, with a relaxed animal in a darkened room,
statistically significant the variation would rarely be
the 1
PLR responses are brisk and the degree of
significant in making clinical decisions. Large breeds of
contraction is significant on direct stimulation. Due to
dogs have higher Schirmer values than small breeds of
the presence of the relatively cone-rich area centralis, a
dogs17. Hamor et al.18 evaluated the Schirmer values in
focal light directed temporally on the retina will
five breeds of dogs and found a difference only in the
stimulate a more complete constriction than a light
Shetland Sheepdog, where values were 45 mm/min
directed on the nasal retina. When the light is moved to
lower. In the dog, ocular signs are usually not associated
the opposite eye, it may be noted that the initial size of
with decreased tear production until values are between
the pupil is slightly larger in this eye and then constricts
5 and 10 mm. In the past, variations in the readings were
further This is due to the unequal pupillomotor input to
 attributable to the type of paper used in manufacture of
the consensually responding eye in the dog and cat, and
the strips19. Newer strips have the measuring rule on the
is a normal dynamic anisocoria12. Sustaining the light in
sheat aui ym dn uayei shieui haded aui ul aap e pue dus
the eye may produce a small amount of redilation due to
to
delineate the amount of wetting. No clinically
adaptation of the retina to a weak light. If the sustained
significant differences were noted between brands of
illumination results in an obvious dilation, the test is
Schirmer tear test in two studies20, 21
positive (Marcus Gunn pupil) and is the result of a retinal
The Schirmer II test measures the basal tear secretion
or optic nerve lesion. It is relatively common for patients
by eliminating the reflex irritative component with a
with retinal/optic nerve blindness to have some degree of
topical anesthetic. After application of the topical
pupil reaction to a bright light, as vision is a more
anesthetic, the lower conjunctival cul-de-sac is dried by
complex function than the PLR. It is actually more
swabbing with a cotton-tip applicator and the tear
common to have vision with dilated nonreactive pupils
production measured. The basal secretion in the dog is
due to efferent arc lesions of the PLR.
approximately 12 mm/min22.
If anisocoria and PLR abnormalities are detected, then
special attention in the ocular examination should be
MYDRIASIS
devoted to vision testing, fundus examination, and
PLRs are evaluated before instilling the mydriatic of
diseases of the iris. The detailed examination should rule
 choice. Most mydriatics take 10-15 minutes to act, s0
out synechiae, iris atrophy, iris hypoplasia, lens
aui ul Xjuea uaaia aq Pinous Aaul aw aaiasuos 01
displacement, elevated IOP, anterior uveitis, and anterior
examination. Mydriasis is necessary for complete
uveal neoplasia, all of which commonly interfere with
ophthalmoscopy and for a thorough examination of
pupil mobility and/or shape.
the lens.
 If the iris appears normal, evaluation of the anisocoria
The mydriatic of choice for diagnostic use should be
in darkness and ambient light should be performed.
effective and short in action. Atropine in the normal dog
Anisocoria associated with an afferent arm (usually
eye lasts for 3 days, and in the horse eye for 5-11 days.
retina or optic nerve) lesion of the PLR will dilate to
equality in a dark room due to an intact sympathetic
chain. The anisocoria of Horner's syndrome remains or
is more pronounced due to a lack of sympathetic input to
the dilator muscle (see Anisocoria, p.97).
SCHIRMER TEAR TEST
1.7 Schirmer
1.7
Schirmer tear testing should be performed before any
tear strips with
 topical medications are placed in the eye, and should be
 an integral ruler
considered part of the basic data collection with every
 on the strip and 
ophthalmic examination, and certainly with any ocular
dhye in the paper.
 surface disease. The test used most often in veterinary
ophthalmology is the Schirmer I test, which measures
basal and reflex secretion rate. The test is performed by
bending the strip at the notch and hooking the short end
over the medial lower lid into the conjunctival cul-de-sac
(1.7). Once the strip is in place, the retention can be
improved by closing the lids. The strip is removed after
one minute and the amount of weting, measured in
millimeters, is immediately recorded. The normal values
of wetting for the dog are 20 ± 5 mm/min and for the cat
are 15-17 mm/min13, 14. The horse has been variably
reported to have Schirmer values of 20-30 mm/min and
16
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Tropicamide 1% (0.5% may be preferred in cats) is the
or biomicroscope is the most sophisticated means of
preferred mydriatic for diagnostics (1.8)23, 24. The alkaloid
accomplishing a magnified examination (1.10)28-32
A
drops traverse the nasolacrimal duct and, when licked from
 simplified slit lamp consisting of a lens and a battery-
the nose, may stimulate profuse salivation in some animals
operated focused light is marketed for about US$500 (1.11)
due to the bitter taste. A transient, dramatic enlargement of
(see Biomicroscopy, p.36 for technical details).
the submandibular salivary glands has been occasionally
A bright light source such as a transilluminator is
 noted in cats2s In young puppies, maximal mydriasis may
directed at various angles and may be utilized in
not be achieved or may be very fleeting. Combining a
 conjunction with magnification to examine the lid
parasympatholytic drug with a sympathomimetic drug
margin, conjunctiva, third eyelid, cornea, anterior
such as 10% phenylephrine may be necessary for good
 chamber, iris, and lens. In addition to direct illumination,
mydriasis. Phenylephrine alone is a poor mydriatic in
 proximal illumination (lighting the region adjacent to the
several species, having minimal effect in the horse and
 object of regard) and retroillumination (examination
cat24, 26 A potential systemic side-effect of concentrated
against background lighting) are also helpful (1.12).
Mydriatics may produce elevations of the intraocular
 Retroillumination is a rapid and sensitive method
 pressure that may be significant in some individuals. This 
of detecting opacities in the clear media, i.e. lens,
should be considered when readings are marginally
cornea, vitreous, aqueous.
 elevated and tonometry repeated at a later time without
mydriatics27-27B.
The lids, lid margins, and canthal regions are
examined for abnormalities of the cilia and meibomian
DETAILED EXAMINATION OF THE
glands. The former may be difficult to detect without
ANTERIOR SEGMENT
magnification. Retroillumination of the eyelids may be 
Magnification in the form of a loupe or slit lamp is a critical
performed with a transilluminator when searching for
aid in ophthalmic lesion recognition due to the frequently
imbedded foreign bodies. The conjunctival surfaces are
minute nature of lesions and the structures involved. This
examined for aberrant cilia (palpebral surface), foreign
technique is mainly limited to the anterior ocular segment
bodies, and presence of follicles, hyperemia, chemosis,
and adnexa, unless the eye is aphakic. Various head loupes
symblepharon, and discharges. The cornea is examined
(1.9) or a magnifying lens can be utilized but the slit lamp
by retroillumination of the iris and fundus (dilated pupil)
1.8
1.8 The two common mydriatics
1.9
u5ed in diagnostic work. Note
the red caps which are typical
for any mydriatic solution.
5Alcon
Mydriacyl"1%
PHDROCHLORINE
10%
1.9 Examples of head loupes used for magnification.
1.10
1.10 Kowa-2 portable slit lamp.
1.11
It consists of a microscope.
focused light, and light source
connected to the microscope
with a fiber-optic cable.
1.11 Relatively inexpensive portable slit lamp that consists of a 20 D
lens and a focused light.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
17
to detect small opacities, and then studied in more detail
Tear break-up time (BUT)
 in direct illumination. Irregularities of the surface,
While previously discussed tear evaluation tests
opacities, and neovascularization are searched for and
evaluate quantity, tear BUT test is an attempt to
characterized based on extent and depth.
evaluate the quality of the tears. The test is performed
The anterior chamber is examined for changes in depth
by instilling fluorescein on the cornea and not allowing
and abnormal contents. The depth is increased with the loss
the patient to blink while observing the intactness of the
 of lens support (aphakia, microphakia, posterior luxated 
fluorescein in the tear film. The time from instillation of
lens, hypermature cataract) and decreased with iris bombe,
fluorescein to the breaking up of the fluorescein sheet is
peripheral anterior synechiae, intumescent lens, or a mass 
the BUT. It can be difficult to perform in animals
in or behind the iris. Abnormal contents in the anterior
because while the lids can be held open, the third eyelid
chamber such as leukocytes, erythrocytes, fibrin, cysts, the
cannot be controlled. This test is not performed
lens, and tumors are noted. Changes in the blood-aqueous
adns snoea ui paeoiu aq aru ing aaunon
barrier can be detected by using a focused light source or
keratopathies. The normal BUT in the dog is reported
thin beam of light to demonstrate the Tyndall effect or
as 19-20 ± 5 seconds35.
 flare' produced by an increased protein content (plasmoid
 aqueous) and cells in the anterior chamber (1.13).
The iris is examined for texture, masses, color,
vascularity, pupillary membrane strands, and stability.
With loss of the lens support from a displaced lens or
peripheral iris adhesions, the iris trembles on ocular
movement (iridodonesis). If the PLRs have not already
been examined, they are recorded. The iris, particularly the
pupillary region, can be examined in the retroillumination
of the tapetum to detect areas of atrophy or hypoplasia. If
the PLRs are incomplete or anisocoria is present, sphincter 
1.12
 atrophy, hypoplasia, or synechiae may be responsible. The
pupil is examined for irregularities in shape that may
indicate atrophy or adhesions.
The lens is first examined in retroillumination from
the fundus to detect opacities rapidly, and then in direct
and focal illumination to determine the depth of the
lesion. Observed opacities are characterized by their
shape, number, color, texture, and location. Irregularities
on the lens surface {wrinkled capsule in hypermature
cataracts), shape {coloboma, lenticonus), and size
(microphakia, intumescent lens) may be observed.
The anterior vitreous can be examined for hyaloid
artery remnants, veils, haze {usually protein or cells) and
blood clots, and retinal detachment.
 A magnification source is critical in ophthalmic
examination and manipulations and it is worth the
1.12 Principle of retroillumination of an object against an
investment to buy a quality instrument that is
illuminated background. (l: path of light; O: position of observer)
comfortable, has good optics and a reasona ble
focal length, and is easily adjusted.
1.13
LACRIMAL EVALUATION TESTS
Schirmer tear test
See page 15.
Phenol red thread tear test
A test utilizing a 75 mm thread impregnated with phenol
red has been developed in Japan and tested in dogs and
cats. The end of the thread is hooked and placed in the
lower conjunctival cul-de-sac, similar to a Schirmer tear
strip. Tears turn the indicator red as they progress down
the thread. The small size of the thread does not create as
 much irritation on insertion as the Schirmer tear strip,
and the reading may be more indicative of the basal tear
secretion. The wetting is measured after 15 seconds; the
 mean wetting for normal dogs is 34 mm ± 4 mm and
23 mm ± 2 mm in cats3 34. Acceptance of this test
1.13 Flare or Tyndall effect present in a petri dish that ha5 a
obviously depends on its availa bility outside Japan.
colloidal solution. (Courtesy of Dr. M. wtyman.)
18
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
OCULAR STAINING
If fluorescein strips are used and the ocular surface is
Fluorescein
not very moist, adding one to two drops of collyrium to
Topical sodium fluorescein is an invaluable tool in detecting
the strip will ensure an adequate quantity of solution on
corneal epithelial defects as well as in monitoring the
the eye. If a dry strip is touched to the eye for moisture, it
healing process. Fluorescein is utilized mainly as single-use
should be placed on the conjunctiva rather than the cornea
strips, since it was discovered that the solution was a good
(1.15). Touching the cornea with the strip may give a slight
culture medium for Pseudomonas spp.36, although this has
positive staining at the point of contact. The eye is rinsed
recently been brought into question37. If used as a 1-2%
thoroughly with collyrium to remove excess fluorescein
solution in multiple-use bottles, care must be taken to avoid
and mucus, and the retention of stain is evaluated. With
contamination. Some clinicians make a fresh solution daily
small defects such as herpes epithelial ulcers in cats, the use
by placing a strip in a 3-6 ml syringe and filling it with
 of an ultraviolet light ( Wood's light) or cobalt-blue filter in
sterile saline. This may be easier to apply in the horse but
a dark room will cause fluorescence of the fluorescein,
false negative staining may be encountered with this method
making minute stain retention visible.
because the fluorescein is too dilute.
Other uses for topical fluorescein stain in ophthal-
Aqueous fluorescein cannot penetrate the normal
mology are to detect aqueous leaks in perforating corneal
lipophilic epithelium and thus is not normally retained. If
wounds (Seidal test) and to determine patency of the
intercellular junctions are widened or loss of epithelium
lacrimal outflow system. The Seidal test is performed by
occurs, fluorescein is retained by the epithelium or
 applying a high concentration of fluorescein at the site in
stroma, respectively, and is visible as a bright green stain
question without rinsing. The concentrated fluorescein
(1.14)38. Staining of extensive ulcerations may result in
will be orange; if aqueous is leaking from the site, a green
the fluorescein being visible in the aqueous. The corneal
rivulet will form in the orange background. Evaluation of
staining is transient ({about 15-30 min), although in
nasolacrimal duct patency with fluorescein is performed
 devitalized corneas it may persist for several hours.
by applying fluorescein to the_ eye and observing its
appearance at the nostril (1.16). Fluorescein can normally
be observed at the nostrils within a few minutes. A
normal test does not ensure the entire lacrimal ductal
1.14
system is patent, as only one patent lacrimal canaliculus
and punctum is necessary for a positive test. The absence
of fluorescein may be due to ductal obstruction or an
 anomalous orifice into the nasal cavity.
Fluorescein may be given i.v. as a 10% solution to
visualize the fundus vasculature or the iris vessels {see
Fluorescein angiography, p.35) and to measure limb-to-
 retina circulation time.
Rose bengal
Rose bengal is a fluorescein derivative of the xanthene
 group and it has been used in ophthalmology as a 1%
 solution. Rose bengal was originally characterized as a
 supravital stain that only stained degenerate epithelial cells
 and mucus. Its main use has been in staining devitalized
cells in keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), and it is thought
to be more sensitive than the Schirmer tear test (1.17]39.
1.14 Fluorescein staining of a superficial ulcer.
1.15
1.16
1.15 Application of a moist fluorescein strip to the conjunctiva.
1.16 Fluorescein staining visible in the nose after application to the
eye of a dog.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
19
[auda sadiay ueis oi pasn uaaq osie su ieauaq aso
ulcers and dysplastic epithelial cells with squamous neo-
1.17
plasia. Recently, the mechanism of action of rose bengal
has been questioned. Cell culture evidence indicates that
rose bengal stains cells that do not have a mucus layer or
the cornea with a deficiency of the preocular tear film40.
Rose bengal will therefore stain healthy cells if they are not
protected by mucin, and it is intrinsically toxic to cells in
concentrations >0.01%. Exposure to light releases 0xygen
radicals, which are toxic to cells40. Rose bengal is also
viracidal and bacteriocidal, and cultures should be
obtained before application of the stain. In a mouse
herpesvirus model, no virus could be isolated after a single
topical application of 1% rose bengal41.
CANNULATION OF THE LACRIMAL
OUTFLOW SYSTEM
Cannulation and establishing patency of the lacrimal
1.17 Faint rose bengal staining of the cornea and conjunctiva of a
outflow system is indicated with a problem of epiphora
dog with KCs.
 or a resistant or relapsing conjunctival infection. This is
readily performed in most dogs with topical anesthesia
and using restraint in lateral recumbency. A blunt
22 gauge needle, or a commercial malleable lacrimal
1.18
needle on a 6 ml syringe, is passed into either the upper
or lower punctum. The upper punctum is usually more
accessible. Ensuring the lid is kept taut, threading the
catheter down the canaliculus, and keeping it parallel to
the canaliculus all help to prevent kinking and
obstruction by the wall of the canaliculus, thus avoiding
a false impression of a pathologic obstruction (1.18).
 Resting the hand with the syringe against the animal's
head minimizes traumatizing the duct if minor head
movement occurs. A fountain of fluid should emerge
from the opposite punctum and the nostril. If fluid is not
observed at the nostril, the opposite punctum is occluded
while flushing to force more fluid down the nasolacrimal
duct. Imperfect nasolacrimal ducts result in some dogs in
fluid running posteriorly into the pharynx and the
patient often starts to choke, sneeze, and swallow. If an
obstruction is present, heavy sedation or general
1.18 Flushing the nasolacrimal duct of a dog through the upper
anesthesia may be required, as the force necessary to
canaliculus, which is usually the easiest to expose and make taut.
unblock the obstruction is painful.
Note the lateral recumbency of the patient and resting of the 
Cats are more difficult to cannulate because of the
examiner's hand on the patient's head.
small canaliculus and the animal's temperament. A
25-27 gauge blunt needle, ketamine sedation, and a
loupe should be used to obtain best results.
The horse's nasolacrimal system is most easily
1.19
evaluated by retrograde flushing from the nasal end of
the nasolacrimal duct. A #8 French urinary catheter or
infant feeding tube may be passed in a retrograde
direction and attached to a syringe for flushing. If the
nasolacrimal duct is blocked, the puncta are easily
cannulated after sedation.
DOUBLE EVERSION OF THE EYELIDS AND
MEMBRANA NICTITANS
The palpebral conjunctiva and bulbar surface of the third
eyelid can be examined by a process of double eversion.
Double eversion is performed under topical anesthesia by
gently grasping the lid margin with forceps and lifting it
up and caudally from the eye,while using an instrument
such as a strabismus hook near the base of the lid to push
toward the eye. This will cause the lid to roll back over
the hook, exposing the palpebral conjunctiva {1.19). This
1.19 Double eversion of the upper lid of a dog to examine the
maneuver also can be performed on the third eyelid to
palpebral conjunctiva.
20
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
1.20 Preparation of
therapy. The scraping may be performed with various
1.20
a #10 Bard Parker
instruments. A metal instrument is used if the surface
blade for use as a
must be debrided to get to the level of the pathology. A
scraping instrument 
 malleable platinum spatula (Kimura) is commercially
to obtain cytology
available but expensive. The author simply uses the
and culture
noncutting end of a sterile scalpel blade as a convenient
 specimens.
disposable sterile scraper (1.20). For surface cytology, a
small disposable nylon bristle brush has given superior
preparations and is easier to insert into the conjunctival
cul-de-sac of cats (1.21)42, 43. Slide preparations made
with the brush have fewer cells but the cells are scattered
 and not clumped as with a spatula. The material is
transferred to glass slides, air dried and fixed, and can be
 stained with a variety of stains such as Giemsa and Gram
1.21
stains. The slides are evaluated for cell type, bacteria,
viral and chlamydial inclusion bodies, fungi, and foreign 
material (see Chapter 8, p.183)44.
TONOMETRY
 The measurement of intraocular tension may be made
with a variety of instruments, all of which were designed
for use on humans. Indentation tonometry is exemplified
by the Schiotz tonometer, which is one of the more
5l jo asneoaq ieo pue sop aui iof sianauouot aiqeoyddr
relatively low cost. This instrument measures the amount
of corneal indention produced by a given weight, and the
scale reading is converted to millimeters of mercury with
conversion tables (1.22). Conversion tables for the dog
and cat have been calculated and they result in higher
IOPs than comparable scale readings on the human
1.21 Cytobrush used for collecting conjunctival cells. (Courtesy off
conversion table45, 46. The normal IOP for most species is
Dr. M. Wwillis, The Ohio State University.]
considered to be <25-30 mmHg (3.3-4.0 kPa) on the
human scale47-s1. The difference in IOP between the two
eyes should be ≤8 mmHg (1.07 kPa)48.
1.22
Technique
After topical anesthesia is administered, the animal is
WOSS
00GM
placed in dorsal to dorsolateral recumbency so that the eye
being measured is directed vertically. The tonometer is
4
allowed to rest with its full weight on the central cornea
for 1-2 seconds (1.23). The scale reading is noted and this
is repeated 3-4 times to determine consistency. Although
most animals object to being placed on their sides or
backs, the sitting patient usually presents with poor eye
position because of the vestibular-ocular reflex that often
results in the tonometer being placed near or over the
limbus. The body position will alter the IOP in man and
animals. In the dog, dorsal recumbency increased the mean
SHuu z-s'l Aq suosd Suis pue jeuais naao do
utilizing the Tono-Pen, but this difference decreased over
3-5 minutes1A. Inaccurate or spurious values with the
1.22 Schiotz tonometer with conversion scale.
Schiotz tonometer can be produced by dried mucus and
tears that have wicked up the plunger, a small corneal
curvature (microphthalmos will overestimate IOP), a large
corneal curvature {such as in buphthalmos, which will
underestimate IOP), corneal scars, corneal edema, an
anterior luxated lens, and transference of pressure to the
expose the lymphoid follicles and gland. It is invaluable
globe while holding the lids open.
in searching for hidden foreign bodies and evaluating the
Applanation tonometry measures the force necessary
tissue pathology.
to flatten a given corneal area and may be measured with
a variety of instruments. A small hand-held electronic
CONJUNCTIVAL AND CORNEAL CYTOLOGY
applanation tonometer, the Tono-Pen, appears almost
Scraping the conjunctiva and/or the corneal surface after
ideal for veterinary medicine (1.24, 1.25). It is portable,
topical anesthesia and examining the cells may enable a
consistent, apparently accurate, and easily used on most
rapid etiologic diagnosis to be made or may guide initial
species including exotics; however, it is expensive
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
21
1.23 Application
1.23
1.24
of the Schiotz
tonometer to the
axial cornea with
the dog in dorsal
TONO-PENXL
recumbency.
1.24 Tono-Pen with cover. The average IOP reading is displayed.
1.25
(>US$2,000). The plunger is 1.5 mm in diameter and is
covered with a latex membrane to avoid disease
transmission and, more importantly, to avoid tears wick-
1.25 Tono-Pen in use by lightly tapping the cornea.
[uao aun uo aiaymaue suddei iuatt vhud au dn su
 two-thirds of the cornea perpendicular to the point will
produce _ accurate  readings. 
Acceptable readings are
1.26
indicated by a clicking sound. Three to six acceptable
readings are averaged, a tone sounds, and the mean value
is displayed in a window with a bar over the coefficient of
variance of the readings from S->20%. The Tono-Pen
Aiaa si 'saue1 mol aui ul dOI ahe1saaa0 01 sueadde
accurate in the normal range, and underestimates IOP in
the high range in the human, dog, and cat53-56. Using the
Tono-Pen, mean IOP in the dog was 19 ± 6 mmHg7 and
In the horse, the instrument underestimated the IOP at all
pressures, although by a predicta ble amount. In the horse,
wide fluctuations in IOP can be measured that are not
eliminated by auriculopalpebral nerve block. In the horse,
when the head was above the heart the IOP was decreased
(mean 17.5 mmHg) and when lowered below the level of
the heart the IOP was increased (mean 25.7 mmHg) in
87% of the subjects. The difference was as much as
1.26 Performing digital tonometry in a dog through the closed lids.
28 mmHg, with a mean of 8 mmHg. As unsedated horses 
Note that the two index fingers and not the thumbs are used.
frequently raise their head when their eyes are being
examined and the head is dropped with xylazine
sedation, the difference in IOP measurements may be
significants6A. The mean IOP in the normal horse was
23 mmHg with the Tono-Pens8.
 A new tonometer, marketed as the Tono Vet, is based
on measuring the deceleration of the impact of a probe
when it strikes the cornea, the soft eye producing less or
slower rebound than the firmer eye. This principle is
termed impact or rebound tonometry. The advantages of
rebound tonometry are no topical anesthetic is required,
it is slightly more accurate at all IOP levels, the status of
TonoVet, the TonoVet recorded IOP 2 mmHg lower in
the cornea may not be as critical due to the small contact
the dog and 1 mmHg higher in the horsesa, s8b.
surface, and the instrument is not as subject to operator
The intraocular tension may be estimated by
error. The instrument must be used on the horizontal
palpating the globe through the closed eyelids alternately
plane, it is heavier than the Tono-Pen, and the probes or 
with the index fingers {1.26). The *give’ and *take' of the
tips are replaced between patients to minimize
 globe is estimated by gentle pressure. This differentiates
soft, medium, and hard eyes but is a poor substitute for
IOP of normal dogs and horses using the Tono-Pen and
an objective measurement.
22
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
GONIOSCO PY
1.27
Gonioscopy is the act of viewing the iridocorneal angle.
This region contains the aqueous outflow pathways and
thus is important in the pathogenesis of many glaucomas.
To view the iridocorneal angle adequately a contact lens is
necessary to allow light to exit the cornea (1.27).
Gonioscopy is performed after ophthalmoscopy because
the coupling fluid utilized under the lens will interfere with
ophthalmoscopy. The procedure can be accomplished with
topical anesthesia and manual restraint  in lateral
recumbency or in a sitting position (1.28). A variety of
gonioscopic lenses designed for use in human medicine are
available and most are applicable to the dog and cat
(1.29). A strong light and a source of magnification are
necessary. This can be provided by an otoscope head, a
loupe, and transilluminator, or by a slit lamp. In addition
to investigating the pathogenesis of glaucoma, gonioscopy
is useful in evaluating lesions of the peripheral anterior
1.27 Demonstration of light exiting from the angle when a contact
chamber such as iris cysts, foreign bodies, tumors of the
lens is applied for gonioscopy. The light can now exit the cornea
 region, and traumatic lesions48, 49, 60-62.
because the refractive index has changed from cornea to plastic (or
The normal  iridocorneal region in carnivores is
glass] and the curvature of the lens is different from the cornea,
dominated by a well developed pectinate ligament with a
 allowing light to exit. Note where the examiner must be positioned
bluish-white trabecular region in the background (1.30).
to view the opposite angle region.
(For further discussion on gonioscopic findings see
Chapter 12, p.337.)
OPHTHALMOSCOPY
1.28
Ophthalmoscopy is one of the most difficult routine
procedures that the veterinarian is asked to master The
traditional direct ophthalmoscope (1.31) is not the
instrument of choice in small animal practice because of
technique of direct ophthalmoscopy is most applica ble in
large animals because the larger eye has less inherent
magnification (see Table 1.1)63. Binocular or monocular
indirect ophthalmoscopy is preferred in the dog and cat
(1.32). The main disadvantage of the binocular indirect
 ophthalmoscope is the cost {Us$1,000) but essentially all 
that is necessary for indirect ophthalmoscopy is a
condensing lens and a focal beam of light.
With either technique, the pupil should be well dilated
for a thorough examination. Examination of the ocular
fundus should include evaluating the optic disk for size,
1.28 Performing gonioscopy in a nonsedated dog utilizing a slit lamp
 color, elevations, depressions, vascular pattern, and
and a Franklin goniolens.
shape. The tapetum, if present, is evaluated for its
reflectivity, mosaic detail, color, size, and retinal vascular
pattern. The nontapetum is evaluated for pigment
1.29
density, mottling, and vascular patterns. The normal
dog's ocular fundus has more variations than that of
other domestic animals and thus can present difficulties
for even an experienced examiner in differentiating mild
pathology  from extremes in normal  variations (see
Chapter 14, p.401).
Direct ophthalmoscopy
Direct ophthalmoscopy is the classical form of oph-
 thalmoscopy and the procedure with which veterinarians
are most familiar. The direct ophthalmoscope is often
purchased as a set with an otoscope. Many of the
principles of direct ophthalmoscopy involving 
lesion
localization and alignment are common to both forms
 of ophtha lmoscopy.
 The direct ophthalmoscope consists of a power source
1.29 Various goniolenses. Left to right are: Cardona type lens that
whose light is reflected through a prism into the patient's
 attaches to a fiberoptic light cable, Franklin lens with sialastic flange.
eye (1.33). The light is then reflected back through the
 and a three mirror prism.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
23
1.30
pupil through a movable lens in the ophthalmoscope to
the observer. When examining an animal with frontal
eyes and a long nose, it is usually mechanically
advantageous for the examiner to avoid the patient's
nose by using his/her left eye to examine the patient's left
 eye and his/her right eye to examine the patient's right
 eye. This is not as important in the horse and cow which
have laterally placed eyes. Alternating eyes in the
examination takes practice as most people have a
dominant eye that they prefer to use. Some of the
principles that Dr. William Havener espoused when
teaching ophthalmoscopy are described below64.
There are two dials for adjustment in the basic
ophthalmoscope. T
The examiner looks through an
aperture of the large dial that contains a series of small
lenses that can be rotated into viewing position (1.31).
The numbers visible on rotating the large dial indicate
the strength of the lens that is in place, expressed in
diopters. A diopter is the reciprocal of the focal length
8
of the lens in meters, i.e. D = 1/focal length in meters.
The black or green numbers represent plus {+) lenses
1.30 Gonioscopic view of a normal canine iridocorneal angle with
which are convex or converging lenses. The red numbers
various anatomic landmarks. [1: deep pigmented zone; 2: superficial
represent minus {-) lenses which are concave or
 pigmented zone; 3: uveal trabeculae in ciliary cleft:; 4: conjunctiva
 diverging lenses.
through the cornea;
The second adjustment possible is one that selects the
5: iris; 6: major arterial
1.31
light beam size, shape, and color. Most of the
circle; 7: pectinate
examinations are performed with white light using the
ligament; 8: pupil.)
large circular aperture. Additional apertures usually
 available are a smaller circular aperture, a grid aperture,
a streak or slit aperture, and often various filters such as
blue and red-free filters. The small circular aperture is
01 pua au ‘uoeuunl leuixoud ioy pasn Aensn
measure relative sizes of lesions, and the streak to detect
irregular contours such as elevations and depressions.
The blue filters are used to examine the nerve fiber layer
 and the red-free filter to examine blood vessels.
 Initially the emmetropic {no refractive error) exa miner
 aperture and places himself about 46-61 cm (18-24 in)
1.31 Direct
from the patient. The examiner has to align with two
ophthalmoscope. Power
 apertures, the aperture of the ophthalmoscope and the
sources may be battery.
aperture of the pupil of the patient. By placing the
rechargeable battery, or
wall transformer.
1.32
1.33
1.32 Binocular indirect ophthalmoscope. This unit has a rechargeable
1.33 Direct ophthalmoscope light pathway. (Pf: patient's fundus;
battery transformer that allws portability.
Ef: exarminer's fundus; LS: light source; A: prism or mirror.)
24
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
ophthalmoscope snugly into the brow, the aperture of the
much easier to regain the alignment at a distance, since
ophthalmoscope is steady and constant and the peripheral
small variations in the angle of incident light are
view through the aperture is maximized (1.34). The
 magnified at the patient level.
examiner then aligns the ophthalmoscope light with the
 Ophthalmoscopy should be performed close to the eye
patient's pupil by finding the fundus or tapetal reflection.
 and through a dilated pupil. The closer to the eye and the
This will usually be a bright, green-yellow tapetal colored
paie jeuauduad aui iaieaa aui 'ldnd aui paiei arou
reflection through the dog or cat's pupil. This serves to
that can be examined (1.36). Ophthalmoscopy should
align the light correctly and quickly, and is a very sensitive
also be performed in a dark environment to maximize
means of picking up central opacities in the clear ocular
the contrast to the observer's eye.
media in front of the retina, i.e. vitreous, lens, anterior
 A bright specular reflection is present from the corneal
chamber, and cornea by retroillumination. Even small
surface and is often quite annoying. Specular reflections
opacities will be detected as darker regions against the
 are the light rays being reflected directly back from the
fundus reflection due to the blockage of returned light to
cornea to the observer and they can drown out fundus
the observer {1.35). The examiner often cannot localize
detail. If the pupil is dilated, this reflection can be
 the opacity in depth with this method but is alerted to the
displaced by shifting the light slightly off center on the
pathology. This technique is a quick screening technique
cornea. If the pupil is miotic, this cannot be done as the
and with a trained eye it is a very sensitive test for
light will strike the iris (1.37).
detecting axial opacities.
One of the difficulties in veterinary ophthalmoscopy is
 In summary, find the fundus reflection and check
a lack of patient cooperation, with constant head and eye
for opacities of the clear ocular media fanterior
 movement causing the examiner to lose the fundic image.
chamber, cornea, lens, vitreous), then move in close
The quickest method of regaining alignment with the
to the patient and perform ophthalmoscopy
patient's pupil is to back up 30 cm (12 in) or more, find
through a dilated pupil and in a dark room.
the tapetal reflection, and then move close again. It is
1.34
1.35
1.36
1.34 Pacement of the ophthalmoscope
B
 into the brow to eliminate movement in
1
relationship to the ophthalmoscope and to
maximize the observer's field of view.
1.35 Retroillumination of a lenticular
lesion from the fundus reflection.
1.36 llustration of how dilating the
patient's pupil and moving close to the 
eye (A] increase the field of observation 
(compare with B].
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
25
The optic disk in a dog is about 1.5 mm diameter
which was the cavity of the embryonic optic vesicle
(1,500 μm). With the 17x magnification of the direct
before invagination occurred to form a cup and bring the
u un oe-og sueuxoidde saunisnus adossoueuudo
two layers of the neuroectoderm in apposition. It is at
diameter can be visualized (Table 1.1, 1.38). Because
this potential space that retinal detachments occur, which
lesions are often microscopic, it is important
to
 technically are retinal separations.
appreciate the histology of the fundus. The normal
The holangiotic {retinal blood vessels over the entire
sensory retina is transparent and what are visualized are
retinal surface) fundus has two sources of blood vessels.
columns of blood (healthy vessels are transparent),
The superficial vessels are the retinal blood vessels, which
pigment, and the optic nerve. In most domestic animals,
supply the inner half of the retina. In the cow, the retinal
the tapetum that is in the superficial choroid and in the
blood vessels lie on, rather than within the retina, where
dorsal half of the fundus is also observed. The retina
 they protrude into the vitreous. The outer half of the retina 
consists  of  the 
pigmented
epithelium  and 
 the
receives nutrition by diffusion from the choriocapillaris. In
 neurosensory layers. A potential space exists between the
pigmented eyes (the norm), the choroidal vessels are
pigmented epithelium and the photoreceptors (1.39),
obscured by the pigmented epithelium and the
1.37
Table 1.1 Magnification factors for direct ophthalmoscopy.
(Modified from Murphy and Howland, 198763.)
 Species
Lateral magnification  Axial magnification 
Horse
7.9
84
Cow
10.59
150
Sheep
13.89
258
Human
14.66
287
Pig
15.15
307
Dog
17.24
397
Cat
19.50
508
Rabbit
25.25
853
Rat
77.18
7,965
1.37 Illustration of how to avoid specular corneal reflections by
moverment of the light slightly off the axis to point B.
1.38
1.39
1.39 A
schema tic
Sclera
histology of
30-90μm
Large vessel -
the fundus.
Choroidal
Note the
 pig ment 
Tapetum
loca tion of
Choriocapillaris
 pigment,
blood vessel5
 Pigment -
 epithelium
 and tapetum.
Arrows
Rod + cone
denote source
of nutrition
for the retina.
1.5 mm
Inner nuclear
layer
1.38 Illustration depicting lesions that are <0.1 of a disk diameter
 (DD] or in the micron range.
 Ganglion cell -
Nerve fiber
layer
Retinal vessels
26
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
1.40
pue wniadei e yoel ieqi saka piouiqie ul (6e'l) umadel
pigment, both vascular systems can be visualized (1.40).
Similarly, there are two sources of pigment, retinal and
choroidal.  In most domestic
 animals, the tapetal
 pigmentation is also in the dorsal choroid (1.41).
When performing ophthalmoscopy, as in all examin-
ations, it is desirable to establish a routine to ensure
thoroughness. The usual starting point is to find the optic
disk ipapilla, nerve head) and then to examine each
quadrant peripherally from the disk. The optic nerve in the
 dog is unique in routinely having myelination extending to
 the level of the retina. In most species, myelination of the 
optic nerve stops at the level of the sclera {lamina cribrosa).
 In the dog, varying degrees of myelination of the nerve
produce great variation in the shape, size, elevation, and
color of the disk (1.41). Of particular importance is the
vasculature pattern on the disk, its density, origin, vessel
size, and color. The retinal arteries in domestic animals are
1.40 A normal canine albinoid, atapetal fundus. Note the two
 cilioretinal in origin. Domestic animals lack a central retinal
 50urces of visible blood vessels.
 artery {as found in humans) and thus the arteries are found
 at the disk periphery. The surface of the cat's optic disk is
 not myelinated, resulting in a small, round, dark optic disk,
1.41
 and the vessels all originate from the periphery of the disk
(1.42). (See Chapter 14, p.401 for further species
variations.)
In the dog the smaller vessels originating near the
periphery are the arterioles. The larger darker primary
 and smaller secondary veins go further onto the disk
 surface, usually to an anastomotic arc (1.40, 1.41).
 The vascular pattern on the disk and how the vessels
disappear or originate varies with the species but
variations may be a clue to pathology involving the disk.
Fish-hooking of vessels over the edge of the disk and
being out of focus are often clues that a depression on the
disk, such as a coloboma or glaucomatous cupping, may
exist (1.43, 1.44). Due to the lack of stereopsis or depth
 perception with direct ophthalmoscopy, the depression
 may not be appreciated without these visual clues.
1.41 A normal canine pigmented fundus with a tapetum. Note the 
absence of visible choroidal vessels and a triangular pinkish-white
 optic disk.
1.42
1.43
1.43 llustration of two views of retinal vessels on the disk: a vessel
that can be followed onto the disk until penetrating the nerve head 
[A]; a vessel that disappears at the edge of a shelf and then
 reappears without obvious continuity (B). (Left panel:
ophthalmoscopic view; right panel: sagittal section.]
1.42 A wide-angle photograph of a feline fundus. Note the small,
round darker disk with vessels only at the periphery.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
27
The color of the disk is quite variable between
0 roled ui sawa mxa inq saads uaamiag pue sieniaiu
effect on the retinal vessels and optic nerve function than
hyperemia are usually significant. The dog, for instance,
papilledema, and is accompanied by blindness.
normally has a pinkish-white disk due to a mixture of
myelin and capillaries. With atrophy of the nerve head it
In summary, changes in disk color, shape, and
becomes whiter to gray in color (1.45, 1.46). In addition,
elevation or depression may be important
the myelination is destroyed so the fullness, shape, and
ophthalmoscopic signs. In the dog, the great
color are affected in the dog. However, in other species
brea dth of normal variation may make it difficult
without myelination of the nerve head, color change is
to diagnose early pathologic changes for even the
the main finding of atrophy.
experienced examiner.
An increased redness of the disk is usually from
 capillary engorgement, and may be active as in inflam-
As mentioned previously, the clinician can use the grid
mation fpapillitis) or passive as in venous stasis that results
 aperture to measure the size of lesions but the size of the
grid varies with the working distance. A more consistent
papillitis the disk is swollen and elevated, causing the
and convenient means of describing and locating lesions
vessels to bend to get onto the disk {1.45, 1.47). The
is to relate the lesions to the disk size and location. This
 vessels are usually dilated and mild peripapillary edema
method utilizes the disk diameter {(DD) size to describe a
1.44
1.45
茶茶景
1.45 llustration of pathology of optic disk vasculature: optic atrophy
with no capillaries (A); normal (B); hyperemic disk with inflammation 
or congestion (papilledema] (C).
1.44 Clinical correlate of 1.43. The dog has a coloboma of the disk
1.47
(white area] with vessels falling into this recess. Retinal vessels on one
side do not proceed onto the disk as they do on the opposite side.
1.46
1.46 Optic nerve atrophy in a dog with advanced progresive retinal
1.47 Papilledema in a dog with an engorged, elevated disk. Mild
atrophy. Note the gray flat disk with scalloped edges.
peripapillary edema is present.
28
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
1.48
1.49
1.49 Morphology of
fluid lesions based 
A
 on area of fundus:
preretinal/subhyaloid
2DD
area (A]: nerve fiber
B
layer (B); intraretinal 
(C); sub-neuroretina 
(D]; choroidal (E).
1DD
1.48 llustration of locating and describing lesions in relationship to
the disk and disk dia meter (DD] .
1.50
lesion's size and distance from the disk, and the hands of
a clock to locate the lesion in relation to the disk {1.48).
This method allows accurate description of a lesion's size
 and location to compare with at a later date.
There are various clues available for localizing the
depth of a lesion with the ophthalmoscope. One useful
1.50 Illustration of preretinal hermorrhage that has settled, giving a
 clue for localization of fluid lesions such as hemorrhages
is the morphology of the lesion. Fluid lesions must
conform to the anatomy involved and, as a result, have a
variety of shapes and sizes. Due to the loose attachment
1.51
of the vitreous to the retina, the neurosensory retina to
the pigmented epithelium, and the loose structure of the
choroid, hemorrhages of large size may occur in these
three spaces. Intraretinal hemorrhages are confined by
the axons, dendrites, and Miller cell processes, which
run mainly in a vertical manner, so these tend to be small,
round hemorrhages. A hemorrhage in the nerve fiber
Ai si ll os siaay au uamiaq aeni oi s raae
flat and striated with feathered borders, and is often
called a flame-shaped hemorrhage (1.49). Preretinal
a a a sa  g m s
and red, and the erythrocytes may settle out, producing a
flat top or keel-boat-shaped hemorrhage (1.50, 1.51). If
the vitreous is liquefied, the preretinal hemorrhage
becomes diffuse hemmorrhage within the vitreous.
 The first principle of lesion location is that the
1.51 Cat fundus with multiple hemorrhages at different levels of the 
 morphology of fluid lesions is determined by the
fundus. Preretinal hemorrhages with flat tops (is the packed cell 
adjacent anatomy. Familiarity with the tissue
volume normal?)] and striated nerve fiber hemorrhages are present.
 architecture will help in localizing the lesion.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
29
1.52
 Hemorrhage A
1.53
-Vein
Hemorrhage
Artery
Choroidal vessel
1.52 llustration relating the depth of lesions to the two
vascular systems.
1.53 Illustration of the principle of parallax by observing the lesion
from two perspectives and noting whether the lesion moves against
A second principle in lesion localization is to find a
the backgroundl. If the lesion moves, it is located in front of the
structure of known depth and relate it to the lesion.
retina and not on it.
The usual structures sought for lesion localization are
a retinal or choroidal blood vessel. Other structures such
 as pigment and the tapetum may also be related to the
1.54
lesion (1.52).
 A third method of lesion localization is utilizing the
phenomenon of parallax. This is a very sensitive method of
determining if two points are in apposition or separated. This 
works well in determining low retinal detachments (1.53).
Parallax is looking at the structure in question
against the background from two different
observation points and determining if the structure
moves in relation to the background. This will
establish whether the two points are separated.
The fourth method of lesion localization, unique to the
 direct ophthalmoscope, is the use of various lenses to focus
on the object. Most animal's fundi will be in focus at 0 to
-2 diopters (D). A lesion that is blurred can be assumed to
lie either in front of or at the back of the plane of the
1.54 llustration of using the ophthalmoscopes lenses to focus on
fundus. The plus (black numbers) lenses will converge light
raised or depressed lesions: ermmetropic eye focused at 0 (A]; + lenses
allowing lesions elevated from the surface to come into
used to focus on a raised lesion (B); - lenses focusing on a depressed 
 focus. The negative lenses (red numbers) will bring into
lesion (C).
focus lesions that are below or beyond the level of the
normal fundus (1.54). Approximately 4 D is equivalent to
1 mm in the canine eye. This varies by species due to the
1.55
1.55
 inherent magnification of the eye.
llustration of
the technigue
Summary
Transmission
utilizing 
The four methods of lesion localization with the
proximal
 direct ophthalmoscope are:
 illumina tion.
1. Lesion morphology.
2. Relating to structures of known depth.
 3. Utilizing the parallax phenomenon.
Light source
 4. Diopter settings.
 Proximal illumination is a technique whereby the area
in question is illuminated by shining the light adjacent to
the area being examined. The small circular aperture is
used in this instance. This may yield information regarding
 Absorption
the structural nature of the lesion. If the lesion is cystic,
fluid, or of a low density, the lesion will transmit light
which will be reflected back to the observer's eyes. A dense
or heavily pigmented lesion will absorb the light (1.55).
30
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 As with most techniques, competence comes only
 examiner's hands to hold the lens and the patient (1.56).
with practice, practice, and more practice!
The function of the headset is not only to provide light but
to narrow optically the examiner's interpupillary distance
(PD) of 60 mm to 15 mm (1.57). Narrowing the PD allows
Indirectophthalmoscopy
both eyes plus the light to be projected through the
Although the image may be confusing with the indirect
 patient's pupil; this allows the observer binocular vision
ophthalmoscope because it is upside down and reversed,
and stereopsis (Table 1.2). Many scopes now have a small 
pupil feature that narrows the PD to as small as 6 mm.
components of indirect ophthalmoscopy are an adequate
Table 1.3 gives the minimum pupil size of the patient that
light source and a converging lens. The light source with
is necessary with three different strengths of condensing
the binocular indirect ophthalmoscope {BIO) is on a
lenses for binocular observation. The lens strength selected
headband or fits on spectacle frames, thus freeing the
will alter the magnification and size of field of the image,
1.56
1.57
60 mm
1.56 Binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy being performed. Note the
1.57 Optics of the binocular indirect ophthalmoscope and narrowing
working distance and lack of an assistant to hold the animal.
the interpupillary distance of the examiner.
Table 1.2 Magnification factors for indirect ophthalmoscopy. (Modified from Murphy and Howland, 198763.)
 Lateral magnification 
 Axial magnification
Species
14D
20 D
30 D
40 D
14D
20 D
30 D
40 D
Horse
1.18
0.79
0.51
0.38
1.86
0.84
0.35
0.19
Cow
1.58
1.06
0.68
0.50
3.34
1.50
0.62
0.34
Sheep
2.07
1.39
0.90
0.66
5.74
2.58
1.07
0.58
Human
2.19
1.47
0.95
0.70
6.39
2.87
1.19
0.65
Pig
2.26
1.52
0.98
0.72
6.83
3.07
1.28
0.70
Dog
2.57
1.72
1.11
0.82
8.85
3.97
1.65
0.90
Cat
2.91
1.95
1.26
0.93
11.31
5.08
2.11
1.15
Rabbit
3.77
2.53
1.63
1.20
18.99
8.53
3.55
1.93
Rat
11.52
7.72
4.98
3.68
177.44
79.65
33.15
18.06
ui enoig buin sasual buisu jo damod buea ym sisdoaais iot ais dnd puaed wniu e'l aie
ophthalmoscopy. (Modified from Goldbaum et al., 198067.)
Interpupillary distance (mm)
Strength of condensing lens (D)
Interpupillary distance of 
 viewer's eyes as projected on 
the patient's eye (mm)
15
30
1.5
15
20
2.25
15
15
3.0
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
31
the size of pupil that the fundus can be visualized through
The light source can be made very bright with a BIO,
stereoscopically, and the inherent stereopsis (Table 1.4).
as it is usually powered by 110 volts from a transformer
The higher the diopter strength of the lens, the smaller the
with a rheostat. In addition, the indirect image is
image but the larger the field of view, the smaller the pupil
inherently brighter due to all of the light returning to the
that can be examined, and the less the stereopsis67, 68
observer's eye. The bright light may allow observation
For the majority of the time when utilizing the BIO,
the examiner can handle the animal without having an
unsuccessful with the direct form66. The light should be
assistant to restrain the head (1.56). A teaching mirror is
 also available for most models and video indirect scopes
creates patient discomfort with a resultant lack of
are available.
cooperation. Anesthetized patients that cannot move
 Before using the BlO a few adjustments are necessary.
may develop retinal burns due to the strong light. The
The headset band tension is adjusted so that it is firm
 strength of the light must often be decreased for the 
enough to keep from slipping and allow subtle movement
"uau peiadeiuou aui roy pasgaoul pue wnadei
of the light by contraction of the brow, but loose enough
The image formed with a BIO is an aerial image which
to avoid a headache. If the headset is not in front of the
is upside down and reversed and formed between the
examiner's eyes, the headset is moved up or down. The
 patient and the examiner (1.58)65.
PD is adjusted for each eye by sliding the optics of each
 The lenses used in indirect ophthalmoscopy are
eyepiece horizontally. The light should fall in the center
biconvex or converging lenses, usually ranging from +14 D
of the observation field for that eye and the two fields
lenses to +30 D in strength. When used with the binocular 
should be fused. The adjustment of the light on a vertical
headset, additional magnification is built into the headset
basis is performed using the hand as a target. With the
and magnification increases fourfold with the +14 D to
hand at the usual comfortable bent arms working
twofold with the +28 D lens, although this will vary with
distance, the light is adjusted to fall in the upper half of
the species (see Tables 1.2, 1.4). The magnification of the
the examiner's field.
retina is equal to diopter strength of the eye divided by the
diopter strength of the lens used67,68. The strength of the
The usual binocular indirect ophthalmoscope has
lens affects not only the magnification but the amount of
three main adjustments to be made before use.
stereopsis or depth perception of the exa miner. The higher
They are:
the diopter strength of the lens, the less the depth
1. Adjustment of the tension of the headband.
perception (Table 1.4).
 2. Adjustment of the interpupillary distance of the
An additional factor in selecting a lens is the size of
eyepieces.
the patient's pupil. The higher diopter lens can project
 3. Vertical adjustment of the light in the eyepieces.
the examiner's pupil onto a smaller patient pupil {1.59,
Table 1.3)67. When examining the peripheral fundus, the
1.58
1.59
S
F1
CL
1.58 Optics of binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy. Note how the
examiner's pupil distance is narrowed by the prisms and that a real
aerial image is formed between the examiner and the patient. (E =
examiner's eyes; LS = light source; P = patient; Fl = patient's fundus;
 = corrective lens; Fl = image of patient's fundus in space) (with
permission from Rubin, 196065.)
Table 1.4 Ocu lar characteristics of lenses. (Modified
1.59 Optics comparing pupil size needed for various strengths of
from Goldbaum et al., 198067.)
condensing lens and the difficulty in projecting the light and viewer's
eyes obliquely through the pupil to view the peripheral fundus: 30 D
Lens power
Field of
lens image of examiner's eyes and light projecting into a small pupil 
Approximate
Approximate
 and when viewing the peripheral fundus (A);: 20 D lens image; note
(D)
 magnification 
view
stereopsis
the larger pupil size required and that the peripheral fundus can still
28-35
x2
.09
x 0.5 normal
be examined if the pupil is large (B);: 14 D lens: the pupil must be
very large and oblique viewing effectively cuts the light out so the
20
51°
x 0.75 normal
peripheral fundus cannot be visualized (C). (with permission from 
14
x4
30°
x 1 normal
Goldbaum et of., 198067)
32
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
patient's pupil becomes optically compressed or narrow,
Note: to bring an object into the central view, the
so to maintain binocular function the examiner may have
observer's head and hand lens move in the same
qidap awos asol inq sual 1aidoip 1auaiy e asn 0
direction as the area to be viewed in the aerial image.
perception in the process (1.59). A good compromise if
only one lens is available is a +20 D lens. The size of the
 Movement of the head to bring objects in the image to
field of view is dependent on the diopter power of the
the center is a simple concept, but it is counterintuitive
lens and the diameter of the lens. The higher diopter lens
 and requires practice (1.62).
produces a more panoramic view and, for a given lens
Parallax can be
 demonstrated  with indirect
strength, increasing the diameter of the lens increases the
ophthalmoscopy by tilting or shifting the hand lens or
field of view67, 68.
the head to observe the object from a slightly different
angle. If the object is separated from the background, it
Selection of the strength of the lens will depend on
will then move in relationship to the background (1.63).
the patient's pupil size and the amount of stereopsis
 Due to the expense of a BIO many other light sources
{depth perception) and magnification desired.
can be used instead. Any light source that does not diffuse
out excessively can be utilized. If the light source is battery
The lens is held with the thumb and forefinger, and
operated, it allows easy portability. The light sources can
the remaining fingers are used to retract the upper lid
be as varied as a good penlight, a strong otoscope or
and steady the lens in space (1.60). The strongest
direct ophthalmoscope, or any fiberoptic bundl. If the
convex surface of the lens should be facing the observer
direct ophthalmoscope is used as the light source, more
for the best image. Many lenses have an identifying dot
magnification can be produced by adding 1-2+ D of
or white ring that identifies the side towards
the
lenses than if it is set at 0 D. Beyond 2 D the image
patient. When using the lens it will be noted that a
becomes blurred. Beca use there is no optical narrowing of
bright specular reflection is present from the anterior
the examiner's PD without a headset, the 60 mm (average
and posterior lens surface and is located in the center of
 PD) must be projected onto the patient's pupil and the
the lens when the lens is held perpendicular to the light
technique requires a much larger pupil to acquire
beam. These bright specular reflections are often
 binocular examination (Table 1.5),. Consequently, it is
annoying, as they obscure the area of interest that is
termed monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy (1.64).
usually centered. These specular reflections can 
be
Another form of monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy is
decentered by tilting the lens slightly, which pushes the
available in which the instrument optically rights the
reflections to the side (1.61)69. Excessive tilting of the
reversed and inverted image, thus avoiding this source of
lens will create a prismatic effect, bending the light so
confusion. The image is smaller but there is a wider field
that it is not directed through the pupil.
than with direct ophthalmoscopy (1.65). The instrument
One of the difficulties in learning indirect ophthalmo-
is expensive but extremely easy to use.
scopy is created by the reversed image. This confuses the
 Indirect ophthalmoscopy gives a lower magnification
beginner as to the direction to move to bring the object
but a larger field than direct ophthalmoscopy, and gives
of regard into better view.
the examiner a better overall 1
 picture. With less
magnification the patient's ocular movements are less
 troublesome. Most forms of indirect ophthalmoscopy
utilize both of the examiner's eyes and thus stereopsis with
depth perception is an important advantage. With good
1.60
1.61
1.60 Technique of holding the lens 5o that the upper id is held
1.61 Illustration of specular reflections off the hand lens: specular
 open, the lens is aligned, and the hand and lens move with the head.
reflex from each surface is centered in the lens that distracts from
viewing (A];: slight tilting of the lens pushes the specular reflection
to the side leaving the central area clear (B).
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
1.62
1.63
Axis of rotation,
Vessel
Lesion
V
1.63 Demonstration of parallax of a lesion with a Bl0. The
lesion when viewed from one perspective is observed against a
 background vessel; if the lesion is separated from the background
vessel, the lesion will move in relation to the vessel by slight
1.62 The area to the side of the branching vessels in the fundus can
rotation of axis of observation.
 be observed by the examiner moving in the direction the vessels are
 seen in the image.
 Table 1.5 Relationship between lens power and patient
pupil size necessary to project both eyes of the examiner
into the fundus without a binocular headset. (Modified
from Goldbaum et al., 198067.)
Average
Power of
Size of 
interpupillary
condensing lens
patient's
distance of
(D)
pupil (mm)
humans (mm)
60
30
6
60
20
9
60
15
12
1.64 Monocular indirect 
.65
ophthalmoscopy being 
 performed with a Finoff
mydriasis the extreme peripheral retina can be examined.
illuminator. Note an
The ora ciliaris retina is routinely visualized temporally
 assistant is necessary to hold 
and ventrally, less commonly nasally, and rarely dorsally
the dog's head.
 without scleral indention. Peripheral exa mination requires 
practice in positioning and manipulating the hand lens to
1.65 Monocular indirect
get a prismatic bending of light.
 scope that optically
 In veterinary medicine an important advantage of the
 corrects the image for the 
BIO is that the examiner's head is a distance from the
observer.
patient. This is important from the standpoint of physical
trauma and, occasionally, contagious diseases 
in
laboratory animals. It is always important to compare eyes
in the examination and the BlO allows this to be done
quickly and thus to be more valid. Most BIOs have a
teaching mirror available, so colleagues or students can
 gain first hand observations with an experienced examiner.
 Most texts emphasize the difficulty of using a BIO
but in practice it is routinely more gratifying to the
novice to finally see the overall picture, so that it
discourages it.
 US$20-200. The magnification with this form of indirect
ophthalmoscopy is usually not as much as the BlO and,
The most important disadvantage of the usual BIO is
depending on the source of light, both of the examiner's
 the cost. This is not prohibitive for the practitioner but it
hands are used, so an assistant is necessary. The patient's
is for the student. The monocular version of indirect
ophthalmoscopy only requires a lens that may cost from
stereopsis (Table 1.5).
34
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
VISION EVALUATION IN SMALL ANIMALS
Menace response
Vision evaluation is at best very crude and testing has not
The menace response is a threatening, sudden movement
significantly improved over the years. In the dog with
presented near the eye, which elicits a blink. Before testing
partial decreases in vision, multiple forms of visual testing
for a menace response the examiner must make sure the
are performed to satisfy the examiner that there is a
facial nerve is intact by eliciting a blink reflex through the
deficit and to characterize it. With complete loss of vision,
palpebral or corneal reflex. While menacing can still be
the result of maze or obstacle course testing is usually
performed without an intact facial nerve, the response is
dramatic. Cats present a special problem in testing their
subtler. The afferent arm of this response is the visual fibers
functional  vision  because  they  are  often  reluctant to
up to the visual cortex and the efferent arm is the facial
explore an area, making it difficult to differentiate a
nerve. Additional centers involved with the menace response
 normal shy behavior pattern from a visual deficit.
are the cerebellum, rostral colliculus, and the motor cortex.
Cerebellar disease produces an ipsilateral deficit in the
 menace response with retention of vision (1.66)70-72. The
 menace response can be altered by nonvisual influences such
1.66
 as mental status and cerebellar disease.
When trying to elicit a menace response, avoid air
currents that may stimulate the blink reflex. A transparent
Orbicularis
 shield may be placed in front of the eye or, more commonly, 
oculi muscle
presentation of fingers rather than a broad hand are used to
 avoid air currents. Complacent or trusting animals should
Optic nerve
have the eyelids occasionally tapped to make them more
alert. The contralateral eye should be closed to determine
that it was not a binocular response to the stimulus. Due to
the mixture of ipsilateral and contralateral visual fibers,
Motor cortex
unilateral lesions above the chiasm do not produce
complete blindness in an eye, and a variable menace
response may be obtained depending on the visual field
stimulated. The predominance of crossed fibers (65-75%)
Internal
in higher lesions results in a larger temporal field (nasal
retina) defect in the eye contralateral to the defect. Nasal
capsule
feld defects {lateral retina) are more difficult to detect as
Lateral
 they are smaller (25-35%), and it is easier to stimulate the
 geniculate
 Opposite eye inadvertently with movement if it is not closed.
nucleus
Table 1.6 summarizes the PLR, and menace responses with
lesions at different anatomic locations.
 Optic radiations
Dazzle reflex
 Pontine nucleus
The dazzle reflex is a subcortical reflex that involves
Cerebellar
(midbrain)
stimulating the retina with a very bright light, resulting in a
cortex -
bilateral narrowing of the palpebral fissure. The reflex
 requires the retina, optic nerve, chiasm, optic tract, and,
Facial
probably, _the supraoptic nuclei and the rostral
nerve ~
colliculi70-72. The dazzle reflex persists with cortical
Facial nucleus
blindness. A positive dazzle response helps to establish the
 (brain stem)
intactness of the lower visual system when vision cannot be
evaluated (such as with cataracts) and the PLR is altered
1.66 Menace response pathways.
 due to efferent problems (such as iris atrophy, synechia).
Table 1.6 Comparative visual reflexes with unilateral complete lesions within the visual system
Lesion location
PLR
Anisocoria
Menace response
ERG
 Retina
Direct absent, +MG
Mild static
Absent
Extinguished in most cases
 Optic nerve
Direct absent, +MG
Mild static
Absent
Normal
 Complete chiasm
Absent OU
Dilated OU
Absent
Normal
Optic tract
 Present, -MG
Mild static
Homonymous field defect
Normal
Optic radiations/visual
cortex
Present
None
Homonymous field defect
Normal
 PLR: pupillary light reflex; ERG: electroretinogram; MG: Marcus Gunn (pupil); Homonymous: right nasal + left temporal field, or
left nasal + right temporal field; OU: both eyes.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
35
Visual placing
affect the ganglion cells or optic nerve, such as glaucoma,
Visual placing is a good test for animals with normal motor
may result in a normal ERG in a blind animal.
function and mental status. The animal is held in space and
A retinal electrical potential evoked with an
supported under the chest and head while approaching a
alternating patterned grating (patterned ERG, PERG)
flat surface such as a table. The normal response is to
evokes responses that may have optic nerve and ganglion
 extend and raise the legs in anticipation of standing on the 
cell origins76. The PERG has also been utilized to
 surface. If the expected response is not forthcoming, then
 estimate the visual acuity of animals77.
tactile stimulation should be used to establish the normalcy
Oscillatory potentials {OPs) are small oscillations that
of proprioception and the efferent arm of the reflex. Testing
 are superimposed on the B-wave and there may be up to
the response with both eyes open and then alternately
four to five wavelets. They are observed best during dark
holding the lids closed will evaluate individual eyes.
adaptation; their origin is the inner retina and they are
Approaching the surface from the lateral or medial aspect
thought to be from the amacrine cells. Wavelets O3 and
 may give an indication of intactness of the visual fields.
alterations in the OPs are observed with alterations in
Maze or obstacle course
 retinal circulation, most nota bly in dia betes mellitus.
An obstacle course in a nonfamiliar environment for the
Visual evoked potentials ( VEPs) are measured over the
animal is one of the more common methods of evaluating
occipital cortex after stimulating the retina with light.
functional vision. The maze test is usually useful with active
 The potentials are small and require computer averaging
animals but is often difficult to evaluate with cats that cower
 and general anesthesia. VEPs mea sure the integrity of the
or do not move. The examiner usually scatters objects of
optic nerve, optic tracts, and occipital cortex.
varying size through the main pathway of the examination
room. Most dogs move toward the exit door or the owner's
FLUORESCEIN ANGIOGRAPHY
voice. Repeated trials through the maze under ambient
Fluorescein angiography is used to study the retinal,
room light and with minimal light are performed. Dramatic
choroidal, and iris vasculature. Ater injection of
differences in scotopic (night) and photopic (light-adapted)
10-25 mg/kg of fluorescein i.v., the circulation is observed
vision may be observed with maze testing. Patching of
 through a camera equipped with an exciter filter (500 nm)
individual eyes can be performed; with monocular blindness
to stimulate the fluorescence of fluorescein, a barrier filter
most patients become preoccupied with the bandage and
that selects light at the peak emission for fluorescein
remove it when the good eye is patched.
(S50 nm), a motorized film advancer, and a rapid strobe
recharging unit. The flow of dye through the vessels is
Visual cliff
sequentially observed as the choroidal, retinal arteriolar,
perception. Some cats that are functionally blind will be
able to jump off a table.
Cotton ball test
Cotton balls dropped into the visual fields of the patient
1.67
are a common means to evaluate vision. Animals often
get easily bored with this so initial impressions are the
most important.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC TESTS
Electroretinography, visually evoked responses, and
electro-oculogra phy are electrophysiologic responses that
may be utilized in clinical investigations. While initially
limited to institutions, computerization has made the
electroretinography equipment less expensive and it is
5 msec/div.
usually available in specialist practices.
The electroretinogram (ERG) is an action potential that
1.67 ERG from a normal dog: A-wave (1); B-wave (2]; no
occurs when a sudden change of illumination falls on the
C-wave is recorded.
retina. The potential is divided into three major compo-
 Performed with blue 
1.68
nents: A-, B-, and C-waves. The A-wave is the first negative
light in a dark room.
deflection and arises from the photoreceptors; the B-wave
 Note two oscilla tory
follows and is the first positive deflection and arises from
 potential wavelets on
nonneuronal glia in the inner nuclear layer; and the C-wave
the B-wave.
is a slow positive potential arising from the pigmented
epithelium of the retina (1.67)73-75, Figure 1.67 is typical of
1.68 Fluorescein
a flash-induced ERG with white light under dark
 angiogram in a dog in
 adaptation (rod dominated response). Fundus photography
the late venous phase.
or indirect ophthalmoloscopy reduces the dark adapted
Note the arteries and 
udepe yep jo sainu og oi dn pue sapndue 5i
veins are both filled.
may be necessary to return to comparable ERG amplitudes 
(Courtesy of Dr. K.
 of 20 minutes of dark adaption_ without previous light
Gelatt.]
stimulation75a. The usual flash ERG is generated by the
outer half of the retina, and diseases that preferentially
36
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
fluoresces at similar wavelengths as fluorescein, thus
endothelium, or lens is more likely. (See Table 1.7 for
reducing the contrast, but this can be minimized by a
 aqueous humor laboratory values92.)
barrier filter that transmits wavelengths over 530 nm82.
Cultures obtained from the aqueous may be negative
with septic conditions because of the dilution and turnover
ULTRASOUND
of fluid. Vitreous is a more reliable culture media for septic
 Ultrasonography in A and B modes has become routine in
most centers for studying ocular lesions when the medium
complications (hemorrhage and creation of retinal holes)
is opaque. It is particularly helpful in detecting neoplasia,
and so is reserved for seriously diseased eyes. A 22 gauge
phacoclastic uveitis, foreign bodies, vitreal pathology, and
needle is used due to the difficulty in aspirating formed
vitreous. The needle is passed 6-8 mm posterior to the
graphy detects acoustic interfaces or differences in the
limbus in the lateral to dorsolateral quadrant where the
density of tissue. The more dramatic the acoustic interface,
 pars plana is widest. The needle is pointed to the center of
the more the ultrasound waves are reflected back to the
the eye {1.71) utilizing extreme care to avoid hitting the
probe. A-mode ultrasonography gives an image of the
lens. The needle frequently needs repositioning to find
amplitude of reflections in one spatial dimension fanterior-
pools of liquified vitreous.
posterior), whereas B-mode ultrasonography consists of
two spatial dimensions. A-mode is best suited for biometric
BIOMICROSCOPY
measuring of ocular dimensions, whereas B-mode is usually
The advent of portable slit lamps has made biomicroscopy
used for diagnostic imaging, although B-mode has been
the standard for examination of the anterior segment.
reported to be as accurate as A-mode for biometric
Otto Uberreiter, an Austrian veterinarian, pioneered the
use of the slit lamp in veterinary ophthalmology28,29,94. A
be through a water bath (surgical glove filled with water)
sauei Aaqi taepoi asn ul aue sdwel s aiqehod jo Aiana
offset on the closed lids or, more commonly, directly on the
 in price from US$500-3500 (1.72). In veterinary medicine,
cornea utilizing an ultrasound coupling gel. Typical probe 
where patient movement is inherent, a disadvantage of the
frequencies used in ophthalmic ultrasound are 7-10 MHz.
newer slit lamp models is that the lowest magnification is
New instruments with probes that can focus at different
often 10x, which is too high.
focal lengths have improved visualizing the anterior
segment without an offset (1.69).
Biomicroscopic techniques
Slit lamps come in many variations but all consist
B-mode ultrasonography has greatly expanded our
essentially of an illuminating system with a focused light
 diagnostic capabilities in eyes with opaque media.
 that usually has various apertures to modify the color and
shape of the light beam, and a microscope. The light can be
An extension of the use of ultrasound has been color
rotated at various angles around the point of observation
flow Doppler studies of the eye and orbit to study blood
with the microscope. The slit lamp is unique in that the
flow, and ultrasonic pachymetry to measure corneal
microscope and the light source ha ve the same focal length
thickness87,8s. Fifty MHz probes are now available, and
(about 7-10 cm [2.8-4 in]). Before using, the oculars of the
they produce a very detailed image of the anterior
microscope should be adjusted for the PD of the examiner 
segment that rivals histologic sections. The latter are
and the focus of the oculars adjusted by observing the light
limited to 4-5 mm of tissue penetration and have been
on a target rod. Some instruments have lines within the
used to study the iridocorneal angle of dogs9
oculars to focus on. Because the light is focused, it is
The reported axial lengths of the dog eye vary with
important to adjust the oculars for each individual so that
the head type. Mesocephalic dogs have a mean axial
length of 19.9 mm and dolicocephalics have a mean of
21.2 mm86. Sedated Samoyeds have a mean of 22 mm90
1.69
and an overall mean of 20.4 mm was found when a
variety of breeds was examined91.
OCULAR CENTESIS
Aqueous and vitreous centesis are performed frequently
for cultures and cytology of intraocular disease92, 93.
Aqueous centesis can be performed under topical
anesthesia in a cooperative patient but most clinicians
will feel more comfortable using sedation. Aqueous
humor centesis is performed with a 25-30 gauge needle
entering the anterior chamber at the limbus, with the
needle passing parallel with the iris (1.70). The *seal on
the syringe should be broken prior to passing the needle
into the eye, to avoid awkward movement when
aspirating fluid. Unless the anterior chamber is collapsed
about 0.3 ml of aqueous humor can usually be
aspirated. Centesis is used not only to obtain aqueous
humor but may be used to vacuum cells off lesions on
1.69 B-mode ultrasound image of a normal 11-year-old dog with a
the iris and aspirate cystic lesions. Centesis of the
10 MHz probe and direct contact with the cornea. Note that with newer
anterior chamber is usually safe but with opaque
technology that the anterior segment is well visualized. (1: cornea:
corneas or marked iris bombe, trauma to the iris,
2: anterior chamber; 3: lens; 4: vitreous; 5: optic nerve.]
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
37
1.70 Aqueous
1.70
1.71  vitreal
centesis from a
 centesis of a cat
1./T
cat with uveitis.
eye. Special care
 should be taken to
avoid the lens.
Table 1.7 Baseline values for aqueous humor for the dog
1.72
and cat. (Modified from 0lin, 197792.)
Factor
Dog
Cat
Refractive index
1.335
1.335
 Protein content 
口
24-54
15-55
(mg/100 ml)
11-55
 Anterior chamber
0.4-0.6
0.6-0.9
volume (ml)
0.72
Cytology
1.72 Kowa SL-14 slit lamp with recharging station.
 Occasional mononuclear cell or melanocyte
.73
the microscope and the light focus coincide. The target rod
is located at the focal point of the light source and the
oculars are adjusted so that the margins of the light image
 are sharp in each ocular. In general, the clinician should
utilize the least magnification possible and wider beam
widths for preliminary examinations, and should selectively
utilize higher magnifications for minute lesions. The light
beam is placed 20-30° from the axis of the microscope, and
in most dogs is oriented from the temporal side of the eye
because the nose interferes with placement of the light. The
light can be utilized from either side in brachycephalic dogs,
cats, and horses.
Most common illumination techniques
1.73 Optic section and parallelpiped of cornea. Note the specular
Direct foca! illumination
reflections. The endothelium can be visualized with a quiet patient
This is the most common form of slit lamp examination
utilizing specular reflections.
with the microscope and light beam focused on the same
 point. The advantage of the focused light beam is that the
sharp demarcation of illuminated and nonilluminated
surfaces reduces scattered light that drowns out detail.
When observing the cornea and lens this produces a
parallelpiped or a three-dimensional block of light as it
overall impression. This is followed with the optic section
traverses the tissue {1.73). Examination of solid structures
which is produced by narrowing the width of the light so
such as the iris simply gives a magnified view with minimal
that the block of light becomes two dimensional, namely
gare. The parallelpiped of the cornea and lens allows
length and depth (1.73). Coincidentally, the strength of the
visualization of the two surfaces of the tissue as well as the
light usually must be increased. Examination of the tissue
 intervening tissue. As the surfaces of the cornea and lens are
with the optic section allows exact localization in depth of
curved, specular reflections will be produced. Specular
lesions. When examining with an optic section, various
reflections appear as bright reflections near the center of the
 zones of optical discontinuity will be observed in the cornea
vertical axis of the light beam. Examination with a broad
0 Areuad e saaa padidalred e huonpoud weaq u
 section at low magnification.
38
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE In VEtERINARY MeDICINE
Retroillumination
1.74
1.74 Direct and
Retroillumination can be categorized into direct and
indirect
indirect. Direct retroillumination examines structures or
retroillumination of a
lesions against the background of the retroilluminated
corneal lesion. At
light {1.12); indirect retroillumination examines the
position A direct 
retroilluminated structure against the adjacent dark
retroillumina tion
background {1.74). The technique of retroillumination
views the object in
the cornea against 
structures such as the iris or fundus, while focusing the
the retroillumina ted 
microscope on the nearer structures studied such as the
iris; at position B the
cornea or lens {1.12)30-32. Retroillumination is an
 object is illumina ted 
extremely sensitive and rapid method of detecting
by the light but is
opacities of the clear media. Objects are observed
 examined against the
because they obstruct, refract, or reflect light. Structures
dark nonilluminated 
studied that obstruct light will appear darker in direct
iris. (Modified from
retroillumination.
Berliner, 1966*5)
Oscillatory iflumination
Oscillatory illumination is a minor variation of direct
focal illumination and retroillumination that utilizes the
movement of the light source to study the dynamics of
changing illumination on the structure or lesions.
Proxima! or indirect iffumination
Examination of theposteriorsegment
 Proximal illumination utilizes a focused beam directed
In an eye with a lens, the slit lamp can only focus as far
adjacent to the object being studied. Proximal
posteriorly as the anterior vitreous cavity. Contact or
illumination may determine the density of the lesion, i.e.
noncontact lenses may be used to neutralize the cornea
 solid versus cystic.
 and allow the fundus to be examined with the slit lamp.
REFERENCES
1 Marfurt C, Murphy C, Florczak J (2001)
7 Urban M, Wyman M, Reins M,
13 Rubin L, Lynch RK, Stockman WS
 Morphology and neurochemistry of
Marraro V (1972) Conjunctival flora in
{1965) Clinical estimation of lacrimal
 canine corneal innervation. Investigative
clinically normal dogs. Journat of the
function in dogs. Journat of the American
Ophthatnology and Visuat Science
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Veterinary Medicat Association
42:2242-2251
161:201-206.
147:946-947.
2 Rubin L {1964) Auriculopalpebral nerve 
8 McDonald PJ, Watson ADJ {1976)
14 Veith LA, Cure TH, Gelatt KN {1970) A
 block as an adjunct to the diagnosis and
Microbial flora of normal canine
simple and helpful diagnostic tool: the
treatment of ocular inflammation in the
conjunctivae. Journat of Small Animat
Schirmer tear test in cats. Modern
horse. Journat of the American Veterinary
Practice 17:809-812.
Veterinary Practice 57:48-49.
Medicat Association 144:1387-1388.
9 Murphy JM, Lavach JD, Severin GA
15 Marts BS, Bryan GM, Preieur J (1977)
3 Manning J, St. Clair L (1976) Palpebral,
{1978) Survey of conjunctial flora in dogs
 Schirmer tear test measurement and
 frontal, and zygomatic nerve blocks for
with clinical signs of external eye disease.
lysozyme concentration of equine tears.
examination of the equine eye. Veterinary
Journat of the American Veterinary
Journat of Equine Medicine ancd Surgery
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
Medicat Association 172:66-68.
1:427-430.
71:187-189.
10 Shewen PE, Povey RC, Wilson MR
16 Williams RR, Manning JP, Peiffer RL
4 Trim C, Colbern G, Martin C {1985)
(1980) A survey of the conjunctival flora
{1979) The Schirmer tear test in the
 Effects of xylazine and ketamine on
of clinically normal cats and cats with
equine: normal values and the
intraocular pressure in horses. Veterinary
conjunctivitis. Canadian Veterinary
 contribution of the gland of the nictitating
Record 117:442-443.
Journal 21:231-233.
membrane. Journat of Equine Medicine
 5 Jones WG (1955) A preliminary report of
11 Hackner DV, Jensen HE, Selby LA {1979)
and Surgery 3:117-119.
the flora in health and disease of the
A comparison of conjunctival culture 
17 Berger SL, King VL {1998) The
external ear and conjunctival sac of the
techniques in the dog. Journat of the
fuctuation of tear production in the dog.
dog. Journat of the American Veterinary
American Animat Hospitat Association
Journat of the American Animat Hospitat
Medicat Association 127:442-444.
15:223-225.
Association 34:79-83.
6 Bistner SI, Roberts SR, Anderson RP
12 Lowenstein O, Murphy S, Loewenfeld I
18 Hamor RE, Roberts SM, Severin GA,
 {1969) Conjunctival bacteria: clinical
(1953) Functional evaluation of the
Chavkin MJ (2000) Evaluation of results
appearances can be deceiving. Modern
pupillary liht reflex pathways:
for Schirmer tear tests conducted with
Veterinary Practice 50:45-47.
experimental pupillographic studies in
and without application of a topical
cats. Archives of Ophthatmotogy
anesthetic in clinically normal dogs of five
49:656-670.
breeds. American Jaturnat of Veterinary
Research 61:1422-1425.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
39
19 Hawkins EC, Murphy CJ (1986)
33 Brown M, Galland J, Davidson H,
47 Magrane WG (1957) Canine glaucoma. 1.
Inconsistencies in the absorptive
Brightman A {1996) The phenol red
Methods of diagnosis. Journat of the
capacities of Schirmer tear test strips.
thread tear test in dogs. Veterinary
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Journat of the American Veterinary
Comparative Ophthatmology 6:274-277.
131:311-314.
Medical Association 188:511-513.
34 Brown M, Brightman A, Butine M,
48 Lovekin LG (1964) Primary glaucoma in
20 Hirsh S, Kaswan R {1995) A comparative
Moore T (1997) The phenol red thread
dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary
study of Schirmer tear test strips in dogs.
tear test in healthy cats. Veterinary and
Medical Association 145:1081-1091.
Veterinary Conparative Ophthatmotogy
Comparative Ophthatmology
49 Vainisi SJ (1970) Tonometry and
5:215-217.
7(4):249-252.
gonioscopy in the dog Journat of Smatl
21 Woman M, Gilger B, Mueller P, Norris K
 35 Moore C, Collier L {1990) Ocular surface
Anmat Practice 11:231-240.
{1995) Clinical evaluation of a new
disease associated with loss of
 50 Heywood R {1971) Intraocular pressures
Schirmer tear test in the dog. Veterinary
conjunctival goblet cells in dogs. Jouarnat
in the Beagle dog. Joturnat of Smatfl
Comparative Ophthatmology 5:211-214.
of the American Animat Hospitat
Animal Practice 12:119-121.
22 Gelatt KN, Peiffer Jr RL, Erickson JL,
Association 26:458-465.
51 Walde VI (1982) Glaukom beim hunde.
Gum GG (1975) Evaluation of tear
 36 Vaughan DG (1955) Contamination of 
Klemtier Praxis 27:343-354.
formation in the dog, using a
fluorescein solutions. Arerican Journat
52 Khan JA, Davis M, Graham CE, Trank J,
 modification of the Schirmer tear test.
of Ophthatmmology 39:55-61.
Whitacre MM (1991) Comparison of
Joturnal of the American Veterinary
 37 Claoue C (1986) Experimental
 Oculab Tono-Pen readings obtained from
Medicat Association 166:368-370.
contamination of minims of fluorescein
various corneal and scleral locations.
23 Rubin LF, Wolfes RL (1962) Mydriatic
by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. British
Archives of Ophthatmology 109:1444-6.
for canine ophthalmoscopy. Journat of
Journat of Ophthatmology 70:507-509.
53 Boothe W, Lee D, Panek W, Pettit T
the American Veterinary Medicat
38 Romanchuk KG (1982) Fluorescein:
(1988) The Tono-Pen: a manometric and 
Association 140:137-141.
physiocochemical factors affecting its
clinical study. Archives of
 24 Gelatt KN, Boggess II TS, Cure TH
fluorescence. Survey of Ophthatmology
Ophthatology 106:1214-1217.
{1973) Evaluation of mydriatics in the
26:269-283
54 Priehs D, Gum G, Whitley D, Moore L
cat. Journat of the American Animat
39 Gelatt KN {1972) Vital staining of the
{1990) Evaluation of three applanation
Hospital Association 9:283-287.
canine cornea and conjunctiva with rose
tonometers in dogs. American Journat of
25 Willis M, Martin CL, Stiles J, Chaffin K
bengal. Journat of the American Animat
Veterinary Research 51:1547-1550.
{1997) Acute, transient sialoadenomegaly
Hosp itat Association 8:17-22.
55 Miller P, Pickett P, Majors L, Kurzman I
in two cats following topical
40 Feenstra R, Tseng S {1992) Comparison
{1991) Evaluation of two applanation
administration of tropicamide. Veterinary
 of fluorescein and rose bengal staining.
tonometers in cats. American Journal of
Comparative Ophthatmology 7:206-208.
Ophthatmotogy 99:605-617.
Veterinary Research 52:1917-1921.
26 Gelatt K, Gum G, MacKay E {1995)
41 Roat M, Romanowski E, Araullo-Cruz T,
 56 Miller PE, Pickett JP, Majors LJ.
 Evaluation of mydriatics in horses.
Gordon J (1987) The antiviral effects of 
 Kurzman ID {1991) Clinical comparison
Veterinary and Comparative
rose bengal and fluorescein. Archives of
of the Mackay-Marg and Tono-Pen
Ophthatmotogy 5(2):104-108.
Ophthatmmology 105:1415-1417.
applanation tonometer in the dog.
27 Pascoe PJ, Elkiw JE, Stiles J, Smith E
42 Bauer G, Speiss B, Lutz H {1966)
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
{1994) Arterial hypertension associated
Exfoliative cytology of conjunctiva and
Ophthatmotogy 1:171-176.
 with topical ocular use of phenylephrine
cornea in domestic animals: a
57 Gelatt KN, MacKay EO {1998)
in dogs. Journat of the American
comparison of four collecting
 Distribution of intraocular pressure in
Veterinary Medicat Association
techniques. Veterinary Comparative
dogs. Veterinary Ophthatmology
205:1562-1564.
Ophthatmology 6:181-186.
1:109-114.
 28 Uberreiter O (1956) Augenunters-
43 Willis M, Bounous D, Kaswan R, et af.
58 Millers P, Pickett P, Majors L (1990)
uchungsmethoden met besonderer
(1997) Conjunctival brush cytology:
 Evaluation of two applanation
berucksichtigung der mikroskopie am
evaluation of a new cytological collection
tonometers in horses. Ammerican Journa!
lebenden tierauge. Wiener Tierarztiche
technique in dogs and cats with a
of Veterinary Research 51:935-937.
Monatsschrift 43:1-13.
comparison to conjunctival scraping.
 60 Martin CL (1969) Gonioscopy and
29 Uberreiter O (1956) Die mikroskopie am
Veterinary Comparative Ophthatmalogy
anatomical correlations of drainage angle
lebenden tierauge. Wiener Tierarztiche
7:74-81.
of the dog. Journat of Smatt Anima!
Monatsschrift 43:77-82.
 44 Lavach JD, Thrall MA, Benjamin MM,
Practice 10:171-184.
 30 Martin C (1969) Slit lamp examination of
Severin GA (1977) Cytology of normal
 61 Gelatt KN, Ladds PW (1971) Gonioscopy
the normal canine anterior ocular
and inflammed conjunctivas in dogs and
in dogs and cats with glaucoma and
segrment. Part I. Introduction and
cats. Jotrnat of the Armerican Veterinary
ocular tumors. Journat of Small Anima!
technique. Journatl of Small Animat
Medical Association 170:722-726.
Practice 12:105.
Practice 10:143-149.
 45 Peiffer RL, Gelatt KN, Jessen CR,
62 Bedford PGC (1977) Gonioscopy in the
31 Martin C {1969) Slit lamp examination of
Gum GG, Swin RM, Davis J (1977)
dog. Journatl of Small Animat Practice
the normal canine anterior ocular
Calibration of the Schiotz tonometer for
18:615-629.
segment. Part II. Description. Journat of
the normal canine eye. Ammerican Jotrnat
63 Murphy C, Howland H (1987) The
SmafAnimatPractice10:151-162.
of Veterinary Research 38:1881-1889.
optics of comparative ophthalmoscopy.
 32 Martin C (1969) Slit lamp examination of
46 Picket J, Miller P, Majors L (1988)
Vision Research 27:599-607.
the normal canine anterior ocular
Calibration of the Schiotz tonometer for
 64 Havener WH (1966) Ophthalmoscopic
segment. Part IIl. Discussion and
the canine and feline eye. Proceedings of
 interpretation: a semi-programmed
summary. Journat of Smatl Animat
the American College of Veterinary
instruction sequence. Notes pp. 1-30.
Practice 10:163-169.
Ophthatmotogy 19:45-51.
40
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
 65 Rubin LF (1960) Indirect ophthalmology.
77 Sims M, Ward D {1992) Response of
86 Cottrill N, Banks W, Pecham R (1987)
Journat of the American Veterinary
pattern-electroretinograms (PERGs) in
Utrasonography and biometric
Medicat Association 137:648-651.
dogs to alterations in the spatial
evaluation of the eye and orbit of dogs.
66 Havener WH, O'Dair RB (1963) The
frequency of the stimulus. Progress in
American Journat of Veterinary Research
indirect ophthalmoscope. Eye, Ea, Nose 
Veterinary and Canparative
50:898-903.
 Throat Monthty 42:41-52.
Ophthatmotogy 2:106-112.
87 Schoster J, Wickman L, Stuhr C (1995)
67 Goldbaum M, Joondeph H, Huamonte F.
 78 Sims M, Brooks D (1991) Changes in
The use of ultrasonic pachymetry and 
Peyman G (1980) Retinal examination
oscillatory potentials in the canine
computer enhancement to illustrate the
and surgery. In: Principles and Practice of
electroretinogram during dark
collective corneal thickness profile of 25
Ophthatmology, vol II. G Peyman, D
adaptation. American Journat of
cats. Veterinary Comparative
Sanders, M Goldberg (eds). WB
Veterinary Research 51:1580-1586.
Ophthatmotogy 5:68-77.
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 988-1097.
79 Sims M, Sackman J, McLean R,
88 Schmid V, Murisier N {1996) Color
68 Snead M, Rubinstein M, Jacobs P (1992)
Slaymaker C {1991) Effects of stimulus
Doppler imaging of the orbit in the dog.
The optics of fundus examination. Survey
intensity and conditioning on the
Veterinary Comparative Ophthatmology
of Ophthatmology 36(6):439-445.
electroretinogram and oscillatory
6:35-43.
69 Havener WH, Gloeckner S {1967) Atfas
potentials in dark-adapted cats. Progress
89 Gibson T, Roberts S, Severin G, Steyn P,
of Diagnostic Techniques and Treatment
in Veterinary and Comparative
Wrigley R (1998) Comparison of 
of Retinat Detachrment. Mosby, St Louis,
Ophthatmology 1:177-185.
 gonioscopy and ultrasound
pp. 1-200.
80 Gelatt KN, Henderson Jr JD, Steffen GR
biomicroscopy for evaluating the
70 Petersen-Jones SM {1989) Neuro-
{1976) Fluorescein angiography of the
iridocorneal angle in dogs. Journat
ophthalmology. British Veterinary
normal and diseased ocular fundi of the
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Jounal 145:99-120.
laboratory dog. Journat of the American
213:635-638.
71 Hart WM (1992) The eyelids. In: Adler's
Veterinary Medicat Association
90 Ekesten B {1994) Biological variability
Physiotogy of the Eye, 9th edn. W Hart
169:980-984.
and measurement error variability in
(ed). Mosby Year Book, St Louis, pp.
81 Peruccio C, Helper LC, Monti F,
ocular biometry in Samoyed dogs. Acta
1-17.
 Brightman ⅢI AH {1982) Fundus
Veterinaria Scandimavica 35:427-433.
72 Scaglliotti RH (1999) Comparative
fluoroangiography in the cat. Journat of
91 Gaiddon J, Rosolen S, Steru L, Cook C,
neuro-ophthalmology. In: Veterinary
the American Animat Hospitat
Peiffer R {1991) Use of biometry and
Ophthatotogy. K Gelatt(ed).
Association 18:939-945.
keratometry for determining optimal
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins,
82 Kommonen B, Koskinen L {1984)
 power for intraocular lens implants in
 Philadelphia, p. 1307-1400.
Fluorescein angiography of the canine
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
73 Parry HB, Tansley K, Thomson LC
ocular fundus in ketamine-xylazine
Research 52:781-783.
{1953) The electroretinogram of the dog.
anesthesia. Acta Veterimaria Scandinavica
92 Olin DD {1977) Examination of the
Journat of Physiology 120:28-40.
25:346-351.
aqueous humor as a diagnostic aid in
74 Rubin LF (1967) Clinical
83 Rubin LF Koch SA {1968) Ocular
anterior uveitis. Journat of the American
 electroretinography in dogs Journal of
diagnostic ultrasonography. Journat of
Veterinary Medicat Association 171:557.
the American Veterinary Medicat
the American Veterinary Medicat
93 Hazel SJ, Thrall MAH, Severin GA,
Association 151:1456-1469.
Association 153:1706-1716.
Lauerman Jr LH, Lavach JD (1985)
 75 Brown KT (1968) The electroretinogram:
84 Hager DA, Dziezyc J, Millchamp NJ
 Laboratory evaluation of aqueous humor
 its components and their orgins. Vision 
{1987) Two-dimensional real-time ocular
 in the healthy dog, cat, horse, and cow.
Research8:633-677
ultrasonography in the dog. Veterinary
American Journat of Veterinary Research
 76 Dawson WW, Maida TM, Rubin ML
Radialogy 28:60-65.
46:657-659.
{1982) Human pattern-evoked retinal
85 Schiffer SP, Rantanen NW, Leary GA,
94 Uberreiter O (1959) Examination of the
responses are altered by optic atrophy.
Bryan GM {1987) Biometric study of the
eye and eye operations in animals. In:
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Vistual
canine eye using A-mode
Acdvances in Veterinary Sciences, vol. 5.
Science 22:796-803.
ultrasonography. American Journat of
Academic Press, New York, pp.1-80.
Veterimary Research 43:826-830.
95 Berliner ML (1966) Biomicroscopy of the 
eye: slit lamp microscopy of the living
eye. Vol 1. Hafner Publishing, New York.
41
2
Ophthalmic
Pharmacology
ROUTES OF ADMINISTRATION
enhance drug penetration. In rabbits, removal of 25-50%
 of the corneal epithelium increases the drug concen-
TOPICAL
tration in the cornea and aqueous ninefold. Defects larger 
 Topical administration is the usual route associated
than 50% do not further increase the drug concen-
with ophthalmic drugs. Some of the many factors to
trations*. In general, topical therapy will achieve
consider when selecting a drug for topical therapy are:
therapeutic drug levels only on the ocular surface and as
what is the target tissue and can the drug reach the
targeted tissue in therapeutic levels; is the drug
 should not be relied on for posterior segment diseases, 6
available in ophthalmic form; what form of topical
drug to use if it is available in more than one form;
Frequency of application
what is the desired frequency of administration and
The frequency of therapy will vary with the severity of
practicality of it being administered; owner compliance;
the condition, the vehicle used, and the duration of
patient cooperation; comparative cost of medications;
action of the drug administered. For instance, one
and potential side-effects and toxicities.
instillation of atropine in the normal eye will maintain
 mydriasis for 3-4+ days, whereas in an eye with iritis,
Ability to penetrate the intact cornea
Aep iad sau te uoesu aunban aeu siseau
 The intact cornea consists of the epithelium, which has a
Antibiotics used for minor infections or prophylaxis may
high lipid content, the stroma, which has a high water
be given q12-8h but for an infected corneal ulcer the
content, and the endothelium, which also has a high lipid
concentration may be increased and it may be used
content. Most drugs penetrate the cornea by a process of
hourly or by constant infusion.
passive diffusion, which depends on concentration
gradients, solubility characteristics, and for ionizable 
Placement of topical drugs
molecules, the dissociation constantl. A drug applied
Most containers are multiple use and are often used on
topically must have a differential solubility in water and
different patients. Care must be taken so that the
Xu 'g seauoo ioeui aui sienaud oi ipio ui Pidl
container nozzle does not touch the hair or cornea and
drugs do not possess this characteristic: for instance,
become contaminated. A solution should be applied so
antibiotics are mainly water soluble, with the notable
that the drop falls onto the eye rather than have the
 exception of chloramphenicol and the sulfonamides. The 
 container held into the eye and squeezed. The amount of
solubility of a drug may sometimes be improved by
fluid that the conjunctival cul-de-sac can accommodate is
 combining it with certain organic salts (glucocorticoids
about 30 μl, and this is often exceeded by one drop from
with acetate), or by producing a prodrug, or chemical
an ordinary bottle. The moral is that one drop, if it hits 
derivative of the drug, manipulated to improve a certain
the eye, is more than enough, and two drops are
characteristic such as solubility, which once absorbed is
excessive, wasteful, and also increase the potential for
regenerated into the parent compound (dipivalyl
systemic side-effects from nasolacrimal absorptionl. To
epinephrine to epinephrine). Surfactants, such 
as
minimize washout by subsequent drops, if more than one
benzalkonium chloride, which is a frequent preservative
anuu s-e e uaned r oi uaaia suaq si uoeiedad
in ophthalmic solutions, also enhance a bsorption through
 interval should be observed between drops.
the epithelial barrier by their epithelial toxicity. The main
Ointments are harder to quantitate but a 1 cm
lipid barrier is broken with ulcerations and lacerations so
(0.25-0.5 in) ribbon of ointment is adequate. After
that in these conditions the water-soluble antibiotics may
application it is almost a reflex action to rub the
attain therapeutic concentrations. In conditions such as
ointment over the cornea but this should be avoided as it
corneal abscesses, the epithelium may be debrided to
is tra umatic, particularly if an ulcer is present.
42
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Vehicle
Table 2.1 Advantages and disadvantages of solutions
The vehicle chosen for topical therapy may be a solution,
and suspensions 
suspension, ointment, or solid ocular insert. The advan-
tages and disadvantages of solutions and ointments are
 outlined in Tables 2.1 and 2.2. Comparable preparations
Advantages
 in different vehicles are usually quite acceptable, and it is
 Less disturbance of vision (questionable importance in
often a matter of personal preference.
veterinary medicinel.
Excibients of topical drugs
Lower incidence of contact dermatitis.
Excibients are the therapeutically inactive ingredients in
Less toxic to interior eye if an unsealed perforating
drugs but they are often critical to the success of the
corneal injury is present.
preparation. Excibients in topical medications are used to
●May be easier to apply for some owners.
buffer, maintain sterility, prevent oxidation, and increase
Disadvantages
absorption. The pH of the preparation may be buffered by
products such as acetic, boric, or hydrochloric acid
or
Very short contact time (30 seconds), necessitates
bicarbonate, borates, citrates, and phosphates to increase the
frequent application (Robin and Ellis, 1978246; Shell,
nonionized form of the drug to improve lipid solubility, to
1982')]. Important when considering owner compliance,
 increase the drug's stability, and to improve ocular comfort.
 as the more frequent the application the less likely it is
The viscosity of the solution will be altered by vehicles such
to be performed.
as polyvinyl alcohol, polyvinylpyrrolidone, and various
● Diluted out in irritated eyes with epiphora.
forms of methylcellulose; in general the goal is to increase the
● Often more expensive for short-term therapy when
morneal contact time with the drug by slowing lacrimal
compared with a comparable ointment.
drainage. Surfactants such as benzylalkonium chloride are
frequently found in ophthalmic solutions and they act as
 Suspensions often need excessive shaking to mix and
 deliver the intended dose.
antibacterial agents or preservatives, increase the solubility
of hydrophobic agents, and enhance corneal penetration by
 Systemic absorption from nasolacrimal duct drainage is
 their epitheliotoxic action. Other preservatives used are
 greater than ointments (Robin and Ellis, 1978246).
chlorhexidine, chlorobutanol, and thimerosal.
Agents such as dextrans, glycerine, and sodium
chloride are added to solutions to bring the tonicity to a
physiologic range of approximately 0.9%, in order to
Table 2.2 Advantages and disadvantages of ointments
minimize ocular discomfort. Antioxidants such as sulfites
and EDTA are added to prevent degradation of many
drugs to an inactive form by sunlight and oxygen fe.g.
Advantages
epinephrine, proparacaine). In suspensions, the particles
￥1
Longer contact time, which means less frequent therapy
that hold the active ingredient are exhibients7, 8.
and higher drug concentrations are usually delivered.
●Not diluted out by epiphora.
Packaging of topical medications
To avoid confusion in identifying topical solutions, by
● Protects the cornea from exposure and keeps it moist
convention they are coded by cap colors: mydriatics and
better than solutions.
cycloplegics are red; mitotics are green; carbonic
● Softens crusts and discharges.
anhydrase inhibitors (CAIs) are orange; beta blockers are
●May help to to prevent symblepharon.
yellow or blue; glucocorticoids are pink; nonsteroidal
● Often less expensive than the comparable solution.
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are gray; and anti-
infective agents are tan or browne.
Disadvantages
●Add to the amount of discharge material from the eye.
Alternative topical delivery systems
●More difficult for some owners to apply.
Membrane controlled delivery system
A polymeric membrane containing a reservoir of drug can
Higher incidence of contact dermatitis.
be placed into the conjunctival cul-de-sac and this allows
 More toxic to the endothelium if a penetrating injury is
the drug to diffuse out at a predictable rate. The rate and
present.
duration will vary depending on the design. Such delivery
 Interfere with epithelial healing more than solutions.
systems are commercially available for a few drugs such as
However, this is controversial, and some studies have
pilocarpine and epinephrine, which are used in glaucoma
found no significant difference or, if present, it is not 
treatment, and these allow placement only once a week
clinically significant (Hanna et al, 1973247).
into the eye. The drug release is small but the effect is equal
to or better than the pulsed therapy of a drop at intervals.
Imprecise dosage.
Because of the lower concentration of drug released, the
●More difficult to sterilize.
undesirable side-effects are not noted?. The commercial
 Drug release from the vehicle is variable so that 
designs have not been satisfactory in the dog or cat as the
prolonged contact time may be negated, i.e. 0.1%%
third eyelid usually catches on the reservoir and flips it out
sodium dexamethasone phosphate solution penetrates
of the cul-de-sac. It is also a relatively expensive means of
better than the ointment (Cox et ar., 1972248;
therapy, particularly for its main use in treating glaucoma,
Hanna et o., 1973247).
which is a lifetime therapy.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
43
Pellets
Two basic techniques exist for applying SPL. The first
Solid pellet-like particles of methylcellulose that dissolve
is a two-hole system where the tubing is looped into and
slowly in the conjunctival cul-de-sac are commercially
back out of the conjunctival cul-de-sac, with one or more
available. The main purpose is to give a slow continuous
holes placed in the portion of the tube exposed to the cul-
release but in domestic animals the third eyelid often flips
de-sac. Placing the tube is difficult and requires two
them out of the cul-de-sac10.
punctures by a needle trochar (2.1); this technique was
popular before the advent of commercial SPL kits. The
Collagen inserts
second technique is a single-hole SPL system that utilizes
Antibiotics impregnated into collagen inserts designed as
a silicone tube with a footplate. Both types of SPL require
rings to be inserted into the conjunctival cul-de-sac have
 placement of the holes at the fornix or furthest extreme
been experimentally utilized in cattle. Mechanical design
of the conjunctival cul-de-sac to avoid ulceration. The
and physical properties of the collagen produce
injection end of the tubing is place on a braided portion
of the mane with a tongue depressor and tape. The
Collagen shields, which when hydrated appear as soft
tubing is held in place with taped "butterflies' that are
contact lenses, are on the market for the cat and dog.
sutured to the skin. The placement of the first butterfly
They slowly dissolve over 3-5 days and may act as a
aqnl aui suidaay ul leouo isou aul si aka aul oi asop
drug reservoir when soaked in water-soluble drugs such
 pulled up away from the cornea. The tubing is slipped
 aS antibiotics. The pharmacokinetics will vary with each
through the barrel of a tuberculin syringe and a blunt
drug and cannot be anticipated but in general will be
comparable to frequent topical applications. Caution
aui ui saiasid aul se pasioaxa aa Pinous
preparation are often toxic and they will also be
increased in concentration.
Soft contact lens
A soft contact lens can be soaked in water-soluble
 drugs and used as a drug reservoir. Caution should be
taken with preparations containing preservatives as
these may reach toxic levels if there is prolonged
contact12.
 Continuous and intermittent irrigation
A tube placed into the conjunctival cul-de-sac and
brought out through either lid {subpalpebral lavage,
 SPL) or placed in the nasolacrimal duct and exiting
2.1 Two-hole
2.1
through the false nostril can be used as a means of
 method of placing
applying drops to an uncooperative patienti3, 14. In the
a subpalpebral
2q o pey saieidioof pue saqni aul uaum ‘ised
lavage in the
fashioned individually, 
there were
 significant
horse. The initial
complications with the tube or footplate rubbing on
hole is created by
a 14 gauge needle
As a result of the complications, clinicians advocated
to thread tubing
utilizing the lower medial lid where the third eyelid
through (the
would protect the cornea or the nasolacrimal ducti4, 16.
direction can also
With the advent of a commercial source of SPL sets
be reversed] (A].
(Mila International, 7604 Dixie Highway, Florence,
Pacement of a
Kentucky), corneal ulcerations from rubbing of the
second hole to 
footplate on the cornea have become uncommon. The
thread tubing
placement of a SPL has become routine in treating
through back onto
horses with painful ocular disease that requires therapy
the lid (B). A knot
is tied at the end
tube (0.1-0.2 ml) and then pushed through with a
 of the tubing to
bolus of air. Some horses object to the passage of air
secure with a
into the cul-de-sac and may require larger amounts of
 suture, and a hole
medication or a flush with saline to push the
 made in the
medication onto the eye. These latter methods increase
tubing traversing 
the volume of drug and the expense, or run the risk of
the conjunctival 
diluting the medications.
cul-de-sac; taped 
When administering
multiple  medications it  is
butterflies are
tempting to combine them in one solution. In vitro
 sutured to the
 antimicrobial testing of solutions combining gentamicin,
skin (C).
tobramycin, miconazole, and atropine for 6 hours did
not demonstrate any decrease in effectiveness against
 Pseudomonas spp. or Aspergilus spp.17.
44
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
2.2
2.2 Single-hole method of placing
subpalpebral lavage 5ysterm in the horse.
A hubless needle trochar is placed in the
fornix and through the lid (A). Tubing is
threaded into the trochar and pulled 
through the lid. A cross-section illustration
to show placement of tubing in the fornix
or as high up in the conjunctival sac a5
possible (B). The footplate is pulled up to
the fornix, taped, and sutured in place and 
a tuberculin syringe used to stabilize the 
distal end of the tubing (C). The tubing is
threaded into the needle end of a
Footplate
tuberculin syringe barrel and a blunt 22 g
cannula is threaded into the tubing; the
hub of the cannula seats or fits snugly into
the tuberculin syringe. A catheter cap is
TB
added to the cannula; the syringe is then 
syringe.
taped to a tongue depressor and the unit
is taped to a piece of braided mane.
Blunt.
20 gauge
needle
Catheter
cap
22 gauge catheter threaded onto the tubing. The catheter
the need for dissection (Mila International). The pump
is seated snugly into the barrel of the tuberculin syringe
holds up to 12s ml of medication but the calculated
and a catheter cap placed on the catheter (2.2).
delivery rate is affected by the temperature and viscosity
Commercial SPL kits are now available so they do not
 of the medication. Pumps are a great work saver when
have to be custom made. SPL units can be applied for
only giving one medication or if several medications are
several weeks but they must be monitored for placement,
to be given at the same high dosing rate. However, when
infection, and function. In a series of 156 SPL placements
using multiple medications drugs are often given on
of a custom-made tube, serious complications requiring
varying dosing schedules. Also, even inexpensive drugs
premature removal developed in 16% of the place-
 may become expensive when administered in the
ments1s. One of the most common complications,
qua ntities necessary for continuous infusion.
 subconjunctival migration of the footplate, is minimized
by using a commercial SPL kit with a larger footplate,
SUBCONJUNCTIVAL
which can decrease the rate of corneal ulceration.
Injection of drug under the bulbar conjunctiva is also
Alternatively, in the horse it is easy to place a tube in
usually under Tenon's capsule and consequently the drug
the nasolacrimal duct and flush retrogradely with
is deposited against the sclera, thus bypassing the lipid
medications, although the tube is not as well tolerated.
barrier that the intact cornea presents. Penetration of
Nasolacrimal catheters require larger volumes of
drug is mainly by simple diffusion through the sclera,
medication to reach the eye, and more of the medication
 although leakage through the needle hole and topical
is likely to reflux back as the tube does not reach the
absorption does occurs, 6. The use of repositol or long-
conjunctival cul-de-sac.
acting products can produce a prolonged therapeutic
 A micropump hooked to the subpalpebral unit will
effect, but there is nothing inherent in the route that
deliver medications in a continuous manner.
The
allows the drugs to last for long periods of time. Most
 micropump may be mechanical, e.g. Cormed ambulatory
animals can have the injection performed under topical
 infusion pump (Medina, NY), elastomeric, or osmotic.
anesthesia (2.3). Injection in the usual anterior location
Aisnoauenoqns pauedui aq Aeu dund souso au
will achieve therapeutic levels only in the anterior
and connected to a SPL or placed subconjunctivally after
segment, although if injected posteriorly, therapeutic
priming with medication. Tissue fluids are drawn around
sp e jo uonu pe ag a sa lu
the drug reservoir, resulting in pressure that pushes the
subconjunctivally in the palpebral conjunctiva, as
is
drug out at a calculated rate for up to 7 days. The
frequently performed in food animal medicine, loses the
amount and duration of medication varies depending on
advantage of being absorbed through the sclera. Drug
the size of pump18-20. An external elastomeric pump is
 commercially available that delivers 0.5 ml/h and avoids
needle hole and systemic from vascular uptake.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
45
2.3 Subconjunctival
2.3
-dxg 'a soa ia in su u
injection being 
 h  's  i
administered in a
have been used to treat recurrent uveitis, and implants
eidoi dapun bop
have been designed to achieve therapeutic cyclosporine
anesthesia with a
levels for up to 10 years22, 23.
25 gauge needle.
RETROBULBAR INJECTION
Retrobulbar injection is an infrequent route of drug
administration, although this may be a route to obtain
good drug levels in the optic nerve, vitreous, and
 posterior pole24. Systemic absorption is significant, with
 serum drug levels comparable to levels given by systemic
routes2s. Air or positive contrast material may be injected
 retrobulbarly for radiographic studies of the orbit. With
the availability of computed tomography {CT) scanning,
these contrast techniques are rarely utilized. In the horse,
some surgeons administer retrobulbar local anesthesia to
position the eye better and decrease ocular movements,
thus allowing lighter general anesthesia.
SYSTEMIC
The systemic route is usually used to achieve
therapeutic drug levels in the posterior segment and
optic nerve. Just as in the cornea, the posterior and
anterior segments have barriers in the normal eye that
limit the penetration of many drugs. A blood-aqueous
humor barrier exists in tight cellular junctions of the
ciliary body nonpigmented epithelium26 and iris
vascular endothelium, and a blood-retinal barrier exists
due to tight junctions in the retinal vascular endo-
thelium and the retinal pigment epithelium27, 28. These
barriers require lipid soluble drugs to penetrate in the
Advantages:
healthy eye but with inflammation, the barriers become
+ Aqueous products can be absorbed into the eye.
more permeable. Systemic therapy is given when the
 If repositol type products are used, a prolonged drug
 drug is needed in the posterior segment, severe anterior
level can be obtained without the bother of frequent
segment disease is present, or it is the only route
topical medication.
 available for the desired drug.
Disadvantages:
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
+
 Perforation of the globe with the needle can occur.
Many drugs are irritating.
+
 If repositol products are used, it is difficult to
CONSIDERATIONS IN SELECTING AN
discontinue therapy, for instance to stop steroids if
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENT
they become contraindicated.
Spectrum of activity and mode of action
 Increased systemic absorption and potential side-
of the drug
effects.
When the infectious agent is unknown, a broad-spectrum
agent or combination product is often used. A
INTRAOCULAR OR INTRACAMERAL
 preliminary selection of antibiotics is made based on the
ADMINISTRATION
presence and morphology of bacteria in scrapings or
 Intraocular injections are given when heroic means are
aspirates, combined with previous _ experience
or
needed to control a problem. The dangers of the trauma
of injection plus the toxicity of many drugs to the corneal
intraocular infections require a bacteriocidal antibiotic to
endothelium, lens, and retina have to be balanced against
stop the infection as quickly as possible. Antimicrobial
the therapeutic benefit. The concentration of drugs is
antagonisms are theoretically possible but due to the very
drastically reduced when intraocular injections are
specific timing and dose relationships that are required,
utilized. The injection can be in either the anterior cham-
clinical antimicrobial antagonism is uncommon32.
ber (intracameral) or the vitreous, or both, depending on
When used prophylactically or for mild 
surface
the condition (see Ocular centesis, p.36, for site). Intra-
infections, potent antibiotics should not be used because
vitreal injections are often the only means of achieving
drug resistance is encouraged.
significant drug levels in the vitreous.
The most common drugs administered intracamerally
Where is the agent needed?
are antibiotics for endophthalmitis and tissue plasmino-
 The target area for the antimicrobial agent determines
 gen activator for fibrin formation. Intraviteal implants of
the route and often the drug used, based on its known
polymers surrounding an antiviral drug have been used
ability to penetrate the various barriers.
46
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Patient comfort
antibiotics. The frequency of administration should be at
Some preparations such as sulfonamides routinely sting
aul uo Suipuadap Xunoy aq Aeu pue Aep e sawn t-e isea
and result in poor owner compliance. Cats are
severity and consequences of the infection (blindness with
 unpredictable in their tolerance to a particular topical
intraocular infection, progressive ulceration). In severe
antibiotic (gentamicin drops are often not tolerated), and
 , aq a uonos r p an s
inflammation may increase the irritation for many drugs.
with the systemic form of the antibiotic to increase the
 antibiotic concentration. Experimental infections have
Potential hypersensitivity to an antibiotic
confirmed the increased efficacy of the fortified pre-
Patients potentially may develop a systemic hyper-
parations; for instance, tobramycin and gentamicin have
sensitivity to an antibiotic that is used topically and thus
been recommended at a fourfold increase from the
preclude future systemic use of that antibiotic. This is a
 commercial topical preparations33 34.
major consideration in humans but less of a concern in
The antibiotic selected will depend on the sensitivity
animals. Alternatively, certain antibiotics such 
as
(known or suspected) of the organism and where the drug
neomycin are prone to produce topical hypersensitivity
is needed. (See Table 2.3 for intraocular penetration of
reactions or, rarely, a systemic anaphylactic reaction.
antibiotics in the nonulcerated, noninflamed eye.) The
fluoroquinolone antibiotics have become popular anti-
INDICATIONS FOR ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
biotics when a broad-spectrum and bacteriocidal antibiotic
Topical antibiotics are used for infections or suspected
is needed either systemically or topically. Ofloxacin has
infective processes involving the lids, conjunctiva, cornea,
become the topical fluoroquinolone of choice because it
anterior chamber, iris, and ciliary body. The number 
of
penetrates the intact cornea better than other fluoro-
antibiotics  commercially
available as  ophthalmic
quinolones3s. The main therapeutic weakness of the fluoro-
preparations is limited, particularly for resistant Gram-
quinolones is their lack of effectiveness against streptococci.
positive organisms. In these cases it is necessary to formulate
The fourth generation fluoroquinolones (moxifloxicin and
topical preparations {often cephalosporins) from systemic
positive organisms while maintaining the similar
effectiveness of older fluoroquinolones to gram-negative
 organisms. Moxifloxicine penetrates the ocular barriers 2-3
 Table 2.3 Intraocular penetration of antibacterial agents 
times better than gatifloxicin and the older generations of
reported to inhibit keratocyte proliferation and produce
Agent
Systemic
Topical 
Subconjunctival
cytotoxicty in tissue culture preparations36. Systemic
 Penicillin
Fair
Poor
Good
fluoroquinolones, specifically enrofloxacin, have been
 Ampieillin
Poor
Poor
Good
associated with acute blindness in cats37 (see Chapter 14,
 Amoxicillin 
Good
Poor
Good
p.434). The toxicity affects the outer half of the retina and
Ciprofloxacin
Good
Poor
appears to be dose dependent. Risk factors are i.v. dosing,
一
 Ofloxacin
Good
long-term administration, and aged animals38.
Methicillin
Good
Good
 Erythromycin
 Poor
Good
Good
Poor
Poor
 Table 2.4 Subconjunctival antibiotic dosages
 Cephalosporin
Good
Colistin
 Poor
Poor
Good
 Gentamicin
Poor
Poor
Good
Agent
Dosage
Tobramycin
Poor
Poor
Good
Ampicillin 
50-250 mg
Kanamycin
 Poor
Poor
 Poor
 Amphotericin B
125 μg
 Amikacin 
Good
？
? probably
Bacitracin
10,000 U
Lincomycin
Good
Carbenicillin
100 mg
Neomycin
Poor
Poor
Cefazolin
50 mg
 Chloramphenicol Poor/fair
Good
Good
Cephaloridine
100 mg
Tetracycline
Poor
Good
Good
Cephalothin
50-100 mg
Minocyeline
Good
？
? probably
 Chloramphenicol
50-100 mg
 Bacitracin
Poor
Poor
Colistin
15-37.5 mg
Rosacin
 Poor
Good
Good
 Polymyxin
Poor
Poor
Erythromyein
100 mg
Gentamicin
10-20 mg
Trimethoprim
 sulfadiazine
Good
Tobramycin
10 mg
Sulfonamide
Good
Good
Good
Lincomycin
150 mg
Methicillin
150-200 mg
(Compiled from: Bloome et al. 197024s; Rowley and Rubin, 1970250: Axelrod
Neomycin
250-500 mg
Penicillin G
0.5-1.0 x 106
Polymixin B
10 mg
Hulem et al, 198262 Tabbara et ol., 1983263, Wingheld et ol., 1983264.
Streptomycin
50-100 mg
Jay et al., 1984265.j
Tetracycline
2.5-5.0 mg
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
47
In addition to topical antibiotics, systemic and
Due to the limited effectiveness of aminoglycosides
subconjunctival antibiotics may be used in severe anterior
against Gram-positive organisms, a cephalosporine is
segment infections, and the systemic route is indicated for
often concurrently injected.
posterior segment infections. Table 2.4 presents appro-
priate antibiotic dosages for subconjunctival injections.
The selection of topical antibiotics is not as varied
as one might anticipate, resulting in the need to
used cautiously in cats and avoided when other antibiotics
improvise in concentration and compounding of
would be just as effective. When utilized, a dose of
systemic preparations when resistant organisms are
2.5 mg/kg q12h is recommended, and fundus exa mination
encountered. Fortunately, many disease processes
should be performed on a weekly basis.
break down the barriers to drug absorption,
 Intraocular antibiotics are given for intraocular infections
 allowing therapeutic levels of antibiotics to be
 and to destroy the aqueous humor secreting capacity of the 
achieved that might otherwise not be effective.
eye. The concentration of antibiotic is critical and must be
supported by research data rather than estimates (Table
2.5). Gentamicin can be tolerated at a maximum dose of
Antibiotic prophylaxis
Topical  antibiotics  are frequently administered  for
bacterial endophthalmitis and may save the eye if given
1-3 days after lid, conjunctival, and corneal surgery. Also,
early. Intravireal injection is the only route that will
whenever there is a break in the corneal epithelium {ulcer 
produce high vitreous drug levels, and therapeutic levels
or laceration), whether or not it is associated with
may remain for 48-72 hours39,40.Higher doses will destroy
infection, it is routine to use prophylactic topical antibiotics
the retina and produce cataracts. Doses of 25-35 mg of
to prevent the native bacterial flora from becoming
gntamicin injected into the vitreous destroy the ciliary
established in traumatized tissue. Newer antibiotics should
epithelium and result in decreased, or cessation of, aqueous
 not be used indiscriminately for routine prophylaxis to help
humor production. Intravitreal gentamicin has been used as
avoid the development of resistant organisms to the drug.
a chemical means of treating some forms of advanced
 In the horse, which is predisposed to fungal keratitis after
 glaucoma with permanent blindness41 but it should not be
corneal ulceration, prophylaxis is often extended to the use
used in the functioning eye because this concentration will
of antifungal antibiotics. Subconjunctival and systemic
also destroy the retina. In one series42, 9% of injected eyes
prophylactic antibiotics are also given before and after
developed phthisis an average of 15 months postinjection,
intraocular surgery by some surgeons.
and in 65% of the eyes glaucoma was controlled. In eyes
that required a second injection, the success rate was 50%.
Intravitreal  aminoglycoside  antibiotics  vary  in
ANTIFUNGAL PREPARATIONS
     
Topical ophthalmic antifungal preparations are in the
kanamycin+3. Due to the emergence of gram-negative
'orphan drug' category as fungal ophthalmic conditions are
 organisms resistant to gentamicin and the lower retinal
 relatively uncommon and thus it is not economically feasible
toxicity of amikacin, 400-500 pg of amikacin intra-
for companies to develop such products. The only
vitreally has been recommended over gentamicin for
commercially available product marketed in the Us for
treating endophthalmitis44.
 ophthalmic use is natamycin 5% suspension. As natamycin
Paromomycin, an aminoglycoside antibiotic that is
is quite expensive and not widely available, off-label use of
poorly absorbed from the gut and used to treat enteric
topical and systemic antifungal preparations has become
 protozoal infections, produced acute renal failure, cataracts,
almost universally accepted. Systemic antifungal drugs may
and deafness in cats after a S-day course of oral therapyts.
be formulated for topical therapy and topical antifungal
Three of four cats developed severe cataracts which were
agents for use on other surfaces may be used for ocular use.
 noted by the owners a few weeks after antibiotic therapy.
Antifungal drugs fall into several categories: polyenes,
pyrimidines, imidazoles, and miscellaneous drugs46.
The selection of an antifungal drug is difficult because
Table 2.5 Intraocular antibiotic dosages
of the lack of choice in commercially available
 products and the lack of knowledge regarding the
Agent
Dosage
drug sensitivity of the organism. Performing mycotic
500μg
 sensitivity testing is expensive and time consuming,
Amikacin
1-5μg
with the results often returning after the patient is
Amphotericin B
cured ( which usually takes several weeks)!
Cefazolin
2.25 mg
Cephalothin
2 mg
Cephaloridine
250μg
Polyene antifungals
100 μg
 Polyene antifungals increase the cell wall permeability of
Ciprofloxacin
350-400 μg
fungi by binding irreversibly to ergosterol.
Gentamicin
● Natamycin S% (pimaricin): natamycin is the only
Methicillin
<10 mg
commercially available ophthalmic drug marketed for
Moxalactam
1.25 mg
topical therapy. Natamycin is a white suspension that
is water insoluble and is effective against filamentous
(Comgiled from: Axelrod and Peyman, 197348; Daily etal, 1973266, May et al.
fungi and yeast such as Candida spp.46, It penetrates
197433: Zachary and Forster, 197640, Rutgard etal, 1978267; Fisher et ol.
1982268, Fett et ol, 198426;Talam0 et ol, 1986*4)
the intact cornea poorly and leaves a white precipitate
on ulcerated surfaces, lids, and inside SPL tubes.
48
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
● Amphotericin B: amphotericin B is best known as an
+
 Fluconazole is a newer imidazole that has been used
antifungal used in treating systemic mycoses. It has 
systemically, topically, and intracamerally. It is a triazole
been used in topical ophthalmic therapy as a
and has the advantage of enhanced tissue penetration
0.1-1.0% solution where it appears to be tolerated
because it has minimal protein binding. Like
but, unless the surface is ulcerated, corneal
miconazole, the i.v. preparation of fluconazole is used as
 penetration is poor. Topical 1% amphotericin B
a topical solution and penetrates very well with corneal
solution exhibits the most corneal toxicity and
debridements6, While anecdotal reports are promising,
interference with corneal healing of a variety of
fungal sensitivity testing indicates that most of the
antifungal agents47. Amphotericin B has also been
isolates are resistant31. Systemic therapy has been
injected subconjunctivally and intravitreally, but 
advocated for deep keratomycosis or corneal abscesses
these routes have significant problems.
because of the drug's excellent tissue penetration57,
Subconjunctival amphotericin B is very irritating and
starting with a loading dose of 2 mg/kg followed by
it is questionable whether there is a safe dose with
1 mg/kg q12h p.o. for 2 weeks. With improvement the
intra vitreal injection. Axelrod and Peyman48 and
dose can be decreased to 1mg/kg q24hs8. Latimer et
Axelrod et al.49 recommended a very low dose of
al.59 studied the pharmacokinetics of fluconazole in the
 5-10 μg in the middle of the vitreous cavity to avoid
horse and calculated that the loading dose should be
retinal toxicity. Souri and Greens0 found that even
14 mg/kg p.o., followed by 5 mg/kg q24h. This is a very
1 μg of intra vitreal amphotericin B was toxic to the
expensive therapy for a horse. Fluconazole has also
 retina and lens in the rabbit.
been administered intracamerally at 100 μg/0.1 ml5s.
Itraconazole is a newer triazole and it has improved
Imidazoles
activity against filamentous fungi31. It has poor water
Imidazoles alter the fungal cell membrane by inhibiting
solubility; Ball et al.60 enhanced corneal penetration by
ergosterol synthesis, resulting in increased permeability
dissolving the drug in dimethyl sulfoxide and creating
of the cell wall. Some may also interfere with mito-
a 1% ointment, with excellent clinical success.
chondrial oxidation and‘cause cell death by an
Itraconazole (5 mg/kg) is also being used systemically
accumulation of toxic substances. In one series of fungal
with equine keratomycosis. Systemic itraconazole has
sensitivities, Aspergillus sp. was the prevalent species,
been the treatment of choice for systemic mycoses.
and the imidazoles were the most effective group of
antifungals against this organismi. The latest in vitro
Itraconazole/DMSO 1% ointment was formulated
sensitivity testing concluded that voriconazole was the
by dissolving 1 g of ultramicronized itraconazole in
most effective antifungal agent for the species of
33.3 ml 90% DMSO, heated to 80°C {176°F) while
Aspergillus isolated from equine mycotic keratitisla.
agitated, and the heated mixture combined with
· Miconazole has a broad spectrum of activity against
66.6 ml of petrolatum that had been heated to 80°C
yeast, filamentous fungi, and dermatophytes46. It
{176°F). The mixture was allowed to cool while
 penetrates moderately well, especially if corneal
agitated until it solidified60.
ulceration is presents2. The i.v. form of miconazole
has been used extensively as a topical 1% solution
for equine keratomycosis; 2% vaginal and
Miscellaneous antifungals
dermatologic creams have also been used for topical
 Betadine solution has been used in topical therapy of
ocular therapy. The i.v. form has also been
keratomycosis.
a dministered subconj unctivally.
+
Silver sulfadiazine has been used as a topical cream for
equine and human mycotic keratitis. It generally is well
Intraocular injection of miconazole is of questionable
tolerated, is inexpensive, and moderately effective61.
safety due to the toxicity of the vehicle as well as the
Chlorhexidine gluconate 0.2% has been used as an
drug. If injected intraocularly, the dose should not exceed
40 μg in a small eye, such as in a dogs3; the safe dose for
humans62.
the larger equine eye is unknown. Intravenous micon-
azole has been taken off the market in the US but
Initiation of antifungal therapy in the horse is often
 compounding pharmacies have been formulating a
accompanied by a clinical worsening of the
preparation. When compounding, it has been difficult to
condition. This worsening is probably due to the
keep the drug in solution.
sudden death of fungi. Therapy is monitored by
 Clotrimazole has been used for topical ophthalmic
frequent corneal cytology if the condition is
therapy using 1% vaginal and dermatologic creams.
superficial. If healthy fungal hyphae continue to be
 Ketaconazole penetrates the cornea well and
observed on cytology despite therapy, the antifungal
dermatologic preparations have been used on the 
drug should be changed.
cornea. Ketaconazole has a broad spectrum of
activity and isolates from equine keratomycosis ha ve
been susceptible1, S1 It has been used extensively for
 treating systemic mycoses in the dog, where cataracts
ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
have been a complication of long-term therapy54.
 Thia bendazole paste has been used historically for
The topical antiviral agents are mainly directed against
equine keratomycosis but has been supplanted by the
herpesvirus in man and they are relatively specific for
newer imidazolesss.
DNA viruses. Their use in veterinary medicine is mainly
for ocular herpesvirus in cats and horses. The topical
Kai pue saoue poe yrnu aie shuae pao
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
49
 Table 2.6 Parasympathomimetic miotics used in ophthalmology
Drug
 Concen tration/forms
Action
Pilocarpine
0.5-10%o solution, 4%o gel, inserts
Direct cholinergic, muscarinic action 
Carbachol
0.75-30%o s0lution
Direct and indirect cholinergic muscarinic and nicotinic actions
 Echothiophate iodide
0.03-0.25%%o solution
Cholinesterase inhibitor; irreversible, muscarinic and nicotinic actions
Isoflurophate (DFP)
Withdrawn
Cholinesterase inhibitor; irreversible, muscarinic and nicotinic actions
Demecarium
Withdrawn
Cholinesterase inhibitor; reversible, muscarinic and nicotinic actions 
interfere with nucleic acid synthesis. They are virostatic
 dehydration and lethargy associated with hepatic necrosis
and will not have an effect on viruses that are latent and
 and renal tubular necrosis after 12 days of therapy65. This
are not multiplying. There are three commercial topical
toxicity is apparently species specific. Despite the report of
 systemic toxicity to valacyclovir, ophthalmologists and
· Idoxuridine (IDU): a first generation antiviral agent.
internists have been using famciclovir p.o. for several years
IDU substitutes for thymidine in the purine building
without apparent toxicity. The dose and duration has been
block of the DNA virus and is toxic to other
quite varied, but some caution is in order. Ophthalm-
mammalian cells as well. IDU was available as a
ologists have been giving between 14 of a 125 mg tablet to
solution and an ointment. Therapy is frequent:
14 of a 250 mg tablet for an adult cat for 3-6 weeks and 14
ointment is q4h and solution q1h or q2h. IDU is the
of a 125 mg tablet for kittens65a. Some individuals have
least expensive of the antiviral agents. Individuals
used famciclovir indefinitely to treat relapsing syndromes.
may experience irritation from the solution and this
Thomasy et al.66 evaluated the toxicity and efficacy of
 is most likely if the product has become oxidized, as
famciclovir (90 mg/kg q8h for 21 days) in experimental
evidenced by a brown discolorization63. IDU has
herpes infection in cats. They detected no adverse affects in
been discontinued in the US but can be obtained
the physical or biochemical parameters and the clinical
through compounding pharmacies.
signs were attenuated with the drug.
● Adenine arabinoside {Ara-A or vidarabin): also a
structural analog for adenosine. Vidarabin is available
The use of topical antiviral therapy with feline
 as a 3% ointment, given q4h. Vidarabin is less toxic
herpesvirus infections raises questions of cost/benefit
to mammalian cells and more effective than IDU63.
ratio and accuracy of diagnosis. The clearest
Trifluorothymidine {TFT) (trifluridine): a thymidine
 indication for therapy is with active corneal
analogue inhibitor against DNA virus. It is a 1%
epithelial ulcers that are characteristic of herpesvirus.
solution, administered q4h. It is less toxic and more
effective than other antivirals but more expensive.
Intravitreal  injection of the systemic antiviral
Based on a rabbit herpes keratitis model, it has been
cidofovir at a dose of 100-500 μg has been advocated as
suggested that the application of trifluridine might be
a treatment for glaucoma. Unlike intraocular gentamicin,
reduced to as infrequently as q24h63a.
cidofovir apparently is not toxic to the retina or lens67. It
 Acyclovir (acycloquanosine): an analog for guanosine
was originally noted that individuals given systemic
that becomes a potent inhibitor of viral DNA
polymerase. Acyclovir is selectively activated by
efficacy of cidofovir for intraocular injections need
phosphorylation by viral thymidine kinase but not by
further investigation.
cellular thymidine kinase. This concentrates the active
form in viral-infected cells and so minimizes toxicity to
other mammalian cells63. Acyclovir may be given both
MIOTICS (CHOLINERGIC AGONISTS)
 systemically and topically, although it is not available 
in the US as an ophthalmic preparation.
PHARMACOLOGY
The cholinergic miotics are classified into direct and
The relative effcacies of the antiviral agents are usually
indirect according to their action. The direct acting
quoted for human herpesvirus in man or rabbit. The efficacy
miotics, e-g- pilocarpine, act directly on the cell to produce
with other species of herpesvirus may vary as well as
an acetylcholine-like action. They will maintain their effect
between strains of the same species. A limited in vitro study
upon denervated structures. Pilocarpine has muscarinic
of feline herpesvirus sensitivities indicated that TFT was
action (stimulation of smooth muscle and glands) but not
most effective, followed by IDU, vidarabin, and acyclovir64.
nicotinic action (stimulation of striated muscle). By
This has been expanded to: trifluridine > idoxuridine =
convention, miotic solutions have a green cap.
ganciclovir > cidofovir = penciclovir > vidarabine > acyclovir
 The indirect acting miotics are cholinesterase
= foscarnet64a, 64b.
aul ie auouiaiae suaiasaud Ag poe kaun pue sioiuu
Shi ol anp 'inq sieo ui pasn uaaq sey iaoaoe oaisas
nerve endings. They have no effect on denervated struc-
limited bioavailability and feline herpesvirus resistance, it is
tures where acetylcholine is not released. They are also
of questionable benefit. Attempts at increasing
the
categorized by their reversible or irreversible binding
bioavailabity of acyclovir by using valacyclovir, which is
ability with  acetylcholinesterase (Table 2.6). The
converted in the liver to acyclovir, result in systemic
indirect, nonreversible drugs are very potent drugs and
toxicity. Cats given valacyclovir exhibited clinical signs of
 severe side-effects from systemic absorption are possible.
50
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Miotic preparations constrict the pupil (miosis), cause
treating this disease, clinicians will use anything that
contraction of the ciliary muscle that produces
might have theoretical value. Because of their
accommodation, open the aqueous humor outflow
convenience, the long-acting preparations are often
channels, and increase vascular permeability. A transient
selected. Based on the studies to date, the type of
breakdown of the blood-aqueous humor barrier may
glaucoma medication used in prophylaxis does not
occur that resolves after about 48 hours68. Miotics are
 apparently make a significant difference80, 81.
used in man almost exclusively for glaucoma therapy.
where the important action is not the outward miotic
Displaced lens
effect but the contraction of the ciliary muscle, which
Miotics may be used to try to trap a subluxated lens in
increases aqueous humor outflow69 Miotics are usually
the posterior chamber in order to keep it from luxating
 not very effective for glaucoma therapy in animals because
forward, or to trap an anterior luxated lens in the
anterior chamber before surgery.  Long-term miotic
and the physical obstruction present in the outflow
therapy results in a decrease in miosis; in the author's
pathway. The miotic and pressure lowering effectiveness
experience, cholinergic therapy is usually less successful
 also decreases with long-term therapy70-72.
in producing sustained, marked miosis than the
INDICATIONS FOR USE
Glaucoma
Hyphema therapy
Miotics are used in glaucoma therapy and work most
Miotics may be recommended for the treatment of
effectively with open-angle glaucoma, which is relatively
hyphema because they increase the outflow of red blood
 rare in the dog. Carrier and Gum70 found a statistically
cells {RBCs) from the anterior chamber. Miotics also
significant decrease in IOP in normal and glaucomatous
produce vascular dilation and may induce secondary
Beagles with 4% pilocarpine gel q24h. However, the
bleeding. Miotic therapy will also aggravate traumatic
animals were only treated for 3 days and during this time
iritis discomfort by inducing ciliary spasm69 and may
IOPs drifted back to baseline values. Mean IOP response
encourage pupillary block.
was 2.0-2.5 mmHg (0.27-0.33 kPa). When testing various
concentrations of pilocarpine from 0.5-8% in the
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye)
glaucomatous  
Beagle,
concentrations produced
Patients with some residual tear production may respond
statistically significant decreases in IOP; all concentrations
to stimulation with a parasympathomimetic drug to
were equally effective, although the higher concentrations
increase their tear production83. The oral use of
had more side-effects73. Carbachol and N-demethylated
ophthalmic pilocarpine had been used successfully for
carbachol both produced similar decreases in IOP
as
years before the advent of topical cyclosporine. Most
pilocarpine in the glaucomatous Beagle and were not
clinicians preferred to use pilocarpine in food but, in
mncentration-related, indicating that weak solutions were
multiple dog households where food is ad lib, the topical
as effective as the higher concentrations74, 7s.
. The
route has been recommended. The efficacy of the topical
decrease in IOP was associated with an increase
in
route has been discounted by Smith et al.84 who found no
conventional outflow, with the coefficient of outflow
saae paira1 ui shop peou ui uoinpoid reai ui aseao
increasing from 0.33 μl/min/mmHg to 0.61 μl/min/mmHg 
and, paradoxically, a decrease in tear production in the
in normal Beagles, and from 0.15 μl/min/mmHg to
contralateral untreated eye.
 0.38 μl/min/mmHg in glaucomatous Beagles76.
The stimulation of lacrimation may take several
Demecarium bromide and echothiophate  iodide
weeks and thus a trial of 4 weeks or more is
produced similar decreases in IOP as pilocarpine in the
recommended. The use of topical cyclosporine as a
glaucomatous Beagle, but the effect was for 3-4 days; 
lacrimomimetic has almost completely supplanted the
thus the drugs decreased the opportunity for pressure
use of pilocarpine {see p.61). On rare occasions a dog
fluctuations during the day and would presumably
may respond to pilocarpine but not to cyclosporine.
increase owner compliance if frequency of application
was reduced77. The pressure in acute closed-angle
Diagnostics
glaucoma (most common in the dog) is usually too high
Miotics may be used to define the cause of a dilated
for miotics to be of much benefit, and the angle
pupils). Direct acting miotics should constrict the pupil 
morphology so disrupted that outflow facility would be
unless there is a problem with the iris sphincter muscle.
 Indirect acting miotics require an intact neuron in the iris
miosis is not observed until the IOP has been decreased.
to function, and thus will not cause miosis with
Intracameral carbachol (0.5 ml of 0.01%) has been
 peripheral parasympathetic denervation (Table 2.7).
used in humans and dogs at the conclusion of cataract
surgery. In the dog, carbachol minimized or eliminated
SIDE-EFFECTS
the transient postoperative hypertensive episode that
 Ciliary muscle contraction or spasm may be
 occurs in 50% of operated eyes78, 79.
stimulated. The discomfort is variable with patients,
usually lasts 5-10 minutes, and often a tolerance 
Glaucoma prophylaxis
develops within several days.
Miotics have been advocated for years for prophylactic
 Decreased vision may result if an axial lenticular
treatment of the normotensive eye when a unilateral
 Opacity is present.
 primary glaucoma is diagnosed (see Prophylaxis, p.364).
 Conjunctival congestion and mild flare (due to
Until recently there were no good clinical trials
to
support this uses0 but, because of the difficulty in
chamber. This is a transient phenomenon.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
51
+ Systemic absorption from topical application or
overdosing with oral medication will produce
unilateral. While the mean increase in IOP was 3 mmHg
vomiting, salivation, and diarrhea. Dogs with a heart
(0.4 kPa), some individual cats had increases in IOP of
block may be compromised. Systemic toxicity must be
18mmHg {2.4 kPa), resulting in IOP values of
considered when intensive treatment is administered,
30-37 mmHg (4.0-4.9 kPa). The phenomenon was age-
as is frequently recommended for acute glaucoma.
related, with younger cats responding with higher mean
 Long-term topical use may produce drug hypersensi-
 changes in IOP. The mechanism for bilateral response with
tivity, resulting in a severe follicular conjunctivitis.
unilateral treatment is unknown, but is thought to be due to
a systemic effect. Stadtbaumer et al.90a repeated the trial
later and found a lack of bilateral IOP rise, with the only
MYDRIATICS
difference in trials being the lack of a topical anesthetic used
for tonometry in the second study. The mydriasis lasted
PHARMACOLOGY
longer than the increase in IOP.  The effect of tropicamide
Mydriatics produce pupillary dilation (mydriasis), and
 on the IOP of dogs is equivocal, with apparently minimal
some agents are also cycloplegics fparalyze the ciliary
muscles). As with the miotics, there are direct and indirect
three breeds (Golden Retrievers, Siberian Huskies, and
acting mydriatics. The duration of action between drugs
English Cocker Spaniels) and found that the majority of the
and variation between species may be significant. Two
dogs had less than a 5 mmHg increase in IOP, but the
groups of drugs are most commonly used for mydriasis,
Huskies had the highest IOPs before and after mydriasis.
either individua lly or in combination for maximum effect.
Examples of parasympatholytics:
By convention, mydriatic solutions have a red cap.
Atropine 0.5-4% solution: atropine is the most
commonly used mydriatic for therapy. In a normal
Parasympatholytic agents
eye, one administration of atropine may last for
Parasympatholytic agents have both mydriatic and
4-5 days but when used in uveitis therapy more
cycloplegic actions and they are direct acting and compete
frequent administration is required (q12-6h).
with acetylcholine. The duration and strength of their
 Homatropine 2-5% solution: used in therapy. In a
action varies?s. The rapidity and degree of mydriasis will
normal dog eye, one administration may last for
vary with the age, species, and pigmentation of the iris.
2 days.
Heavily pigmented irides bind many drugs and the result is
 Scopolamine 0.25-0.5% solution: used in therapy.
a slower onset and a decrease in magnitude of mydriasis
Duration of action of one administration in a normal
A si paauod aq au uoe jo uep au ing
eye is 4-5 days.
explain why the pupils of some horses remain dilated for
Cyclopentolate 1% solution: potent drug that
weeks after long-term atropinization?6. Some but not all
frequently produces marked chemosis in the dog, so
ra bbits produce atropine esterase that inactivates atropine
is not routinely used.
by hydrolysis. Occasionally, a dog will respond,
Tropicamide 0.s-1%: most common agent used for
 paradoxically, to atropine or tropicamide with miosis. This
diagnostic purposes because of its short duration of
is usually encountered preoperatively and subsequent
6-12 hours.
intraocular epinephrine will dilate the pupil. Long-term
Susa las u pansan sieo sunoa u uoeziudo
Adrenergic agents/sympathomimetic agents
 pupils after discontinuation of the drug, and this was
Due to the development of new drugs with activity
thought to be due to a compensatory increase in cholinergic
 targeted against specific adrenergic receptors, and due
receptors due to deprivation of transmitter87. This
to species differences in receptors, not all adrenergic
phenomenon has been used to explain the previously
drugs dilate the pupil. For instance, apraclonidine
mentioned paradoxical miosis with mydriatics but it is
 dilates the dog pupil but constricts the cat pupil. Some
lacking in evidence.
adrenergic agonists such as nonselective alpha and beta
agonists and selective alpha agonists will generally
dhange in IOP after atropine instillation in the horse,
produce mydriasis without cycloplegia. Adrenergic
L0 u d un ssep %LI ue punog 6g'u za Su
horses, but one horse had a significant increase in IOP.
release  of
norepinephrine) or direct (act on
Stadtbaumer et al.90 found significant increases in IOP in the
catecholamine receptors, similar to norepinephrine).
cat after O.s% tropicamide. Unilateral instillation 
of
Catecholamine receptors are classified as alpha-1,
tropicamide produced bilateral stastically significant
alpha-2, beta-1, and beta-2.
Table 2.7 Pharmacologic lesion localization with a dilated pupil
Central
Peripheral
Drug
Normal
 Parasympathetic
 Parasympathetic
Iris atrophy
Glaucoma
Atropine
lesion 
lesion 
blockage
1 % Pilocarpine
+ (hypersensitive)  
0
0
0.01%% Phospholine iodide
+
0
0
0
+: constriction; 0: no response
52
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
vomiting. The side-effects in cats preclude using
 commercially available 0.5% apraclonidine100.
humor outflow and decrease aqueous humor production,
 Brimonidine is a selective alpha-2 agonist that is more
and in diagnostics to localize sympathetic lesions
selective than apraclonidine. It lowers the IOP by decreasing
involving the pupil ( Table 2.8). Examples are:
 aqueous humor production as well as increasing uveoscleral
● Epinephrine 0.1-2%: direct action, used for therapy
outflow. Gelatt et al.101 tested 0.2% and 0.5% brimonidine 
 and diagnostics. It is a nonselective alpha and beta
in glaucomatous Beagles and did not find a statistically
agonist and is used for glaucoma therapy, to dilate
sgnificant decrease in IOP, although the pupil dilated.
the pupil intraoperatively, and for vasoconstriction
Tachyphylaxis results in a decreased effectiveness over time.
 and hemostatic control in surgery.
● Dipivalyl epinephrine (propine): a prodrug of
The adrenergic agonists have not become an
 epinephrine. It is the esterified form of epinephrine
important group of drugs for glaucoma therapy
and penetrates the cornea much better (9-17x) than
beca use of their minimal effectiveness combined
epinephrine, and can thus be used in lower
with significant side-effects.
concentrations. Once in the anterior chamber and in
the uvea it is hydrolyzed to epinephrine, which is
direct acting.
INDICATIONS FOR USE
●Paradrine (hydroxyamphetamine) 1%: indirect
Diagnostics
 action, has been used for diagnostics for localizing
Mydriatics are used for examination of the lens and in
the sympathetic lesion in Horner's syndrome92, 93
ophthalmoscopy. A long-acting agent is undesirable and
It is no longer available as a commercial product.
tropicamide is the agent of choice5, 94, Very young animals
● Phenylephrine 2-10% solution: a direct acting alpha
do not respond as well or as long, and the addition of a
agonist, used in diagnostics and therapy.
 sympathomimetic agent may be necessary to achieve good
Phenylephrine is not effective as a mydriatic in the
dlation. The use of sympathomimetic drugs for lesion
localization in Horner's syndrome (sympathetic denervation 
 sympathetic lesions in Horner's syndrome97.
to the eye and adnexa) is based on denervation hyper-
 Cocaine: indirect sympathomimetic which dilates the
sensitivity and the ability, or lack thereof, to stimulate intact
pupil, causes vasoconstriction, and is a potent long-
sympathetic fibers in the iris. Direct acting sympatho-
 acting topical anesthetic. It is rarely used now
mimetics are used to determine whether the iris is stimulated
because it is a Class IV controlled drug. It blocks the
by dilute concentrations of epinephrine, or similar acting
uptake of epinephrine by nerve endings, allowing a
drugs, that are not effective in the normal eye. Hyper-
prolonged action of epinephrine and
aagu sl au u sauua aaau au ieu pue uoau pi
synechiae or adhesions of the pupil.
 degenerated. Boydell97 utilized the speed of pupil dilation to
Apraclonidine: alpha-2 agonist that is used in
 humans to treat postoperative IOP spikes and
second, and third order neuron involvement in Horner's
augment maximum medical therapy in glaucoma
syndrome in the dog. Dogs with first order neuron disease
treatment. The selective alpha-2 agonists have been
responded to 10% phenylephrine in 50-60 minutes, second
developed for glaucoma therapy to overcome the
order neuron disease in 30-45 minutes, and third order
side-effects that topical epinephrine produces in
neuron disease in 10-20 minutes. Similarly, drugs such as
many patients. One percent apraclonidine decreases
 paradrine (hydroxyamphetamine) act by stimulating intact
aqueous humor formation by decreasing cyclic AMP
nerve endings to release norepinephrine, and thus a positive
and increases uveoscleral outflow in the treated as
response indicates an intact third neuron (Table 2.8). The
well as the untreated eye, and produces mydriasis98.
results from these tests are highly variable and interpretation
Tachyphylaxis limits the duration of effectiveness of
is based on speed of onset and degree of reaction. Ideally, the
the drug for many patients.
opposite eye (if normal) should be used as a control.
In normal dogs, 0.5% apraclonidine decreases IOP and
Therapy of corneal ulcers
sonpoud Aq paseaoap aq Aru ued reinoeu
fowers IOP and produces miosis, bradycardia, and
'sds a A  1d a dos on ido
Table 2.8 Pharmacologic lesion localization in Horner's syndrome 
Drug
Lesion 
Normal
Central
 Preganglionic
 Postganglionic
1% Hydroxamphetamine
+
0
1% Phenylephrine
0
0
0
十
10% Phenylephrine
+60 min
+30-45 min
+10-20 min
 0.001% Epinephrine 
+Pl!w
+: dilates; O: no response
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
53
Ciliary muscle spasms may occur with stimulation of the
 Frequent therapy with atropine may result in
Vth cranial nerve endings in the cornea. The spasms are
disorientation and incontinence. This usually occurs
thought to arise from antidromic impulses that travel
in very old or small dogs.
down the sensory nerve to the muscles. Atropine is
 Topical 10% phenylephrine may induce significant
usually the agent of choice and is administered qi2-8h.
systemic hypertension through systemic
While some horses appear sensitive to topical atropine-
 a bsorption 106.
induced colic at moderate doses q12-6h, intensive
 Acute, transient enlargement of the salivary glands
therapy is more likely to induce colic. Williams et al.102
may occur in cats after administration of
induced colic with topical atropine administered hourly in
tropicamide and atropine. The conditions resolves in
4/6 horses. Topical atropine administration in horses may
about 30 minutes107.
produce colic from systemic absorption102, Occasionally,
a pupil will remain dilated for weeks after multiple
 atropine applications and this is probably due to
BETA ADRENERGIC BLOCKERS
depletion of atropine esterase or binding of atropine by
uveal pigment and subsequent prolonged release86.
PHARMACOLOGY
Topical beta adrenergic blockers decrease the production
Therapy of anterior uveitis
of aqueous humor by as much as 50% in humans108 The
Mydriatics, specifically atropine, are used in uveitis
 mode of action on the inhibition of aqueous humor 
therapy to dilate the pupil, minimize adhesions or
production is unknown, although beta adrenergic blockers
 complications from complete adhesions, and decrease
 are known to be potent inhibitors of cyclic AMP in the
ciliary muscle pain. Atropine is also used after surgically
ciliary body The major receptor in the anterior segment is
induced uveitis.
the beta-2 receptor; thus drugs such as betaxolol, which
are beta-1 blockers, are less effective than nonselective
Unless severe uveitis is present, intensive use of
blockers but they have fewer systemic side-effectsi09 Beta
postoperative atropine in cataract surgery has been
blockers do not affect carbonic anhydrase or the aqueous
discontinued by many surgeons in favor of no
humor outflow108. The effect of beta blockers is variable in
mydriatics or tropicamide.
different species, due in part to concentration differences
dog, higher concentrations of drug appear to be necessary
Nonsurgical therapy for axial cataracts
 to produce a reduction in IOP than in humans, and this
Vision can be improved in patients with axial cataracts
may explain the early reports that beta blockers were
and a clear periphery by dilating the pupil. Mydriasis
ineffective in the doglll. Two studies reported that
allows the patient to see around the central opacity.
timoptic, which is a nonselective beta-1 and beta-2
blocker, was effective in both the dog and cat and in the
Medical therapy of equine glaucoma
 normal and glaucomatous Beaglel12-f14.
The horse has a significant amount of aqueous humor
Topical 0.s % timolol applied unilaterally in the normal
outflow via the uveoscleral route and it has been
cat eye reduced IOP by 22% in the treated eye, and by 16%
hypothesized that atropine may be beneficial in treating
 in the untreated eye. In addition, the pupil in the treated eye
glaucoma in this species. Normal horses had a 11%
a u 1u 1q so 71 1ao 1og %8 4 Psm
decrease in IOP when treated with atropine compared to
the control eye103.
timolol produced a significant mean reduction of 16%
(2.5 mmHg [0.33 kPa]) in IOP, a 34% reduction in pupil
SIDE-EFFECTS
 sze in the treated eye, and a 14% decrease in pupil size in
● Parasympatholytics will decrease tear production and
 the untreated eye, whereas other studies were unable to
may produce transient keratoconjunctivitis sicca
demonstrate a significant difference in IOP at this
(KCS), Atropine administered to one eye decreases
the Schirmer tear test (STT) in both eyes and may
 glaucoma did respond, with a significant drop in iOP using
persist for S weeks or more after cessation of
0.5% timolol, but the decrease was only 4-5 mmHg
thera py. This is commonly observed in postoperative
(0.53-0.7 kPa). In the glaucomatous Beagle, concentrations 
cataract patients104.
of timolol of 4%, 6%, and 8% did produce a significant
 Parasympatholytics may produce atony of the gut.
drop in IOP of 8-14 mmHg f1.0-1.9 kPa) in the treated eye
While atropine may be used in most horses as often
and a less extensive decrease in the untreated eye. This study
as q2-4h without problems, the gut motility should
did not detect any changes in the pupil size but did note a
be monitoredl02, 10s Some horse are more sensitive
significant decrease in the heart rate at all concentrationsl12
than others to atropine-induced colic.
Available beta blockers may be either nonselective,
● Atropine may produce prolonged mydriasis and
blocking both beta-1 and beta-2 receptors, or selective.
photophobia.
Timolol and levobunolol are nonselective beta blockers
 Sympathomimetics often sting and may cause self-
and are available as 0.25% and 0.s% solutions; as
mutilation or rubbing. This tendency is most critical
previously indicated, these drugs are minimally effective
 after intraocular surgery.
in the dog and cat at this concentration. Betaxolol 0.5%
 Phenylephrine is toxic to the corneal endothelium
is a selective beta-1 blocker. While not studied as
 and may produce corneal edema when used
extensively as nonselective beta blockers, in the dog it is
 intensively in 10% concentration or if the absorption
also questiona bly effective at this concentration. Therapy
is enhanced by breaks in the epithelium.
is usually administered q12h with both agents.
54
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Beta blockers can be additive in their effect when used
Glycerol or glycerine: administered orally at
with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors f61% decrease in
1-2 g/kg. Glycerol is irritating to the stomach and
[OP), para sympathomimetics, and even with epinephrine
frequently results in vomition unless diluted.
Glycerol is less expensive than mannitol and is an
The additive effect with epinephrine is confusing,
alternative in the horse.
considering that epinephrine is an adrenergic alpha and
 Isosorbide: administered orally as a 50 % solution at
beta-1 and beta-2 agonist.
a dose of 1.5 g/kg.
INDICATIONS FOR USE
Indications for use
Beta blockers are used in glaucoma therapy and
+
 Glaucoma: mannitol is used in emergency glaucoma
prophylactic treatment of eyes thought to be susceptible
therapy until surgery can be performed or until
to gla ucoma (Table 2.9).
medical therapy becomes effective. Mannitol may
also be used to treat transient post-cataract surgery
SIDE-EFFECTS
ocular hypertensive episodes if the IOP becomes
Systemic absorption of beta-2 blockers may produce or
very elevated.
exacerbate pulmonary signs of bronchoconstriction and
spasms and cardiovascular signs of bradycardia and
Topical latanoprost often produces dramatic
heart blocksl17. Decreased exercise tolerance may be
 decreases in IOP in acute glaucoma and may be
noted and therefore these drugs should be avoided in
 used instead of mannitol in emergency therapy. If
athletic dogs. Corneal erosions may occur and may be
latanoprost does not realize the desired reduction in
related to a decrease in tear production1l18.
IOP within 30 minutes, mannitol is then
a dministered.
DIURETICS
● Pre-, intra-, and postoperatively to reduce the
vitreous size and so minimize vitreous prolapse
 Two specific forms of diuretics are routinely used in
through the pupil.
ophthalmology, osmotic and carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors.
CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS
CAIs reversibly interfere with the hydration of carbon
OSMOTIC DIURETICS
dioxide to form carbonic acid. CAIs are sulfonamides
Osmotic diuretics are used to draw fluid from the eye
and are relatively ineffective diuretics but they decrease
(aqueous humor and vitreous), and they are of dramatic
aqueous humor production by about 30-40%121, 122.
CAIs affect only the aqueous humor and not the
produce systemic dehydration so they are limited as to their
vitreous. The exact mechanism of CAIs is still unknown
frequency of use. Since they expand the blood volume, the
but they are thought to act on the active secretory
presence of a weak cardiovascular system should be
component of aqueous humor production and this is
Onsidered, and care be taken in the speed of administration.
 independent of the kidney122.
The preparations usually used are:
Four isoenzyme forms of carbonic anhydrase have
 Mannitol: recommended dose is 1-2 g/kg i.v. via slow
been described.
 Carbonic
anhydrase I is the
 push (over 5 minutes) or 1 ml/kg/mini20. The author
predominant form present in the eye and is involved with
routinely uses 0.5-1.0 g/kg mannitol and obtains the
aqueous humor production123, It is also present in the
expected results with glaucoma patients. Mannitol
corneal endothelium, iris, and retina. In general, CAIs
 may crystallize out of solution if not kept in a fluid
 must be given systemically to have an effect as >99% of
warmer. Mannitol tends to remain in the vascular
system and exits via the kidneys, thus producing less
 anhydrase is ubiquitous in the body, nonselective
rebound of fluids into the interstitial spaces. This is
inhibitors are likely to produce side-effects other than the
not absolute, particularly with inflammation, and with
desired decrease in IOP. Systemic CAIs have historically
repeated administration it becomes less effective, until
been the backbone of medical maintenance therapy in
a minimal response is achieved after the third or
canine glaucoma therapy.
fourth dose. Lowered IOP is evident by 20-30 minutes
and may last for 6-72 hours.
Table 2.9 Topical ophthalmic beta blockers and their action
Drug
Con cen tration /forms
Action
Timolol
0.25%%, 0.50o 50lutions
Nonselective beta-1, beta-2 blocker
Levobunolol
0.259o, 0.5%/o 5olutions
Nonselective beta-1, beta-2 blocker
Carteolol
2% solution
Nonselective beta-1, beta-2 blocker
 Metipranolol 
0.30o solution
Nonselective beta-1, beta-2 blocker
 Betaxolol 
0.259%o ointment, 0.59%o solution
Selective beta-1 blocker
Levobeta xolol
0.5%o ointment
Selective beta-1 blocker
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
55
 Enhancing the corneal penetration by increasing the
OTHER DIURETICS
liphophilia of the compounds has allowed topical
Ethacrynic acid in cell cultures of trabecular cells
preparations of CAIs to produce modest decreases in
produced reversible changes in cell shape. In enucleated
canine eyes, ethacrynic acid increased the outflow facility
pursued because of the frequent side-effects noted with
and decreased IOP when injected intracamerally in
systemic CAI therapy, and consequent poor patient
monkeys and humans140, 141, Pilot studies in dogs with a
compliance. Dorzolamide was the first commercially
2% solution were very disappointing. No changes in IOP
available topical CAl. It is not as effective as systemic
were noted, marked ocular irritation was produced, and
CAIs but does not have the usual side-effects of
 it was difficult to prepare a stable solution142.
systemic therapy. It is available as a 2% solution and
q8h therapy is recommended. In humans, dorzolamide
decreases the IOP by 17-20%, and is only slightly less
ARTIFICIAL TEARS
with beta blockers and the effect is additive. Intraocular
Artificial tear solutions are used as vehicles for
penetration of the drug is probably through the limbus
ophthalmic solutions, replace tears if deficient, protect
and sclera rather than the cornea.
 The hypotensive
eyes from exposure, and act as a filling substance
between the cornea and a diagnostic lens (gonioscopy).
darker irides found more commonly in animals. This is
They are generally over-the-counter products that do not
 presumably due to drug binding by the melanin.
require a prescription. Their main goal is to lubricate the
Corneal  decompensation  or edema might be
surface of the eye, and many agents or combinations of
expected with CAIs as carbonic anhydrase is present in
agents are capable of this goal to varying degrees. The
the endothelium and postulated to be responsible for
pumping water out of the stroma. To date, corneal
fisotonic versus hypotonic), presence of preservatives,
decompensation is a rare eventl29. Stastically signi-
and type and viscosity of lubricating agent used.
ficant decreases in IOP have been found in the horse,
dog, and cat after treating with dorzolamide and the
AGENTS
decrease is larger when combined with a beta blocker
 Methylcellulose, hydroxypropylmethylcellulose, and
such as timolol131-133.
While not as effective as
carboxymethylcellulose: preparations with different
systemic CAIs, the lack of systemic side-effects and
viscosity are available.
cost for equine patients has made topical CAIs popular
 Polyvinyl alcohol: 1.4-3%.
in veterinary ophthalmology.
 Polyvinyl pyrrolidone: artificial mucus-like agent
Brinzolamide 1% is the newest topical CAl. It is
(mucomimetic).
equally effective in suppressing aqueous humor secretion
Hyaluronic acid: is not available as a tear substitute
 as dorzolamide but with less ocular irritation1 34.
in the US but is marketed in other countries. Human
studies have indicated no particular advantage and
Systemic preparations
such viscoelastic agents are expensive. Hyaluronic
● Acetazolamide: is available as a tablet, spansule, and
 acid is available in Canada as a 0.15% preparation.
i.v. preparation. It is the most widely available CAI
It is packaged in single use containers because it
but, at a dose of 10-20 mg/kg q8-12h, many dogs
lacks a preservative, and one container provides one
have side-effects.
day of therapy. The prolonged contact time imparts
 Dichlorphenamide: has fewer side-effects. It has
better corneal protection and lubrication than other 
recently been discontinued by the manufacturer and
artificial tears.
must be compounded. It was available only as a
Various ointment bases are used as ocular
tablet (50 mg), and administered at 2-5 mg/kg
lubricants with tear deficiencies and to protect the
q8-12h.
cornea from exposure fanesthesia, exophthalmos,
Ethoxzolamide: 5 mg/kg q8-12h.
VIth cranial nerve deficiency). They usually
+
Methazolamide: 5 mg/kg q8-12h.
contain some combination of white petrolatum,
mineral oil, and lanolin.
Side-effects
Side-effects are common with systemic CAIs, in
DYES
particular with acetazolamide at the recommended
dose. Systemic acidosis, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia,
panting, poorer temperament, and paresthesias
Most dyes are used for diagnostic purposes. The main
 manifesting as lameness are possible. Ataxia is common
dyes used are fluorescein and rose bengal.
in cats. In humans, kidney stones and fatal blood
dyscrasias have been recorded13s, 136. An individual
SODIUM FLUORESCEIN
patient may be sensitive to all or only one of the
Sodium fluorescein is available as a 1-2 % solution or on
preparations. Potassium supplementation has been
strips. The solution is a good culture medium because
recommended with long-term therapy. Besides ocular
preservatives are not used as they are inactivated by the
irritation, in humans, corneal edema, sterile muco-
dye. Multiple use vials were found to be a potential
purulent conjunctivitis, and nephrolithiasis have been
rare complications of topical CAls137-139
strips or small volume bottles and care in application are
 recommended to minimize iatrogenic infection.
56
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Indications for use
TOPICAL ANESTHETICS
· To detect corneal epithelial loss and follow the pro-
gression of healing. Water-soluble fluorescein does not
Topical anesthetics are used extensively and exclusively for
normally penetrate the intact epithelium but if breaks 
diagnostic and manipulative procedures of the eye but not
in the epithelium exist it diffuses into the stroma where
for medical therapeutics. They are rapid in their onset,
it is seen as a bright green color Small breaks can be
taking effect within 15-30 seconds and lasting about
detected by using a blue light to excite fluorescence.
15 minutes. Herring et al149a found that by applying 2
To determine the patency of the nasolacrimal duct.
drops at 1 minute intervals the length of maximal analgesia
 Fluorescein applied to the eye will usually appear at
was extended to 25 minutes. For the most profound
the nostril within 30-60 seconds. False negatives are
analgesia the author frequently supplements drops with a
possible and so a negative result should be followed
cotton tip applicator saturated with the anesthetic and
by nasolacrimal flushing.
placed specifically on the location to be manipulated. As a
● Fluorescein i.v. is used to study the fundus
group, topical anesthetics are readily absorbed from
vasculature. Fluorescein is a small molecule and
mucosal surfaces but not from the skin. They are very toxic
 approximately 80% is protein bound. The
to the epithelium and retard healing of the cornea by
nonprotein bound portion is readily diffusible but is
retained by tight intercellular junctions. Thus, it is
usage creates tolerance, which begets increased frequency.
valuable in detecting alterations in vascular
It has been demonstrated that a reduced concentration can
 permeability and epithelial intercellular barriers144.
be used without toxic effects but the disadvantage of short
 To detect an aqueous humor leak from a
duration of action still remains1s1, Repeated topical
perforating corneal injury (Seidel test)145. The
application of anesthetics to diseased epithelium, such as in
orange fluorescein applied to the suspicious area
corneal edema, may result in epithelial erosionsis2, The
will develop a green rivulet where the aqueous
topical anesthetics are also bactericidal, so conjunctival or
humor trickles out of the wound.
 corneal cultures should be taken prior to application.
ROSE BENGAL
mydriasis or prevent miosis and decrease the breakdown
Rose bengal has been traditionally called a supravital
of the blood-aqueous humor barrier as much as topical
stain that stains devitalized cells. The staining mechanism
NSAIDs; therefore it is being used preoperatively with
has been questioned in that it will stain healthy cultured
cells. Recent evidence suggests that healthy corneal cells
are protected from staining by tear components such as
 Do not use topical anesthetics for the treatment of
albumin and mucin that block the stain uptake146. When
corneal ulcers.
rose bengal is applied to the cornea and conjunctiva it
will stain unprotected epithelial cells a rose color.
 It is used mainly in diagnosing KCS (dry eye), and it is
AGENTS
supposed to be more sensitive than the STT for
● Proparacaine 0.s%: is the most commonly utilized
evaluating siccasl47, Rose bengal is viracidal and should
topical anesthetic.
not be used before culturing. It is also photodynamic and
+
Tetracaine 0.s-2%.
Piperocaine.
when applied as a solution; this can be decreased by the
 Dibuca ine.
use of a topical anesthetic prior to use or the use of
Benoxinate 0.4%.
 impregnated strips of rose bengal.
Cocaine 0.5-4%: the original topical anesthetic
but it is the most toxic to the epithelium. Cocaine
INDOCYANINE GREEN
is a controlled drug, so is rarely used now for
A 0.5% solution of indocyanine green has been used
this purpose.
intracamerally to visualize the capsule while performing
curvilinear capsulorrhexis. Visualizing the capsule against a
mature white cataract is difficult and staining aids
in
MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASE INHIBITORS
humans, indocyanine green has also been injected i.v. and
The matric metalloproteinases (MMPs) are categorized
used for retinal angiography. Combined with diode laser it
into subgroups according to their structure and matrix
has been used to obliterate retinal neovascularization.
specificity,
i.e.
 collagenases,
gelatinases,
and
stromelysins. The MMPs are a family of zinc-dependent
TRYPAN BLUE
endopeptidases that are present in low levels in normal
Trypan blue has been used as a supravital stain to
tissue and upregulated during normal and pathologic
determine the viability of corneal endothelial cells
in
remodeling of tissue, such as in embryonic development, 
donor corneas for transplantation. It is also used to stain
inflammation, neoplasia, and angiogenesis. They cleave
the capsule to facilitate capsulorrhexis during cataract
collagen molecules and are secreted in a latent form. The
 surgery. Trypan blue is introduced into the anterior
catalytic domain for proteolytic activity contains a Zn2+
chamber under a large air bubble to keep the stain away
binding site that is stabilized by Ca2+1s4. Examples of
from the corneal endothelium and against the lens
MMPs are collagenases {MMP-1, MMP-8, MMP-13),
capsule. It is rinsed out after 30 seconds to 2 minutes,
gelatinases (MMP-2, MMP-9), stromelysins (MMP-3,
leaving a mildly blue-stained lens capsule that is easier to
MMP-10), elastase, and the serine proteases of plasmin
see against the background of a white, mature cataract.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
57
are present in various cells such as migrating neutrophils,
Thiols and hydroxamic acids (MMP inhibitors): e.g.
phagocytes, corneal cells, and in infectious agents such as
 Galardin; more effective than previous drugs but
experimental and is not yet availableiss, is6.
 The original ophthalmic interest in MMPs was in their
role in corneal ulceration. The regenerating corneal
For effective therapy, MMP inhibitors must be
epithelium interacts with the stroma to liberate the
administered frequently, probably every hour, to keep the
enzyme collagenase (MMP-1)is9 Collagenase is liberated
cells bathed in the inhibitor. Acetylcysteine has been used
in a latent form by corneal cells, is activated by plasmin,
most frequently, because it is commercially available as a
and is calcium dependent160, 161. If present in excessive
mucolytic agent for respiratory nebulization therapy.
amounts, collagenase cleaves the stromal collagen and
Mucomyst is available as 10% and 20% solutions and
 creates a progressive ulcer in both depth and diameter.
 should be refrigerated; once opened it is relatively
 Once initiated, progression of a superficial ulcer to a
unstable. Mucomyst at the higher concentrations is toxic
perforated ulcer can be a matter of hours.
to the cornea, so a 5-10% solution is recommended17s.,
 Strubbe et al.162 isolated MMP-2, MMP-9, and neutro-
Serum from the patient is another alternative,
phil elastase in higher levels from the tear film of horses
particularly for horses, but care must be taken to avoid
with corneal ulcerations than from normal aged-matched
contamination since it is such a good culture medium.
controls. Levels of MMPs were elevated whether the ulcer
was sterile or was associated with bacteria or fungi; MMPs
were present in both eyes even with a unilateral ulcer.
GLUCOCORTICOIDS
 Four natural inhibitors of MMPs {tissue inhibitors of
 MMPs [TIMPs] have been identifiedl63, Various drugs
PHARMACOLOGY
cause collagenase inhibition and most of these work as
Glucocorticoids found an early use in ophthalmology and
chelating agents against calcium and zinc. Clinically,
were a great therapeutic advance due to the importance of
results are often disappointing. A verifiably effective
minimizing scarring in the ocular healing process. As with
protocol for treating progressive corneal ulcers has yet to
all therapeutic modalities, glucocorticoid therapy was not
be decribed; however, due to the potential devestating
a panacea, and it has been responsible for many avoida ble
outcome of rapidly progressive corneal ulceration,
ocular
catastrophes.
Their anti-inflammatory
and
clinicians utilize empirical treatment with a variety
of
immunosuppressive effects have made the glucocorticoids
products.(
Glucocorticoid  t
therapy
is potentially
a powerful tool in preventing scarring, maintaining
dangerous with active ulceration because the drugs
transparency, and treating the  immune-mediated
augment collagenase activity up to 15x164. Olliviero et
inflammations of some forms of keratitis, uveitis,
ali6s tested a variety of MMP inhibitors against tears
conjunctivitis, scleritis/episcleritis, and corneal transpla nts.
from horses with ulcerative keratitis and found all to
Glucocorticoids do not eliminate noxious stimuli but
 have 92-99% inhibitory activity against MMPs in tears.
appear to only modify the response to the noxious stimuli.
Drugs tested were: EDTA, acetylcysteine, doxycyline,
Glucocorticoids at therapeutic doses have some action on
ilomastat (Galardin), and alpha-1 proteinase inhibitor.
every facet of the immune response (Table 2.10).
The interest in MMPs in ‘ophthalmology
has
expanded from corneal ulceration to aqueous humor
 outflow regulation, angiogenesis, and cancer163.
AGENTS
Table 2.10 Anti-inflammatory effects of therapeutic
 Topical sodium and calcium EDTA reversibly bind
doses of glucocorticoids
calcium and zinc. Calcium binding interferes with
Block permeability of capillary endothelium.
 neutrophils to degranulate166,167.
Topical acetylcysteine binds calcium but it also acts
Prevent intracellular edema.
by reducing a disulfide bond and consequently is not
Inhibit migration of neutrophils by decreasing vascular
 completely reversible by adding calcium166.
permeability and vasoconstriction.
Topical penicillamine binds calcium166, 167.
 Reduce neutrophil adherence.
 Topical serum globulin: serum contains alpha-2
Inhibit ingestion of bacteria and release of proteolytic
macroglobulins which are nonspecific, irreversible
enzymes by neutrophils and macrophages.
Prevent antibody production of B-lymphocytes before
on a molar basis than the metal chelators. Brooks et
humoral recognition.
al.169 found that equine serum had high levels of in
Suppression of lymphokines from stimulated
vitro inhibition of MMP activity that was effective
T-lymphocytes.
for up to 1 week, whether stored in a refrigerator or
Interfere with complement subfractions.
 at room temperature; no differences were found in
Inhibit histamine synthesis and counteract histamine
activity between fresh or frozen serum.
Topical sodium citrate inhibits calcium167
vascular effects.
 Decrease fibroblastic proliferation and collagen
+
 Systemic ascorbate: there is conflicting evidence as to
deposition.
its efficacy170-172.
 Tetracycline given intramuscularly at 50 mg/kg/day
 Possibly stabilize lysosomal membranes.
was effective in treating alkali- and Pseudomonas
 Possibly affect prostaglandin synthesis.
deruginosa-induced ulcerations in rabbits173, 174
58
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
A variety of corticosteroid glucocorticoids are available
become contraindicated. There is also an increased
commercially in topical preparations. In general, the more
systemic effect from the subconjunctival route, and
potent the steroid the lower the concentration in the
patients routinely develop polyuria and polydypsia183.
solution. Considerations in selecting a glucocorticoid for
An occasional complication of subconjunctival repositol
topical therapy are: corneal penetration, anti-inflammatory
steroids is a subconjunctival granuloma184, which
effect, duration of action, and systemic and topical side-
appears as a smooth, circumscribed subconjunctival
effects176. Topical phosphate solutions are water soluble,
mass. A white residue from the repositol steroids is often
and acetates and alcohols are suspensions and biphasic.
visible for weeks after injection.
Experimental studies indicate that topical prednisolone
The systemic route is utilized for severe intraocular
acetate 1% produces the best anti-inflammatory effect in
the intact cornea, followed by dexamethasone alcohol
contra indicated.
0.1% suspension, prednisolone phosphate 0.1 % solution,
and dexamethasone phosphate 0.05 % ointment177. Despite
INDICATIONS FOR USE
the advantage of prednisolone acetate suspension, vigorous
+ Sterile immune-mediated ocular diseases, e.g.
 shaking of the bottle is necessary to deliver the intended
pannus, atopic conjunctivitis, VKH.
dosage, and marked discrepancies can occur between
brands of the same product. In one study, shaking the bottle
Two of the most common errors when treating
40 times delivered 82% of the maximum concentration of
severe inflammatory conditions with topical
the product with one product and 22% with another
se uons ionpoud yeam e asn 0i aue spioouoooono
product178.
hydrocortisone and not to administer the drug
 All  the prednisolone  derivatives penetrate the
frequently enough (q4-6h).
blood-aqueous humor barriers equally when given
systemically. With the exception of methylprednisolone,
 Post-tra umatic ocular inflammation, e.g. post-
which is a repositol glucocorticoid, the aqueous humor
 surgical inflammation.
levels are short lived, i.e. 2-3 hours.
 Ocular infections with significant destructive inmmune-
 mediated inflammation, e.g. feline infectious
ROUTE OF THERAPY
peritonitis (FIP) associated uveitis, feline
If possible it is desirable to limit steroid therapy to the
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) associated uveitis,
topical route to minimize systemic side-effects. Even with
Toxaplasma associated uveitis. Therapy with systemic
topical therapy there is ample evidence to show adrenal
infectious agents is almost always limited to topical
suppression and hepatic metabolic changes from systemic
glucocorticoid therapy. Glucocorticoids are generally
absorption (through conjunctiva and oral absorption
not used with bacterial or mycotic ocular infections.
from licking the nose after exiting from the nasolacrimal
 Reduction of ocular scarring, neovascularization,
 duct). Clinical signs of polyurea, polydipsia, and
 a nd pigmentation.
increased appetite may occasionally be noted with topical
more
CONTRAINDICATIONSAND
difficult to control while on topical glucocorticoids.
NONRESPONSIVE CONDITIONS FOR
Subconjunctival repositol steroid products relieve the
TOPICAL GLUCOCORTICOID THERAPY
u saal auay aonod pue Adeaui suanbay jo raumo
 In the presence of corneal ulcerations and abrasions:
the anterior segment (Table 2.11). However, there is
glucocorticoids activate collagenase and may induce
 potential difficulty in stopping the steroid action if they
a progressive ulceration (2.4)i64, 18s.
Table 2.11 Repositol subconjunctival glucocorticoids
2.4
Duration
Relative anti-
 of action
inflammatory
Drug
potency
 Methylprednisolone
acetate
14-30 days
5
 Betamethasone
 sodium phosphate
 and acetate
7-14 days
25
 Dexamethasone 
 sodium phosphate
7-10 days
30
Triamcinolone
acetonide
7-30+ days
5
2.4 Collagenase ulcer in a dog following experimental wounding 
and administration of repositol methylprednisolone. Five days after
Modified from Krohne and Vestre (1987]196
wounding, the lesion progressed from a healing superficial lesion to
a descermetocele within 6 hours.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
59
 In general, the presence of bacterial or fungal
and conjunctival hyperemia. The effect on IOP varies
infections of the eye. The latter applies particularly
with the species, PG, dose, and time. In general, an
to the horse.
hypotension. The signs of inflammation can be reduced
Glucocorticoids are ineffective against old scars of the
by prior treatment with PG inhibitors, and therefore
cornea or elsewhere in the eye, stromal pigment, primary
they are ideally used before surgery to minimize post-
glaucoma, cataracts, and degenerative corneal diseases
surgical inflammation.
such as corneal endothelial degeneration with edema and
corneal lipids.
NSAIDS
 Glucocorticoids induce a protein called macrocortin
SIDE-EFFECTS AND COMPLICATIONS
(also called lipomodulin) that interferes with
 Increase corneal mycotic infections (horse), activate
latent herpesvirus infection (cat), and in all species
may worsen a bacterial infection if not covered by
Glucocorticoids are selective inhibitors of cyclo-
appropriate antibiotic.
Oxygenase 2 (see Glucocorticoids, p.57).
+
 Progression of corneal ulceration due to
+
 Aspirin is a cyclo-oxygenase pathway inhibitor.
augmentation of MMPs.
Many dogs can tolerate a dose of 10 mg/kg q12h for
 Complications of posterior subcapsular cataracts and
long periods. Aspirin has been demonstrated to
glaucoma as observed in humans were not thought to
decrease the protein in secondary aqueous humor
develop in domestic animals; however, subcapsular
(newly formed aqueous humor after an ocular insult
cataracts and ocular hypertension were produced with
to the blood-aqueous humor barrier) in the
topical dexamethasone sodium phosphate therapy in
 cats186, 187. Anecdotally, dogs on systemic or topical
 aspirin postoperatively due to an observed higher
glucocorticoids have been found with rapidly
incidence of postoperative hyphema, nor in equine
developing cortical cataracts and lipid keratopathy.
recurrent uveitis due to perceived ineffectiveness.
● Band keratopathy or superficial calcification of the
 Flunixin meglumine: is not approved for use in small
cornea may occur with topical therapy using
animals but many surgeons use it routinely before
phosphate salts of the glucocorticoidsi88
 eye surgery at a single dose of 0.5 mg/kg i.v. without
fatrogenic Cushing's syndrome and adrenal
problem. Higher doses may produce
suppression181.
 gastrointestional ulcerations and renal failure.
Flunixin should be used cautiously in patients who
 are hypotensive or dehydrated194. Flunixin indirectly
PROSTAGLANDIN INHIBITORS (NSAIDS
decreases aqueous humor protein after an ocular
AND PROSTAGLANDIN ANALOGS
injury by reducing PG-induced vascular permeability,
and it is additive when used in combination with
 systemic dexamethasone (64% reduction) on
PHARMACOLOGY
Prostaglandins (PGs) are a group of oxygenated fatty acids
Systemic flunixin and topical flurbiprofen were
that in humans and higher animals are derived mainly
relatively equal in minimizing miosis after a laser-
from arachidonic acid. The precursors are stored as
induced injury but they also promoted post-injury
esterified phospholipids in cell membranes and are
released by phospholipase A2. The precursors are rapidly
extensively in equine ophthalmology in treating
corneal and uveal diseases.
genase pathways. The cyclo-oxygenase pathway leads to a
Flurbiprofen 0.03% was the original topical NSAID
variety of PG compounds and thromboxane A,. In the
preparation and was marketed to prevent
presence of epinephrine as a cofactor, the main PGs
intraoperative miosis during cataract surgery. When
used as a postoperative anti-inflammatory agent it
thromboxane. There are two cyclo-oxygenase isoforms:
does not inhibit corneal stromal healing198, 199.
cyclo-oxygenase 1 is present at all times in the tissue and
 Intraoperative spontaneous bleeding appears to be
is responsible for the basal prostaglandin synthesis in
more common with intensive preoperative PG
homeostasis; and cyclo-oxygenase 2 is inducible and
inhibitors and therefore the author has decreased the
expressed in inflammatory sites by monocytes, macro-
intensive use of hourly flurbiprofen. It can be used as
phages, and fibroblasts. Most NSAIDs are nonselective
an alternative anti-inflammatory when corneal
inhibitors of cyclo-oxygenase, and this results in many of
ulceration prohibits glucocorticoid therapy, or used
the undesirable side-effects of these drugs 189.
in conjunction with glucocorticoids. Topical
The lipoxygenase pathway results in the production of
flurbiprofen has been shown to decrease significantly
various leukotrienes and hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids
 aqueous humor outflow in noninjured and injured
(HETEs), which are strong chemotactic agents for
eyes200. Flurbiprofen was more effective in
 pol ymorphonuclear cells190.
decreasing aqueous humor protein than systemic or
PG precursors are abundant in the anterior uvea and
topical steroids in two noninvasive models of
conjunctiva and are released whenever the iris is
inflammation, while in an invasive model, topical
injured. Species variations are present but in general the
1% prednisolone acetate was more effective than
result of PG release is intraocular inflammation, i.e.
topical NSAIDs153, 201, 202.
miosis, increased protein content in the aqueous humor,
60
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
● Diclofenac 0.1%, suprofen 1%, and 0.5% ketorolac
increase matrix metalloproteinases in the ciliary body, which
are alternative topical NSAIDs and, depending on the
may decrease the resistance to outflow in the extracellular
model used, they may not be as effective as flurbiprofen
 spaces of the ciliary muscle209, 210.
in inhibiting miosis and aqueous flare. Diclofenac has
There is not much information on the use of
some corneal analgesic properties but, like topical
latanoprost in canine glaucoma, but in the author's
 anesthetics, the effect is relatively short lived203.
 experience it frequently produces a dramatic drop in IOP
in dogs within 30-60 minutes of instillation, often when
Topical NSAIDs are frequently utilized when the
other drugs have not worked. The continued success of
cornea is ulcerated and an anti-inflammatory drug
treatment has been variable after the initial reduction, as
is still needed. The author has used flurbiprofen for
it becomes ineffective in some dogs, while others maintain
 years in this manner without complications, but 
a low IOP for extended periods. The author routinely uses
melting ulcers have been reported in humans with
it q12h. Gelatt and MacKay211 found that 0.005%
topical ketorolac and dichofenac204. NSAIDs, either 
latanoprost reduced the IOP in the glaucomatous Beagle
topical or systemic, are generally not indicated with
model by 50-60%, and q12h therapy resulted in less
glaucoma due to the ocular hypertensive effect.
fluctuation in IOP through the day.
Latanoprost can be used with other antiglaucoma
+
 Indomethacin is rarely used systemically in the dog
medications, including the beta blockers and topical and
due to digestive tract complications. Topical
 systemic CAIs. Whether latanoprost should be used in
preparations are available commercially outside the
secondary glaucoma associated with breakdown of the
US. Indomethacin has been shown to decrease
blood-aqueous humor barrier is not yet clear The author
significa ntly aqueous humor protein content in.
has used it where there are postoperative cataract surgery
 secondary aqueous humor and prevent miosis20s, 206
pressure spikes with dramatic but not invariable results, and
Concentrations from 0.1-1% are equally effective.
has not noted any increased postoperative inflammation.
● Phenylbutazone at 20 mg/kg i.v. decreased the
 Diehl et al.2i2 found that latanoprost administered
protein in the secondary aqueous humor after
q24h produced a significant lowering of IOP in normal
paracentesis to one-third that of controls193.
horses, but adverse effects of epiphora, blepharospasm,
Clinically, phenylbutazone is not as effective as
and blepharoedema were common. Clinically, the author
flunixin in the horse in treating ocular pain and
has not observed a significant reduction in IOP with
inflammation. Nevertheless, it is used extensively for
latanoprost in glaucomatous horses. Latanoprost is not 
mild to moderate ocular pain and inflammation
effective in lowing the IOP in normal cats, although it is
because it is much less expensive than flunixin.
a very potent miotic213-213b, Anecdotally, clinicians have
 Carprofen is a systemic anti-inflammatory that is a
thought it is effective in treating feline glaucoma.
weak cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor and a free radical
scavenger The effect of carprofen on inhibiting
Side-effects
breakdown of the blood-aqueous humor barrier is
Like its action, the side-effects of latanoprost are also
 comparable to aspirin and flunixin207.
unique and vary between species. In the cat and dog,
latanoprost produces a dramatic miosis that lasts for
Carprofen may be associated with gastrointestinal
several hours213. Conjunctival hyperemia is variable but
signs and renal and hepatocellular toxicosis.
may be marked. In humans, no miosis is noted but up to
10% of patients may develop iris hyperpigmentation
 Most studies have shown that the maximum anti-
after 3-5 months of therapy. Other side-effects reported
inflammatory effect is achieved when combinations of
in humans are hypertrichosis of the cilia, macular edema,
glucocorticoids and NSAIDs are given, rather than either
choroidal effusion, anterior uveitis, and facial skin
type of agent alone1 93, 199.
severity of herpesvirus keratitis and increased the risk of
PROSTAGLANDIN ANALOGS
recurrences16. If latanoprost proves ineffective in feline
Latanoprost, which is an ester prodrug of PGFza, was the
gla ucoma, concern with aggravating herpesvirus keratitis
first PG analog introduced for topical glaucoma therapy.
may not be of significance in veterinary medicine.
It is available as a 0.o0s% solution and, in humans, is
normally only given q24h. It has been described as the
It would appear that all the effects of latanoprost in
most potent topical drug to date for treating glaucoma.
dogs are not currently known. The rapid decrease
Additional PG derivatives that have been recently intro-
au1 isulear anbue pinom ssop aaisuodsau ul dol u
duced are travaprost 0.004%, bimatroprost 0.03%, and
 proposed mechanism of altering MMPs; such a
unoprostone 0.15%. In normal dogs and glaucomatous
mechanism should have a lag time since MMPs
Beagles the IOP lowering effect and side-effects of the
exist in a latent form.
various prostaglandin analogs appear to be quite
similar207a, 207b.
The effects of PGs vary with the type, dose, and species
ANTIHISTAMINES AND DECONGESTANTS
so each species must be explored individually. Latanoprost
 increases the unconventional outflow (uveoscleral) pathway, 
which is unique for antiglaucoma medications. Latanoprost
PHARMACOLOGY
Histamine release from mast cells in the conjunctiva
the end product, PGF, 208 How it affects uveoscleral flow
mediates the clinical signs of vasodilatation, edema, and
is still under investigation but one demonstrated effect is to
itching through H1 and H? receptors. H1 and H2
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
61
receptors both dilate small blood vessels. Intraocular
liver These compounds interfere with the nucleic acid
effects of histamine are constriction of the pupil and an
metabolism by inhibiting the incorporation of normal
iris vasodilation, causing an increase in aqueous humor
purine compounds. The purine analogs are most effective
 protein176. Antihistamines and decongestants are widely
in inhibiting cel division during the S phase220, The
used in over-the-counter ophthalmic drugs that are used
for 'red eyes'.
lymphocyte function, with little effect on humoral
AGENTS
administered within 48 hours of antigenic priming221.
● Antazoline phosphate is an H1 blocker that inhibits
The purine analogs work best on cell-mediated immune
itching but not conjunctival redness, and so is often
diseases221 In the dog, it has been used most frequently
combined with a vasoconstrictor176. Other H1
in the therapy of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) uveitis
blockers used topically are pheniramine maleate and
and fibrous histiocytomas (nodular epikeratoscleritis) of
 pyrilamine maleate.
the cornea222.
· Sodium cromolyn, a drug that prevents mast cell
Azathioprine is most commonly used at 50 mg/m2
degranulation, is available as a 4% ophthalmic
(2 mg/kg) p.o. q24h, reduced after 2 weeks to 1 mg/kg
solution. It inhibits all the signs of histamine release.
every other day for 2 weeks and then 1 mg/kg once a
Unfortunately, to be effective it must be given before
week if possible222, Azathioprine is usually given initially
the insult to prevent degranulation217.
with systemic glucocorticoids because there is a 3-5 week
● Lodoxamide tromethamine 0.1% inhibits mast cell
lag before clinical effects are evident20. Glucocorticoids
are tapered once clinical improvement is noted and,
and eosinophilic keratitis in the horse. However, it is
hopefully, eventually discontinued. Weekly complete
expensive, which can prevent its use in routine
blood cell and platelet counts should be monitored until
 treatment of atopic or allrgic conjuncti vitis. Its
the minimal maintenance dose of azathioprine is reached,
effectiveness in feline eosinophilic keratitis has not
when monitoring can be reduced in frequency, depending
been reported.
on the blood cell counts.
Vasoconstrictive agents utilized in topical
preparations are: na phazoline, tetrahydrozoline,
FOLIC ACID ANALOGS
 and phenylephrine.
Methotrexate is the major drug in this category.
Methotrexate competitively inhibits folic acid reductase,
which is involved in folate metabolism. Folic acid is
IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE DRUGS
reduced to tetrahydrofolic acid, which is involved with
purine metabolism, and thus DNA and RNA synthesis
PHARMACOLOGY
and cellular replication are inhibited. Methotrexate has
Despite the potential for serious side-effects, the
been recommended for use as a subconjunctival injection
immunosuppressive drugs are developing a niche for
 at 12.5 mg for treatment of intraocular tumors223
treating blinding ophthalmic inflammatory conditions
that are resistant to conventional glucocorticoid thera py.
CYCLOSPORINE A
 Most of these drugs function by inhibiting the process of
Cyclosporine is the metabolite of two fungi and, unlike
 cellular division. While the goal is usually to interfere
other immunosuppressive agents, its action is not
with lymphocyte proliferation and function, most of
mediated via cytotoxicity. Cyclosporine's action is
them are nonselective in their inhibition, resulting in side-
Kq pe ot luanoui si yu inq pooisuapun Apaajduosu
effects that are first noted in rapidly dividing cells.
interfering with interleukin-2 and  T-cell activation.
Cyclosporine is normally administered orally,
 is
ALKYLATING AGENTS
expensive, and has potential renal toxicity218. A safer, less
Cyclophosphamide and chlorambucil are alkylating
expensive mode of therapy for ophthalmic use is topical
agents and are cell cycle-phase nonspecific, affecting cells
application,
 and a 0.2% ointment is now available
in either the resting or proliferating phase. The alkylating
commercially for topical use in veterinary medicine.
agents produce cross-linking and breakage of DNA
 Before this, veterinarians or pharmacists were diluting
strands and inhibition of DNA synthesis. While these
the oral preparation with corn oil to a 1% or 2%
agents will affect slow growing cells, they are most
solution for topical use.
effective on rapidly dividing cells; lymphocytes are very
Cyclosporine is lipophilic and thus is well absorbed
sensiti ve218, 219p
through the cornea. A 1-2% solution and a 0.2 % ointment
The dose of cyclophosphamide depends on the
have demonstrated an effect on a variety of experimental
severity of the condition and concurrent drugs that are
being used. For immunosuppression, 1.s-2.s mg/kg
use topically in veterinary ophthalmology is in treating KCS
every other day has been used?i9.
but it has potential in the treatment of a variety of immune
surface diseases such as pannus, pigmentary keratitis, and
PURINE ANALOGS
Some purine analogs have been used for immuno-
lacrimal secretion and will increase the tear production in 
suppression and others as antiviral agents. The two most
normal and deficient dogs. In mice, this action of topical
important for immunosuppression are 6-merca ptopurine
cyclosporine was reversed with capsaicin, which depletes
and azathioprine.
substance P from the lacrimal gland230, suggesting
Azathioprine is a prodrug that becomes 6-mercapto-
cyclosporine causes the release of the neurotransmitter
purine after reacting with sulfhydryl compounds in the
substance P from sensory nerve endings, and that substance
62
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
P then stimulates parasympathetic nerves in the gland.
reasonable {US$20 per vial). Anterior chamber doses of
Topical cyclosporine either as a 1% or 2% solution is
25 μg are safe and effective but caution should be used
effective in 75-85% of KCS cases231-23 The frequency
with vitreal injections. Most patients can be injected
of therapy varies with the condition treated but therapy
under topical anesthesia using a 30 gauge needle. Topical
for KCS is usually q12h and the duration of therapy is
application of tPA in a 0.1% solutions (1 mg/ml) has also
indefinite. Inflammatory conditions have been initially
experimentally  resulted  in  detectable  intraocular
treated at 6-hour intervals over a 2-3 week period and
concentrations of tPA and dissolution of clots. However,
continued at decreased frequency as long as needed to
at this concentration expense is once again a factor242.
control the condition.
Cyclosporine has been implanted in the vitreous in an
Tissue plasminogen activator is truly a miracle drug
 experimental sustained-release device to treat recurrent
 to the surgeon/clinician who has struggled with
uveitis in horses. The device was primed with
 intraocular adhesions. To watch a large fibrin clot
 dissolve or synechiae release is amazing.
Complications from the procedure were minimal when
the device was implanted in quiet eyes.
HEPARIN
TACROLIMUS AND PIMECROLIMUS
Heparin impairs the thrombin mediated formation of
Tacrolimus is derived from Streptonryces tsukabaensis and
 fibrin and is utilized intraoperatively during intraocular
is an immunosuppressant that is 10-100 times more potent
surgery
to minimize fibrin formation during
and
 on a weight basis than cyclosporine. Tacrolimus and
immediately  after
r surgery. An increased risk of
pimecrolimus are macrolactam derivatives that bind to
intraoperative and postoperative bleeding may occur.
 macrophilin-12 and inhibit calcineurin, resulting in T-cell 
 Preservative-free heparin is preferable. The dose is 1 U/ml
activation and some suppression of humoral immunity.
of irrigating fluids.
Tacrolimus is used systemically to counteract transplant
HIRUDIN
rejections and both tacrolimus and pimecrolimus are used
topically to treat eczema in humans. Tacrolimus is being
 Hirudin is a direct acting antithrombin agent that blocks
compounded for topical use as a 0.02-0.03% solution or
the formation of fibrin from fibrinogen without an effect
ointment and pimecrolimus as a 1% oil solution for
on platelets. It was originally isolated from leeches and is
treating KCS and chronic superficial keratitis234a-234c.
now available in a recombinant form. It decreased the
Chambers et al.235 had a 96% success rate, although the
amount of fibrin in a rabbit model when used
severity of cases treated was not stipulated. As tacrolimus
intraoperatively at 100 μg/ml in an infusion, and no
utilizes different cell receptors than cyclosporine, it may be
 intraocular hemorrhage was noted243.
effective in cyclosporine resistant cases of KCS.
VISCOELASTIC AGENTS
ANTIFIBRIN AGENTS
Viscoelastic agents are transparent solutions of high
TISSUEPLASMINOGEN ACTIVATOR
viscosity and they have become important adjuncts to
 Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator {tPA) is used
intraocular surgery. These agents are used to maintain
systemically in humans to break up blood clots in patients
spatial relationships, separate tissue to prevent adhesions,
with myocardial infarction and stroke. It acts by binding
contain hemorrhage, act as a lubricant, and protect tissue
fibrin and the complex then binds plasminogen and
from mechanical injury244. In addition, they have been used
activates it to plasmin. Plasmin then accelerates the
on the corneal surface to lubricate and replace tears and
maintain optical clarity during surgery {see Artifical tears,
and fibrin to fibrin split products. Tissue plasminogen
p.55). While somewhat slow to be accepted into veterinary
activator injected at 25 pg into the anterior chamber has
ophthalmologic surgery because of their significant cost,
been successful in lysing fibrin clots and breaking
they have become almost universally accepted with the
synechiae when used within 24-72 hours of their
advent of phacoemulsification surgery. Their viscous nature
formation236, 237. The author has used tPA in acute
helps to maintain the
anterior chamber during
idiopathic inflammation and postoperatively in cataract
manipulations through small incisions, and they protect the
and aqueous humor shunt surgery238. The use of tPA with
corneal endothelium from trauma during surgery and
hyphema that is not spontaneously resolving is a tempting
introduction of intraocular lenses.
possibility but there is a significant danger of recurrent
Wilkie and Willis24s reviewed the properties of
hemorrhage239, 240.
viscoelastic agents and compared the various properties
Tissue plasminogen activator has demonstrated no
available. Viscoelastic agents can be characterized in terms
toxic effects to the corneal endothelium or changes in the
of their rheologic properties of viscosity, pseudoplasticity,
IOP when ≤50 μg was injected in the anterior chamber of
viscoelasticity, and surface tension. Viscosity is a mea sure of
the resistance to flow; high viscosity products have the
in doses of ≥50 μg results in photoreceptor cell damage
desirable property of staying in the anterior chamber but
but at least part of this toxicity is due to the vehicle241
they may be difficult to inject through a small cannula.
 Pseudoplasticity is the change of viscosity that occurs with
use and is extremely expensive. Diluting the drug and
increasing shear rate, ie. decreasing viscosity with
repackaging into sterile vials that are stored at -70°℃
increasing movement; this property allows the product to
(-94°F) until thawed for use has made the cost
be injected through a small cannula. Elasticity of a
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
63
substance is the ability to return to its original shape after
 Chondroitin sulfate-sodium hyaluronic mixture
a deforming force has been applied and is related to
provides increased coating of tissues and implants due
 cohesiveness. Cohesive viscoelastics maintain spaces well
to the dispersive qualities of chondroiten and the
and are aspirated more easily from the anterior chamber. A
cohesiveness of hyaluronate; the mixture thus remains
dispersive viscoelastic is lower in molecular weight and
within the eye to maintain spatial relationships.
Hydroxypropylmethylcellulose 2%: unlike the
Viscoelastics with dispersive properties spread and protect
previous two agents is not a natural substance in
Sunp Aipideu se ahe aul woy paladxa jou are pue sanssy
animals. It is readily available and thus less
surgery as cohesive viscoelastics.
expensive to manufacture and it is stable and
Ideally, because of the varying qualities needed from a
a utocla vable. Hydroxypropylmethylcellulose is
viscoelastic
different
stages
f
performing
viscous and dispersive and is less cohesive than the
extraca psular extraction with phacoemulsification, more
other viscoelastics.
than one product would be used during the procedure. In
practice most surgeons utilize only one viscoelastic that
Viscoelastic agents have made all intraocular
happens to be their favorite, often based on cost.
surgeons better surgeons, allowing manipulations
through small incisions that would previously have
AGENTS
been difficult to perform.
· Sodium hyaluronate was the first viscoelastic agent.
It was initially derived from rooster combs and
umbilical cords and most recently from genetic
SIDE-EFFECTS
engineering utilizing fermentation with streptococci.
 Postoperative pressure elevations. Postoperative IOP
 Sodium hyaluronate is the benchmark against
elevations are reported in humans if viscoelastic
which all other viscoelastic agents are compared.
 agents are not completely removed at the termination
There are various hyaluronic acid preparations on
of surgery but not in the dog. However, transient
the market, and the purity and viscosity may vary.
postoperative pressure elevations are also common
Thus, agents used for treatment of joint disease
without the use of viscoelastic agents.
may not be acceptable for ophthalmology.
 Endotoxins from nonophthalmic preparations may
Ophthalmic sodium hyaluronate is available in a
produce sterile postoperative inflammations.
 regular viscosity and, more recently, as a
 Postoperative corneal edema has been clinically noted
supercohesive form.
with some batches of hydroxypropylmethylcellulose.
REFERENCES
 1 Shell JW (1982) Pharmacokinetics of
 7 Mindel JS (1998) Alpha-adrenergic drugs.
topically applied ophthalmic drugs.
In: Duane's Foundations of Clinicat
placement of ocular lavage systems in
Survey of Ophthatmology 26:207-218.
Ophthatotogy 3. W Tasman, EA Jaeger
horses. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl Animat
2 Leno N, Refojo MF, Abelson MB (1994)
(eds). Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, pp.
Clinician 87:460-471.
 Pharmacokinetics. In: Principles and
1-17.
15 Sweeney CR, Russll GE (1997)
Practice of Ophthatmotogy: Basic
8 Fiscella RG, Burstein NL (2001)
Complications associated with use of a
Sciences. DA Ablert, FA Jokobeic (eds).
Ophthalmic drug formulations. In:
one-hole subpalpebral lavage system in
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 916-929.
Clinicat Ocular Pharmacology, 4th edn.
horses: 150 cases. Journat of the
3 Axelrod J, Daly JS, Glew RH, Barza M,
JD Bartlett, SD Jaanus (eds). Butterworth
American Veterinary Medical Association
Baker AS {1995) Antibacterials. In:
Heinemann, Boston, pp. 19-40.
211:1271-1274.
Principtes and Practice of
9 Richardson KT (1975) Ocular
16 Giuliano EA, Maggs JD, Moore CP,
Ophthatmology: Basic Sciences. DA
microtherapy. Archives of
Boland LA, Champagne ES, Galle LE
Ablert, FA Jokobeic (eds). WB Saunders,
Ophthatmotogy 93:74-86.
(2000) Inferomedial placement of a
 Philadelphia, pp. 940-961.
10 Gelatt KN, Glenwood GG, Williams LW,
single-entry subpalpebral lavage tube for
4 Johnson DA, Johns KJ, Robinson RD,
Peiffer RL (1979) Evaluation of a soluble
teatment of equine eye disease.
Head WS, O'Day D {1995) The
sustained-release ophthalmic delivery unit
Veterinary Ophthatmnotogy 3:153-156.
 relationship of corneal epithelial defect 
in the dog. American Journat of
17 Hinkle KM, Gerding PA, Kakoma I,
size to drug penetration. Archives of
Veterimary Research 40:702-704.
Schaeffer DJ (1999) Evaluation of activity
Ophthatmotogy 113:641-644.
11 Punch PI, Costa ND, Edwards ME,
of selected ophthalmic antimicrobial
 5 Mathis GA (1991) Clinical ophthalmic
Wilcox GE (1987) The release of 
 agents in combination against common 
 pharmacology and therapeutics. In:
insoluble antibiotics from collagen ocular
ocular microorganisms. American Journat
Veterinary Ophthatrmology, 3rd edn.
inserts m vitro and their insertion into the
of Veterinary Research 60:316-318.
K Gelatt (ed). Lippincott, Williams and
conjunctival sac of cattle. Journat of
18 Eliason JA, Maurice DM (1980) An
Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 291-336.
Veterinary Pharmacology and
ocular perfusion system. Investigative
6 Bartlett JD (2001) Ophthalmic drug
Therapeutics 10:37-42.
Ophthatmology and Vistuat Science
delivery In: Clinicat Ocular
12 Fraunfelder FT, Hanna C (1974)
19:102-105.
Pharmacology, 4th edn. JD Bartlett, SD
 Ophthalmic drug delivery systems. Survey
19 Glaze M (1986) An implantable system
Jaanus (eds). Butterworth Heinemann,
of Ophthatotogy 18:292-298.
for perfusion of the equine eye.
Boston, pp. 41-62.
13 Gelatt KN, Peterson GE, Myers V,
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
McClure R (1972) Continuous 
the American College of Veterinary
subpalpebral medication in the horse.
Ophthatmologists 17:52-57.
Journat of the American Animat Hospital
Association 8:35-37.
64
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
20 Blair MJ, Gionfriddo JR, Polazzi LM,
33 Kupferman A, Leibowitz HM (1979)
46 Yolton DP (2001) Antinfective drugs. In:
Sojka JE, Pfaff AM, Bingaman DP (1999)
Topical antibiotic therapy of
Clinicat Ocular Pharmacology, 4th edn.
Subconjunctivally implanted
Pseudomonas deruginosa keratitis
JD Bartlett, SD Jaanus (eds). Butterworth
microosmotic pumps for continuous
Archives of Ophthatmology
Heinemann, Boston, pp. 219-264.
 ocular treatment in horses. American
97:1699-1702.
47 Foster Cs, Lass JH, Moran-Wallace K,
Journat of Veterinary Research
34 Gilbert M, Wilhelmus K, Osato M {1987)
Giovanoni R (1981) Ocular toxicity of 
60:1102-1105.
 Comparative bioavailability and efficacy
topical antifungal agents. Archives of
21 Hyndiuk RA {1969) Radioactive depot-
of fortified topical tobramycin.
Ophthatmology 99:1081-1084.
 corticosteroid penetration into monkey
Inestigative Ophthalmology and Visuat
48 Axelrod AJ, Peyman GA (1973)
ocular tissue. Il. Subconjunctival
Science 28:881-885.
Intravitreal amphotericin B treatment of
administration. Archives of
35 Donnenfeld ED, Schrier A, Perry HD
experimental fungal endophthalmitis.
Ophthatmology 82:259-262.
{1994) Penetration of topically applied
American Journal of Ophthatmology
 22 Gilger BC, Allen JB (1998) Cyclosporine 
ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, and ofloxacin
76:584-588.
 A in veterinary ophthalmology.
into the aqueous humour.
49 Axelrod AJ, Peyman GA, Apple DJ
Veterinary Ophthatmology 1:181-187.
Ophthatmology 101:902-905.
[1973) Toxicity of intravitreal injection of
 23 Velez G, Whitcup SM (1999) New
36 Setz B, Hayashi S, Wee WR, LaBree L.
amphotericin B. American Journat of
developments in sustained release drug 
McDonnell PJ (1996) In vitro effects of
Ophthatmology 76:578-583.
 delivery for the treatment of intraocular
aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones on
 50 Souri EN, Green WR {1974) Intravitreal
disease. British Journat of
keratocytes. Investigative Ophthatmology
amphotericin B toxicity. Armerican
Ophthatmology 83:1225-1229.
ond Visuat Science 37:656-665.
Journat of Ophthatmology 78:77-81.
24 Hyndiuk RA, Reagan MG (1968)
37 Gelatt KN, Van der Woerdt A, Ketring KL,
 51 Coad CT, Robinson NM, Wilhelmus KR
Radioactive depot-corticosteroid
et αf. (2001) Enrofloxacin-associated
{1985) Antifungal sensitivity testing for
penetration into monkey ocular tissue.
retinal degeneration in cats. Veterinary
equine keratomycosis. American Journal
Retrobullar and systemic administration.
Ophthatmology 4:99-106.
of Veterinary Research 46:676-678.
Archives of Ophthatmology 80:499-503.
 38 Wiebe V, Hamilton P (2002)
52 Foster Cs, Stefanyszyn M (1979)
25 Wiejtens O, Sluijs V, Schoemaker R
Fuoroquinolone-induced retinal
 Intraocular penetration of miconazole in
{1997) Peribulbar corticosteroid injection:
degeneration in cats. Journat of the
rabbits. Archives of Ophthatmology
vitreal and serurm concentrations after
American Veterinary Medicat Association
97:1703-1706.
dexamethasone disodium phosphate
221:1568-1571.
53 Tolentino FI, Foster CS, Lahav M,
injection. American Joturnat of
39 May DR, Ericson ES, Peyman GA,
Liu LH, Rabin AR {1982) Toxicity of 
Ophthatmology 123:358-363.
Axelrod AJ (1974) Intraocular injection
intravitreous miconazole. Archives of
26 Smith R, Rudt L {1973) Utrastructural
of gentamicin. Archives of
Ophthatmology 100:1504-1509.
studies of the blood-aqueous barrier. 2.
Ophthatmotogy 91:487-489.
54 da Costa and Meredith {1996) Cataracts
The barrier to horseradish peroxidase in
 40 Zachary IG, Forster RK (1976)
in dogs after long-terrm ketaconazole
primates. American Journat of
 Experimental intravitreal gentamicin.
therapy. Veterinary and Comparative
Ophthatmotogy 76:937-947.
American Journat of Ophthatmotogy
Ophthatmotogy 6:176-180.
27 Cunha-Vaz JG, Shakib M, Ashton N
82:604-611.
55 Upadhyay M, West EP, Sharma AP
{1966) Studies on the permeability of the
41 Moller I, Cook CS, Peiffer Jr RL,
(1980) Keratitis due to Aspergiltuas flavus
blood-retinal barrier. British Journat of
Nasisse MP, Harling DE (1986)
successfully treated with thiabendazole.
Ophthatmology 50:441-453.
Indications for and complications of
British Journat of Ophthatmology
28 Hudspeth A, Yee A (1973) The
pharmacological ablation of the ciliary
64:30-32.
 intercellular junctional complexes of
body for the treatment of chronic
56 Yee RW, Cheng CH, Meenakshi S,
retinal epitheium. Investigative
gaucoma in the dog. Journat of the
Ludden TM, Wallace JE, Rinaldi MG
Ophthatmology amd Vistuat Science
American Animat Hospitat Association
(1997) Ocular penetration and
12:354-365.
22:319-326.
pharmacokinetics of topical fluconazole.
29 Moore CP, Collins BK, Fales WH (1995)
42 Bingaman DP, Lindly DM,
Cormea 16:64-71.
Antibacterial susceptibility patterns for
Glickman NW, Krohne SG, Bryan GM
57 O'Day DM, Foulds G, Williams TE,
 microbial isolates associated with
(1994) Intraocular gentamicin and
Robinson RD, Allen RH, Head WS
 infectious keratitis in horses: 63 cases 
glaucoma: a retrospective study of 60 dog
{1990) Ocular uptake of fluconazole
{1986-1994). Journat of the American
pun Ainiaa (e66l-5861) sana 1eo pue
following oral administration. Archives of
Veterinary Medicat Association
Comparative Ophthatmology
Ophthatmology 108(7):1006-1008.
207:928-933.
4(3):113-119.
58 Blair MJ, Gionfriddo JR, Krohne SG
30 Moore CP, Collins BK, Fales WH,
43 D'Amico DJ, Caspers-Velu L, Libert J.
 {1996) Fluconazole therapy for mycotic
 Halenda RM (1995) Antimicrobial agents
et af. (1985) Comparative toxicity of
endophthalmitis. Praceedings of the
 for treatment of infectious keratits in
intravitreal aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Scientific Meeting of the American
horses. Journat of the Ammerican
American Joturnat of Ophthatnotogy
College of Veterinary Ophthatologists
Veterinary Medicat Association
100:264-275.
27:66.
207:855-862.
44 Talamo JH, D'Amico DJ, Kenyon KR
59 Latimer FG, Colitz CMH, Campbell NB,
31 Brooks D, Andrew S, Dillavou C, Ellis G,
(1986) Intravitreal amikacin in the
Papich MG (2001) Pharmacokinetics of
Kubilis P {1998) Antimicrobial
 treatment of bacterial endophthalmitis.
fluconazole following intravenous and
susceptibility pattens of fungi isolated
Archives of Ophthatmotlogy
 oral administration, and body fluid
from horses with ulcerative
104:1483-1485.
concentrtions of fluconazole following
keratomycosis. American Joturnat of
45 Gookin JL, Riviere JE, Gilger BC,
repeated oral dosing in horses. Armerican
Veterinary Research 59:138-142.
Papich MG {1999) Acute renal failure in
Journat of Veterinary Research
 32 Leopold IH (1984) Anti-infective agents.
 four cats treated with paromomycin.
62:1606-1611.
In: Pharmacology of the Eye. ML Sears
Journat of the American Veterinary
(ed). Springer-Verlag, New York, pp.
Medicat Association 215:1821-1823.
385-457.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
65
60 Ball M, Rebhun W, Trepanier L,
70 Carrier M, Gum G {1989) Effects of 4%
80 Miller PE, Schmidt GM, Vainisis SJ,
Gaarder J, Schwark W (1997) Corneal
pilocarpine gel on normotensive and
Swanson JF, Hermann MK (2000) The
 concentrations and preliminary
glaucomatous canine eyes. American
efficacy of topical prophylactic
toxicological evaluation of an
Journat of Veterinary Research
antiglaucoma therapy in primary
itraconazole/dimethyl sulphoxide
50:239-244.
closed-angle glaucoma in dogs: a
ophthalmic ointment. Journat of
 71 Pickett P, Irby M, McCain W (1991)
multicenter clinical trial. Journat of the
Veterinary Pharmacology and
Short-term and long-term effects of
American Animat Hospitat Association
Therapeutics 20:100-104.
twice daily topical administration of
36:431-438.
61 Mohan M, Gupta S, Vajpayee R, Kalra V,
0.125% demecarium bromide in the
81 Slater M, Erb H {1986) Effects of risk
 Sachdev M (1988) Management of
normal canine. Proceedings of the
factors and prophylactic treatment on
keratomycosis with 1% silver
Scientific Meeting of the American
primary glaucoma in the dog. Journa!
sulfadiazine: a prospective controlled
Coltege of Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
of the American Veterinary Medicat
clinical trial in 110 cases. In: The Cornea:
22:42.
Association 188:1028-1030.
Transactions of the Warid Cangress. D
72 Pickett P, Irby M, McCain W {(1991)
82 Bito LZ, Hyslop K, Hyndman J (1967)
Cavanagh (ed). Raven Press, New York,
Short-term and long-term effects of
Antiparasympathomimetic effects of
pp. 495-498.
twice daily topical administration of 4%
cholinesterase inhibitor treatment.
62 Rahman MR, Johnson GJ, Husain R,
pilocarpine gel in the normal canine.
Journat of Pharmacotogy and
Howlader SA, Minassian DC (1998)
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Therapeutics 157:159-169.
Randomised trial of 0.2% chlorhexidine
the American College of Veterinary
83 Rubin LF, Aguirre GD (1967) Clinical
 guconate and 2.5% natamycin for fungal
Ophthatmology 22:43.
use of pilocarpine for
keratitis in Bangladesh. British Journal of
 73 Whitley RD, Gelatt KN, Gum GG
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs and
Ophthatmology 82(8):919-925.
{1980) Dose response of topical
cats. Journat of the American
63 Teich SA {1993) Topical and systemic
pilocarpine in the normotensive and
Veterinary Medicat Association
 antiviral agents. In: Duane's Foundations
glaucomatous Beagle. American Joturnat
151:313-320.
of Clinicat Ophthatmology. M Yanoff, B
of Veterinary Research 41:417-424.
84 Smith E, Buyukmihci NC, Farver T
Fine, JS Mindel, NB Leonard (eds).
74 Chiou CY, Trzeciakowski J, Gelatt KN
{1994) Effect of topical pilocarpine
Lippincot-Raven, Philadelphia, pp. 139.
{1980) Reduction of intraocular
treatment on tear production in dogs.
63a Kaufman HE, Varnell ED,
pressure in glaucomatous dogs by a new
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Thompson HW (1998) Trifluridine,
cholinergic drug. Invest igative
Medicat Association 205:1286-1289.
cidofovir, and penciclovir in the treatment
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
85 Rubin LF, Wolfes RL {1962) Mydriatic
of experimental herpetic keratitis.
19:1198-1203.
for canine ophthalmoscopy. Journat of
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
 75 Gelatt KN, Gum GG, Wolf D, White
the American Veterinary Medicat
116:777-780.
MM {1984) Dose response of topical
Association 140:137-141.
64 Nasisse MP, Guy JS, Davidson MG,
carbamylcholine (carbachol) in
86 Salazar M, Patil PN (1976) An
 Sussman W, De Clercq E (1989) In vitro
normotensive and early glaucomatous
explanation for the long duration of
susceptibility of feline herpesvirus-1 to
Beagles. American Journatl of Veterinary
mydriatic effect of atropine in the eye.
vidarabine, idoxuridine, trifluridine,
Research 45:547-554.
Investigative Ophthatmalogy
acyclovir, or bromovinyldeoxyuridine.
76 Gum GG, Metzger KJ, Gelatt JK,
15:671-673.
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Gilley RL, Gelatt KN {1993)
87 Smith EL, Redburn DA, Harwerth RS,
50:158-160.
Tonographic effects of pilocarpine and
Maguire GW (1984) Permanent
65 Nasisse MP, Dorman DC, Jamison KC,
pilocarpine-epinephrine in dogs. Journat
alterations in muscarinic receptors and
Weigler BJ, Hawkins EC, Stevens JB
of Small Anwmat Practice 34:112-116.
 pupil size produced by chronic
{1997) Effects of valacyclovir in cats
 77 Gum GG, Gelatt KN, Gelatt JK,
atropinization in kittens. Investigative
infected with feline herpesvirus-1.
Jones R {1993) Effect of topically
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
American Journat of Veterinary Research
applied demacariumn bromide and
25:239-243.
58:1141-1144.
echothiophate iodide on intraocular
88 Mughannam AJ, Buyukmihci NC,
66 Thomasy SM, Maggs DJ, Lim CC,
 pressure and pupil size in Beagles with
Kass PH {1999) Effect of topical
Lappin MR, Stanley (2006) Safey and
normotensive eyes and Beagles with
atropine on intraocular pressure and
efficacy of famciclovir in cats infected 
 inherited glaucoma. American Journat
pupil diameter in the normal horse eye.
with feline herpesvirus. Proceedings of
of Veterinary Research 54:287-293.
Veterinary Ophthatmology 2:213-215.
the 37th Annuat Conference of the
 78 Smith PJ, Brooks DE, Lazarus JA,
 89 Herring IP, Pickett JP, Champagne ES,
American Callege of Veterinary
Kubilis Ps, Norman K (1996) Ocular
Troy GC, Marini M (2000) Effect of
Ophthatmotogists 37:43.
hypertension following cataract surgery
topical 1% atropine sulfate on
67 Peiffer R, Harling D {1998) Intravitreal
in dogs: 139 cases {1992-1993). Jourmat
intraocular pressure in normal horses.
cidofovir (Vistide) in the management of
gaucoma in the dog and cat. Proceedings
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Ophthatmology 3:139-143.
Association 209:105-111.
90 Stadtbaumer K, Kostlin RG, Zahn KJ
of the Scientific Meeting of the American
 79 Stuhr CM, Miller PE, Murphy CJ.
(2002) Effects of topical 0.5%
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
 Schoster JV, Thomas CB (1998) Effect
tropicamide on intraocular pressure in
29:29.
of intracameral administration of
normal cats. Veterinary
68 Krohne SG {1994) Effect of topically
carbachol on the postoperative increase
Ophthatmotogy 5:107-112.
 applied 2% pilocarpine and 0.25%
in intraocular pressure in dogs
 demecarium bromide on blood-aqueous
91 Hacker DV, Farver TB {1988) Effects
undergoing cataract extraction. Journat
of tropicamide on intraocular pressure
barrier permeability in dogs. Armerican
of the American Veterinary Medicat
in normal dogs: preliminary studies.
Journat of Veterinary Research
Association 212:1885-1888.
Jourmat of the American Animat
55:1729-1733.
Hospitat Association 24:411-415.
69 Zimmerman TJ (1981) Pharmacology of
Ocular drugs. Ophthatmotogy 88:85-88.
66
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
92 Thompson HS, Mensher JH (1971)
104 Hollingsworth SR, Canton DD,
116 Kass M, Korey M, Gordon M,
Adrenergic mydriasis in Horner's
Buyukmihci NC, Farver TB {1992)
Becker B {1982) Timolol and
 syndrome: the hydroxyamphetamine
Effect of topically administered atropine
acetazolamide: a study of concurrent
test for diagnosis of postganglionic
on tear production in dogs. Journat of
administration. Archives of
defects. American Journat of
the American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthatmotogy 100:941-942.
Ophtha imology 72:472-480.
Association 200:1481-1484.
117 Nelson W (1986) Adverse respiratory
93 Skarf B, Czarnecki JS (1982)
105 McLaughlin SA, Whitlely RD,
and cardiovascular events attributed to
 Distinguishing postganglionic from
Gilger BC (1991) Ophthalmic atropine
timolol ophthalmic solution,
 preganglionic lesions: studies in rabbits
in horses: is colic a serious problem?
1978-1985. American Journat of
with surgicall-produced Horner's
Equine Veterinary Education 3:94-96.
119-909:201 180o
syndrome. Archives of Ophthatmotogy
106 Pascoe PJ, Elkiw JE, Stiles J, Smith E
118 Arthur B, Hay G, Wasan S, Willis W
100:1319-1322.
[1994) Arterial hypertension associated
{1983) Utrastructural effects of topical
94 Gelatt KN, Boggess II TS, Cure TH
with topical ocular use of phenylephrine 
timolol on the rabbit cornea. Archives 
{1973) Evaluation of mydriatics in the
in dogs. Journat of the American
of Ophthatmology 101:1607-1610.
cat. Journat of the American Animat
Veterinary Medicat Association
119 Robbins R, Galin MA {1969) Effect of
Hospitat Association 9:283-287.
205:1562-1564.
 osmotic agents on the vitreous body.
95 Hacker DV, Buyukmihci NC, Franti CE,
107 Willis M, Martin CL, Stiles J.
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
Bellhorn RW (1987) Effect of topical
Chaffin K {1997) Acute, transient
82:694-699.
phenylephrine on the equine pupil.
sialoadenomegaly in two cats following
120 Lorimer DW, Hakanson NE, Pion PD,
American Journat of Veterinary
topical administration of tropicamide.
Merideth RE {1989) The effect of
Research 48:320-322.
Veterinary Comparative
 intravenous mannitol or oral glycerol
96 Gelatt KN, Gum GG, MacKay EO
Ophthatmotogy 7:206-208.
on intraocular pressure in dogs. Corneff
{1995) Evaluation of mydriatics in
108 Novack G (1989) Beta-blockers in
Veter nar ion 79:249-258.
cattle. Veterinary Comparative
ophthalmology. Clinics of North
121 Maren TH (1976) The rates of 
Ophtha tmotogy 5:46-49.
Amer ica 2:77-96.
movement of NA+, CL-, and HCO3
97 Boydell P {1999) The accuracy of
109 Allen RC, Hertzmark E, Walker AM,
from plasma to posterior chamber:
 denervation hypersensitivity testing with
Epstein DL (1986) A double-masked
effect of acetazolamide and relation to
10% phenylephrine eyedrops in
comparison of betaxolol vs. timolol in
the treatment of glaucoma. Investigative
Horner's syndrome in the dog.
the treatment of open-angle gla ucoma.
Ophthatmology and Vistuat Science
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
American Journat of Ophthatmology
15:356-364.
the American Callege of Veterinary
101:535-541.
122 Friedman Z, Krupin T, Becker B
Ophtha tmologists 30:49.
110 Liu H, Chiou G, Garg L (1980)
{1982) Ocular and systemic effects of
98 Mindel JS {1995) Alpha-adrenergic
Ocular hy potensive effects of timolol in
acetazolamide in nephrectomized
drugs. In: Duane's Foundations of
cat eyes. Archives of Ophthatmotogy
rabbits. Investigative Ophthatmology
Clinicat Ophthatmology. W Tasman,
98:1467-1469.
and Visuat Science 23:209-213.
 EA Jaeger (eds). Lippencott-Raven,
111 Pickett J, Majors L {1989) Short-term
123 Wistrand PJ, Schenholm M,
Philadelphia, pp. 1-24.
and long-term effects of topical timolol
Lonmerholm G {1986) Carbonic
99 Miller PE, Nelson MJ, Rhaesa SL
maleate and betaxolol on intraocular
anhydrase isoenzymes CA I and CA II in
{1996) Effects of topical administration
 pressure, heart rate, and blood pressure
the human eye. Investigative
 of 0.5% apraclonidine on intraocular
in normal dogs. Proceedings of the
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
pressure, pupil size, and heart rate in
Scientific Meeting of the American
27:419-428.
clinically normal dogs. Amer ican
College of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
124 Gerding P, Essex-Sorlie D {1991) Effects 
Joturnat of Veter inary Research
20:115.
 of intracameral injection of tissue
57:79-82.
112 Gum G, Larocca R, Gelatt K, Mead J,
 plaminogen activator on intraocular
100 Miller PE, Rhaesa SL {1996) Effects of
Gelatt J (1991) The effect of topical
 pressure, corneal endothelium, and fbrin
topical administration of 0.5%
timolol maleate on intraocular pressure
in dogs. Proceedings of the Scientific
 apraclonidine on intraocular pressure,
in normal Beagles with inherited
Meeting of the American College of
 pupil size, and heart rate in clinically
glaucoma. Progres in Veterinary and
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 22:90.
normal cats. American Journat of
Comparative Ophthatmology
125 Remis LL (1994) Carbonic anhydrase
Veterimary Research 57:83-86.
1:141-148.
inhibitors. In: Primciples and Practice of
101 Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (2002) Effect
113 Wilkie D, Latimer C {1991) Effects of
 Ophthatmotogy: Basic Sciences.
of single and multiple doses of 0.2%
topical administration of timolol
DM Albert, FA Jakobiec (eds). WB
brimonidine tartrate in the
 maleate on intraocular pressure and
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 1070-1075.
glaucomatous Beagle. Veterinary
pupil size in dogs. American Journat of
126 Stein A, Pinke R, Krupin T, et at. (1983)
Ophthaimology 5:253-262.
Veterinary Research 52:432-435.
The effect of topically administered
 102 Williams MM, Spiess BM, Pascoe PJ,
114 Wilkie D, Latimer C {1991) Effects of
 carbonic anhydrase inhibitors on aqueous
O'Grady M (2000) Systemic effects of
topical administration of timolol
humor dynamics in rabbits. American
topical and subconjunctival ophthalmic
 maleate on intraocular pressure and
Joturnat of Ophthatmology 95:222-228.
atropine in the horse. Veterinary
pupil size in cats. American Journat of
127 Bar-Ilan A, Pessah NI, Maren TH
Ophtha tmotogy 3:193-199.
Veterinary Research 52:436-444.
{1984) The effects of carbonic anhydrase
103 Herring IP, Pickett JP, Champagne ES,
115 Higgins R, Brubaker R (1980) Acute
 inhibitors on aqueous humor chemistry
Troy GC (1997) The effect of topical
effect of epinephrine on aqueous humor
and dynamics. Investigat ive
atropine sulfate on intraocular pressure
formation in the timolol-treated normal
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
in the normal horse. Proceedings of the
eye as measured by fluorophotometry.
25:1198-1204.
Scientific Meeting of the American
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
 128 Fach AJ, Peterson Js, Seligmann KA
Coltege of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
Science 19:420-423.
(1984) Local ocular hypotensive effect of
28:53.
topically applied acetazolamide.
Anerican Journal of Ophthatmotogy
98:66-72.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
67
129 Pfeiffer N {1997) Dorzolamide:
142 Keller CH (1997) The effect of topical
156 Barletta J, Angella G, Balch KC, Dimova
 development and clinical application of a
ethacrynic acid on the intraocular
HG {1996) Inhibition of pseudomonal 
topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor.
 pressure in normal dogs: a pilot study
ulceration in rabbit corneas by a synthetic
Survey of Ophthatmology 42:137-151.
Praceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor.
130 Wayman L, Larsson LI, Maus T, Alm A,
the Americam College of Veterinary
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
 Brubaker RB (1997) Comparison of 
Ophthatmologists 28:11.
Science 37:20-28.
 dorzolamide and timolol as suppressors
143 Vaughan DG (1955) Contamination of 
157 Foster CS, Zelt RP, Mai-Phan T, Kenyon 
of aqueous humor flow in humans.
fuorescein solutions. Arerican Journat of
Ophthatmatogy 39:55-61.
selective inflammatory cell depletion.
115:1368-1371.
144 Kommonen B, Koskinen L (1984)
Arcthives of Ophthatmology
131 Cawse MA, Ward DA, Hendrix D
 Fuorescein angiography of the canine
100:1820-1824.
(1999) Effects of topically applied 2%
 ocular fundus in ketamine-xylazine
158 Seng WL, Kenyon KR, Wolf G {1982)
dorzolamide on intraocular pressure and
anesthesia. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavicd
Studies on the source and release of
aqueous humor flow in normal dogs.
25:346-351.
collagenase in thermally burned corneas
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
145 Schnider CM (2001) Dyes. In: Clinicat
of vitamin A-deficient and control rats.
the American Coltege of Veterinary
 Ocular Pharmacology, 4th edn. JD
Investigative Ophthatnology and Visuat
Ophthatmotogists 30:48.
Bartlett, SD Janmus (eds). Butterworth
Science 22:62-72.
132 Willis AM, Robbin TE, Wilkie DA
Heinemann, Boston, pp. 349-366.
159 Brown SI, Weller CA {1970) Cell origin
{1999) Effect of topical dorzolamide and
 146 Feenstra R, Tseng S (1992) Comparison
of collagenase in normal and wounded
 dorzolamide-timolol on intraocular
of fluorescein and rose bengal staining.
 corneas. Archives of Ophthatmology
 pressure in normal horse eyes.
Ophthatmatogy 99:605-617.
83:74-76.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
147 Gelat KN (1972) Vital staining of the
160 Berman M, Leary R, Gage J (1980)
the American College of Veterinary
canine cornea and conjunctiva with rose
Evidence for a role of the plasminogen
Ophthatmologists 30:48.
bengal. Journat of the American Animat
activator-plasmin system in corneal
133 Rainbow ME, Dziezyc J (2001) Effects
Hosp itat Association 8:17-22.
ulceration. Investigative Ophthatmology
of 2% dorzolamide on intraocular 
148 Horiguchi M, Miyake K, Ohta I, Ito Y
amd Visuat Science 19:1204-1221.
 pressure in cats. Proceedings of the
{1998) Staining of the lens capsule for
161 Wang H, Berman M, Law M (1985)
Scientific Meeting of the American
circular continuous capsulorrhexis in eyes
Latent and active plasminogen activator
College of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
with white cataracts. Archives of
in corneal ulceration. Investigatie
32:5.
Ophthatmology 116:535-537.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
134 Ingram CJ, Brubaker R (1999) Effect of
149 Silverman BS (2000) Anterior capsule
26:511-524.
brinzolamide and dorzolamide on
taining with indocyanine green for
162 Strubbe DT, Brooks DE, Schultz GS,
aqueous humor flow in human eyes.
continuous curvilinear capsulorrhexis.
et αt. (2000) Evaluation of tear film
American Journat of Ophthatmotogy
Praceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
 proteinases in horses with ulcerative
128:292-296.
the American Colege of Veterinary
keratitis. Veterinary Ophthatmology
135 Kass MA, Kolker AE, Gordon M, et at.
Ophthatmotogists 31:5.
3:111-119.
{1981) Acetazolamide and urolithiasis.
150 Gundersen T, Liebman SD (1944) Effect 
163 Clark AF (1998) New discoveries on the
Ophthatmotogy 88:261-265.
 of local anesthetic on regeneration of
roles of matrix metalloproteinases in
136 Fraunfelder FT, Meyer SM,
 corneal epithelium. Archives of
 ocular cell biology and pathology.
Bagby Jr GC, Dreis MW (1985)
Ophthatmotogy 31:29.
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Visuat
Hematologic reactions to carbonic
151 Maurice DM, Singh T {1985) The
Science 39:2514-2516.
anhydrase inhibitors. Armerican Journat
absence of corneal toxicity on low-level
164 Brown SI, Weller CA, Vidrich AM
of Ophthatmology 100:79-81.
topical anesthesia. American Journat of
{1970) Effect of corticosteroids on
137 Carlsen J, Durcan J, Zabriskie N,
Ophthatmology 99:691-696.
corneal collagenase of rabbits. Americam
 Crandall A (1999) Nephrolithiasis with
152 Rubin LF, Gelatt KN {1967) Corneal
Journat of Ophthatmology 70:744-747.
dorzolamide. Archives of Ophthatmology
epithelial sloughing in dogs with
165 Olliviero FJ, Brooks DE, Kallberg ME,
117:1087-1088.
glaucoma. Journat of the American
et at. {1992) In vitro effects of EDTA,
138 Konowal A, Morrison JC, Brown SVL,
Veterinary Medicat Association
doxycycline, N-acetylcysteine, ilomastat,
et αl. {1999) Irreversible corneal
151:1449-1452.
and alpha-1 proteinase inhibitor on
 decompensation in patients treated with
153 Krohne S, Gionfriddo J, Morrison E
matrix metalloproteinase activity in the
topical dorzolamide. American Journat of
{1998) Inhibition of pilocarpine-induced
tear film of horses with ulcerative
Ophthatmotogy 127:403-406.
aqueous humor flare, hypotony, and
keratitis. Proceedings ofthe Scientific
139 Schnyder CC, Tran VT, Mermoud A,
miosis by topical administration of anti-
Meeting ofthe American College of
Herbort CP (1999) Sterile mucopurulent
 inflammatory and anesthetic drugs to
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 33:55.
 conjunctivitis associated with the use of
dogs. Aerican Journat of Veterinary
166 Hook CW, Brown SI, Iwanij W,
 dorzolamide eyedrops. Archives of
Research 59:482-488.
 Nakanishi I {1971) Characterization and
Ophthatmology 117:1429-1431.
Jdoys  ryduz I reza 1 AnorH t51
inhibition of corneal collagenase.
140 Quinn RF, Keller CB, Tingey DP (1994)
E Vanscheidt W, Norgauer J (2000)
Investigative Ophthatmotogy
Evidence of sulfhydryl reactivity in cells
Matrix metalloproteinases and venous leg
10:496-503.
cultured from the canine iridocorneal
ulceration. European Journat of
167 Pfister RR, Haddox JL, Dodson RW,
angle. Veterinary Comparative
Dermatology 10:173-180.
Deshazo WF (1984) Polymorphonuclear
Ophthatmotogy 4:149-154.
155 Schultz GS, Strelow S, Stern GA,
leukocytic inhibition by citrate, other
141 Quinn RF, Keller CB, Yamashiro S,
Chegini N (1992) Treatment of alkali-
 metal chelators, and trifluoperazine.
Tingey DP (1994) The effects of
injured rabbit corneas with a synthetic
Investigative Ophthainology and Visuat
ethacrynic acid on the facility of aqueous
inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases.
Science 25:955-970.
 outlow in the enucleated canine eye.
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
Veterinary Comparative Ophthatnology
Science 33:3325-3331.
4:155-159.
68
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
168 Berman M (1975) Collagenase
179 Roberts SM, Lavach JD, Macy DW,
191 Fower R {1981) Glucocorticoids,
 inhibitors: rationale for their use in
Severin GA {1984) Effect of ophthalmic
phospholipase Az, and inflammatory
teating corneal ulceration. In:
prednisolone acetate on the canine
trends. Pharmuacatogy and Science
Internationat Ophthatmotogy Clinics. D
adrenal gland and hepatic function.
2:186-189.
Pavan (ed). Little Brown, Boston,
American Journat of Veterinary Research
192 Brightman AH, Helper LC,
pp.49-66.
45:1711-1714.
Hoffman WE (1981) Effect of aspirin on
169 Brooks DE, Olliviero FJ, Schultz GS, et al.
 180 Eichenbaum JD, Macy DW, Severin GA,
aqueous protein values in the dog.
(2002) Duration of im vitro inhibitory
Paulsen ME (1988) Effect in large dogs of
Journat of the American Veterinary
activity of equine serum against equine tear
 ophthalmic prednisolone acetate on
Medicat Association 178:572-573.
film matrix metalloproteinases.
adrenal gland and hepatic function.
193 Regnier A, Bonnefoi M, Lescure F
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of the
Journat of the American Animat Hospitat
{1984) Effect of lysine-acetylsalicylate and
American College of Veterinary
Association 24:705-709.
 phenylbutazone premedication on the
Ophthalmologists 33:54.
181 Murphy CJ, Feldman E, Bellhorn R
 protein content of secondary aqueous 
170 Pfister RR, Paterson CA (1977)
{1990) Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome in
humour in the dog. Research in
Additional clinical and morphological
a dog caused by topical ophthalmic
Veterinary Science 37:26-29.
 observations on the favorable effect of
medications. Journat of the American
194 Forrester SD, Troy GC (1999) Renal
ascorbate in experimental ocular alkali
Animat Hospitat Association
effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
burns. Investigative Ophthatmology and
26:640-642.
drugs. Compendium on Continuing
Visuat Science 16:478-487.
182 Glaze MB, Crawford MA,
Eaducation for the Practicing Veterinarian
171 Pfister RR, Nicolaro ML, Paterson CA
Nachreiner RF, Casey HW, Nafe LA,
21:910-919.
{1981) Sodium citrate reduces the
Kearney MT (1998) Ophthalmic 
195 Regnier A, Whitley RD, Benard P,
 incidence of corneal ulcerations and
corticosteroid therapy: systemic effects in
 Bonnefoi M 1986) Effect of flunixin
 perforations in extreme alkali-burned
the dog. Journat of the American
meglumine on the breakdown of the
eyes: acetylcysteine and ascorbate have no
Veterinary Medicat Association
 blood-aqueous barrier following
favorable effect. Investigative
192:73-75.
 paracentesis in the canine eye. Journat of
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
183 Regnier A, Toutain PL, Alvinerie M,
Ocutar Pharmacology 2:165-170.
21:486-490.
Periquet B, Ruckebusch Y (1982)
196 Krohne SDG, Vestre WA {1987) Effects
172 Phan TM, Zelt RP, Kenyon KR,
Adrenocortical function and plasma
of flunixin meglumine and 
Chakrabarti B, Foster CS {1985) Ascorbic
biochemical values in dogs after
dexamethasone on aqueous protein
 acid therapy in a thermal burn model of
 subconjunctival treatment with
values after intraocular surgery in the
corneal ulceration in rabbits. American
 methylprednisolone acetate. Research in
dog. American Journat of Veterinary
Journat of Ophthatmatogy 99:74-82.
Veterimary Science 32:306-310.
Research 48:420-422.
173 Seedor JA, Perry HD, Mcnamara TF,
184 Fischer CA (1979) Granuloma
197 Millichamp NJ, Dziezyc J (1991)
Golub LM, Buxton DF, Guthrie DS
 formation associated with
 Comparison of flunixin meglumine and
{1987) Systemic tetracycline treatment of
 subconjunctival injection of a
furbiprofen for control of ocular
 alkali-induced corneal ulceration in
corticosteroid in dogs. Journat of the
irritative response in dogs. American
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Joturnat of Veterinary Research
105:268-271.
174:1086-1088.
52:1452-1455.
174 Levy JH, Katz HR {1990) Effect of
185 Martin C (1971) The effect of topical
198 Lee BB, Kuperman A, Leibowitz HM
systemic tetracycline on progression of 
 vitamin A, antibiotic, mineral oil, and
{1985) Effect of suprofen on corneal
Pseudomonas aeruginosa keratitis in the
subconjunctival steroid on corneal
wound healing. Archives of
rabbit. Annats of Ophthatrmology
epithelial wound healing in the dog.
Ophthatmology 103:95-97.
22:179-183.
Journat of the American Veterinary
199 Leibowitz HM, Ryan WJ,
175 Sugar A, Waltman SR (1973) Corneal
Medicat Association 159:1392-1399.
Kupferman A, Desantis L (1986) Effect of
toxicity of collagenase inhibitors.
186 Zhan GL, Miranda OC, Bito LZ (1992)
concurrent topical corticosteroid and
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Vistuat
Steroid glaucoma: corticosteroid-induced
NSAID therapy of experimental keratitis.
Science 12:779-782.
cular hypertension in cats. Expermmentat
Investigative Ophthamotogy and Visuat
176 Abelson MB, Allansmith MR,
Eye Research 54:211-218.
Science 27:1226-1229.
 Friedlaender MH {1980) Effects of
187 Bhattacherjee P, Paterson CA,
200 Millichamp NJ, Dziezyc J, Olsen JW
topically applied decongestant and
Spellman JM, Graff G, Yanni JM (1999)
(1991) Effect of flurbiprofen on facility of
antihistamine. American Journal of
Pharmacological validation of a feline
aqueous outflow in the eyes of dogs.
Ophthatmology 90:254-257.
model of steroid-induced ocular 
American Journat of Veterinary Research
177 Leibowitz HM, Kupferman A {1974)
hypertension. Archives of
52:1448-1451.
Anti-inflammatory effectiveness in the
Ophthatmology 117:361-364.
201 Ward DA, Ferguson DC, Ward SL,
cornea of topically administered
188 Taravella MJ, Stulting D, Mader TH,
Green K, Kaswan RL (1992) Comparison
 prednisolone. Investigative
Weisenthal RW (1994) Calcific band
of the blood-aqueous barrier stabiizing
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
keratopathy associated with the use of
effects of steroidal and nonsteroidal anti-
13:757-763.
topical steroid-phosphate preparations.
inflammatory agents in the dog. Progress
178 Apt L, Henrick A, Silverman LM (1979)
Archives of Ophthatmology
in Veterinary and Conparative
 Patient compliance with use of topical
112:608-613.
Ophthatmotogy 2:117-124.
ophthalmic corticosteroid suspensions.
189 Masferrer J, Kulkarni P (1997)
 202 Dziezyc J, Millichamp NJ, Smith WB
American Journat of Ophthatmology
Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors: a new
{1995) Effect of flurbiprofen and
87:210-214.
approach to the therapy of ocular
corticosteroids on the ocular irritative
inflammation. Survey of Ophthatmology
response in dogs. Veterinary Comparative
41:35-40.
Ophthatmology 5:42-45.
190 Stjernschantz J (1984) Autocoids and
reuropeptides. In: Pharmacology of the
Eye. ML Sears (ed). Springer-Verlag, New
York, pp. 311-350.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
69
203 Szerenyi K, Sorken K, Garbus J, Lee M,
215 Warwar R, Bullock J, Ballal D {1998)
229 Williams D, Hoey A, Smitherman P
 McDonmell P {1994) Decrease in normal
Cystoid macular edema and anterior
[1995) Comparison of topical 
human corneal sensitivity with topical
uveitis associated with latanoprost use.
cyclosporine and dexamethasone for the
diclofenac sodium. American Journat of
Ophthatmology 105:263-268.
teatment of chronic superficial keratitis 
Ophthatmoiogy 118:312-315.
 216 Kaufman HE, Varnell ED,
in dogs. Veterimnary Research
204 Guidera AC, Luchs JI, Udell IJ (2001)
 Thompson HW (1999) Latanoprost 
137:635-639.
 Keratitis, ulceration, and perforation
increases the severity and recurrence of
230 Yoshida A, Fujihara T, Nakata K {1999)
associated with topical nonsteroidal anti-
herpetic keratitis in the rabbit. American
Cyclosporin A increases tear fluid
inflammatory drugs. Ophthatmotogy
Journat of Ophthatmology 127:531-536.
 secretion via release of sensory
108:936-944.
217 Allansmith M, Ross R {1986) Ocular
 neurotransmitters and muscarinic
205 Spiess BM, Mathis GA, Leber A {1991)
allergy and mast cell stabilizers. Survey of
pathway in mice. Experimentat Eye
 Kinetics of uptake and effects of topical
Ophthatmology 30:229-244.
Research 68:541-546.
indomethacin application on protein
 218 Nussenblatt R, Palestine A {1986)
231 Salisbury M, Kaswan R, Ward D,
 concentration in the aqueous humor of
Cyclosporine: immunology.
 Martin C (1990) Topical application of
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
pharmacology, and therapeutic uses.
cyclosporine in the management of 
Research 52:1159-1163.
Survey of Ophthatmology 31:159-169.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs. Journat
206 Regnier AM, Dossin O, Cutzack EE,
219 Stanton M, Legendre A {1986) Effects of
of the American Animat Hospitat
 Gelatt KN {1995) Comparative effects of
cyclophosphamide in dogs and cats.
Association 26:269-274.
two formulations of indomethacin
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
232 Morgan R, Abrams K {1991) Topical
eyedrops on the paracentesis-induced
Medicat Association 188:1319-1322.
administration of cyclosporine for
inflammatory response of the canine eye.
220 Beale KM (1988) Azathioprine for
treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
Veterinary and Canparative
teatment of inmmune-mediated diseases of
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
Ophthatmology 15:242-246.
dogs and cats. Journat of the American
Medicat Association 199:1043-1046.
207 Krohne SG, Blair MJ, Bingaman D,
Veterinary Medicat Association
233 Olivero D, Davidson M, English R,
Gionfriddo JR (1998) Carprofen
192:1316-1318
Nasisse M, Jarmieson V, Gerig T (1991)
 inhibition of flare in the dog measured by
221 Foster SC {1994) Pharmacologic
Clinical evaluation of 1% cyclosporine
Jaser flare photometry. Veterinary
teatment of inmmune disorders. In:
for topical treatment of
Ophthatmotogy 1:81-84.
Principies and Practice of
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs. Journat
208 Patel S, Spencer C (1996) Latanoprost: a
Ophthatmology: Basic Sciences. D Albert,
of the American Veterinary Medicat
 review of its pharmacological properties,
F Jakobiec (eds). WB Saunders,
Association 199:1039-1042.
clinical efficacy, and tolerability in the
Philadelphia, pp. 1076-1084.
234 Gilger BC, Wilkie DA, Davidson MG,
management of primary open-angle
222 Latimer C, Wyman M, Szymanski C
Allen JB (2001) Use of an intravitreal
gaucoma and ocular hypertension. Drugs
(1983) Azathioprine in the management
sustained-release cyclosporine delivery
and Aging 9:363-378.
of fibrous histiocytoma in two dogs.
device for treatment of equine recurrent
209 Lindsey J, Kashiwagi K, Kashiqagi F.
Joturnat of the American Animat Hospital
uveitis. American Journat of Veterinary
Weinreb R (1997) Prostaglandins alter
Association 19:155.
Research 62:1892-1896.
 extracellular matrix adjacent to human
223 Bussanich M, Rootman J, Kumi C,
235 Chambers L, Fischer C, McCalla T,
ciliary muscle cells in vitro. Investigative
Gudauskas G (1985) Ocular absorption
Parshall C, Slatter D, Yakley B (2002)
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
and toxicity of methotrexate in the dog.
Topical tacrolimus in treatment of canine 
38:2214-2223.
Canadian Veterinary Journal 26:263-266.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca: a multicenter
210 Weinreb R, Kashiwagi F, Tsukahara S,
 224 Wiederholt M, Kossendrup D, Schulz W,
preliminary clinical trial. Poster
 Lindsey J (1997) Prostaglandins increase
Hoffmann F {1986) Pharmacokinetics of
Presentation at the Scientific Meeting of
matrix metalloproteinase release from
topical cyclosporine in the rabbit eye.
the American College of Veterinary
 human ciliary smooth muscle cells.
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
Opthatologists. Denver.
Investigative Ophthatmology and Vistuat
Science 27:519-524.
236 Johnson R, Olsen K, Hernandez E
Science 38:2772-2780.
225 Kaswan R, Martin C, Gardner S {1987)
{1988) Tissue plasminogen activator
211 Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (2001) Effect of 
Pharmacokinetics of ophthalmic
treatment of postoperative intraocular
 different dose schedules of latanaprost on
cyclosporin. Praceedings of the 2nd
fibrin. Ophthatmmology 95:592-596.
intraocular pressure and pupil size in the
International Congress on Cyctosporine
237 Jaffe G {1989) Treatment of
 glaucomatous Beagle. Veterinary
2:59.
postvitrectomy fibrin pupillary block with
Ophthatrmology 4:283-288.
 226 Kaswan R, Kaplan H, Martin C (1988)
tissue plasminogen activator. American
212 Diehl KA, Willis AM, Hoshaw-Woodard
 Topically applied cyclosporin for
Journat of Ophthatmology 108:170-175.
 S, Kobayashi I, Vittuci M, Schmall M
modulation of induced immunogenic
238 Martin C, Kaswan R, Gratzek A,
(2000) Effect of topical 0.005%
uveitis in rabbits. American Journat of
Champagne E, Salisbury M, Ward D
latanoprost on normal eyes of horses.
Veterinary Research 49:1757-1759.
{1993) Ocular use of tissue plasminogen
Proceedings of the Scientifi Meeting of
227 Gratzek A, Kaswan R, Martin C,
 acitvator in companion animals. Progress
the American College of Veterinary
Champagne E, White S (1995)
in Veterinary and Conparative
Ophthatmotogists 31:15.
Ophthalmic cyclosporine in equine
Ophthalmotogy 3:29-36.
213 Studer M, Martin C, Stiles J (2000) The
keratitis and keratouveitis: 11 cases.
239 Sternberg PL, Aguilar H, Drews C,
 effect of latanoprost 0.005% on
Equine Veterinary Journat 27:327-333.
Aaberg T (1990) The effect of tissue
intraocular pressure in normal feline and 
 228 Sansom J, Barnett K, Neumann W.
 plasrminogen activator on retinal bleeding.
canine eyes. American Journat of
Schulte-Neumann S, Clerc B {1995)
Archives of Ophthatmology
Veterimary Research 61:1220-1224.
Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
108:720-722.
214 Rowe J, Hattenhauer M, Herman D
dogs with cyclosporine ophthalmic
240 Howard G {1991) Intraocular tissue
{1997) Adverse side-effects associated
 ointment: a European clinical field trial.
 plasminogen activator in a rabbit model
with latanoprost. American Journat of
Veterinary Record 137:504-507.
of traumatic hyphema. Archives of
Ophthatmology 124:683-685.
Ophthatmotogy 109:272-274.
70
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
241 Johnson M (1990) Retinal toxicity of 
252 Purnell WD, McPherson Jr SD (1974)
261 Borden TB, Cunningham RD (1982)
 recombinant tissue plaminogen activator
The effect of tobramycin on rabbit eyes.
 Tobramycin levels in aqueous humor
in the rabbit. Archives of Ophthatmology
American Journal of Ophthatmology
after subconjunctival injection in humans.
108:259-266.
77:578-582.
American Journal of Ophthatmology
242 Lim J (1991) Intraocular penetration of 
253 Rieder J, Ellerhorst B, Schwartz DE
93:107-110.
topical tissue plasminogen activator.
(1974) Ubergang von sulfamethoxazo]
262 Hulem CD, Old SE, Zeleznick LD,
Archives of Ophthatmology
umd trimethoprim in das
Leopold IH (1982) Intraocular
109:714-717.
 augenkammerwasser beim menschen.
penetration of rosoxacin in rabbits.
243 Mittra R, Dev S, Nasir M, Toth C
Albrecht von Graefes Archiv fur Ktinische
Archives of Ophthatnology
 {1997) Recombinant hirudin prevents
tomd Experimentele Ophthatmologie
100:646-649.
 postoperative fibrin formation afer
190:51-61.
263 Tabbara KF, Ghosher R, O'Conner R
 experimental cataract surgery.
254 Faigenbaum SJ, Boyle GL, Prywes AS,
{1983) Ocular tissue absorption of
Ophthatmology 104:558-561.
Abel Jr R, Leopold IH (1976) Intraocular
minocycline in the rabbit. Archives of
 244 Liesegang T (1990) Viscoelastic
 penetration of amoxicillin. American
Ophthatmology 101:1426-1428.
substances in ophthalmology. Survey of
Journat of Ophthalmology 82:598-603.
 264 Wingfield DL, McDougal RL, Roy FH,
Ophthatmmology 34:268-293.
 255 George FJ, Hamma C (1977) Ocular
Hanna C (1983) Ocular penetration of
245 Wilkie DA, Willis AM {1999)
 penetration of chloramphenicol. Archives
amikacin following intramuscular 
Viscoelastic materials in veterinary
af Ophthatmology 95:879-882.
injection. Archives of Ophthatmology
ophthalmology. Veterinary
 256 Barza MB, Kane AB, Baum J {1978)
101:117-120.
Ophthatmotogy 2:147-153.
 Intraocular penetration of gentamicin
265 Jay WM, Shockley RK, Aziz AM,
246 Robin JS, Ellis PP (1978) Ophthalmic
 after subconjunctival and retrobulbar
Aziz MZ, Rissing JP (1984) Ocular
 ointments. Survey of Ophthatmology
injection. Ammerican Journat of
pharmacokinetics of ceftriazone following
22:335-340.
Ophthatology 85:541-547.
subconjunctival injection in rabbits.
247 Hanna C, Fraunfelder F, Cable M,
257 Kluge RM, Zimmerman T (1978) The
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
Hardberger R (1973) The effects of
 penetration of antistaphylococcal
102:430-432.
ophthalmic ointments on corneal wound 
 antibiotics into the aqueous humor of
 266 Daily MJ, Peyman GA, Fishman G
healing. Americam Journat of
rabbits. Annats of Ophthatmology
{1973) Intravitreal injection of methicillin
Ophthatmotogy 76:193-200.
10:1248-1251.
for treatment of endophthalmitis.
248 Cox WV, Kupferman A, Leibowitz HM 
258 Hillman JS, Jacobs SI, Garnett AJ,
American Joturnat of Ophthatmology
 (1972) Topically applied steroids in
Kheskani MB (1979) Gentamicin
76:343-350.
corneal disease. Archives of
 penetration and decay in the human
267 Rutgard JJ, Berkowitz RA, Peyman GA
Ophthatmmology 88:549-552.
aqueous. British Joturnat of
{1978) Intravitreal cephalothin in
249 Boome MA, Golden B, McKee AP
Ophthatmology 63:794-796.
experimental staphylococcal
{1970) Antibiotic concentration in ocular 
 259 Saunders JH, McPherson Jr SD (1980)
endophthalmitis. Annats of
tissues: penicillin G and
Ocular penetration of cefazolin in 
Ophthatmology 10:293-298.
dihydrostreptomycin. Archives of
humans and rabbits after subconjunctival
 268 Fisher JP, Civiletto SE, Forster RK
Ophthatmotogy 83:78-83.
injection. American Journat of
[1982) Toxocity, efficacy, and clearance of
250 Rowley RA, Rubin LF (1970) Aqueous
Ophthatmalogy 89:564-566.
 intravitreal injected cefazolin. Archives of
humor penetration of several antibiotics
260 Sigel CW, Macklin AW, Grace ME,
Ophthatmology 100:650-652.
in the dog. American Journal of
Tracy CH {1981) Trimethoprim and
269 Fett DR, Silverman CA, Yoshizumi MO
Veterimary Research 31:43-49.
sulfadiazine concentrations in aqueous
(1984) Moxalactam retinal toxicity.
251 Pohjanpelto PEJ, Sarmela TJ, Raines T
 and vitreous humors of the dog.
Archives of Ophthatmology
{1974) Penetration of trimethoprim and
Veterinary Medicine/Smalt Animat
102:435-438.
sulfamethoxazole into the aqueous
Clinician 76:991-993.
humor. British Joturnat of Ophthatmotogy
58:606-608.
71
Basic Ocular Pathology
K. Paige Carmichael
OVERVIEW OF INFLAMMATION
· A mixture of blood and tissue components,
collectively called the acute inflammatory exudate,
 Inflammation is the response of living tissue to injury.
floods the affected area. The exudate carries
Some form of inflammatory response is seen in virtually
proteins, fluid, and cells from local blood vessels into
all living organisms but the higher life forms have the
the damaged area to mediate local defenses.
unique ability to use the vascular system to transport
If a causative agent, e.g. bacteria or a foreign body,
 and deposit fluid and cells in the extravascular space.
is present in the damaged area, it can be contained,
This is known as the inflammatory response. Inflamm-
destroyed, and/or eliminated by components of the
ation may be due to physical damage, chemical
exudate.
substances, microorganisms, or other agents. The
The damaged tissue can be degraded and the debris
inflammatory response consists of changes in blood
removed from the site of damage. The process of
flow, increased permeability of blood vessels, and
healing and repair is linked to the inflammatory
escape of cells from the blood into the tissues. The
response, such that the inflammatory response is
changes are essentially the same whatever the cause and
continuous with the process of repair.
wherever the site.
 There are no inflammatory reactions that are unique
 The globe is a closed system that supports sharing of
to the eye but many of the familiar general
chemical messengers and inhibits removal of these and
inflammatory events are sometimes altered in their
other potentially harmful humoral and cellular factors?.
expression by factors related to unique ocular anatomy
Injury to any part of the globe may result in an
and physiologyl. Such factors include an unusually
inflammatory or reparative reaction virtually anywhere
strong interdependence between the structural and
else within the globe. Chemical mediators or growth
functional elements of the eye, with intolerance for even
factors produced for use in one part of the globe will
minor imperfections. For example, corneal disease can
often impact on a distant part of the globe, resulting in
lead to uveal inflammation, which in turn can cause
increased or at least prolonged ocular damage.
lenticular changes. In addition, even mild corneal
Acute inflammation can be divided into vascular and
disease causes a "bystander” anterior uveitis, and
cellular components, even though both components are
inflammatory disease within the uveal tract can change
 in reality closely intertwined. The vascular response
the quantity and quality of aqueous humor production,
includes changes in blood flow and vessel caliber, and
lea ding to cataract formation.
the cellular response includes movement of the
Inflammation can be somewhat arbitrarily divided
inflammatory cells from within blood vessels to the
into two phases: acute inflammation and chronic
extravascular space.
inflammation.
VASCULAR EVENTS
Small blood vessels adjacent to the area of tissue
ACUTE INFLAMMATION
 damage initially become dilated due to increased blood
flow, followed by a slowing of blood flow along the
Acute inflammation is short-lived, lasting only a few
vessels. In the early stages of inflammation, the affected
hours to days. If it persists for an extended period, then
tissue becomes reddened, due to increased blood flow,
it is referred to as chronic inflammation. Congestion,
 and swollen, due to edema fluid. These changes involve
edema, and inflammatory cell infiltration characterize
three main processes:
acute inflammation. The acute inflammatory response
 Changes in vessel caliber and, consequently, blood
has three main functions:
flow.
 Increased vascular permea bility.
+
 Formation of the fluid exudate.
72
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Congestion and hyperemia are terms that refer to
cells must pass through them in single file. The smooth
excessive blood within the vascular system (3.1) due to
muscle of arteriolar walls forms precapillary sphincters
the dilation of blood vessels and increased blood flow to
that regulate blood flow through the capillary bed. Flow
tissues. Hyperemia of the sclera and conjunctiva are one
through the capillaries is intermittent; some precapillary
of the earliest signs of acute ocular inflammation. These
sphincters form preferential channels for flow while
to uous peso iaua jo uais e aq ku sau
Others are usually shut down.
because of the interdependence of the structures in the
In blood vessels larger than capillaries, blood cells 
eye, inflammation in the cornea or uveal tissues.
flow mainly in the center of the lumen {axial flow), while
Edema is another manifestation of acute inflamm-
the area near the vessel wall carries only plasma. This
ation. This is the result of increased vascular permeability
feature of normal blood flow keeps blood cells away
and movement of low-protein fluid from within the
from the vessel wall.
vascular component to the extravascular tissues. Edema
Following injury, the initial phase of the vascular
of the cornea results in decreased corneal clarity;
component is vascular constriction, which is transient
therefore, even minor degrees of disruption by edema,
 and probably of little importance in acute inflammation.
that in almost any other tissue would be insignificant and
The subsequent phase of vasodilation resulting in
even imperceptible, are significant in the eye?.
hyperemia may last from 15 minutes to several hours,
Serous exudate is not uncommon in early inflam-
depending upon the severity of the injury. Experimental
mation. This exudate consists of serum and plasma
evidence indicates that blood flow to the injured area
proteins that have moved from within the blood vascular
 may increase up to tenfold.
system to the extravascular space. This fluid tends to be
higher in protein than the transudate seen with edema.
Increased vascular permeability
(Transudate is fluid low in protein, which is produced
A single layer of endothelial cells line capillaries. In some
tissues these form a blood-tissue barrier, composed of a
decreased blood osmotic pressure without a change in
complete layer of tightly aligned endothelial cells {tight
permeability). Serous effusion from the choroid is an
junctions) around the vessel wall. In other tissues there
example of a fluid exudate and it causes retinal
 are areas of endothelial cell thinning, known as
detachment,
 whichcanlead
to blindness and
fenestrations. There are no tight junctions along the
 photoreceptor degeneration (3.2)1.
 anterior border layer of the iris. The blood-eye barrier is
Any damage to blood vessels can result in fluid
at the level of the choroidal vascular endothelium?. Thus,
effusion into the globe. Hypertension is an example of
 any inflammatory cells or fluids that exude from the iris
vascular damage that is due to a combination of
vessels almost immediately enter the aqueous humor.
 increased blood flow and hypoxia4. This leads to damage
Therefore, any cytokines or growth factors present in the
to the blood vessel (3.3), itself resulting in fluid effusion
aqueous humor will have free access to the iris stroma.
 and hemorrhage.
Heavy accumulation of edema or granulocytes is rarely
seen in the iris, even when there is massive accumulation
Changes in vessel caliber
within the aqueous humor, due to the absence of tight
The microcirculation consists of the network of small
junctions in the anterior border layer of the iris3.
capillaries which lie between arterioles, which have thick
The blood vessels within the ciliary processes are
muscular walls, and venules, which have thin walls.
freely permea ble, and the blood-eye barrier exists at the
Capillaries have no smooth muscle in their walls
to
level of tight junctions between adjacent ciliary epithelial
control their caliber, and are so narrow that red blood
cells. It is thus common to see marked distension of
3.1
3.2
3.1 Histologic section of cerebral blood vessels from a dog. Blood
 3.2 Histologic section of the subretinal space in the eye of a dog.
vessels are distended with erythrocytes. The interstitial connective
containing eosinophilic fluid consistent with serous effusion (arrow).
tissue is edermatous.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
73
Jo saeis aua au sunp rae ym sassand Ar
microorganisms, and coagulation factors {such as
inflammation, as the fluid is able to exude through the
fibrinogen), which result in fibrin deposition on contact
vessels but not through the ciliary epithelium'.
with the extravascular tissues. Hence, acutely inflamed
The walls of small blood vessels act as a microfilter,
organ surfaces are commonly covered by fibrinous
allowing the passage of water and solutes but blocking
exudate. There is considerable turnover of the
that of large molecules and cells. Oxygen, carbon
inflammatory exudate.
dioxide, and some nutrients transfer across the wall by
Circulating neutrophils initially become  closely
diffusion but the main transfer of fluid and solutes is by
apposed to the endothelium (pa vementing), then adhere to
ultrafiltration6. The high colloid osmotic pressure inside
the swollen endothelial cells (margination), then actively
the vessel, due to plasma proteins, favors fluid return to
migrate through the vessel 
 basement  membrane
the vascular compartment.
{emigration), passing into the area of tissue damage. These
events are mediated through expression of ligands on the
Increased vascular permeability in
blood cell surface that interact with adhesion molecules on
acute inflammation
the endotheliuml, 6. These leukocyte and endothelial cell 
 There are two mechanisms for increased permea bility of
 adhesion molecules are called selectins and integrins.
small vessels following tissue damage: toxins and
Cytokines  control  t
the expression  of  the  adhesion
physical agents may cause necrosis of vascular
molecules and thus orchestrate these cellular events. Later,
endothelium, leading to abnormal leakage (injury-
 small numbers of blood monocytes ( macrophages) migrate 
induced vascular leakage); and chemical mediators of
 in a similar way, as do lymphocytes.
 acute inflammation may cause retraction of endothelial
Theoretically, since the cornea is normally an
cells, leaving intercellular gaps (chemical-mediated
avascular tissue, it cannot undergo inflammation.
vascular lea kage).
However, the nomenclature of *keratitis" is widespread in
 As the vessels become leaky, they permit the passage
the clinical literature, even though many of the
of water, salts, and some small proteins from the plasma
conditions included under that name are probably not
into the damaged area (exudation). One of the main
truly inflammatory. Neutrophils can gain access to the
proteins to leak out is the small soluble molecule,
cornea from any break in the continuity of the surface
fibrinogen. Endothelial cells swell and partially retract so
epithelium, or by migrating from the limbal blood vessels
that they no longer form a completely intact internal
in response to any pathogens in the corneal stroma. The
lining. Expression of adhesion molecules on the capillary
 presence of inflammatory cells within the stroma can
endothelium allows white blood cells to adhere and
result in the development of bystander stromal injury
eventually migrate.
from granulocytic enzymes, and the production of
leukocyte-associated growth factors that will stimulate
CELLULAR EVENTS
corneal neovascularization and increased inflammatory
 In acute inflammation, the capillary hydrostatic pressure
infiltrate. Deep stromal mycotic keratitis is almost
increases and vascular permeability increases, allowing
exclusively a disease of horses. The histologic lesion is
the escape of larger molecules such as plasma proteins
distinctive: a deep stromal purulent keratitis in which the
into the extravascular space. Consequently, much more
neutrophils are always karyorrhectic. They are most
fluid leaves the vessels than is returned to them, resulting
numerous adjacent to Descemet's membrane, and the
 in the net escape of protein-rich (<50 g/l) fluid (exudate).
fungi are also found in greatest numbers adjacent to, or
 The proteins present include immunoglobulins, which
within, Descemet's membrane. In many cases this is the
may be important in the destruction of invading
only location in which they can be found. Because the
3.3 Choroidal blood vessel from a dog with hypertension. The vessel
3.3
wall is thickened (arrow) and the surrounding choroid is hemorrhagic.
74
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
lesion is chronic and deep, there is frequently healing of
APPEARANCE OF ACUTE INFLAMMATION
the overlying stroma and epithelium, creating a deep-
Specific descriptive terms are used to describe the
seated stromal "abscess" (3.4, 3.5).
pathologic appearance of acute inflammation.
Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis is another inflam-
matory disease of horses'. Heavy infiltrations of
Serous inflammation
eosinophils into the conjunctiva and, sometimes, the
In serous inflammation there is exudation of abundant
cornea characterize this disease. The chemotactic agent
protein-rich fluid exudate with a relatively low cellular
for the eosinophils is not well understood.
content, for instance in acute conjunctivitis. Vascular
As previously noted, it is unusual to find large
dilatation may be apparent to the naked eye, the serous 
amounts of granulocytes outside the blood vessels of the
surfaces appearing injected, i.e. having dilated, blood-
uveal tract in early inflammation, due to the impervious
laden vessels on the surface, as in the conjunctiva in
nature of the vasculature. However, significant accumu-
"bloodshot' eyes.
lations of granulocytes are not uncommon in the anterior
chamber (hypopyon) or adhered to the endothelium and 
Catarrhal inflammation
the posterior aspect of the cornea (keratic precipitates).
Blood (hemorrhage) in the anterior chamber is called
 ation of a mucous membrane, the appearance is described
hyphema (3.6, 3.7).
i uas ansn si uu jo adi s iu se
the acute stage of inflammation in tissue such as the
3.4
3.5
3.4 Histologic section of a cornea from a horse containing a dense
3.5 Increased magnification of 3.4 shows the fungal hyphae (arrows]
accumulation of neutrophils (arrow] consistent with a corneal
in Descemet's membrane deep to the corneal stromal abscess.
stromal abscess. (D, Descemet's membrane.) H&tE.
3.6
3.7
2
3.6 Hyphema in the anterior chamber of the eye of a horse.
 3.7 Photomicrograph of a dog with hyphema showing an
accumulation of free erythrocytes (arrow] in the anterior chamber.
(D, Descemet's membrane; C, corneal stroma.] H&tE.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
75
conjunctiva that has goblet (mucus producing) cells. As the
 greenish exudate. Accumulation of pus in the anterior
disease progresses, other inflammatory exudates may be
chamber of the eye is termed hypopyon {3.8).
seen, such as neutrophils (mucopurulent) or fibrin.
Necrotizing inflammation
Fibrinous inflammation
The products of inflammation (such as proteolytic
When the inflammatory exudate contains abundant
 enzymes) and vascular occlusion and thrombosis may
fibrinogen, fibrin polymerizes into a thick fi brin coating.
result in widespread necrosis of the affected organ. The
term necrotizing can be used to describe this kind of
Occurs in the anterior chamber of the eye.
inflammation (3.9). As with other types of inflammation,
necrotizing inflammation can occur in conjunction with
Suppurative (purulent) inflammation 
 an influx of neutrophils (necropurulent) or hemorrhage
The terms “suppurative' and “purulent’ denote the
(necrohemorrhagic). In the eye, necrotizing inflammation
production of pus, which consists of dying and degenerate
is seen most often in association with an infectious agent,
neutrophils, infecting organisms, and liquefied tissues. The
such as bacteria, fungi, and some viruses&, 9, and with
pus may become walled-off by granulation tissue or
 some poorly defined idiopathic lesions10.
fibrous tissue to produce an abscess fa localized collection
of pus in a tissue). This is often seen in cases of canine
CAUSES OF INFLAMMATION
distemper in which the conjunctiva is covered with thick
The most common cause of inflammation is microbial
infection. These microbes include viruses, bacteria,
protozoa, fungi, and parasites. Viruses lead to death of
individual cells by intracellular multiplication. Bacteria
synthesize and release specific exotoxins, which initiate
inflammation, or endotoxins, which are associated with
3.8
their cell walls. Additionally, some organisms such as
parasites and Mycobacterium spp. ca use immunologically-
 mediated inflammation through hypersensitivity reactions.
It is important to note here that there is a difference
between inflammation and infection. Infectious agents can
cause inflammation but not all inflammatory reactions are
caused by infectious agents. Examples of noninfectious 
causes of inflammation are described below.
Hypersensitivity reactions
A hypersensitivity reaction occurs when an altered state
 of immunological responsiveness causes an inappropriate
 or excessive immune reaction that damages the tissues.
Physical agents
Tissue damage leading to inflammation may occur
through physical (perforating or
blunt) trauma,
3.8 Photograph illustrating hypopyon in the anterior chamber of an
ultraviolet or other ionizing radiation, burns, or
equine eye (arrow). This is an example of purulent exudate.
excessive cooling (frostbite'). Trauma to the eye can
include immune-mediated inflammation, such as in lens-
induced uveitis, and inflammation as a result of infection,
3.9
such as in sepsis due to secondary bacterial infection of a
ruptured globe.
Irritant and corrosive chemicals
Corrosive chemicals (acids, alkalis, oxidizing agents)
 provoke inflammation through direct tissue damage. The
eye is susceptible and sensitive to damage by a variety of
corrosive chemicals, damage which often first manifests
 as corneal damage.
Tissue necrosis
Death of tissues from lack of oxygen or nutrients
resulting from inadequate blood flow {infarction) is a
potent inflammatory stimulus. In the cornea, kerato-
malacia is the specific term used to describe liquefactive
necrosis of corneal stroma. This is usually a sequela to
bacterial or fungal contamination, and results from a
3.9 Histologic section of equine choroid showing a large focal area
bystander effect of neutrophilic inflammation, as well as
of necrosis surrounded by inflammatory cells.
 other ca uses.
76
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Another form of corneal necrosis is corneal sequestrum
Therefore, when a blood sample is taken, increased num-
'   o    
bers of neutrophils are counted. Sometimes, increased
usually secondary to ulcerationll. The condition is most
numbers of monocytes can be present in severe or more
often seen in cats, although a similar lesion has been
chronic inflammation.
described in dogs and horses. In cats, the necrotic stroma
 The major cells in inflammatory responses include:
acquires a characteristic brown/black discoloration. The
mast cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages,
endothelial cells, and platelets. These cells react to a
usually surrounded by a thin zone of lytic neutrophils.
variety of signals, stimuli, and irritants in order to
The lesion is slowly extruded through the corneal surface,
 orchestrate the inflammatory response.
with gradual turnover of the corneal stroma.
Granulocytes consist of neutrophils, eosinophils, and
basophils.
MANIFESTATIONS OF INFLAMMATION
The manifestations of inflammation include cellular and
Neutrophils
biochemical changes.
Neutrophilic leukocytes are also known as polymorphs,
segmented cells or segs, and polymorphonuclear cells
Cellular changes
(3.11). In some species, notably guinea pigs, birds, rep-
An increased leukocyte count due to an increase in
tiles, and rabbits, the term heterophil is used to describe
 neutrophil count in the peripheral blood often occurs
the functional counterpart. These cells are key cells
in acute inflammatory responses. The leukocytes res-
involved  in the earliest events associated with
pond to chemical attractants {chemota xins) originating
inflammation. There are a large number of neutrophils
from the site of injury. Leukocytes are released from
within the body; for instance, a dog has approximately
the bone marrow into the blood in larger numbers than
107/kg body weight. About half of these are moving
are normally present under the influence of cytokines.
rapidly along with the circulation. Others are sequestered
in vascular eddies or are temporarily lining the vascular
walls (the marginal pool). There are also vast numbers of
mature and nearly mature neutrophils held in reserve in
3.10
the bone marrow (the storage pool).
Neutrophils are formed in the bone marrow from
 granulocytic stem cells, the myeloblasts. The nucleus of
 a very immature neutrophil is slightly indented; with
maturity, it assumes a band’ shape. As the neutrophil
continues to mature, the nucleus becomes hyper-
indented to take on a multilobed configuration with
multiple constrictions.
Even with the vast numbers of neutrophils in the
exceeds the vascular supply. The body responds by
releasing neutrophils from the storage pool in the bone
marrow to increase the number in the circulation. This
increase is called a neutrophilic leukocytosis. If the tissue
demand for neutrophils persists or even increases, many
of the immature forms or bands' will be released as well.
3.10 Histologic section of feline cornea. The corneal stroma is
This is referred to as a left shift'.
amorphous (arrow] from coagulation necrosis and discolored brown.
 There are two main types of cytoplasmic granules in
depicting a corneal sequestrum. H&tE.
neutrophils: azurophilic and neutrophil-specific. Azuro-
philic {or primary) granules contain myeloperoxidase,
lysozyme, defensins, and a variety of neutral proteases.
3.11
These azurophilic granules are generally denser than the
 neutrophil-specific granules.
 Neutrophil-specific, or
secondary granules, contain lysozyme, collagenase,
plasminogen activator, and histaminase. Both types of
granules fuse with phagosomes to form phagolysosomes,
where digestion of phagocytized material takes place. If
activated, the neutrophil-specific granules may also fuse
with the plasma membrane, releasing their damaging
enzymes out into the extracellular environment.
 Neutrophils have a very short half-life; they probably
only survive about 6 hours at a site of inflammation and
last less than a few days in blood. Therefore, the pool
needs to be continually replenished. Neutrophils leave
the blood in response to tissue damage. They migrate
rapidly to where they are needed, and emigrate through
 the wall in response to chemotactic signals. Such signals
3.11 Blood smear from a dog showing three mature neutrophils.
include bacterial components, a factor of complement
Note the lack of color in the cytoplasm and the multilobed nucleus.
C5, fibrin, interleukin-8, and leukotriene B4.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
77
Neutrophils are the most common cell in purulent
Eosinophils are similar to neutrophils in their
exudate. In fact, pus is an accumulation of dead
maturation and release sequences. Like neutrophils,
neutrophils {3.12).
eosinophils are also end-cells that do not replicate after
release. They are more long-lived than neutrophils,
 Most bacteria have very strong chemotactic factors
 persisting up to 8-12 days in tissue.
that attract neutrophils. Any accumulation of pus
Eosinophils are most often associated with fungal and
should trigger the suspicion that bacteria are present.
be allergic or anaphylactic {3.14)12, and some neo-
The myeloperoxidase in neutrophils give pus its green
plasms13, including mast cell tumors14 and some types
color As neutrophils die in large numbers within
 of lymphoma1s.
inflamed tissues, their contents are released into the
Once eosinophils reach the tissue, they can function in
extracellular fluids. These contents are also further
several ways. They can be bacteriocidal, although not as
chemotactic to other neutrophils.
effectively as neutrophils; although eosinophils have high
levels of peroxidase, they lack lysozyme. Eosinophils are
Eosinophils
most effective at killing metazoan parasites, due to major
 Eosinophilic granulocytes are so called because of the
basic protein released from the eosinophil granule, which
presence of red-pink (the same color as erythrocytes)
 appears to be enhanced by mast cell products.
 cytoplasmic granules when stained with Wright's stain or with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (3.13). These granules vary in
Basophils and mast cells
size and shape in the different species, being very large and
Basophils are the third type of granulocytic leukocyte
globular in the horse and quite small and rod-shaped in the
(3.15). Produced in the bone marrow, they occur in the
cat. The granules contain major basic protein, which is toxic
circulation in very low numbers and emigrate into
to parasites and ca uses lysis of mammalian epithelial cells.
extravascular tissues at sites of inflammation. They have
3.13
3.12 Histologic picture of the hypopyon seen in 3.8, showing 
3.13 Blood smear from a horse showing an eosinophil. Note the 
accumulations of neutrophils, cellular debris and necrosis (arrows]. H&tE.
 eosinophilic granularity of the cytoplasm and the multilobed nucleus.
3.14
3.15
3.14 Photomicrograph showing infiltrations of eosinophils in the
 3.15 Blood smear showing a canine basophil. Note the blue
conjunctiva of a horse with habronermiasis.
 granularity of the cytoplasm that obliterates the nucleu5.
78
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
a multilobed nucleus and large, globular basophilic
with a specific antigen, the population of cells that
granules that can obliterate the nucleus.
 recognizes the antigen will proliferate in response16.
 Although mast cells are granulated, they are usually
 Functionally, lymphocytes can be divided into two broad
not considered granulocytes. These cells are related to
dasses. The primary function of B-cells, as mentioned
basophils but are present in connective and mucosal
earlier, is to produce antibodies. B-cells have specific
tissue and only very rarely in the circulation. They are
2ul 0l 1oidaoa1 B se saa1as 1eul aoepns 1iaul uo Apoquue
particularly abundant in skin, gastrointestinal mucosa,
homologous specific antigen. When specific antigen is
and respiratory tract, all host-environment interfaces.
bound to the surface of B-cells they are induced to divide
The nucleus is round to oval and contains a prominent
repeatedly, forming a line of memory cells and a line of
nucleolus. Mast cells possess distinct spherical basophilic
 antibody-producing cels called plasma cells17. These plasma
to metachromatic cytopla smic granules.
cells only live for a few days but they work full-time
Neither mast cells nor basophils are end-cells, and
producing large amounts of immunoglobulin (3.17). Plasma
both are capable of continued division at the site of
inflammation. These cells are not phagocytic and are
or elliptical with much more cytoplasm than a lymphocyte.
only sluggishly motile. Their main function is the
The nucleus is usually eccentrically placed and the
degranulation of their cytoplasmic contents when
chromatin often is clumped at the periphery, creating a
stimulated, which releases a number of preformed
"wagon-wheel 
 appearance. The cytoplasm contains
proinflammatory products contained within the gran-
 ules. The end result is increased vascular permeability,
 endoplasmic reticulum, and therefore takes on a slightly
vasodilation, anticoagulation, tissue destruction, and
basophilic tone. In many cells an area of pallor just adjacent
 attraction of eosinophils.
to the nucleus can be seen histologically. This represents the
cell's packaging machinery, the Golgi apparatus.
Lymphocytes
T-cells are roughly divided into T-helper cells and T-
Lymphocytes are small round cells with a round,
 cytotoxic cells. The helper cells all have a CD4 molecule
is- a rs  sn 
 on the surface, which allows the helper cell to recognize 
cytoplasm (3.16). Although lymphocytes all appear similar
Aue) lao guuasad-uaae ue Aq panuasad uaaiue un
morphologically, they come in two functional varieties,
B-
 cell with MHC II surface marker), usually a macrophage.
cells and T-cells. The B-lymphocytes are committed
to
The combination of T-helper cell and macrophage is
making antibodies. They originate in the bone marrow
essential in complexing with a B-cell to allow the
and come to reside in extramedullary lymphoid issues. The 
 production of antibodies. The second type of T-cells is the 
precursors of T-lymphocytes migrate from the bone
CD8 group. The CD8 molecule complexes with
marrow through the thymic cortex to differentiate into
nonmacrophage-type cells, 
i.e. cells with MHC I
mature T-cells. Approximately 80-90% of the cells in the
molecules on their surface. When the CD8 molecule
circulation are T-cells, while B-cells are much more
aligns with an MHC I expressing cell that also has specific
 sedentary by comparison.
 antigen on its surface, the T-cell destroys that cell.
 Lymphocytes are maintained in populations of clones
 Lymphocytes are drawn into sites of inflammation by
that are each specific for a certain antigen. Each
a number of factors. Once at the site, they can either
lymphocyte clone is preprogrammed to recognize only a
cluster around blood vessels or form nodular aggregates.
single antigen. In an animal there may be lymphocytes
The presence of these nodular aggregates is usually a
capable of responding to 108 different antigens, most of
nonspecific indication of chronic antigenic stimulation.
which have never been encountered. When challenged
 In these cases, plasma cells are quite often also seen.
3.16
3.17
3.17 Two
plasma cells
from a dog
in a bone
marrow
aspirate. The
cells have
eccentrically
placed 
nuclei and 
abundant
basophilic
cytoplasm.
3.16 Blood smear from a dog containing a lymphocyte. Note the
round nucleus and the paucity of cytoplasm.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
79
Mononuclear phagocytes
accumulate, their main function is phagocytosis and
Macrophages are professional tissue phagocytes {3.18).
microbial killing.
The word macrophage is used to describe a monocyte
The process whereby cells (such as neutrophils and
that has emigrated from the blood to the tissue. The term
macrophages) ingest solid particles is termed phago-
histiocyte is also used to describe these cells. There are a
cytosis. The first step in phagocytosis is adhesion of the
number of factors that recruit monocytes to sites of
particle to be phagocytozed to the cell surface. This is
inflammation. Once there, however, they do not divide at
facilitated by opsonization. The phagocyte then ingests 
the site of inflammation. Compared to neutrophils, they
the attached particle by sending out pseudopodia
are more long-lived, surviving at an inflammatory site for
around it. These meet and fuse so that the particle lies in
as long as 1 month. In general, they are also slower to
a phagocytic vacuole (also called a phagosome),
 arrive at the site of inflammation, usually taking about
bounded by cell membrane. Lysosomes, membrane-
48 hours. They appear as large cells with bean-shaped or
bound packets containing the toxic compounds des-
oval nuclei with fine, diffusely scattered chromatin. The
cribed below, then fuse with phagosomes to form
cytoplasm stains a pale pink and may contain vacuoles or
phagolysosomes. It is within these that intracellular
 particulate debris of phagocytozed foreign material.
killing of microorganisms occurs.
The function of macrophages is primarily phago-
BIOCHEMICAL CHANGES
addition to their phagocytic function, activated
aos aq ed sirl u paau si uoeuwu
macrophages can become glassy, eosinophilic, “epi-
 substances found in plasma called mediators. Many
thelioid macrophages. These cells produce and secrete
noncellular mediators of inflammation can be measured
a wide variety of biologically active substances. These
clinically. An increase in the concentration of acute-
include: toxic oxygen meta bolites, proteases, neutrophil
phase proteins in the blood is commonly seen. {These
chemotactic factors, nitric oxide, arachidonic acid
are normally present in small concentrations but
metabolites, growth factors that promote fibrosis, and
increase dramatically in response to acute inflamma-
angiogenesis factors.
Aq paonpul aue kau aa aui Aq paonpoid iruo
When the inciting cause remains for a long time,
circulating cytokines. Specific acute-phase proteins, like
macrophages will often fuse to form a multinucleated
fbrinogen, may be measured in blood to monitor
giant cell. These cells are metabolically active but their
inflammatory processes.
phagocytic potential is significantly reduced. Macro-
 The movement of leukocytes from the vessel lumen to
phages have been incriminated in proliferative neoplasm-
the site of tissue damage is by chemotaxis, and is
like diseases such as systemic histiocytosis19.
mediated by substances known as chemotactic factors
(chemotaxins), which diffuse from the area of tissue
Chemotaxis of leukocytes
damage. All granulocytes and monocytes respond to
During the early phases of the inflammatory response,
chemotaxins, and respond to a concentration gradient,
the normally inactive endothelium has to be activated to
moving from an area of lesser concentration of the factor
allow adhesion of neutrophils. Normally inactive
 to an area of greater concentration of the factor.
neutrophils have to be activated to enhance their capacity
Chemotaxins can be exogenous or endogenous. Most
for phagocytosis, bacterial killing, and generation of
 exogenous chemotaxins are bacterial or other microbial
inflammatory mediators. Neutrophils have to develop
products, e.g. endotoxin. Chemotaxins bind to receptors
the ability to move actively, from vessels towards the
on the surface of leukocytes and activate secondary
specific area of tissue damage. When leukocytes
 messenger systems. These messenger systems work by
stimulating increased intracytoplasmic calcium. The
calcium then interacts with the 
cytoskeleton  with
resulting assembly 
 of cytoskeletal
 specializations
involved in motility.
3.18
In large part the acute inflammatory response is
 orchestrated by plasma-derived and cell-derived chemi-
cal mediators.
Plasma-derived factors
The plasma contains four major protease cascade
systems that（
 contribute to acute inflammation:
complement, the kinins, the coagulation factors, and the
fibrinolytic systems. These are interrelated and produce
various inflammatory mediators.
Complement system: the complement system consists
products. It can be activated during the acute
inflammatory reaction in several ways. With tissue
necrosis, enzymes capable of activating complement are
released from dying cells. During infection, the formation
of antigen-antibody complexes can activate complement
3.18 Blood smear showing a canine monocyte. The nucleus is
via the classical pathway, while the endotoxins of Gram-
horseshoe shaped and the cytoplasm is vacuolated.
negative bacteria activate complement via the alternative
80
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
pathway. Products of the kinin, coagulation, and
degranulation can be stimulated by tra uma, cross-linkage
fibrinolytic systems can activate complement.
of cytophilic IgE with antigen, cytokines IL-1 and IL-8,
 Kinin system: the kinins are peptides of 9-11 amino
and binding of anaphylatoxins from the complement
acids; the most important vascular permea bility factor is
cascade. Histamine is the primary mediator of immediate
bradykinin. The kinin system is activated by coagulation
vasodilation and increased vascular permeability in acute
factor XIl. Bradykinin is also a chemical mediator of the
inflammation.
 pain that is a cardinal feature of acute inflammation.
Coagulation  system:  the coagulation system
is
Cytokines
responsible for the conversion of soluble fibrinogen into
 sadai lo Au Aa panod sand ae sauoi
fbrin, a major component of acute inflammatory
modulate cell function by interaction with cell surface
exudate. Coagulation factor Xll (the Hageman factor),
receptors
(Table 3.1). The cytokines allow for
once activated by contact with extracellular materials,
 communication between cells and they can have autocrine,
such as basal lamina, and various proteolytic enzymes of
paracrine, or endocrine activity. Included in this group are
bacterial origin, can activate the coagulation, kinin, and
interleukins, growth factors, and chemokines. Major
fibrinolytic systems. Tissue factor is another important
cytokines involved in inflammation include IL-1 and TNFo.
initiator of the coagulation cascade.
from monocytes and macrophages, and INFy and TNFo.
Fibrinolytic system: plasmin is responsible for the lysis
from lymphocytes. In general, endothelial cells respond to
of fibrin into fibrin degradation products, which may
inflammatory cytokines by expressing leukocyte adhesion
have local effects on vascular permeability. Kallikrein
molecules {E-selectins) and becoming more thrombogenic
from the kinin system can activate the fibrinolytic system
by production of tissue factor. Leukocytes respond by
by converting plasminogen to plasmin.
becoming activated and expressing surface molecules that
All four cascades are interrelated and participate at
bind to endothelial adhesion molecules.
different levels in each inflammatory response. All
IL-1 and TNFo have many similar activities. Once
cascades are under strict and redundant controls
 synthesized and released from macrophages, these
designed to maintain homeostasis, and, at the same time,
cytokines have the following effects:
allow for an appropriate inflammatory response to occur
● Endocrine: resulting in fever, cachexia (by
and resolve as needed.
uond asudi-anoe (asedi uaoidodi sussanddns 
release from the liver, hemodynamic changes
MEDIATORS OF INFLAMMATION
(circulatory shock), and neutrophilia.
The mediators are numerous, have redundant activities,
 Endothelial cell activation: increased expression of
 and include a variety of chemical groups. In any
leukocyte adhesion molecules, prostaglandin (PG) I
inflammatory response, leukocyte activation is
a
 synthesis, IL-1, IL-8, IL-6, and platelet-derived 
prerequisite to mediator release, de novo synthesis of
growth factor (PDGF) synthesis.
mediators, degranulation, and phagocytosis. Leukocytes
 Fibroblast activation: proliferation of fibroblasts,
are activated by binding to numerous cytokines such as
collagen synthesis, PG synthesis.
interferon gamma (IFNy) and tumor necrosis factor
● Leukocyte activation: increased cytokine secretion
{TNF), or other ligands such as the Fc portion of
 and priming.
antibody and complement components.  Activated
leukocytes are capable of a variety of functions such as
Chemokines
adhesion to and migration through endothelial cells,
Chemokines are classes of small proteins with specifically
 chemotaxis, production of arachidonate metabolites,
 spaced, conserved cysteine-disulfide bonds. They are
 phagocytosis, and oxidative burst and degranulation.
produced by a variety of cells including activated
 Mediators such as histamine are preformed and stored
 endothelial cells and macrophages. Chemokines activate
 in granules. These granules can be released immediately
and attract leukocytes and some stimulate hematopoietic
upon activation. Other mediators such as arachidonic
progenitor cells. A key activity of chemokines is to
 acid metabolites require de novo synthesis. Endothelial
induce secretion of other cytokines from the leukocytes
cell activation results in expression of leukocyte adhesion
that they activate. Each class of chemokine recruits and
molecules and, sometimes, 1
 procoagulant  activity.
activates different classes of leukocytes. For example,
Endothelial cells are activated by cytokines such as TNF
IL-8 is chemotactic for neutrophils and basophils, and
 and interleukin-1 (IL-1). Platelets are activated by a
eotaxin is chemotactic for eosinophils.
variety of mediators to degranulate and participate in
coagulation, including thrombin, adenosine diphosphate,
and platelet activating factor (PAF).
CHRONIC INFLAMMATION
Cellular derived mediators are important in both
immediate and sustained inflammatory responses. The
Chronic inflammation is characterized by the formation
vasoactive amines are responsible for the immediate and
of fibrous connective tissue in the area of inflam-
short-lived responses in inflammation, including
mation20. Macrophages also may be a feature. This
vasodilation, increased vascular permeability,
and
fibrous connective tissue formation results in organiza-
smooth muscle contraction in the respiratory and
tion or scar formation. Chronic inflammation may lead
digestive tracts.
to repair and takes place in days to weeks.
 Histamine is found primarily in mast cells that are
Chronic inflammation is the end result of a host
distributed throughout tissues, and it is also present in
response to an inciting stimulus. This form of
platelet granules. Histamine is a preformed mediator that
inflammation is considered to be of prolonged duration,
is released upon mast cell degranulation. Mast cell
usually weeks to months. Instead of an exudative
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
81
Table 3.1 Important growth factors and cytokines involved in neovascularization and fibroblast proliferation
 Mediator
Source
Function
Platelet-derived
Platelets, macrophages,
 Chemotactic for fibroblasts, macrophages, smooth muscle;
growth factor
endothelium
mitogenic for fibroblasts
 Transforming growth
 Platelets, T-cells,
Chemotactic for fibroblasts, leukocytes; stimulates proliferation
factor beta
macrophages
of fibroblasts, extracellular matrix.
Fbroblast growth factor
Many cell types 
Stimulates angiogenesis; mitogenic for endothelium, smooth muscle,
fibroblasts
Epidermal growth factor
Platelets, macrophages
Induces proliferation of epithelium, endothelium, fibroblasts;
increases production of glycosaminoglycans
Insulin-like growth factor
Fibroblasts, hepa tocytes 
 Mitogenic for fibroblasts
Interleukin-1
Macrophages,
 Chemotactic for leukocytes; stimulates proliferation of keratinocytes,
endothelium 
fibroblasts, endothelium 
Tumor necrosis factor alpha
Macrophages
Mitogenic for fibroblasts; angiogenic
Interferon gamma
Lymphocytes
Inhibits fibroblast proliferation; inhibits collagen synthesis
3.19 Photomicrograph of the anterior chamber of
3.19
a canine eye. The lens capsule (LC) is ruptured and
there is a proliferation of fibroblasts (arrow). H&tE.
LC
response, chronic inflammation usually consists of
a feature of chronic inflammation. These mononuclear
connective tissue proliferation. Many of these changes
inflammatory cells include macrophages, lymphocytes,
also represent the repair process, and there is a continuum
 and plasma cells.
between chronic inflammation and repair. In addition to
Most ocular tissues have very limited regenerative
the hea ling response, chronic inflammation tends to occur
capacity and have a propensity for scarring. The adult
with infections by organisms that are resistant to clearing
retina and corneal endothelium have practically no
by the body. Such persistent organisms include some 
of
regenerative capacity21, the corneal stroma and the lens
the higher bacteria {including Mycobacterium), fungi, and
have poor regenerative capacity, and fibrous metaplasia
quite a few parasites. Histologically, chronic inflam-
is a very common phenomenon within the globe and a
mation is characterized by fibroplasia (3.19). In addition,
frequent response of corneal endothelium, lens epi-
infiltration with mononuclear inflammatory cells may be
thelium, and retinal pigmented epithelium.
82
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
GRANULATION TISSUE
CORNEA
Granulation tissue is new fibrovascular connective tissue
If the original injury has caused substantial loss of stroma,
formed in the early phases of repair. Granulation tissue
or if the bystander injury from neutrophilic inflammation
serves to fill in defects, replace lost tissue, and cause
has destroyed the superficial stroma, then epithelial healing
wound contraction. This newly formed fibrous tissue
will be delayed until new stroma can be built via
contains numerous small blood vessels. Eventually the
recruitment of granulation tissue from the nearest available
fibrous connective tissue may mature to have the normal
vascular bed, the limbus. After a lag period of about 4 days,
histology of the loose fibrillar connective tissue, but in
a combination of new vessels and fibroblasts will then
the formative stages the fibroblasts are plump and only a
begin to grow from the limbus at approximately 1 mm/day.
few collagen fibrils have been produced.
Although the blood vessels will become less
Contraction occurs as a result of the action of
prominent over time, and the haphazard fibroblasts will
myofibrobasts. These cells have features intermediate
become oriented parallel to the corneal epithelial surface,
between those of fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells,
such granulation tissue will never completely disappear
and appear in the wound area 2 or 3 days after injury.
and will always be clinically and microscopically
Their origin is not entirely clear but they probably
 distinguishable from normal stroma. It is claimed that
derive either from perivascular cells (ie. pericytes) or
injured corneal stroma will thus never be remodeled with
 from mesenchymal cells. Contraction may reduce the
the extremely precise architecture required to ensure
Aeais pue %oz se yonu se Aq ioajap ieuiauo
perfect corneal clarity.
facilitates healing.
Although the mature corneal endothelium is said to be
Fibroplasia begins early after injury, with existing
incapable of mitotic replication in some species, including
fibroblasts adjacent to the wound being the source of
the dog, cat, and horse, it seems to acquire proliferative
newf
fibroblasts. The immature 
fibroblasts
aré
capacity when damaged and can undergo fibrous
characterized by their plumpness, l
basophilia, rich
 metaplasia. Following injury, the normally inconspicuous
complement of rough endoplasmic reticulum, and
endothelium proliferates as fibroblast-like cells. These may
prominent nucleoli, all evidence of active synthesis
either be restricted to a plaque lining the cornea or the cells
(3.20). They are active in synthesizing glycosamino-
glycans and collagen fibers.
anterior surface of the iris. If this occurs, it may result in
The new capillaries most commonly run in a
pupillary block or the cells may enter the posterior
perpendicular direction to the outer surface of the
chamber. The cells are distinguished from true fibroblasts
by the retention of PAS-positive basement membrane
surface, while fibroblasts tend to grow in from the side of
production. In at least some instances, it is difficult to
the defect to bridge the gap. This often produces a
determine whether all of the fibrous membrane has
originated from corneal endothelium or whether it has
the direction of the fibroblasts. The formation of new
received contributions from deep corneal stromal
capillaries is termed angiogenesis or neovascularization.
fibroblasts or from cells growing out of the iris stroma.
In the eye, neovascularization can occur in many areas.
Neovascularization of the normal avascular cornea is
UVEAL TRACT
 probably the most well known of these phenomena22.
Chronic inflammation in the globe is usually in the form
Limbal blood vessels proliferate in response to corneal
of fibrosis. The iris is susceptible to the development of
injury. These blood vessels are leaky and can result in
preiridial fibrovascular membranes23. Angiogenic growth
corneal edema. Granulation tissue can also form on
many of the surfaces within the globe, including the
surface of the anterior and posterior iris and the
endothelium of the cornea.‘
These
fibrovascular
3.20
membranes are also leaky and can bleed easily, resulting
in hyphema.
 Remember, granulation tissue is part of the repair
process and consists of inflamed, proliferating
fibrous tissue.
If the process continues too long, granulation tissue
will accumulate in excessive amounts and bulge above
the surface, causing severe disfigurement of the
structure. This excessive granulation tissue is termed
‘proud flesh’(
Or ‘exuberant granulation tissue'.
Exuberant granulation tissue is a common complication
to flesh wounds in the horse.
The proliferation of fibrovascular connective tissue in
wound healing is under the influence of growth factors
and various cytokines. The most important of these are
 3.20 Histologic view of fibroblasts and inflammatory cell
 the fibroblast growth factors. These can be secreted by a
infiltration in the cornea (C) and anterior chamber (AC) of a 
wide variety of cell types, including the corneal
canine eye follwing a perforating injury. (D, Descemet's
epithelium and endothelium and the ciliary epithelium.
mem brane.] H&tE.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
83
factors released from a detached retina, from intraocular
LENS
neoplasms, or as a consequence of chronic inflammation
The events surrounding attempted lens repair involve
anywhere within the globe are absorbed into the iris
 migration and fibrous metaplasia of the lens epithelium.
stroma, and act on the iridial blood vessels. These stromal
This normally inconspicuous epithelium is usually
vessels and accompanying fibroblasts grow outwardly
present only under the anterior lens capsule. In chronic
onto the anterior face of the iris. From that location, there
hoaisod suioupun Aq spuodsau unuda su Ainu
 is a definite risk of migration which can cause occlusion
 migration, hypertrophy, and hyperplasia. When the lens
of the filtration angle or pupillary block {3.21).
is ruptured and the epithelium escapes from the lens
The normal iris lies against the face of the lens. Acute
through the capsular defect, it is able to proliferate
inflammation that results in any exudation makes the iris
extensively within the globe. It will cause pupillary block,
sticky, and greatly increases the risk of fibroplasia and
occlusion of the filtration angle, and may even migrate
 subsequent granulation tissue formation in chronic
into the vitreous. In the cat, this proliferative lens
cases24. Iridolenticular adhesion (posterior synechia)
epithelium has been shown to undergo malignant
occurs when the granulation tissue formation causes the
transformation, and is possibly the tissue of origin for the
lens to adhere to the iris. This, in turn, increases the risk of
so-called post-traumatic ocular sarcoma that is unique to
pupillary block, thus leading to iris bombe and secondary
the cat (3.22 )25, 26.
glaucoma. Iridocorneal adhesion (anterior synechia) is
much less frequent, and is seen almost exclusively as a
POSTERIOR SEGMENT
consequence of perforating corneal injury.
The accumulation of inflammatory exudate within the
posterior chamber and the vitreous tends to organize by
fibrous metaplasia and to contract into a transverse band
that extends from the ciliary body across the globe to the
3.21
other side of the ciliary body. This is called a
retrolenticular fibrous membrane, also known as a
cyclytic membrane. It will usually incorporate the
detached retina into its posterior face {3.23).
GRANULOMATOUS INFLAMMATION
There is one specific subset of inflammation that is usually
considered as chronic. Granulomatous inflammation is a
definite type of chronic inflammatory reaction and it is
seen in a number of settings. Histologically, it is very
characteristic and  is described  as  infiltration of
macrophages (or histiocytes) with fibroplasia.
Granulomatous inflammation was initially described
as
inflammation  that  i
included the presence 
of
granulomas. A granuloma is characterized as discrete
accumulations of macrophages with centrally placed
lymphocytes surrounded by a rim of fibrous connective
3.21 Photomicrograph of the anterior face of the iris of a cat. The
tissue. The definition of granulomatous inflammation
 proliferation of fibrovascular tissue is called 'rubeosis iridis.
3.22
3.23
3.22 Photomicrograph from a cat showing the eosinophilic lens
3.23 Retrolenticular fibrovascular membrane (arrows)] in a dog. Note
capsule with prolific metaplasia of the lens epithelium into spindle-
the inflammatory cells admixed with the proliferating fibroblasts.
shaped cells (arrow). These cells have undergone malignant
(CP, ciliary process.) H&tE.
transforma tion to neoplastic cells. H&tE.
84
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
has been broadened and now means any inflammatory
Also, it follows that exposure to specific antigens will
response consisting  predominantly  of epithelioid
drive the reactions. There are some classical lesions that
(differentiated) macrophages (3.24). Their cytoplasm is
indicate an immune-mediated inflammatory response.
abundant and finely granular, with indistinct cell
Lymphocytic infiltrations are characteristic of some types
boundaries, so that they resemble epithelial cells more
of immune-mediated inflammation. The presence of
than macrophages.
plasma cells characterizes other types of immune
Other cell types unique to granulomatous inflam-
reactions17. Other cell types that can be seen in immune-
mation include the multinucleated giant cells (3.25).
mediated inflammation are eosinophils and mast cells27.
These are cells formed from tissue macrophages, and
Many types of immune-mediated lesions do not
their main function is secretion of cytokines that aid in
contain inflammatory cells; products of lymphocytes
the destruction of the offending antigen. Like epithelioid
cause the lesion, such as antibodies produced at a distant
macrophages, they are poorly phagocytic.
 site or cytokines produced locally.
TYPE I: ANAPHYLACTIC OR ALLERGIC
IMMUNE-MEDIATED INELAMMATION
HYPERSENSITIVITY
In type I hypersensitivity the first exposure to antigen
Immune-mediated reactions that damage normal tissue
causes plasma cells to produce IgE that binds to Fc
are called hypersensitivity reactions. They may result as
receptors on mast cells and basophils. Re-exposure to the
part of the normal response to antigens or occur
in
same antigen causes binding of antigen to fixed IgE on
response to overwhelming antigen exposure or an
mast cells, resulting in mast cell and basophil
inappropriately regulated immune response to normal
degranulation with immediate release of histamine,
antigen load. Ideally, the antigen enters the host, elicits a
serotonin, and proteases. Binding of antigen also results
humoral or cell-mediated immune response, and is
in de rovo synthesis of more inflammatory mediators.
effectively neutralized or eliminated. Things do not
Mast cell cytokines are released, resulting in recruitment
always go so smoothly. General disorders involving the
 of eosinophils and, in some cases, neutrophils. Mediators
immune system are grouped into four classes of
from eosinophils amplify the inflammatory response and
hypersensitivity reactions. These reactions may be
in
damage tissue. A large dose antigen re-exposure may
response to exposure to exogenous antigens, including
result in systemic release of mediators, which may lead to
allergens and infectious agents, or as part of an
anaphylactic shock. Smaller dose local re-exposure to
 autoimmune disease, a response to endogenous antigen.
 antigen results in local signs, including cutaneous wheals
Types I, II, and Il are mediated by serum immuno-
 and nasal or conjunctival discharge.
globulins. Type IV hypersensitivity is cell mediated and
generally induces an inflammatory response characterized
TYPE II: CYTOTOXIC HYPERSENSITIVITY
by a perivascular infiltrate rich in monocytes and lympho-
In this form of hypersensitivity, exposure to antigen
cytes. This classification of immune-mediated reactions is
causes plasma cells to produce IgG or IgM. This
imperfect. In reality many reactions are combinations of
 ueuuopand adai auo yim sadki noy au
injury. There are three possible mechanisms for cell
 Immune-mediated inflammation is inflammation that
injury: activation of complement followed
by
is ca used by the immune response. All immune responses
complement-mediated lysis or phagocytosis and removal
are directed by lymphocytes; therefore, lymphocytes and
by leukocytes; antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
their products drive immune-mediated inflammation.
(ADCC); or inactivation of a biologically active
3.24
3.25
3.24 Sheets of vacuolated macrophages are present in the anterior
3.25 Photomicrograph of canine tissue showing a large
chamber of a dog. This is an example of granulomatous inflammation.
multinucleated giant cell (arrow). Note the large amounts
 of cytoplasm and the multiple nuclei. H&tE.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
85
molecule. In the first instance, complement is activated
and adjacent normal tissues, often resulting in fibrinoid
and forms a membrane attack complex (MAC), resulting
necrosis of vascular walls.
in lysis of the target cell. The second possibility is for
Corneal endothelitis is often seen in animals with
 antibody and complement to opsonize the target cell.
anterior uveitis. This is because the corneal endothelium
This would result in phagocytic destruction of the target
S ia soa l lai ds e ag Add a
cells by neutrophils or macrophages. The third possibility
 and deposition of antigen-antibody complexes. This results
can occur by the disruption of biologically functional
in a neutrophilic or mononuclear infiltration. The result is
molecules. The function of these molecules can be
tansient or even permanent corneal edema. The cause for
blocked or at least affected when autoantibodies bind to
the specific endothelial targeting in most naturally occurring
these molecules and render them nonfunctional.
aq A aau aadxa nq uou nou si sadxa
Equine recurrent uveitis may be an example of type II
coss-reaction between corneal endothelium and infectious 
hypersensitivity28, 29, There is epidemiologic evidence
disease antigen that makes the corneal endothelium an
that cross-reaction between leptospiral antigens and
accidental target for immune attack. Altematively, viral
 intraocular antigens plays an important role. The
infection of the endothelium may result in persistent viral
resultant inflammation and necrosis of the non-
antigen that becomes the target for antibody {immune
pigmented ciliary epithelium is thought to be due to
complex disease) or cellular attack.
ADCC destruction of these cells (3.26, 3.27). In the cat,
a similar syndrome may occur with Toxoplasma but this
TyPe IV: CELL-MEDIATED [OR DELAYED]
sa aui sasru ur sdead pue sie ul ogusadun st
HYPERSENSITIVITY
are correlated with the development of glaucoma by
some unknown mechanism.
This is a common response to many intracellular
pathogens and to large or complex infectious agents,
TYPE IIl: IMMUNE COMPLEX HYPERSENSITIVITY
including
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis,
viruses,
In immune complex hypersensitivity, exposure to
protozoa, fungi, and metazoan parasites. The cells bind
antigen in specific conditions causes plasma cells to
 specific antigen by means of T-cell surface receptors. The
produce IgG or IgM. In situations of persistent
sensitized  T-cells release cytokines that attract
antigenemia and slight antigen excess, soluble
macrophages and more lymphocytes to the area. The
antigen-antibody complexes can be formed. Exposure
lymphocytes further activate macrophages that are
to antigen also stimulates some IgE production that
further chemotactic. Activated macrophages can cause
 sensitizes mast cells to release mediators, increasing
destruction of normal adjacent tissues by release of
vascular permeability. Increased vascular permeability
 digestive enzymes and oxygen radicals. This results in
allows antigen-antibody complexes to be deposited in
formation of the classic granuloma.
vessels, or to form de novo in vascular basement
 Type IV cell-mediated hypersensitivity is initiated by
membranes. The complexes deposited in the blood
T-lymphocytes specifically sensitized to locally deposited
vessels activate complement that causes mast cell
 antigen. The two effector mechanisms, delayed type and
degranulation and attracts neutrophils. The formed
direct cytotoxicity, are mediated by two different
complexes are usually tightly bound to the extracelluar
 subpopulations of T-cells: CD4 cells mediate delayed
matrix around the blood vessels, and are too large to be
type reactions and CD8 cells direct cytotoxicity.
phagocytized by neutrophils. The frustrated neutrophils
release oxygen radicals and lysosomal contents into the
actively sensitized T-cells. However, only about 10% of
tissues. These substances destroy the blood vessel wall
the
mononuclear cell
linfiltrate inadelayed
3.26
3.27
 3.26 Photomicrograph of the normal ciliary body epithelium
 3.27 Photomicrograph of the ciliary body in a horse with equine
of a horse.
recurrent uveitis. Note the thickening due to necrosis of the ciliary
 epithelium and protein deposition (P). H&tE.
86
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
hypersensitivity reaction are specifically sensitized T-
 cells; the other 90% are nonsensitized lymphocytes and
enter and eventually die.
as  sor aa pae so
Normal cells of the body can be divided into several
T-cells to amplify the reaction. Macrophages activated by
categories: continually replacing cells fhematopoietic
INFy from lymphocytes are required to develop the
tissue, surface epithelium, some glandular epithelium);
 prominent inflammatory reaction and tissue damage in
delayed hypersensitivity. They function through the
connective tissue, some glandular epithelium); 
and
release of proteolyticé
enzymes, PGs, cytokines,
essentially nonreplacing cells (neurons, muscle). Relevant
TNF, leukotrienes, tissue thromboplastin, PDGF, and
to the study of abnormal cell growth is the category of
other substances, as well as through phagocytosis.
"continually replacing cells'. For example, hematopoietic
precursor cells comprise stem cells that are capable of an
 Remember, development of type IV reactions does
indefinite number of divisions and progeny cells that either
not require antibody, and depends on T-lymphocytes.
proliferate or mature to a nonproliferative state f'end-
cells'). As the cells mature toward the end-cell state, they
The reaction is called delayed type hypersensitivity
lose their proliferative potential and gain characteristics of
because in the classical tuberculin reaction, physical
differentiation. In this context, abnormal cell growth can
detection is dela yed for 24-48 hours after injection of the
be viewed as a disorder of maturation or differentiation, in
tuberculin antigen. This differs from the immediate
which many of the tumor cells remain in the replicating
response that occurs in type I reactions.
pool of undifferentiated stem cells.
The T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity reaction is a type IV
reaction, mediated by cytotoxic T-cells that directly cause
HYPERPLASIA, METAPLASIA, AND DYSPLASIA
 cell injury. In direct cytotoxicity, recognition of a cell
Non-neoplastic cellular proliferations are not uncommon
surface antigen fin this case a virus) by the corresponding
and must be distinguished from neoplasia. Hyperplasia is
receptor on a T-cell (CD8 cell) brings the T-cell (cytotoxic
an absolute increase in the number of cells per unit of
Tcells, TCTL) into close contact with the target cell,
tissue. It is generally initiated and regulated by definable
which triggers the T-cell to release perforin that causes
(such as hormonal) stimuli and may be useful to the host
apoptosis of the target cell.
(physiologic and adaptive hyperplasia).
Both delayed type hypersensitivity (CD4-mediated)
Metaplasia denotes a change of one type of adult cell to
 and direct T-cell-mediated (CD8-mediated) cytotoxicity
another. It is usually an adaptive response to an
 are necessary immunologic reactions but they can cause
inflammatory or other abnormal stimulus and is usually
extensive tissue damage in some instances. Examples
reversible. Metaplasia is a change occurring within tissue in
include granulomatous reactions to fungi, parasites, and
which one mature cell type changes to another mature cell
mycobacteria, idiopathic granulomatous diseases31, 32,
type. Metaplasia is usually a protective mechanism and the
 and so-called lens induced uveitis.
new cell type is a sturdier, hardier cell, e.g. columnar
The eye is considered an immunologically privileged
r s a s o s a
site. Denatured lens proteins from either a leaky lens
takes place over a period of several mitotic generations. In
(phacolytic uveitis) or a ruptured lens (phacoclastic
 other words, the change takes place at the stem cell level
uveitis) are thought to incite an immune-mediated
 and subsequent progeny, over a period of several cell
response33. Phacoclastic uveitis is a severe destructive
 generations, begin to change shape, structure, and function,
granulomatous endophthalmitis that occurs as a delayed
until eventually the cells that are produced are of the other
 type hypersensitivity response to the ruptured lens. The
cell type. Metaplasia is generally a reversible process. Once
sudden presentation of large amounts of lens protein to
the stimulus has been removed the tissue can revert {over
the immune system overwhelms the low-dose tolerance
time) to its original type, unless there have been permanent
to lens protein and results in a severe chronic
changes such as proliferation of connective tissue.
inflammation. The symptoms of disease are typically
delayed for one to several weeks after lens injury, and
describe an extremely common corneal reaction to any
require that the lens capsular rupture be large enough to
persistent low-grade external irritant. Any disease of
allow the escape of a substantial amount of lens protein.
 gradual onset that requires the cornea to become 'tougher"
There is some species difference in the hypersensitivity
will cause the cornea to recall its cutaneous embryologic
response, with rabbits and birds undergoing a more
heritage. This term is somewhat of a misnomer, as the
classical granulomatous response than dogs or cats.
 entire cornea and not just one cell type undergoes this
change, and it is probably more of a hyperplastic than a
metaplastic change. The histologic hallmarks of corneal
ABNORMAL CELL GROWTH AND NEOPLASIA
metaplasia include some or all of the following: epithelial
hyperplasia and keratinization, epithelial or stromal
Normal cell growth is controlled by a milieu of
melanin pigmentation, thickening of the basement
cytokines, growth factors, and hormones. The normal
membrane with development of rete ridges, superficial
cell cycle is divisible into four sequential phases that
stromal fibrosis, and stromal vascularization. All of these
culminate in cell division: the interphase gap (G1),
changes are reversible and are probably reflections of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) synthesis (S), the gap
changes that originate within the permanent replicative
between the end of DNA synthesis and the beginning of
 population of epithelial stem cells at the limbus. These are
mitosis {G2), and mitosis {M). A fifth interval, G0, is
the cells that retain unlimited mitotic capability, and it has
designated for cells that are no longer in the normal
been proposed that corneal metaplasia is not actually an
cycle. Some of these cells may be induced to re-enter the
active process by which the corneal epithelium and stroma
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
87
become skin-like but rather a process by which the
patchy gliosis, pigmentary migration, and scarring
pluripotential limbal stem cells fail to express the
identical to changes seen in the adult retina with similar
specialized phenotype of cornea (3.28, 3.29).
infectious disease can be seen?5. In addition, however,
Dysplasia
is an.
 abnormal
1  atypical
cellular
there will be futile attempts at retinal regeneration, the
proliferation  (atypical  hyperplasia)." It  is  usually
hallmark of which is retinal rosettes. These are considered
reversible and is not a tumor but possibly a precursor in
 tubular/acinar accumulations of primitive photoreceptors.
some circumstances. Dysplasia is a regressive alteration
There are many hereditary retinal dysplasias of
in adult cells manifested by a variation in their size,
shape, and orientation. In some tissue types the change
is abnormal retinal maturation, with no degenerative
may be precancerous. In other cell types {especially the
changes. Retinal rosettes are also present but in this
retina), this change is thought to be a developmental
instance they are almost always just transverse sections
change or at least the result of an in utero event. Corneal
through tubes of folded retina (3.30, 3.31).
dermoid is a form of dysplasia in which normal tissue
The difference between abnormal cell growth and
(skin) is formed in an abnormal location (cornea)34,
neoplasia is clear. Metaplasia is a reversible change of
Retinal dysplasia  is a condition characterized
by
one adult cell type to another mature cell type.
disordered retinal development. This definition can 
be
Dysplasia is a reversible change in adult cells to an
somewhat confusing because the retina continues
to
atypical or disorderly appearance. By comparison,
develop after birth, and disordered development can
be
neoplasia is an irreversible change. This process is a
induced by in utero or postnatal infectious disease as well
marked regressive change in adult cell type following
as by inborn errors of retinal development. In those cases
several generations of mitosis toward more primitive,
caused by perinatal infection {usually viral infection),
less differentiated cell types.
3.28
3.29
3.28 Photomicrograph of the normal corneal epithelium of a dog.
3.29 Photomicrograph of a cornea from a dog with KCs. The corneal
epithelium is keratinized (arrow)] and pigmented and the stroma is 
vascularized (Bv) and infiltrated with inflamma tory cells. H&tE.
3.30
3.31
3.30 Photomicrograph of a normal retina of a dog.
3.31 The section of this canine retina have multiple retinal folds
[(arrows)] . H&tE.
88
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE In VeteRINAry MeDICINE
GROWTH CHARACTERISTICS OF TUMOR CELLS
3.32
The most fundamental properties of tumor cells are
relatively autonomous growth and reproduction and, for
 malignant tumors, invasion and metastasis. Tumor cells
proliferate without relation to the needs of the host in
which they arise. Tumor cells are self-controlling and
have various levels of independence from normal growth
control mecha nisms.
 In the tumor cell cycle, neoplastic cells may undergo
successive cycles of mitosis or leave the cell cycle and
enter Go. Some of the neoplastic cells in the G0 state will
die, while others remain as dormant or latent tumor cells
 and may re-enter the_cycle of cell division with the
appropriate stimulus. The cell growth kinetics of tumor
cells and the cell cycle time (from one mitosis to the next)
can be measured using radioactive DNA labeling and
 autoradiography. The cell cycle time of tumor cells varies
with cancer type (72-260 hours) and, surprisingly, is
 3.32 Photomicrograph of a benign conjunctival papilloma of a bovine.
often considerably longer than that of normal dividing
Note the regular arrangement of the cells and the normal relationship
 cells, such as bone marrow precursor cells (18 hours) or
between the epithelial cells and the underlying stroma. H&tE.
colonic crypt epithelial cells {39 hours). The increased
frequency of mitosis often seen in malignant tumors is
attributed in part to the longer mitotic interval of tumor
3.33
cells compared to normal cells.
Tumors are broadly divided into benign {3.32) and
3.2). In general, malignant tumors differ from benign
tumors in four biological properties: structure, rate of
 growth, invasive growth, and disseminated growth by
metastasis. Of these characteristics, metastasis is a
 unique feature of malignant neoplasms. It is a major
factor in the fatal course of the disease, and is the main 
obstacle to successful treatment.
In domestic animals, ocular tumors are often also
neoplasia. In general, melanomas are most common in
 dogs, followed by ciliary body adenocarcinomas39. In
cats, diffuse iris melanomas and lymphosarcomas are
most common26, 40.
3.33 Photomicrograph of a malignant epithelial tumor of a bovine.
BIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF BENIGN AND
The cells are of varying sizes and shapes (N, neoplastic cells] and 
MALIGNANT NEOPLASMS
there is invasion into the surrounding stroma. The stroma (arrow]
Histologically, all neoplasms are composed of two main
 appears reactive (scirhous or desmoplastic reaction]. H&tE.
parts: tumor cells, which comprise the parenchyma or
specific component and proliferate to enlarge the tumor;
and tumor stroma, a supporting framework consisting of
connective tissue and newly formed blood vessels elicited
Table 3.2 Biological properties of neoplasms 
from adjacent tissues. The stromal reaction of some
tumors is characterized by overproduction of fibrous
Benign
 stroma. This is termed desmoplasia or a scirrhous
Malignant
reaction. Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) are notorious
Structure
Resemblance to 
Abnormal; less
in their ability to incite a desmoplastic reaction (3.34).
normal cells (well
 similarity to normal
Some neoplasms, such as benign tumors and some
differentiated)
cells
slowly growing malignant tumors, have a cellular maturity
Mitoses
Few
Relatively common
and histologic organization similar to normal adult tissue
at the site of origin, and are said to be well differentiated.
Growth
Usually purely
Invasive
In comparison, more rapidly growing malignant tumors
expansive
show a greater degree of structural abnormality and
Growth rate
Slow
Rapid
resemble immature embryonal tissues or stem cells capa ble
of proliferative activity. The loss or absence of organiza-
Growth
May cease growing
Rarely cease
tional, structural, and functional differentiation of cells is
duration 
or regress
growing or regress
termed   poorly  d
differentiated,
, undifferentiated, 
0r
Encapsulation
Usually
Rarely
anaplastic (backward growth'). Anaplasia is a charac-
teristic property of malignant tumor cells. The grading of
Metastasis
None
Frequent
a cancer is an estimate of its malignant behavior and is
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
89
based upon its degree of structural abnormality In general,
In addition, invasion is a prerequisite for tumor cell
the more marked the anaplasia of a tumor, the more
metastasis. Metastasis is the physical separation and
malignant is its biological behavior, as shown by tumor
dissemination of malignant tumor cells from the tissue of
recurrence, invasion, and metastasis.
origin to another site by lymphatic, vascular, and other
The cytological changes characteristic of malignant
routes. The presence or absence of regional and,
tumor 
cells
reflect
the
degree (
ofanaplasia
particularly, distant metastasis is a major factor in
{undifferentiation)  and  include: increased structural
 determining the prognosis of a malignant neoplasm.
variations (pleomorphism) in cellular and nuclear size
Conceptually, metastasis involves three steps or
and shape compared to corresponding normal cells; large
processes: tumor cell invasion, embolization, and
hyperchromatic nuclei containing a coarse, irregular
extravasation.
network of chromatin; increased nuclear to cytoplasmic
ratio of mass; tumor giant cells; large nucleoli; increased
Tumor cell invasion
or bizarre mitotic figures; chromosomal abnormalities;
 In the process of tissue invasion by an epithelial cancer,
and cytoplasmic changes.
tumor cells must traverse the barriers of the basement
 In mucous membrane sites such as the eyelid, third
membrane and the stromal extracellular matrix. The
eyelid, and conjunctiva, 
where repeated clinical
 sequence of events includes:
observation and tissue or cel sampling are possible,
 Detachment of tumor cells from the primary tumor.
 carcinomas are often seen to be preceded by noninvasive
Attachment to ba sement membrane matrix.
lesions. In SCC of horses and cattle, squamous papilloma
Degradation of basement membrane matrix.
and squamous plaque are considered preneoplastic lesions.
Locomotion and infiltration of tumor cells.
The epithelial cells of these precursor lesions may have
 Degradation of extracellular matrix.
atypical features, among them: enlarged nuclei, somewhat
 Degradation of vascular basement membrane matrix.
disorderly positional arrangement, and greater than
normal proliferative activity. This abnormal tissue
The detachment of cancer cells from the tissue of origin
development is commonly termed “dysplasia'. Dysplastic
apparently involves many factors, including decreased
squamous conjunctival plaques of horses may revert to
mutual adhesiveness, diminished  number of cell
normal, while others progress over time to develop many
junctions, and other alterations in surface membrane
cellular features of SCC, except tissue invasion. Such an
structures.
intraepithelial lesion, with the cellular features of SCC but
The attachment of tumor cells to certain matrix
 remaining confined to the conjunctival mucosa and not
invading through the basement membrane, is termed
be a factor in the process of invasion. Some invasive tumor
carcinoma in situ.
cells have an increased number of laminin receptors on
their surfaces. It is possible that increa sed binding of tumor
TUMORINVASIONANDMETASTASIS
cells to laminin facilitates their invasiveness.
The dual properties of invasion and
Imetastasis
The active degradation of components of the
distinguish malignant from benign tumor cells. Invasion
basement membrane, and subsequently of the stromal
of normal tissue is a fundamental characteristic of
extracellular matrix, is required for invasion. The
malignant tumor cells and is one of their potentially most
enzymatic breakdown of proteins and proteoglycans is
dangerous properties. Microscopic invasion of neoplastic
accomplished in various ways. Some invasive tumor cells
cells commonly occurs beyond the gross boundaries of a
produce plasminogen activator, a serine protease that
primary tumor, and in some operative cases may extend
 splits plasminogen into its proteolytically active form,
beyond the surgical margins of apparently normal tissue.
plasmin, whereas others release type IV collagenase
(which can cleave basement membrane collagen),
cathepsins, and heparinase. In some tumors, proteolytic
enzymes are released in the stroma by 'cooperating' host
3.34
cells, such as macrophages.
The next step in invasion requires active neoplastic
cell locomotion and infiltration into the region where the
matrix has been broken down. There, infiltrating cells
with the capacity to proliferate produce progeny cells.
The processes of matrix degradation and tumor cell
locomotion are repeated over and over as tumor cells
infiltrate normal tissue and finally invade lymphatic or
blood vascular channels.
Tumor cell embolization
 Even though malignant tumor cells may invade lymphatic
or blood vessels and enter the circulation, only an
ae ae so pazqa jo raquu s aa
able to establish metastatic lesions. For example,
experimental studies indicate that less than 0.01% (<1 in
10,000) of neoplastic cells entering the blood stream give
3.34 Photormicrograph of an invasive SCC from a horse. The neoplastic
rise to metastatic tumors41. Tumor cell invasion of blood or
epithelial cells (arrows] are surrounded by fibroblast proliferation of the
lymphatic vessels is not sufficient by itself to establish
stroma (S) (scirrhous or desmoplastic reaction]. H&tE.
metastatic growth. The host immune system plays an
90
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
important role in preventing the dissemination_of
often predispose to neoplasia. Heredity plays an
 neoplastic cells and killing them in the vascular system. The
important role in many human tumors, including
survival and growth of metastatic cells is not a random
common cancers such as carcinoma of the colon and
 process but depends upon the selection of cancer cells
breast, and the same may be true for some tumors of
possessing specific properties needed for metastatic growth.
domestic animals such as mast cell tumors in Boxers.
Familial
chromosomal
insta bility,
inherited
Tumor cell extravasation
abnormalities of DNA repair, and germline mutation of
This process involves more than the mere lodging of
various tumor suppressor genes ha ve been associated with
embolized cancer cells in small vessels such as capillaries
tumorigenesis. In children with retinoblastoma, a mutant
or lymphatics. The sequence of mechanisms includes:
gene whose normal function suppresses tumorigenesis is
·Adhesion to endothelial cells.
inherited from a carrier parent. An acquired mutation in,
 Endothelial cell retraction.
or loss of, the remaining normal gene fhomozygosity for
Migration.
mutant allele or loss of heterozygosity for normal allele)
 Degradation of matrix.
results in absence of normal gene product, thereby
+ Locomotion.
permitting or resulting in tumorigenesis. In sporadic
{nonfamilial) retinoblastoma, loss of the normal gene
Neoplastic cells attach to the endothelial surface, induce
product results from mutation or loss of both alleles. In
endothelial retraction, migrate through the breach,
 most inherited predispositions to neoplasia, multiple
dissect beneath the endothelium, degrade the vascular
 somatic genetic a bnormalities occur that produce cancer.
basement membrane, and migrate out of the vascular
Thus, induction events can be based on activity of
compartment to form a metastatic tumor (3.35 ).
proliferation-promoting genes, on loss of normal
Within a primary tumor, there is a marked cellular
proliferation-suppressing genes  with  inactivation of
heterogeneity of metastatic potential. Factors which
negative regulatory pathways, and on loss of normal
influence the establishment of tumor metastases include:
DNA repair mechanisms. The important interaction
genetic instability of the tumor cells; enzymatic degra dation
between hereditary and environmental factors is obvious.
of basement membrane collagen; ability to withstand
trauma; size of the tumor cell embolus; interaction with
MORPHOLOGIC ALTERATIONS
cytotoxic T-cells, natural killer cells, and macrophages;
 One of the hallmarks of neoplasia is abnormal morphology.
entrapment by fibrin or platelets; and surface properties
which includes both cellular structure and tissue
(glycoproteins) which may favor the ability of variant
 organization. Transformation, i.e. altered morphology in
 tumor cells to reach and colonize specific organs.
titro, is characteristic of cells that have undergone induction
 events. However, morphologic alterations in vivo occur
ETIOLOGY OF NEOPLASIA
commonly in the absence of neoplasia.
Tumorigenesis is a complex multistep process, and even
Although morphologic alterations are the principal
clinically early cancers are late in the biological course of
method of identifying and classifying neoplasms, the
 the disease. Intratumoral and intertumoral heterogeneity
pathogenesis of these alterations at a cellular level is not
are common phenomena.
well understood. Cellular morphology is dependent upon 
dynamic interactions of the structural components.
Induction events
 Nuclear matrix forms an interlocking network with the
The specific causes of most types of neoplasia are
cytomatrix that extends throughout the cell and
is
unknown but both environmental and hereditary factors
attached to the extracellular matrix via the cell
are involved. Induction is the multistep series of events
membrane. The cytomatrix is composed in part of net-
that converts a normal cell into one predisposed to
works of active microfilaments, intermediate filaments,
neoplasia. In chemical carcinogenesis, initiation results
and microtubules.
Much
of the macromolecular
from rapid, irreversible, permanent alterations in DNA
metabolism of cells fincluding synthesis of DNA, RNA,
after its interaction with the chemical. The specific
 and protein) appears to respond to changes in cell shape.
genetic target is known for very few carcinogens, e.g.
aflatoxin in hepatic carcinoma.
 Radiation also produces DNA damage, and many of the
3.35
critical changes  in  both chemical  and radiation
tumorigenesis appears to involve conversion of normal
 cellular genes, important in cellular proliferation, to cellular
 Oncogenes or inactivation of suppressor genes42. Viral
 oncogenesis by both DNA and RNA viruses also involves
alteration of cellular regulatory mechanisms. Some
oncogenic viruses encode an abnormal activated oncogene
product homologous to a proto-oncogene, which results in
abnormal overproduction of normal proto-oncogene
 product, or eliminate normal function of a suppressor gene,
causing  cellular  proliferation.
Damage to DNA
(genotoxicity) is a common feature of these mechanisms of
induction but nongenotoxic carcinogens also exist.
The processes of induction are not yet understood in
most human tumors. Diseases and conditions associated
 3.35 Neovascularization of the corneal stroma of a horse. A tumor
with  increased cell proliferation  (hyperproliferation)
embolus (arrow) is present in one of the blood vessels. H&tE.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
91
Progressive loss of shape-responsive controls may be an
ROUTES OF METASTASIS
important factor in neoplasia.
The cells of primary neoplasms are heterogeneous for
The  mechanistic  relationships  l
between   genetic
metastatic properties.
 The process of metastasis is
alterations  and  abnormal 
  morphology  are
poorly
 sequential and selective. Clonal dominance of a primary
understood. Growth-regulated cellular functions may be
tumor by the subset of cells that have the ability to
 altered by signals that are transmitted through an organized
metastasize may occur, due to selective pressures and
cytoskeleton that has been disrupted by the carcinogenic
 growth advantages. Malignant tumor cells may spread
process. Also, cell-cell interaction probably plays an
by three major routes: lymphatics, blood vessels, and
important role in determining tumor architecture.
implantation (seeding) by physical contact between
tumor and normal serosal or mucosal surfaces or surgical
TUMOR CELLPROLIFERATIONAND
instruments. The pattern of metastasis of tumors is not
TUMOR GROWTH
random. Both anatomy and local factors play a role in
Proliferation of normal cells is a tightly regulated
the preferential pattern of metastasis which is evidenced
homeostatic function with numerous carefully balanced
by many types of cancers.
stimulatory and inhibitory pathways. Proliferation of tumor
Primary tumors arising in or near the tributaries to the
cells contributes to the growth of a tumor. Neoplastic cells
portal vein often metastasize to the liver, while those in
of the vast majority of tumors are derived from a single cell,
contact with the caval distribution disseminate to the
although the time during tumor development when
lungs. However, selective homing of tumor cells
to
monoclonality begins is uncertain. Tumor progression is
particular organs outside the usual anatomic distribution
determined by the acquisition of permanent changes in one
Occurs frequently. As expressed by Paget's hypothesis,
or more characteristics of a neoplasm. Heterogeneity within
both "seed and soil' affect the pattern of dissemination.
a neoplasm affects many characteristics  including
That is, compatibility between the tumor cells (seed) and
morphology, cell surface receptors, karyotypes, growth
the parenchymal organ (soil) is needed for successful
properties, ability to invade and metastasize, and response 
metastasis. Cell surface receptors between tumor cells
to therapeutic agents. This heterogeneity is often attributed
and endothelial cells are involved in “homing". The
t genetic instability, with random mutations leading to
parenchymal organ influences the endothelial receptors
selective production of new subclones.
by poorly understood mechanisms. Finally, some organs
Tumor growth would
l seem at first glance to be
are particularly resistant to metastasis of any kind, again
attributable to accelerated tumor cell proliferation.
for reasons that are not clear.
However, the rate of tumor cell proliferation is often not
increased over that of normal counterparts. Furthermore,
DIAGNOSIS OF NEOPLASIA
the length of the cell cycle is not shorter in tumors.
Specimens for the pathologic diagnosis of tumors may
Tumor growth is not often due to an increased growth
be obtained by excision, biopsy, intraoperative biopsy
fraction ( proportion of cycling cells), and the majority of
for "frozen section', needle aspiration, or preparation of
cells in a tumor are not replicating. Consequently, factors
 other than tumor cell proliferation play an important
as H&E, sometimes supplemented by special stains for 
role in tumor growth.
cytoplasmic and secretory products, are most common-
 Tumor cells can leave the proliferative pool by one of
ly used in the histopathologic evaluation of lesions by
four mechanisms:
light microscopy.
+
 Shedding due to reduced cohesion.
In some cases, more advanced techniques, such
+
Differentiation.
 as immunohistochemistry (immunoperoxidase/immuno-
+
 Entrance into the resting phase (G0).
fluorescence), in situ hybridization, flow cytometry,
Apoptosis (programmed cell death).
chromosome analysis, and electron microscopy are
useful in the evaluation and classification of tumors.
In addition to accelerated proliferation, reduced cell
 Understanding of the etiology of neoplasia continues to
death and cell loss is a primary factor in tumor growth.
expand at a remarkable rate. However, the complexity
and heterogeneity of the abnormal processes is
therapeutic implications: cytotoxic therapy directed only
 staggering. A major challenge is our ability to translate
at proliferating cells may fail to address a major
the advances in understanding into therapeutic aids that
determinant of tumor growth.
will reduce morbidity and mortality.
REFERENCES
1 Magone M, Whitcup S {1999)
3 Laurell C, Zetterstrom C (2000)
5 Foulds W (1990) The choroidal
Mechanisms of ocular inflammation.
 Inflammation and blood-aqueous
circulation and retinal metabolism: an
Cheical Immunology 73:90-119.
barrier disruption. Journat of Cataract
Overview. Eye 4:243-248.
2 Holtkamp G, Kijlstra A, Peek R, de
and Refactive Surgery 26:306-307.
6 Green K, Paterson C, Cheeks L, Slagle
Vos A (2001) Retinal pigment
4 van der Woerdt A, Peterson ME (2000).
T, Jay W, Azaz M (1990) Ocular
epitheli um-immune system
Prevalence of ocular abnormalities in
 blood flow and vascular permeability
interactions: cytokine production and
cats with hyperthyroidism. Journal of
in endotoxin-induced inflammation.
cytokine-induced changes. Progress in
Veterinary Internat Medicine
Ophthatmic Research 22:287-294.
Retinat Eye Research 20:29-48.
14(2):202-203.
92
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
7 Yamagata M, Wilkie DA, Gilger BC
19 Paterson S, Boydell P, Pike R (1995)
32 Herrera HD, Duchene AG {1998)
{1996) Eosinophilic
Systemic histiocytosis in the Bernese
Uveodermatological syndrome
keratoconjunctivitis in seven horses.
Mountain Dog. Journat of Smat!
{Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like
Journat of the American Veterinary
Animat Practice 36(5):233-236.
Medicat Association 209:1283-1286.
20 Peiffer R, Wilcock BP, Yin H {(1990)
depigmentation in a Dachshund.
8 Miller TR, Gaskin JM, Whitley RD,
The pathogenesis and significance of
haopougdo Aiuian
Wittcoff ML (1990) Herpetic keratitis
 pre-iridal fibrovascular membrane in
1(1):47-51.
in a horse. Equine Veterinary Joturnat
domestic animals. Veterinary
33 Pfleghaar S, Schaffer EH {1992) Lens-
Supplement 10:15-17.
Pathotogy 27:41-45.
induced uveitis {endophthalmitis
9 Bernays ME, Peiffer RL {1998) Ocular
21 Peiffer R, Devanzo R, Cohen K {1981)
phakoanaphylactica) in domestic 
infections with dermatiaceous fungi in
Specular microscopic observations of
animals. Tierarztt Praxis 20(1):7-18.
two cats and a dog. Journat of the
 clinically normal feline corneal
 34 Neumann SM (1984) Corneal
American Veterinary Medicat
endothelium. American Journat of
dermoid in a beef calf. Modern
Association 213:507-509.
Veterinary Research 42:854-855.
Veterinary Practice 65(7):553-554.
10 Ramsey D, Ketringn K, Glaze M,
22 Caffery B, Josephs J {1995) Corneal
35 Percy D, Scott F, Albert D {1975)
 Render J (1996) Ligneous
vascularization. Optometry Clinics
Retinal dysplasia due to feline
conjunctivitis in four Doberman
4:19-29.
panleukopenia virus infection. Journaf
Pinschers. Journat of the American
23 Williams R, Morter R, Freeman M,
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Animat Hospitat Association
Lavignette A {1971) Experimental
Association 167:935-937.
32:439-447.
chronic uveitis. Investigative
36 Morris M (1965) Feline degenerative
11 La Croix N, van der Woerdt A,
Ophthaimology 10:948-954.
 retinopathy. Carnelt Veterinary
Olivero D (2001) Non-healing ulcers
24 Garcia-Alonso M, Blanco A, Reina D,
60:295-308.
in cats: 29 cases {1991-1999). Jourmat
 Serrano FJ, Alonso C, Nieto CG
 37 Narfstrom K (1983) Hereditary
of the American Veterinary Medicat
{1996) Immunopathology of the
progressive retinal atrophy in the
Association 218:733-735.
uveitis in canine leishmaniasis.
Abyssinian cat. Jou rnat of Heredity
12 Gardiner C, Dick E, Meininger A,
Parasite Immunology
74:273-276.
Lozano-Alarcon F, Jackson P {1993)
18{12):617-623.
38 Narfstrom K, Wrigstad A, Ekesten B,
Onchocerciasis in two dogs. Jou rnat
25 Dubielzig R {1984) Ocular sarcoma 
Nilsson SE {1994) Hereditary retinal
Of the American Veterinary Medicat
following trauma in three cats.
dystrophy in the Briard dog: clinical
Association 203:828-830.
Journat of the American Veterinary
and hereditary characteristics.
13 Rebhun W, Mirro E, Georgi M,
Medicat Association 184:578-581.
Veterinary Cr Comparative
Kern T {1981) Habronemic
26 Dubielzig RR, Everitt J {1986) Feline
Ophthaimotogy 4:85-92.
blepharoconjuncti vitis in horses.
ocular melanoma and post-traumatic
39 Schoster JV, Dubielzig RR, Sullivan L
Journat of the American Veterinary
sarcoma. Proceedings of the Scientific
(1993) Choroidal melanoma in a dog.
Medical Association 179:469-472.
Meeting of the American Caltege of
Journat of the American Veterinary
14 Hum S, Bowers JR (1989) Ocular
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
Medicat Association 203:89-91.
mastocytosis in a horse. Austratian
17:441-450.
40 Dubielzig RR (1990) Ocular neoplasia
Veterinary Journal 66(1):32.
27 Brightman A, Vestre W, Helper L,
in small animals. Veterinary Clinics of
15 Rebhun W, Piero F {1998) Ocular
Godshalk C (1979) Chronic
North America/Smatt Animal Practice
lesions in horses with lymphosarcoma:
 eosinophilic keratitis in the cat. Fetine
20(3):837-848.
21 cases {1977-1997). Journat of the
Practice 9:21-24.
41 Cook C, Peiffer R, Stine P {1984)
American Veterinary Medicat
28 Hines M, Halliwell R (1991)
 Metastatic ocular squamous cell
Association 212:852-854.
Autoimmunity to retinal S-antigen in
carcinoma in a cat. Journat of the
16 Whiteley H, Young S, Liggitt H,
horses with equine recurrent uveitis.
American Veterinary Medicat
Demartini J {1985) Ocular lesions of
Progress in Veterinary and
Association 185:1547-1549.
bovine malignant catarrhal fever.
Comparative Ophthatmology
42 Ching SV, Gillette SM, Powers BE,
Veterinary Pathology 22:219-225.
1:283-290.
Roberts SM, Gillette EL, Withrow SJ
17 Canapp SO, Cohn LA, Maggs DJ,
 29 Romeike A, Brugmann M,
{1990) Radiation-induced ocular
Miller MA, Kerl ME, O'Brien DP
Drommer W (1998)
injury in the dog: a histological study.
{2001) Xerostomia, xerophthalmia,
Immunohistochemical studies in
Internationat Journat of Radiation
and plasmacytic infiltrates of the
equine recurrent uveitis (ERU).
Oncology Biotogic Physics
salivary glands (Sjogren's-like
Veterinary Pathology 35:515-526.
19(2):321-328.
syndrome) in a cat. Journat of the
30 Piper R, Cole C, Shadduck J {1970)
 43 Gelatt KN (1974) Ophthalmic biopsy
American Veterinary Medicat
 Natural and experimental ocular
 procedures. Veterinary Clinics of
Association 218(1):59-65.
toxoplasmosis in animals. American
North America 4(2):437-438.
18 Fischer C (1979) Granuloma
Journal of Ophthatmology
44 Havener VR (1980) Basic principles
 formation associated with
69:662-668.
 for the submission and management 
subconjunctival injection of a
31 Lindley DM, Boosinger TR, Cox NR
of ophthalmic specimens for
corticosteroid in dogs. Journat of the
{1990) Ocular histopathology of
histopathology. Veterinary Ctinics of
American Veterinary Medicat
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome
North American/Smalt Animat
Association 174:1086-1088.
in an Akita dog. Veterinary Pathology
Practice 10(2):497-508.
27{4):294-296.
93
1
Problem-Based
Management of
Ocular Emergencies
INTRODUCTION
Table 4.1 Ocular conditions associated with various
degrees of clinical urgency
There are relatively few true emergencies in ophthal-
mology where delaying treatment for a few minutes or
Acute visual loss
hours will change the outcome of the disesase but there
Acute glaucoma
Luxated lens 
are many that require timely therapy. Table 4.1 lists the
usual ocular emergencies. The veterinarian is often asked
 Optic neuritis 
 to respond to ocular conditions that are either dramatic
Proptosis
 Acute detachment syndromes
and/or alarming to the owner but rather benign as far as
Iris prolapse
visual function is concerned. A good philosophy, when in 
Endophthalmitis 
doubt, is to see nonemergencies rather than risk turning
Hyphema 
away an emergency.
Acute cataracts
Ocular emergencies can be triaged into acute loss of
Ruptured globe
sight, imminent loss of sight, potential loss of sight,
Imminent visual loss 
 painful conditions but usually not blinding, and dramatic
Descemetocele
 signs with no significant visual sequela (Table 4.1). In
 Progressive ulcer
addition, systemic implications may be superimposed on
 Endophthalmitis
the ocular scoring, and the general practitioner should
Glaucoma
decide whether or not to refer the patient (Table 4.2).
Anterior uveitis
The majority of ocular emergencies that have visual
 Corneal laceration
implications should probably be seen by a veterinary
 Potential loss of sight 
 ophthalmologist, either for definitive therapy or to
Stromal ulcer 
confirm your diagnosis and advise on therapy. Proptosis
Orbital cellulitis
(prolapse) of the globe is one of the main exceptions for
Myositis of masticatory muscles
referral. This condition can usually be readily managed
Anterior uveitis
Displaced lens 
without special instrumentation, and the outcome is
Immune-mediated keratitis
mainly dependent on the injury sustained by the eye at
 Corneal endothelial decompensation
the time of proptosis.
Cataract
Hyphema
Lipids in aqueous
 Painful but not usually blinding
Orbital cellulitis/abscess
Superficial corneal ulcer 
Table 4.2 Ocular emergencies that should be referred
Corneal foreign body
Entropion
Distichia
 Most sight-threatening conditions
Aberrent cilia
Glaucoma
Myositis of masticatory muscles
Luxated/subluxated lens 
 Dramatic signs without visual significance
Optic neuritis
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Progressive ulcers
 Protrusion of the third eyelid
Descemetoceles
 Subconjunctival hemorrhage
Iris prolapse from various causes
Chemosis
Acute retinal detachments: to determine cause
Blepharoedema 
Endophthalmitis
Lacerations involving the third eyelid
Acute cataracts
Lid lacerations
Uveitis workup
Lid bruising
 Nontraumatic hyphema workup
94
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Triaging ocular emergencies often begins on the
BLINDNESS
telephone. Knowing what questions to ask comes with
HISTORY
the experience of taking countless histories and listening
to clients interpret various ocular events fsee Table 4.3
Historical questions relating to blindness should include
for a list of questions regarding loss of sight). In general,
the duration of the problem, partial or complete loss of
it is difficult to interpret events from an owner's
vision, conditions under which it is observed (both
perspective, so when in doubt, timely examination
environment and light conditions), course, what the
should be encouraged.
animal can and cannot do visually, systemic or
Detailed management of all the possible ocular
neurologic signs, breed, and age of animal (Table 4.3).
emergencies will not be dealt with in this chapter but the
 Many animals that have their environment changed
reader will be referred to the appropriate chapter for a
are thought by their owners to become acutely blind,
detailed discussion. The objective of this chapter is to
when in reality they have been chronically blind from an
develop a *mindset’ or mental algorithm for managing
insidious problem. True acute blindness is usually
ocular emergencies.
 associated with disorientation and anxiety, which should
Ocular emergencies can be categorized into one or more
be differentiated from signs and symptoms of senile
problems: loss of vision in one or both eyes, unequal pupils,
dementia (cognitive dysfunction syndrome), such as
red eye, painful eye, ocular discharge, ocular opacity, and
pacing, circling, and panting, that are often interpreted
change in position of the eye. It is helpful to have an
by owners as being caused by blindness. When asked,
algorithm to investigate the various problems rationally.
many owners will note differences in vision with varying
amounts of ambient light. However, this information is
not usually spontaneously volunteered.
The owner should be asked about systemic or
topical medications that the patient may have been
given in the recent past or is currently taking, and
Table 4.3 History taking questions for patients with
any history of systemic problems.
vision loss
Evaluation of patients with vision
 Qu estion
Variables
deficiency (4.1)
Clinical testing of vision is usually limited to a maze test,
Duration of deficit?
Acute, chronic
menace response, and the dazzle reflex. The maze test
Amount of deficit?
Complete, partial, one eye
should be performed in both light and darkened
conditions. The pupillary light reflex (PLR) should be 
Type of deficit?
 Complete, moving versus
evaluated with a bright light and the intraocular pressure
 stationary, large versus small,
(IOP) taken before dilating the pupils if they are not
 near versus far
already dilated. Interpretation of the PLR is not as
Changes since first noted?
Static, progressive
obvious as is often suggested, and incomplete sluggish
movement should not be interpreted as a normal
 Ability to see in various
Night blind, day blind,
response. Conversely, a lack of response often occurs
 ambient light conditions?
no difference
from something as innocuous as atrophy of the iris
Environment when
No change, moved, different
sphincter. Examination with a penlight at this time will
first noted?
note other signs such as conjunctival hyperemia, corneal
opacification and irregularities, abnormal anterior
Environment of animal?
Outside, inside, both
chamber contents (flare, hypopyon, hyphema), irregula-
Medications past and
Preventive, therapeutic, how
rities in the pupil margin and iris, and significant
opacities in the axial lens. Once the pupils are dilated, a
present?
much, how long, current 
 penlight examination will quickly determine whether the
Toxin exposure?
House plants, insecticides,
vision complaints can be attributible to the clear media
pest control
by the presence or absence of a clear tapetal reflection.
 Systemie signs?
PUfPD, weight gain, appetite,
Assumptions should not be made until the pupils
 seizures, ataxia, weakness
 are dilated; nuclear sclerosis is easily misdiagnosed
Intact or neutered?
Used for breeding?
as blinding cataracts in aged patients.
Diet?
Commercial, formulated, table
food
Causes of blindness
 Other animals in
Related, ages, similar signs,
There are usually four broad categories of patients: blind
environment?
illness 
with PLR, with or without clear media, and blind with
no PLR, with or without clear media. If possible, a
Past medical history?
None, CNS signs, metabolic 
fundus examination should now be performed. If the 
signs, neoplasia
fundus can be examined, blindness should not be
PROBLEM-BASED MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR EMERGENCIES
95
4.1
 Confirm blindness:
 menace response, following hand motion, following falling cotton balls, maze test
Evaluate pupillary light reflexes (PLR)
Present
 Examine iris for
Absent
adhesions,
 atrophy, history
of atropine
medication
Dilate pupils
Abnormal iris
 Absent fundus reflex
 Evaluate clear
media
 Examine for more than
 one ocular lesion 
Loca lize lesion:
Good fundus
Cornea
reflex
Aqueous
 Lens
Vitreous
 Examine retinaf
 Evaluate
optic papilla
clear media
Abnormal
Abnormal
Normal
 Evaluate retinaf
 optic disk
Probable error
ERG
Abnormal
in interpretation
Measure intraocular
of PLR
pressure
Glaucoma if.
eleva ted
Norma
ERG
Abnormal
Normal
'Cortical'
Neurologic
Chiasm or
Diffuse
blindness 
signs
 bilateral nerve or
 retinal 
tract lesions 
disease
Neurologic
evaluation 
4.1 Algorithm for evaluating blindness.
96
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
attributed to opacification of the media. If media
If the fundus can be examined, the possibilities are:
opacification precludes fundus examination, the
dramatic fundus lesions, optic nerve lesions, minor/focal
challenge is to determine the location of the opacity and
fundus lesions, or no lesions. Blindness with normal
whether it is an emergency (needs immediate therapy) or, 
PLRs, clear media, and a normal fundus usually equates
indeed, needs therapy (Table 4.4). Acute corneal edema,
to central nervous system (CNS) blindness, either
large fibrin clots or lipids in the anterior chamber,
associated with metabolic disease (portocaval shunts) or
hyphema, acute cataract formation, hyalitis, and vitreal
diffuse or multifocal CNS disease. These cases should
hemorrhage are examples of opacities in the clear media
have medical and neurologic workup. Hemeralopia {day
that may be presented as an emergency.
blindness), a relatively rare disease, will mimic CNS
The two conditions that pose the greatest challenge to
blindness but will date back to a young age and evidence
recognition are lipids in the anterior chamber and hyalitis
Of vision in a darkened environment.
(vitreal opacity). True acute cataracts, while not an
Bilateral blindness with sluggish or dilated pupils and
emergency in themselves, are typically intumescent
clear media implies an afferent arc lesion in the PLR
(swollen) and may have accompanying severe lens-
(bilateral retina, optic nerve, chiasm, or optic tract)
induced uveitis and/or glaucoma. The main rule out for
(Table 4.5). If the lesion is in the retina or anterior optic
true acute bilateral cataracts is diabetes mellitus and the
nerve, dramatic retinal lesions such as detachments,
accompanying systemic implications. Ocular ultrasound
diffuse tapetal hyperreflectivity and vascular attenuation,
 is invaluable with opaque ocular media to determine the
diffuse inflammatory lesions, diffuse retinal hemor-
full extent of the lesions and, sometimes, to diagnose the
 rhages, or disc elevation with hyperemia and edema will
cause of the opacification, e.g. foreign bodies, intraocular
be present in most instances (Table 4.4). The three main
tumors, retinal detachment.
exceptions are sudden acquired retinal degeneration
Table 4.4 Causes of bilateral loss of vision
Opacification of the clear media
Lesions of the optic nerve, chiasm, optic tracts, or
optic radiations
Keratitis: keratoconjunctivitis sicca, immune mediated,
 multiple ulcerative events, chemical burns
Hypoplasia of the optic nerves
Keratopathy: lipids, endothelial
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis
dystrophy/degenerationfinflammation 
 Distemper encephalitis
Aqueous turbidity: fibrin, lipids, hemorrhage
FIP
Cataracts: genetic, metabolie, toxic, nutritional,
Systemic mycoses
radiation, traumatic, inflammation 
Neoplasia involving the chiasm 
Vitreous: hemorrhage, inflammation, fibrous scars
Traumatic avulsion
 Myositis of masticatory muscles
Diseases of the retina
Vitamin A deficiency
 Retinopa thies
 Genetic: PRA, inborn errors of metabolism,
Lesions of the occipital cortex
hemerolopia
Hydrocephalus
Nutritional: taurine deficiency (cats), vitamin E
 Cerebral malformations
Glaucoma
 Distemper encephalomyelitis
Postinflammatory atrophy
FIP
SARD
Systemic mycoses
Toxic: enrofloxacin, ivermectin
 Granulomatous encephalomyelitis
 Retinal detachment syndromes
Hepatoencephalopathy
Genetic: Collie eye anomaly, retinal dysplasia
 Inborn metabolic errors
 syndromes, Australian Shepherd anomaly
lvermectin toxicosis
Exudative: systemic mycoses, protothecosis,
Hypoxia
ehrlichiosis, toxoplasmosis, FIP, FeLV, immune-
Vascular infarcts 
mediated choroiditis
Traumatic edema and/or hemorrhage
Transudative: hypertension, i.v. solution overload
Postictus
Neoplastic: metatstatic, multicentric
Chorioretinitis
Distemper, systemic mycoses, brucellosis, FIP.
toxoplasmosis, ehrlichiosis, granulomatous
 meningoencephalitis, bacterial septicemia, VKH
syndrome
PROBLEM-BASED MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR EMERGENCIES
97
(SARD), retrobulbar neuritis, and chiasmal lesions
hypertension
pue
 sterile
{immune-mediated)
(pituitary tumor). The majority, but not all, of SARD
choroiditis. Nonseptic optic neuritis may respond to
patients may have accompanying cushingoid signs and
systemic glucocorticoids. Metabolic (liver disease)
dinical features. An electroretinogram (ERG)
will
blindness _and some toxicities (ivermectin)  which
differentiate SARD (extinguished trace) from retrobulbar
produce CNS blindness may improve with specific
neuritis/chiasmal lesions (normal trace).
therapy or time.
Focal lesions that may be incidental are the most
difficult to interpret. The focal lesions may be clues in
ANISOCORIA
piecing the puzzle together or, more likely, be
pa1, 
Evaluation
herrings'. What appears to be a focal "scar' in one eye
Cats or dogs with light colored irides are most likely to
 may be geographic retinal dysplasia and indicates that
be presented for the complaint of unequal pupils. Dark
the retinal detachment in the contralateral eye is part of
a an isee aaa oi  uano are s
an inherita ble dysplasia/detachment syndrome.
pupil. The first decision is to determine which of the
Of the causes of acute l
blindness, only a small
pupils is abnormal; this is not always obvious if the
number can be successfully
treated. Blindness
anisocoria is mild and both pupils are mobile.
associated with opacities
 in the clear media may be
reversible finflammation,
, lipids, some hemorrhages,
While anisocoria has neurologic connotations to
glaucoma-induced corneal edema, luxated lens) by
most observers, ocular causes should always be
A1oedo au sua0wa1 Aq 1o asgasip 1eno0 au gueau
ruled out first as these are much more common.
(cataracts). Blindness in eyes with clear media
can
occasionally be treated. Examples of potentially
The pupillomotor pathways are presented in 11.8,
treatable retinal diseases are bullous detachments from
11.10. Anisocoria is evaluated in a dark room by shining
Table 4.5 Pupillary light reflexes with unilateral complete lesions at various levels of the visual system
Location of lesion
PLR
Anisocoria
Menace
ERG
 Retina
Absent direct
Mild static
Absent
Extinguished
Ipsilaterally, +MG
 Optic nerve
Absent direct,
Mild static
Absent
Normal
lpsilaterally, +MG
Chiasm
Absent OU
Mild static
Absent
Normal
Optic tract
Present, -vG
Mild static
Homonymous field 
Normal
defect
Optic radiationsf
 Present 
None
Homonymous field
Normal
visual cortex
defect
98
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
4.2
Anisocoria
Greater in dark
 Greater in light 
(suggests dilator
(suggests sphincter
weakness or
weakness or
 sympa thetic lesion]
parasympathetic
Examineeyeclosely
[esion]
Normat
Normal
Constricted
Abnormal
Dilated
Stain cornea
MeasureIOP
Ulcer
Iritis
Elevated
Normal I0P
 Examine for others
 signs of Horner's
syndrome
Glaucoma
Iris atrophy.
hypoplasia,
1 % hydroxya
nphetamine
synechia
Visual
Dilates
Does not dilate
1% pilocarpine
 Preganglionic
0.01-0.001%
lesion 
 epinephrine 
Response
No response
hypersensitive
No dilation
 Parasympathetic
Atropine
lesion
blockade
Reduced vision
Dilates
Swinging flashlight test
Postganglionic lesion
MG
+MG
 Optic tract
ERG
 disease partial
chiasm lesion
Flat
Normal
Retinal disease
 Optic nerve
complete chiasm
lesion 
4.2 Algorithm for evaluating anisocoria. (IOP: intraocular pressure; MG: Marcus Gunn (pupil); ERG: electroretinogram.)
PROBLEM-BASED MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR EMERGENCIES
99
the light at the base of the nose. This results in both
The main rule outs for static anisocoria associated
pupils being illuminated against the tapetal reflection.
with blindness and other ocular problems are glaucoma
Anisocoria should be evaluated under both dark and
(dilated pupil), uveitis {constricted or midpoint), or a
ambient light conditions. An algorithm for evaluating
combination of the two. A fixed dilated pupil with
 anisocoria is presented in 4.2. The PLRs are evaluated
blindness but without a red eye, may be due to an orbital
with the swinging flashlight test. Anisocorias can be
apex syndrome. The latter is usually due to a space-
classified as to whether the PLRs are static {constant) or
occupying orbital lesion and will have decreased globe
dynamic (manifest during or after light stimulation).
retropulsion. Detailed workups should entail finding the
underlying cause for these ocular signs.
Causes of anisocoria
With regard to ocular emergencies, static anisocoria is the
ocular signs of uveitis (see Chapter 11, p.298) and
m paieiosse uaho si pe panou aq oi Aill iso wo
gla ucoma (see Chapter 12, p.337).
vision complaints (Table 4.5). Static anisocoria is associated
OCULAR PAIN
with disease of the efferent side of the PLR reflex arc from
the parasympathetic nuclei to the iris. Evaluation of static
Evaluation
 anisorcoria should start from the eye and work backwards
Ocular pain is a frequent cause of presentation of ocular
to the brain. Ocular examination should determine if the
emergencies. The most obvious manifestations of ocular
 pupil is constricted, midpoint, or dilated. Constricted pupils
pain are blepharospasm, third eyelid protrusion, and
 are typical of acute uveitis, iris spasm such as from corneal
enophthalmos. Since the cornea is one of the most
pain, or drug induced. Midpoint irregular pupils are typical
sensitive tissues in the body, it should be evaluated first.
of a chronic uveitis. Irregular pupils may be congenital or
4.3 is an algorithm for evaluating blepharospasm. The
be due to posterior or anterior synechia, iris atrophy, or a
corneal nerve endings.:
aré
concentrated in the
space occupying lesion in the iris. A dilated pupil may be
 subepithelial region, and thus the degree of pain may be
irregular if associated with iris atrophy or synechia, and
inversely related to the seriousness of the corneal
will be regular if associated with oculomotor paralysis,
 disease: superficial ulcers may cause more pain than
 gla ucoma, or if drug induced.
deep ulcers. Corneal ulceration is the most common
If the cause of anisocoria is ocular disease, there are
form of corneal disease associated with significant pain.
usually other ocular signs such
 as conjunctival
However, nonulcerative disease is also a common cause
hyperemia, corneal opacity, aqueous humor turbidity,
 of pain, especially in horses. All patients with corneal
altered anterior chamber depth, and blindness. Oculo-
pain should have fluorescein testing of the cornea to
motor nerve paralysis may be strictly internal, combined
detect ulceration. In the cat, evaluation with a blue light
with external ophthalmoplegia fparalysis of extraocular
and/or rose bengal may be necessary to detect small
herpesvirus ulcerations.
suggest neighboring lesions.
4.3
Blepharospa sm -
 Examine lid 
 Perform Schirmer tear
Topical anesthesia
conformation without
testing
head restraint 
Reevaluate conformation -
Normal
 Stain cornea
Positive
Search for a
with fluorescein
physical cause
 and remove
Entropion
Negative
 Examine conjunctival surfaces for foreign
distichia
body, aberrent cilia, inflammation
Examine intraocular structures for an acute anterior
uveitis, acute glaucoma, or luxated lens
4.3 Algorithm for evaluating blepharospasm.
100
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
Causes of ocular pain
Depending on the surface area of the defect, some
If corneal ulcers are present, the examination should be
descemetoceles may be tolerated for an extended period
continued to search for the cause (Table 4.6). All ulcers
jn ue ai Aal ss o1 isag sl 1l inq a 1o
should be evaluated for depth and the likelihood of
problem. Descemetoceles are a surgical problem and
 progression, i.e. how serious an emergency is it. Epithelial
 should be referred by most general practitioners.
ulcers, while painful, do not represent a true emergency
juld e uo aq keu ued leauoo jo aunos iauiouy
despite the dramatic signs. Epithelial ulcers will have only
foreign body. The most common appearance is a flat,
a thin margin of epithelium visible at the edges without
brownish 1-2 mm lesion lying on the corneal surface
any appreciable depth to the base of the ulcer (10.71).
(10.106). This type of foreign body can be easily
These ulcers may present problems with slow healing but
removed  after application of a topical anesthetic.
rarely become progressive in depth except in some
Splinters are much more difficult to remove, requiring
brachycephalic breeds (see Chapter 10, p.241).
general anesthesia and delicate forceps, so they should be
Stromal ulcers have some depth to the sides of the
referred. Penetrating foreign bodies that are retained
ulcer {10.65), take up fluorescein stain, usually stimulate
should be referred; they pose significant risk to the eye
some  neutrophilic
infiltration,
 and have some
through sterile as well as septic inflammation. Breeching
perilesional edema. If a mucopurulent exudate or a dense
the lens capsules with these injuries may necessitate lens
yellow perilesional halo accompanies the stromal ulcer,
removal to save the eye.
both   bacterial  sepsis  and  progression should  be
anticipated, and intensive therapy should be initiated to
Small self-sealing perforating injuries often belie the
arrest further development (see Chapter 10, p.241). For
seriousness of the incident if the lens capsule has
the general practitioner, these cases should be referred
been ruptured or vitreal/retinal pathology exists.
before they become surgical emergencies. An ulcer with
steep edges and a clear bottom that does not take up
Perforations, whether self-sealing or closed by iris
entrapment, may be from BB (airgun) shot or pellet
danger of perforation {10.70). Care in manipulation of
injuries, lacerations, perforated ulcers, or ruptured
the eye and restraint of the patient are important in order
globes following blunt trauma. Recognition of an iris
to avoid applying pressure to a severely weakened globe.
prolapse should prompt immediate referral.
All focal, peracute, perforating lesions, even if
sealed, should have ultrasound and/or radiographic
examination of the head to diagnose metallic
Table 4.6 Rule outs for the cause of corneal ulceration
foreign bodies.
Acute anterior uveitis and acute anterior lens
 Mechanical irritation 
luxation, with or without glaucoma, often manifest with
 Distichia, trichiasis, aberrant cilia, entropion, foreign
acute ocular pain. Concomitant signs of selective
bodies, dermoid 
 conjunctival hyperemia, corneal edema, and pupillary
Trauma
changes will accompany these syndromes. In the dog, if
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
the lens is clear and luxated, it probably represents a
 Deficiency in serous, mucous, or lipid layers 
primary luxation if in a predisposed breed, such as a
Epithelial bulla rupture
terrier (see Chapter 13, p.369). If the lens is cataractous,
 Corneal edema from endothelial disease: degeneration,
it is probably a secondary luxation, and the prognosis for 
 inflammation, trauma 
vision may be guarded. Emergency treatment of a
luxated lens consists of controlling the IOP with drugs
Lagophthalmos
Shallow orbits, Vllth cranial nerve paralysis,
that do not constrict the pupil. Pupillary constriction
exophthalmo5
with acetylcholine-like drugs or prostaglandin analogs
Neurotrophic
 may aggravate a pupillary block. In the cat and horse,
Vth cranial nerve deficit, postsurgical, postlasering of
most lens luxations are secondary to uveitis and the
 ciliary body
 prognosis is more complex.
 Acute anterior uveitis is typically treated with anti-
Infectious
 inflammatory drugs, by topical and systemic routes, and
Viral: herpesvirus in cats
with topical atropine. Systemic glucocorticoids should
Bacterial: Moraxella spp., secondary to trauma
not be used if there is known or suspected systemic
 Fungal: usually secondary to trauma
bacterial or fungal infection. Antibiotics are indicated
Immunologic: peripheral ulcerations and furrows, rarely
with sepsis but are often administered without clear
bullous epithelial diseases 
indications.
Degenerative
 Calcium and lipid plaques sloughing
OCULAR DISCHARGE
 Thermal injuries
Evaluation
 Chemical injuries
If patients are presented for an ocular emergency because of
 Acids, alkalies, soaps
an ocular discharge, typically the discharge is mucopurulent
 Basal lamina defects
 or purulent and copious. Most patients presented with an
 Indolent ulcers
ocular emergency will at least have epiphora, although this
 will not be the presenting symptom.
PROBLEM-BASED MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR EMERGENCIES
101
Virtually all patients with purulent ocular discharge will
Tear production should always be evaluated in
ued se yons suais peuppv eauadau eaunuo aau
patients with ocular discharge. Patients with acute
and corneal lesions are common, as well as intraocular
keratoconjunctivitis sicca  frequently  (
develop deep
 changes. The possible diagnoses with this problem include
corneal ulcers. Patients with acute glaucoma may have
conjunctivitis, keratitis, and enophthalmitis, and they are
 decreased tear production with mucopurulent discharge,
differentiated by the associated signs. 4.4 presents a
or increased tear production with epiphora.
 diagnostic plan. Conjunctival hyperemia with conjunc-
 Conjunctival cultures and cytology are indicated in
tivitis is typically diffuse and primarily on the palpebral
many patients with acute purulent discharge. Topical
surface (4.5). Selective large conjunctival vessel hyperemia
 antibiotics are indicated for variable periods depending
is more typical of intraocular diseases (glaucoma, uveitis)
 on the underlying ca use.
and scleritis (4.6).
Diagnostic Action
Diagnostic Action
4.4
Conjunetivitis
Glaucoma
Uveitis
Episcleritis 
selective 
 selective
selective
Diffuse or selective
injection
 Examine intraocular
nomal
dilated, fixed
constricted,
normal
structure
pupil
irregular pupil
Schirmer tear test
variable
normal or
normal or
Fluorescein stain 
normal
normal
normal
normal
?
Topical anesthesia
normal
elevated
low
normal or
Measure I0P
4.4 Algorithm for evaluating conjunctival hyperemia.
4.5
4.6
4.5 Conjunctival hyperemia typical of conjunctivitis in a dog. Note
4.6 Conjunctival hyperemia in a dog, typical of intraocular disea5e,
the diffuse hyperemia involving capillaries and the large vessels.
with selective large vessel injection of the bulbar surface.
This involves both bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva, but is usually
mainly palpebral.
102
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
CHANGES IN POSITION OF THE GLOBE
the optic nerve and vision. Early oribital cellulitis
Evaluation
presents with a red eye and a protruding third eyelid. The
The ocular emergencies most commonly associated with
exophthalmos at this time may not be noted unless
this complaint are proptosis of the globe and acute
 specifically evaluated from a dorsal perspective, and by
orbital cellulitis. Much less common causes for acute
testing ocular retropulsion (see Chapter 1, p.11, 1.4).
exophthalmos are extraocular myositis, as observed in
While not a strict ocular emergency, it is desirable to
 the Golden Retriever, and acute masticatory myositis (see 
initiate systemic antibiotics as soon as possible to shorten
Chapter 6, pp.123-124). While orbital neoplasia does
the course of the disease.
not produce acute exophthalmos, the owner's observa-
Enophthalmos may be presented with a complaint of
tions may be inaccurate. Proptosis of the globe does not
"film over the eye' or 'the eye is rolling up into the head'.
represent a diagnostic challenge, and the reader is
These observations are of course due to protrusion of the
referred to Chapter 6 (p.113) for a more detailed
third eyelid. The most common cause of acute
discussion on prognosis and therapy. While considered
enophthalmos that will be presented as an emergency is
an emergency for humane reasons, the prognosis for
ocular pain. {See the previous discussion on ocular pain
Adeaui dud aq a aaa piaie si uoi
and Chapter 6 [p.113].]
Orbital cellulitis is a questionable emergency from the
 perspective of affecting vision but the dramatic pain and
OCULAR OPACITY
periocular swelling prompts the request for emergency
 The emergency patient with an ocular opacity may present
examination. Severe forms of orbital cellulitis may affect
with problems as diverse as third eyelid protrusion,
pannus, corneal edema, lipids in the aqueous humor, fibrin
in the anterior chamber, hyphema, and cataracts. The
Table 4.7 Rule outs for a red eye
opacities can be divided into red, white, or black. Tables
4.7-4.9 present causes of opacities based on color.
Third eyelid protrusion is a frequent cause for
Intraocu lar redness 
emergency presentation and has been discussed with
Hyphema 
 ocular pain. In evaluating protrusion of the third eyelid it 
Vitreous hemorrhage
is important for the examiner to keep in mind the factors
Normal albinotie fundus reflection 
that control the position of the third eyelid in order to
Hemorrhage into the lens (rare) associated with
develop an algorithm for protrusion (see Chapter 
8,
 congenital vascular anomalies (PHTVL)
p.183). Emergency conditions that may be presented
 Ocular surface redness 
with this problem would be any condition that produces 
Conjunctivitis
pain fconjunctivitis, corneal ulcers, glaucoma, acute 
Anterior uveitis
uveitis, acute lens luxation); acute orbital space-
Glaucoma
occupying lesion (hemorrhage, inflammation, edema );
Episcleritis/scleritis 
head, neck, and chest trauma; poisoning (strychnine);
Subconjunctival hemorrhage
tetanus; and systemic states that induce dehydration.
Corneal granulation in healed ulcer, proliferative 
 Opacities of the cornea that are acute and may present
keratitis
 as an emergency include corneal edema (white), cellular
 Corneal neovascularization: ulcerative and
infiltration (creamy
white)，
stromal  hemorrhage
 nonulcerative keratitis
(relatively rare), and black lesions produced by uveal
Corneal hemorrhage: rare
 prolapse. Profound corneal edema implies endothelial
 Corneal neoplasia
disease or deep corneal involvement and may be caused
Iris prolapse covered by fibrin-laceration, perforated
by trauma, uveitis, glaucoma, or a luxated lens {see
 corneal ulcer, ruptured globe, perforating injury
Chapter 10, p.241, 10.24). Therapy should be directed at
Table 4.8 Rule outs for white corneal opacities
 Table 4.9 Rule outs for black corneal opacities
Lipid deposition: any depth
Chronic keratitis with melanin migration: superficial, flat
Calcium deposition: usually superficial
Limbal melanocytoma: usually raised
Stromal scar: any depth 
aoisip ldnd pasien illensn 'eieyadns iasdeloid sul
Edema: usually full-thickness 
 chamber shallowed
Leukocytic infiltration: any depth
Anterior synechia: deep, distorted pupil, shallow chamber
Infectious agents: mycotic plaques, 'Florida spots'
 Persitent pupillary membrane attachments: deep, may
 Descemet's membrane scars: PPM, anterior synechia,
have strands present, pupil usually not distorted
perforating injuries, inflammatory
Intraocular melanoma: extraocular invasion, extension to 
 Inclusion cyst: relatively rare, usually superficial
 posterior cornea, mass in globe
Corneal scleralization: extends from limbus
Corneal sequestrum: only in cats, superficial but extends
Eosinophilic protein: present with eosinophilic keratitis
deep
syndromes in cat and horse
 Dematiaceous fungi: rare, cytology
Immune complex formation: often multifocal or
Plant foreign bodies: superficial
zonular
 Drug residues: rare, silver nitrate, epinephrine
PROBLEM-BASED MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR EMERGENCIES
103
the underlying cause of the opacity; topical hyperosmotic
should be monitored and glaucoma therapy initiated if
drugs will produce only minimal improvement. Chronic
the IOP is elevated (see Chapter 12, p.337).
 corneal edema may be presented as an emergency due to
Fibrin clots may produce acute opacities in the eye and
the formation of subepithelial bullae that rupture,
are often intermixed with hemorrhage (11.54). Dramatic
producing a painful acute ulcerative syndrome.
.The
fibrin clots are most commonly observed in neonatal
causes of chronic edema are similar to the causes of acute
septicemia in large animals (11.60). The aqueous humor
edema, with the addition of senile denenerative disease.
may be sterile but antibiotics should be administered as
Intense leukocytic infiltration, usually accompanied by
well as anti-inflammatories and atropine. Large fibrin clots
edema and neovascularization, is a common emergency
may undergo dramatic resolution over a 7-day period but
presentation  with septic ulcerative or nonulcerative
intraocular tissue plasminogen activator {tPA) will ensure
keratitis (10.86). Corneal abscessation is common in the
 and hasten the resolution (see Chapter 11, p.298).
horse but less so in other species. The cause may be
Subconjunctival hemorrhage is a common finding on
bacterial or fungal. Intense topical antibacterial and
ocular examination in trauma patients but is usually not
antifungal therapy is indicated. Systemic antifungal
the presenting complaint. In itself, subconjunctival
therapy can also be administered but is very expensive.
hemorrhage is a benign condition that does not require
Other causes for white corneal opacities are lipids,
therapy. The remainder of the eye should always be
calcium, eosinophils, and infectious agents. Lipids and
evaluated to ascertain if other more serious ocular lesions
calcium in the cornea are usually incidental findings,
may be present. Subconjunctival hemorrhage is usually
although exceptions may occur Occasionally, lipid
due to trauma but choking injuries and systemic diseases
degeneration associated with hypothyroidism is diffuse
should also be considered if other physical evidence of
and rapid enough to be presented with a sense of urgency.
trauma is not present.
Calcium is usually deposited superficially in the cornea,
Hyphema is commonly presented as an ocular
and denotes a degenerative condition; if rapidly
agn ioy paau ou si aau Aeau ul nq Aouaiua
progressing, Cushing's syndrome should be considered.
treatment. However, the systemic implications of hyphema
Calcium plaques may slough and produce corneal ulcers.
may warrant an emergency visit. The outcome of traumatic
Eosinophilic keratitis in the horse and cat may have
hyphema is rarely dependent on the therapy but is
white plaques or spots in a bed of granulation tissue
dependent on the initial damage produced by the trauma
that, on cytology, reveals numerous eosinophils and
 and the amount of blood present. While trauma is the most
mast cells. These patients will present with pain or red,
common cause of hyphema, it is not the only cause. Unless
 granulating opacities (10.47, 10.48). The most common
there is physical evidence of trauma or trauma was
infectious cause for white to yellow plaques on the
witnessed, an underlying systemic disease should always be
sh u anun si aso au 'uoau hy si a
considered, such as hypertension, blood dyscrasias, diseases
susceptibility to fungal keratitis but it may occur
causing vasculitis such as tick born infection, and clotting
occasionally in the dog and cat (10.37). The diagnosis
and bleeding disorders. It is common for the owner to
 is made from corneal cytology.
presume trauma with hyphema and present it as historical
Hypopyon (leukocytes in the anterior chamber) is
fact, when it was not actually observed. Conversely, the
common with septic ulceration and uveitis but is not
patient may have suffered trauma as a result of hyphema or
usually the presenting symptom. It is recognized by the
blindness. The opposite eye and the fundus should also be
white boat-shaped opacity in the ventral anterior
examined for evidence of hemorrhage. Hyphema may also
chamber (see Chapter 11, p. 298, 11.52). Hypopyon is
mask and be caused by other ocular conditions such as
 not an absolute indicator of intraocular sepsis. Sterile
neoplasia, glaucoma, retinal detachment (acute or chronic),
inflammation can also induce hypopyon but it is safer to
and chronic uveitis. Ocular ultrasonography is indicated to
assume sepsis and treat with antibiotics until proven
determine the presence of other lesions and the extent of the
otherwise. Rarely, ocular lymphoma syndromes will be 
 Ocular hemorrhage (presence in the vitreous).
presented with marked hypopyon (11.51).
The prognosis for hyphema depends on the cause and
Lipid in the anterior chamber appears as a diffusely
 associated ocular lesions. Simple traumatic hyphema
white opacity and may be confused with diffuse corneal
involving less than half of the anterior chamber has a
edema or a cataract with a dilated pupil {11.65). The
good prognosis, whereas complete hyphema has a
lack of texture may help to differentiate lipid from
guarded prognosis. Assessment of the degree of hyphema 
corneal edema, and the inabililty to see the iris should
may vary with the animal's activity level. Hyphema
differentiate it from a cataract. Lipid in the anterior
usually settles out in the anterior chamber with rest and
chamber indicates systemic hyperlipidemia, and may
becomes dispersed with activity. This apparent
occur with systemic metabolic diseases such as diabetes
worsening of the hyphema is not accompanied by any
mellitus, pancreatitis, Cushing's disease, liver disease,
change in the amount of blood in the anterior chamber.
and essential hyperlipidemia of Schnauzers, or may result 
The main therapy for hyphema is cage rest and tran-
simply from ingestion of a fatty meal (garbage). Lipids
quilization. While a variety of drugs have been used to
gain access to the chamber because of a breakdown of
treat hyphema, none have shown clear benefit in
the blood-aqueous humor barrier and their presence
controlled studies. Patients with traumatic hyphema
implies underlying uveitis. Consequently, most patients 
should be assumed to have traumatic uveitis as well, and
with lipid aqueous humor also have a red eye. Therapy
 should be treated accordingly. Surgical removal of the
should be directed at any systemic disease, treating the
blood is rarely indicated.
uveitis with anti-inflammatory drugs and atropine, and
Acute onset of cataracts is occasionally presented as
dietary restriction of fat. Glaucoma may be
a
an emergency. One of two scenerios is usually present
 complication of lipids in the anterior chamber, so the IOP
with this complaint: insidious cataracts that have reached
104
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
a threshold that the owner has noticed, or truly acute
Acute lid swelling from contusions should be further
onset of bilateral cataracts. Most forms of cataracts are
evaluated for globe and orbital injuries, and they may
usually significantly asymmetrical in their development
benefit from cold packing in the first 12-24 hours, and,
with the significant exception of sugar and toxic
later, from hot packing. Acute cellulitis or abscessation is
cataracts. Of these exceptions, diabetic cataracts are by
a common emergency in cats, particularly free-roaming
far the most common. Diabetic cataracts may literally
intact males. If treated early, systemic antibiotics will be
appear overnight to the owners, and often the owners do
sufficient but at the stage of abscessation, drainage plus
not volunteer information regarding the accompanying
local and systemic antimicrobial therapy is necessary. Lid
systemic signs, such as polyurea and polydipsia. These
abscessation often produces marked chemosis and may
patients are often poorly regulated and ketotic, and can
drain into the conjunctival cul-de-sac but the globe is
sometimes be diagnosed by smelling their breath. Acute
usually spared.
dia betic cataracts are typically symmetrical, intumescent,
iauae ka pasneo Suilams P!l leuaielg ainoy
or swollen, and may have complications of uveitis and/or
reactions {angioedema) may be accompanied by edema
glaucoma. While the systemic state will take precedence,
of the nose and urticaria. Angioedema will improve with
the eyes should be treated for lens-induced uveitis with
or without treatment (see Chapter 7, p.145) but is
topical atropine and anti-inflammatory drugs. In some
usually treated with an injection of anthistamines and/or
instances the inflammation and/or IOP is not easily
glucocorticoids.
controlled and will require lens removal to control.
Acute chemical burns to the lids and globe are,
 Sometimes the lens ruptures.
unfortunately, (
often malicious. The main therapy is
 Black opacities on the cornea that are presented as
immediate and copious flushing with any water or saline
solution at hand, and removal of any residue from the
from a breech in the surface (Table 4.9). The lesion is often
surface. Alkali burns are the most disastrous to tissue
raised and although the uvea is itself pigmented, the
because of their deep penetration. The various self-
exuding of fibrin from the surface often results in a red or
defense sprays such as mace and pepper spray are often
gray opacity (see Chapter 10, p.241, 10.100-10.105).
blamed for various ocular lesions without definite proof
Involvement of the iris can usually be confirmed by finding
of exposure. While irritating, no lasting pathology
the anterior chamber is partially or completely shallowed
should occur with these chemicals; irrigating the eye and
or collapsed, and the pupil tented or not visible.
 avoiding self-trauma should be sufficient therapy.
Concurrent corneal opacification may preclude direct
Emergency presentation for conjunctival lesions is
 evaluation of intraocular structures. Uveal prolapse may
usually associated with trauma or infection. Laceration,
occur from a, perforated ulcer, penetrating injury,
chemosis, and subconjunctival hemorrhage are the usual
laceration, or blunt traumatic rupture of the cornea. The
sequelae  to
conjunctival
trauma.
Conjunctival
prognosis will vary according to the cause and amount of
lacerations do not need suturing unless the third eyelid
damage to intraocular structures (see Chapter 11, p.298).
attachments or cartilage are involved. Dramatic chemosis 
These patients should be referred immediately.
 may occur from allergic reactions, trauma, or infection.
Superficial corneal pigment may also be present as a
Differentiation will be based on associated lesions,
result of previous or chronic pathology. Other sources of
history, type of ocular discharge, and conjunctival
pigment in the cornea may be the corneal nigrum in the cat
cytology. Traumatic and allergic reactions are treated
and, rarely, dematiaceous fungi that produce pigment.
with topical anti-inflammatory therapy fassuming no
corneal abrasions), while antimicrobial therapy is
EMERGENCIES THAT DO NOT THREATEN SIGHT
administered for suspected infection.
Injuries and diseases of the lids, conjunctiva, and third
 Emergency presentation due to third eyelid disease is 
eyelid may be presented as emergencies but in general do
usually due to eversion of the third eyelid gland or
not threaten sight. As such, they are examined to ensure
protrusion of the third eyelid. Cherry eye or eversion of
the process is localized to the adnexa and they can then
the gland is a common dramatic but nonemergency
be managed at a more convenient time.
event. The diagnosis can usually be made with some
Lid emergencies are usually lid lacerations or acute
confidence over the telephone from the age (up to
swellings
from
contusions, i
infection,
 angioedema,
2 years) and breed of the dog. Similar signs in older dogs
venemous bites, and burns, either heat or chemical. Of these
may have more serious implications, such as an orbital
 only snake bites or chemical burns would indicate urgent
lesion, but are not emergencies. Protrusion of the third
therapy. Lid lacerations are easily recognized and are most
eyelid has been discussed previously (p.102, p.211).
easily treated within the first 24 48 hours. Accurate
apposition of the lid margin is the key to functional and
cosmetic success (see Chapter 7, p.145). Slips of lid margin
 that may be hanging loose with lacerations running parallel
to the lid margin should not be removed, but sutured in
place to maintain the normal mucocutaneous junction.
105
Principles
Ophthalmic Surgery
INTRODUCTION
by the inherent risk of surgery should also be thoroughly
counseled on the advantages and disadvantages of surgery,
The emphasis in this chapter will be on the preparation,
or perha ps should be encouraged to avoid elective surgery.
instrumentation, principles of surgery, and postoperative
B seu oum kiaguns iof pauasaid juaned aui
care of patients for ophthalmic surgery of the adnexa and
periocular or conjunctival infection should have the
cornea. Beca use of the investment in equipment and the
infection controlled before proceeding with surgery. A
uniqueness of the surgery, intraocular surgery should be
more dramatic dilemma is presented in the patient with a
delegated to those individuals who perform it on a
bacterial panophthalmitis that has extended to an orbital
regular basis. Nevertheless, extraocular surgery is still the
cellulitis. The indication for enucleation is clear but
 operating in an infected field is contraindicated. Humane
general practitioner. A knowledge of the anatomy
considerations must be balanced with good medical
involved and the acquisition of a few specialized
principles, and intense medical and supportive care
instruments will greatly facilitate performing extraocular
 should precede and follow surgery.
surgery. The individual surgical procedures are discussed
in detail in the appropriate chapters.
Extraocular surgery is often elective and can be
delayed until the animal is older, undergoing an
anesthesia episode for another condition, or until
PATIENT PREPARATION FOR SURGERY
the time is mutually convenient.
PATIENT SELECTION
Ophthalmic surgery is often indicated for the very young
ANESTHESIA/SEDATION
or the very old patient. Patient selection and preparation
Many adnexal surgical procedures can be performed
unnecessary mortalities. S
Surgery on the very young
with local anesthesia and/or sedation, and this should be
patient (2-12 weeks) is difficult due to the constraints of
 considered as an alternative to general anesthesia in the
 size and the increased anesthetic risk. Surgery in the very
aged or high risk patient. If the surgery is elective and
young puppy or kitten for conformational defects that
general anesthesia is indicated, the high risk patient
are not producing significant corneal disease may be
should be evaluated by performing a thorough physical
postponed until adult conformation  is achieved
examination and organ function test. Age alone is not a
(5-6 months). If the cornea or vision is being affected in
contraindication for surgery or anesthesia.
the very young patient, either a provisional surgical
Unless performing a salvage procedure, glaucoma
 procedure or medical therapy may extend the time until
patients should have the IOP normalized before surgery.
 a definitive procedure can be performed; for example,
If intensive preoperative diuretic therapy has been
 everting lid sutures for entropion can be placed in the
 administered, electrolyte and acid-base imbalances may
very young puppy, and the cornea in a kitten with eyelid
be produced and create an increased anesthetic risk. In
agenesis can be medically protected.
 general, potassium loss and a tendency to metabolic
Ophthalmic surgery is often elective and can be
acidosis can be assumed with the use of carbonic
performed at a mutually convenient time. The animal's
anhydrase inhibitors1. Mannitol may be used pre-
temperament and the owner's expectations are important
operatively with glaucoma patients, or to reduce vitreous
to assess prior to surgery. Animals that are very nervous or
volume in intraocular surgery. If possible, mannitol
vicious will require at least one additional sedation for
administration should be performed before anesthesia
suture removal if absorbable sutures are not used.
induction as adverse side-effects are more common in the
Complications from wound dehiscence from rubbing the
hypotensive anesthetized patient?.
face are more likely in the nervous, compulsive patient.
If surgical  intervention  is  anticipated fparticularly
Owners who have unrealistic expectations regarding the
intraocular), prolonged preoperative administration of
correction of complex conformational defects are seldom
prostaglandin inhibitors (aspirin) and topical cholinesterase
satisfied and therefore require detailed and accurate
inhibitors should be avoided. Intraocular hemorrhage is
communication. The owner who is extremely distraught
more frequent and severe when these groups of drugs are
106
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
used. Similarly, the preoperative use of long-acting
PREPARATION OF THE SURGICAL FIELD
subconjunctival glucocorticoids is usually contraindicated
 if a keratectomy is anticipated. Glucocorticoids in high
MINOR Lid SURGERY
dosages or in a form that cannot be withdrawn may result
Postoperative lid infection is uncommon, so relatively
in corneal perforations in >20% of keratectomy cases3.
minor plastic surgery of the eyelid, such as simple
Aminoglycoside antibiotics, systemic cholinesterase
entropion, is managed as a "clean' procedure. The surgical 
inhibitors such as insecticides, and some anthelmintics
 area is prepared by modest shaving with a surgical blade or
should be avoided before and during surgery if an
dlippers (5.1) and scrubbing with a 1:10 dilution of 10%
anesthetic  protocol  with 
neuromuscular blockade
stock povidone-iodine solution for 2-4 minutes6. This
(pancuronium) is to be used. These drugs will prolong the
dilution is nonirritating to the cornea and is as effective a
nuonued aul jo sishlened pue isaue Aoiendsa
 germicide as the concentrated solution. Alcohol is not used
in surface preparation, nor are other antiseptics, such as
 Preoperative topical and/or systemic medications such
hexachloraphene, which are irritating to the cornea.
as mannitol, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors,
The surgery site is covered with a fenestrated drape and
 cholinesterase inhibitors, glucocorticoids, and NSAIDs
sterile gloves are wom. A cap and mask are optional and a
may have important ramifications for safe anesthesia.
surgical gown is not necessary. This protocol is also used for
third eyelid surgeries, minor conjunctival surgery, and
While some anesthetic protocols are more ideal than
keratectomies. While some practitioners might argue that
others, there is no clear surgical advantage fother than
more stringent asepsis should be adhered to, the cost-benefit
duration) of one anesthetic over another for eyelid
ratio does not warrant it; the procedure is often only
surgery. Surgery of the conjunctiva and cornea is
excision of a small piece of skin and suture of the defect.
facilitated by anesthetics or degree of anesthesia that
keep the eye from rolling ventrally or constantly moving,
MAJOR LID SURGERY, LID SURGERY WITH
and therefore barbiturates and sedatives fother than
BURIED SUTURES, AND CORNEAL SURGERY
ketamine) are not preferred. Conjunctival flaps can be
FOR DEEP OR PERFORATED ULCERS
performed with sedation, if necessary, in debilitated
 Unlike minor lid surgeries, extensive plastic procedures, such
patients. The author routinely uses an anesthetic
 as large tumor excision or procedures which have buried
protocol of preoperative atropine and acepromazine,
nonabsorbable sutures, are treated as aseptically as possible.
Shaving or clipping the surgical site is more extensive than for
intubation and maintenance on isoflurane/nitrous oxide.
minor procedures, although the skin disinfection is similar.
 Neuromuscular blockade  with pancuronium or
 Careful shaving with a surgical blade after wetting the hair
atracurium may be used with intraocular surgery or for
with a sterile water soluble lubricant is preferred to clipping
the repair of a perforated cornea of the ventral medial
(5.1). Clipper blades, when hot, may bum the skin, are often
region, where manipulation is necessary to bring the
ontaminated from previous preparations, and do not cut
surgical field into view. If neuromusclular blockade is
dose on cats or shorthaired dogs. The draping of the surgical
used, concurrent ventilatory support must be given to
 site is usually by triangulation with three drapes or covering
avoid respiratory acidosis. Low-dose pancuronium may
with a fenestrated drape. Preparation of the surgeon is the
provide ocular muscle paralysis with apparent intact
 same as for all aseptic surgery. The surgeon's gloves should
respirations; however, the respiratory efforts are not
be wiped free of powder to avoid foreign body reaction in
sufficient to avoid hyperca pnia4.
tissues or in the eye.
The proper restraint (or lack of it) of an animal with
 Surgery for deep corneal ulcers and perforated
a descemetocele or perforated cornea should be
 corneas is usually managed with little skin preparation to
emphasized to personnel who are helping with anesthesia
avoid intraocular contamination with surface debris. If
induction. Many of the brachycephalic breeds which
the cornea is intact, the skin is prepared for 1-2 cm
develop these kinds of problem are extremely difficult to
restrain without putting pressure on the globe. If the
patient struggles, restraint of the animal should be
reduced in order to avoid rupture of the eye. Heavy
5.1
narcotic sedation is indicated for these patients.
 Extreme caution should be used when restraining
brachycephalic dogs with weakened globes, such as
with corneal lacerations and descemetoceles, to
avoid inadvertent perforation of the globe.
The use of atropine to prevent the oculocardiac reflex
is not necessary for most procedures, unless significant
pulling on the optic nerve or extraocular muscles is
anticipated, such as with enucleationf. The horse seems
the most prone to problems with the oculocardiac reflex,
and glycopyrrolate is the drug of choice to counteract the
bradycardia in this species. Atropine is routinely with-
5.1 Shaving in a dog with a #10 Bard-Parker blade after wetting the
held preoperatively with parotid duct transplantation to
hair with a sterile water-soluble jelly. Shaving is with the direction of
facilitate the retrograde passage of a nylon suture up the
the hair. Cats and shorthaired dogs do not clip well, but they are also
parotid duct.
difficult to shave.
PRINCIPLES OF OPHTHALMIC SURGERY
107
5.2
5.3, 5.4 vacuum
5.3
bag (before applying 
vacuum] that is 
utilized to 
immobilize a dog's
head (5.3). The bag is
filled with beads 50 
that when a vacuum
is applied (5.4), it
holds the mold or
shape that wa5 
fashioned before
applying the vacuum.
Additional tape is 
applied to the nose 
to help position the 
eye for surgery.
5.4
5.2 Preparation of a dog's eye for sterile surgery with a small
underlying plastic adhesive drape covered by a larger fenestrated drape.
(0.4-0.8 in) beyond the eyelid margins; pressure should
5.5 Positioning of 
not be exerted on the globe. A sterile water-soluble jelly
the practitioner's
may be placed on the globe to trap loose hairs that fall into
arms and hands 50
the conjunctival cul-de-sac when sha ving or clipping. The
that they are
water-soluble jelly is also placed on the blades of scissors 
 supported is
which are used to trim the lashes, in order to prevent the
 important for
cut cilia from falling onto the globe. If the cornea is
microsurgery, to
perforated, no lid shaving or preparation is performed
allow smooth
other than cutting the lashes and cautiously cleaning the
 precise movement.
 conjunctival cul-de-sac with cotton tip applicators.
Rinsing the conjunctival sac with sterile electrolyte
solutions increases the risk of contaminating the
5.5
conjunctiva and cornea with skin bacteria from any
backwashing that may occur7. A sterile plastic adhesive
drape is placed over the eye and this is covered with a
larger fenestrated drape or triangulated with drapes. The
larger drapes around the eye extend over the arms of an
operating chair and cover the patient (5.2).
While counter-intuitive, often minimal skin preparation
and irrigation results in less contamination of the.
 surgery site than extensive preparation; this may be
critical if wounds have perforated the globe.
PATIENT POSITIONING AND
EXPOSURE OF THE GLOBE
Positioning of the patient for ophthalmic surgery can vary
from dorsal, ventral, or lateral recumbency, depending on
the surgeon's preference, the skull conformation, and the
procedure to be performed. Lid and third eyelid
procedures are usually performed in lateral or ventral
Bags containing small beads, which when placed under
recumbency, and corneal or conjunctival flap surgeries can
be performed in these positions as well as in dorsal
are excellent for immobilization of the head in any
recumbency. Dolicocephalic dogs do not lend themselves
 position, and are a good investment for all types of surgery
to positioning in dorsal recumbency because the nose
(5.3, 5.4). Alternatives are the use of 'sand bags' or bags of
obstructs medial placement of the hands. If bilateral lid
various size filled with spent soda lime, and tape to
procedures are to be performed, the animal is usually
position the nose and head. All delicate ophthalmic
placed in ventral recumbency with the nose supported.
surgery is performed seated, with the hands and arms
This allows access to both sides without moving,
Supueis pauojad uayo sl Auaains pil 'is'sh pauoddns
repreparing, and redraping the patient.
 and allows more flexibility in positioning of the patient.
108
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
After incision of the plastic adhesive drape, a method
 meticulously placed with a good ophthalmic needle they
must be utilized to keep the lids open and expose the area
are often only anchored in the loose conjunctiva and are of
of concern. The usual method of holding the lids open is
minimal benefit. If manipulating an intact globe, such as for
by the use of a lid speculum. Because of the diversity of
a keratectomy, two small mosquito hemostats placed 180°
breeds and species, more than one size of speculum is
from each other on the perilimbus conjunctiva offer good
pue saop lews soy pasn si wnnoads oueipad y papaau
exposure. This method should not be used for a weakened
cats. Wire lid speculums are preferred because of their
globe, as pressure is transmitted to the globe.
simplicity, light weight, and low cost (5.6). Alternatively,
The third eyelid can be retracted with forceps or, less
 sutures can be placed near the lid margins and held by an
traumatically, with a mattress stay suture that is passed
assistant or clamped to the drapes, or small clamps can
through the medial lower lid and into the third eyelid near
be fixed to the lid margins {two to a lid) and the lids
its margin, and back out of the skin. This pulls the third
retracted with sutures placed through the clamps. If the
eyelid into a retracted position, and the friction of the
globe is weakened or perforated, great caution must be
suture through the skin is often enough to hold it in place.
taken with any instrument that is used to hold the lids
open, to avoid transmitting pressure onto the globe.
Convenient positioning of the globe for surgery is often
INSTRUMENTATION
the most frustrating step for the beginner, and the method
used can be critical when dealing with a perforated or
 Eponyms are common and confusing in instrument
weakened globe. One method for increasing the surgical
nomenclature. Despite the wide array of names and
is
instruments, most represent variations of a few basic
performed by making a horizontal crimp at the lateral
instruments.
canthus for about 1 cm (0.s in) using a hemostat, and
 then cutting the crimp with scissors. With experience, the
LID AND THIRD EYELID SURGERY
need for a canthotomy decreases, except in patients with
INSTRUMENTATION
 a very small palpebral fissure.
Many of the simple ophthalmic lid procedures can be
 Stay sutures placed near the limbus in the superficial
performed without special instrumentation. However,
sclera can be used to manipulate the globe, but unless
two instruments that facilitate lid procedures are a lid
plate and a large chalazion clamp (5.7). The skin of the
eyelids is loose and it is difficult to make a smooth
incision on the eyelids unless they are held taut while
5.6
incising. The lid plate is an inexpensive contoured plate
that is placed in the conjunctival sac, producing a firm,
taut, and immobile skin surface that facilitates a clean
precise incision. Since it stretches the skin, the surgeon
must become accustomed to evaluating the amount of
skin to excise under these conditions.
A chalazion clamp facilitates the removal of aberrant
 cilia and small lid tumors. When clamped over the area
 to be incised it provides hemostasis and a firm backing
for making an accurate, clean incision.
 Forceps that are used for lid and third eyelid surgeries
5.6 Lid speculums appropriate for veterinary use. The wire speculum
 are usually medium sized, rat-toothed forceps with the
is appropriate for small dogs and cats, whereas the larger speculum is
teeth at right angles, such as Adson or Bishop-Harmon
necessary for large fissures in the dog and will work in the horse. The
forceps (5.8). These are inexpensive forceps and are
surgeon should be aware that pressure may be inadvertently applied 
preferred to more delicate forceps that are easily
to the globe with the larger speculum.
damaged. Since the suture material for lid and third
5.7
5.7 Instruments
5.8
5.8 various sizes
used for lid surgery.
of forceps for
A variety of 
adnexal and
chalazion clamps
corneal surgery.
(C] of different 
Left to right:
sizes are available.
Bishop-Harmon
 They facilitate
conjunctival
excision of tissue
forceps, Adson rat-
and hemosta sis.
tooth forceps for 
The lid plate (LP)
lids, jeweler's
facilitates clean
forceps for cornea.
skin incisions.
 Colibri corneal
Hermosta ts should
forceps.
be available due to
the vascular nature
of the lid.
PRINCIPLES OF OPHTHALMIC SURGERY
109
eyelid surgery is not usually smaller than S-0 in size,
kmots. Manipulation of suture with toothed forceps will
nonophthalmic needle holders will suffice, and are
damage the suture. Unfortunately, corneal forceps will be one
prefera ble for larger needles. Smaller ophthalmic scissors
of the most expensive instruments to purchase because of the
azis aieuidoudde ur aie (6's) siossios Auonouai se yons
delicate teeth. Extreme care should be exercised in the type
for ophthalmic plastic surgery but they can be easily
of tissues grasped with these forceps, as improper use will
damaged by misusing them on the skin.
easily damage the teeth. If corneal surgery is performed
A loupe or magnification is usually unnecessary for lid
infrequently, an alternative to corneal forceps are the
surgery until the surgeon becomes presbyopic, and then they
jeweler's forceps used in electron microscopy laboratories.
will be necessary for everything, including suture removal!
These are inexpensive, accurate, smooth-tipped forceps (5.8).
However, the jeweler's forceps is very pointed on the end,
A well-stocked extraocular surgery pack for eyelids
which can be a danger when working on the cornea.
and third eyelid should include:
10 pauooi-ieu paue ue si sdaaoy jo adki piui au
A lid plate
splay-toothed forceps that is used for fixation and
A chalazion clamp
manipulation of the globe. When pressed against the
Adson rat-tooth forceps
globe and closed, they grasp the deeper layers of episclera
 Bishop-Harmon forceps
and sclera rather than the loose conjunctival surface, or
 Small needle drivers (nonophthalmic)
when closed over a rectus muscle, they pass under the
Tenotomy scissors
muscle rather than entrapping the muscle (5.12).
Small mosquito forceps (2)
Towel clamps (3)
Cotton buds (e.g. Q-tips), ga uze sponges
CONJUNCTIVAL AND CORNEAL SURGERY
5.9
Since conjunctival and corneal tissue is inherently more
 delicate, smaller suture material is utilized and specialized
ocular instruments are preferable. In general, the
instruments are miniaturized and designed to hold like a
ag pinous sue suoeains aui pueu yoea u louad
supported on the table or chair arms, and often the hand is
steadied by support of at least one finger on the patient's
head (s.s). The action of the instrument is mainly
developed in the wrist and by rolling the instrument with
the fingers. Instruments, such as ophthalmic needle holders,
some lid surgeries. Note the round tip5.
that are designed to roll between the fingers are usually
rounded or six-sided {5.10). Instruments that are not
5.10
rotated, such as scissors and many forceps, have flattened
handles or platforms for the fingers. Locking instruments,
such as a needle holder, should be designed to lock and
unlock smoothly with no change in hand position. Because
of the delicate nature of many of these instruments,
inappropriate use may damage the instrument.
5.10 Ophthalmic needle holder with a locking mechanism. The 5mall 
Lid speculum
jaws do not deform small needles, and the round tubular handle is
See globe exposure, p.107, 5.6.
designed for a rolling motion with the surgeon's fingers.
Scissors
Small blunt-tipped scissors such as tenotomy scissors will
5.11
suffice for conjunctival dissection (5.9). They may also be
used for cutting fine suture material. Sharp-tipped
separating tissue.
Forceps
5.11 Colibri corneal forceps. Small right-angled teeth are barely
Two or three types of forceps are needed for conjunctival and
visible and a tying platform is located behind the teeth.
 mrneal manipulation. A right-angled rat-toothed forceps of
medium to small size {(Bishop-Harmon)  is used to
5.12
manipulate the conjunctiva. Grasping with this type of
forceps captures only the conjunctiva and Tenon's capsule.
They are not used for fixation of, or moving, the globe. If the
 mrnea is to be manipulated or sutured, a pair of forceps with
o sao yo al se yns an pae-u s Aaa
smooth forceps, is used to hold the edges of the cornea
(5.11). Many of the corneal forceps also have a tying
5.12 Scleral fixation forceps with splayed teeth. The teeth willfixate the
platform behind the teeth to hold fine suture while tying
deeper tissue such as the sclera when pressure is applied while closing.
110
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Alternatives to forceps in manipulation of the globe are
include 1:10,000 epinephrine, flushing with an
fixation sutures or blunt instruments such as a strabismus
electrolyte solution, battery-powered low-temperature
hook or a cotton tip applicator, pushed into the fornix to
cautery, or bipolar wetfield cautery (5.15). Disposable,
move the globe in the appropriate direction. Extreme
low-temperature cauteries are quite 
effective  in
caution should be exercised with all forms of globe
controlling conjunctival, scleral, and corneal hemorrhage
manipulation if the cornea is weakened or perforated.
that continues despite flushing. They can be reused if
ethylene oxide sterilization is available.
Needle holders
Because the suture material is a minimum of 5-0 in size
 A well-stocked surgery pack for extraocular and
and the needles are very small, a needle holder that is
corneal surgery should include:
easily manipulated and will not damage the needle is
 Instruments as in box, p.109
necessary for corneal and conjunctival surgery. A variety
Wire eyelid speculums, pediatric and adult size
of designs are available, with variations in whether or
 Corneal forceps such as Colibri*
not they lock, the locking mechanism, and the size and
Ophthalmic needle holders*
shape of the jaws (5.10). The surgeon who only performs
 Beaver blade holder or small handle for
the occasional ocular surgery will prefer the locking
Bard-Parker blade
needle holder This instrument and the corneal forceps
Spatula such as a cyclodialysis or iris spatula
are the two most expensive instruments in a minor
Irrigation ca nnula
ophthalmic surgery pack for extraocular surgery.
Cellulose sponges
*: expensive instruments 
Miscellaneous instruments
A muscle or strabismus hook is an inexpensive
instrument which can be used for various manipula-
tions of the globe and eyelids, as well as in enucleation
(5.13). When performing an enucleation, the stra bismus
hook is used to hook the extraocular muscles by
passing it posterior to the equator, where the muscle
separates from the globe, and then coming forward to
5.13
catch the muscle.
A cyclodialysis-type spatula is a general purpose
instrument. It can be used for performing a superficial
keratectomy, sweeping anterior synechiae off the inner
cornea with perforated ulcers, and removing fibrin
membranes from the pupil and iris {5.14). It is rarely
5.13 Strabismus hook used to hook the extraocular muscles or
used as originally  designed for
performing the
pushed into the conjunctival sac to rotate the globe.
lood aul on anp ruon rog aunpanod sisaipoi
success rate of the surgery.
Irrigation through a blunt lacrimal needle is used to
5.14
control hemorrhage in the surgical field and keep the
cornea moist. Lacrimal needles often have a malleable
end to adjust the angle to the surgeon's preference.
 A wide variety of scalpel blades for ophthalmic surgery
are available but most surgeons utilize only two types: a
small curved blade and a small pointed blade. While
specialized handles and blades (such as Beaver handles
5.14 Cyclodialysis spatula that can be used for teasing iris and fibrin
and blades) are preferred by some surgeons, the regular
membranes off of cornea, superficial keratectomies, and vitreous off 
#15 and #11 blades are quite satisfactory. The corner of a
of the posterior lens.
double-edged razor blade may be broken off and held in
a special holder for a sharp cutting instrument. Diamond
knives are the ultimate for a sharp instrument.
5.15
5.15 Methods for
 Sponges used in ophthalmic surgery can be either the
controlling hemostasis 
common cotton-tipped applicators or cellulose sponges. If
in extraocular and 
 the globe is intact, cotton-tipped applicators are satisfactory
corneal surgery. Cotton-
 and inexpensive. Cellulose sponges are preferred when the
tipped applica tors are 
 cornea is perforated or when performing intraocular
used if the eye is not
surgery, to avoid loose cotton fbers entering the eye and
open. The celulose
reating an inflammatory reaction (5.15).
spears are preferred if
the globe is open, to
Hemostasis
avoid leaving residual
Hemostasis during ophthalmic surgery may be effected
foreign rma terial. Low-
by sponging and clamping with hemostats, as in general
 temperature battery
 surgery. Conjunctival, corneal, and iris hemostasis is
cautery will control 
usually effected with cotton-tipped applicators, or with
conjunctival, corneal, 
cellulose sponges if the eye is open. Alternative methods
and iris bleeding.
PRINCIPLES OF OPHTHALMIC SURGERY
111
Irrigation solution
edge. If the needle is not entered vertically, the bite will
The type of sterile electrolyte solution used for irrigation
aul jo sudea iouaisod ui Suunsau iroadns Aiaa aa
in extraocular and corneal surgery is not critical.
incision. If the needle does not have a steep curvature, it
Irrigating solutions used for prolonged intraocular
is difficult to place the suture deep in the cornea and have
s (o s osh   
it exit the cornea at the incision. The side of the incision
be balanced for pH, buffered with bicarbonate, and 
being sutured should be held with forceps to provide
contain glutathione and glucose. Most intraocular
counterpressure to the force of driving the needle, and to
irrigation procedures take only a few minutes, and
allow eversion of the edge of the incision in order to
lactated Ringer's solution or Ringer's solution is as
visualize the depth of the needle tract. The needle is
efficacious as the more expensive and
unstable
passed as deep as possible, emerging under the forceps
commercial intraocular irrigating solutions8, 9.
and just anterior to Descemet's membrane. The opposite
side of the incision is then stabilized with the forceps and
Suture material
the needle is pushed across the incision at the same depth
Suture material for lid skin should be 4 to 5-0 in size. Silk
that it emerged from on the other side. The suture is tied
suture was the past gold standard but many shorthaired
with a minimum of two loops on the first throw, and if
dogs develop suture abscesses and excess granulation due
nylon is used, three loops are recommended. A second
to gamma globulin binding to the silk. Nylon or
and third throw of a single loop each is then placed. If
monofilament suture, and even synthetic absorbable
10-0 nylon is used, the ends can be cut short and the
suture, can be used on the skin with good results. If
suture rotated to draw the knot into the suture tract.
Jo asnroaq ieaouau ainins u paiedoue si Ano
 Larger sutures are cut close to the knot and left exposed.
location or temperament of the animal, synthetic
When suturing edematous, friable tissue, or incisions
with excess tension, for additional holding capacity the
sutures and monofilament suture should be avoided in the
needle bite is usually extended to 2 mm from each edge.
skin if the ends may rub on the cornea. Conversely, they
Synthetic absorbable suture will dissolve in about
may be placed on the cornea with the ends pointing out,
3-4 weeks but may stimulate excessive vascularization. If
although some conjunctival irritation will result. If the
 this occurs, the sutures should be removed. Nylon suture 
suture is to be buried in the lid, an absorbable suture (gut,
larger than 10-0 is removed. Suture removal can be
collagen, or synthetic), 5 to 6-0 in size, is usually used.
performed after application of topical anesthesia in most
The general surgeon should have some ophthalmic
instances. Rather than using scissors, a blade should be
suture on hand for corneal lacerations and perforated ulcers.
used to cut the suture. Scissors are usually too large and
The size and type can vary with preference but the needle
if the animal moves during the procedure, the suture is
should be a good quality, ophthalmic, reverse cutting or
torn out rather than cut.
spatula needle. Use of an inappropriate needle when
suturing the cornea results in excessive distortion and stress
STORAGE AND CLEANING OF INSTRUMENTS
on the globe, and inaccurate depth placement of the needle.
The investment in and delicate nature of ophthalmic
Ophthalmic needles are very sharp and should be handled,
instruments dictate that care in cleaning and
with forceps, only on the shank, or they will be quickly
maintenance of instruments be emphasized. Cleaning of
blunted. The needle must be pushed far enough through the
instruments is best performed with an ultrasonic cleaner.
tissue so that when pulled through, it can be grasped behind
Alternatively, careful brushing, avoiding instrument
the point, to avoid blunting the cutting edges.
contact and entanglement, and drying will prolong the
Gut and collagen sutures are rarely used on the cornea
life of the instruments. The hinges should be lubricated in
since the advent of newer synthetic absorbable sutures but
"instrument milk' after each use. Instrument corrosion
they are still a good suture for many conjunctival
may occur if the instruments are not thoroughly cleaned,
applications. Suture sizes used in the cornea vary from
instrument milk is not used, the instruments are not
6 to 10-0. Very fine nylon suture is the least reactive but
dried, and contact with other instruments is allowed.
it has inherent difficulties in handling if the surgeon is not
 Instruments should be stored and sterilized so they are
equipped (appropriate instruments and magnification).
not in contact with adjacent instruments. Special
instrument trays and storage devices are available but a
Ophthalmic suture in the smaller sizes and with
simple container, that has several narrow pockets sewn in
ophthalmic needles is very expensive; the general
it to hold the instruments, can be made from a draping
surgeon will want to be judicious as to the variety
cloth. This can be doubled over, rolled up, and sterilized
and sizes kept in stock. Six-0 synthetic absorbable
in a pack. Instruments with cutting edges and teeth
suture with a spatula or reverse cutting needle will
should have the ends covered with tips that can either be
suffice for the majority of conjunctival and corneal
bought commercially or made from silicone tubing.
suturing, although the ophthalmologist would often
Damaged instruments can be repaired to new condition
use an 8-0 in small animals and a 7-0 in large
in most instances, and this is usually cost effective.
 animal corneal surgery.
 Sterilization of metal ophthalmic instruments can be by
 any means if good technique is followed. If instrument milk
Technique
is not used, they should be dried before steam sterilization.
In the healthy cornea the needle entrance and exit from
Ethylene oxide sterilization is probably too expensive and
the incision or laceration should be 1 mm from the edge.
toxic to be used in the usual practice environment. The level
The needle tip enters the cornea on a vertical plane. The
of acceptable environmental contamination of ethylene
needle should be sufficiently small enough in curvature to
 Oxide has been reduced, and since it is difficult to monitor,
enter from this distance and exit deep in the incision
it is not worth the risk to personnel.
112
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 In patients who have had entropion surgery and have
Improper use, storing, and cleansing of instruments
had extensive blepharospasm and are very 'eye conscious',
often results in rust, bent, or damaged tips and
it is usually prudent to omit any topical ocular therapy since
teeth of forceps and dull scissors.
any contact with the eyes will likely precipitate
 blepharospasm. When topical medications are administered
postoperatively, the patient is held or observed for several
minutes afterwards to prevent self-trauma.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 Attention to prophylactic measures regarding self-
PREVENTION OF SELF-MUTILATION
trauma by the patient pays great dividends that are
Depending on the postoperative pain expected and the
inta ngible when successful.
temperament of the animal, postoperative sedation and
mechanical devices used to prevent self-trauma will vary.
POSTOPERATIVE INFECTION PROPHYLAXIS
In general, it is preferable to err on the side of caution,
rather than have sutures pulled out or the eye
Routine lid and conjunctival surgery is treated with a
traumatized. When animals are r
recovering from
prophylactic topical, broad-spectrum bacteriocidal
anesthesia, it is often necessary to hold them or their
antibiotic for 3-5 days. Parotid duct transplantation is an
head to prevent the eye being traumatized. Postoperative
inherently nonsterile surgery, and is treated with a
systemic analgesics and sedation may be used to
systemic,
 broad-spectrum  bacteriocidal  antibiotic
minimize self-trauma, particularly in the very nervous
immediately before and for 3 days postoperatively.
animal. Mechanical devices, such as the Elizabethan
Perforated ulcers and intraocular surgery may be treated
collar, are commonly used to prevent self-trauma after
A   n  a
ocular and adnexal surgery. An alternative to commercial
before surgery, subconjunctival antibiotics such as
collars is a plastic bucket that has the bottom cut out,
gentamicin after surgery, and systemic postoperative
 and with the edge that is placed over the head padded
 antibiotics for 3-s days. The use of prophylactic
and tied to a collar. This arrangement is preferred for
antibiotics other than immediately before and after
 dolicocephalic dogs or large dogs with short legs. Taping
aseptic surgery is questionable but the natural caution of
of the front dewclaws with a nonadhesive tape is an
the clinician with regard to postoperative infection is
additional measure to prevent self-trauma.
difficult to overcomeio.
REFERENCES
1 Haskins S, Munger R, Helphrey M,
5 Clutton R, Boyd C, Richards L,
9 Nasisse M, Cook C, Harling D {1985)
et αf. (1981) Effect of acetazolamide
 Schwink K (1988) Significance of the
Response of the canine corneal
 on blood acid-base and electrolyte
 oculocardiac reflex during ophthalmic
 endothelium to intraocular irrigation.
values in dogs. Journat of the
surgery. Journat of Small Animat
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting
American Veterinary Medicat
Practice 29:573-579.
of the American College of Veterinary
Association 179:792-796.
6 Roberts S, Severin G, Lavach J {1986)
Ophthatmotogy 16:16-25.
2 Parker A {1973) Blood pressure
Antibacterial activity of dilute
10 Vasseur P, Paul H, Enos L, Hirsh D
 changes and lethality of mannitol
 povidone-iodine solutions used for
 {1985) Infection rates in clean surgical
infusions in dogs. American Joturnat of
ocular surface disinfection in dogs.
procedures: a comparison of
Veterinary Research 34:1523-1528.
American Journat of Veterinary
ampicillin prophylaxis vs a placebo.
3 Martin C (1971) The effect of topical
Research 47:1207-1210.
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
vitamin A, antibiotic, mineral oil, and 
7 Isenberg S, Apt L, Yoshimieri R {1983)
Medicat Association 187:825-827
subconjunctival steroid on corneal
Chemical preparation of the eye in 
epithelial wound healing in the dog.
ophthalmic surgery. I. Effects of
Journat of the American Veterinary
 conjunctival irrigation. Archives of
Medicat Association 159:1392-1399.
Ophthatmology 101:761-763.
4 Sullivan TC, Hellyer PW, Lee DD,
8 Edelhauser H, Gonnering R, Van
Davidson MG (1998) Respiratory
Horn D (1978) Intraocular irrigating 
function and extraocular muscle
solutions. A comparative study of BSS
 paralysis following administration of
plus and lactated Ringers solution.
pancuronium bromide in dogs.
Archives of Ophthatmology
Veterinary Ophthatmology
96:516-520.
1:125-128.
113
6
Orbit and Globe
ANATOMY
fascia or Tenon's capsule. The muscular fascia is divided
into three layers: a thick superficial layer which
The orbit, or enclosure for the eye and associated muscles,
originates from the orbital septum; a middle layer which
nerves, and vasculature, is the conical cavity outlined by the
 attaches just posterior to the limbus of the globe and
periorbita. The orbit is incompletely encased in bone
covers the extraocular muscles and attaches to the lateral
laterally and ventrally in all domestic animals. The bones
 aspect of the third eyelid; and a deep muscular layer that
that form the orbit in the dog, cat, and cow are: the frontal,
covers the deep surface of the rectus muscles and
lacrimal, zygomatic, maxilla, presphenoid, basisphenoid,
 separates them from the retractor bulbi musclel. The
 and palatine bones (6.1, 6.2). in the horse, the squamous
bulbar fascia or Tenon's capsule is located deep to the
portion of the temporal bone also contributes to the orbit.
deep muscular fascia.
The horse and cow have a complete bony orbital rim,
Circumferentially oriented smooth muscle is present
whereas in the cat and dog the lateral orbital rim is formed
in the periorbita, in the muscular fascia layers, and in the 
by the orbital ligament (6.1, 6.2).
area of the dorsomedial wall of the orbit. Contraction of
The periorbita is modified periosteum that becomes
this smooth muscle produces exophthalmos and,
thicker over the lateral and lateral-ventral orbit, where
conversely, loss of tone with sympathetic denervation
bone is lacking. The periorbita forms a cone with the
produces enophthalmos2.
point at the optic foramina and orbital fissure and the
 In the dog, the size of the orbit varies with the skull
base at the orbital rim. The periorbita divides at the
type and the size of the dog. Globe position in the orbit
orbital rim where the superficial leaf continues as the
is dramatically affected by the skull type. The size of the
periosteum of the facial and cranial bones, and the deep
 orbit is also influenced by the presence or size of the
leaf continues into the lid as the orbital septum. In the
gobe during development. Early enucleation or
orbit the periorbita is separated from most of the bone
microphthalmos may decrease the size of the orbit by up
and periosteum by orbital fat. The periorbita reflects
to 27% but can be partially prevented by placing an
over the extraocular muscle and forms the muscular
implant in the orbit?.
6.1
6.1 Skull of a mesaticephalic dog with the bones that form the orbit 
6.2 Eqine orbital bones. (F: frontal; L: lacrimal; S: sphenoid;
and the major foramina. (F: frontal; L: lacarimal; M: maxilla;
T: termporal; Z: zygomatic; Op: optic foramen; Or: orbital fissure;
S: sphenoid; T: temporal; Z: zygomatic; Op: optic foramen; Or: orbital
E: ethrmoidal foramen; A: rostral alar foramen.] (From Martin and
fissure; E: ethmoidal foramen; A: rostral alar foramen.] (From Martin
Anderson, 1981152)
and Ander5on, 1981152)
114
OpHThAlMIC DIsEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDICINe
The foramina of the orbit in various domestic animals
6.3
and the structures that traverse them are listed in Table 6.1.
 Optic foramen
The periorbita attaches around the optic foramen and
Orbital fissure
orbital fissure. The extraocular muscles and levator
Dorsa rectus m.
palpebrae muscle form a muscular cone that originates
around the optic foramen. The optic nerve and internal
Ophthalmic v.
 Oculomotor n.
ophthalmic artery and vein traverse the optic foramen. The
retractor bulbi muscle originates from the margins of the
Levator
Trochlear n.
orbital fissure. The oculomotor (Illrd), trochlear {IVth),
palpebrae m.
Abducens n.
and abducens (VIth) cranial nerves, the ophthalmic division
of the trigeminal (Vth) cranial nerve, the orbital vein, and
 Dorsal oblique m..
the anastomotic artery traverse the orbital fissure (6.3)
The placement of the eye in the skull of animals is
Optic n.
usually correlated with the dietary evolution. Carnivores,
Medial rectus m.
 dao u  sa p aa 's  
 Retractor bulbi m..
visual fields that give them good binocular vision for depth
Lateral rectus m.
perception. Herbivores, or the hunted, have lateral
Ventral rectus m.-
 Ophthaimic br.
placement of the eyes to give a wide field of vision with
little or no blind spots, so that they can graze and watch
Anastomotic a.
Orbital v.
 of trigerminal n.
for the hunters {6.4). The lateral placement of the eyes is
also correlated with the degree of decussation of the optic
6.3 Orbital apex of the dog illustrating structures passing through
nerve fibers at the chiasm. The more lateral the eye, the
the optic foramen and orbital fissure, as well as extraocular muscle
more complete the decussation, i.e. 81% in horses, 83% in
 attachements. (From Martin and Anderson, 1981152) (br: branch:
cattle, 89% in sheep, 88% in pigs, 75% in dogs, 65% in
m: muscle; n: nerve; v: vein.]
cats, and 50% in humans*. This translates functionally
 into variations in the PLR. Animals with a high percentage
of crossed fibers have minimal consensual light reflexes
6.4
because the input is unequal to both eyes.
The size of the globe does not increase pro-
(Table 6.2). The ratio of eye weight to body weight in a
Table 6.1 Orbital foramina and associated structures in
 domestic animals 
Foramen
Presence in 
Structures
 or fissures
domestic species 
associated with 
6.4 Visual fields of a cat cormpared to the horse. Note the frontal eye
foramen
placement increases the binocular field with an attendant increase in
depth perception in the cat. The horse, with lateral eye position and 
Alar, rostral
Equine, canine, feline
Maxillary artery.
horizontally elongated pupil, can see threatening objects from behind.
maxillary nerve 
without moving the head or eyes.(From Coulter and Schmidt, 1984153]
Ethmoid 
 All species
Ethmoidal nerve
(one or more)
and vessels
 Orbital
Equine, canine, feline 
Abducens,
ophthalmic
Table 6.2 Comparison of eye and body weight
trochlear, and
 oculomotor cranial
 Animal
Average
Weight of
Ratio
nerves
body weight
eyes (g)
 Orbitorotundum Bovine
 Oculomotor,
(kg)
trochlear, maxillary.
Horse
500
100.8
1:4960
 ophthalmic, and 
Cow
400-500
65.0
1:6923
abducens cranial
nerves
Sheep
85
23.3
1:3648
Optic
 All species
Optic nerve,
Pig
75
19.0
1:3947
internal ophthalmic
Dog (large)
36.55
14.2
1:2574
artery
 Dog (small)
4.7
8.6
1:545
Rotundum
Equine, canine, feline
Maxillary nerve
Cat
2.9
10.9
1:267
 Supraorbital
Bovine, equine, canine, Supraorbital nerve
(variable feline]
and vessels
(Translated from Bayer J, 19145, measurements by Koschel.)
ORBIT AND GLOBE
115
6.5
small dog is 1:545 and in a large dog is 1:2,5745. The
globe in the cat and dog is somewhat spherical with the
P
three perpendicular axes fanterior-posterior, vertical,
transverse) being within 1 mm of each other. The globe
of the cow, and less so the horse, is flattened in the
anterior-posterior axis (6.5). See Table 6.3 for the
various globe dimensions of domestic animals.
The cornea of most domestic animals is slightly
oblong or egg-shaped, with the longest axis horizontal
6.5 Lateral view of the 
 and the narrow end temporal. The optic nerve enters the
canine and equine globe
globe ventro-temporally. Two long posterior ciliary
 comparing the size of
 arteries leave their course with the nerve at this point to
globe and the position of the optic nerve. (LP: long posterior ciliary
course anteriorly in the sclera at 3 and 9 o'clock. These
artery: V: vortex vein; MN: membrana nictitans.) (From Martin and
 arteries are landmarks and guides in the orientation of an
Ander5on, 1981152)
enucleated globe.
The sclera of domestic animals is very thin at the
equator (0.5 mm [So0 μm]] with little inherent rigidity.
 Consequently, the globe collapses when opened surgically
6.6
 and is difficult to prepare for histopathologic exa mination.
The globe is relatively immobile in a vertical and
horizontal plane in domestic animals compared with
humans but, unlike humans, animals can dramatically
 move the eye in an anterior-posterior direction. Domestic
animals have, in addition to the four rectus and two
Oculomotor n.
oblique muscles, a retractor bulbi muscle that draws the
branches to:
eye into the orbit for protection and passively allows the
Ventral oblique
third eyelid to move across the globe (6.6).
Trochlear n. Iv to
Ventral rectus m.
dorsal oblique m.
 Dorsal rectus m.
VISION IN DOMESTIC ANIMALS
Medial rectus m.
Humans have always been inquisitive as to how well or
Abducens n. Vl to
what animals see. This relates to humans being so
Lateral rectus m.
visually oriented that they assume that animals live in the
Retractor bulbi m.
same sensory world. In reality, many animals have a
sensory world that is far expanded beyond that of
m
humans. The most common questions that the
veterinarian is asked regarding animal vision are related
 to color perception and visual acuity.
6.6 Dorsal view of the extraocular muscles and their innervation in a
dog. (m: muscle; n: nerve.)
Table 6.3 Dimensions of the globe in domestic animals (mm)
A-P
Vertical
Transverse
Ratio
axis
axis
axis
Animals
A
V
T
A:V
A:T
V:T
Horse
43.68
47.63
48.45
1:1.09
1:1.10
1:1.01
Mule
43.00
47.50
48.50
1:1.10
1:1.12
1:1.01
Cow
35.34
40.82
41.90
1:1.15
1:1.18
1:1.02
Calf
26.50
32.50
34.20
1:1.22
1:1.20
1:1.05
Sheep
26.85
30.02
30.86
1:1.11
1:1.15
1:1.02
Pig
24.60
26.53
26.23
1:1.08
1:1.06
1:0.99
Dog
21.73
21.34
21.17
1:0.98
1:0.97
1:0.99
Cat
21.30
20.60
20.55
1:0.97
1:0.96
1:0.99
(Translated from Bayer J, 19145.)
116
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
The puppy is not precocious and it has incomplete
Horses are functionally precocious when born and
development of the visual system, first evident in the
their visual system reflects this compared to the dog. Foals
physiologic ankyloblepharon that is present until
have a menace response on average by 5 days postpartum,
10-14 days postpartum. PLRs are present on opening of
and all have PRLs on day 119. Horses have been calculated
the lids but they are sluggish and exhibit hippus
as having visual acuities of 20/3520 to 20/6021. Most
(alternate dilating
 and constricting). The menace
horses are emmetropic, with equal amounts of very mild
response and visual cliff reactions are not present until
hyperopia and myopia found?2. Because the horse has
4 weeks postpartume.
only about 1 D of accommodation, early theories of how
Miller has written two excellent reviews7, 8 on the
the horse focused objects at different distances were based
subject of animal vision, and readers are encouraged to
on a 'ramp retina' theory. This was based on the shape of
explore these publications further. Many of the following
the equine globe {6.5) that was supposed to produce a
 comments are summarized from these articles. By necessity,
  i re  r n  
veterinarians equate vision in animals based on their
axial light having the shortest focal length and ventral
comparative human experience, and it is probably fair to
light (ground) having the longest focal length23. This
say this does not do justice to the visual world of animals.
The dog obviously  has a  lower threshold
for
view different objects. Sivak and Allen24 and Harman
perception of light ‘than humans based on 
the
et al.20 discounted the ramp retina. Harman et al.20, in
predominant rod retina, a rhodopsin characteristic of
 evaluating head position, visual fields, and visual acuity of
animals that function in dim light, and the presence of a
horses, found that binocular vision was present only in
tapetum. The tapetum, while enhancing light, also
front and down the nose but not straight ahead with the
induces a scatter factor that will decrease the resolution.
nose down. Thus when grazing, the binocular vision is
Vision in dogs is thought to be sensitive to motion because
toward the ground with the peripheral vision giving a
of the predominance of rods in the retina, and perhaps
panoramic view of the lateral horizon. If an object of
due to a horizontal visual streak. Dogs do not fuse
interest appears in the distance, horses raise their head to
individual flickers of light until 70 or more cycles/sec
look down their nose at the object with binocular vision.
(Hz), and this is often given as the reason most dogs do
 Horses probably have dichromatic color vision and may
not watch television. Television is 60 Hz and a dog would
lack the ability to see green2s.
view it as individual frames rather than a fused picture.
The visual field of dogs varies between breeds, based on
the length of the nose and how frontal the eyes are. The
DISEASES OF THE ORBIT
total visual field is 240-250°, with up to 60° binocular or
overlap field. Visual acuity, the ability to discriminate
CLINICAL SIGNS
between objects, requires that the object be focused on the
Diseases of the orbit produce signs by altering the
retina. Most dogs tested are emmetropic, although myopia
volume of the orbit and/or the function of orbital
 and hyperopia have been noted and may have some breed
structures. Alterations in the volume of the orbit produce
predisposition?. The visual acuity of the dog given in the
either exophthalmos, enophthalmos, or deviation of the
familiar Snellen fractions is about 20/65-20/85 and varies
globe. An additional accompanying sign of exophthal-
significantly with the methodology employed. Accommo-
mos may be either periocular or temporomandibular
dation in the dog is said to be only 2-3 D.
pain. Alterations in the function of orbital structures
 Dogs are similar to humans with deuteranopia fpartial
create signs as diverse as deviations in ocular alignment,
color blindness to red and green), discerning colors in the 
blindness, disparities in pupil size and function, vascular
blue and yellow spectrum and they are blind to the
congestion of the anterior segment, third eyelid prolapse,
 red/green colors10.
 altered tear secretion, and hypesthesia of the cornea
 The cat tapetum is high in riboflavin, which produces
(Table 6.4).
the yellow color and tapetal fluoresencell. The amount of
light reflected is a function of the color, with the yellow
tapetum reflecting over 60% of the light and the green
tapetum refecting 50%12. The amount of light required
for vision in the cat is 5.5-7x less than humans13. This is
facilitated by the tapetum and a large cornea and pupil
Table 6.4 Signs of orbital disease
which allow more light into the retina. Cats have a large
binocular field of approximately 130°, with a total
Exophthalmos or enophthalmos 
monocular field of 200° and a total field of view of
287914. The cat has a large lens that is positioned deep in
 Prolapsed third eyelid.
 the eye to produce a small but concentrated image on the 
Deviations of the ocular axis (+f-].
Periorbital swelling (+f-).
retina. The accommodative power of the cat has variably
Temporomandibular pain (+f-).
Abnormal pupil size and function (+f-).
a cat follow an insect up a wall that was immediately in
Exposure keratitis (+f-].
front of it would believe they have good accommodative
Blindness (+f-].
powers. Surprisingly, visual discrimination in the cat is
 Conjunctival hyperemia (+f-).
Papilledema (+f-).
sensitivity to light is better. The color vision of cats has
Optic nerve atrophy (+f-].
been variably reported but is probably partial, with
Orbital bruit (+f-).
weakness in distinguishing yellow from green.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
117
Exophthalmos
blindness, pressure striae in the fundus, prolapse of the
Exophthalmos is an increased prominence or protrusion
third eyelid, and vascular congestion and swelling of the
of the globe, and should be differentiated from
lids and conjunctiva may be present or may develop.
buphthalmos and the conformational exophthalmos seen
Table 6.5 presents the etiologies of exophthalmos. Further
in animals with a shallow orbit and a large palpebral
details will be discussed with the specific diseases.
fissure. In most instances this is not difficult but
measurements of the corneal diameter or ultrasonic
Diagnosis
measurements of the globe may be required to
Physical examination
differentiate the two. Exophthalmos signifies a space-
Physical examination of the mouth, sinuses, and teeth,
occupying orbital lesion, whereas buphthalmos is specific
and history are very important in the workup of
for glaucoma. Exophthalmos can be produced by 
a
exophthalmos. Pain on opening the mouth and decreased
space-occupying lesion of the orbit or the retro-orbital
retropulsion of the eye are typical of inflammatory
space due to the incomplete bony orbit. Specifically,
disease. In larger dogs, deep palpation of the orbit may
lesions of the muscles of mastication, the zygomatic
reveal a mass. Examination for ocular deviations or
salivary gland, and the adjacent soft tissues may produce
limitations of gaze may suggest the location of an orbital
exophthalmos.
lesion. Masses within the muscle cone push the eye
Manifestations of exophthalmos are detected by
straight forward, and masses outside the muscle cone
observation and palpation. The relative prominence of
 push the eye away from the mass. Vascular lesions are
the two globes can be compared by observing from a
rare but produce unusual signs, such as an orbital bruit
dorsal vantage point and comparing the position of the
associated with an arteriovenous fistula26 or intermittent
two corneal apexes (6.7). Previous alterations in one
exophthalmos dependent on head position associated
eye/orbit, such as enucleation or phthisis/microph-
with a venous aneurysm (varix)27. Bilateral exophthal-
thalmos, do not allow this comparison. Palpation is
mos is relatively uncommon and is suggestive of a
performed to determine the compressibility of the orbital
myositis of the muscles of mastication, a multicentric
contents. Compressibility is determined by pushing the
 neoplasia, or systemic inflammatory/infectious disease28.
eye into the orbit through the closed lids, and
determining the resistance to retropulsion {see Chapter 1,
History
p.11, 1.4). The degree of retropulsion is then compared
 The speed of onset and course are typically acute and
between the two orbits.
short with inflammatory disease and hemorrhage, and
 chronic with neoplasia. The response to prior therapy
Orbital compressibility is an easy but frequently
such  as  antibiotics or administration  of systemic
 overlooked diagnostic test to confirm differences
glucocorticoids may be important information. Infor-
between the two orbits when evaluating an animal
mation on relapse and pain should be obtained.
for exophthalmos.
Radiography
Depending on the cause of the exophthalmos,
While noncontrast skull radiographs are routinely
additional signs of pain (ocular and on opening the
performed, it is, overall, a low-yield diagnostic test.
mandible), ocular deviations or restrictions in movement,
Radiographs are examined for bone irregularities of the
orbit, involvement of adjacent sinuses or nasal cavity,
 and tooth root lesions. Even when dramatic lesions from
neoplastic invasion of the bony orbit are present, the
6.7 Examination
6.7
changes on the radiographs are often subtle.
for unilateral
exophthalmos from
the dorsal vanatage
point. There is some
periocular swelling 
as well as mild 
Table 6.5 Causes of exophthalmos
exophthalmos. This 
dog has orbital
 Orbital neoplasia: primary or secondary.
hermorrhage from 
Retro-orbital neoplasia: bone, sinuses, nasal and oral
immune-mediated 
cavity.
thrombocytopenia.
 Orbital hemorrhage: trauma, blood dyscrasia, clotting
deficiencies.
Orbital cellulitis/abscess.
Retra-orbital cellulitis/abscess: tooth root, zygomatic
sialoadenitis, foreign body.
 Orbital edema: trauma, immune-mediated?
 Orbital mucocele: zygomatic origin.
Orbital cysts.
 Arteriovenous fistula: very rare.
Myositis of ocular muscles.
Myositis of muscles of mastication.
 Mandibular hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in terriers.
118
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Orbitography
Laterality
Radiographs of the orbit utilizing contrast material of air
Bilateral exophthalmos is usually due to systemic disease
or dye injected into the muscle cone or retroconal region
Or
 myositis of the muscles of mastication or the
may be helpful in defining an orbital lesion29. If the
extraocular muscles. Multicentric neoplasia, such as
lesion cannot be localized by other techniques, then
lymphosarcoma, may occasionally create bilateral
exophthalmos in the dog and cat,
，and orbital
excessive effort and money is often expended with these
lymphosarcoma is well known in cattle42. Secondary or
techniques, and a specific diagnosis is still not made.
primary orbital neoplasia generally produces a unilateral,
chronic, slowly progressing, nonpainful exophthalmos
Venograms and arteriograms
but the author has observed neoplasia extending from
Venograms of orbital veins via the angularis oculi vein,
the nose/frontal sinus region that extended into both
 or arteriograms of the orbit by injecting the infraorbital
artery, have been advocated for localizing and defining
orbits, and bilateral orbital multilobular osteochrodro-
 orbital lesions30, 31
sarcoma has been reported in the cat43.
Ultrasonography
Pain
Ultrasonography
has  become almost universally
While pain is typical of inflammatory lesions, milder degrees 
 available in veterinary medicine, and provides another
 of discomfort in the periorbital region and temporo-
practical imaging technique for detecting orbital lesions.
 mandibular joint may also be present with neoplasia. The
Two-dimensional, real-time (B-mode) ultrasonography is
presence of pain on opening the mouth should always be
useful in characterizing the lesions into discrete or
evaluated with exophthalmos. Granulomas and chronic
nondiscrete and deforming or nondeforming lesions of
walled-off abscesses may not have significant pain, and are
often referred to as pseudotumors, especially if idiopathic4,
transcorneal imaging, orbital lesions should be imaged
45. Cystic space-occupying lesions such as a mucocele are
by a temporal approach, placing the probe laterally
usually not painful46.
behind the orbital ligament33. The results of ultra-
sonography, like radiography, are nonspecific in most
Ocular position
cases, and the main advantage is localization of the lesion
Ocular deviation usually points to the origin of the
for future surgical exploration or guided needle biopsies
exophthalmos. Lesions in the muscle cone may restrict
and fine needle aspiration.
 Ocular movement and produce exophthalmos, blindness,
and retinal pressure striae, but usually do not produce an 
Fine needle aspiration
ocular deviation. The lesion is typically opposite to the
Fine needle aspiration {FNA) is inexpensive, rapid, and
direction of deviation.
relatively safe, and may yield a specific diagnosis. The
main difficulty with this technique is the lack of certainty
Onset
thatt
the aspirated tissue is representative of the
 Sudden onset is typical of inflammatory lesions but
pathology. When FNA is positive, it usually eliminates
owners will frequently underestimate the duration of
the need for more extensive orbital surgery. In a series of
exophthalmos with neoplasia.
fine needle aspirates in 35 animals with exophthalmos,
34 were diagnostic34. However, in the author's own
Vision
experience and that of others?s, FNA has not been as
 Loss of vision with orbital disease is typically associated
successful in arriving at a specific diagnosis, and the
with involvement of the optic nerve and/or the chiasm
cytologists often diagnose the type of neoplasia
with the orbital lesion. Bilateral blindness may result
incorrectly. If lesions are observed on ultrasound, the
from chiasm involvement or, occasionally, from bilateral 
FNA can be guided by ultrasound.
orbital disease. Retinal lesions may also contribute to
blindness through retinal detachment or orbital lesions
Imaging techniques
interfering with the retinal vascular system.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed
tomography (CT) scans of the orbit have supplanted
Lesion autonomy
 contrast radiographic procedures. They are the ideal
 For prognostic and diagnostic purposes it may be helpful
noninvasive diagnostic techniques to evaluate the orbital
to determine whether structures surrounding the orbit
contents but MRI or CT is not widely available in
 are involved. Bone lysis is highly indicative of neoplasia,
 as is nasal and/or sinus involvement on radiographs.
Orbital exploration
Enophthalmos
Exploratory orbital surgery is the main diagnostic
Introd uction/etiology
modality for those cases that have not been diagnosed on
Enophthalmos, or a retraction of the globe into the orbit,
cytology from FNA, have not responded _to medical
must be differentiated from a decrease in globe size
therapy, or are thought to be neoplastic. The surgical
(microphthalmos, phthisis bulbi). This differentiation may be
approach may vary depending on the animal's size and the
difficult because the globe may not be accessible to evaluate.
location of the lesion. Animals with a large orbit and an
The third eyelid is always prolapsed with enophthalmos.
anterior lesion may be explored and biopsied with a
Entropion from loss of lid-globe support and ocular
retrobulbar approach. Deep lesions with blind eyes may
 discharge are secondary events that may accompany
undergo enucleation or,if visual, a lateral orbitotomy40, 41.
ophthalmos. Causes of enophthalmos include:
ORBIT AND GLOBE
119
Extreme dehydration and cachexia: will produce
6.8
bilateral enophthalmos.
● Increased tone to extraocular muscles: tetanus and
strychnine poisoning will produce enophthalmos by
increased extraocular muscle (retractor) tone.
●Atrophy of orbital fat: trauma to the orbit may
result in post-traumatic atrophy of orbital fat and/or
fibrosis of tissues causing restricted globe movement.
 Loss of perioribital lining: in the cat a paradoxical
 syndrome of enophthalmos with orbital neoplasia
may occur47. The enophthalmos is severe and may be
confused with microphthalmos or phthisis bulbi. The
enophthalmos is thought to be due to loss of the
lateral-ventral periorbita, which essentially expands
the orbit.
6.8 Lateral-ventral deviation of the eyes in a puppy with
 Loss of retro-orbital muscle mass: atrophy of the
hydrocephalus, due to expansion of the calvarium into the orbit.
muscles of mastication is a relatively common cause
 of enophthalmos that may be unilateral or bilateral.
Lesions that may be concurrent with orbital
6.9
disease: periorbital lesions in the mouth, nasal
cavity, sinuses, upper arca des, muscles of
mastication; ocular lesions that may extend out of
the globe such as neoplasia, infection.
Diagnosis
Important factors in the differentiation of the causes of
enophthalmos are:
 bilateral versus unilateral, the
 presence/absence of systemic signs, and the history.
CONGENITAL ORBITAL DISEASE
Shallow orbits
The most common congenital abnormality of the orbit
is a shallow orbit, usually observed in the brachy-
cephalic breeds. Expansion of the orbit with growth
depends on having a globe in the orbit and, conse-
6.9 Severe unilateral hypertropia with excyclotropia that is fixed in
quently, if an eye is microphthalmic or enucleated early
position in a young dog. Surgical exploration revealed aplasia of all
in life, the normal orbital size will not be obtained3, 48.
the extraocular muscles except the medial rectus and ventral
A shallow orbit may also develop from congenital
oblique, which were hypoplastic. The cornea is barely visible under
hydrocephalus, where the associated expansion of the
the upper lid.
calvarium 
encroaches  on
the orbit from the
dorsomedial quadrant (6.8).
The significance of a shallow orbit depends on the
6.10
thalmos. Animals with a shallow orbit are more
susceptible to tear film problems, exposure keratitis,
and traumatic injuries ranging from corneal abrasion to
proptosis. A partial tarsorrhaphy (see Chapter 7, p.145
for technique) and ocular lubricants are utilized in both
a proactive and reactive manner in animals with this
conformation.
Extraocular muscle agenesisfhypoplasia
A congenital lack of most of the extraocular muscles
was described in a Miniature Poodle. The patient
was presented with a marked hypertropia in one eye,
that precluded vision, and an esotropia in the
opposite eye (6.9). On orbital exploration, only the
medial rectus and  ventral oblique muscles were
present. Excision of the medial rectus freed the globe
and the muscle was diagnosed on histopathology to
6.10 Young goat with congenital strabismus due to aplasia and 
be hypoplastic49. A similar syndrome was observed
hypoplastic extraocular muscles. The globe is immobile, needing 
in a goat kid (6.10).
forced duction or forceps to move the globe.
120
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
ACQUIRED ORBITAL DISEASE - INFLAMMATION
6.11
Orbital cellulitis/abscess, retro-orbital
cellulitis/abscess
DR
Introduction/etiology
Due to the incomplete bony orbit, the signs of inflam-
ON
mation inside the orbit are similar to retro-orbital
inflammation, and the process may extend from one region 
to the other. Unless the ca use of the space-occupying lesion 
is uncertain and surgical exploration is being considered, it
is usually not important nor possible to differentiate the
MA
two conditions. Most patients with orbital inflammation
are presented in the acute cellulitis stage because of the
dramatic signs. Abrams and Goodwin50 reported that 52%
of canine cases of orbital cellulitis were presented during
August and September. The cause of the cellulitis was not
established, which is frequently the case.
 6.11 Dissected canine skull to illustrate the relationship of the upper
An important cause of orbital cellulitis is extension
dental arcade to the orbit. (G: posterior globe; DR: dorsal rectus
 from an infected tooth root, nasal sinus, or zygomatic
muscle; ON: optic nerve; VR: ventral rectus muscle; TM: maxillary
salivary gland (6.11)51-53 A migrating plant foreign body,
branch of the trigeminal nerve; PN: pterygopalatine nerve:
such as a grass awn, or penetration of a foreign body
MA: maxillary artery: PT: medial pterygoid muscle; PM: maxillary
through the soft palate or posterior pharyngeal area are
fourth prermolar tooth; M,: maxillary first molar tooth; M&: maxillary
important and seasonal causes for retro-orbital cellulitis in 
second molar tooth.) (From Ramsey et of., 199653.)
many regions. When cellulitis is associated with extension
from teeth or sinuses, or caused from a foreign body, it will
often respond to therapy but relapse if the primary cause
6.12
 is not removed. Direct inoculation into the orbit from a
periocular injury through the lids or conjunctiva may
Occur in both large and small animals4, ss
Orbital/retro-orbital inflammation is common in the
dog and less common in other species. Most cases are
due to bacterial infection, often anaerobics6, 57, and
respond promptly to antibiotics. However, mycotic
etiologies have been described. Systemic mycoses such as
Cryptococcus have been observed in the orbit of small
animals and horses58, s9. Cryptococcosis may be
generalized or spread from local lesions in the adjacent
sinuses and nasal cavity. Saprophytic fungi such as
Penicilium spp. or Aspergillus spp. may rarely involve
the orbitso, 6i, and usually extend from the adjacent
sinuses or from systemic involvement. An adult Toxocard
6.12 Early orbital cellulitis in a dog manifesting with prolapsed third
canis worm has been reported as producing an acute
eyelid, conjunctival hyperemia, mild mucopurulent exudation, and
orbital celulitis syndrome6la. In many instances the
minimal periocular swelling. Easily misdiagnosed as conjunctivitis.
 origin of the inflammation is not definitively determined.
6.13
6.14
6.13 A dog with orbital cellulitis, with more dramatic signs of
 6.14 Moderately severe signs of orbital cellulitis in a dog, with
prolapsed third eyelid, conjunctival hyperemia, exophthalmos, and
dramatic periocular swelling and prolapsed third eyelid. The globe is
ocular discharge. Pain on opening the mouth will be evident.
normal behind the third eyelid. The cause was a zygomatic
sialoadenitis (see 6.17].
ORBIT AND GLOBE
121
6.15
6.16
6.15 Extreme signs of orbital cellulitis in a dog, with turgid swelling
6.16 Examination of the mouth of a dog with orbital cellulitis under
over the side and top of the head that on aspiration was purulent. The
general anesthesia. A swelling and fistula are present in the typical
 animal had received systemic prednisone. Anaerobes were cultured.
location behind the last upper molar.
6.17
6.18
6.17 Inflamed zygomatic salivary gland papilla from the dog in 6.14.
6.18 Chronic granulation under the eye from fistulation of an 
Secretions were very viscous.
infected lateral root of the fourth upper premolar tooth.
Clinical signs
6.19
Orbital cellulitis typically has a sudden onset of unilateral
 protrusion of third eyelid, exophthalmos, and conjunctival
swelling and hyperemia (6.12-6.15). If observed before
exophthalmos is severe, it is likely to be misdiagnosed as
 mnjunctivitis (6.12). Ocular discharge is generally present
 and begins as a serous discharge that rapidly develops to a
mucoid to mucopurulent discharge. Retropulsion of the
gobe is decreased, with varying degrees of periocular
swelling. The periocular swelling may migrate over the top
of the head and/or may become dependent when severe.
One of the most dramatic signs is often the severe pain
manifest on periocular palpation and on opening the mouth.
The pain can be so severe that cervical disk disease has been
confused with the condition. Fever, depression, and
6.19 Aged Beagle with exophthalmo5, prolapsed third eyelid, and
leukocytosis may occur in severe cases but is not universal.
temporomandibular pain (note the muzzle). The edema below the eye
Usually, heavy sedation or general anesthesia is
 is somewhat atypical for pure orbital cellulitis of this severity. Marked
necessary to inspect the posterior oral cavity, and a
gum recession with root exposure is evident with several teeth of the
swelling or fistula may be present in the roof of the mouth
upper arcade.
behind the last molar (6.16). The salivary gland papilla
log paadsu aq osie pinous qiaai addn 1ouaisod pun
obvious pathology. On occasion, some of the patients that
6.20 Fourth upper premolar
6.20
have a zygomatic sialoadenitis will have an inflamed
from the dog in 6.19.Note
papilla and altered salivary secretions (6.17). Depending
the black medial root.
 a       
 or a fistula that opens under the eye may be seen. The
latter is classical for infection of the lateral roots of the
fourth upper premolar tooth (6.18-6.20).
122
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Orbital cellulitis is a dramatic syndrome and is
body, is indicated. If skull radiographs were not performed
most common in the dog. It usually responds to
initially, they are indicated at this time.
 systemic antibiotics but a nidus for infection should
Beca use of the marked exophthalmos, lagophthalmos
be considered with relapsing conditions.
is frequently present and the cornea may have to be
 protected by the liberal application of ointments.
ponu ai suu Aq nqio an jo ap loains
Diagnosis
behind the last molar is often recommended for the
Diagnosis of orbital cellulitis/abscess is made on the
treatment of orbital infection {6.23). However, since the
clinical signs of acute exophthalmos with pain, but
procedure sets the resolution process back by about
differentiation from masticatory myositis may.
be
48 hours and the yield for finding an abscess is low, the
 difficult in the early stages. Diagnosing the cause of the
author does not use drainage if the area is not swollen or
cellulitis should involve inspection of the oral cavity for
discolored. If the area is swollen, drainage may be achieved
problems involving the upper molars and last pre-
by puncturing and probing with a blunt instrument such
molars, and of the zygomatic papilla. If the area behind
the last molars is swollen or has a fistula, careful
probing may locate an abscess and culturing
will
identify the infectious agent. Skull radiographs and
ultrasound are particularly indicated in atypical cases
or those that ha ve relapsed.
6.21
Differential diagnosis
Differentials include other space-occupying orbital/retro-
orbital masses. Neoplasia may exhibit pain, ocular
discharge, and swelling but in general is nonpainful or not
as acutely painful as inflammation (6.21). Fulminating
panophthalmitis that extends into the orbit will produce
and mimic orbital cellulitis but it has diffuse intraocular
lesions and results in blindness (6.22)61b, A history of
starting in the eye and later developing orbital signs, and
the obvious intraocular pathology, should differentiate
 panophthalmitis from simple orbital cellulitis.
Orbital hemorrhage manifests as an acute space-
occupying lesion, often with some degree of discomfort.
If the hemorrhage does not dissect forward to the
subconjunctival space, it may be confused with orbital
cellulitis (6.7). Dicumerol poisoning causing retrobulbar
6.21 Horse with signs suggestive of orbital cellulitis (purulent
hemorrhage has at times been difficult to differentiate
ocular discharge, periocular swelling, decreased orbital retropulsion].
from cellulitis when the history is incomplete and the
ANA and biopsy behind the zygomatic arch diagnosed a squamous
hemorrhage does not dissect forward.
 cell carcinoma.
Early orbital cellulitis may have a similar presentation
to acute masticatory myositis, with swelling and pain,
 except that myositis is typically bilateral. Cystic orbital
6.22
lesions such as mucoceles will not have the acute pain or 
extensive periorbital involvement.
The main rule outs for orbital cellulitis/a bscess are:
masticatory myositis, orbital neoplasia, orbital
hemorrhage, and cellulitis as an extension of
 panophthalmitis.
Therapy
Early in the course of the disease, penicillin administered at
a dose of 20,000-30,000 U/kg will usually arrest and cure
most uncomplicated cases of orbital cellultis. Alternatively,
other drugs that are effective against anaerobes, such as
metronidazole, amoxicillin-clavulanate, chloramphicol,
and clindamycin, may be used. Due to the pain on opening
the mouth, the injectable route is often used. In the author's
6.22 Hunting dog presented in the fall with an endophthalmitis
experience, procaine penicillin has been more consistent in
presumed to be due to a plant foreign body. Despite 5ystemic
effecting a response than the broad-spectrum synthetic
antibiotics, the process progressed through the sclera to involve the
penicillins.
Improvement  is  usually
notedwithin
orbit within 24 hours. The dramatic ocular involvement differentiate5
24 48 hours. If a relapse occurs, re-examination for a nidus 
this from a pure orbital cellulitis. Plant material (grass awns) wa5
of infection, such as an infected tooth root or a foreign
 observed in the globe on histopatholgy with polarized light.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
123
as a hemostat. A blade should not be used as the
exophthalmos, conjunctival hyperemia, third eyelid
infraorbital artery may be incised. If the periorbital
prolapse and, occasionally, blindness from optic nerve
swelling is severe and has migrated over the head, and on
involvement. The myositis may be more generalized
needle aspiration the material is purulent, a Penrose drain
than just the muscles of mastication, and the term
is inserted. Obviously, if the source of the cellulitis is an
polymyositis is more appropriate when this is evident.
infected tooth root, the tooth is extracted (6.20).
Masticatory muscles are predominantly type 2M fibers,
whereas limb muscles contain types 1, 2A, and 2C
Eosinophilic (masticatory] myositis
fibers62, 63 Eosinophilic myositis is predominantly found
Introductionjetiology
 in large breeds of dogs, less than 4 years of age64. The
Eosinophilic myositis is best known for its acute
syndrome was initially thought to affect primarily
involvement
of the muscles of mastication. The
German Shepherd Dogs (GSDs) or GSD' crosses,
pronounced muscle swelling impinges on the nonbony
Samoyeds, and Doberman Pinschers but it is not
orbital wall, often producing dramatic ocular signs of
restricted to any breed63, 64.
In the acute phase of the disease, the histolopathologic
findings  are  multifocal 
orä
diffuse
 plasmacytic,
lymphocytic, macrophagic, and eosinophilic infiltration
of the muscles, with muscle necrosis63, 64. The disease is
 suspected to be immune mediated, with selective reaction 
6.23
 against the type 2M fibers63, and is characterized by
recurrent, acute attacks that eventually result in muscle
atrophy. The remission phase is variable, ranging from
weeks to months. Blindness due to optic neuritis may
also 0ccur64-66.
Se asiou e ui pahodau uaaq seu sisoau Aieos
 the main sign of nutritional selenium deficiency67. The
signs were restricted to the masticatory muscles and eyes,
and were not generalized, perhaps because the horse had
been restricted to a stall.
Clinical signs
Typically, masticatory myositis presents with bilaterally
swollen, firm muscles of mastication, although early in
the course the swelling may be asymmetrical (6.24). The
swelling is accompanied by trismus {difficulty in opening
the mouth) and pain on opening the jaw. Peripheral
6.23 Lancing the soft area behind the last molar in a dog with
lymphadenopathy may be present. On laboratory testing,
orbital cellulitis. Probing should be with a blunt instrument.
 peripheral eosinophilia is uncommon but serum globulin
Sanguinopurulent material is draining from the opening, but often
 and creatine kinase levels are often elevated64.
only blood is obtained if the area is not swollen.
 The exophthalmos with masticatory myositis may be
dramatic and may produce a secondary exposure
keratitis. Conjunctival vascular injection produces a red
6.24 Masticatory
6.24
eye, and with exophthalmos the condition may mimic
myositis
glaucoma. The third eyelid is prolapsed from orbital
evidenced by
pressure, and blindness, that is later associated with optic
swollen temporal
nerve atrophy, occasionally occurs64, 65, 68. If there are
and masseter
other signs of muscular involvement, such as gait
muscles and
abnormalities, 
 dysphagia, and profound weakness,
difficulty opening 
the mouth.
The disease is characterized by recurrent attacks with
 each episode lasting 2-3 weeks. With repeated episodes,
muscle atrophy develops and may result in enophthalmos
with prolapse of the third eyelid, weight loss from the
ina bility to eat, and loss of muscle mass of the head.
Diagnosis
The
 signalment
puB 
elevated 
serum
creatine
 phosphokinase (CPK) during the acute phase (>200 IU/l)
 are very suggestive of the diagnosis of masticatory
myositis. Elevations of CPK can be due to other insults to
the muscles, such as trauma and medication injections.
 Elevated levels of the muscle enzymes CPK, aspartate 
 aminotransferase, or lactic dehydrogenase have been
variable in polymositis, and normal levels do not rule out
the diagnosis69.
124
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
A muscle biopsy with mononuclear inflammation and
Therapy
eosinophils is the most definitive test but negative
The condition was initially reported as responsive to a
findings may occur due to sampling error since the
short course of systemic anti-inflammatory doses of
inflammation may be patchy. Phagocytosis of necrotic
glucocorticoids70. Ramsey et al. 71 reported poor response 
 myofibers is the most common histopathologic finding6 3.
Electromyography is not widely available in practice
was administered, and a 57% relapse rate if the dose was
but it may give additional evidence of myositis or
tapered before 3 weeks. Recurrences occurred in 81% of
pol ymyositis.
the dogs and may have been related to stress.
Therapy
Restrictive extraocular myositis
 Treatment during the acute phase is systemic prednisolone
Introduction/etiology
at anti-inflammatory doses. Once the swelling and acute
Restrictive extraocular myositis presents as a rapidly
signs disappear the dose is halved for a period of
acquired, severe strabismus in young dogs of large
2-3 weeks, and if remission is maintained, it is halved until
breeds. It may be unilateral or bilateral. Reported breeds 
a maintenance dose of 5-10 mg every other day is obtained.
have been the Irish Wolfhound, Shar Pei, Akita, Golden
Therapy should be continued for several months, and the
Retriever, and Dalmatian72. No relationship was found
 animal monitored frequently for relapses. The emphasis is
 on control rather than on a cure. Alternatively, concurrent
Restrictive extraocular myositis may be the end result of
systemic prednisolone and azathioprine may be given64,
 acute extraocular myositis as described in the Golden
 after 3-4 weeks the prednisolone is tapered off leaving a
Retriever but the breeds involved, variation in clinical
maintenance therapy of azathioprine.
signs, and laterality make it unlikely. Histopathology is
Some of the worst cases of orbital cellulitis and
characterized by muscle fibrosis, myonecrosis, and
abscessation the author has observed had been
 mononuclear inflammation.
misdiagnosed as masticatory myositis and had received
immunosuppressive doses of prednisone (6.15). These 
 Clinical signs
 Restrictive myositis presents as a rapidly developing
clinicians, and had undergone electromyography; such
 strabismus in the ventral to ventromedial direction, and
cases emphasize the importance of muscle biopsies to
enophthalmos in young adult large breeds. Forced
 make a diagnosis of masticatory myositis when presented
duction tests ( forceps applied to the globe to move it) are
 with an atypical clinical syndrome.
positive or restricted when the globe is abducted or
sursumducted (elevated). Limited serology for immune-
 Masticatory myositis and orbital cellulitis may be
mediated disease, infectious agents, antibodies against
difficult to differentiate in the prodromal phase 
2M fibers, and muscle enzymes are normal72.
and, unfortunately, their therapies are diametrically
'pasoddo
Therapy
To date therapy has been surgical resection of the
 affected extraocular muscles {ventral and medial rectus,
Prognosis
ventral
oblique)withgoodresults,
 although
The prognosis may be good if adequate glucocorticoid or
enophthalmos persists. If the patient presents with acute
other immunosuppressive therapy is administered early,
signs, potent systemic anti-inflammatory therapy such as
at appropriate
e doses, for an adequate period of
 azathioprine and glucorticoids would be indicated.
3-4 weeks, and then tapered gradually64. Client educa-
However, the former seldom occurs.
 tion is crucial to emphasize the importance of treating
any relapses promptly.
Extraocular myositis
6.25
Introd uction/etiology
A syndrome of myositis restricted to the extraocular
(eak I> Alensn) sunor aul ul pauodau uaaq sey salosnu 
Golden Retriever, GSD, and Doberman Pinscher70
About 30% of the patients had a recent, stressful event
associated with the onset of the signs. The earliest sign is
conjunctival hyperemia that develops into a nonpainful
bilateral exophthalmos and apparent lid retraction
(6.25). Vision is affected in 17% of cases, with
funduscopic lesions of vascular tortuosity, focal retinitis,
and papilledema that is reversible with therapy71. The
IOP may be mildly elevated. Repeated episodes may
result in stra bismus and mild enophthalmos.
Histopathologic examination of the extraocular
muscles is characterized by a mononuclear infiltrate of T-
lymphocytes in the extraocular muscle bellies, with the
retractor muscle being spared70, 71. The masticatory
6.25 Young Golden Retriever with bilateral exophthalmos and wide-
eyed appearance due to extraocular muscle myositis.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
125
Trauma (orbital fractures, hemorrhage, and edema)
Repair of fractures should be performed if bony
Introduction/etiology
displacement is significant.
 Blunt orbital trauma may result in fractures of the bones
of the orbit or orbital rim. Swelling, crepitus, pain, and
Orbital mucocele
exophthalmos are usually present with acute fractures.
Introduction/etiology
Chronic fractures may not have pain and crepitus. In the
In the dog, a mucocele may rarely develop from the
horse, fractures of the supraorbital process are relatively
 zygomatic salivary gland and extend into the orbit. Only
common {6.26). Fracture of the medial portion of the
 one case has been reported in the cat7s and ferret76. Most
supraorbital process or the lacrimal bone may damage
zenn sno py say ane au ui sas
the paranasal sinuses, resulting in epistaxis, and it is a
possible source for orbital sepsis73. Occasionally, severe
 presentation has been quite varied.
orbital hemorrhage may occur secondary to trauma.
Shearing injuries to the optic nerve as it passes
 Clinical signs
through the optic foramen may result in blindness. In the
Orbital mucoceles are presented  with  nonpainful
dog, the most common source of optic nerve injury
 exophthalmos, or enophthalmos, depending on which
secondary to trauma is associated with a proptosis of the
 direction the mucocele is pushing the globe. Dissection of
globe. In the horse, traumatic optic nerve injuries usually
the mucocele behind the eye produces exophthalmos, and if
occur from a blow to the poll, and involve the region of
dissection occurs forward to the orbital rim, it may push the
the optic nerve traversing the optic canal74 or the chiasm
 globe caudally into the orbit. The location of the mucocele 
(see Trauma of the fundus, p.457).
is variable and may present as a fluctuant swelling in the
The cat frequently develops orbital trauma associated
lower conjunctival cul-de-sac or on the top of the head
with multiple f
fractures of t
the head i
(palatine,
(6.27)79. Accompanying the orbital mucocele, a ranula-like
mandibular) from automobile accidents. The resultant
 swelling may be present along the duct in the mouth.
exophthalmos often results in severe lagophthalmos and
 Optic neuropathy and corneal ulcerations may occur
may require a temporary tarsorrha phy for protection.
 as complications.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of traumatic orbital disease is made on the
The mucocele must be differentiated from other
history and associated contusions and abrasions, and by
periocular cystic lesions. Aspiration of the cyst may
radiography.(
 Oblique radiographic views are often
disclose a “honey-like material’ but orbital cysts
necessary to demonstrate fractures, due to the complex
associated with nasal adenocarcinomas will have a
anatomy of the region.
similar consistency. The diagnosis is facilitated if an oral
Therapy
last molar is present. Sialography of the zygomatic
Therapy is directed at protecting the cornea if exposure
 salivary gland is the most definitive method of diagnosis.
keratitis develops from proptosis or palpebral nerve
 paralysis. Medical therapy is indicated in the acute case
Therapy
to relieve swelling, and may consist of cold compresses
If the zygomatic duct is swollen in the mouth,
{for the first 24 hours) followed by warm compresses,
 marsupialization may be curative79 but most cases have
systemic glucocorticoids, and dimethyl sulfoxide.
A
had the cyst and zygomatic salivary gland excised
tarsorrhaphy may be necessary to protect the cornea.
through an orbitotomy78, 78a.
6.26 Head trauma
6.26
6.27
in a horse resulting
in bilateral fractures
of the supraorbital 
process of the
frontal bone. Severe 
chemosis and
periocular swelling
make it difficult to 
 examine the eye.
The eye is deviated 
ventrally, but it is
normal. The
fractured proces5
was elevated and
the swelling
resolved.
6.27 A dog with a zygomatic mucocele presenting as a fluctuant
nonpainful swelling under the lower lid. The mucocele extended into the
orbit, and there was also a ranula-like swelling in the oral vestibule.
126
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Orbital neoplasia
connective tissue tumors predominating3s, 80, 81. Orbital
Introduction/etiology
cellulitis may be confused with neoplasia because both
 Neoplasia of the orbit is moderately uncommon and may
conditions may exhibit pain on opening the mouth and be
be classified as primary or secondary. Secondary neoplasia
transiently responsive to antibiotics. Thirty-six percent of
may arise from distant metastasis, multicentric neoplasia,
 or extension from contiguous structures. While the
inq shouni [iquo jo Aauea e uo punoqe shuodau ase
incidence of orbital neoplasia increases with age, many are
with relatively few series of cases. A few unique tumor
presented in the dog in young (2-3 year old) animals.
types are discussed in detail below.
Cattle have a unique syndrome of bilateral orbital
involvement with lymphosarcoma, that is relatively rare in
Approximately 90% of orbital tumors are malignant
other species. This produces a gradually developing
and about one-third mimic orbital cellulitis with
unilateral or bilateral exophthalmos. The cow will usually
exophthalmos and some degree of pain.
have involvement of other lymph nodes and target organs,
and the globe is not involved except secondarily from
Muitilobularosteosarcoma
exposure (6.28). Most animals die within 6 months42.
Multilobular osteosarcoma is a dramatic but infrequent
Orbital lymphosarcoma also occurs in the dog, and is
orbital tumor that has had multiple case reports.
'siewue Sunoa ul pue Sueuwny Aiaa Alleoidai
The
Historically, synonyms for the tumor have varied, creating
 eyes are normal unless exposure keratitis develops (6.29).
confusion and also implying the tumor was benign.
In the dog almost all orbital neoplasia is malignant
 Synonyms have included parosteal osteoma, multilobular
(91-95%) and 75-82% are primary orbital tumors.
osteoma, chondroma rodens, and calcifying aponeurotic
The typical dog is purebred, female, and middle-aged
fibroma&2. While multilobular osteosarcoma may initially
be benign, follow-up examinations indicate that 58%
in the author's experience.
develop metastases by 14 months and this percentage
 Over 18 tumor types ha ve been reported from the orbit.
increases if the tumor is incompletely excised. The lesions
 Primary neoplasia originates from orbital bone, muscle,
develop from the membraneous bones of the skull, i.e.
lacrimal gland, and neural, vascular, fat, and connective
mandible, maxilla, or cranium. The histologic feature is
tissue. Osteosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, multilobular ostero-
nodules that have a cartilaginous or osteoid core,
sarcoma (chondroma rodens), meningioma, glioma,
 surrounded by fibrous tissue. Plain radiographs are often
rhabdomyosarcoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and
 suggestive of the diagnosis and demonstrate multiple
 adenocarcinoma may occur as primary neoplasms, with
lobules of tumor, which contain calcium. In one report the 
 overall median survival rate was 22 months82.
6.28
6.28 Bilateral
Canine orbital meningioma
lymphosarcoma of
Canine orbital meningioma is a relatively benign tumor
the orbit in a cow,
that arises within the muscle cone, so it typically produces
producing marked
 exophthalmos
without strabismus.
 Patients
with
exophthalmos and a
meningiomas frequently have visual complaints (60%)
secondary exposure
and fundus lesions from involvement of the optic nerve
keratitis. (Courtesy
(35%). Bilateral blindness may ocur from invasion of the
of Dr. W. Rebhun
cranial vault and involvement of the chiasm. The tumors
(deceased] of 
 are epithelioid (meningotheliomatous) and the majority
Ithaca, NY.)
contain bone or cartilage metaplasia83.
Caninelobularorbitaladenoma
Headrick et al83a described a benign lobular tumor of
lacrimal or salivary gland origin. The mass most commonly
presented as a subconjunctival and, less frequently, as a
space occupying orbital mass (i.e. exophthalmos, 3rd eyelid
6.29
protrusion, decreased retropulsion). Recurrences were
common after surgical excision or even enucleation, but
metastasis was not documented.
Feline orbital tumors
Feline orbital tumors have similar characteristics to the
dog - age group (8.9 years old) and malignancy (90 %)-
but secondary (71%) and epithelial (67%) orbital tumors
 predominate. All primary orbital tumors in one report
were mesenchymal84, and the mean survival time was 1.9
months. Enophthalmia was present in 24% of the cats and
 FNAs were diagnostic in only 45% of the patients.
 Enophthalmia is unique to orbital neoplasia in the cat47 84.
6.29 Bilateral orbital lymphosarcoma in a young Brittany. The eyes
The short survival time of cats with orbital
were normal except for exposure keratitis. Exophthalmos is more severe
neoplasia is in large part due to early euthanasia.
in one eye. Generalized peripheral lymphadenopathy was present.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
127
6.30
6.31
6.30 A dog with a multilobular osteosarcoma involving the ventral
6.31 A dog with a meningioma producing marked proptosis of the
and ventrormedial orbit. Note the prolapsed third eyelid, dorsolateral
globe. Severe exposure keratitis developed and the eye was blind.
strabismus, and swelling below the eye that was very firm.
Orbital tumors in the horse
Orbital tumors in the horse are rare and are usually
6.32
secondary tumors. Orbital extension of ocular or eyelid
squamous cell carcinoma and lymphosarcoma are most
common*s. Case reports of a variety of equine orbital
tumors exist without giving_a clear picture of tumor
frequency and malignancy. Tumors reported from the
glioma87, multiple osteoma, neuroepithelial tumor89,
and lipoma 90.
Paraganglioma
Paraganglioma is a unique orbital tumor that has been
described in the horse90, 91. It arises from the
neuroendocrine system, and in the orbit is thought to
arise from the ciliary ganglion?1. Paraganglioma may
invade the orbit from the nasal cavity and sinuses92. It
10 azisisiau Aeu inq Suimoua mos aq 01 sieadde
invade the cranial cavity through the optic foramen90.
Systemic hypotension may be a complication during
surgical resection.
6.32 A dog with severe papilldema produced by an orbital ma55
that was diagnosed as a carcinoma on FNA. A very advanced renal
Clinical signs
carcinoma was also diagnosed and removed. lt was not possible to
Orbital neoplasia typically presents with a unilateral,
determine whether the orbital lesion was a metastatic lesion or
nonpainful, slowly progressive exophthalmos with
primary lesion. Severe asteroid hyalosis obscures fine detail.
decreased retropulsion of the globe. Metastases or, more
commonly, multicentric or secondary neoplasia from the
 sinuses or nasal cavity, may be bilateral (6.29). Some
degree of pain may be present from inflammation;
6.33
Hendrix and Gelatt?s reported that 36% of dogs with
orbital neoplasia had signs of pain, ocular discharge, and
at least a transient response to antibiotics, mimicking
orbital cellulitis. The third eyelid is prolapsed and, if the
lesion is outside the muscle cone, a strabismus is present
(6.30). Lesions outside the muscle cone and anterior in
the orbit may be able to be palpated near the orbital rim.
Lesions within the muscle cone, such as meningiomas,
are likely to produce visual problems due to involvement
of the optic nerve (6.31). Papilledema may be present
early in the course of the disease (6.32), and optic nerve
atrophy results later if the neoplasia is impinging on the
optic nerve. Pressure striae and indentation of the globe
may be visible on ophthalmoscopy (6.33).
An enophthalmos syndrome has been observed in
cats with the extension of a fibrosarcoma and squamous
6.33 Canine fundus that is indented due to orbital involverment
cell carcinoma into the orbit. The enophthalmos is
with a multilobular osteosarcoma. Most of the dorsal fundus is
profound and is not due to pushing of the eye into the
pushed inward.
128
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
orbit; rather, it is due to loss of the lateral periorbita
Diagnosis
from an unknown mechanism. The loss of periorbita
 A slowly progressive exophthalmos with minimal pain is
essentially expands the orbital space and the eye sinks
 highly suggestive of orbital neoplasia. Localization of the
into the expanded space (6.34).
daap Aq sl A1aains A1oieoldxa 1of uoeiedaud ul uoisa
orbital palpation, the direction of ocular deviation, ultra-
sound, radiography, and CT or MRI scans. Orbital neo-
6.34
 plasia is characterized on ultrasonography by margins of
the lesions being delineated, usually hypoechoic, homo-
geneous, and often indenting the globe. The presence of
 mineralization of the lesion was indicative of neoplasia92a.
Radiographs of the skull are taken to help define the 
 composition of the neoplasia and to determine whether
bony lysis has occurred and whether the adjacent
structures, such as the nasal and frontal sinus cavities,
may be the source of the neoplasia. FNA should be
attempted if the location of the lesion is known. Because
of questions on interpretation of the cytology, an
 excisional biopsy is often still required for diagnosing the
type of tumor. For a definitive diagnosis, orbital
exploration and biopsy are performed.
 In medium to large size dogs with adequate orbit size
and with lesions outside the muscle cone, the author
6.34 A cat with enophthalmos associated with a fibrosarcoma that
usually uses a transpalpebral approach to the quadrant in
was present over the frontal sinus (shaved area] and invaded the
which the lesion is localized. In patients in which the
orbit. The mass was not pushing the eye into the orbit, but wa5
lesion cannot be localized, the lesion is in the muscle cone,
associated with a loss of lateral periorbita that expanded the orbit.
 or, in small dogs and cats, with minimal space in the orbit 
 The globe was normal on enucleation.
to manipulate, a more extensive lateral orbitotomy with
 resection of the zygomatic arch is indicated40, 41.
6.35
Therapy
A
 The literature has concentrated on tumor types and clinical
signs, with few reports of the results of therapy. Despite the
malignant nature of these tumors, it is not uncommon to
obtain survival rates of 6-12 months with combined
 surgical and radiation therapies. Hendrix and Gelatt35
reported 86% survival at 6 months of dogs following
therapy. However, further analysis was impossible due to
 the small numbers of patients in each therapy group.
6.35 Mocified transpalpebral exenteration of the orbit. The eyelids are
closed with towel forceps or sutured with a continuous suture, and the
skin is incised with a blade or electrosurgical scalpel (A). Scissors extend 
the dissection through the orbital septum into the orbit and remain
external to the conjunctiva and muscle cone if neoplasia is present. If
orbital neoplasia is present, the dissection is more liberal, with the muscles
transected further back in the orbit rather than on the globe (B, C).
Transection of the optic nerve. The optic nerve may be crushed with a
snare device, an enucleation scissors, or with a hemostat, and cut rostrally
to the hemostat or simply cut (D). Two-layer closure of orbital muscles and 
fascia and the superficial closure of the skin (E).
ORBIT AND GLOBE
129
Excision
Chemotherapy
Due to the malignant nature of most orbital tumors,
Chemotherapy with doxorubicin resulted in remission of
excision is not curative but debulks the lesion and
an undifferentiated orbital sarcoma of 7 months95. Data
provides a diagnosis. Primary orbital tumors that are
on protocols for chemotherapy of orbital neoplasia and
isolated  may   respond  t
toorbital
exenteration.
 success rates are lacking.
Exenteration of the orbit rather than enucleation is
indicated for neoplasia and involves removal of the globe
Radiation therapy
and orbital contents.
Technically, exenteration
iS
Data are also lacking for the results of deep radiation
performed by stripping the periorbita from the bone,
therapy, or the combination of exenteration and radia-
staying outside the orbit with the surgical dissection until
tion therapy, for malignant orbital lesions. Despite this,
the apex is ligated and excised. As usually performed,
the author advocates  a combination  of surgical
exenteration is not complete but is a transpalpebral
debulking or excision with deep radiation therapy.
enucleation with excision of the extraocular muscles
In general, the prognosis for orbital neoplasia is grave
(6.35). In horses, cats, and some dogs, if a wide skin
but depends on the type of neoplasia. In the author's
 excision is made around the lids the amount of loose skin
experience, patients have survived for up to 1 year with
that can be mobilized over the exenterated orbit is very
malignant lesions such as mucinous carcinoma, with no
limited. A flap dissected over the course of the caudal
 specific therapy.
auricular artery on the lateral cervical region and
transposed forward over the orbit has been utilized with
MISCELLANEOUS DISEASES OF THE ORBIT
some success. The most common problem was distal flap
Emphysema (pneumatosis)
Introduction/etiology
Enucleation and exenteration often result in a sunken
Accumulation of air in the enucleated orbit is a relatively
appearance over the orbit (6.36), and attempts to
rare complication of enucleation in the brachycephalic
improve this appearance are important to make it a more
breeds. Air enters the orbit via the nasolacrimal duct.
acceptable procedure to the owner Suturing the muscle
Due to a high positive pressure in the nasal cavity, air is
layer under the skin as a barrier to sinking has limited
apparently forced up the nasolacrimal duct and
success. The use of a temporalis muscle flap to fill the
maintains the patency of one or both of the cut lacrimal
canaliculi. Increased pressure within the nasal cavity may
procedure?3. Temporalis muscle flaps have also been
occur associated with exercise and mastication,
used to close bony defects of the calvarium from
producing a bellows effect inthe nasal cavity and forcing
neoplastic destruction and frontal sinus defects94.
 air up the nasolacrimal duct?6, 97.
Synthetic meshes ha ve also been used to cover the orbital
opening and to prevent collapse of the surface.
 Clinical signs
The use of an orbital prosthesis after evisceration is
The orbit becomes obviously distended and is non-
questiona ble in light of the high degree of malignancy of
painful and compressible (6.37). Needle aspiration of
these tumors.
the swelling reveals only air. The amount of distention
may periodically get worse or improve, depending on
physical activity.
6.36 An example of
6.36
6.37
extreme depression of the 
 skin covering the orbit after
enucleation in a horse.
6.37 Orbital emphysema in a Pug. The enucleated orbit wa5
distended with air and the distention would recur after aspiration.
 The condition increased in severity following exercise or excitement.
130
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE In VeteRINARY MeDICINE
Diagnosis
6.38
6.38 Cong enital
Diagnosis of orbital emphysema is by needle aspiration.
bilateral cystic
 Radiology may rule out a fracture into the sinuses as a
eye in a rabbit.
source of the air.
Therapy
Treatment has involved exploration of the orbit and
ligation of the canaliculus, if visible, or of the
nasolacrimal sac in the nasolacrimal fossa.
Orbital cysts
Introduction/etiology
Cysts may arise in the orbit either as congenital mal-
formations or acquired following trauma, surgery, inflam-
mation, parasites, or neoplasia. Congenital anomalies that
may be associated with cyst formation are microphthalmos
6.39
and dermoids (6.38)98,98a. Aoquired cysts following trauma
 may be a mucocele originating from the zygomatic salivary
gland (6.27)46, 96, dacryops (a lacrimal cyst from the orbital
lacrimal gland or the gland of the third eyelid) (see Lacrimal
cysts, p.236, 9.35)99, or a hematic cyst from hemorrhage.
Retrobulbar hydatid cysts may be a rare cause for a
 chronic, space-occupying lesion in horses and mules100.
 Mucinous carcinomas originating from the nose or
frontal sinus may invade one or both orbits, producing
cystic space-0ccupying lesions (6.39)46.
6.39 Bilateral exophthalmos associated with a mucinous carcinoma
Clinical signs
of the frontal sinus in a dog. The neoplasia invaded both orbits and 
Cysts in the orbit present as slowly enlarging, nonpain-
eroded through the top of the frontal sinus, producing a srmall 
ful, space-occupying lesions with exophthalmos. The
fuctuant swelling dorsocaudal to the eyes. On FNA of the orbit, a
condition is usually unilateral (6.27, 6.38, 6.39).
thick tenacious material similar to a mucocele was aspirated. The dog
lived for 1 year after cobalt therapy.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of a cystic lesion is on the clinical signs, needle
 aspiration of the orbit, ultrasonography, and CT scans.
The presence of bony and nasal cavity changes on
the eye, dilated pupil, ptosis, and hypalgesia of the cornea
 and eyelids. Vision should be present. The cause of the
from a benign cyst.
cavernous sinus syndrome is a mass lesion, and in the dog
 and cat it may be either inflammatory or neoplastic in
CT scans or MRI have become the gold standard
naturel02. Confirmation of the location of the lesion is by
for diagnosing and localizing orbital masses.
MRI or CT scans. The prognosis is guarded.
The orbital apex syndrome involves structures exiting the
Cytology may help to determine the cause of the cyst
optic foramen and orbital fissure. The cranial nerves and
but can be inconclusive. For instance, in the author's
function affected are: the optic (Il, vision), oculomotor (IlI,
laboratory, cytology failed to differentiate between a
ophthalmoplegia, dilated pupil), trochlear {IV, rotation of
neoplastic cyst and a zygomatic mucocele.
gobe), abducens (VI, retracts eye, lateral movement), and 
the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal (V, sensory to
Therapy
mornea ). Note that the maxillary division of the Vth is intact.
Surgical excision of the cyst (except those associated with
Masses at the apex of the orbit are the usual cause.
 microphthalmos) is the preferred method of treating benign
forms of orbital cysts. Aspiration and intralesional injection
Steroid-induced exophthalmos in calves
of oxytetracycline has been used as a sclerosing method for
In Holstein calves, administration of dexamethasone
decreasing
 secretions.
This
will
produce
acute
(30 μgm/kg q12h s.c. from 3 days of age) was noted to
 inflammatory signs and should be used with caution101.
produce a progressive, bilateral exophthalmos 28 days after
injection. The condition was produced by deposition of
Cavernous sinus and orbital apex syndromes
retrobulbar fat and did not affect the health of the globe102a.
Neurologic deficits of clusters of nerves that innervate
This is unlikely to be found as a clinical syndrome.
orbital and facial structures will occasionally be noted.
The cavernous sinus syndrome refers to multiple nerve
Sclerosing pseudotumors in cats
impa irment involving the oculomotor ( Il), trochlear (IV),
Introduction/etiology
abducens (VI) cranial nerves, and the ophthalmic and
A relatively rare syndrome of fibrous tissue infiltration of
maxillary division of the trigeminal (V) cranial nerve.
the orbit has been described in the cat. It follows a very
These cranial nerves course through the cavernous sinus
slow insidious course and results in exophthalmos. The
and lesions in this area can affect all of them. The ocular
syndrome has been resistant to therapy, resulting in
signs are: complete ophthalmoplegia or ina bility to move
enucleation and/or euthanasia in all the cases. No cause
ORBIT AND GLOBE
131
6.40
examples of microphthalmia, with dysplastic ocular
remnants in the orbit on serial sectioning.
The eye may or may not be visually functional with
microphthalmia.  Associated   intraocular anomalies
include cataract, persistent pupillary membranes, uveal
colobomas, retinal detachment, retinal dysplasia, orbital
cyst, and goniodysgenesis. Inbreeding dogs with color
dilute genes {merling genes) and blue eyes often results in
microphthalmia with multiple ocular anomalies103, 104. In 
the Australian Shepherd Dog. the trait is simple
recessivel0s. Although microphthalmos occurs in the
6.40 Moderately severe bilateral microphthalmos in a puppy, with
horse and cat, there are no described inherited syndromes
lateral strabismus.
as in the dog and cow. Guernsey calves have a syndrome
of microphthalmos with cardiac and tail defects that are
thought to be recessively inheritedl06. F
Hereford cattle
6.41
have a recessively inherited syndrome of microphthalmia,
muscular
dystrophy, and
hydrocephalus107, and
Shorthorn cattle have an inherited syndrome of
microphthalmos108. A possible dominant trait has been
reported, resulting in microphthalmos in half of the 
offspring of a Hereford bullo9. Despite several known
inherited syndromes, most cases of anophthalmia-
microphthalmia in calves have no demonstrable genetic
basislio. In utero infection with bovine virus diarrhea
virus may produce microphthalmos, cataract, retinal and
 Optic nerve lesions, and cerebellar diseaselii
6.41 Unilateral clinical anophthalmos in a puppy.
+ Inherited syndromes: Australian Shepherd Dog104,
Akita112, St Bernardl13, Collie, Doberman 
Pinscheri14, 11s, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel16, Old
was determined on histopathology of the globe and orbit,
English Sheepdog, Bedington Terrierl17, Sealyham
although three of seven cats had a history of respiratory
Terrierl18, Miniature Schnauzerl19, and Soft Coated
infection and had gingival hyperplasia. Six of seven cats
Wheaten Terrier120. (See Retinal dysplasia, p.417 and
were Domestic Shorthairs with no sex prediction102a.
Congenital cataracts, p.375.)
Teratogenic drugs: griseoful vin administered to
Clinical signs
pregnant queens produces cyclopia or anophthalmia
A slow progressive exophthalmos develops in one eye and
and multiple neurologic, skeletal, and digestive tract
in several weeks or months the second eye also becomes
malformations121.
involved. The globe resists retropulsion and has reduced
 In utero viral infection: bovine virus diarrhea virus may
mobility, the third eyelid may lose mobility, and the cornea
produce microphthalmos among many other ocular
develops a secondary exposure keratitis. Blindness may
develop from optic nerve involvement, retinal detachment,
 Many cases of microphthalmia are sporadic and
or corneal complications. Titers, blood work, and
without a known causel10.
histopathology have not revealed a cause.
Clinical signs
Therapy
Microphthalmos may be unilateral or bilateral. The
To date the syndrome has not responded to therapy and,
degree of reduction of globe size is usually obvious
 indeed, continues to progress to the second eye. Therapy
when it is unilateral but mild decreases that are bilateral
has consisted of anti-inflammatory doses of glucocorti-
may not be so obvious. In milder forms the condition is
coids, radiation therapy, and antibiotics. Alternative
compatible with vision but microphthalmos is often
immunosuppressive  doses of  glucocorticoids
puE
blinding due to the multiple ocular anomalies.
alternative immunosuppressants may be indicated.
Therapy
None.
DISEASES OF THE GLOBE
Anterior segment dysgenesis
CONGENITAL
Introd uction/etiology
Microphthalmos
Anterior segment dysgenesis refers to a congenital syndrome
Introduction/etiology
observed in various breeds of horse such as the Rocky
Microphthalmos
1S
acongenitally
small 
eye.
Mountain, Kentucky Saddle, Mountain Pleasure, Morgan,
Microphthalmos includes a wide variety of anomalies
ponies, miniature breeds, and American Saddlebred. It is a
such as a globe barely reduced in size with normal
syndrome with varying degrees of manifestation depending
intraocular structures, a marked reduction in size of the
 on the coat color. The trait is dominant with incomplete
gobe with numerous intraocular anomalies, and a
penetrance that manifests only with the dominant silver
clinical anophthalmos in which no globe is present (6.40,
dapple locus that imparts a chocolate coat with a flaxen or
6.41). Most cases of clinical anophthalmos are extreme
white mane. Black horses are protected3.
132
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Clinical signs
6.42
The basic lesion with anterior segment dysgenesis is ciliary
body cysts that are manifested in the temporal region (see
ris and ciliary body cysts, p.305, 11.30). Some of the
horses with cyst manifestation will have peripheral retinal
detachments, retinal dysplasia, and arcuate lines of retinal
pigmented epithelium proliferation from previous retinal
detachments. The homozygous individual with a flaxen
mane will have, in addition, varying degrees of multiple
ocular anomalies, consisting of cornea globosa (see Cornea
gobosa, p.247, 10.14), goniodysgenesis and synechia,
nuclear cataracts, posteroventral luxated lens, miotic pupil,
iris stromal hypoplasia, large palpebral fissures, and
 microphthalmoss3.
Therapy
Therapy is limited to genetic counseling of breeding to
6.42 Esotropia in a Himalayan cat. The condition is associated with
black stallions.
an increased percentage of fibers from temporal retina crossing at
the chia sm.
Strabismus
Introduction/etiology
Deviations of the normal visual axis are common in
brachycephalic and toy breeds, Siamese cats, and cattle.
6.43
The condition is often inherited, although strabismus
may be acquired. In the Siamese cat, strabismus is
typically an esotropia and is associated with the albino
 gene (6.42). Various albino animals may have an
increased number of optic nerve fibers decussating at the
optic chiasm from the temporal retina. This results in
abnormal retinotopic projections to the lateral geniculate
and occipital cortex122-124. The strabismus is thought to
be a compensatory mechanism, and develops in the first
6 months of life in the Siamese cat12s. A fine pendular
nystagmus may be associated with the strabismus.
Congenital hypoplasia or aplasia of the extraocular
muscles may, rarely, be responsible for dramatic ocular
deviations, and these conditions have been observed in
the dog and goat (6.9, 6.10)49.
 Convergent stra bismus with or without exophthalmos
 is an inherited trait in Jersey and Shorthorn cattle126, and
6.43 Microphthalmos and esotropia present bilaterally in a Holstein
is observed less frequently in Ayrshire, Holstein-
cow. A pendular nystagmus was present. The condition was genetic.
Friesian127 and brown Swiss cattle (6.43)106. Strabismus
may occasionally be observed in the horse, with the
Appaloosa most commonly affected with a hypertro-
pia128, 129, Strabismus in the Appaloosa horse has also
been associated with night blindness1 30.
6.44
Bilateral exotropia with hypotropia feyes are deviated
down and out) is commonly associated with congenital
hydrocephalus, due to enlargement of the calvarium and
encroachment on the dorsomedial orbit {6.8). Ocular
deviations after replacement of a proptosed globe are
common. The most common deviation is an exotropia-
hypertropia {dorsolateral) (6.44), although the deviation
may occur in any direction {6.45). The deviation usually
results from avulsion of the ventral and medial rectus
muscles or, possibly, nerve damage. The deviation
moderates over a period of 4-8 weeks but does not
return to normal.
Therapy
 In the majority of strabismus cases, no therapy is
attempted. The strabismus in Siamese cats has not
responded to surgical correction. Severe deviations
direction. Note the irritation to the ventromedial globe and cornea.
Suououe Aq paiea1 aq Aeu euneu qun paieossg
ORBIT AND GLOBE
133
6.45
6.46
6.45 A dog with severe esotropia as the result of a prior
6.46 A dog with phthisis bulbi after cyclocryotherapy for glaucoma.
proptosed globe.
Note the dense corneal opacity and the mismatching of the globe
size to third eyelid and palpebral fissure. These features help to
differentiate phthisis from microphthalmo5.
sutures or medial tarsorrhaphies to improve the
appearance and protect the cornea. If forced duction tests
6.47
indicate limitations of movement, surgery can be
performed on the limiting muscles to weaken them by
recession or removal of the muscle insertions49, 128.
ACQUIRED CONDITIONS OF THE GLOBE
Phthisis bulbi
Phthisis bulbi is a shrunken disorganized globe usually
resulting from massive intraocular pathology. Cyclitic
membranes or inflammatory membranes that stretch
across the globe between the ciliary body are usually
present and result in ciliary body detachment and marked
hypotony. A yellow-white corneal opacification, cataract,
and retinal detachment are usually present (6.46). The eye
is nonfunctional, and in veterinary medicine is often not
removed due to the owner's objection to the appearance of
an enucleated orbit. The danger of having a nonfunctional
eye with opaque media is that subsequent intraocular
6.47 Intraocular chondrosarcoma that fills the vitreous cavity in a
neoplasia may arise and not be recognized until very late.
cat. Sarcomas such as these have been related to past trauma and 
In the cat, the increased recognition of intraocular
inflammation, and typically are advanced by the time they are
sarcomas after trauma and severe intraocular disease is an
detected because they arise in blind eyes with opaque media.
argument for the enucleation of phthisical eyes (6.47).
Other problems related to phthisis are appearance, subtle
 discomfort, and poor lid-globe apposition that results in
6.48 Screech
6.48
entropion and chronic ocular discharge.
owl with an
orbital 
 Microphthalmos and phthisi bulbi may be difficult
prosthesis after
to differentiate if the animal's history is not
enuclea tion.
 available. Diffuse corneal opacity is more typical of
phthisis bulbi.
The easiest solution to phthisis is the implantation of
an orbital prosthesis at the time of enucleation. Silicone
orbital prostheses have been applied in dogs, cats, birds
(6.48), and horses. Commercial methyl methacrylate
orbital prostheses have been successful in the dog but a
ue oi anp sieo ul pauooo seu aiei ainey iueoyuais
accumulation of orbital fluid1 31.
Cats should have phthisical eyes enucleated to
avoid ocular sarcomas later in life.
134
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
6.49
The size of implant that the orbit can accommodate
varies with head conformation in the dog. Often the
leading edge of the implant will be shaved flat. The horse
will usually accommodate a 40-47 mm diameter sphere
and the dog a 20-22 mm sphere, unless it is a
brachycephalic dog where 14-16 mm is recommended131,
132. In the short term, orbital prosthesis is a significant
improvement over enucleation. However, with time some
prostheses will be pushed forward by orbital granulation,
resulting in a questionable cosmetic improvement.
Proptosis [prolapse] of the globe
Proptosis of the globe out of the orbit with subsequent
 entrapment by the lids is a common traumatic event in
the dog and cat. Two forms of trauma are associated
with proptosis: car accidents, and dog fights. In
extremely brachycephalic dogs, simply grasping the skin
6.49 Proptosed globe in a cat. Note the miotic pupil.
 over the back of the neck may result in proptosis. Since
the trauma necessary to cause proptosis in a cat or
mesaticephalic dog is much more than in a brachy-
cephalic dog, the attendant injuries to the globe are
6.50
usually more severe in the cat and longer nosed dogs.
Since proptosis is indicative of head trauma, many
patients ha ve significa nt neurologic signs.
It is rare to preserve vision in a proptosed globe in
a cat or dolicocephalic dog.
Clinical signs
 Proptosis is obvious and often grotesque but evaluation of
other ocular signs is important for prognostic purposes
(6.49). A variety of pupil abnormalities may be present in
the affected eye but are not important in evaluating visual
function. If the direct PLR is present, this is a good sign.
The pupil of the affected eye may be dilated from
oculomotor nerve paralysis or constricted. Marked
constriction may result from an antidromic axonal reflex
6.50 Avulsion of the optic nerve and retinal vessels associated with
of the ophthalmic branch of the Vth cranial nerve, due to
a proptosis of the globe in a young Doberman Pincher. The optic disc
corneal pain or traumatic uveitis {see Chapter 10, p.241
is swollen, retinal hermorrhages are present, retinal vessels contain
 and Chapter 11, p.298). The important pupillary reaction
only residual blood and are incompletely filled, and the retina ha5
for evaluating vision is often the consensual reaction; a
become white and opaque from infarction.
defect in the opposite eye indicates retinal/optic nerve
injury and a poor prognosis for vision.
The extraocular muscles, especially the medial rectus,
are usually torn and are responsible for the strabismus
6.51
that is a common complication of proptosis. Three or
more torn extraocular muscles has been cited as an
unfavorable prognostic indicatorl33 but this is difficult to
ascertain in practice. Conjunctival tears are common,
and the cornea appears dry and covered with mucus and
hair. Superficial ulceration is common.
 If the fundus can be visualized, severe damage may be
observed associated with avulsion of the optic nerve and
retinal vessels. This presents in the acute stage with large
white ischemic areas of retina, bloodless blood vessels,
and papilledema {6.50). Later, the tapetal coloration may
be lost or, if present, it is hyperreflective with a lack of
retinal blood vessels, and a gray-white atrophied optic
disc is present.
Intraocular hemorrhage usually occurs with severe
intraocular damage, such as a ruptured globe, and
6.51 Proptosed globe in a cat with intraocular hermorrhage. Marked
indicates a poor prognosis (6.si). An important
hypotony was present on palpation of the globe.
prognostic sign is the IOP; specifically, if the globe is very
ORBIT AND GLOBE
135
soft it usually indicates that it is ruptured. The rupture is
6.52 Posterior rupture
6.52
usually posterior and not visible, although vitreous may
of the globe enucleated
herniate through conjunctival lacerations {6.52).
from 6.51.
A very soft proptosed globe probably has a
 posterior rupture and will become phthisical.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is obvious but the prognosis should be
determined for sight and appearance. Ultrasound may
help in detecting posterior globe ruptures.
Prognosis
Gilger et al.133 reported retention of vision in only 27%
6.53
of dogs with proptosis, with a better prognosis for
brachycephalic dogs. No cats retained vision after
proptosis. The prognosis is considered on the basis of
two outcomes, vision and cosmetic appearance. If the
prognosis  for l
both is poor, then enucleation is
recommended as the eye will remain problematic.
Therapy
Neurologic signs, if present, frequently preclude expedient
management of the proptosis. Patients with severe neurologic
signs and proptosed globes often need to wait for 1-3 days 
t stabilize before administration of general anesthesia.
However, the prognosis for the proptosed globe in these
 patients is usually grave and enucleation is indicated.
General rule: you can always remove the globe but
you cannot put it back, so try to salvage most
globes for cosmetic purposes, even if the animal is
likely to be blind.
Enucleation
6.53 llustration of proptosis and how the rolled lid entraps the
The eye should be enucleated if:
globe when caught posterior to the equator.
· The owner is pragmatic: the globe after replacement
requires ongoing chronic postoperative care and if
the eye is blind, some owners do not appreciate the
6.54
expense and effort.
 The eye is very soft: it will be neither functional nor
cosmetic, as the eye will become phthisical.
The globe is dangling from a few muscles.
There is significant intraocular blood present, which
usually indicates that the globe is ruptured.
Repiacement of the globe
 Most owners will want to try and salvage the eye whether 
 it is functional or not. The lid margins must be lifted up
 and over the equator of the globe while simultaneously
pushing on the globe (6.53, 6.54). This maneuver usually
requires general anesthesia. The main difficulty occurs
when only the edge of the folded over lid is grasped, rather
than the lid margins. The lid margins can be rolled out by
placing hemostats parallel and near the rolled over edge,
and then rolling the hemostats. Another method is to
leap-frog" or alternately grasp with two pair of forceps
until the lid margin is reached. Once each lid margin is
elevated and everted outward, the globe is pushed into the
orbit and the lid margins are released as they pass the
6.54 llustra tion of replacerment of a globe following proptosis. Note
equator of the globe. At this time, torn conjunctiva and
that the lid margins must be rolled out and away from the globe, while
avulsed muscles can be sutured if they can be found.
simultaneously pushing on the globe to replace the globe in the orbit.
136
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
A tarsorrhaphy is placed with an everting suture
injury frequently seals uneventfully but damage to the
pattern (see Therapy, p.158, 7.30) and tied firmly so that
lens, vitreal hemorrhage, and retinal detachment are
when the swelling subsides the sutures do not rub on the
common accompanying lesions. Vitreal hemorrhage is
cornea. Steroids should not be injected into the orbit and
important as it often leads to subsequent retinal detach-
 systemic steroids should only be used cautiously, because 
ment with contraction of the clot (6.55).
of the danger of corneal ulceration. Orbital swelling
improves quickly, and the main justification for using
The size of the corneal defect with perforating
steroids is for treating traumatic optic neuritis. Injection
missiles and injuries has no prognostic value for
of systemic mannitol may also be justified for this reason
vision. The smallest corneal defect may result in
but not for simply replacing the globe. Neuroprotective
blinding sequelae.
therapy in the form of calcium channel blockers is
indicated for minimizing collateral nerve damage from
Larger pellets and BB shot injuries may mimic acute
ischemia (see p.357). The tarsorrhaphy should be in place
 corneal ulcers with or without iris prolapse but they should
for 2 weeks as most cases have inadequate tear function
be differentiated for prognostic purposes {see Penetrating
and lagophthalmos. Upon removal of the sutures, the
and perforating wounds of the cornea and globe, p.280,
cornea should be observed for KCS over the next several
10.101). While infection is uncommon, sterile inflam-
days. Corneal ulceration is a common problem after
mation may be overwhelming. The initial traumatic
removal of the tarsorrhaphy, and supplemental artificial
inflammation may be controlled but 2-3 weeks or later
tears are often needed for several weeks.
another more severe inflammatory reaction occurs due to
Strabismus with the eye directed up and out is
phacoclastic uveitis. Penetrating injuries from sticks and
common and slowly improves over 4-6 weeks in most
porcupine quills may or may not be obvious, depending on 
cases. A strabismus will remain but is milder than the
whether they are retained in the eye.
original deviation and acceptable cosmetically. The
medial cornea often develops ulcerations due to the
Diagnosis
exposure that the dorsolateral strabismus produces, and
 The history of a peracute onset of the injury or perhaps
 a medial canthoplasty is helpful for protection and for 
knowledge of the injury, as in hunting dogs, is important
cosmetic purposes (see p.160, 7.36).
to stimulate diagnostic testing. Typically, malicious injuries
have a history of the dog being let out for a couple of hours
Client education is critical with proptosed globes
 and returning with a perforated cornea. The perforating
 because of the frequency of long-term sequelae that
injury should be differentiated from an acute perforating
require therapy, despite the globe being visually
corneal ulcer. With metallic missiles this is easily
nonfunctional.
 accomplished with radiographs of the skull. Ultrasound
can also be utilized to determine the extent of ocular
injuries and to locate the foreign body more precisely.
TRAUMA
Nonmetallic penetrating foreign bodies, if not visible, are
 Perforating and penetrating ocular injuries
most easily diagnosed with ultrasonography57.
A perforating injury to the globe is one that enters and
exits the globe, while a penetrating injury is one that
Peracute corneal perforations should not be confused
enters without exiting. Perforating injuries to the globe
with complicated corneal ulcers. Skull radiographs
ae pun uo aie sanad pue ious (une) dg i
are indicated to find a metallic foreign body.
quite devastating to the function of the eye. The corneal
Prog nosis
Before initiating therapy, consideration should be given to
6.55
the three objectives of maintaining function, comfort, and
cosmesis. The prognosis is dependent on the extent of injury
to specific ocular tissue, whether the lens is damaged and the
extent of damage (6.56), the presence of significant vitreal
hemorrhage, and the size of any exit wound. Small BB shot
perforating through the peripheral cornea and not hitting
the lens are compatible with good cosmesis, although the
injuries have more concussive force and are rarely
compatible with saving function and cosmesis. Infection is
uncommon with metallic foreign bodies, although severe
inflammation is common. Penetrating injuries from cat
daws, sticks, and porcupine quills are more likely to be
infected, although not as often as one might anticipate.
 A perforating injury through the lens, with significant
vitreal hemorrhage, signals an eye that has a high
probability of developing overwhelming inflammation,
6.55 Multiple BB shot corneal perforations (arrows] that occurred in
as well as losing function from a detached retina. A
both eyes. Despite the self-sealing nature of the injuries, the
loaue yoq aaey ot Aiaxll ssal si Aunjui Sueauad
prognosis is very guarded for sight.
segment and posterior  segment considerations  for
ORBIT AND GLOBE
137
prognosis. The type of metal retained will affect the
Methods for differentiating laceration from rupture
tissue reaction; lead is relatively nonreactive as an
have been discussed in the equine literature but
insoluble carbonate envelope develops that isolates the
incomplete historical data is not helpfu]137, (See Ruptures
metal from surrounding tissue134.
of the globe, p.281 for more details.)
Therapy
Diagnosis
 The objectives of therapy are to maintain function, limit
Differentiating a ruptured globe from a laceration is
inflammation, prevent or treat infection, and maintain a
facilitated if the history is complete or there is further
comfortable eye. The decision to treat may be based not
evidence of blunt trauma to the head. Injuries of the
only on the prognosis but on prognostic uncertainties
cornea that cross the limbus are usually ruptures. In
 and an owner who is adamant in wanting to save the eye.
horses, only approximately 4/24 of cases that had wounds
Any leaking corneal defect or iris prolapse should be
repaired but many small lesions are self-sealing.
Uultrasonography may identify an absence of the lens,
Traumatic inflammation should be treated first, and this
retinal detachment, and perhaps vitreal hemorrhage in
usually subsides within 2 weeks with anti-inflammatory
rupture, features which are not typical for the usual
therapy given both topically and systemically. Anti-
laceration. Surgical exploration of a rupture usually
inflammatory therapy may have to be given for an
reveals the lens is missing or the lens capsule is ruptured.
extended period of time. Concurrent topical and systemic
antibiotics are administered for 7-10 days, and topical
Therapy
atropine administered to control ocular pain and to
If the diagnosis of a ruptured globe is certain, enucleation
s g s yons siog uaog peat 'dnd e u
or evisceration with implantation of a silicone sphere is
 and pellets in the orbit or globe are not removed, as they
recommended in order to minimize expense and pain.
are well tolerated134 and the surgical trauma involved
Evisceration carries the risk of extruding the prosthesis
will usually far outweigh the benefit of removal.
sisud suaaad anpad aut pue pauiau are isu ing
With penetrating injuries {without posterior segment
bulbi. Enucleation should be the procedure of last resort.
lesions), the lens should be removed to prevent phaco-
Enucleation may be performed with a transpalpebral,
clastic uveitis if the lens capsule has a tear larger than
subconjunctival, or lateral approach. The transpalpebral
usually
manifests
approach (6.35) usually removes more orbital tissue than
2-3 weeks after the injury, just as traumatic uveitis is
the other approaches and all of the conjunctival tissue,
resolving. While lens extraction can be performed,
 and thus has less complications of postoperative
posterior segment injuries often preclude a visually
accumulation of secretions. If the ocular surface is
functional eye, so it is an expensive surgery to save an eye
infected or neoplastic, the transpalpebral approach
just for cosmetic purposes.
minimizes the risk of carrying infection or seeding of
In humans, vitrectomies are routinely performed for
neoplastic cells deeper into the orbit. The method has
 removal of vitreous hemorrhage, to prevent subsequent
 two major disadvantages: most surgeons simply excise
retinal detachment, and to remove any metallic foreign
until the globe is free, with little attempt at retaining
bodies. The best timing for vitrectomy is still debated.
 orbital tissue to minimize a postoperative shrunken
The use of both intravitreal and i.v. antibiotics with
appearance; and the skin and orbicularis oculi muscle
open globe injuries is also debated136. As veterinary
often bleed profusely if electrocautery is not used.
ophthalmologists develop the skills and instrumenta-
tion for performing vitrectomies, such procedures may
become routine in managing these types of injuries. It
should be emphasized that even with procedures
involving lensectomy, vitrectomy, and suturing the
sclera, or combination surgery, the prognosis for vision
6.56
is very poor.
Ruptured globe
Blunt trauma to the globe may cause it to rupture either
 posteriorly or anteriorly. Ruptures of the globe from blunt
trauma in the dog and cat are usually posterior and
associated with proptosis of the globe. in the horse,
ruptures are usually observed in the cornea and adjacent
 sclera, and are due to throwing the head and hitting an
 object or rearing over and hitting the floor (6.56). An
anterior rupture is accompanied by iris prolapse, and it
may mimic a laceration or, occasionally, a perforated ulcer.
It is important to differentiate between these
conditions, as lacerations and ulcerations have a
relatively good prognosis for retaining vision,
whereas ruptured globes have a very poor
6.56 Horse that had suffered blunt trauma to the eye resulting in a
prognosis and usually result in phthisis.
rupture across the entire corneal diameter. The lens was expelled at
the time of injury.
138
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
The subconjunctival approach eliminates bleeding from
procedure. Postsurgical infection is usually managed
the skin and orbicularis muscle while performing the
with systemic antibiotics. When contamination is present
enucleation, is usually more clear and distinct in
or suspected at the time of enucleation, flushing the orbit 
 dissection, but may not remove all the potential secreting 
with antibiotics such as crystalline penicillin, and
membranes (6.57). In animals with a tight globe-orbit
 utilizing preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative 
relationship, such as the cat, or buphthalmos, dissection is
systemic antibiotics is usually successful. Seatons or
more difficult. The lid margins and the third eyelid with its 
drainage tubes are used on rare occasions.
gland are excised before suturing the orbit closed (6.58).
A common complication of enucleation is excessive
Complications of enucleation include factors that
orbital hemorrhage, with a swollen orbit after surgery.
made the procedure necessary, such as infection or
This can be treated with initial cold compresses, followed
neoplasia, as well as complications that are specific to the
 after 24 hours with warm compresses. The condition
6.57
6.58
6.57 Subconjunctival
 approach to enucleation.
Incision and blunt dissection of
 conjunctiva from the globe, for
360° (A]. Individual extraocular
muscles are lifted up with a
 strabismus hook and excised
with tenotomy scissor (B).
After the extraocular muscles
have been excised from the
globe, the optic nerve is 
crushed either with a Kelly
B
forceps and then cut with 
scissors or a tonsil/enucleation 
snare is passed over the globe 
 and used to crush/cut the
nerve (C, D].
AV
6.58 After the globe is rermoved
the third eyelid is excised after 
 placing forceps at the base and 
ligating (E). The lid margins are
G
removed with special attention 
given to the medial canthus. The
 medial can thal ligament can be 
cut to loosen the skin from the 
skull and make it easier to
dissect (F). Note the proximity 
 to the angularis oculi vein (AV).
An orbital prosthesis can be 
placed and the orbit closed in a
deep layer of muscle and fascia.
and a superficial skin closure
H
performed (G, H).
ORBIT AND GLOBE
139
usually resolves without incident, although serum may be
from penetrating injuries or from a perforating corneal
expelled if the incision is disrupted. Increased attention
ulceration. Most of the time these processes produce
to hemostasis will minimize bleeding, e.g. using an
an endophthalmitis {involvement of the inner tunic)
electroscalpel on the skin and muscle, ligating the base of
but if overwhelming infection occurs, the entire
the third eyelid before excising, and crushing the optic
thickness of the globe may become involved and
nerve before cutting.
inflammation may extend into the orbit. Blindness and
 In the cat, the surgeon should be cautious of how
pain are the devastating end result, and the course is
much forward traction is placed on the globe during
often very rapid.
enucleation, to avoid optic chiasm damage. Cats have
Fungi are not an uncommon cause of pan-
become blind in the contralateral eye after enucleation,
ophthalmitis/endophthalmitis, and inflammation may be
 as a result of such damage138.
due to systemic fungi, hematogenous saprophytic fungi, or
In the cat, a large globe and small orbit make
Viruses that produce vasculitis, such as malignant catarrhal
enucleation more difficult; pulling the globe
fever in the cow and FIP in the cat, may produce a
forward for exposure may avulse the optic chiasm.
panophthalmitis. Bacteria are the most common causes of
panophthalmitis, and the most feared form is postsurgical
An additional common complication of enucleation is
infection. While accurate statistics are not available for
orbital retention of sterile serous secretions that
large numbers of cases in veterinary medicine, in human
subsequently drain from the medial canthus. Removal of
 intraocular surgery endophthalmitis occurs in about 0.1%
all the conjunctival surfaces and the third eyelid are
of patients. One would expect endophthalmitis post-
performed to try to prevent postoperative secretions, but
 surgically to be higher in veterinary medicine, and the horse
most surgeons do not remove the orbital lacrimal gland;
 some patients continue to have orbital secretions that
reported four cases in 34 cataract surgeries. The most
presumably are from this gland. In most instances the
 common causes of bacterial endophthalmitis in man144 and
drainage is tolerated. Therapy for chronic orbital
 animals143 are Gram-positive organisms.
 drainage includes 95% ethanol injected into the orbit139,
 Occasionally, infection may occur due to conta mina-
orbital exploration for any remaining conjunctiva, and
tion of surgical instruments outside the surgical arena,
excision of the orbital lacrimal gland.
and when this occurs it usually produces clusters of
In some very complicated cases that require
infections. Most bacterial infections arise from the
 enucleation, the eyelids and periorbital skin may not be
 patient's bacterial flora. In light of the high incidence of
viable for use in covering the orbit, either because of
so ieu stt rouy snoane asod-amns
infection or neoplasia. The cat, horse, and some small
during canine and human cataract surgery, the
breeds of dog have very little mobile skin surrounding
incidence of infection appears to be very small. The
the eye, compared to the average and large breeds of
dog. In these instances, flaps of axial pattern skin grafts
been affected by  perioperative  scrubbing146  or
can be used to cover the avascular bed of the enucleated
01 1eaddr lou saop pue 'ainou Aue Aq uaaig souoiquun
orbit. Axial flaps based on the distribution of the
affect the postoperative outcome.
superficial temporal artery140, 141 and the caudal
auricular arteryl42 have been used successfully to close
 Clinical signs
the orbit after enucleation.
Panophthalmitis/endophthalmitis  is  characterized  by
The most common complication of enucleation is
ocular pain, marked conjunctival and episcleral injection,
cosmetic: a sunken orbit. jSee p.129 and p.363 for
 corneal edema with neovascularization, hypopyon
methods to minimize this objectionable appearance.) An
 and/or hyphema, pupillary constriction, and a hazy
alternative to enucleating a ruptured globe is evisceration
vitreous if visible. Marked decrease in vision or blindness
together with a silicone sphere implantation (see p.363).
is present. If the process has become a panophthalmitis,
These cases have an increased risk of extrusion of the
it has passed through the sclera and the conjunctiva will
sphere through the ruptured cornea but the implant
be very chemotic, the lids will be hot and tender, and
 prevents phthisis from occurring.
 decreased orbital retropulsion will be present, appearing
The repair of the rupture can be performed by
 as orbital cellulitis. The rapidity of the development of
excising uveal tissue and suturing the fibrous tunic as for
signs will vary depending on the virulence of the
a laceration, but the vast majority of these eyes will
organism. In veterinary medicine, typically the signs
become phthisical and the cornea will be opaque.
develop peracutely in a period of 12-24 hours. In
Medical therapy consists of glucocorticoids (systemic-
humans, postoperative infection is often associated with
ally), prostaglandin inhibitors, and antibiotics.
low virulence organisms, and signs may not develop for
weeks or months after surgery. Because of the pain
INFLAMMATION OF THE GLOBE
involved, the animals may manifest systemic signs such
Panophthalmitisfendophthalmitis
as depression, colic, and leukocytosis.
Panophthalmitis refers to inflammation that involves
all tissues of the eye, i.e. fibrous (cornea and sclera),
Diagnosis
uveal, and neurosensory (retina). The vitreous is also
If endophthalmitis is suspected, bold, rapid, definitive
involved. The inflammatory process may be either
action is necessary. Aqueous and vitreous humor centesis
sterile or septic, with the latter being most common.
is necessary to identify rapidly the organism on cytology
The infectious agent may originate either from
 and for culture and sensitivity testing.
hematogenous routes or be external in origin, such as
140
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Therapy
Additional therapy for endophthalmitis/panophthal-
Intraocular antibiotics should be administered at the time
mitis includes intraocular injections of tPA to break up
of ocular centesis, with caution exercised over the dose
clots, topical atropine for pain, systemic NSAID therapy.
 and form of drug utilized. The vitreous is the most
hot-packing the lids, and cleansing the ocular surface.
difficult tissue to clear of bacteria, so intravitreal
 The prognosis remains very guarded for most cases of
injections are preferred. The data on safe antibiotic
 established endophthalmitis treated without surgery.
dosage should be verified by experimental work, as
 Even when treated aggressively, the eye remains inflamed
toxicity of drugs or preservatives is of real concern. The
long after it is sterile, as judged by cultures and cytology.
choice of antibiotics has varied over the years, based on
Panophthalmitis cases usually need enucleation but
the acquisition of bacterial resistance to drugs. In
selecting the appropriate time can be a difficult decision.
general, a drug, or combination of drugs, is used that will
When the field is septic, the author prefers to decrease
have both a Gram-positive and Gram-negative spectrum
the inflammation or have it resolved, and this may
of activity and be bacteriocidal. Historically, gentamicin
necessitate a delay of several days.
with a cephalosporin was recommended but because of
 drug resistance and drug toxicity, amikacin has replaced
MISCELLANEOUS
gentamicin and second and third generation cephalo-
Head shaking in horses
sporins are used. Vancomycin has been advocated
Head shaking in the horse can be a serious fault that
because of its effectiveness against resistant staphylo-
results in a dysfunctional animal. A variety of causes have
cocci. The trend today is to inject intravitreally with
been proposed but removal of potential causes has
 0.4%/0.1 ml vancomycin and a third generation cephalo-
 generally not been successful. The onset of head shaking is
sporin such as ceftazidime 2.25 mg/0.1 ml147. These two
usually noted in the spring and the condition becomes
drugs are incompatible and must be injected with
chronic. Photic head shaking is a specific type that is
separate syringes.
induced by exposure to sunlight and can be stopped by
Intraocular antibiotics are now universally accepted
blindfolding and a dark environmentis1. Exercise also
for the treatment of endophthalmitis but it remains
 stimulates head shaking. Head shaking is usually in a
controversial whether concurrent antibiotics given by
vertical manner and is often accompanied by snorting.
other routes such as subconjunctivall48 or systemic are
The condition may spontaneously improve, only to recur
beneficial144 149. Despite the evidence that they are not of
the following spring. Animals develop avoidance behavior
additional benefit, they remain in widespread use
of natural light. The ca use is unknown but it is compared
because of the catastrophic nature of the disease. If the
to photic sneezing in man. Interaction between the optic
process has become a panophthalmitis with orbital
nerve and the Vth cranial nerve are postulated to produce
involvement, systemic therapy is definitely warranted.
vasodilatation in the nose, or stimulation of the sensory
A routine component of treating endophthalmitis in
nerves in the nose, to stimulate the snorting and head
humans is vitrectomyl44. The removal of the vitreous
shaking. Therapies including anti-inflammatories, anal-
removes a burden of infection that is difficult to reach
 gesics, melatonin, and sedatives have been unsuccessful.
through any route of therapy except intraviteal injection.
Cyproheptadine, a H-1 histamine and serotonergic
Vitrectomies also remove the inflammatory cells that
blocking agent, was successful in treating 71% of a small
perpetuate inflammation and produce inflammatory
cohort of horses at 0.3 mg/kg q12h orallyi s1.
membranes that result in retinal detachment. To date,
vitrectomies have not been commonly performed in the
treatment of acute endophthalmitis, with the exception
 of equine recurrent uveitis1so.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
141
REFERENCES
1 Constantinescu G, McClure R {1990)
18 Blake R, Cool SJ, Crawford M (1974)
32 Morgan R (1989) Utrasonography of
Anatomy of the orbital fascia and the
Visual resolution in the cat. Vision
retrobulbar diseases of the dog and cat.
third eyelid in dogs. Armerican Journat
Research 14:1211-1216.
Joturnat of the American Animat
of Veterinary Research 51:260-263.
19 Enzerink E {1998) The menace response
Hospitat Association 25:393-399.
2 McClure R {1974) The distribution and
and pupillary light reflex in neonatal
33 Stuhr C, Scagliotti R {1996) Retrobulbar
action of the smooth muscle tissue in the
foals. Equine Veterinary Journat
ultrasound in the mesaticephalic and 
 periorbital membrane in the dog.
30:546-548.
dolichocephalic dog using a temporal
Anatomy Record 178:406.
20 Harman AM, Moore S, Hoskins R,
approach. Veterinary and Comparative
3 Kennedy R {1965) The effect of early
Keller P {1999) Horse vision and an
Ophthatmology 6:91-99.
enucleation on the orbit. American
explanation for the visual behaviour
 34 Boydell P {1991) Fine needle aspiration
Journat of Ophthatology 60:277-306.
originally explained by the 'ramp' retina.
biopsy in the diagnosis of
4 Herron M, Martin J, Joyce J (1978)
Equine Veterinary Journat 31:384-390.
exophthalmos. Journat of Small Animat
Quantitative study of the decussating
21 Murphy CJ, Neitz J, Ver Hoeve JN
Practice 32:542-546.
optic axons in the pony, cow, sheep, and
{1999) Temporal and spatial vision in
35 Hendrix DH, Gelatt KN (2000)
pig. Aerican Journat of Veterinary
the horse. Proceedings of the Scientific
Diagnosis, treatment, and outcome of
Research 39:1127-1129.
Meeting of the American Callege of
orbital neoplasia in dogs: a retrospective
5 Bayer (1914) Angenheilkunde.
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 30:75.
study of 44 cases. Journat of Smal!
 Braumueller, Vienna, p.22.
22 Stuhr CM, Abrams G, Bullimore M,
Animat Practice 41:105-108.
6 Fox M (1963) Postnatal ontogeny of the
Murphy CJ (1999) The normal
36 Lecouteur R, Fike J, Scagliotti R,
 canine eye. Journat of the American
refractive state of the equine.
Cann C (1982) Computed tomography
Veterinary Medicat Association
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
of orbital tumors in the dog. Journat of
143:968-974.
the American College of Veterinary
the American Veterinary Medicat
7 Miller PE, Murphy CJ (1995) Vision in
Ophthatmologists 30:74.
Association 180:910-913.
dogs. Journat of the American
 23 Nicolas E {1930) Veterinary and
37 Boroffka SA, Voorhout G {1999) Direct
Veterinary Medicat Association
Comparative Ophthatmotogy. J & W
 and reconstructed multiplanar computed
207:1623-1634.
Brown, London.
tomography of the orbits of healthy
 8 Miller PE (2000) A Limited Review of
 24 Sivak JG, Allen DB {1975) An
dogs. American Joturnat of Veterinary
Fetine and Equine Vision. Bill Magrain
evaluation of the 'ramp' retina of the
Research 60:1500-1507.
 Basic Science Course for Veterinary
horse eye. Vision Research
 38 Daniel GB, Mitchell SK (1999) The eye
Ophthalmologists, Ralaigh, 2, pp. 1-11.
15:1353-1356.
and orbit. Clinicat Techniques in Small
9 Murphy CJ, Zadnik K, Mannis MJ
25 Pick DF, Lovell G, Brown S, Dail D
Anmat Practice 14(3):160-169.
{1992) Myopia and refractive error in
(1994) Equine color perception revisited.
 39 Dennis R (2000) Use of magnetic
dogs. Investigative Ophthatmology and
Applied Animat Behaviorat Science
resonance imaging for the investigation
Visuat Science 33:2459-2463.
42:61-65.
of orbital disease in small animals.
10 Neitz J, Geist T, Jacobs GH (1989)
26 Rubin L, Patterson D {1965)
Journat of Small Animat Practice
Color vision in the dog. Visuat
Arteriovenous fistula of the orbit in a
41:145-155.
Netroscience 3:119-125.
dog. Cornefl Veterinarin 55:471-481.
40 Slatter DH, Abdelbaki Y {1979) Lateral
11 Elliott JH, Futterman S {1963)
27 Millichamp NJ, Spencer CP (1991) 
 orbitotomy by zygomatic arch resection
Fluorescence in the tapetum of the cat's 
Orbital varix in a dog. Journat of the
in the dog. Journat of the American
eye. Archives of Ophthatmotogy
American Animat Hospitat Association
Veterinary Medicat Association
70:137-140.
27:56-60.
175:1179-1182.
12 Weale RA {1953) The spectral
 28 Koch S {1969) The differential diagnosis
41 Gilger BC, Whitley DR, McLaughlin SA
reflectivity of the cats tapetum
of exophthalmos in the dog. Journat of
{1994) Modified lateral orbitotomy for
measured in situ. Journat of Physiology
the American Animat Hospitat
removal of orbital neoplasms in two
212:30-42.
Association 5:229-237.
dogs. Veterinary Surgery 23:53-58.
13 Gunter R {1951) The absolute threshold 
29 Ackerman N, Munger R {1979)
42 Rebhun W (1982) Orbital
for vision in the cat. Journat of
 Intraconal contrast orbitography in the
lymphosarcoma in cattle. Journat of the
Physiology 114:8-15.
dog. American Journat of Veterinary
American Veterinary Medical
14 Duke-Elder S (1958) The perception of
Research 40:911-918.
Association 180:149-152.
space in the eye in evolution. In: Systenm
30 Gelatt K, Guffy M, Boggess T {1970)
43 Cottrill NB, Carter JD, Pechman RD,
of Ophthatmatogy vol 1. CV Mosby, St
 Radiographic contrast techniques for
Dubielzig RR, Waldron DR (1987)
Louis, p. 666-707.
detecting orbital and nasolacrimal
Bilateral orbital parosteal osteoma in a
15 Vakkur GJ, Bishop PO (1963) The
tumors in dogs. Joturnat of the American
cat. Journat of the American Animat
schematic eye in the cat. Vision
Veterinary Medicat Association
Hospitat Association 23:405-408.
Research 3:357-381.
156:741-746.
44 Dziezyc J, Barton CL (1992)
16 Vakkur GJ, Bishop PO, Kozak W (1963)
 31 Lee R, Griffiths IR (1972) A comparison
Exophthalmia in a cat caused by an
Visual optics in the cat, including
of cerebral arteriography and cavernous
eosinophilic infiltrate. Progress in
 posterior nodal distance and retinal
sinus venography in the dog. Journat of
Veterinary Cr Comparative
landmarks. Vision Research 3:289-314.
Small Animmat Practice 12:225-238.
Ophthatmotogy 2:91-93.
17 Wassle H {1971) Optical quality of the
cat eye. Vision Research 11:995-1006.
142
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
45 Miller S, van der Woerdt A, Bartick T
58 Scott EA, Duncan JR, McCormack JE
71 Ramsey DT, Hamor RE, Gerding PA,
(2000) Retrobulbar pseudotumor of the
{1974) Cryptococcosis involving the
Knight B {1995) Clinical and
orbit in a cat. Journat of the American
postorbital area and frontal sinus in a
immunohistochemical characteristics
Veterinary Medicat Association
horse. Journal of the Ammerican
of bilateral extraocular polymyositis
216:356-358.
Veterinary Medciat Association
of dogs. Proceedings of the Scientific
46 Martin C, Kaswan R, Doran C (1987)
165:626-627.
Meeting of the American College of
Cystic lesions of the periorbital region.
59 Rebhun WC, Edwards NJ (1977)
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
Compendium on Continuing Education
Cryptococcosis involving the orbit of
26:130-132.
for the Practicing Veterinarian
a dog. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl
72 Allgoewer I, Blair M, Basher T, et αf.
9:1021-1029.
Animat Clinician 72:1447-1450.
(2000) Extraocular muscle myositis
47 Pentlarge VW, Powell-Johnson G,
60 Peiffer RL, Belkin PV, Janke BH
and restrictive strabismus in ten dogs.
Martin CL, et af. {1989) Orbita]
{1980) Orbital cellulitits and
Veterinary Ophthaimotogy 3:21-26.
neoplasia with enophthalmos in a cat.
 pneumonitis by Peniciltiun spp. in a
73 Caron J, Barber S, Bailey J, Fretz P,
Journat of the American Veterinary
cat. Journat of the American
Pharr J {1986) Periorbital skull
Medicat Association 195:1249-1251.
Veterinary Medicat Association
fractures in five horses. Journat of
48 Sarnat BG, Shanedling PD (1970)
176:449-450.
the American Veterinary Medicat
 Orbital volume following evisceration,
61 Willis MA, Martin CL, Stiles J {1999)
Association 188:280-284.
enucleation, and exenteration in rabbits.
Sino-orbital aspergillosis in a dog.
74 Martin C, Kaswan R, Chapman W
Ammerican Journat of Ophthatmology
Journat of the American Veterinary
(1986) Four cases of traumatic optic
70:787-799.
Medicat Association 214:1644-1647.
nerve blindness in the horse. Equine
49 Martin CL {1978) Strabismus associated
62 Shelton GD, Bandman E,
Veterinary Journat 18:133-137.
with extraocular muscle agenesis in a
Cardinet GH {1985) Electrophoretic
75 Speakman AJ, Baines SJ,
dog. Journat of the American Animat
 comparison of myosins from
Williams JM, Kelly DF {1997)
Hosp itat Association 14:486-489.
 masticatory muscles and selected limb
Zygomatic salivary cyst with
50 Abrams K, Goodwin C (1996) Seasonal 
muscles in the dog. American Journat
mucocele formation in a cat. Journat
influence of inflammatory orbital disease
of Veterinary Research 46:493-498.
of Smaltl Animat Practice
 in dogs in the northwest United States.
63 Shelton GD, Cardinet GH,
38:468-470.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Bandman E {1987) Canine
76 Miller PE, Pickett JP (1989)
the American College of Veterinary
 masticatory muscle disorders: a study
Zygomatic salivary gland mucocele in
Ophthatmologists 27:87.
of 29 cases. Muscte Nerve
a ferret. Journat of the American
51 Simison WG {1993) Sialadenitis
10:753-766.
Veterinary Medicat Association
associated with periorbital disease in a
64 Gilmour M, Morgan RV, Moore FM
194:1437-1438.
dog. Journat of the American Veterinary
(1992) Masticatory myopathy in the
77 Knecht C, Slusher RK, Guibor E
Medicat Assoc iation 202:1983-1985.
dog: a retrospective study of 18 cases.
(1969) Zygomatic salivary cyst in a
 52 Grahn B, Szentimmrey, D, Battison A,
Journat of the American Animat
dog. Journat of the American
Hertling R {1995) Exophthalmos
Hospitat Association 28:300-306.
Veterinary Medicat Association
associated with frontal sinus
65 Glauberg A, Beaumont P (1979)
155:625-626.
 osteomyelitis in a puppy. Journat of the
 Sudden blindness as the presenting
78 Schmidt GM, Betts CW (1978)
American Animat Hospitat Association
 sign of eosinophilic myositis: a case
 Zygomatic salivary mucoceles in the
31:397-401.
report. Journat of the American
dog. Journat of the American
 53 Ramsey DT, Marretta SM, Hamor RE,
Animat Hospitat Association
Veterinary Medicat Association
et αf. (1996) Ophthalmic manifestations
15:609-611.
172:940-942.
and complications of dental disease in
66 Lescure F {1985) Myosite des
 79 Martin C {1971) Orbital mucocele in
dogs and cats. Journal of the American
masticateurs et cecite chez le chien.
a dog. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl
Animat Hospitat Association
Revue de Medicine Veterinaire
Anmmal Clinician 66:36-38.
32:215-224.
136:761-776.
80 Gross S, Aguirre G, Harvey C (1979)
54 Koch S, Buell BE (1970) Medial orbital
67 Step DL, Divers TJ, Cooper B,
Tumors involving the orbit of the
abscess in a Collie dog. Journat of the 
Kallfelz FA, Karcher LF, Rebhun WC
dog. Proceedings of the Scientific
American Veterinary Medicat
{1991) Severe masseter myonecrosis in
Meeting of the American Cottege of
Association 156:1905-1906.
a horse. Journat of the American
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
55 Brightman AJ, McLaughlin SA,
Veterinary Association 198:117-119.
10:229-240.
Brogdon JD, Ream VB, Szajerski ME
68 Lescure F {1983) La rubeose de l’iris
81 Kern T {1985) Orbital neoplasia in
{1985) Intraorbital foreign body in the
chez le chat son traitement par
23 dogs. Journat of the American
dog: a case report. Veterinary Medicine
I'acetate de methyl prednisolone.
Veterinary Medical Association
80:45-48.
Revue de Medicine Veterinaire
186:489-491.
56 Collins BK, Moore CP, Dubielzig RR,
134:527-531.
82 Straw RC, LeCouteur RA,
Gengler WR (1991) Anaerobic orbital
69 Kornegay J, Gorgacz E, Dawe D,
Powers BE, Withrow SJ (1989)
cell ulitis and septicemia in a dog.
Bowen J, White N, Debuysscher E
Multilobular osteochrondrosarcoma
Canadian Veterinary Journat
{1980) Polymyositis in dogs. Journat
of the canine skull: 16 cases
32:683-685.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
{1978-1988). Journat of the
57 Grahn BH, Szentimrey D, Pharr JW.
Association 176:431-438.
American Veterinary Medicat
Farrow Cs, Fowler D {1995) Ocular
70 Carpenter J, Schmidt G, Moore F.
Association 195:1764-1769.
 and orbital porcupine quills in the dog:
Albert D, Abrams K, Elner V {1989)
83 Mauldin EA, Deehr AJ, Hertzke D,
a review and case series. Canadian
Canine bilateral extraocular
Dubielzig (2000) Canine orbital
Veterinary Joturnat 36:488-493.
polymyositis. Veterinary Pathalogy
 meningiomas: a review of 22 cases.
26:510-512.
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 3:11-16.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
143
84 Gilger BC, McLaughlin SA, Whitley RD,
98 Walde I, Hittmair K, Henninger W.
111 Bistner S, Rubin L, Saunders L
Wright JC (1992) Orbital neoplasms in
Czedik-Eysenberg T {1997) Retrobulbar
{1970) The ocular lesions of bovine
cats: 21 cases {1974-1990). Journal of
dermoid cyst in a Dachshund.
viral diarrhea-mucosal disease.
the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary and Comparative
Veterinary Pathology 7:275-286.
Association 201:1083-1086.
Ophthatnotogy 7:239-244.
112 Laratta L, Ris R, Kern T, Koch S
85 Rebhun W, Piero F (1998) Ocular
99 Harvey C, Koch S, Rubin L (1968)
(1985) Multiple congenital ocular
lesions in horses with lymphosarcoma:
Orbital cysts with conjunctival fistula in
defects in the Akita dog. Cornefl
21 cases (1977-1997). Journal of the
a dog. Journat of the American
Veter marian 75:381-392.
American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Medicat Association
113 Martin C, Leipold H (1974) Aphakia
Association 212:852-854.
153:1432-1435.
and multiple ocular defects in Saint 
86 Beech J (1983) Retrobulbar melanoma
100 Barnett K, Cottrell B, Rest J {1988)
Bernard puppies. Veterinary
in a horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
Retrobulbar hydatid cyst in the horse.
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
Supplement 2:123-124.
Equine Veterinary Journat 20:136-138.
69:448-453.
87 Finn JP, Tennant BC {1971) A cerebral
101 Pickett J {1987) Intracystic injection 
114 Arnbjerg J, Jensen O (1982)
and ocular tumor of reticular tissue in a
 of tetracycline for cystodesis of an
Spontaneous microphthalmia in two
horse. Veterimary Pathology 8:458-466.
 intraorbital cyst in a dog. Proceedings
Dobermann puppies with anterior
88 Richardson DW, Acland HM (1983)
of the Scientific Meeting of the
chamber cleavage syndrome. Journat of
Multilobular osteoma (chondroma
American Cotlege of Veterinary
the American Animat Hospitat
rodens) in a horse. Journat of the
Ophthaimologists 18:18.
Association 18:481-484.
American Veterinary Medicat
102 Theisen SK, Podell M, Schneider T,
115 Lewis D, Kelly D, Sansom J (1986)
Association 182:289-291.
Wilkie D, Fenner W {1996) A
Congential microphthalmia and other
89 Bistner S, Campbell J, Shaw D,
retrospective study of cavernous sinus
developmental ocular anomalies in the
Leininger JR, Ghobrial HK (1983)
syndrome in four dogs and eight cats.
Dobermann. Journat of Small Animat
Neuroepithelial tumor of the optic nerve
Journat of Veterinary Internat
Practice 27:559-566.
in a horse. Cornefl Veterinaricn
Medicine 10:65-71.
116 Narfstrom K, Dubielzig R (1984)
73:30-40.
103 Lucas D {1954) Ocular associations
 Posterior lenticonus, cataracts, and
90 Basher AW, Severin GA, Chavkin MJ,
 of dappling in the coat colour of dogs.
 microphthalmia: congenital ocular 
 Fran AA {1997) Orbital neuroendocrine
Journal of Comparative Pathology
defects in the Cavalier King Charles
tumors in three horses. Journat of the
64:260-266.
Spaniel. Journat of Small Animat
 American Medicat Veterinary
104 Gelatt KN, McGill LD (1973)
Practice 25:669-677.
Association 210:668-671.
Clinical characteristics of
117 Rubin L (1968) Hereditary of retinal
91 Goodhead AD, Venter J, Nesbit JW
microphthalmia with colobomas of
dysplasia in Bedlington Terriers. Journat
{1997) Retrobulbar extra-adrenal
the Australian Shepherd Dog. Journa!
of the American Veterinary Medicat
 paraganglioma in a horse and its
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Association 152:260-262.
surgical removal by orbitotomy.
Association 162:393-396.
118 Ashton N, Barnett K, Sachs D (1968)
Veterinary and Comparative
105 Gelatt K, Powell G, Huston K {1981)
 Retinal dysplasia in the Sealyham
Ophthatmology 7:96-100.
Inheritance of microphthalmia with
Terrier. Journat of Pathotogy and
92 van Maanen C, Klein WR, Dik KJ
coloboma in the Australian Shepherd
Bacteriology 96:269-272.
{1996) Three cases of carcinoid in the
Dog. American Jotrnat of Veterinary
119 Rubin L, Koch S, Huber R {1969)
equine nasal cavity and maxillary
Research 42:1686-1690.
Hereditary cataracts in Miniature
sinuses: histologic and
106 Rebhun W (1979) Diseases of the
Schnauzers. Journat of the Amer ican
immunohistochemical features.
bovine orbit and globe. Journal of the
Veterinary Medicat Association
Veterinary Pathology 33:92-95.
American Veterinary Medicat
154:1456-1458.
93 Tomlinson J, Presnell K {1981) Use of 
Association 175:171-175.
120 van der Woerdt A, Stades FC, van der
the temporalis rmuscle flap in the dog.
107 Urman JK, Grace OD (1964)
Linde-Sipman JS, Boeve MH (1995)
Veterinary Surgery 10:77-79.
Hereditary encephalomyopathy: a
Multiple ocular anomalies in two related
94 Bentley J, Henderson R, Simpsons S
hy drocephalus syndrome in newborn
litters of Soft Coated Wheaten Terriers.
{1991) Use of a temporalis muscle flap
calves. Cornefl Veterinarian
Veterinary and Comparative
in reconstruction of the calvarium and
54:230-249.
Ophthatmology 5:78-82.
 orbital rim in a dog. Journat of the
108 Leipold H, Gelatt K, Huston K
121 Scott FAD, Schultz R, Bistner S, Ris R
American Animat Hospitat Association
{1971) Multiple ocular anomalies and
{1975) Teratogenesis in cats associated
27:463-466.
hydrocephalus in grade beef
with griseofulvin therapy. Teratotogy
95 Schoster J, Wyman M (1978) Remission 
Shorthorn cattle. American Journat of
11:79-86.
of orbital sarcoma in a dog using
Veterinary Research 32:1019-1026.
 122 Creel D (1971) Visual system anomaly
doxorubicin therapy. Journal of the
109 Kaswan R, Collins L, Blue J,
associated with albinism in the cat.
American Veterinary Medicat
Martin C {1987) Multiple hereditary
Nature 231:465-466.
Association 172:1101-1103.
ocular anomalies in a herd of cattle.
123 Hubell D, Wiesel T (1971) Aberrant
% Martin C (1971) Orbital emphysema: :
Journat of the American Veterinary
visual projections in the Siamese cat.
complication of ocular enucleation in
Medicat Association 191:97-99.
Journat of Physiology 218:33-62.
the dog. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl
110 Leipold H, Houston K (1968)
124 Guillery R, Casagrande V,
Anwmat Clinician 66:986-989.
Congenital syndrome of
Oberdorfer M (1974) Congenitally
 97 Bedford P (1979) Orbital pneumatosis
 anophthalmia-microphthalmia with
abnormal vision in Siamese cats. Nature
as an unusual complication to
associated defects in cattle.
252:195-199.
enucleation. Journat of Smatl Animat
Pathologica Veterinaria 5:407-418.
125 Blake R, Crawford M {1974)
Practice 20:551-555.
 Development of strabismus in Siamese
cats. Braim Research 77:492-496.
144
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
126 Holmes J, Young G (1957) A note on 
136 Mittra RA, Mieler WF {1999)
146 Beigi B, Westlake W, Mangelschots E,
exophthalmos with strabismus in
 Controversies in the management of
Chang B, Rich W, Riordan T (1997)
Shorthorn cattle. Veterinary Record
 open-globe injuries involving the
Perioperative microbial contamination
69:148-149.
posterior segment. Suarvey of
 of anterior chamber aspirates during
127 Julian RJ (1975) Bilateral divergent
Ophthatmotogy 44:215-225.
extracapsular cataract extraction and
 strabismus in a Holstein calf. Veterimary
137 Lavach JD, Severin GA, Roberts SM
phakoemulsification. British Journat of
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
{1984) Lacerations of the equine eye: a
Ophthatology 81:953-955.
70:1151.
review of 48 cases. Journal of the
147 Roth DB, Flynn HW (1997) Antibiotic
128 Gelatt K, McClure J (1979) Congenital
American Veterinary Mediciat
selection in the treatment of
strabismus and its correction in two
Association 184:1243-1248.
endophthalmitis the significance of drug
Appaloosa horses. Journat of Equine
138 Stiles J, Buyukmihci NC, Hacker DV,
combinations and synergy Sturvey of
Medicine and Surgery 3:240-244.
Canton DD {1993) Blindness from
Ophthatmology 41:395-401.
129 Lavach J (1990) Orbit, sinuses, and 
damage to optic chiasm. Journat of the
148 Jaanus SD (1996) Prevention of 
eyeball. In: Large Animat
American Veterinary Medicat
 postoperative infection: limits and
Ophthatmotlogy. CV Mosby.
Association 202:1192.
possibilities. British Joturnal of
Philadelphia, p. 232.
139 Janig CJ, Hornblass A (1986)
Ophthatmology 80:681-682.
130 Rebhun WC, Loeu ER, Ris RC (1984)
 Treatment of postenucleation orbital
 149 Davis JE (1996) Intravenous antibiotics 
Clinical manifestations of night 
xfougougpggdofospuuysisio
for endophthalmitis. American Journat
 blindness in the Appaloosa horse.
18:191-193.
of Ophthatmology 122:724-726.
Compendium on Continuing Education
140 Smith MM, Shults S, Waldron DR,
150 Fruhauf B, Ohnesorge B, Deegen E,
for the Practicing Veterinarian
Moon ML (1993) Platysma
 Boeve M (1998) Surgical management
6:103-106.
myocutaneous flap for head and neck 
of equine recurrent uveitis with single
131 Nasisse M, Van EER, Munger R.
reconstruction in cats. Head and Neck
port pars plana vitrectomy. Veter inary
Davidson M {1988) Use of methy]
15:433-439.
Ophthatmotogy 1:137151.
 methacrylate orbital prosthesis in dogs
141 Fahie MA, Smith M {1997) Axial
151 Madigan JE, Kortz G, Murphy C,
and cats: 78 cases {1980-1986). Journal
 pattern flap based on the superficial
 Rodger L (1995) Photic headshaking in
of the American Veterinary Medicat
temporal artery in cats: an experimental
the horse: 7 cases. Equine Veterinary
Association 192:539-542.
study. Veterinary Surgery 26:86-89.
Journat 27:306-311.
132 Provost P, Ortenburger A, Caron J
142 Smith MM, Payne JT, Moon ML,
152 Martin CL, Anderson BG (1981)
{1989) Silicone ocular prosthesis in
Freeman LE (1991) Axial pattern flap
Ocular anatomy. In: Veterinary
horses: 11 cases (1983-1987). Journat
 based on the caudal auricular artery in
Ophthatmology, 1st edn. K Gelatt 
of the American Veterinary Medicat
dogs. American Journat of Veter inary
(ed). Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia,
Association 194:1764-1766.
Research 52:922-925.
pp. 12-121.
133 Gilger BC, Hamilton HL, Wilkie DA,
143 Millichamp NJ, Dziezyc J (2000)
153 Coutler D, Schmidt G {1984) The
van der Woerdt A, McLaughlin SS.
Cataract phakofragmentation in horses.
eye and vision. In: Duke's Physiotogy
Whitley RD (1995) Traumatic ocular
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 3:157-164.
of Domestic Animats. M Swenson
proptosis in dogs and cats: 84 cases
144 Group EVS (1995) Results of the
{ed). Cornell University Press, Ithaca,
[1980-1993). Journal of the American
endophthalmitis vitrectomy study: a
pp. 728-741.
Veterinary Medicat Association
randomized trial of immediate
206:1186-1190.
vitrectomy and of intravenous
134 Schmidt G, Dice P, Koch S {1975)
antibiotics for the treatment of
Intraocular lead foreign bodies in four
 postoperative bacterial endophthalmitis.
canine eyes. Journat of Small Animat
Archives of Ophthatmology
Practice 16:33-39.
113:1479-1496
135 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Jamieson V,
145 Taylor MM, Kern TJ, Ris RC,
English R, Olivero D (1991) Traumatic
McDonough PL, Erb HN (1995)
anterior lens capsule disruption. Journat
Intraocular bacterial contamination
of the American Animat Hospitat
during cataract surgery in dogs. Journat
Association 27:410-414.
Of the American Veterinary Mediciat
Association 206:1716-1720.
145
Eyelids
INTRODUCTION
When making surgical incisions into the eyelid, the
orbicularis oculi muscle is encountered immediately under
The dog has the highest incidence of eyelid disease due to the
the skin. Motor innervation is via the palpebral branch of
wide variation in conformation that has been bred into the
cranial nerve Vll. The orbicularis oculi muscle is involved
species. Also, in this species a large number of dermatoses
 in the efferent arm of the palpebral reflex (tapping the lids
with eyelid involvement may involve the face. The dog will be
results in blinking), the corneal reflex (touching the cornea
mnsidered the model for discussion, unless otherwise noted.
results in a blink), the glabellar reflex (tapping the frontal
The opening of the eyelids is termed the palpebral
bone between the eyes results in a blink), and the menace
fissure and is usually somewhat almond shaped.
The
response {a threatening motion to the head results
in
conformation will vary between individuals and breeds
blinking). The orbicularis oculi muscle is a strong muscle
of dogs, depending on the size of the orbit and globe and
that is responsible for the severe blepharospasm seen with
the amount of redundant skin.
ocular pain. It is anchored medially by the medial palpebral
(canthal) ligament, a palpable structure connecting the
medial commissure of the palpebral fissure to the frontal
ANATOMY
bone (7.2). The lateral palpebral ligament is poorly deve-
loped in most dogs and connects the lateral commissure of
SKIN
the eyelids to the orbital ligament.
The skin of the eyelids is typically thin and loosely adherent
to the underlying tissue to facilitate movement. This
Superciliaris muscle
looseness results in subcutaneous edema or hemorrhage
The superciliaris muscle is a superficial facial muscle that
accumulation from relatively minor trauma such as
helps to elevate the medial upper lid. Motor innervation
rubbing. The upper eyelid is the most mobile; medially it
is by cranial nerve VII.
has a group of tactile hairs, the supraorbital pili.
Retractor angularis oculi muscle
MusCLES
The retractor angularis oculi muscle is a superficial facial
Orbicularis oculi muscle
muscle that draws the lateral canthus laterally, thus
The orbicularis oculi muscle is a superficial facial
 acting as a lateral canthal ligament (7.2). Motor innerva-
sphincter muscle and is the only muscle that contributes
tion is by cranial nerve VII.
significantly to closure of the palpebral aperture (7.1).
Beginning from the lid margin, it may be divided into the
Sphincter colli profundus pars palpebralis
 pretarsal, preseptal, and orbital zones. It consists mainly
The sphincter colli profundus is also a superficial facial
of type 2 fast twitch muscle fibers, which are involved in
muscle, and the palpebral portion depresses the lower lid 
initiating contractions of rapid and short durationl.
(7.1). Motor innervation is by cranial nerve VIl.
7.1
7.2
Superficial temporal a.
Orbicularis oculi m.
 Zygomaticotemporal n.
Supraorbital n.
Frontalis m. .
Angularis oculi v.
Palpebral n.
Infra trochlear n.
 Deep facial v.
Med.
Superficial
palpebral
temporal a.
lig.
Sphincter
Retractor
colli
angularis
profundus 
oculi m.
m. (pars
 Angularis
palpebralis]
oculi v.
Zygomaticofacial n.
Ventral and dorsal
Malar a.
palpebral a.
7.1 Gross anatomy of the eyelids and surrounding muscles, nerves.
 7.2 Gross anatomy of the eyelids of the dog. (a: artery: lig: ligament;
and vessels of the dog. (a: artery: m: muscle; v: vein.)
m: muscle; n: nerve; v: vein.)
146
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Levator palpebrae superioris
Ophthalmic division of trigeminal:
The levator palpebrae superioris muscle is the only
 Infratrochlear nerve: sensory to the medial dorsal
muscle of the eyelid that originates from within the orbit
and ventral lid.
above the optic foramen. It is the main skeletal muscle
 Frontal (supraorbital) nerve: sensory to the middle
that elevates the upper lid (7.3). Motor innervation is by
 portion of the upper lid.
cranial nerve III.
Motor
Muller's muscle
Oculomotor (Ill)
Miller's muscle originates from the dorsal surface of the
The oculomotor nerve supplies motor (somatic efferent)
levator palpebrae superioris muscle in the upper lid and
fibers to the levator palpebrae superioris muscle, as well
the ventral rectus of the lower lid. It is a smooth muscle
as to all the extraocular muscles except the dorsal
which inserts in the lids and third eyelid and keeps them
oblique and lateral rectus muscles. The oculomotor nerve
also supplies parasympathetic fibers {visceral efferent) to
fbers traveling in the nasociliary branch of the
the iris and ciliary smooth muscles, Miller's muscle, and
ophthalmic division of cranial nerve V.
smooth muscle in the third eyelid and periorbita.
FASCIA
Facial (Vll)
The periosteum of the orbit (periorbita) divides at the
 The facial nerve supplies the superficial facial muscles
 orbital rim to reflect as periosteum on the cranial and
 involving the lid, i.e. orbicularis oculi muscle.
facial bones and continues as a fascial sheath into the lids
to join the tarsus. This fascial sheet in the lids is termed
Sympathetic fibers
the orbital septum, and it provides an important barrier
Sympathetic fibers of the trigeminal nerve supply smooth
separating the orbit from the superficial lid. Lacerations
muscle in the lids (Miller's muscle), third eyelid, and the
 or weak areas in the orbital septum may allow infection
lacrimal glands2, 3
to penetrate into the orbit.
The orbicularis oculi muscle closes the eyelids and
NERVES
is innervated by cranial nerve Vll; the levator
Sensory
palpebral (skeletal) and Miller's muscle (smooth)
The sensory innervation to the eyelids is entirely by
elevate the upper eyelid and are innervated by
cranial nerve V (trigeminal). The sensory nerves emerge
 cranial nerve Ill and by sympathetic fibers
around the orbital margin and can be blocked by a ring
respectively.
block or at specific sites of emergence (7.2).
Maxillary division of trigeminal:
LIGAMENTS
● Zygomaticofacial nerve: sensory to the lateral ventral
Medial canthal ligament
lid.
This is a well developed collagenous structure that
 Zygomaticotemporal nerve: sensory to the lateral
originates from medial fibers of the orbicularis oculi
dorsal lid.
muscle and inserts on the orbital rim of the lacrimal
bone. A comparable lateral ligament does not exist, but
lateral fascial attachments and the retractor angularis
7.3
 oculi muscle keep the palpebral aperture almond shaped
Muller's m.
rather than circular (7.2). In mesaticephalic broad-based
skulls, the lateral canthal ligament may be well developed
 and misdirected medially, producing tension on the 
Leva tor
lateral canthus that may result in involution4.
tendon
 Orbicularis m.
BLOOD VESSELS
Superficial tem poral artery
The superficial 
 temporal
 artery courses with the
Fornix
palpebral nerve 1 cm (0.4 in) dorsal to the zygomatic
arch, and terminates in a dorsal and ventral palpebral
Tarsus
branch (7.2). Caution is required when injecting a local
 Palpebral conjunctiva
anesthetic to block the palpebral nerve to avoid intra-
 arterial injection.
1
Meibomian gland
Malar artery
Gland of Moll
The malar artery originates ventrally outside of the orbit
from the infraorbital artery. It supplies medial structures
such as the third eyelid and eyelid and anastomoses with
Gland of Zeiss
the ventral palpebral artery (7.2).
Cilium.
Angularis oculi vein
The angularis oculi vein is a branch of the facial vein. It
7.3 Histologic features of the upper eyelid of the dog. (m: muscle.)]
passes superficial to the medial canthal ligament to enter
EYELIDS
147
the dorsal orbit (7.1, 7.2), where it becomes the dorsal
Glands of Moll
ophthalmic vein. The ophthalmic vein provides the major
The glands of Moll are rudimentary sweat glands that
venous drainage of the orbit and it courses through the
are located at the base of the cilia and open onto the lid
orbital fissure to join the cavernous sinus..
The
margin and the follicle of the cilia (7.3).
ophthalmic vein does not contain valves, and blood may
flow either towards the face or the cavernous sinuss.
Glands of Krause and Wolfring
aul oi peads Aew uaa siu suanau sassaod oudas
Texts frequently refer to the glands of Krause and
cranial cavity, and accidental cutting during enucleation
Wolfring as the accessory lacrimal glands, but they have
will result in profuse hemorrhage. The vein is readily
not been demonstrated in the dog and cat. The gland of
accessible percutaneously or with a surgical cut down;
the third eyelid probably subserves this function.
injection of radiographic contrast material into the vein
enables the orbital veins, space-occupying lesions of the
Conjunctiva
orbit, and the base of the brain {for pituitary tumors) to
The conjunctiva that lines the eyelids is termed the
be studied6.
palpebral conjunctiva. It is composed of stratified
squamous epithelium and is more tightly adherent to the
Exuberant dissection in the dorsal medial eyelid
underlying tissues over the tarsus. Towards the fornix the
and orbit frequently transects the angularis oculi
epithelium is stratified columnar and has more goblet
vein and results in marked venous hemorrhage.
cells. The conjunctiva reflects onto the globe at the fornix
to become the bulbar conjunctiva.
LID MARGINS
Lacrimal punctum
Surgery frequently involves the lid margin and accurate
In the dog, cat, horse, and cow a single lacrimal punctum
reconstruction is essential for cosmetic and functional
exists on the conjunctival surface of each lid, about 1 mm
 considerations. Important landmarks are discussed.
from the lid margin. The orifices are slit-like and about
5 mm from the medial canthus in the lower lid and
Cilia
 7-8 mm from the medial canthus in the upper lid. Not all
The cilia are tactile organs present in 3-4 rows near the
species have two puncta: the rabbit has one large ventral
margin of the upper lid in the dog (7.3). The cat is often
punctum.
said not to have true cilia, but in fact they are present,
 although less well developed than the dog. The horse and
cow also have well developed cilia on the upper eyelid.
PHYSIOLOGY
The dog has numerous problems with cilia, while
problems are relatively rare in other species.
FUNCTION OF THE EYELIDS
 Protect the eye from the entrance of foreign particles.
Lid trough
Aid in removing foreign particles by blinking.
A trough or furrow runs the length of the lid on the
 Distribute a tear film and aid in propulsion of tears
 middle of the lid margin. The meibomian glands (tarsal
toward the lacrimal puncta. The palpebral fissure
glands) open into this trough and are observed as
closes in a zipper-like fashion, starting at the lateral
30-40 white orifices on each lid margin. The trough
canthus and moving to the medial canthus.
serves as a surgical landmark for procedures that involve
 Removal of visual stimuli for sleeping.
lid splitting or halving.
Contain glands that contribute to the tear film and,
therefore, are of importance in optics and nutrition
Tarsus
of the cornea.
The tarsus is a fibrous plate that runs parallel to the lid
+
 Cilia and vibrissae are important tactile organs.
margin and contains the embedded meibomian glands.
BLINKING
The tarsus gives some rigidity to the lids, but in domestic
animals is poorly developed compared to humans,
Reflex blinking
resulting in relatively floppy lids (7.3).
Tactile, i.e. corneal, glabellar, and palpebral reflexes,
 are examples of tactile reflex blinking.
Meibomian glands
 Optical: the dazzle reflex is the induction of a blink
The meibomian (tarsal) glands are large sebaceous glands
in response to a strong light. It is used to evaluate
that can be viewed through the conjunctiva as white
the intactness of the lower visual system. In humans,
parallel streaks near the lid margin (7.3). Secretion from
the dazzle reflex is frequently accompanied by
the meibomian glands provides nutrition to the cornea
sneezing.
and forms the
: lipid layer of the precorneal tear film,
which prevents evaporation and spilling of tears onto the
The menace response is the sudden presentation of a
face. Alterations in secretion may produce lid and
threatening object to the eye which stimulates a blink. It
corneal pathology. The glands may undergo metaplasia
is not considered a reflex because it involves the cerebral
 to become hair follicles, producing a hair that emerges on
cortex. The pathway for the menace response is
the lid margin (distichia).
somewhat vague, but it involves the visual pathways as
well as the motor cortex, cerebellum, and facial nerve
Glands of Zeiss
(1.66). The auditory response is seen when a loud noise
The glands of Zeiss are sebaceous glands located at the base
produces a blink.
of the cilia and they open into the follicle of the cilia (7.3).
148
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
The menace response may not be present until 7-10
Coloboma
days after birth in foals and 4 weeks after birth in
Introduction/etiology
 puppies. Conditions other than blindness will
A coloboma is a fissure or notch-like defect of either the
 interfere with the menace response.
lid, iris, ciliary body, lens, or posterior segment. Small
notch-like defects are common in the upper middle to
medial eyelid of certain lines of dogs of varying breeds.
Spontaneous blinking
These defects have very minor esthetic significance but no
Spontaneous blinking occurs without obvious stimuli. The
functional significance. The most notable colobomatous
rate of blinking varies greatly between species and under
defect of the lids is agenesis of the upper eyelid, observed
varying environmental influences. Blinking may occur
in kittens {7.5). This condition is part of a syndrome
unilaterally or bilaterally. The cat blinks less frequently
termed multiple ocular colobomas (MOC) that has been
than most other species (1-5 blinks/5 min7, 2 blinks/min),
observed in snow leopards in zoos and in the domestic
with half of these being incomplete. The dog blinks about
cat. Usually an individual kitten is presented, but an entire
3/min7 to 14/min?, with most of them incomplete. This
litter may be involved with variable manifestations within
normal infrequent blinking may explain the higher tear
the litter, from minor defects in the upper lateral lids to
production and increased ability to tolerate facial paralysis
in many animals compared to humans.
MOC is a bilateral lack of the lateral two-thirds of the
upper eyelid. The cause is unknown, and to date attempts
to prove a genetic link in the snow leopard have
DISEASES OF THE EYELIDS
failed14, 1s. There are no reports in the domestic cat to
support a genetic cause for either MOC or lid colobomas.
CONGENITAL DISEASES
Ankyloblepharon
 Clinical signs
The dog and cat are born with a physiologic ankylo-
+
 Young kitten with blepharospasm.
blepharon which lasts for 10-15 days. The ankylo-
 Bilateral defect of upper lids involving the temporal
blepharon may open prematurely with no adverse
 two-thirds of the lid. The normal lid margin is
reaction, or an exposure keratitis may develop10, 1l. The
missing, usually resulting in the facial hairs being
corneal  pathology
may be related more to an
misdirected toward the cornea (trichiasis). Varying
accompanying lack of lacrimal fluids and palpebral
degrees of malformation may be observed in a litter,
 jo sis f do ad oi ui saxa
from mild thinning of the lateral canthus to a large
develop, either a tarsorrhaphy should be performed
defect in the upper lid (7.5).
utilizing local anesthesia or copious amounts of ocular
 Variable amounts of keratitis are present under the
lubrica nts used to protect the cornea.
defect.
In the dog, a persistent ankyloblepharon associated
+
 Persistent pupillary membrane is the most common
aq oi paiodau uaag seu euapa Aeuownd qim
associated defect observed in individual kittens.
associated with feeding raw eggs to the dam. It was
guoaau ysipued pue saiau sndo aui jo seuoqoo
 postulated that avidin was responsible for this syndrome, 
(see Chapter 14, p.401).
as it corrected with cooking the eggs12.
Multifocal retinal dysplasia (see Chapter 14, p.401).
If neonatal conjuncti vitis occurs, the ankyloblepharon
+
 Microphthalmia is the most severe manifestation of
may be detrimental due to retention of exudates (7.4). If
MOC.
exudate or swelling is present, the lids should be opened
by spreading a hemostat at the medial canthus and
Course
applying topical antibiotics. Corneal perforation is the
The blepharospasm often abates with time; consequently,
most severe sequela of this syndrome. Cultures of the
as the cat gets older and is a better candidate for surgery,
exudate often yield a mixed bacterial infection.
the necessity to treat is often not as urgent.
7.4
7.5
7.4 Neonatal conjunctivitis in a puppy with physiologic
7.5 Young adult cat with bilateral eyelid agenesis or coloboma5.
ankyloblepharon. Note the swelling of the eyelids with
Note trichiasis but relatively normal cornea.
the purulent exudate at the medial canthus.
EYELIDS
149
7.6
7.6 Rotating a
 pedicle flap from the 
凸
lower lid to fill a
 colobomatous upper
 eyelid in a cat. The lid 
 is split into skin and 
conjunctiva and a
 pedicle flap is
 outlined from the
lower lid (A). The 
canthus is cut to 
 allow rotation and 
 squaring of the tip of
the pedicle and
 minimize ischemia
7.7 Patient in 7.5 24 hours after surgery, with a rotating pedicle
(B). The layers are
 graft from the upper forehead and a rotating pedicle conjunctival
transposed, leaving 
 Orbicularis m.
 graft from the lower conjunctival sac.
conjunctiva (C).
Transposition (D).
 Conjunctiva 
Sutured pedicle and 
Tarsus
donor area (E).
(Modified from
 Roberts and Bistner.
196817.) (m: muscle.)
C
Diagnosis
A young cat is usually presented with trichiasis, and
 upon detailed examination the normal mucocutaneous
junction of the margin is missing and the normal
curvature of the upper lid is deviated dorsally. A full
ophthalmic examination should be performed in order to
7.8 Cutler-Beard two-stage procedure for repair of eyelid defect5.
look for other colobomatous defects.
The procedure can be reversed for lower lid defects, but may create a
mild ptosis. A full thickness lid pedicle from the opposite lid is
Therapy
created, leaving a bridge of normal lid approximately 5 mm wide (A].
 Due to the small size of most patients when initially
The pedicle is placed and sutured in two layers; this is left to heal for
presented with MOC, they are not good candidates for
6 weeks (B, C). The pedicle is cut after healing; because it is under 
surgery because of mechanical and anesthetic difficulties.
tension the cut should be about 1 mm from the continuation of the
A variety of surgical procedures have been devised for
adjacent lid margin (D). The cut conjunctiva is sutured to the skin in
correction. Definitive surgery is usually postponed until
a continuous pattern, to form a new mucocutaneous border (E).
S-6 months of age.
Pedicle graft
A rotating pedicle skin graft from the lower lid, with or
without conjunctival grafting, may be used to fil the
 coloboma (7.6)17, 18. The author usually rotates the flap
down from the forehead, rather than take it from the
Cutler-Beard procedure
lower lid, because of the danger of creating ectropion in
The Cutler-Beard procedure will give excellent results,
 the lower lid. This approach also ensures the direction of
but the eye is covered for several weeks, which is a major
the hair is away from the globe (7.7).
 disadvantage since agenesis is a bilateral disease (7.8)i9.
150
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Cryoepilation
Therapy
Cryoepilation of the offending cilia is a rapid, easy
Therapy is surgical excision and repair of the defect {see
alternative to extensive plastic surgery, and can be
Eyelid neoplasia, Therapy, p.176). If the lesion extends to
performed on the very young kitten. This will remove the
the cornea, a superficial keratectomy will remove this
 trichiasis but will not correct the defect or protect the globe.
portion of the lesion.
Subdermal coffagen injection with a modified
Diseases of the cilia
Stades procedure
Diseases of the cilia are very common in the dog but
Wolfer20 recently described the injection of bovine subdermal
relatively rare in other species. Most of the conditions are
mollagen into the lid immediately above the eyelid coloboma,
probably inherited, but they have not been studied in
followed by lid splitting and removal of 1 cm (0.4 in) of skin
enough detail to determine the mode of inheritance.
the length of the coloboma. The remaining bulbar con-
junctiva was then mobilized and sutured about one-third of
Distichia
the distance across the wound bed that was created, with the
Introduction/etiology
remainder left to granulate. The relative simplicity of the
 Distichiasis is the presence of an additional row of lashes
procedure facilitated its use in young kittens.
on the lid margin. The prevailing hypothesis is that
distichia originate from metaplastic meibomian glands
Dermoid
(closely related to hair follicles embryologically) and
Introduction/etiology
 emerge on the lid margin. Alternatively, Raymond-Letron
 A dermoid is a choristoma or congenital misplacement of
 suoes iosy uis iye pasodd e na
tissues that are not normal to the location. The
dogs, that the hair follicles are abnormally located close to
misplacement involves dermal elements of skin, hair,
the meibomian glands that envelop the follicle and the hair
glandular tissue, and fat. Dermoids involving the eyelids
reaches the surface via the path of least resistance, which
may be an extension from extensive dermoids of the
is the duct of the meibomian gland. While most distichia
cornea and conjunctiva or an isolated island of tissue,
are thought to be developmental, they are not usually
usually near the lid margin. [
Dermoids have been
au ul laiel isaueu inq Addnd Sunos aui ul paaiasqo
observed in both the dog and cat, where inheritance has
growing dog. Distichia are also thought to arise due to
been suggested but not defined in the Burmese cat (7.9),
chronic inflammatory irritation to the meibomian glands,
Dachshund, St. Bernard, and GSD21, 22. A bilateral
and so may arise later in life24. The lashes can be stout or
syndrome has been found in Hereford calves, and
fine, few or numerous (7.11). Distichiasis is very common
pedigree analysis suggests either a recessive or a
in many breeds of dogs such as the American Cocker
polygenic trait for the condition23. The author has
Spaniel (75%+ incidence), Pekingese, Toy and Miniature
observed very large dermoids on the cornea of calves,
Poodle, Shetland Sheepdog, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,
and these dermoids have reflected onto the eyelids (7.10).
and Golden Retriever (see Chapter 15, p.471). The mode
of inheritance has been postulated as dominant with
Clinical signs
irregular penetrance2s.
 Tufts or masses on the lid margin with hair that often
extends onto the conjunctival surfaces and cornea.
 Clinical signs
 Hairs on the lid may point toward the eye and
 Most animals with distichia are asymptomatic, and
produce epiphora, blepharospasm, and keratitis (7.9).
therapy is not recommended simply because they are
present.
7.9
7.10
7.9 Dermoid at the lateral canthus of a Burmese cat. Note corneal
7.10 Massive dermoid on the cornea, extending across the
ulcera tion and neova scularization.
conjunctival sac to the lids, in a calf. The lesion was bilateral
 and was surgically rermoved.
EYELIDS
151
· Mild signs include epiphora and nonulcerative keratitis.
Surgical resection
 Severe cases of distichiasis will present with
Surgical procedures involving the lid margins, such as lid
 blepharospasm and ulcerative keratitis.
splitting and tarsoconjunctival resection (7.12), are
 currently out of favor with most surgeons, due to the risk
Diagnosis
of postoperative deformities of the eyelid and regrowth of
Diagnosis of distichiasis is made by observing the
hairs. Tarsoconjunctival resection performed on the upper 
presence of one or more hairs on one or more
P!
 lid removes most of the supporting tissue for the normal
margins. Magnification is often necessary to observe the 
cilia, resulting in their collapse onto the cornea. A lid plate
fine hairs. Examination against different backgrounds 
has been designed to facilitate lid splitting surgery28
 su aul a a (ias pue ba se yons)
 Resection of the meibomian glands with their distichia
visible. If distichia contact the ocular surface, they
from the conjunctival surface is a preferable method
become covered in a "dewdrop' of tears or mucus and
because it spares the lid margin (D in 7.12). A strip of
this may highlight their presence. If a hair is observed, it
tissue 2-3 mm in width is removed from the conjunctival
is important to determine that it is actually rubbing on
 side that includes the involved meibomian glands27,29, The
the cornea and is in the correct location to be associated
author uses this method combined with cryotherapy for
with the corneal pathology. Plucking out the distichia
extensive numbers of distichia over the length of the lid.
should then relieve the signs. The milder manifestations
of distichia such as epiphora have many causes; most
 dogs with distichia are asymptomatic; consequently, it is
important to establish cause and effect. If in doubt as to
the significance of the distichia, plucking with relief of
signs will confirm their role in producing the signs.
Distichia is the most common eyelid lesion
observed in dogs, but it produces appreciable signs
7.12 Various lid
7.12
in only a small percentage of affected animals. The
splitting techniques
凸
challenge is not in diagnosing distichiasis, but to
devised for distichia
attribute ocular signs accurately to the condition to
removal. True lid
 a void unnecessary surgery.
splitting with both
incisions on the lid
margin (A, B].
Therapy
Modification with 
A wide variety of surgical therapies have been used over
 only one lid margin
the years, with most having significant complications. The
incision (C).
most common complication of surgery is regrowth of
Tarsoconjunctival
hairs. Preliminary to performing any of the procedures, the
resection is the 
meibomian glands should be expressed by squeezing
safest procedure
against a firm plate or the handle of an instrument. This 
(D).
procedure pushes hidden hairs out of the meibomian
orifice; these hairs would otherwise remain overlooked
 and be considered regrowth at a later time25-27
7.11
7.11 Marked distichia of both lids, but only visualized well in the
photo of the upper lid of a Shih Tzu.
152
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Eectrolysis
Cryosurgery
paumun Suraouau noy Adeaun pio ue si siskiona
The germinal epithelium of hair follicles and melanocytes are
hairs. It involves passing a fine needle into each indivi-
p auond snq uza woy Anui m andaosns isou
dual hair follicle to destroy the follicle with an electric
noninvasive, rapid technique that is more effective than
current (7.13, 7.14). This is a very tedious procedure
electrolysis. Nitrous oxide is used to obtain a tissue tem-
when the hairs are numerous. The strength of the current
 perature of -25°C (-13°F) without sloughing. A chalazion 
is critical to destroy the hair follicle without causing
damp can be placed over the area of freezing to facilitate
excessive destruction of the lid. Recurrences are frequent
eversion and to decrease the blood flow to ensure an
when battery-operated electrolysis needles are used. If
adequate freeze. The author prefers not to use the chalazion
the power supply is not a battery, it is very easy to apply
damp on small dogs with very thin eyelids, to avoid excessive
excessive current, resulting in lid deformities and
tissue damage from excessive freezing. The probe is placed on
depigmented spots on the lid margin (7.15).
the conjunctival side over the area of the meibomian glands
mtil the ice ball reaches the trough on the lid margin (7.17).
Electrocautery
The author routinely double freezes the area. The hairs are
 Electrocautery from the conjunctival side30 running
removed after freezing. Freezing can occur over the lacrimal
parallel to the lid margin has been advocated for
distichia. This incision transects the base of the hair
The postoperative swelling with cryotherapy
is
follicle, allowing the hair to be easily plucked. Regrowth
usually mild and transient. A topical steroid
is
of hairs may be frequent (7.16).
administered after freezing unless the condition
is
7.13
7.13 Electrolysis of distichia.
 7.14 Battery operated electrolysis unit. This method is prone to regrowth
of hairs, but will not disfigure the lid.
7.15 Pekingese that has lid margin deformities after electrolysis with a
hyfra ca tor.
7.14
7.15
EYELIDS
153
accompanied by corneal μlceration. Depigmentation of
All forms of distichia therapy will have some
lid margins occurs post freezing, but most dogs regain
regrowth of hairs in some patients.
the pigment over several weeks. The owners of show
dogs must be forewarned of this complication if the dog
has pigmented hair or lid margins.
Trichiasis
Introduction/etiology
Carbon dioxide laser
Trichiasis is when normally placed hair follicles or cilia are
g pasn uaag sy asel (oo) aixo uoqo au
abnormally directed toward the cornea. Trichiasis may be
distichia removal but is very tedious to use and has the
congenital or acquired from lid scarring or from
potential for excessive tissue damage. The CO, laser,
entropion. Congenital trichiasis may be unilateral or
while expensive, has become available in practice. The
bilateral, involves the upper lid, and is usually found in
author has no experience with the use of the CO, laser
 small breeds of dogs (7.18). Acquired trichiasis may be due
for distichia, only with its complications.
to redundant skin over the head pushing down on the
upper lid, such as in the Shar Pei, Chow Chow, Bulldog,
Plucking
hounds such as the Bloodhound, and St. Bernard (see
Plucking of distichia is tedious, requires a pair of
Ptosis, p.163). In all species, lacerations of the lid that are
 nontoothed forceps with good apposition, and is only a
 not properly attended to may result in trichiasis (see
temporary measure. Plucking is useful to ascertain
 Lacerations, p.171). Entropion in all species is significant
whether hairs are responsible for the clinical signs, before
because of the trichiasis that it produces.
performing definitive surgery.
7.16 Electrocautery used to cut across the base of the cilia. Distichia
7.16
will easily pluck out but often regrow. (Courtesy of Dr. R. Ris, Cornell 
Veterinary College, Ithaca, NY)
77771
7.17 Cryothermy to the meibomian gland region, utilizing a chalazion
damp to position and restrict blood flow, to treat distichia in a dog.
Freezing is suspended when the ice ball reaches the middle of the lid 
margin. This can be performed over the lacrimal puncta without injury.
7.18 Congenital trichiasis in a Pomeranian. Note the collapsed 
eyelashes on the cornea. The condition was bilateral.
7.17
7.18
154
OpHTHAlMIC DISEASE In VEteRINARY MeDICINE
 Clinical signs
7.19
+ Epiphora is the mildest sign.
+Keratitis, either ulcerative or nonulcerative, is the
usual significant sign.
 In congenital trichiasis, the cilia of the upper lateral
two-thirds of the lid are collapsed on the cornea but
the lid is not rolled inward.
Therapy
Trichiasis following scarring or from laceration may require
excision, advancing pedicle grafts, or rotating pedicle flaps
to correct the lid defect as well as to correct the trichiasis.
Trichiasis/entropion due to excessive skin folds over the
top of the head is difficult to manage. Correction usually
requires massive resection of skin folds over the head and,
perhaps, anchoring sutures to the underlying periosteum or
fascia (see Entropion, p.157 and Ptosis, p.163). Stades has
described a technique for removal of lid skin, allowing it to
removes the cilia, it has the esthetic disadvantage of a
wound healing by second intention.
 Congenital trichiasis of the upper lid has been treated
similarly to entropion by excision of adjacent skin, but this
 may relapse. Cryotherapy has been a rapid and effective
alternative method for destroying the offending hairs.
Adventitious, ectopic, or aberrant cilia
Introduction/etiology
In the dog, cilia frequently grow aberrantly through the
conjunctiva
toward the
globe.
Thecilia
are
characteristically very short, 2-5 mm from the lid
 margin, and are usually in the upper lid (7.20). There are
usually one or two cilia, although rarely an island of cilia
may be present. The condition was originally described
7.19 Stades' method for correction of trichiasis and ptosis.
 in the Boxer28, 36 and is rare in other species37.
 Preopera tive appearance with skin folds (A]. Incision is made
0.5-1 mm above the meibomian gland orifices; a second incision
Clinical signs
follows the dorsal orbital rim (B). The superior wound margin is 
Blepharospasm and varying degrees of a focal, usually
 positioned with interrupted sutures to the palpebral subcutis, just
ulcerative keratitis are characteristic because the cilium is
 5uperior to the base of meibomian glands (C), and then with
short and stiff {7.20). The history is often one of acute
'senuos pue saieinuean eane buuieuan aul'(al aanns snonuuon
 onset. The ulcer may be vertically linear, following the
(From Stades, 198734.)
path of the lid across the cornea while blinking.
Diagnosis
Aberrant cilia are often overlooked and consequently
7.20
misdiagnosed because the lid margin must be everted to
observe the conjunctival surface, and magnification
{5-10x) is critical to visualize the very short cilium. The
location of the cilium is suspected by the location of the
 ulcer. A small elevation or depigmented spot is often
present where the hair emerges.
 Magnification of S-10x is usually necessary to.
visualize the short hairs. It is very easy to overlook
 aberrant cilia as the cause of a nonhealing ulcer.
Therapy
While this is the most difficult of the cilial problems to diag-
nose, it is the easiest to treat. The therapy for aberrant cilia
is excision of a block of conjunctiva, utilizing a chalazion
clamp to fixate the region and maintain hemostasis (7.21).
D'Anna et al.37a utilized a 2-3 mm dermal punch to remove
7.20 Aberant cilia (arrow) in the upper palpebral conjunctiva of a
the aberrant cilia. Surgery is usually successful, although
dog. It is recognized by the small depigmented spot and a very short
 o a o a  o s 
cilia. Note the keratitis.
EYELIDS
155
excision. Sedation and local anesthetic infiltration are all
et al.38 measured the palpebral length in dogs and cats 
that is necessary for restraint. The corneal ulcer usually
and found a mean of 32.7 ± 4.2 mm for dogs and 27.8 ±
heals rapidly after removal of the cilia.
2.7 mm for cats. In general, breeds with longer palpebral
fissures are predisposed to entropion, but individuals
Trichomegaly
with entropion do not have longer fissures than normal
Trichomegaly (long eyelashes) is observed in the American 
individuals of the same breed. In the Sphinx cat, macro-
Cocker Spaniel and Shih Tzu. The cilia are normally
pblepharon with entropion has been observed.
placed but of such extreme length that they fall forward
over the eye (7.22). However, no ocular irritation occurs
 Clinical signs
with the syndrome and thus no therapy is required.
+ Excessively large palpebral fissure that is most
evident when the skin over the head is pulled taut.
Macroblepharon (euryblepharon)
 Ectropion and perhaps entropion due to floppy lids.
Introduction/etiology
Conjunctivitis due to exposure.
Occasionally,  macroblepharon  (enlarged palpebral
● In the brachycephalic breeds, varying degrees of
fissure) is unilateral, but typically it is bilateral in various
ulcerative or nonulcerative keratitis may develop
breeds of hounds, St. Bernards, and spaniels, where it is
from exposure with lagophthalmos and
associated with ectropion and often entropion (7.23). In
macroblepharon. A shallow orbit combined with a
breeds with taut skin, such as brachycephalics, ectropion
large palpebral fissure predisposes to proptosis with
is not present but varying degrees of exposure keratitis
minimal effort, such as with restraint from the nape
and proptosis of the globe is more likely (7.24). Stades
of the neck.
7.21
7.22
7.21 Removal of aberrant cilium utilizing chalazion forceps for
7.22 Trichomegaly in an American Cocker Spaniel. The appearance is
immobilization and hemostasis.
rather dramatic, but few signs are produced.
7.23
7.24
7.23 Macroblepharon with ectropion and entropion in a Mastiff.
7.24 Macroblepharon in a Boston Terier with increased amounts
of exposed globe. Corneal scarring and pigmentation is evident in
one eye.
156
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
7.25
7.25 Lateral
7.26
canthoplasty using a
A
halving technique for
strength. Triangles of
skin and conjunctiva 
of equal size are
removed from 
opposite lids. The
2
length of the triangle
along the lid margin 
is equal to the
B
amount of shortening 
desired. The upper lid 
is incised along xy. xy
is transposed and
sutured to the tip of
the triangle in the 
lower lid (C). The full 
7.26 Blepharophimosis in a Pomeranian. The dog appears
C
thickness cut upper
blepharospastic due to small fisures. Marked epiphora was present 
lid is transposed 
due to tight lid-globe conformation resulting in a small lacrimal lake.
down to form the
 Enlargerment of the palpebral fissures relieved the epiphora.
new lateral canthus.
and the remaining cut
surfaces are sutured.
This technique
provides a broader
healing area than cut
lid margins. and thus
is less prone to
dehiscence.
Microblepharon or blepharophimosis
Introd uction/etiology
A small palpebral fissure in the absence of microph-
thalmos is observed bilaterally in several breeds of dog.
Breeds such as the Collie, Shetland Sheepdog, Chow
Chow, Shar Pei, Kerry Blue Terrier, and English Bull
Terrier are typically affected. The condition does not
 usually produce signs, although marginally elevated IOP
in the Bull Terrier has been associated with the condition.
 Clinical signs
● Little if any exposed conjunctiva or sclera even with
manipulation of the lids.
Diagnosis
+
Tight lid-globe conformation, which may result in a
 Diagnosis is by inspection.
limited lacrimal lake and resultant epiphora (7.26).
 Globe may appear small because of limited exposure.
Thera py
+
 Entropion is the most serious sequela and usually
Conservative
results in significant corneal pathology because of
Antibiotic/glucocorticoid preparations are used to con-
the tight lid-globe conformation.
trol the conjunctivitis, but only with caution in brachy-
cephalic breeds. Ocular lubricants are administered to
Diagnosis
protect the eye in brachycephalic breeds.
 The diagnosis is usually by inspection, but microblepharon
may be overlooked as the predisposing cause for entropion.
Canthoplasty
Lateral canthoplasty is performed  in brachycephalic
Therapy
breeds to protect the cornea (7.25)39. Alternatively, a
● No therapy is necessary for most animals with
medial canthoplasty may be performed to shorten the
minimal signs.
fissure and obliterate a medial entropion (see Entropion,
+
 Chronic epiphora may be treated medically with low-
p.24). If medial entropion is not a problem, lateral
 dose tetracycline orally to lessen the tear staining.
canthoplasty is preferred beca use of the esthetics.
 Surgical removal of the third eyelid gland may
enlarge the lacrimal lake, but risks predisposing the
Ectropion correction
patient to KCS.
Procedures to shorten the lids must also provide traction
Entropion should be corrected; this may require
on the skin to avoid a shortened lid that still droops {see
creation of a lateral canthal ligament to evert the
Ectropion, p.161).
lateral canthus (see Entropion, Therapy, p.158).
EYELIDS
157
Entropion
Entropion involving the lateral canthus in mesati-
Introduction/etiology
cephalic breeds with broad heads may also be associated
 Entropion is a rolling of the eyelid inward toward the eye.
with a lateral canthal ligament that is misdirected in a
It is a very common condition in dogs and is less common
more medial direction. Entropion is seen commonly in the
in the cat, horse, and cow. It is considered familial in the
lateral half of the lower lid. However, it may extend to the
dog, but the genetics are unknown40. It is probably a
lateral third of the upper lid in the St. Bernard, Bulldog,
combination of inherited conformation and exciting
Boxer, Chow Chow, Kerry Blue Terrier, Rottweiler, and in
environmental influences, and thus does not behave as a
 spaniels, retrievers, and pointers (7.28). Entropion
simple autosomal trait. In large animals it is most common
associated with ocular pain can occur in any breed. An
 in neonates. In sheep it is reported to be inherited41, 42.
entropion of the medial lower lid and, less frequently, of
The tarsus in domestic animals is poorly developed
the upper medial lid is seen commonly in the Miniature
 and lacks the rigidity found in the human (check your
and Toy Poodle, Pekingese, Pug, English Bulldog,
own upper lid). In addition, the lids are supported by the
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, and Maltese.
Entropions can be classified as conformational,
set' eyes, or in conditions of ocular pain where the
spa stic, or cicatricial.
retractor bulbi muscle pulls the globe into the orbit, this
 support is lost or is minimal. A loss of orbital mass or
Conformationa!
ocular mass (phthisis bulbi) may also be responsible for
Conformational entropion is often called congenital,
loss of lid support, resulting in entropion (7.27). Without
although entropion is not usually 
present at birth.
the internal support to the lid and with the additional
Entropion in the horse and sheep is usually present in
loss of support from the globe, contraction of the
neonates and involves the lower lid. The Shar Pei typically
orbicularis oculi muscle causes the lid to roll inward.
has entropion of very early onset. Environmental
influences are also present, as most patients ha ve a period
of normalcy before the entropion is noted. Early
intervention by counteracting the spastic component may
halt the process and avoid definitive surgery.
7.27
Conformational features that predispose to entropion
are redundant folds over the head {see Ptosis, p.163),
deep set eyes that do not support the lids, wide head
conformation in mesaticephalic breeds that alters the
 direction of the tension of the lateral canthal ligament,
 and a personality trait of excessive guarding of the eyes
or blepharospasm with pain on ocular manipulation.
Spastic
Spastic entropion is secondary to a painful ocular
condition such as corneal ulcer. Most conformational
before becoming manifest, and are probably initiated by
conditions such as conjunctivitis that stimulate blepharo-
spasm. A vicious cycle of pain and blepharospasm occurs
7.27 Enophthalmos in a horse after multiple fractures of the orbital
that, once it is well established in conformationally
bones and floor has resulted in entropion due to lack of lid support.
predisposed animals, is not relieved by removing the
pain. Almost all entropions in cats begin as a spastic
entropion that, if allowed to remain, becomes perma-
7.28
nent. Topical anesthetic relieves the pure spastic
entropion and allows the surgeon to estimate the spastic
 component for surgical evaluation.
Cicatricia!
sca rring and contracture.
 Clinical signs
Mild
Epiphora and conjunctivitis, often associated with exces-
 sive lymphoid follicles, is typical (7.28). It is probable that
conjunctivitis is the initiating factor in many instances, as
it is usually present in both eyes, and entropion may be
 present in only one eye (thus entropion did not cause
conjunctivitis). Dogs with lower lid entropions may
 protect the cornea by prolapsing the third eyelid. Epiphora 
7.28 Entropion of the lower lid in an 8-week-old Irish Setter puppy.
produces depigmentation of the inverted lid margin.
No corneal lesions have yet developed due to the third eyelid and 
Varying degrees of blepharospasm are usually present.
deep orbit.
158
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Modest
periodically if necessary. Surgical staples have also been
Blepharospasm (moderate), corneal ulcer, or focal super-
utilized in place of everting sutures.
ficial keratitis with scarring, pigment, and neovasculari-
The author has also utilized tarsorrhaphies in 2-3-
zation are present (7.29). Bacterial infection may occur with
week-old puppies, but the puppy cannot see if the
 mucopurulent ocular discharge, rather than epiphora.
condition is bilateral. The sutures have often only
 remained in place for 2-3 days, but have usually been
Severe
successful in correcting the spastic entropion.
Extreme blepharospasm and, usually, a severe keratitis
 are present, although the cornea may be hard to evaluate
Fornix-based sutures
until the animal is anesthetized. Blepharospasm may even
Williams43a used a suture pattern to evert lids with entro-
 persist after anesthesia.
pion that was a modification of the Quickert-Rathbun
technique utilized in humans. A double-armed 5-0 suture
Diagnosis
was placed beginning from the conjunctival side at the
 Blepharospasm with absence of the normal hairless zone
fornix and passed in the lid to exit the skin above the lid
 of the lid margin against the cornea is diagnostic. The
margin. When both needles were passed this created a
facial hairs extend to the apparent lid margin (7.28,
mattress pattern that was tied on the skin adjacent to the
7.29). The head should be examined unrestrained, as
lid margin. Williams only used the technique with lower lid
 manipulation of the head will precipitate or exaggerate
 entropions. The technique would be best with spastic and
blepharospasm in many dogs. The head is supported by
mild 
entropions
that
may self-correct once
the
 lifting under the mandible without touching the side or
 blepharospasms are relieved.
top of the head. The animal should be examined before
and after the application of topical anesthetics.
Subcutaneous injection
Agents such as penicillin have been injected subcuta-
Therapy
neously adjacent to the entropion in sheep and foals.
Everting mattress sutures
Injection of approximately 1 ml of penicillin pushes the
 Most patients that are temporized by placing everting
lid away from the globe and may break
 the
pain-blepharospasm cycle. Injection of more irritating
unless presented in the early, purely spastic, phase of the
substances, such as mineral oil, results in a foreign body
disease. The objective is to relieve the primary condition
 granuloma and is not recommended.
(corneal ulcer, conjunctivitis) and to stop the pain-spasm
cycle. Spastic entropions, acute onset entropions, and
entropions in the neonate and young animal of all species
may be treated by placing 2-3 nylon sutures in a vertical
matress pattern in the skin of the appropriate lid (7.30)43.
A un sadnd ad ius ui aunu son su s
7.30
instances this may be curative or at least relieves the problem
until the puppy grows to the point of being suitable for a
more definitive procedure. The everting effect of the sutures
often only lasts a few weeks, but new sutures can be placed
7.29
7.29 Entropion of the lower lateral lid and lateral canthus in a
7.30 Placement of everting mattress sutures in a puppy to treat
Rottweiler. Note the corneal pigmentation.
spastic entropion or to allow growth of the animal before performing 
a definitive procedure. Often such sutures are combined with a
Hotz-Celsus procedure (7.31] to counteract initial blepharospasm
from surgery and medica tion5.
EYELIDS
159
Removal of skin
7.31
Established entropion requires surgical correction.
Various procedures have been devised, but most patients
respond to the simple removal of an ellipse of skin and,
possibly, of underlying orbicularis muscle {Hotz-Celsus
 procedure) adjacent to the entropion (7.31). The amount
of skin removed and the length of the incision is a
judgment decision, which may be estimated by clamping
with hemostats. The maximum amount of skin removed
is usually about S-6 mm at the widest part of the ellipse.
Removal of underlying orbicularis muscle is certainly not
harmful, but is not necessary. If only a short length of lid
is affected, excising an ellipse without involving the
normal adjacent lid is difficult, and correction using a
Y-V procedure may minimize a secondary ectropion
(7.32, 7.33). The Hotz-Celsus procedure can be
combined with lateral full thickness wedge excision of
the lid margin to tighten up the lower lidt3b, This would
seem most appropriate in dogs with entropion associated
with slack or floppy eyelids.
7.31 Hotz-Celsus procedure for correction of lower lid entropion in a 
Creation and cutting of lateral canthal figaments
dog. The use of a lid plate facilitates incisions, and excision of
In patients where the lateral canthus is rolling inward,
 orbicularis muscle is optional. The incision closest to the lid margin is
lateral canthal ligaments can _be fashioned from the
just within the hairline and the maximum width is typically 4-6 mm.
orbicularis muscle, as in 7.34. This procedure is also fre-
quently used when a second attempt at surgical correction
is necessary44. However, in the author's experience, the
initial tautness produced is lost over several weeks.
7.32
7.34
7.33
1
7.34 Modified Wyman's lateral canthoplasty in a dog. Strips of
 orbicularis muscle are fashioned and sutured under tension to the
7.32, 7.33 Y-V procedure for entropion in a dog. This is indicated
 Zygomatic bone periosteum to pull the lateral canthus outward. It is 
for entropion involving a short length of the lid and avoids
rarely performed now as lateral canthal ligament tenotomy is superior.
overcorrection of adjacent normal lid.
 There is a marked tendency for overcorrection, and the ligaments
usually do not maintain contraction for more than a few weeks.
160
OpHThAlMIC DisEASe In VeTeRINArY MeDICInE
7.35
7.36
A
7.35 Lateral canthal tenotomy performed in a dog by cutting the taut
band through the conjunctival surface. Additional lid shortening or 
Hotz-Celsus may need to be performed, depending on the conformation.
Recently, a tenotomy of the overdeveloped lateral
inward rolling lateral canthus (7.35). Any remaining
 entropion of the lower and upper lid is repaired by skin
 excision and/or the macroblepharon is shortened. This
procedure has given good results and is not as laborious
as creating the canthal ligaments.
Skin excision with tarsal pedicles
Elliptical skin excision with the creation of tarsal pedicles
G
that are anchored in pockets away from the lid margin is
a method used to minimize a recurrence of entropion4s.
The principle is similar to the lateral canthal ligaments
procedure, except the tarsal pedicle tags are smaller and
the tension is perpendicular to the lid margin.
Medial canthoplasty
7.36 Pocket flap medial canthoplasty used to shorten the palpebral
Medial entropion in brachycephalics is most easily
fissure and obliterate medial entropion and lacrimal caruncle trichiasis in
treated by performing a medial canthoplasty (7.36)46,47
the dog (A). The lid is split along the length to be shortened (B). Damage
If treated by routine skin excision, entropion usually
to the lower lacrimal canaliculus must be avoided (by passing a catheter
recurs in the brachycephalic breeds because of the
 if necessary]. A strip of lid margin is removed (C). The inner half of the lid
redundant skin in this region. Medial canthoplasty
 is cut along the border (D). The upper triangle is rotated into the lower
simply obliterates the lid region that had the entropion.
 pocket by a suture placed at the tip of the triangle (E). The cut lid
 Owners must be forewarned that the appearance will be
margins are sutured (F). The final appearance (G). The large healing
modestly altered (7.37).
 surfaces of lids that have been halved create stronger adhesions.
Lateral canthal tenotomy
Mesaticephalic breeds with involution of the lateral can-
 thus, usually in combination with entropion of the lower
7.37
lid, may respond to lateral canthal tenotomy by itself or,
more commonly, in conjunction with lid shortening or lid
eversion (7.35). After transection of the lateral canthal
ligament, the size and position of the lids are evaluated to
determine what additional steps are needed. Frequently,
lid shortening or eversion will also be necessary.
No one surgical procedure is effective for all
patients with entropion. A detailed study of the
conformation while the patient is as relaxed as
 possible is necessary to select the most appropriate
 technique and location for surgery.
7.37 Lhasa Apso with bilateral medial canthoplasties, performed for
keratitis of the medial cornea from entropion and trichiasis. Note
that the eyes will appear further apart.
EYELIDS
161
7.38
7.40 Modified
7.40
Kuhnt-Szymanowski
 technique for ectropion
correction. The lids are 
studied to estimate the 
amount of shortening. A
 skin incision is made 3 mm 
from, and parallel to, the 
lid margin from the lateral
one-half to three-quarters
of the lower lid (A]. The 
incision cunves
dorsolaterally to a point
1.0-1.5 cm beyond the 
lateral canthus, following
 7.38 Conformational ectropion in a Gordon Setter. Note the
the natural curve of the 
conjunctivitis.
lower lid. The skin flap is
undermined from the 
orbicularis muscle, and the
7.39
amount of estimated
shortening is made by
removing a triangular
shaped piece of lid margin
from the middle of the
lower lid (B). The
tarsoconjunctival layer is
sutured with 6-0
 absorbable suture in a
simple interrupted or 
continuous pattern. The lid
 margin is tied in a figure
of eight pattern, to avoid
suture ends rubbing the 
cornea (C). The previously
7.39 Cicatricial ectropion in a Miniature Poodle that had trauma to
dissected skin flap is now made taut, the excess skin excised, and the
the lower lid several months previously. The condition is unilateral.
skin sutured (D, E).
Ectropion
(7.39). Unfortunately, the most common cause is
Introduction/etiology
iatrogenic overcorrection from entropion surgery.
Ectropion is eversion of the lower lid. It is common in
dogs but rare in other animals. There are four forms:
Paralytic
conformational, transient, cicatricial, and paralytic.
 Paralytic ectropion may occur from facial nerve paralysis.
Conformationa!
Therapy
Dogs such as hounds, setters, spaniels, retrievers, St.
While ectropion is common, therapy directed towards
 Bernards, Bulldogs, and Boxers are usually affected
the primary problem is relatively infrequently requested.
(7.38). In some breeds, such as hounds, a degree of
Medical treatment of the associated conjunctivitis with
ectropion is considered normal.
topical antibiotic-steroid preparations  is the most
 frequent form of therapy.
Transient
Surgical correction should be postponed until about
Hunting breeds, such as retrievers and setters, may
6 months of age or when adult conformation is obtained,
exhibit intermittent ectropion that becomes manifest late
 as some animals improve with growth. A modification of
in the day, after exercise, or when the animal is relaxed.
the Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure has given good
This is actually a subtype of conformational ectropion.
 results in cases of moderate ectropion (7.40)48. A variety
of other procedures usually succeed in shortening the
Cicatricia!
palpebral fissure but do not correct the slackness.
Ectropion may occur secondary to scar contracture in the
Ectropions that are localized to a notch in the middle of
lid. This form is usually unilateral and is relatively rare
the lid can be repaired by simple excision of the notch
162
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
and shortening of the lid. The most difficult to correct
Large nasal folds
are those associated with marked redundancy of skin
Introduction/etiology
over the head that has very little subcutaneous
Nasal fold problems are overdiagnosed as the cause of
attachments. In this instance the usual lid shortening
corneal disease in Pekingese and other brachycephalic
with minor tucks of skin is not sufficient to overcome the
breeds. Careful examination of the medial lids behind the
looseness and weight of the skin over the side and top of
nasal fold will often reveal the problem as a medial
the head.
 entropion. Both factors may be present and producing
corneal disease (7.42).
 Relatively few patients with ectropion undergo
surgical correction unless it is accompanied by
 Clinical signs
entropion.
 Mild: epiphora.
 Modest: chronic superficial keratitis with a
A V-Y blepharoplasty is specific and successful with
 pigmented wedge in the medial conjunctiva and
modest amounts of cicatricial ectropion. The V-Y plasty
cornea.
is not recommended for other types of ectropion (7.41).
 Severe or acute signs: ulcerative keratitis in the
medial cornea.
Signs may occur from multiple causes such as medial
entropion, distichiasis, and lagophthalmos due to
shallow orbits. Pekingese may 1
have all of these
conditions, so sometimes it is difficult to know which of
A
the conditions is producing the problem.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis depends on demonstration that the nasal fold
hairs are rubbing on the area of pathology, and that a
medial lower lid entropion is not behind the fold.
Therapy
F
Conservative
 In mild cases or in show dogs, applying ointments to
make the hairs lie flat is all the owners may allow.
Surgical excision
Excision may meet with owner resistance as this is an
expected part of the breed conformation. Complete
 excision is performed by cutting at the base of the nosefold
C
and suturing the cut edges. Cut suture ends should not be
directed toward the eye, so a continuous pattern is pre-
ferred. Incomplete excision is a better cosmetic solution,
but if the eyes are extremely prominent, this may not be 
sufficient to reduce contact with hair.
7.42
D
7.41 V-Y correction of cicatrical ectropion (A]. Dissection of scar
7.42 Trichiasis frorm large nose folds in a Pekingese.
tissue (B). Mobilization of adjacent skin (C). Suturing the V incision 
without incorporating original incised lid skin pushes the skin toward 
the eye (D). The final appearance (E).
EYELIDS
163
Lagophthalmos
Diagnosis
Introduction/etiology
Lagophthalmos is demonstrated by being able to touch
Lagophthalmos is an inability to close the eyelids
 the cornea without eliciting a total blink or eliciting only
 completely In animals, due to the presence of a third eyelid,
a partial blink. With chronicity, most animals probably
lagophthalmos may be tolerated reasonably well, but the
also have decreased corneal sensation. The clinician must
 cornea over time is likely to develop secondary exposure
differentiate between lagophthalmos due to a lack of
problems. Lagophthalmos can be congenital or aquired.
motor innervation, and cranial nerve V paralysis and a
Congenital lagophthalmos is common in Pekingese
lack of sensation to the eyelids and/or cornea when
due to very shallow orbits. The eyes are often so
testing the palpebral and corneal reflexes.
prominent that the lids are unable to close completely
unless an added facial effort is made.
 Clinical signs
Lagophthalmos as a result of facial nerve paralysis is
 Signs of lagophthalmos are ulceration, pigmentation, or
a common isolated symptom in the American Cocker
scarring of the cornea. Often the ulcers may appear in the
Spaniel, and it occurs with inner ear disease in all
morning after sleeping with the eyes partially open.
breeds49. Facial nerve paralysis is idiopathic in 75% of
dogs and 2s% of cats. In the horse, most cases of facial
Therapy
nerve paralysis are far enough peripheral (halter injuries)
 Lagophthalmos secondary to facial nerve paralysis usually
that they do not involve the lids. Exophthalmos from
does not require therapy unless the animal is also very
increased orbital mass, such as tumor, infammation,
exophthalmic. Soft contact lens or partial permanent
hemorrhage, and edema, can cause lagophthalmos.
 tarsorrhaphy may be performed if signs are noted (7.43).
Lagophthalmos from exophthalmos due to orbital
space-occupying lesions may require tarsorrhaphy until
the orbital lesion is resolved.
7.43 Technique of placing
7.43
Congenital lagophthalmos in the brachycephalic
tarsorrhaphy sutures. The
breeds will benefit from either lateral or medial
drawing depicts creating 
canthoplasty to prevent multiple bouts of ulceration and
raw surfaces for adhesions.
decrease the risk of proptosis of the globe. Lateral
but this is rarely performed.
 canthoplasty gives better cosmetic results than medial
Sutures are placed half 
canthoplasty (7.25).
thickness and emerge and 
Artificial tear preparations or lubricants are often
enter on the lid margin. The
 administered in addition to the above procedures.
use of rubber band stents 
 and the suture pattern
Ptosis
force the sutures away from
Introduction/etiology
the globe. The sutures 
Ptosis is an inability to elevate the upper eyelid to a
should be snug, to
normal degree. Ptosis may be acquired or congenital, and
eliminate exposure of
due either to pathology of the muscles that elevate the lid
suture across the palpebral
(levator palpebrae or Miller's muscle) (7.44), disease of
fissure. The medial canthus
the peripheral nerves or CNS foculomotor or sym-
can be left open to 
pathetic fibers or centers), or redundant skin over the
administer medica tion.
head weighing down the upper lid (7.45).
7.45 Ptosis in a
7.45
Shar Pei,
secondary to
redundant skin
over the forehead.
7.44 Horner's syndrome in a cat after cleansing the ear canals. Note
the modest ptosis, prolapse of the third eyelid, and miosis.
164
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
7.46
The most common cause of ptosis is weight of
redundant skin, and this is seen in St. Bernards.
English Bulldogs, Chow Chows, Shar Peis, and
hounds.
 Clinical signs
If ptosis is associated with neurologic disease, it may be
accompanied by either a dilated or a constricted pupil.
With sympathetic denervation (Horner's syndrome), the
 pupil is miotic (7.44); with oculomotor denervation, if
the parasympathetic fibers are affected, the pupil is
dilated. Generalized muscular dystrophy may occasion-
ally be a ca use of ptosis.
Diagnosis
7.46 The dog in 7.45 immediately after fold rermoval and entropion
The palpebral fissure should be carefully examined for
surgery of the lower lids. The lower lids appear overcorrected due to
symmetry and to eliminate the presence of blepharo-
tem porary everting mattress sutures.
 spasm. A neurologic and physical examination should be
performed and function of other extraocular muscles and
pupil should be evaluated.
7.47
Therapy
Frontalis m.
Orbital
The treatment for ptosis is usually not specific except for
rim
redundant skin problems (see Entropion, p.157, and
Trichiasis, p.154). Excision of skin folds is a laborious job of
suturing, but if adequate amounts are removed; it results in 
significant improvement (7.46). A technique of creating a
sling of mersilene mesh that is anchored to the periosteum
ofthe skull to elevate the upper lid has given excellent results
Periosteum
in the dog (7.47, 7.48)50-52 While this requires acquiring the
mesh and runs the increased risk of infection (burying a
foreign body), the excellent results obtained to date make it
 an attractive alternative to skin fold excision for owners
who are insistent on retaining the forehead folds.
ACQUIRED DISEASES
Blepharoedema
Introd uction/etiology
7.47 Ptosis correction utilizing a mersilene sling in a Shar Pei. Five
Blepharoedema is usually a sign rather than a disease in
small stab incisions are made in the skin (A] and the strip of 
itself. The skin of the lid is thin and loose to allow
mersilene that is attached to a straight needle is passed from one
mobility, resulting in dramatic edema with minimal insult.
incision to the next, and finally anchored to the temporal bone
Bilateral blepharoedema may be caused by an
periosteum (B). Usually two slings are needed per lid. (m: muscle.)
immune-mediated process, such as angioedema from
hypersensitivity to insect bites/stings, vaccines (7.49),
systemic medications, or food. Trauma, whether self-
7.48
inflicted or external in origin, is a common cause of
blepharoedema. The combination of ocular allergy with
mast cell degranulation and self-inflicted trauma from
rubbing, is common in the horse.
Venomous insect and snake bites, and topical
chemicals such as surgical scrubs, may produce
chemically-induced blepharoedema. Infectious causes
of periocular and orbital inflammation are common
ca uses of blepharoedema.
Clinical signs
Blepharoedema is usually unilateral with trauma, bee
 stings, and periorbital cellulitis, and bilateral with
allergic angioedema and many forms of blepharitis.
Associated signs are often of importance in differential
 diagnosis: exophthalmos, dermatitis elsewhere, edema
7.48 Shar Pei that has had bilateral frontal sling surgery. Note the folds
 of the muzzle, and perhaps urticaria on the body with
over the head are retained. Overcorrection can produce lagophthalmo5.
 angioneurotic edema.
EYELIDS
165
7.49
7.50
7.49 Bilateral angioedema in a puppy after vaccination.
7.50 Hordeolum, ('stye′ in a dog. It is a small acute abscess of the
 meibomian glands.
7.51
7.52
7.52 Local furunculosis or deep pyoderma of hair follicles in a dog.
history was compatible with an atopic dog. The dog responded 
 Onset was rapid, and while the condition responded to antibiotics,
initially to 5ystemic antibiotics and steroids, but required low-dose
 5everal days of therapy were necessary.
 steroids to keep the condition from recurring.
Therapy
Allergic blepharoedema is usually treated with systemic
diffuse or focal and acute or chronic. Examples of focal
 steroids and/or antihistamines, although most patients
blepharitis are hordeolums, chalazions, and focal
 improve spontaneously. Trauma and acute inflammation
pyogranulomas. A hordeolum (stye) is an acute
(post surgical) often benefit from initial cold packs in the
abscessation of one or more meibomian glands of the
first 12-24 hours, and later by hot packing. Blepharoedema
eyelid (7.50). A chalazion is a chronic lipid granuloma,
secondary to infection should be specifically treated.
 caused from meibomian gland contents being liberated
 Elizabethan collars to prevent self-trauma in small animals, 
into the adjacent tissue after blockage of the gland.
or face masks in the horse, may be beneficial.
Focal pyogranuloma and furunculosis (7.51, 7.52) are
deep infections of the hair follicless3, 54.
Blepharitis
The causes of blepharitis are similar to and as varied
Introductionjetiology
 as the causes of dermatitis in general. Many forms of
Blepharitis is a common syndrome, but is often ignored
 dermatitis with a potential for generalized involvement
if it is part of a more generalized dermatitis, unless 
secondary corneal disease occurs. Blepharitis may be
with, or selectively involve, the eyelids.
166
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Parasites
lesions have become a rarity with contemporary routine
Mites. Demodectic mange in the dog and cat, notoedric
deworming programs.
mange in the cat, and sarcoptic mange in the dog and cow
(7.53) produce a dry scaly dermatitis that often involves
Viruses
the eyelids. Demodectic mange is typically nonpruritic,
In the cat, feline herpesvirus 1 {FHV-1) has been
while notoedric and sarcoptic mange are intensely
implicated in producing an ulcerative facial and nasal
pruritic. Secondary infections with bacteria may produce
dermatitis with an eosinophilic/neutrophilic inflamma-
a moist dermatitis and self-trauma.
tory response. Holland et al.s7a were able to detect FHV-
Cuterebra larvae. Cuterebra fly larvae are normal
1 DNA in PCR assays of skin biopsies from all cats
subcutaneous parasites of rodents but on occasion they
suspected of having herpes dermatitis and they found
are found in the lids, conjunctiva, and eye of the cat and
FHV-1 DNA in only 1 of 17 biopsies from cats with
nonherpetic dermatis and no instance in 21 biopsies from
burrows where hunting cats might become exposed. The
cats with no dermatitis.
subcutaneous larvae stimulate a severe reaction, and a
burrowing hole, within which the larvae can be
Bacteria
visualized, if present.
Facial pyodermas frequently involve the eyelids.
Habronema larvae. In the warmer months, Habronemd
Juvenile pyoderma is an excellent example of pyoderma
larvae produce a typical chronic medial canthal lesion in the
with an affinity for the eyelids. It presents in puppies 
horse  (summer  sores).
 The lesion is usually
an
less than 4 months of age as an acute, severe, deep
erosive/proliferative lesion with yellow caseated or calcified
pyoderma that is usually restricted to the head. Culture
particles, and involves the lid, conjunctiva, and third
 of the lesions often reveals Stapbylococcus spp. but the
eyelid (7.5s)57. The larvae are carried by Musca domestica
pathogenesis is thought to be more complex than a
{housefly). Since ivermectin kills the Habronema larvae,
simple infection. A hypersensitivity to the organism is
7.53
7.54
7.53 Demodectic mange in a dog. The condition was localized to
7.54 Cuterebra sp. larva visible near the lower lid margin of a cat.
the head.
Note the severe conjunctival reaction. (Courtesy of Dr. J. Stiles,
Purdue Veterinary College.]
7.55
7.56
7.55 Habronema sp. infestation of the medial canthus of a
7.56 Juvenile pyoderma in a 10-12-week-old puppy. Note the marked 
horse. Note the yellow caseous material and the erosive nature
eczematous lesions of the eyelids and nose. The ear canals are also
of the lesion.
involved and the lymph nodes of the head are markedly swollen.
EYELIDS
167
usually postulated to explain the
  response to
Fungi
glucocorticoids and the explosive course.
Dermatophyte lesions may be limited to the periocular
Auo ym paiuasaid aq Aeu Addnd e saaeis Aea aui u
region or can be part of a generalized infection in all
 swelling or pustules of the lids, but within a few days the
species. The appearance of the lesions is quite variable,
 pyoderma extends to the ears and muzzle. The lesions
but a dry, alopecic, scaly lesion is common (7.59). Most
become moist and purulent, and the submandibular lymph
 cases of localized dermatomycosis are self-limiting in the
 nodes become markedly enlarged (7.56). Affected puppies
dog and cat. Dermatomycosis is a zoonosis.
may be anorexic, lethargic, or febrile. Usually only one
 animal in the litter is involved. Occasionally, puppies will
Protozoa
develop a more generalized pyoderma.
In the dog, the most common ocular lesion with
In adult dogs, focal or generalized bacterial blepharitis
Leishmania infantum is a scaly blepharitis or periocular
can be secondary to bacterial infection of cilial follicles
alopecia (7.60). Pena et al.59 reported that 24% of all
or meibomian glands, bite wounds, clipper burns, and
dogs with leishmaniasis had ocular lesions; the most
'spilling over’ from bacterial conjunctivitis (7.57). In
common ocular lesion was either periocular alopecia or
intact free-roaming cats the most common cause of
blepharitis (52%). The appearance of blepharitis varied
bacterial blepharitis is bite wounds (7.58).
from dry scaly lesions to diffusely thickened lesions that
Chronic blepharitis and keratoconjunctivitis may be
were hyperemic or ulcerated. Focal nodular granulomas
associated with staphylococcal infection and meibomian
may occur in the eyelids. Most reported cases of
gand dysfunction in humans, and possibly in animals. A
leishmaniasis have a history of being in the Mediteranean
 proposed mechanism of action is that keratin plugs block 
region, but a New World form of leishmaniasis due to L.
the meibomian orifices, providing the environment for the
chagasi has been reported in North, Central, and South
bacterial flora to thrive. The bacteria then produce lipases
America. The dog is a reseryoir for the parasite, which is
that hydrolyze lipids to toxic free fatty acids58.
transmitted by sandflies60, 61
7.57
7.58
7.57 Acute bacterial infection of the lids in a dog that resulted from
7.58 Cat with a bite wound abscess in the upper eyelid.The abscess
spilling over' from a bacterial conjunctivitis.
is draining into the conjunctival sac. Note the bite wound just below
 the practitioner's thumb.
7.59
7.60
7.59 Cat with Microsporum dermatomycosis, characterized by dry.
 7.60 Scaly dermatitis in a dog with leismaniasis. (Courtesy of
scaly dermatitis. (Courtesy of Prof. M. Lorenz, College of Veterinary 
Dr. S. Pizzirani, Florence, Italy.)
Medicine, Oklahoma State University.]
168
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Burns
Immune-mediated skin diseases
 Sunlight on nonpigmented lids and mucocutaneous junctions 
A range of immune-mediated diseases, from allergy to
will produce sunbum in all species, and chronic exposure
autoimmune diseases, may be characterized by facial
 may eventually result in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
dermatosis63
Therapeutic deep radiation for nasal and brain tumors often
Atopic blepharitis. Atopic blepharitis is typically
results in blepharitis and hair loss from surface burns (7.61).
 associated with generalized pruritus, rubbing of the eyes,
Lyes, acids, and fire may induce facial and eyelid
 otitis, and licking of the feet. It may be accompanied by
burns (7.62). Contracture of the eyelids in the healing
conjunctivitis. Most affected dogs begin to show clinical
phase often becomes a major complication of chemical
signs between 1-3 years of age. Predisposed breeds
 and thermal burns.
include the Shar Pei, West Highland White Terrier and
other terrier breeds, Lhasa Apso, Shih Tzu, Golden
Seborrhea/keratinization disorders
Retriever, and Labrador Retriever.
Generalized primary or secondary seborrhea in the dog,
Drug eruption. Immune-mediated 
d reactions to drugs
and idiopathic facial dermatitis and primary seborrhea of
may occur from systemically administered drugs or from
Persian cats, can be associated with blepharitis in
contact sensitivity to topical drugs. Both forms of
addition to other typical clinical signs. In Persian cats
exposure to sensitizing drugs may produce blepharitis
with idiopathic facial dermatitis, a black waxy material
and facial dermatitis. The topical exposure is limited to
becomes adherent to the hairs of the face and variable
the lids and face (7.63), whereas systemic drugs produce
 amounts of underlying dermatitis are present. Otitis
bilateral lids lesions and more generalized dermatologic
externa is often present and Malassezia pacbydermatitis
lesions (7.64).
 may be isolated from about half of the patients62.
7.61
7.62
7.61 Radiation-induced alopecia and dermatitis in a dog after
7.62 Severe burns over the upper lid of a horse, with diffuse les5
teletherapy for nasal neoplasia.
severe burns over the body. The eyelid lesions contracted with time
 producing marked distortion.
7.63
7.63 Contact
7.64
hypersensitivity to
 topical medica tions
 in a horse utilized 
to treat corneal
lesions. Note the
pattern of
distribution.
7.64 Erythema multiforme (Stevens-Johnson 5yndrome] in a dog
with skin reactions to systemically administered sulfa drugs for a
 Septicemia. (Courtesy of Dr. L. Medleau, Department of Small Animal
Medicine, University of Georgia.]
EYELIDS
169
 Drug hypersensitivity should be suspected whenever
Discoid and systemic lupus erythematosus. The immune-
there is a worsening of the ocular condition once
mediated diseases of lupus erythematosus may occur as
therapy has commenced.
discoid lupus erythematosus, a local disease limited to the
skin, or systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), which is a
Eosinophilic plaque. In 
the cat, lesions (
f
the
multiorgan disease with skin involvement in 30-60% of
 eosinophilic granuloma complex may manifest on the
cases. The lesions in both conditions are frequently a facial
lids and precede skin lesions at other sites64. These
 dermatosis with eyelid involvement (depigmentation,
lesions usually reflect underlying hypersensitivity {flea
erosions, crusting) (7.66). Systemic lupus erythematosus has
allergy, atopy, food allergy).
an increased incidence in the Collie, Shetland Sheepdog, and
Pemphigus complex. The autoimmune skin diseases of
GSD63, 67 Pathogenesis of skin lesions in the lupus diseases
pemphigus vulgaris, pemphigus vegetans, pemphigus
 involves antinuclear antibodies which bind to keratinocytes
foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, and bullous pem-
to cause cytotoxic injury and cytokine release, resulting in
phigoid are often accompanied by facial dermatosis and
 attraction of lymphocytes and further epithelial damage.
eyelid involvement in the dog and cat {depigmentation,
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome. Vogt-Koyanagi-
Harada (VKH) syndrome produces skin lesions charac-
vegetans, and bullous pemphigoid are characterized
terized by vitiligo {skin depigmentation) and poliosis
clinically by involvement of the mucocutaneous junctions
(whitening of hair), which preferentially involve the
(7.65). The pemphigus complex is characterized by auto-
eyelids, lips, nose, food pads, and scrotum of young adult
antibodies against epithelial intercellular cement substance.
dogs (mean age 2.8 years)69. In occasional cases the skin
changes may be generalized70.
The skin lesions usually occur after ocular lesions
that typically manifest as a bilateral uveitis.
.65
While the eyelid lesions are characterized by depig-
mentation, some cases progress to a more erosive,
crusting dermatitis (7.67). VKH syndrome has been
reported in a variety of breeds, but the Akita represents 
80% of reported cases70.
 Clinical signs
 Blepharitis lesions vary with the cause, chronicity,
modification with therapy, and amount of self-trauma.
Alopecia, crusts, edema, hyperemia, cicatrization, kera-
 titis, and conjunctivitis are common signs.
Diagnosis
Historical data and other clinical findings, including the
7.65 Mucocutaneous lesions in a dog due to pemphigus vulgaris.
age, breed, environment, distribution of lesions, presence
(Courtesy of Dr. L. Medleau, Department of Small Animal Medicine,
of pruritus, and course and response to therapy, are often
University of Georgia.]
important clues to the specific cause.
7.66
7.67
7.66 Presumed discoid lupus erythermatosus in a cat. The cat wa5
 7.67 WKH in an Akita. Note the moist erosive dermatitis with
positive on LE preparation and negative on immunostaining of skin
depigmentation.
biopsies for pemphigus. The condition responded to oral anti-
inflammatory doses of corticosteroids. Discoid lupus erythematosu5
appears similar to idiopathic facial dermatitis of the Persian cat.
170
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Skin scrapings and cytology should be performed
a few days. Meibomian gland dysfunction should be
on most cases of blepharitis to detect causative
organisms such as parasites, bacteria, and fungi
the orifices and low-dose systemic tetracyclines to inhibit
bacterial lipase productions8.
Cultures should supplement cytology when bacterial
 Focal pyogranulomas have been treated in a variety of
or fungal causes are suspected. Biopsy of Habronema
ways including systemic antibiotics, systemic glucocorticoids,
lesions typically reveals granulation tissue with colla-
 intralesional antibiotics, curretage of lesion, staphylococcal
genolysis, eosinophils, mast cells, and neutrophils. If fine
vaccine, and tetracycline/niacinamide therapy. The latter
needle biopsy of mast cell accumulation is obtained, mast
ombination is postulated to be an immunomodulator, and
 cell tumor may be misdiagnoseds7.
it has been used to treat dogs with focal granulomas and with
 Serologic tests are available for diagnosing exposure
episcleritis/scleritis.
Tetracycline and niacinamide are
toLeishmania, but they 
will cross-react
twith
administered at a dose of 250-500 mg of each drug q8h, and
Trypanosoma-positive dogs71. Actinic/radiation/chemical-
dose frequency is gradually reduced once a response is
or heat-induced burns are diagnosed based on history and
lesion distribution, and histopathologic findings.
scabs with warm moist gauze, hot packing for 15 minutes
Keratinization disorders are diagnosed by characteristic
q8-12h, and expressing and treating infections of meibomian
histopathology and clinical findings. Primary seborrhea is
 gands or lash follicles.
diagnosed only after all causes of secondary seborrhea
have been ruled out {allergies, infection, parasites,
Fungi
endocrine disease, nutritional disorders).
 In dogs, localized disease may be self-limiting or may be
 For dogs with symptoms compatible with atopy.
treated with topical antifungal agents. Dogs with
intradermal skin testing may indicate the offending
generalized or multifocal disease, and cats, are treated
allergen(s). Drug eruptions are diagnosed by establishing
with a combination of topical and systemic antifungal
a temporal relationship of lesion development to drug
medications (griseofulvin 50 mg/kg daily, ketoconazole
administration and resolution of symptoms with drug
5-10 mg/kg/day, or itraconazole 5-10 mg/kg/day). Dilute
 discontinuation. Eosinophilic plaques are diagnosed by
bleach cleaning {1:10) of the immediate environment is
characteristic histopathologic findings. Autoimmmune
 indicated to prevent spread and reinfection77.
skin diseases are diagnosed by biopsy with characteristic
histopathology.
Immunostaining  may
 demonstrate
Leishmaniasis
characteristic immunoglobulin deposition.
Leishmaniasis therapy has traditionally used pentavalent
Histologic findings in VKH
I syndrome  include
 antimony compounds administered until clinical remission
pigmentary incontinence and a lichenoid infiltration with
is noted. The relapse rate is high (75%)78 unless therapy is
histiocytes, plasma cells, multinucleated giant cells, and
mainta ined on a long-term intermittent dose of allopurinol
lymphocytes. Response to therapy is a common means of
20 mg/kg daily for 1 week once a month79.
making a provisional diagnosis.
Burns
Therapy
Exposure to the most intense sun should be limited by
Mites
housing the animal during the day and using chemical
Mitocides are often used topically, but care should be
sun-screens if necessary. Tattooing may be attempted, but
taken to avoid the eyes. Demodectic mange is usually self-
needs periodic retreatment.
limiting in a young dog. If limited to a few local regions
Chemical and thermal burns are treated acutely by
such as the periocular area, specific therapy is usually
copious cool water lavage. Affected skin should then be
unecessary. If the condition becomes generalized,
kept clean of exudate and debris with gentle daily lavage.
treatment options include amitraz dips, oral ivermectin
Daily topical application of silver sulfadiazene cream can
(except in herding breeds)72, or oral milbemycin.
prevent secondary bacterial infection and speed healing
of injured skin. Reconstructive surgery may be needed to
Habronema
correct scarring/lid contracture.
Therapy consists of mechanical expression and debride-
ment of irritating granules in the lesion, followed by
Seborrhea/keratinization disorder
topical or intralesional injection of glucocorticoid.
Antiseborrheic shampoos are indicated, but care should
 Systemic ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg) will kill the larvae73. Fly
be taken to avoid contact with the eyes. In severe cases,
control is important to prevent reinfestation.
steroids or retinoids may be helpful.
Bacteria
Immune-mediated
If infection is superficial, therapy consists of topical
Atopic blepharitis can be treated with topical steroids,
 antibiotic; if the infection is deep, systemic antibiotics are
oral antihistamines, or intermittent oral glucocorticoids.
usually required. Autogenous bacterins may be helpful in
Desensitization in an atopic animal is an adjunct or
recurrent or resistant cases74.
alternative  to systemic glucocorticoids when the
aiano pue uoisou Aa paiea aie suoizeleuo
offending allergen is known?0.
through the conjunctival side. Tissue should be sent for
 Drug eruption/hypersensitivity is treated by withdrawal
histopathology as neoplasia may mimic a chalazion.
of the causative drug, with or without immunosuppressive
Acute hordeolum is treated by lancing from the con-
medication, if lesions do not spontaneously improve
junctival surface and a topical antibiotic administered for
within 2-3 weeks of starting treatment.
EYELIDS
171
Eosinophilic granuloma complex in cats is commonly
Discoid lupus erythematosis may also be successfully
treated with intermittent injectable or oral gluco-
 treated with tetracycline and niacinamide, and dogs with
corticoids. Refractory lesions may respond to chloram-
localized disease may benefit from topical administration
bucil, gold salts, or radiation therapy. Cats with
of glucocorticoids or cyclosporine in vegetable oil. VKH
recurrent or refractory lesions should be evaluated and
syndrome is usually treated initially with a combination
treated for underlying hypersensitivity disorder {flea
of systemic glucocorticoids and azathioprine, in addition
allergy, atopy, food allergy).
to topical ophthalmic glucocorticoids and atropine. After
Autoimmune diseases are usually treated with
remission is induced, drugs are slowly tapered over
systemic immunosuppressive doses of glucocorticoids
several months to the lowest dose of systemic drug(s)
which may be combined with chemotherapy with
which controls the disease.
azathioprine or cyclophosphamide in severe cases65, 68.
After remission is induced, drugs are slowly tapered over
Lacerations
several months to the lowest dose which controls the
Lacerations of the eyelids are common in all species. In
disease. Glucocorticoids alone are inadequate in about
the dog and cat, lid lacerations are usually the result of
 50% of pemphigus disease cases81. Refractory cases may
either fighting or automobile accidents. In large animals
au ul leu e 1o auim paqueq 4q pasneo Aensn aue Aaul
stall. Lacerations should not be dismissed as not worth
the trouble to suture, as they may become quite
disfiguring if not treated. The usual sequela is a notch or 
 coloboma that allows spillage of tears or cicatrization,
7.68
that progresses to a secondary keratitis. Lacerations are
of two main types:
 Perpendicular to the lid margin. Even small nicks in
the lid margin will remain as notches due to the
orbicularis oculi muscle separating the edges (7.68).
This opposing tension must be considered when
repairing the lid or removing masses from the eyelid.
 Paralll to the lid margin. Lacerations of this type
often consist of a very narrow pedicle of skin that is
tempting to excise (7.69). It is important to remember
that the pedicle contains the normal mucocutaneous
junction of the lid. A common sequela to excision of
this pedicle is for trichiasis to develop months later
(7.70). This type of laceration does not have the
opposing muscle tension pulling it apart.
Clinical signs
7.68 Lid laceration in a dog running perpendicular to the lid
The signs of lacerations are usually obvious but the globe
margin. Note the separation of the wound edges due to
should be examined for penetrating or perforating wounds.
orbicularis oculi tension.
7.69
7.69 Lid laceration in a dog running parallel to the margin, with a
7.70 Sequela of excision of a lid tag from a parallel laceration of
narrow tag containing the lid margin. These tags should always be
the lid margin in a horse. Note the acquired coloboma, trichiasis of
sutured back in place.
the remaining cilia, and small hairs on the cornea in the
mucocutaneous junction.
172
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
7.71
Therapy
Lacerations should be repaired as soon as possible as
chronicity makes the edges indurated and thicker,
detracting from the cosmetic appearance. Typically, a
significant amount of debris and hair must be removed
from the wound. When preparing the site for surgery, if
clipping of adjacent hair is done, the wound should be
filled with sterile lubricant gel to trap the hair The gel
with the hair can then be removed from the wound.
Minimal debridement is recommended, because most
tags of tissue remain viable.
Lacerations perpendicular to the lid margin should
have at least two layers of sutures placed to minimize the
dehiscing force of the orbicularis muscle?3. A layer of
5-0 to 6-0 gut or absorbable suture is placed in the
conjunctiva and subconjunctival stroma, with the knots
tied within the tissue so the cornea is not irritated.
7.71 Method of fullid thickness excision of srmall lid tumors. Note 
4-0 monofilament is suitable for the muscle-skin layer.
the incision is perpendicular to the lid margin to give maximum
Extra care should be taken to appose the lid margin
tumor removal and minimum loss of lid margin (A). Full thicknes5 
accurately, as this is the most obvious cosmetic
excisions or lacerations should be closed in two layers (B). Different
landmark. If the margin is not smooth, the suture must
suturing strategies are shown to keep the suture ends from contact
be repositioned until the margin is in apposition, as it
with the cornea (C, D).
will not self-correct. It is also important to develop a
strategy to avoid the suture ends from rubbing on the
cornea (see 7.71 for methods)84. Topical antibiotics are
usually adequate postoperative therapy.
7.72
7.72 Eyelid
sebaceous
The temptation to excise pedicles of lid that contain the
 adenoma in a
mucocutaneous junction (lid margin) should be resisted
dog. Note the
and the pedicles should be sutured back in place. The
cauliflower
vast majority of even thin pedicles will remain viable
 appearance. The
enough to preserve the normal lid margin.
site of origin can
be followed to 
 the conjunctival
Eyelid neoplasia in the dog
side of the lid.
Lid neoplasia is very common in the dog but, fortunately,
75% are benign. Sebaceous adenomas, papillomas, and
melanomas account for about 82% of lid tumors, and more
than one type may occur in an individual. The most
common tumor arises from the meibomian gland and,
depending on the differentiation, will be termed as
 sebaceous hyperplasia, sebaceous adenoma, adenocar-
 cnoma, epithelioma, or basal cell tumor (7.72-7.74). The 
7.73
7.74
7.73 Fine needlle aspirate from a sebaceous adenoma in a dog.
7.74 Histopathology of a canine lid tumor diagnosed a5 a sebaceous
Several vacuolate sebaceous epithelial cels are present, with fewer
 epithelioma. The section is composed of large numbers of basaloid or
basophilic reserve cells (wuright's stain].
reserve cells arranged in lobules, with fewer mature sebaceou5
epithelial cells (H&tE stain].
EYELIDS
173
7.75
 average age for developing lid neoplasia is 8 years, and
breeds such as the Boxer, Collie, Poodle, English Springer
Spaniel, and American Cocker Spaniel have a higher
incidence than the hospital population. While about 25%
 are malignant, metastasis is rare?s. In the author's experi-
ce the exception is mast cell tumor of the lid (7.75); this
gop aul ul sisouaoud 1ownn P isiom aul sey Aqeqo1d
Fortunately, mast cell tumor of the lid is not common and is
easily diagnosed with fine needle aspirates (7.76). Other
tumors which are occasionally observed are squamous cell
carcinoma
{SCC),
fibroma and fibrosarcoma, and
histiocytoma36, 87. Two lid tumors typically occur in young
dogs: viral papilloma (7.77) and histiocytoma (7.78, 7.79),
 and they are unique in that they develop rapidly and usually
regress spontaneously. Viral papillomas of the lid may occur
mncurrently with oral papillomas. The papilloma is usually
7.75 Mast cell tumor that developed very rapidly in a dog. The dog 
was euthanized shortly after presentation, due to systemic
papillomas occurring, and they may involve the conjunctiva
complications of disseminated mastocytosis. The tumor is easily
 and cornea as well as the eyelidss8. The histiocytoma is
diagnosed by fine needle aspiration.
7.76
7.76 Fine needle aspirate from a mast cell turmor in a dog, with large
 7.77 Viral-induced papilloma in a young Rottweiler dog. Papillormas
round cells with nuclear and cytoplasmic pleomorphism. The
 were also present in the mouth. Lesions were allowed to regress
cytoplasm contains basophilic cytoplasrmic granules typical of mast
naturally over the following month.
cells. A few eosinophils are present.
7.78
7.79
7.78 Histiocytoma of the upper lid of a young adult dog. Rapid
7.79 Fine needle aspirate of a histiocytoma in a dog. A monopopulation
onset, smooth broad-based lesion and age are indicators of
of large cells with an oval, hyperchromatic nuclei and abundent
histiocytoma, and diagnosis is confirmed by fine needle aspiration.
Cytoplasm typical of histiocytes can be seen (Wright's stain].
The lesion regressed spontaneously.
174
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
typically a broad-based, elevated red lesion with a relatively
and Scott92 and Molander-McCrary et al.93 found no
smooth surface (7.78).
 correlation with biologic behavior and histologic grading
Systemic histiocytosis of Bernese Mountain Dogs
of the tumor, while Wilcock et al.91 divided mast cell
produces multiple cutaneous nodules over the body, with
tumors into two subtypes based on these two
the eyelids being one of the common sites89.
characteristics. Wilcock et al.91 found that about 75%
(65/85) were solitary, discrete nodules with mild atypia
Eyelid neoplasia in the cat
that behaved benignly, although seven in this group had
Eyelid neoplasia is relatively uncommon in the cat. The
more anisocytosis and mitotic activity and spread or
most common lid tumor of the cat is SCC. The lesion is
recurred within 3 months. A second morphologic form
associated with actinic radiation and usually occurs in
with histiocytic-looking mast cells that were often multiple
white-furred cats. The location is usually on the lower lid
nodules, occurred predominantly in young Siamese cats,
near the medial canthus and most are erosive (7.80).
 and often regressed spontaneously over 2 years.
nq Xuea io uouuoo aq oi ieadde iou saop siseiseian
recurrences are common. Other neoplasms of the feline
Eyelid neoplasia in the horse
lids are papilloma, adenoma/adenocarcinoma, basal cell 
Squamous cell carcinoma
tumor, fibroma/ fibrosarcoma, neurofibroma, mast cell
Eyelid neoplasia in the horse and cow is less common
tumor, hemangiosarcoma, and xanthoma90. In the cat,
than in the dog. SCC is the most common tumor of the
eye and adnexa in horses, and the eyelid is the least
common site (23% of cases) compared to the third eyelid
 or limbus. It is usually found on the lower lid or medial
canthal region (7.81, 7.82). Ultraviolet radiation is
7.80
believed to be the primary excitor of SCC. About 16% of
 SCCs may be bilateral. The incidence increases with age,
with the mean age ranging from 9-12 years, and is more
common in neutered animals. Males are twice as likely to
be affected as females, and the gelding is five times more
susceptible than the stallion. The Draft horse and
Appaloosa are at greater risk, as are horses with white,
creamello, and palomino hair colors94-98.
In spite of the well known predisposition for SCC
in color dilute horses, it is not unusual to observe
 SCC in heavily pigmented horses such as bays and
in young adult horses of any coat color.
SCC has a high reccurrence rate (>30%) but a late and
low metastatic rate. Reports vary as to whether the site
of origin influences the prognosis, with one report citing
7.80 Squamous cell carcinoma of the lower medial eyelid in a white
a higher recurrence with eyelid SCC than from the third
cat. A slowly progressive, proliferative erosive lesion in a white-furred
 eyelid or limbus 97, 98
cat is a typical presentation.
7.81
7.82
7.81 Squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lateral lid in a white
7.82 Histopathology of a squamous cell carcinoma, showing sheets
horse. Previous brachytherapy had been given, but the lesion had 
of neoplastic squamous epithelial cells that show anisokaryosis,
recurred. Cryotherapy was administered and the horse was lesion-free
anisocytosis, and occasionally dyskeratosis. Several mitotic figures are 
for at least 2 years. No plastic surgery was performed.
 present. The horse does not typically exhibit epithelial pearls with
squamous cells, as does the cow (H&tE stain].
EYELIDS
175
Sarcoid
presented with periocular alopecia or altered hair color
Sarcoid is the second most common tumor of the eyelid and
and had small subdermal nodules or plaques. Verrucose
 the most common tumor in general in the horse It has been
sarcoids had alopecia and hyperkeratosis of the periocular
associated with bovine papillomavirus and with a
region, with varying amounts of ulceration of the surface
retrovirus9, 100 New molecular biology techniques have
and subdermal nodules. Nodular sarcoids were either a
confirmed the presence of bovine papilloma virus DNA in
well defined solid nodule or multiple nodules with an
the vast majority of equine sarcoidsiot. Early reports did
intact skin, or nodules with varying amounts of skin
not demonstrate a predilection for breed, sex, or coat color.
ulceration. Fibroplastic sarcoids were either pedunculated
Unlike most neoplasia, it is usually found in young horses.
or broad-based and were proliferative, with diffuse
A genetic predisposition has been demonstrated and
ulceration. Mixed sarcoids had characteristics of two or
 related to the equine leukocyte antigen102, 103. Piscopo104
 more types, while a 'malignant' sarcoid was one that had
reported a predisposition in the Quarter horse, Appaloosa,
 grown rapidly and infiltrated deeply into the adjacent
and Arabian. When found periocularly, the lesions are
tissues and orbit. Lesions may be found on either the upper
proliferative, may have erosions, and are often firmly
 or lower lids and canthal regions. While sarcoids may be
anchored to deeper structures (7.83, 7.84). Knottenbelt
locally invasive and frequently recur after therapy, they
and Kelly1os described six forms of periocular sarcoids and
 have no tendency for internal metastasis106. About one-
correlated the type with response to various therapies
third of horses with sarcoid may undergo spontaneous
administered over a 25-year period. Occult sarcoid
 regression unrelated to any specific clinical parameter or
 Other tumors described as arising from the equine lid
include mast cell tumor, lymphosarcoma, schwannoma,
7.83
and papilloma 95, 108, 109
Eyelid neoplasia in the cow
SCC of the eye and adnexa is a significant economic
disease in cattle. It is found most frequently in the
Hereford, Hereford cross, Simmental, and Shorthorn
breeds, although it has been observed in a variety of other
breeds. The eyelids are the least common site for
involvement, accounting for only about 12-15% of cases 
(7.85)l10. The etiology is multifactorial, with ultraviolet
light and genetic predisposition being crucial. The amount
of circumocular pigmentation may be associated with
neoplasia1, 112. The corneal limbus is the most frequent
 site of involvement in the cow (see Chapter 10, p.241).
Diagnosis
 A tentative diagnosis of eyelid neoplasia is usually made
7.83 Equine nodular sarcoid of the lateral upper lid. The lesion is
on appearance and confirmed by biopsy of the lesion.
firm and anchored.
7.84
7.85
7.84 Histopathology of an equine sarcoid. The dermis is composed of
7.85 Atypical appearance of a squamous cell carcinoma of the eyelid
interlacing bundles of spindle-shaped cells that form a palisading
in a young heifer.
interface with the epidermis. The epidermis has prominent rete-pegs
into the sheet of neoplastic spindle cells (H&tE stain].
176
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Biopsy of equine lid sarcoids may be
 a noticeable shortening of the fissure. Tumor excision
contraindicated unless followed by definitive
 should minimize lid margin excision while maximizing
 therapy, since they may become more aggressive10s.
tumor removal (7.71).
Accurate apposition of the lid margins is critically
important for cosmesis, as is care to avoid sutures rubbing
Therapy
 on the cornea. Large lesions require mobilization of
The appropriate therapy for eyelid neoplasia varies with
 adjacent skin to repair the defect. A wide variety of plastic
the type and extent of the tumor, history of previous
procedures have been advocated for repair of large defects,
therapy, systemic health, and resources available. As
but all have the disadvantage of not having a normal lid
most lid tumors are benign or slow to metastasize, the
margin, which may result intrichiasis at a later datel117
most common complication is local regrowth. In most
The Cutler-Beard procedure can be used to fill a variety of
instances of benign tumors there is no clear evidence that
defects along the length of the upper or lower lids 7.8)118.
one form of therapy is superior to another; selection of a
This procedure has given excellent cosmetic results, but the
particular modality is based on familiarity and what is
major disadvantage is that it is a two-stage procedure
available to the clinician.
requiring two anesthetic episodes, as with many other
plastic procedures. Rather than try to master and
Surgical excision
remember a wide variety of plastic techniques that are
Excision is the main form of tumor therapy in practice,
rarely utilized, it is probably more pragmatic to be familiar
mainly because it does not require additional instru-
with one or two versatile techniques.
mentation. Surgery may consist of full-thickness or
 Surgical resection of equine lid neoplasia can present a
partial lid excision, depending on the tumor. The dog
challenge because of the lack of mobile skin. This
normally has adequate skin on the lid to accommodate
combined with a high recurrence rate with sarcoids
the removal of one-quarter to one-third of the lid margin
(35-50%)103 makes surgical resection one of the least
without a permanent cosmetic blemish. Toy dogs with
desirable forms of therapy in the horse. Excision of lid
small palpebral fissures, and cats, may not tolerate more
 SCC in cattle is frequently performed, and is preferable to
that one-quarter of the lid length being removed without
enucleation if there is no bony involvement. Mobile skin
makes excision followed by an advancing skin flap {H-
plasty) a reasonable procedure in the field (7.86, 7.87)i19.
Cryotherapy
7.86
Cryotherapy is a rapid, rather imprecise means of
to ensure adequate freezing of -20°C (-4°F). Therapy
can often be performed under sedation, which is an
 advantage in the aged animal. Roberts and Severin87
reported that the rate of tumor recurrence in the dog
after surgery and cryotherapy was similar, although the
mean recurrence time after cryotherapy was 7.4 months
 an   g   
 experience, nitrous oxide cryotherapy has a high rate of
7.87
7.86 H-plasty performed for excision of the lesion in 7.85.
7.87 The case in 7.85 at the time of suture rermoval 3 weeks later.
The location of the lesion allowed sparing of the lid margin.
EYELIDS
177
regrowth even with benign forms of lid neoplasia in
 and results in better cosmetic results than surgery and,
dogs. Liquid nitrogen, while usually more cumbersome
compared to radiation teletherapy, it requires fewer
to maintain and administer, has demonstrated its
 anesthetic episodes. In the horse, brachytherapy with
effectiveness in treating a variety of neoplasms, especially
iridium-192 resulted in 87% lesion-free for sarcoid, and
82% for SCC at 1 year. At 5 years, 74% and 64% were
described cryotherapy as one of the more effective
therapies for equine sarcoid, although Knottenbelt and
Knottenbelt and Kelly10s had almost 100% success with
Kellyios found a high rate of recurrence with cryotherapy
treating equine sarcoids with brachytherapy. Temporary
and a transformation to a more aggressive sarcoid.
implants utilized are either cesium-137 or iridium-192.
 Surgical debulking of the lesions should precede
The seeds are gamma radiation emitters, and require that
cryotherapy of large tumors. Despite sloughing of frozen
the animal be isolated from human exposure until the
tissue, the lid is usually able to maintain its architecture
seeds are subsequently removed. Disadvantages are the
without the need for secondary reconstructive surgery.
relative unavailability and cost of the implants, and
radiation exposure to the radiologist during implan-
Hyperthermic therapy
tation127, 128. Beta radiation is often used for treating
The use of heat to kill neoplastic cells became readily
superficial SCC in all species after debulking.
available with the advent of a commercial unit designed
to treat SCC in cattle (7.89). Hyperthermic therapy is
Brachytherapy, while not widely available in practice,
based on the observation that neoplastic cells are killed
is the most successful means of managing difficult lid
by temperatures of 50°C (122°F). It provides a rapid
tumors such as equine sarcoids, aggressive SCC of all
means of therapy and requires a minimum of technical
species, and canine mast cell tumors.
skills. The results of treating SCC with cryotherapy and
hyperthermic therapy are very similar123, 124. In cattle,
90% of squamous cell tumors regressed and the site
Chemotherapy
remained free of tumor for over 1 year. The lesions
 Chemotherapy is rarely performed in the dog, due to the
 should be debulked prior to therapy, and multiple 
relatively benign nature of most lid tumors, the variety of
therapies may be given. Hyperthermic therapy has also
other treatment modalities that are usually successful,
been   successful  in treating equine  sarcoid  after
 and the lack of responsive tumors. The author has rarely
debulking. Ford et al12s reported a 91% success rate
used chemotherapy for lid neoplasia in the dog, apart
with hyperthermia in ten Equidae involving 13 sarcoids.
from palliative glucocorticoid chemotherapy for mast
The initial therapy was a combination of debulking and
cell tumors. The injection of sterile saline in some mast
hyperthermia treatment and hyperthermia was repeated
cell tumors has been effective, resulting in lysis of cells
 at 2-4-week intervals, with a minimum of five therapies.
 and shrinkage of lesions129.
 In the horse, intralesional cisplatin in sesame oil (1 mg/ml
Radiation therapy
 given every 2 weeks for 4 treatments) has been successful
Radiation therapy is often not readily available, but it is
in treating periocular sarcoid and SCC. One year relapse-
a very effective therapy for SCC in all species and equine
free rates were 87% for sarcoid and 65% for SCC130.
sarcoid. Brachytherapy,
, or the implantation of
When cisplatin intratumoral injections were combined
encapsulated radioactive materials, has been used
with surgical debulking for SCC and sarcoid in the horse,
extensively in malignant lid tumors of all species.
the relapse interval was 41 months. The concurrent use
 Brachytherapy is more likely to prevent local recurrence
with surgery did not interfere with wound healing131.
7.88
7.89
7.88 Liquid nitrogen cryotherapy unit. Delivery may be by a contact
7.89 Commercial hyperthermic unit treating a squamous cell
probe as shown, or by a spray.
carcinoma of the lower lid in a horse, after debulking the lesion. The
tissue is heated to 50°C (122°F] between the probes, and treatment
time is typically 30 seconds at a site.
178
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Cisplatin injections are appropriate to use on eyelid
use of the cell wall fraction lessens the chance of
lesions, but not on globe lesions due to toxicity to the eye.
anaphylaxis. The tumor is usually saturated or given about
The clinician should be cautious with intralesional
1 ml/cm2 at 2-3 week intervals until regression is complete.
injections of toxic preparations such as cisplatin, since the
Multiple therapies are needed and swelling, necrosis, and
drug frequently leaks or oozes out of the surface of the
au yim paadxa aq ueo als uooalui aui ie uouepnxa
tumor or, if the lesion is dense, the syringe may blow off
most reaction occurring after the second injection. A 93%
the needle, exposing the clinician to the drug.
 cure rate has been obtained if used in periocular sarcoids
5-fluorouracil (s-FU) has been used topically for SCC
and equine sarcoids, with some success. Knottenbelt and
SI Moo aul u1 juaea1l Dos pue asy aul u1 juawea
 oo  ai s   pdr 
confused by the relatively high incidence of spontaneous
verrucose sarcoids, with two different forms of topical 5-FU.
regression with these tumors.
Immunotherapy
Photodynamic therapy
Immunotherapy has been used for both SCC in cattle and
Injection of a photosensitizing agent into a neoplasm or
equine sarcoid. While bovine SCC has been responsive,
injecting it systemically and then exciting the chemical with
the immunostimulant used was a mycobacterium cell
the appropriate light wavelength has been on the periphery
wall fraction, which had the disadvantage of turning the
of clinical application for several years. Klauss et at140
reported on treating, periocular SCC with surgical
extract of bovine SCC also produced regression of lesions
debulking, then injecting a commercial photosensitizer
when injected intramuscularly133, Regrowth may occur
(PhotochlorTN) and treating the bed with a diode laser One
and be resistant to further immunization.
or 2 applications were successful in producing a remission.
 Oral cimetidine may be used as an immunomodulator
Melanomas and sarcoids have also been treated in this
for eyelid tumors. It has been reported as a treatment for
way141. The methodology at this time is in the experimental
 cutaneous equine melanoma and, in humans, to treat
 Stage and reported case numbers are small.
ocular papillomatosis134, It would seem most logical to
use immunomodulation to hasten resolution in condi-
 The most important point to emphasize to owners
tions that have a normal involution, such as canine
of all species with SCC is that because of the
ssads e ur sded pue s
underlying genetic predisposition for SCC, the long-
 Immunotherapy has been most popular in the treatment 
term outcome of therapy is not cure but control.
 Of equine sarcoid, although it has also been successful in
While the present lesion may be 'cured', the
 treating a SCC that had not responded to cryotherapy136.
probability for new lesions in the same or opposite
Due to the large size of many of the lid lesions, regression
 eye is significant and periodic examinations for the
rather than resection is desirable. Immunotherapy utilizing
life of the patient are critical to initiate treatment at
intralesional bacillus of Calmette and Guerin (BCG) or
an early stage.
BCG cell wall fraction in oil has had a high cure rate. The
EYELIDS
179
REFERENCES
1 Miller W, Braund K {1991) Morphologic
15 Schaffer E, Wiesner H, von Hegel G
29 Long R {1991) Treatment of distichiasis
and histochemical features of the normal
(1988) Multiple oculare kolobome
by conjunctival resection. Journat of
 canine orbicularis oculi muscle. Progress 
(MOC) mit persistierender 
Small Animat Practice 32:146-148.
in Veterinary and Comparative
pupillarmembran beim schneeleopard
 30 Ris RC (1982) Basal meibomian gland
Ophthatmology 1:150-154.
[Panthera uncia). Tieraztt Prax
cautery: a surgical technique for
2 Thomas JW (1961) The nerve supply to
16:87-91.
distichiasis. Proceedings of the Ammerican
the nictitating membrane of the cat.
16 Bellhorn RW, Barnett KC, Henkind P
College of Veterinary Ophthatnology
Journat of Anatomy 95:371-785.
{1971) Ocular colobomas in domestic
and Internationat Society of Veterinary
3 Powell C {1988) Innervation to the canine
cats. Journal of the American Veterinary
Ophthatmotogy, pp. 88-93.
lacrimal glands. Masters Thesis,
Medical Association 159:1015-1021.
31 Chambers ED, Slatter DH (1984)
 University of Georgia, pp. 1-17.
17 Roberts SR, Bistner SI {1968) Surgical
Cryotherapy (N?O) of canine distichiasis
4 Robertson BF, Roberts SM {1995) Lateral
correction of eyelid agenesis in the
and trichiasis: an experimental and
canthus entropion in the dog, Part I.
feline. Modern Veterinary Practice
clinical report. Journat of Small Animat
Veterinary Comparative Ophthatology
49:40-43.
Practice 25:647-659.
5:151-156.
18 Dziezyc J, Millichamp N {1989) Surgical
 32 Liu D, Natiella J,Schaefer A, Gage A
5 Miller M, Christensen G, Evans H {1964)
 correction of eyelid agenesis in a cat.
(1984) Cryosurgical treatment of eyelids
The venous system. In: Anatormy of the
Journat of the American Animat
and lacrimal drainage ducts of the
 Dog. WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
Hospitat Association 25:513-516.
Rhesus monkey. Archives of
p. 393.
19 Doherty MJ (1973) A bridge-flap
Ophthatmology 102:934-939.
6 Lee R, Griffiths IR (1972) A comparison 
 blepharorrhaphy method for eyelid
33 Wheeler CA, Severin GA (1984)
 of cerebral arteriography and cavernous
reconstruction in the cat. Journat of the
 Cryosurgical epilation for the treatment
sinus venography in the dog. Journat of
American Animat Hospitat Association
of distichiasis in the dog and cat.Journat
Small Anmat Practice 12:225-238.
9:238-241.
of the American Animat Hospitat
7 Gum G (1991) Physiology of the eye. In:
20 Wolfer JC (2002) Correction of eyelid
Association 20:877-884.
Veterinary Ophthatmology, 2nd edn. K
 coloboma in four cats using subdermal
34 Stades FC (1987) A new method for
Gelat (ed). Lea and Febiger.
 collagen and a modified Stades
surgical correction of upper eyelid
Philadelphia, p. 124.
technique. Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
trichiasis-entropion: operation method.
8 Carrington SD, Bedford PG, Guillon JP,
5:269-272.
Journat of the American Animat
Woodwards EG (1987) Polarized light
21 Koch SA (1979) Congenital ophthalmic
Hospitat Association 23:603-606.
biomicroscopic observations on the pre-
abnormalities in the Burmese cat.
35 Stades FC, Boeve MH {1987) Surgical
corneal tear film. 3. The normal tear
Journat of the American Veterinary
 correction of upper eyelid
film of the cat. Journat of Small Aniumat
Medicat Association 174:90-91.
trichiasis-entropion: results and follow-
Practice 28:821-826.
22 Brandsch H, Schmidt V {1981)
up in 55 eyes. Journat of the American
9 Carrington SD, Bedford PG, Guillon JP.
Erbanalytische untersuchungen zum
Animat Hospitat Association
Woodward EG {1987) Polarized light
 dermoid des auges beim hund.
23:607-610.
 biomicroscopic observations on the pre-
Veterinary Medicine 37:305-306.
36 Helper LC, Magrane WG {1970)
corneal tear film. 1. The normal tear
23 Barkyoumb S, Leipold H (1984) Nature
 Ectopic cilia of the canine eyelid. Journat
film of the dog. Jaurnat of Smatt Animat
 and cause of ocular dermoids in
of Small Animat Practice 11:185-189.
Practice 28:605-622.
Hereford cattle. Veterinary Pathology
37 Hacker DV (1989) Ectopic cilia in a
10 Aguirre G, Rubin LF (1970)
21:316-324.
Siamese cat. Companion Animat
Ophthalmitis secondary to congenitally
24 Lawson DD {1973) Canine distichiasis.
Pracitice 19:29-31.
open eyelids in a dog. Journat of the
Journat of Smalfl Animat Practice
38 Stades FC, Boeve MH, van der
American Veterinary Medicat
14:469-478.
Woerdt A (1992) Palpebral fissure
Association 156:70-72.
25 Halliwell WH (1967) Surgical
length in the dog and cat. Progress in
 11 Gelatt KN (1974) Premature eyelid
 management of canine distichia. Journat
Veterinary amnd Comparative
 opening and exposure keratis in a
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthatmotogy 2:155-161.
puppy. Veterinary Medicine/Smatt
Association 150:874-879.
39 Kaswan RL, Martin CL, Doran CC
Animal Clinician 69:863.
26 Gelatt KN (1969) Resection of cilia-
{1988) Blepharoplasty techniques for
 12 McCuistion WR (1965) Pulmonary
bearing tarsoconjunctiva for correction
canthus closure. Companion Animat
edema and persistent ankyloblepharon
of canine distichia. Journat of the
Practice 2:6-8.
in puppies. Veterinary Medicine/Small
American Veterinary Medicat
40 Rubin L (1989) Inberited Eye Diseases
Animal Clinician 60:1206-1207.
Association 155:892-897.
m Purebred Dogs. Williams and
13 Martin C, Stiles J, Willis M (1997)
27 Campbell LH (1977) Conjunctival
Wilkins, Baltimore.
 Feline colobomatous syndrome.
resection for the surgical management of
41 Littlejohn A {1954) Entropion in 
Veterinary and Comparative
canine distichiasis. Journat of the
newborn lambs. Veterinary Record
Ophthatmology 7:39-43.
American Veterinary Medicat
66:211.
14 Gripenberg U, Blomqvist L, Pamilo P, et
Association 171:275-276.
42 Crowley J, McGloughlin P (1963)
at. (1985) Multiple ocular coloboma
 28 Bedford PGC {1971) Eyelashes and
Hereditary entropion in lambs.
{MOC) in snow leopards (Panthera
adventitious cilia as causes of corneal
Veterimary Record 75:1104.
uncia). Clinical report, pedigree analysis,
irritation. Journat of Smafl Animat
chromosome investigations, and serum
Practice 12:11-17.
protein studies. Hereditas 102:221-229.
180
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
43 Lenarduzzi RF (1983) Management of
57 Rebhun W, Mirro E, Georgi M, Kern T
70 Herrera HD, Duchene AG {1998)
eyelid problems in chinese Shar Pei
{1981) Habronemic
Uveodermateological syndrome
 puppies. Veterinary Medicine/Smalt
blepharoconjunctivitis in horses. Journat
(Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome)
Animal Clinician 78:548-550.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
with generalized depigmentation in a
44 Wyman M (1971) Lateral canthoplasty.
Association 179:469-472.
Dachshund. Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
Journat of the American Animat
 58 Doughterty J, McCulley J, Silvany R,
1(1):47-51.
Hosp itat Association 7:196-201.
Meyer D {1991) The role of tetracycline
71 Vercammen F, Berkvens D, Le Ray D,
45 Wyman M, Wilkie DA {1988) New
 in chronic blepharitis. Investigative
Vervoort J (1997) Development of a
 surgical procedure for entropion
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
slide ELISA for canine leishmaniasis and
correction: tarsal pedical technique.
32:2970-2975.
comparison with four serological tests.
Jotrnat of the American Animat
 59 Pena MT, Roura X, Davidson MG
Veterimary Record 153:328-330.
Hospitat Association 24:345-349.
(2000) Ocular and periocular
 72 Medleau L (1994) Using ivermectin to
46 Jensen HE (1979) Canthus closure.
manifestation of leishmaniasis in dogs:
treat parasitic dermatoses in small
Compendium on Continting Education
105 cases (1993-1998). Veterinary
animals. Veterinary Medicine
for the Practicing Veterinarian
Ophthatmotogy 3:35-41.
89:770-774.
10:735-741.
60 Kontos VJ, Koutinas AF (1993) Old
73 Bridges E (1985) The use of ivermectin 
47 Moore CP {1982) Multiple indications
world canine leishmaniasis.
 to treat genital cutaneous habronemiasis
for pocket-flap canthotomy in the
Compendium on Continuing Education
in a stallion. Compendium on
canine. In: Proceedings of the American
for the Practicing Veterinarion
Continuing Education for the Practicing
Society of Veterinary Ophthatmology
15:949-959.
Veterimarian 7:S94-S97.
and Internationat Society of Veterinary
61 Slappendel RJ, Ferrer L {1998)
74 Chambers ED, Severin GA (1984)
Ophthatmology, pp. 69-73.
Leishmaniasis. In: Infectious Diseases of
Staphylococcal bacterin for treatment of
48 Munger RJ, Carter JD (1984) A further
the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn. C Greene
chronic staphylococcal blepharitis in the
 modification of the
(ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
dog. Journat of the American Veterinary
 Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure for
pp. 450-458.
Medicat Association 185:422-425.
correction of atonic ectropion in dogs.
62 Bond R, Curtis CF, Ferguson EA, Mason
 75 White SA, Rosychuch RAW, Reinke SI,
Journat of the American Animat
IS, Rest J (2000) An idiopathic facial
Pardis M {1992) Use of tetracycline and
Hospitat Association 20:651-656.
 dermatitis of Persian cats. Veternary
niacinamide for treatment of
49 Kern T, Erb H {1987) Facial neuropathy
Dermatology 11:35-11.
autoimmune skin disease in 31 dogs.
in dogs and cats: 95 cases {1975-1985).
63 Miller Jr. WH {1979) Canine facial
Journat of the American Veterinary
Journat of the American Veterinary
dermatoses. Compendium on
Medicat Association 200:1497-1500.
Medicat Association 191:1604-1609.
Continuing Education for the Practicing
76 Rothstein E, Scott DW, Ris RC (1997)
50 Elder M (1993) Mersilene mesh and
Veterimarian 1:640-649.
Tetracycline and niacinamide for the
 fascia lata in brow suspension: a
64 Latimer C, Dunstan RW (1987)
treatment of sterile
comparative study. Ophthatmology
Eosinophilic plaque involving eyelids of
 pyogranuloma/granuloma sysndrome in
Surgery 24:105-108.
a cat. Journal of the American Animat
a dog. Journat of the American Aninat
 51 Kirschner S {1995) Modified brow sling
Hospitat Association 23:649-653.
Hospitat Association 33:540-543.
technique for the upper lid entropion.
65 Manning TO, Scott DW, Kruth SA,
77 Moriello KA {1996) Treatment of feline
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Sozanski M, Lewis RM {1980) Three 
dermatophytosis. Fetine Practice
the American Colege of Veterinary
cases of canine pemphigus foliaceus and
24:32-37.
Ophthatmmologists 25:68-69.
 observations on chrysotherapy Journat
78 Lester SJ, Kenyon JM (1996) Use of
52 Willis M, Martin C, Stiles J, Kirschner S
of the American Anirmat Hospitat
allopurinol to treat visceral leishmaniasis
{1999) Brow suspension for treatment of
Association 16:189-202.
in a dog. Journat of the American
 ptosis and entropion in dogs with
66 Scott DW, Miller Jr WH, Lewis RM,
Veterinary Medicat Association
redundant facial skin folds. Journat of
Manning TO, Smith CA (1980)
209:615-617.
the American Veterinary Mediciat
 Pemphigus erythermatosus in the dog
79 Ginel PJ, Lopez LR, Molleda MMJ
Association 214:660-662.
and cat. Journal of the American
(1998) Use of allopurinol for
53 Barrie KP, Parshall CJ {1979) Eyelid
Animat Hospitat Association
maintenance of remission in dogs with
 pyogranulomas in four dogs. Journat of
16:815-822.
leishmaniasis. Journat of Small Anima!
the American Animat Hospitat
67 Walton DK, Scott DW, Smith CA,
Practice 39:271-274.
Association 14:433-437.
 Lewis RM (1981) Canine discoid lupus
 80 Scott DW {1981) Observations on
54 Sansom J, Heinrich C, Featherstone H
erythematosus. Journat of the American
canine atopy. Journal of the American
(2000) Pyogranulomatous blepharitis in
Animat Hospitat Association
Animat Hospitat Association
two dogs. Journat of Small Animat
17:851-858.
17:91-100.
Practice 41:80-83.
68 Caciolo PI, Nesbitt GH, Hurvitz AI
81 Scott DW, Manning TO, Smith CA,
55 Rosenthal JJ (1975) Cuterebra
{1984) Pemphigus foliaceus in eight cats
Lewis RM (1982) Observations on the
infestation of the conjunctiva in a
 and results of induction therapy using
immunopathology and therapy of
puppy. Veterinary Medicine/Smatt
azathioprine. Journal of the American
 canine pemphigus and pemphigoid.
Animat Clinician 70:462-463.
Animat Hospitat Association
Journat of the American Veterinary
56 Harris BP, Miller PE, Bloss JR,
20:571-577.
Medicat Association 180:48-52.
Pelliteri PJ (2000) Ophthalmomyiasis
69 Morgan RV (1989)
82 Ihrke PJ, Stannard AA, Ardans AA,
 interna anterior associated with
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome in
Griffin CE {1985) Pemphigus foliaceus
Cuterebra spp.in a cat. Journat of the
 humans and dogs. Corrpendiurr on
in dogs: a review of 37 cases. Journat of
American Veterinary Medicat
Continuing Edtucation for the Practicing
the American Veterinary Medicat
Association 216:352-355.
Veterimarian 11:1211-1218.
Association 186:59-60.
EYELIDS
181
83 Rebhun WC (1980) Repair of eyelid
98 Dugan S, Curtis C, Roberts S, Severin G
111 Anderson D, Lush J, Chambers D
lacerations in horses. Veternary
{1991) Epidemiologic study of 
(1957) Studies on bovine ocular
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
 ocular/adnexal squamous cell carcinoma
squamous carcinoma ('cancer eye"). I.
75:1281-1284.
in horses. Journat of the American
Relationship between eyelid
84 Schoster JV (1988) Surgical repair of
Veterimary Medicat Association
 pigmentation and occurrence of cancer
equine eyelid lacerations. Veterinary
198:251-256.
eye lesions. Joturnat of Animat Science
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
 99 Cheevers W, Roberson S, Brassield A,
16:739-746.
83:1042-1049.
Davis WC, Crawford TB {1982)
112 Nishimura H, Frisch J (1977) Eye 
85 Krehbiel J D and Langham R F (1975)
 Isolation of a retrovirus from cultured
cancer and circumocular pigmentation in
Eyelid neoplasms of dogs. American
equine sarcoid tumor cells. American
Bos toturus and crossbred cattle.
Journat of Veterinary Research
Journat of Veterinary Research
Austratian Journat of Experimentat
36:115-119.
43:804-806.
Agrictutture and Animat Husbandry
86 Barrie K, Gelatt KN, Parshall CP {1982)
100 Trenfield K, Spradbrow P, Vanselow B
17:709-711.
Eyelid squamous cell carcinoma in four
{1985) Sequences of papillomavirus
113 Gelatt KN (1967) Blepharoplastic
dogs. Journat of the American Animat
DNA in equine sarcoids. Equine
procedures in horses. Journat of the
Hospitat Association 18:123-126.
Veterimary Journat 17:449-452.
American Veterinary Medicat
87 Roberts S, Severin G {1986) Prevalence 
101 Nasir L, Reid SW (1999) Bovine
Association 151:27-44.
and treatment of palpebral neoplasms in 
papillomaviral gene expression in equine
114 Gelatt KN, Blogg JR {1969)
the dog. American Veter inary Medicat
sarcoid tumours. Virus Research
Blepharoplastic procedures in small
Association 10:1355-1359.
61{2):171-175.
animals. Journat of the American
88 Collier LL, Collins BK (1994) Excision
102 Lazary S, Gerber H, Glatt PA, Straub R
Anwmat Association 5:67-78.
 and cryosurgical ablation of severe
{1985) Equine leucocyte antigens in
115 Blanchard GL, Keller WF {1976) The
periocular papillomatosis in a dog.
sarcoid-affected horses. Eguine
rhomboid graft flap for the repair of
Journat of the American Veter inary
Veterinary Joturnat 17(4):283-286.
extensive ocular adnexal defects. Journat
Medical Association 204(6):881-883.
103 Brostrom H, Fahlbrink E, Dubath ML,
of the American Animat Hospitat
89 Moore P (1984) Systemic histiocytosis of
Lazary S {1988) Association between
Association 12:576-580.
 Bernese Mountain Dogs. Veterinary
 equine leucocyte antigens (ELA) and
116 Munger RJ, Gourley IM (1981) Cross
Pathology 21:554-563.
 equine sarcoid tumors in the population
Pana addn saie jo tedai ioy de P
90 Williams LW, Gelatt KN, Gwin RM
 of Swedish halfbreds and some of their
defects. Journat of the American
(1981) Ophthalmic neoplasms in the cat.
families. Veterinary Intunology
Veterinary Medicat Association
Joturnat of the American Animat
Immumopathology 19(3-4):215-223.
178:45-48.
Hospitat Association 17:999-1008.
104 Piscopo SE (1999) The complexities of
117 Hamilton HL, Whitley RD,
91 Wilcock B, Yager J, Zink M (1986) The
sarcoid tumors. Equine Practice
McLaughlin SA, Swaim SF (1999) Basic
 morphology and behavior of feline
21:14-18.
blepharoplasty techniques. Compendium
 cutaneous mastocyctomas. Veterinary
105 Knottenbelt DC, Kelly DF (2000) The
O Continuing Education for the
Pathology 23:320-324.
 diagnosis and treatment of periorbital
Practicing Veter inarian 21:946-953.
92 Buerger R, Scott D {1987) Cutaneous
sarcoid in the horse: 445 cases from
118 Cutler N, Beard C {1955) A method
mast cell neoplasia in cats: 14 cases
1974 to 1999. Veterinary
for partial and total upper lid
(1975-1985). Journat of the American
Ophthatmology 3:169-191.
reconstruction. American Journat of
Veterinary Medicat Associat ion
106 Tarwid J, Fretz P, Clark E (1985)
Ophthatmology 39:1-7.
190:1440-1444.
 Equine sarcoids: a study with emphasis
119 Welker B, Modransky PD, Hoffsis GF,
 93 Molander-MeCrary H, Henry C,
on pathologic diagnosis. Campendium
Wyman MW, Rings DM, Hull BL
Potter K, Tyler J, Buss M (1998)
on Continuing Education for the
{1991) Excision of neoplasms of the
Cutaneous mast cell tumors in cats: 32
Practicing Veterinar iam 7:S293-S300.
bovine lower eyelid by H-blepharoplasty.
cases {1991-1994). Journat of the
107 Studer U, Marti E, Stornetta D,
Veterinary Surgery 20:133-139.
American Animat Hospitat Association
Lazary S, Gerber H (1997) The therapy
120 Farris H, Fraunfelder F (1976)
34:281-284.
of equine sarcoid with a non-specific
Cryosurgical treatment of ocular
 94 Strafuss A (1976) Squamous cell
immunostimulator: the epidemiology
squamous cell carcinoma of cattle.
carcinoma in horses. Journaf of the
and spontaneous regression of sarcoids.
Jotrnat of the American Veterinary
American Veterinary Medicat
Schtweiz Arch Tierheilkd
Medicat Association 168:213-216.
Association 168:61-62.
139(9):385-391.
121 Holberg D, Withrow S (1979)
95 Lavach J, Severin G (1977) Neoplasia of
108 Altera K, Clark L (1970) Equine
Cryosurgical treatment of palpebral
the equine eye, adnexa, and orbit: a
cutaneous mastocytosis. Pathotogid
neoplasms: clinical and experimental
review of 68 cases. Journat of the
Veterinaria 7:43-45.
results. Veterinary Sturgery 8:68-73.
American Veterinary Medicat
109 Murphy C, Lavoie JP, Groff J,
122 Joyce J (1975) Cryosurgery for removal
Association 170:202-203.
Hacker D, Pryor P, Bellhorn RW (1989)
 of equine sarcoids. Veterinary
96 Junge R, Sundberg J, Lancaster W
 Bilateral eyelid swelling attributable to
Medicine/Smalt Animat Clinician
(1984) Papillomas and squamous cell 
lymphosarcoma in a horse. Journat of
70:200-203.
carcinomas of horses. Journat of the 
the American Veterinary Medicat
123 Grier R, Brewer WJ, Theilen G {1980)
American Veterinary Medicat
Associat ion 194:939-942.
 Hyperthermic treatment of superficial
Association 185:656-659.
110 Monlux A, Anderson W, Davis C
tumors in cats and dogs. Journat of the
 97 Schwink K (1987) Factors influencing
{1957) The diagnosis of squamous cell
American Veterinary Medicat
morbidity and outcome of equine ocular
carcinoma of the eye (cancer eye) in
Association 177: 227-232.
squamous cell carcinoma. Equine
cattle. American Journat of Veter inary
Veterinary Journal 19:198-200.
Research 28:5-34.
182
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
124 Kainer R, Stringer J, Lueker D {1980)
130 Theon AP, Pascoe JR, Carlson GP,
135 Goetz TE, Ogilvie GK, Keegan KG,
Hyperthermia for treatment of ocular
Krag DN {1993) Intratumoral
Johnson PJ (1990) Cimetidine for 
squamous cell tumors in cattle. Journa!
 chemotherapy with cisplatin in oily
treatment of melanomas in three horses.
of the American Veterinary Mediciat
emulsion in horses. Journat of the
Journat of the American Veterinary
Association 176:356-360.
Amterican Veterinary Medicat
Medicat Association 196:449-452.
125 Ford MM, Champagne ES,
Association 202(2):261-267.
136 McCalla T, Moore C, Collier LA
Giuliano EA, Galle LE, Kramer J,
131 Theon A, Pascoe J, Meagher D (1994)
 (1992) Immunotherapy of periocular 
 Moore CP (2002) Radiofrequency
Perioperative intratumoral
squamous cell carcinoma with
hyperthermia as a treatment for equine
 administration of cisplatin for treatment 
metastasis in a pony. Journat of the
 periocular sarcoids: ten cases.
of cutaneous tumors in Equidae. Journat
American Veterinary Medicat
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Association 200:1678-1681.
the American College of Veterinary
Association 205:1170-1176.
137 Wyman M, Rings M, Tarr M, Alden C
Ophthatmologists 33:29.
132 Kleinschuster S, Rapp H, Green S,
 (1997) Immunotherapy in equine
126 Theon AP, Pascoe JR (1995) Iridium-
Bier J, Kampen K {1981) Efficacy of
sarcoid: a report of two cases. Journat of
192 interstitial brachytherapy for equine
 intratumorally administered
the American Veterinary Medicat
 periocular tumours: treatment results
mycobacterial cell walls in the treatment
Association 171:449-451.
 and prognostic factors in 115 horses.
of cattle with ocular carcinoma. Journat
138 Murphy J, Severin G, Lavach J,
Equine Veterinary Journat
of the Nationat Cancer Institute
Helper D (1979) Immunotherapy in
27{(2):117-121.
67:1165-1171.
 ocular equine sarcoid. Journat of the
127 Banks W, England RA {1973)
133 Hoffman D, Jennings P, Spradbrow P
American Veterinary Medicat
Radioactive gold in the treatment of
{1981) Immunotherapy of bovine ocular
Association 174:269-272.
 ocular squamous cell carcinoma of
squamous cell carcinomas with
139 Lavach J, Sullins K, Roberts S,
cattle. Journat of the Veterinary Medicat
phenol-saline extracts of allogeneic
Severin G, et af. (1985) BCG treatment 
Association 163:745-748.
carcinomas. Australian Veterinary
of periocular sarcoid. Equine Veterinary
128 Turrel J, Koblik P {1983) Techniques of
Jourmal 57:159-162.
Journal 17:445-448.
afterloading iridium-192 interstitial
134 Shields CL, Lally MR, Singh AD,
brachytherapy in veterinary medicine.
Shields JA, Nowinski T {1999) Oral
Veterimary Radiology 24:278-283.
cimetidine (Tagamet) for recalcitrant,
129 Grier R, Kigurardo G, Schaffer C,
difuse conjunctival papilmatosis.
Pedrosa B, Myers R, Merkley DF,
American Journal of Ophthatmology
Touvenelle M (1991) Mast cell
128:362-364.
destruction by deionized water.
American Journat Veterinary Research
51:1116-1120.
183
8
Conjunctiva
and
Third
d Eyelid
ANATOMYANDPHYSIOLOGY
2-3 mm posterior from the limbus, and is heaviest over
the rectus muscle insertions dorsally and ventrally. This is
The conjunctiva is a thin mucous membrane that lines the
clinically evident as the most difficult dissection area
posterior surface of the lids (palpebral conjunctiva) and
when performing conjunctival flap surgery.
reflects forward at the fornix or recess onto the globe f bulbar
The epithelium contains goblet cells that contribute to
mnjunctiva). In animals lower than primates, it is also
the mucin layer of the tear film. The mucin allows an
reflected over a cartilage and glandular tissue to form the
aqueous solution to spread over a hydrophobic lipid corneal
membrana nictitans, or third eyelid in the medial-ventral
epithelium {8.1). The concentration of goblet cells varies
cul-de-sac. Depending on the location, the epithelium of the
with the area examined and, in the dog, they are most
conjunctiva is either stratified columnar or stratified
numerous in the lower medial fornix and are least numerous 
squamous, and it is continuous with the corneal epithelium
on the bulbar conjunctiva. The female dog has a greater
(8.1). The stem cells of the palpebral conjuctiva (rabbit) are
density of goblet cells than the male. A lack of goblet cells
located at the mucocutaneous junction and migrate toward
results in a specific form of keratoconjunctivitis sicca
the fornix?. Presumably, the stem cells for the bulbar
 (KCS)6, 7. The nerve supply of the conjunctiva is the long
mnjunctiva reside at the limbus with the comeal stem cells.
ciliary nerve fophthalmic division of the Vth cranial nerve).
Perilimbal pigment is present to a variable degree in
The third eyelid is well developed in domestic animals,
most animals. The presence of conjunctival pigment is a
while in higher primates it is a vestigial structure, the plica
protecting factor for development of squamous cell car-
semilunaris. It functions as a protective mechanism that is
cinomas, which are stimulated by ultraviolet (UV)
very active in grazing animals and birds, and is a source of
radiation. In the cow, perilimbal pigment has a herita-
tears. The movement of the third eyelid across the globe
bility factor of 0.53, and pigmentation increases with
consists of a passive component and an active component,
age3. The conjunctival melanocytes migrate into the
the latter being found in birds and, perhaps, cats. The
cornea with corneal neovascularization, resulting in the
passive movement is produced when the globe is retracted
corneal pigmentation observed in an inflamed cornea*.
into the orbit by the retractor bulbi muscle, which results in
Tenon's capsule (or fascia) of the globe becomes
pressure on the base of the third eyelid pushing it forward.
intimately involved with the overlying conjunctiva about
Any condition that increases the orbital volume will push on
8.1 A
B
8.1 A: Bulbar conjunctiva of a dog near the fornix, consisting of stratified squamous epithelium with scattered goblet cells in the epithelium.
of the epithelium. The pigment is observed clinically and in large animals it is protective for development of squamous cell carcinoma.
184
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
the base of the third eyelid, and any decrease in orbital
A cluster of lymphoid follicles is found on the bulbar
ynd pu no aun oui yus oi aqo aun asno ke a
surface of the third eyelid in most animals (8.2). These
On the base of the third eyelid.
frequently become hyperplastic and hypertrophied with
Birds lack a retractor bulbi muscle but have a very active
chronic antigenic stimulation. The margin of the third
third eyelid that is pulled from the dorsonasal quadrant
Yoel Aeu sienpaipun inq 'paluauaid Alensn s! Paaa
across the eye by the pyramidalis muscle, which originates
pigmentation in one or both eyes. Animals with
from the posterior globe?. The cat has been reported to
nonpigmented conjunctival surfaces are more prone to
have an active component of protrusion of the third eyelid
ocular irritation and neoplasia. In cattle, periocular
due to slips of skeletal muscle that originate from the lateral
pigmentation has a heritability factor of 0.53 {about the
rectus muscle and insert near the free margin?. Innervation
same as lid pigmentation), increases with age, and is
is supplied by the VIth cranial nerve. These slips of skeletal
 protective for squamous cell carcinoma3, 15.
muscle were not confirmed by Nuyttens and Simoens10, but
they did report nine smooth muscle slips that attach to the
 third eyelid; four protract and four retract the third eyelid,
EXAMINATION OF THE CONJUNCTIVA
and one has unknown function. These smooth muscles are
part of a fibroelastic plate that originates in the levator,
DIFFUSE LIGHT AND MAGNIFICATION
medial, ventral, and lateral rectus muscles.
The various conjunctival surfaces should be examined
 Similar dissections have not been reported for other
for hyperemia, chemosis, follicular development, type of
domestic animals, but most appear to have smooth muscle
exudation, mechanical factors, and involvement of other
that retracts the third eyelid tonically. Innervation of the
Ocular or adnexal structures.
smooth muscle of the third eyelid in the dogll and the
medial side of the third eyelid in the cat12 is by sympathetic
MICROBIOLOGIC CULTURE
fibers arriving via the infratrochlear nerve, a branch of the
If cultures are indicated, swabs should be taken before
ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (Vth cranial.
instilling topical anesthetics due to their bacteriocidal
nerve). The smooth muscle in the ventral aspect of the
action, and before applying rose bengal stain due to its
 third eyelid in the cat is innervated by sympathetic fibers 
viricidal action16. Swabs should be plated immediately or
placed in transport medium.
of the Vth cranial nervel2.
Denervation results in
protrusion of the third eyelid in Horner's syndrome
SCHIRMER TEAR TEST (STT)
The third eyelid varies among species, but in general it
A STT should be performed in most cases of red eye to
consists of a T-shaped hyaline cartilage skeleton that is
evaluate for a sicca syndrome. It should be performed
covered with conjunctiva and has a gland enveloping the
before instilling topical drops. Sicca is a commonly
base (8.2). This gland is one of two lacrimal glands for
overlooked cause of chronic conjunctivitis.
each eye and is often referred to erroneously as the
Harderian gland. The true Harderian gland is deeper in
CONJUNCTIVAL SCRAPING
the orbit than the third eyelid gland, and is found only in
Conjunctival scrapings obtained with a spatula, cotton bud,
certain domestic animals such as the rabbit, cow, and
 Or cytology brush, and stained with either Giemsa or a quick
pig13. These animals therefore have two glands asso-
stain for cytology and Gram stain for bacterial population,
ciated with the third eyelid. The secretions of the
are frequently helpful in making a specific etiologic diagnosis
mammalian Harderian gland have a high lipid contentl4.
(Table 8.1). If indirect fluroescent antibody (IFA) staining is
to be performed, such as in the diagnosis of herpesvirus or
chlamydia, prior use of topical fluorescein should probably
be avoided. Conflicting evidence exists as to whether prior
staining of the cornea and conjunctiva with fluorescein will
8.2
result in false-positive results with IFA staining17, 18
DOUBLE EVERSION OF THE LIDS
AND THIRD EYELID
 Eversion of the lids is indicated, particularly in refractory
conjunctivitis and with refractive ulcerative keratitis, to
make sure contributing mechanical factors such as an
aberrant hair or a foreign body are not overlooked.
LACRIMAL OUTFLOW
Chronic epiphora or a mucopurulent conjunctival
discharge, usually unilateral, may occur with obstruction
of the lacrimal outflow system, and thus must be
differentiated from conjunctivitis.
MEIBOMIAN GLANDS
The meibomian glands may be the site of residual or
persistent infection that extends to the conjunctiva, or
8.2 Histologic section of a normal canine third eyelid. (A: cornea;
the source of irritating lipid breakdown products (see
B: gland of the third eyelid; C: cartilage; D: lymphoid follicles;
Blepharitis, p.165) resulting in chronic conjunctivitis.
E: palpebral surface.]
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
185
Table 8.1  Cellular responses associated with
DISEASES OF THE CONJUNCTIVA:
conjunctivitis
CONJUNCTIVITIS
INTRODUCTION/ETIOLOGY
Disease
 Cellular response
Conjunctivitis is the most commonly diagnosed ocular
Acute bacterial
Predominantly neutrophils, few 
disease in general practice. Chronic conjunctivitis is
 conjunctivitis
mononuclear cells, many bacteria,
 frequently frustrating to treat, as the etiologic diagnosis is
degenerating epithelial cells
often presumptive and not based on laboratory results,
Chronic bacterial
 Predominantly neutrophils, many
and the response to therapy is often inconclusive. How-
 conjunetivitis
mononuclear cells, degenerate or 
ever, neither veterinary nor medical ophthalmologists are
keratinized epithelial cells, goblet
very successful in arriving at a definitive diagnosis with
cells, bacteria may or may not be
 seen, mucus, fibrin
CLINICAL SIGNS
Feline herpesviral
 Neutrophils and mononuclear cell
Hyperemia
conjunetivitis
numbers depend on stage of
infection
Hyperemia of the conjunctiva is the hallmark of con-
junctivitis and may vary in severity. Hyperemia
l of
 Feline mycoplasmal
Predominantly neutrophils, fewer
conjunctivitis should be distinguished from distension of
 conjunctivitis
mononuclear cells, basophilic 
 coccoid or pleomorphic organisms
selected conjunctival veins draining the episcleral and
scleral veins. The latter is an important indicator of
on cell membranes
intraocular disease. The hyperemia of conjunctivitis is
Feline chlamydial
 Predominantly neutrophils,
diffuse and more severe toward the fornix and not
conjunetivitis
 mononuclear cells in subacute 
restricted to a few large veins (8.3). The hyperemia of
 cases are increased in number,
conjunctivitis is usually located in the palpebral con-
plasma cells, basophilic cytoplasmic
junctiva (8.4) but on occasion will involve all conjunc-
inclusions early in the disease
tival surfaces (8.3).
Keratoconjunctivitis
Epithelial cells keratinized, goblet
sicca
cells, mucus, neutrophilic response 
Chemosis
marked if there is infection,
Conjunctivitis of acute onset produces variable degrees
bacteria
of chemosis (edema). A mild to moderate degree of
 Canine distemper
Varies with stage of disease: early:
chemosis is manifested by thicker folds of dorsal bulbar
 giant cells, mononuclear cells;
conjunctiva forming when the lid is rubbed against the
later: neutrophils, goblet cells, and
bulbar conjunctiva. The fluid retention, as well as the
mucus. Infrequent cellular
hyperemia of the bulbar conjunctiva, obscures the epi-
inclusions
 scleral vessels and the underlying scleral venous plexus to
 Eosinophils, neutrophils may be
 a variable degree. Shar Peis often have the appearance of
Allergic conjunetivitis 
marked, basophils possible
chemosis {8.47), presumably due to increased amounts of
glyosaminoglycans {mucin) in the conjunctival stroma,
similar to the subcutis (mucinosis).
8.3 Diffuse hyperemia
8.3
8.4
of the palpebral and 
bulbar conjunctiva in a
dog with conjunctivitis
associated with atopy.
8.4  Typical
appearance of
conjunctivitis that
 preferentially involves
the palpebral 
conjunctiva more than
the bulbar conjunctiva.
Note chemosis (folds 
in conjunctiva] and 
diffuse hyperemia.
186
OpHThAlMIC DisEASe In VeTeRINArY MeDICInE
8.5
8.6
8.5 Marked chermosis without hyperemia in a cat. Chemosis of
8.6 Brownish-black waxy discharge in a cat with chlamydial
this degree without hyperemia is often due to topical medication5
infection. Discharge is not specific for chlamydia, but is unique
 or allergens.
 in certain cats for any conjunctival irritation.
8.7
8.8
8.7 Marked follicle formation visible on the palpebral conjunctiva
8.8 Mild ocular discomfort characteristic of cats with conjunctivitis.
and palpebral surface of the third eyelid of a dog.
Note the mild blepharospasm with prominent third eyelid and ocular and 
nasal discharge. The conjunctivitis was due to herpesvirus infection.
Adverse reactions to topical medications produce
Follicles
dramatic chemosis with minimal inflammation (8.5).
Lymphoid follicles may be present on the conjunctival
Cyclopentolate, a topical mydriatic, is very predicta ble in
surfaces in variable numbers.
 Follicles have a
 producing marked chemosis in dogs.
characteristic “cobblestone' appearance, and their num-
bers may not be fully appreciated until the lids are
Ocular discharge
everted and both surfaces of the third eyelid
 aré
The presenting complaint is usually ocular discharge.
examined. Follicular hyperplasia is frequently a
Ocular exudates may be minimal or absent, as observed in
nonspecific reaction to chronic conjunctival irritation
cases of uncomplicated viral conjunctivitis and atopy. Mild
{8.7). In the horse, they have been associated with
inflammation results in a serous discharge from hyper-
Onchocerca spp. infestation, and in the cat, possibly
secretion of the lacrimal glands due to irritation.
with herpesvirus.
The next degree of severity of ocular discharge is
excessive production of mucus. Small quantities of mucus
Pain
are normal, and mucus has an important role in the tear
Pain or discomfort observed with conjunctivitis varies
flm. Depending on the nature of the irritant, variable
greatly with the type of conjunctivitis and the species. In
degrees of polymorphonuclear cell exudation may occur
humans, the discomfort of conjunctivitis is described as a
and, if severe, manifest as a purulent exudate. These
"foreign body sensation on the eye'. Cats with con-
frequently, but not invariably, are associated with a bacterial
junctivitis frequently have some degree of blepharo-
infection and are usually accompanied by excess mucus and
spasm, whereas dogs often are oblivious to the condition
thus become mucopurulent in nature. Certain breeds of cats
(8.8). When blepharospasm is present, corneal pain
such as the Persian, Himalayan, and Siamese are predis-
should be ruled out by fluorescein staining before
posed to a black, waxy discharge with conjunctivitis. The
 ascribing the pain to conjunctivitis.
source is probably the meibomian glands, as it may still be
present with sicca {8.6). This material may play a role in the
black deposits found with corneal sequestrum.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
187
Laterality
Adenoviruses
Most cases of conjunctivitis are bilateral and, when
Canine adenovirus type 1 (CAV-1) and canine adenovirus
unilateral, unique conditions such as mechanical
type 2 (CAV-2) both produce a conjunctivitis. CAV-1 is
irritation from a foreign body or hair should be
the agent of infectious canine hepatitis, while CAV-2 is
investigated. Some infectious conditions begin in one eye,
one of the etiologic agents of tracheobronchitis or kennel
but usually spread to the opposite eye or have one eye
cough'. Both agents may be responsible for a bilateral
more severely involved than the other.
conjunctivitis characterized by marked hyperemia and a
serous to seromucous exudate23. The systemic signs may
CLASSIFICATION BY ETIOLOGY
provide clues for differentiating the adenovirus infections
The usual classification of various inflammatory diseases
from distemper, but it may be difficult to differentiate
of the conjunctiva has been based on descriptive
 complicated tracheobronchitis from distemper.
terminology of the duration {acute and chronic) and type
of exudate {mucoid and purulent). While this method-
Herpesvirus
 ology makes it convenient to label or make a superficial
Introduction/etiology
diagnosis, it adds very little to our understanding of the
Cat. Conjunctivitis is present to a variable degree in all
etiology of conjunctivitis. It is preferable to classify
the feline viral respiratory syndromes. The herpesvirus,
 inflammatory lesions by emphasizing the cause.
calicivirus, and reovirus groups have been isolated from
Viral conjunctivitis
evidence indicates that herpesvirus and calicivirus are
Viruses are common etiologic agents of conjunctivitis in
widespread in the cat population and account for most of
all domestic animals. Often, the conjunctivitis is among
the least of the many signs produced in a particular viral
disease and as such, may be chosen to be ignored by the
clinician. The diagnostic challenge occurs when the
conjunctivitis is the main sign and represents either a
prodromal or subclinical systemic syndrome.
Canine distemper
8.9 Distemper
6'8
introduction/etiology
conjunctivitis in an
Distemper seems to be almost invariably associated with
apparently healthy
 some degree of bilateral conjunctivitis. The classical
young dog that wa5
picture is a mucopurulent ocular discharge in association
febrile when
with other catarrhal signs. While the mucopurulent
presented for
exudate is usually described as typical for distemper, this 
vaccina tion. The 
Baioeq Aiepuoas se leua Ajaund iou Aensn si wo
palpebral
and a variable degree of tear deficiency promote the
conjunctiva was
mucopurulent exudation. Distemper may also present as
severely hyperemic
bilateral marked hyperemia of the conjunctiva, with a
bilaterally and 
minimal seromucoid discharge (8.9). The animal's
minimal exudation
pharynx and tonsils may also be inflamed, and a mild
was present.
fever of 39.5-40°C (102-104°F) may be present, but no
Conjunctival
Other systemic signs.
scra pings are
If observed early in the course of the disease,
presented in 8.10.
Myoclonus developed within 1 month.
inclusion bodies in the cytoplasm of the epithelial cells
(8.10). There is usually an absolute lymphopenia in the
blood count, and the animal may develop other signs of
8.10
distemper at a later date.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of distemper is usually based on history,
accompanying systemic signs, intracytoplasmic inclusions
in epithelial cells on conjunctival scrapings (8.10), and an
absolute lymphopenia in the peripheral blood. A lack of
 inclusion bodies is not definitive as the peak observation
period of inclusions is 7-11 days post inoculation, with a
range of 5-21 days22. Thus, chronic distemper cases are
often negative. Fluorescent antibody staining is more
 sensitive for detecting inclusions than routine cytology.
8.10 Conjunctival cytology from the case in 8.9. A red cytoplasmic
inclusion body is present (arrow) in the central epithelial cell 
(Schorr's stain].
188
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
the cases of infectious upper respiratory disease2s.
 Dog. The herpesvirus responsible for neonatal puppy
Reovirus appears to be an insignificant cause of feline
death produces a transient follicular genital infection in
conjunctivitis26. The prevalence of the varying viral
adult male and females, as well as a transient (4-5 days)
causes has depended on the method of detection, with
 conjunctivitis41. A herpesvirus was suspected in a
newer techniques utilizing polymerase chain reaction
syndrome of chronic follicular conjunctivitis and
(PCR) being more sensitive than IFA, cultures, and
balanitis of dogs. The disease was produced after passage
serology. It has been suggested that the more severe
ztpaielos iou sem juage aul inq aunns anssii yanoiui
forms of conjunctivitis are associated with herpesvirus
Later work by the same authors could not duplicate the
(Table 8.2), but factors such as antigenic variants,
transmissibility of the syndrome43. A follicular
individual immunity, potentiation by other viruses, and
conjunctivitis associated with balanitis or vaginitis does
bacteria may all modify the disease so that considerable
exist but an infectious ca use has yet to be confirmed.
overlap occurs between clinical signs27.
A keratopathy that was similar in appearance to a lipid
 Feline herpesvirus type 1 (FHV-1), the causative agent
keratopathy has been reported to be associated with
of feline rhinotracheitis, has a tropism for conjunctival
herpesvirus, but has not been confirmed+4. While many
and respiratory epithelium, where it replicates and
ophthalmologists have suspected that a canine herpes
produces necrosis. This is most severe in the young
syndrome exists in the adult dog due to the occasional
dendritic ulcer and found it curious why the dog should be
replicate in the corneal epithelium, producing ulceration,
unique in not having an adult ocular herpes syndrome,
the most typical being a linear dendritic' ulceration30, 31
Ledbetter et al.43a confirmed that indeed the adult dog
Following primary infection, latent infection for the life
does have an ocular herpes syndrome. They reported on
two dogs with dendritic corneal ulcers and isolated canine
perhaps the corneal stroma3437 in about 80% of cats38.
herpes type 1 from the lesions. Both dogs were responsive
In young cats, infection with herpesvirus may produce
to topical antiviral therapy.
severe conjunctivitis and usually there are upper
respiratory signs. Signs of conjunctivitis progress from
Horse. Equine herpesvirus 2 may produce a keratooonjunc-
seromucoid to mucopurulent in 45 days, and the dis-
tivitis (see Chapter 10, p.241) and viral arteritis may pro-
charge is often quite profuse (8.8, 8.11).
 duce a conjunctivitis4s-47, Viral conjunctivitis and kerato-
In young kittens, the conjunctival surface is often
uveitis may be observed with adenoviral infection in foals.
ulcerated, with fibrinous exudation resulting in persistent
symblepharon (8.12, 8.13) 39. The resultant conjunctival
Cow. Bovine herpesvirus 1, the cause of infectious bovine
adhesions may adhere to the cornea if it is concurrently
rhinotracheitis (IBR), may produce infectious pustular
ulcerated, create a permanent protrusion of the third
vulvovaginitis or respiratory signs and may involve the
eyelid from adhesions, or obliterate the lacrimal lake or
conjunctiva, to the extent that eye or ocular signs
lacrimal puncta in the lower medial conjunctival cul-de-
predominate48. Manifestation depends on the strain of
 sac, creating a chronic epiphora. Various degrees of
virus. Conjunctival involvement typically produces
keratitis may occur with herpesvirus30, but keratitis is
elevated red plaques that are proliferations of lympho-
not present with the other viral etiologies of the
respiratory disease/conjunctivitis complex. The duration
Ocular involvement may be observed with respiratory
of the acute clinical signs is usually 10-14 days39. Adult
signs and, in addition to conjunctivitis, consists
of
cats frequently manifest chronic herpesvirus conjunc-
anterior uveitis and a nonulcerative keratitis that
is
 tivitis unilaterally or bilaterally with minimal respiratory
characterized by peripheral edema that spreads centrally.
signs, and these represent the biggest diagnostic and
Lesions may be either unilateral or bilateral. As with
therapeutic challenge20 21, 40.
other herpesvirus infections, animals often become latent
carriers and may become symptomatic when stressed.
Table 8.2 Clinical differentiation of feline respiratory infection
FVR
FVC
Chiamydophila spp.
Severity
 Primary infection
Variably mild to moderate
Mild
typically severe 
 Ocular symptoms
Conjunctivitis often prominent Conjunctivitis mild to absent 
Chronic and marked
 Nasal discharge
 Often profuse
Scanty to moderate
Scanty to moderate
Epithelial ulceration
Very occasionally tongue
Very frequently tongue, also 
Not associated
or pharynx
hard palate, external nares 
Coughing
Common
Rare, if ever
Rare, if ever
(From Povey, 197627)
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
189
IBR virus has also been isolated from goats with
and 21% were positive for herpesvirus. In cats with
ocular lesions of conjunctivitis and keratitis and
conjunctivitis, a history of recent exposure to other cats,
respiratory diseases1.
sneezing, and acute signs were correlated with positive
herpesvirus on PCR. Cats with conjunctivitis and which
Diagnosis
were   chlamydophila-positive  were   younger  (
cats
A presumptive diagnosis of viral conjunctivitis may be made
[9 weeks-6 months) and there was a seasonal incidence
by observing conjunctivitis associated with typical systemic
in the summer.
signs, exclusion of other etiologies, lack of response to
antibiotics in a condition that is contagious, or a typical
Viral culture
disease in that species. As diagnostic tests are not often
Viral cultures from conjunctiva may be performed, but
widely available, and are expensive or ambiguous, clinical
 are usually reserved for outbreaks with multiple animals.
judgement is often relied upon for making a diagnosis of
With herpesvirus infection, cultures are_ frequently
viral conjunctivitis (particularly herpesvirus)20, 40
negative because of the latent carrier state. Rose bengal
The main differential diagnosis of infectious conjunc-
is highly virocidal and should not be applied to the
tivitis in cats is Chlamydophila felis (Chlamydia psittaci)
 cornea before obtaining viral culturesl6. Hickman et al.s3
infection. Sykes et al.$2 correlated the clinical signs with
found in a herpesvirus outbreak in a colony of specific
the results of PCR testing for both chlamydophila and
pathogen-free (SPF) cats that only 4% of the cats were
feline herpesvirus, and found that of cats with upper
actively shedding herpesvirus. Upon activation of
respiratory signs, 14% were positive for chlamydophila
herpes virus infection with glucocorticoid injections, 21%
8.11
8.12
8.11 A cat with chronic bilateral seromucoid discharge associated
 8.12 Marked fibrinous reaction in a kitten with herpesvirus
with herpesvirus conjunctivitis.
conjunctivitis, resulting in symblepharon. The condition is bilateral.
8.13
8.14
8.13 Symblepharon (adhesions of conjunctiva to the third eyelid]. In
 8.14 Marked conjunctivitis in a calf with respiratory and ocular
the cat these are usually associated with early herpesvirus infection 
disease due to infectious bovine rhinotracheitis. Note the marked
a5 a kitten. This will result in epiphora from blockage of the lower
chemosis and white areas coalescing in the conjunctiva. On
puncta, and normal tear flow in the lower conjunctival cul-de-sac
histopathology, these represent infiltrations of lymphocytes and.
and a more prominent third eyelid.
possibly, surface necrosis. Multiple anirmals were involved and other
calves had keratitis and anterior uveitis.
190
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
of previously negative cats shed the virus after one
Immunization does not protect animals from most of
injection and an additional 12% after a second
the ocular manifestations of herpesvirus infection, nor
 glucocorticoid injection. Maggs et al.54 found 11% of
does it have a known role in therapy, although anecdotal
clinically normal cats were culture positive,_which was
reports may suggest otherwise. Sykes et al.s2 found
previous vaccination history to have no statistical value
in determining the cause of upper respiratory disease.
Indirect fluorescent antibody staining and cytology
Interferon given intranasally or topically onto the eye has
Inclusion bodies may be found with adenoviruses and
been used for therapy, although it has not been critically
distemper virus {8.10) but herpesvirus inclusions are not
evaluated in clinical practice. In vitro testing of feline
seen with routine cytologic processing57. Fixation for one
herpesvirus to acyclovir was potentiated eightfold by the
hour in Bouin's solution will retain herpesvirus inclusionss8.
addition of alpha interferon at doses of 10-100 U61.
 IFA staining is a more sensitive method of detecting viral
L-lysine (500 mg q12h p.o.) decreased the severity of
antigen than routine cytologic examination. Prior
herpesvirus-induced conjunctivitis in cats, but did not alter
application of fluorescein to the eye before taking samples
the duration of the disease or the ability to isolate the virus.
for IFA may result in a false-positive test59 but this is
Lysine was administered 6 hours before inoculation with
mntroversial; reports in the human literature and the
the virus; this raises the question of efficacy in the clinical
author's own experience indicate that prior fluorescein
situation, where therapy is initiated after the infection is
staining does not interefere with IFA interpretation17. Viral 
established62. Maggs et al62a tested the effectiveness of
inclusions are often transient and present only early in the
lysine in cats with upper respiratory infections and found
 Murse of disease. Thus a negative result is inconclusive. IFA
the mean disease scores were higher. FHV-1 DNA was
Aua1adxa sieo jo %og inoqe auo ui aaisod si susa
more frequently detected and the blood arginine levels were
infected with herpesvirus+ and, in the author's research and
lower in the lysine treated group. This study raises serious
dinical experience, it is almost always negative36,37.
questions about the efficacy and potential side-effects of
using dietary lysine. Lysine may have a role in prophylaxis
 Many ophthalmologists dismiss conjunctival
when administered daily in catteries, in multi-cat
cytology as a low-yield test for feline conjunctivitis;
households, or when new animals are introduced.
however, it is a quick and inexpensive method to
The elimination of herpesvirus from catteries is best
diagnose chlamydophilal, mycoplasmal, and
performed by PCR testing and culling of carriers. In an
eosinophilic conjunctivitis.
SPF colony, all cats with positive viral cultures of oral
 swabs before and 10 days after two injections of 5 mg/kg
 methylprednisolone acetate i.m. at 6-week intervals were
Serology
culled from the colony. Despite these drastic measures,
Serologic testing is complicated by the widespread
 23% of cats herpesvirus negative after two glucocorticoid
vaccination and ubiquitous nature of many of the viral
 injections, were positive after a third injection$3.
agents. Maggs et al.54 found herpesvirus serology to be of
no use in differentiating normal cats from diseased cats.
Prophylaxis
Prevention of viral conjunctivitis as well as other forms
Polymerase chain reaction
of infectious conjunctivitis should consist of segregation
PCR testing for virus DNA may be overly sensitive when
of animals by age, function, and health status, and
many cats are carriers for herpesvirus. The rate of
quarantine upon first acquisition. Immunization of new
 positive herpesvirus on PCR testing of normal cats has
animals before introduction into the main herd or
varied from <1%36, 37 to 11%53, 56, 59a. Vaccine virus
cattery, decreasing the concentration of animals, good
DNA is also detected by PCR, decreasing the diagnostic
ventilation, and avoiding fomite transmission by hand
sensitivity, and the various PCR assays published also
washing are important steps in minimizing outbreaks of
 have significantly variable detection ratess9b.
infectious conjunctivitis. L-lysine {500 mg q12h) may be
administered to cats in quarantine and throughout the
Therapy
period of introduction into the household or colony, to
Treatment of viral conjunctivitis with topical antibiotics is
minimize signs if exposed to herpesvirus.
usually undertaken only if the disease is incorrectly
diagnosed or thought to be complicated with bacteria.
Chiamydophila felis
Topical antiviral agents are not effective against distemper
Introd uction/etiology
virus or adenoviruses, but are effective against the
The agent of feline pneumonitis has undergone various
herpesvirus group. The efficacy of the various antiherpes
name changes, from Miyagawanella felis to Chlamydia
agents varies, with reports indicating a decreasing sensitivity
psittaci; most recently, Chlamydia psittaci has been
order of: trifluridine > idoxuridine = ganciclovir > cidofovir
divided into four new species, Chlamydopbila felis, C.
psittaci, C. abortus, and C. caviae. These respectively
this, Willams et al.60b reported clinical improvement in
primarily infect cats, birds, sheep, and guinea pigs63, 64.
feline herpes syndromes with topical 0.5% aciclovir given
Chlamydopbila spp, are obligate intracellular Gram-
5 times a day. Similarily, topical 0.s% cidofovir q12h in
negative bacteria that have a tropism for mucous
experimental herpes significantly decreased the severity of
membranes. There are two forms, the elementary body
the clinical signs and viral shedding60, Cidofovir has the
{infectious form) and the reticulate body {intracellular,
advantage of decreased frequency of dosing because of its
metabolically active form)6s. Although mammalian
long halflife in ocular tissues. While the course of the
strains are thought to have relatively low infectivity for
disease may be shortened with therapy, a cure is not pro-
humans, they should still be considered a zoonosis66, 67
duced due to the carrier status that many animals develop.
After reviewing the literature on human infections with
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
191
C. felis, Browning67a concluded that of 7 cases only one
some lymphocytes are present as well. Cytoplasmic
case in an immunocompromised patient could be
inclusion bodies in epithelial cells may be found as long
definitely attributed to C. felis.
as 50 days after infection, but are most numerous in the
first 2 weeks of the disease (8.17)$7. A history of possible
Clinical signs
exposure such as boarding, cat shows, veterinary
While C. felis was initially described as an agent for
hospitals, and introduction of new animals onto the
 pneumonitis in cats, subsequent studies have indicated the 
premises indicates expos ure.
conjunctiva and nasal cavity are the primary sites of
 infection, with rare lower respiratory infection6s-70. In a
survey of feline conjunctivitis, C. felis were cultured in
30% of cases71 . Utilizing PCR for both herpesvirus and C.
8.15 Chlamydial
8.15
felis, Sykes et al.$2 found C. felis in 14% of cats with
 conjunctivitis in 
upper respiratory disease and all had conjunctivitis. Cats
a cat. The
with conjunctivitis were as likely to be positive on PCR
 condition wa5
for herpesvirus as for C. felis; however, sneezing cats with
unilateral at this
conjunctivitis and cats with acute disease were 2.2x and
time. Note
hyperermia,
No cats  with upper  respiratory  disease  without
glistening
conjunctivitis were positive for C. felis; coinfection with
follicles, and 
C. felis and herpesvirus was uncommon, and 56% of cats 
 seromucoid 
with upper respiratory disease were negative for both
discharge.
agents. C. felis had a higher prevalence in young cats
Inclusion bodies
{5 weeks-9 months). Vaccination history was no help in
were found on
differentiating  the  infectious 
agents involved
in
cytology.
 conjunctivitis and upper respiratory diseases2.
 The conjunctivitis of C. felis infection is usually the pre-
dominant sign and may
be unilateral on initial
examination, although it usually spreads to the opposite
eye in 5-7 days57, 72. In the early stages, the conjunctiva is
8.16 Chlamydial
8.16
chemotic, smooth, shiny, and a grayish-pink color. In the 
kerato-
initial stages, the ocular discharge is serous, but within
conjunctivitis in 
2 days the secretion becomes mucopurulent and the
a goat. Typical
conjunctiva becomes thick and more hyperemic (8.15).
inclusion bodies
The ocular discharge is progressively reduced until only a
were found on 
scant or moderate mucopurulent exudate is present. In
conjunctival
chronic cases, hyperplasia, hyperemia, and follicle
cytology. The
formation may develop.
condition
 Untreated, the disease may run a prolonged course of
responded to 
 several months68, 69, 72,73. Kittens born to carrier queens
topical
may manifest neonatal conjunctivitis before the physio-
tetracycline.
logic ankyloblepharon separates. Isolation of the feline
Several young
 agent from humans with conjunctivitis indicates that it
goats were
may have zoonotic potential66.
involved.
 Chlamydophila spp. may also produce conjunctivitis
 and keratoconjunctivitis in the horse, sheep, goat, and pig
 and may be associated with polyarthritis74, 7s. Keratitis
may develop in these species, unlike the cat, where this
8.17
has not been described or documented (8.16). Two
 serotypes of Chlamydopbila have been described in cattle:
type 1 is responsible for abortion, genital infection, and
enteric infections; and type 2 produces polyarthritis,
polyserositis, keratoconjunctivitis, encephalomyelitis, and
pneumonia. Transmission has been proposed as via oral,
tick vectors, aerosol, and direct contact routes. With
aerosol and direct contact exposure the predominant
 signs are conjunctivitis and pneumonia. The mani-
festation of the disease is dependent on the virulence of
the strain and the age and immunity of the animal76.
Diagnosis
Associated clinical signs will vary with the species.
Conjunctivitis is typically present in the young animal,
and is chronic and associated with a thickened,
hyperemic conjunctiva. Conjunctival cytology contains
8.17 Chlamydial inclusions (arrows] in the cytoplasm of conjunctival
 primarily polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs), but
epithelial cells of a cat (Wright's stain].
192
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Therapy
Prophylaxis
Topical tetracyclines have been the traditional therapy for
Previous killed vaccines have been ineffective but new,
chlamydial infections. Animals usually respond well if
modified, live vaccines have demonstrated more
 treated early in the course of the disease. The enigma lies
An inactivated feline_ C. felis vaccine
in controlling the disease in catteries, herds, and hospitals 
demonstrated immunity for 1 year*2. Vaccination 
is
because of the carrier state and short-lived immunity. The
carrier state resides in the gastrointestional tract and,
exposure to other cats is present.
consequently, treatment emphasis has shifted from topical
to systemic tetracyclines.
Mycoplasma
Systemic doxycycline {5 mg/kg q12h) for 3 weeks
Introduction/etiology
jo sap e um suais un uawaondu panpond
As with mycoplasmal infections in other tissues and
commencing treatment and no relapse of disease was noted
species, the role of mycoplasma in ocular disease of cats
in experimental infections6. The author's personal
is not without controversy. A stress factor appears to be
experience with using systemic doxycycline in treating
necessary in addition to the mycoplasma, as direct
C. felis infection in a group of hospital blood donor cats has
inoculation onto the conjunctiva does not produce the
not been as successful, with relapses common. Dean et al.76a
followed the clinical signs and presence of C. felis DNA
Clinically, the mycoplasma may occur as a sequela to, or
with real time PCR and found that at least a 28-day course
in conjunction with, other viral upper respiratory
 of doxycycline was needed to eliminate the organism. An
 diseases. The pure clinical picture is distinctive enough to
alternative to twice daily systemic doxycycline therapy is
help differentiate  mycoplasmal  conjunctivitis  from
azithromycin; azithromycin (5 mg/kg q48-72h in the cat) is
chlamydophilal and viral conjunctivitis73.
a long-acting macrolide similar to erythromycin, that has
 Mycoplasma is a fastidious organism that is difficult to
culture and this may have contributed to the clinical
enrofoxacin are active against C. felis and Mycoplasma
impression over the last 25 years that it is not frequently
spp., but neither drug was as effective at clearing C. felis as
associated with feline conjunctivitis. With the use of PCR
doxycycline, resulting in more relapses76b, 76c, Clavulanic
testing, Mycoplasma DNA is once again being pushed to
acid-amoxycillin was successful in treating C. felis when
the
forefront as a significant cause
for feline
 given for 4 weeks76d. While doxycycline has been taken as
conj unctivitis.
s. Heather et al.84a detected Mycoplasma
the gold standard” for treating C. felis, alternative
DNA in 9.6% of cats with conjunctivitis , FHV-1 DNA in 
antibiotics may have fewer serious side-effects.
6.7%, and C. felis in 3.2%.
Oral doxycycline may be associated with esophageal
 Clinical signs
strictures in cats, resulting in signs of regurgitation.
Feline mycoplasmal conjunctivitis is characterized by an
Administering the drug with food or water may
initial unilateral, serous to mucopurulent exudate that usu-
diminish the risk76e.
ally extends to the opposite eye within 7 days. Conjunctival
hyperemia is severe on all conjunctival surfaces, with
Therapy should be continued for 10-14 days after
 modest to marked chemosis, papillary hypertrophy, and
clinical recovery as relapse is common26. Cats with
blepharospasm (8.18). In 4-10 days, the response moder-
infectious conjunctivitis and/or respiratory signs that have
ates with less hyperemia, loss of papilla, pale conjunctiva
 a prolonged course or have relapsing episodes should be
with thickening and induration, increased mucopurulent
screened for immune suppression with feline leukemia
exudation and, in some cases, a pseudodiphtheritic
virus (FeLV) or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)77, 78.
membrane. The disease is self-limiting, having a course of
Cats with C. felis and FIV infection shed Chlamydopbila
 about 30 days with little change throughout the duration.
sp. for 270 days and have prolonged signs; dual infection
Mycoplasma are also significant ocular pathogens in
 accelerates the progression of Flv78.
sheep and goats. In addition to an infectious con-
8.18
8.19
8.18 A cat with acute mycoplasmal conjunctivitis. Marked chermosis
 8.19 Mlycoplasma organisms on conjunctival epithelial cells of the cat in
and ocular discharge is present, mycoplasma organisms were cultured.
8.18; mycoplasma were also cultured from the conjunctival cul-de-sac.
and the conjunctival cytology was positive for mycoplasma (8.19).
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
193
junctivitis, ocular lesions of keratitis?s and anterior
Therapy
uveitis may be produced, as well as mastitis, pleuro-
The course of the disease can be shortened to 4-5 days with
pneumonia, and arthritis.
the use of topical tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, genta-
 In cattle, Mycoplasma bovoculi and ureaplasma have
micin, fluroquinolones or erythromycin preparations.
been isolated from herds with conjunctivitis. When
 inoculated experimentally, the organisms produce a
Bacterial conjunctivitis
conjunctivitis syndrome of  approximately  1 month
Introduction/etiology
duration. During the course of the syndrome, the signs
Bacterial conjunctivitis is more important in the dog than
vacillate between mild and severe86.
the cat (excluding mycoplasmal conjunctivitis)20. Cultures
In swine, an infectious conjunctivitis and kerato-
 are readily obtained, but the difficulty lies in interpretation
conjunctivitis syndrome without systemic signs has been
of the results, assuming satisfactory collection techniques
attributed to mycoplasma87. Ocular mycoplasma
syn-
have been observed. Urban et al.90 isolated bacteria from
 dromes in the horse and dog have not been described88, 89.
91% of conjunctiva of clinically normal dogs. Other
studies utilizing different techniques yielded bacterial
Diagnosis
 growth from 72-94% of cultures from the conjunctiva of
Conjunctival cytology is the most practical method for
normal dogs (Table 8.3)91-94. The incidence of isolates in
diagnosing mycoplasma. Mycoplasma appear as coccoid
normal eyes varies between breeds and, as one might
to coccobacillary organisms in clusters, on or near the
P o saielos! jo uoeqauoo auos sl auaun iadxa 
surface of the epithelial cell (8.19). The organisms should
conformation?0. The normal flora is predominantly Gram-
da au ui sa sud  pea a
positive (Table 8.3). In the dog, streptococci, staphylo-
cells. The inflammatory exudation cytology is completely
cocci, and diphtheroids are the predominant isolates from 
polymorphonuclea r57, 83, 84.
both normal animals and those with conjunctivitis. Thus
some clinical judgment has to be made as to the
significance of positive cultures9s-98
Compared to dogs, cats have a relatively sterile
Table 8.3 Isolation of bacteria from the conjunctival sac
 conjunctiva with bacterial isolates reported in 34-67% of
of clinically normal dogs (%)
 conjunctival swabs from normal cats (Table 8.4)83, 99, 100.
The horse conjunctival sac has a predominantly
 Bistner 
Urban
Hacker
Gram-positive resident flora with Corrybacterium spp-,
et a.
et a.
et af.
Stapbylococcus
epidermidis,
Bacillus cerus, and
Organism 
(1969)91
(1972)90
(1979)93
hemolytic and nonhemolytic Streptomyces being most
Staphylococcus
 spp. (total)
70.0
70.7
59.0
Stapbylococcus spp. (24%), and Pseudomonas spp.
 Coagulase-positive
24.0
44.7
NR
 (14%) were isolated from the conjunctiva and cornea of
Coagulase-negative
46.0
55.3
NR
animals with extraocular disease102. 1
Nutritionally
Streptococcus
variant streptococci have been shown to be a significant
spp. (total)
6.0
43.3
NR
cause of equine corneal ulcers, and their significance in
NR
12.0
51.0
extraocular infections is unknown. Cultures may be
Nonhemolytic
negative as these organisms do not grow on the usual
Alpha-hemolytic
4.0
34.0
5.0
liquid or solid media unless the medium includes thiol-
Beta-hemolytic
2.0
7.3
3.0
containing compounds and B6, or has an additional
Corynebacterium
 spp. (total)
75.0
30.0
NR
Undifferentiated 
NR
11.3
NR
C. psuedodiph-
theriticum
NR
9.3
NR
 Table 8.4 Bacteria isolated from normal cats
C. xerosis
NR
12.7
NR
Neisseria spp.
Location
Organism
%
(total)
NR
26.0
NR
Conjunctiva
Staphylococcus atbus
16.3
Undifferentiated 
NR
4.0
NR
S. aureus
10.4
NR
8.7
NR
Mycoptasma spp.
N. cotorrhatis
5.0
N. pharyngitidis
NR
4.0
NR
M. fetis*
Bocillus spp.
2.9
N. sicca
NR
3.3
NR
Alpha-hemolytic streptococci
2.5
Corynebacterium spp.
N. coviae
NR
2.7
NR
1.3
N. foctomicus
NR
2.7
NR
Lids
S. arbus
13.8
S. oureus
8.8
N. fovescens
NR
2.7
NR
Alpha-hemolytic streptococci
1.7
Pseudomonas spp.
NR
14.0
NR
Bacillus spp.
1.7
Moraxella spp.
NR
6.7
NR
Escherichia coli
0.4
Bacillus spp.
12.0
6.0
18.0
*Five Mycopfasma isolates were lost prior to identification.
NR: not reported
(Adapted from Campbell et ar., 197383.)
194
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
The virulence and number of organisms are factors in
obvious disease in other organs (skin, ear) or poor lid
infection, and so is the individual's resistance, such as
 conformation (8.21). Spaniels, St. Bernards, Bulldogs, and
immunoglobulin level and local or systemic stress.
hounds are frequently affected with chronic bacterial
Examples of stress may be local trauma, ultraviolet
conjunctivitis. If allowed to go unchecked, a superficial
radiation, and concurrent systemic or local disease. Since
keratitis eventually develops. Occasionally, a marginal
 the animal's defenses are important, it is not surprising to
find that many dogs with bacterial conjunctivitis may
hypersensitivity reaction to the toxins produced with
have the following concurrent problems: generalized
sta phylococcal 
 conjunctivitis. Tear production often
seborrhea, pyoderma, otitis externa, lip fold infections,
 decreases with chronicity and this contributes to the
distemper, ectropion, entropion, trauma, and sicca.
conjunctivitis by keeping the surface debilitated (8.22).
Depending on the host's predisposing factors, the
infection may only be controlled rather than cured; a
Diagnosis
course of antibiotics, even if given for a prolonged
A STT should always be performed when examining
period, may only improve the ocular condition
chronic conjunctivitis. If the STT has only been
transiently.
performed late in the course of the disease, it may not be
possible to determine whether the sicca is primary or
Acute bacterial conjunctivitis
secondary. Despite this uncertainty, therapy will have to
Clinical signs
be directed at the sicca to effect an improvement (see
 The signs of acute bacterial conjunctivitis are usually
Chapter 9, p.219). An additional important differential 
associated with sudden onset of a dramatic purulent
diagnosis for chronic unilateral bacterial conjunctivitis
ocular discharge, marked diffuse conjunctival hyperemia,
and moderate chemosis (8.20). The infection may extend
onto the eyelids, producing an acute moist blepharitis.
8.20
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of acute bacterial conjunctivitis is usually
made on clinical signs and conjunctival cytology. Culture
and antibiotic sensitivity testing is performed to confirm
and guide the therapy, especially if an immediately
favorable response is not obtained. Conjunctival
scraping and Gram staining are rapid methods to aid in
the selection of antibiotic.
The head in general should be examined, as the early
stages of acute orbital cellulitis or retrobulbar infections
frequently
mimic
 acute
purulent 
conjunctivitis.
Differentiation
between
simple
acute
purulent
 conjunctivitis and endophthalmitis or panophthalmitis
with accompanying purulent exudation may be made by
the lack of active intraocular inflammation with
conjunctivitis. Predisposing factors such as conjunctival
foreign bodies, blocked nasolacrimal duct, and entropion
8.20 Acute unilateral bacterial conjunctivitis in a Weimaraner.
should be eliminated.
Therapy
 Initial specific therapy is usually a broad-spectrum
8.21
topical antibiotic. Most animals respond well in 3-5
days. In the horse, many strains of streptococci are
resistant to the usual triple antibiotic or aminoglycoside
 preparations, and chloramphenicol, erythromycin,
or
ciprofloxacin preparations are more appropriate. I
In
resistant or relapsing cases, specific antibiotics are chosen
on the basis of culture and antibiotic sensitivity testing.
 Cleansing the eye of exudate with a collyria and soaking
the crusts off the lid margins are important supportive
mea sures.
Chronic bacterial conjunctivitis
Clinical signs
Exudation varies from mucoid to mucopurulent and the
conjunctiva is thickened, hyperemic, and has redundant
folds. Some degree of follicular hyperplasia is usually
 present and the process frequently extends to the dermis,
 8.21 A dog with chronic 5taphylococcal pyoderma and chronic
resulting in depigmentation of the lid margins. The
 bilateral severe conjunctivitis. Note the thickened conjunctiva
condition is often bilateral and may be associated with
with follicles and possibly pyogranuloma.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
195
is dacryocystitis. Blockage of the nasolacrimal duct
Mycotic conjunctivitis
results in stagnation of tears and bacterial infection that
Introduction/etiology
refluxes back into the conjunctival sac {see Chapter 9,
Mycotic agents are a rare cause of conjunctivitis in the
p.219). Differentiation is based on the results
of
dog and cat, although Nocardia spp., fungi, or yeast have
nasolacrimal duct flushing. Culture and antibiotic
been isolated in 17% of cultures from eyes with chronic
sensitivity testing are usually performed if prior
 conjunctivitis?s. The significance of finding mycotic
antibiotic therapy has been unsuccessful.
elements in the conjunctiva is unknown, as in normal
animals 22% of dogs, 40% of cats, 95% of horses, and
Therapy
100% of cows culture positively for fungil03 This study
Specific thera py should consist of controlling systemic or
was performed in a subtropical climate and in a building
other local disease processes (ectropion, sicca, otitis), and
whose ventilation system was contaminated with fungi,
administration   of
antibiotic
or
antibiotic-steroid
pue
thus may
not
bé
representative  of other
preparations based on culture and antibiotic sensitivity
environments. Other studies have found fungal isolates
tests. The medication may need to be continued at a low
from normal
pue (t%l) saop u! Baounuos
frequency indefinitely or given intermittently as the signs
hospitalized and stabled horses {55% and 83%
dictate. In many cases of keratoconjunctivitis,
the
respectively1o1). The environment was significant in
importance of control rather than cure should
be
determining the presence of transient flora such as fungi,
emphasized to the owner, and vigorous treatment kept
but did not influence the bacterial isolatesl01. In the
for use in the more “acute’ exacerbations. Supportive
horse, 53% of the isolates were Cladosporium spp. 0r
therapy consists of cleansing the eye with collyria.
Alternaria spp.
Animals with mycotic conjunctivitis or keratitis often
have a history of treatment with a variety of topical
 antibiotics or antibiotic-steroid preparations, that
8.22
pauewau uaui pue juawaaoidui Airodwal ul pannsa
static or regressed (8.23). The horse has a unique
susceptibility to fungal infections of the cornea after
traumatic breaks in the epithelium. Primary fungal
conjunctivitis is rare, even in the horse.
Diagnosis
 and is confirmed by culture.
Therapy
A variety of antifungal antibiotics are available, but few
 are marketed for ophthalmic use. Natamycin is the only
 available topical ophthalmic antifungal preparation and,
based on sensitivity testing, is the most effectivel01. The
lack of widespread availability and the expense of
natamycin limit its use (see Fungal keratitis, p.2s5).
8.22 Chronic conjunctivitis associated with sicca. The conjunctiva is
Intravenous miconazole preparations are well tolerated
hyperermic, indurated, and has mucopurulent exudation.
 and are effective as topical ophthalmic preparations, but
they have been removed from the market in the US and
supunoduoo Aieioads e Aq papunoduos aq isnu
8.23
pharmacy.
Itraconazole‘with" DMSO104 "and i.v.
[uny og aeoidon pasn uaag ose aaey aozuo
keratitis. Topical silver sulfadiazine and other antifungal
 agents used on other mucous membranes are often used in 
place of natamycin.
Parasitic conjunctivitis
Introduction/etiology
Thelazia is a genus of nematode worms that has been
recovered from a variety of domestic and wild animals
and  is usually associated with mild conjunctival
irritation. The parasite is widespread in North America,
although it is not recognized as producing signs very
often. The worms reside within the ducts of the lacrimal
released into the tears and ingested by the intermediate
host (thought to be Musca autumnalis), which transmits
8.23 Calf with a pseudomembrane adhered to conjunctiva.
Cytology and culture demonstrated Mucor sp. The calf had
In cattle, in one postmortem study the highest
systemic mucormycosis with joint and pulmonary signs.
incidence was in 3-4 year olds, with a S3% infection
196
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
rate106 A similar age predilection was found in younger
Diagnosis
horses in Kentucky, with a prevalence of 45% in 3 year
Diagnosis C
 of immune-mediated  conjunctivitis  is
olds and 50% in 4 year olds, with an overall prevalence
frequently presumptive, relying on response to cortisone
of 43% for 1-4-year-old horses107. Other equine studies
therapy, history, and accompanying systemic signs.
<1-3 years old108, 109
eosinophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells.
 In birds, Philopbthalmus gralli, a trematode, has been
described in the conjunctival sac. The freshwater snail is
Therapy
the intermediate hostl10.
If possible, the offending antigen is removed. The most
common therapy is low doses of topical steroids if the
Clinical signs
problem is confined to the eyes, or systemic steroids if
Infection may be unilateral or bilateral. In cattle, most
signs are more generalized. The least amount of drug,
animals are unilaterally affected, whereas in the horse, most
both in concentration and frequency of application,
are bilaterally affected. The signs do not seem to be
should be employed to control the disease. In mild cases,
mrrelated with the worm burden and most animals are
the use of topical antihistamines may be of value.
asymptomatic. S
Signs usually consist of epiphora and
Mast cell granule stabilizers such as sodium cromolyn
mnjunctivitis, but conjunctival nodules may be produced by
may be effective in treating allergic conjunctivitis;
 the worms and, rarely, conjunctival cysts and keratitis!l1.
however, their cost and the fact that they are most
 effective when administered before exposure limits their
Therapy
widespread use.
Topical  cyclosporine   is another
Mechanical removal with forceps or flushing the worms
alternative to topical glucocorticoids when treating
out if they are numerous has been the standard
conditions mediated via mast cells and eosinophils. In
recommendation. Most systemic anthelmintics have not
mice, topical cyclosporine therapy was as effective as
been efficaciousll2, but topical application of doramectin
topical glucocorticoids for the treatment of allergic
(poured on the skin) is effective against eyeworms and
 conjunctivitisl14. Topical nonsteroidal drugs have also
 other gastrointestional and pulmonary worms113.
 reduced the signs of seasonal allergic conjuctivitis and are
Bianciardi and Otrantol13a successfully treated dogs with
 another alternative to glucocorticoids11s, 116.
Thelazia calipaeda infestation with a single dermal applica-
tion of imidacloprid 10% and moxidectin 2.5%. The moxi-
Eosinophilic conjunctivitis of cats
dectin appeared to be the effective agent in the combined
Introduction/etiology
 product, as imidacloprid by itself was not effective.
A condition in cats has been described, characterized by
a chronic conjunctivitis that is accompanied by
Sicca-related conjunctivitis
eosinophil and mast cell infiltration of the tissues and, in
 Reduced tear production should be investigated as a
described five cats with this condition, and Allgoewerl18
obvious epiphora. STT values below 12-15 mm/min are
reported 12 cases. This condition may be a variant of
often associated with variable degrees of conjunctivitis,
eosinophilic keratitis that is associated with herpesvirus;
and the condition may be acute or chronic, unilateral, or
three of the five cats in the Pentlarge series had keratitis.
bilateral. Varying degrees of mucoid to mucopurulent
In addition, Laroccall19 reported a case with concurrent
discharge is typical of sicca-associated conjunctivitis.
herpesvirus  and
 eosinophilic  
 conjunctivitis
that
With chronicity, the hyperemia involves all conjunctival
developed a dendritic ulcer when glucocorticoid therapy
surfaces and the tissues are thickened. (See Chapter 9,
was initiated. The 12 cases in the Allgoewer series,
p.219, for a detailed discussion of KCS.)
however, had no keratitis and herpesvirus was not
 detected by PCR from Schirmer tear strip, although some
Allergic-fimmune-mediated conjunctivitis
saliva and nasal swabs were positive {test performed on
Introduction/etiology
8/12). All palpebral conjunctival biopsies (from 6/12)
Allergic conjunctivitis is probably overdiagnosed as it is
were negative for herpesvirus on electronmicroscopy.
 often based soley on history and response to steroid therapy.
The animals in this series were older (mean 7.2 years)
than in the other two series (mean 4 years). All the
Clinical signs
 aa  e i e  
The response of the conjunctiva to an allergen is usually
significant blepharitis of the lower lid.
a serous discharge and moderate to intense hyperemia
{8.4). Chemosis, while occasionally dramatic, is usually
 Clinical signs
mild. Pruritus is often present from mast (
cell
A severe conjunctivitis is present, involving the bulbar and
 degranulation involving the eye, and is not expected with
palpebral conjunctiva of one or both eyes and often
most infectious etiologies. Inflammation of the pharynx,
months in duration (8.24). The third eyelid conjunctiva
gums, and ear canals, a serous rhinitis, and more
may also be affected. Conjunctival papillae develop that
generalized dermatologic allergic manifestations may be 
produce a granular or cobblestone surface. Modest
concurrent, and a seasonal incidence may be present.
blepharospasms are often present and minor amounts of
Topical medicaments are possible antigens, and a
 superficial keratitis may develop with chronicity. An
sudden increase in ocular irritation after medicating the eye
erosive blepharitis with depigmentation and swelling may
 may be indicative of a drug allergy. This should be differ-
be present involving the lower lid and canthal regions.
entiated from reactions to drugs which are irritating.
as
Tear production may be decreased with chronicity but is
well as from the vasodilatation and reactive hyperemia
normalized with appropriate therapy. Marked conjunctival
which may occur with many of the autonomic drugs.
chemosis is thought to obstruct the lacrimal ductules.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
197
Diagnosis
On histopathology, the conjunctival blood vessel
Diagnosis is based on conjunctival cytology or biopsy
endothelium has multilaminar basement membranes,
that has numerous eosinophils and mast cells.
If
suggesting increased permeability. A thick, amorphous
decreased STT values are present, they may mislead the
hyaline-like membrane is present in the substantia
clinician into misdiagnosing a primary KCs. Presumptive
propria of  the
conjunctiva
and
contains
T-
evidence is based on the response to glucocorticoid
lymphocytes122. In humans, it has recently been linked to
 therapy and lack of response to antibiotic therapy.
a familial deficiency of plasminogen123
 The deficiency of plasminogen results in disruption of
Therapy
the fibrinolytic pathway. This allows fibrin to accumu-
+ Topical glucocorticoids given frequently initially and
late, with minor trauma due to impaired proteolysis, and
 then tapered down for indefinite duration
the surface is arrested at the granulation stage. Johnstone
maintenance thera py.
et al. 123a described a 7-month-old Golden Retriever with
 Topical inhibitors of mast cell degranulation, such as
ligneous conjunctivitis that  repeatedly had  low
sodium cromolyn or lodoxamine, may also be
 circulating plasminogen levels that responded to systemic
 indicated as well as topical cyclosporine.
fresh frozen plasma and surgical resection, but not to
 Artificial tears if sicca is present and until it is
 topical fresh frozen plasma. Torres et al.123b described a
 resolved with the reduction of swelling.
case in a Yorkshire Terrier that was moderately
 Topical antiviral therapy should be considered if a
responsive to topical cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and
keratitis is present or develops with the use of
glucocorticoids.
glucocorticoid therapy.
Actinic-related conjunctivitis
 All species with lightly pigmented lid margins and lack of
pigmentation of the third eyelid are predisposed to solar
blepharitis and conjunctivitis, that if chronic may result in
SCC
formation.
Similarly,
patients with
SCC
characteristically have a moderate to severe conjunctivitis
that is more diffuse than simple mechanical irritation
would produce. The reason for this is not clear, but may be
due to factors liberated from the neoplasm.
8.24 Chronic
8.24
unilateral
Lipogranuloma.
eosinophilic
Introduction/etiology
conjunctivitis in 
White nodular lesions of one or both eyes have been
a cat. The
described in older cats. The lesion may be single or
condition was
multiple, and involve one or both eyes, and it is associated
diagnosed by
with a conjunctivitis (8.25). Read and Lucas120 described
conjunctival
 the condition in 21 eyes of 13 cats and found a mean age
cytology and 
of 11 years and a preference for involvement of the
responded to 
palpebral conjunctiva of the lower lid. On histopathology.
topical
the lesion is a lipogranuloma, but the source of the lipids is
glucocorticoids.
unknown. Potential sources are the meibomian glands,
(Courtesy of Dr.
adipose tissue in the conjunctiva, systemic hyperlipidemia,
V. Pentlarge.
Athens, GA.]
postulated that the lipids originate from the meibomian
 glands because of their consistent location near the lid
 margin and inclusion of ruptured meibomian glands 
in
some of the biopsies. The relative high frequency in
8.25
A aeu au sieue id raai u pue esn
radiation may have a contributing role.
Therapy
Curretage of lesions from the conjunctival side and
topical glucocorticoids has been curative. Since the cause
is not known, a thorough ocular and systemic
 examination should be performed.
Ligneous conjunctivitis
Introduction/etiology
Ligneous conjunctivitis is a rare form of chronic
 membranous conjunctivitis. Currently, it is usually found
in the Doberman Pinscher. The signs are very dramatic,
 chronic, and resistant to conventional therapy. The cause 
is unknown, but the disease has systemic implications as
oral, respiratory, and renal disease may also be present.
 8.25 Unilateral lipogranuloma in a cat.
198
OpHTHAlMIC DISEASE In VeteRINARY MeDICINE
Clinical signs
8.26
Ligneous conjunctivitis is characterized by bilateral, marked
frm swelling of the conjunctival surfaces fincluding third
eyelid) with gray membranes covering the surface (8.26).
The membranes are firmly adherent and attempts to peel
them off result in hemorrhage. The cornea eventually
becomes involved with pannus formation, but it is often
surprisingly healthy considering the dramatic conjunctival
lesions. Systemic signs relating to the oral cavity and the
respiratory and/or urinary system may be present.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of ligneous conjunctivitis is made by the
dramatic signs of a thick membranous conjunctivitis
occurring in a Doberman Pinscher. Biopsy of the lesion
will confirm the nature of the membranes.
Therapy
 8.26 Ligneous conjunctivitis in a Doberman Pinscher. Note the
Ligneous conjunctivitis has been resistant to convential
dramatic swelling of the conjunctiva that was firm with a relatively
mnjunctivitis therapy. The most successful therapy has been
normal cornea at this time. The dog also had oral and skin lesions 
systemic prednisolone and azathioprine, with topical
 and eventually developed a keratitis. The condition wa5
cyclosporine. In humans, an infant was successfully treated
 nonresponsive to topical therapies.
with i.v. lys-plasminogen123 The Golden Retriever with a
plasminogen deficiency described above responded to i.y.
fresh frozen plasma, but not to topical plasma. The half-life
bacterial cause. Chronic serous to mucoid discharge is
of plasminogen is about 24 hours, so daily i.v. injections of
generally the same etiology, although bacterial
fresh frozen plasma were given. In addition to surgical
components are probably emerging as contibuting
debridement, topical fresh frozen plasma, tissue plas-
factors. If the discharge is mucopurulent, this suggests
minogen activator, topical cyclosporine, heparin, and corti-
definite bacterial association or complications; in addition, 
 Costeroids were administered. Cessation of the systemic
the status of the tear secretion should be evaluated.
fresh frozen plasma resulted in relapse of signs. However,
 The cause of conjunctivitis is determined by
the
the frequency of administration and the cost and availability
history, conjunctival cytology and culture, STT, and
of fresh frozen plasma limit this modality of therapy.
detailed examination of the eye and adnexa. Mechanical
factors such as distichiasis must be evaluated based on
Conjunctivitis secondary to physical irritation
whether their presence correlates with the location and
Introduction/etiology
extent of signs. Entropion may cause conjunctivitis or be 
Conjunctivitis due to irritation is usually mild to modest
 produced by conjunctival irritation; therefore, both eyes
in severity, with a serous to mucoid exudation. The
should be evaluated.
factors for irritation can be endogenous or exogenous.
Endogenous sources are usually aberrant anatomic
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF CONJUNCTIVITIS
relationships such as trichiasis, distichiasis, entropion,
FROM OTHER OCULAR DISEASE
ectropion, exophthalmos, lagophthalmos, and nasal
Conjunctivitis is the most common ocular diagnosis in
folds. The cornea may be involved, with an ulcerative or
practice, but it is important to avoid overdiagnosing it
superficial keratitis. Exogenous factors may be foreign
and undertreating a more serious intraocular syndrome.
bodies of various forms, from fiberglass to plant awns.
Conjunctivitis produces a “red eye’ and the emphasis is
Dust and wind are common irritants. Hunting dogs that
usually on differentiating it from other conditions that
are frequently in the water may have problems with their
produce conjunctival hyperemia. Conjunctivitis must be
eyes and ears throughout the working season.
differentiated from anterior uveitis and glaucoma.
Scleritis and episcleritis are also important diseases that
Diagnosis
may mimic conjunctivitis. Differentiation of intraocular
Diagnosis is based mainly on history and exclusion of
disease from conjunctivitis is important but is usually not
other causes. Endogenous irritations are often obvious
difficult in most instances if the clinician looks beyond
 on detailed examination. Exogenous sources of irritation
the hyperemic conjunctiva (Table 8.5). The error of not
are usually bilateral, unless due to a foreign body.
observing is much more common than observing and not
correctly interpreting signs.
Therapy
Uncomplicated conjunctivitis does not involve the
Removal of the source of irritation is usually curative,
interior of the eye; therefore, signs such as anisocoria,
although a topical antibiotic-steroid preparation is
appreciable variation of ocular tension, anterior chamber
usually used if corneal ulceration is not present.
flare, and decreased visual acuity indicate intraocular
disease. The 
cornea is not involved in simple
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF
conjunctivitis, but in complicated or chronic cases a
CAUSES OF CONJUNCTIVITIS
keratoconjunctivitis may be present. Thus, clarity of the
In general, serous to mucoid discharge of acute duration is
cornea may not be a differentiating factor between
suggestive of an irritant, allergic, or viral cause and not a
intraocular disease and complicated conjunctivitis.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
199
Table 8.5 Differential diagnosis of conjunctival hyperemia
Anterior uveitis
Conjunctivitis
Glaucoma
 Conjunctiva
Not thickened; episcleral 
 Thick, folded, and hyperemic;
Not thickened
vessels easily seen
episcleral vessels concealed
 Conjunctival vessels
Selective injection of large
 Diffuse injection of
Selective injection of large
 conjunctival veins 
conjunctival vessels, usually
conjunctival veins
palpebral
Secretion or discharge
Often serous
 Serous to mucopurulent
Often serous
 Pain
Moderate (acute)
None to slight
 Subtle, behavior changes
Photophobia
Moderate
Mild
Slight
Cornea
Variable degree of edema
Clear
Variable degree of edema
Pupil size
 Small, sluggish, irregular,
Normal
 Dilated, moderate to complete,
or fixed 
fixed
Pupillary light response
Poor
Normal
Absent
Intraocular pressure
If uncomplicated will be low
Normal
Elevated
8.27
8.28
8.27 Diffuse conjunctival hyperemia, primarily of the palpebral
8.28 Selective conjunctival injection of the large vessels and 
conjunctiva, that is typical of most cases of atopic conjunctivitis
the deeper episcleral vessels in a dog with secondary glaucoma
in dogs.
(lymphosarcoma related). This vascular pattern is typical of
intraocular disease.
Pain is quite variable in all the categories, and if present
Conjunctival vascular injection or congestion is present
with conjunctivitis, corneal ulceration should be looked
 in both conjunctivitis and intraocular disease. The pattern of
for with fluorescein stain. Patients with conjunctivitis
vascular congestion  varies on  close examination. In
often do not exhibit pain but, when present, pain is mild
mnjunctivitis, the palpebral conjunctiva is most commonly
to modest and in humans is described as like having sand
hyperemic, and the bulbar conjunctiva, when involved, is
 Or grit in the eye(s). Anterior uveitis, especially of acute
most severely hyperemic near the fornix, decreasing toward
onset, has appreciable pain, but in chronic cases, pain may
the limbus (8.27). The hyperemia of conjunctivitis is diffuse,
not be noted. Glaucoma has variable amounts of pain
involving even small caliber vessels.
ranging from severe to not appreciable. Ocular pain may
In glaucoma and anterior uveitis, deep congestion is very
not only be manifested locally by blepharospasm and
noticeable just posterior to the limbus, in the episcleral
retraction of the globe in the orbit, but also by changes in
vessels and scleral venous plexus that lie under the conjunc-
behavior such as excessive sleeping or lethargy, rubbing
tiva. The conjunctival vessels which are engorged are the
the eye on the ground, and worsening of temperament.
 numerous veins that drain the deeper scleral veins (8.28).
 Ocular discharge of variable character may be found with
The conjunctiva between the draining veins is not diffusely
all three conditions.
hyperemic, as would be expected with conjunctivitis.
200
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE In VEteRINAry MeDICINE
Episcleritis/scleritis has a similar selective large conjunctival
8.29
venous engorgement and, in addition, the episclera is
thickened to nodular, obscuring the scleral veins (8.29).
Episcleritis/scleritis often involves the peripheral cornea
with a rim of edema and neovascularization. An anterior
uveitis may be present with deep scleritis.
The pupil is a sensitive indicator of the presence of
intraocular disease. Unilateral intraocular disease produces
anisocoria. In general, glaucoma dilates the pupil and
 anterior uveitis contracts the pupil. Prior drug therapy,
synechia, iris atrophy, and denervation may alter the pupil.
No change is expected with simple conjunctivitis.
Principles of therapy
When treating routine superficial infections of the eye
such as conjunctivitis, it is a good principle to use an
antibiotic or a combination of antibiotics which is not
 generally administered systemically. This decreases the
8.29 A dog with selective vascular injection with thickening of the
possibility of sensitizing the patient to a drug which may
episcleral tissue typical of episcleritis. Note the thin peripheral rim of
have some value in future systemic administration. Also,
cormeal edema and early neovascularization.
the indiscriminate use of potent antibiotics is more likely
to result in resistant strains of bacteria and, as a result,
 may eliminate future effectiveness in systemic therapy.
8.30
Topical therapy is adequate in the majority of instances,
and the frequency and duration of therapy varies
depending on the severity and chronicity of the infection.
Most simple cases of acute bacterial conjunctivitis will
respond to therapy q6-8h for 7-10 days, whereas chronic
cases may require an intermittent or continuous low-
frequency therapy for prolonged periods of time if the
underlying cause can not be determined or removed.
TRAUMA-ASSOCIATED CONDITIONS
SUBCONJUNCTIVAL HEMORRHAGE
Introductionfetiology
Subconjunctival hemorrhage is a common, often
 dramatic lesion, but is of little consequence. However, it
signals that possible ocular trauma has occurred or
8.30 Petechial hermorrhages on the palpebral surface of the third
systemic disease may be present. Both eyes and the head
eyelid in a dog with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.
should be examined for other evidence of trauma, and a
good physical examination carried out for clues of
systemic disease. Owners often presume trauma when
they observe hemorrhage, and unless the trauma has
been observed or there is other evidence such as
8.31
abrasions of the head, it is often best to rule out other
etiologies and diagnose trauma by exclusion.
In neonatal foals, 8% may have subconjunctival
hemorrhage, usually in the dorsal conjunctiva. The
presence of subconjunctival hemorrhage is related to
foaling difficulty and is more common in multiparous
mares that foal more rapidly. The hemorrhage resolves
 spontaneously and has no long-term implications124.
Causes of subconjunctival hemorrhage include:
· Trauma: subconjunctival hemorrhage most commonly
 originates from direct trauma, but choking injuries
creating elevated intra vascular pressure in the head
may produce subconjunctival hemorrhage.
 Blood dyscrasia and bleeding or clotting deficiency:
 due to neoplasm, toxin, infection, or autoimmune
origin.
Vasculitis: may be either infectious, immune-, or
8.31 Acute diffuse subconjunctival hemorrhage in a puppy with a
neoplastic-mediated.
strangulation injury.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
201
8.32
Clinical signs
A variable amount of blood is present under the bulbar
conjunctiva; this can be either unilateral or bilateral.
Depending on the duration of the hemorrhage, the color
will  range from bright red (acute) to blue-green
(rea bsorbing stage). The hemorrhage(s) may be petechial,
 or be flat with little conjunctival elevation. In severe cases,
the conjunctiva is elevated (8.30-8.32). Occasionally, retro-
orbital hemorrhage may dissect rostrally to the
 subconjunctival space and present with additional signs of
 anterior displacement of the globe, decreased retropulsion
 of the globe, and prolapse of the third eyelid.
Diagnosis
A definite history of observed trauma or other evidence
 of trauma to the head should be present rather than
assumed. Alternatively, trauma is diagnosed by exclusion 
8.32 A dog with marked subconjunctival hemorrhage due to
by
 performing a complete ocular and physical
dicoumarol poisoning. Retrobulbar hemorrhage had dissected 
examination and searching for additional evidence of
 anteriorly into the subconjunctival space.
bleeding or coagulation defects. When trauma is the
cause of subconjunctival hemorrhage, it is a warning that
other ocular structures may have been disrupted, and a
8.33
complete ocular examination of both eyes should be
performed for accurate prognosis.
Therapy
Specific therapy for hemorrhage is not given unless the
underlying etiology is treata ble. Cold compresses may be
given in the peracute stage. Trauma to the lids and
 conjunctiva may be a destabilizing stress to the host's
mucous membranes, and a secondary bacterial
 conjunctivitis may develop and need treatment with
 antibiotics. Most cases of traumatic origin do not require
 any therapy, although antibiotics are often administered
as a placebo to satisfy the owner.
LACERATIONS
Most lacerations confined to the conjunctiva and less
than 0.5-1 cm will probably heal rapidly without
8.33 Prolapsed orbital fat in the lower conjunctival cul-de-sac of an
suturing. If the conjunctival insertion of the third eyelid
older horse. The third eyelid was rudimentary or had been excised
is torn, sutures are frequently necessary as the tissues do
(possibly for squamous cell carcinoma]. The owner had just purchased
 not remain in apposition. If suturing is necessary, 6-0 gut
the horse 5o no history was available.
 or other absorbable suture is utilized.
SUBCONJUNCTIVAL PROLAPSE OF ORBITAL FAT
8.34
Either congenital defects, senile weakness, or traumatic
rupture of the orbital septum may allow orbital fat to
 prolapse under the conjunctiva. This presents as dorsal or
ventral, smooth, nonirritating swellings. The condition may
be unilateral or bilateral, and has been observed more often 
in large animals than in the dog or cat. In cattle,
 subconjunctival orbital fat is commonly observed dorsally
when the dorsal lid is retracted and the eye is rolled
ventrally. In the horse, the author has repeatedly observed
prolapse of orbital fat after third eyelid excision for SCC
(8.33). The condition may be surgically corrected by
excision and suturing the orbital septum, or ignored.
NEOPLASIA
Neoplasia of the conjunctival surface is most common in
the horse and cow and is discussed further with third
eyelid and corneal neoplasia. The most common
8.34 Squamous cell carcinoma on the temporal limbus of a cow.
 neoplasm of the conjunctiva in large animals is SCC
This is the most common site of occurrence of Scc in cattle. Note
(8.34). The occurrence of SCC in general is thought to be
the lack of periocular and lid pigmentation.
related to ultraviolet (UV) radiation and genetic
202
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
susceptibility, that in part is related to periocular and
chemosis or swelling without significant redness (8.35).
In one study of lymphoma in the horse, the eye and
incidence of SCC was >50% in cattle over 7 years of
adnexa was involved in 20% of cases, and infiltration of
agel27, Clearly, advising on genetic selection has to be an
the conjunctiva was the most common ocular lesion130.
important factor in treating herds with SCC. On a
On physical examination, a marked lymphadenopathy is
 molecular basis, mutations of the p53 tumor suppression
usually present that associates the conjunctival swelling
gene have been implicated in UV-related skin cancers. The
with lymphoma, but the ocular lesion may precede overt
p53 tumor suppressor gene monitors the genome and
systemic invol vement130, 131.
regulates the cell cycle, delaying DNA replication if DNA
Mast cell tumors involving conjunctival surfaces have
 is damaged. Mutant p53 may result in uncontrolled cell
been observed by the author in the dog, cat, and horse
growth  ands
selection
of malignant 
clones128.
(8.36). Subconjunctival masses in the dog are chronic
Overexpression of the p53 gene has been demonstrated in
ans oi puodsau Aaui iul ui uaiuaq xuaiedde pue
SCC of the horse, cow, cat, and dog128, 129.
excision132, 132a Conjunctival mast cell tumors, like
 conjunctival hemagiosarcomas, may in general be more
 As SCCs have a strong genetic and environmental
benign in behavior than their respective type in other
component, it is best to explain to the owners that
locations, but they still deserve to be treated aggressively
SCC is a treatable but not curable disease. The
and followed closely.
individual lesion may be cured but new lesions
Conjunctival melanoma is fortunately infrequent,
 are likely to develop elsewhere. Periodic rechecks
since it is probably the most aggressive form of
are critical.
melanoma that arises from ocular tissue. In the horse,
melanoma of the conjunctiva has rarely been reported, so
Lymphoma in the horse and cow may produce a
bilateral conjunctival infiltration that manifests as
133a. Conjunctival melanomas frequently involve the
8.35
8.36
8.35 A Holstein cow with conjunctival swelling due to lymphosarcoma
8.36 Mast cell turmor in a horse arising from the palpebral
that mirmics chemosis. Note the lack of hyperemia and tearing. The
 conjunctiva. It was treated by excision and beta-radiation therapy.
condition was bilateral and peripheral lymphadenopathy was present.
8.37
8.38
8.37 Conjunctival melanoma invading the cornea in a horse. The
 8.38 Conjunctival melanoma arising from the third eyelid in a
lesion had previously been resected and it relapsed after further
13-year-old dog.
resection and adjunctive diode laser therapy.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
203
cornea by the time of presentation, and must 
be
they frequently metastasize to the regional lymph nodes
differentiated from epibulbar melanoma that
is
(8.42)140, 141. Hemangiosarcomas should be treated by
progressing into the cornea and intraocular melanoma
enucleation rather than excision. Wide excision is usually
that has penetrated the sclera. Canine and feline
not possible and hemangiosarcomas appear resistant to
conjunctival melanoma is locally aggressive and may
adjunctive therapy of radiation, cryotherapy, chemo-
location for conjunctival melanoma of the dog {8.38,
bilateral
hemangioma 
in adog. Conjunctival
 8.39). Recurrence after surgical excision is common, and
hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma may recur in the 
the preferred therapy appears to be surgical excision
 dog, but metastasis has not been reported142, 143, 143a. The
followed by cryotherapy.
author has noted very aggressive canine conjunctival
Conjunctival vascular tumors are most common in the
hemangiosarcomas on histopathology specimens that
dog and horse. The vascular lesions may range from
invaded the globe, and thus not all would appear to be
small  areas  of telangiectasis  (angiokeratoma)
to
benign in behavior. Therapy should be wide excision and
hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma. Angiokeratoma is a
if this is not possible, enucleation.
 small, localized, red raised lesion that does not progress
and may be found on the conjunctiva or third eyelid
(8.40)137, 138. Hemangiomas and hemangiosarcomas
MISCELLANEOUS CONJUNCTIVAL DISEASES
arise from the temporal limbal region and the third
eyelid, perhaps reflecting the relationship to solar
ECTOPIC LACRIMAL GLAND TISSUE
radiation exposure (8.41). In the horse, hemangioma has
Ectopic lacrimal gland tissue has been described under
the dorsal conjunctiva and involving the cornea of a
hemangiosarcomas and should be considered malignant;
4-month-old GSD144, Excisional biopsy was curative.
8.39
8.40
8.39 Massive conjunctival melanoma that had previously been
8.40 Angiokeratoma in a 9-year-old mixed breed dog.
excised in an elderly mixed breed dog. Enucleation was performed.
8.41
8.42
8.41 Hemangioma of the third eyelid in an 11-year-old Brittany.
 8.42 Aggressive hemangiosarcoma of the temporal conjunctiva in an
elderly white horse. The prognosis is guarded.
204
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
INCLUSION CYSTS
CONGENITAL DISEASES OF THE THIRD EYELID
Inclusion cysts in the conjunctiva have been reported in
the dogl42, They appear as smooth, relatively small,
EVERSION
cystic structures that are diagnosed and treated
by
 Eversion of the third eyelid is a sporadic and fairly benign
excisional biopsy. The cause is unknown, although
a u saop paanq aare sudop ui punoy uu
 trauma and therapy with ointments have been suggested.
German Shorthair Pointer, it is thought to be inherited as a
recessive trait, but the inheritance is unknown in other
CONJUNCTIVAL OVERGROWTH
breeds146. The deformity has been postulated to be due to
A condition of progressive covering of the cornea by an
either unequal growth rates of the two conjunctival surfaces
overgrowth of bulbar conjunctiva may be observed
in
or a primary deformity of the cartilage. Everted cartilage has
rabbits. The dwarf or dwarf-cross rabbit may
be
been described as a genetic deformity seen in the Burmese
 predisposed. The conjunctiva is not adherent and consists of
Gat, but it is not clear whether it develops with growth fas in
a fold of redundant bulbar conjunctiva that progressively
the dog), due to the variation in ages at presentation147.
mvers the comea over several weeks. Simple excision
usually results in regrowth. The cause is unknown and
Clinical signs
therapy has consisted of excision combined with topical
Everted cartilage manifests as either unilateral or bilateral
cyclosporine14s, Allgoewer et al.145a reported on 6 dwarf
scrolling forward of the free margin of the third eyelid
rabbits with the syndrome treated sucessfully with 6 radial
(8.43). A serous ocular discharge is usually present and
incisions around the circumference of the overgrowth and
initially the conjunctival surface is very hyperemic. The
then retracted with 6 transpalpebral sutures. The sutures
mndition persists indefinitely, although in some instances it
were placed from the external lid into the fornix and then
improves spontaneously with growth. Chronic cases develop
 into the central extent of the overgrown conjunctiva, back
pigmentation of the surface and become less noticeable.
out through the lid, and tied. The sutures were left in place
for 3 or more weeks. No recurrences were noted.
Diagnosis
Identification of the free margin of the everted cartilage and
 demonstration of the scroling may be performed with
8.43
forceps. Occasionally, eversion of the cartilage may be
combined with a prolapsed gland. The main differential
 diagnosis is prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid, which
is more common.
Therapy
If the dog is 3-4 months of age, it may be advisable to wait
for spontaneous improvement and treat the ocular irritation
with topical  steroids. 
Most cases do not improve
 spontaneously, and surgical correction is necessary to make 
 a cosmetic improvement. Surgery consists of removing the
bent portion of the cartilage through the bulbar conjunctiva,
while preserving the pigmented fre margin148,149 and then
suturing as a third eyelid flap to the upper lid or globe during
the healing process. The placement of the third eyelid over
8.43 Everted cartilage of the third eyelid in a young Great Dane. A
the globe allows the tissues to heal with a normal curvature
scrolling forward of the free margin is present and the gland is not
rather than allowing the free margin to be loose and floppy.
visible. A seromucoid discharge is present.
COLOBOMA
A notch defect that bisects the third eyelid has been observed
8.44
in the horse and dog. The defect is bilateral and occurs with 
other congenital ocular anomalies such as corneal dermoids
and coloboma of the optic nerve. The defect results in a
reduced protective capability. Improvement can be made
cosmetically by making an incision along the coloboma and
suturing the apposing edges. The third eyelid gland may be
 prolapsed with the defect and may need reducing.
NONPIGMENTED MARGIN
Introduction/etiology
The free margins of one or both third eyelids may be
nonpigmented. This condition is often associated with
other albinoid features such as blue irides, white hair,
and pink skin.
Clinical signs
8.44 Unilateral lack of pigment on the free margin of the third 
 The lack of a pigmented border to the third eyelid is usually
eyelid in a Saluki. The asymmetrical pink tissue draws the observer's
most obvious when it is unilateral and the contrast between
eye to that side of the head.
the two eyes is noted {8.44). Patients are often presented for
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
205
ocular irritation, due to the obvious pinkness, but this may
have a mucopurulent discharge and may have have
be more apparent than real. The nonpigmented conjunctiva
reduced tear productioniss, Chronic cases develop
is more prone to actinic radiation and, perhaps, carcinoma.
pigmentation of the conjunctival surface and the gland
 Bilateral large corneoconjunctival dermoids associated with
bilateral dermoids of the nasal planum were reported in an
Angus/Hereford calf. The dermoids in both sites contained
&topic glandular tissue153a.
8.45
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by observation.
Therapy
Usually, symptomatic treatment of the conjunctivitis is
given in the f
form of low-dose topical steroids or a
decongestant. Tattooing of the third eyelid margin is not
necessary or permanent in most instances.
Dermoid
 Dermoids involving the conjunctiva may be restricted to
the conjunctiva or involve the cornea and/or eyelid. The
condition is usually recognized by finding a raised island
of hairs, and this is easily removed {8.45) (see Chapter
10, p.241). Dermoids are sporadic and relatively
aul ul pauaqui aq ol paiodau aie Aaul uowuoun
8.45 A dermoid in an Aberdeen Angus calf involving the third eyelid
Burmese cat and, perhaps, the GSD, Saint Bernard, and
and cornea.
Dachshund, and in cattlei 50-153.
ACQUIRED DISEASES OF THE THIRD EYELID
8.46
PROLAPSE OF THIRD EYELID GLAND (CHERRY EYE]
Introduction/etiology
Prolapse of third eyelid gland is a disease of young dogs,
from 4 weeks to 2 years of age. Cats rarely exhibit the
nilateral or bilateral prolapse of the gland may appear as a
red mass in the medial canthus. The prolapse is sudden in
onset but it may regress once or twice for a few days and
fnally returns to remain for the animal's life. Certain breeds
such as the American Cocker Spaniel, English Bulldog,
Boston Terrier, Lhasa Apso, Shih Tzu, Beagle, and Pekingese
are more prone to develop the condition. These are largely
 the same breeds that are prone to develop KCs. The etiology
8.46 Prolapsed gland of the third eyelid in a young American Cocker
is unknown, and there is disagreement as to whether
Spaniel. The condition was bilateral. Note the mucopurulent exudate that
inflammation predisposes the animal to prolapse. Dugan et
 can accompany a transient sicca or secondary bacterial infection.
al.1$s found only mild surface inflammation associated with
prolapse in the Beagle. The histologic features in the gland
may vary between breeds predisposed to KCS and those not
8.47
predisposed, such as the Beagle. Severin1s6, without
evidence, suggested that the condition is due to weak fibrous
structures that normally hold the gland in place.
 Under certain circumstances, cherry eye may appear to be
infectious. Several dogs housed in proximity may develop the
mndition and, occasionally, a febrile patient with depression,
 tonsillitis, and partial anorexia may develop a cherry eye.
Usually there is no history of systemic involvement.
Protrusion of the gland of the third eyelid is occasionally
observed in older animals, and these animals should be
investigated for orbital disease using the history and a
physical examination. Cherry eye has been observed in dogs
after orbital cellullitis and in dogs with orbital neoplasia.
Clinical signs
Sudden development of a red mass at the medial canthus
8.47 Very large prolapsed gland of the third eyelid in a Shar Pei.
is the most dramatic sign (8.46, 8.47). Acute cases often
Note the puffy conjunctiva that is typical of this breed.
206
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
become less noticeable. Corneal ulceration rarely develops
Excision
as a complication. Usually there are no deleterious effects
Although not recommended by veterinary ophthalmolo-
to the eye except for the risk of developing KCS.
gists, excision of the gland is still widely practiced by the
 general practioner. Excision is not the preferred method
Diagnosis
used by most ophthalmologists, as patients that have
Diagnosis of a prolapsed third eyelid gland is made by
been treated by glandular excision and subsequently
 observation of a red mass protruding over the free
develop KCS are frequently observed. Morgan et al.1537
margin of the third eyelid.
found that 48% of 27 eyes treated by glandular excision
developed KCS within 0.5-6 years of surgery. In dogs
Therapy
that had the gland replaced, 14% developed KCS and
Initial  treatment  with a topical antibiotic/steroid
42% developed KCs if the gland was allowed to remain
preparation may appear transiently to cause the gland to
 prolapsed. When only the high risk breeds for KCS were
become replaced. Prolapse may occur two or three times
evaluated, 59% developed KCS with excision of the
and eventually the gland remains prolapsed.
 gland, 17% with gland replacement, and 75% when no
treatment was given.
8.48
8.48 Tacking of the prolapsed gland 
to the orbital rim in a dog. This
requires general anesthesia.
Prolapsed gland of third eyelid (A).
Scissors are used to cut the fornix
 of the conjunctiva in front of the
third eyelid (B). A 1-0 or 2-0
 monofilament suture with a cutting 
needle is used to place the
anchoring portion of the suture to 
the periosteum of the rim of the 
orbit (C). This is the most critical 
step and may be guided by a finger
on the skin side. If anchored
correctly, the suture is very firm
when tugged on. The needle is then
 passed from the outer surface of
the third eyelid to the inner side.
emerging on the top and to one side
of the prolapsed gland. The needle 
is then passed back into the hole 50 
that little if any exposed suture is
 present, and the needle is passed
across to the opposite side of the
top of the gland (D). The needle is
then redirected back into the tract
and down to ermerge in the original
incision and tied (E). Cross-section 
of the third eyelid with gland pulled 
down and anchored to the rim of
the orbit (F).
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
207
Repositioning the gland
the posterior surface with the lymphoid follicles. Thus,
Because of the risk of KCS, various techniques ha ve been
any technique that debrides the posterior surface to
developed for replacing and anchoring the gland in a
create adhesions may obliterate the ducts. Tacking the
more correct anatomic position.
gland to the orbital rim (8.48, 8.49) gives good results if
 A desirable technique should not only reposition the 
the gland is well anchored to the orbital rim159, 160. The
gland but spare the ducts on the bulbar surface. Moore
modification of Stanley and Kaswan allows easier
et al.1s8 investigated the location of the ducts of the third
placement of the critical orbital rim anchor.
eyelid gland and found multiple ducts that all exited onto
8.49 Modification of the original 
8.49
tacking procedure in 8.48. A skin
incision is made over the medial
ventral orbital rim (A, B] and the 
suture is anchored to the
periosteum (C). The orbital rim is
doser to the skin in larger dogs
and it is easier to place the
 anchoring bite from this vantage
point than from the conjunctival
fornix. The remaining suture
pattern is similar to the original
procedure (D-F).
E
208
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Anchoring techniques  are  relatively difficult  to
Pocket technique on the bulbar surface of the third eyelid
perform and ma y fail if incorrectly performed. The risk of
{8.50) Two parallel incisions into the bulbar conjunctival
infection is proba bly higher when a monofilament suture
surface on either side of the prolapsed gland are created,
is buried. Postoperatively, dogs with large palpebral
and the bases of these incisions are joined with a simple
continuous suture. When the suture is tightened the gland
8.50 A
8.50 Pocket procedure for replacing the third eyelid gland of a dog. Third eyelid everted with prolapsed gland (A)]. A conjunctival incision through
the bulbar surface near the fornix (B). A second parallel incision adjacent to lymphoid follicles made with a blade and avoiding transection of the
cartilage (C). Two parallel incisions that do not meet (D]. A simple continuous suture of 6-0 absorbable suture (E). A bite is taken and knot tied on
the palpebral face before penetrating to the bulbar face. Cut conjunctival edges can be apposed or bites taken at the bottom of incisions and 
apposed. The completed running suture with knot tied on palpebral side to avoid corneal irritation (F).
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
209
is forced ventrally. The knots may be tied on the outside
8.51
surface by taking a preliminary bite at the beginning and
end of the suture pattern on the outside surface. The two
incisions should not connect; this avoids formation of a
retention cyst. This technique was 94% successful in one
studyis7. ‘The most common complications are
recurrence, a corneal ulcer from the suture knots, and a
retention cyst {8.51). The author has seen a recurrence of
prolapse 1-2 years after replacement, and the surgical
 adhesions were still in place.
 Unfortunately, all the surgical techniques for gland
replacement may have the complication of
 reprolapse. Some breeds such as the English
Bulldog, Shar Pei, and Neopolitan Mastiff are more
prone to this complication.
8.51 Cyst formation 2 years after a pocket procedure for a prolapsed 
FOLLICULAR CONJUNCTIVITIS OF THE THIRD EYELID
gland in a dog. It was treated by opening the cyst from the bulbar
Introduction/etiology
side and allowing drainage. The gland remained in place.
Follicular conjunctivitis occurs primarily in dogs. Some
forms of conjunctivitis have a pronounced follicular
reaction, and the third eyelid is preferentially involved
due to hyperplasia of the normal follicles on the bulbar
surface. The cause is unknown, but is generally
considered to be due to chronic antigenic stimulation in
the dog. In the cat (Chlamydopbila felis, herpesvirus),
horse (Oncbocerca spp-), and cattle fherpesvirus),
infectious agents may  be  responsible.
Follicular
formation in the horse is typically perilimbal.
Any chronic antigenic stimulation to the conjunctival
surfaces is thought to be capable of initiating follicular
hyperplasia. Other mucous membranes such as the prepuce
or vagina may have similar proliferations. A herpesvirus
Clinical signs
Dogs are usually presented with a serous ocular
discharge, hyperemia and, in addition, marked follicular
hyperplasia on both conjunctival surfaces of the third
8.52 Marked follicular hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the normal
eyelid and often the remaining conjunctiva (8.52). Some
 patch of follicles on the bulbar surface of the third eyelid of a dog.
leadde Aru spll aul pue wsedsoueudalq aaey Aeu saop
thickened in extreme cases. The author has observed
 multiple pyogranulomas restricted to the inner third
8.53
eyelid of the dog, that mimicked severe follicular
conjunctivitis (8.s3). The cause was unknown, but
excision was curative.
Diagnosis
Careful observation of the conjunctival surfaces,
including both sides of the third eyelid, will reveal
numerous small raised lymphoid follicles. Determination
of the cause of the hyperplasia is usually based on history
 and is presumptive.
8.53 Chronic conjunctivitis of the third eyelid that involved
both eyes in a dog. Excisional biopsy revealed pyogranuloma
 of unknown cause.
210
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Therapy
Eosinophilic granuloma
If excess follicles are present, part of the therapy should be
In the cat, eosinophilic
C granuloma  involves  various
directed at their removal. Follicles may be treated either by
ocular and adnexal tissues including the eyelids, cornea,
excision when clustered, such as on the inner third eyelid,
conjunctiva, orbit, and third eyelidi62. Third eyelid
scraping off with a blade or gauze, or cauterizing with
involvement is characterized by bilateral large red masses
 copper sulfate crystals. The latter treatment can be easily
that are attached to the palpebral surface of the third
overdone and often is worse to tolerate than the disease.
eyelid. The lesions are covered with foci of white caseous
Removal of follicles is followed with topical glucocorticoid
material. An allergic cause has not been determined, and
therapy. Glucocorticoid therapy alone is not as effective as
when combined with follicle removal.
curative. Herpesvirus testing would be prudent as
Nasisse et al.163 found that 76% of feline eosinophilic
Plasma cell conjunctivitis
keratitis patients were positive on PCR testing for FEV-1.
Introduction/etiology
GSD, GSD crosses, and Collie types may develop a bilateral
INFECTIOUS CAUSES OF INFLAMMATION
pinkish-gray nodular infiltration of the margin of the third
OF THE THIRD EYELID
eyelid that produces a thickening and loss of the pigmented
margin. Some, but not all, of these dogs may eventually
develop pannus or an immune-mediated keratitis. On
The infectious causes of conjunctivitis, previously
cytology/histology, the infiltration is found to be due to
discussed in the cat, usually involve the third eyelid.
plasma cells and thus the condition is thought to be
When the third eyelid is protruded, due to discomfort, it
 immune mediated. The course of the disease is chronic161.
may appear to be the predominant conjunctival surface
that is involved. Cryptococcus neoformans produced
Clinical signs
marked bilateral granulomatous reactions in the third
Plasma cell conjunctivitis manifests as a bilateral
eyelid of a cat without intraocular lesions (8.55)164. No
thickening of exposed third eyelids with a gray-pink
other systemic signs were present or developed, even
infiltrate (8.54). A serous to seromucoid ocular discharge
though the cat had antigenemia, and the condition
accompanies the infiltration. Plasma cell conjunctivitis
responded to systemic itraconazole.
may occur with chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis.
Therapy
LACERATIONS OF THE THIRD EYELID
The most important and least practical therapy is to
change the environment. Hospitalization can result
in
 Lacerations involving the cartilage, even if they are very
noticeable improvement in some cases. Topical or
small, need suturing or they will leave a permanent
subconjunctival steroids only produce a very modest
cosmetic defect. Larger lacerations involving the
response. Similarly, beta-radiation therapy will improve
conjunctival attachments should have two layers of
the condition, but often topical glucocorticoids are still
absorbable suture to minimize dehiscence (8.56).
necessary. Topical 0.2% cyclosporine q12h gives
excellent clinical and histopathologic improvement over
6 weeks. Therapy is presumed to be needed indefinitely.
8.54
8.55
8.54 Pasma cell conjunctivitis of the third eyelid in a German
 8.55 Granulomatous inflammation of both third eyelids in a cat that
Shepherd Dog. Note the roughened gray surface with depigmentation
was due to Cryptococcus neoformons. No other ocular or systemic
of the margin of the third eyelid. The condition is bilateral.
lesions were noted and the condition responded well to topical and
 Systemic antifungal therapy.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
211
FOREIGN BODIES OF THE THIRD EYELID
 Sympathetic denervation: Horner's syndrome, which
also has miosis and ptosis and is usually unilateral.
Foreign bodies, usually from plant material, will lodge
Key-Gaskell syndrome in cats is a generalized
behind the third eyelid, creating a refractive ulcerative
dysautonomia and is bilateral1 65, 166. Key-Gaskell
keratitis until they are discovered and removed (8.57).
has been described in the UK and parts of Europe.
The condition is usually unilateral, but may be bilateral
The cause is unknown.
 and is common in areas with a hot dry season. Retained
 Ocular pain from the cornea, iris, or conjunctiva
foreign bodies are important in the differential diagnosis
causes the globe to be retracted into the orbit,
of infectious keratoconjunctivitis in cattle in the dry
resulting in protrusion. The causes of pain may be
summer of the western US.
unilateral or bilateral.
 Increased extraocular muscle tone: if systemic, such
 Any nonhealing ulcer, nonresponsive keratitis, or
as with tetanus or strychnine and mycotoxin
persistent blepharospasm should prompt eversion
poisoning, the condition is bilateral. If associated
of the third eyelid to look for a foreign body or a
with extraocular muscle fibrosis and contracture it
source of physical irritation. The longer the interval
may be unilateral.
between presentation and diagnosis, the more
+
 Idiopathic: diagnosis by exclusion. A bilateral
embarrassment it will ca use.
syndrome occurs in the cat that lasts 6-8 weeks and
 may be associated with intestinal parasites or
gastrointestinal malfunction. A torovirus-like particle
PROTRUSION OF THE THIRD EYELID
was isolated from 14% of cats with watery diarrhea
Introduction/etiology
which preceded a protruding third eyelid167. Some of
The lay term for a protruding third eyelid is “haws". The
the cats appeared to have decreased anal sphincter
causes of a protruding third eyelid are numerous, but in
tone. The disease lasted for more than 4 weeks in
most cases the cause becomes readily apparent if a logical
about half of the cases, but could not be reproduced
algorithm is followed. When searching for the cause of a
by transmitting the virus to kittens. Further work is
 protruded third eyelid, the following should be considered:
needed to define the role of this or other viruses in
+ Decreased orbital mass: dehydration and emaciation
producing these symptoms.
with loss of orbital fat or volume is bilateral, but
traumatic atrophy may be unilateral. The eyes
The protrusion of the third eyelid is a sensitive
become enophthalmic and the third eyelid protrudes.
 indicator of changes in orbital/ocular mass and
 Decreased ocular mass: microphthalmos and phthisis
ocul ar pa in.
bulbi, which may be bilateral or unilateral.
 Increased orbital mass: inflammation, neoplasia,
hemorrhage. These are usually unilateral, although
multicentric neoplasia such as lymphoma will
 produce bilateral disease.
8.56
8.57 A dog with a
8.57
plant foreign body
behind the third 
eyelid that had 
created a
superficial corneal
ulcer. Note the
amount of corneal
neova sculariza tion
which correlates
with the duration
of injury. (Courtesy
of Dr. M. Wyman.]
8.56 A cat with a large laceration of the conjunctival attachment of
the third eyelid from fighting. Sutured with a two layered closure.
212
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASe In VeTeRINARY MeDICInE
8.58
8.59
8.58 Blue cyst (dacryops] at the base of the third eyelid in a young
8.59 Squamous cell carcinoma at the base of the third eyelid in a
Shetland Sheepdog. It was treated by excision.
cat. Note this cat is heavily pigmented.
Therapy
8.60
The cause of the protrusion should be defined and
treated. Therapy   with topical sympathomimetics 
(epinephrine or phenylephrine q6-8h) will improve
idiopathic cases and those due to denervation.
A surgical procedure has been devised for correcting a
protruding third eyelid that involves shortening the eyelid,
but this is usually not necessary. The procedure involves
removing a full-thickness piece of the third eyelid parallel to
the free margin and above the gland. The width of the
excision is the amount of "shortening' and the defect is
sutured in two layers. The margin can also be shortened by
removing a V-shaped piece at one end168. The third eyelid
should not be removed for benign conditions.
CYSTS IN THE THIRD EYELID
Cysts may develop in the base of the third eyelid and
8.60 Squamous cell carcinoma of the third eyelid in a horse.
have previously been described as a complication of
The third eyelid is the most common site for SCC in the horse.
other disease/surgery: Thelazia spp. infestation in a calf,
It was treated by excision and beta-radiation therapy of the
and surgical replacement of a prolapsed third eyelid
 excisional margin.
gland with the pocket technique (8.50). Spontaneous
cysts may occasionally be observed in the dog,
presumably from blockage of the ducts of the third eyelid
ocular SCC in the horse (8.60) (see Corneal tumors,
smooth surface and, if necessary, by fine needle
p.284).
aspiration (8.58). Excision is curative.
 If diagnosed early, excision of the free margin of the
third eyelid with the involved tumor is the treatment of
NEOPLASIA OF THE THIRD EYELID
choice and is relatively simple. When extension occurs to
Tumors of the third eyelid and conjunctiva are relatively
adjacent conjunctival and corneal surfaces, excision is
rare in the dog and cat, whereas they are the most
 more difficult. If the tumor extends deep into the orbit, 
common tumors of the horse and cow. Neoplasms
the prognosis guarded.
arising from the conjunctival surfaces are SCC,
Vascular lesions of the conjunctival surfaces of the
papilloma, angiokeratoma, hemangioma, hemangio-
third eyelid include telangiectasia, angiokeratoma,
sarcoma, fibrosarcoma, melanoma, lymphoma, aden-
hemangioma, and hemangiosarcoma (8.40-8.42)173, 174.
oma, and adenocarcinoma.
Angiokeratomas are benign superficial telangiectasia that
Neoplasia of the conjunctival surfaces is most
appear as small, red raised lesions that are differentiated
common in large animals and commonly originates from
from 
hemangiomas
histopathology
(8.40).
 the third eyelid and the conjunctiva near the limbus. SCC
Angiokeratoma has dilated vascular, spaces with
of the third eyelid (8.59) is rare in small animalsi71. In
hyperplastic epithelium17s. Pirie et al.143a reported on
the cat, SCC is most frequent in the white-furred cat and
108 canine conjunctival vascular tumors that were
usually involves the mucocutaneous junction of the lid.
SCC must be differentiated from the more benign lesions
sarcoms. The most common site was the third eyelid and
 of papilloma and pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia172.
temporal bulbar conjunctiva, with a breed predisposition
In the cow, the third eyelid accounts for 7-15% of ocular
for outdoor working breeds. UV radiation was thought
and lid SCC, and is the most common site of origin of
to
u uoisodsaid e on anp aonquoo a
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
213
8.61
8.62
8.61 Viral papilloma on the margin of the third eyelid of a young
8.62 Lymphoma that was restricted to the third eyelid of a dog.
Shar Pei. A papilloma was also present in the oral cavity.
8.63
 In a series of 12 conjunctival melanomas in the dog, 83%
arose from the third eyelid, 7s% were in females, and the
Weimaraner had a breed predisposition136 Metastatic rates 
were 17-33% depending on the criterea used. The
recurrence rate was 55% after surgical excision, reflecting
 the difficulty in obtaining wide excision (8.37-8.39). Fewer
reports are available for the cat, but a malignant potential
 has been documented180, 181.
Adenocarcinomas may arise from the third eyelid
gland in all species, but they appear to be relatively rare,
with most of the reports being in the dog. The tumor
frequently recurs due to incomplete removal, and it may
metastasize to lymph nodes and lungs in the dog and
Fibrosarcomas have also been reported in the third
eyelid and clinically they may look similar to SCCs17s.
8.63 Lymphoma nodule involving the third eyelid of a cat that wa5
Systemic lymphoma may involve the third eyelid of the
FelV- and FIv-negative and had no systemic signs. The lymphoma
dog and cat, but extranodal lymphoma has also been
recurred quickly after simple excision. Excision and systemic
recorded with no evidence of systemic involve-
chermotherapy was successful for over 1 year until lost to follow up.
regrowth. In the author's experience, the disease has been
associated in the cat with FeLV-negative animals.
Therapy has been excision and systemic chemotherapy
nonpigmented exposed sites, breeds most likely to be
 despite the lack of obvious systemic neoplasia.
aaadsonau e ing 'aaeno paueadde Aderauoano uim
Clinical signs
pathologic study in a centralized pathology laboratory
An obvious mass or roughened area is observed on the
had inherent deficiencies in evaluating clinical outcomes.
conjunctival surface of the third eyelid. Mild cases may
 Pirie et al17sa reported on 8 cases of vascular tumors
have only epiphora with a mildly irritated' surface.
of the conjunctiva in cats; the third eyelid was the most
common site. Older neutered male Domestic Shorthaired
Diagnosis
cats predominated. No metasases were recorded at the
Cytology or biopsy of the lesion can be performed if the
time of excision and only 2 cases (hemangiosarcomas)
diagnosis is not obvious. SCC in large animals is so
required repeat surgery. Since only 2 of the eight cases
characteristic that excisional biopsy and adjunctive
were hemangiosarcomas, there is not enough evidence to
 therapy are often given at the same time.
support a good prognosis. UV radiation was thought to
be a contributing factor based on location of lesions and
Therapy
patients originating from high UV states, although the 
The mass or the entire third eyelid should be excised if the
environment of the patients was known in only 3 cases.
lesion is extensive. Neoplasia is one of the few indications
Papillomas may occur as one or more lobulated
for entire excision of the third eyelid; keratitis may be a
lesions near the mucocutaneous borders of the lids, and
sequela of such treatment. Additional therapy, if indicated
involves the conjunctiva and cornea. Young and old dogs
by type of tumor and/or incomplete excision, may include 
have been presented with the disease. Young animals
cryotherapy, beta-radiation, brachytherapy, or chemo-
may have oral papillomas, and the _disease may be
therapy depending on the availability and reported sensi-
tivity of the neoplasm.
214
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
REFERENCES
1 Martin C, Anderson B {1981) Ocular
15 Nishimura H, Frisch J (1977) Eye cancer
 26 Gaskell RM (1993) Upper respiratory
anatomy In: Veterinary Ophthatmology.
and circumocular pigmentation in Bos
disease in the cat (including chlamydia):
K Gelatt (ed). Lea and Febiger,
taturus and crosshred cattle. Australian
control and prevention. Feline Practice
Philadelphia, pp.12-121.
Journat of Experimentat Agricuturat
21:29-34.
2 Wirtschafter JD, Ketcham JM, Weinstock
Animat Husbandry 17:709-711.
27 Povey R {1976) Feline respiratory
 RJ, Tabesh T, McLoon LK {1999)
16 Roat M, Romanowski E, Araullo-Cruz T,
infections: a clinical review. Canadion
 Mucocutaneous junction as the major
Gordon J (1987) The antiviral effects of
Veterinary Journat 17:93-100.
source of replacerment palpebral
rose bengal and fluorescein. Archives of
28 Hoover EA, Rohovsky MW.
conjunctival epithelial cells. Investigative 
Ophthatmology 105:1415-1417.
Griesmer RA {1970) Experimental feline
Ophthatmotogy and Vistual Science
17 Vrabec M, McCanna P {1988) The effect
viral rhinotracheitis in the germ-free cat.
40:3138-3146.
of topically applied fluorescein on
American Journal of Pathology 58:269.
 3 Anderson DE (1991) Genetic study of eye
fluorescent monoclonal antibodies in the
 29 Nasisse M, Guy J, Davidson M, Sussman
cancer in cattle. Journat of Heredity
diagnosis of chlamydial conjunctivitis.
W, Fairley N {1989) Experimental ocular
82:21-26.
Annals of Ophthatmology 20:421-423.
herpesvirus infection in the cat.
4 Bellhorn R, Henkind P (1966) Superficial
18 Da Silva Curiel J, Murphy C, Jang S,
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
 pigmentary keratitis in the dog. Journat
Bellhorn R (1990) Nutritionally variant
Science 30:1758-1768.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
streptococci associated with corneal
30 Bistner S, Carlson J, Shively J, Scott F
Association 149:173-175.
ulcers in horses: 35 cases {1982-1988).
{1971) Ocular manifestations of feline
 5 Moore CP, Wilsman N, Nordheim E,
Journat of the American Veterinary
herpesvirus infection. Journat of the
Majors L, Collier L {1987) Density and 
Medicat Association 197:624-626.
American Veterinary Medicat Association
distribution of canine conjunctival goblet
19 Jackson WB {1993) Differentiating
159:1223-1237.
cells. Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
conjunctivitis of diverse origins. Survey of
 31 Roberts S, Dawson C, Coleman V, Togni
Visuat Science 28:1925-1932.
Ophthatmotogy 38(Supplement);:91-104.
B{1972) Dendritic keratitis in a cat.
6 Moore C, Collier L {1990) Ocular surface
20 Nasisse M, Guy J, Stevens J {1993)
Journat of the American Veterinary
disease associated with loss of
Clinical and laboratory findings in
Medicat Association 161:285-288.
conjunctival goblet cells in dogs. Journat
chronic conjunctivitis in cats: 91 cases
 32 Gaskell RM, Dennis PE, Goddard LE, et
of the American Animat Hospitat
{1983-1991). Journat of the American
dt. 1985) Isolation of feline herpesvirus
Association 26:458-465.
Veterinary Medicat Association
from the trigeminal ganglia of latently
7 Cullen CL, Njaa BL, Grahn BH (1999)
203:834-837.
infected cats. Journat of Generat Virology
 Ulcerative keratitis associated with
21 Stiles J {1995) Treatment of cats with
66:391-394.
qualitative tear film abnormalities in cats.
ocular disease attributable to herpesvirus
33 Nasisse MP, Davis BJ, Guy JS, Davidson
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 2:197-204.
infection: 17 cases {1983-1993). Journat
MG, Sussman W (1992) Isolation of
8 Duke-Elder S (ed) (1958) The eyes of
of the American Veterinary Medicat
feline herpesvirus 1 from the trigerminal
birds. In: Systems of Ophthatmotogy: the
Association 207:599-603.
 ganglia of acutely and chronically
Eye in Evotation. Mosby, St Louis,
22 Fairchild G, Wyman M, Donovan E
infected cats. Journat of Veterinary
pp.234-427.
{1967) Fluorescent antibody technique as
Internat Medicime 6:102-103.
 9 Rosenblueth A, Bard P {1932) The
a diagnostic test for canine distemper 
34 O'Brien WJ, Taylor JL (1989) The
 innervation and functions of the
 infection: detection of viral antigen in
isolation of herpes simplex virus from
nictitating memhrane in the cat.
epithelial tissues of experimentally
rabbit corneas during latency.
American Journat of Physiology
infected dogs. American Journat of
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
100:537-544.
Veterinary Research 28:761-768.
Science 30:357-364.
10 Nuyttens J, Simoens P {1995)
23 Swango L, Wooding W, Binn L (1970)
35 Kaye SB, Lynas C, Patterson A, Risk JM,
 Morphologic study of the musculature of
 Comparison of the pathogenesis and
McCarthy K, Hart CA {1991) Evidence
the third eyelid in the cat (Felis catus).
antigenicity of infectious canine hepatitis
for herpes sirmplex viral latency in the
Laboratory Animmat Science 45:561-563.
virus and the A26/61 virus strain
human cornea. British Journat of
11 Powell C {1988) Autonomic mmervation
{Toronto). Journat of the American
Ophthatmology 75:195-200.
of the canine lacrimat giands. Masters
Veterinary Medicat Association
36 Stiles J, MeDermott M, Bigshy D, et af.
Thesis, University of Georgia.
156:1687-1699.
{1997) Use of nested polymerase chain
12 Thompson JW (1967) The nerve supply
24 Scott F,Kahn D, Gillespie J {1970) Feline
reaction to identify feline herpesvirus in
to the nictitating memhrane of the cat.
viruses: isolation, characterization, and
ocular tissue from clinically normal cats 
Journat of Anatomy 95:371-385.
 pathogenicity of a feline reovirus.
 and cats with corneal sequestra or
13 Prince J, Diesem C, Eglitis L, Ruskell G
American Journat of Veterinary Research
conjunctivitis. American Journat of
(eds) (1960) The orbit and ocular
31:11-20.
Veterinary Research 58:338-342.
adnexa. In: Anatonry and Histology of
25 Ardley R, Gaskell R, Povey R {1974)
37 Stiles J, McDermott M, Willis M, Roberts 
the Eye and Orbit in Domestic Animats.
 Feline respiratory viruses: their prevalence
W, Greene C (1997) Comparison of
CC Thomas, Springfield, p. 3-12.
in clinically healthy cats. Journat of Smalf
rested polymerase chain reaction, virus
14 Sakai T, Yohro T {1981) A histological
Anwmat Practice 15:579-586.
isolation, and fuorescent antibody testing
 study of the Harderian gland of
for identifying feline herpesvirus in cats
Mongolian gerbils, Meriones meridianus.
with conjunctivitis. American Journat of
Anatomry Record 200:259-270.
Veterinary Research 58:804-807.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
215
38 Gaskell RM, Povey RC (1977)
50 Rebhun W, Smith J, Post J, Holden H
61 Weiss R {1989) Synergistic antiviral
Experimental induction of feline viral
{1978) An outbreak of the conjunctival
activities of acyclovir and recombinant
rhinotracheitis virus re-excretion in FVR
form of infectious bovine rhinotracheitis.
human leukocyte (alpha) interferon on 
recovered cats. Veterinary Record
Conell Veterinarian 68:297-307.
feline herpesvirus replication. Armerican
100:128-133.
 51 Mohanty S, Lillie M, Corselius N, Beck J
Journat of Veterinary Research
39 Speiss B (1985) Symblepharon,
{1972) Natural infection with infectious
50:1672-1677.
 pseudopterygium and partielles
 bovine rhinotracheitis virus in goats.
62 Stiles J, Townsend WM, Rogers QR,
 ankyloblepharon als folgen feliner herpes 
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Krohne SG (2002) Effect of oral
keratokonjunktivitis. Kleinter Praxis
Medical Association 160:879-880.
 administration of L-lysine on
30:149-154.
 52 Sykes JE, Anderson GA, Studdert VP,
conjunctivitis caused by feline herpesvirus
 40 Nasisse MP, Weigler BJ (1997) The
Browning GF (1999) Prevalence of feline
in cats. American Journat of Veterinary
diagnosis of ocular feline herpesvirus
 Chlamrydia psittaci and feline
Research 63:99-103.
infection. Veterinary and Comparative
herpesvirus-1 in cats with upper
63 Herring AJ {1993) Typing Chlamrydia
Ophthatmotogy 7:44-51.
respiratory tract disease. Journal of
psittaci: a review of methods and recent 
41 Hill H, Mare C {1974) Genital disease in
Veterinary Internat Medicine
fndings. British Veterinary Journat
dogs caused by canine herpesvirus.
13:153-162.
149:455-475.
American Journat of Veterinary Research
 53 Hickman J, Reubel G, Hoffman D,
35:669-672.
Morris J, Rogers Q, Pedersen (1994) An
tract pathogens: Chamrydophila felis.
42 Jackson J, Corstvet R {1975)
epizootic of feline herpesvirus type 1 in a
Compendium on Continting Edication
Transmission and attempted isolation of
large specific pathogen-free cat colony
for the Practicing Veterinarian
the etiologic agent associated with
and attempts to eradicate the infection by
23:231-240.
lymphofollicular hyperplasia of the
identification and culling of carriers.
65 Wyrick PB, Richmond SJ (1989) Biology
canine species. American Journat of
Laboratory Animal 28:320-329.
of chlamydiae. Journat of the American
Veterinary Research 36:1207-1210.
54 Maggs DJ, Lappin MR, Reif JS, et αf.
Veterinary Medicat Asociation
43 Jackson J, Corstvet R {1980) Study of
{1999) Evaluation of serologic and viral
195:1507-1516.
nictitating membranes and genitalia of
detection methods for diagnosing feline
66 Schachter J, Ostler HB, Meyer KF (1969)
dogs with reference to lymphofollicular
herpesvirus 1 infection in cats with acute
Human infection with the agent of feline
hyperplasia and its cause. American
respiratory tract or chronic disease.
pneumonitis. Lancet 1:1063-1065.
Journat of Veterinary Research
Journat of the American Veterinary
67 Schachter J (1989) Chlamydial infections:
41:1814-1822.
Medical Association 214:502-507.
past, present, future. Journat of the
44 Keller W, Hinz R, Blanchard G (1972)
55 Harbour DA, Howard PE, Gaskell RM
American Veterinary Medicat Association
 Experimentally produced canine herpetic
 {1991) Isolation of feline calicivirus and
195:1501-1506.
keratitis. Proceedings of the Scientific
feline herpesvirus from domestic cats
68 Hoover E, Kahn D, Langloss J {1978)
Meeting of the American College of
1980-1989. Veterinary Record
Experimentally induced feline chlamydial
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 3:2-7.
128:77-80.
infection (feline pneumonitis). American
45 MeChesney A, England J, Rich L (1973)
 56 Sykes JE, Studdert VP, Browning GF
Journat of Veterinary Research
Adenoviral infection in foals. Journat of
{1999) Comparison of the polymerase
39:541-547.
the American Veterinary Medicat
chain reaction and culture for the
69 Shewen P, Povey R, Wilson M (1978)
Association 162:545-549.
detection of feline Chtarrydia psittaci in
Feline chlamydial infection. Canadian
46 Thein P, Bohm D (1976) Aeiologie und
untreated and doxycycline-treated
Veterinary Journat 19:289-292.
kinik einer virsubedingten
experimentally infected cats. Journat of
 70 Bart MF, Guscetti F, Zurbriggen A,
keratokonjunktivitis beim fohlen.
Veterinary Internat Medicime
Popischil A, Schiller I(2000) Feline
 Zentratbiatt fuer Veterinaermedizin Reihe
13:146-152.
infectious pneumonia: a short literature
B 23:507-519.
57 Cello R {1971) Clues to differential
review and a retrospective
47 Collinson P, O'Rielly J, Ficorilli N,
diagnosis of feline respiratory infections.
immunohistological study on the
 Studdert M (1994) Isolation of equine
Journat of the American Veterinary
 involvement of Chtamydia spp. and
herpesvirus type 2 (equine gamma
Medicat Association 158:968-973.
distemper virus. Veterinary Journat
 herpesvirus 2) from foals with
58 Hotkin J, Reynaud A, Okumoto M
159:220-230.
keratoconjunctivitis. Journat of the
{1971) Cytologic study of herpetic
71 Wills J {1988) Prevalence of Chtarrydia
American Veterinary Medicat Association
keratitis. Archives of Ophthatmology
psittaci in different cat populations in
205:329-331.
85:597-599.
Britain. Journat of Small Animat Practice
48 Cook N {1998) Combined outbreak of
 59 Da Silva Curiel J, Nasisse M, Hook R,
29:327-339.
the genital and conjunctival forms of
Wilson H, Collins B, Mandell C {1991)
 72 Cello R (1967) Occular infections in
bovine herpesvirus 1 infection in a UK
Topical fluorescein dye: effects of
animals with PLT (Bedsonid) group
dairy herd. Veterinary Record
immunofluorescent antibody test for
agents. American Journat of
143:561-562.
 feline herpesvirus keratoconjunctivitis.
Ophthatmotogy 2:244-248.
49 Abinati F, Plumer G {1961) The isolation 
Progress in Veterinary cmd Comparative
73 Campbell L, Otis B (1983) Ocular
of infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus
Ophthatmology 1:99-104.
changes associated with mycoplasmal,
from cattle affected with conjunctivitis: 
60 Nasisse MP, Guy JS, Davidson MG,
chlamydial, and herpesvirus infections in
 ohservations on the experimental
Sussman W, De Clercq E (1989) In vitro
the cat. Modern Veterinary Practice
infection. American Journat of Veterinary
susceptibility of feline herpesvirus-1 to
64:529-531
Research 22:13-17.
vidarabine, idoxuridine, trifluridine,
acyclovir, or bromovinyldeoxyuridine.
American Journat of Veterinary Research
50:158-160.
216
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
74 Hopkins J, Stephenson E, Storz J, Pierson
87 Rogers D, Frey M, Hogg A {1991)
100 Espinola MB, Lilenbaum W (1996)
 R {1973) Conjunctivitis associated with
Conjunctivitis associated with a
Prevalence of bacteria in the conjunctival
chlamydial polyarthritis in lambs.
 mycoplasma-like organism in swine.
sac and on the eyelid margin of clinically
Journat of the American Veterinary
Journat of the American Veterinary
normal cats. Journat of Small Animat
Medical Association 163:1157-1160.
Medicat Association 198:450-452.
Practice 37:364-366.
75 Rogers DG, Andersen AA, Hogg A,
88 Rosendal S (1982) Canine mycoplasmas:
101 Moore C (1988) Prevalence of ocular
Nielsen DL, Huebert MA {1993)
their ecologic niche and role in disease.
microorganisms in hospitalized and 
Conjunctivitis and keratoconjunctivitis
Journat of the American Veterinary
stabled horses. American Journat of
associated with chlamydiae in swine.
Medicat Association 180:1212-1214.
Veter imary Research 49:773-777.
Journat of the American Veterinary
89 Rosendal S {1986) Detection of
102 McLaughlin S, Brightman A, Helper L,
Medical Association 203:1321-1323.
antibodies to Mycopiasma fetis in horses.
Manning J, Tomes J (1983) Pathogenic
76 Idtse F (1984) Chlamydia and chlamydial
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
bacteria and fungi associated with
diseases of cattle: a review of the
Medicat Association 188:292-294.
extraocular disease in the horse. Journat
literature. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl
90 Urban M, Wyman M, Reins M, Marraro
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Anwmal Clinician 79:543-550.
V {1972) Conjunctival flora in clinically
Association 182:241-242.
77 Bech-Nielsen S, Fullton RW,
normal dogs. Journat of the American
103 Samuelson D, Andresen T, Gwin R
Downing MM, Hardy WD (1981) Feline
Veterinary Medicat Association
{1984) Conjunctival fungal flora in
 infectious peritonitis and viral respiratory
161:201-206.
horses, cattle, dogs, and cats. Journal of
 diseases in feline leukemia virus infected
91 Bistner SI, Roberts SR, Anderson RP
the Armerican Veterinary Medicat
cats. Journat of the American Animat
{1969) Conjunctival bacteria: clinica]
Association 184:1240-1242.
Hospitat Association 17:759-765.
 appearances can be deceiving. Modern
104 Ball M, Rebhun W, Gaarder J {1997)
78 O'Dair H, Hopper C, Gruffydd-Jones T,
Veterimary Practice 50:45-47.
Evaluation of itraconazole-dimethyl
Harbour D, Waters H {1994) Clinical
92 McDonald PJ, Watson ADJ (1976)
sulfoxide ointment for treatment of
 aspects of Chlatmydia psittaci infection
Microbial flora of normal canine
keratomycosis in nine horses. Journat of
 in cats infected with feline
conjunctiva. Journat of Small Anirmat
the American Veterinary Medicat
immunodeficiency virus. Veterinary
Practice 17:809-812.
Association 211:199-203.
Research 134:365-368.
93 Hacker DV, Jensen HE, Selby LA {1979)
105 Barker I {1970) Thelazia lacrymalis
79 Mitzel J, Strating A (1977) Vaccination 
A comparison of conjunctival culture
from the eyes of an Ontario horse.
against feline pneumonitis. Armerican
techniques in the dog. Journat of the
Canadian Veterinary Journat
Journat of Veterinary Research
American Animat Hospitat Association
11:186-189.
38:1361-1363.
15:223-225.
106 Ladouceur C, Kazacos K {1981) Eye
80 Shewen P, Povey R, Wilson M (1980) A
 94 Gerding PA, Cormany K, Weisiger R,
worms in cattle in Indiana. Journat of the
comparison of the efficacy of a live and 
Kakoma I {1993) Survey and
American Veterinary Medicat Association
four inactivated vaccine preparations for
topographic distribution of bacterial and
178:385-386.
the protection of cats against
fungal microorganisms in eyes of
107 Lyons E, Tolliver S, Drudge J.
experimental challenge with Chiamydia
dinicall normal dogs. Camine Practice
Swerczek T, Crowe M (1986) Eyeworms
psittaci. Canadicn Journat of
18:34-38.
(Thelazia lacrymatis) in one- to four-year-
Comparative Medicine 44:244-251.
95 Verwer M, Gunnink J(1968) The
old thoroughbreds at necropsy in
81 Gill M, Beckenhauer W, Thurber E
occurrence of bacteria in chronic
Kentucky (1984-1985). American
[1987) Immunogenicity and efficacy of a
purulent eye discharge. Journat of Smafl
Journat of Veterinary Research
 modified live feline chlamydia vaccine.
Animat Practice 9:33-36.
47:315-316.
Norden Netus, summer edn., pp. 26-30.
96 Stone A, Schrock J {1972) Bacterial
108 Lyons E, Drudge J, Tolliver S (1980)
82 Wasmoen T, Chu H J, Chavez L,
conjunctivitis in the dog: preliminary
Age distribution of horses in Kentucky
 Acree W (1992) Demonstration of one-
fndings. Journat of the American Animat
 infected with the eye worm Thelazia
year duration of immunity for an
Hospitat Association 8:10-12.
lacrymalis. Journat of the American
inactivated feline Chiarrydia psittaci
97 Murphy J, Lavach J, Severin G {1978)
Veterinary Medicat Association
vaccine. Fetine Practice 20:13-16.
 Survey of conjunctival flora of dogs with
176:221-223.
83 Campbell L, Fox J, Snyder S (1973)
 clinical signs of external eye disease.
 109 Robertson JT, Johnson FM (1980) Age
Ocular bacteria and mycoplasma of the
Journat of the American Veterinary
distribution of horses in Kentucky
clinicall normal cat. Feline Piactice
Medicat Association 172:66-68.
 infected with the eye worm Thelazia
3:10-12.
98 Gerding PA, McLaughlin SA, Troop MW
lacrymalis. Journat of the American
84 Camphell L, Synder S, Reed C, Fox J
{1988) Pathogenic bacteria and fungi
Veterinary Medicat Association
{1973) Mycoplasa felis-associated
 associated with external ocular diseases
176:221-223.
conjunctivitis in cats. Journat of the
in dogs: 131 cases (1981-1986). Joumat
110 Greve J, Harrison G (1980)
American Veterinary Medicat Association
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Conjunctivitis caused by eye flukes in
163:991-995.
Association 193:242-244.
captive-reared ostriches. Journat of the
85 Dagnall GJ {1993) Experimental
 99 Gerding PA, Cormany K, Weisiger R,
American Veterinary Medical Association
infection of the conjunctival sac of lambs
Kakoma, I {1993) Survey and
177:909-910.
with Mycoplasma confunctivae. British
topographic distribution of bacterial and
111 Miller P, Campbell B {1992)
Veterinary Journat 149:429-435.
fungal microorganisms in eyes of
Subconjunctival cyst associated with
86 Rosenbusch RF, Knudtson WU (1980)
clinically normal cats. Feine Practice
Thelazia gulosa in a calf. Journat of the
 Bovine mycoplasmal conjunctivitis: 
21:20-23.
American Veterinary Medicat Association
experimental reproduction and
201:1058-1060.
characterization of the disease. Cornefl
Veter marian 70:307-320.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
217
112 Lyons E, Drudge J, Tolliver S {1981)
124 Munroe G {1999) Subconjunctival
136 Collins BK, Collier L, Miller M,
Apparent inactivity of several
haemorrhages in neonatal thoroughbred
Linton L {1993) Biologic behavior and 
 antiparasitic compounds against the
foals. Veterinary Record 144:279-282.
histologic characteristics of canine
eyeworm Theiazia facrymatis in equids.
125 Anderson D, Lush J, Chambers D
conjunctival melanoma. Veterinary and
Armerican Journat of Veterinary Research
{1957) Studies on bovine ocular
Comparative Ophthatmology
42:1046-1047.
squamous cell carcinoma ('cancer eye').
3:135-140.
113 Marley S, Ilyes E, Keller D {1999)
 II. Relationship between eyelid
137 Buyukmihci N {1981) Canine
 Efficacy of topically administered
pigmentation and occurrence of cancer 
conjunctival angiokeratomas. Journat of
 doramectin against eyeworms,
eye lesions. Journat of Animat Science
the American Veterinary Medicat
lungworms, and gastrointestinal
16:739-746.
Association 178:1279-1282.
 nematodes of cattle. Armerican Journat of
126 Bailey CM, Hanks DR, Hanks MA
138 George G, Summers BA (1990)
Veterinary Research 60:665-668.
(1990) Circumocular pigmentation and
 Angiokeratoma: a benign vascular
114 Whitcup S, Chan C, Luyo D, Bo P, Li Q
incidence of ocular squamous cell tumors
tumour of the dog. Journat of Smatl
{1996) Topical cyclosporine inhibits mast
in Bos toturus and Bos indicus x Bos
Animat Practice 31:390-392.
cell-mediated conjunctivitis. Investigatite
taurus cattle. Journat of the American
139 Vestre WA, Turner TA, Carlton WW
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Veterinary Medicat Association
(1982) Conjunctival hemangioma in a
37:2686-2693.
196:1605-1608.
horse. Journat of the American
115 Tinkellman DG, Rupp G, Kaufman H,
127 Den Otter W, Hill G, Klein W, et αf.
Veterinary Medicat Association
Pugely J, Schultz N (1993) Double-
{1995) Ocular squamous cell carcinoma
180:1481-1482.
masked, paired-comparison clinical study
in Simmental cattle in Zimbabwe.
140 Moore PF, Jacker DV, Buyukmihci NC
of ketorola tromethamine 0.5%
American Journat of Veterinary Research
{1986) Ocular angiosarcoma in the
ophthalmic solution compared with
56:1440-1444.
horse: morphological and
 placebo eyedrops in the treatment of
128 Sironi G, Riccaboni P, Mertel L,
immunohistochemical studies. Veterinary
seasonal allergic conjunctivitis. Sarvey of
Cammarata G, Brooks D (1999) p53
Pathology 23:240-244.
Ophthatmotogy 38:133-140.
 protein expression in conjunctival
141 Crawley GR, Bryan GM,
116 Notivol R, Martinez M, Bergamini MV
squamous cell carcinomas of domestic
Gogolewski RP (1987) Ocular
{1994) Treatment of chronic nonbacteria]
animals. Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
hemangioma in a horse. Equine Practice
 conjunctivitis with a cyclo-oxygenase
2:227-231.
9:11-13.
 inhibitor or a corticosteroid. Ammerican
129 Teifke JP, Lohr CV (1996)
142 Murphy CJ, Bellhorn RW,
Journal of Ophthatmology 117:651-656.
Immunohistochemical detection of p53
Buyukmihci NC (1989) Bilateral
117 Pentlarge V (1991) Eosinophilic
overexpression in paraffin wax-
conjunctival masses in two dogs. Journa!
conjunctivitis in five cats. Journat of the
embedded squamous cell carcinoma of
of the American Veterinary Medicat
American Animat Hospitat Association
cattle, horses, cats, and dogs. Journat of
Association 195:225-227.
27:21-28.
Comparative Pathology 114:205-210.
143 Mughannam AJ, Hacker DV,
 118 Allgoewer I, Schaffer E, Stockhaus C,
130 Rebhun W, Piero F (1998) Ocular
 Spangler WL (1997) Conjunctival
Vogtlin A (2001) Feline eosinophilic
lesions in horses with lymphosarcoma:
vascular tumors in six dogs. Veterinary
conjunctivitis. Veterinary Ophthatmology
21 cases (1977-1997). Jourmat of the
and Comparative Ophthatnology
4:69-74.
American Veterinary Medicat Association
7:56-59.
119 Larocca R (2000) Eosinophilic
212:852-854.
144 Regnier A, Magnol J, Servantie J (1986)
 conjunctivitis, herpesvirus, and mast cell
131 Joyce J {1973) Chemosis associated
Corneal and subconjunctival ectopic
tumor of the third eyelid in a cat.
with malignant lymphoma in a heifer.
Jacrimal glands in a dog. Canadian
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 3:221-225.
Veterinary MedicalSmall Animat
Practice 13:12-14.
120 Read RA, Lucas J (2001)
Clinician 68:33-34.
145 Roze M, Ridings B, Lagadic M (2001)
 Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis:
132 Johnson B, Brightman A, Whiteley H
Comparative morphology of epicorneal
clinical findings from 21 eyes in 13 cats.
{1988) Conjunctival mast cell tumor in
conjunctival membranes in rabbits and
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 4:93-98.
two dogs. Journat of the American
human pterygium. Veterinary
121 Kerlin RL, Dubielzig RR {1997)
Animat Hospitat Association
Ophthatmology 4:171-174.
Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis in cats.
24:439-442.
146 Martin C, Leach R {1970) Everted
Veterinary and Comparative
133 Hamor R, Ramsey D, Wiedmeyer C,
membrana nictitans in German
Ophthatmotogy 7:177-179.
Gerding P, Knight B, Whiteley H (1997)
Shorthaired Pointers. Journat of the
122 Rammsey D, Ketringn K, Glaze M,
Melanoma of the conjunctiva and cornea
American Veterinary Medicat Association
 Render J (1996) Ligneous conjunctivitis
in a horse. Veterinary and Comparative
157:1229-1232
 in four Doberman Pinschers. Journaf of
Ophthatmotogy 7:52-55.
147 Albert R, Garrett P, Whitley R, Thomas
the American Animat Hospitat
134 Cook CS, Rosenkrantz W, Peiffer RL,
 K{1982) Sugical correction of everted
Association 32:439-447.
MacMillan A (1985) Malignant
third eyelid in two cats. Journat of the
123 Schott D, Beck P, Liermann A, et αf.
 melanoma of the conjunctiva in a cat.
American Veterinary Medicat Association
{1998) Therapy with a purified
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
180:763-766.
 plasminogen concentrate in an infant 
Medicat Association 186:505-506.
148 Gelatt K {1972) Surgical correction of 
with ligneous conjunctivitis and
135 Patnaik A, Mooney S {1988) Feline
everted nictitating membrane in the dog.
homozygous plasminogen deficiency.
 melanoma: a comparative study of
Veterinary Medicine/Smatl Anirmat
Netw England Journat of Medicine
 ocular, oral, and dermal neoplasms.
Clinician 67:291-292.
339:1679-1686.
Veterinary Pathology 25:105-112.
149 Kuhns E {1977) Correction of eversion
of the membrana nictitans in the dog.
Veterinary MedicalSmall Animat
Clinician 72:411-417.
218
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
150 Koch SA (1979) Congenital ophthalmic
162 Keil S, Olivero D, McKeever P,
174 Peiffer R, Duncan J, Terrell T {1978)
abnormalities in the Burmese cat. Journa!
Moore F {1997) Bilateral nodular
Hemangioma of the nictitating
Of the Armerican Veterinary Medicat
eosinophilic granulomatous
membrane in a dog. Journat of the
Association 174:90-91.
 inflammation of the nictitating
American Veterinary Medicat Association
151 Brandsch H, Schmidt V (1982)
membrane of a cat. Veterinary and
172:832-833.
Erbanalytische untersuchungen zum
Comparative Ophthatmology
175 Buyukmihci N {1981) Canine
dermoid des auges beim hund.
7:258-262.
conjunctival angiokeratomas. Journat of
Monttshette fur Veterinarmedizin
163 Nasisse M, Glover T, Moore C, Weigler
the American Veterinary Medicat
37:305-306.
 B{1998) Detection of feline herpesvirus-
Association 178:1279-1282.
152 Barkyoumb S, Leipold H (1984) Nature
1 DNA in corneas of cats with
176 Hare C, Howard E (1977) Canine
and cause of ocular dermoids in
eosinophilic keratitis or corneal
conjunctivocorneal papillomatosis: a case
Hereford cattle. Veterinary Pathology
sequestration. American Journat of
report. Journat of the American Animat
21:316-324.
Veterinary Research 59:856-858.
Hospitat Association 13:688-690.177
153 Christmas R {1992) Surgical correction
164 Martin C, Stiles J, Willis M {1996)
Bonney C, Koch S, Dice P, Confer A
of congenital ocular and nasal dermoids
 Oeular adnexal cryptococcosis in a cat.
{1980) Papillomatosis of conjunctiva and
and third eyelid gland prolapse in related
Veterinary and Comparative
adnexa in dogs. Jounat of the American
 Burmese kittens. Canadian Veterinary
 Ophthatology 6:225-229.
Veterinary Medicat Association
Jourmat 33:265-266.
165 Rochlitz I (1984) Feline dysautonomia
176:48-51.
154 Schoofs S {1999) Prolapse of the gland
(the Key-Gaskell or dilated pupil 
178 Bonney D, Koch S, Confer A, Dice P
 of the third eyelid in a cat: a case report
syndrome): a preliminary review. Journat
{1980) A case report: a
and literature review. Journat of the
of Small Anwmat Practice 25:587-598.
conjunctivocorneal papilloma with
American Animat Hospitat Association
166 Sharp N, Nash A, Griffiths I (1984)
evidence of a viral etiology. Journat of
35:240-242.
 Feline dysautonomia (the Key-Gaskell
Small Anumat Practice 21:183-188.
155 Dugan S, Severin G, Hungerford L,
 syndrome): a clinical and pathological
179 Sansom J, Barnett KC, Blunden AS,
Whiteley H, Roberts S {1992) Clinical
study of forty cases. Journat of Smat!
Smith KC, Turner S, Waters L (1996)
 and histologic evaluation of the
Anmat Practice 25:599-615.
Canine conjunctival papilloma: a review 
prolapsed third eyelid gland in dogs.
167 Muir P, Jones T, Howard P {1990) A
of five cases. Journat of Small Anima!
Journat of the American Veterinary
 clinical and microbiological study of cats 
Practice 37:84-86.
Medicat Association 201:1861-1867.
with protruding nictitating membranes
 180 Schaeffer EH, Pfleghaar S, Gordon S,
156 Severin G {1995) Third eyelid. In:
and diarrhoea: isolation of a novel virus.
 Knoedlseder M (1994) Maligne
Severin's Veterinary Ophthatmology
Veterinary Research 127:324-330.
nickhauttumoren bei hund und katze.
Notes, 3rd edn. American Animal
168 Peruccio C {1981) Surgical correction of
Terderztt Praxis 22:382-391.
Hospital Association, p. 214.
prominent third eyelid in the dog.
181 Roels S, Ducatelle R {1998) Malignant 
157 Morgan R, Duddy J, McClurg K (1993)
California Veterinarian 4:24-27.
 melanoma of the nictitating membrane in
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
169 Latimer C, Wyman M, Szymanski C,
a cat. Journat of Comparative Pathotogy
 in dogs: a retrospective study of 89 cases
Werling K {1983) Membrana nictitans
119:189-193.
[1980-1990). Journat of the American
gland cyst in a dog. Journat of the
182 Wilcock BP, Peiffer RL {1988)
Animal Hospital Association 29:56-60.
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Adenocarcinoma of the gland of the
158 Moore C, Frappier B, Linton L (1996)
183:1003-1005.
third eyelid in seven dogs. Journat of the
Distribution and course of ducts of the
170 Martin C, Kaswan R, Doran C (1987)
American Veterinary Medicat Association
canine third eyelid gland: effects of two
Cystic lesions of the periorbital region.
193:1549-1550.
surgical replacement techniques.
Compendium on Continuing Education
183 Kkomaromy AM, Ramsey DT,
Veterinary and Comparative
for the Practicing Veterinarian
Render JA, Clark P {1997) Primary
Ophthatrmotogy 6:258-264.
9:1021-1029.
adenocarcinoma of the gland of the
159 Kaswan R, Martin C {1985) Surgical
171 Lavach J, Snyder S {1984) Squamous
nictitating membrane in a cat. Journat of
correction of third eyelid prolapse in
cell carcinoma of the third eyelid in a 
the American AnimatHosp itat
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
dog. Journat of the American Veterinary
Association 33:333-336.
Medicat Association 186:83.
Medicat Association 184:975-976.
184 Buyukmihci N {1975) Fibrosarcoma of
160 Stanley R, Kaswan R {1994)
172 Peiffer R, Johnston S (1976)
the nictitating membrane in a cat.
Modification of the orbital rim
 Pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia of the
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
anchorage method for surgical
 mebrana nictitans in a dog. Veterinary
Medicat Association 167:934-935.
replacement of the gland of the third
Medicine/Smatl Animat Clinician
eyelid in dogs. Journat of the American
71:636-637.
Veterinary Medicat Association
173 Hargis A, Lee A, Thomassen R (1978)
205:1412-1414.
Tumor and tumor-like lesions of
161 Teichert G (1966) Plasmazellulare
perilimbal conjunctiva in laboratory
 infiltration des dritten augenlides beim
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
hund. Beliner und Muenchner
Medicat Association 173:1185-1190.
Tieraerztiche Wochenschrift 79:499.
219
9
Lacrimal System
The lacrimal apparatus may be divided into secretory
puncta on each eyelid (in most domestic species), a
and excretory components. The secretory components
lacrimal canaliculus draining the punctum into the
consist of the orbital lacrimal gland, the third eyelid
lacrimal sac, and the nasolacrimal duct (9.1).
gland, and the glands of the eyelids. Cows, pigs, birds,
and rodents have an additional deeper gland in the third
eyelid, the Harderian glandl, the secretions of which are
ANATOMYANDPHYSIOLOGY
high in lipids?. In general, the gland is absent from
terrestrial carnivores and primates. The excretory
The orbital lacrimal gland and third eyelid gland are
components of the lacrimal system consist of a lacrimal
mixed, mucoserous, compound tubuloacinar glands. The
glandular tubules contain serous granules and the acini
contain sialomucin granules  on  histochemistry   and
9.1
ultrastructural studies (9.2)3. In the third eyelid gland,
 peripheral acini contain large amounts of lipids and no
striated ducts (9.3).
The ultrastructure of the normal equine lacrimal
gland+ is similar to that of the dog, as are the lacrimal
glands of sheep and goats'. In the dog and cat, the gland
of the third eyelid surrounds the base of the cartilage of
the third eyelid, and the orbital lacrimal gland is
flattened and lies in a fold of periorbita beneath the
dorsolateral orbital rim and orbital ligament. Based on
production, Gelatt et al.6 determined that, in the dog,
approximately 62% of tear secretion is produced by the
main lacrimal gland and 35% by the third eyelid gland,
 although either gland alone can supply adequate tears to
maintain a normal eye. Helper et al.7 observed that in the
 dog a 5-23% decrease in tear production occurred with
9.1  Cast of nasolacrimal duct in a sculptured skull of a dog. Note the
removal of the lacrimal gland, and a 29-s7% decrease
lack of a distinct lacrimal sac, the proximal bony portion, and the
Occurred with removal of the third eyelid gland. In the
proximity to the root of the upper canine tooth.
cat, the orbital lacrimal gland contributes 13-46% of
9.2
9.3
 9.2 Normal canine third eyelid gland with acini granules staining
 9.3 Peripheral lobules of a canine third eyelid gland containing acini
positive for alcian blue (arrows] that indicates sialomucin; the
with lipids (arrows]. (1 μm section, toludine blue stain.)
tubules (T, structures with lumen] do not stain as they contain serous
granules. (Alcian blue pH 2.5, nuclear fast red counterstain, x200.]
220
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
aqueous tears, and the third eyelid gland approximately
The lacrimal glands secrete a slightly alkaline, protein-
25% of the tears8. These percentages are misleading, as
poor, isotonic serous fluid with a small component of
they do not take into account the compensatory increase
mucin12. The secretion of the aqueous phase is the result 
of tears by the remaining gland.
of passive osmotic drawing of water into the lumen from
Removal of only one of the two glands does not
active secretion of electrolytes, typical of most exocrine
produce a sufficient decrease in tears to produce
 glands. The tears lubricate the corneal surface, providing
disease6, 9. Removal of both the orbital lacrimal glands 
a smooth, regular surface that enhances the optical
and the third eyelid gland results in KCS in the dog and
properties of the cornea. Tears also mechanically cleanse
cat. Mucus is also produced by conjunctival goblet cells.
the conjunctival sac and function in the nourishment of
Accessory lacrimal glands are limited to the small glands
the cornea and conjunctiva. A variety of growth factors,
of Zeis and Moll in the eyelids. No comparable accessory
antibacterial substances, and proteases have been
lacrimal glands to glands of Krause and Wolfring have
isolated from tears (Table 9.1). The concentration of the
been demonstrated in the dog and cat.
various proteins, and thus their importance, may vary
with species.
Removal of one of the lacrimal glands is tolerated
 Although the tear film consists mainly of water, it is
in a healthy eye, but removal in a breed
not a homogenous solution. Traditionally, the tear film
predisposed to keratoconjunctivitis sicca may
is quoted as 7-9 μm thick and consisting of three layers
accelerate the onset of disease and will leave the
(9.4). Newer measurement techniques indicate the tear
stigma of an iatrogenic cause to the owner.
film may be 3445 μm thick13. The inner layer is a
hydrophilic mucin, a mixture of glycoproteins probably
Aoqoudou pul jeuoel u wsqdowp enxas 
au1 Aq osie inq sllao lalqog au1 Aq 4juiew paiaioas
exists in a variety of species, with males having a greater
lacrimal glands. The mucin contributes to 1
the
mass of acinar tissuelo, This gender difference also
glycocalix on the surface of the epithelium and makes
translates into functional differences and may partially
the naturally hydrophobic epithelium wettable. The
explain the effect of gender and neutering on the
mucus also protects the epithelium from bacteria and
incidence of KCs11.
other noxious agents. The second and most voluminous
Table 9.1 Tear proteins: their source(s) and function(s)
 Protein
Source
Function
slgA
Lacrimal
First defense of ocular surface from microbes
IgG, IgM
Conjunctival leakage
Indicative of conjunctival inflammation
IgE
Conjunctiva
Allergic reaction
 Albumin, transferrin 
Conjunctival leakage
Indicative of conjunctival inflammation
Lipocalin (TSP)
Lacrimal
Transport protein for vitamin A
Lactoferrin
Lacrimal
Binds iron, antibacterial
Lysozyme
Lacrimal
Antibacterial
Peroxidase
Lacrimal
Antibacterial
Fibronectin
Cornea
 Corneal wound healing
Epidermal growth factor
Lacrimal
 Corneal wound healing
 Plasminogen activator
Lacrimal, conjunctiva, cornea
C-1-Anti trypsin
Cornea
Inactivates proteases, protects the cornea
 Procollagenases
Cornea, PMNs
 Debride cornea, reduce scarring, excess promotes corneal melting
Tryptase
Conjunctiva, mast cells
Ocular allergy
Cystatins
Lacrimal
 Protease inhibitors
 Antitrypsins
Lacrimal
Protease inhibitors
LDH
Cornea
Metabolic enzyme, indicates corneal epithelial cell damage
Lysosomal enzymes
Lacrimal
 >20 enzymes found, including amylase, cathepsins; alkaline
phosphatase function is obscure
slgA: secretory immunoglobulin A; LDH: lactate dehydrogenase; TSP: tear specific prealbumin (now lipocalin)
(From Kaswan et or.,1995142.)
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
221
layer is aqueous, secreted by the lacrimal glands. The
9.4
thin outer layer of lipids is secreted by the meibomian
glands in the lid margins and increases surface tension
Lipid layer
and retards evaporationl4. Recent concepts of the tear
film mucous layer favor a transition of mucus from the
mucus-rich corneal side extending into the aqueous
phase, resulting in a bilaminar model of aqueous-mucin
and lipid1s.
The third eyelid gland and the lacrimal gland are
mder dual autonomic control. The third eyelid gland
receives parasympathetic fibers that originate in the
facial nerve (nucleus intermedius), but arrive via a
branch of the infratrochlear nerve jophthalmic
Aqueous
division
ofthe
Vth
 cranial
nervej16.
The
parasympathetic fibers of the orbital lacrimal gland
originate similarly to those of the third eyelid, but
reach the gland via the lacrimal nerve, which is a
branch of the ophthalmic division of the Vth cranial
nerve (9.s)17,18. Parasympathetic stimulation increases
the lacrimal flow rate and electrolyte content, and
adrenergic stimulation controls the macromolecular
content of the secretion. The control of goblet cell
mucus production is not understood, but a mucus
 stimulating factor has been demonstrated to be present
in normal human tears and absent from individuals
Mucus
with various dry eye syndromes19.
Epithelium
 9.4 Trilaminar structure of the normal tear film.
9.5
Gland of the
 3rd eyelid 
Infratrochiear n.
！
Nasocilary n.
Ganglion
Lacrimal n.
Maxillary n.
Nerve of pterygoid canat
 Pterygopalatine 
ganglion
 Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers
 Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers 
Unknown location of transfer of parasympa thetic fibers from nerve of pterygoid canal
to lacrimal n. and nasociliary n. to reach lacrimal gl. and gl. of the 3rd eyelid.
9.5 Proposed parasympathetic nerve supply to the lacrimal gland and the third eyelid gland. Preganglionic nerve fibers leave the skull via the
pterygoid canal nerve and synapse in the pterygopalatine ganglion and return in the pterygoid canal nerve and distribute to ophthalmic nerve
branches. (n: nerve.] (From Powell, 198816.)
222
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Tears pool ventrally within the recess of the conjunctival
9.6
sac in the medial canthus, forming a lacrimal lake. Drain-
age proceeds into the lacrimal canaliculi through the
lacrimal puncta. In the dog, the lower punctum is normally
situated about 5 mm from the medial canthus and 1-2 mm
from the mucocutaneous margin within the palpebral con-
junctiva. The dorsal punctum is similarly situated 5-8 mm
from the medial canthus in the dorsal lid. The rabbit has
only a single large ventral punctum and canaliculus.
The canaliculi converge in a vestigial lacrimal sac
encased within the lacrimal bone. The nasolacrimal duct
carries tears from the lacrimal sac to the anterior end of the
nasal vestibule. The lacrimal canaliculi, lacrimal sac, and
 nasolacrimal duct have a stratified columnar epitheliums.
The nasolacrimal duct consists of a proximal portion
encased in bone and a distal membranous portion. The
bone-encased  portion is  narrower   and  often 
has
9.6 Normal canine dacryocystorhinography performed by injection of an
constrictions
in  various  species
(9.1, 9.6)20, 21]
aqueous contrast material. Note the ventral curvature of the proximal 
Imperfections may occur in the nasolacrimal duct of
half (arrow] and how narrow the lumen is through the bony portion.
individuals, with the result that drainage may occur
posteriorly into the nasopharynx. These variations are
particularly common in brachycephalic dogs.
in this study. Kern et al.27 were unable to demonstrate
decreased goblet cell numbers on scanning electron
microscopy in a subacute experimental model.
DISEASES OF THE LACRIMAL APPARATUS
 Most reports indicate no apparent sex predisposition in
most breeds, apart from the West Highland White Terrier,
Most diseases of the lacrimal system can broadly be
categorized into problems of decreased tear production,
 of either the male or female dog increases the predisposition
increased tear production, obstruction of the outflow
to KCS; because more females are neutered {3.4x) than
system, and abnormal masses.
males, more older females develop KCs. The effect of
neutering on KCS prevalence is not noted until animals are
KERATOCONJUNCTIVITIS SICCA
10 years of agell. Androgens have an effect on lacrimal
Introductionfetiology
gand size and function and on autoimmunity, and may
Commonly called *dry eye' or xerophthalmia, KCS can be
inhibit an endogenous tear suppresser such as prolactin. The
defined as a progressive inflammatory condition of the
incidence of KCS is higher in older dogs (7-9 years at onset).
cornea and conjunctiva caused by a lack of tears. The
Sanchez et al28a presented contemporary statistics for
deficiency is usually in the aqueous phase, but deficiencies
idiopathic KCS as reflected in Scotland and found that
 in mucin have been recognized in the dog and cat22,23. A
58% of the cases were comprised of 4 breeds: English
deficiency of the precorneal tear film is commonly
 Cocker Spaniel, West Highland White Terrier, Cavalier King
encountered in small animal practice. In a survey of
Charles Spaniel, and Shih-Tzu. These were not matched
14 veterinary colleges, approximately 0.4% of the general
 against a hospital-based population and so are somewhat
hospital population had KCs24. Updated analysis of the
relative. All were bilateral disease or progressed to bilateral
 same database has shown an increase in prevalence to
disease. The disease in the two brachycephalic breeds
1.52%, which probably represents an increased awareness 
presented at an earlier age and was more rapidly referred
 as well as changes in breed popularityl1.
due to a more acute syndrome, often with corneal ulceration
With loss of the nutritive and protective functions of the
 and upper eyelid trichiasis. The West Highland White
tears, a spectrum of acute and chronic corneal and
       g
onjunctival lesions are produced. In the acute to subacute
 predisposition and a more chronic course.
patient, the epithelium of the cornea is thinned to 3-4 layers,
 English Bulldogs, Cocker Spaniels, and Dachshunds
with loss of the basal layer. The subacute epithelium
aré 
 predisposed to KCs, often with concurrent
 develops keratinization and subepithelial inflammatory cell 
generalized skin disease. The West Highland White
infiltration. The epithelium with chronicity becomes
Terrier and Miniature Schnauzer have a high incidence of
thickened, develops rete pegs, contains pigment granules,
KCS independent of skin disease. In exophthalmic
and is keratinized. The anterior comeal stroma develops
breeds, lagophthalmos often complicates a deficiency of
 extensive vascularization and mononuclear inflammatory
tears, causing the KCs lesions to be more pronounced.
cell infiltration. There is a decrease in the number of goblet
Even when STT values are only slightly reduced, dry
cells in the conjunctival epithelium2s. Short-term studies in
spots and exposure keratitis develop easily with
the cat indicate that the epithelial changes of decreased
lagophthalmos. In some breeds, such as the Pug and
goblet cell density and squamous metaplasia are not
 Pekingese, melanocyte activity is particularly intense and
associated with decreased tear film, but with the infiltration
severe pigmentary keratitis is common. (See Table 9.2 for
of subepithelial  lymphocytic  inflammatory  infiltration,
incidence of KCS in specific canine breeds.)
whatever the cause26. Lim and Cullen26a found the clinical
A variety of causes or conditions are known to be
orrelate for this in that cats with conjunctivitis from a
 associated with KCS. There is growing evidence that the
variety of causes had decreased tear break up times. There
most common etiology of KCs is a genetically based
was no relationship between the STT and the conjunctivitis
 autoimmune adenitis, often with systemic ramifications29.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
223
Table 9.2 KCS breed distribution (597,516 cases)
9.7
Relative
Relative
population
incidence
Breed
(0%0]
American 
 Cocker Spaniel
2.8
6.76
 Boston Terrier
0.76
3.89
Bulldog
0.64
20.12
Chihuahua
1.09
1.31
Dachshund
2.96
1.48
Doberman Pinscher
3.20
0.15
German Shepherd Dog
7.60
0.57
Lhasa Apso
0.56
16.56
 Miniature Schnauzer
1.91
3.93
9.7 Congenital lack of tears in a Chihuahua. This is typically observed in
5mall breeds and is usually unilateral. Note the profound dryness.
Mixed breed
27.09
0.82
 Pekingese
0.99
6.31
Pug
0.4
7.87
rabbit, or human42. Atropine- and anesthesia-induced KCS
 Shih Tzu 
0.27
4.02
is usually transient, but may last for several days when
Yorkshire Terrier
0.64
5.33
combined with other postoperative complications. Topical
yyest Highland
 atropine applied to one eye decreased the STT value in both
Wyhite Terrier
0.39
18.36
 eyes for up to 5 weeks in normal dogs43. In testing various
 sedative combinations, xylazine and butorphanol caused the 
most profound decrease in Schirmer I value (6 mm), but the 
 duration until recovery was not reported*4.
 Congenital alacrima
 Sulfonamide-induced KCS is frequently permanent. In
Congenital KCS occurs occasionally as an extreme dryness,
one study, KCS secondary to sulfonamide administration
and is usually unilateral. It is most commonly observed in
was permanent in 77% of dogs3 Another study indicated
small breeds (9.7). Herrera et al.29a reinforced this clinical
that dogs <12 kg were at increased risk of developing
picture by reporting on 16 Yorkshire Terriers with early
KCS4s. KCS may develop after only a few doses of
onset of a unilateral profound KCs. Biopsy of the lacrimal
sulfonamide; in one study most animals developed KCS
gand region was attempted on one dog without success,
within the frst week of therapy45, while in another study,
indicating either a lack of a lacrimal gland or a technical
KCS was found only after long-term therapy46. Animals
problem. None of the cases responded to cyclosporine
administered sulfonamide long term for conditions such as
cystitis and colitis should be monitored frequently for
King Charles Spaniel that was well known in the breeding
decreased tear production. No association was found
fraternity, but not the veterinary profession, of congenital
between the type of sulfonamide used, dosage, or duration
bilateral KCS associated with a curly coat. The signs began
 of therapy and the prognosis for recovery from KCs46.
as early as 10 days of age, often with corneal ulceration.
Beta-blockers such as timolol have been reported in
With growth the hair became coarse, pruritis developed,
and the skin became hyperkeratotic on the ventral
 produce KCS symptoms in a small group of patients47,
abdomen and on the paws and nail beds, with distortion of
but similar findings have not been reported in veterinary
the nails. On necropsy the orbital and third eyelid lacrimal
medicine. There have been anecdotal reports of oral
glands were normal on light microscopy.
etodolac {Eto Gesic) producing KCS in dogs but a critical
evaluation has not yet been reported.
Neurologic
KCS may be observed in animals with facial nerve palsy of
Viral infection
central origin or occurring in the very proximal nerve before
Distemper virus can cause a unilateral or bilateral acute
branching of the parasympathetic fibers in the petrous
lacrimal adenitis. Corneal ulceration with descemetocele
temporal bone30. Denervation of the parasympathetic fibers
formation frequently occurs. Sicca due to distemper usually
 in the lacrimal nerve may also occur from damage such as
resolves spontaneously in 6-8 weeks if the animal recovers
proptosis in the dog and cat. Ruskell31 reported that in
systemically Histopathologic lesions are marked glandular
primates, serous secretory cells in the lacrimal glands require
degenerative changes associated with a mononuclear and
neutrophilic cellular infiltration. Despite the marked
 autonomous. Trauma to cranial nerve Vll with neurologic
morphologic changes, glandular function usually recovers48
 sequelae is the usual cause of KCS in the horse32, 33.
Obstruction of the lacrimal ductules
Drug induced
Obstruction due to chemosis or conjunctival cicatrization
Atropine, phenazopyridine, anesthesia, aminosalicylic acid,
 can cause transient or permanent sicca. Decreased STT
 and sulfonamides can cause transient or permanent KCS in
values are frequent in cats with marked conjunctival
the dog.
.depending on how long the drug has been
swelling and is often transient. Vitamin A deficiency with
squamous metaplasia of the ducts is a cause of KCs in
species, and the lacrimal gland is unaffected in the cat,
turtles, but is thought to be an unlikely etiology of canine
224
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
KCS25, 49. Vitamin A deficiency in rats does not alter the
In breeds predisposed to cherry eye, 47% developed KCS
volume of tears, but does alter the composition of tears as
after glandular excision, compared to 17% with
a result of marked changes  in secretory granule
 glandular repositioning (see Chapter 8, p.183)51.
development50. Leishmania infection in the dog may
produce KCS in 2.8% of infected animals. Naranjo et
KCS associated with third eyelid gland removal is not
al.50a described the lacrimal gland pathology in dogs with
immediate but usually has a delayed onset of months
leishmaniasis as a granulomatous to pyogranulomatous
or years. This delay may explain the diversity of
inflammation localized around the distal lacrimal ducts.
opinion between ophthalmologists and general
The organisms were found in this region as well. The
practitioners regarding third eyelid gland removal.
 pathogenesis of KCS may be due to ductal blockage as well 
 as meibomian gland dysfunction, as the meibomian glands
were also commonly infiltrated.
Autoimmune-mediated adenitis
Evidence for an autoimmune cause was found in histology
Removal of the third eyelid gland
from a series of 25 third eyelid glands or main lacrimal
Controversy exits between ophthalmologists and general
glands dissected from dogs with chronic KCS undergoing
 practitioners as to whether it is contraindicated to remove
parotid duct transplant. The most common lesion was
a prolapsed third eyelid gland, or to remove the third
multifocal mononuclear cell infiltration with varying
eyelid gland for the treatment of epiphora. For KCS to
degrees of fibrosis (9.8, 9.9). In about 50% of the biopsies,
occur, the orbital lacrimal gland must be damaged,
as
the morphologic changes were mild to modest and were
removal of the third eyelid gland in itself does not lead to
not so disruptive as to explain the lack of glandular
sicca6-8. while the normal dog can tolerate removal of the
function, despite the chronicity and absolute deficiency of
third eyelid gland, it is prudent to avoid surgical excision
tears (9.10)52, 53. On serum electrophoresis, the beta-2
for benign conditions in those breeds predis posed to KCS.
fraction of gammaglobulin was elevated in 90% of KCS
cases. Antinuclear antibodies and rheumatoid factor titers 
were elevated in 42% and 50% respectively of KCS
cases29, 54. A probable immune-mediated KCS has also
9.8
been described in the horse, in which the histopathologic
response is predominantly eosinophilic adenitisss
Endocrine and other disease
Hyperadrenocorticoidism, hypothyroidism, diabetes
mellitus, 
demodectic mange, and systemic lupus
erythematosus have been empirically associated with
canine sicca. In one study, 29% of canine KCS cases had
 other diseases related to immunologic disorders and 32%
had chronic refractory skin diseases29. Peruccio58 reported
a 20% incidence of hypothyroidism in dogs with KCS as
evidenced by a low T3 and T4. Hypothyroidism and KCS
are probably associated through a multiglandular
autoimmune phenomenon, as hypothyroidism does not
cause KCS when experimentally induced59, 60. Dryness of
the nasal and oral mucous membranes 0ccurs in 10-30%
9.8 Extensive mononuclear adenitis with acinar atrophy and
 of KCS cases and should be evaluated before performing
interstitial fibrosis. (H&tE x1 50.)
66
9.10
9.9 Advanced fibrotic changes with acinar loss in a third eyelid 
 9.10 Modest mononuclear inflammation of the third eyelid gland 
gland from a dog with sicca. This gland may not improve with 
with intact acini in a dog with chronic KCs. This type of gland would 
therapy. (H&E x150.)
be expected to respond to therapy. (HetE x150.)
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
225
parotid duct transposition. Dogs with multiglandular
Causes in the cat
involvement and circulating autoantibodies have signs
The causes of KCS in the cat are not well documented, but
resembling Sjogren's syndrome in man61.
conjunctival chemosis may be the cause for obstruction of
the lacrimal ductules, as evidenced by rapid improvement 
Senile atrophy
in STT values with resolution of the chemosis (9.11).
 It is unknown whether age-related atrophy exists in the
Ocular herpesvirus infection is thought to be responsible
dog as a cause of KCs.
for KCs in the cat, although it is unknown whether the
virus affects the gland or simply produces chemosis that
Irradiation
may in turn cause obstruction. Neurologic disease, whether
Irra diation for cancer therapy near the eyes may result in
traumatic, infectious, or neoplastic, may be associated with
 glandular damage. Although irradiation is an uncommon
KCS in the cat. Trauma to the orbit such as proptosis
cause of KCs, in patients undergoing radiation therapy it 
 frequently results in KCS for about 8-12 weeks.
is quite common. Megavoltage therapy of nasal and
paranasal lesions resulted in ocular complications in
Clinical signs in the dog
75% of patients, of which 25% developed KCS62.
Severity of signs varies with the species. The dog
Supervoltage or cobalt-60 irradiation of the head region
typically has the most dramatic signs, while in the cat,
resulted in 84% of patients developing ocular lesions, of
signs are often minimal, even with an absolute lack of
which 35% were KCS63.
aqueous tears. The horse is intermediate in the severity
of signs.
Retrograde infection into the lacrimal glands
Chronic conjunctivitis with retrograde infection up the
Approximately 70% of KCS cases in the dog
lacrimal ductules has historically been blamed as the
eventually become bilateral. The eyes may be
cause of KCs. In most instances it was not known
sequentially or simultaneously involved.
whether the conjunctivitis was caused by, or produced,
the KCs. Retrograde infection is not thought to be a
significant cause of KCS in the dog, based on the absence
Pain 
 of infectious agents on histopathology of the glandss3.
Initially, corneal dryness is painful and may be associated
with blepharospasm. Chronic cases usually do not
Androgen deficiency
exhibit blepharospasm, but there seems to be individual
Androgens have a significant modifying effect on the
and breed differences as to the manifestation of pain. The
morphology and function of the lacrimal gland.
 cornea of brachycephalic breeds is less sensitive than that
Androgen therapy of mouse models of Sjogren's
Of other breeds67.
syndrome
{autoimmune adenitis)
 suppresses
the
lymphocytic inflammation in the lacrimal gland and
In the author's experience, very acute onset of KCS
improves the lacrimal function64. It has been theorized
produces more dramatic signs of pain and corneal
that an androgen deficiency causes an atrophy
of
ulceration, but also has a greater chance for 
lacrimal gland acini that triggers an autoimmune
 spontaneous remission over a 8-12-week period.
 response65. Sullivan et al.66 were unable to produce either
lacrimal gland inflammation or a decrease in function by
castrating mice, ra bbits, and guinea pigs, examining mice
Conjunctivitis
with dysfunctional androgen receptors, or examining
The bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva are usually intensely
 men treated with antiandrogen therapy.
hyperemic and thickened. Mucopurulent material is
usually abundant in the conjunctival folds (9.12).
9.11
9.12
9.11 Cat with marked conjunctival chemosis associated with ocular
9.12 Hyperermic, thickened conjunctiva with tenacious exudate in
herpesvirus infection that resulted in a lack of tears. The tear
folds characteristic of KCs.
secretion returned when the chemosis decreased.
226
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Ocular discharge
Mucin deficiencies
Mucin, produced by conjunctival goblet cells, is not
Mucin deficiencies in the tear film are characterized by
 dispersed because of the lack of an aqueous tear phase and,
recurrent corneal ulceration, chronic keratoconjunctivitis,
therefore, accumulates in varying degrees as tenacious
normal STT values, and a lack of ocular discharge. The tear
ropey' flaments. Mucin production is actually decreased in
break-up time is less than 5 seconds, and on conjunctival
KCS as the goblet cell density decreases. Cellular exudation
biopsy a deficiency of goblet cells with mononuclear
from secondary bacterial infection produces a mucopurulent
discharge (9.13, 9.14). In animals with severe tear
 deficiencies the condition has often been temporary and may
deficiencies, this exudate, on culture, often contains heavy
reflect the fact that many causes for conjunctivitis produce a
growths of coagulase-positive staphylococci, beta hemolytic
reduction in the tear break up time and decreases in
 onjunctival goblet cells appear to be due to nonspecific
Interestingly, bacterial growth postparotid duct transplant
 onjunctival inflammation.
was more consistent and heavier, and the flora more
 pathogenic than before surgery69.
Clinical signs in the cat
The signs of KCS in the cat are much more subtle than in
Keratitis
the dog. The diagnosis is based on multiple low STT
Multifocal punctate or central corneal ulceration (9.15) is
values and clinical signs. Cats may have very labile STT
common in the acute phase of KCs, and may progress to
values, and one low reading is not diagnostic for KCS.
descemetoceles. In chronic KCS, the cornea develops a dull
KCS in the cat is characterized more by a conjunctivitis
irregular appearance with neovascularization, fibrosis, and
 and less often with a keratitis. Discharge is typically
pigmentation.
The corneal
epithelium  becomes
scant and mucoid. The conjunctivitis is characterized by
hypertrophic. Pigment is deposited in patches or can
hyperemia, chemosis, and thickened folds. KCS may be
become so dense that the cornea loses all transparency and
responsible for chronic nonhealing ulcers that develop a
blindness ensues (9.16). In the cat, chronic ulceration may
corneal sequestrum in the ulcer bed.
lead to corneal sequestrum formation (9.17).
9.13
9.14
9.13 West Highland White Terrier with tenacious, copious exudate
 9.14 Extensive tenacious mucopurulent exudate with KCs.
from KCs. The third eyelid gland had previously been rermoved.
9.15
9.16
9.15 Small descemetocele (arrow, dark spot] in a Boston Terrier
9.16 Same eye as 9.14 after cleansing. Note the thickened conjunctiva
with acute KCs. Note the tenacious discharge on the cornea and
and extensive corneal pigmentation and gray scarring of the cornea.
the dull surface.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
227
Diagnosis
While variations occur in STT values of normal
 Historically, KCs has been among the most commonly
dogs, they are usually not of such magnitude that
misdiagnosed  ophthalmic I
diseases. Bacterial con-
they would result in an error of diagnosis. KCS is
junctivitis and recurrent idiopathic corneal ulcers are
diagnosed by correlating clinical signs with STT
 commonly mistaken diagnoses made in cases of KCS.
yalues and, as with any laboratory test, STT should
Misdiagnosed cases treated frequently with any topical
be repeated when results do not correlate with
ophthalmic
preparation usually S
show transient
clinical signs.
improvement,
falsely
reinforcing the clinician's
confidence in the original diagnosis. Virtually all topical
Mucin deficiency is diagnosed by the presence of a
medications wet the eye and add lubrication and,
decreased tear film break-up time (BUT) and on biopsy of
therefore, have some therapeutic benefit. A high degree
the medial ventral palpebral conjunctiva to examine for
of suspicion for KCs should be held for any recurrent
goblet cells. The BUT is evaluated by instilling fluorescein
conjunctivitis, keratitis, or corneal ulceration. Even
onto the cornea and examining it with a cobalt blue filter
29 Pinous 1is r 1p 1eaddr iou Aew eauoo aul yanou
while keeping the animal from blinking. Tear film break-
performed as a routine part of the anterior segment
up is recognized by focal dark spots in the fluorescein
ophthalmic examination. The diagnosis should be based
film. The BUT is recorded as the time from last blink to
on multiple functional abnormalities, as has been
the presence of the first dark spots. Values <10 seconds
 suggested in human medicine71.
are definitely low and when combined with a STT value
A diagnosis of KCS is made when a decrease in STT
 of >12 mm/min are suggestive of a mucin deficiency22, 23.
value occurs with mucopurulent keratoconjunctivitis,
 Because the BUT is not routinely performed in practice,
corneal inflammation, ulceration, or pigment deposition.
this is probably an underdiagnosed condition.
The STT value in a normal dog is usually 16-24
Rose bengal staining of the cornea and conjunctiva is
mm/min, whereas in KCS cases the STT value is typically
 suggestive but not specific for KCS. Rose bengal stains the
<10 mm/min, with the majority <5 mm/min on repeated
epithelial surface when it is not protected by mucin (1.17).
trials. In climates with dry humidities the accepta ble level
for STT readings before signs are observed is often
Therapy
increased due to tear loss from increased evaporation.
Medical therapy
Atropinization can cause transient dryness for 2-6 days
Medical therapy should be attempted for 2-3 months to.
postoperatively. Fear-induced sympathetic stimulation
evaluate whether the KCS is transient or permanent and
also leads to sporadic low values, particularly in cats.
whether the patient is responsive to medications.
 Inconsistencies have been demonstrated in STT values
due to different papers used by different manufacturers72
Artificial tears
and the design of the strip73. Day to day variations in STT
Artificial tears are used to replace the wetting action of the
values as large as 5-9 mm in 17% and 10-21 mm in 6%
natural tears. They should be used as often as possible.
of normal young Beagles have been demonstrated74.
Solutions are used q2-4h or, minimally, q6h. Methyl-
Berger and King7 were unable to demonstrate significant
cellulose ointments are used at night or when frequent
variations in day to day measurements, but did find
 administration is impossible. If the pet is kept indoors,
differences in week to week values and between dogs of
particularly as a lap' dog, frequent administration of eye
different sizes. Large breeds of dogs had greater Schirmer
drops may be acceptable. Usually, artificial tear therapy fails
I and II readings than small breeds of dogs. These
to control the progression of lesions due to the client's
differences in STT values must be considered when test
K1essaoau se uayo se saaa au iea1i 0i aoueniau 1o Aie
results do not correlate to clinical signs.
Artificial tear solutions vary in pH, osmolarity, and
individual tolerance to the agent. Methylcellulose and
polyvinyl alcohol increase surface tension and retard
ewaporation.  Polyvinyl  pyrrolidone (PVP)  increases the
 ability of the solution to adhere to the hydrophobic cornea,
and therefore gives a longer tear BUT. The tear film
9.17
unq u ieousadq q on punoy uaq seq Aurous
KCS patients compared to normal patients. This
hyperosmolarity has been suggested as a cause of the
pathology of the surface epithelium, and as being
responsible for the symptoms of discomfort76. As a result,
hypo-osmolar tear substitutes have been recommended.
Slow release hydroxypropylcellulose ophthalmic inserts can
be used once or twice daily, but they are difficult to keep in
the conjunctival cul-de-sac of the dog and cat due to the
 third eyelid. Viscoelastic agents such as hyaluronic acid and
they are quite expensive. Dilution of hyaluronic acid to
0.4% has been recommended as a means of making it more
economic and it is reported to remain effective with
 infrequent therapy77. The lack of preservatives in hyaluronic
 acid means the solution must be applied carefully to avoid
9.17 Cat with trauma-induced KCS that is forming a corneal
mntamination from the lids or eye. A commercial tear
sequestrum (arrow)] in an ulcer bed.
 preparation of 0.4 % hyaluronic acid is available.
228
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Topical dilute serum (20% serum, 80% saline) has
 reversed, patient comfort improved, and corneal scarring
been advocated in the treatment of Sjogren's syndrome in
and pigmentation improved2, despite a lack of increased
 humans78. This provides various substances that the tears
tear production. Long-term therapy of 8 weeks or more
udoni aauisod e aany ieul pue Aiddns Alewou pinom
resulted in regression of the initial improvement. The
effect on epithelial surfaces. In situ upregulation of mucin
concentration must be <0.01%; stronger concentrations
was also demonstrated and thus topical dilute serum may
 are very irritating to the eye83.
have special benefit for mucin related dry eyes.
Topical cyclosporine
Pilocarpine
 piepuis pios aui soq sey auuosoio peido
Pilocarpine may be used for its acetylcholine-like action in
treating KCs. The original protocol of a 1-2% solution
 stimulating residual lacrimal gland secretions. For an average
 q24-12h gave remarkable results and quickly became the
25 lb (11 kg) dog, 1-2 drops of 2% pilocarpine placed in
main form of therapy for sicca. The response has been a
food and given q12h is initially recommended79. If no im-
return of tear production {unlike with retinoic acid) and
 provement in the STT value occurs, the dose can be increased
decreased corneal scarring. The response is often very
by increments of one drop at a time. If hypersalivation,
rapid, but some cases require 4-6 weeks to respond. It was
vomiting, or diarrhea occur, the medication should be stopp-
initially recommended that both eyes be treated, even if the
ed until signs abate and then reinstituted at a lower dosage.
KCS was unilateral. Most clinicians now only treat the
Bradycardia is a possible side-effect and pilocarpine
 affected eye. In general, the therapy controls but does not
will aggravate a pre-existing heart block. Topical dilute
 cure the problem; when therapy is withdrawn the STT
(0.25-1.0%) solutions of pilocarpine  have been
value decreases again in many cases.
recommended in these cases, although they have recently
The main form of KCS that appears responsive to
ot sieadde auidieood osaaa aq oi iou umous uaag
cyclosporine is the immune-mediated (idiopathic) form.
be most useful in dogs with marginal tear secretion;
A statistically significant improvement in the glandular
responsiveness decreases with disease progression.
pathology after cyclosporine therapy has not been
 Pilocarpine use has been supplanted by the use of
demonstrated, although a trend in improvement in
cyclosporine, but on occasion a dog that did not respond
histopathology lesions and regeneration of glandular
to topical cyclosporine will respond to oral pilocarpine.
lobules has been identified84. In preliminary tests, KCS
associated with distemper, trauma, and advanced fibrosis
Antibiotics
has not responded to cyclosporine. KCS associated with
Conjunctival overgrowth with commensal bacteria can be
systemic sulfonamide therapy has not responded when
the loss of tears was profound3s, 86.
not usually a critical part of therapy, as the discharge
 Topical cyclosporine is thought to work in two distinct
dissipates rapidly when the sicca is corrected.
ways: a lacrimomimetic effect (stimulating tear secretions)
 and an anti-inflammatory effect on the gland7 and ocular
Glucocorticoids
 surface. The lacrimomimetic effect may occur by releasing
If no active corneal ulceration is present, corneal neovas-
 neurotransmitters such as substance P from sensory nerve
 cularization and/or conjunctivitis may be improved with
endings in the lacrimal gland88. The anti-inflammatory
short-term_ (7-14 days) use of topical glucocorticoids,
effect on the ocular surface may produce clinical improve-
 q6-8h. A fluorescein dye uptake test is mandatory prior to
ment without an increase in tear production. The quality of
glucocorticoid usage because many cases of KCs have
the tears produced on stimulation by cyclosporine is similar
recurrent ulceration. Based on the postulated autoimmune
to normal tears, without the decrease in secretory IgA that
adenitis, topical, subconjunctival, or systemic gluco-
Occurs with reflex tearing. Dogs with KCS that are treated
corticoids would appear to be indicated. The author's
with cyclosporine have a decrease in their tear IgG levels as
experience with injection of repositol glucocorticoids into
a result of the anti-inflammatory effect on the re-
the third eyelid was initially promising, but all dogs relapsed
eStablishment of the blood-tear barrier1s.
 and were later nonresponsive.
Cyclosporine also has a direct beneficial effect on the
conjunctival cells that have been altered by the induction
Mucolytic agents
of KCs. Moore et al.89 induced KCS in dogs with
 Mucolytic agents are used to break up tenacious discharge
bilateral excision of both lacrimal glands and found that
in cases of excessive mucous accumulation. The agent
topical 2% cyclosporine rescued and maintained the
commercially available is 10% and 20% acetylcysteine and
quantities of mucin in the goblet cells, despite an ongoing
it should be diluted to 5% to avoid epithelial toxicity. It can
deficiency in aqueous tears. This resulted in a lesser
be used as often as q2h. Acetylcysteine has a short shelf life
 degree of conjunctivitis and less mucus discharge.
once it is opened {4 da ys) and ideally requires refrigeration
In patients with a STT value of 2 mm, all dogs responded 
 once opened. Combination preparations of topical agents
 to cyclosporine therapy with an increased STT value of
can be used effectively if care is taken to use only those
5 mm, whereas if the STT value was 0 mm, 36% of the
ingredients necessary for each individual patient. The
 patients failed to respond. Subsequent studies have reported
author reserves acetylcysteine therapy for those patients
 a 75-82% success rate, and a 1% solution was found to be
with copious amounts of discharge, as it contributes
Ad re lo ouns % e se sa se
significantly to the cost of treating KCS and is also known
improved with cyclosporine therapy even in those patients
to be toxic to the corneal epithelium81.
that did not have improved tear production. Duration of
KCS, gender, and breed had no affect on the outcome. The 
Retinoic acid
 only correlation with outcome was the initial STT value.
Initial studies with topical retinoic acid indicated that the
The only adverse effect noted with the 1% and 2%
conjunctival and corneal keratinization of KCS can be
 solutions to date has been ocular irritation and blepharitis,
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
229
probably due to the vehicle or alcohol in the preparation.
0.03-0.02% solution or ointment for topical treatment of
After topical application of a 2% solution of cyclosporine,
KCS. Chambers et al.95 obtained a 96% success rate,
barely detectable blood levels are present and depression
although the severity of cases treated was not stipulated.
of a lymphocyte proliferation test occurs, which may
Berdoulay et al.95sa administered 0.02% aqueous solution of
indicate a depressed cell-mediated immunity92. The clinical
acrolimus to dogs naive to tear stimulation and 8s% of
implications of this are unknown.
 those with tear production less than 10 mm responded, with 
Cyclosporine is commercially
 available as a 0.2%
 a mean increase of 7.s mm/min. In dogs with a marginal
ophthalmic ointment and in most cases, but not all, this
tear production of 11-15 mm/min, 25% responded with an
has been as successful as the 1-2% solution93. Topical
increase of 2.7 mm/min. Dogs that had been on 1%
application of 0.2% cyclosporine ointment is not
cyclosporine responded to tacrolimus with a mean increase
detecta ble in the blood with current assay techniques.
2.8 mm/min and 27% responded with an increase greater
 Initial KCS therapy usually consists of topical artificial
 than 5 mm/min. Of the dogs that were unresponsive to
tears with topical cyclosporine; the tears are discontinued as
1-2% cyclosporine, 51% had an increase in tear production
improvement is noted. If the patient is very responsive,
of 5 mm/'min or better on tacrolimus. Systemic effects were
cyclosporine may be decreased in frequency or occasionally
not noted and only one dog was noted to rub his eyes after
discontinued after several weeks or months; however, in the
topical tacrolimus administration.
majority of cases therapy is usually assumed to be lifelong.
 In two clinical studies in KCS dogs comparing pimecro-
lmus 1% in corn oil with 0.2% cyclosporine ointment, dogs 
Topical or systemic androgens
 on pimecrolimus responded on average with 4 mm/min
While androgen receptors have been demonstrated in the
nuclei of epithelium of the lacrimal gland, conjunctiva,
was also effective in treating superficial keratitis.
cornea, meibomian glands, and lens, and in retinal
pigment epithelium
1{(RPE) in humans and laboratory
Surgical therapy
 animals,the significance of their role is largely unknown94.
If medical therapy is unsuccessful after 90 days, parotid duct
As previously discussed, androgen deficiency may produce
 ransposition (PDT) is recommended. With the advent of
acinar epithelial death that may trigger an immune-
lu anq paad Auanbau si Iad xdeau auosoo 
mediated inflammatory response6s. Topical androgen
still has its indications. The basal salivation rate and patency
therapy may become a form of therapy in the future, but
of the parotid duct should be evaluated prior to anesthesia.
it has not been reported in domestic animals.
Some dogs with xerophthalmia have concurrent xerostomia.
In general, PDT done by a practiced surgeon is 63-90%
Tacrofimus and pimecrofimus
 successful%-99. Parotid duct transposition can be performed
Tacrolimus suppresses T-cell activation and is 10-100x
in the cat, but it is technically more diffcult and the success
more potent on a weight basis than cyclosporine. As
tacrolimus utilizes different cell receptors, it has been
 There are basically two methods of performing PDT:
effective in some cases of KCs that were resistant to
1) the original open method of exposing the duct over the
cyclosporine. Tacrolimus has been compounded as a
side of the cheek and dissecting it free (9.18, 9.19)%6; and
9.18
9.19
-Facial vein
9.18, 9.19 Open parotid duct transplantation. Before making the cheek incision the duct is cannulated with 0- to 1-nylon suture and scissors 
used to dissect the papilla from the oral mucous membranes (A]. A lazy J incision is made in the cheek with the horizontal member over the 
parotid duct. The duct may be palpated if cannulated or assumed to be at the level of the lateral commissure of the mouth (A). The superficial
facial muscles are incised and the duct found on the surface of the masseter muscle between the dorsal and ventral buccal nerves. The duct is
elevated and kept under moderate tension to show the fascial attachments, which are cut (B).
The anterior dissection is more difficult because of the facial vein which crosses the duct; the duct burrows into the submucosa before forming
the papilla (C, D). Once rermoved, the papilla is trimmed and the duct is run between the fingers to unwind any twists that may have formed with 
the manipulations. 9.19 A tunnel is formed between the eye and the surgical site with a mosquito forceps (E). The papilla is pulled into the
conjunctival sac (F). The papilla is sutured to the conjunctiva with 3-5 sutures of 6-0 gut (G). The original incision is closed in two layers. The
230
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
2) the closed method of performing all of the dissection
· Dogs placed on systemic sulfonamides and etodolac
of the duct from the mouth, starting from the parotid
or topical mydriatics such as tropicamide or atropine
 papilla and working posteriorly10o. The closed method is
should have a STT performed at frequent intervals to
rapid and more convenient when performing bilateral
monitor tear production.
PDT, but contamination from the mouth is probably
 Autoimmune dacryoadenitis probably has a genetic
greater, the dissection is more blind and incomplete, and
basis and caution should be expressed with breeding
constricting forces on the tunnel from the conjunctiva are
 from affected animals. It is not unusual to observe 
not seen and relieved at the time of surgery. Variations of
several generations of KCS in purebreds.
the open method involve the placement of the skin
incision, degree of prior dissection of the papilla from the
ANOMALOUS NASOLACRIMAL DUCTS
mouth, type of cannula placed in the papilla, and the
Supernumerary nasolacrimal ducts that open on the face
placement of the papilla in the conjunctival cul-de-sac.
below the eye have been described in brown Swiss cattle.
Complications of PDT are: epiphora of varying
The extra ducts originate from the proximal one-third of
degrees, lack of function due to prior sialoadenitis,
the duct. The condition is usually bilateral and does not
twisting of the duct creating a stricture, cutting of the duct
produce significant signs. The openings on the face may
during surgery, tra nsection of the duct before the papilla,
be delineated by hairless, pigmented areas. The mode of
infection of the surgery site, dilated duct over the
inheritance has not been determined1 0s.
zygomatic arch, sialoadenitis, blockage by a sialolith, and
*mineral deposits on the cornea and lidio1, 102. The most
EPIPHORA/LACRIMATION
significant complication  is mineral deposition on the
Introduction/etiology
cornea and lids. Often this is mild, with modest ^dusting"
Epiphora refers to an abnormal flow of tears down the face.
of the cornea with a white deposit (9.20). In severe
Epiphora is often used to denote an obstructive cause of
a injued aiaa pue all-anbed si Aoedo aul saoueisu
overflow, whereas lacrimation is used to denote an increased
deposit may also accumulate on the lid margins and be felt
production of tears producing an overflow. Constant
as a very gritty material (9.21). Mild cases may respond to
epiphora causes the hair and skin around the medial canthus
topical 1% EDTA solution, but in severe cases the only
to be stained brown, and often causes a moist dermatitis of
therapy to relieve the discomfort is partial or complete
the medial canthus (9.23). Epiphora/ lacrimation can 0ccur
 parotid duct ligation. The author has been una ble to find
from an increased production of tears fusually ocular
a method for medically altering or controlling parotid
rritation), an obstruction to the outflow of tears, a wicking.
secretion, but feeding a prescription diet in one patient 
of tears onto the face from hair, or from anatomic defects of
reversed the mineral deposits. The author discovered this
the lower lid that permit * spilling' of the tears. Once reflex
effect accidentally, when a dog with a previous PDT and
tearing or hypersecretion has been ruled out, obstructions of
corneal mineralization developed chronic renal failure and
 the lacrimal drainage system should be considered in the 
differential diagnosis of epiphora.
protein, magnesium, phosphorus, and calcium. Anec-
  uaq oe aa s sud r 
Congenital atresia of the lacrimal punctum
some positive response, and powdered buttermilk on the
 a o d p  
 food has been recommended102a.
the American Cocker Spaniel, Bedlington Terrier, and
When obstruction to the duct occurs, it is usually over
 Golden Retriever The lower punctum is usually involved
the region of the zygomatic arch and may result from
and the condition is usually unilateral (9.24). Rarely, the
twisting, constriction of the tunnel created from the
entire canaliculus will be lacking106.
conjunctival cul-de-sac to the surgical site, or from
external trauma to the duct over the bone (9.22).
Congenital atresia of the nasal end of the
Obstruction at this site may be reversed by excision of
nasolacrimal duct
the constriction, freeing the duct as much as possible,
In the horse a syndrome of atresia of the distal end of the
and resuturing the duct to the conjunctiva103
nasolacrimal duct will result in epiphora and, eventually,
Epiphora is present to some extent in all successful
mucopurulent ocular discharge, when dacryocystitis
PDTs. Larger dogs with high salivary flow rates are most
develops from the stagnant fluid that promotes bacterial
likely to have a pronounced epiphora. Brachycephalics may
 overgrowth (9.25). The condition is unilateral and does not
have nose fold dermatitis from the chronic wetness, and
usually become manifest until 3-4 months after birthi07, 108.
others may develop a blepharitis on the lower lid. Partial
ligation of the parotid duct may be attempted to reduce
Malplacement of the ventral punctum
 salivary flow, either at the time of the primary procedure in
The ventral punctum may be improperly positioned in its
the larger breeds or as a secondary procedure.
relationship to the lacrimal lake, so that tears are not
readily drawn into the ventral canaliculi. Entropion of
Punctal occfusion
the medial lower lid that irritates the eye and causes
Occlusion of the lacrimal puncta will help preserve the
malposition of the lower punctum is a common cause of
ratural tears as well as preserve topical medications used in
epiphora. Congenital displacement of the lacrimal
lubricating the eye. Occlusion may be performed by ligation,
puncta can be observed particularly in the American
cautery, gelatin implants, or sialastic plugs104. The
Cocker Spa niel.
Micropuncta
Prevention
 The lacrimal puncta may be very small in individual dogs
· As discussed earlier, third eyelid gland removal is not
and, while patent, be unable to handle the outflow
recommended in breeds with a predisposition for KCS.
without epiphora.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
231
9.20
9.21
9.20 Fine white deposits on the cornea and third eyelid of a dog
 9.21 Severe mineral deposits on the lids of a dog after parotid
after parotid duct transposition. The lesion is gritty and irritating 
when in high concentration and is thought to represent salivary
The duct was ligated.
minerals deposits.
9.22
9.23
9.22 Burmese cat with a dilated parotid duct over the zygomatic
9.23 Severe bilateral epiphora in a Bichon Frise. Mild medial
 arch that developed several weeks after parotid duct transposition.
 entropion and conjunctivitis were present.
9.24
9.25
9.24 American Cocker Spaniel with atresia of the lower lacrimal
 9.25 Unilateral mucopurulent discharge from the eye of a young
 punctum that was ballooned up (arrow] from irrigating through the
horse. The condition was chronic. On examination of the nasolacrimal
upper punctum.
duct, the distal end was not perforated, resulting in a blind tube that 
would become infected.
232
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Taut lid-globe conformation
Shih Tzu and presumably other brachycephalics) had no
In toy breeds, the lids are so taut against the globe that it
correlation with lacrimation and Schirmer II tests.
is probable that the lacrimal lake is small and access to the
puncta is restricted {see Chapter 7, p.145, 7.26). This may
Light and wind
also play a role in the brachycephalic cat with epiphora.
Many individual dogs have epiphora outside, but not
while indoors. Obviously, environmental irritants will
Acquired symblepharon
aggravate an individual animal's eyes, but dogs with this
Acquired adhesions of the conjunctiva in the region of
type of reflex lacrimation will have marked epiphora
the puncta may obstruct the outflow of tears. This is a
outside, irrespective of the weather or season.
condition seen in young kittens with severe herpesvirus
 Lacrimation quickly subsides when sheltered. The Chow
conjunctivitis and following trauma to this area (see
asodsipaid aue yad reus pue mou
Chapter 8, p.183, 8.13.)
Clinical signs
Injuries to the lower lid
Epiphora is usually visible at the medial canthus, but
Lacerations that either disrupt the continuity of the lid
with lid defects or wicking of facial hairs, wetting and
margin or disrupt the lower punctum or canaliculus may
staining may occur anywhere along the length of the lid.
result in epiphora.
The condition is often chronic and, when associated with
congenital defects such as atresia of the puncta, it will
icking of tears
date back to when the animal was young. Additionally,
Wicking of tears onto the face may occur from long
in animals with congenital defects the lower puncta
facial hairs. These may be present at the medial or lateral
cannot be visualized.
canthus or on the lacrimal caruncle. This is common in
Additional signs associated with the cause of epiphora
long-haired dogs such as the Poodle (9.26).
may
be present, such as conformational defects,
Hypersecretion of the glands
Hypersecretion of tears may be due to irritation from
9.26
glandular inflammation. Enlargement of the third eyelid
gland (9.27), mononuclear inflammatory infiltration,
squamous metaplasia of ducts, and cystic ducts have
been observed in histopathology of the glands taken from
with swelling of the gland, decreasing the lacrimal lake,
or increased production of tears due to irritation.
However, it has been reported that in dogs with epiphora
the tear production was only 10% above normali,112
Histologic hyperplasia and clinical enlargement of the
nictitans gland was observed in a series of dogs with
idiopathic epiphoral13, The cause and effect was not
clear, but removal of the gland improved epiphora,
possibly by enlarging the lacrimal lake or decreasing the
tear production. The postsurgical STT value was not
significantly decreased from the presurgical STT value,
indicating the improvement may not have been due to
 9.26 Poodle with hairs on the medial canthus that wicked tears onto 
reduced tear production.
the face.
Reflex lacrimation
9.27
Ocular and periocufar discomfort or pain
Irritation can be from mechanical etiologies such as
distichia, entropion, ectopic cilia, or foreign bodies. Atopic
 conjunctivitis often results in chronic epiphora, and brown 
staining may be present not only on the face, but on the feet
and flanks from licking. Pain associated with corneal
ulceration is an obvious cause of reflex lacrimation, but it
will also be noted with glaucoma and uveitis. Reflex
such as blepharospasm. Saito and Kotanil14 found that
97% of small breeds of dogs with epiphora had an
epitheliopathy, defined as epithelial staining with a mixture
of rose bengal and fluorescein. Schirmer I values were
normal but the Schirmer II values were low, indicating an
increase in reflex lacrimation. The authors postulated that
a decrease in basal secretion was the cause of the
epitheliopathy and that an increase in detached epithelial
 9.27 Adenitis of the third eyelid gland associated with epiphora.
cells might interfere with outflow and also increase reflex
The gland is swollen and the overlying conjunctiva is hyperemic 
lacrimation. In animals with epitheliopathy, breed (such as
with minimal follicular involvement.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
233
 inflammation, or pain. Pain or blepharospasm of varying
fluorescein on the nares is not conclusive, nor does a
degrees may be associated with epiphora from reflex
positive test rule out obstruction of a single punctum.
lacrimation, and is not typical for epiphora from obstruction.
Nasolacrimal irrigation is necessary in most cases of
epiphora to demonstrate the patency of both puncta, the
Diagnosis
canaliculi, and the nasolacrimal duct. This is a crude test
In order to diagnose the cause of epiphora, the history
and does not evaluate the possibility of a functional
should be evaluated and a careful examination
outflow deficiency that may be present despite an
performed. It is easy to fall into the trap of trying to
anatomically patent outflow system. Atresia is diagnosed
associate certain etiologies with breed, without doing a
by cannulation and infusion of fluid in one punctum,
thorough examination. Often, multiple etiologies are
with the absence of flow out of the opposite punctum. A
present in the same animal; the examination should not
tenting of the conjunctiva at the site of the opposite
be curtailed when one possible etiology, such as distichia
punctum may be observed. Obstructions of the outflow
or conjunctivitis, is found.
system are usually further examined by contrast
On physical examination the integrity of the lid
radiography (9.6) (see Dacryocystitis, p.234).
margins, conformational 1
lid defects, causes 
of
mechanical irritation, excess facial and caruncle hairs,
Nasolacrimal irrigation is a very minor procedure
ocular inflammation or discomfort, and whether the
that can be performed in the horse and dog under
 puncta are grossly visible should be evaluated. STTs may
topical anesthesia. The same principles apply to
indicate an overproduction or an obstruction, and
cannulations as to venepuncture:
fluorescein staining of the cornea may delineate a minute
 Direct the needle parall to the course of the duct.
defect of the epithelium that has stimulated lacrimation.
?
Seat the needle deeply in the duct.
In addition, yisualization of fluorescein at the nostrils is
Keep the hand holding the syringe in contact
indicative of a patent nasolacrimal duct. A lack of
with the animal's head to minimize the effects of
head movements.
9.28
Therapy
Treatment is specific for the etiology, if it can be found.
Medical therapy
Medical therapy for epiphora is either directed at
inflammation and pain, if present, or reducing tear staining.
Therapy aimed at reducing tear staining may involve just
masking the tearing with powders or trying to affect the
stain itself. Medical therapy directed at staining has often
been empirical, poorly documented, and controversial.
Tetracycline
Tetracycline (50 mg/day/dog) will decrease the staining
and wetness of the face in many “idiopathic' cases of
epiphora. The mechanism of action is not known, but 
since it does not decrease tear production in normal dogs,
9.28 Same patient as 9.23. The dog has been on metronidazole for
it is thought to interfere with the brown staining of the
2 weeks. Both the hair staining and weting have improved significantly.
facelis. In the author's experience, it not only reduces the
staining on the face, but reduces the wetness as well.
9.29
Metronidazole
Metronidazole (100 mg per average dog for 10 days) has
 also been recommended for treating the tear staining of
epiphoral16. As with tetracycline, metronidazole does
not decrease tear production or have a lacrimal toxic
effect when given in high doses for short periods of
timel17, and it decreases the wetness on the face (9.28).
After an initial trial period of 2-4 weeks, medical
needed to control the sta ining.
Surgical thera py
Opening an atretic lacrimal punctum can usually be
performed using topical anesthesia and restraint in
lateral recumbency. The procedure consists of nicking or
 incising with a #11 blade the area where the punctum is
9.29 Opening an atretic lower lacrimal puncta in a Cocker Spaniel
expected to be or where the conjunctiva tents up when
with a #11 blade using topical anesthesia.
flushing (9.29). This is followed by insertion of a
punctum dilator to distend the proximal end. Topical
234
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASe In VeTeRINARY MeDICInE
9.30A
9.30B
9.30A, B Dacryocystorhinogram of a Bichon Frise with a cystic lesion
in the nasolacrimal duct resulting in persistent purulent exudate in the
conjunctival cul-de-sac. The condition was cured with a rhinotomy and
removal of the wall of the sac. Aberrant lacrimal gland was associated 
with the wall of the cyst and the nasolacrimal duct was patent.
Contrast material was injected into the left side and cysts were
visualized on both sides (arrows].
glucocorticoids are applied for several days to prevent
DACRYOCYSTITIS
healing. If the punctum seals, the procedure can be
Introductionfetiology
repeated or a nasolacrimal tube implanted for 2-3 weeks.
Dacryocystitis is an inflammation of the lacrimal sac and
Mechanical
problems
such
as
entropion,
nasolacrimal duct. Dacryocystitis usually produces an
distichiasis, or excess hairs on the lacrimal caruncle are
 obstruction or is caused by an obstruction to the lacrimal
usually surgically corrected.
Multiple potential
outflow system. It is a relatively uncommon condition,
etiologies fi.e.
distichia,
conjunctivitis, medial
but must be considered when persistent signs of
entropion, wicking hairs) are often present in the same
conjunctival infection are present. Causes of dacrocystitis
include:
responsibility for the signs. Either the most obvious
● Plant awns: foreign bodies are the most common
cause is treated first, the conditions amenable to
 cause in arid climates during the dry seasons120.
medical therapy are treated before surgery, or a
+
 Facial bone fracture with occlusion of the
simultaneous multipronged therapy is given.
nasolacrimal duct.
 In dogs with no obvious cause for the epiphora, such
+
 Neoplasm of the nose, sinus, or bone that occludes
as in many Miniature Poodles, removal of the third
the nasolacrimal duct.
eyelid gland has been advocatedl09. This is an effective
 Aneurysmal dilation of the duct that allows fluid to
therapy, but the risk of contributing to KCS later in the
pool (9.30)121.
animal's life is one that should be carefully considered.
 Periodontal disease of the upper premolars or canine 
Consequently, the author does not recommend excision
teeth.
of the third eyelid gland for treating epiphora.
Conjunctivorhinostomy  has  l
been advocated for
Clinical signs
 surgical relief of epiphora. This consists of creating a
Epiphora is present, usually chronic and unilateral in
permanent
fistula
between 
the
medial-ventral
nature. Epiphora often changes to a chronic, unilateral,
conjunctival cul-de-sac and the nasal cavity or maxillary
mucopurulent 
conjunctival
discharge
(9.31). The
the cat as in the dog. The cost and risk preclude this as a
 STT is normal and the discharge responds transiently to
form of treatment for
 epiphora,
except for the
topical antibiotics.  Rarely, an acute abscessation will
exceptional case or demanding owner.
 produce swelling below the medial canthus (9.32).
Diagnosis
Irrigation of the nasolacrimal duct through one of the
lacrimal puncta will demonstrate an obstruction; reflux
 of a mucoid to mucopurulent material from the opposite
punctum indicates a dacrocystitis (9.33).
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
235
9.31
9.32
 9.31 Marked purulent exudate caked on the lid margins and in the
 9.32 Acute abscessation (arrow) associated with dacryocystitis
conjunctival cul-de-sac associated with obstruction of the
in a Chinchilla.
nasolacrimal duct of a dog. The condition was unilateral.
9.33
9.34
9.33 Reflux of purulent material out of the lower lacrimal punctum
9.34 Polyethylene tube sutured in place for the treatment of
while flushing through the upper punctum of a dog. This indicates
dacryocystitis (arrow)] in a dog. The tube will be left in place for
da cryocystitis.
>3 weeks.
The duct may have a temporary obstruction that can
While improvement may occur, it is usually transient and
usually be relieved with ‘forced irrigation. If the
repeat injections are necessary.
obstruction is firm, the forced irrigation is painful and
Most cases of dacryocystitis with obstruction will
requires heavy sedation or general anesthesia. Irrigation
 relapse; a polyethylene or sialastic tube should be placed
may expel the obstruction from the opposite punctum.
 in the nasolacrimal duct to maintain patency (9.34)12s.
Dacryocystorhinography:
is indicated in most
Antibiotic solutions based on culture and sensitivity
instances
where
the
cause
is
not
 apparent.
results are applied topically and the tube left in place for
 Dacryocystorhinography is. performed by injecting a
3-4 weeks. Many dogs do not tolerate the tube well and
radiopaque contrast material through a fine polyethylene
restraining devices must be used to minimize premature
or lacrimal catheter placed in one of the canaliculi, while
removal.
 Occluding the opposite punctum to force the fluid nasally
 If grass awns are likely to be the cause, due to the
(9.6)122-124
 season and incidence in the practice area, surgical
Therapy
In animals that cannot be successfully catheterized, a
Removing the cause of the obstruction is the basis of
 conjunctivorhinostomy may be indicated.
successful therapy but is not always possible. If the
Cystic dilation of the duct does not usually produce
 obstruction is removed by modest flushing pressure,
obstruction, but creates an area that has stagnant tears
topical antibiotic/glucocorticoid solutions, draining into
 and secondary infection. Treatment is by performing a
the nasolacrimal ducts, may be used. Injection of
rhinotomy and either removing the cyst or opening it
antibiotics directly into the duct may also be performed.
into the nose so that it can drain121.
236
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
LACRIMAL CYST
Diagnosis
Introduction/etiology
Dacryops is usually suggested by the clinical signs and
Lacrimal cysts (dacryops) are rare cystic dilations of the
location, but is confirmed by surgical excision and
ducts or gland. They may be associated with the orbital
biopsy. In the author's experience, nasolacrimal duct
lacrimal gland or the third eyelid gland127-30 A condition
flushing is usually normal, without enlargement of the
termed canaliculops, a cystic dilation of the lacrimal
cyst, and injection of radiopaque dye into the cyst or the
canaliculus, may manifest under the medial canthus131.
nasolacrimal duct has not demonstrated a commu-
The condition has only been reported in the dog.
nication between the structures.
The cause of dacryops or canaliculops is usually
unknown, but dilation of the duct system weakened by
Therapy
inflammation is suspected in humans132. Three of six
Careful dissection and excision of the cyst is curative.
reported cases have been in young Basset Hounds, which
Methylene blue injected into the cyst may aid dissection.
 suggests a genetic developmental defect may occur in the
 Bony projections may have to be cut down with a rongeur.
duct system.
ECTOPIC LACRIMAL GLAND(S)
Clinical signs
 Subconjunctival, corneal, and intraocular masses have
Most lesions are recognized as cystic by their fluctuant
been diagnosed on biopsy as ectopic lacrimal gland in the 
nature and this can be easily confirmed by centesis. The
dog, cow, and deer. Typically, the condition manifests
proximity of the cyst to one of the lacrimal glands is
itself in the young animal, but the signs may not be
usually suggestive of the origin, but this may not always
be obvious. Lesions may exhibit acute pain and
Excision is successful when tissue is found on the ocular
expansion due to hemorrhage within the cyst and
surface. In deer, microphthalmos masks the ectopic gland
secondary bony malformations may occur around the
and is the predominant lesion.
cyst (9.35, 9.36).
PRIMARY LACRIMAL GLAND TUMOR
Primary tumors arising from the lacrimal glands include
9.35
 adenoma (2.37)136 and adenocarcinoma; they are rela-
10f papiens Aqeqoid si sisousoud aui inq kdeuau uon
both diseases. (See Neoplasia of the third eyelid, p.212.)
 A pseudotumor of granulation tissue protruding from
the lower lacrimal punctum that took five attempts at
excision has been reported141.
9.35 Dacryops in a young Basset Hound that had produced secondary
bony changes in the facial bone ventral to the cyst. No communication
with the nasolacrimal duct or sac could be established.
9.36
9.37
9.36 Dacryops or lacrimal
cyst in a young Basset
Hound. The condition wa5
chronic and the cyst had 
blood tinged fluid. On
exploration, the cyst wa5
independent of the lacrimal 
sac but communicated with 
the gland of the third eyelid.
9.37 A cystadenoma of the
lacrimal gland in a dog. The
condition was treated with
surgical excision and
teletherapy.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
237
REFERENCES
1 Prince J, Diesem C, Eglitis L, Ruskell G
13 Prydal J, Artal P, Woon H, Campbell F
26 Johnson B, Whiteley H, McLaughlin S
(eds) (1960) The orbit and adnexa. In:
(1992) Study of human precorneal tear
{1990) Effects of inflammation and
Anatony and Histotogy of the Eye and
flm thickness and structure using laser
aqueous tear film deficiency on
Orbit in Domestic Animats. Charles C.
interferometry Investigative
conjunctival morphology and ocular
Thomas, Springfield, pp. 3-12.
Ophthatmology and Vistat Science
mucus composition in cats. Armerican
2 Sakai T, Yohro T {1981) A histological
33:2006-2011
Journat of Veterinary Research
study of the Harderian gland of
14 Ehlers N (1965) The precorneal film:
51:820-824.
Mongolian gerbils, Meriones rmeridianus.
biomicroscopical, histological, and 
27 Kern T, Erb H, Schaedler J, Dougherty EP
Anatomy Record 200:259-270.
chemical investigations. Acta
{1988) Scanning electron microscopy of
3 Martin C, Munnell J, Kaswan R {1988)
Ophthatmotogica 81:4-134.
experimental keratitis sicca in dogs:
The normal ultrastructure and
15 Fullard R, Kaswan R {1994)
cornea and bulbar conjunctiva. Veterinary
histochemical characteristics of canine
Characterization of tears induced by
Pathology 25:468-474.
lacrimal glands. American Journat of
cyclosporine. European Society of
 28 Barnett K {1988) Keratoconjunctivitis
Veterimary Research 49:1566-1572.
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy and European
sicca: sex incidence. Journat of Smatfl
4 Orlandini G, Bacchi A {1977) Sulla
College of Veterinary Ophthatmatogists,
Anmat Practice 29:531-534.
ultrastruttura della ghiandola lacrimale
Dresden.
29 Kaswan R, Martin C, Dawe D (1985)
negli equidi. Archives Itatian Anatomry
 16 Powell C (1988) Attonomic innervation
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca: immunological
and Embryotogy 82:1-13.
qf the canine lacrimat giands. Masters
evaluation of 62 canine cases. American 
5 Sinha R, Calhoun L (1966) A gross,
Thesis, University of Georgia, pp. 1-77.
Journat of Veterinary Research
histologic, and histochemical study of the
 17 Bromberg B {1981) Autonomic control of
46:376-383.
 lacrirmal apparatus of sheep and goats.
lacrimal protein secretion. Investigative
 30 Kern T, Erb H {1987) Facial neuropathy
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Ophthatmology and Vistat Science
in dogs and cats: 95 cases (1975-1985).
27:1633-1640.
20:110-116.
Journat of the American Veterinary
6 Gelatt KN, Peiffer Jr RL, Erickson JL,
18 Powell C, Martin C {1989) Distribution
Medicat Association 191:1604-1609.
Gum GG (1975) Evaluation of tear
of cholinergic and adrenergic nerve fibers
 31 Ruskell G {1969) Changes in nerve
formation in the dog, using a
 in the lacrimal glands of dogs. American 
terminals and acini of the lacrimal gland
modification of the Schirmer tear test.
 Journat of Veterinary Research
and changes in secretion induced by
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
50:2084-2088.
autonomic denervation. Zellforsch
Medical Association 166:368-370.
19 Franklin R, Bang B {1980) Mucus-
Mikrosk Anatory 94:261-281.
7 Helper L, Magrane W, Koehm J.
stimulating factor in tears. Investigatite
32 Joyce J, Bratton G (1973)
Johnson R {1974) Surgical induction of
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca secondary to
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in the dog.
19:430-432.
fracture of the mandible. Veterinary
Journal of the American Veterinary
20 Latimer C, Wyman M, Diesem C, Burt J
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
Medicat Association 165:172-174.
{1984) Radiographic and gross anatomy
68:619-620.
8 McLaughlin S, Brightman A, Helper L,
of the nasolacrimal duct of the horse.
33 Spurlock S, Spurlock G, Wise M {1989)
Primm N, Brown M, Greely S {1988)
American Joturnat of Veterinary Research
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca associated with
 Effect of removal of the lacrimal and
45:451-548.
fracture of the stylohyoid bone in a horse.
third eyelid glands on Schirmer tear tests
21 Burling K, Murphy C, Da Silva Curiel J,
Journat of the American Veterinary
in the cat. Journat of the American
Bellhorn R {1991) Anatomy of the rabbit
Medical Association 194:258-259.
Veterinary Medicat Association
nasolacrimal duct and its clinical
 34 Bryan G, Slatter D (1973)
193:820-822.
implications. Progress in Veterinary and
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca induced by
9 Helper L {1970) The effect of lacrimal
Comparative Ophthatmotogy 1:33-40.
phenazopyridine in dogs. Archives of
gland removal on the conjunctiva and
22 Moore C, Collier L {1990) Ocular surface
Ophthatmology 90:310-311.
cornea of the dog. Journat of the
disease associated with loss of
35 Slatter D, Davis W {1974) Toxicity of 
American Veterimary Medicat Association
conjunctival goblet cells in dogs. Journat
 phenazopyridine. Archives of
157:72-75.
qf the Americam Animat Hospitat
Ophthatmotogy 91:484-486.
10 Cornell-Bell A, Sullivan D, Allansmith M
Association 26:458-465.
36 Slatter D, Blogg J (1978)
{1985) Gender-related differences in the
23 Cullen CL, Njaa BL, Grahn BH (1999)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs
morphology of the lacrimal gland.
Ucerative keratitis associated with
associated with sulphonamide
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
qualitative tear film abnormalities in cats.
administration. Austratian Veterinary
Science 26:1170-1175.
Veterinary Ophthatmology 2:197-204.
Journat 54:444-446.
11 Kaswan R, Salisbury M, Lothrop C
24 Helper L {1976) Keratoconjunctivitis
 37 Vestre W, Brightman A, Helper L, Lowery
{1991) Interaction of age and gender on
sicca in dogs. American Acaderry of
J {1979) Decreased tear production
occurrence of canine keratoconjuncti vitis
 Ophthatmology Otolaryngology
associated with general anesthesia in the
sicca. Progress in Veterinary
81:624-628.
dog. Journat of the American Veterinary
Ophthatmology and Comparative
25 Aguirre G, Rubin L, Harvey C (1971)
Medicat Association 174:1006.
Ophthatmotogy 1:93-97.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs. Journat 38 Morgan R, Bachrach A (1982)
12 Holly F, Lemp M (1977) Tear physiology
qf the American Veterinary Medicat
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca associated with
and dry eyes. Survey of Ophthatmotogy
Association 158:1566-1578.
sulfonamide therapy in dogs. Jotrnat of
22:69-87.
the American Veterinary Medicat
Association 180:432-434.
238
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
39 Arnett B, Brightman A, Musselman E
51 Morgan R, Duddy J, McClurg K (1993)
63 Jamieson V, Davidson M, Nasisse M,
{1984) Effect of atropine sulfate on tear
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid in
English R (1991) Ocular complications
 production in the cat when used with
dbgs: a retrospective study of 89 cases
following cobalt-60 radiotherapy of
ketamine hydrochloride and
{1980-1990). Journat of the American
 neoplasms in the canine head region.
acetylpromazine maleate. Journat of the
Animat Hospitat Association 29:56-60.
Journat of the American Animat Hospital
American Veterinary Medicat Association
 52 Moulimard J (1982) Contribution d
Association 27:51-55.
185:214-215.
tetude etiologique de fa kerato
64 Sullivan DA, Wickham LA, Rocha EM,
40 Collins K, Moore C, Hagee J (1986)
conjonctivite seche chez le chien. These
Kelleher RS, Silveir LA, Toda I {1998)
Sulfonamide-associated
 pour le Doctorat Veterinaire, Ecole
Influence of gender, sex steroid hormones,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and corneal
Nationale Veterinaire D'Alfort.
and the hypothalmic-pituitary axis on the
ulceration in a dysuric dog. Journat of the
 53 Kaswan R, Martin C, Chapman W
structure and function of the lacrimal
American Veterinary Medicat Association
{1984) Keratoconjunctivitis sicca:
gland. Advances in Experimentat
189:924-926.
histopathologic study of nictitating
Medicime and Biology 438:11-42.
41 Barnett K, Hoseph E {1987)
 membrane and lacrimal glands from 28
65 Azzarolo AM, Mircheff AK, Kaswan RL,
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in the dog
canine cases. American Journat of
et αt. (1997) Androgen support of
following 5-aminosalicyclic acid
Veterinary Research 45:112-118.
lacrimal gland function. Endocrine
 administration. Human Toxicology
54 Kaswan R, Martin C, Dawe D (1983)
6:39-45.
6:377-383.
Rheumatoid factor determination in 50
 66 Sullivan DA, Krenzer KL, Sullivan BD,
42 Slatter D, Piek J, Costa N {1982) Lack of
dbgs with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Tolls DB, Toda 1, Dana MR {1999) Does
lacrimotoxicity to phenazopyridine in
Journat of the American Veterinary
androgen insufficiency cause lacrimal
rabbits. Journat of Veterinary
Medicat Association 183:1073-1075.
gand inflammation and aqueous tear
Pharmacoiogy and Therapeutics
55 Wolf E, Merideth R {1981) Parotid duct
deficiency? Investigative Ophthatmotogy
5:209-212.
transposition in the horse. Journat of
and Vistuat Science 40:1261-1265.
43 Hollingsworth SR, Canton DD,
Equine Veterinary Science 1:143-145.
67 Barrett P, Scagliotti R, Merideth R,
Buyukmihci NC, Farver TB {1992) Effect
 56 Spiess B, Wilcock B, Physick-Sheard P
Jackson P, Alarcon F {1991) Absolute
 of topically administered atropine on tear
{1989) Eosinophilic granulomatous
corneal sensitivity and corneal trigeminal 
production in dogs. Joturnat of the
dacryoadenitis causing bilateral
nerve anatomy in normal dogs. Progress
American Veterinary Medicat Association
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a horse.
in Veterinary and Comparative
200:1481-1484.
Equine Veterinary Journat 21:226-228.
Ophthatmotogy 1:245-254.
44 Dodam JR, Branson K, Martin DD
57 Collins K, Johnson P, Moore C, Collier L,
 68 Salisbury M-A, Kaswan RL, Brown J
{1998) Effects of intramuscular sedative
Shaw M (1994) Immune-mediated
 {1995) Microorganisms isolated from the
 and opioid combinations on tear
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a horse.
corneal surface before and during topical
production in dogs. Veterinary
Veterinary and Comparative
cyclosporine treatment in dogs with
Ophthatmotogy 1:57-59.
Ophthatmotogy 4:61-65.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Armerican
45 Berger S, Scagliotti R (1995) A
 58 Peruccio C {1982) Incidence of
Journat of Veterinary Research
quantitative study of the effects of
hypothyroidism in dogs affected by
56(7):880-884.
tribrissen on canine tear production.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Proceedings of
 69 Petersen-Jones S {1997) Quantification of
Journat of the American Animat Hospitat
the American Society of Veterinary
conjunctival sac bacteria in normal dogs
Association 31:236-241.
Ophthatmology and Internationat Society
and those suffering from
46 Diehl K, Roberts S (1991)
of Veterinary Ophthatmology, Las Vegas,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Veterinary
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs
p. 47.
Comparative Ophthatmotogy 7:29-35.
 associated with sulfonamide therapy: 16
 59 Miller P, Panciera D {1994) Effects of
70 Ralph R (1975) Conjunctival goblet cell
cases {1980-1990). Progress in Veterinary
experimentally induced hypothyroidism
density in normal subjects and in dry eye
and Comparative Ophthatmology
on the eye and ocular adnexa of dogs.
syndromes. Investigative Ophthatmology
1:276-282.
Americam Joturnat of Veterinary Research
and Vistat Science 14:299-302.
47 Van Buskirk EM (1980) Adverse
55:692-697.
71 Taylor H, Louis W (1980) Significance of
reactions from timolol maleate therapy.
 60 Dodds W (1997) Autoimmune thyroiditis 
tear function test abnormalities. Annais of
Ophthatmnoliogy 87:447-450.
and polyglandular autoimmunity of
Ophthatmology 12:531-535.
 48 Martin C, Kaswan R {1985) Distemper-
purebred dogs. Canine Practice 22:18-48.
 72 Hawkins EC, Murphy CJ (1986)
 associated keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
 61 Quimby F, Schwartz R, Poskitt T, Lewis
Inconsistencies in the absorptive
Journat of the American Animat Hospitat
R {1979) A disorder of dogs resembling
capacities of Schirmer tear test strips.
Association 21:355-359.
Sjogren's syndrome. Clinicat Irmunotogy
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
49 Elkan E, Zwart P {1967) The ocular
and Inmtmopathotogy 12:471-476.
Medicat Association 188:511-513.
disease of young terrapins caused by
62 Roberts S, Lavach J, Severin G, Withrow
73 van der Woerdt A, Adamcak A (2000)
 vitamin-A deficiency. Veterinary
S, Gillette E (1987) Ophthalmic
Comparison of absorptive capacities of
Pathology 4:112-118.
complications following megavoltage
original and modified Schirmer tear test
50 Hayashi K, Reddy C, Hanninen L, Wolf
irradiation of the nasal and paranasal
strips in dogs. Joturnat of the American
G, Kenyon K (1990) Pathologic changes
cavities in dogs. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medicat Association
 in the exorbital lacrimal gland of the
Veterinary Medicat Association
216:1576-1577.
vitamin A-deficient rat. Investigative
190:43-47.
74 Hakanson N, Arnesson K (1997)
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Temporal variation in tear production in
31:187-196.
normal Beagle dogs as determined by
Schirmer tear test. Veterinary
Comparative Ophthatmology 7:196-203.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
239
75 Berger SL, King V {1998) The fluctuation 
88 Yoshida A, Fujihara T, Nakata K {1999)
99 Schmidt G, Magrane W, Helper L {1970)
of tear production in the dog. Journat of
Cyclosporin A increases tear fluid 
 Parotid duct transposition: a follow-up
the American Animat Hospitat
secretion via release of sensory
study of 60 eyes. Journat of the American
Association 34:79-83.
 neurotransmitters and muscarinic 
Animat Hospitat Association 6:235-241.
76 Gilbard J, Farris L, Santamaria J (1978)
pathway in mice. Experimentat Eye
100 Glen J, Lawson D {1971) A modified 
Osmolarity of tear microvolumes in
Research 68:541-546.
technique of parotid duct transposition
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Archives of
 89 Moore CE, McHugh JB, Thorne JG,
for the treatment of keratoconjunctivitis
Ophthatmotogy 96:677-681.
Phillips TE (2001) Effect of cyclosporine
sicca in a dog. Veterinary Research
77 Schadler H (1987) An alternative
on conjunctival mucin in a canine
88:210-213.
treatment for keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca model.
101 Harvey C, Koch S (1971) Surgical
Veterinary Medicine/Small Animat
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Vistuat
 complications of parotid duct
Clinician 82:1145-1148.
Science 42:653-659.
tansposition in the dog. Journal of the
78 Tsubota K, Goto E, Fujita H, et αf. {1999)
 90 Morgan R, Abrams K {1991) Topical
American Animat Hospitat Association
 Treatment of dry eye by autologous
administration of cyclosporine for
7:122-126.
serum application in Sjogren's syndrome.
treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
102 Stanley R {1997) Failure of parotid duct
British Journat of Ophthatmotogy
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
tansposition due to sialolith formation.
83:390-395.
Medical Association 199:1043-1046.
Veterinary and Conparative
79 Rubin L, Aguirre G {1967) Clinical use of 
 91 Olivero D, Davidson M, English R,
Ophthatmology 7:126-127.
 pilocarpine for keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Nasisse M, Jamieson V, Gerig T {1991)
103 Betts D, Helper L (1977) The surgical
in dogs and cats. Joturnat of the American
Clinical evaluation of 1% cyclosporine
correction of parotid duct transposition
Veterinary Medicat Association
for topical treatment of 
failures. Journat of the American Animat
151:313-320.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs. Journat
Hosp itat Association 13:695-700.
80 Smith E, Buyukmmihci, Farver T (1994)
qf the American Veterinary Medicat
104 Startup F {1984) Intra-canalicular gelatin
Effect of topical pilocarpine treatment on
Association 199:1039-1042.
 implants in lacrimal punctum surgery.
tear production in dogs. Journat of the 
92 Gilger B, Andrews J, Wilkie D, Lairmore 
Journat of Smatl Animat Practice
American Veterinary Medicat Association
 M {1996) Lymphocyte proliferation and
25:635-637.
205:1286-1289.
blood drug levels in dogs with
105 Heider L, Wyman M, Burt J, Root C,
81 Thermes F, Molon-Noblot S, Grove J
keratoconjunctivitis sicca receiving long-
Gardner H {1975) Nasolacrimal duct
{1991) Effects of acetylcysteine on rabbit
term topical ocular cyclosporine.
anomaly in calves. Journat of the
conjunctival and corneal surfaces.
Veterinary Comparative Ophthatmalogy
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
6:125-130.
167:145-147.
Science 32:2958-2963.
93 Sansom J, Barnett K, Neumann W.
106 Barnett K (1979) Imperforate and
82 Tseng S, Maumenee E, Stark W, et af.
Schulte-Neumann S, Clerc B {1995)
microlachrymal puncta in the dog.
[1985) Topical retinoid treatment for
Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
Journat of Smalt Animat Practice
various dry eye disorders.
dbgs with cyclosporine ophthalmic
20:481-490.
Ophthatrmotogy 92:717-733.
ointment: a European clinical field trial.
107 Lundvall R, Carter J {1971) Atresia of
83 Vainisi S (1988) Personal communication.
Veterimary Record 137:504-507.
the nasolacrimal meatus in the horse.
84 Bounous D, Carmichael P, Kaswan R,
94 Rocha EM, Wickham LA, da Silveira LA,
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Hirsh S, Stiles J {1995) Effects of
et αfl. (2000) Identification of androgen
Medicat Association 159:289-291.
ophthalmic cyclosporine on lacrimal
receptor protein and 5 alpha-reductase
108 Latimer C, Wyman M (1984) Atresia of
gland pathology and function in dogs
 mRNA in human ocular tissues. British
 the nasolacrimal duct in three horses.
with keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Veterinary
Journat of Ophthatmology 84:76-84.
Journat of the American Veterinary
and Comparative Ophthatmology
95 Chambers L, Fischer C, McCalla T,
Medicat Association 184:989-992.
5:5-12.
Parshall C, Slatter D, Yakley B (2002)
85 Kaswan R, Salisbury M, Ward D {1989)
 Topical tacrolimus in treatment of canine
orbital gland and tear-staining in the dog.
 Spontaneous canine keratoconjunctivitis
keratoconjunctivitis sicca: a multicenter
Veterinary Medicine/Small Animat
sicca, a useful model for human
 preliminary clinical trial. Poster
Clinician 61:121-124.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca: treatment with
pesentation at the Scientific Meeting of
110 Loeffler K, Branscheid W, Rodenbeck H,
cyclosporine eye drops. Archiuves of
the American College of Veterinary
Ficus H {1978) Histologische
Ophthatmotogy 107:1210-1216.
Ophthatmotogists, Denver.
untersuchungen an nickhautdrusen von 
86 Kaswan R, Salisbury M, Ward D, Martin
 96 Lavignette A {1966) Keratoconjunctivitis
hunden mit vermehrtem tranenflub.
C, Ramsey J, Fischer C {1990) Topical
sicca in a dog treated by transposition of
Kleimtier Praxis 23:215-220.
 application of cyclosporine in the
the parotid salivary duct. Journal of the
 111 Roberts S (1962) Abnormal tear
 management of keratoconjunctivitis sicca
American Veterimary Medicat Association
 production in the dog. Modern Veterinary
in dogs. Journatl of the American Animat
148:778-786.
Practice 43:37-40.
Hosp itat Association 26:269-274.
97 Baker G, Formston C (1968) An
112 Harrison V (1964) Clinical observations
87 Tsubota K, Saito I, Ishimaru N,
evaluation of transplantation of the 
On epiphora. Veterinary Record 76:437.
Hayashi Y (1998) Use of topical
parotid duct in the treatment of
113 Read R, Dunn K, Smith K, Barnett K
cyclosporine A in a primary Sjogren's
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in the dog.
{1996) A histological study of nictitans
syndrome mouse model. Investigative
Journat of Smatl Animat Practice
 glands from dogs with tear overflow of
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
9:261-268.
umknown cause. Veterinary Comparative
39:1551-1559.
98 Gelatt K {1970) Treatment of canine 
Ophthatmology 6:195-204.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca by parotid duct
transposition. Journat of the American
Animat Hospitat Association 6:1-12.
240
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
114 Saito A, Kotani, T (1999) Tear
123 Yakely W, Alexander J (1971)
133 Wyand DS, Lehav M, Albert DM
 production in dogs with epiphora and
Dacryocystorhinography in the dog.
 {1972) Intraocular lacrimal gland tissue
 corneal epitheliopathy. Veterinary
Journat of the American Veterinary
with other ocular abnormalities occurring
Ophthatmology 2:173-178.
Medicme Association 159:1417-1421.
in a white-tailed deer Journal of
115 Thun R, Abraham R, Helper L {1975)
124 Gelatt K, Cure T, Guffy M, Jessen C
Commparative Pathology 82:219-221.
 Effect of tetracycline on tear production
{1972) Dacryocystorhinography in the
134 Linde-Sipman VD, Klein WR (1984)
in the dog. Journat of the American
dbg and cat. Journat of Smatl Animat
Ectopic lacrimal gland tissue in the globe
Animat Hospitat Association
Practice 13:381-397.
of a cow. Veterinary Pathology
11:802-804.
125 Severin G {1982) Nasolacrimal duct 
21:613-614.
116 Gale V {1976) Use of metronidazole in
catheterization in the dog. Journat of the
135 Regnier A, Magnol J, Servantie J (1986)
teating 'tear staining' in the dog.
American Animat Hospitat Association
 Corneal and subconjunctival ectopic
Veterinary Record 98:14.
18:13-16.
lacrimal glands in a dog. Canadion
117 Filipek M, Rubin L {1977) Effect of
126 Laing E, Spiess B, Binnington A {1988)
Practice 13:12-14.
 metronidazole on lacrimation in the dog:
Dacryocystotomy: a treatment for chronic  136 Kirayama K, Kagawa Y, Tsuzuki K,
a negative report. Journat of the
dacryocystitis in the dog Journat of the
et af. (2000) A pleomorphic adenoma of
American Animat Hospitat Associat ion
American Animat Hospitat Association
the lacrimal gland in a dog. Veterinary
13:339-341.
24:223-226.
Pathology 37:353-356.
118 Long R {1975) The relief of epiphora by
127 Harvey C, Koch S, Rubin L (1968)
137 Rebhun W, Edwards N (1977) Two
 conjunctivorhinostomy. Journat of Smal
Orbital cysts with conjunctival fistula in a
cases of orbital adenocarcinoma of
Antmat Practice 16:381-386.
dog. Journat of the American Veterinary
probable lacrimal gland origin. Journat of
119 Covitz D, Hunziker J, Koch S {1977)
Medicat Association 153:1432-1435.
the Americam Animat Hospitat
Conjunctivorhinostomy: a surgical
128 Playter R, Adams L {1977) Lacrimal cyst 
Association 13:691.
method for the control of epiphora in the
{dacryops) in 2 dogs. Journat of the
138 Wilcock BP, Peiffer RL (1988)
dog and cat. Journat of the American
American Veterinary Medicat Association
 Adenocarcinoma of the gland of the third
Veterinary Medicat Association
171:736-737.
eyelid in seven dogs. Jotarnat of the
171:251-255.
129 Latimer C, Wyman M, Szymanski C,
American Veterinary Medicat Association
120 Lavach J, Severin G, Roberts S (1984)
Werling K {1983) Membrana nictitans
193:1549-1550.
 Dacryocystitis in dogs: a review of
gland cyst in a dog. Journat of the
139 Schaeffer EH, Pfleghaar S, Gordon S,
twenty-two cases. Journat of the
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Knoedlseder M (1994) Maligne
American Animat Hospitat Association
183:1003-1005.
nickhauttumoren bei hund und katze.
20:463-467.
130 Martin C, Kaswan R, Doran C {1987)
Teraerztl Praxis 22:382-391.
121 van der Woerdt A, Wilkie D, Gilger B,
Cystic lesions of the periorbital region.
140 Kkomaromy AM, Ramsey DT,
Smeak D, Kerpsack S {1997) Surgica]
Compendium on Continuing Education
Render JA, Clark P {1997) Primary
treatment of dacryocystitis caused by
for the Practicing Veterinarian
adenocarcinoma of the gland of the
 cystic dilation of the nasolacrimal system
9:1021-1029.
nictitating membrane in a cat. Journat of
in three dogs. Journat of the American
 131 Gerding P (1991) Epiphora associated
the American Animat Hospitat
Veterinary Medical Association
with canaliculops in a dog. Journat of the
Association 33:333-336.
211:445-447.
Americam Animat Hospitat Association
141 Williams D, Long R, Barnett K (1998)
122 Gelatt K, Guffy M, Borgess T {1971)
27:424-426.
 Lacrimal pseudotumour in a young Bull
 Radiographic contrast techniques for
132 Brownstein S, Belin M, Krohel G, Smith
Terrier. Journat of Small Animat Practice
 detecting orbital and nasolacrimal tumors
RS, Condon G, Codere F {1984) Orbital
39:30-32.
in dogs. Journat of the American
dacryops. Ophthatmology
Veterinary Medicine Association
91:1424-1428.
156:741-746.
241
10
Cornea and Sclera
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
10.1
The cornea and sclera comprise the fibrous tunic of the
globe. The transitional zone where the sclera superficially
 Overlaps the cornea is termed the limbus. This overlap is
widest dorsal and ventrally, When the globe is viewed
rostrally the cornea is slightly horizontally elongated,
especially in ungulates, and when viewed from the side
the cornea has a greater curvature than the sclera {10.1,
10.2). The cornea of the dog has an average radius of
curvature of 8.5 mm and varies from 13-17 mm in the
horizontal axis and 12-16 mm in the vertical axis1.,2. The
 cat cornea has an average radius of curvature of 8.6 mm,
horizontal axis of 17 mm, and vertical axis of 16 mm?.
Corneal measurements vary significantly in the horse,
with the horizontal axis ranging from 28-34 mm and
vertical axis ranging from 23-27 mm1, 4.
10.1 Frontal view of the cow cornea demonstrating the egg shape or
The thickness of the cornea of the dog and cat is often
elongated horizontal axis that is exaggerated in ungulates.
quoted as being thicker in the center than at the
10.2
Sclera
Extraocular muscle
Choroidal vein 
Third eyelid
Sclera
Choriocapillaris
Choroid
Rod.
Pupil 
Retina
 Inner nuclear cell 
Iris
 Ganglion cell
 Macula
Leri5
To optic  
Retinal  Cone  Pigmented 
Tapetum
nerve
vessel5
epithelium
~ Retinal vessels
Cornea
~Optic disk
Iris
~Nontapetal retina 
Hyaloid canal in the vitreous body
Lim bus
-Zonules
Conjuctiva -
- Ciliary body
~ Scleral plexu5
10.2 llustration of a cat eye to dermonstrate the different radius of curvature of the cornea compared to the globe and the relationships of the
 cornea and sclera at the limbu5.
242
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
periphery, unlike the cornea of humansl, 4. However,
10.3
early measurements were made post mortem and modern
measurement methods in the live animal confirm that the
central cornea is slightly thinner than the periphery, as in
humans. The central cornea of the dog is 0.62 mm (range
0.41-0.74 mm [410-740 μm] and of the cat is 0.56 mm
(560 μm)5, 6, 7, In the dog, females have a thinner cornea
than the male7. Moodie et al.8 studied the development of
the feline curvature and corneal thickness from 9 weeks
to 2 years of age and found that the thickness increased
mainly during the first 4 months of life. The corneal
thickness increased from 0.379 mm at 9 weeks
to
0.548 mm at 16 weeks and to 0.567 mm at 1 year or
more. In the cat, an 8% increase in corneal thickness
Occurs diurnally and is associated with lid closure?.
The cornea not only serves to support and protect the
interior ocular structures but has the unique property of
being transparent. It produces 70% of the refraction
{bending) of light rays that occurs in the dog eye. Almost
49 D of refraction occurs at the anterior corneal surface
and -5.8 D at the posterior corneal surface, yielding a
total refraction of 43 D2. The kitten's refractive power
10.3 Normal histology of the canine cornea. The epithelium has a
decreases from 55 D to 39 D at 1-2 years of age*. The
basal lamina but there is no distinct Bowman's mermbrane (E). The
cornea produces more refraction than the lens because
majority of the cornea is stroma, composed of collagen fibers that
refraction depends on:
traverse the cornea (S) without terminating. Descemet's mermbrane (D)]
Curvature of surface.
abuts the deep stroma and is lined with a simple cuboidal epithelium.
+ Difference in density of the two media.
10.4
The radius of curvature of the lens and cornea are fairly
similar. Light passes through air with a refractive index of
1, enters the cornea with a refractive index of 1.376, passes 
into the aqueous humor with a refractive index of 1.336,
and finally into the lens with a refractive index of 1.42.
Thus the biggest difference in refractive index is between
the air and cornea and, consequently, more refraction
occurs here than between the aqueous humor and the lens.
The anatomy of the cornea and sclera is simple.
Although the cornea is obviously unique in its
transparency, it is composed anteriorly of stratified
squamous epithelium with its basal lamina, the stroma,
which comprises the major portion, and the posterior
epithelium {erroneously termed the endothelium), which
has Descemet's membrane as an exaggerated basal
lamina (10.3).
The corneal epithelium in the dog and cat is S-11 cells
10.4 Scanning electron microscopy of feline corneal epithelium 
thick and has a turnover rate of approximately
7
illustrating the light and dark polyhedral cells associated with the
daysl0. The flattened surface cells are polygonal and have
number of microplica on the surface (x480].
numerous microvillae and microplicae {10.4) that are
coated with a glycocalyx, which functions to sta bilize the
tear film.
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) of which is keratin sulfate.
The corneal stroma is 90% of the mass of the cornea
Dermatan sulfate is the other major GAG found in the
and consists of parallel lamellae (bundles) of collagen
fibers that extend across the entire diameter of the cornea
Keratin sulfate is most concentrated in the posterior
(10.3). While the bundles are parallel to one another,
cornea, whereas dermatin sulfate is concentrated in the
they are not oriented in the same direction. The lamellae
anterior cornea12. The GAGs maintain corneal hydration
are most regular or parallel in the posterior stroma. The
and help to maintain the critical regular spacing of
anterior subepithelial lamellae are more oblique to the
 collagen fibers necessary for corneal transparency.
surface, with more interweaving. This arrangement is
The cornea is richly supplied with sensory innervation
responsible for the anterior stroma being more reflective
from the long ciliary branches of the ophthalmic division of
when seen on biomicroscopy. Keratocytes, which are
the Vth cranial nerve. The nerves are concentrated in the
fbroblasts with branching processes, are scattered
 anterior stroma and penetrate into the epithelium where they
between the collagen lamellae.
terminate as naked nerve endings. The corneal epithelium is
The ground substance surrounding the collagen fibers
 the most densely innervated epithelium in the bodyl1. The 
is composed of proteoglycans, the predominant
dog has an average of 12 nerve trunks13 andthe cat 19 nerve
CORNEA AND SCLERA
243
trunksl4 that enter the cornea. The nerve endings are
The sclera is the major portion of the fibrous tunic; it
 sensitive to pain, pressure, and temperature. The dense 
does not have any epithelial layers. The thickness varies
mncentration of nerve endings in the epithelium accounts for
considera bly, being thinnest at the equator and posterior
the severe pain observed with superficial epithelial loss,
pole of the globe and thickest over the base of the iris.
whereas a deep ulcer often does not exhibit the same degree
The scleral collagen fibers branch and intermingle and
of pains A difference in corneal sensitivity is demonstrated
between dog skull types using a’Cochet-Bonnet
present in the sclera but are minimal in number. Cellular
anesthesiometer. Not surprisingly, brachycephalics have
elements  consist
of
scattered
fibroblasts 
puB
decreased sensitivity compared to dolicocephalic and
melanocytes. The episclera is a thin collagenous and
mesaticephalic breeds. The central cornea is more sensitive
vascular layer on the outer surface of the sclera.
than the peripheral regions. Dogs and cats are relatively more
 insensitive than other species that have been tested13.
CORNEAL TRANSPARENCY
 The sensory innervation has a positive trophic influence
Several anatomic peculiarities contribute to cormeal
 On the epithelium. Marfurt et al.16 investigated the anatomy
transparency:
and  neurochemistry of  canine corneal  nerves  and
· Smoothness of the epithelium aided by the tear film.
confirmed that, as in other species, the anterior half of the
Arrangement and size of the stromal collagen and
stroma and epithelium is densely innervated
with
GAGs. A lattice of collagen fibers is formed that is
14-18 radially oriented superficial nerves from the limbus
regular and parallel. This is postulated to produce
 that have repeated dichotomous branching. The epithelium
a mutual interference of light, which prevents the
has dense leashes of nerves that are not oriented in a
light from reflecting back to be visualized24. The
specific direction, unlike in some species. Marfurt et al.16
small regular diameter of the collagen fibers is also
found that 99% of all the corneal nerves of dogs contained
thought to be important for corneal clarity2s.
both substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide,
 Absence of blood vessels and pigment.
indicating their probable sensory function, while 30%
 Relative dehydration of the stroma.
contained tyrosine hydroxylase (TH). TH-positive nerves
were concentrated in the stroma and were absent in the
HEALING OF CORNEAL WOUNDS
epithelium. TH-positive nerves are thought to represent
Epithelial healing
autonomic nerves, principally sympathetic nerves in the
Epithelial wound healing is divided into three cellular
cornea. The neuropeptide substance P may stimulate DNA
synthesis for epithelial healing, since depletion of substance
● Cell migration. Epithelial cells at the margin of a
P slows epithelial healing17. Substance P, with insulin-like
wound retract and become thicker within the first hour
growth factor 1, stimulates corneal epithelial cell migration
following trauma. Neutrophils from the tear film and
and adhesion but not mitosis in cell culture18.
fibrinous material are present in the epithelial defect
within 1-3 hours. Hemidesmosomal attachments are
Any insult to the peripheral cornea and limbal
dissolved around the edge of the wound, superficial
 region such as corneal incisions, lasering the
cells are desquamated, and the leading edge of the
 adjacent sclera for glaucoma, or lacerations may
wound decreases to a single cell layer. After a latent 
produce partial denervation of the cornea and loss
phase of 3-6 hours, sliding or cell migration occurs26.
of neurotrophic influences, resulting in slow healing
The cells flatten and increase their surface area by
epithelial erosions.
increasing cell volume with water27. Smaller defects are
covered by a monolayer in this manner, which
Ans si eao n suu sla jo iaae nasd a
eventually thickens by cellular proliferation.
referred to as the endotheliuml9, although it is not a true
endothelium. Its single layer of cells are usually
hexagonal and line the inner cornea (10.5). The
endothelial cell count is 2,700-2,800/mm? for both the
10.5
dog and cat and decreases with ages. While the
endothelium is metabolically active, its mitotic activity is
more questionable than the anterior epithelium. The
regenerative capabilities vary with the species: minimal in
the cat, good in the young dog20, 21 Healing in the adult
is mainly by cellular enlargement and migration, rather
than by mitosis. The posterior epithelium shows
pleuripotenial capabilities with differentiation into the
typical “endodothelial cell, fibroblasts, or an epithelial
cell type22. The epithelial cell type possesses desmosomal
attachments and tonofilaments.
The basilar side of the posterior epithelium lies on the
stroma and p
produces a modified basal lamina,
Descemet's membrane (10.3). It is produced throughout
life and consequently is much thicker in the old animal
than in the young animal. Although clinically it acts as an
"elastic' membrane, it contains only fine fibrils that are
10.5 Scanning electron microscopy of equine corneal endothelium
predominantly type IV collagen.
with the characteristic hexagonal shape of most of the cells (x1200].
244
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
 Cell proliferation. Mitosis occurs, after a 24 hour
with its disorganized stroma leaves some degree of
delay, to re-establish the epithelial thickness. The
residual scar. Clinically, scars are often described
stem cells for the corneal epithelium are located at
according to their size and density: a nebula is a small
the limbus28. They travel in a centripetal pattern
very faint scar or opacity, a macula is a small but distinct
from the limbus. If the healing is not accomplished
white opacity, and a leukoma is a large dense white
by sheets of cells, the small groups of migrating cells
opacity. An adherent leukoma is a dense white scar with
form a whorl or vortex pattern27. The stem cells are
 an underlying adhesion of the iris to the cormea.
long-lived cells that have the ability to undergo
mitosis and are responsible for cell replacement and
CORNEAL VASCULARIZATION
tissue healing. They produce transient amplifying
The cornea is normally devoid of vessels but whether
cells that divide rapidly and eventually differentiate
vascularization is inhibited by a factor (e.g. angiostatin)
into the terminally differentiated cell of the tissue.
or is prevented by the compactness of the tissue is
The amplifying cell of the corneal epithelium is the
mknown. Conversely, many agents may stimulate
basal cell and the superficial cells are the postmitotic
vascularization but their physiologic significance is often
and terminally differentiated cells27. Removal of the
unknown. Hypoxia, neoplasia, and inflammation are
entire epithelium or removal of the limbal epithelium
frequent initiators of neovascularization. These events
will result in wound healing by conjunctival epithelium
trigger angiogenic factors such as tumor angiogenic
migrating over the cornea. Even lesions of the central
factor, fibroblast growth factor, transforming growth
corneal epithelium produce an increase in the mitotic
factor-beta, platelet-derived growth factor, and vascular
rate of the conjunctival epithelium29. The conjunctival
endothelial growth factor. Lymphokines produced by
epithelium also produces goblet cells once on the
activated T-lymphocytes and prostaglandin (PG) E1_are
cornea. These goblet cells eventually undergo a process
capable of producing corneal neovascularization37-39.
of transdifferentiation into corneal epithelial cells,
Loss of compactness, i.e. corneal edema, is a factor but by
which takes 6 weeks or more. If the cornea is
itself is not sufficient to ca use neovascularization40.
vascularized, the transdifferentiation is retarded, with
A variety of inhibitors of angiogenesis are known
 the epithelium retaining conjunctival characteristics30.
(angiostatin, endostatin, thrombostatin, platelet factor 4,
Topical retinoids inhibit this transdifferentiation and
fibronectin, and prolactin) but their interactions are
are thought to be the blood-borne factor responsible
complex and incompletely understood at this time. MMPs
for inhibition?l.
are enzymes that degrade the extracellular matrix, thereby
 Cell adhesion. Although the epithelium regenerates
allowing endothelial cell migration. Neutrophils are
rapidly, anchoring units are not formed until the
involved to some extent in most forms of corneal
defect is covered. If the basal lamina is intact,
neovascularization. While leukopenic animals can develop
hemodesmosomes are formed within 1 week. If the
neovascularization, t
the reaction is amplified
by
basal lamina is removed, hemodesmosomes are much
neutrophils41, 42. Ocular yascular homeostasis is now
slower to regenerate (6-7 weeks). Consequently, the
thought to involve a balance between inhibitors and
epithelium is susceptible to re-injury for a prolonged
stimulators of neovascularization and multiple mediators
 period when the basal lamina has been lost, as the
 are probably responsible for varying phases of the process43.
 epithelial attachment to the basal lamina is
important for adhesion to the stroma 32.
CORNEAL METABOLISM
The epithelium and endothelium utilize most of the
Stromal healing
corneal oxygen and receive most oxygen from the
Stromal healing initially involves the invasion of leukocytes
 atmosphere. Four sources of oxygen are:
from the tear film or limbus within a matter of a few hours33.
 Aqueous humor - important for the endothelium.
Within the first hour keratocyte disintegration occurs at the
 Limbal capillaries.
Capillaries of the tarsus when the eyes are closed.
keratocytes undergo activation. Two to three days after the
Oxygen dissolved in the tear film layer This is the
injury the wound margin is filled with a mixture of
most important source of oxygen.
keratocytes and fibroblast type cells. Whether the fibroblasts
are all transformed keratocytes or a mixture of transformed
Glucose is derived mainly from the aqueous humor and
keratocytes and monocytes is controversial34. After 3-6 days 
is metabolized via anaerobic glycolysis and the hexos-
the fibroblasts invade the fbrin plug of the wound. The
monophosphate shuntll. The metabolic activity of the
initial ground substance of the scar is dermatan sulfate but by
stroma is low.
15-30 days post trauma, keratin sulfate is detected, which
indicates a transformation of fibroblasts to keratocytes. It
CORNEAL TURGESCENCE
 takes up to 3 months to achieve normal levels of keratin
The normal cornea mainmtains a fairly constant thickness.
sulfate35 The area of stromal healing is not transparent due
During the night a slight increase in thickness occurs due to
to the disorganized and large collagen fibers. The tensile
the absence of evaporation of tears when the lids are closed.
 strength of the wound progresses slowly, with only 50%
The cornea is about 75-80% water by weight but it still has 
strength achieved by central corneal wounds in 100 days. A
 a marked affinity for more water. As a result, an excised piece
lack of epithelium over the stromal healing markedly
of cornea immersed in solution becomes turgesced (swollen).
decreases the tensile strength of the wound36.
Most of this swelling occurs in an anterior-posterior
drection, with slight shortening of tangential length. The
Corneal scar formation and opacification
importance of turgesence is that it is always acoompanied by
Epithelial healing will occur without scar formation, but
a loss of transparency. The imbibition of water is due to the
when the stroma is damaged the resultant fibroplasia
 gound substance or GAGs in the stroma.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
245
10.6
Stroma
10.7
(Na+ 179 mEq/KgH20)
 Osmotic water flux
Epithelium 
Na
H+
 Stroma
Na/K ATPase
_CA
Nat
HCO,  H,0 + COz
Na
Endothelium
ump
Aqueous humor
H,O HCO
Barrier
(Na+1 44 mEq/Kg H,0)
H,O
Pump 20
10.7 Proposed endothelial pump mechanisms that draw water out of
the stroma into the aqueous hurmor. (Reprinted with permission from
NafK ATPase
Waring et of., 198222)
Na+
The normal cornea is in a deturgesced state. Any
HCO-,
H20
damage to or loss of epithelium will produce localized
edema, which is usually transient due to rapid
BarrieY RR0
regeneration. Endothelial damage, however, is far more
 serious, with marked and often permanent loss of
 transparency because of limited regenerative capa bilities.
The mechanism for maintaining corneal deturgescence
in the endothelium and epithelium is associated with a
barrier function and a metabolic pump. The barrier 
Tight junction
Extracellular pathway
 consists of intercellular junctions which are leaky to water
aui ut 1aien jo ino sudund aaoe Aq iaso si sun ing
10.6 llustration of the forces that control corneal hydration. The
normal cornea (10.6). Conditions that damage the barrier
endothelium is an incomplete physical barrier to water from tight
cause the leak rate to exceed the pumping rate and result
junctions at the lateral cell junctions. The intraocular pressure pushes
in stromal edema. The mechanisms by which water is
water through these tight junctions, resulting in water having to be 
pumped out of the cornea into the aqueous humor are
pumped back into the anterior chamber. The pumping of sodium and 
incompletely understood. Prevalent theories emphasize the
bicarbonate back into the aqueous humor osmotically draws water
movement of water secondary to sodium and bicarbonate
with them. (Reprinted with permission from Waring et af.198222)
ion movement into the aqueous. A Na+/K+ ATPase
metabolic pump is present on the lateral endothelial cell
membrane and pumps Na+ ions into the aqueous humor,
Table 10.1 Common causes of color changes noted in
creating an osmotic gradient that draws water out of the
the cornea
 stroma. Bicarbonate is also pumped into the aqueous
humor under the influence of carbonic anhydrase (CA)
and/or bicarbonate I
ATPase pump (10.6, 10.7)22.
 White lesions: edema, leukocytes, lipid, calcium, scar,
infectious agents.
Surprisingly, topical or systemic CAIs do not cause corneal
decompensation except on the rare occasion.
 Red lesions: neovascularization, stromal hemorrhage,
 symblepharon, neoplasia.
Dense corneal edema should prompt the clinician to
 Pigmented lesions: superficial benign melanin, sequestrum,
rule out various causes of endothelial dysfunction, i.e.
uveal pigment (usually deep), pigmented neoplasia,
degeneration, uveitis, glaucoma, and trauma.
dematiaceous fungi, exogenous pigment.
DISEASES OF THE CORNEA
Table 10.2 Categorization of corneal lesions
The cornea is easily visualized under magnification,
ena bling the clinician to examine the pathology and use
Congenital noninflammatory: superficial and deep.
diagnostic tests. However, due to the limited response of
the cornea to disease, many diseases affect the cornea
Acquired noninflammatory: superficial and deep.
similarly. One of the basic pathologic changes with
Nonulcerative inflammatory: superficial and deep.
corneal disease is a loss of clarity or opacification of the
 cornea. The types of opacity can be categorized on color;
Ulcerative: superficial, deep, and perforated.
Table 10.1 presents some of the most common causes for
Proliferative: pseudotumors, congenital tumors, and
color changes in the cornea. The type of opacity, the
acquired neoplasia.
depth of the lesion, and whether it is acquired or
congenital may aid in making a diagnosis (Tabie 10.2).
246
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
CONGENITAL SUPERFICIAL NONINFLAMMATORY
Clinical signs
DISEASE
Puppy band keratopathy manifests with a faint, usually
Puppy band keratopathy
incomplete, superficial (subepithelial) hazy band in
Introduction/etiology
suckling puppies (10.8, 10.9). The opacity is most
Puppy band keratopathy denotes a common benign
commonly found adjacent to the medial and lateral
condition that is often transient in neonatal puppies. The
limbal region and is usually self-correcting.
cause is unknown but may be due to calcium in the diet.
Histologic features have not been studied because the
Diagnosis
condition is benign. Roberts et al.44 reported a central
23e aul pue pauoo aui jo aoue 1eadde aul 4q sl sisouaeia
superficial white opacity in Collie puppies due to an
of the puppy.
 accumulation of a hematoxylin-staining amorphous
layer under the epithelium. However, the central location
Therapy
and appearance of the opacities in this study differed
No therapy is necessary.
from the usual presentation. Puppy band keratopathy
may affect all breeds of dog but is most often found in
Sclerocornea
breeds which are screened for genetic disease as puppies,
 Sclerocornea is a congenital corneal opacity at the limbal
i.e. Collie, English Springer Spaniel, Sheltie.
region. It is nonprogressive and occurs infrequently. The
peripheral cornea has an extension of scleral-like tissue
into it (10.10), involving only a segment of the
circumference. The condition may be associated with
other congenital ocular lesions4 and may be unilateral or
bilateral. It has been observed in both the dog and horse.
10.8
CONGENITAL DEEP NONINFLAMMATORY
DISEASE
Persistent pupillary membrane attachment
(Peter's anomaly)
introduction/etiology
This is a condition associated with corneal opacification
 and embryonic aberrant persistent pupillary membrane
(PPM) strands attached to the inner cornea. The
condition is known to be inherited in some breeds such
as the Basenji, Welsh Corgi, and Chow Chow. In the
Basenji, the condition has been reported to be a
dominant trait but other studies have indicated that in
this breed the condition does not follow a simple
dominant or recessive trait46-48. Chapter 15 (Presumed
inherited ocular diseases) includes a more extensive list of
affected breeds. It is observed less frequently in the cat.
10.8 Puppy band keratopathy in a Collie puppy visualized in
In the cat, PPMs are commonly associated with eyelid
retroillumination. Note that the lesions are faint and will 
 agenesis or MOC.
 spontaneously resolve.
10.9
10.10
10.9 Puppy band keratopathy in a Collie puppy that istypical of the
10.10 Scleralization of the dorsal cornea of a horse. The
scleralization was most likely a congenital lesion. Acquired 
the retroillumination of the tapetum and are typically adjacent to the
multifocal corneal scars with vascularization are also present.
limbus and do not form a complete band.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
247
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.11 A dog with multifocal scars at
10.12 A more severe form of persistent
10.13 The appearance of the same dog in
Descermet's level with associated persistent
pupillary membranes (PPMs) in a 10-week-old
10.12 several months later after the edema
 pupillary membranes. The corneal lesions are
Welsh Terrier puppy. The central cornea has a
has subsided. A deep white 'scar' is residual
both pigmented and white.
dense ederma, but strands of PPMs are visible
at Desecemet's level.
at the periphery to differentiate from an
infectious canine hepatitis reaction.
 Clinical signs
questionable. Breeding from affected dogs with corneal
 Focal pigment deposits or a grayish-white opacity at
lesions should be discouraged.
Descemet's membrane are found. The lesions are
usually axial, sparing the far peripheral cornea {10.11).
Posterior polymorphous dystrophy
Deep corneal lesions were recorded in 20% of Basenjis
Introductionfetiology
Posterior polymorphous dystrophy refers to a disease
blindness may result from severe corneal edema but the
that has been observed in the American Cocker Spaniel
edema often improves with age, leaving a residual deep
opacity at Descemet's level (10.12, 10.13). PPMs are
 opacities present at Descemet's membraneso. The
usually present but may break with age, making it more
condition is congenital and nonprogressive. It is thought
difficult to associate the deep corneal opacities to a
to be inherited, with a suggested mode of a dominant or
specific etiology.
incomplete dominant trait. Histopathologic changes seen
are focal endothelial necrosis and cell loss with fibrous
Diagnosis
 metaplasia of the endothelial cells. Focal areas may be
The cause of the corneal opacity, whether pigmented,
 denuded of endothelial cells, with exposure of the
gray, or edematous, is obvious if associated with PPMs.
 Descemet's membrane.
Localization of the opacity to the Descemet's membrane,
without an overlying stromal scar (indicating.
 Clinical signs
a
perforating injury) or signs of prior intraocular
 Bilateral, multiple, nonprogressive, grayish opacities are
inflammation in a young animal, is presumptive evidence
present in the deep cornea. The opacities are scattered
of a PPM syndrome. Posterior polymorphous dystrophy
over the entire posterior surface and vary from linear to
will also produce white opacities at Descemet's
vesicular in shape. There are no attachments of opacities
membrane but these are rare and relatively breed specific,
to uveal tags or PPMs. No visual problems are noted.
and the lesions are more diffuse. Historically, severe
forms of infectious canine hepatitis with corneal edema
Diagnosis
were an important differential, because both conditions
 Diagnosis is made on the characteristic appearance and
presented in young animals.
location of opacities, the breed, and lack of uveal
 attachments to lesions.
The PPM syndrome with axial to paraxial 'scars' is
one of the most common causes of endothelial
Therapy
lesions in the dog. Many patients do not have the
No therapy is needed. Breeders should be advised that
diagnostic iridal strands and the diagnosis is
posterior polymorphous dystrophy is a suspected genetic
presumptive, based on lack of stromal scarring.
disease.
breed involved, and age.
Cornea globosa
Therapy
Cornea globosa refers to a cornea that is large and
No therapy is usually given or needed in most cases. A
protruding due to a large radius of curvature. The corneal
penetrating corneal graft can be performed in severe
diameter is not abnormal and the globe itself is not
cases. It has been suggested that cutting the strands will 
enlarged, compared to buphthalmos. The Rocky Mountain
improve the stromal edema but given the spontaneous
horse has an inherited congenital ocular problem with
improvement in most cases, the benefit of surgery is
 multiple ocular lesions, possibly depending on genetic
248
OpHThAlMIC DIsEASe In VeTeRINARY MeDICINE
10.14
10.14 Comparison of
corneal curvature in a
normal horse (left] with a
Rocky Mountain horse 
with cornea globosa 
(right]. (Courtesy of Dr. D.
Ramsey, Michigan State
University.]
10.15
10.16
10.17
10.15 Axial dystrophic calcification in a dog
10.16 Band keratopathy in a horse after
10.17 Band keratopathy in a dog with chronic
with Cushing's disease. The lesions developed 
cyclophotocoagulation performed for
 uveitis. The patient was presented for acute
rapidly within several days.
glaucoma.
pain from the ulcer that is stained with
fluorescein. Note the foamy appearance; this
is not as white or chalky as other examples of
corneal calcification.
than a horizontal band (10.15). In the horse, rapid corneal
was initially termed a megalocornea but the diameter is not
calcification can occur after laser cyclophotocoagulation
but most cases are associated with chronic endogenous
uveitis54 (10.16). Corneal calcification can also 0ccur in
 presence of macropalpebral fissures (10.14).
old corneal scars, in which case it does not have a band
pattern. Old dogs may develop dystrophic calcium plaques
ACQUIRED SUPERFICIAL NONINFLAMMATORY
in the cornea that eventually slough, leaving ulcers of
DISEASE
variable depth.
Band keratopathy
The mechanism of corneal calcification is unknown but
Introduction/etiology
increases in tissue pH associated with inflammation and
Band keratopathy usually refers to a deposition of calcium
evaporation of tears are thought to be importantss.
in the epithelium, basal lamina, and superficial stroma that
Medications containing phosphates, such as topical steroid
 often follows the horizontal pattern of the palpebral
fissure. While metastatic corneal calcification can
 phosphate buffers, have produced band keratopathys7
occasionally occur from systemic hypercalcemic states
 (hyperparathyroidism, pseudohyperparathyroidism, dietary
 Clinical signs
intake), it is usually associated with chronic corneal or
A grayish-white, very superficial opacity is present,
intraocular inflammation. The dog and horse are most
extending in a horizontal band across the cornea to a
commonly affected. The author has also observed a
variable degree. The calcium does not extend to the limbus.
condition of rapidly developing corneal calcification
Depending on the density of the calcium, it will appear as
associated with Cushing's disease'", which differs from
gray and 'moth-eaten' or a plaque-like white granular
band keratopathy by an axial or paraxial location rather
lesion. The lesion feels gritty if scraped (10.17).
CORNEA AND SCLERA
249
Depending on the cause of calcium precipitation,
10.18
concurrent signs of uveitis, keratitis, or corneal scars may
be present. As the calcium becomes dense and plaque-
like, it may slough, producing an ulcer of variable depth
and varying degrees of pain.
Diagnosis
A presumptive diagnosis of calcium deposition is usually
made by the clinical appearance but a definitive diagnosis
can be obtained with a biopsy, using a superficial
keratectomy or corneal scraping to demonstrate the
 presence of calcium.
Therapy
Complete excision with a superficial keratectomy, or
removal of the epithelium and bathing the cornea with a
1-3% EDTA solution, are potential therapies. If the eyes
 are blind from the intraocular disease, no therapy is
10.18 Macular keratopathy in a young Sheltie visualized in
usually warranted unless the condition is painful or an
retroillumination. The lesions are multifocal, superficial, and
ulcer is created by sloughing of the calcium.
brownish at this stage. They later evolved into white lesion5.
Superficial punctate keratopathy
Introduction/etiology
Superficial  punctate
：keratopathy is a condition of
unknown etiology usually seen in the Shetland Sheepdog.
It is characterized initially by brown, faint, superficial
opacities that transform into multifocal grayish-white,
superficial round or irregular rings 1-3 mm in diameter.
condition is termed a lipid dystrophy if it is bilateral
It is observed in dogs as young as 4 months and may be
and presumed inherited, and a lipid degeneration if it is
a form of a corneal dystrophy.
associated with systemic lipid abnormalities or previous
Histologically, the lesions are limited to the epithelium
corneal disease. Most lipid keratopathies would seem to
and are composed of dyskeratotic cells and degenerate
be local metabolic disturbances as hyperlipidemia is
epithelial cells8, 59. In the initial stages there is no
sually not present6o. Breeds such as the Airedale,
evidence of inflammation but, with chronicity,
Collie, Shetland Sheepdog, Siberian Husky, Beagle,
vascularization occurs. After months to years, the initial
Dachshund, Afghan Hound, Cavalier King Charles
white opacities appear as crystalline or lipid deposits.
Spaniel, and GSD seem susceptible, but definite
inheritance patterns are known in relatively few
Clinical signs
breeds61-64.
. Lipid dystrophy is reported to be a
Initially, bilateral brownish circular maculae develop in
recessive trait in the Siberian Husky6s. In general,
the epithelium that progress to white maculae {10.18). No
females are affected more commonly than males66.
inflammatory signs, vascularization, or pain is present.
 In the author's experience, many dogs with lipid
Chronic cases may develop blepharospasm from corneal
keratopathy have a history of being given a coat
erosions. Symptomatic dogs have reduced STT values
conditioner, high energy dog food, dry food with added
(10-12 mm), decreased tear film BUT (<10 seconds), and
oils and fat, or a fatty diet. The condition may manifest
rose bengal stain retention. Vascularization is eventually
with a combination of dietary overload and a genetic
stimulated when corneal erosions are present.
intolerance to fat. Lipid keratopathy in the cat is
probably secondary to previous corneal vascularization
Diagnosis
in most instances and is relatively infrequent67.
 Diagnosis is usually on the clinical signs and the breed of
Systemic abnormalities that result in high blood
dog. Superficial keratectomy can be used for biopsy
lipids may produce a lipid keratopathy that is often
pur poses.
more rapid in development and is progressive. A
familial lipid storage disease in young Fox Terriers has
Therapy
been observed with corneal lipid accumulation in a
Artificial tears, hyperosmotic solutions, and soft contact
 peripheral circular ring adjacent to the limbus68. Lipids
lenses are recommended to protect the cornea. When
will also accumulate in the cornea at the leading edge of
 vascularization is present but erosions are healed, topical
raised corneal
lesions, such as neoplasms and
corticosteroids, topical NSAIDs, or topical cyclosporine
episcleritis, and in corneal lesions with previous
are used.
vascularization. When corneal lipid accumulations are
secondary to systemic or local ocular disease, the term
Lipid keratopathy
lipid degeneration or keratopathy is preferred to
Introduction/etiology
Lipid deposition at any or all depths of the cornea may
predispose many patients to corneal lipid deposition;
be seen in a wide variety of dog breeds. The con-
use in patients with pre-existing lipid keratopathy
fguration, type of lipid, speed of progression, and age
should be avoided and, if this is not possible, therapy
of onset varies with the breed and disease. The
 should be stopped when lipid deposition is beginning.
250
OpHThAlMIC DisEASe In VeTeRINArY MeDICInE
10.19
10.20
10.21
10.19 Axial superficial cholesterol crystals
10.20 Multifocal diffuse superficial lipid
10.21 Lipid degeneration in a Collie. The bitch
in a dog. These are usually bilateral and are
accumulation in an English Springer Spaniel.
had elevated cholesterol levels and had been
a common form of dystrophy in several
 The condition was bilateral. The lesions were
on a high energy diet for parturition and 
breeds. They can be modified by limiting
rapidly progressive and were modified by
nursing. The lesion was surgically rermoved 
the dietary fat.
fat restriction.
and, with dietary restriction, did not recur
for the life of the dog.
Clinical signs
10.22
Crystalline or white amorphous accumulations are
present in one or both eyes. The texture of the lesion
will depend on the type of lipid deposited and the stage
of the lesion. Cholesterol crystals are typically needle-
like {10.19). Most cases are very superficial in nature
but lipids may accumulate at any level or through the
full stromal thickness. The pattern varies with breed,
cause, and chronicity of the condition {10.20). The
condition is usually slowly progressive and rarely
results in blindness. Often it will regress with long-term
restriction of dietary fat.
If the condition is rapidly progressive or peripheral
in location, systemic lipid abnormalities should be
investigated with a lipid profile, and the adrenal,
thyroid, pancreas, and liver metabolism evaluated
(10.21, 10.22). Vascularization usually develops with
10.22 Arcus lipid degeneration in an Afghan Hound with chronic
au on jeuoodoud nou si uoisal aui inq aiuo
hypothyroidism. This pattern of target-like rings of cholesterol
vascularity {10.21, 10.22).
accumulation has been noted in other Afghan Hounds without
known metabolic disorders.
Axial superficial oval crystalline cholesterol
deposits beginning in one cornea and eventually
becoming a bilateral disease are a very common
Corneal lesions with metabolic storage disease
lesion in a wide variety of breeds on diets of
Introduction/etiology
≥14% fat, or given oral coat conditioners.
Gangliosidosis GMi and GM269 and mucopolysaccaridosis
types I and VI have been reported to cause a cloudy cornea
to develop in young cats70-73, Mucopolysaccharidosis
Diagnosis
types I and Vll have also been associated with a cloudy
The crystalline appearance suggests the diagnosis but
cornea in the dog74, 7s. The ocular lesions of these
keratectomy  with histopathologic examination 
1S
metabolic storage diseases may be overlooked because of
necessary for confirmation.
the severity of the systemic neurologic signs. The corneal
lesions are due to vacuolation of keratocytes and
Therapy
endothelium with GAGs. The lesions are throughout the
 Therapy is often not given due to the minimal opacity
full thickness of the corneal stroma.
and slow benign course of most cases. Restriction of
dietary fat is recommended. Superficial keratectomy can
Clinical signs
be performed in larger or progresive opacities if they are
ag Aeu ieui juasaud an srauoo azeu 'asnr 'teiaie
superficial. Although the underlying cause is not
Ploy Aew jewue aul 1o wsedsoueqdaq Aq panueduome
 addressed, the cornea may remain clear postoperatively
 the eyes partially closed. It is difficult to localize the haze
for extended periods. Any systemic abnormality in lipid
because it is full thickness. Accompanying signs are
metabolism should be controlled, e.g. hypothyroidism.
referable to skeletal and neurologic systems.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
251
10.23
10.24
10.25
10.23 Doberman Pinscher that was treated
10.24 Stromal corneal ederma from
10.25 An 11-year-old Boston Terrier with
for a cardiomyopathy and developed diffuse 
 endothelial degeneration in a Miniature 
advanced diffuse endothelial degeneration and 
bilateral corneal edema from tocainide toxicity.
 Poodle. The condition was initially unilateral
accompanying corneal edema. A few bullae
but developed bilaterally and progressed 
are present and pigment is starting to invade
rapidly within 12 months. Note the lack of
the cornea dorsally.
 inflammatory signs at this stage.
10.26
 appears to be a spontaneous senile degeneration of the
endothelium. Pathologically, the endothelial cells are
reduced in number, increased in size, bizarre in shape,
o uoda     u
 Descemet's membrane76, 77.
A hereditary corneal dystrophy in the Manx cat
manifests with severe corneal edema resulting in epithelial
bullae, but the endothelium is morphologically norma178.
Mild, bilateral, axial, focal corneal edema develops at
4-5 months and slowly progresses. Late in the course,
 recurrent ulcerations develop from ruptured bullae. A
similar condition of corneal edema has been reported in a
domestic shorthaired cat79. While the pathogenesis has not
been clarified, the endothelium appears to have at least a
 functional deficiency in the pump mechanism.
In cattle wormed with phenothiazine and allowed in
10.26 Boston Terrier with advanced endothelial degeneration
the sunlight, a photosensitivity may develop that results
resulting in corneal edema with multiple bullae. The bullae rupture.
in bilateral diffuse corneal edema. The edema is
producing acute painful ulcerative episodes that may result in the
typically in the lower two-thirds of the cornea80.
 owner requesting enucleation or euthanasia.
Animals on a low plane of nutrition may be more
susceptible. Recovery may occur in 1 week if the animal
is restricted indoors, or recovery may be prolonged to
Diagnosis
2-3 months if it is kept on pasture. Ulcerations may
Neurologic and ophthalmic signs are suggestive of the
occur secondary to the edema.
diagnosis, as are histopathologic changes. Screening for 
 Long-term systemic tocainide was associated with
mucopolysaccaridosis  can  be performed on urine
diffuse corneal edema in Doberman Pinschers that were
 samples dried on filter paper and stained with toluidine
being treated for cardiomyopathy. The condition is
blue. Definitive diagnosis of the type of deficiency is
 reversible if recognized in the early stages (10.23) but is
made by measuring the lysosomal enzyme activities of
permanent at later stages*1.
leukocytes and fibroblasts.
Clinical signs (dog)
ACQUIRED DEEP NONINFLAMMATORY DISEASE
A focal area of stromal edema is observed in one eye,
Corneal endothelial dystrophy/degeneration
often beginning temporally (10.24). Initially there is no
Introd uction/etiology
inflammation in the cornea or in the eye but most eyes
Endothelial dystrophy manifests as a slowly progressive
 develop significant conjunctival vascular injection.
corneal edema in one eye that eventually
becomes
Edema slowly progresses over months to involve the
bilateral. The Boston Terrier is predisposed, and the
entire cornea and eventually the second eye (10.25).
disease manifests mainly in older females. A variety of
Epithelial bullae often develop from the increased water
other breeds (Poodle, Chow Chow, F
Basset Hound,
in the stroma collecting under and in the epithelium
Chihuahua, Dalmatian) may develop the disease but it is
(10.26). The bullae frequently rupture, producing an
not restricted to females in these breeds. In most cases it
acute superficial ulceration. The erosion is often slow to
252
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
heal as the basic cause is not cured. The end result is
often blindness. Chronic edema combined with multiple
cornea) with a low temperature battery cautery may
ulcerative episodes results in eventual vascularization
produce enough scarring to prevent recurrent ulcerations
and pigmentation of the cornea (10.27).
and pain. The corneal fibrosis reduces the ability of the
Cataracts frequently develop concurrently but how
cornea to swell and opacification may decrease.
they are related to the corneal edema is unknown.
Striate keratopathy
Diagnosis
Striate keratopathy is usually due to breaks in Descemet's
 Diagnosis is usually by ruling out other causes of endothelial
membrane and is usually the result of glaucoma. The
damage such as trauma, uveitis, luxated lens, PPMs, drug
 condition manifests as curvilinear, often branching, double
 toxicity, or glaucoma. Biomicroscopy of the endothelium
white lines that can be localized to Descemet's membrane
 may reveal multiple holes in the endothelial sheet.
with the slit lamp (10.29). Lines have been described in the
normal horse eye due to thinning of Descemet's
Therapy
membrane. Glaucoma should always be ruled out before
Therapy is usually palliative, consisting of hypertonic salt
 dismissing these lines as an innocent lesion?2. In the horse,
solution {which draws water out of the cornea) and soft
the signs of glaucoma may be very subtle, and the lack of
contact lenses. Hypertonic ointments or solutions have
readily available instruments to measure the IOP makes
minimal effect and are surprisingly expensive. Soft lenses 
glaucoma an underdiagnosed disease in the field. The
make the eyes more comfortable and the condition more
author has observed acute corneal edema that followed the
acceptable to the owner. Corneal grafting may
be
course of previous striae in the horse {10.30) and the
attempted but if performed late in the course, corneal
edema was the first obvious sign of gla ucoma to the owner.
vascularization will increase the chances of graft
Normal IOP at the time of examination does not rule out
rejection (10.28). The concurrent development of
past elevation as being the cause for striate keratopathy.
cataracts often complicates the prognosis for vision.
No therapy is given for the corneal lesions.
10.27
10.28
10.27 Miniature Poodle with advanced stages of endothelial
10.28 Full-thickness penetrating keratoplasty that was performed
degeneration that has left the chronically edematous cornea
on the patient in 10.24 later in development. The graft was rejected
vascularized and pigmented.
 approximately 4 weeks later.
10.29
10.30
10.29 Striate keratopathy or multiple breaks in Descemet's
10.30 Acute striate keratopathy with overlying corneal edema in a
membrane in an Elkhound with glaucoma.
horse. Multiple bullae are present in the edematous streak. Glaucoma
was the cause of the striae and edema was the first sign noted.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
253
10.31
10.33
10.31 Relatively acute corneal abscess in
10.32 A dog with intense neovascularization
10.33 Two Florida spots' in a dog. The opacities
a horse. Note the early, but intense, corneal 
of the cornea and a stromal keratitis asociated
 are white, stromal, with hazy borders and there
neovascularization. The dense creamy opacity
with Listeria monocytogenes Corneal edema is
 is no evidence of an inflammatory response.
represents neutrophils, whereas the lighter
a55ociated with bullae over the neovascularization.
cormeal opacity is due to edema.
 The patient responded well to antibiotics.
SUPERFICIAL NONULCERATIVE INFLAMMATORY
DISEASE
been isolated from both the dog and horse cornea {10.32).
Superficial keratitis
Many corneal abscesses in the horse are due to fungal
Introd uction/etiology
 organisms. All abscesses should be treated with both anti-
Superficial keratitis may be unilateral or bilateral and it
fungal and anti bacterial agents, due to the difficulty in ob-
is caused by a variety of agents. The condition may be
taining a representative sample for culture. In a series of
focal or multifocal, or progressive and diffuse. There are
16 horses undergoing corneal transplantation for corneal
many ca uses of superficial keratitis.
abscesses, Michau et al.86 found that 56% of corneal
buttons were positive for fungi while only 12% had
Mechanica!
bacteria. In a larger series of 62 cases of transplants in
Hairs and foreign bodies are common causes of focal uni-
horses for corneal abscesses, Lassaline et al.87 found fungi
lateral keratitis. Such factors should be considered, particu-
in 56% of corneal buttons.
larly in unilateral cases, as the resulting keratitis is usually
Moore et al.88 described a series of six cases of
curable and improvement will not occur until the cause is
postraumatic keratouveitis that were postulated to be
mrrected. In grazing animals and working dogs, plant foreign
sterile abscesses that required vascularization to heal.
bodies are a significant cause of keratitis in the late summer
The lack of positive cultures from the aqueous humor or
 and fall. Any chronic nonhealing keratitis should prompt re-
tissue in three of the six horses was thought to indicate a
evaluation and a careful search for an embedded foreign body
sterile immune process due to corneal necrosis. The
 in the conjunctiva or behind the third eyelid (8.57).
author still treats such abscesses as septic since, when it
is possible to obtain a culture, a number are positive for
Infectious
infective organisms, particularly for fungi89.
Bacterial. Bacteria usually require breaks in the epithelium
A syndrome of granuloma formation in the cornea
to become established, or they are carried into the stroma
 associated with an acid-fast bacterium has been described in
by a puncture wound. While bacterial keratitis is usually
the cat and is thought to be associated with feline leprosy90.
ulcerative, corneal abscessation from a puncture wound
Both diagnosis and therapy involved a superfcial keratec-
often no longer stains with fluorescein by the time of
tomy. In Australia, 15 cats with granulomatous skin, subcuti-
presentation. Abscessation is uncommon in the dog and
cular, ocular, and periocular lesions had a fastidious
cat; when present it is often in hunting dogs with punctures
Mycobacterium that was difficult to culture, but numerous
 from plants and in cats with claw injuries from fighting.
organisms were present on histopathology. PCR gene
Abscessation is most common in the horse and may be
sequencing identified the organism as a member of the
superficial or very deep. It is recognized by a focal
 Mycobacteriu simiae-related group, taxonomically related
accumulation of yellow-white neutrophils in the stroma
to the mycobacterium that causes leproid granulomas in
and confirmed by corneal scrapings and culture. Corneal
dogsa Successful therapy included surgical debulking plus
vascularization is eventually very intense and is a necessary
medical therapy. The nine-banded armadillo is used as an
part of the healing process (10.31). Deep abscessation is
animal model for human leprosy as it is susceptible to
often accompanied by a secondary anterior uveitis in the
Mycobacterium leprae without immune suppression. As in
horse. Determining the organism in deep abscessation is
humans, armadillos may develop lepromatous corneal
difficult since surface cultures are not representative and the
 granuloma and anterior uveal lesions91.
 aqueous humor is usually sterile?3. Bacterial isolates from
 In southern Florida, a disease characterized by multifocal
equine infectious keratitis are about equally divided
 small superficial macula {Florida spots) has been found in
between Gram-positive and Gram-negative organisms on
the dog and cat; investigators have reported acid-fast
initial culturing but this shifts to Gram-negative isolates
bacteria present in the lesions on biopsy (10.33). Other
 after intensive medical therapy. The most common Gram-
investigators have found no organisms in the lesions.
positive organisms found are Stapbylococcus spp. and
The lesions are not characterized by inflammation clinically
Streptococcus spp, and the most common Gram-negative
organisms found are Pseudomonas spp., Escherichia coli,
be due to Rhinosporidium spp.92, 93, Florida spots are more
254
OpHThAlMIC DIsEASe In VeTeRINARY MeDICINE
10.34
10.35
10.36
10.34 A cat with mycotic keratitis. The
10.35 Early mycotic keratitis in a horse. The
10.36 Mycotic keratitis in a horse that is more
yellowish-white opacities were mycotic
 lesions are subepithelial and no inflammatory
advanced than in the horse in 10.35 but is still
plaques. The cat had been treated for months
response has been mounted. Fusarium spp.
quite superficial. The lesion is subepithelial and 
with a topical corticosteroid. Debridement and 
was subsequently cultured.
will require vascularization in addition to
antifungal therapy instituted a rapid response.
antifungal therapy before it is healed.
common in cats than dogs. Histologically, they consist of
10.37
10.37 Mycotic
abnormal collagen fibrils. The lesions do not respond to
plaque in a horse
 either steroids or antibiotics and do not progress in number 
cornea due to
lu st Adeaui tiaao s aposida renut a souo shods jo
Fusarium spp.
recommended. Interestingly, humans in southern Florida
 Debridement of the 
also get nontuberculous mycobacterial keratitis that appears
 plaque to reduce
 similar and is not responsive to antibiotics9s.
the fungal mass was
performed
a a   io 5 s  
repea tedly, in
when observed in the dog and cat it is usually in
addition to topical
individuals that have received topical corticosteroids or
 antifungal therapy.
topical antibiotics, have high endogenous corticosteroids,
has initially improved and then regressed, is characterized
by plaques, and/or is antibiotic resistant should be
10.38
10.38 Rapidly
considered for mycotic keratitis {10.34). Dematiaceous
 melting corneal 
fungi such as Curvularia spp. and Cladosporium spp. are
ulcer in a horse.
uncommon infections but are unique in that they may
Culures and
produce a black pigmentation of the cornea8-100.
cytology were
 Fungal keratitis in the horse is usually preceded by corneal
 nega tive for
abrasion and treatment with an antibiotic or antibiotic-
bacteria but an
 orticosteroid. The history is usually one of improving and
Aspergiltus sp. was
 then stabilizing or relapsing. Mycotic keratitis is so common
 cultured. Note the
in the horse that the author avoids using glucocorticoids if at
 massive neutrophilic
all possible for equine comeal disease, and often treats simple 
response and
abrasions and ulcers prophylactically with topical antifungal
malacic cornea
 drugs as well as antibacterial drugs.
ventrally.
In the mildest form, the patient is presented with
epiphora and mild blepharospasm. On examination of
the eye, the cornea has a faint to moderate superficial
10.39
10.39 Focal opacity
 edema with characteristic subepithelial, multifocal white
 at Descemet's
macula with hazy edges. The epithelium is loose,
membrane adjacent
roughened, and easily removed (10.35). Patients that
to the flash artifact 
have had topical corticosteroid therapy, and therefore
in a horse. Full-
may be more chronic, often have deeper stromal lesions
thicknes5
and more pronounced edema. Deeper lesions may
keratoplasty "button'
 develop surrounding furrows and slough, lea ving deep to
had fungal hyphae
perforating lesions (10.36, 10.37). The most severe form,
 on histopathology.
with the worst prognosis, is the progressive stromal ulcer
that often results in perforation (10.38)101.
 Some conditions have a gritty plaque formation that is
 formed from a colony of organisms, often Fusariurm spp.
or Aspergillus spp. (10.36, 10.37)102. The predominant
isolate may vary with the region and environment. Fungi
CORNEA AND SCLERA
255
10.40
antifungal agent on the US market but it is not widely
 available and it is very expensive. This has resulted in the
use of a wide variety of nonophthalmic agents that have
 antifungal properties. Such agents include:
 Topical tincture of iodine or povidone-iodine swabbing
may be used in conjunction with other drugs.
 Polyene antifungals: act by binding to ergosterol in the 
fungal cell wall thus altering membrane permeability
and ca using disruption of the cell. Natamycin
(pimaricin) is a polyene antifungal manufactured as a
 5% suspension. The drug is effective against
filamentous fungi. Therapy is frequent, at least hourly
initia lly, and tapering to q2-4h. Corneal absorption is
 poor if the epithelium is intact104.
10.40 Corneal cytology from a horse with mycotic keratitis. The
Amphotericin B as a topical 0.5-1% drug has
hyphae are more dense in this preparation than usual and they may
been used and is effective, but unfortunately it is
represent cytology frorm a fungal plaque.
the most toxic to the cornea of the various agents.
It is most efficacious against yeasts and Fusarium
spp. Nystatin is rarely used topically due to
toxicity and poor ocular penetration.
are frequently the cause of deep corneal abscessation at
· Imidazole antifungals: these drugs are fungistatic at
Descemet's membrane and seem to have an a ffinity for this
low concentrations (by inhibiting ergosterol
location. The inaccessibility of the membrane makes
synthesis) and fungicidal at high concentrations
clinical confirmation difficult (10.39). It is not uncommon
(having a direct damaging effect on the cell wall).
through the course of mycotic keratitis to have
High concentrations are difficult to obtain or sustain
 complications with bacterial infection. Moore et al.102a
in ocular tissue, so these drugs are essentially
reported that in 91 cases of confirmed fungal keratitis,
Clinically fungistaticios.
30% also had one or more bacterial isolates. Sixty percent
 Thiabendazole deworming pastes have been used
had two bacterial isolates, the most common of which
topically to treat fungal keratitis106 but, with more
(75%) were gram-positive bacteria. The course of the
appropriate products available, their use is no
disease, even when specifically treated, is chronic, often
longer recommended. Clotrimazole is available as a
lasting 6-8 weeks before the eye is *quiet' and comforta ble.
dermatologic and vaginal cream that is tolerated by
the eye. It is effective against Aspergillus spp.
Diagnosis of bacterial and fungal keratitis Diagnosis is
Miconazole i.v. solution is used as a topical drop
by corneal scraping for cytology and cultures, with
and dermatologic or vaginal creams have been
emphasis placed on the cytology for directing the initial
tolerated reasonably well by the eye. However, the
therapy (10.40). Cytology is pivotal in diagnosing fungal
drug does not penetrate the intact corneal
keratitis, except for deep stromal lesions, since culture
epithelium. Miconazole has a broad spectrum of
requires ≥2 weeks for a definitive result. Massa et al.103
activity against yeasts and filamentous fungi and
reported a positive result with infectious keratitis: 54%
is a commonly used agent.
from cytology, 60% from culture, and 73% from both
Ketaconazole is successful as either oral or topical
cytology and culture. Hendrix et al.89 reported that of 24
therapy. Topical concentrations of 1-5% are 
horses with corneal abscesses only three were positive by
tolerated10s
routine culturing. Specimens taken during surgical
 Fluconazole, as topical and oral preparations, is
intervention yielded a positive result for fungal or
being used for therapy. Oral fluconazole has been
bacterial organisms in another five cases, resulting in a
used for deep fungal keratitis by giving a loading
total of 37% positive results for an infectious agent.
dose of 2 mg/kg q12h for 1-4 days, followed by a
maintenance dose of 1 mg/kg q12h for 2 weeks or
Therapy of bacterial and fungal keratitis Therapy for
more. Latimer et al107 studied the pharmacokinetics
bacterial keratitis is often fortified topical antibiotics q4h.
of fluconazole in the horse and recommended
 Removal of the epithelium may be performed to enhance
14 mg/kg q24h as a loading dose and 5 mg/kg q24h
antibiotic penetration. Deep abscessation often requires
as a maintenance dose. Since fluconazole is very
both systemic and topical antibiotics. In the horse, if treating
expensive, this regimen would make therapy very
without the benefit of cultures, more than one antibiotic is
expensive. One study of isolates found it to be the 
usually used. An antibiotic such as a cephalosporin, that is
least effective of the various imidazoles for 
effective against Streptococcus spp., should be one of the
selections. It may have to be compounded because few
 Fluconazole does have the property of achieving high
 commercal topical preparations are available for resistant
tissue levels and it has been argued that the in vitro
organisms. The responsible agent is usually not isolated so
sensitivity testing does not reflect the in vivo effect.
antifungal therapy is also given. Ideally, antifungal
Itraconazole 1%/DMSO ointment can be
sensitivity testing should guide therapy but the relative
formulated that achieves good thera peutic corneal
unavailability, cost, and time do not make it very practical.
 concentrations. It was effective in eight of ten eyes
A wide variety of drugs and methods have been used
treated. The author has used this preparation
to treat fungal keratitis, which is a reflection of the
extensively and has had only modest success,
frustration involved. Natamycin is the only ophthalmic
256
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
+ Voriconazole: voriconazole is the newest of the imida.
surgical therapy is roughly equivalent. Despite the difficult
zoles commercially available for parenteral administra-
rature of the disease to treat, most eyes remain visual.
tion. In testing susceptibility patterns it was more
effective against the usual fungal isolates than natamycin,
Viral. Herpesvirus is the main viral agent producing
itraconazole, fluconazole, and ketoconazole. Miconazole
keratitis. The various conditions in different species will
was equally as effective in vitroll10a. Voriconazole has the
be
discussed under ulcerative keratitis, although
significant benefit of penetrating the intact cornea and
nonulcerative syndromes are common.
blood aqueous barrier in horses and achieving thera-
Lack of tears
 most effective concentration without ocular irritation
 KCS is an important etiology for keratitis in the dog and
was 1% and the systemic dose utilized was 4 mg/kg.
less so in the cat and other species. (See Chapter 9,
 Silver sulfadiazine cream has broad antibacterial and
p.219.)
antifungal properties. It is available and is tolerated
on the eye as a 1% cream1l1. Betbeze et al.llla found
Chemica!
silver sulfadiazine fungistatic and fungicidal against
Chemical injury with a strong alkaline solution is a
all of the fungal isolates from horses that it was
devastating injury and more damaging to the cornea than
tested against, in comparison with natamycin that
a strong acid. Alkaline solutions penetrate deeper into the
was not effective against Fusarium. It is effective
cornea, whereas acidic solutions precipitate proteins that
against both yeast and filamentous fungi.
act as a barrier to deeper penetration. Many of these
injuries are of a malicious nature. Immediate therapy is
Antibiotics are also administered in addition to the
thorough rinsing of the ocular surface and removal of any
antifungal agent as mixed bacterial-fungal infections or
retained particulate material. Strong soaps for bathing are
secondary bacterial infections are not uncommon. Ocular
common causes of superficial ulcerative lesions.
discomfort is controlled with atropine and NSAIDs.
Systemic NSAIDs such as flunixin or phenylbutazone, are
Parasitic
used for pain relief and secondary uveitis.
In the horse, Orchocerca cervacalis microfilaria that have
The course of corneal bacterial abscesses and fungal
 ded in the cornea may produce a keratitis. It is characterized
keratitis is typically chronic and the lesions usually require
in the acute stages by multifocal opacities and later by
vascularization to occur before improvement is noted. For
vascularization and scarring in the stroma {10.41). Perilimbal
this reason, peripheral corneal lesions usually heal faster. It
follicular formation, anterior uveitis, and conjunctival vitiligo
is not unusual for the condition to worsen after the
 may also be present. The condition is usually bilateral (see
initiation of therapy. This has been attributed to the release
Chapter 11, p.298). The diagnosis of onchocercal keratitis is
of exotoxins from the killed fungi. Welch et al.113 were a ble
often presumptive. Conjunctival snip biopsy containing
to demonstrate in vitro antiangiogenic properties of certain
motile microflaria is suggestive but not an absolute indicator
isolates of clinical cases of mycotic keratitis; theoretically,
die to the presence of microfilaria in horses without ocular
these properties may be responsible for slowing down the
 diseasel17. The role of Onchocerca microflaria in producing
ocular lesions has been reduced with the use of routine
usually frequent and the patient becomes uncooperative,
deworming with broad-spectrum anthelmintics.
necessitating using SPL. Because of these demands,
hospitalization is often necessary and this results in
Leishmaniasis. Leishmaniasis 
may
produce
 significant expense to treat the condition.
keratoconjunctivitis. Pena et al.l18 reported that 24% of
The prognosis will vary with the depth of the lesion.
dogs with leishmaniasis had ocular/periocular lesions
Superficial infections, while expensive to treat, usually carry
and 34% had some form of keratoconjunctivitis. In
t11'7n za maupuy uonouny pue uosa loy sisousoid poog e
 addition, 42% of ocular leishmaniasis produced anterior
reported a 95% success in maintaining the eye and a 92%
uveitis and/or secondary glaucoma that often resulted in
success for visual function with fungal keratitis. Others have
corneal
lesions
such
as
cormneal .
edema
DuB
not been as successful, with 64% retention of a visual eye
neovascularization.
 The keratitis observed 
with
 and 25% enucleation rate with fungal keratitisl1s.
leishmaniasis varied from focal corneal edema with
 Surgical augmentation of medical therapy with a keratec-
neovascularization and cellular infiltration adjacent to
 tomy combined with conjunctival grafting will enable better
the limbus, to focal nodular lesions near the limbus.
sampling for microbiological testing, removal of part of the
infectious burden and necrotic tissue, and bring a blood
Diagnosis and therapy. See leishmaniasis involving the
supply to the lesion more rapidly. Smaller deep lesions can be
eyelid (Protozoa, p.167) and anterior uveitis (p.312-314).
removed entirely by a penetrating keratectomy or a posterior
lamellar keratoplastylf6. Posterior lamellar grafts were placed
Immune-mediated
by dissecting a square of superficial lamellar graft on three
Superficial keratitis due to immune-mediated processes are
sides, leaving it hinged on the remaining side, and removing
common but are incompletelyl
understood.
The
the deep abscess using a penetrating trephined graft in the
 mechanism is often presumed, based on bilaterality, lack of
lamellar bed. After placing a donor button in the trephined
infectious or mechanical etiologies, mononuclear cellular
 graft, the superficial lamellar flap was sutured over the deeper
infiltrates on histopathologic examination, and response
graft. Despite obtaining deeper tissue surgically, in many cases
to corticosteroids or other immunosuppressa nts. Keratitis
an infectious agent is not isolated or observed on
in many of the infectious diseases also has an immunologic
histopathology6,87 Medical therapy is necessary for an aver-
component.  Examples of immune-mediated superficial
age of 45 days9 The risks of anesthesia must be weighed
nonulcerative keratitis are described below.
against the benefit of surgery. The expense of medical or
CORNEA AND SCLERA
257
10.41
10.42
10.43
10.41 Horse with multifocal stromal opacities
10.42 Early pannus formation in a Boykin
10.43 Advanced pannus in a German
adjacent to the limbus that were associated with
 Spaniel. The condition was bilateral and 
Shepherd Dog.
Onchocerca cervicalis. Conjunctival perilimbal
responded well to topical corticosteroid 
follicular hyperplasia was also present.
therapy.
Pannus
genetic predisposition, combined with UV exposure at high
Introduction/etiology Pathologically,
pannus is the
altitude, altering a corneal antigen so that it is recognized
subepithelial proliferation of vessels and connective tissue.
 as foreign and resulting in inflammation, has been
The term pannus is used clinically to signify a bilateral
proposedl19. Chandler et al1302 demonstrated an increased
superficial keratitis that is thought to be immune mediated in
 expression of MMP2 and MMP9 in dogs with pannus and
the GSD and GSD crosses. Similar syndromes have been
ass ui uou d sasea a An rel paio
observed in the Greyhound, Shetland Sheepdog, Siberian
      i a 
Husky, Sootch Collie,_ Border Collie, Belgian Tervuren,
expression of MMPs and these may facilitate 
the
inflammatory reaction. While the breed specificity of the
histopathologic
 changes
aré
characterized
by
condition and the fact that pannus is more difficult to
neovascularization and fibroplasia, and by plasma cell,
control in patients from geographic areas of higher altitude
lymphocyte, macrophage, and melanocytic cell infiltration.
would suggest a genetic link interacting with environmental
While the epithelium remains intact, it becomes variable in
factors, the heritability has not been elucidated.
 thickness from hyperplastic to thin; surface changes may be
observed early in the course of the disease using electron
Climical signs The age of onset is usually 4-5 years in the
microscopy121-123 Petrick and van Rensberg reported that
GSD but it may vary with the altitude of the region and
GSDs with pannus had very thin corneal epithelial layers
the breed of dog. The lesion begins as an area of
mmpared to other breeds of dogs. In addition, a number
'snqw leodwai au ie uouenueig pue uoezeno5a
GSDs in the control group had thinned epithelium, loose
usually in both eyes (10.42). Most dogs have a
mrneal stroma, and decreased corneal tensile strength. This
 conjunctivitis and about 10% may have plasma cell
was proposed as denoting a predisposing factor for pannus.
involvement of the third eyelidi22 The disease progresses
 An increase in eosinophils and mast cells at the limbal regions
 Over weeks and months with invasion from the medial
of GSDs compared to other breeds has been reported and
and ventral areas of the cornea. Eventually, the entire
cornea is covered with a_gray to red roughened
cytoplasmic inclusions were found in comeal fibroblasts,
superficial opacity {10.43). Focal gray spots are often
vascular endothelial cells, macrophages, and trabecular cells
present in the clear cornea adjacent to the infiltrating
of GSDs with and without pannus. Virus cultures were
lesion. Some individuals with pannus will develop heavy
negative and the significance of the cytology is unknown126
pigmentation,
which 
obscures
the 
underlying
While pannus is thought to be immune mediated,
inflammatory reaction. The end result is often blindness.
 most of the testing has been nonspecific and/or the
significance of findings is unknown. An increase in
Diagnosis Diagnosis of pannus is presumptive when
immunoglobulin (Ig) G has been demonstrated in the
bilateral proliferative keratitis is present in a 'typical
-ue ol asuodsau aui Aq paooguau sl siui 'paa1g
elevated IgG is probably a nonspecific finding with
inflammatory therapy.
 stromal inflammation. Dogs with pannus have also been
Glucocorticoids. The main therapy for pannus is topical
when exposed to corneal and iridal antigens, suggesting
glucocorticoids to suppress corneal inflammation. The
a delayed hypersensitivity reaction. However, another
route, frequency, and form of glucocorticoid therapy
study was unable to
 demonstrate lymphocytic
varies with the individual circumstances and preferences.
Initial therapy is intensive but later maintenance therapy
 Epidemiologic studies relate the occurrence of pannus to
is reduced and titrated to the individual response. The
 geographic areas with an elevation of 4,s00 feet or higher
duration of therapy is indefinite, perhaps for the life of
 in 95% of casesl19,120 Spontaneous improvement in severe
%1 e oosd pid   
y uouezndsou paauooud aq paaae uaaq sey snuued 
suspension is given q4h' for 7-10 days. At this time a
258
OpHThAlMIC DisEASe In VeTeRINArY MeDICInE
10.44
10.45
10.44 Same dog as 10.43 after 2 weeks of topical corticosteroid
10.45 Same dog as 10.43 after 10 weeks of topical corticosteroid
thera py q4h.
therapy decreasing in frequency and maintained on q24h therapy.
Note residual corneal pigmentation and focal opacities.
dramatic improvement should occur and the dose can be
incorrectly, therefore nitrous oxide is preferred.
decreased to q6h for 7-10 days. The frequency
is
Cryotherapy does not take the place of corticosteroids
decreased progressively at weekly intervals as long as
 and they should be continued after healing.
improvement is maintained (10.44, 10.45).
 Maintenance therapy of q24-12h is usually achieved
Radiation
therapy. Beta-radiation therapy is. an
but may have to be adjusted periodically. It is extremely
alternative 
therapy available mainly at teaching
important that the owner realizes that the therapy will
institutions. Beta-radiation may be used to disperse the
control but not cure the condition. Many dogs with
pigment and suppress inflammation in cases that are
 controlled long-term glucocorticoid medication_ (for
difficult to control with corticosteroids. The dose used is
years) may not require further treatment but the diligent
quite variable and bullous keratopathy is a complication
owner at this point is often wary of stopping therapy.
from endothelial damage (see Corneal tumors, p.286).
If the initial intensive topical therapy is not likely to be
given, then topical glucocorticoids can be supplemented
Surgery. Superficial
keratectomies
will
produce
with long-acting subconjunctival glucocorticoids such as
immediate, but usually temporary, improvement.
betamethasone, triamcinolone, or methylprednisolone.
Keratectomies are used mainly to treat patients with
The injections may be repeated if exacerbation occurs
heavy pigmentation and as a last resort {see Corneal
but they do not replace the use of topical glucocorticoids.
dermoids, p.282, 10.110). The initial effect from surgery
is short-lived as granulation occurs in the healing
 The most common error in treating pannus is not
process. Topical corticosteroids, cyclosporine, and
 to treat intensively for the first 2 weeks and/or to
NSAIDs postoperatively are necessary to moderate the
use weak concentrations of glucocorticoids.
inflammatory reaction in the cornea. These drugs must
be monitored carefully to avoid complications.
Topical cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or pimecolimus. Topical
 Corneoscleral grafting of the involved area has been
0.2-2% cyclosporine, 0.02% tacrolimus solution or
pauiea iou sey anbiuuoai siui inq saop inoy ul pauodau
ointment, and 1 % pimecolimus have demonstrated efficacy
the technical difficulty, expense, questionable results, and 
be used alone or in conjunction with topical corticosteroids
difficulty in obtaining donors.
for best results is unresolved at this point. They are
alternative drugs that can be used in resistant cases and may
Eosinophilic keratitis
Xe Aaui 'saso auaas ui Aaans ioy Aissau aui suaad
Introductionletiology
v Eosinophilic keratitis is unique
also minimize the risk of local (lipid keratopathy)
and
to cats and horses.
 It manifests as a proliferative,
systemic side-effects that corticosteroids may induce.
progressive, superficial keratitis. The etiology
is
unknown
but
LO
histopathology
superficial
Cryotherapy. Cryotherapy of the corneal surface has
 granulomatous
inflammation
with
numerous
been used to slough superficial pigment. When
eosinophils and mast cells is present. Some cases may
pigmentation is extensive, cryotherapy of the corneal
have a peripheral eosinophilia but this and any
surface for 10-20 seconds at each site using nitrous oxide
 association with the feline eosinophilic complex is very
Liquid nitrogen spray for 15 seconds and double freezing
for herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) was positive in 33% and
has also been reported to be successful in removing
PCR for FHV-1 was positive in 76% of cats with
corneal pigment134. Liquid nitrogen is more capable of
eosinophilic keratitis139, 140.
producing permanent corneal edema if performed
CORNEA AND SCLERA
259
10.46
10.47
10.48
10.46 Relatively early eosinophilic keratitis at
10.47 Advanced eosinophilic keratitis in a cat.
10.48 Multifocal eosinophilic keratitis in a
the nasal limbus in a cat. Note the white surface
 The condition is characterized by superficial
horse. The white material easily shelled out
on the proliferative mass. Eosinophils, mast cells.
white material. The patient was treated with
of the cornea, leaving an ulcer, and it wa5
and lymphocytes were readily found on scrapings
oral megestrol acetate and responded well.
rich in eosinophils. The patient responded 
from the lesion. The patient responded well to
(Courtesy of Dr. S. Winston, Atlanta, GA.]
dramatically to topical corticosteroid therapy.
topical corticosteroids, but the second eye
become involved several months later.
10.49
and corneal neovascularization. The white plaques in the
multifocal form 'shell out' of the cornea with manipulation.
Diagnosis Diagnosis is usually based on the unusual
cytology of numerous mast cells and eosinophils.
Differential diagnosis should include mast cell neoplasia,
which may have similar cytology.
Therapy If topical glucocorticoids have not been previously
used, they should be given a trial since most cases are
responsive. In cats it is also prudent to treat concurrently
with a topical antiviral agent when administering topical
gucocorticoids, due to the high percentage of FHV-I-
positive cats. If relapses or an incomplete response occurs in
the cat, megestrol acetate (5 mg/q24h for 1 week and
 2.5-5 mg/week maintenance) has been recommended.
10.49 Proliferative keratitis with a white plaque in a cat. This
In horses with the multifocal form of eosinophilic
syndrome does not have eosinophils on histopathology. (Courtesy 
keratitis, response to topical glucocortioid therapy.
is
of Dr. V. Pentlarge, Athens, GA.]
rapid. The ulcerative and limbal based forms respond to
mast cell stabilizers such as 0.1% lodoxamide q6h.
Therapy will probably be very prolonged.
Clinical signs fcat) Initially, the keratitis is unilateral but
it may become bilateral. A progressive red granulating
This condition is yet another reason why the
proliferation usually begins at the superior temporal or
 clinician should become comfortable in performing
inferior nasal limbus and eventually covers the cornea
cytology of ocular surfaces for diagnostic reasons.
(10.46, 10.47). Whitish deposits of cheesy consistency,
that are rich in eosinophils, are present in chronic cases.
Proliferative keratitis in the cat
STT values may be decreased but improve with
treatment. Blepharospasm is present in about 20% of cases
variant of eosinophilic keratitis143. A proliferative
and the conjunctiva and third eyelid adjacent to the corneal
chronic superficial keratitis with white cheesy deposits
lesions may be severely affected. Whether this overlaps with
 on the surface has been described with clinical signs
eosinophilic conjunctivitis as described in Chapter 8
similar to eosinophilic keratitis. Histopathologically, no
(p.196) is unknown. After an initially positive response to
eosinophils were present and the white material was an
therapy, relapse is common (66%) after several months.
 amorphous eosinophilic depositl144, 14s.
Clinical sigrs (horse)  Two forms have been observed in the
Clinical sigrs A superficial proliferative keratitis is present,
horse: an acute multifocal form (10.48) with white plaques
which usually is bilateral and begins temporally. There are
in the superficial cornea and a more diffuse limbal based
white deposits on the surface of the cornea {10.49).
form with white deposits which may be ulcerativel41, 142.
Adjacent conjunctiva may have similar proliferations and
The inflammation stimulates epiphora and blepharospasm
deposits. The cats are usually middle aged.
260
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Diagnosis Biopsy of the lesion and eosinophilic material
Various metals such as iron, copper, gold, and silver
near the basal lamina differentiates the condition from
may stain the cornea. The most common metallic stain is
eosinophilic keratitis. Corneal scrapings or cytology have
iron, usually from a retained corneal foreign body.
'lasqe ae sudousoa Aiqensaid ing pahodau uaag io
Corneal staining as a complication of silver nitrate stick
Therapy The condition is responsive to topical
A variety of topical and systemic medications have
 corticosteroids but may relapse or occur in the other eye.
been documented to produce corneal pigmentation, but
If the condition is resistant or relapsing, oral megestrol
most of the drugs are either not often used or are not
 acetate should be considered. Relapses occur when
therapy ceases, so long-term therapy should be
topical epinephrine may induce a dark pigmentation in
 anticipated. If corticosteroids are effective, they should
the conjunctiva and cornea.
be used to avoid the complications of megestrol acetate.
Amiodarone is an antiarrhythmic drug that has long
been recognized to produce pigmented fine deposits in the
Pigmentary keratitis
basal cells of the corneal epithelium when used long term
Introduction/etiology It is not unusual for clinicians to use
in humans. Typically, the deposits are reversible after
this term as a specific diagnosis. However, the condition
cessation of therapy. Dogs appear resistant to amiodarone
should not be viewed as a separate entity. The term
deposits; of six dogs administered amiodarone, only one
 pigmentary keratitis is used for those forms of keratitis in
dog developed mild deposits after 11 weeks of therapyl49.
On histopathology the typical cytoplasmic inclusions
dense that the inflammatory response of neovascularization
were found in the basal cells of the affected dog.
may not be visible. Sources of pigmentation on or in the
Nevertheless, periodic ocular examinations are prudent
cornea may be categorized as either endogenous or
for animals on long-term amiodarone therapy. Lesions,
exogenous in origin. Superficial corneal pigment results 
when present, are observed on biomicroscopy as fine dots 
from the migration of limbal melanocytes along blood
in the epithelial layer of the cornea.
vessels. Corneal neovascularization is thus a prerequisite
 Pigmentation of the cornea of the cat is common with
for 
 superficial
1  stromal  pigmentation  (melanin)146.
formation of a corneal sequestrum condition  see
Alternatively, latent or amelanotic melanocytes may be in
Corneal sequestrum, p.272). Dematiaceous fungi will
the cornea and activated by neovascularization, or
also produce a darkly pigmented cornea98-100
epithelial pigment may arise from stem cell stimulation at
 The author categorizes pigmentary keratitis into focal
the limbus. Pigment that is in the epithelial layers will be
nonprogressive and diffuse progressive forms. The focal
sloughed with the turnover of epithelium if the cause is
form is common in brachycephalic breeds and is usually
corrected or controlled. Stromal pigmentation remains
 caused by long-term mechanical irritation such as medial
indefinitely. Breeds such as Pugs, Shetland Sheepdogs, and
entropion, nasal fold irritation, or a stromal ulcer that
Dachshunds respond to corneal inflammation  with
has been slow to heal. These often take the shape of a
 pigmentation more than other breeds.
wedge of pigment on the medial cornea that points to the
Deep melanin pigmentation may occur from uveal
axial cornea (10.52). Often, by the time these areas are
sources such as PPMs, anterior synechiae, or ruptured
recognized by the owner, they are not in the progressive
iris cysts. Blood staining may occur from hemoglobin
 or developing phase.
breakdown products from some forms of hyphema or
from intracorneal hemorrhage (10.50, 10.51).
10.50
10.51
10.52
10.50 A dog with blood staining the cornea
10.51 Intrastromal hemorrhage in the cornea
10.52 Medial corneal pigmentation and 
from a chronic hyphema with increased 
of a dog that had cobalt radiation therapy and
granulation in a Pug due to irritation from
intraocular pressure.
developed a sterile stromal absces5.
medial entropion. The lesion is still active but
will not cover the cornea. Both eyes were
treated with a medial canthoplasty.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
261
Diffuse pigmentary keratitis is often insidious and
 Diffuse pigmentary keratitis is very frustrating to
progresses to complete or near complete coverage of the
monitor for the owner and the clinician, since the
cornea and blindness (10.53). The condition may be
progression is insidious and the increased
unilateral or bilateral. The underlying cause may be KCS,
pigmentation remains in most cases as a high
lagophthalmos, or immune-mediated keratitis. Some
water mark' for the inflammation.
forms of pannus in the GSD are characterized more by
pigment than by granulation tissue. The underlying
Surface cryotherapy and beta-radiation therapy have
inflammation is variably masked by the pigment.
been used to disperse the pigmentation when severe.
While the pigment may 
disperse, residual corneal
Clinical signs Superficial corneal pigmentation is the
 scarring is often severe. A superficial keratectomy will
predominant sign. Focal pigmentation in brachycephalics
remove the pigment. However, since the pigment
is usually a limbal based triangle of pigment in the medial
deposition recurs in immune-mediated conditions,
cornea (10.52). Diffuse pigmentation may have a vortex
keratectomy is not recommended in most patients150.
appearance with the tip directed to the central cornea.
Postsurgical complications of infection and melting
The latter pattern is explained by the pigment following
ulcers are common in brachycephalic breeds if the cornea
the stem cell migration from the limbus, which occurs in
is not covered or lubricated well.
a whorl or vortex pattern27.
Depending on the stage of development and cause of
DEEP NONULCERATIVE INFLAMMATORY
the pigment, additional signs of pain, discharge, and
DISEASE
neovascularization may be present. Blindness is common
Stromal or interstitial keratitis
when the condition is bilateral and diffuse.
Hepatitis ocular reaction is described as the typical
example of deep keratitis in the dog. Most cases of deep
Diagnosis The underlying cause of pigmentation should
keratitis that are not complications of deep ulcerations,
be determined and treated.
accompany an anterior uveitis. Thus the causes of
 stromal keratitis are often the same as uveitis.
Therapy Mechanical causes such as medial entropion in
 Neovascularization associated with stromal keratitis
brachycephalic breeds should be corrected if the keratitis
is usually characterized by vessels that are relatively
is in the developing stage. However, patients are often
straight and, with the slit lamp, can be localized deep in
presented once the condition is established and surgery
the cornea {10.54). Because the corneal endothelium
will not change the pigment. As most medial entropions
participates in the process, various degrees of corneal
Aq paienoip aq Aeu Adeuaul 'suais [ensia Aue asnro jou op
 edema and cellular deposits (keratic precipitates) on the 
other signs that are present, such as epiphora.
endothelium are common (10.55), as are signs relating to
In the progressive forms, therapy is directed at the
an anterior uveitis (synechiae, hypotony, and flare).
cause (e.g. KCS) or the underlying infammation (e.g.
An anatomic diagnosis is made by the straight vascular
immune-mediated inflammation). If the inflammation is
 pattern, localization of lesions to the deep cornea, and
controlled, most animals will retain vision despite the
uveal signs. Therapy is directed at the anterior uveitis and,
presence of diffuse pigmentation. Topical cyclosporine
if the condition is not thought to be an infectious process,
also appears promising at decreasing the pigmentation,
usually consists of corticosteroids. Prednisolone acetate
both in cases associated with KCS and with other forms.
1% is the best topical steroid for corneal inflammation.
10.53
10.54
10.55
10.53 Progressive pigmentation that will 
10.54 Deep stromal vessels with minimal
10.55 Stromal keratitis in a dog with
cover the cornea in this Pug if the stromal
 branching in a cat with stromal keratitis.
toxoplasmosis-induced episclerokeratouveitis.
inflammation is not controlled. Note
Note the focal deposits, which are keratic
thickening of the cornea and 
precipitates on Descemet's membrane, and 
neovascularization. Vision will improve by
secondary corneal edema from endothelial
controlling the inflammation and thinning the
compromise. An episcleritis was associated
cornea, even if the pigmentation rermain5.
with the keratitis dorsally.
262
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Infectious canine hepatitis
Canine adenovirus-1 {CAV-1), whether virulent or
Introduction/etiology
attenuated as a vaccine strain, may produce a condition
Interstitial keratitis due to infectious canine hepatitis (ICH)
of acute anterior uveitis and endotheliitis with corneal
is almost an historical disease. The routine use of canine
edema. The ocular signs begin about 10-14 days after
adenovirus-2 {CAV-2) for vaccination has all but eliminated
vaccination, 6-8 days after i.v. injection, or in the
the previous vaccine-related reaction and, since natural
recovery stage of clinical disease, and are the result of an
 ICH is now quite rare, clinicians seldom see the condition.
Arthus-type immune reaction151, 152 The basic lesion is a
On rare occasions typical ocular reactions have been
uveitis and the corneal edema is due to damage from
reported 2 weeks following immunization with CAV-2.
neutrophilic lysosomal enzymes. Most cases improve
spontaneously over 2-3 weeks but some patients have
persistent corneal edema and/or secondary glaucoma.
Table 10.3 Possible pathogenesis of infectious canine
Breeds such as the Siberian Husky, Afghan Hound, and
hepatitis blue eye151
other sight hounds may have an increased incidence of
such complications1s3, 154. Certain breeds that have
Viremia:
goniodysgenesis
may be more susceptible to the
Viral growth in reticuloendothelial tissue, kidney, liver 
complication of glaucoma. (See Table 10.3 for the
 proposed pathogenesis of ICH ocular lesions.)
▼
± Viral growth in anterior uvea/corneal endothelium (CE)
Clinical signs
No growth - no uveitis
 Occasionally, observant owners will present patients
Growth - CE, vascular endothelium, trabeculae
with signs of anterior uveitis such as blepharospasm,
▼
miosis, flare, and hypotony. Within 24-36 hours the
 Local immune response
familiar sign of corneal edema develops. Corneal edema
 Lymphocytes and plasma cells in anterior uvea
may be focal or diffuse and it has the appearance of
Restricted viral growth
ground glass (10.56). In 10-15% of cases the edema is
▼
bilateral. Epithelial bullae may develop and rupture,
Viral growth arrested or viral persisitence in restricted sites
producing corneal ulceration. If severe hypotony
is
No persistence - no clinical signs 
present, the cornea may develop keratoconus. The
 Persistence - CE, trabecular meshwork cells
 conjunctiva is usually hyperemic and, after a lag of
 Viral antigen release into aqueous fluid 
2-3 days, neovascularization of the cornea begins. Most 
patients improve spontaneously over 2-3 weeks, while
▼
Others have partial improvement, delayed improvement,
Immune complex formation (CAv-1 antibody)
Virusfantibody excess: slight or no pathogenicity
Or no improvement of the edema with eventual
Virusfantibody balance: complement (C') binding;
development of pigmentation. Patients whose corneas do
not clear in the expected 2-3 weeks may show clearing
pathogenic
after a lag of several weeks or months. In these patients,
▼
residual pigmentation is usually present in the cornea.
C'-mediated release of biologically active components
 Leukocyte chemotactic factors
Immune adherence factor
 Enhanced phagocytosis of immune complexes 
▼
10.56
Leukocyte infiltration into anterior chamber
▼
 Phagocytosis of immune complexes-C' by neutrophils 
 and macrophages
▼
Lysosomal enzyme release
Injury (focal) to CE at points of contact with
leukocytes?
▼
Infiltration of leukocytes between CE and 
 Descemet's membrane
Aqueous fluid permeates into corneal stroma
 Corneal edema 
▼
 Digestion of immune complexes within phagocytic
vacuoles and removal
If lesions in CE focal: resolution in 1-3 weeks
If lesions extensive: no CE regeneration, persistent or
 permanent corneal damage. Bullous keratopathy.
10.56 Diffuse stromal edema associated with infectious canine
hydrophthalmos, or extensive corneal pigmentation 
hepatitis vaccination with CAv-1 2 weeks earlier. The uveitis is
with complete loss of vision.
masked. As most of these reactions occur in puppies, many will
 spontaneously improve in 2-4 week5.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
263
10.57
10.58
10.59
10.57 Presumed herpes-induced stromal
 10.58 Severe herpes-induced keratouveitis
10.59 Keratouveitis in a young calf due to the
keratitis in a cat. Note also the symblepharon.
in a young Persian cat. The endothelial
(herpesvirus] infectious bovine rhinotracheitis.
decompensation produced marked bullae
Intense peripheral leukocytic infiltration is
on the corneal surface. The condition was
present compared to the central ulcerative
bilateral and took several weeks to abate.
lesion found in infectious bovine keratitis.
The condition was bilateral and the calf also
Therapy
had respiratory signs.
It is questionable whether therapy alters the course of ICH-
induced disease. Most cases improve spontaneously but if
the condition is iatrogenically-induced, the clinician will
10.60
probably treat using the placebo effect. Topical steroids and
atropine are indicated for the uveitis but the regeneration of
the endothelium will probably not be influenced by these
 drugs. If the cornea has bullae, steroids should be used with
 caution due to the risk of corneal erosion. IOP should be
monitored since the clinical signs will mask glaucoma until
 the eye enlarges. CAls are indicated for glaucoma.
Herpesvirus stromal keratitis
FHV-1 is a common cause of stromal keratitis in the cat.
Herpesvirus stromal keratitis may accompany epithelial
erosions  with immune  suppression  f
(glucocorticoid
administration) or develop after the erosions have healed.
Stromal keratitis is usually associated with recurrent ocular
disease and not with primary ocular disease. Stromal
keratitis may be produced by certain strains of herpesvirus
that replicate in the stroma and it is the result of an immune
reaction of the host to the virusss156Townsend et al.6a
10.60 Typical corneal ederma in a cow with malignant catarrhal
and Stiles and Pogranishniyls6b found FHV-1 DNA in
fever. The corneal edema from endothelial inflammation is obvious 
approximately half of cat corneas without ocular disease
but a panophthalmitis is produced by the herpesviru5.
and in 41% of the trigeminal ganglia and it was cultured
from 6 corneas from 5 normal cats. The findings are not
conclusive of the cornea being a latent site in the cat, only
that viable virus can be present in normal corneas.
Herpesvirus infection in cattle may also produce deep
Experimentally, stromal disease accompanied primary
stromal
keratitis and  endothelial damage.
The
epithelial disease when cats were pretreated
1with
herpesvirus of IBR may produce a severe nonulcerative
subconjunctival glucocorticoidsis7. Additional ocular
keratouveitis {10.59) (to be differentiated from
lesions in this group consisted of corneal calcification, KCS,
"pinkeye'); the herpesvirus of malignant catarrhal fever
and the corneal nigrum or S
sequestrum syndrome.
Occasionally, herpesvirus corneal involvement in the cat
(10.60) that simulates an ICH eye in the dog. This
will produce such severe edema and bullae that the
characteristic of MCF is important in differentiating
endothelium has to be involved (10.54, 10.57, 10.58). The
neurologic diseases of cattle. The edematous cornea
iris usually has some color changes, indicating uveitis; the
masks the preceding uveitis.
course of the disease is usually weeks to months in
duration, with little apparent response to antiviral therapy.
Endotheliitis
Acute corneal edema that is not associated with vac-
A stromal keratitis syndrome has not been described
cination, systemic disease, increased IOP, or overt anterior
for the dog but, now that an ulcerative keratitis
uveitis may represent focal endothelitis. Focal opacities at
syndrome is known, perhaps we will recognize a role
Descemet's membrane, with overlying corneal edema, are
for canine herpesvirus to be associated with other
 posse aq au saoua 'snq u ieda
corneal syndromes just as in other species.
autoimmunity and herpesvirus infectioni58-161
264
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE In VeteRINARY MeDICINE
10.61
10.62
10.63
10.61, 10.62 Bilateral endothelitis in a horse without overt anterior uveitis. Cellular deposit5
10.63 A dog with corneal malacia due to a
are visible at Descemet's membrane, with overlying corneal edema. The patient responded
wasp sting. There was evidence of other stings 
initially to anti-inflammatory therapy but uveitis occurred with synechia and blindness over
around the head. Note the lack of cellular
a period of 2 years. The cause was unknown but possibly due to herpesviru5.
reaction in the cornea at this time. Compare
this appearance to that of a septic ulcer.
10.64
10.64 Diffuse
Physical
sup erficial 
As with nonulcerative keratitis, it is important to look for
ulceration in a dog
 and remove mechanical causes. Agents such as trauma,
after having been 
 richiasis, distichiasis, insect bites (10.63), and foreign
bathed and
bodies are common causes of ulcers in all species. Thermal
groomed. Soap or
burns from house and barn fires may be occasional causes
 chemical burns are
of epithelial ulcerations. In the dog, a single small aberrant 
typically diffuse.
cilium that protrudes through the palpebral conjunctiva
Note the miosis
(see Cilia, p.154, 7.20) is a frequently overlooked mecha-
from corneal pain.
nical cause. High magnification is necessary to identify and
locate the hair but once diagnosed the ulcer is easily treated.
Foreign bodies may lodge under the third eyelid and may
not be visible without eversion (see Foreign bodies, p.211,
8.57). Small foreign bodies embedded in the conjunctiva
can be very difficult to detect.
Chemical
Chemical agents such as soap and other dermatologic
On several occasions the author has been presented with
 preparations are a common cause of diffuse superficial
a horse with focal to multifocal corneal edema, of sudden
corneal ulceration in dogs after bathing {10.64). Mali-
onset. Overt anterior uveitis was absent but multifocal
 cious burns from strong acids or alkalis will occasionally
opacities at Descemet's membrane were visible (10.61). The
be observed. While pet owners frequently blame corneal
condition was responsive to, but not cured by, topical
ulceration on mace and pepper spray, the corneal
 corticosteroids or topical cyclosporine ( 10.62 )1 62 Based on
the response to anti-inflammatory therapy and the corneal
edema and endothelial lesions, a presumptive diagnosis of
Infectious
endothelitis of unknown etiology was made. This
Bacteria, viruses (FHV-1), and fungi are the usual agents
condition should be differentiated from the corneal edema
involved in ulcerative keratitis. Most surface bacterial
of glaucoma, trauma, and anterior uveitis in the horse.
infections are not strictly primary; other debilitating
 conditions often potentiate the pathogenicity of organisms
ULCERATIVE INFLAMMATORY DISEASE
that are indigenous to the ocular surface. Control of the
Introduction/etiology
normal ocular flora is maintained by rinsing the ocular
 Ulcerative corneal disease has the potential to change
 surface with tears and blinking that pushes the tears into
quickly and subsequently results in disastrous ocular
the nasolacrimal system. Tears also contain IgA and other
consequences. The signs of ocular pain are often very
antibacterial substances such as lactoferrin. Competitive
dramatic and ulceration should be ruled out whenever
interaction between the indigenous flora helps to keep the
Ocular pain is present. The basic tenet when evaluating
 organisms low in numbers, whereas disrupting this balance
ulcers is to look for, and remove, any underlying cause
may cause an overgrowth of one species. Debilitating con-
ditions to the ocular surface such as reduced tear secretion,
 after correction but may be delayed for months if the
UV radiation, systemic disease with immunosuppression
underlying cause is ignored. Many factors are involved as
such as diabetes mellitus and Cushing's disease, and trauma
causative agents in the development of corneal ulcers.
which creates breaks in the epithelial barrier may allow
CORNEA AND SCLERA
265
10.65
10.67
10.65 Staphylococcal hypersensitivity ulcer
10.66 A dog with a marginal furrow paralling 
10.67 Macular keratitis in a Cocker Spaniel.
adjacent to the limbus in a dog with
the limbus that was acute in onset. The condition 
Multifocal white superficial infiltrates stained 
staphylococcal keratoconjunctivitis. The central 
was treated with cyclosporine and responded
with fluorescein are present. The condition
ulcer is almost healed and this was the initiating
rapidly. The ulcer healed with granulation. This
was bilateral. Note the intense vascular
problem. The patient responded quickly to topical
 condition is similar to Mooren's ulcer in hurmans.
reaction in the conjunctiva and cornea.
 antibiotic and corticosteroid therapy.
Compare with 10.69 taken after therapy.
indigenous bacteria to adhere to the ocular surface and/or
10.68 Macular
10.68
 Overgrow, thus causing disease.
keratitis in a
Bacteria must adhere to replicate and then invade the
Minia ture Poodle.
Characteristic
ability to adhere to varying epithelial surfaces, thus
multifocal white
explaining why organisms are relatively specific for different
infiltrates with an
 tissues. In most cases, adherence does not occur with healthy
intense vascular
cells, only with injured cells, frequently associated with prior
reaction are present.
 trauma. The factors involved with adhesion are incompletely
The condition wa5
mderstood but require both a bacterial component, such as
bilateral and
fmbriae or pilus, and a host cellular receptor. Cellular injury
responded quickly
may expose these cellular receptors or the bacteria may
to topical
adhere to fibrinectin that is bound to the damaged cell. Once
mrticosteroids.
adhered, the bacteria are engulfed by the cell and then invade
the stroma where inflammation is stimulated.
Inadequate tear film
An absolute lack of tears as in KCS or an inadequate tear
flm due to excessive exposure from lagophthalmos, facial
considered immune mediated if a mechanical cause cannot
nerve paralysis, or exophthalmos are common causes of
be found to explain the unusual location and if cytology is
recurrent ulceration. The Pekingese is thought to have an
negative for infectious agents. These ulcers are typically
unstable tear film due to retention of mucus on the surface
moderately deep and may develop into a descemetocele.
contaminating the lipid layer164. The resultant dry spots
They may be associated with staphylococcal conjunctivitis
 may result in corneal ulcers. Most nonexophthalmic dogs
and are thought to be a result of hypersensitivity to
are able to tolerate facial nerve paralysis without ulcerative
bacteria or toxins. Peripheral furrows that may encircle the
keratitis if the tear production is normal.
cornea have also been observed, similar to Mooren's ulcer
in humans (10.66, 10.70),
Neurotropic
Peripheral ulcers may be dramatically responsive to
Loss of sensory innervation to the cornea may result in
topical
 glucocorticoids or cyclosporine but therapy
central corneal ulceration that is slow to heal. Corneal
should be closely monitored. This condition is one of the
epithelial metabolism and mitotic rate may be partially
few
exceptions
 where  glucocorticoids
 arenot
dependent on intact sensory innervation. Neurotropic
 contraindicated in treating corneal ulceration.
 ulcers may be observed with neurologic patients, after laser
Macular keratitis or superficial punctate keratitis is
observed in the dog and should be differentiated from
superficial punctate keratopathy of Shelties. Macular
Imm unological
keratitis is characterized by bilateral multifocal, white,
Large corneal epithelial erosions have been observed on
 superficial stromal infiltrates that are often ulcerative and are
occasion in the horse and dog with autoimmune bullous
accompanied by intense pain and neovascularization (10.67,
skin diseases. Immune-mediated ulceration, which is more
10.68)i66. The condition is typically observed in medium to
frequently observed, is indicated by the presence of
small breeds of dogs; the Long-haired Dachshund has a
peripheral ulcers adjacent to the limbus with a small rim
predisposition. Repeated attacks leave a scarred cornea. The
of clear cornea (10.65, 10.70). These ulcers should be
 mndition is very responsive to either topical glucocorticoid
266
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Or cyclosporine therapy, with improvement noted in
Therapy
 24 hours (10.69). Low-level maintenance therapy is advised
All corneal ulcers have the potential for rapid change and
to prevent relapse of the disease.
thus should be monitored frequently (every 2-3 days) or
the patient hospitalized (for high risk patients such
as
It is prudent for the clinician to realize that
brachycephalic breeds). Since the epithelial barrier is
ulceration associated with an immunologic
broken, bacterial infection by resident flora is possible
pathogenesis is uncommon. These cases require
 and topical prophylactic antibiotics are routine therapy.
therapy that is antithetical to dogma for treating
Superficial ulcers are usually more painful than deep
most ulcers and, consequently, should be followed
ulcers and topical atropine, given q24-12h to reduce
 closely by the clinician.
 reflex ciliary spasms, is the second arm of routine therapy.
Topical anesthetics are too toxic to use therapeutically. In
the horse, systemic PG inhibitors are commonly
Metabolic
administered for ocular pain. Most uncomplicated ulcers
Cushing's
disease is associated  with ulceration
will heal in 3-5 days but indolent or very slow healing
 characterized by rapid progression and slow healing. It is
superficial ulcers are not uncommon.
unknown whether the elevated endogenous steroids
actually induce an ulcer or whether they simply
Indolent epithelial erosion (slow healing ulcer.
 complicate an ulcer produced from another cause. The
Boxer ulcer, rodent ulcer]
elevated steroid levels are thought to activate MMPs
Introd uction/etiology
-lis e oiu raon jeaou ue uni pue (asrueo)
 Indolent epithelial ulcers are common and may occur in
threatening disease.
all species. They may be divided into those with edema
and those with little, if any, edema. Those with corneal
Dystrophic corneal changes
edema are probably secondary to epithelial and
Endothelial dystrophy with severe corneal edema often
subepithelial bulla formation from endothelial disease, as
results in bullae that rupture, producing an ulcer that
previously discussed.
may heal slowly or allow bacterial contamination. More
Spontaneous erosions without significant corneal
commonly, spontaneous epithelial erosions that are
edema are typically epithelial ulcers with little tendency
usually very slow to heal {indolent epithelial ulcers) are
to progress in depth, but they may spread over the
surface. It may be months until vascularization is
epithelial cells and consequent basal lamina changes.
 stimulated and the ulcers then heal by granulation.
 Indolent epithelial erosion was originally thought to be
Clinical signs
 specific to Boxers167 but it has since been observed in a
Signs of ocular pain such as blepharospasm and epiphora
are the most common reason for presentation with a
tectomies are typified by degenerative changes in the basal
corneal ulcer. Ocular discharge is usually mucopurulent
epithelial cells, loosely adhered epithelium near the ulcer
with septic ulcers. Superficial corneal ulcers and erosions
margin, disorganized epithelial maturation, incomplete or
often present with more dramatic pain than deep
absent basal lamina over the ulcer, production of an
ulcerations. On examination, the normal smooth corneal
irregular basal lamina beside the ulcer, and a mild
neutrophilic or lymphocytic infiltration168, 169. Bentley et
of corneal opacification due to focal corneal edema
and/or leukocytic  infiltration.
Corneal  neovascu-
epithelium but reported normal or possibly thicker basal
larization is stimulated with stromal and septic ulcers but
lamina in areas distant to the ulcer. They reported an
epithelial erosions may go for weeks without stimulating
acellular layer on the ulcer bed that was PAS-positive and
a vascular response. The duration of the ulcer can often
was covered with fibronectin but only irregularly with
be surmised by the vascular response.
lamina, collagen IV, and collagen Vll. Whether these
changes are the cause of the erosion or the result of
Diagnosis
Fluorescein staining should be performed when there is
reported normal corneal sensation in dogs with chronic
 any undiagnosed ocular pain. While fluorescein may not
epithelial erosions and increased numbers of substance P
be necessary to diagnose an ulcer, it is valuable in
nerves in the epithelium adjacent to the erosion.
evaluating the healing progress. Descemetoceles have no
Occasionally the condition is bilateral but usually the
second eye is affected at a later time. Approximately
Stromal ulcers require both fibroplasia and epithelial
50% of patients will have a recurrence in the same or
healing to fill in the defect. Technically, deep ulcers can be
opposite eye. The mean age of onset in the Boxer is
"healed’ over with epithelium but they often retain a facet
6 years and the right eye is affected most commonly168,
or depression for months and may be mechanically weak.
169, 172, 173. The relatively recent @
discovery that the
When evaluating facets in the stroma with fluorescein
corneal epithelial stem cell is at the limbus may suggest
stain, the eye should be thoroughly rinsed to remove
that the problem is at the limbus rather than in the basal
pooled fluorescein in the tear film and avoid a false-
cells. In rabbits, loss of limbal epithelium results in
positive interpretation. Corneal scrapings for cytology are
recurrent erosions, 
 delayed healing, and corneal
a rapid and inexpensive method to help rule out bacterial
vascularization after a delay of 6 months174.
and fungal causes of ulcerative keratitis. These methods
Corneal sensitivity may be altered by disease and
should be routinely used for any progressive 
or
surgical procedures at or near the limbus. Diabetic dogs
nonhealing ulcer. The result of scrapings helps to guide
had decreased corneal sensitivity compared to normal
therapy until the result of cultures is known.
dogs but no correlation could be demonstrated with either
CORNEA AND SCLERA
267
10.69
10.69 Same patient as 10.67 after only
10.70 Peripheral descemetocele in a West 
10.71 A dog with spontaneous epithelial
48 hours of topical cyclosporine and
Highland Wwhite Terrier. The lesion was sterile and 
erosion with loose epithelial edges. Note the
 corticosteroid therapy.
 progressed around the circumference, despite
diffusion of the rose bengal stain under the
performing a hood conjunctival flap. The
loose epithelium.
diagnosis was a probable Mooren's ulcer.
the duration or control of diabetes17s. Decreased corneal
Diagnosis
 sensitivity may promote corneal ulceration by reduced
Diagnosis is on the presence of a nonhealing epithelial
blinking and lacrimation, thus exposing the cornea to.
ulcer with loose overhanging epithelial borders and with
various traumatic stimuli, or through deficiencies of
no mechanical cause.
neurotrophic regulation of epithelial proliferation,
migration, and adhesion. The predisposition to epithelial
Therapy
ulcers with altered corneal nerves may also be mediated
 Indolent ulcers have been managed in a variety of ways
through substance P nerves170.
with no single therapy working consistently. When
Indolent epithelial ulcers are observed in the cat and
healing does not occur in the expected time, the
are typically central or paracentral. These ulcers are over-
 condition should be re-evaluated to make sure a
represented in Persian and Himalayan breeds. Van der
mechanical ca use has not been missed.
Woerdt and Olivero176 reported on 29 cats with
 36 indolent ulcers. The mean age of the cats was
Medica!
7.7 years and no sex predilection was reported. A history
Routine medical therapy consists of prophylactic
of previous respiratory infection or recurrent conjunc-
topical antibiotics and, if the condition is painful,
tivitis was noted in 72% of the cats, reinforcing the clini-
 atropine. Hypertonic topical preparations to dehydrate
cal suspicion that many cases are associated with FHV.
the cornea are often advised but when compared
Slow healing epithelial erosion has also been described
critically are of no benefit.
Topical fibronectin has shown promise in treating
Sheaddn asioy aul uy uoisoia taaamoy raop au ul
 persistent epithelial defects; purified fibronectin may be a
refractory   to. most   therapies   except_. superficial
means of treating the condition in the futurel8o. Topical
keratectomy. Hakanson and Dubielzig179 described
serum has been used with success as a source of fibronectin
chronic epithelial erosion that did not have loose
and other growth factors in treating humans with indolent
epithelial borders in a subset of horses. These ulcers had
epithelial erosions from a variety of causes181. Topical
a thin acellular membrane on the anterior stroma, which
recombinant epidermal growth factor (100 μg/ml) given
was felt to represent a corneal sequestrum. Unlike the cat,
q6h healed 8/10 indolent corneal erosions in dogs182, This
 the sequestrum remained superficial and did not pigment.
concentration may be excessive: studies in the rabbit
indicate that >5 μg/ml stimulates healing and a maximum
Michau et al.179a and Brunott et al.179b, The horses had
healing rate is obtained with 20 μg/ml13. Epidermal
mean ages of 14 and 12 years, respectively. These authors 
growth factor does not appear to be indicated with erosions
described a loose epithelial border and response to
from corneal edema or with herpesvirus ulcers.
debridement and grid keratotomy in most cases.
Topical S% polysulfonated GAG (PGAG) has been
advocated for the treatment of indolent epithelial
Clinical signs
erosions, with a healing rate of 82%184. PGAG is an
Superficial epithelial erosion with loose epithelial borders
inhibitor of proteolytic enzymes. It may benefit epithelial
is the diagnostic criterion for an indolent ulcer {1o.71).
healing if there is an imbalance in proteolytic activity
The ulcer is usually central or paracentral. Unlike a simple
that promotes epithelial cell migration at the expense of
abrasion, the ulcer fails to heal within 1 week and may
disrupting cellular adhesion. Seventy-seven percent of
spread around the cornea, healing on one side and
dogs with epithelial erosions had elevated levels of
extending on the other side. Gross corneal edema is
 proteolytic activity that were decreased with PGAG
minimal or absent and neovascularization  is not
therapy and returned to normal levels when healed185.
 stimulated for an extended period of time. Very chronic
Murphy et al.170 treated 21 dogs with chronic epithelial
lesions heal by granulation. Many dogs exhibit severe pain
defects with topical substance P and achieved 70-75%
but this is quite variable.
healing. While this novel therapy appears highly successful,
268
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE In VeteRINARY MeDICINE
10.72
10.73
10.72 A dog with epithelial erosion before debridement with
10.73 Same erosion a5 10.72 after debriderment of the loose epithelium
a cotton tip applica tor.
and application of a soft contact lens. The amount of epithelium
removed is often startling for the veterinarian and the owner.
10.74
10.74 Treatment
of an indolent 
healing but do improve patient comfort.
epithelial erosion
An alternative to soft lenses in the dog is to use a
with debridement
commercially available collagen shield. While this tends to
of the epithelium 
be retained better than a soft lens, it dissolves over a period
pub e pue
of 3-5 days and may not last long enough to be effective191.
keratotomy with a
In a controlled study comparing various therapies for
25 gauge needle.
epithelial erosions, Morgan and Abrams192 found that
debridement alone and collagen shields are the least
 successful therapies.
Surgica!
Debridement If an epithelial erosion has loose edges or a
mechanically or chemically with iodine, no matter what
 other therapy is planned. This is especially important if
the margins are loose and nonadherent. Debridement may
remove a much larger area of epithelium than the original
ulcer, but the epithelium regenerates rapidly and often
other procedures are similarly successful. Why additional
heals with no further specific thera py (10.72, 10.73).
substance P should be beneficial when Murphy et al. found
increased amounts in the cornea of dogs with chronic
Punctate or linear keratotomy. Keratotomy
in
epithelial erosions was not addressed in the study.
combination with epithelial debridement is now the first
While not recommended on a routine basis, the
choice of many clinicians for surgical therapy in the dog.
author has resorted to topical glucocorticoid therapy
The technique consists of multiple punctures or cross-
when conventional therapy was unsuccessful, and
hatching of the basement membrane with a 25 gauge
achieved rapid improvement. I
If indolent ulcers have
needle (10.74). This can be performed under topical
healed by granulation, topical glucocorticoid therapy
anesthesia with the animal restrained in lateral
produces rapid resolution of the granulation and
recumbency. Keratotomy exposes the epithelium to the
minimizes the scarring process. Glucocorticoids should
stroma, which promotes a more secure binding of the
be used with caution in any ulcerative condition and the
epithlium. There are many theories to explain the benefit
patient should be monitored at frequent intervals.
of a keratotomy: penetrating the basal lamina to expose
In the cat, herpesvirus should be considered when
the epithelial cells to the stroma, thus promoting
 treating a superficial nonhealing ulcer and specific oral or 
adhesions; breaching the basal lamina coupled with an
topical antirviral therapy may be indicated.
abnormal hyaline zone in the superficial cornea may be
Soft contact lenses are available for both the dog and
horse and may be used as a pressure bandage to aid
extracellular matrix 
 proteins  promotes epithelial
 adhesions194. Healing 0ccurs within 1-2 weeks in the
lens may not be retained and, if lost, results in significa nt
majority of instances. The healing rate with a grid
financial loss, especially in the horse. In humans, soft
keratotomy has been variably reported as 72-85% after
contact lenses slow healing and increase the complication
rate when used in the treatment of ulcers188, 189. In cats 
healing with grid keratotomy193.
with intact corneas, extended contact lens wear results in
 Michau et al.179a treated nonhealing superficial corneal
reduced epithelial adhesion due to a reduced concentration
ulcers in horses with either debridement, debridement and
CORNEA AND SCLERA
269
grid keratotomy, or superficial keratectomy. The shortest
10.75
healing time was 15 days, but only 63% healed with
 debridement only and the remaing patients were then
entered into the keratotomy or superficial keratectomy
group. Seventy-eight percent of the keratotomy group
healed with the remainder either undergoing a second
keratotomy or a keratectomy. All of the cases of keratec-
tomies healed that were followed up; one was lost to follow-
up.Brunott et al.179b had 8 of 9 cases heal with debridement
and a grid keratotomy, with a mean healing of 8 days. One
horse required a second grid keratotomy and one horse was
lost to follow-up. In the author's experience most of the slow
healing equine epithelial erosions have minimal loose
epithelium, which can be debrided, and they have not
responded to grid keratotomies, even when repeated. As a
onsequence, the author has gone directly to standing
superficial keratectomies. The time and type of sedation
10.75 Placement of a
10.76
necessary is the same as a grid keratotomy, but the success
third eyelid flap. This is
has been universal. If animals are hospitalized for the
the most common
healing period, it simply prolongs the hospitalization if a
 suture pattern used.
keratotomy is performed and is not successful and then has
 Note the stints on the
 to be followed by a keratectomy. Grid kertotomies should
skin side and the
be performed as a last resort in the cat. Van der Woerdt and
suture is placed back 
 Olivero176 found that 31% of cats with indolent epithelial
from the lid margin to
erosions treated by debridement and  keratotomies
ensure pulling the
 developed a corneal sequestrum, whereas 10% developed a
third eyelid up for
sequestrum when treated only by debridement. If some
pressure, rather than
 indolent ulcers in the cat are associated with herpesvirus, an
just pulling the upper
additional concern with keratotomies is inoculation of the
lid down.
 virus deeper into the stroma to produce a stromal keratitis.
10.76 A-D Technique
Keratotomies are utilized only on indolent superficial
 of suturing the third 
epithelial erosions and not on stromal ulcers.
eyelid to the
diametrically opposite 
Superficial keratectomy. A superficial keratectomy is
episclera. This requires
successful in 100% of cases but it is technically more
 a good ophthalmic
difficult, requires general anesthesia, and thus is more
cutting needle to pick
expensive (see Dermoids, p.282-283, 10.110,10.111).
up the tough episclera,
The theoretical benefit of a superficial keratectomy is to
 a5 sutures only in the 
remove the abnormal basal lamina and underlying
 conjunctiva will pull 
hyaline membrane present in the anterior stroma. The
out. The advantage is
u auo sop un sanaieian iyiadns sasn noune
that the globe and 
those patients resistant to other therapies, but uses the
third eyelid are a unit
procedure more in cats and routinely in horses. In the
rather than 
horse, superficial keratectomies can be performed under
independent in their 
hea vy sedation combined with topical anesthesia.
movement.
Third eyelid flap. Bandaging the eye by placing a third
 eyelid flap for 10-14 days will promote healing in most
 patients (10.7s-10.77). Suturing to the bulbar conjunctiva
10.77 Suture pattern
10.77
produces the least rubbing on the cornea but is also the most
used to place a third 
difficult to perform, requiring a small ophthalmic needle
eyelid flap that allows
(10.76). Approximately 75% of indolent ulcers without
 stints to be used on
edema will heal with a third eyelid flap. While healing may
both sides. This should
be promoted, a third eyelid flap does nothing to improve
 be considered in dogs
 cellular adhesion.
 or animals that require
a lot of tension on the
third eyelid to cover
the globe. The
disadvantage is that
often the cartilage of
the third eyelid is
deformed after
removal due to
bending over the stint.
270
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Prophylaxis
Biopsy via a superficial keratectomy may demonstrate
In many instances, the ulcer is not only slow to heal but
virus particles on electron microscopy or inclusion bodies
recurs in the same or the other eye.7
This is very
on light microscopy. Viral cultures have traditionally
discouraging for the owner and clinician who have just
been considered the gold standard for diagnosing
ui aul naa oi kauou pur au jo yunoue jeaa e uads
herpesvirus but PCR testing is more sensitive.
 ulcer healed. In the past when diethylstilbesterol was
Unfortunately, PCR testing for herpesvirus is not yet 
 available it was used in low doses to try and prevent
universally available for diagnostics.
recurrences. The rationale behind this therapy is not
When the clinical presentation is a dendritic epithelial
known; many of the patients were old and neutered but
ulcer, it is considered pathognomonic for herpesvirus.
this is by no means consistent.
 aaneoipu jeuouppe aie sugis Aioirdsa addn 1o suzaaus
signs of a presumptive diagnosis of herpesvirus infection.
Viral ulcers in cats
Lastly, the response to specific antiviral therapy may be used
Introduction/etiology
 retrospectively to diagnose herpesvirus infection.
FHV-1 will commonly produce an epithelial ulcer that
may be dendritic {linear branching) or geographic
Therapy
{irregular) or, when complicated, produce a stromal ulcer
Antivira!
that may develop into a descemetocele. In severe
[doxuridine {IDU) was the first specific antiviral agent used
instances,
 keratouveitis may develop with marked
to   treat   herpesvirus ulcerative   keratitis.  Adenine
corneal edema and epithelial bullae formation. One or
arabinoside (Ara-A) and trifluorothymidine (TFT) are
both eyes may be involved. Affected cats are usually not
newer antiherpes medications, with the latter being more
ill with respiratory disease and typically are young adult
effective, less toxic, and having better corneal penetration.
Unfortunately, TFT is very expensive for routine use.
 primary infection and is self-limiting, being up to 24 days 
Topical ophthalmic acyclovir (acycloguanosine) is available
in experimental cats157.
Ae hood aieoipui sisal Aieuaid inq adong u
The virus resides in a latent form in the sensory ganglia,
 syndromes with topical 0.5 % aciclovir given 5 times a day.
evidence suggests that the corneal stroma may also host
While in-situ testing indicated mediocre effectiveness,
the herpesvirus in a latent and an active form in normal
topical 0.5% cidofovir q12h in experimental herpes
feline corneas1 56b, 200-202.
 significantly decreased the severity of the clinical signs and
viral shedding. Cidofovir has the advantage of decreased
Clinical signs
frequency of dosing because of its long half-life in ocular
The cat is usually presented with epiphora and mild
tissues207b, Some strains of herpesvirus become resistant to
blepharospasm. The typical lesion is a superficial, linear or
acyclovir because they are able to replicate with cellular
 irregular ulcer (10.78, 10.79) which is usually epithelial if
thymidine kinase. Acyclovir is available for systemic use
uncomplicated. Lesions begin as small dots that coalesce to
 asneoaq ieo aui ul uoudo poog e iou si Ajaieuniojun ing
form a linear erosion but they may progress in depth. Due
therapeutic levels produce renal, liver, and bone marrow
to the small size of the lesions, a blue light or magnification
toxicity208. Despite the toxicity of systemic acyclovir,
may be necessary to detect fluorescein staining. Rose
dinicians have been using famciclovir for several years
bengal staining may be preferred due to the epithelial
without apparent toxicity. The dose has been quite varied,
necrosis that the virus produces. Stromal keratitis may
develop later in one
or both eyes, as diffuse
periods of time is often used. This is an off-label use of the
neovascularization  with  multifocal 
 gray maculae.
drug, so appropriate caution should be exercised. In
Epithelial erosions may or may not be present with
humans, oral acyclovir has been successful in decreasing the
stromal keratitis (10.54, p.261, 10.57, 10.58, p.263).
relapses of ocular, genital, and orofacial herpes simplex
Affected cats may have a history of intermittent sneezing
infections. Ocular herpes simplex relapses were decreased
 and ocular discharge, indicating a carrier state.
by 50% when patients were maintained on oral acyclovir
for 1 year209, It is unknown whether similar decreases in
Diagnosis
rela pses could be produced in the cat at a dose of acyclovir
 Diagnosis of herpesvirus ocular lesions is often difficult
 that would be safe for such a long period of administration.
due to the carrier state and the ubiquitous nature of the
virus; herpesvirus can be either cultured, or detected with
Interferon
PCR, from 10% of conjunctivae and from 50% of
Recombinant human leukocyte interferon is synergistic with
corneas of normal cats202 Maggs et al.203 found 11%
 and 28% of normal cats positive for herpesvirus using
 This has prompted either topical or oral use of interferon in
virus isolation and IFA testing, respectively.
conjunction with topical antivirals in patients who have
 IFA testing of conjunctiva or corneal scrapings for
been unresponsive to antivirals alone. Topical interferon is
herpesvirus is the easiest definitive test but in the author's
empirically formulated at 0.5-1 IU drop of artifical tear
experience is rarely positive. Previous fluorescein staining
solution and is considered to be clinically successful.
of the cornea has been reported to give a false-positive IFA
Vennebusch209a reported feline omega interferon given 5
test (see Chapter 8, p.183). Routine conjunctival cytology,
juauaaoudui %7e e Suonpoud se saep 07 1oy Aep e sawn
-oudouaod pue saiiooudual seu pauedaud Aoidki se
auh 'shep o7 kq %oz pue saep 9 Aq suueiay u
 recombinant interferon is not approved in the United States 
 specimens fixed in Bouin's solution for 1 hour will retain
and human or bovine interferon is usually substituted. Haid
the inclusion bodies20s.
et al.209b in controlled experimental FHV-1 infections in SPF
CORNEA AND SCLERA
271
10.78
10.79
10.80
10.78 Herpesvirus dendritic epithelial ulcer in
 10.79 Herpesvirus dendritic epithelial ulcer
10.80 Faint subepithelial macular opacities
a cat viewed against the fundus reflection and
in a cat viewed against the tapetal reflection.
in a horse. Herpesvirus was suspected, but
after staining with fluorescein. Small dots,
 Note the linear opacity with small branches 
biopsies and culture could not confirm 
branching linear lesions, and a geographic
and, beyond the linear opacity, small
the dia gnosis.
 erosion are present.
punctate defects.
 cats found that recombinant feline interferon omega given
Prophylaxis
topically at 10,000 U q12h and p.0. at 20,000 U q12h for
 In the author's clinical experience, prior vaccination against
48 hours before infecting with FHV-1 administered
FHV infection does not prevent the development of
topically on the eye resulted in no difference from controls
 subsequent ocular manifestations, nor is it of value as
in virus load, clinical scores, course of the disease, and virus
therapy Weigler et al.218 were unable to alter the latency of
 shedding. The treated group also had more epithelial disease
FHV-1 or detection of virus shedding in various tissues after
than the control group.
experimentally-induced relapses by the prior vaccination of
animals with an intranasal vaccine. FHV vaccination mainly
L-iysine
decreases the severity and duration of the signs but does not
Oral L-lysine (500 mg q12h) reduced the severity of
pevent infection or latency219 This is of special concern to
breeders of cats that develop severe problems. Persian cats
be  beneficial  in  treating  corneal  manifestations of
have more frequent and more severe ocular symptoms.
herpesvirus infection as well. L-lysine was administered
Good preventive medicine measures will decrease the
before the induction of experimental infection and thus may
 incidence of herpesvirus infection in a cattery Quarantining
not be as effective in the clinical setting, where therapy is
new cats for several weeks before admission to the cattery,.
started after the animal has signs of infection. L-lysine
segregation of cats by age group and pregnancy status,
(400 mg q24h) decreased the amount of viral shedding with
good ventilation {10 air exchanges/hour) and sanitation,
mild stressors but did not prevent shedding when challenged
disposable food, water, and litter trays, and handling the
with  glucocorticoid  administration2i2.
A proposed
younger cats before the older cats are helpful in decreasing
mechanism of action if L-lysine is by competing with
the spread of herpesvirus. Obvious carriers of the virus such
arginine for absorption from the gut and the renal tubule.
as cats with sinusitis and recurrent conjunctivitis should be
Arginine is required for in vitro replication of herpesvirus
removed from the colony. If dealing with a problem cattery,
and elevated levels of L-lysine may deprive the virus of
early vaccination with a killed vaccine followed later with
arginine213 Oral L-lysine (500 mg q12h) produced elevated
 a live virus vaccine is recommended220.
plasma levels of lysine but did not affect plasma levels of
 Screening for FeLV and FIV may be helpful in explaining
arginine, which is fortunate for therapy as the cat is very
frequent and severe forms of herpesvirus infection in a
sensitive to a deficiency in arginine211, 212
cattery.
Stressing
latent carriers
with5mg/kg
methlylprednisolone injections and identifying carriers with
immunosuppressants
viral cultures of saliva 8-10 days later was used in a
The use of immunosuppressants in stromal keratitis may
pathogen-free colony to cull carriers and therefore reduce
be considered with moderate to severe disease but they
 the incidence of upper respiratory disease221 This protocol
should always be used concurrently with antiviral drugs.
was repeated after an interval of 6 weeks. Nevertheless, 8
Glucocorticoids are blamed for many of the progressive
ulcerative conditions seen in herpesvirus keratitis of
 respiratory tract infection developed after a stressing event.
made much more severe with glucocorticoid immuno-
Viralulcers in horses
suppression147. In addition, glucocorticoid dependence
 Equine herpesvirus-1 has been incriminated as a cause of a
and a rebound effect after cessation of glucocorticoid use
multifocal superficial punctate keratitis (10.80). The
may occur214, 215. Topical cyclosporine may be effective
keratitis may be accompanied by frank corneal ulceration or
with feline herpesvirus stromal conditions. However,
fne punctate fluorescein staining. The etiology has not been
 cyclosporine therapy should also be used with caution
proven but was suggested to be herpesvirus-induced because
and in conjunction with antiviral therapy216. Systemic
Zasdq a zade e o asudsa si
cyclosporine prolonged and
1  worsened experimental
was isolated from an outbreak of keratooonjunctivitis in
stromal keratitis in rabbits217
foals. The disease was characterized by epiphora to
272
OpHThAlMIC DIsEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDICINe
10.81
10.82
10.83
10.81 Large corneal sequestrum in a Persian
10.82 Himalayan cat with a corneal
10.83 Conjunctival pedicle flap in a cat
cat. Note the conjunctivitis and corneal
sequestrum. Note the blepharospasm and the
that has healed in place after removal of a
neovascularization. The patient was treated with
 brownish-black discharge caked on the eyelids.
sequestrum and is about to be excised or
a keratectomy and conjunctival pedicle flap.
trimmed.
mucopurulent discharge, conjunctivitis, and superficial focal
herpesvirus infected animals than from controls202. The
macular opacities223 Keratooonjunctivitis characterized by
study by Nassisse et al.140 found that in DSH and domestic
epiphora, blepharospasm, and focal crystalline deposits
longhaired (DLH) cats, the rate of recovery was 80% while
with punctate fluorescein staining was observed in
12
in the Persian-Himalayan breeds it was about 50%,
 horses224. Equine herpes-2 virus was isolated from a corneal
suggesting an alternative pathogenesis for these breeds.
biopsy of two foals with a unilateral keratoconjunctivitis.
Cullen et al.227a recovered FHV-1 DNA from 4/9 corneas of
Two horses had similar lesions that responded to antiviral
cats with sequestra and Toxoplasma gondi DNA from 4/9
corneas, with one of these cats being positive for both. The
lesions. The signifcance of herpesvirus in equine keratitis is
histopathologic lesions of corneal sequestra are desiccated
 unknown but evidence suggests that it should be considered
and degenerative stromal necrosis, with an adjacent zone of
as an etiology in ulcerative and nonulcerative keratitis. In
inflammatory cells228-231
the author's practice area, small subepithelial white foci are
usually of fungal origin.
Clinical signs
The appearance of a black plaque on the cat cornea is almost
Corneal sequestrum (nigrum)
pathognomonic for corneal sequestrum. The surface of the
Introduction/etiology
 plaque may be smooth or roughened. While normally the
In the Persian, Siamese, and, occasionally, domestic
paque is assumed to enlarge slowly, the author has observed
 shorthaired (DSH) cats, slow-healing epithelial defects from
progression from a pinpoint spot to a 6-7 mm lesion in
a variety of causes may result in a corneal nigrum or
2 weeks in his own cat. As the condition progresses, the
sequestrum. This is a brownish-black plaque or deposit that
paque separates from the adjacent tissue and may eventually
is usually   central or paracentral and stimulates
slough from the surface. Ocular pain and corneal fluorescein
vascularization (10.81). On occasion, the plaque will
 staining is vaniable.
occupy the majority of the cornea. The lesion may or may
not be painful and occasionally will be bilateral. It may
Diagnosis
begin as a small superficial spot and progresses quickly
Diagnosis is on clinical appearance.
(2-3 weeks) in width and depth. The black appearance has
been speculated to be iron, catecholamines, and desiccation.
Therapy
Therapy is somewhat controversial, with two camps, the
 small initiating ulcer plays a role in the condition.
autters and the observers. If the eye is comfortable, one may
Cats which develop sequestra usually have a similar
wait for weeks to months for spontaneous sloughing. The
 colored mucus on the lid margins whenever the eyes are
dsadvantage of waiting is that the lesion may extend in
irritated {10.82). This mucus is not from tears (since the
depth. If the lesion is painful, owners are not tolerant of
mucus is observed in cats with no tears), but apparently
waiting and the therapy is a superficial keratectomy. Often
from the glands of the conjunctiva or lids. Davidson et al.227
the brown tissue cannot be completely excised due to the
were unable to detect any differences in tear proteins from
depth of the lesion. If the keratectomy site is not covered and
normal cats and cats with sequestra. The predisposing
ulcerative condition may be obvious or occult, such as from
avoid recurrence in the keratectomy bed, most surgeons
 suggest covering the site with either a corneal graft, a
development of corneal sequestra in S0% of cats with
experimental herpesvirus infection that _ had _ chronic
ulcerations due to glucocorticoid therapy157. PCR testing
 sequestra managed surgically and found no statistical
yelded positive results for herpesvirus in 55% of cases in
difference in recurrence of the sequestra whether the
one study140; in another study there was no significant
keratectomy site was covered with a graft or not. Recurrence
difference in recovery of herpesvirus (18%) from
of sequestra developed in 16 of 74 eyes. Conjunctival grafts
CORNEA AND SCLERA
273
10.84
10.85
10.86
10.84 Corneal hydrops in a cat. Note the
10.85 Comeal hydrops in a foal that developed 
10.86 Pseudomonos descemetocele in a
marked protrusion of the edematous cornea
within hours. Culture was negative and no
horse. Note the strong leukotactic response,
that has been stained with fluorescein. The
bacteria were found on histopathology of the
diffuse corneal edema, and impending 
condition developed peracutely and wa5 
 tissue. Treatment was by debriderment of the
vascular response.
treated successfully with a third eyelid flap.
malacic cornea and partial tarsorraphy, and the
lesion healed in 10 days.
have the disadvantage of leaving a scar that is usually axial.
Therapy
To avoid this problem, lamellar feline grafts and canine grafts
Therapy entails removing the exposed gelatinous stroma
have been used to repair the defect with excellent results (see
 and covering the cornea to 'splint it. In the cat, a third
10.91)234. Unfortunately, the recurrence rate with corneal
eyelid flap works
well
l as a pressure bandage
grafting is unknown.
(10.75-10.77). In the horse the author prefers a partial
Bullous keratopathy (corneal hydrops)
accessible for treatment and observation (7.43). Topical
Introduction/etiology
antimicrobial agents are used but need not be intensive,
Peracute marked localized swelling of the cornea is
and systemic analgesics are usually not necessary. In the
observed in both the cat and horse. The lesions present as
horse, after two or three debridements of the area the
ulcerations that have marked focal edema, producing an
lesion stabilizes and begins to epithelialize.
elevation and a gelatinous stroma with loss of structural
integrity (10.84, 10.85). The surrounding cornea is clear
Deep corneal ulcers
and infectious organisms are not present unless due to
Introduction/etiology
contamination from the surface. The condition usually
Tissue damage from infection is caused by a combination
 Occurs in young to young adult cats or in horses in foals or
 of toxins liberated by the organism and MMP enzymes
 in young adults, and may sequentially involve the second
liberated by the ocular tissue and neutrophils. MMPs are
involved in a variety of normal processes throughout the
finding. The cornea may become infected and perforation
body, such as tissue remodeling, as well as pathologic
may occur. The initiating cause is unknown, although the
-oue pue ueu punm au se yns suopuo
 mechanism of progression is probably via MMP digestion.
 genesis236. There are >20 MMPs described, based on their
The author has observed lesions in several cats either on or
substrate specificity, with four endogenous tissue
that had had topical or systemic dexamethasone therapy.
inhibitors of MMPs {TIMPs). Older nomenclature used
When observed early, prodromal lesions are small, single or
for these enzymes includes collagenase (MMP-1),
multifocal ulcerations that may be accompanied by small
gelatinase A {MMP-2), stromelysin-1 (MMP-3), and
bullae that rapidly coalesce to form large bullae. In the
 gelatinase B (MMP-9). Endogenous MMP may be secreted
au um paieiosse uaagq nou sey Adriaui anp ioud asiu
by
keratocytes, leukocytes and, perhaps, corneal
condition. One possible theory, based on the peracute
epithelium. They normally exist as pro-enzymes or are
history, a lack of significant inflammatory cells on cytology
latent, but when activated after a lag period, rapid melting
and biopsy, and sterility on culture is that foals and young
Of the stroma may occur.
horses tend to lie down when sleeping and insect bites such
 Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the usual bacterial organism
as from spiders may be initiating the condition.
 involved in producing progressive, often perforating, ulcers.
P aeruginosa has a variety of proteolytic enzymes237 and has
Diagnosis
been shown to activate endogenous MMPs of the cornea238.
Diagnosis is by the marked focal edematous lesion of
Even with organisms such as Pseudomonas spp., the host's
gelatinous stroma, with adjacent normal cornea devoid of
response is very important in creating the melting ulcers.
edema, leukocytic infiltration, or vascular reaction.
 Specifically, lysosomal enzymes from neutrophils may be
Cytology and biopsy of the gelatinous material is typically
more important than direct damage by P aeruginosa
sterile on culture, lacks significant inflammatory cells
0r
exoenzymes239 Therapy with agents that inhibit the cyclo-
bacteria, and consists of disoriented collagen fibrils with
oxygenase pathway and increase the neutrophilic response
marked edema separating the fibrils. Bullous keratopathy
will accelerate corneal ulceration240. Ulceration associated
must be differentiated from an acute, progressive,
with bacteria usually has a more intense leukotactic
melting, septic ulcer that will have organisms and
stimulus, resulting in a dense creamy-white infiltrate and an 
neutrophils on cytology.
intense neovascular response (10.86),
274
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
In one study, Pseudomonas spp. and other Gram-
rods are observed on scrapings, a fortified ophthalmic
negative organisms were reported to be the most
common isolates from ulcerative keratitis in horses102
been
recommended24s
 Alternatively,
the newer
but a repeat study 12 years later and other studies
fluoroquinolone antibiotics such as moxifloxicin are used.
showed that Streptococcus spp. and Stapbylococcus spp.
Frequent topical antibiotics have been more effective in
are the most common isolates84, 241. The incidence of
clearing the cornea of organisms in experimental infections
Gram-negative isolates and their antibiotic resistance
than subconjunctival or parenteral routes246, 247.
increases with previous therapy8s, Another cause of
In the horse, due to the frequency of resistant
rapidly melting ulcer is an insect bite from fire ants,
 streptococci and mixed infections with fungal organisms,
spiders, or bees (10.63).
the author suggests using an antibiotic that has a good
Gram-positive spectrum of activity, e.g. cephazolin
Clinical signs
formulated as a 5% solution, and 
l an antifungal
Crater defects with visible stromal walls indicate that the
ulcer has extended into the stroma. Associated corneal
Gram-negative organisms. Resistant organisms may
edema with thickening of the stroma often exaggerates
require formulation of topical antibiotics from systemic
the depth of the ulcer. If the bottom of the ulcer is clear
preparations. E
 Fluoroquinolone   antibiotics  such 
as
or dark, it usually indicates that there is no residual
ciprofloxacin and ofloxacin are now used more commonly
stroma and the ulcer has progressed to Descemet's
in bacterial ulcers because of their broad-spectrum activity
membrane (10.70).
and bactericidal properties. Their weakness is in treating.
Varying degrees of white corneal opacity will be
streptococcal ulcers.  Aggressive antibiotic therapy of
present due to combinations of cormeal edema and
Pseudormonas spp. ulcers without surgical intervention
leukocytic infiltration. Marked leukocytic infiltration is
 resulted in excellent function in 73% of cases248
indicative of sepsis and is usually more yellow-white than
MMP inhibitors (anticollagenase inhibitors) are often 
administered hourly if the process is in the progressive
superficial and deep vascularization develops depending
stages of ulceration, but their effectiveness against
on the chronicity and stimulus.
Pseudomonas spp. has been questioned?49 Systemic
tetracycline may be an alternative. Tetracycline was
Diagnosis
beneficial with P. aeruginosa ulcers in an experimental
 Diagnosis of stromal ulceration is usually from the defect
model and the benefit was thought to be independent of
in the stroma that has sharp sides and deep walls and
the antibacterial effect250.
 stains with fluorescein.
Vygantas et al.2s1 found that bacitracin was more
effective in vitro in inhibiting MMP-9 from wounded
 Some considerations when interpreting fluorescein
canine corneas than tetracycline, thus adding yet another
staining are:
drug as a possible MMP inhibitor. Acetylcysteine 10% is
● Deep defects may pool fluorescein but may not
available as a nebulizing agent in respiratory therapy and
actually take up stain. These may be healed
has anticollagenase activity; it is therefore often used due
facets of previous deep ulcers that have not filled
to
convenience.
Serum is often used for its
in with fibroplasia.
 anticollagenase activity, particularly in the horse.
Descemetoceles do not stain since there is no
stromal tissue to take up stain.
Surgica!
Unless pinpoint or about 2 mm in diameter, deep ulcers
 The etiologic diagnosis may be made by performing a
 or those involving >7s% of the corneal thickness should
corneal scraping for cytology and culture, although
be considered surgical problems. The procedure of choice
 cultures are often retrospective if the progression is rapid.
depends on the ulcer size, its location, whether it is still
With tissue necrosis, anaerobic bacteria may cause
in the progressive stage, the clinician's experience, and
ulceration and will not be diagnosed by the usual
the instrumentation a vailable.
culturing
techniques242, 243. Nutritionally variant
streptococci require thiol-containing compounds and
Tissue glue. Small deep ulcers may have a small amount
vitamin Bg and have been reported to be a significant
of tissue glue (cyanoacrylate) applied to reinforce the
cause of corneal ulceration44. Nutritionally variant
 cornea structurally2s2 The glue must be placed in a very
streptococci do not grow on most bacteriological media
Aue aus 'padde jnown nwuw e pue paq aoin Ap
unless .a pyridoxal 
 secreting organism such
excess creates a very irritating surface (10.87). Keeping
Staphylococcus spp. is also growing, in which case they
the cornea dry (often using a hair dryer) and carefully
develop as satelite colonies. Equine ulcers frequently
applying a very small drop usually requires general
have mixed bacterial and fungal agents, particularly if
anesthesia. Patients often benefit little from this
they have been previously treated102
technique, due to the frequent premature loss of the glue
and, if retained, the resultant marked irritation. If general
Therapy.
anesthesia is required, the author recommends using a
Medica!
more beneficial procedure.
The vast majority of patients with deep corneal ulcers
should be hospitalized for intensive medical and surgical
Cormeal sutures. Sutures placed across the ulcer bed to
therapy. Medical therapy is guided by corneal scraping but
obliterate it may be used in small deep ulcers that are
 a bactericidal antibiotic with known effectiveness for
 stable. If the condition is still progressive, the sutures
Pseudomonas spp. is usually selected. The antibiotic of
will slough out. The disadvantage is that even a small
choice is constantly changing due to resistance patterns. If
ulcer produces considerable distortion of the corneal
CORNEA AND SCLERA
275
10.87
10.88 Dissection steps for
10.88
performing a 360°
conjunctival flap for a
 central ulcer. Central
 corneal ulcer (A]. The
limbal conjunctiva is
 excised with scissors for
360° (B) . Dissection
consists of cutting and
then spreading the scissor5
under the conjunctiva to
 separate Tenon's fascia.
 This is thickest dorsally and 
ventrally adjacent to the 
rectus muscles. Failure to
perform this step correctly
results in premature 
10.87 A dog that has had cyanacrylate glue placed over an ulcer
retraction of the
(arrow)]. It is very difficult to get a small enough drop (even with 30-25
 conjunctiva. Once the
gauge needle] that does not extend significantly beyond a small ulcer.
dissection is complete the 
 conjunctiva should easily
 pull over the cornea (C) and 
10.89
can be sutured in a variety
 of patterns (D). The critical
time is 5-7 days if
 retraction is going to occur.
The flap is left for
approximately 3 weeks and 
then trimmed, leaving 
 minimal adherence at the 
ulcer. The conjunctiva does 
 not have to be resutured in 
place.
10.89 A dog with a bridge conjunctival graft in place for a central
 from moving.
surface when a round defect is closed in a linear
hemorrhage that results from conjunctival dissection and
pattern. A purse-string pattern is favored over a linear
the immediate vascularization that the flap brings to the
closure. The sutures should be 7-0 in size, and should
 ulcer are beneficial to halting progressive collagenase
 include a 2-3 mm bite on each side to minimize pulling
destruction of the stroma253
out of the stroma.
Variations of the 360° conjunctival flap are possible and,
other than requiring placing fine sutures in the cornea, they
Conjunctival flaps. A technique that reinforces or
are usually easier and faster. Such variations include: a
 patches the weakened cornea is indicated with deep
hood or 180° flap, a bridge flap {10.89), a conjunctival
ulcers of larger size. If the ulcer is acute and in the
pedicle flap (10.83), a tarsoconjunctival pedicle flap, and a
progressive stage, any procedure that relies on sutures
embedded in the adjacent cornea will probably fail. The
usually a two-step procedure, with the second step.
 360° conjunctival flap is still the best procedure for large
{removal of the flap) ≥3 weeks later. After dissection of
 central ulcers that are in a progressive stage (10.88). The
excess conjunctival tissue from the adhered region of prior 
276
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
10.90
10.90 Autogenous
 corneoconjunctival graft. If 
A
 an ulcer has enough
adjacent normal tissue to
cover it as in (A), a half-
 depth lamellar dissection is 
 performed out to the
limbus (B). The width of
the dissection should be 
 5omewhat wider than the
ulcer. The conjunctiva is
 then excised with scissors.
R
again wider than the space
to be filled to counteract 
 contraction (C), and the 
underlying Tenon's capsule
Limbus
 is removed (D). The
Conjunctiva 
 remaining limbal zone is 
 Subconjunctiva
 cut and this will allow 
. Sclera
radial movement of the 
dissected tissue into the
C
ulcer (E, F). As this
 procedure is often a source
 of hemorrhage, it is 
prudent to do the
 procedure last. The end of
the corneal graft is 
trimmed to fit the ulcer
(G). The entire graft is
5utured with 8 to 9-0
D
ma terial (H).
ulceration, topical steroids are often administered for
minimize scarring (10.91). Homologous corneal grafts
 2-3 weeks to minimize the scar. The final appearance, with
frozen in a standard freezer have been used to patch
 continued shrinkage of the scar, may take several months.
corneal defects in dogs, cats, and horses. These grafts
 A scar will always be present with stromal ulcers, due to
remain opaque but they successfully patch the defect and
healing by fibroplasia. Complete 360° conjunctival flaps 
O Aia aiou aue inq asioy aui u panass Aea ae
 an intraocular prosthesis2s9 With nonperforating ulcers
retract prematurely. Pedicle, bridge, or free grafts are more
in  t
the dog and cat, frozen lamellar grafts provide
successful than 360° flaps in the horse.
edematous, stimulate intense neovascularization, and
Corneal grafts. Free corneal grafts can be performed to
then are clear by 60 days.
fill defects from ulceration but a sliding autogenous
A variety of materials have been used as 'patches" to
lamellar graft is more practical and successful if there is
 cover an ulcer, similar to a free-hand conjunctival graft.
enough normal cornea adjacent to the lesion (10.90)257.
 Porcine small intestinal submucosa261, equine renal
In one study, 95% of these grafts were translucent and
capsule262, 262a, 262b,
，équine
pericardium263, and
the experimental group had the corneal endothelium re-
established2ss This procedure will give better functional
been used as patches. Covering the ulcer with a patching
results than conjunctival flaps and, while technically
material when dealing with septic problems has the
 n l g   i r 
disadvantage of not bringing a blood supply to the ulcer.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
277
10.91
10.92
10.93
10.91 Kitten that has had a corneoconjunctival
10.92 Dense corneal leukoma in a horse. The
10.93 A horse with a corneal tattoo
diding graft for a herpesvirus descemetocele.
scar was cosmetically objectionable to the
immediately after applying platinum chloride.
The vascular portion is the conjunctival part and
 owner, who requested corneal tattooing.
Note the adjacent corneal edema which 
the corneal portion is mainly clear. The clinical
detracts from the cosmetic improvement.
 appearance was clearer than the photograph
would indicate.
The advantage of most of the nonconjunctival patches is
 Age: young animals have the highest incidence of
that they leave less scarring; however, they should only
disease, which suggests that some immunity is
be used in a stable ulcer.
acquired from previous exposure270.
 Season: peak incidence of disease is usually in
Corneal tattooing Deep corneal ulcers will invariably have
warmer humid months. Winter outbreaks have been
a significant scar. If pigmentation has not accompanied the
associated with reflected UV light from the snow. In
healing process, a significant cosmetic blemish may compel
addition, crowded conditions in the winter may lead
the owner to seek a solution. Corneal tattooing
with
to outbreaks.
platinic chloride offers a cosmetic improvement. After
 UV radiation: outbreaks of IBK can be correlated
debriding the epithelium, 2% platinic chloride is soaked
with peak UV radiation. Experimental infections are
into the scar and then precipitated with 2% hydrazine265.
created by first irradiating the eyes with UV light.
 A black precipitate is formed in the scar which does not
 UV radiation produces degeneration and increased
improve function but does blend with the usual
 sloughing of the epithelial cells and promotes 
background of a dark equine iris (10.92, 10.93).
 conditions for attachment of M, bovis271. The most
critical wavelength is 270 nm272.
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (pinkeye)
+
 Breed: Bos indictus breeds (Brahmam type) are
Introduction/etiology
 generally resistant.
Infectious bacterial ulcerative keratitis occurs in both
 Ocular and periocular pigmentation: breeds and
cows and sheep. The disease is worldwide and has a
genetic lines of animals with less pigment are more
significant economic impact from weight loss and cost of
susceptible273.
treatment. In one retrospective study of a beef herd, one-
 Flies: Musca domestica and Musca autumnalis may
third of the calves at weaning had infectious bovine
 carry the organisms between animals and may
keratoconjunctivitis {IBK). Two-thirds of the affected
 mechanically injure the corneal surface267.
calves had unilateral involvement and one-third had
 Dust, tall grass, wind: these may produce mechanical
bilateral involvement. The average suppression of weight
irritation to the ocular surface.
in calves with unilateral involvement was 11 lb (S kg) and
 Other infectious agents: concurrent infection with IBR
  i  sm    
virus or vaccination with a live IBR virus increases the
 The consensus is that the primary etiology in the cow
 severity and prevalence of the 0cular lesions274-276.
is Moraxella bovis but multiple factors play a role in
Mycoplasma spp. may promote colonization of the
both the susceptibility of the animal and the severity of
conjunctiva by Moraxella spp. but do not have a
the disease267-269.
 primary role in producing IBK277, 278.
Enhancing factors
Transmission
● Strain of Moraxella bovis: piliated hemolytic strains
Direct transmission without the enhancing factors
which produce rough cultures are the pathogenic
described above or other enhancing factors is of minimal
importance. Only one of 20 calves developed clinical IBK
virulence and promotes conversion to smooth
from close contact when housed in conditions 
that
minimized other risk factors such as fly control279.
278
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASe In VeTeRINARY MeDICInE
10.94
10.95
10.94 Uncomplicated early infectious bovine keratitis lesion in the
10.95 Complicated infectious bovine keratitis lesion that has
anterior stroma. The lesion is typically axial.
resulted in a descermetocele. The calf was valuable, 5o was treated
successfully with a pedicle conjunctival graft.
 Clinical signs
10.96
In order of development:
+
 Epiphora, photophobia, and conjunctivitis are very
early signs.
A focal axial corneal opacity or small abscess
develops followed by ulceration in 2-4 days (10.94).
+
 The central ulcer may heal or progress in depth.
Simple ulcerations may heal in 1-2 weeks.
Progression of the ulcer in depth often occurs with
descemetocele formation or perforation and iris
prolapse. Corneal vascularization is stimulated as well
as leukocytic infiltration of the cornea (10.95). This 
produces opacification of the cornea peripheral to the
ulcer Healing of the ulcer bed is frequently by
vascular invasion of the ulcer bed, resulting in a
raised bed of granulation tissue {10.96). Deep and
perforated ulcers heal over in 1-2 months by fibrosis.
10.96 Healed infectious bovine keratitis lesion with granulation. The
 An endophthalmitis may develop with deep or
cow develops corneal granulation more readily than other species.
perforated ulcers.
A central corneal scar that shrinks in size over several
months is present in most recovered animals (10.97).
10.97
Therapy
Moraxella bovis is susceptible to a wide variety of
antibiotics but the number of affected animals and
difficulty in providing frequent treatments present a
challenge. Topical antibiotics are effective but unless
only a few animals are affected, and they are confined
for treatment, this route is not practical. Subcon-
junctival injection of an antibiotic is often administered
to avoid frequent therapy. Procaine penicillin given
either through the upper lid into the dorsal fornix
region or subconjunctivally in the bulbar conjunctiva
achieves a therapeutic concentration in the conjunctival
fuid for 68 and 40 hours, respectively280. Parenteral
administration of long-acting oxytetracycline, given at
20 mg/kg i.m. q72h, was successful both in treating and
Treatment with long-acting oxytetracycline is approved
10.97 Typical axial corneal scar indicative of prior infectious bovine
by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA), except in
kera titis infection.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
279
10.98
10.99
10.98 Peracute developing descermetocele with small iris prolapse in a
10.99 Acute iris prolapse from an ulcer in a Yorkshire Terrier. Note
Boston Terrier. The lesion began as an epithelial ulcer. The iris prolapse is
the lack of adjacent corneal reaction indicating the acute nature.
mvered with fibrin and thus is not brown or black. Culture was negative.
Because of the acute nature, prognosis is good to guarded. The
The patient was treated with a 360° conjunctival flap because of the
patient was treated successfully with a pedicle flap.
progressive nature of the condition. Vision was retained.
lactating dairy cows. Florfenicol {a chloramphenicol
s.c. vaccination with a bacterin that contains pilus
derivitive) has also proved highly effective in treating.
antigens should be considered in problem herds.
IBK; 98% of animals heal with one s.c. injection of
Vaccination can be as early as 3 weeks of age and
40 mg/kg and 93% heal with two i.m. injections of
should be repeated in 3 weeks and annually thereafter.
 20 mg/kg q48h282.
While experimental evidence suggests that multiple
Corticosteroids
aré
often
given
 topically
Or
inoculation of a piliated bacterin reduces the incidence
subconjunctivally with antibiotics for treating IBK; this
of clinical disease, the effectiveness of available vaccines
defies the rule of not using corticosteroids with infection
has been questioned28s, 286.
or ulceration. Despite this contradiction, most clinicians
feel that it shortens the course of the disease and markedly
Infectious ovine keratoconjunctivitis
improves the appearance of the cornea. A frequently used
Infectious keratoconjunctivitis is recognized worldwide
drug combination of penicillin and dexamethasone given
condition is
characterized
by
subconjunctivally on 3 consecutive days was recently
conjunctivitis and a peripheral keratitis that is usually
demonstrated to have no therapeutic benefit when
not ulcerative. Organisms thought to be responsible are
Mycoplasma
conjunctivae
and,
less 
commonly,
Topical atropine ointment may be given for pain, and
 0l saseo auaaas ul uiys aul oi panla aq Xeu sauoied aka
occur in the more severely affected lambs. Animals
protect the eye from flies, dust, and sun. Alternatively, a
infected with chlamydial forms of conjunctivitis may
third eyelid flap is frequently used in severe cases.
also have joint disease. Mycoplasma-associated
ins aul pa4a puiyi aul aunins oi pasn sl insieo yiwo1uo
keratoconjunctivitis increases in severity with age.
sutures will dissolve spontaneously, which is an
Branhamella ovis, Escherichia coli, and Stapbylococcus
advantage when treating animals in large pastures or in
@reus are commonly cultured from diseased and
great numbers284.
normal eyes but are not thought to be primary casual
 agents, although this is controversial290 The disease is
Prophylaxis
self-limiting but the course can be shortened with
Because of the significant economic impact of IBK,
antibiotics.
particular emphasis should be placed on prevention.
Emphasis should be placed on good husbandry
Perforated ulcers
techniques such as quarantine of all new animals,
Introduction/etiology
avoiding purchase of animals from public auction if
Perforated ulcers are managed similarly to deep ulcers
possible, and/or treating all new animals with long-acting
but have the additional factors of a protruding iris,
 oxytetracycline for two treatments at 3-4-day intervals
alterations of intraocular structures, and an increased
to minimize the risk of carrier animals.
risk of intraocular infection. 
The  iris prolapse may
Fly control during the summer with devices such as
appear black, gray, or red, depending on the chronicity
ear tags or dust bags, and provision of shaded areas, are
and the amount of fibrin layered on the surface {10.98,
important to minimize potentiating factors. Live IBR
10.99). The fibrin adds to the mass, producing a
vaccine should be avoided during the IBK season and
mushroom shape. The fibrin becomes organized with
280
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
time and the condition is often termed a corneal
Injuries to the lens may result in a delayed
 staphyloma at this stage (10.100). The mushroom shape
inflammation (phacoanaphylaxis, phacoclastic uveitis),
of the protruding iris and layers of fibrin may create a
that usually destroys the eye, and vitreous hemorrhage,
false impression as to the size of the ulcer and consequent
 often resulting in traction-induced retinal detachment as
 assessment of how difficult it will be to repair. Judgment
the hemorrhage organizes. Whenever a peracute iris
 as to the prognosis and means of surgical repair should
prolapse occurs without prior ocular signs, a perforating
be made after the iris has been stripped of the fibrin and
corneal missile injury should be suspected. Many missile
the extent of the injury determined.
injuries are malicious and thus a history is lacking.
Smaller BB pellet wounds are often self-sealing and do
Thera py
not have an iris prolapse, whereas larger air rifle pellet
The protruding iris is usually excised unless the condition
wounds usually have a small iris prolapse (10.101).
is only a few hours old and/or it is very small. Bleeding
Screening skull radiographs are used to diagnose
will be encountered with iris excision and may be
metallic perforating foreign bodies. With metallic
controlled with irrigation, low temperature cautery,
missiles, infection is rarely a problem but intense steroid
viscoelastic   a
agents,  
and/or 
topical
epinephrine
therapy is indicated to control the inflammation.
(1:10,000). Anterior synechiae to the posterior cornea
Porcupine quills may perforate the eye directly or from
are released by sweeping with a spatula and the anterior
the orbital region. Orbital porcupine quills are readily
chamber maintained with viscoelastic agents while
recognized on ultrasound by a double-banded linear
covering the defect with a surgical patch. The anterior
hyperechoic lesion291. Cat claw injuries are typically in
 chamber will reform if the perforation is hours or a few
naive puppies, are often self-sealing, and are recognized
days old but older lesions will resist expansion of the
by a full-thickness linear lesion. The lens capsule is often 
anterior chamber due to posterior pooling of aqueous
ruptured with claw injuries and while infection is of
humor in the vitreal compartment. A surgical patch,
concern, surprisingly it often does not materialize.
usually of conjunctiva or cornea, is devised and sutured
If the injury is self-sealing, surgical repair of the cornea
in place. Intensive topical and systemic antibiotic therapy
is not necessary Lesions with iris prolapse are managed as
is given. Despite the potential gravity of these conditions,
a perforated ulcer, if attempts to salvage the eye are to be
the prognosis may be quite good if the anterior chamber
made. If the lens capsule has suffered a tear >1.5 mm, it has
can be reformed.
been recommended that the lens be removed to reduce
subsequent immune-mediated inflammation292.
PENETRATING AND PERFORATING WOUNDS
OF THE CORNEA AND GLOBE
CORNEAL LACERATIONS
ssed jou saop inq saiua ieul auo si Ainlui sueiauad y
Corneal lacerations are relatively easy to manage
through the structure, while a perforating injury is one
compared to corneal ulceration, since usually there is no
that does pass through the structure. Injuries from
tissue missing {10.102). The prognosis and treatment of
missiles, sticks, porcupine quills, and claw wounds may
lacerations will depend on the chronicity and amount of
mimic corneal ulcers but they have a very different
collateral damage, such as uveal and lens lacerations. The
prognosis. Pellets and BB shot usually produce multiple
length of the laceration in horses correlates with prognosis,
injuries at various depths in the globe that lead to more
with all lacerations >15 mm resulting in phthisis,
chronic complications and blindness. Accurate diagnosis
'uaaia aq ueo sisousoid aieunoe ue ieul 0s juniod1 51
most corneal lesions >15 mm are probably corneal
10.100
10.101
10.100 Corneal staphyloma in a Pekingese. This is a chronic problerm
10.101 Smalliris prolapse in a dog that was very peracute in onset,.
and the prognosis for vision is very poor. Because of the size, either a
without a prior history of an ocular problem. The prolapse was due
360° conjunctival flap or, preferrably, a corneal graft should be used to
to a perforating pellet. X-rays will quickly confirm a metallic foreign 
fill the defect. The collapsed anterior charmber will be dlifficult to reform.
body. The condition should be differentiated from a perforated ulcer
for prognosis and therapeutic reason5.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
281
10.102
10.103
10.104
10.102 Corneal laceration in a dog with iris
10.103 Corneal laceration in a horse after
10.104 Corneal rupture from blunt trauma in a
prolapse. Most acute lacerations will have a
 suturing. A residual blood clot retracted 
horse. Lesions extend through the limbus on each 
good prognosis for vision if the lens is not
spontaneously, but tissue plasminogen
end and, on exploration, the lens had been
involved. Depending on the extent and
activator could be injected in a couple of days 
 expelled. Ultrasound of the eye prior to surgery
acuteness, the iris may be replaced or
to hasten the resolution. Lacerations should be 
would reveal loss of the lens and probable retinal
excised before suturing.
differentiated from a corneal rupture.
detachment. The typical outcome is phthisis bulbi.
ruptures from blunt trauma. Lavach et al.294 found that
10.105 Corneal
10.105
 only 12% of horses with corneal perforations involving
foreign body in a
the cornea and sclera were managed successfully.
dog. This is a seed 
 Lacerations require accurate apposition of edges with
hull and a common
sutures and treatment for potential infection. Lacerations
foreign body in all 
of the cornea that are not perforating may not require
species. The hull lies 
 sutures. If the edges of a nonperforating laceration gape,
in a facet and
 then sutures are indicated. Perforating lacerations require
usually requires
management of the prolapsed iris by excision and freeing
 mechanical 'flicking 
any anterior synechiae from the posterior cornea. The
out' under topical
anterior chamber is reformed with viscoelastic agent and
 anesthesia.
the cornea is accurately sutured. If the anterior chamber
has been collapsed for a long time, it may not reform
well. Suturing should be with a minimum S-0 and
minimize scarring but will have to be removed at a later
time. Lacerations should be differentiated from ruptures
of the cornea and sclera.
Diagnosis
RUPTURES OF THE GLOBE
Diagnosis of a rupture as opposed to a laceration is on
Introd uction/etiology
the history of a blunt injury. Ruptures of the cornea
Rupture of the cornea and often the sclera from blunt
usually extend into the sclera, whereas lacerations are
trauma mimics a laceration but the prognosis is much
often restricted to the cornea (10.104). Ultrasound of the
worse294. The sudden decompressive force associated
eye, showing loss of the lens, indicates a ruptured globe.
with a rupture usually results in such severe internal
ocular injury that it rarely lea ves a functional eye and the
Therapy
globe frequently becomes phthisical. Horses usually
If the diagnosis is certain, enucleation is recommended,
develop ruptures of the cornea and anterior sclera.
because the eye will be blind, with an extensive recovery
Ruptures of the cornea frequently extend across the
period that ends in phthisis bulbi. Exploration of the
limbus into the sclera. Dogs and cats usually develop
globe during attempts to suture the defects may reveal a
 posterior ruptures of the sclera and they are often not
ruptured or missing lens. Silicone spheres have been
visible. Posterior scleral ruptures should be suspected
implanted after evisceration of the globe and suture of
when the globe is very soft (e.g. following an injury such
 the rupture, in an attempt to prevent phthisis. A definite 
as proptosis of the globe). In small animals, ruptures are
risk of extrusion of the sphere is present when
usually the result of trauma from automobiles and
implantation is performed under these conditions.
usually accompany proptosis of the globe; in the horse,
ruptures are commonly found as a result of throwing the
CORNEAL FOREIGN BODIES
head or rearing over and hitting the floor. Ruptures of
Corneal foreign bodies are usually vegetable matter. A
the cornea can be managed similarly to a laceration, but
flat brownish seed hullis the most common foreign body
almost invariably the cornea will have severe permanent
(10.105) and it can usually be removed under topical
edema and the globe will become phthisical.
  io  , o   i
282
OPHTHALMIC DISEASe IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
10.106
10.107
10.106 Splinter in the cornea of a cat (arrow). These are difficult to
10.107 Equine dermoid at the lateral limbus accompanied by a
remove and require general anesthesia, magnification, cutting down
coloboma of the third eyelid and of the optic disk.
over the splinter, and good forceps to grasp the splinter.
10.108
10.109
10.109 Removal of a
corneal dermoid with a
superficial kera tectomy.
The dermoid is outlined 
and the incision at the
tip is extended slightly 
to make it cruciate, to
facilitate picking the tip
up. The edges of the
incision should have 
 mild gaping to indicate
incision into
the stroma rather than 
 scra tching the 
epithelium. (Courtesy of 
Dr. M. Wyman, The Ohio
State University.]
10.108 German Shepherd Dog puppy with a corneal dermoid at the
lateral limbus.
25 gauge needle or cytobrush. Splinters in the cornea are
{10.107). A syndrome of iris hypoplasia, limbal dermoid,
 more difficult to remove unless one end is protruding
 and cataract was observed in the offspring of one
from the cornea (10.106). Splinters usually require
Quarter horse stallion297.
incising over them so they can be grasped with forceps.
A rare complication of vegetable foreign bodies may be
 Clinical signs
fungal keratitis.
Owners usually
present the patient because of
blepharospasm and epiphora resulting from the dermoid
MASSES IN THE CORNEA AND SCLERA
hairs. In the dog, most dermoids are unilateral but they
Dermoids
are often bilateral in cattle. The size of the dermoid in the
Introduction/etiology.
dog and cat is usually rather small. The most common
A dermoid is a choristoma or congenital tumor
site of corneal dermoids in the dog is at the temporal
composed of tissues not normally present in that site.
limbus (10.108). In cattle, dermoids often involve the
Dermoids are observed occasionally in all species but are
central cornea and may extend onto the third eyelid and
most common in the dog and cow. Dermoids are thought
conjunctiva (see Dermoids, p.205, 8.45).
to be an inherited trait in some dog breeds, cattle, horses,
and the Burmese cat29s, 296. Dermoids have been
Diagnosis
observed occurring with coloboma of a hypoplastic third
 Diagnosis of a dermoid is usually obvious because hairs
eyelid in the dog (Neapolitan Mastiff), cat, and horse
 are present on the mass.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
283
10.110
10.111
10.110 Technique for performing a superficial keratectomy. The blade
10.111 Corneal inclusion cyst in a dog. This presents as a raised,
is rotated so it is tangential to the cornea and a bluish-white tension
smooth mass on the cornea that is pink to creamy in color. Mlost
line will indicate the line of dissection. If the lesion involves the
are superficial and can be dissected with a superficial keratectomy.
lirmbus, dissection should start from the corneal side to avoid
bleeding during the majority of the dissection. Excess tension on
the cornea will leave tufts of torn fibers rather than incised fibers.
10.112
A variety of specialty blades can be utilized for the dissection.
Therapy
Dermoids, even when massive, are always superficial and
can be removed with a superficial keratectomy when the
animal is old enough to undergo general anesthesia
(10.109, 10.110). Until the animal has attained a size to
make the surgery practical, ointments can be applied to
protect the cornea.
Pseudotumors
● Epithelial inclusion cysts are rare but they may mimic
a tumor. They are raised, smooth-surfaced lesions that
are filled with a milky fluid (10.111). A central
location on the cornea differentiates the cyst from
10.112 Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis (NGESK) in a Collie.
neoplasia. A history of prior trauma or surgery in the
The main differential is a neoplastic process. Both eyes are probably 
region months previously is helpful but not
involved in NGESK and some response will occur with anti-
consistent298, 299 Diagnosis and therapy is by
inflammatory therapy.
 performing a superficial keratectomy. If incised during
 surgery, the cystic nature is obvious. Most epithelial
inclusion cysts are superficial in the cornea but,
depending on their origin, it is possible to have almost
NGESK usually respond initially to topical or
full-thickness corneal involvement and so require a
subconjunctival steroid therapy but often become
surgical patch of conjunctiva or cornea after excision.
unresponsive with time. Superficial keratectomy
 Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis (fibrous
followed by topical steroid therapy may be curative but 
histiocytoma) (NGESK) is the most common
aui se Arans panueiddns sey audonueze oaiss
 pseudotumor observed. Collies are predisposed.
therapy of choice302. The recommended dose of
Fibrous histiocytoma is a misnomer as this condition is
 azathioprine is 2 mg/kg q24h until clinical
not considered neoplastic in dogs and cats; it is in
improvement occurs, reducing to 1 mg/kg q24h, then
humans. NGESK manifests as proliferative pink
on alternate days, and finally weekly depending on
masses, usually at the temporal limbus of one or both
lesion response and results of weekly hemograms.
eyes (10.112). An arc of lipid is often present in the
Therapy may eventually be terminated after long-term
cornea adjacent to the advancing edge of the lesion.
Occasionally, the masses are on the lids, third eyelid,
is cryotherapy or superficial keratectomy followed by
 and central cornea 300, 301. On histopathologic
cryotherapy, provided concurrent immunosuppressive
examination, the masses consist of subepithelial
therapy is not used304. Successful primary treatment of
inflammatory cells that range from predominantly
scleritis with oral tetracycline (500 mg q8h) and
lymphocytes and plasma cells to predominantly
niacinamide (500 mg q8h) has been reported30s The
histiocytes. NGESK is thought to be an immune-
frequency of dose can be reduced to qi2-24h, based
mediated disease based on histopathology, breed
on response. This therapy can also be used when anti-
predisposition, and response to therapy. The masses in
inflammatories have failed.
284
OpHThAlMIC DIsEASe In VeTeRINArY MeDICInE
10.113
10.114
10.113 Nodular fascitis (episcleritis) that is invading the peripheral
10.114 Corneal papilloma in an aged Gordon Setter. The papilloma
 cornea. The lesion was excised for therapeutic and biopsy purposes
was removed with a superficial keratectomy.
and controlled with topical corticosteroid therapy.
10.115
ongoing medical therapy, whereas 50% of unilateral
lesions resolved and dd not require ongoing therapy310a.
+
Equine limbal pseudotumors: Moore et ai. 310b
described pseudotumors in 5 horses that were raised,
smooth, nonulcerated pink masses usually in the
dorsal limbal or perilimbal region as well as the third
eyelid. The horses were 5-8 years of age. On biopsy
the lesions were inflammatory, with a predominant
lymphocytic reaction, macrophages, and fibrosis.
The lymphocytes were predominantly T cells. All
responded to surgical excision and/or topical
corticosteroid therapy. Relapses may occur and long-
term therapy may be required. The cause is
unknown, but postulated to be immune mediated.
CORNEALTUMORS
Introduction/etiology
10.115 Epibulbar melanocytoma in a young German Shepherd Dog.
Tumors of the cornea in the dog and cat are not
Note the arc of lipid in advance of the tumor. The patient was treated
common, unlike in the horse and cow. Most tumors arise
by excision and corneoscleral graft.
near the limbus and extend into the cornea.
Dog and cat
Tumors such as melanomas, melanocytomas, hemangiomas,
●Nodular fascitis: the literature is confusing regarding
hemangiosarcomas, papillomas, and SCC have been
differentiation of this lesion from NGESK or fibrous
observed (see also Conjunctival neoplasia, p.201) (10.114).
histiocytoma. The confusion is compounded by use of
While SCC in the dog is rare, chronic KCS or chronic
 the synonym nodular episcleritis306, 307, Clinically,
keratitis in general may be a predisposing factor311-313.
nodular fasciitis is often a subconjunctival mass
Epibulbar melanomas are more appropriately termed
attached to the sclera but it may involve the cornea,
melanocytomas, considering the predominant plump
third eyelid, and lids (10.113). Unlike fibrous
histiocytoma, the American Cocker Spaniel and
their benign nature. They are most common in the GSD,
Golden Retriever are predisposed to nodular
Labrador Retriever, and Golden Retriever314, 314a, In the
fascitis308. The condition may be static or expand
young dog, the tumor may invade axially into the cornea
rapidly and behave very aggressively.
as well as deeper into the iridocorneal angle and ciliary
Histopathologically, the two conditions are similar,
body. Some melanocytomas may remain static for long
with fibroblasts in a lamellar pattern and mononuclear
periods of time and, when present in an old dog, often
inflammatory cells. The inflammatory cell component
require only surveillance. The leading edge of the tumor
is not as severe with nodular fascitis compared to
onto the cornea frequently has an arc of lipid in front of
NGESK309, 310 Surgical excision is usually curative but
the advancing edge (10.115). Epibulbar melanomas
aggressive lesions may require azathioprine therapy.
should be differentiated from extension of an intraocular
 Immunohistochemical investigations of episcleritis
melanoma. They _are relatively benign and rarely
 indicated that lesions that were bilateral and those dogs
with a high percentage of B lymphocytes required
be similar to the dog317.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
285
10.111
10.117
10.118
10.116 Cormeal squamous cell carcinoma in a
10.117 Corneal invasion of a limbal
10.118 Typical location of an early squamous
9-year-old Clydesdale. Despite the extensive
hemangiosarcoma. The prognosis is guarded
cell carcinoma in a cow. Lesions of this size
invasion the lesion remains superficial in most 
 because of the metatstatic potential;
are easily treated by a variety of modalities,
instances. The patient was treated with a
enucleation is the therapy of choice.
but cryotherapy is probably the most common.
superficial keratectomy followed by beta-
ra diation therapy.
Horse
10.119
SCC is the most common tumor of the eye and adnexa of
the horse. It originates from the cornea/limbus in 25-30%
cornea until late in the progression of the condition, and
 can be excised even when it covers most of the surface area.
About 16% of cases may be bilateral. The incidence
increases with age, with a mean age ranging from
9-12 years. SCC is more common in neutered horses. In
intact animals, males are twice as commonly affected as
females and geldings are five times more susceptible than
stallions. Draft horses, Appaloosas, and horses with white,
creamello, and palomino hair color have a greater
risk318-322
SCC has a high recurrence rate {30-42%) but a late and
low metastatic rate (6-15%). Reports vary as to whether the
site of onigin influences the prognosis: one report cites a
higher recurrence with eyelid SCC319 than from the third
10.119 Extensive squamous cell carcinoma of the cornea.Range cattle
tyelid or limbus; another found no relationship between
that are not observed at frequent intervals may present at this late
 tumor location and final outcome322.
 stage. The tumor usually prefers to grow outward, but later willinvade
 Hemangiosarcomas are relatively rare and may be
the globe. Enucleation is the most pragma tic therapy at this stage.
 found on the equine cornea and limbal region. They can
usually be 
identified
clinically by their vascular
appearance 
(10.117). While they can be excised
surgically, they have a high potential for metastasis and
the prognosis for the animal's long-term survival is
most common site of origin of SCC lesions (70%), which
guarded {18:
months )323-32s
Angiosarcomas are
then spread over the cornea. Approximately 10% of cases
resistant to radiation therapy and it is unknown
are bilateral and 30% have multiple lesions. Precursor
whether more aggressive therapy such as enucleation
sediaay aium pasii uaua are os on suosa
improves the prognosis.
keratinized plaques and papillomas and about one-third
 Other tumors reported in the cornea of the horse are
melanocytomas, basal cell carcinomas, and mast cell
Metastasis is late, with rates of about S-1s%. The
tumors326, 327
tumor will invade the globe in advanced cases (20%) but
the path of least resistance is across the cornea and
Cow
outward (10.118, 10.119)331,
SCC of the eye and adnexa is most frequent in Herefords,
 Hereford crosses, Simmentals, and Shorthorns and it has 
Diagnosis
significant  
economic impact.
The etiology
is
The appearance and history of most tumors is usually
multifactorial with UV light and genetic predisposition
 suggestive of the diagnosis but excisional biopsy is
being crucial. The amount of circumocular pigmentation
definitive. Cytology gives numerous spurious results,
has been reported as being associated with neoplasia but
usually negative ones. Pseudotumors such as fibrous
genetic
predisposition
éxists，
independent
of
histiocytoma may mimic neoplasia in their appearance
and by being progressive in nature.
286
OpHThAlMIC DIsEASE In VeteRINAry MeDiCINE
10.120
10.121
凸
10.121 Application of a beta-radiation probe to a keratectomy site
after rermoval of a squarmous cell carcinoma in a horse. This is a 5oft
radiation that does not penetrate more than 2-3 mm.
with the highest recurrence was the limbus. Recurrence rates
without radiation were 44 % An alternative to surgical
excision is carbon dioxide laser ablation337.
Frequent follow up of cases is important in order to
recognize and treat promptly any early recurrences. The
 author routinely rechecks 3-4 weeks after initial therapy and
H
at 3-month intervals for the frst year Suspicious areas are
biopsied and re-treated with cryotherapy under sedation.
Medical therapy of SCCs with intralesional cisplaten or
S-fluorouracil (s-FU) has become a mode of therapy for lid
lesions. Injections are repeated at 2-week intervals for 3-4
10.120 Technique of performing a corneoscleral graft for neoplasia
treated successfully with a superficial keratectomy and
of the ocular surface. Rermoval of a full-thickness piece of cornea and
topical 0.04% mitomycine C (q6h for 8 weeks). It was not
sclera with the neoplasm in-bloc (A, B]. Placement of a free-hand 
clear whether the adjunctive therapy was the reason for
fresh or frozen graft of sclera and cornea (C-H). The suturing and 
 success, but this may be an alternative to facilities that lack
cutting of the graft are performed one side at a time.
 a strontium-90 probe339a. In humans. recurrent corneal
and conjuctival SCC have been treated successfully in 6/7
patients  with  topical alpha  2bj
interferon at a
Therapy
concentration of 1 million units/ml q6h339b.
If progressive, epibulbar melanocytomas should have either 
 There is no successful therapy for hemangiosarcomas,
 mrneoscleral grafting performed (10.120)314, keratectomy
 although excision followed by cryotherapy may
be
or   superficial
keratectomy   followed   by  diode
or
recommended. Enucleation is also recommended for
neodymium:yttrium, aluminum, and garnet (YAG) laser
hemangiosarcomas if advanced at the time of diagnosis.
et al332b reported excellent results of treating epibular
Prophylaxis
melanocytomas with superficial keratecomy and beta-
Owners are advised to avoid pasturing horses until late
radiation. Only one tumor reoccurred, but the radiation dose
afternoon if possible, and for the horse to wear a fly
 needed refining as multiple complications occurred due to the
mask. In cattle, it is important to emphasize the genetic
radiation. An alternative to a corneal graft is patching the
predisposition and cull affected bulls. It is not
defect with an autogenous cartilage and conjunctival patch
economically feasible to cull large numbers of grade
from the third eyelid232. Papillomas and SCCs are removed
cows, so early intervention by inspection at 3-month
with a keratectomy. Because of the inability to obtain a wide
intervals is recommended. Since spontaneous regression
occurs in a significant number of cattle {33%), smaller
either cyrotherapy, diathermy/hyperthermia, or beta-
lesions can be observed for growth and, if present,
radiation therapy (10.121)333. Success rates as high as 97%
treated with cryothera py330, 340
have been reported with a double-freeze technique for
 treating bovine SCC334 and as high as 80-91% when treated
  po ee sy 
DISEASES OF THE SCLERA
strontium-90 irradiation in horses with corneal SCC has
been reported as having an 83% success rate336a Mosunic et
Sta phyloma
al.336b evaluated 157 horses with SCC of the globe and
A staphyloma is a thinned outpocketing of the fibrous 
adnexa treated in a variety of ways; excision with beta-
tunic that is lined by the uveal tunic. It may arise from
radiation therapy had a 12% recurrence rate and the site
Congenital maldevelopment  or may  be  acquired.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
287
10.122
10.123
10.124
10.122 Intercalary 5staphyloma in a Basset
10.123 Sector episcleritis in an American 
10.124 Diffuse episcleritis in an American
Hound with chronic glaucoma. Note the 
Cocker Spaniel. Note the selective vascular
Cocker Spaniel. Note the thickened episclera.
bluish-black of the uveal tract bulging under
 engorgement and thickening of the episclera.
selective conjunctival engorgement, and 
the bulbar conjunctiva.
The adjacent cornea may have a mild edema
 peripheral corneal edema and
with neovascularization.
neovascularization. Because of the breed.
these signs might be confused with glaucoma.
Congenital staphylomas may occur with Collie eye
anomaly and with MOC inherited by the Australian
Shepherd Dog. The term corneal staphyloma is used for a
10.125 Necrotizing
10.125
 prolapsed iris and associated deposition of multiple layers
 scleritis in a dog
of fibrin (10.100). As the fibrin organizes and matures, a
with Ehrlichia canis
layer of collagenous tissue covers the protruding iris.
infection. The
 Intercalary staphyloma is located near the limbus and
condition became 
has been described as a late complication of limbal
 bilateral and
incision with cataract surgery341. An additional cause of
initially presented
acquired intercalary staphyloma is chronic glaucoma
because of a uveitis
{10.122) and necrotizing scleritis (10.125).
with hemorrhagic
overtones.
Scleritis/episcleritis
Fischer342 classified canine scleritis/episcleritis based on
 clinicopathologic changes into:
●Episcleritis
simple
 nodular episclerokeratitis
+ Scleritis
same process (10.112, 10.113). Deykin et al.308 considered
superficial
nodular episcleritis significantly different in Collies and
deep
non-Collie breeds on histopathologic examination. Non-
 necrotizing
Collie forms of nodular episcleritis are characterized by
degenerate collagen   with  scattered mononuclear
Simple episcleritis is common and is recognized by
inflammatory
 cells. Collie nodular  episcleritis
is
 engorgement of the superficial episcleral vessels and a diffuse
characterized by fibroblasts but no degenerative collagen.
or sector thickening of the episcleral space (10.123, 10.124).
Non-necrotizing superficial scleritis tends to be
The peripheral cornea usually has a narrow rim of edema
bilateral and involves the anterior sclera, cornea, and
 and mild neovascularization. The condition is benign and is 
anterior uvea. It manifests as mildly elevated, red lesions
responsive to topical or intralesional  corticosteroids,
in the anterior sclera. The histopathologic changes in the
although the drugs may have to be given for an indefinite
superficial and deep forms are similar, with mononuclear
period The bulbar vascular hyperemia appears similar to
inflammation and a few giant cells. It is responsive to
intraocular diseases such as glaucoma and anterior uveitis,
corticosteroid therapy but may relapse.
 and may be confused with conjunctivitis. Differentiating
Deep non-necrotizing scleritis involves the anterior
features are the thickened episclera under the conjunctiva
 and posterior sclera, uvea, and retina. The condition may
and peripheral corneal edema (10.124) with normal IOP,
be bilateral and loss of ocular function is possible.
umless acoompanied by anterior uveitis. An association with
Fortunately, this is a rare condition. Corticosteroid
positive toxoplasmosis titers has been found in some areas,
therapy is frequently unsuccessful and azathioprine or
the significance of which is unknown343 An immune panel
cyclophosphamide therapy should be used.
may have positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) titers but
 these are quite variable.
 structures are involved in an intense nongranulomatous
Nodular  episclerokeratitis  was described  earlier 
inflammation. The process may progress rapidly, similar to
{Pseudotumors, p.283) and, according to Fischer, fibrous
a
melting ulcer.
of the cornea, and results 
in
histiocytoma and nodular fascitis are variations of the
subconconjunctival iris prolapse (10.125). The condition
288
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
may occur bilaterally and systemic disease should be
hosts. The dog and other canids are probably the
 suspected in this form. Ehrlichia canis infection has been
definitive host.
documented_ in multiple instances of necrotizing
Ocular onchocerciasis may be either unilateral or
scleritis343, 343a.
bilateral. In the Greek study it was characterized by one
 Parasitic granulomas from Onchocerca spp. have
or more conjunctival masses on the sclera. All the dogs
been reported in the dog, involving the episcleral/scleral
had associated signs of periorbital swelling (23),
regions adjacent to the limbus344 346. Reports of three
exophthalmos (23), ocular discharge, ocular pain,
dogs from the western US suggested the species involved
conjunctival hyperemia, and protrusion of the third
was O. lienalis or O. stilesi that normally infect cows,
eyelid. Episcleral granulomas were present in most cases
and thus were thought to be aberrant infections. No
{18/23) and involvement of the anterior or posterior uvea
intraocular involvement was noted in these cases.
was a complication in 60%. Peripheral eosinophilia was
Epibulbar involvement with Onchocerca spp. appears
present in 8/23.
to be endemic to Greece, where 23 cases were reported
Diagnosis was made by finding the parasite either
over a 3-year period346. In the Greek cases, the species
protruding from the granuloma on clinical examination,
was unique, with most ungulate-infecting species ruled
or in the tissues obtained from surgical excision of the
out by various morphologic criteria. The authors
granulomas. Both live and dead parasites of both sexes
postulated that the infective agent was a unique species,
were found in the granulomas. Therapy consisted of
that had not been recognized to date, probably from an
 surgical excision of the granulomas followed by medical
unknown wild ungulate. To date, 64 cases have been
therapy with melarsomine (2.5 mg/kg q24h 'i.m.) for
described in Europe and the United States. Nucleotide
 2 days followed by ivermectin (50 μg/kg. q24h) for
sequencing of canine Oncbocera indicates that it is a
30 days. Initial therapy resulted in increased periocular
unique species, probably Onchocera lupus, that was
swelling and pruritis that abated within 1 week. No
originally identified in a wolf346a. The life cycle is
relapses were noted for at least 1 year.
probably indirect, involving biting flies as intermediate
REFERENCES
1 Bayer (1914) Augenbeitkunde. Wilhelm
9 Chan-Ling T, Efron N, Holden B {1985)
16 Marfurt C, Murphy C, Florczak J
 Braumuller, Leipzig, pp. 1-630.
Diurnal variation of corneal thickness
(2001) Morphology and neurochemistry
2 Dice P (1981) Veterinary
in the cat. Investigative Ophthatmology
of canine corneal innervation.
Ophthatmology. Lea and Febiger,
and Visuat Science 26:102-105.
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Visuat
Philadelphia.
10 Petrick S, van Rensburg I (1989)
Science 42:2242-2251.
3 Freeman R {1980) Corneal radius of
Corneal anatomical differences in the
17 Murphy C, Reid T, Mannis M,
curvature of the kitten and the cat.
aetiology of chronic superfical keratitis.
Iwahashi C (1990) The role of
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
Journat of Smatl Animat Practice
neuropeptides in corneal wound healing.
Visuat Science 19:306-308.
30:449-453.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
4 Prince J, Diesem C, Eglitis I, Ruskell G
11 Watsky MA, Olsen TW, Edelhauser HF
the American Cotlege of Veterinary
[1960) The globe. In: Anatomy and
{1995) Cornea and sclera. In: Duane's
Ophthatmologists 21:81.
Histology of the Eye and Orbit in
Foundations of Ctinicat
18 Nishida T, Nakamura M, Ofuji K, Reid
 Domestic Animals. CC Thomas.
 Ophthatmology. W Tasma, E Jaeger, PL
T, Mannis M, Murphy C (1996)
Springfield, pp. 13-42.
Kaufman (eds). Lippincott, Williams
Synergistic effects of substance P with
5 Stapleton S, Peiffer R {1979) Specular
and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 1-29.
insulin-like growth factor-1 on epithelial
 microscopic observations of the
12 Castoro JA, Bettelheim AA,
migration of the cornea. Journat of
clinically normal canine corneal
 Bettellheim FA (1988) Water gradients
Celtatar Physiology 169:159-166.
endothelium. American Journat of
across the bovine cornea. Investigative
19 Shamsuddin A, Nirankari V, Purnell D,
Veterinary Research 42:1803-1804.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Chang S (1986) Is the corneal posterior
6 Peiffer R, Devanzo R, Cohen K {1981)
29:963-968.
cell layer truly endothelial?
Specular microscopic observations of
13 Barrett P, Scagliotti R, Merideth R,
Ophthatmotogy 93:1298-1303.
clinically normal feline corneal
 Jackson P, Alarcon F {1991) Absolute
20 Van Horn D, Sendele D, Seideman S,
endothelium. American Journa! of
 corneal sensitivity and corneal
 Buco PJ (1977) Regenerative capacity of
Veterinary Research 42:854-855.
trigeminal nerve anatomy in normal
the corneal endothelium in rabbits and
7 Gilger B, Whitley D, McLaughlin S,
dogs. Progress in Veter inary and
cats. Investigative Ophthatmotogy
Wright J, Drane J (1991) Canine 
Comparative Ophthatmalogy
16:597-613.
corneal thickness measured by
1:245-254.
21 Befanis P, Peiffer R, Brown D (1981)
ultrasonic pachymetry. American
14 Chan-Ling T {1989) Sensitivity and
Endothelial repair of the canine cornea.
Journat of Veterinary Research
neural organization of the cat cornea.
American Journal of Veterinary
52:1570-1572.
Investigative Ophthatrtotlogy and
Research 42:590-595.
8 Moodie K, Hashizume N, Houston D, et
Visuat Science 30:1075-1082.
22 Waring G, Bourne W, Edelhauser H,
af. (2001) Postnatal development of
15 Duke-Elder S, Gloster J {1968)
Kenyon K {1982) The corneal
corneal curvature and thickness in the
Physiology of the eye and of vision. In:
endothelium: normal and pathologic
cat. Veterinary Ophthatmology
Systems of Ophthatmology. CV
structure and function. Ophthatmology
4:267-272.
Mosby, St Louis, pp. 337-363.
89:531-590.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
289
23 Martin CL, Anderson BG (1981)
36 Gasset A, Dohlman C {1968) The
50 Gwin R, Cunningham D, Shaver R
Ocular anatomy. In: Veterinary
tensile strength of corneal wounds.
{1983) Posterior polymorphous
Ophthaimotogy. K Gelatt (ed). Lea
Archives of Ophthatmology
dystrophy of the cornea in Cocker
and Febiger, Philadelphia, pp. 12-121.
79:595-602.
Spaniels: preliminary clinical and
24 Maurice D (1957) The structure and
37 Benezra D {1978) Neovasculogenic
specular microscopic findings.
transparency of the cornea. Journat of
ability of prostaglandins, growth
Praceedings of the Scientific Meeting
Physiotogy 136:263-286.
factors, and synthetic
of the American Coltege of Veterinary
25 Goldman J, Benedek G, Dohlman C,
chemoattractants. American Journat
Ophthaimologists 14:154-166.
Kravitt B {1968) Structural alterations
of Ophthatmotogy 86:455-461.
51 Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA,
 affecting transparency in swollen
38 Glaser B, D'Amore P, Michels R, et af.
Cook CS, Latimer CA {1999)
human corneas. Investigative
{1980) The demonstration of
Congenital ocular abnormalities of 
Ophthatmology 7:501-519.
angiogenic activity from ocular
Rocky Mountain horses. Veterinary
26 Pfister R {1975) The healing of 
tissues. Ophthatmotogy 87:440-446.
Ophthatmotogy 2:47-59.
corneal epithelial abrasions in the
39 Lutty G, Liu S, Prendergast R (1983)
52 Ramsey DT, Hauptman JG, Petersen-
rabbit: a scanning electron microscope
Angiogenic lymphokines of activated
Jones SM (1999) Corneal thickness,
Study. Investigative Ophthatmalogy
T-cell origin. Investigative
intraocular pressure, and optical
dnd Visuat Science 14:648-661.
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
corneal diameter in Rocky Mountain
27 Dua H, Gomes J, Singh A {1994)
24:1595-1601.
horses with cornea globosa or
Corneal epithelial wound healing.
40 Maurice D, Zauberman H,
clinically normal corneas. American
British Journal of Ophthatmology
 Michaelson I (1966) The stimulus to
Journat of Veterinary Research
78:401-408.
neovascularization in the cornea.
60:1317-1321.
28 Kruse F, Chen J, Tsai R, Tseng S
Experimentat Eye Research
 53 Ward D, Martin C, Weiser I (1989)
{1990) Conjuntival
5:168-184.
 Band keratopathy associated with
transdifferentiation is due to the
41 Fromer C, Klintworth G {1975) An
hyperadrenalcorticism. Journat of the
incomplete removal of limbal basal
evaluation of the role of leukocytes in
American Animat Hospital Association
epithelium. Investigative
the pathogenesis of experimentally-
25:583-586.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
induced corneal vascularization. I.
54 Rebhun WC, Murphy CJ, Hacker DV
31:1903-1913.
 Comparison of experimental models
(1993) Calcific band keratopathy in
29 Danjo S, Friend J, Thoft R (1987)
of corneal vascularization. American
horses. Compendium on Continuing
Conjunctival epithelium in healing of
Journat of Pathalogy 79:537-550.
Education for the Practicing
corneal epithelial wounds.
42 Epstein R, Stulting R, Hendricks R,
Veter marian 15:1402-1409.
Investigative Ophthalmotogy and
Harris D {1987) Corneal
55 Doughman DJ, Olson GA, Nolan S,
Visual Science 28:1445-1449.
neovascularization: pathogenesis and
Hajny RG {1969) Experimental band
30 Tseng S, Hirst L, Farazdaghi M,
inhibition. Cornea 6:250-257.
keratopathy. Archives of
Green W (1984) Goblet cell density
43 Casey R (1997) Factors controlling
Ophthatmotogy 81:264-272.
 and vascularization during
ocular angiogenesis. American Journat
 56 Taravella MJ, Stulting D, Mader TH,
conjunctival transdifferentiation.
of Ophthatmology 124:521-529.
Weisenthal RW (1994) Calcific band
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
44 Roberts SR, Dellaporta A, Winter FC
keratopathy associated with the use of 
Vistal Science 25:1168-1176.
{1966) The Collie ectasia syndrome:
topical steroid-phosphate preparations.
31 Tseng S, Hirst L, Farazdaghi M,
pathology of eyes of young and adult
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
Green W (1987) Inhibition of
dogs. American Journat of
112:608-613.
conjunctival transdifferentiation by
Ophthatmalogy 62:728-752.
 57 Nevyas AS, Raber IM, Eagle RC,
topical retinoids. Investigative
45 Molleda JM, Simon M, Martin E,
Wallace IB, Nevyas HJ (1987) Acute
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Ginel PJ, Navales M, Lopez R {1994)
band keratopathy following
28:538-542.
Congenital corneal opacity resembling 
intracameral Visacoat. Archives of
32 Khodadoust A, Silverstein A,
human sclerocornea concurrent with
Ophthaimology 105:958-964.
Kenyon K, Dowling J (1968)
scleral ectasia syndrome in the dog.
58 Dice P {1982) Corneal opacities in the
Adhesion of regenerating corneal.
Veterinary and Comparative
 Shetland Sheepdog: preliminary report.
 epithelium: the role of basement
Ophthatmology 4:190-192.
Proceedings of the Annuat Meeting of
membrane. Ammerican Journat of
46 Roberts S, Bistner S {1968) Persistent 
the American Society of Veterinary
Ophthatmotogy 65:339-348.
 pupillary membrane in Basenji dogs.
Ophthatmology and Internationat
33 Robb R, Kuwabara T {1962) Corneal
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Society of Veterinary Ophthatmatogy
wound healing. I. The movement of
Medicat Association 153:533-542.
13:58-64.
 polymorphonuclear leukocytes into
47 Barnett K, Knight G {1969) Persistent
 59 Dice P (1984) Corneal dystrophy in
corneal wounds. Archives of
pupillary membrane and associated
the Shetland Sheepdog. Proceedings of
Ophthatmatogy 68:592-642.
defects in the Basenji. Veterinary
the Scientific Meeting of the American
34 Weimar V {1958) The sources of
Record 85:242-249.
Coltege of Veterinary
fibroblasts in corneal wound repair.
48 Bistner S, Rubin L, Roberts S {1971b)
Ophthatmologists 15:241.
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
A review of persistent pupillary
60 Roth A, Ekins M, Waring G, Gupta L,
60:93-109.
 membranes in the Basenj dog. Journat
Rosenblatt L {1981) Oval corneal
35 Kitano S, Goldman J (1966) Cytologic
of the American Animat Hospitat
opacities in Beagles. I. Histochemical
and histochemical changes in corneal
Association 7:143-157.
demonstration of stromal lipids
wound repair. Archives of
49 Mason T (1976) Persistent pupillary
without hyperlipidemia. Investigative
Ophthatmology 76:345-354.
membrane in the Basenji. Austratian
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Veterinary Journat 52:343-344.
21:95-106.
290
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
61 Veenendaal H (1937) Dystrophia
75 Haskins M, Desnick R, DiFerrant N,
87 Lassaline M, Andrew S, Brooks D,
corneae adiposa bij de hond. Tijdsch1
Jezyk P, Patterson D {1984) β-
Detrisac C (2002) Histologic analysis of
Diergeneesk 64:913-921.
glucuronidase deficiency in a dog: a
keratectomy specimens from horses
62 Dice P {1974) Corneal dystrophy in the
model of human
undergoing corneal transplantation for
Airedale. Praceedings of the Scientific
mucopolysaccharidosis VIl. Pediatric
stromal abscess. Proceedings of the
Meeting of the American College of
Research 18:980-984.
Scientific Meeting of the American
Veterinary Ophthatmo togists 5:80-86.
76 Gwin R, Polack F, Warren J,
College of Veterinary Ophthatnologists
63 Waring G, Muggli F, MacMillan A
Samuelson D, Gelatt K {1982)
33:32.
{1977) Oval corneal opacities in
Primary canine corneal endothelial cell
88 Moore C, Halenda R, Grevan V, Collins
Beagles. Journat of the American
dystrophy: specular microscopic
B {1998) Posttraumatic keratouveitis in
Animat Hospitat Association
 evaluation, diagnosis, and therapy
horses. Equine Veterinary Journat
13:204-208.
Journat of the American Animat
30:366-372.
64 MacMillan A, Waring G, Spangler W,
Hospitat Association 18:471-479.
89 Hendrix D, Brooks D, Smith P,
Roth A {1979) Crystalline corneal
77 Martin C, Dice P {1982) Corneal
Gelatt K, Miller T {1995) Corneal
 opacities in the Siberian Husky. Journat
endothelial dystrophy in the dog.
stromal abscesses in the horse: a review
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Journat of the American Animat
of 24 cases. Equine Veterinary Journat
Associat ion 175:829-832.
Hospitat Association 18:327-336.
27:440-447.
65 Waring G, MacMillian A, Reveles P
78 Bistner S, Aquirre G, Shively J {1976)
90 Dice P {1977) Intracorneal acid-fast
{1986) Inheritance of crystalline
Hereditary corneal dystrophy in the
granuloma. Proceedings of the Scientific
corneal dystrophy in Siberian Huskies.
 Manx cat: a preliminary report.
Meeting of the American College of
Journat of the American Animat
Investigative Ophthatmotogy
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 8:91-92.
Hospital Association 22:655-658.
15:15-26.
91 Malaty R, Togni B (1988) Corneal
66 Crispin S, Barnett K (1983) Dystrophy.
79 Olin D, Tenbroeck T {1973) Corneal
 changes in nine-banded armadillos with
 degeneration and infitration of the
dystrophy in a cat. Veterinary
leprosy. Investigatiue Ophthatmology
canine cornea. Journat of Smafl Anima!
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
and Visual Science 29:140-145.
Practice 24:63-83.
68:1237-1238.
92 Peiffer R, Jackson W (1979) Mycotic
67 Carrington S {1983) Lipid keratopathy
80 Bistner S, Shaw D, Sartori R {1981)
keratopathy of the dog and cat in the
in a cat. Journat of Smatt Animat
Ocular manifestations of low-level
southeastern United States: a
Practice 24:495-505.
 phenothiazine administration to cattle.
preliminary report. Journat of the
68 Sandersleben J (1986)
Cornefl Veterinarian 71:136-143.
American Animal Hospitat Association
Lipispeicherkrakheit vom typ der
81 Gratzek A, Calvert C, Martin C,
15:93-97.
wolmanschen erkrankung des
Kaswan R (1993) Corneal edema in
93 Fischer C, Peiffer R {1987) Acid-fast
 menschen beim Fox Terrier.
dogs treated with tocainide. Progress
organisms associated with corneal
Terdrztiche Praxis 14:253-263.
in Veterinary and Comparative
opacities in a dog. Proceedings of the
69 Collins L, Munnell J, Lorenz M (1978)
Ophthatmology 3:47-51.
Scientific Meeting of the American
 The pathology of feline GM,
 82 Walde I (1983) Band opacities. Equine
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
 gangliosidosis. American Journat of
Veterinary Journat 32(Supplement
18:241-243.
Pathology 90:723-730.
2):32.
94 Karpinski R {1999) Veterinary
70 Cowell K, Jezyk P, Haskins M,
83 Rebhun W (1982) Corneal stromal
Ophthalmologists Listserve.
Patterson D (1976)
abscesses in the horse. Journat of the
95 Ford JG, Huang AJ, Pflugfelder SC,
Mucopolysaccharidosis in a cat.
American Veterinary Medicat
Alfonso EC, Forster RK, Miller D
Journat of the American Veterinary
Association 181:677-679.
{1998) Nontuberculous mycobacterial
Medical Association 169:334-339.
84 Moore C, Collins K, Fales W (1995)
keratitis in south Florida.
71 Langweiler M, Haskins M, Jezyk P
Antibacterial susceptibility patterns
Ophthatmology 105:1652-1658.
{1978) Mucopolysaccharidosis in a
for microbial isolates associated with
96 Rheins M, Suie T, van Winkle G,
litter of cats. Journat of the Ammerican
infectious keratitis in horses: 63 cases
Havener W (1966) Potentiation of
Animat Hospitat Association
{1986-1994). Journat of the American
mycotic ocular infections by drugs.
14:748-751.
Veterinary Medicat Association
British Journat of Ophthatmotogy
72 Haskins M, Jezyk P, Desnick R,
207:928-933.
50:533-539.
McDonough S, Patterson D {1979)
85 Moore CP, Collins BK, Fales WH,
97 Schmidt G (1974) Mycotic
Mucopolysaccharidosis in a domestic
Halenda RM (1995) Antimicrobial
keratoconjuncti vitis. Veterinary
shorthaired cat: a disease distinct from
agents for treatment of infectious
Medicine/Smatt Animat Clinician
that seen in the Siamese cat. Journaf of
keratitis in horses. Journat of the
69:1177-1179.
the Amer ican Veterinary Medicat
American Veterinary Medicat
98 Miller D, Blue J, Winston S {1983)
Association 175:384-387.
Association 207:855-862.
Keratomycosis caused by Cladosporitm
73 Breton L, Guerin P, Morin M {1983) A
86 Michau T, Maggio F, Pizzirani S,
spp. in a cat. Journal of the American
case of mucopolysaccharidosis VI in a
Davidson M, Gilger B {2002) Findings
Veterinary Medicat Association
cat. Journat of the American Animat
 from 16 consecutive cases of
182:1121-1122.
Hospitat Association 19:891-896.
penetrating keratoplasty for deep
99 Qualls C, Chandler F, Kaplan W,
74 Shull R, Munger R, Spellacy E, Hall C,
stromal abscess in the horse
Bretschwerdt E, Cho D {1985) Mycotic
Constantopoulos G, Neufeld E (1982)
[2001-2002). Proceedings of the
keratitis in a dog: concurrent
 Canine alpha-L-iduronidase deficiency:
Scientific Meeting of the American
Aspergilus spp. and Curuataria spp.
a model of mucopolysaccharidosis I.
College of Veterinary
infections. Journat of the American
American Joturnat of Pathotogy
Ophthatmologists 33:30.
Veterinary Medicat Association
109:244-248.
186:975-976.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
291
100 Bernays ME, Peiffer RL {1998) Ocular 
111 Mohan M, Gupta S, Vajpayee R,
122 Bedford P, Longstaffe J {1979) Corneal
infections with dematiaceous fungi in
Kalra V, Sachdev M (eds) (1988)
pannus (chronic superficial keratitis) in
two cats and a dog. Journal of the
 Management of keratomycosis with
the German Shepherd Dog. Journat of
American Veterinary Medicat
 1% silver sulfadiazine: a prospective
Small Animat Practice 20:41-56.
Association 213:507-509.
controlled clinical trial in 110 cases. In:
123 Eichenbaum J, Lavach J, Gould D,
101 Bistner S, Ris R {1979) Clinica]
The Cornea: Proceedings of the World
Severin G, Paulsen M, Jones R {1986)
aspects of mycotic keratitis in the horse.
Congress on the Cornea. Il. Raven
 Immunohistochemical staining patterns
Cornell Veterimar iam 69:364-374.
Press, New York, pp. 495-498.
of canine eyes affected with chronic
102 Moore C, Fales W, Whittington P,
112 Rahman MR, Johnson GJ, Husain R,
superficial keratitis. Armerican Journat
 Bauer L {1983) Bacterial and fungal
Howlader SA, Minassian DC {1998)
of Veterinary Research 47:1952-1955.
isolates from Equidae with ulcerative
Randomised trial of 0.2% 
124 Peterhans E (1978) Histologische
keratitis. Journat of the American
 chlorhexidine gluconate and 2.5%
untersuchungen zur pathogenese der
Veterinary Medicat Association
natamycin for fungal keratitis in
keratitis superficialis chronica
182:600-603.
Bangladesh. British Journat of
{Ueberreiter des deutschen
103 Massa KL, Murphy CJ, Hartmann FA,
Ophthatmnology 82:919-925.
schaferhundes). Schtweizer Archiv fur
Miller PE, Korsower CS, Young KM
113 Welch P, Gabal M, Betts D,
Tierheilkunde 120:41-45.
{1999) Usefulness of aerobic microbial
Whelan N, Studer M (2000) In vitro
125 Clerc B (1982) Immunological
culture and cytologic evaluation of
analysis of antiangiogenic activity of
reactions in chronic superficial keratitis
corneal specimens in the diagnosis of
fungi isolated from clinical cases of
(pannus): attempts to prove the
infectious ulcerative keratitis in animals.
equine keratomycosis. Veterinary
 presence of immediate type
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Ophthatmology 3:145-151.
hypersensitivity in chronic superficial
Medicat Association 215:1671-1674.
114 Andrew S, Brooks D, Smith P,
keratitis in the German Shepherd Dog.
104 O'Day D, Ray W, Head S,
Gelatt K, Chmielewski N, Whittaker C
Proceedings of the Annuat Meeting of
Robinson R {1984) Influence of the
{1998) Equine ulcerative
the American Society of Veterinary
corneal epithelium on the efficacy of
keratomycosis: visual outcome and
Ophthatmology and Internationat
topical anti fungal agents. Investigative
ocular survival in 39 cases
Society of Veterinary Ophthatmology.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
{1987-1996). Equine Veterinary
Las Vegas, pp. 54-55.
25:855-859.
Journat 30:109-116.
126 Rapp E, Kolbl S {1995) Ultrastructural
105 Johns K, O'Day D {1988)
115 Gaarder J, Rebhun W, Ball M,
study of unidentified inclusions in the
Pharmacologic management of 
Patten V, Sang Shin EH (1998) Clinical
cornea and iridocorneal angle of dogs
 keratomycoses. Survey of
 appearances, healing patterns, risk
with pannus. American Journat of
Ophthatmotogy 33:178-188.
factors, and outcome of horses with
Veterimary Research 56:779-785.
 106 Joyce J (1983) Thiabendazole therapy
fungal keratitis: 53 cases {1978-1996).
127 Tellhelm E, Reinacher N, Tellhelm B
of mycotic keratitis in horses. Equine
Journat of the American Veterinary
{1982) Klinische, immunhistologische,
Veterinary Journat Supplement 2:45-47.
Medicaf Association 213:105-112.
und elektronenmikroskopische
107 Latimer FG, Colitz CMH,
116 Andrew S, Brooks D, Biros H, Denis T,
untersuchungen der keratitis superficials
Campbell NB, Papich MG (2001)
Cutler T, Gelatt K (2000) Posterior
chronica {Uberreiter) des Deutschen
Pharmacokinetics of fluconazole
lamellar keratoplasty for treatment of
schaferhundes. Kle intierpraxis
following intravenous and oral
deep stromal abscesses in nine horses.
27:131-144.
administration and body fluid
Veterinary Ophthatmology 3:99-103.
128 Anderson L, Keller W, Blanchard G,
 concentrations of fluconazole following
117 Cello R {1971) Ocular onchocerciasis
 Bull R (1974) Serum immunoglobulin
 repeated oral dosing in horses.
in the horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
changes associated with canine
American Journat of Veterinary
3:148-153.
pigmentary keratitis. Proceedings of the
Research 62:1606-1611.
118 Pena M, Roura X, Davidson M
Scientific Meeting of the American
108 Brooks DE, Andrew SE, Dillavou CL,
 (2000) Ocular and periocular
College of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
Ellis G, Kubilis PS {1998) Antimicrobial
manifestations of leishmaniasis in dogs:
5:102-118.
suspectibility patterns of fungi isolated
105 cases (1993-1998). Veterinary
129 Campbell L, Okuda H, Lipton D,
from horses with ulcerative
Ophthatmology 3:35-41.
 Reed C (1975) Chronic superficial
keratomycosis. American Journat of
119 Slatter D, Lavach J, Severin G,
keratitis in dogs: detection of cellular
Veterinary Research 59:138-142.
Young S (1977) Uberreiter's syndrome
hypersensitivity. American Journat of
109 Ball M, Rebhun W, Gaarder J (1997)
(chronic superficial keratitis) in dogs in
Veterinary Research 36:669-671.
Evaluation of itraconazole/dimethyl
the Rocky Mountain area: a study of
130 Peiffer R {1978) Chronic superficial
 sulfoxide ointment for treatment of
463 cases. Journat of Smaft Animat
keratitis response of lymphocytes from
keratomycosis in nine horses. Jourmat of
Practice 18:757-772.
dogs affected with chronic superficial
the American Veterinary Medical
120 Chavkin MJ, Roberts SM,
keratitis to soluble homologous corneal
Association 211:199-203.
Salman MD, Severin GA, Scholten NJ
antigen. Proceedings of the Scientific
110 Ball M, Rebhun W, Trepanier L,
{1994) Risk factors for development of
Meeting of the American College of
Gaarder J, Schwark W {1997) Cornea]
chronic superficial keratitis in dogs.
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 9:51-62.
 concentrations and preliminary
Journat of the American Veterinary
 131 Jackson P, Kaswan R, Merideth R,
toxicological evaluation of an 
Medicat Association 204:1630-1634.
Barrett P (1991) Chronic superficial
itraconazole/dimethyl sulfoxide
121 Kupper W (1975) Oberfachenstruktur
keratitis in dogs: a placebo controlled 
 ophthalmic ointment. Journat of
ker hornhaut bei der keratitis
trial of topical cyclosporine treatment.
Veterinary Pharmacalogy and
 superficialis chronica (Uberreiter).
Progress in Veterinary and Coparative
Therapeutics 20:100-104.
Bertiner und Mtenchner Tierdrztliche
Ophthatmology 1:269-275.
Wochenschrift 88:371-374.
292
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
132 Williams D, Hoey A, Smitherman P
145 Pentlarge V, Riis R {1984) Proliferative
159 Khodadoust A, Attarzadeh A {1982)
{1995) Comparison of topical
keratitis in a cat: a case report. Journat
 Presumed autoimmune corneal
cyclosporine and dexamethasone for
of the American Animat Hospitat
endotheliopathy. American Journat of
the treatment of chronic superficial
Association 20:477-480.
Ophthatmology 93:718-722.
keratitis in dogs. Veterinary Recard
146 Bellhorn R, Henkind P (1966)
160 Vannas A, Ahonen R, Makitie J (1983)
137:635-639.
 Superficial pigmentary keratitis in the
Corneal endothelium in herpetic
133 Rickards D, Carter K {1978)
dog. Joturnat of the American Veterinary
keratouveitis. Archives of
Cryosurgery in canine pannus. Canine
Medicat Associat ion 149:173-175.
Ophthatmology 101:913-915.
Practice 5:48-50.
147 Rubin L, Koch S {1969) Silver mitrate
161 Holbach L, Fonnt R, Haumann G
134 Holmberg D, Scheiffer H, Parent J
burn of the dog cornea. Journat of the
(1990) Herpes simplex stromal and
{1986) The cryosurgical treatment of
Amer ican Veter inary Medicat
endothelial keratitis. Ophthatmology
pigmentary keratitis in dogs: an
Association 155:134-135.
97:722-728.
experimental and clinical study.
148 Pilger I {1983) Pigmentation of the
162 Gratzek A, Kaswan R, Martin C,
Veterinary Sturgery 15:1-4.
cornea: a review and classification.
Champagne E, White S (1995)
135 Kuhns E, Keller W, Blanchard G
Annats of Ophthatmotogy
Ophthalmic cyclosporine in equine
{1973) The treatment of pannus in
15:1076-1082.
keratitis and keratouveitis: 11 cases.
dogs by use of a corneal-scleral graft.
149 Bicer S, Fuller G, Wilkie D,
Equine Veterimary Journat 27:327-333.
Journat of the American Veterinary
Yamaguchi M, Hamlin R (2002)
163 Vesaluoma M, Muller L, Gallar J, et αf.
Medicat Association 162:950-952.
Amiodarone-induced keratopathy in
(2000) Effects of Oleoresin capsicum
136 Brightman A, Vestre W, Helper L,
healthy dogs. Veterinary
pepper spray on human corneal
Godshalk C {1979) Chronic
Ophthatmology 5:35-38.
morphology and sensitivity. Investigative
eosinophilic keratitis in the cat. Fetine
150 Stiles J, Carmichael P, Kaswan R,
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
Practice 9:21-24.
Bounous D, Moore A, Hirsh S {1995)
41:2138-2147.
137 Collins K, Swanson J,
Keratectomy for corneal pigmentation
164 Carrington SD, Bedford PG, Guillon J.
MacWilliams P {1986) Eosinophilic
 in dogs with cyclosporine responsive
Woodward EG (1989) Biomicroscopy of
keratitis and keratoconjunctivitis in a
chronic keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
the tear film: the tear film of the
cat. Modern Veterinary Practice
Veterinary and Comparative
Pekingese dog. Veterinary Record
67:32-35.
Ophthatmology 5:25-33.
124:323-328.
138 Paulsen M, Lavach J, Severin G,
151 Carmichael L (1965) The pathogenesis
165 Johnson S {1998) Neurotrophic corneal
Eichenbaum J (1987) Feline
 of ocular lesions of infectious canine
defects after diode laser cycloablation.
eosinophilic keratitis: a review of 15
hepatitis. Pathologica Veterinaria
American Journat of Ophthatmology
clinical cases. Journat of the American
2:344-359.
126:725-727.
Animat Hospitat Association
152 Carmichael L, Medic B, Bistner S,
166 Clerc B, Jegou J (1996) Superficial
23:63-69.
Aguirre G {1975) Viral-antibody
 punctate keratitis. Canine Practice
139 Morgan R, Abrams K, Kern T
 complexes in canine adenovirus type 1
21:6-11.
{1996) Feline eosinophilic keratitis: a
{CAV-1) ocular lesions: leukocyte 
167 Roberts S {1965) Superficial indolent
retrospective study of 54 cases
chemotaxis and enzyme release. Cornef
ulcer of the cornea in Boxer dogs.
{1989-1994). Veterinary and
Veterimarian 65:331-351.
Journat of Smafl Animat Practice
Comparative Ophthatmology
153 Curtis R, Barnett K {1973) The ocular
6:111-115.
6:131-134.
 lesions of infectious canine hepatitis.
168 Gelatt K, Samuelson D (1982)
140 Nasisse M, Glover T, Moore C,
Journat of Smatt Animat Practice
Recurrent corneal erosions and
Weigler B {1998) Detection of feline
14:737-745.
epithelial dystrophy in the Boxer dog.
herpesvirus-1 DNA in corneas of cats
154 Curtis R, Barnett K {1973) The ocular 
Journal of the American Animat
with eosinophilic keratitis or corneal
lesions of infectious canine hepatitis. I.
Hospitat Association 18:453-460.
sequestrum. American Journat of
Clinical features. Journat of Srmaf!
169 Kirschner S, Niyo Y, Covitz D,
Veterinary Research 59:856-858.
Anmat Practice 14:375-389.
 Betts D (1989) Idiopathic persistent
141 Ramsey DT, Whiteley HE, Gerding PA,
155 McNeil J, Kaufman H (1979) Local
corneal erosions: clinical and
Valdez RA (1994) Eosinophilic
antivirals in a herpes simplex stromal
pathological findings in 18 dogs.
keratoconjunctivitis in a horse. Journa!
keratitis model. Archives of
Journat of the American Animat
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthatmotogy 97:727-729.
Hospitat Association 25:84-90.
Association 205:1308-1311.
156 Wander A, Centifanto Y, Kaufman H
170 Murphy C, Marfurt C,
142 Yamagata M, Wilkie DA, Gilger BC
{1980) Strain specificity of clinical
McDermott A, et αf. (2001)
{1996) Eosiniphilic
isolates of herpes simplex virus.
Spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial
keratoconjunctivitis in seven horses.
Archives of Ophthatnology
defects (SCCED) in dogs: clinical
Journat of the American Veterinary
98:1458-1461.
features, innervation, and effect of
Medicat Association 209:1283-1286.
157 Nasisse M, Guy J, Davidson M,
topical SP, with or without IGF-1.
143 Prasse K, Winston SM {1996)
Sussman W, Fairley N (1989)
Investigative Ophthatmology and
Cytology and histopathology of feline
Experimental ocular herpesvirus 
Visuat Science 42:2252-2261.
eosinophilic keratitis. Veterinary and
infection in the cat. Investigative
171 Bentley E, Abrams G, et αf. (2001)
Comparative Ophthatmotogy
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Morphology and
6:74-81.
30:1758-1768.
immunohistochemistry of spontaneous 
144 Bedford P, Cotchin E {1983) An
158 Green W, Zimmerman L {1967)
chronic epithelial defects (SCCED) in
unusual chronic keratoconjunctivitis
Granulomatous reaction to Descemet's
dogs. Investigative Ophthatmology
in the cat. Journat of Smatl Animat
membrane. American Journat of
and Visual Science 42:2262-2269.
Practice 24:85-102.
Ophthatmology 64:555-558.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
293
172 Krahenmann A {1976) Die
184 Miller W (1996) Use of polysulfated
196 Pickett JP (1995) Treating persistent
rezidivierende hornhaut-erosion des
glycosoaminoglycans in treatment of
corneal erosions with a cross-hatch
Boxers. Schweizer Archiv fur
persistent corneal erosions in dogs: a
keratotomy technique. Veterinary
Tierheitkunde 118:87-97.
pilot clinical study. Veterinary
Medicine 90:561-572.
173 Scherrer K {1983) Histologische
Medicine 91:916-922.
197 Bistner S, Carlson J, Shively J,
untersuchungen zur pathologie der
185 Willeford K, Miller W, Abrams K,
Scott F {1971) Ocular manifestations 
erosio recidiva corneae des Deutschen
Vaughns B (1998) Modulation of 
of feline herpesvirus infection. Journat
Boxers. Schtveizer Archiv fu!
proteolytic activity associated with
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Tierheiikunde 125:337-344.
persistent corneal ulcers in dogs.
Association 159:1223-1237.
174 Huang A, Tseng S {1991) Corneal
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 1:5-8.
198 Roberts S, Dawson C, Coleman J,
epithelial wound healing in the
186 Schmidt G, Blanchard G, Keller W
 Togni B (1972) Dendritic keratitis in a
absence of limbal epitheliurm.
{1977) The use of hydrophilic contact
cat. Journat of the American
Investigative Ophthaimology and
lenses in corneal diseases of the dog
Veterinary Medical Association
Visual Science 32:96-105.
and cat: a preliminary report. Journat
161:285-289.
175 Good K, Maggs D, Hollingsw orth 
of Small Animat Practice 18:773-777.
199 Nasisse MP, Davis BJ, Guy JS,
S, Scagliotti R, Nelson R (2003)
187 Morgan R, Bachrach A {1984) An
Davidson MG, Sussman W (1992)
Corneal sensitivity in dogs with
 evaluation of soft contact lens usage
Isolation of feline herpesvirus-1 from
diabetes mellitus. American Journa!
in the dog and cat. Journat of the
the trigeminal ganglia of acutely and
of Veterinary Research 64:7-11.
American Animat Hospitat
chronically infected cats. Journat of
176 Van der Woerdt A, Olivero D
Association 20:885-888.
Veterinary Internat Medicine
{1999) Nonhealing corneal ulcers in 
188 Williams R, Buckley R (1985)
6:102-103.
cats: 29 cases. Proceedings of the
Pathogenesis and treatment of
200 O'Brien W, Taylor J (1989) The
Scientific Meeting of the American
recurrent erosion. British Journat of
 isolation of herpes simplex virus from
College of Veterinary
Ophthatmotogy 69:435-437.
rabbit corneas during latency.
Ophthaimolog ists 30:84.
189 Ali Z, Insler M {1986) A comparison
Investigative Ophthatmology and
177 Rebhun W (1983) Chronic corneal
of therapeutic bandage lenses,
Visuat Science 30:357-364.
epithelial erosions in horses.
tarsorrhaphy, and antibiotic and
201 Cook S, Hill J (1991) Herpes simplex
Veterinary Medicine/Smattl Animat
hypertonic saline on corneal epithelial
virus: molecular biology and the
Clinician 78:1635-1638.
wound healing. Annats of
possibility of corneal latency. Survey of
178 Cooley P, Wyman M (1986)
Ophthatmalogy 18:22-24.
Ophthatmotogy 36:140-148.
 Indolent-like corneal ulcers in three 
190 Madigan M, Holden B (1992)
202 Stiles J, McDermott M, Bigsby D,
horses. Journat of the American
Reduced epithelial adhesion after
et αt. (1997) Use of nested polymerase
Veterinary Medicat Association
extended contact lens wear correlates
chain reaction to identify feline
188:295-297.
with reduced hemidesmosome density
herpesvirus in ocular tissue from
179 Hakanson NE, Dubielzig RR {1994)
in cat cornea. Investigative
clinically normal cats and cats with
Chronic superficial corneal erosions
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science 
corneal sequestra or conjunctivitis.
with anterior stromal sequestrum in
33:314-323.
American Journat of Veterinary
three horses. Veterinary and
191 Aquavella J, Del Cerro M, Musco P,
Research 58:338-342.
Comparative Ophthaimalogy
Ueda S, Depaolis M (1987) The effect
203 Maggs DJ, Lappin MR, Reif JS, et αf.
4:179-183.
of a collagen bandage lens on corneal
{1999) Evaluation of serologic and
180 Phan T, Foster C, Boruchoff A,
wound healing: a preliminary report.
viral detection methods for diagnosing
 Zagachin L, Colvin R (1987) Topical
Ophthatmic Surgery 18:570-573.
feline herpesvirus-1 infection in cats
fibronectin in the treatment of
192 Morgan R, Abrams K (1994) A
with acute respiratory tract or chronic
 persistent corneal epithelial defects
comparison of six different therapies
disease. Journat of the American
and trophic ulcers. American Journat
for persistent corneal erosions in dogs
Veterinary Medicat Association
of Ophthatmology 104:494-501.
and cats. Veterinary and Comparative
214:502-507.
181 Tsubota K, Goto E, Shimmura S,
Ophthatmology 4:38-43.
204 Cello R {1971) Clues to differential
 Shimazaki J (1999) Treatment of
193 Stanley RG, Hardman C,
diagnosis of feline respiratory
 persistent corneal epithelial defect by
Johnson BW (1998) Results of grid
infections. Journat of the American
autologous serum application.
keratotomy, superficial keratectomy.
Veterinary Medicat Association
Ophthatmology 106:1984-1989.
and debriderment for the management
158:968-973.
182 Kirschner S, Brazzell R, Stern M,
of persisten corneal erosions in 92
205 Plotkin J, Reynaud A, Okumoto M
Baird L {1991) The use of topical
dogs. Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
{1971) Cytologic study of herpetic
 epidermal growth factor for
1:233-238.
keratitis. Archives of Ophthatmotogy
treatment of nonhealing corneal
194 Hsu J K, Rubinfeld R, Barry P,
85:597-599.
erosions in dogs. Jotrnat of the
Jester J(1993) Anterior stromal
206 Nasisse MP, Guy JS, Davidson MG,
American Animat Hospitat
 pucture: immunohistochemical studies
Sussman W, De Clercq E {1989) In
Association 27:499-452.
in human corneas. Archives of
vitro susceptibility of feline
183 Kitazawa T, Kinoshita S, Fujita K,
Ophthatmology 111:1057-1063.
herpesvirus-1 to vidarabine,
et αt. (1990) The mechanism of
195 Champagne E, Munger R (1992)
idoxuridine trifluridine, acyclovir, or
 accelerated corneal epithelial healing
Multiple superficial punctate
bromovinyldeoxy uridine. American
 by human epidermal growth factor.
keratectomies for the treatment of
Jotrnal of Veterinary Research
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
recurrent erosions in dogs. Journat of
50:158-160.
Visual Science 31:1773-1778.
the American Animat Hospitat
Association 28:213-216.
294
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
207 Owens J, Nasisse M, Tadepalli S,
219 Tham K, Studdert M (1987)
231 Schmidt V (1977) Herdformige
Dorman D {1996) Pharmacokinetics of 
Response of cats to feline herpesvirus
 hornhautnedrose der katze.
acyclovir in the cat. Journal of
type 1 infection. Veterinary Record
Monatshefte fi Veterinarmedizin
Veterinary Pharmacology and
120:321-326.
32:493-495.
Therapeutics 19:488-490.
220 August J {1990) The control and
232 Blogg J, Dutton A, Stanley R {1989)
208 Nasisse MP, Dorman DC, Jamison
eradication of feline upper
Use of third eyelid grafts to repair full-
KC, Weigler BJ, Hawkins EC,
respiratory infections in cluster
thickness defects in the cornea and
Stevens JB {1997) Effects of
populations. Veterinary Medicine
sclera. Journat of the American
valacyclovir in cats infected with feline
85:1002-1006.
Animat Hospitat Association
 herpesvirus-1. American Journat of
 221 Hickman J, Reubel G, Hoffman D,
25:505-512.
Veterinary Research 58:1141-1144.
Morris J, Rogers Q, Pedersen (1994) An
233 Blogg J, Stanley R, Dutton A {1989)
209 Group THEDS {1998) Acyclovir for
epizootic of feline herpesvirus type 1 in
 Use of conjunctival pedicle grafts in
the prevention of recurrent herpes 
a large specific pathogen-free cat colony
the management of feline keratitis
simplex virus eye disease. Netu
 and attempts to eradicate the infection 
nigrum. Journat of Smalt Animat
Engtand Journat of Medicine
by identification and culling of carriers.
Practice 30:678-684.
339:300-306.
Laboratory Animal 28:320-329.
234 Gimenez M, Farina I {1998)
210 Weiss R {1989) Synergistic antiviral
222 Matthew A, Handscombe M (1983)
Lamellar keratoplasty for the
activities of acyclovir and recombinant
 Superficial keratitis in the horse:
treatment of feline corneal
human leukocyte (alpha) interferon on
treatment with the antiviral drug
sequestrum. Veterinary
feline herpesvirus replication. American
idoxuridine. Equine Veterinary Journal
Ophthaimotogy 1:163-166.
Journat of Veter inary Research
Supplement 2:29-31.
235 Glover TL, Nasisse MP,
50:1672-1677
223 Collinson P, O'Rielly J, Ficorilli N,
Davidson MG {1994) Acute bullous
211 Stiles J, Townsend WM, Rogers QR,
 Studdert M (1994) Isolation of equine
keratopathy in the cat. Veterinary and
Krohne SG (2002) Effect of oral
herpesvirus type 2 (equine gamma
Comparative Ophthatmology
administration of L-lysine on
herpesvirus-2) from foals with
4:66-70.
conjunctivitis caused by feline
keratoconjunctivitis. Jotrnat of the
236 Clark AF (1998) New discoveries on
herpesvirus in cats. American Journa!
American Veterinary Medicat
the roles of matrix metalloproteinases
of Veterinary Research 63:99-103.
Association 205:329-331.
in ocular cell biology and pathology.
212 Maggs D, Nasisse M, Kass P (2003)
 224 Thein P, Bohm D {1976) Aeiologie und
Investigative Ophthatmology and
 Efficacy of oral supplementation with
kinik einer virsubedingten
Visuat Science 39:2514-2516.
 L-lysine in cats latently infected with
keratokonjunktivitis beim fohlen.
237 Gray L, Kreger A {1975) Rabbit
feline herpesvirus. American Journat of
Zentratbiatt der Veterinarmedzin
corneal damage produced by
Veterinary Research 64:37-42.
23:507-519.
Pseudomonas deruginosa infection.
213 Maggs D, Collins K, Thorne J,
225 Thein P {1978) The association of
Infection and Immunity 12:419-432.
Nasisse M (2000) Effects of L-lysine
EHV-2 infection with keratitis and
238 Matsumoto K, Shams NB,
 and L-arginine on in vitro replication
research on the occurrence of equine
Hanninen LA, Kenyon KR (1993)
of feline herpesvirus type 1. Armerican
coital exanthema (EHV-3) of horses in
Cleavage and activation of corneal
Journat of Veter inary Research
Germany. In: Equine Infectious Diseases
matrix metalloproteases by
61:1474-1478.
IV. J Bryans, H Gerber (eds). Veterinary
Pseudomonas deruginosa proteases.
214 Ostler H, Pavan-Langston D, Abelson
Publications, Princeton, pp. 33-41.
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
M {1978) Glucocorticoid therapy in
226 Souri E {1975) The feline corneal
Vistuat Science 34:1945-1953.
Ocular herpes simplex. Survey of
nigrum. Veterinary Medicine/Smatt
239 Steuhl K, Doring G, Henni A,
Ophthatmotogy 23:35-48.
Animat Clinician 70:531-534.
Thiel H, Botzenhart K {1987)
 215 Nasisse M (1991) Anti-inflammatory
227 Davidson HJ, Gerlach JA, Bull RW
Relevance of host-derived and
therapy in herpesvirus
{1992) Determination of protein
bacterial factors in Pseudormonas
keratoconjunctivitis. Progress in
 concentrations and their molecular
deruginosa corneal infections.
Veterinary and Comparative
weight in tears from cats with normal
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
Ophthatmotogy 1:63-65.
corneas and cats with corneal
Visuat Science 28:1559-1568.
216 Boisjoly H, Woog J, Pavan-Langston D,
 sequestrum. American Journat of
240 Moreira H, McDonnell P, Fasano A,
Park N {1984) Prophylactic topical
Veterinary Research 53:1756-1759.
Silverman D, Coates T, Sevanian A
cyclosporine in experimental herpetic
228 Knecht C, Schiller A, Small E (1966)
{1991) Treatment of experimental
stromal keratitis. Archives of
 Focal degeneration of the cornea with
Psetadomonas keratitis with cyclo-
Ophthatmmology 102:1804-1807.
 sequestration in a cat. Journat of the
oxygenase and lipoxygenase
217 Meyers-Elliot R, Chitjian P, Billups C
American Veterinary Medicat
inhibitors. Ophthatmotogy
{1987) Effects of cyclosporine A on
Association 149:1192-1193.
98:1693-1697.
 clinical and immunological parameters 
229 Gelatt K, Peiffer R, Stevens J {1973)
241 McLaughlin S, Brightman A,
in herpes simplex keratitis.
Chronic ulcerative keratitis and
Helper L, Manning J, Tomes J (1983)
Investigative Ophthatmology and
sequestrum in the domestic cat.
Pathogenic bacteria and fungi
Visuat Science 28:1170-1180.
Journat of the American Animat
associated with extraocular disease in
218 Weigler B, Guy J, Nasisse M,
Hospitat Association 9:204-213.
the horse. Journat of the American
Hancock, Sherry B {1997) Effect of a
230 Formston C, Bedford P, Staton J,
Veterinary Medical Association
live attenuated intranasal vaccine on 
Tripathi R {1974) Corneal necrosis in
182:241-242.
latency and shedding of feline
the cat. Journat of Smatt Animat
242 Perry L, Brinser H, Kolondner H
herpesvirus-1 in domestic cats.
Practice 15:19-25.
{1982) Anaerobic corneal ulcers.
Archives of Virotlogy 142:2389-2400.
Ophthatmotogy 89:636-641.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
295
243 Rebhun WC, Cho JO, Gaarder JE,
254 Peiffer R, Gelatt K, Gwin R {1977)
266 Killinger A, Valentine D, Mansfield M
Peek SF, Patten VH {1999) Presumed
Tarsoconjunctival pedicle grafts for
{1977) Economic impact of infectious
clostridial and aerobic bacterial
deep corneal ulceration in the dog and
bovine keratoconjunctivitis. Veterinary
 infections of the cornea in two horses.
cat. Journal of the American Animat
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
Journat of the American Veterinary
Hospital Association 13:387-391.
72:618-620.
Medicat Association 214:1519-1522.
255 Hakanson N, Merideth R {1987)
267 Wilcox G {1968) Infectious bovine
244 Da Silva Curiel J, Murphy C, Jang S,
Conjunctival pedicle grafting in the
keratoconjunctivitis: a review.
Bellhorn R {1990) Nutritionally
treatment of corneal ulcers in the dog
Veterinary Btllet in 38:349-360.
variant streptococci associated with
and cat. Journat of the American
268 Pugh G, Hughes D {1971) Infectious
corneal ulcers in horses: 35 cases
Animat Hospitat Association
bovine keratoconjunctivitis induced by 
{1982-1988). Journal of the American
23:641-648.
different experimental methods. Cornelf
Veterinary Medicat Association
256 Scagliotti R {1988) Tarsoconjunctival
Veterimarian 61:23-45.
197:624-626.
island graft for the treatment of deep
269 Nayar P, Saunders J (1975) Infectious
245 Hyndiuk R, Skorich D, Davis S,
corneal ulcers, descemetoceles, and
bovine keratoconjunctivitis. I.
Sarff L, Divine K, Burd E {1988)
perforations in 35 dogs and six cats.
Experimental production. Canadian
 Fortified antibiotic ointment in
Seminars in Veterinary Medicine and
Journat of Comparative Medicine
bacterial keratitis. American Journa!
Stu rgery 3:69-76.
39:20-31.
of Ophthatmology 105:239-243.
257 Parshall C {1973) Lamellar
270 Hughes D, Pugh G {1970) A five-year
246 Davis S, Sarff L, Hyndiuk R (1979)
corneal-scleral transposition. Journat
study of infectious bovine
Comparison of therapeutic routes in
of the American Animat Hospitat
keratoconjuncti vitis in a beef herd.
 experimental Pseudomonas keratitis.
Association 9:270-277.
Journat of the American Veterinary
American Journat of Ophthatmology
258 Brightman A, McLaughlin S,
Medicat Association 157:443-454.
87:710-716.
 Brogdon J (1989) Autogenous
 271 Vogelweid C, Miller R, Berg J.
247 Leibowitz H, Ryan W, Kupferman A
lamellar corneal grafting in dogs.
Kinden D {1986) Scanning electron
{1981) Route of antibiotic
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
microscopy of bovine corneas irradiated
administration in bacterial keratitis.
Medicat Association 195:469-475.
with sun lamps and challenge exposed 
Archives of Ophthatmology
259 Hacker D {1991) Frozen corneal
with Moraxella bovis. American Journat
99:1420-1423.
grafts in dogs and cats: a report on 19
of Veterinary Research 47:378-384.
248 Sweeney CR, Irby NL {1996) Topical
cases. Journat of the American Animaf
272 Kopecky K, Pugh G, Hughes D (1980)
treatment of Pseudomonas spp.
Hospitat Association 27:387-398.
Wavelength of ultraviolent radiation
infected corneal ulcers in horses: 70
260 Hansen PA, Guandalini A {1999) A
that enhances onset of clinical infectious
cases {1977-1994). Journal of the
 retrospective study of 30 cases of
bovine keratoconjunctivitis. Americam
American Veterinary Medicat
frozen lamellar corneal graft in dogs
Journat of Veterinary Research
Association 209:954-957.
and cats. Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
41:1412-1415.
249 Bohigian G, Valenton M,
2:233-241.
273 Pugh G, McDonald T, Kopecky K,
Okumoto M, Caraway B (1974)
261 Lewin GA {1999) Repair of a full-
 Kvasnicka W (1986) Infectious bovine
Collagenase inhibitors in
thickness corneoscleral defect in a
keratoconjunctivitis: evidence for
Pseudomonas keratitis. Archives of
German Shepherd Dog using porcine
genetic modulation of resistance in
Ophthatmology 91:52-56.
small intestinal submucosa. Journat of
purebred Hereford cattle. Armer ican
250 Levy J, Katz H {1990) Effect of
Small Animat Practice 40:340-342.
Journat of Veterinary Research
systemic tetracycline on progression of
 262 Andrade AL, Laus JL, Figueiredo F.
47:885-889.
 Pseudomonas aeruginosa keratitis in
 Batista CM (1999) The use of
274 Pugh G, Hughes D, Packer R (1970)
the rabbit. Annats of Ophthatmotogy
preserved equine renal capsule to
 Bovine infectious keratoconjunctivitis:
22:179-183.
repair lamellar corneal lesions in
interactions of Moraxefla bovis and
251 Vygantas K, Janicki J, Whitley R,
normal dogs. Veterinary
infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus.
Wright J, Dillon A, Tillson D {(2001)
Ophthaimology 2:79-82.
American Journal of Veterinary
In vitro inhibition of matrix
263 Barros PS, Safatle AM, Malerba TA,
Research 31:653-662.
 metalloproteinases in experimentally-
Burnier M (1995) The surgical repair
275 Webber J, Selby L {1981) Risk factors
induced corneal ulcers. Proceedings of
 of the cornea of the dog using
related to the prevalence of infectious
the Scientific Meeting of the American
pericardium as a keratoprosthesis.
bovine keratoconjunctivitis. Journat of
College of Veterinary
Brazilian Journat of Veterinary
the American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthatmotogists 32:34.
Research and Animal Science
Association 179:823-826.
252 Peruccio C, Bosio P, Cornaglia E
32:251-255.
276 George L, Ardans A, Mihalyi J,
{1983) Indications and limits of the
 264 Barros Ps, Garcia JA, Laus JL,
Guerra R {1988) Enhancement of
Cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive in
Ferreira AL, Gomes TL (1998) The
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
 corneal ulcers and perforations.
use of xenologous amniotic membrane
by modified live infectious bovine
Proceedings of Scientific Meeting of
 to repair canine corneal perforation
rhinotracheitis virus vaccine. Armerican
the American Caltege of Veterinary
created by penetrating keratectomy.
Jotrnat of Veterinary Research
Ophthatmologists 14:135-152.
x8ojouggdo kinuiaan
49:1800-1806.
 253 Conn H, Kenneth B, Langer R,
1:119-123.
277 Pugh G, Hughes D, Schulz V (1976)
Gage J {1980) Stromal vascularization
265 Pischel D {1930) Tattooing of the
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis:
 prevents corneal ulceration.
cornea with gold and platinum 
experimental induction of infection in
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
chloride. Archives of Ophthatmology
calves with mycoplasm and Moraxetla
Visual Science 19:362-370.
3:176-181.
bovis. American Joturnat of Veter inary
Research 37:493-495.
296
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
278 Rosenbusch R, Ostle A {1986)
289 Hopkins J, Stephenson E, Storz J,.
301 Blogg R (1977) Proliferative
Mycoplasma bovoculi infection
Pierson R {1973) Conjunctivitis
keratoconjunctivitis in the Collie.
increases ocular colonization by
associated with chlamydial polyarthritis
Proceedings of the Scientifc Meeting of
Moraxefia ovis in calves. American
in lambs. Journat of the American
the Armerican Cotlege of Veterinary
Journat of Veterinary Research
Veterinary Medicat Association
Ophthatmologists 8:89-90.
47:1214-1216
163:1157-1160.
302 Paulsen M, Lavach J, Synder S, Severin 
279 Kopecky K, Pugh G, McDonald T
290 Egwu G, Faull W, Bradbury J,
G, Eichenbaum J (1987) Nodular
{1986) Infectious bovine
Clarkson M {1989) Ovine infectious
granulomatous episclerokeratitis in
keratoconjunctivitis: contact
keratoconjunctivitis: a microbiological
dogs: 19 cases {1973-1985). Journat of
transmission. American Journat of
study of clinically unaffected and
the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Research 47:622-624.
affected sheep's eyes with special
Association 190:1581-1587.
280 Abeynayake P, Cooper B {1989) The
reference to Mycoplasma conjunctiuae.
303 Latimer C, Wyman M, Szymanski C
concentration of penicillin in bovine 
Veterimary Record 125:253-256.
(1983) Azathioprine in the management 
conjunctival sac fluid as it pertains to
291 Grahn BH, Szentimrey D, Pharr JW,
of fibrous histiocytoma in two dogs.
the treatment of Moraxefta bovis
Farrow CS, Fowler D {1995) Ocular
Journat of the American Animat
 infection. I. Subconjunctival injection.
and orbital porcupine quills in the dog:
Hospitat Association 19:155-158.
Journat of Veterinary Pharmacotogy
a review and case series. Canadian
304 Wheller C, Blanchard G, Davidson H
and Therapeutics 12:25-30.
Veterimary Joturnat 36:488-493.
{1989) Cryosurgery for treatment of
292 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Jamieson V.
recurrent proliferative
of acute ocular Moraxefla bovis
 English R, Olivero D {1991) Traumatic
keratoconjunctivitis in five dogs. Journat
infections in calves with a parenterally
anterior lens capsule disruption. Journat
of the American Veterinary Medicat
 administered long-acting
of the American Animat Hospitat
Association 195:354-357.
oxytetracycline formulation. American
Association 27:410-414.
305 Rothstein E, Scott DW, Ris RC (1997)
Journat of Veterinary Research
 293 Chmielewski NT, Brooks DE, Smith PJ,
Tetracycline and niacinamide for the 
46:804-807.
Hendrix DV, Whittaker C, Gelatt K
treatment of sterile
282 Angelos JA, Dueger EL, George LW,
 {1997) Visual outcome and ocular
 pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome in
et αf. (2000) Efficacy of florfenicol for
 survival following iris prolapse in the
a dog. Joturnat of the American Animat
treatment of naturally occurring
horse: a review of 32 cases. Equine
Hospitat Association 33:540-543.
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis.
Veterinary Joturnat 29:31-39.
306 Peiffer R, Gelatt K, Gwin R {1976)
Journat of the American Veterinary
294 Lavach JD, Severin GA, Roberts SM
 Proliferative episcleritis in the dog.
Medicat Association 216:62-64.
{1984) Lacerations of the equine eye: a
Veterinary Medicine/Small Animat
283 Allen L, George L, Willitis N {1995)
review of 48 cases. Journal of the
Clinician 71:1273-1278.
 Effect of penicillin or penicillin and 
American Veterinary Mediciat
307 Schadler H (1985) Azathioprine in
dexamethasone in cattle with
Association 184:1243-1248.
treatment for ocular nodular episcleritis.
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis.
295 Barkyoumb S, Leipold H (1984)
Veterinary Medicine 80:64-67.
Journal of the American Veterinary
Nature and cause of bilateral ocular
308 Deykin AR, Guandalini A, Ratto A
Medicat Association 206:1200-1203.
 dermoids in Hereford cattle. Veterinary
{1997) A retrospective histopathologic
284 Anderson J, Gelatt K, Farnsworth R
Pathology 21:316-324.
study of primary episcleral and scleral
{1976) A modified membrana
296 Christmas R {1992) Surgical correction
inflammatory disease in dogs. Veterinary
nictitans flap technique for the
of congenital ocular and nasal dermoids
amd Comparative Ophthatmotogy
treatment of ulcerative keratitis in
and third eyelid gland prolapse in
7:245-248.
cattle. Journat of the American
 related Burmese kittens. Canadian
309 Bellhorn R, Henkind P (1967) Ocular
Veterinary Medicat Association
Veterinary Journat 33:265-266.
nodular fascitis in a dog. Journat of the
168:706-708.
297 Joyce JR, Martin J, Storts RW, Skow L
American Veterinary Medicat
285 Lehr C, Jayappa H, Goodnow R
[1990) Iridal hypoplasia (aniridia)
Association 150:212-213.
{1985) Controlling bovine
accompanied by limbic dermoids and
310 Gwin R, Gelatt K, Peiffer R {1977)
keratoconjunctivitis with a piliated
 cataracts in a group of related Quarter
 Ophthalmic nodular fascitis in the dog.
Moraxelta bovis bacterin. Veterinary
horses. Equine Veterinary Journat
Journat of the American Veterinary
Medicine 80:96-100.
Supplement 10:26-28.
Medicat Association 170:611-614.
286 Smith P, Blankenship T, Hoover T,
298 Koch S, Langloss J, Schmidt G (1974)
 311 Latimer K, Kaswan R, Sundbery J
Powe T, Wright J {1990) Effectiveness
Corneal epithelial inclusion cysts in four
{1987) Corneal squamous cell
of two commercial infectious bovine
dogs. Journat of the American
carcinoma in a dog. Journat of the
 keratoconjuncti vitis vaccines.
Veterinary Medicat Association
American Veterinary Medicat
American Journat of Veterinary
164:1190-1191.
Association 190:1430-1432.
Research 51:1147-1150.
 299 Schmidt G, Prasse K (1976) Corneal
 312 Ward DA, Latimer KS, Askren RM
287 Dickinson L, Cooper B (1959)
epithelial inclusion cysts associated with
{1992) Squamous cell carcinoma of the
Contagious keratoconjunctivitis of
keratectomy in a dog. Journat of
corneoscleral limbus in a dog. Joturnat of
sheep. Journat of Pathology and
American Veterinary Medicat
the American Veterinary Medicat
Bacteriology 78:257-266.
Association 168:144.
Association 200:1503-1506.
288 Langford E {1971) Mycoptasma and
300 Smith J, Bistner S, Ris R {1976)
313 Bernays ME, Flemming D, Peiffer RL
 associated bacteria isolated from ovine
 Infitrative corneal lesions resembling
(1999) Primary corneal papilloma and
pinkeye. Canadian Jaurnat of
fibrous histiocytoma: clinical and
squamous cell carcinoma associated
Comparative Medicine 35:18-21.
pathologic findings in six dogs and one
with pigmentary keratitis in four dogs.
cat. Journat of the American Veterinary
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Medicat Association 169:722-726.
Medicat Association 214:215-217.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
297
314 Martin C {1981) Canine epibulbar
326 Martin C, Leipold H (1972)
337 English R, Nasisse M, Davidson M
 melanomas and their management.
Mastocytoma of the globe in a horse.
{1990) Carbon dioxide laser ablation for
Journat of the American Animat
Journat of the American Animat
treatment of limbal squamous cell
Hospitat Association 17:83-90.
Hospital Association 8:32-34.
carcinoma in horses. Journat of the
315 Ditter R, Dubielzig R, Aguirre G,
327 Hirst L, Jabs D, Stoskopf M,
American Veterinary Medicat
Acland G {1983) Primary ocular
Strandberg J (1983) Benign epibulbar
Association 196:439-442.
melanoma in dogs. Veter inary
melanocytoma in a horse. Journat of
338 Theon A, Pascoe J, Carlson G, Krag D
Pathology 20:379-395.
the American Veterinary Medicat
{1993) Intratumoral chemotherapy with
316 Ryan A, Diter SR (1984) Clinical
Association 183:333-334.
cisplatin in oily emulsion in horses.
and pathologic features of canine
 328 Anderson D, Lush J, Chambers D
Journat of the American Veterinary
ocular melanomas. Journat of the
{1957) Studies on bovine ocular
Medicat Association 202:261-267.
American Veterinary Medicai
 squamous carcinoma ('cancer eye').
339 Theon A, Pascoe J, Meagher D {1994)
Association 184:60-67.
II. Relationship between eyelid
Perioperative intratumoral
317 Harling D, Peiffer R, Cook C
pigmentation and occurrence of
administration of cisplatin for treatment
{1986) Feline limbal melanoma: four
cancer eye lesions. Journat of Animat
of cutaneous tumors in Equidae. Journat
cases. Journat of the American
Science 16:739-746.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Medicat Association
329 Nishimura H, Frisch J (1977) Eye
Association 205:1170-1176.
22:795-802.
cancer and circumocular pigmentation
340 Sloss V, Smith T, Gao D (1986)
318 Dugan S, Curtis C, Roberts S,
in Bos tourus and crossbred cattle.
Controlling ocular squamous cell 
Severin G {1991) Epidemiologic
Austratian Journat of Experimentat
carcinoma in Hereford cattle. Australian
study of ocular/adnexal squamous
Agricuiturat Animat Husbandry
Veterinary Journat 63:248-251.
cell carcinoma in horses. Journaf of
17:709-711.
341 Gelatt K, Rubin L (1969) Delayed
the American Veterinary Medicat
330 Otter W, Hill G, Klein W, et al. (1995)
postoperative staphylomas in dogs.
Association 198:251-256.
Ocular squamous cell carcinoma in
Journat of the American Veterinary
319 Dugan SJ, Roberts SM, Curtis CR,
 Simmental cattle in Zimbabwe.
Medicat Association 154:283-288.
Severin GA {1991) Prognostic factors
American Joturnat of Veterinary
342 Fischer C {1982) A clinicopathologic
and survival of horses with
Research 56:1440-1444.
classification of episcleritis and scleritis
ocular/adnexal squamous cell
331 Monlux A, Anderson W, Davis C
in the dog. Proceedings of the Scientific
carcinoma: 147 cases (1978-1988).
{1957) The diagnosis of squamous cell
Meeting of the American College of
Journat of the American Veterinary
carcinoma of the eye (cancer eye) in
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 13:1-18.
Medicat Association 198:298-303.
cattle. American Journat of Veterinary
343 Willis M, Martin C, Stiles J {1996)
320 Strafuss A {1976) Squamous cell
Research 28:5-34.
Infectious disease as a possible cause for
carcinoma in horses. Journat of the
332 Sullivan TC, Nasisse MP,
scleritis and episcleritis in dogs.
American Veterinary Medicat
Davidson MG, Glover TL {1996)
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Association 168:61-62.
 Photocoagulation of limbal melanoma
the American Cotlege of Veterinary
321 Lavach J, Severin G {1977)
 in dogs and cats: 15 cases (1989-1993).
Ophthatmologists 27:45.
Neoplasia of the equine eye, adnexa,
Jotrnat of the American Veterinary
344 Orihel T, Ash L, Holshuh H,
and orbit: a review of 68 cases.
Medicat Association 208:891-894.
Santeneli S (1991) Onchocerciasis in a
Journat of the American Veterinary
333 Rebhun W (1990) Treatment of
Californian dog. American Jotrnat of
Medicat Association 170:202-203.
advanced squamous cell carcinomas
Tropicat Medicine and Hygiene
322 Schwink K {1987) Factors
involving the equine cornea. Veterinary
44:513-517.
influencing morbidity and outcome
Surgery 19:297-302.
345 Gardiner C, Dick E, Meininger A,
of equine ocular squamous cell
334 Farris H, Fraunfelder F {1976)
Lozano-Alarcon F, Jackson P (1993)
carcinoma. Equine Veterinary Journat
Cryosurgical treatment of ocular
Onchocerciasis in two dogs. Journat of
19:198-200.
 squamous cell carcinoma of cattle.
the Ammerican Veterinary Medicat
323 Hacker D, Moore P, Buyukmihci N
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Association 203:828-830.
{1986) Ocular angiosarcoma in four
Medicat Association 168:213-216.
346 Kommenou A, Eberhard M,
horses. Journat of the American
335 Grier R, Brewer W, Paul S, Theilen G
Kaldrymidou E, Tsalie E, Dessiris A
Veterinary Medicat Association
{1980) Treatment of bovine and equine 
(2002) Subconjunctival filariasis due to
189:200-203.
ocular squamous cell carcinoma by
Onchacerca sp. in dogs: report of 23
324 Moore PF, Hacker DV,
radiofrequency hyperthermia. Journat of
cases in Greece. Veterinary
 Buyukmihci NC {1986) Ocular
the American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthatmology 5:119-126.
angiosarcoma in the horse:
Association 177:55-61.
 morphological and
336 Kainer R, Stringer J, Lueker D {1980)
immunohistochemical studies.
Hyperthermia for treatment of ocular
Veterinary Pathotogy 23:240-244.
 squamous cell tumors in cattle. Journa!
325 Bolton JR, Lees MJ, Robinson WF,
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Thomas JB, Klein KT {1990) Ocular
Association 176:356-360.
neoplasms of vascular origin in the
horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
Supplement 2:73-75.
298
11
Anterior Uvea and
Anterior Chamber
ANATOMYANDPHYSIOLOGY
 peripheral ciliary zone and a thinner central pupillary zone,
with the collarette forming the junctional area (11.3).
The uvea is the vascular tunic of the eye and the anterior
Remnants of the embryonic pupillary membrane may
uvea consists of the iris and ciliary body (11.1, 11.2). The
Occasionally be observed arising from the collarette region.
most striking species differences in the anterior uvea is in
The pupillary border has a 'ruff of pigment formed by the
pupil shape and reactivity to light. The PLRs of ungulates
central extension of the posterior pigmented epithelial
are
more
 sluggish  than  those
of carnivores.
layers. In ungulates, this pigment extension is exaggerated
Topographically, the iris is divided grossly into a thick
dorsally and ventrally to form the granula iridica or
11.1
Conjunctiva
Medial 
canthus 
Iri5
Third eyelid
Pupil
 (nictitating membrane]
 Sclera
 Choroid 
 Iridocorneal angle
Retina
Cormea
Tapetum lucidum
Iris
Optic nerve 
Lens
 Cloquet's canal
Anterior chamber
Vitreous body
Zonular fibers
 Non-tapetal region
Ciliary body
Conjunctiva 
Beael
11.1 llustration of the canine globe with the three tunics of the eye.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
299
11.2
 Anterior ciliary a., v.
Vortex vein
Scleral venous plexu5 
 Circumlimbal a.
Long posterior a., v.
Major arterial
circle of iris 
 Choroidal a., .
Short posterior a., v.
Ophthalmic a., v.
 Optic n
 Retinal a., v.
Venous sinus of 
 Choroidal a., v.
ciliary body 
Choriocapillaris
 Retina 
 Circular ciliary a.
 Scleral venous plexus 
 Circumlimbal a.
11.2 llustration of the canine uveal tract. (a: artery: v: vein; n: nerve)]
11.3
11.4
11.3 Canine iris with the lighter peripheral ciliary zone and the
11.4 Equine corpora nigra or granula iridica on the dorsal pupil
darker pupillary zone. Note the persistent pupillary membranes 
 margin. Fine white lines on the cornea are artifactual reflections
originating from the collarette.
of the cilia.
corpora nigra (11.4). In addition to pigmented epithelium,
coloration can vary within an eye, between eyes, and
 small capillaries are present in the granula iridica.
between individuals. The darker the iris the more dense
The iris rests on the anterior lens surface and when
and compact the iris and iris surfacel. Crypts or surface
this support is lost, iridodonesis or trembling of the iris is
defects in the iris, when present, are usually in the lighter 
noted with movement of the globe. Loss of support may
 pigmented irides and in the pupillary zone.
occur from lens displacement, removal or resorption, or
Topographically, the ciliary body is divided into an
forward placement of the iris due to peripheral anterior
anterior pars plicata (ciliary processes) and a posterior
synechiae (congenital or acquired). Normal
1  iris
A o< Jo suu e si eied sied a 'ud sied
300
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
processes and the pars plana is the flat posterior portion
Unless the iris is torn or incised at the 12 o'clock
between the ciliary processes and the peripheral
position, the location of the major arterial circle
termination of the retina (ora ciliaris retinae). The width of
results in hemorrhage when the peripheral portion
the pars plana is narrower medially and ventrally due to
of the iris is incised or excised.
the more anterior extension of the retina in these
quadrants. The usual site for vitreous centesis is dorsal or
The iris muscles of mammals are smooth muscles with a
dorsolateral, where the pars plana is 7-8 mm posterior to
sphincter muscle located adjacent to the pupil and a dilator
the limbus in a medium-sized dog?. The ciliary processes in
muscle that runs radially from the iris root to near the pupil
carnivores are blade-like and are ensheathed with zonular
(11.7). The dilator muscle arises from the anterior epithelial
fibers which originate from the pars plana (11.5). The
layer of the posterior iris. In species with an elongated
ciliary processes in the horse are capped with a broad band
pupil, the dilator is poorly developed on the axis of
of cells that stops short of the tips of the processes (11.6).
elongatione. Each muscle has dual reciprocal autonomic
The anterior chamber is the space demarcated
innervation. The sphincter muscle is predominantly under
posteriorly by the lens and iris and anteriorly by the
parasympathetic control  (Illrd cranial  nerve)  with
cornea and iridocorneal angle (11.1). The posterior
inhibitory adrenergic fibers (mediating relaxation). The
dlator muscle is predominantly under sympathetic control
of the iris, peripherally by the ciliary body, and
(via the nasociliary nerve of the ophthalmic division of the
 posteriorly by the anterior vitreous humor.
Vth cranial nerve) with inhibitory cholinergic fibers7. The
The iris consists of an anterior border layer, stroma,
two muscles are not equal antagonists, the sphincter muscle
and posterior epithelium (11.7). The anterior border
being stronger than the dilator muscle. When the pupil
layer is well developed in the dog and cat and consists of
dlates, the posterior leaf of the iris initially contracts and,
a layer of fibroblasts and one or more layers of
with maximum dilation, the anterior leaf of the iris also
melanocytes; it is not a true endothelial or epithelial layer
contracts. Prostaglandins have been demonstrated to
as has been reportedl, 3, 4. The stroma of the iris contains
contribute to the muscle tone of the sphincter muscle and,
collagen fibrils, blood vessels, nerves, melanocytes,
to a lesser extent, the dilator muscle*, which may be of
fibroblasts, and the sphincter muscle.
 significance in inflammation.
Suol aui Aq papiaoud si sui aui ot Aqddns 1ejnosa aul
The afferent arm of the PLR consists of three neurons:
 posterior ciliary arteries, which form the major arterial circle
the bipolar cells, the ganglion cells, and the neurons in
of the iris that is visible in the peripheral third of the iris {11.2,
the pretectal nucleus {11.8). The afferent arm of the
11.7). The circle is incomplete at 6 and 12 o'clock1, s.
pupillomotor fibers course with the visual fibers until just
before they reach the lateral geniculate body. Seventy-five
percent of visual and pupillomotor fibers in the dog and
65% in the cat decussate or cross at the optic chiasm?.
The majority of pupillomotor fibers then cross again in
the pretectum to the original side10. In animals with
11.6 Scanning electron 
microscopy of equine
iris and ciliary body. (1:
iris; 2:lens capsule; 3:
pars plana; 4: zonules
 originating from pars
plana; 5: ciliary cleft;
6: ciliary muscles; 7:
sclera.] Note the
convolutions that cap
each ciliary process but
stop short of the tips 
(large arrow) (SEM
11.5 Scanning electron microscopy of the canine ciliary body viewed
x18]. (From Martin and 
from the vitreous. The blade-like ciliary process are ensheathed and
Anderson, 1981'.)]
capped by the lens zonules. The posterior iris surface is visible dorsal
to the zonules (x45).
11.7
10
3
11.7 Montage of canine iris and ciliary body. (1:
cornea; 2: limbus; 3: anterior chamber: 4: anterior
layer of iris; 5: major arterial circle; 6: pigment in
posterior stroma; 7: dilator muscle; 8: sphinchter
muscle; 9: pigmented epithelium; 10: lens capsule;
11: ciliary processes; 12: meridonal ciliary muscle
tendons; 13: anterior hyaloid membrane; 14: ciliary
stroma (x35]]. (From Martin and Ander5on, 19811.)
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
301
11.8
11.9
4
5
PTN
11.9 D-shaped pupil in a cat due to hemiparalysis of the nasal
 branch of the short ciliary nerves.
11.8 visual and pupillomotor pathways. The vision and pupillomotor
pathways are common at (1, 2, 3]. Near the lateral genulate body (5)
Paralysis of one of the two short ciliary nerves in
the pupillomotor fibers separate from the optic tract at (4] to
the cat produces a hemiplegia, resulting in a D'- or
 Synapse in the pretectal nucleus (PTN). These fibers cross in the same
reversed D'-shaped pupil (11.9).
proportion that they did at the optic nerve chiasm to synapse in the
parasympathetic nuclei (8) of the oculomotor nerve. The
Evaluation of PLR and dynamic anisocoria requires
parasympathetic fibers travel with the oculomotor nerve and synapse
an appreciation of the differences in the proportion of
in the ciliary ganglia before entering the eye as the short ciliary 
optic nerve fibers that cross at the chiasm and
nerves. Visual fibers synapse in the lateral geniculate body (5) and 
sads rened aun ui uea aui u auanasans 
continue in the optic radiation (6) to the visual cortex (7].
 examined. This lack of equal input to both eyes when
stimulating the PLR in one eye explains the dynamic
anisocoria present in the normal dog, i.e. the
consensual reflex is not as strong or complete as the
laterally placed eyes, the decussation increases: 81% in
direct PLR. Data transposed from humans and
the horse and 83% in the cowll. Since this same
primates, where 50% of the fibers cross, is not
 completely applica ble.
opposite eye is minimal and is responsible for the weak
Sympathetic innervation to the iris provides the
consensual reflex in these species.
stimulation for dilation by relaxing the sphincter muscle
The efferent arm of the PLR consists of two neurons:
and contracting the dilator muscle. The sympathetic
the first originates in the parasympathetic nucleus of the
chain is long and consists of three neurons (11.10). The 
oculomotor nerve {Illrd cranial nerve) and remains
first neuron originates in the hypothalamus, passing with
ipsilateral to synapse in the ciliary ganglion; the second
 some decussation down the brainstem and cervical spinal
neuron passes from the ciliary ganglion in the short
 cord to synapse at the level of thoracic vertebrae T1, T2,
ciliary nerves to the iris sphincter muscle {11.8). The
and T3. The second neuron passes through the rostral
short ciliary nerves differ in the dog and cat. In the dog,
chest and up the neck in the vagosympathetic trunk, to
multiple branches supply the globe whereas in the cat,
synapse in the cranial cervical ganglion. The third neuron
only two branches are present12.
traverses the tympanic bulla and joins the ophthalmic
11.10 Sympathetic pathway to the eye. The first 
11.10
order neuron originates in the hypothalamus and
Hypothalamus
synapses in the interomedial cell column of the 
first three thoracic spinal segments. The second
order neuron passes out of the ventral roots into
Optic r
the ramus communicantes, then into the
 sympathetic trunk, which continues into the 
vagosympathetic trunk and synapses in the 
cranial cervical ganglia. Postganglionic fibers
then join the internal carotid artery and pa55
Nasociliary n.
Orbital
through the tympanic bulla before entering the
fissure
cranial vault to join the Vth cranial nerve and 
reach the eye via the nasociliary branch of the 
Ophthalmic
ophthalmic division of the Vth cranial nerve.
branch V.
[n: nerve.)]
302
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASe IN VeTeRINARY MeDICINE
11.1
11.11 Marked miosis in a dog with acute uveitis.
11.12 Horner's syndrome in a Boxer with chronic otitis. Note
the anisorcoria but the miosis is not pinpoint. Classic ptosis,
 enopthalmos, third eyelid prolapse, and miosis were present.
Table 11.1 Signs of Horner's syndrome in different species 
Third eyelid 
 Species
prolapse
Ptosis
Miosis
Enophtha lmos
Facial sweating
Dog
X
+
Cat
+
+
Horse
Slight +
+
Slight +
+
Cow
Slight +
Slight +
Decreased muzzle secretions
division of the Vth cranial nerve in the cranial vault, to
Miosis (a constricted pupil) is a common ocular sign and
reach the globe via the long ciliary nerve.
may be from ocular or neurologic disease or be
Anisocoria can be classified as a static or dynamic
pharmaoologically induced. Intense miosis is a common 
inequality of pupils. Static anisocoria manifests without
manifestation of ocular iritation or pain and is typical of
stimulation of the PLR and is constant, whereas dynamic
acute uveitis and corneal pain {11.11). This miosis is often
anisocorias become manifest during or immediately after
resistant to atropine dilation. Neurologic disease involving
stimulation of the PLR.
the midbrain may produce an intense miosis, whereas the
Direct and consensual reflexes are best determined in
miosis seen with sympathetic dennervation {Horner's
dm ambient light utilizing a strong stimulating light. The
syndrome) is usually moderate {11.12). The miosis
direct response is determined and the consensual
associated with superfical corneal pain may mimic Horner's
response evaluated while alternately directing the light
syndrome by being accompanied by third eyelid prolapse
quickly from one eye to the other at 2-4 second intervals
 and a narrowed palpebra fissure from blepharospasm. The
(swinging light test). The pupils will normally have
manifestation of Horner's syndrome varies by species (see
 minimal excursions when performing the swinging light
Table 11.1) and in small animals approximately half of the
test. An eye with an afferent defect in the PLR can be
ases are idiopathicl3. The Colliel4 and Golden Retrieverl5
detected even if an efferent arm lesion such as synechia or
 are breeds predisposed to idiopathic Horner's syndrome.
oculomotor paralysis is present.
The color of the iris is dependent on the amount of
Afferent arm lesions are detected in the presence of a
pigment in the stroma and the pigmented epithelium.
unilateral efferent lesion with the swinging light test by
Blue irides have a lack of pigment in the stroma but
the presence of further constriction of the opposite
 retain the pigment in the pigmented epithelium. Albino
normal eye when the light is swung over to it. This test is
animals have melanocytes but, due to an enzyme
not as sensitive in animals as in humans due to the
deficiency {usually tyrosinase), they are unable to
normal dynamic anisocoria that is present with the
 synthesize pigment granules. White-furred animals have
unequal decussation of the optic nerve.
no melanocytes in the stroma due to a neuroectoderm
defect and many may also be deafl6. A defect in the
Afferent arm lesions in the retina and optic nerve
tapetal pigment is also present in white-furred animals.
are detected by the swinging light test; dilation of
The ciliary processes consist of a capillary tuft, stroma,
the pupil occurs when light is shone in the affected
and two layers of epithelium that are a continuation from
eye (Marcus Gunn pupil).
the retina. The sensory retina continues onto the pars plana
 as the inner nonpigmented epithelial layer and the retinal
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
208
11.13
11.14
11.15
11.13 A dog with persistent pupillary
11.14 Incidental polycoria (arrow) in a cow that
11.15 Congenital dyscoria in a dog. Note the
membranes that are iris to iris. Most are
was presented for SCC at the medial canthus.
tented, tilted pupil.
originating frorm the collarette.
The cornea has some edema medially and 
reflections of cilia are present on the cornea.
pigmented epithelium as the outer pigmented epithelial layer
11.16
of the ciliary body. The tight epithelial junctions between the
epithelial cells are the basis for the blood-aqueous humor
barrier. The capillaries of the ciliary body are fenestrated
 and do not provide a barrier to large molecules17.
The ciliary processes are responsible for aqueous
humor formation. The pars plana cells are the origin of
the zonules and, in conjunction with the ciliary muscles,
have a function in accommodation. The ciliary muscles
are not as well developed in domestic animals as in
primates . and
consequently
the
amount
of
accommodation achieved is very modest. The anterior
insertions of the ciliary muscles form the trabecular
meshwork in the angle and thus have an effect on
aqueous humor outflow (11.7).
11.16 Dyscoria and corectopia in an Australian Shepherd Dog
with a hypoplastic iris. Note the transillumination of the iris from
the fundus reflection.
DISEASES OF THE IRIS AND CILIARY BODY
CONGENITAL DISEASES
Persistent pupillary membrane[s)
hypoplasia or atrophy, that results in holes in the iris near
Embryologically, the lens is surrounded by a vasuclar
the pupillary border.
network, the tunica vasculosa lentis (see Chapter 13,
p.369) and normally the anterior remnants of the
Dyscoria
network disappear by 3-5 weeks of age19. When
Dyscoria is a congenital or acquired abnormal shape or
remna nts of the embryonic vessels persist, they are visible
form of the pupil (11.15). The condition is usually of no
either on the iris surface or bridging the pupil and are
functional importance. It is observed as a congenital
termed persistent pupillary membranes (PPMs). Variable
finding in the microphthalmos syndrome of merled
degrees of retained PPMs are frequently observed as a
genetic trait in the Basenji, Welsh Corgi, Golden
incompletely penetrant recessive gene24. Dyscoria may be
Retriever, Chow Chow, and English Cocker Spaniel.
observed with corectopia or a displaced pupil. Dyscoria
is more commonly observed as an acquired finding
problerm except in genetic counseling (11.3, 11.13). In
secondary to iridal degeneration, trauma, neoplastic
the cat, agenesis of the upper lids in kittens is frequently
infiltration, and inflammatory synechiae.
 associated with PPMs20. Aberrant PPMs attached to the
cornea and lens are discussed in Chapters 10 (p.241) and
Aniridia
13 (p.369), respectively.
Aniridia (absence of the iris) is a misnomer. While an
apparent clinical absence of the iris may be present, itis not
Polycoria
usually a complete anatomic absence. The condition is
 Polycoria is the presence of more than one pupil in the
more correctly termed iris hypoplasia. The condition is rare
eye, each having a sphincter muscle (11.14). It is rare and
and will usually manifest as a very dilated pupil. Glaucoma
is often confused with the more common condition of iris
 may develop from adhesions or synechiae over the angle.
304
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
In Belgian horses, it is inherited as an autosomal dominant
deafness occurs on the side of the blue eye if the deafness
tait and thus genetic influences should be suspected when
is l
unilateral. Deafness is the result of defective
 observed in other species25-27, Aniridia and aniridia with
development in the organ of Corti and degeneration of
limbic dermoids and cataracts have been reported
in
Quarter horses26, 28, the latter thought to be autosomal
White cats with a black spot on the forehead are less
dominant in nature. Aniridia has been described in Jersey
likely to be blue-eyed and deaf.
cattle with multiple ocular defects of microphakia, luxated
The merling gene in the dog is dominant and, in many
lenses, and cataracts. It was reported as an autosomal
breeds, homozygous individuals f
for merling have
recessive trait in the Jersey cow29. Two cases of aniridia in
microphthalmic or severe ocular malformations as well as
deafness23 32, 35 Animals with heterochromia exhibit a mild
Varying degrees of keratitis have frequently been noted
 anisocoria with the blue eye being slightly more dilated.
with aniridia and the cause for this is unknown.
Siamese cats and cats
 with  Chediak-Higashi
Aniridia presents with bilateral widely dilated pupils
syndrome are considered partial albinos; they are not
that expose the ciliary processes, zonules, and lens
deaf but may have chiasmal misrouting of optic nerve
equator. Animals will probably exhibit photophobia due
fibers16, 37, Conversely, the white-furred cat has normal
to the inability of the iris to constrict in bright sunlight.
routing of optic fibers at the chiasm, with normal
Varying degrees of cataract formation are usually
retinogeniculate projections.
 present. Superficial keratitis over the dorsal cornea has
been observed in many species of animals and in humans
Ectropion uvea
with aniridia. The cause is unknown.
Ectropion uvea refers to the pupilary margin everting
forward to expose the posterior pigmented epithelium. This
Coloboma
may occur as a congenital anomaly (11.18) or, more
Coloboma of the iris is manifested as a notch-like or
commonly, is acquired due to contracting membranes on
"keyhole' defect in the iris. A typical coloboma occurs
the iris surface. The contracting membranes (preiridal
ventronasally in the iris due to incomplete closure of the
fbroblastic membranes, PIFMs) are observed with ocular
choroidal fissure, while atypical colobomas occur
inflammation, neoplasia, or chronic retinal detachment.
elsewhere {11.17). The condition may be an isolated
event or found with other ocular anomalies such as in the
ACQUIRED DISEASES
 Australian Shepherd Dog.
Altered iris pigmentation
Introduction/etiology
Heterochromia
Focal pigment proliferations or densities may be
Heterochromia is a lack of iris pigmentation within a
observed on the surface of the iris and should
be
portion of a pigmented iris or of the entire iris when the
differentiated from neoplastic pigmentary changes. Iris
opposite iris is pigmented. In certain breeds of dogs with
 freckles are clusters of melanocytes on the surface of the
the merling gene and cats with white haircoats, deafness
iris and are only a few cells thick. This results in a focal,
may be associated with blue eyes31-36. In the white-furred
flat, hyperpigmented patch on the surface of the iris. A
cat, the eye color may be blue, yellow, or heterochromic;
nevus is a benign accumulation of either the precursors
the genes for eye color are independent of white fur but
of melanocytes or of atypical melanoctyes. It has variable
the blue eye color is expressed only in the presence of the
 amounts of pigmentation, is more extensively elevated,
 gene for white fur, In the white-furred cat, deafness may
 and extends deeper into the stroma than a freckle38, 39
be unilateral or bilateral; if heterochromia is present,
The nevus is thicker and may undergo malignant
11.17
11.18
11.17 Gobe of an Australian Shepherd Dog
with a typical iris coloboma (arrow)]. The
 globe has been transected at the equator and 
the observer is looking forward from the
vitreous cavity through the pupil. Note the 6
oclock defect. Note also the defect in the
 ciliary body and zonules and the flattened 
lens equator in this region (coloboma of
lens].
11.18 Ectropion uvea in a dog. Ectropion 
 of the pupil margin is visible dorsomedially
and has no apparent cause. Either preiridal
fibrovascular membranes from lens-
induced uveitis or congenital deformity
was the suspected cause.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
305
11.19
11.20
11.21
11.19 Iris nevus in the peripheral iris of a
11.20 Suspect iris freckle in a cat from 
11.21 Sphincter iris atrophy in an aged 
Border Collie. The lesion was followed for
6-8 o'clock. The lesion must be followed for
Miniature Poodle. Note the dilated pupil with
 over 3 years without change.
 months to years to differentiate it from an
5calloped borders and isolated strands on the 
 early diffuse iris melanoma.
pupil border.
transformation. Most melanomas are thought to
11.22
originate from nevi.
Multiple flat or
diffuse flat
pigmented lesions may be freckles that coalesce and be
very difficult to differentiate clinically from malignant
 progression of a melanoma unless it is bilateral, in which
case it is usually a benign lesion. In the cat, these
pigmented patches increase with age and pose a special
problem for differentiating benign changes from early
diffuse melanomas that are typical for this species.
Increases in iridal pigmentation also occur with
chronic insidious uveitis in all species. This is so insidious
that unless it is unilateral it may not be appreciated by
the examining clinician.
Clinical signs
A flat, focal, pigmented spot is present on one or both
irides. Nevi may be mildly elevated but should have
sharp borders (11.19, 11.20).
11.22 Stromal iris atrophy viewed against a cataract in a diabetic
 Poodle. Note the dyscoria and corectopia from loss of iris ma55.
Therapy and prognosis
Pigmented spots of questionable significance should be
photographed and observed for change over several
months. Benign lesions will remain static. If the lesion
· Stromal iris atrophy is the second form of iris
changes in thickness or expands, diode or YAG laser
atrophy and is less frequent. This is usually observed
ablation should be considered.
in toy breeds of dogs. It manifests with large defects
in the iris stroma and frequently results in almost
Iris atrophy
complete loss of the iris stroma. The pupil may have
Two forms of iris atrophy are frequently observed and
dyscoria and may be displaced to the opposite side
are considered senile in origin. A third form of iris
 of the atrophy (11.22). The presumed cause is
atrophy is observed secondary to inflammation and/or
vascular insufficiency.
glaucoma. Iris atrophy is observed most commonly in the
dog, although blue-eyed cats will frequently manifest
The main clinical significa nce of iris atrophy is recognition
both congenital hypoplasia and atrophy with age.
of its presence when interpreting PLRs. When severe iris 
 Sphincter iris atrophy is the most common form of iris
 atrophy and involves the pupillary portion of the iris.
 evaluate retinal function without an ERG. Glaucoma has
This form is present in most Miniature Poodles as they
not been documented as a complication of iris atrophy in
 age. Mild sphincter atrophy is characterized by
the dog as it has in humans.
scalloped pupillary margins and loss of the pupillary
ruff. As it progresses, asymmetrical or symmetrical loss
Iris and ciliary body cysts
of the PLR is noted and depigmented areas of iris at
 Clinical signs
the pupillary margin are visible on transillumination.
Iris cysts manifest as variably pigmented cystic structures
Advanced atrophy results in fixed dilated pupils or
in the anterior or posterior chamber or pupil. The eye
anisocoria. Pseudopolycoria and/or PPM-like strands
may contain one or more cysts which, in the dog, are
are often present at the pupillary margin (11.21).
often free floating in the anterior chamber The condition
306
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASe IN VeTeRINARY MeDICiNE
11.23
11.24
11.23 Multiple lightly pigmented iris cysts in
11.24 Multiple heavily pigmented iris cysts in
11.25 Ruptured iris cysts on the posterior
the anterior chamber of a Basset Hound.
the anterior chamber of a Basset Hound. Cysts 
 cornea of a dog. Cysts are recognized by a
were aspirated with a 25 gauge needle.
round flat pigment deposit on the posterior
cornea, angle, or lens.
11.26
11.27
11.28
11.26 Multiple iris cysts in a cluster and 
11.27 A cat with a large srmooth iris cyst that
11.28 Stromal iris cyst in a horse. Note the
attached to the pupil border in a cat.
was fixed in place. It was treated with diode
appearance of bombe or a mass in the iris.
laser energy, which was only partially
The lesion is most visible on pupil constriction.
successful in decreasing the size.
is quite common in the dog, with breeds such as the
Teadde Aleoidai Aaui ieui ul ia ieo aui ui sisao s
Boston Terrier, Labrador Retriever, and Golden Retriever
as pigmented clusters still attached to the pupillary
predisposed to the formation of cysts. If a cyst is densely
margin (11.26, 11.27).
pigmented and solitary, it must be differentiated from a
In the horse, stromal iris cysts may manifest as a
pigmented tumor (11.23, 11.24). Cysts may rupture and
become deposited in the angle region, lens, or on the
refuted that they are cysts and stated that they are
posterior cornea where they are visible as a circular
hypoplastic areas of the iris and, when the pupil is
 pigmented deposit (11.25).
miotic, the pressure in the posterior chamber pushes
Cysts originate either from the posterior epithelium of
the hypoplastic region forward. Clinically, stromal iris
the iris or the epithelium of the ciliary body fciliary body
 cysts appear as smooth focal swellings that are usually
cysts)40. Iris cysts are usually of no clinical significance4l
darker than the adjacent iris and are in the basilar
except as minor opacities of the lens or cornea. Ciliary
aspect of the iris. They are more common in the dorsal
body cysts in the Golden Retriever and Great Dane have
region but may be found in the ventral iris (11.28). The
been associated with glaucoma and uveitis42, 43.
.The
swellings transilluminate when the iris is examined in
mechanism of glaucoma production is unknown and is
the miotic state and they produce a shallowing of the
thought to be through cyst pressure resulting in angle
anterior chamber. The condition may be bilateral or
closure, although PIFMs are also observed in both breeds.
umilateral and must be differentiated from iris bombe
The pathogenesis of PIFMs {fibrovascular membranes on
 and a localized growth. Equine stromal cysts are more
the iris) with ciliary body cysts is unknown. Uveitis is also
commonly observed in lighter colored irides and Welsh
associated with iridocorneal cysts in the Golden Retriever.
 ponies may have a predisposition44.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
307
11.29
11.30
11.31
11.29 Cyst of the lower corpora nigra in a
11.30 Ciliary body cyst in a Tennessee 
11.31 Iridodialysis in a dog's iris from blunt
horse. It was treated with diode laser, but
Walking horse.
trauma. The anterior and posterior leaves of
needle aspiration is as effective.
the iris have separated and the pupil is
dyscoric from rupture of the iris sphincter.
The most common type of iris cyst in the horse involves
tear (11.31). The IOP should be monitored and therapy
the granula iridica, which manifests as large attached
is symptomatic.
swellings at the pupillary margin (11.29). Owners
frequently feel the cysts are responsible for behavior or
Iridoplegia
performance changes and request cyst removal.
Introduction/etiology
 Iridoplegia (immobile pupil(s) in a mydriatic state may
inferotemporal quadrant in three ponies of unspecified
occur due to end-organ dysfunction (iris sphincter),
breed or color, with no other ocular lesions. Large cysts
efferent nerve dysfunction iparasympathetic fibers or
of the ciliary body are also observed as the main lesion of
nuclei of the oculomotor Illrd cranial nerve), or bilateral
 anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD) observed in the Rocky
 afferent limb dysfunction (retina, optic nerve or chiasm, 
Mountain horse and related breeds such as the Kentucky
optic tracts) of the PLR. Pharmacologic iridoplegia occurs
Mountain Saddle horse, Mountain Pleasure horse, and
from the use of topical mydriatic agents or the ingestion of
Morgan horset7. ASD is a dominant trait with
hyoscyamine, hyoscine, solanine, and belladonnine
incomplete penetrance that is expressed in color-dilute
alkaloids from various poisonous plants (Black Henbane,
animals with light manes. If the animal is heterozygous,
Jimson weed, Nightshades, and Ground Cherry).
 the only lesions observed by looking obliquely through
 Pharmacologic iridoplegia may last from 4-5 days to
the pupil are large cysts located temporally behind the
several weeks {in horses) after the last exposure to
iris (1i.30). Animals with the full syndrome may have
atropine. If the application was accidental, the history
large globose corneas, dyscoria, cataracts, temporal
may not be helpful and the cause can only be diagnosed
retinal detachment, retinal dysplasia, PPMs,
large
by the lack of synechia or iris atrophy, normal IOP, and
palpebral fissures, and persistent hyaloid arteries47.
the lack of response to direct-acting miotic drugs
(pilocarpine). Improvement after several days aids a
Therapy
retrospective diagnosis of drug-induced mydriasis.
 No therapy is usually required for iris cysts, although the
Iridoplegia from posterior synechiae and sphincter iris
cystis) can be easily aspirated through a needle if
 atrophy is a common phenomenonon. Anterior uveitis is
characterized by a tonic pupil in the mid-point to
by diode or YAG lasering47a. In some individuals with
au ul ldnd oiuoi e Aq euoone pue 'aieis paisuo
numerous cysts, removal may be indicated to clear the
dilated state. Blunt trauma may produce iridoplegia,
visual pathway and to reduce pathology to the cornea
which is usually temporary.
and lens. If there is any difficulty in differentiating cysts
 Iridoplegia due to parasymathetic denervation results
from neoplasia because of location or concurrent
in a dilated pupil that, depending on the cause, may be
 pathology, ocular ultrasound should be performed. Even
umilateral  or  bilateral.
 Efferent denervation 
is
when heavily pigmented, cysts are smoother and rounder
characterized by a visual eye (unless multiple nerve injury
than most neoplasms. In the Rocky Mountain horse, the
Occurs), lack of a direct or consensual PLR, and response 
genetic implications should be recognized.
to direct-acting cholinergic drugs. Peripheral oculomotor
nerve injury usually has somatic efferent deficits as well
Iridorhexis (iris tears)
and, depending on the location of injury, multiple nerve
Tears in the anterior uvea may occur as the result of
deficits may occur. Total ophthalmoplegia from
blunt or perforating trauma. The tears may be full or
peripheral oculomotor nerve lesions results in a dilated,
partial thickness. Hyphema or varia ble amounts of blood
fixed pupil and a ventrolateral deviation of the globe.
in the anterior chamber may result and obscure the uveal
Cavernous sinus and orbital fissure syndromes manifest
pathology. The iris root is the thinnest portion of the iris
with oculomotor paralysis as well as deficits involving the
and is most prone to traumatic tears. Pupillary shape and
abducens, trochlear, ophthalmic, and maxillary nerves.
function may be altered depending on the extent of the
The orbital apex syndrome also involves the optic nerve.
308
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Unless multiple orbital nerve deficits are associated with
and thrombocytopenia are the usual causes. Uveitis may
trauma, such as a proptosed globe, the prognosis is usually
or may not accompany the iris hemorrhage.
very guarded for the life of the patient, because the cause
Hyphema {blood in the anterior chamber) is the
is often orbital or intracranial neoplasia or intracranial
result of either blunt (11.33) or perforating traumatic
 granulomatous inflammation.
disruption of the anterior uveal vasculature, a bleeding
 Feline dysautonomia
 presents  with  generalized
or clotting defect, systemic hypertension, neoplasia, or
dysautonomia with dilated pupils. The condition is
neovascularization. The condition is usually unilateral.
 u ids   a u a a
The blood may partially or completely fill the anterior
regions. The etiology is unknown and the incidence has
chamber and may or may not remain uncloted. The
decreased markedly in the last decade. It does not appear
larger the hemorrhage the more likely it will be clotted.
to be related to FeLV, as does alternating anisocoria. Cats
Factors which determine whether the hyphema is fluid
with dysautonomia may have an initial anisocoria but,
or is clotted are incompletely understood but, unlike
subsequently, the pupils are dilated and equal, the eyes are
external hemorrhages, blood in the anterior chamber is
visual, the third eyelid is prolapsed, and the tear secretions
immediately diluted with aqueous humor. Blood in the
are decreased. The lesion is characterized as an efferent
anterior chamber undergoes rapid fibrinolysis due to
arm parasympathetic lesion..
Additional   signs
of
dilution by aqueous humor and the release 
of
dysautonomia are constipation, regurgitation, dry mucous
fbrinolytic agents (e.g. tPA) from the iris. Since
membranes, bradycardia, and urinary incontinence48,49. It
coagulation of the hyphema interferes with resorption,
is possible in the cat to have an isolated palsy of one of the
these two factors are beneficial for resorption but they
also favor the possibility of rebleeding and increased
fibers). This produces a D- or reversed D-shaped pupil due
complications. Rebleeding presents a physiologic
to the hemidilation (11.9)12.
dilemma since the intrinsic and extrinsic factors of
 Spastic pupils have been observed in FeLV-positive
coagulation are not activated completelys1.
 cats that manifest with paradoxical pupillary changes.
Hyphema in the acute stages is bright red but if it is not
The animal may have anisocoria that alternates at
resorbed and new hemorrhages have not occurred, the
intervals of hours to days, or have widely dilated or
constricted pupils. The condition is attributed to FeLV
involvement of the ciliary ganglia50.
Causes of iridoplegia include:
11.32
Midbrain lesions from trauma, neoplasia,
inflammation, or degenerative conditions.
 Cavernous sinus lesions, usually inflammatory
or neoplastic.
 Orbital fissure lesions that may be traumatic,
neoplastic, or inflammatory.
+
Increased IOP, usually >40 mmHg (5.9 kPa).
 Pharmacologic induction or ingestion of certain
+
toxic plants such as Jimson weed and
Nightsha des.
Orbital lesions invol ving the parasympathetic
 fibers or ciliary ganglion.
 Sphincter iris atrophy.
Bilateral afferent arm lesions of the PLR, i.e.
retina, optic nerve, chiasm, or optic tracts.
11.32 Iris pectechia/ecchymoses in a Siberian Husky with immune-
 Posterior synechia development while the pupil
 mediated thrombocytopenia.
is mydriatic.
Diagnosis
11.33
Ocular lesions must be eliminated from the diagnosis by
a thorough ocular examination including measurement
of IOP. The PLRs are tested and a neurologic
examination performed. The response of the pupil to
 autonomic drugs may be tested (see Table 2.7).
Therapy
Therapy is directed at the underlying cause rather than
the iridoplegia.
Iridal hemorrhage and hyphema
Introduction/etiology
Petechiae of the iris stroma may be observed in blue
irides but are rarely observed in heavily pigmented irides 
(11.32). Petechiae usually indicate a problem with
platelets or a vasculitis. Tick-borne infectious diseases
size has a good prognosis if no new bleeding occurs.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
309
blood becomes dark; it is designated an “eight ball'
The pupilis), if visible, may be constricted due to
hemorrhage if the entire anterior chamber is filed with
anterior uveitis, corneal pain {abrasions), or concurrent
dark blood. Hyphema that is incomplete and fluid settles
brainstem hemorrhages that are irritative, or dilated due to
if the animal has been quiet, whereas clotted blood often
glaucoma, concussion to the iris with iridoplegia, efferent
remains over the pupil region. With fluid hyphema the
lesions of the oculomotor nerve, or from progressive or
amount of blood often appears to change quickly; this is
paralytic brainstem lesions with head trauma.
often a function of the animal's activity level. If the animal
has been quiet, the blood settles ventrally in the chamber
Diagnosis
and the remainder of the anterior chamber is clear.
The anatomic diagnosis is usually obvious but the cause
Typically, pet owners note that the eye is clear in the
often requires an accurate history, good physical
morning but later in the day appears worse, due to ocular
examination, ultrasonography, and laboratory testing.
motion mixing the blood with aqueous humor. Blood
The remainder of the ipsilateral globe and orbit and the
pigments may stain the corneal stroma if the endothelium
opposite eye should be examined and a physical
is not functional or if there is increased IOP.
examination should be performed to determine the
 Blood leaves the anterior chamber through the
presence of hemorrhages elsewhere or other lesions of
aqueous humor outflow pathways, with minimal
trauma. This is important to provide clinical clues for the
absorption by the iris. The iris is an important source of
 origin of the hemorrhage and to give a prognosis.
fibrinolysin that frees the erythrocytes from the fibrin so
they may escape, but this also may dislodge clots in torn
Therapy
vessels and cause rebleeding or secondary hemorrhage.
Therapy for hyphema has included a great number of
The etiology of hyphema includes:
drugs and procedures, most of which, when examined
Trauma: blunt and penetrating/perforating globe
with double blind studies, have demonstrated no benefit.
injuries are a common source of hyphema.
The outcome of hyphema is more dependent on the
 Blood dyscrasias such as hyperviscosity,
amount of instantaneous damage done by the trauma
thrombocytopenia, polycythemia, and leukemia may
than the therapy that is given afterwardss1,54. If the cause
ca use hyphema.
is not trauma, control of the primary processes, such as
 Bleeding and clotting deficiencies: dicoumarin
a
blood dyscrasia,
bleeding/clotting
defect,
or
poisoning, inherited clotting factor deficiencies,
hypertension, is essential for resolution of the condition.
acquired clotting deficiencies with renal and liver
The concurrent uveitis is treated with corticosteroids
failure, and consumption of clotting factors may
and atropine provided corneal abrasions or ulcerations are
ca use hyphema.
not present. If the trauma is perforating, glucocorticoids 
 Hypertension is a common cause of ocular bleeding
may be contraindicated if sepsis is present. Aspirin and
in the cat and occasionally manifests as hyphema.
other NSAIDs are usually not given due to their
 Vascular anomalies such as persistent hyperplastic
interference with platelet function, which can promote
tunica vasculosa lentis may cause hyphema.
secondary hemorrhage's. Cage rest and tranquilization is
● Neovascularization associated with PIFMs that
probably the most significant therapy for traumatic
develops with inflammation, neoplasia, and chronic
hyphema but also the most difficult to enforce.
If the IOP is elevated, the patient is treated
The conditions that produce PIFMs stimulate diffusible
symptomatically with topical or systemic CAIs or topical
angiogenic factors that stimulate neovascularization of
beta-blockers. If traumatic in origin, the presence of
the iris surface. Neovascularization is leaky and
glaucoma with complete hyphema of 7-10 days duration
susceptible to hemorrhage. PIFMs are a common
is one of the few indications for invasive surgery or
histopathologic finding in the horse, dog, and cat but
irrigation to remove the bloods6. While this might seem
 are usually not clinically visibles2.
 an obvious choice of therapy, removing blood from the
Vasculitis: a variety of infectious diseases such as
anterior chamber usually results in more trauma and
 tick-borne diseases may cause ocular hemorrhage
 more hemorrhage once the IOP is lowered.
from vasculitis.
 Erosion of vessels from neoplasia or
Surgery is rarely performed to remove hyphema
inflammatory/infectious processes.
and then only if associated with trauma.
Clinical signs
The use of pilocarpine with hyphema is controversial.
 Red to black hemorrhage is present to varying degrees in
Plocarpine is often recommended because it opens the
the anterior chamber If the hemorrhage is unclotted and
trabecular meshwork pores, allowing erythrocytes easier
the animal is quiet, the hemorrhage settles ventrally and
egress, and it presents a larger iris surface, which is a source
has a flat top (11.33). If the blood is diffuse, it is either a
for fibrinolytic activity. Pilocarpine also dilates the uveal
large amount or due to a partial hyphema that becomes
vasculature, which may increase the chances of rebleeding,
mixed with the aqueous humor after physical activity.
and it causes ciliary muscle spasms that accentuate ocular
Clotted blood is often localized and suspended in the
discomfort if traumatic anterior uveitis is present.
anterior chamber. The pupillary area may retain a clot
Vasoconstictors such as epinephrine and phenylephrine are
longer than other areas due to the lack of adjacent iris
 often recommended but are of questionable benefit.
with fibrinolytic factors.
Fibrinolytic therapy to dissolve clots and facilitate
IOP may be increased, decreased, or normal depending
 egress of nonclearing hyphema from the eye has been
on the cause and extent of the hyphema and accompanying
advocateds7.  Dramatic resolution of f
fibrin and
ocular lesions.(
Concurrent lesions of trauma may be
hemorrhagic clots occurrs with 25 μg tPA injected into
abrasions and contusions on the lids, head, or body.
the anterior chamber but secondary bleeding is common.
310
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Antifibrinolytic  therapy  with   agents  such
as
seal a corneal perforation or injury salvages the eye and
aminocaproic acid or tranexemic acid has been used to
does not greatly hinder function. Animals requiring
prevent
rebleeding.
 Aminocaproic  acid   inhibits
sharp vision, such as hunters, have more protected eyes
plasminogen activation58. Antifibrinolytic therapy is still 
and do not respond to injury to the same extent.
considered experimental.
Causes of uveitis in all species include:
Experimental clotted hyphema benefited from i.v.
Infectious agents: viral, bacterial, protozoal, mycotic,
mannitol. Also, subconjunctival r
methylprednisolone
rickettsial, algal.
administered before clotting occurred resulted in poor clot
Metazoan parasites: worms, flukes, fly larvae.
formation and faster resorption59. Systemic corticosteroids
Trauma: perforating and blunt.
were thought to be beneficial in humans with hyphema by
 Immune mediated: lens-induced, systemic immune-
decreasing the incidence of secondary hemorrhages but a
mediated diseases.
 double-blind study failed to show any benefit60, 6i
 Neoplastic: primary, multicentric, meta static.
 Blood dyscrasia: neoplastic, immune-mediated.
UVEITIS
 Idiopathic: this is a large group in all species.
Introd uction/etiology
Anterior uveitis, iritis, and iridocyclitis are synonyms for
Clinical signs of anterior uveitis in the dog and cat
inflammation of the iris. In most instances, both the iris
[see Table 11.2]
and ciliary body are involved and the preferred term is
 Selective bulbar conjunctival and episcleral vascular
anterior uveitis. The causes of uveitis are varied and
injection (11.34).
often elusive  in all
species. The condition may
be
Miosis that does not easily dilate with mydriatics
unilateral or bilateral and may be either confined to the
(11.11). In mild and chronic anterior uveitis, the
anterior uvea or be panuveal.
pupils are usually not constricted but are not as
 Unlike many areas of the body, physiologic function in
responsive to mydriatic agents.
the eye may be impaired by small lesions or scars
associated with intraocular inflammation. Consequently,
the eye has developed a moderating protective
mechanism against the inflammatory reactions of many
Table 11.2 Clinical signs of anterior uveitis in the dog
antigens within the anterior chamber. This is termed
and cat 
anterior chamber-associated immune deviation {ACAID),
which   downgrades
the delayed
hypersensitivity
Signs
Sensitivity and specificity
immunity to many antigens that are presented to the
Conjunctivalf
Sensitive but not specific:
anterior chamber. This has the effect of minimizing
episcleral injection 
glaucoma, episcleritis also produce
similar injection
immune-mediated destruction but may allow the antigen
(infectious or neoplastic) to progress unchecked. This
Miosis
Neither sensitive nor specific:
immune privilege is the result of a lack of lymphatic
mainly acute forms, multiple causes
drainage in the eye, with antigens bypassing regional
Blepharospasm
Neither sensitive nor specific:
lymph nodes and being presented directly to the spleen.
mainly acute forms, multiple causes
Suppressor T-cells that downplay cell-mediated responses
Aqueous flare
 Sensitive and specific: indicative of
are produced by the spleen62
active uveitis
 Inflammatory damage may be due to cytotoxic efects
Synechia
Specifie for past, but not active,
of an infectious agent, chemical mediators produced by the 
uveitis
host defense, and proliferative cellular reactions that
disrupt normal morphology. Examples of chemical
Change in iris
Sensitive (lighter irides), specific:
texture and color
but must differentiate from 
mediators with potentially harmful cellular effects are
neoplasia
complement, cell-derived lytic enzymes, cytokines, and
arachidonic acid metabolites. The arachidonic acid
Iris nodules
Not sensitive: usually
metabolites that utilize the cyclo-oxygenase and lipo-
 granulomatous; specific if
oxygenase pathways have been studied the most and they
differentiated from neoplasia
 provide the rationale for utilization of NSAIDs in uveitis
Keratic precipitates
Specific: usually granulomatous,
therapy. Proteolytic enzymes released by neutrophils ha ve
may persist after inflammation
been assumed to damage the tissues directly but evidence
Hypotony
 Sensitive and specific: often persists
is accumulating that oxygen meta bolites, such as hydrogen
after resolution
 peroxide and hydroxyl and superoxide radicles, damage
 Secondary glaucoma
 Not sensitive or specific: persists
the tissue, potentiate arachidonic acid metabolites, and
 after inflammation
prolong the life of proteolytic enzymes63. Future anti-
Stromal keratitis 
Not sensitive or specific: usually in 
inflammatory therapy may incorporate antioxidants and
chronie forms
hydroxyl radical scavengers.
Rubeoisis iridis
 Not sensitive or specific: chronic
Species variations exist in the response to ocular
 injury. Bito64 argued that species that are grazers or the
uveitis, observed most easily in light 
irides
blood-aqueous humor barrier compared to the hunters.
Ca taracts
Nonspecific: usually capsular and
outer cortex
field of vision that are subject to injury. These animals do
Decreased vision
Nonspecific and not sensitive
not have sharp vision; a massive outpouring of protein to
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
311
11.34
11.35
11.34 Selective injection of the the conjunctival and episcleral
11.35 Serofibrinous clot in the anterior chamber of a cat with
vessels in a dog with uveitis due to Bruceffa conis. The pupil is
anterior uveitis.
 pha rma cologically dilated.
11.36 Lens-induced
11.36
11.37 Iris bombe
11.37
uveitis in a
e ul euauday pue 
Miniature Poodle.
dog with uveitis
Note the selective
 a55ociated with
conjunctival
Ehrfichia conis.
injection and dark 
iris. The pupil is 
irregular from
posterior synechiae,
and the anterior
lens capsule is 
dusted with pigment
from the iris.
11.38
· Photophobia and blepharospasm, particularly in
acute cases.
 Plasmoid aqueous humor and possible fibrin clots in
the anterior chamber due to alterations in the
blood-aqueous humor barrier. The presence of flare 
from plasmoid aqueous humor is the clinical
hallmark of anterior uveitis (see Chapter 1, p.11
1.13). Clotted or unclotted hyphema may be present 
and the leukotactic stimulation so intense that
hypopyon may develop (11.35).
 Synechiae: with fibrinous exudation from the uveal
vasculature, the iris adheres to adjacent structures
resulting in variable degrees of synechiae. These
may manifest as posterior synechiae, producing
11.38 Marked darkening of the iris in a Siamese cat with chronic
immobile or irregular pupilis). Uveal pigment
uveitis of undetermined cause.
 disruption and synechiae often result in pigment
deposits on the anterior lens capsule (11.36).
Complete posterior synechiae (pupil seclusion)
 Change in iris texture and color: the iris becomes
result in iris bombe (balooning forward) with a
thicker, loses its delicate surface mosaic texture, and
shallowing of the anterior chamber (11.37).
becomes darker in color with inflammation. The
Peripheral anterior synechiae involving the
blue and gold irides become brown, which is striking
iridocorneal angle may develop independent of, or
in appearance if it occurs unilaterally, and the brown
secondary to, iris bombe.
iris becomes blacker (11.38).
312
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
11.39
11.39 Large mutton
· KPs: cellular debris often accumulates on the corneal
fat keratic
endothelium, forming KPs. Large deposits (mutton
 precipitates in a dog 
fat) that can be seen with the unaided eye are formed
with panuveitis and 
by macrophages and mononuclear cells, whereas
exudative retinal
small deposits are usually neutrophils (11.39, 11.40).
detachment due to
 Hypotony is typical of uncomplicated uveitis and is 
systemic mycoses.
due to decreased aqueous humor production and
 increased uveoscleral outflow190.
 Synechiae and/or fibrin or cellular debris may block
the aqueous humor outflow pathways and produce
secondary glaucoma.
 Stromal keratitis usually accompanies chronic
 anterior uveitis and, conversely, most deep corneal
problems also produce anterior uveal involvement
(see Chapter 10, p.241).
11.40
11.40 Mutton fat
+
 PIFM {rubeosis iridis) or neovascularization of the
 keratic precipitates
iris surface is present with many cases of chronic
in a cat with FelV-
uveitiss2. Rubeosis, while a common histopathologic
associated uveitis.
lesionf2, is not often clinically visualized without
fluorescein angiography. Rubeosis is most easily
detected in lighter pigmented irides. Rubeosis often
extends into the iridocorneal angle and may be
responsible for spontaneous hyphema and a very
 intracta ble form of glaucoma.
 Cataracts, either anterior or posterior capsular
opacities, or both, may occur with anterior uveitis
and are termed complicated cataracts. The opacities
may be from pigment dispersion, synechiae, or
deposition of inflammatory debris on the capsules.
Eventually, impaired nutrition to the lens may result
 young adult dogs. Sight hounds and the Siberian Husky seem
 in varying degrees of cortical cataracts. Cataracts that
 i s e   y ie sa 
are the result of uveitis should be differentiated from
thought to be an Arthus-type immune inflammatory
cataracts that cause uveitis or cataracts that resulted
reaction67,68. Severe instances will result in glaucoma and/or 
from a common initiating factor such as trauma.
persistent corneal edema, the most serious sequelae. Most
cases improve spontaneously over 2-3 weeks (see Chapter
Causes of uveitis in the dog (Table 11.3]
10, p.241).
Systemic infectious diseases
Ehrlichia canis, E. platys, and Rickettsia rickettsii are tick-
Infectious canine hepatitis, ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain
borne rickettsial diseases that produce a vasculitis that often
spotted fever (RMSF), systemic mycoses, protothecosis,
manifests as unilateral or bilateral anterior uveitis, often with
toxoplasmosis,
leishmaniasis,
canine
brucellosis,
s sd o a  u  
mycobacteria, leptospirosis, and bacterial septicemia are
(11.37)69-73b, Approximately one third of the ehrlichiosis
examples of infectious diseases that may cause uveitis. Massa
ouaisis ou pue suoisal jenoo Auo peu eeApnis suo u sase
et al.6s found that in over 100 dogs with uveitis unrelated to
signs. Another study described ocular lesions in 37% of all 
 the lens or trauma, 18% were related to systemic infectious
cases of ehrlichiosis, with 65% of these having ocular lesions
agents. These authors found that the most common agent
as the only sign. In the author's experience, ocular
was Ebrlichia canis. Obviously, the infectious agents
 manifestations due to Ebrlichia spp. are usually more severe
involved with uveitis will vary with what is endemic for the
  oe a s    
geographical region. Some infectious agents may cause an
uveitis manifested with infiltrates and/or retinal detachment
immune-mediated inflammation, rather than destruction by
dhie to exudation (see Chapter 14, p.401).
the:
 infectious agent itself.  Anterior uveitis  with
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease) is a tick-borne
toxoplasmosis and systemic mycoses may have organisms
and ocular hemorrhage74. Most reports used antibody
rarely present in the anterior uvea. This results in speculation
testing, which can be unreliable; _recently, however, the
that anterior uveitis is more immune mediated than due to
 antigen was demonstrated by PCR in the canine eye7s.
drect tissue damage by the infecting organism.
Contagious bacterial infections such as Brucella canis,
-onuelauou e saonpod Ajueu (HOl Susneo) IA
leptospirosis, and tuberculosis may also manifest with
matous anterior uveitis with involvement of the corneal
uveitis. Brucella canis has been found both experimentally
 ndothelium. The ocular lesions typically manifest 10-14
and clinically to produce anterior uveitis or endophthalmitis,
days after immunization with adeno-1 modified live vaccine
either unilaterally or bilaterally. The uveitis is often
(MLV) or in the convalescing stage of clinical hepatitis. The
accompanied by hemorrhage and, like the systemic disease,
Ie of adeno-2 MLV vaccines has dramatically decreased but
becomes a chronic insiduous process despite therapy (11.41).
has not eliminated the incidence of vaccine-induced uveitis.
The ocular lesions may be the only clinical signs of
Three percent of uveitis cases in a recent report were
brucellosis76-79. As Brucella canis is a potential zoonotic
associated   with  vaccination6s.
Ocular lesions manifest
agent, if the dog is a house dog, the owners should be
 milaterally in 85% of cases and occur in young puppies to
educated as to the inherent risk of having a potentially
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
313
Table 11.3 Causes of canine anterior uveitis
Etiology
Diagnostic aids
 Systemic infectious diseases 
Infectious canine hepatitis 
 History of vaccination, age, appearance
Ehrtichia spp.
Hemorrhagic uveitis, titers, response to tetracycline, low
platelet count
Rickettsia rickettsii
 Petechiae, titers, response to tetracycline, low platelet count
Brucella conis
Hemorrhagic uveitis, history, titers
Leptospira spp.
Renal and liver signs, titers
Borretia burgdorferi
Polyarthritis, renal disease, serology, Western blot
Systemic mycoses
Pulmonary, bone, skin, or CNS signs, chest X-ray, titers,
cytology of lesions, geographic location
Toxoptasma gondii
Elevated IgM or rising IgG titers
Leishmania donovani
History of Mediterranean travel, Fox Hound, cytology of marrow, titers 
Prototheca spp.
Hemorrhagic diarrhea, ocular cytology, cytology of urine
 Metazoan parasites
Observation of worm or larva in eye, wandering tracts in fundus
Trauma
 Blunt or perforating
Physical examination, history, X-ray or ultrasound with missile 
and foreign bodies
Neoplasia
History, physical examination, ultrasound, cytology of ocular fluids
 Extension from keratitis
Deep ulceration, history, ocular examination
Immune-mediated processes
 Phacoclastic uveitis
 Bilateral, sterile, cytology non-septic, typical of syndrome,
Lens-induced uveitis
i.e. cataracts, breed, dermal depigmentation, response to anti-
VKH syndrome
inflammatory drugs
Sclerouveal syndromes
Steroid responsive retinal
detachment syndrome
11.41 A 2-year-old
11.41
11.42 Anterior
11.42
Labrador Retriever 
uveitis with
with anterior uveitis
exuda tive retinal
associated with
 detachment in a
Bruceffo conis. The
dog with
cornea is edematou5 
 blastomycosis. The 
due to elevated 
pupil is irregular due
intra ocular pressure.
to synechia and the 
Note the free blood
 detached retina can
in the anterior
be visualized
cha mber.
through the pupil.
infectious animal in a family environment. Noncontagious
disease3. Organisms are usually easily demonstrated in
bacterial infections from a variety of sources may result in
the posterior uvea but are less common in the anterior
embolization to the eye, with inflammation.
 uvea, suggesting the possibility of an immune-mediated
Systemic mycoses often present with anterior uveitis
 reaction being responsible for the anterior uveitis.
that is usually part of a panuveitis. Histoplasmosis
Secondary glaucoma from iris bombe is a common
capsulatum is the least likely of the systemic mycoses to
complication of anterior uveal involvement {11.42). The
produce ocular signs in the dogs0. The incidence
of
complication of blindness with ongoing painful ocular
histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and coccidioidomycosis is
 disease, after systemic improvement with therapy, is a
often very regional. Cryptococcosis is sporadic
and
common cause for euthanasia request. Disseminated
widespread, often associated with pigeon feces and
opportunistic fungal diseases associated with saprophytic
poultry houses81. Coccidioidomycosis and blastomycosis
 fungi have a predisposition for the German Shepherd Dog.
are common etiologies of uveitis in the dog in their
Organisms such as Aspergillus spp., (
Candida spp.
respective endemic regions. The portal of entry is usually
Penicillium spp, and Paecilomryces spp. may disseminate to
the respiratory tract, with hematogenous spread to the
 the eye, causing uveitis*4. Toxoplasma gondi infection in
eye. Despite the systemic origin of the organism, the
the dog is worldwide and common, based on serologic and
ocular complaint is often primary. Blastomycosis and
histopathologic surveys; clinical signs and recognition of the
cryptococcosis typically produce a bilateral granulo-
disease are relatively rare due to the mildness or ambiguity
matous anterior and/or posterior uveitis (11.42).
of the signs85. Clinical systemic disease is most common in
Coccidioidomycosis is bilateral in only 20% of patients 
 dogs <1 year and in dogs with distemper86. The cat is more
and 40% have no systemic signs*2. 1
 Blastomycosis
 often affected than the dog. Systemic signs may or may not
involves the eye in >40% of cases with systemic
be present with ocular disease. In the dog, the most common
314
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
ocular lesions with toxoplasmosis are cyclitis and retinitis
(11.44). The source of the inflammation may be either
(11.43). Organisms are often found in the posterior segment
mechanical trauma or immune mediated. Removal of the
lesions but are usually absent in the anterior uvea87, 88.
worms results in rapid improvement, although peristent
 Many previously diagnosed cases of toxoplasmosis, based
corneal edema may result. Fly larvae may move freely
on histopathology, may have been due to Neospora
between the anterior and posterior compartments and
canirum due to similarities in morphology of T. gondli and
stimulate anterior uveitis, as well as produce wandering
 N. canirum. N. canirmm is transmitted transplacentally and
tracks in the subretinal space. A bright light seems to
thus most reports are of infection in neonates, where it
stimulate movement of the parasites away from the light.
usually produces an ascending paralysis. Ocular lesions have 
included retinochoroiditis, anterior uveitis, and extraocular
Trauma
myositis89.
Trauma is a common cause of canine anterior uveitis and
Leishmania infantum is transmitted by the sandfly
may be perforating or blunt. Trauma-induced uveitis is
and the dog is a reservoir host. It is endemic in the
usually unilateral but it is not infrequent for both eyes to
Mediterranean region, Africa, and Asia and may be
be affected in BB shot injuries. Blunt trauma-induced
responsible for endophthalmitis in the dog90-92. The
uveitis may be difficult to diagnose without a complete
ocular inflammation is relatively confined to the anterior
history or other periocular injuries to suggest the cause.
uvea, cornea, and lids. The inflammation is mononuclear
Perforating injuries may mimic perforating corneal ulcers
and organisms are present in the histiocytes. The
but the prognosis for perforating injuries is much worse.
majority of cases reported in North America have
Cat claw injuries to puppies and kittens are common and
traveled in the Mediterranean, although a form of
while infection is a potential complication (11.45), the
Leisbmania chagasi is found in South and Central
most serious complication is usually rupture of the lens
America and in the US. The Fox Hound appears uniquely
capsule during trauma. Tearing of the lens capsule often
susceptible to Leishmania chagasi in the Us93. The mode
results in a severe sterile inflammation 2-3 weeks after
of transmission in the US has not been clarified but may
initial trauma, when the initial traumatic uveitis 
is
involve direct transmission as well as an insect vector.
subsiding (11.46, 11.47). Dubielzig and Piriet08a disputed
 Prototheca spp. is an ubiquitous algae found in soil and
that the uveitis in this syndrome was sterile phakoclastic
water but is rarely associated with systemic disease in the
uveitis, as they were able to demonstrate gram-positive
dog. The portal of entry is thought to be the digestive tract,
bacteria intralenticularly in numerous cases. This uveitis is
with hemorrhagic diarrhea being the most common sign.
termed phacoanaphylaxis or phacoclastic uveitis and is
Ocular involvement with a granulomatous posterior
due to altered tolerance to lens protein.
uveitis or panuveitis is present in >50% of cases94. Ocular 
lesions may occur without systemic signs9s.
Neoplasia
Aberrent parasites such as fly larvae in the dog and
Neoplasia mimics simple anterior uveitis by producing
tissue necrosis, hemorrhage, and glaucoma. Primary ocular
Eu xp sngd oxo pue ssu ui ds
neoplasia is unilateral but secondary multicentric ocular
horsel01, and nemotodes such as Dirofilaria immitist02-106
 neoplasia or metastatic neoplasia may be bilateral. The
 most common secondary ocular tumor in all domestic
in dogs may be relatively rare causes of anterior uveitis.
species is lymphosarcoma. Lymphosarcoma will produce
The most common ocular parasites in the dog are
 and mimic inflammation in all species (11.48, 11.49)109
immature adult male and female Dirofilaria immitis that
Massa et al. 65 reported that neoplasia accounted for 25%
have been identified as moving between the aqueous humor
 of uveitis cases and 68% were due to lymphosarcoma. The
and the vitreous and are associated with inflammation
Rottweiler and Golden Retriever were most commonly
11.43
11.44
11.45
11.43 A dog with granulomatous uveitis and
11.44 Dirofilaria in the anterior chamber 
11.45 Penetrating claw injury that has
scleritis associated with toxoplasmosis. Note
of a dog with anterior uveitis. (Courtesy of
induced a bacterial uveitis in a young cat.
the keratic precipitates ventrally that are
Dr. M. Glaze, Louisiana State University
Note the dark linear penetrating corneal injury.
associated with corneal edema; peripheral
Veterinary College.]
A secondary glaucoma is producing mild
corneal infiltrates dorsally are associated
corneal edema and the dilated pupil. The
with scleritis. The iris is darker and thicker
condition responded rapidly to intraocular
than normal.
 gentamicin but vision was not restored.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
315
11.46
11.47
 11.46 Intractable phacoclastic uveitis and secondary glaucoma in a
11.47 Globe from patient in 11.46. Only an empty collapsed capsular
dog. A penetrating scleral injury was responsible. Enucleation wa5 
bag remains of the lens (arrow]. The iris is very thick 
eventually performed.
 and inflammatory membranes (M] are present behind the len5.
affected. All cases of ocular lymphosarcoma had systemic
11.48
signs of lymphosarcoma. Hema ngiosarcoma, tra nsmissible
venereal tumor, and adenocarcinoma may metastasize
bilaterally to the anterior or posterior uvea.
Secondary to deep corneal ufceration and keratitis
Anterior uveitis secondary to deep corneal inflammation
is often sterile even if the process is septic. Bacterial toxins
and inflammatory mediators freely diffuse through
Descemet's membrane to stimulate anterior uveal
inflammation, shown in a cat (11.50). Aqueous humor
 centesis may be utilized to determine whether sepsis is
present in the anterior chamber but, beca use of aqueous 
humor turnover, false-negative responses may occur.
Immune mediated
Many forms of anterior uveitis are sterile and/or cannot be
11.48 An Old English Sheepdog with bilateral iris bombe and secondary
 associated with serologic evidence of infection. Such forms
glaucoma due to lymphosarcoma. The white subconjunctival deposit is 
 are assumed to be immune mediated by exclusion. Massa
from a previous injection of methylprednisolone by the referring
et al.65 reported that 58% of uveitis cases in the dog were
veterinarian. The dog had advanced lymphadenopathy that was missed 
idiopathic/immune mediated; this figure would have been
because it was not self-evident with the long hair coat. Despite
even higher had they not excluded lens-induced uveitis
improvement with chemotherapy, the animal was blind from glaucoma.
cases from the series. Circulating immune complexes from
11.49
11.50
11.49 Presentation in a dog with bilateral marked hypopyon, uveitis,
11.50 Hypopyon in a cat with a relatively superficial corneal ulcer.
and secondary glaucoma due to lymphosarcoma. The cornea ha5
neovascularization and edema, a large mass of cells is present in
the anterior charmber, and the pupil is dilated from the elevated 
intraocular pressure.
316
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
elsewhere in the body may localize in the uvea, or humoral
incubated with an antigen in sensitized animals. This
 and/or cellular immune-mediated processes may be
augmentation was thought to be due to absorption of
directed against ocular tissue (melanin, retinal S antigen,
Two Akitas were
lens protein), infectious agents, or foreign material in the
immunized with tyrosinase-related protein 1 and a VKH-
eye. The ocular inflammation may be part of a systemic
like syndrome was produced involving the eyes and
immune response or be localized to the eye.
 skin114a. In humans, VKH syndrome has been associated
 Phacoanaphylaxis (phacoclastic) and lens-induced uveitis
with meningeal signs in some patients; this is apparently
(LIU) are examples of immune-mediated responses against
uncommon in the dog since only one dog has been
ocular antigens. Phacoanaphylaxis is a chronic severe
reported with neurologic signsl15. VKH syndrome is
 inflammatory reaction that occurs in some individuals 1-3
observed most frequently in the young adult Akita, Irish 
  i anu s ansde sal au rahe saa
Setter, Siberian Husky, and Samoyed. Dogs with
 granulomatous reaction in some species but in the dog it is
heterochromia may have only a unilateral uveitisi1sa. The
cdharacterized by a ruptured lens capsule with neutrophilic
panuveitis is chronic, bilateral, and granulomatous in
invasion of the lens and a surrounding lymphocytic-
nature. Depigmentation of the skin and hair often occurs
plasmacytic reaction around the lens and in the anterior
after the initiation of ocular inflammation {see Chapter 7,
uveallo. Perilenticular f
fibroplasia with iris adhesions
p.145, 7.67)18. Blindness may occur from secondary
frequently results in inractable glaucoma (11.46, 11.47)}i11.
glaucoma, retinal detachment, retinal degeneration,
The traditional view of phacoanaphylaxis is that the body is
and/or complicated cataractsl16-120
reacting to the exposed lens protein, because the lens was
Pigmentary uveitis has been described in the Golden
sequestered early in development and the immune system
Retriever and may involve other breeds as well. The
does not recognize it as 'self. This has been challenged as
condition is chronic, low grade, and progressive, resulting
normal individuals have circulating antilens antibodies. An
in secondary glaucoma and loss of vision in most eyes
 alternative theory is that the tolerance to lens protein is
 despite extensive systemic and topical therapy.
The
altered by the massive exposure to lens antigens, which
 condition is characterized by radially oriented pigment
overrides the effects of intraocular T-suppressor cell12. A
deposits on the anterior lens capsule, low-grade flare,
 second type of lens-induced immune-mediated anterior
fibrin in the anterior chamber, development of posterior
uveitis is more frequent and observed with mature
to
 synechia and angle closure, and iridociliary body cysts121.
hypermature cataracts, when the lens protein is absorbed
The mean age of the patients was 8.6 years and laboratory
through an intact lens capsule (11.36). This has been called
testing and histopathology was negative for systemic
LIU or phacotoxic uveitisl13. LIU is usually mild and easily
disease. Glaucoma led to blindness in 47% of these
 sisuud pue suoonelg Aipuooas u insau Aeu inq paiean
patients and only one eye remained visual once the
bulbi in some animals if untreated. It is characterized by
pressure was elevated. Histopathologically, a mild
mild lymphocytic-plasmacytic iridocyclitis. With chronicity,
the zonules are dissolved by inflammatory cell enzymes and
patients had received extensive treatment before
the lens may subluxate or luxate. While these two forms of
enucleation. The role of iridociliary cycts in uveitis and
uveitis are presented as separate entities, they probably
glaucoma is unclear but an association has been made by
represent opposite ends of a spectrum of inflammatory
several authors42, 43. A genetic link is also likely since the
reactions to lens proteins.
incidence in the Golden Retriever varies with the lineage
VKH syndrome is thought to be an immune response
 and thus varies in geogra phic regions.
to melanin that results in depigmentation of the skin, hair,
A syndrome of bilateral exudative (transudative)
and uvea and inflammation. Kaya et al.l14 found melanin
retinal detachment, optic neuritis, and anterior uveitis is
to lack antigenicity or immunogenic properties. Free
idiopathic but is thought to be immune mediated, mainly
melanin granules, when injected into the anterior
due to a lack of a demonstrable cause and a response to
chamber, did not stimulate inflammation but they did
corticosteroids122, 123. This syndrome will be discussed
significantly augment intraocular inflammation  when
further in Chapter 14 (p.401).
Table 11.4 Causes of feline anterior uveitis
Etiology
Diagnostic aids
 Systemic infectious diseases 
Feline leukemia virus
FeLV testing +f- systemic signs
Feline immuno-deficiency virus 
FIV titers, chronic infections, gingivitis 
 Feline infectious peritonitis 
FIP titer, physical examination, elevated globulins
Toxopfasma gondii
Elevated IgM and rising IgG titers
Systemic mycoses
Cytology of ocular centesis, titers
Bartonella hensetae
Serology, yet to be established as cause
Herpesvirus felis
 PCR testing, yet to be established as cause 
Trauma
History, physical examination, evidence of ocular perforation
Immune-mediated processes 
Cataract induced
Negative on infectious disease titers, steroid responsive?
Idiopa thic
Neoplasia
History, ultrasound, ocular cytology
Idiopa thic
Negative on infectious disease titers, older cats
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
317
11.51 Gray nodular
11.51
11.52
infiltrates or
granulomas in the 
iris stroma of a cat.
Cryptococcus spp.
organisms were
observed on
aqueous humor
centesis.
11.52 Intraocular extranodal lymphosarcoma in a cat that was negative
for FelV on EUSA testing of serum and bone marrow. PCR testing for FelV
was also negative. The FlV serum antibody titer was negative but FIV
Causes of uveitis in the cat (see Table 11.4]
antigen was found with PCR. Note the marked iris hyperemia and tan
Most cases of anterior uveitis in the cat are bilateral and,
infiltrate of the peripheral iris, producing dyscoria. This resulted in
if granulomatous, they are often indicative of severe
secondary glaucoma and was only mildly responsive to anti-inflammatory
systemic disease, with poor prognosis for the cat. Most
 therapy. Malignant cells were noted on aqueous humor cytology.
cats with granulomatous anterior uveitis will die of
systemic disease within 6 months in the author's
experience.(
Granulomatous uveitis in the cat is
characterized by bilaterality, large keratic precipitates
(KPs), a chronic course, posterior synechia, and
11.53
secondary glaucoma as a sequela. Small nodules may be
 present on the iris surface but are very inconsistent
(11.40, 11.51).
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) complex
Anterior uveitis has been commonly associated with
  s s a  
retrospective histopathologic study of feline uveitis,
 about 20% of cases were due to lymphosarcoma12s, This
was obviously a biased study as it reflected only
enucleated eyes. A clinical study of feline uveitis in
 53 eyes reported approximately the same percentage of
cats had FeLV or lymphosarcomal26, Some eyes have
obvious mass lesions in the iris with FeLV but most
appear simply as uveitis; aqueous humor aspirates
11.53 Cat with Felv-associated lymphosarcoma and bilateral iris
typically have nonmalignant lymphocytes and macro-
bombe with secondary glaucoma. The kidneys were also involved.
phages {11.52, 11.53). It is not clear whether the
lymphocytic uveitis is always neoplastic. Nonmalignant
anterior uveitis has been experimentally produced by s.c.
11.54
the frequency of cats presented with ocular lesions asso-
ciated with FeLV appears to have dramatically decreased
in the last decade and the incidence of nonviremic
summarized 57 cases of lymphosarcoma submitted for
histopathology in the last 12 years and found that 36%
of cases with uveitis and lymphosarcoma were positive
for FeLV; of eyes with only lymphosarcoma, 16% were
positive for FeLV. Extranodal lymphoma or single tumor
masses affecting an organ without systemic illness are
usually of B-cell lineage and may be associated with FIV.
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
Anterior uveitis due to FIP occurs either alone or in
 conjunction with posterior uveitis and optic neuritis and is
11.54 Young kitten with FIP-induced bilateral anterior uveitis with
similar in clinical manifestation _to the FeLV syndrome
fibrin clots in the anterior chamber. Effusions were also present in
the chest and abdomen.
318
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
 present, the etiology is more likely to be FIP than FeLV.
The division of nongranulomatous from granulomatous
Ocular lesions are typically associated with the 'dry' or
is rather arbitrary and blurred. An acute fibrinous
noneffusive form of FIpl31. Ocular lesions were noted in
reaction may change to a typical granulomatous
about 50% of cases with neurologic manifestations,
0r
reaction with mutton fat KPs. In two series,
about 15% of the total cases of Fip, in one study132.
.A
 nongranulomatous anterior uveitis/lymphocytic uveitis
histopathologic study of feline uveitis found 20% of the
accounted for 32% and 70% of cases125, 126?
 eyes with typical FIP lesionsl2s but in a clinical study of
In a histopathologic study of 158 cat eyes with
uveitis125s, the most common lesion (29%) was diffuse
The perivascular pyogranulomatous lesions of FIP and the
lymphocytic-plasmacytic anterior uveal inflammation.
association of a more severe disease in seropositive cats are
 Inflammation was bilateral, with a mean age of 7.4 years
 compatible with an immune-mediated Arthus-type of
with no breed or gender predisposition. No infectious
 reaction, rather than direct viral toxicity133
agents were apparent. Two cats were serologically
positive for toxoplasmosis and the remaining cats, when 
Systemic mycoses
tested, were negative for FeLV and FIP. A nodular form
As in dogs, the incidence of systemic mycoses in cats is
of lymphocytic-plasmacytic uveitis was less frequent
often  very regional. In endemic river l
bottoms,
(3%), developed in slightly older cats (8.8 years), and
histoplasmosis with ocular involvement is more common
was usually unilateral. In the remaining group of eyes in
in cats than in dogs. Feline histoplasmosis signs mimic the
this study, 22% were consistent with FIP lesions, 21%
systemic and ocular signs of FeLV and FIpi34-137.
were lymphosarcoma, 10% were traumatic or secondary
Cryptococcosis is more widespread than other systemic
to keratitis, 8% were LIU, and 5% were secondary to
mycoses and about 20% of reported systemic cases in the
systemic mycotic disease. The study was biased towards
cat have ocular lesions. This figure is. probably 
an
the most severe forms of uveitis since the cats either died
underestimation as another series had almost a 50%
or had the worst ocular lesions and sequela (glaucoma)
incidence of ocular lesions when the fundus was examined
and the eyes were therefore enucleated.
(see Chapter 14, p.401)133, Blastomycosis139, 140, coccidio-
A clinical study of 53 cats with
  nontraumatic
idomycosisl41, and candidiasis142 are rare causes of uveitis
uveitis126 found 70% were considered idiopathic and
in the cat.
17% were due to FeLV/lymphosarcoma, with one case
each of FIP and toxoplasmosis. The idiopathic form was
Toxoplasmosis
chronic (247 days), free of systemic disease, had a mean
Toxoplasma gondii has frequently been associated
age of 9.3 years, was bilateral in 32% of cases, and was
more common in the male {4.3:1). Thirty-six percent of
 probably not in the anterior uvea143, 144. The anterior
the cats had enucleation and the idiopathic form was
uveitis may or may not be granulomatous in nature. Cats
characterized by lymphocytic-plasmacytic infiltration of
with uveitis associated serologically with toxoplasmosis
the anterior uvea. Sera from 20 of 53 cats with idiopathic
do not usually have concurrent systemic signs.
uveitis were retrospectively tested for FIV and 21% were
Conversely, 60-82% of cats with systemic toxoplasmosis
positive. It is clear from the previously cited studies that
have ophthalmic signs, with anterior uveitis being the
histopathologic studies are limited in elucidating the
most common 145.
etiology of chronic nongranulomatous uveitis.
Serologic testing of uveitis patients raises different
Bartonella henselae
questions than the histopathologic studies; in one series
Bartonella benselae, one of the causes of cat scratch
of 124 cats, 83% had positive serology. In this series, T.
disease, has been serologically linked to unilateral
 gondi was the most common cause (74%) found on
chronic anterior uveitis in a catl46, Bartonella spp. are
 serologic testing (54% Toxoplasma-positive prevalence
Gram-negative bacteria that are prevalent in cats and
in healthy normal cats) followed by FIV (13%), FeLV
may produce disease in cats, dogs, and humans. The
(12%), and FIP (6%), and 17% were negativel47.
importance of Bartonella spp. in animals as a cause of
Another series from the same laboratory reported a 90%
uveitis remains to be elucidated. Fontenelle et al.146a
positive response for infectious agents with serologic
compared Bartonela titers between normal cats, cats
testing in uveitis patients. In this series the seroprevalence
with nonocular disease, and cats with uveitis and found
of infections was 79% for T. gondii, 23% for FIV, 6%
no difference between the incidence and magnitude of
for FeLV, and 27% for FIp148.
titers between the nonocular group and the uveitis group.
The exact role of T. gondii in anterior uveitis is
The healthy cats had a higher prevalence and higher
unknown. The availablility of E
ELISA tests
for
titers than the cats with uveitis. The mean titer was 1:64
Toxoplasma antigen, and feline anti-T. gondii IgG and
for all groups.
IgM has caused a reassessment of the role of
toxoplasmosis in uveitis149, 1s0. While 74-79% of cats 
Nongranulomatous anterior uveitis
with anterior uveitis may have serologic evidence of
Nongranulomatous anterior uveitis is common in the
T. gondii infection, the histopathology reports from eyes
cat. Unilateral causes are often due to trauma,
enucleated for secondary glaucoma fail to demonstrate
neoplasia, or lens injury, or are idiopathic. Bilateral
the organism. That T. gondii frequently involves the eye
cases are often presumed to be immune mediated or
in cats that have died from histologically proven systemic
manifestations of systemic disease but often the
toxoplasmosis was recently reconfirmed. In this study of
relationship is tenuous, relying on serologic testing.
100 cases over a 38 year period, the eyes of 27 of the cats
Viral infections, immune-mediated conditions, and
were available for examination and 82% had intraocular
toxoplasmosis are a few of the etiologies to consider.
inflammation. T. gondi was histologically observed in
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
319
45% of these eyes145. Multifocal iridocyclochoroiditis
 Iris: the iris is miotic, dull, thicker, and darker
was the most common lesion. Fatal toxoplasmosis with
{11.56). Posterior synechiae develop rapidly.
histologic confirmation is rare when considered in light
 Lens: lens changes are a common cause of eventual
of the serologic prevalence.
blindness of the animal. The lens often has pigment
 Davidson and Englishis1 have summarized the various
deposits or nests of pigment from iris adhesions, a
theories in the literature on the possible link between
 capsular haze develops from deposits of cells and fibrin
T. gondi and uveitis in humans and other animals. The
and, eventually, cortical opacities develop. Uveitis is the
rarity of finding organisms in the anterior uvea of the cat
most common cause of cataracts in the horse.
has lead to various hypotheses:
Vitreous: the vitreous usually develops inflammatory
● Anterior uveitis is associated with inflammatory
infiltrates which result in a haze and, later,
mediators from the posterior segment.
organization into strands and floaters.
 Organism numbers are so low they are difficult to
+
 Retina and optic nerve: peripapillary multifocal to
detect.
confluent areas of pigment disruption in the
 Ocular inflammation is the result of memory
 nontapetum are most typical. Vascular alterations of the
immune cells homing to the eye after exposure to
nerve head and blurring of the nerve margins may be
organisms at nonocular sites.
present (see Chapter 14, p.401).
 Molecular mimicry is involved, where peptides of the
 organism are close to self-antigens that drive the
inflammation.
Circulating immune complexes of T. gondi and
antibody are deposited in the anterior uvea.
 Nonspecific upregulation of antibody production in
uveitis has increased T. gondii antibodies.
 The response to therapy with clindamycin has been cited
as indirect evidence for the role of T. gondii in uveitis.
Clindamycin (25 mg/kg q12h) alone or with gluco-
corticoids was more effective in reducing inflammation
experimental model where clindamycin therapy increased
 the morbidity and mortality of treated animals compared
to controls. In a Syrian Golden hamster model of retinal
toxoplasmosis, of the variety of drugs used to treat
11.55 Acute ERU-
11.55
toxoplasmosis none affected the acute clinical course and
 a5sociated corneal
only atovaquone reduced the number of tissue cysts and
 edema masking
had any affect on the chronic course152.
the uveitis.
FIV has been associated with anterior uveitis,
characterized by anterior uveitis, glaucoma, and pars
planitis. Inflammation was usually mild to moderate,
chronic, and characterized by aqueous flare, peripheral
iridal hyperemia, posterior synechia, anterior sub-
capsular cataracts, and hypotony. Pars planitis is
diagnosed by the presence of white cellular infiltrates in
the peripheral anterior vitreous that often coalesce153.
Clinical signs of acute equine recurrent uveitis {ERU)
Synonyms for equine anterior uveitis are equine recurrent
uveitis (ERU), periodic ophthalmia, and moon blindness.
Equine uveitis is worldwide, has been known from
11.56 Acute
11.56
antiquity, and is considered the leading cause of
 bilateral ERU with
blindness in horses and mules.
miosis and fibrin
● Lids and conjunctiva: blepharospasm, lacrimation
exudation in the 
 turning to mucopurulent discharge, chemosis, and
anterior chamber.
marked conjunctival hyperemia are typical. The 
animal may be depressed and anorexic.
· Cornea: the cornea develops varying degrees of
edema and may turn very yellow from neutrophilic
infiltration (11.55). Neovascularization develops
after several days.
 Aqueous humor: aqueous flare is the hallmark of
 uveitis, with possible hypopyon and hemorrhage in
severe cases {11.56). Aqueous formation is
decreased, resulting in hypotony.
320
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Clinical signs of chronic ERU
 aspect of the nonpigmented epithelium, and eosinophilic
Each acute to subacute bout of ERU leaves more scarring
linear inclusions in the nonpigmented ciliary epithelium are
in the eye. The pupil is commonly immobile in a constricted
diagnostic of ERU154, 155.
position due to synechiae {11.57). While adhesions are
A wide variety of suggested etiologies have been
common, glaucoma is not a common complication and
proposed over the years for recurring keratouveitis that
ael au ui doaap on ai a yn si ianq ss
has a course that varies from acute to chronic and
stages (11.s8). Chronicity results in corneal scarring that is
insidious. The acute forms become quiescent with time or
usually quite diffuse and is at various levels. Band
therapy but often have relapses or recur at irregular
keratopathy or corneal calcifiction  is a  frequent
intervals. Early reports discredited genetic influence1s6,
complication. The anterior capsule becomes fibrosed and
hypothyroidism, and nutritional influences (vitamin A
covered with pigment nests and, in the late stages, a dense
 and riboflavin1s7, 158) on ERU. However, in humans and
yellow-white cataract develops. Subluxation of the lens
mice the interaction of genetic factors with immunologic
may 0ccur {11.59). The iris is darker than normal and the
granula iridica are often missing.
antigens. In humans, specific major histocompatability
Vitreal opacities and bands may be visible (11.59) if
antigen HLA-B27 has been associated with certain forms
the lens is not opaque and the retina may be detached
due to traction bands. Peripapillary scars of varying
ue suisisau sioui aie sam ogsashoy hof pesodoid
degrees are the most common fundus lesions. Blindness is
horses to recurrent uveitis and  Appaloosas are
frequently due to optic nerve atrophy that is manifest as
disproportionately represented (25% of cases)160, 161.
a pale optic nerve with decreased or no visible retinal
vessels (see Chapter 14, p.401). While the clinical
disease compared to 36% of non-Appaloosas160.
an ue Aewd aq on sradde iensn awous
Onchocerca cervicalis microfilaria have long been
uveitis, Deeg et al.f54a, on examining histopathologic
thought to be a major cause of ERU. O. cervicalis
specimens of ERU at various stages of clinical disease,
microfilaria pass from the lid to the conjunctiva and cornea
found retinal changes in all eyes and the histopathology
and then into the eye with the episcleral blood vessels. Dead
was similar whether the eye had clinically active
larvae are thought to incite the inflammation rather than live
inflammation or was quiescent.
larvae.
The infection in horses is similar to the
onchocerciasis in humans that is endemic in parts of Africa.
Causes of ERU
The importance of O. cervicalis may vary with geographic
There are multiple etiologies for uveitis in the horse.
 region: the incidence of O. cervicalis larvae in England is too
 Trauma and deep corneal infection, which are common
low to acoount for ERU, while in the US it is found in
causes of equine uveitis, will not be included in this
discussion. ERU is most commonly manifested as an
primary site of microflaria localization in the eye is at the
anterior uveitis but it may be a panuveitis or be restricted
lmbus and adjacent cornea and conjunctiva, which has
tothe posterior uvea and optic nerve.
Itisa
resulted in attempts to make a diagnosis by snip biopsies at
 nongranulomatous uveitis that usually becomes bilateral
 the lateral bulbar conjunctiva167. The routine use of broad-
and it is relapsing in nature. Histopathologically, it has been
spectrum dewormers has markedly decreased O. cervicalis
suggested that the findings of infiltration of lymphocytes
 as a major cause of uveitis.
and plasma cells into the nonpigmented ciliary epithelium,
Leptospira spp. have been associated with uveitis in
a thick acellular hyaline membrane adherent to the inner
the horse experimentally and naturally. Leptospira spp.
11.57
11.58
11.59
11.57 Chronic ERU that is presented with
11.58 Appaloosa with ERU that has resulted
11.59 Chronic equine recurrent uveitis that
multiple posterior synechiae.
in phthisis bulbi. The opposite eye had
has resulted in posterior luxation of the lens 
glaucoma.
(arrow). Note the very dark iris and 
membranes in the anterior vitreous.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
321
Immune-mediated responses are an important factor
although the usual method of diagnosis has been high
in combination with one or more of the other factors
 serum titers or high aqueous humor titers. Wollanke
discussed. Delayed hypersensitivity to an antigen
et al168 were able to culture Leptospira interrogans
{L. interrogans) is currently thought to be the process
from 52% of vitrectomy samples from horses with
involved with ERU183 but the inciting antigen might be
chronic ERU, whereas all normal control samples were
different in various regions. The histopathology, presence
negative on culture. Finding a higher titer in the aqueous
of a predominance of T-cells in the cellular reaction,
humor than in the serum is presumptive evidence of a
expression of major histocompatibility complex antigens
in ocular cellsi83, and elevated antibody levels against
L. interrogans serovar pomona resulted in ocular
inflammation after a lag of 1 year or later in 61 % of the
findings compatible with an immune-mediated process.
eyes174. While in many geographic areas of the US
The recurrences may be associated with persistence of
leptospiral titers indicate that L. interrogans plays a
antigen, re-exposure to an antigen in the presence of a
major role in recurrent uveitis, in England the
leaky blood-aqueous humor barrier, or acquired
prevalence is so low that it is not considered a probable
sensitivity to autoantigens through either alteration or
the
 geographic
region.
InGermany, it is
L.
As with other species, a combination of infectious
grippotyphosa (no L. pomona is found)i76. In the Us, L.
 agents and immunological mechanisms is the favorite
pomona and L. bratislava are the common serovars
current etiology of ERU. It is probable that the
associated with uveitis.
condition has a different primary cause in different
geographic areas.
panuveitis in a pony; the organism was isolated from the
anterior chamber. This may be an additional cause for
Miscellaneous uveitis syndromes in various species
 recurrent uveitis in endemic areas for Lyme disease177.
 Neonatal horses with Rhodococcus equi or other
Brucella abortus has been suggested as a cause of
bacterial septicemia frequently develop dramatic
recurrent uveitis but surveys of normal and affected
bilateral uveitis characterized by large fibrin clots
 horses could not find a correlation178, 179.
and hypopyon in the anterior chamber {11.60). The
Streptococcus equi was suggested as a possible cause
foals are systemically ill and the uveitis usually
of an outbreak of peripapillary chorioretinitis in horses
improves dramatically with systemic antibiotics,
because of an earlier outbreak of strangles. Whether the
topical corticosteroids, and atropine. Intraocular
condition  resulted   from 
direct infection or a
injections of 25-50 μg tPA will rapidly lyse the 
anterior chamber fibrin clot and synechia.
Streptococcus spp. are not thought to play a significant
Uveitis secondary to a keratitis is very common in the
role in ERU.
horse and may be associated with ulcers infected with
 Strongyle infection (Strongylus vulgaris) has been
bacteria or fungi, comeal abscesses from bacteria or
postulated to have a role in ERU. The addition of
fungi, and sterile keratouveitis from trauma or
phenothiazine and riboflavin to the ration prevented
unknown causes {see Chapter 10, p.241). Topical
outbreaks in a herd but no controls were used in the
steroid therapy is not administered with infectious or
feeding triali81 Viruses such as adenovirus and influenza
 suspected infectious keratouveitis, rather the uveitis is
virus have been clinically implicated in uveitis182.
treated with systemic NSAIDs and topical atropine.
11.60 A foal with rhodococcal joint infection that has resulted in a
11.60
bilateral uveitis with marked fibrin exuda tion.
322
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 The rabbit has a phacoclastic form of uveitis that is
11.61
spontaneous and not associated with trauma or
swollen mature cataracts. The syndrome is
characterized by granuloma in the anterior chamber
and typical signs of uveitis usually in a young dwarf
rabbit. The microsporidium Encepbalitozoon cuniculi
is thought to associated with this syndrome, based on
compatible186, elevated titers of E. cuniculi, and DNA
of E. curiculi87, The pathogenesis is unknown.
Therapy is topical glucocorticoids to quiet the eye,
followed by lens remova188 and albendazole 15-30
 Uveitis in cattle is common with bacterial septicemic
diseases such as thromboembolic
 meningoencephalitis (11.61), listeriosis, neonatal
septicemia {11.62), and herpesvirus diseases such as
[BR (10.59, 11.63) and MCF (10.60). An idiopathic
11.61 A downer cow with infectious thromboembolic
anterior and posterior uveitis was described in a herd
meningoencephalitis due to Hemophitus somnus. The pupil is
of Holstein cows that affected 65% of the herd. No
 constricted, the cornea is diffusely edematous, and hypopyon is present.
husbandry problems or infectious disease agents
Could be identified with extensive testing189
11.62
Diagnosis of the cause of uveitis
Anterior uveitis may be unilateral or bilateral, endogenous
or exogenous in origin, acute or chronic in course, and
granulomatous or nongranulomatous. All these factors
may provide diagnostic clues to direct the search for an
etiology.  A  t
thorough history and general physical
examination should be performed to search for a definitive
diagnosis. Bilateral uveitis is often a manifestation of
systemic disease that may have a guarded prognosis, so as
much documentation as possible is desired.
Laterality
Systemic disease should be considered when both eyes
are involved, although systemic diseases do not always
result in bilateral uveitis, e.g. ICH in the dog. With
unilateral disease the clinician should rule out something
unique to that eye, such as trauma or neoplasia. Bilateral
11.62 A calf with E. cofi scours that developed diffuse corneal ederma
BB shot or multicentric neoplasia such as lympho-
and anterior uveitis.
sarcoma are exceptions of traumatic and neoplastic
causes of uveitis that may be bilateral.
11.63
Granufomatous versus nongranulomatous
These are pathologic descriptive terms that are subject to
 error when based on clinical findings, and they change
with time. The finding of large or *mutton fat' KPs is the
main clinical diagnostic criterion for granulomatous
uveitis (11.39, 11.40). Focal proliferative lesions may
also be present on the iris surface but are not as
consistent a finding as large KPs (11.51). An additional
limitation of this differentiation is the changing nature of
the inflammation over the course of the disease.
Despite these limitations, the terminology persists and,
particularly in the cat, may narrow down the etiology. In
the dog, defining the nature of the inflammation is not as 
helpful in finding the cause, although a nonviral etiology
such as systemic fungal infection should be considered
 more strongly with granulomatous inflammation.
11.63 Acute bilateral anterior uveitis in a young cow.
Ocufar centesis with aqueous humor testing
 characterized by miosis, thickening of the iris, and peripheral
   o  s n 
 corneal neovascularization. Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
diagnosing sepsis, either bacterial or fungal. Aqueous 
was the suspected cause.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
323
humor centesis is easily performed but may yield false-
agglutination and the indirect hemagglutination tests are
negative findings due to the fast turnover of aqueous
not as sensitive and specific as the ELISA technique for
humor. Vitreous cultures are much more reliable for
detection of T. gondi-specifc IgG and IgM192 An IgM and
cultures but the procedure is also potentially more
IgG antibody titer ≥1:64 has been considered positive but
traumatic to the eye. In general, cytology is not very
in regions where the titers are ubiquitous, most clinicians
informative except in sepsis or neoplasia.
require higher titers for diagnosing toxoplasmosis. Elevated
PCR testing, looking for minute quantities of DNA,
 IgM titers are considered evidence of active, acute infection.
may become a more widespread diagnostic aid in the
Additional tests for systemic mycoses may be
future. Antibody titers can also be performed on the
performed if the initial tests are not diagnostic. Not all
aqueous humor and, when compared with serum titers,
cats with FeLV complex ocular manifestations are
viremic, so a negative test does not rule this out.
Goldmann-Witmer coefficient or C value theoretically
indicates local antibody production if the levels are above
Imaging
1191. The C value for a specific antibody is:
Radiology, ultrasound, CT, and MRI may be useful when
both searching for a cause for uveitis and giving a
specific IgG in aqueous humor
×
total IgG in serum
prognosis for vision. Special imaging is particularily
 specific IgG in serum
total IgG in
valuable when the ocular media is so hazy that direct
aqueous humor
observations cannot be made and it can diagnose lens-
induced uveitis, trauma, neoplasia, and iris cysts.
Even with high C values, caution is recommended in
Imaging is also very important in determining a
interpreting active toxoplasmosis infection.
prognosis for vision based on posterior segment changes
such as retinal detachment.
Biopsy
Biopsy of the iris to aid diagnosis (particularly with
Diagnosis of ERU
neoplasia) can be performed by aspiration or excision.
Diagnosis of uveitis is usually not difficult but whether it is
Vacuuming the surface of a lesion without puncture may
ERU or from an exogenous cause such as trauma or exten-
yield diagnostic cytology without the risk of hemorrhage.
sion from corneal pathology may not always be obvious
 Skin biopsy may also be indicated for VKH syndrome
when the uveitis is unilateral. Bilateral pathology usually
and lymph node biopsy for lymphoma.
        s
recurrent bouts of pain and epiphora. If the condition is acute
Physical examination
without evidence of primary cormeal pathology such as a
Clinicians are often quick to resort to expensive laboratory
deep abscess, a diagnosis of ERU is probably correct.
testing before obtaining a thorough history and performing
Testing is often restricted to serum and perhaps aqueous
a basic physical examination. Physical examination should
humor Leptospira spp, titers. Leptospirosis is ideally
look for a source of sepsis, other systemic signs, and
 diagnosed in individual animals by obtaining aqueous
involvement of other systems. For example, dermal
humor and serum samples and demonstrating local ocular
 depigmentation may be associated with VKH syndrome,
antibody production193. If multiple animals are to be
peripheral lymphadenopathy with lymphoma, petechiae
ti ia iaq s oi p ansn si ust pxa
with vasculopathies and blood dyscrasia, and altered
were unable to correlate positive aqueous humor cultures
kidney size or thyroid size with hypertension.
of Leptospira spp. with serology; however, Wollanke et
al.168 found that of the horses from which Leptospira spp.
Blood tests
were isolated from the eye, 76% had a four-fold increase in
Serology provides presumptive evidence of infection and
titer from the vitreous compared with the serum. Wollanke
 should demonstrate either very high or rising titers.
et al.194a later contradicted this when they compared vitreal
Brucella
canis,
toxoplasmosis,
leishmaniasis,
Leptospira titers with results of vitreal cultures in ERU eyes
leptospirosis, systemic mycoses, tick-borne rickettsial
in a control group and cultured L. interrogans from 52%
diseases, borreliosis, FIP, and FIV are a few of the
of the ERU eyes and none of the controls. The mean vitreal
etiologies searched for in this manner.
titers in ERU eyes was 1:1,332 and the mean serum titer
When combined with a sterile centesis, antinuclear
was 1:186. The conclusion was that Leptospira persists in
antibodies (ANA), rheumatoid factor, and lupus
ERU eyes and the ratio between the vitreal and the serum
erythematosus cells may occasionally indicate a diagnosis
titers may be less than a four-fold difference. In the future,
of immune-mediated uveitis. While many causes of uveitis
PCR testing for Leptospira spp. in aqueous humor will
 are thought to have an immune component, the diagnosis 
probably be utilized.
is usually presumptive based on ruling out other etiologies
 and the response to immunosuppressive therapy.
 Past dogma was that Leptospira spp. organisms were
Complete blood count (CBC) and chemistry profile do
not present in the eye at the time of ERU signs and
not usually contribute to the diagnosis in the dog, unless
the disease was an immune response. However, there
related to a systemic disease such as infection, blood
is mounting evidence that Leptospira spp. organisms
dyscrasia, or meta bolic disease. A CBC, chemistry profile,
are still present in the eye at the time of the ERU.
Toxoplasma gondi titer, FIV and FIP titers, and FeLV test
are the initial recommendations for diagnostic work up of
Conjunctival snip biopsies can be taken from the
 most cases of feline uveitis. The immunosuppression
lateral bulbar region and examined for O. cervicalis
produced by FIV and FeLV may make cats susceptible to
larvae. The tissue is placed in saline and allowed to warm
mixed infections with FIP and T. gondi. The testing
on the microscope light for a few minutes and then
examined for motile larvae.
324
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
 In the author's experience, looking for microfilaria
Nonspecific uveitis therapy
in conjunctival biopsies has a low test yield in
Atropine or mydriatics. Atropine is used with uveitis
horses with ERU and is rarely performed today.
therapy to minimize posterior synechiae. It is also
indicated for the relief of pain from ciliary spasms.
Therapy (all species)
Treatment may have to be administered several times a
Specific therapy
day and combinations of atropine and phenylephrine
In the horse with a severe, painful, acute uveitis, the first step
may give maximum mydriasis. In chronic cases with
may be to place a SPL unit to administer topical medications.
broad synechiae, the pupil cannot usually be mobilized
Specific therapy is often not feasible. Some of the infectious
despite using frequent therapy, utilizing concentrations of
auses of uveitis may have zoonotic potential, e.g. canine
 >1% atropine, and combining with other mydriatics such
brucellosis and canine leptospirosis, and the risk to the owner
 as phenylephrine and cocaine.
should be fully explained before recommending therapy.
Even with specific therapy, eliminating the organism from
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). tPA may be used
with acute uveitis to dissolve large fibrin clots in the
long-term therapy and repeat testing. Systemic or
anterior chamber or break down early synechiae. When
subconjunctival and topical antibiotics are indicated if a
dealing with endogenous uveitis as opposed to traumatic
bacterial cause is suspected, e.g. from a perforating injury, or
uveitis, it may be necessary to give repeated injections at
is known to be present, e.g. brucellosis or tick-borne diseases,
approximately 5-day intervals, because of an ongoing
but often antibiotics are used indiscriminately. Despite the
inflammatory process. In small animals, 25 pg is injected
rmle of Leptospira spp. in ERU, intraocular antibiotics have
into the anterior chamber, usually using a 30 gauge
not been a critical or routine part of therapy, although this
needle, without sedation, after application of a topical
 o p se as a a u  
anesthetic; in the horse, S0 μg is administered after
expensive for use in the horse and in the author's experience
topical anesthetic application in the standing sedated
have not made an observable clinical improvement.
 animal, often with a dramatic response.
Topical antiviral agents do not penetrate the cornea.
 Of the systemic antiviral agents there is only anecdotal
Glucocorticoid drugs. Glucocorticoids are indicated in
experience with famcyclovir, and this is applicable
sterile uveitis or uveitis in which the immune-mediated
mainly to DNA virus in cats.
response is thought to be a significant factor. Topical,
 Antifungal agents such as systemic amphotericin-B or
subconjunctival, and systemic routes, either individually
imidazole therapy are used  for systemic mycoses.
or together, may be indicated depending on the severity.
Subconjunctival  amphotericin-B may  be administered,
Despite the poor prognosis for systemic disease, the
although it is irritating If concurrent systemic therapy is
granulomatous uveitis of cats with FeLV and FIP is
being administered, suboonjunctival administration is of
responsive to glucocorticoids. If therapy is instituted
questionable benefit. Intraocular injection of amphotericin-B
after extensive synechiae formation, the IOP may become
should be reserved for blind eyes since it is so toxic it is
elevated as the inflammation subsides, and glaucoma
debatable whether there is a safe dose (see Chapter 2, p.41).
therapy may be necessary.
Hendrix et al.19s could find no difference in the number of
 Injection of subconjunctival repositol steroids should 
Blastorryces dermatitidis organisms found on histopathology
be given only when the clinician is confident that the
of the eyes between itraconazole-treated and nontreated
aui pue ssaooud jeauny 1o leaoeq odas p iou si saan
affected dogs. This argues for enucleation of eyes with
cornea is not ulcerated. Subconjunctival repositol steroid
blastomycosis to remove a nidus of infection and to try to
administration is a common method to treat ERU in both
avoid relapse. In general, systemic glucocorticoid therapy has
the chronic and acute stages. Methylprednisolone or
been considered to be contraindicated with systemic mycotic
triamcinolone can be given subconjunctivally in horses
o  si  uo pa   u sun
(20-40 mg) and small animals (10-20 mg).
blastomycoses that were treated with topical and systemic
prednisiolone in addition to systemic antifungal therapy. The
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Systemic non-
duration of the oral predniolone therapy ranged from 2
steroidal therapy with aspirin (25 mg/kg), butazolidin, or
weeks to 8.5 months. All eyes with mild to moderate lesions
pue uid suouoo u juou ae uxn
and 50% of those with severe ocular lesions were visual at
inflammation in the horse. Aspirin has been advocated
their last examination. The use of systemic glucocorticoids
for daily use for months to prevent relapse that is
dd not adversely affect the systemic outcome. This success
common  with endogenous immune-mediated uveitis
rate is significantly better than previous reports on ocular
such as ERU. In the author's experience, aspirin therapy
blastomycoses and the visual outcomel96b, 196c.
has not been successful in preventing relapsing episodes.
Antifilarial treatment for O. cervicalis should be
In the dog, systemic NSAIDs, commonly carprofen
administered after the inflammation has subsided, as
(0.5 mg/kg q12h), are usedi97 Topical NSAIDs are often 
used to supplement topical corticosteroids.
 To minimize this, repositol corticosteroids are initiated
before treatment. Ivermectin in a single 0.2 mg/kg i.m.
Other
 immunosuppressive agents. Severe ocular
dose is very effective in removing dermal microfilaria for
inflammation may be nonresponsive or incompletely
about 6 months196. The author has, on occasion, noted
responsive to corticosteroids. Patients with VKH
uveitis after routine deworming with ivermectin.
syndrome may not be controlled with corticosteroids and
 In cats with positive T. gondii titers, clindamycin
 treatment with systemic azathioprine (2 mg/kg q24h for
(12.5 mg/kg p.0. q12h) for 14-21 days may be indicated,
2 weeks, followed by 1 mg/kg q48h) may be necessary.
although this treatment is controversial if there are no
systemic signs.
and azathioprine; the steroids are tapered off after 3-4
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
325
weeks as the inflammation diminishes and the
 Phthisis bulbi from cyclitic membranes fa
azathioprine blood levels have plateaued. These patients
fibrovascular membrane passing from one side of the
should have a complete blood count and platelet count
ciliary body to the other) that detach the ciliary body
performed at biweekly intervals.
and disorganize the ocular anatomy.
 Experimentally, vitreal implants containing cyclo-
 sporine have been used to control inflammation with
Prognosis (all species)
ERU and experimental immune-mediated uveitis. These 
The prognosis for uveitis may vary. Chronic recurrent
implants may deliver therapeutic levels of drugs for
uveitis, such as ERU and VKH syndrome in dogs, should
always have a guarded to unfavorable prognosis for long-
mercially available.
term vision. Horses with recurrent uveitis or evidence of
prior episodes are considered unsound. The Appaloosa has
Patching. Patching the eye and/or keeping the animal in
a poorer prognosis than other breeds for maintaining
a dark environment are supportive measures for acute
vision161, Dwyer and Kalsow161 reported vision loss in one
uveitis. In small animals, patching is rarely performed,
or both eyes in 44-56% of all horses with uveitis. Blindness
especially when frequent therapy is to be administered. In
occurred in one or both eyes in 36-46% of non-Appaloosa
large animals, masks are available to protect the eye and
breeds and in 68-81% of Appaloosas160.(
Of horses
avoid self-trauma (11.64).
seronegative for leptospirosis, 24 52% became blind in one
or both eyes, while 59% of seropositive horses were blind
Surgical therapy. In Germany, investigators have been
in one or both eyes. If the horse was seropositive for L.
performing partial vitrectomies on selected ERU cases.
pomona, then vision loss in one or both eyes occurred in
Vitrectomy has produced a significant decrease in relapse,
100% of Appaloosas and 51% of non-Appaloosas161.
although the visual prognosis has not altered, usually
Obvious uveitis associated with systemic mycoses also
because of cataract formation and retinal detachment200,
 carries an unfavorable prognosis, although focal granulomas
201. The goal of vitrectomy is to reduce or eliminate pain
may heal. Uveitis associated with penetrating trauma also
 and recurrent attacks and not to preserve vision. Brooks
should be given a guarded prognosis, especially if the lens is
et al.22 reported very poor results in horses in Florida,
damaged and not surgically removed. Uveitis in cats
with cataract formation occurring in 46% and one-third
associated with FIP and FeLV carries a guarded prognosis for
of these becoming complete cataracts. The lack of
sight and an unfavorable prognosis for long-term survival.
experience with the technique and the preponderance of
uaaq aaeu keu sanis aui ul paaa esoieddy au
responsible for the poor results. The proposed beneficial
ALTERED AQUEOUS HUMOR
effect was to remove immunological memory cells from
the vitreous that may be driving the ongoing
 As discussed under the signs of uveitis, breakdown of
inflammation. Pragmatically, the procedure is successful
 the blood-aqueous humor barrier produces a dramatic
 in minimizing relapse, although it is difficult to justify in
increase in the protein content of the aqueous humor. In
 visual eyes that are controlled with medical therapy.
the milder foms this produces a flare', but in more
 In all cases of uveitis, secondary glaucoma should be
severe breaches a fibrin clot of variable proportions may
 monitored and controlled with medical therapy.
be formed (11.35, 11.54, 11.60). Variable degrees of
 cellular exudation are often found with inflammation
Prevention (all species)
and, when severe, results in the accumulation of
An equine vaccine for leptospirosis is not available but
leukocytes in the anterior chamber (hypopyon) (11.50,
many practitioners in high risk areas are utilizing the
11.61). These changes may have a degree of hemorrhage
bovine vaccine. Anaphylaxis may occur with the bovine
associated with them (11.35). Fibrin clots may be treated
vaccine so it is not without risk. The efficacy of vaccines
by intraocular tPA as previously discussed and
in preventing ERU or relapsing episodes is unknown.
hypopyon is treated by treating the cause.
Hendrix et al.203 immunized horses with ERU with a
vaccine that included six serovars of Leptospira
interrogans  and  were   unable  to  
 demonstrate
a
statistically significant difference in the number of uveitis
11.64 Commercial
11.64
episodes after vaccination. No significant adverse effects
face mask for a
were noted in the vaccinated horses.
horse that provides
In animals with perforating trauma and lens injury,
 protection from self
lens removal in the acute stage to avoid phacoclastic
pue ewne
uveitis is indicated if vitreal hemorrhage, retinal
minimizes
 detachment, and scleral rupture are not present204.
photophobia. It is
usually used with
Sequelae (all species)
 subpalpebral
· Interstitial keratitis with corneal scarring and/or
lavage.
endothelial dysfunction with edema.
Complicated cataracts.
 Posterior synechiae may result in a fixed pupil,
irregular pupil, and iris bombe.
 Secondary glaucoma may result from synechiae.
 Iris color changes {usually darker).
 Prolonged hypotony.
326
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
· Lipids may occur in the anterior chamber and cause a
Dog
sudden diffuse gray-white opacity that fills the anterior
The average age of dogs with ocular melanoma is 9 years
chamber {11.65). The condition is usually unilateral
at the time of diagnosis. Anterior uveal melanomas arise
and occurs in animals that have concurrent
from the anterior surface of the iris or from the ciliary
hyperlipemia, either from ingestion of a high fat meal
body and are usually raised, pigmented masses, although
or from a metabolic problem20s. It may be confused 
amelanotic melanomas 0ccur {11.66-11.68). Melanoma
with a diffuse corneal opacity or a cataract with a
of the iris will be noted earlier as it invades the anterior
dilated pupil. However, with a focal light or slit lamp
chamber and distorts the pupil {11.66). Melanoma of the
the opacity can be localized to the anterior chamber.
ciliary body is usually discovered at a later stage after it has
Lipids are thought to gain access to the anterior
invaded into the vitreous, forward into the iris and
chamber from an underlying anterior uveitis with
iridocorneal angle, or through the sclera {11.69). Many
break down of the blood-aqueous humor barrier. The
apparent iris masses actually have expanded from the
author has observed precipitation of glaucoma by
ciliary body. Ocular melanomas may act very aggressively
lipids in those patients predisposed by the presence of a
locally with rapid growth and invasion of adjacent
closed angle. A rare complication of aqueous laden
structures such as the sclera and orbit (11.69).
lipid may be an xanthogranuloma. This is an
Efforts to predict the biologic behavior of canine
intraocular mass of macrophages, laden with lipids,
melanomas have resulted in conflicting reports. Bussanich et
that result in a secondary glaucoma20sa, Miniature
al.216 reviewed the literature and found only seven
Schnauzers are probably predisposed due to their
metastases in 190 cases of reported intraocular melanoma.
 propensity for hyperlipidemia and diabetes mellitus.
While melanomas frequently destroy the eye with their
Centesis of the anterior chamber will produce a
growth and invade the sclera and the orbit, it is clear that
moderate clearing and visualization of the interior
<5% metastasize. Classification of melanomas by the
 structures. Therapy is restriction of dietary fats, topical
Callender system (used with human ocular melanomas) to
corticosteroids to treat the anterior uveitis, and
predict biologic behavior has been controversial. This
systemic heparin {10 IU/kg s.c.).
u lo jo adai aun Aq seuoueu saaia uonesyssep
 increasing anaplastic characteristics; spindle A, spindle B,
epithelioid, and mixed cell type. Many authors have
NEOPLASIA OF THE IRIS AND CILIARY BODY
mnsidered the histopathologic characteristics of Callander's
Primary tumors
Introduction/etiology
and secondary glaucoma the only predictors of metastatic
The anterior uvea is the most common origin of primary
intraocular tumors in all species of domestic animals.
mitotic index to be the only reliable predictor of metastasis.
Primary intraocular tumors are not common and, as a result,
Giuliano et al.222 studied the survival rate of canine ocular
extensive follow-up data to determine epidemiologic
melanoma patients compared to age-matched controls and
statistics has only recenmtly been forthcoming. In the dog,
found no correlation to tumor extension, tumor size, or
melanoma is about twice as common as all the other primary
mitotic index, although the malignant melanoma group had
intraocular tumors combined Adenocarcinoma and aden-
a shorter survival time than the benign melanoma
oma are the only other primary intraocular tumors occurring
(melanocytoma) group. Clinically, it seems prudent to treat
those tumors with a history of rapid growth and invasion of
including hemangiosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, fibrosar-
adjacent structures more aggressively, i.e. with enucleation.
 mma, ganglioglioma, medulloepithelioma, ganglioneuro-
Bilateral melanomas have been described in two
blastoma, histiocytic sarcoma, schwannoma, osteosarcoma,
reports: one was metastatic to the opposite eye (multiple
retinoblastoma, and hemangioma210-215c.
 systemic metastasis)23 and the other was thought to be
11.65
11.66
11.67
11.65 A dog presented with acute unilateral
 11.66 Iris melanoma in a dog. This is an ideal
11.67 Melanoma in a dog that involves the
opacification of the eye due to lipids in the
candlidate for laser ablation of the tumor.
iris, but originated in the ciliary body.
anterior chamber. This is easily confused with
corneal edema or a large cataract.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
327
 primary in both eyes224. Breed predisposition for benign
pigmented patches develop that eventually coalesce and form
melanocytoma and malignant melanoma includes mixed
a diffuse thickened pigmented iris (11.72-11.74). Feline 
breeds，1
Labrador Retrievers, （
Golden   
Retrievers,
melanomas also differ from canine melanomas in that they
 Schnauzers, and Cocker Spaniels22. Inherited melanoma
that occurred at a young age (most between 1-2 years)
of older cats (average 11 years) and in one study, 63% of cats
 has been described in the Labrador Retriever225s.
with anterior uveal melanomas died from metastatic
Adenocarcinomas and adenomas are typically pink
dsease231. Duncan and Peiffer232 reported a 56% mortality
masses arising behind the iris from the ciliary body or
rate and found malignancy correlated with the mitotic index.
invading the iridocorneal and peripheral iris (11.70). Many
In a survival study of feline ocular melanomas, the melanoma
adenomas may contain pigment and melanomas may be
group as a whole died earlier than controls but when
amelanotic {11.68), making it difficult clinically to
differentiate epithelial tumors from sarcomas. Labrador and
Golden Retrievers are susceptible to epithelial tumors226 as
well as melanomas. The biologic behavior of epithelial
11.68 Amelanotic
11.68
 melanoma of the
 in that while often locally invasive, even carcinomas appear
diliary body in a
to metastasize only infrequently207,209, 226,22
German Shepherd
 Dog that extended 
Cat
 anteriorly into the 
In the cat, intraocular melanomas typically arise from the iris
iris and anterior
as flat, diffuse to multifocal pigmented lesions, rather than
chamber. The type
 nodular lesions228 Initially, feline iris melanoma appears as a
of tumor was
focal, flat, dark spot on the iris that is difficult to differentiate
difficult to diagnose
from a benign nevus or a senile pigment change (11.71).
even with aqueous
With progression, the lesion not only enlarges but multifocal
humor centesis and 
 eventual biopsy.
11.69
11.70
11.71
11.69 Extraocular extension of an intraocular
11.70 Ciliary body adenocarcinoma in a
11.71 Early diffuse iris melanoma in a cat.
melanoma in a Norwegian Elkhound. This 
Labrador Retriever.
should be differentiated from a more benign
epibulbar melanoma.
11.72
11.73
11.74
11.72 Moderately advanced diffuse iris
11.73 Advanced iris melanoma in a cat that
11.74 Advanced iris melanoma in a cat that
melanoma in a cat.
 has resulted in secondary glaucoma.
 is viewed obliquely. The lesion has nodular a5
well as diffuse characteristics.
328
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
stratified according to ocular involvement, the less the
advanced systemic signs, while in the cat the ocular signs
invasion of various ocular tissues, the better the survival.
may be prodromal to the systemic signs. The ocular signs
Thus, early enucleation when the tumor is confined to the iris 
are mainly in the anterior uvea and manifest as bilateral
 improves the survival to that of controls233
uveitis, often with the complication of secondary
Experimentally, feline sarcoma virus {FeSV) injected
glaucoma 11.48, 11.49, 11.52, 11.53)109,2ss, 256,
intraocularly causes disease similar to feline intraocular
 Metastasis of tumors to the anterior or posterior uveal
melanoma234 The experimental model has a higher rate of
tract in the dog and cat is a relatively rare occurrence but
metastasis if the eye is enucleated, as is the case in human
a number of case reports have documented the
melanomas, which raised queries on the advisability of this
phenomenon. Adenocarcinomas from a variety of sources
procedure in the
veterinary
clinical setting23s.
have been reported metasta sizing to the eye in the dog and
Kalishman et al.233 re-enforced that early enucleation in
 cat253, 257-261. Several squamous cell carcinomas have been
the cat improves survival but did not comment on whether
late enucleation hastens metastasis. In the author's
pheochromocytoma, and malignant angioendothelio-
experience, cats with intraocular melanoma are FeLV
 negative. Stiles et al.236, however, found FeLV-FeSV DNA
have been described in the eye predominantly in
in three of 36 melanomas using PCR, the significance of
Rottweilers, Retrievers, and Bernese Mountain Dogs. They
which is unknown, but it tends to bring clinical relevance
were thought to be metatstatic to the eye, as most dogs
to the experimental FesV model of melanomas.
died relatively shortly after enucleation. Without specific
Feline intraocular melanomas arising posterior to the
stains on histopathology they look similar to amelanotic
 iris have been described and, while multifocal, they are
melanomas, which carry a good prognosis for survival. In
characterized by round pigmented cells that are not
paraffin-embedded tissue, the finding of CD-18-postive
typically anaplastic as is found in iridal melanomas237
cells with no reactivity to melan-A was indicative of
Typically, these tumors are late in their presentation and
histiocytic sarcomas215a
may have metastasized.
Bilateral metastatic lesions have been observed with
 In the cat, post-traumatic spindle cell sarcoma has been
transmissible
venereal
tumor,
hemangiosarcoma,
 described. Trauma usually occurred years earlier and
squamous cell carcinoma, transitional cell carcinoma,
resulted in blind or phthisical eyes. The differentiation of
 seminoma, and pulmonary carcinoma264, 269-273 In the
the tumor may vary from osteosarcoma to an
author's experience, hemangiosarcomas have been the
most common metastatic tumor to the eye (11.76) and
in eyes with opaque media, the tumor is usually not
usually manifest in the posterior uvea, mimicking
discovered until it fills the globe. No instances of
hemorrhage (see Chapter 14, p.401).
metastases have been described but aggressive local
invasion of the sclera and the optic nerve may occur241.
Clinical signs of ocular neoplasia
Most cases have rupture of the lens capsule and loss of lens
● A mass on the iris or protruding into the pupil
substance and it has been speculated that the lens
region from behind the iris is present that may or
epithelium may be the origin of the tumor242, This is an
 may not be pigmented (11.66).
argument for the enucleation of blind eyes with opaque
Hyphema.
media or eyes that are phthisical. Cats with spindle cell
 Secondary glaucoma.
 sarcoma are negative for FeSV and FeLV243.
 Progressive irial color change, usually an increase in
pigmentation.
Horse
Diagnosis
au jo maax y 9rztsaeia ut Ausuupand punog
 Diagnosis of an intraocular neoplasia may be obvious if
literature found only 12 reported cases and six possible
visualized as a mass protruding from the ciliary body or
additional cases247. Ten of 12 cases where coat color was
iris.
However, the lesion may be masked by
known were gray horses and, thus, other dermal
hemorrhage, uveitis, or secondary glaucoma. In the
melanomas may coexist with ocular melanomas. Equine
past, the presence of a tumor when the clear media was
ocular melanoma appears to originate from the anterior
opaque was usually made after enucleation, but
uvea and, based on the limited data, the cells appear
utrasound now allows an inexpensive and rapid
histologically to have a low malignant potential (11.75).
 method for evaluating these eyes274.
Medulloepithelioma is a rare tumor that has been
The type of tumor cannot be determined with
observed in horses and dogs, arising from the ciliary
certainty unless cytology, biopsy, or enucleation is
performed. FNA of the lesion may be a practical method
from the nonpigmented ciliary epithelium or from
for making a definitive diagnosis if representative tissue
undifferentiated cells that form the inner layer of the
is obtained27s. Vacuuming the surface of iridal lesions
primitive optic cup. The cells form tubular cords that,
will  1
minimize the  risk of hemorrhage (11.77).
when cut on cross-section, form rosettes; in the older
Hemorrhage and seeding of the tumor along the needle
literature they..
were
often erroneously called
 tract are possible complications276
retinoblastomas2s2.
For prognostic reasons, primary intraocular neoplasia
 should be differentiated from metastatic neoplasia, as the
Secondary tumors
latter disease has a grave prognosis. Epibulbar neoplasia
Introduction/etiology
should be differentiated from extraocular extension of
Lymphosarcoma is the most common secondary tumor of
intraocular neoplasia (11.69). Differentiation of primary
the uvea in the dog, cat, cow, and horse253 254. In the dog
from  metastatic
tumor is l
by l
history, physical
and horse, the ocular signs are usually accompanied by
examination, and histopathologic examination.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
329
Therapy
followed by systemic 5-fluorouracil in five dogs that were
Considering the relatively benign nature of most primary
diagnosed with ciliary body adenocarcinoma. Whether
 intraocular tumors in the dog, consideration should be given
the tumors excised were actually adenocarcinomas rather
[o jo Adeian lasel no uoisixa Aq uouanaui Aea oi
than adenomas was questioned and, consequently,
lesions in an attempt to save the eye. Both YAG and diode
chemotherapy may not have been necessary282.
lasering of canine ocular melanoma have been advocated277,
The ocular lesions of generalized lymphosarcoma may
a9 oi sieadde Adeiaul iasel ioy aiepipueo isaq aul'8z7
 dramatically regress with systemic therapy but often the
melanoma of the iris, which is accessible. Melanoma of the
secondary glaucoma has produced permanent blindness.
diliary body is usually larger by the time it is diagnosed and
Conversely, a worsening of the ocular condition has been
it cannot be lasered as effectively due to size and location.
 noted when medical therapy is given for transmissible
Minimal complications occur with smaller iris lesions that
venereal tumor This is presumably due to necrosis of
do not touch the cornea. Larger tumors of the ciliary body
metastatic tumor in the eye that stimulates a severe uveitis.
induce significant uveitis, hemorrhage risk, and some degree
In the cat, early focal iris melanomas or nevi may be
of cataract formation when lasered.
treated with laser ablation, although it is more
Cimetidine has been used successfully to treat or arrest
controversial due to the malignant nature of the tumors; the
dermal melanoma in three horses but it has not been tested
effectiveness of lasering has not been evaluated. Many
on ocular melanoma or in other domestic animals.
owners refuse permission to enucleate an eye that is quite
Cimetidine therapy involves multiple doses each day for
functional. Enucleation of eyes with spindle cell sarcoma
months, the optimal response is after 3-4 months of therapy.
should include as much of the optic nerve as possible.
The action of cimetidine is unknown but it is described as a
Histopathologic examination of the nerve should 
be
performed because of the tendency to spread up the nerve.
hypothesized that cimetidine acts by inhibiting histamine
activation of suppressor T-cells. Whether intraocular
Pseudotumors (granulomas)
mncentrations can be achieved is unknown.
Pink iridal masses of 1-2 clock hours or more in FeLV-
Surgical excision, with or without chemotherapy, has
negative cats have been presented to the author. Centesis
been advocated for ciliary body adenoma and, perhaps,
of the eye has not been diagnostic and the lesions have
adenocarcinoma280, 281)
Clerc281
achieved
good
regressed with steroid therapy, or by waiting 3-6 weeks.
functional and cosmetic results with surgical excision
The etiology is unknown (11.78, 11.79).
11.75
11.76
11.77
11.75 Early iris melanoma in a gray horse.
11.76 Metastatic hemangiosarcoma in the iris 
11.77 Cytology of a feline diffuse iris melanoma
of a dog.
 obtained by anterior chamber centesis and 
vacuuming the surface of the lesion.
11.78 A young adult cat with a raised iris mass
11.78
11.79
occupying the dorsolateral quadrant. The cat had
a history of a previous mass in the same location
that had spontaneously resolved. Aqueous humor
centesis and vacuuming of the surface were 
rondiagnostic. The cat was Felv negative.
11.79 Sarme lesion as 11.78 after 2 months of
topical glucocorticoid therapy.
330
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
REFERENCES
1 Martin C, Anderson B (1981) Ocular
15 Boydell P (1995) Idiopathic Horner's
28 Joyce JR, Martin J, Storts RW, Skow L
anatomy. In: Veterinary Ophthatmology.
 syndrome in the Golden Retriever.
{1990) Iridal hypoplasia (aniridia)
1st edn. K Gelatt (ed). Lea and Febiger,
Journa! of Smaff Anima! Practice
accompanied by limbic dermoids and
Philadelphia, pp. 12-121.
36:382-384.
ataracts in a group of related Quarter
2 Smith PJ, Pennea L, MacKay EO,
16 Thibos L, Levick W, Morstyn R (1980)
horses. Eqaine Veterinary Journa!
 Mames RN (1997) Identification of
Ocular pigmentation in white and
Supplement 10:26-28.
sclerotomy sites for posterior segrment
Siamese cats. Investigative
29 Saunders L, Fincher M (1951) Hereditary
surgery in the dog. Veterimary and
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
multiple eye defects in grade Jersey cows.
Comparative Ophthatmology
19:475-486.
Cornell Veterimarian 41:351-366.
7:180-189.
17 Smith R, Rudt L (1973) Ultrastructural
30 Crispin SM, Bazeley KJ, Long SE, Gould
3 Shively J, Epling G (1969) Fine structure
studies of the blood-aqueous barrier. 2.
DJ, Watts JA (2000) Two cases of
Of the canine eye: iris. Americam Journa!
The barrier to horseradish peroxidase
aniridia in Llanwenog sheep. Veterimary
of Veterimary Research 30:13-25.
in primates. American Journa! of
Record 147:364-365.
4 Donovan R, Carpenter R, Schepens C,
Ophthaimofogy 76:937-947.
31 Bamber R, Herdman E (1933)
Tolentino F (1974) Histology of the
18 Herrera HD, Duchene AG (1998)
Correlation between white coat colour,
normal Collie eye. I. Uvea. Anmafs of
Uveodermatological syndrome
blue eyes, and deafness in cats. Journa! of
 Ophthatmology 6:1175-1189.
(Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like
Genetics 27:407-413.
5 Purtscher E (1962) The large arteries of
syndrome) with generalized
32 Lucas D (1954) Ocular associations of
the canine iris. Berfiner wmd Munchener
depigmentation in a Dachsh und.
dappling in the coat colour of dogs.
Terarztfiche Wochenschrift 74:436-438.
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 1(1):47-51.
Journal of Comparative Pathology
6 Prince J, Diesem C, Eglitis I, Ruskell G
19 Fox M (1963) Postnatal ontogeny of
64:260-266.
(1960) The globe. In: Anatomy amd
the canine eye. Journa! of the American
33 Bergsma D, Brown K (1971) White fur,
Histology of the Eye and Orbit in
Veterinary Medicat Association
blue eyes, and deafness in the domestic
 Domestic Animais. CC Thomas,
143:968-974.
cat. Journa! of Heredity 62:171-185.
Springfield, pp. 13-42.
 20 Bellhorn RW, Barnett KC, Henkind P
34 Mair I (1973) Hereditary deafness in the
7 Yoshitomi T, Ito Y (1986) Double
(1971) Ocular colobomas in domestic
white cat. I. Hereditary and clinical
reciprocal innervations in dog iris
cats. Journa! of the American
aspects. Acta Otofaryngofica Supplement
sphincter and dilator muscles.
Veterinary Medicat Association
314:5-11.
Investigative Ophthaimology and Visua!
159:1015-1021.
35 Dausch D, Wegner W, Michaelis M,
Science 27:83-91.
 21 Gelatt K, Veith L (1970) Hereditary
 Reetz I (1977) Ophthalmologische
8 Yoshitomi T, Ito Y (1988) Effects of
multiple ocular anomalies in Australian
befunde in einer merlezucht. Deutsche
indomethacin and prostaglandins on the
Shepherd Dogs. Veterinary
Terarztfiche Wochenschrift 84:453-492.
 dog iris sphincter and dilator muscles.
Medicine/Smafl Anima! Clinician
36 Coulter D, Martin C, Alvarado T (1980)
Investigative Ophthamofogy and Visua!
65:39-42.
A cat with white fur and one blue eye.
Science 29:127-132.
22 Gelatt KN, McGill LD (1973) Clinical
California Veterimarian 9:11-14.
 9 de Lahunta A {1977) Visual systerm-special
characteristics of microphthalmia with
37 Creel D, Collier L, Leventhal A, Conlee J,
sormatic afferent system. In: Veterinary
colobomas of the Australian Shepherd
Prieur D (1982) Abnormal retinal
Neuroanatomy and Clinica! Neurology.
Dog. Journat of the American
projections in cats with the
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 266.
Veterinary Medicat Association
Chedaik-Higashi syndrome. Investigative
10 Lowenstein O, Murphy S, Loewenfeld I
162:393-396.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
(1953) Functional evaluation of the
 23 Gwin R, Wyman M, Lim D, Ketring K,
23:798-801.
pupillary light reflex pathways:
Werling K (1981) Multiple ocular
38 Gelatt K, Johnson K, Peiffer R {1979)
experimental pupillographic studies in
defects associated with partial albinism
Primary iridal pigmental masses in three
cats. Archives of Ophthatmology
and deafness in the dog. Journat of the
dogs. Journat of the American Anima!
49:656-670.
American Animat Hospitat Association
Hospitat Association 15:339-344.
11 Herron MA, Martin JE, Joyce JR (1978)
17:401-408.
39 Peiffer R (1981) The differential
Quantitative study of the decussating
24 Gelatt K, Powell G, Huston K (1981)
diagnosis of pigmented ocular lesions in
optic axons in the pony, cow, sheep, and
 Inherita nce of microphthalmia with
the dog and cat. California Veterinarian
pig. American Journa! of Veterinary
coloboma in the Australian Shepherd
5:14-18.
Research 39:1137-1139.
Dog. American Journa! of Veterinary
40 Carter J, Mausolf F (1970) Clinical and
12 Christensen K (1936) Sympathetic and
Research 42:1686-1690.
histologic features of pigrmented ocular
 parasympathetic nerves in the orbit of
25 Eriksson K (1955) Hereditary aniridia
Cysts. Journat of the American Anima!
the cat. Journal of Anatomy
with secondary cataract in horses.
Hospitaf Association 6:194-200.
70:225-232.
Nordisk Veterinary Medicin
41 Corcoran K, Koch S (1993) Uveal cysts
13 Morgan RV, Zanotti SW (1989) Horner's
7:773-793.
in dogs: 28 cases (1989-1991). Journa!
syndrome in dogs and cats. Journa! of
26 Joyce J (1983) Anridia in a Quarter 
of the Arericam Veterinary Medica!
the American Veterimary Medicia!
horse. Equine Veterinary Journa!
Association 203:545-546.
Association 194:1096-1099.
Supplement 2:2 1-22.
42 Deehr A, Dubielzig R (1998) A
14 Herrera J, Suraniti AP, Kojusner N
27 Irby N, Aquirre G (1985) Congenital
histopathological study of iridociliary
(1998) Idiopathic Horner's syndrome in
aniridia in a pony. Journaf of the
cysts and glaucoma in Golden Retrievers.
Collie dogs. Veterinary Ophthatmology
American Veterinary Medica!
Veterinary Ophthatmology 1:153-158.
1:17-20.
Association 186:281-283.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
331
43 Spiess B, Bolliger J, Guscetti F, Haessig 
58 Crouch E, Frenkel M (1976)
72 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Breitschwerdt
M, Lackner P, Ruehli M (1998) Multiple
Aminocaproic acid in the treatment of
E, Roberts S, Armstrong P (1986)
ciliary body cysts and secondary
traumatic hyphema. American Journa! of
Ocular manifestations of Rocky
glaucorma in the Great Dane: a report of
Ophthaimology 81:355-360.
Mountain spotted fever in dogs.
nine cases. Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
59 Masket S, Best M, Fisher L, Kronenberg
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
1:41-45.
S, Galin M (1971) Therapy in
the American Coltege of Veterinary
44 Rubin L (1966) Cysts of the equine iris.
experimental hyphema. Archives of
Ophthatmologists 117:335-337.
Journat of the American Veterinary
Ophthalmofogy 85:329-333.
73 Glaze M, Gaunt S (1986) Uveitis
Medicaf Association 149:151-155.
60 Yasuna E (1974) Management of
associated with Ehrlichia platys
 45 Buyukmihci N, MacMillan A, Scagliotti
taumatic hyphema. Archives of
infection in a dog. Journa! of the
 R {1992) Evaluation of zones of iris
 Ophthatmology 91:190-191.
American Veterinary Medica!
hypoplasia in horses and ponies. Journa!
61 Spoor T, Harnmer M, Belloso H(1980)
Association 188:916-918.
of the ArnericamVeterinary Medicat
Traumatic hyphema: failure of steroids to
74 Cohen ND, Carter CN, Thomas MA,
Association 200:940-942.
alter its course: a double-blind prospective
Angulo AM, Eugster AK (1990)
46 Dziezyc J, Samuelson DA, Merideth SR
study. Archives of Ophthaimology
Clinical and epizootiologic
(1990) Ciliary cysts in three ponies.
98:116-119.
characteristics of dogs seropositive for
Equime Veterimary Journat Supplement
 62 Streilen J (1990) Anterior chamber-
Borrefia burgdoreri in Texas: 110 cases
10:22-25.
 associated immune deviation: the privilege
(1998). Journal of the American
47 Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA, Cook
of immunity in the eye. Survey of
Veterinary Medical Association
CS, Latimer CA (1999) Congenital
Ophthatmology 35:67-73.
197:893-898.
 Ocular abnormalities of Rocky Mountain
63 Rao N, Rormero J, Fernandez M,
75 Weigt AK, Duncen RB, Pickett JP
horses. Veterinary Ophthatmology
Sevanian A, Marak G (1987) Role of free
(2000) A report of Lyme disease
2:47-59.
radicals in uveitis. Survey of
(Borrelia burgdorferi) with primary
48 Rochlitz I (1984) Feline dysautonomia
Ophthalmology 32:209-213.
 ocular involverment in a dog.
(the Key-Gaskellor dilated pupil
 64 Bito L (1984) Species differences in the
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
syndrome): a preliminary review. Journa!
reponse of the eye to irritation and
the American College of Veterinary
of Smaff Animaf Practice 25:587-598.
trauma: a hypothesis of divergence in
Ophthalmofogists 31:60.
49 Sharp N, Nash A, Griffiths I (1984)
ocular defense mechanism, and the choice
76 Riecke J, Rhoades H (1975) Bruceffa
 Feline dysautonomia (the Key-Gaskell
Of experimental animals for eye research.
canis isolated from the eye of the dog.
syndrome;: a clinical and pathologica]
Experimental Eye Research 39:807-829.
Journa! of the American Veterinary
study of 40 cases. Journa! of Smaff
65 Massa K, Gilger B, Miller T, Davidson M
Medical Association 166:583-584.
Anima! Practice 25:599-615.
(2002) Causes of uveitis in dogs: 102
77 Saegusa J, Ueda K, Goto Y (1977)
50 Scagliotti R (1980) Neuro-
cases (1989-2000). Veterimary
Ocular lesions in experimental canine
ophthalmology. In: Current Veterinary
Ophthaimnology 5:93-98.
brucellosis. Japanese Journa! of
Therapy VII, 7th edn. R Kirk (ed). WB
66 Curtis R, Barnett K (1973) The ocular
Veterinary Science 39:181-185.
 Suanders, Philadelphia, pp. 510-517.
lesions of infectious canine hepatitis. I.
 78 Gwin R, Kolwalski J, Wyman M,
51 Pandolfi M (1978) Intraocular
Clinical features. Jourma! of Smalf Anima!
Winston S (1980) Ocular lesions
hemorrhages: a hemostatic therapeutic
Practice 14:375-389.
associated with Bruceffa canis in a dog.
approach. Sturvey of Ophthatmology
67 Carmichael L (1965) The pathogenesis of
Journa! of the American Anima!
22:322-334.
ocular lesions of infectious canine
Hospital Association 16:607-610.
52 Peiffer R, Wilcock B, Yin H (1990) The
hepatitis. Veterinary Pathofogy
79 Gordon J, Pue H, Rutgers H (1985)
 pathogenesis and significance of pre-
2:344-359.
Canine brucellosis in a household.
 iridal fibrovascular membrane in
68 Bistner S, Aguirre G (1972) Further 
Journat of the American Veterinary
domestic animals. Vetermary Pathology
studies in the immunopathogenesis of the
Medical Association 186:695-698.
27:41-45.
 Ocular manifestations of canine hepatitis
80 Gwin R, Makley T, Wyman M,
53 Nelms SR, Nasisse MP, Davidson MG,
virus. Proceedings of the Scientific
Werling K (1980) Multifocal ocular 
Kirschner SE (1993) Hypherma associated
Meeting of the American College of
histoplasmosis in a dog and cat.
with retinal disease in dogs: 17 cases
Veterinary Ophthalmologists 3:46-68.
Journat of the American Veterinary
(1986-1991). Jourmaf of the American
69 Keenan K, Buhles W, Huxsoll D, Williams 
Medicaf Association 176:638-642.
Veterinary Medical Association
R, Hildebrandt P (1977) Studies on the
 81 Ajello J (1958) Occurrence of
202:1289-1292.
 pathogenesis of Rickettsia rickettst in the
Cryptococcus neoformans in soils.
54 Havener W (1978) Ocular
dog: clinical and clinicopathologic
American Journa! of Hygiene
Pharmacology. CV Mosby, St Louis, pp.
changes of experimental infection.
67:72-77.
703-719.
American Journa! of Veterimary Research
 82 Angell J, Merideth R, Shively J.
 55 Ganley J, Geiger J, Clement J, Rigby P,
38:851-856.
Sigler R (1987) Ocular lesions
Levy G (1983) Aspirin and recurrent
70 Troy G, Vulgamott J, Turnwald G (1980)
associated with coccidioidomycosis in
hyphema after blunt trauma. American
Canine ehrlichiosis: a retrospective study
dogs: 35 cases (1980-1985). Journaf of
Journa! of Ophthalmology 96:797-801.
of 30 naturally occurring cases. Journa! of
the American Veterinary Medica!
56 Wilson F (1980) Traurmatic hyphema:
the American Anima! Hospita!
Association 190:1319-1322.
 pathogenesis and management.
Association 16:181-187.
83 Legendre A, Walker M, Buyukrmihci N,
Ophthaimology 87:910-919.
71 Kuehn N, Gaunt S (1985) Clinical and
Stevens R (1981) Canine
 57 Lambrou F, Snyder R, Williams G (1987)
hematologic findings in canine
blastomycosis: a review of 47 clinical
 Use of tissue plasminogen activator in
ehrlichiosis. Journat of the American
cases. Journa! of the American
experimental hyphema. Archives of
Veterimary Medicat Association
Veterinary Medical Association
Ophthatmology 105:995-997.
186:355-358.
178:1163-1168.
332
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
84 Watt PR, Robins GM, Galloway AM,
97 Kaswan R, Martin C (1984)
113 Fischer C (1972) Lens-induced uveitis
O'Boyle DA (1995) Disseminated
Ophthalmomyiasis interna in a dog and 
in dogs. Journa! of the American
opportunistic fungal disease in dogs:
cat. Canime Practice 11:28-34.
Animat Hospita! Association 8:39-48.
ten cases (1982-1990). Journaf of the
 98 Johnson BW, Helper LC, Szajerski ME
114 Kaya M, Edward D, Tessler H,
American Veterinary Medica!
(1988) Intraocular Cuterebra in a cat.
Hendricks R (1992) Augmentation of
Association 207:67-70.
Journat of theAmericanVeterinary
intraocular inflammation by melanin.
 85 Quinn P, McCraw B (1972) Current
Medica! Association 193:829-830.
Investigative Ophthaimofogy and Visua!
status of Toxoplasma and
99 Abdelbaki Y, Davis R (1972)
Science 33:522-531.
toxoplasmosis: a review. Canadian
Ophthalmoscopic findings in
115 Cottrell B, Barnett K (1987) Harada's
Veter mary Journa! 13:247-262.
elaeophorosis of domestic sheep.
disease in the Japanese Akita. Journaf of
86 Dubey J (1985) Toxoplasrmosis in dogs:
Veterimary Medicime/Smalf Anima!
Small Animat Practice 28:517-521.
a review. Canine Practice 12:7-28.
Clinician 67:69-74.
116 Asakura I (1977) Harada's syndrome
87 Piper R, Cole C, Shadduck J (1970)
100 Shoho C (1994) Chronological review
(uveitis diffusa acuta) in the dog.
Natural and experimental ocular
of the literature relating to 'the worm in
JapaneseJournat of Veterimary Medicine
toxoplasmosis in animals. American
the eye' of the horse and cattle. Japanese
673:445-455.
Journat of Ophthatmology
Journa! of Veterinary History 31:19-45.
 117 Bussanich M (1982) Granulomatous
69:662-668.
101 Rames DS, Miller DK, Barthel R, et af.
panuveitis and dermal depigmentation
88 Bussanich M, Rootman J (1985)
{1995) Ocular Haticephalobus (syn.
in dogs. Journaf of the American
Implicating toxoplasmosis as the cause
Micronemia) defetrix in a horse.
Animat Hospitat Association
of ocular lesions. Veter imary Medicine
Veterinary Pathotogy 32:540-542.
18:131-138.
80:43-51.
102 Bellhorn R (1973) Removal of
118 Kern T, Walton D, Ris R, Manning T,
89 Dubey JP, Koestner A, Piper RC (1990)
intraocular Dirofilaria immitis with
Laratta L, Dziezyc J (1985) Uveitis
 Repeated transplacental transmission of
subsequent corneal scarring. Journaf of
associated with poliosis and vitiligo in
Neospora canimum in dogs. Journaf of
the American Animat Hospita!
six dogs. Journa! of the American
the American Veterinary Medicaf
Association 9:262-264.
Veterimary Medical Association
Assoc iation 197:857-860.
103 Brightman A, Helper L, Todd K (1977)
187:408-414.
90 McConnell E, Chaffee E, Cashell I,
Heartworm in the anterior chamber of a
119 Romatowski J (1985) A
Garner F (1970) Visceral leishmaniasis
dog's eye. Veterinary Medicine/Smal!
uveodermatological syndrorme in an
with ocular involvement in a dog.
Anima! Cfiniciam 72:1021-1023.
Akita dog. Journatl of the American
Journa! American Veterimary Medicine
104 Blanchard G, Thayer G (1978)
Animat Hospital Association
Association 156:197-203.
Intravitreal Dirofilaria immitis in a dog.
21:777-780.
91 Giles R, Hildebrandt P, Becker R,
Journa! of the American Anima!
 120 Campbell K, McLaughlin S, Reynolds
Montgomery C (1975) Visceral
Hospitaf Association 14:33-35.
H (1986) Generalized leukoderma and
leishmaniasis in a dog with bilateral
105 Forney M (1985) Dirofilaria immitis in
poliosis following uveitis in a dog.
endophthalmitis. Journa! of the
the anterior charmber of a dog's eye.
Journat of the American Anima!
American Animat Hospital Association
Veterimary Medicime 80:49.
Hospitat Association 22:121-124.
11:155-159.
106 Miller W, Cooper R (1987) Identifying
121 Sapienza J, Domenech F, Prades-
92 Tryphonas L, Zawidzka Z,
and treating intraocular Dirofilarid
Sapienza A (2000) Golden Retriever
Bernard MA, Janzen EA (1977)
immtitis in dogs. Veterinary Medicine
uveitis: 75 cases (1994-1999).
Visceral leishmaniasis in a dog: clinical,
82:381-385.
Veterinary Ophthaimology 3:241-246.
hematological, and pathological
107 Perry AW, Hertling R, Kennedy MJ
122 Gwin R, Wyman M, Ketring K,
observations. Canadian Journa! of
(1991) Angiostrongylosis with
Winston S (1980) Idiopathic uveitis and 
Comparative Medicine 41:1-12.
disserminated larval infection associated
exudative retinal detachment in the dog.
93 Swenson CL, Silverman J,
with signs of ocular and nervous disease
Journat of the American Anima!
Stromberg PC, et af. (1988) Visceral
in an imported dog. Canadian
Hospitaf Association 16:163-170.
leishmaniasisis in an English Fox
Veterimary Journa! 32:430-431.
123 Andrew SE, Abrams KL, Brooks DE,
Hound from an Ohio research colony.
108 King MC, Grose RM, Startup G
Kubilis PS (1997) Clinical features of
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
[1994) Angiostrongylhus vasorum in the
steroid-responsive retinal detachments
Medicaf Association 193:1089-1092.
anterior charmber of a dog's eye. Journa!
in 22 dogs. Veterimary and Comparative
94 Migaki G, Font R, Sauer R (1982)
of Small Animat Practice 35:326-328.
Ophthatmology 7:82-87.
Canine protothecosis: review of the
109 Saunders L, Barron C (1964)
124 Corcoran KA, Peiffer RL, Koch SA
literature and report of an additional
 Intraocular tumours in animals. IV.
{1997) Histopathologic features of feline
case. Journa! of the American
 Lymphosarcoma. British Veterimary
ocular lymphosarcoma. Veterimary amd
Veter imary Medical Association
Journa! 120:25-35.
Comparative Ophthatrnology 5:35-40.
181:794-797.
110 Wilcock B, Peiffer R (1987) The
125 Peiffer R, Wilcock B (1991)
 95 Schultze AE, Ring RD, Morgan RV.
 pathology of len-induced uveitis in dogs.
Histopathologic study of uveitis in cats:
Patton CS (1998) Clinical, cytologic,
Veterimary Pathology 24:549-553.
139 cases {1978-1988). Journa! of the
 and histopathologic manifestations of
111 Fischer C (1971) Lens-induced uveitis
American Veterimary Medica!
 protothecosis in two dogs. Veterimary
and secondary glaucoma in a dog.
Association 198:135-138.
Ophthalmology 1:239-243.
Journal of the American Veterimary
126 Davidson M, Nasisse M, English R,
96 Gwin R, Merideth R, Martin C,
Medical Association 158:336-341.
Wilcock B, Jamieson V (1991) Feline 
Kaswan R (1984) Ophthalmomyiasis
112 Marak G (1992) Phacoanaphylactic
anterior uveitis: a study of 53 cases.
interna posterior in two cats and a dog.
endophthalmitis. Sturvey of
Journat of the American Anima!
Journa! of the American Anima!
Ophthatmology 36:325-339.
Hospitat Association 27:77-83.
Hospitaf Association 20:481-486.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
127 Lubin J, Albert D, Essex M, Noronha F,
140 Nasisse M, van Ee R, Wright B
153 English R, Davidson M, Nasisse M,
Ris R (1983) Experimental anterior 
[1985) Ocular changes in a cat with
Jamieson V, Lappin M (1990)
uveitis after subcutaneous injection of
disseminated blastomycosis. Journa! of
Intraocular disease associated with feline
feline sarcoma virus. Investigative
the American Veterinary Medica!
immunodeficiency virus infection in cats.
Ophthatmofogy and Vistua! Science
Association 187:629-631.
Journal of the American Veterinary
24:1055-1062.
141 Angell J, Shively J, Meredith R, Reed
Medicat Association 196:1116-1119.
128 Dubielzig R, Steinberg H, Fischer B,
R, Jamison K (1985) Ocular 
154 Cooley PL, Wyman M, Kindig O
Jackson M, Moore P (2000) Feline
coccidioidomycosis in a cat. Journa! of
(1990) Pars plicata in equine recurrent
 prirmary ocular lymphosarcorma:
the American Veterinary Medica!
uveitis. Veterinary Pathology
 immunophenotyping of leukocytes, FeLV
Association 187:167-170.
27:138-140.
status, and relationship to idiopathic
142MillerWW,A1bert RA{1988)Ocular
155 Dubielzig RR, Render JA, Morreale RJ
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis. Proceedings of
and systemic candidiasis in a cat.
(1997) Distinctive morphologic features
the Scientific Meeting of the American
Journa! of the American Anima!
of the ciliary body in equine recurrent
College of Veterinary Ophthatologists
Hospitat Association 24:521-524.
uveitis. Veterimary and Comparative
31:46.
143 Vainisi S, Campbell H (1969) Ocular 
Ophthatology 7:163-167.
129 Doherty M (1971) Ocular
toxoplasmosis in cats. Journat of the
156 Jones T, Maurer F (1942) Heredity in
 rmanifestations of feline infectious 
American Veterinary Medica!
periodic ophthalmia. Journaf of the
peritonitis. Journat of the American
Association 154:141-152.
American Veterimnary Medica!
Veterinary Medical Association
144 Lappin M (1989) Clinical feline
Association 101:248-250.
159:417-424.
toxoplasmosis: serologic diagnosis and
157 Jones T, Roby T, Maurer F (1946) The
130 Slauson D, Finn J (1972)
therapeutic managment of 15 cases.
relation of riboflavin to equine periodic
 Meningoencephalitis and panophthalmitis
Journa! of Veterinary Interna! Medicine
ophthalmia. American Journa! of
in feline infectious peritonitis. Joura of
3:139-143.
Veterimary Research 7:403-416.
the American Veterinary Medica!
145 Dubey J, Carpenter J (1993) Histologically
158 Jones T (1949) Riboflavin and the
Association 160:729-734.
confirmed clinical toxoplasmosis in cats:
control of equine periodic ophthalmia.
131 Neu H, Pfeifer E (1985) FP (feline
100 cases (1952-1990). Journa! of the
Journat of the American Veterinary
infektiose peritonitis): klinische
Armerican Veterimary Medicat Association
Medical Association 94:326-329.
fruhsymptome und vorausgengangene
203:1556-1566.
159 Saari KM, Solja J, Hakli J, et af. (1981)
belastungen. Kteinter Praxis 30:307-314.
146 Lappin MR, Black JC (1999)
Genetic background of acute anterior 
132 Kornegay J (1978) Feline infectious
 Bartonella spp. infection as a possible
uveitis. American Journa! of
 peritonitis: the central nervous system
cause of uveitis in a cat. Journaf of the
Ophthatmology 91:711-720.
forrm. Jourmaf of the Americam Anirma!
American Veterinary Medica!
160 Dwyer A, Crockett R, Kalsow C (1995)
Hospitaf Association 14:580-584.
Association 214:1205-1207.
Association of leptospiral seroreactivity
133 Wiess R, Scott F (1981) Pathogenesis of
147 Lappin M, Marks A, Greene C, et af.
and breed with uveitis and blindness in
feline infectious peritonitis: pathologic
(1992) Serologic prevalence of selected
horses: 372 cases (1986-1993). Journa!
 changes and immunofluorescence.
infectious diseases in cats with uveitis.
Of the American Veterinary Medica!
Armerican Journat of Veterinary Research
Journat of the American Veterinary
Association 207:1327-1331.
42:2036-2048.
Medicat Association 201:1005-1016.
161 Dwyer A, Kalsow C (1998) Visual
134 Mahaffey E, Gabbert N, Johnson D,
148 Chavkin M, Lappin M, Powell C
 prognosis in horses with uveitis.
Guffy M (1977) Disserminated
{1992) Seroepidemiologic and clinical
Proceedings of the Annuat Meeting of
histoplasrmosis in three cats. Journa! of
observations of 93 cases of uveitis in
the American Society of Veterimary
the American Animat Hospita!
cats. Progress in Veterinary and
Ophthatmology. Chicago, pp. 1-8.
Association 13:46-50.
Comparative Ophthalmology 2:29-36.
162 Stannard A, Cello R (1975)
135 Peiffer R (1979) Ocular rmanifestations
149 Lappin M, Greene C, Prestwood A
Onchocerca cervicalis infection in horses
 of disseminated histoplasmosis in a cat.
(1989) Enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
from the western United States.
Fefine Practice 9:24-29.
assay for detection of circulating
American Journat of Veterinary
136 Wolf A, Belden M (1984) Feline
antigens of Toxopiasma gondii in the
Research 36:1029-1031.
histoplasmosis: a literature review and
serurm of cats. American Journa! of
163 Lloyd S, Soulsby E (1978) Survey for
retrospective study of 20 new cases.
Veterinary Research 50:1566-1586.
infection with Onchocerca cervicafis in
Journat of the American Anima! Hospita!
150 Lappin M, Greene C, Prestwood A,
horses in the eastern United States.
Association 20:995-998.
 Dawe D, Tarleton R (1989) Diagnosis
Aerican Journal of Veterinary
137 Cinkenbeard K, Cowell R, Tyler R
of recent Toxopfasmosis gondii
Research 39:1962-1963.
(1987) Disseminated histoplasmosis in
infection in cats by use of an enzynme-
164 Lyons E, Drudge J, Tolliver S (1981)
cats: 12 cases (1981-1986). Journaf of the
linked irmmunosorbent assay for
Prevalence of microfilariae (Onchocerca
American Veterimary Medicat Association
imm unoglobulin M. American Journa!
spp.) in skin of Kentucky horses at
190:1445-1448.
of Veterinary Research 50:1586-1590.
necropsy. Journal of the American
138 Blouin P, Cello R (1980) Experimental
151 Davidson M, English R (1998) Feline
Veterimary Medica! Association
ocular cryptococcosis: preliminary studies
Ocular toxoplasmosis. Veterinary
179:899-900.
in cats and mice. Investigative
Ophthatmology 1:71-80.
165 Attenburrow D, Donnelly J, Soulshy E
Ophthalmology and Visuat Science
152 Gormley P, Pavesio C, Minnasian D,
[1983) Periodic ophthalmic (recurrent)
19:21-30.
 Lightman S (1998) Effects of drug
uveitis of horses: an evaluation of the
139 Alden C, Mohan R (1974) Ocular
therapy on Toxoplasma cysts in an
aetiological role of microfilariae of
blastomycosis in a cat. Jourma! of the
animal model of acute and chronic
Onchocerca cervicafis and the clinical
American Veterimary Medicat Association
disease. Investigative Ophthatmology
 managerment ofthe condition. Equine
164:527-528.
dnd Visuaf Science 39:1171-1175.
Veterimary Journa! Supplement 2:48-56.
334
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
166 Cummings E, James E (1985)
178 Jones T (1940) The relation of
191 Chavkin MJ, Lappin MR, Powell CC,
 Prevalence of equine onchocerciasis in
brucellosis to periodic ophthalmia in
Cooper CM, Munana KR, Howard LH
 the southeastern and midwestern United
Equidae. American Journa! of Veterinary
(1994) Toxopiasma gondii-specific
States. Journat of the American
Research 1:54-57.
antibodies in the aqueous humor of cats
Veterinary Medical Association
179 Davis G, Wood R, Gadd J, Kennedy R
with toxoplasmosis. Arericam Journa! of
186:1202-1203.
[1950) The incidence of Brucella
Veterimary Research 55:1244-1249.
167 Cello R (1971) Ocular onchocerciasis in
agglutinins in horses and their
192 Lappin M, Powell C (1991) Comparison
the horse. Equine Veterinary Journa!
relationship to periodic ophthalmia.
of latex agglutination, indirect 
3:148-153.
Cornefl Veterimarian 40:364-366.
hemagglutination, and ELISA techniques
168 Wollanke B, Rohrbach B, Gerhards H
180 Roberts S (1971) Chorioretinitis in a
for the detection of Toxoplasma gondi-
(2001) Serum and vitreous humor
band of horses. Journa! of the American
specific antibodies in the serum of cats.
antibody titers in, and isolation of,
Veterinary Medical Association
Joturnal of Veterinary Interna! Medicine
Leptospira interrogans from horses with
158:2043-2046.
5:299-301.
recurrent uveitis. Journa! of the American
181 Quin A (1950) The control of equine
193 Davidson M, Nasisse MP, Roberts SM
Veterinary Medical Association
strongylosis and periodic ophthalmia
(1987) Immunodiagnosis of leptospiral
219:795-800.
with a ration additive. British Veterinary
veitis in two horses. Equine Veterimary
169 Rimpau W (1947) Leptospirose being
Journo! 106:116-118.
Jourmaf 19:155-157.
pferde. Terarztfiche Umschau
182 Matthews A, Handscombe M (1983)
194 Faber N, LeFebvre R, Crawford M,
2:177-178.
Uveitis in the horse: a review of the
Madigan J, Buyukmihci N (1998)
170 Heusser H (1948) Die periodische
aetiological and immunopathological
snonbe ay u ds nndsoda o aouasad
 augenentzundung, eine leptospirose?
aspects ofthe disease. Equine Veterinary
humor of horses with recurrent uveitis.
Sehtueizer Archiv fur Tierheifkunde
Journa! Supplement 2:61-64.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
90:288-312.
183 Romeike A, Brugmann M, Drommer W
the Armerican College of Veterinary
171 Roberts S (1958) Sequelae of
 {1998) Immunohistochemical studies in
Ophthaimologists 29:49.
leptospirosis in horses on a small farm.
equine recurrent uveitis (ERU).
195 Hendrix D, Bochsler P, Rohrbach B
Journat of the American Veterinary
Veterimary Pathology 35:515-526.
(2000) Effect of itraconazole therapy on
Medicaf Association 133:189-194.
184 Hines M, Halliwell R (1991)
the histopathologic findings in the eyes of
172 Halliwell R, Brim T, Hines M, Wolf D,
Autoimmunity to retinal S-antigen in
dogs with blastomycosis. Proceedings of
White F (1985) Studies on equine
horses with equine recurrent uveitis.
the Scientific Meeting of the American
recurrent uveitis. I. The role of infection
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
with Leptospira nterrogans serovar
Ophthatmology 1:283-290.
33:52.
poona. Current Eye Research
185 Maxwell S, Hurt D, Brightman A,
196 Herd R, Donham J (1983) Efficacy of 
4:1033-1040.
Takemoto D (1991) Humoral responses
ivermectin against Onchocerca cervicalis
173 Sillerud C, Bey R, Ball M, Bistner S
to retinal proteins in horses with
microfilarial dermatitis in horses.
(1987) Serologic correlation of suspected
recurrent uvetis. Progress in Veterimary
Armerican Journat of Veterinary Research
Leptospira interrogans serovar pomona-
and Comparative Ophthalmology
44:1102-1105.
induced uveitis in a group of horses.
1:155-161.
197 Krohne SG, Blair MJ, Bingaman D,
Journa! of the American Veterinary
186 Wolfer J, Wilcock B, Percy D (1993)
Gionfriddo J (1998) Carprofen inhibition 
Medicat Association 191:1576-1578.
 Phacoclastic uveitis in the rabbit.
of flare in the dog measured by laser flare
174 Williams R, Morter R, Freerman M,
Veterinary and Comparative
photometry. Veterinary Ophthaimofogy
Lavignette A (1971) Experimental
Ophthatmology 3:92-97.
1:81-84.
chronic uveitis. Investigative
187 Stiles J, Didier E, Ritchie B,
198 Gilger BC, Allen JB (1998) Cyclosporine
Ophthatmology 10:948-954.
Greenacre C, Willis M, Martin C (1997)
A in veterinary ophthalmology. Veterinary
175 Matthews A, Waitkins S, Palmer M
Encephafitozoon cunicufi in the lens of a
Ophthatmology 1:181-187.
(1987) Serological study of leptospira]
rabbit with phacoclastic uveitis:
199 Velez G, Whitcup SM (1999) New 
 infections and endogenous uveitis among
confirmation and treatment. Veterimary
developments in sustained release drug
horses and ponies in the United
and Comparative Ophthatmology
delivery for the treatment of intraocular
Kingdom. Equine Veterimary Journa!
7:233-238.
disease. British Journa! of
19:125-128.
188 Wolfer J, Grahn B, Taylor M, Laperriere
Ophthalmology 83:1225-1229.
176 Wollanke B, Gerhards H, Brem S,
E{1995) Treatment of phacoclastic
200 Winterberg A, Gerhards H (1997)
Gothe R, Wolf E (1999) Studies on
uveitis in the rabbit by
 Langzeitergebnisse der pars-plana-
vitreous and serurm samples from horses
phacoemulsification. Proceedings of the
vitrektomie bei equiner rezidivierender
with equine recurrent uveitis (ERU): the
Scientifie Meeting of the American
uveitis. Pferdeheikumde 13:377-383.
role of Leptospira, Borrefia burgdorferi,
College of Veterinary Ophthatrnologists
 201 Fruhauf B, Ohnesorge B, Deegen E,
Borna disease virus, and Toxapfasma in
26:12.
 Boeve M (1998) Surgical managerment of 
the etiology of ERU. Proceedings of the
189 Davidson HJ, Blanchard GL, Coe PH
equine recurrent uveitis with single port
Scientific Meeing of the American
(1990) Idiopathic uveitis in a herd of 
 pars plana vitrectomy. Veterinary
Colfege of Veterinary Ophthalologists
Holstein cows. Progress in Veterimary
Ophthatmology 1:137-151.
29:31.
cnd Comparative Ophthatmology
202 Brooks D, Cutler T, Andrew S, et af.
177 Burgess E, Gillete D, Pickett P (1986)
2:113-116.
(2001) Outcoome of pars plana vitrectomy
Arthritis and panuveitis as manifestations
190 Toris C, Pederson J (1987) Aqueous
 in 24 eyes of 18 horses with equine
 of Borreltia burgdorferi infection in a
humor dynamics in experimental
recurrent uveitis. Proceedings of the
Wisconsin pony. Journaf of the American
iridocyclitis. Investigative
Scientific Meeting of the American
Veterinary Medical Association
Ophthalmology and Visua! Science
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
189:1340-1342.
28:477-481.
32:38.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
335
203 Hendrix D, Rohrbach B, Ward D,
217 Ditter R, Dubielzig R, Aguirre G, Acland 
231 Patnaik A, Mooney S {1988) Feline
Cawrse M (2002) Effects of an
G {1983) Primary ocular melanoma in
melanoma: a comparative study of
inactivated vaccine against Leptospird
dogs. Veterimary Pathology 20:379-395.
ocular, oral, and dermal neoplasms.
 mterrogans on the frequency of uveitis in
 218 Ryan A, Diter SR (1984) Clinical and
Veterinary Pathofogy 25:105-112.
horses with equine recurrent uveitis.
 pathologic features of canine ocular
232 Duncan D, Peiffer R (1991)
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
melanomas. Jourma! of the American
Morphology and prognostic indicators
the American Coffege of Veterinary
Veterinary Medica! Association
of anterior uveal melanomas in cats.
Ophthatmologists 33:52.
184:60-67.
Progress in Veterinary and
204 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Jamieson V,
219 Schaffer E, Funke K (1985) Das prirmar-
Comparative Ophthaimofogy 1:25-32.
 English R, Olivero D (1991) Traumatic
 intraokulare maligne melanom bei hund
233 Kalishman J, Chappell R, Flood L,
anterior lens capsule disruption. Journa!
und katze. Tterarztfiche Praxis
Dubielzig R (1998) A matched
of the American Animat Hospita!
13:343-359.
observational study of survival in cats
Association 27:410-414.
220 Trucksa R, McLean I, Quinn A (1985)
with enucleation due to diffuse iris
205 Olin D, Roger W, MacMillan A (1976)
 Intraocular canine melanocytic
melanoma. Veterinary Ophthalmofogy
Lipid-laden aqueous humor associated
neoplasms. Journa! of the American
1:25-29.
with anterior uveitis and concurrent 
Anima! Hospital Association 21:85-88.
234 Albert D, Shadduck J, Craft J,
hyperlipermia in two dogs. Journaf of the
221 Wilcock B, Peiffer R (1986) The
Niederkorn J (1981) Feline uveal
Armerican Veterimary Medical Association
 morphology and behavior of primary
melanoma model induced with feline
168:861-864.
Ocular melanomas in 91 dogs. Vetermary
sarcoma virus. Investigative
206 Bellhorn R, Henkind P (1968)
Pathology 23:418-424.
Ophthatmofogy and Vistua! Science
 Adenocarcinoma of the ciliary body: a
222 Giuliano E, Chappell R, Hogge G,
20:606-624.
 report of two cases in dogs. Veterinary
Fischer B, Dubielzig R (1998) Canine
235 Niederkorn J, Shadduck J, Albert D
Pathofogy 5:122-126.
 Ocular rmelanocytic tumors: clinical profile
(1982) Enucleation and the appearance
 207 Bellhorn R (1971) Ciliary body
and survival in 244 cases (1988-1998).
of second primary tumors in cats
adenocarcinoma in the dog. Journaf of
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
bearing virally-induced intraocular
the American Veterimary Medica!
the American College of Veterinary
tumors. Investigative Ophthatmofogy
Association 159:1124-1128.
Ophthatmofogists 29:2941.
and Visuaf Science 23:719-725.
208 Peiffer R, Gwin R, Gelatt K, Jackson W,
 223 Render J, Ramsey D, Ramsey C (1997)
236 Stiles J, Bienzle D, Render JA,
Williams L, Hill C (1978) Ciliary body
Contralateral uveal metastasis of
Buyukmihci NC, Johnson EC (1999)
epithelial tumors in four dogs. Journa! of
malignant anterior uveal melanoma in a
 Use of nested polymerase chain
the American Veterinary Medica!
dog. Veterinary cmd Comparative
reaction (PCR) for detection of 
Association 172:578-583.
Ophthatrmology 7:263-266.
retroviruses from formalin-fixed,
209 Peiffer R (1983) Ciliary body epithelial
224 Roperto F, Restucci B, Crovace A (1993)
para ffin-ermbedded uveal melanomas in
tumours in the dog and cat: a report of
Bilateral ciliary body melanomas in a dog.
cats. Veterinary Ophthatmology
thirteen cases. Journaf of Smaff Anirma!
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
2:113-116.
Practice 24:347-370.
Ophthatmology 3:149-151.
237 Harris BP, Dubielzig RR (1999)
210 Barron C, Saunders L (1959) Intraocular
225 Cook C, Lannon A (1997) Inherited iris
Atypical primary ocular melanoma in
turmors in animals. II. Primary
 melanoma in Labrador Retriever dogs.
cats. Veterinary Ophthatmology
 nonpigmented intraocular tumors. Cancer
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
2:121-124.
Research 19:1171-1174.
the American Coflege of Veterinary
238 Woog J, Albert D, Gonder J,
211 Verwer M, Thije P (1967) Tumour of the
Ophthalmologists 28:106.
Carpenter J (1983) Osteosarcoma in a
epitheliurm of the ciliary body in a dog.
226 Dubielzig R, Steinberg H, Garvin H,
phthisical feline eye. Veterinary
Journat of Small Animal Practice
 Deehr AM, Fischer B (1998) Iridociliary
Pathology 20:209-214.
8:627-630.
epithelial tumors in 100 dogs and 17 cats:
 239 Dubielzig R (1984) Ocular sarcoma
212 Saunders L, Geib L, Barron C (1969)
a morphological study. Veterinary
following trauma in three cats. Journa!
Intraocular ganglioglioma in a dog.
Ophthatnology 1:223-231.
Of the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterimary Pathotogy 6:525-533.
227 Glickstein JM (1974) Malignant ciliary
Association 184:578-581.
213 Wilcock B, Williams M (1980)
body adenocarcinoma in a dog. Journat
240 Miller W, Boosinger T (1987)
Malignant intraocular
of the Armerican Veterinary Medica!
Intraocular osteosarcoma in a cat.
 medulloepithelioma in a dog. Journa! of
Association 165:455-456.
Journa! of the American Anima!
the American Animat Hospita!
228 Acland G, McLean I, Aguirre G, Trucksa
Hospitaf Association 23:317-320.
Association 16:617-619.
 R (1980) Diffuse iris melanoma in cats.
241 Hakanson N, Shively J, Reed R,
214 Brooks DE, Patton CS (1991) An ocular
Journat of the American Veterinary
 Merideth R (1990) Intraocular spindle
ganglioneuroblastoma in a dog. Progress
Medica! Association 176:52-56.
cell sarcoma following ocular trauma
in Veterinary amd Comparative
229 Bellhom R, Henkind P (1970)
in a cat: case report and literature
Ophthatmology 1:299-302.
 Intraocular malignant melanoma in
review. Journal of the American
215 Read RA (1993) Ciliary body
domestic cats. Journa! of Smaff Anirma!
Anima! Hospita! Association 26:63-66.
haemangioma in a dog with secondary
Practice 10:631-637.
242 Dubielzig RR, Hawkins KL, Toy KA,
glaucoma. Journa! of Smalf Anima!
230 Bertoy R, Brightman A, Regan K (1988)
 Rosebury WS, Mazur M, Jasper TG
Practice 34:405-408.
Intraocular melanoma with multiple
(1994) Morphologic features of feline
 216 Bussanich NM, Dolman PJ, Rootman J,
metastases in a cat. Journaf of the
ocular sarcomas in ten cats: light
Dolman CL (1987) Canine uveal
American Veterimary Medica! Association
microscopy, ultrastructure, and
 melanommas: series and literature review.
192:87-89.
immunohistochemistry. Veterinary and
Journat of the American Anima! Hospita!
Comparative Ophthaimofogy 4:7-12.
Association 23:415-422.
336
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
243 Cullen C, Haines D, Jackson M, Peiffer
258 Bellhom R (1972) Secondary ocular
271 Szymanski C, Boyce R, Wyman M
 R, Grahn B {1998) The use of
adenocarcinoma in three dogs and a cat.
(1984) Transitional cell carcinoma of the
immunohistochemistry and the
Journat of the American Veterinary
uethra metastatic to the eyes in a dog.
 polymerase chain reaction for detection of 
Medica! Association 160:302-307.
Journat of the American Veterinary
feline leukemia virus and feline sarcoma
259 Whitley R, Jensen H, Andrews J,
Medicaf Association 185:1003-1004.
virus in six cases of feline ocular sarcoma.
 Sirmpson S (1980) Renal adenocarcinoma 
 272 Hogenesch H, Whiteley H, Vicini D,
Veterimary Ophthatmofogy 1:189-193.
with ocular metastasis in a dog. Journa!
Helper L (1987) Seminoma with
244 Murphy J, Young S (1979) Intraocular
of the American Animat Hospita!
metastases in the eye and the brain in a
 melanoma in a horse. Veterinary
Association 16:949- 953.
dog. Veterimary Pathology 24:278-280.
Pathology 16:539-542.
260 Murphy CJ, Canton DC, Bellhorn RW,
273 Cassotis NJ, Dubielzig RR, Gilger BC,
245 Neumann S (1985) Intraocular
Okihiro M, Cahoon B, Dufort R (1989)
Davidson MG (1999) Angioinvasive
melanoma in a horse. Moderm Veterinary
Disseminated adenocarcinoma with
pulmonary carcinoma with posterior
Practice 66:559-560.
Ocular involvement in a cat. Journaf of
segrment rmetastasis in four cats.
246 Davidson H, Blanchard G, Wheeler C,
the American Veterimary Medica!
Veterimary Ophthatmology 2:125-131.
Render J (1991) Anterior uveal
Association 195:488-491.
274 Dziezyc J, Hager D, Millichamp N
 melanoma with secondary keratitis,
261 Gionfriddo JR, Fix AS, Niyo Y,
(1987) Two-dimensional real-time ocular
cataract, and glaucoma in a horse.
Miller LD, Betts DM (1990) Ocular
ultrasonography in the diagnosis of
Journat of the American Veterinary
 manifestations of a metastatic pulmonary
Ocular lesions in dogs. Journat of the
Medica! Association 199:1049-1050.
adenocarcinoma in a cat. Journaf of the
American Anima! Hospital Association
247 Barnett KC, Platt H (1990) Intraocular
American Veterimary Medicat Association
23:501-508.
 melanomata in the horse. Equine
197:372-374.
275 Bussanich M (1984) Don't overlook
Veterimary Journa! Supplement 10:76-82.
262 Hayden D (1976) Squamous cell
 fine-needle aspiration biopsy to
 248 Bistner S, CampellJ, Shaw D, Leininger
 carcinoma in a cat with intraocular and
differentiate intraocular turmors.
JR, Ghobrial HK (1983) Neuroepithelial
orbital rmetastases. Veterimnary Pathology
Veterimary Medicine 79:1055-1060.
tumor of the optic nerve in a horse.
13:332-336.
276 Karcioglu Z, Gordon RA, Karcioglu G
Cornefl Veterimarian 73:30-40.
263 West SC, Wolf ED, Vainisi SJ (1979)
[1985) Tumor seeding in ocular fine
249 Szymanski C (1987) Malignant teratoid
Intraocular metastasis of mammary
needle aspiration biopsy. Ophthatmofogy
medulloepithelioma in a horse. Journa! of
adenocarcinoma. Jourmaf of the American
92:1763-1765.
the Americam Veterinary Medica!
Anima! Hospita! Association 15:725-728.
277 Cook CS, Wilkie DA (1999) Treatment
Association 190:301-302.
264 Cook C, Peiffer R, Stine P (1984)
of presumed iris melanoma in dogs by
250 Ris RC, Scherlie PH, Rebhun WC
Metastatic ocular squamous cell 
diode laser photocoagulation: 23 cases.
(1990) Intraocular medulloepithelioma in
carcinoma in a cat. Journat of the
Veterinary Ophthalmology 2:217-225.
a horse. Equine Veterinary Journa!
American Veterimary Medicat Association
278 Nasisse MP, Davidson MG, Olivero DK,
Supplement 10:66-69.
185:1547-1549.
Brinkmann M, Nelms S (1993)
251 Ueda Y, Senba H, Nishimura T, Usui T,
 265 Hamilton H, Severin G, Nold J (1984)
Neodymiurm: YAG laser treatment of
Tanaka K, Inagaki S (1993) Ocular
 Pulmonary squamous cel arcinoma with
 prirmary canine intraocular tumors.
 medulloepitheliorma in a thoroughbred.
intraocular metastasis in a cat. Journaf of
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
Equime Veterimary Journa! 25:558-561.
the American Veterinary Medica!
Ophthatmology 3:152-157.
252 Bistner S (1974) Medulloepithelioma of
Association 185:307-309.
279 Goetz T, Ogilvie G, Keegan K,
the iris and ciliary body in a horse.
266 Fulton LM, Bromberg NM,
Johnson P (1990) Cimetidine for
Cornefl Veterimarian 64:588-595.
Goldschmidt MH (1991) Soft tissue
treatment of melanomas in three horses.
253 Barron C, Saunders L, Jubb K (1963)
 fbrosarcoma with intraocular metastasis
Journat of the American Veterinary
Intraocular tumors in animals. IIl.
in a cat. Progress in Veterimary amd
Medicat Association 197:449-452.
Secondary intraocular tumors. Armericam
Comparative Ophthatmology 1:129-132.
280 Bellhorn RW, Vainisi SJ (1969)
Journaf of Veterimary Research
267 Nyska A, Hermalin A, Jakobson B, et αf.
Successful rermoval of ciliary body
24:835-853
(1992) Intraocular vascular embolization 
adenoma. Modern Veterinary Practice
254 Rebhun W, Piero F (1998) Ocular
 of a malignant canine
50:47-49.
lesions in horses with lymphosarcoma: 21
 pheochromocytoma. Progressin
281 Cerc B (1996) Surgery and
cases (1977-1997). Journaf of the
Veterinary and Comparative
chemotherapy for the treatment of
American Veterimary Medical Association
Ophthatmofogy 2:129-132.
adenocarcinoma of the iris and ciliary
212:852-854.
268 Kilrain CG, Saik JE, Jeglum KA (1994)
body in five dogs. Veterinary and
255 Cello R, Hutcherson B (1963) Ocular
Malignant angioendotheliomatosis with
Comparative Ophthatmology 6:265-270.
changes in malignant lymphoma of dogs.
retinal detachments in a dog. Jourma! of
 282 Peiffer RL (1997) Letters to the editor:
Cornelfl Veterimarian 52:492-523.
the American Veterimary Medica!
adenocarcinoma cormmentary. Veterinary
256 Lavach JD (1984) Disserminated
Association 204:918-921.
and Comparative Ophthalmology 7.
 neoplasia presenting with ocular signs: a
269 Barron C, Saunders L, Seibold H, Heath
283 Gaunt PS, Confer AW, Carter JD,
report of two cases. Journat of the
M (1963) Intraocular tumors in animals.
Trucksa RC, Neafie RC, Litchtenfels JR
American Animat Hospitaf Association
V. Transmissible veneral tumor of dogs.
(1982) Intraocular strongylidiasis in a
20:459-462.
American Journal of Veterinary Research
dog. Journat of the Americam Anima!
257 Ladds P, Gelatt K, Strafuss A, Mosier J
24:1263-1269
Hospitaf Association 18:120-122.
(1970) Canine ocular adenocarcinoma of
 270 Szymanski C {1972) Bilateral rmetastatic
rmammary origin. Journa! of the
intraocular hemangiosarcoma in a dog.
American Veterimary Medical Association
Journat of the American Veterinary
156:63-68.
Medica! Association 161:803-805.
337
12
Glaucoma
INTRODUCTION
ultrafiltration and active secretion. The emphasis on the
importance of secretion versus ultrafiltration has varied over
Glaucoma is traditionally defined as an elevation of the
the years, but it is now thought that active secretion is the
IOP beyond that which is compatible with the health of
most important process in aqueous humor formation and
the eye. Elevation of IOP may arise from a variety of
takes place in the nonpigmented ciliary epithelium.
causes and, thus, is a final common pathway for many
Hydrostatic and oncotic pressures in the ciliary processes are
 disease processes. Therefore, glaucoma is a sign and not
not great enough to promote ultrafiltration as a major
 the basic disease itself and every effort should be made to
 mntributor of aqueous humor production. While species 
understand why the IOP is elevated.
variations exist in aqueous humor composition and,
 In the last decade, human glaucoma has been defined
perhaps, in formation, Na+/K+-activated ATPase is thought
as a progressive optic neuropathy with elevation of the
to be the major transporter of solutes into the aqueous
IOP being only one of the causes for optic neuropathy.
a suoe uoeoo isaqy u punog si pue on
Glaucoma
a is now considered a neurodegenerative
lateral cellular membranes of the nonpigmented epithelium?.
diseasel-3. In time, veterinary medicine may also
 Sodium is thought to be transported into the intercellular
dhannels, creating an osmotic gradient that pulls fluid into
humans and we may shift our focus in treating glaucoma
 the channels and thence into the posterior chamber. Oubain,
from controlling IOP to treating neurodegeneration.
which inhibits Na+/K+-activated ATPase, decreases aqueous
Glaucoma results in blindness if it is not controlled
humor production by up to 70%. Carbonic anhydrase
and thus has to be considered one of the main causes of
inhibitors (CAIs) have long been known to decrease aqueous 
a 'potentially' treatable blindness. In a survey of 162,000
humor production, but theories on the mechanism have been
dogs seen at veterinary teaching hospitals, the diagnosis
 somewhat controversial. CAIs decrease both sodium and
of glaucoma was made in one out of every 204 patients4.
bicarbonate transport into the aqueous humor, although
In one review, glaucoma represented almost 9% of
how this coupling occurs is unknown*. The endogenous 
ophthalmologic diagnoses5, 6.
influences on aqueous humor formation are multiple,
complex, and incompletely understood.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
AQUEOUS HUMOR EGRESS
 Once secreted into the posterior chamber, aqueous
humor passes through the pupil and exits the eye
processes in the posterior chamber by a process of passive
 through the iridocorneal angle (angle) (12.1). Fluid in
12.1 Normal canine iridocorneal angle
12.1
illustrating the alternative routes by which
aqueous humor can egress from the angle region.
 Arrows 1 and 2 indicate the major aqueous
humor flow through the vascular pathway5.
Aqueous hurmor is collected from the trabecular
mesh work into the large scleral venous plexu5 
and may exit anteriorly into the anterior ciliary
and conjunctival vein, or posteriorly into the 
vortex venous 5ystem. Arrow 3 indicates the
uveoscleral flow through the ciliary muscle
interstitium to the suprachoroid. (From
Martin, 198373]
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VeTeRINARY MeDICINE
12.2
12.3
12.2 Scanning electron micrograph of a normal canine iridocorneal
12.3 Frontal view of the canine iridocorneal angle. (1: iris;
angle as viewed from the anterior chamber or on a gonioscopic
2: pectinate ligament; 3: uveal trabecula; 4: corneal endothelium.]
view. The iris is pulled down and the cornea excised (x21]. (From
(SEM x60.] (From Martin, 197534.)
Martin, 197534]
12.4
12.5
12.5 Feline
iridocorneal
angle on sagittal
section.
{1: anterior
chamber;: 2: iris;
 3: pectinate
ligament;
4: uveal
trabecula filling 
the 5: ciliary
cleft; 6: aqueous
plexus; 7: scleral
venous plexus.]
(SEM x43.] (From 
Martin and
Anderson,
12.4 Histologic section of the normal canine iridocorneal angle.
198114]
(1 : limbus; 2: plexus venosus sclerae; 3: collecting veins; 4: aqueous
plexus; 5: anterior chamber; 6: pectinate ligament (accessory row) :
7: ciliary cleft filled with 8: uveal trabecula; 9: corneoscleral trabecula;
10: ciliary body: 11: iris.) (From Martin and Anderson, 198114.)
12.6
 the angle passes through the pectinate ligament to the ciliary
deft or sinus (12.2, 12.3). The ciliary cleft is flled with a
porous uveal trabecular network (12.4, 12.5) Lying external 
to the uveal trabecular meshwork is the comeoscleral
trabecular meshwork, which separates the small aqueous
pexus from the ciliary cleft (12.4). The aqueous plexus
Sa al an 0 a P ls Aa ae sa55
veins and finally into the scleral venous plexus {12.1, 12.4,
12.6). The scleral veins communicate freely with episcleral
veins, anterior ciliary veins, and the vortex venous system
(12.1)9-12. Arteriovenous anastomosis between the anterior
diliary artery and the scleral veins has been demonstrated to
A system of fine capillaries, that are nomally bloodless, run
radially to drain the aqueous humor from the corneoscleral
meshwork. These have been variously termed trabecular
veins or capillaries, aqueous veins, angular plexus, or
12.6 Aqueous plexus of a dog viewed on sagittal view. (1: collecting vein;
2: trabecular plexus or aqueous plexus; 3: corneoscleral meshwork.] The
limbus but does have some circumferential anastomosis
inner surface of the trabecular meshwork is covered by a sheet of cells
between channels. The plexus arises within the corneoscleral
(open arrow)]. Holes are present in the sheet but may represent artifact in
meshwork (12.6), with outpockets or diverticulae. It drains
preparation. Dark arrow denotes the direction of the anterior chamber.
into larger collecting vessels that join the circumferentially
(SEM x411)
GLAUCOMA
12.7 Normal equine
2.7
12.8 Goniophotograph 
12.8
iridocorneal angle on 
of a canine iridocorneal
histology. Note a large
angle with landrmarks.
ciliary cleft at the base
(1 : deep pigmented
of the iris with a large
zone; 2: superficial
uveal trabecula and a
pigmented zone;
lack of a significant 
 3: uveal trabeculae
vascular systerm in the
in ciliary cleft;
adjacent sclera 
4: conjunctiva through
compared to the 
the cornea; 5: iris:
dog (H&tE).
 6: major arterial circle;
7: peculnate ligament;
8: pupil.]
(types I, III, IV, V, VI, and VI), elastin, and the adhesive
12.9 High power
12.9
 gycoproteins fibronectin, laminin, and vitronectin28. A
goniophotograph of a
variety of influences such as glucocorticoids, growth factors,
canine iridocorneal
and MMPs affect the ECM. Weinstein et al.28a demonstrated
angle.
MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the normal canine aqueous and
iridocomeal angle. Latent MMP-2 was highest in the
u uul saaa snoieuooneg ul rauay sem pue snoanbe
normotensive eyes. Within the trabecular meshwork, latent
MMP-9 and active MMP-2 were the relevant MMPs and
Myocilin is a glycoprotein that is present in the eyes of
dogs and humans and has been studied recently due to the
association of a mutant mycolin gene with primary open
angle glaucoma (POAG) in humans. In the normal dog it can
  n sa  a te 
be found in the aqueous and localized to the smooth muscle
scleral venous plexus in the mid sclera. The scleral venous
of the iris and ciliary body, endothelial cells, cytoplasm of the
pexus communicates posteriorly with the vortex venous
nonpigmented ciliary epithelium, and the trabecular
system, draining the posterior uvea, and anteriorly with the
meshwork extracellular matrix and adjacent sclera. It is
episcleral venous plexus (see Chapter 11, p.298, 11.2), 11,12.
elevated in some humans with POAG and in Beagles with
The method of entry of aqueous humor into the vascular
 POAG. The role in the disease is yet to be clarified28b, 28c.
channels is unknown: two proposed routes are intracelluar
 In addition to aqueous humor outflow via the aqueous
or transcellular channels and intercellular channels.
plexus and venous channels, an unconventional or
Intracellular channels are thought to occur through giant
uveoscleral flow of fluid has been demonstrated in yarious
vacuoles or macropinocytosis17. These channels are
 species, including the dog, cat, and horse29-3 The
sensitive to IOP changes18, i9. The significance and, indeed,
uveoscleral route passes through the ciliary cleft and into
the existence
 of intracellular
vacuoles  has  been
the ciliary muscle interstitium to the suprachoroidal space,
to be absorbed by the choroidal veins and trans-sclerally to
be more important for the intravascular transport of
the orbital lymphatics {12.1). The relative importance of
aqueous humor20,22 The author, among others, has only
the two pathways varies with the species. The uveoscleral
route accounts for 1s% of aqueous humor dispersal in the
endothelium of the aqueous plexus1s. Direct channels from
dog32 but only 3% in the cat29. While not measured in the
the trabecular meshwork to the capillaries can be easily
horse, the uveoscleral flow is thought to be important based
 demonstrated with injection techniques and scanning
on microsphere injection?3. Additionally, in the horse a
electron microscopy (12.6)14, 20, 23.
uveovortex flow was demonstrated from the large ciliary
The extracellular matrix {ECM) of the the trabecular
sinus at the base of the iris {12.7, Chapter 11, p.298, 11.6).
meshwork has been of interest to investigators because it is
Spheres from this space progress into the iris vessels and
thought to be the main source of resistance to aqueous
then to the vortex venous system33.
humor outflow from the eye, and alterations within it may
be the elusive underlying cause for open-angle glaucoma. The
GONIOSCOPIC ANATOMY
ECM consists of a variety of macromolecules, of which the
The terminology utilized in describing structures of the
GAGs have been of particular interest because of the
iridocorneal angle has varied greatly over time and with
observation that perfusion of hyaluronidase in the anterior
investigator.  Recently, Samuelson16 summarized the
chamber reduces the outflow resistance24, 2s. GAGs are
historical comparative  anatomy  and terminology of
demonstrable in the trabecular meshwork and trabecular
mammalian iridocorneal angles. In carnivores, the
capillaries. Alterations in the composition of GAGs may
 predominant structure on frontal or gonioscopic view is the 
result in changes in resistance to aqueous humor outflow26,
pectinate ligament, which is composed of strands that
27. Chondroitin sulfate is the major GAG present in the
originate from the base of the iris and insert on the peripheral
 normal Beagle27. Other constituents of the ECM are collagen
inner cornea (12.2, 12.3, 12.5, 12.8, 12.9). Strands of the
340
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
ligament are usually single but may have branching
trabeculae are extensions of the longitudinal ciliary muscle
mnnections to adjacent ligaments. Thinner strands originate
that lines the inner sclera and inserts at the point of the
behind the primary row of the pectinate ligament to form an
pectinate ligament insertion. In the horse, a supraciliary
space filled with trabeculae lies external to the ciliary
mlor as the iris and, therefore, are usually pigmented. On
muscle and is the entrance for the uveoscleral flowl4, 37.
histologic section the pectinate ligament strands are usually
The feline iridocorneal angle is similar to the dog,
incomplete, because the section is unlikely to be cut parallel
except that the pectinate ligament tends to be longer and
to the full length of the ligament strand (12.4).
more slender (12.5, 12.10). In the horse and other
The pectinate ligament inserts on the inner peripheral
cornea at a uniform level and, in most instances, is
and is more of a sheet with pores near the iris {12.7,
associated  with deep corneal 
pigment near the
termination of Descemet's membrane. This forms a
scleral venous plexus is much less developed (12.7) and a
pigmented zone {deep) that is visible on gonioscopy. The
large ciliary cleft is present that extends into the base of
pigment continues to line the shelf of the limbus or
the iris14, 16, 37, 38
corneoscleral overlap and is visible on gonioscopy as the
Theoretically,
, increased IOP may occur from an
superficial pigment zone (12.8). This zone is grayer, as it
increased rate of aqueous humor production, obstruction
is viewed through the intervening cornea ll The presence
to aqueous humor outflow either at the pupil or angle
of the pigmented zones varies between dogs as well as in
region, or an increased episcleral and orbital venous 
various quadrants of the same eye.
hydrostatic pressure. In practice, the obstruction to outflow
at the pupil or angle is the usual cause of glaucoma. It may
The pectinate ligament is the predominant structure
be that the other two possibilities are important but are
visualized on gonioscopy; if it is not observed, it is 
difficult to assess in clinical veterinary medicine.
beca use of angle pathology, the angle of
 observation is incorrect, or the goniolens is not
positioned correctly on the corneal apex.
CLINICAL SIGNS OF GLAUCOMA
 Posterior to the pectinate ligament lies the ciliary cleft
 Since glaucoma is a sign rather than the basic disease, it is
that is filled with fine interwoven nonpigmented fibers of
necessary to study each case as thoroughly as possible to
the ciliary or uveal trabecular meshwork (12.3, 12.4,
determine the underlying cause(s). Externally, the signs of
12.5). The spaces of the trabecular meshwork are often
glaucoma are too nonspecific in the majority of primary
termed the spaces of Fontana36. On gonioscopy, the
glaucoma cases to help differentiate the cause, so special
individual uveal trabecular beams are not recognized and
the region of the uveal trabecular meshwork is seen as a
bluish-white zone behind or through the pectinate
The signs of glaucoma vary between species, degree
ligament (12.8-12.10)11, 34. External (sclerad) to the loose
of elevation of IOP, cause of the glaucoma, and 
uveal trabecular meshwork are the more compact
chronicity. The dog tends to have the most florid
trabeculae of the corneoscleral trabecular meshwork
signs; the horse and cat have more subtle forms.
[ i i t ( 
12.10
12.11
12.11 Combined
sagittal and frontal
view of an equine
iridocorneal angle.
 Note the pectinate
liga ment that is
sheet-like with
holes near the iris 
(1) base (SEM x178).
(CE: corneal
endothelium.)
CE
12.10 Goniophotograph of a feline iridocorneal angle. Note the long 
slender pectinate ligament that does not contrast very much with the
uveal trabecula because of the lighter pigmentation.
GLAUCOMA
341
INCREASED INTRAOCULAR PRESSURE
PUPIL AND IRIS CHANGES
High normal IOP for the dog has historically been quoted as 
Changes in pupil function are common but not specific
25-30 mmHg {3.3-4.0 kPa) and should not vary between
signs of glaucoma. Elevation in IOP impairs function
of the iris sphincter muscle more than the function of
 and MacKay44 used four different applanation tonometers in
the dilator muscle. This results in a defect in the
a variety of breeds and found a mean canine IOP of
efferent arm of the PLR that is nonresponsive to
19 mmHg (2.5 kPa), with a range of 11-29 mmHg (1.5-3.9
pilocarpine 
constriction6. The 
impairment
is
kPa). No differences were noted between breeds measured
associated with, but not entirely due to, iris ischemia
but IOP did decrease with age by 2-4 mmHg (0.3-0.5 kPa).
that develops when the IOP exceeds the diastolic blood
Uilizing th TonoPen,Miller t al45 46 rported a mean 
pressures7. Because most veterinary, patients are
of 17±4 mmHg ((2.3±0.5 kPa) in the dog, 20±6 mmHg
presented with IOPs that are very high, i.e. ≥S0-60
(2.7±0.8 kPa) in the cat, and 23 mmHg {3.1 kPa) in the
mmHg (6.7-8.0 kPa), the pupil is usually dilated if
horse. In two studies comparing rebound tonometry (Tono-
there are no iris adhesions {12.12). If the IOP is around
Vet) with applanation tonometry (TonoPen), the rebound
30 mmHg (4.0 kPa), the pupils may be normal in their
tonometer mean IOP in the dog was 9 mmHg versus a mean
light reaction or miotic due to uveitis or PG release
IOP of 11 mmHg for the applanation tonometer and
(12.13),. With chronicity the iris may undergo atrophy,
11 mmHg versus 13 mmHg, respectively; in the horse the
which further interferes with function. Iridodonesis
rebound tonometer mean IOP was 22 mmHg and the
(trembling of the iris) may occur due to a lack of
applanation tonometer mean IOP was 21 mmHg46a, 46b.
support from a displaced lens.
Diurnal IOP variations occur; in the dog, IOP is 2-4 mmHg
 s   a   ( 1oo
variation  in endogenous  catecholamines47. I
IOP
remarkably similar across a variety of species. Diurnal
variations have been recorded in the cat, with IOP about
 4 mmHg higher during the dark cycle (9 PM to 3 AM)47a.
12.12
 In the horse_ particularily, the head position while
measuring the IOP is critical. It is the author's experience that
 equine IOPs can be quite labile, with marked differences in
the same horse. Komaromy et al.47b noted that the IOP in
horses varied significantly with the head position in relation
to the heart. The mean difference between head up and head
down position was 8 mm Hg, but in some individuals it was
as much as 28 mm Hg.
Elevated IOP is the only specific sign of active
gaucoma. The most practical measuring instrument
based on cost in small animal ophthalmology is the
Schiotz tonometer (see Chapter 1, p.11). Two tables
 calibrating the Schiotz tonometer for use in the dog
12.12 A cat with unilateral glaucoma, with the most obvious sign of
have been published and they yield IOPs several units
pupil dilation, producing anisocoria. Note the lack of obvious corneal
higher than human tables48, 49.
 Glaucoma  will
be
edema and conjunctival injection of the limited exposed sclera.
dagnosed in many normal dogs if these conversion
tables are used. Canine and feline IOP taken with
applanation tonometry correlates most closely with
12.13
instruments) and, while differences exist, they are not
clinically significant50, 51
Schiotz tonometers are frequently purchased by
veterinarians but are infrequently used.
Consequently, erroneous readings are common and
confidence in the results is often lacking.
In general, the TonoPen overestimates the real IOP in
the normal and low range and underestimates the real
IOP in the elevated ranges2, s3. The variations from real
IOP are not clinically significant and do not cause
diagnostic dilemmas.
The TonoPen and the TonoVet are the preferred
tonometers because of their accuracy, ease of use, and
adaptability to various species, but they are relatively
expensive fapproximately 3,000 Us$, see Chapter 1,
horizontal plane. These tonometers are easy to use and
12.13 Selective large vessel injection of the bulbar conjunctiva
will potentially pay for themselves if tonometry is
routinely performed in general practice.
(4.0-5.3 kPa]. Note the lack of pupillary dilation.
342
OpHThAlMIC DisEASe In VeTeRINArY MeDICinE
12.15
12.16
12.14 A Basset Hound with acute intraocular
12.15 Marked buphthalmos in a 4-month-old 
12.16 Marked selective conjunctival
pressure of >80 mmHg (10.7 kPa]. Intense 
dog that developed subsequent to a
hyperemia and staphyloma from scleral
conjunctival hyperemia, pupil dilation, corneal
 perforating cat claw injury.
thinning in a Basset Hound with chronic
edema, and a 3+ flare in the anterior chamber
glaucoma.
were present. The aqueous humor protein was
4.5 g/dl (45 g/l).
CONGESTION OF EPISCLERAL VESSELS AND
Suouenq no as ao o auo s is pue juauad
CONJUNCTIVAL VEINS
deep curvilinear double white lines (12.18). They may or
Due to the free communication of the ocular venous
may not be associated with corneal edema. In the horse,
system, when the posterior intrascleral venous channels are
acute breaks in Descemet's membrane with edema are often
obstructed from scleral distention, the anterior ciliary veins
the presenting sign of glaucoma. Breaks in Descemet's
and episcleral veins become distended. This is typically a
membrane are quite specific for a history of glaucoma but the
selective injection of the episcleral and large conjunctival
process may not be active at the time of examination.
veins but may, with very acute high pressures or PG release,
Descemet's membrane breaks are one of the most consistent
 involve the entire conjunctival vasculature {12.13, 12.14).
signs with equine glaucoma but striate keratopathy has also
The horse and cat have minimal to modest congestion of
been observed in equine eyes without glaucoma {see Striate
the episcleral and conjunctival veins with glaucoma. In
keratopathy, p.252).
addition, these species have tight lid-globe conformation
Corneal scarring or pannus is observed in chronic
which makes observation difficult. In the horse, the lack of
 glaucoma where chronic edema, corneal hypesthesia, and
congestion may be related to the lack of or rudimentary
repeated trauma
have occurred (12.19). Corneal
scleral venous plexus.
 epithelial erosions may occur associated with repeated
trauma of tonometry or a reaction to topical anesthetics.
BUPHTHALMOS
OCULAR PAIN
Buphthalmos fenlargement of the globe) is frequent in the
dog, cat, and horse due to high IOP and distensible sclera.
Manifestations
of
pain
or
discomfort
with
Buphthalmos occurs most rapidly and dramatically in the
uncomplicated glaucoma are often subtle and are related
 young puppy or kitten with glaucoma (12.15). Staphyloma 
to changes in temperament, activity, and general well
may develop from the extreme thinning of the sclera
being, rather than obvious ocular discomfort such as
(12.16). Prolonged elevated IOP produces permanent
blepharospasm. In humans, the pain of acute high IOP is
enlargement, despite spontaneous or therapeutic lowering
one of a radiating headache. Owners frequently note the
of the IOP. Corneal measurements can be used to detect
temperament changes after the animal improves, rather
questionable enlargements, especially if unilateral. Normal.
than as it
worsens.
Glaucoma associated  with
horizontal diameter is 15-17 mm in the dog and 17 mm in
inflammation often has more acute pain.
the cat. Enlargement of the globe can only be caused by
gla ucoma but the presence of buphthalmos does not imply
As advocates for the patient, the clinician must
an active glaucoma. Many chronic buphthalmic eyes are
assume pain is present with most forms of
soft due to atrophy of the ciliary body with resultant lack
glaucoma and encourage some form of resolution
of aqueous humor secretion. Buphthalmos should be
for ocular pain.
differentiated from exophthalmos.
CORNEAL OPACIFICATION
RETINAL AND OPTIC NERVE CHANGES
Corneal opacities may be due to edema, breaks in
The observable fundus changes with glaucoma vary from
Descemet's membrane, or pannus in chronic glaucoma.
Aaa u aeu aeldedad pur rupded aqissd
Corneal edema is due to endothelial damage or
acute cases to the more common optic disk cupping, optic
ompromise and is rapidly reversible when the IOP is
disk atrophy, peripapillary retinal atrophy, focal infarcts of
lowered Edema may be very dense or very faint (bedewing)
the retina, diffuse retinal atrophy, and attenuation of retinal
(12.17). Glaucoma associated with an anteriorly displaced
vessels (12.20-12.22). Optic nerve cupping is the most
lens typically has a circular area of corneal edema where the
specific of the fundus changes {12.23) but is difficult to
lens touches the cornea. Descemet's membrane breaks are
detect early in the dog, due to the marked variation in the
GLAUCOMA
343
12.17
12.18
12.19
12.17 Corneal edema associated with
12.18 Breaks in Descemet's membrane 
12.19 Advanced pannus or scarring in a
glaucoma in a Basset Hound.
producing curvilinear white tracts in a horse 
Wirehaired Fox Terrier with absolute or long-
with glaucoma. Note the subluxated lens.
 standing glaucoma.
12.20
12.21
12.22
12.20 Ocular fundus of a Siberian Husky with 
12.21 Fundus of a dog with acute glaucoma.
12.22 Canine fundus with diffuse tapetal
acute closed-angle glaucoma. The optic disk is 
 The gray areas surrounding the optic disk are
hyperreflectivity, retinal vascular attenuation,
cupped with retinal vessels stopping at the
acute retinal infarcts. At this time the vessels,
optic disk atrophy, and cupping from chronic 
 edge of the disk. Peripapillary hemorrhages
tapetum, and optic nerve appear normal.
glaucoma.
and white choroidal infarcts are present. (From 
Martin and vestre, 198576.)
myelination of the optic disk. With progression the disk
12.23
becomes atrophied (12.20, 12.22). The cat normally has a
small unmyelinated disk that is cupped and tan to black;
onsequently, the usual signs of atrophy are difficult to
 recognize even in advanced glaucoma.
DECREASED VISION
Vision loss with glaucoma is variable; in some patients it
may become permanent within 2-3 days, while some
patients may retain vision despite chronically elevated
 pressures. The degree and rapidity of elevation of IOP
are probably responsible for these variations in tolerance.
Grozdanic et al.s7a experimentally elevated the IOP
above systolic blood pressure {100-160 mmHg) for one
hour and evaluated the eyes for 28 days. One day post
elevation all eyes were blind judged by an absent menace
response, although 5/14 had positive PLR and 10/14 had
a positive dazzle reflex. Two weeks after the elevation all
the dogs had a positive menace, PLR, and dazzle reflex
12.23 Photomicrograph with marked optic nerve cupping from
despite finding significant thinning of the ventral retina
chronic glaucoma in a dog (H&E).
utilizing optical coherence tomography. Damage to the
retina and optic nerve is thought to arise from two
mechanisms:
+ Ischemic changes to the retina.
344
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
 Blockage of axoplasmic flow of the ganglion cells at the
DIAGNOSIS OF GLAUCOMA
lamina cribrosa from a deregistering of the pores. The
lamina cribrosa is the weak point of the fibrous tunic
All of the signs of glaucoma except elevated IOP are
 and elevated IOP results in outward bowing, causing the
nonspecific  for active glaucoma.
Despite
this,
 pores within it to deregister. This misalignment pinches
veterinarians still seek to make the diagnosis without this
key piece of information because the tonometer is not
probably only affect axoplasmic flow, whereas the usual
considered a basic instrument in practice. The diagnosis
high IOP observed in the dog produces ischemia as well
of glaucoma per se is only the first step. The second step
as obstructing axoplasmic flow. Retinal ischemia is
is to determine the cause of the glaucoma.
presumably responsible for the diffuse full-thickness
retinal atrophy observed on histopathology with many
Early diagnosis of glaucoma can only be
forms of high pressure glaucoma. The retinal ganglion
 accomplished with a tonometer; early therapy has
cells are the most sensitive cells in the retina to ischemia,
the best chance of preventing blindness.
and alpha neurons with large diameter axons are most
 sensitive to hypoxia and glaucoma62.
PROVOCATIVE TESTING
At the molecular level, ganglion cell death may be caused
Attempts to predict a predisposition to glaucoma by
by excitotoxins, whether initiated by traumatic or vascular
provocative  testing
have not met with widespread
injury. Glutamate is one excitotoxin that has been studied
acceptance, due to the difficulty in reproducibility in
extensively.(
Glutamate  is t
the primary excitatory
mtrained animals, expense, difficulties in interpretation, and
neurotransmiter in the CNS and retina and the most
risk. Testing for glaucoma susceptibility has been performed
abundant free amino acid in the CNS. Glutamate binds to
with the water provocative test, tonography, and mydriasis.
several receptors that are all ion channels. One important
glutamate receptor, N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA),
is
Water loading
highly permeable to calcium. Ischemia or trauma to cells
The water provocative tests forces a water load (1 l), given
results in increased permeability of the cell membrane and
by stomach tube, onto the vascular system and produces a
the release of glutamate from the damaged cell. Increased
subsequent increased rate of aqueous humor formation. The
levels of glutamate in the extracellular environment 
of
normal dog may have an increase in IOP of 3-9 mmHg
adjacent normal cells produces an overstimulation of the
(0.4-1.2 kPa) at 1 hour68, 69. If the aqueous humor outflow
NMDA receptors on the cell membrane and a resultant
channels are compromised, the elevation of IOP is beyond
influx of toxic levels of intracellular calcium. Toxic levels of
the normal range. Acute glaucoma has been produced by
intracellular calcium result in activation of a variety
o
this test and so it is not without risk.
calcium dependent enzymes and apoptosis (cell death)63, 64.
This may become a self-perpetuating process and explains
Tonography
how retinal and optic nerve degeneration continues to
Tonography is placing the weight of a tonometer (usually a
progress despite normalization of IOP in some patients.
Schiotz) on the cornea for a specific time period (usually
Increased glutamate levels have been found in the vitreous
4 minutes) and observing the decay of IOP due to the weight
 of humans, rabbits, and dogs with glaucoma65-67.
of the tonometer If the aqueous humor outflow channels are
compromised, the decay is not as great as in a normal eye.
FLARE IN THE ANTERIOR CHAMBER
The C value fcoeffcient of facility of aqueous humor
Many of the very congestive cases of glaucoma have high
outflow  is 0.240.30
μl/mmHg/min in the dog,
aqueous humor protein content, as well as pigment clumps
0.34 μl/mmHg/min in the cat, and 0.24 μl/mmHg/min in
floating in the anterior chamber. The significance of the
humans. While tonography has been used in research
breakdown in the blood-aqueous humor barrier is
mlonies of dogs with glauooma, it has not become a clinical
unknown; it may be due to the anterior uveitis that had
 tool despite its advocates70., 71.
precipitated the glaucoma, or the high pressure may ha ve
liberated PGs that broke down the blood-aqueous barier.
Provocative testing for glaucoma is rarely
On histopathology of 100 dogs with goniodysgenesis-
 performed in clinical veterinary ophthalmology.
associated glaucoma, pigment dispersion in the anterior
segment fevidenced by loss or clumping of posterior iris
pigment), pigment in the trabecular meshwork or pigment
12.22
12.24 Ventrolateral
cells in the ventral iridocorneal angle was present in 96 of
subluxation of the 
100 dogs and neutrophils in the trabecular meshwork in
lens secondary to
acute cases in 86% of the dogs67a.
buphthalmos in a
dog with glaucoma.
LENTICULAR CHANGES
 Note the aphakic
Subluxation of the lens is often associated with stretching
crescent
of the globe and rupture of part of the zonules (12.18,
dorsomedially.
12.24). Since lens displacement can be an active rather
than a passive component in the pathogenesis
of
glaucoma, it is important to try to determine the cause of
the displacement. The degree of buphthalmos and close
examination of the opposite eye are important in
determining the role of the lens in glaucoma. Cataract
formation is common with chronic gla ucoma.
GLAUCOMA
345
Table 12.1 Proposed classification of veterinary glaucomas
 Open-angle glaucoma. Glaucoma associated with a normal
●Slack zonules with forward displacement of the lens that
iridocorneal angle.
 creates a pupil blockage which further aggravates the
A. Primary open-angle glaucoma. Glaucoma associated with
anterior displacement of the peripheral iris (12.27). In the
 a normal angle, with no obvious anatomic precipitating
yonon isowje on se jej os piemuoy ysnd Aew sual aun 'ten
factors, bilateral disease potential, and a genetic
the cornea.
●Shallow anterior chamber associated with a small 
predisposition.
anterior ocular segment. This creates a narrow
B. Secondary open-angle glaucoma. Glaucoma associated 
iridocorneal angle (in degrees) and is more susceptible to
with an open angle, but aqueous contents or vascular
pupillary blockade and subsequent forward displacement
hypertension interfere with aqueous egress:
of the peripheral iris and angle closure (12.28, 12.12).
1. Inflammation: cells, fibrin, or serum obstruct outflow 
●Plateau iris: the iris plane is flat but the peripheral iris has
pathways.
a recess adjacent to the iris which is susceptible to
 2. Hyphema: erythrocytes and fibrin obstruct outflow
closure if pupillary blockage occurs (12.29].
pathways.
 B. Secondary closed-angle glaucoma. Acquired lesions
 3. Obstruction of orbital venous return: orbital lesion,
 arteriovenous fistula, or other causes of an elevated
precipitate closure of a normal angle. Also, the angle
episcleral venous pressure that decreases the pressure
conformations listed under (2) below (bullet points 1-3) have
differential favoring aqueous humor uptake.
an increased susceptibility to pupillary blockage.
 4. Pigment deposition or proliferation in the angle that
1. Associated with pupil block:
obstructs aqueous humor outflow.
● Intumescent cataract (12.30).
 5. Anterior luxated lens: lens may obstruct access to the
● Posterior synechia, iris bombe (12.31].
 angle and aqueous humor outflow.
●Subluxa ted lens (12.25).
6. Vitreous herniation with aphakia/displaced lens (12.25].
●Vitreous herniation with aphakia/displaced lens (see
12.32].
Closed-angle glaucoma. Angle is collapsed or covered with
● Increased volume in vitreous compartment pushes lens-
 peripheral iris or connective tissue.
 iris diaphragm forward.
A. Primary closed-angle glaucoma:
 2. No pupil blockage:
1. Congenital maldeveloped angle (goniodysgenesis,
●Neoplasia invasion of angle and iris (12.33].
pectinate ligament dysplasia]. Angles are bilatera lly
● Inflammation with peripheral anterior synechia.
involved, often breed predisposition, age of onset varies
●Displaced lens pushing iris base forward (see 12.25).
(12.26].
● Fibrovascular proliferation over angle.
 2. Acquired closure associated with abnormal anterior
chamber conformation:
Anfui bupeiojad io Aiabins jo uoeodwm
●Pigment proliferation in the angle with obstruction. Cause
is unknown.
CLASSIFICATION OF GLAUCOMA
12.25
The classification of glaucoma in veterinary medicine
human medicine. This approach is probably valid up to a
 certain point but species differences in anatomy and genetic
traits have produced marked differences in the prevalence
of the different forms of glaucoma72. Glaucoma is broadly
divided into primary and secondary forms. Primary
gaucoma has an implied familial and bilateral tendency.
Simplistically, primary glaucoma has no antecedent ocular
disease associated with the pressure rise40. Secondary
glaucoma is associated with concurrent or antecedent
12.25 llustration of a tilted subluxated lens pushing forward on the
intraocular disease. Confusion with these definitions occurs
peripheral iris, closing the iridocorneal angle or collapsing the ciliary
when some of the causes of apparent secondary glaucoma
deft. Vitreous herniation through the pupil may create a pupillary
 are closely investigated, because the obvious secondary
block or obstruct the angle. (From Martin, 198373.)
cause may have been only a precipitating factor on a
 compensated, but abnormal, system.
Congenital glaucoma is associated with congenital
anterior segment anomalies and, in humans, may manifest
up to the fourth decade in life (translated = 8 years in the
dog?). As the term is a misnomer based on time of onset, and
dsease73. As we learn more about the pathogenesis of
this is the only form of glaucoma where age is considered, it
gaucoma, this definition may need modification.
would seem appropriate to place the cause(s) of congenital
Absolute glaucoma is a term frequently used and is
gaucoma under the appropriate primary or secondary forms
simply an end-stage blind eye from any cause of
of glaucoma and to redefine primary glaucoma. Therefore,
 glaucoma and thus has no etiologic connotation.
primary glaucoma can be defined as a glaucoma that is not
A basic assumption when classifying glaucoma is
associated solely with acquired intraocular lesions or
knowledge of the status of the iridocorneal angle, since
346
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
12.26
12.27
12.26 llustration of goniodysgenesis that is characterized by a sheet
12.27 Ilustration of forward placement of the lens-iris diaphragm
 covering the angle where the pectinate ligament would normally be
that reduces the depth of the anterior chamber and creates a pupil
visualized. Flow holes are usually present in the sheet on the corneal
block. Note the iris hugs the lens 5o firmly it outlines the lens.
side. (From Martin, 198373.)
(From Martin, 198373)
12.28
12.29
12.28 llustration of a small anterior chamber that creates a narrow
12.29 llustration of a plateau iris that is characterized by a reces5
iridocorneal angle. This is more susceptible to closure if pupillary
in the periphery of the iris plane and then a plateau or flat plane
block should occur from lens growth or pathologic conditions. (From
centrally. On gonioscopy this may look like a closed angle unless the
Martin, 198373]
lens is tilted toward the angle under observation. It may lead to
peripheral anterior synechiae due to close apposition of adjacent
tissues. (From Martin, 198373)
12.30
12.31
12.30 llustration of how an intumescent cataractous lens shallows
12.31 llustration of pupil seclusion from posterior synechiae
the anterior chamber, producing a relative pupillary block, which may
resulting in iris bombe. The pressure head of the aqueous hurmor 
result in closed angles. Chamber conformations such as in 12.27.
 balloons the iris forward. Peripheral anterior synechiae and collapse
12.28, 12.29 may have a higher risk of closing with lens 
of the ciliary cleft sub5equently develop. (From Martin, 198373)
intumescence. (From Martin, 198373)
GLAUCOMA
347
12.32
12.33
12.32 Illustration of an anterior lens luxation and how the attached 
12.33 llustration of an intraocular tumor pushing forward on the iris
vitreous may produce a pupillary block or the lens may physically
base creating iridocorneal angle closure and infiltrating the angle to
block the iridocorneal angle. (From Martin, 198373.)
obstruct flow directly. Other mechanisms are through stirmulation of 
preiridofibrovascular membranes, hemorrhage, inflammation, and
excessive thickening of the iris to close the angles. (Frorm Martin, 198373.)
both primary and secondary glaucoma are divided into
12.34
open- and closed-angle, glaucoma. This requires
 gonioscopy or high-resolution ultrasonic biomicro-
scopy74 (see Chapter 1, p.11) .
PRIMARYOPEN-ANGLE GLAUCOMA
Open-angle glaucoma  is  relatively 
uncommon in
animals. The Beagle has an autosomal recessive form of
primary open-angle glaucoma that has been well
 documented7s. Other breeds of dogs, such as the
Norwegian Elkhound, probably have a form of primary
 In the Beagle, open-angle glaucoma is bilateral and
IOP elevations begin at 6-8 months of age. On
gonioscopy the angles are open in the early and
moderately advanced stages (12.34). In the early stages
the clinical signs are subtle and the IOP is 35-45 mmHg
(4.7-6.0 kPa). With chronicity, varying degrees of lens
displacement and a secondary closure of the angle
 progresses, the IOP is often very erratic and high and the
clinical signs are more typical of canine glaucoma.
12.34 Goniophotograph of a Beagle with moderately early open-angle
The cause of the obstruction in aqueous humor
 glaucoma. Note the relatively normal pectinate ligament and open
 outflow is unknown but GAG alterations in the angle
filtering cleft, but the lens is very round and protruding through the pupil.
have been demonstrated27. The major GAG in normal
 and glaucomatous Beagles is chondroitin sulfate and the
amount of chondroitin sulfate decreases with the
duration of the glaucoma, while an enzyme-resistant
form of a GAG increases. Myocilin increases in the
trabecular meshwork of affected Beagles and one
hypothesis is that it increases the resistance to aqueous
outflow. As with so many findings, it is not known at this
time whether it is a cause of the IOP increase or the
result, only that it is associated with increased IOp28b, 28c.
 Open-angle glaucoma is characterized by its subtlety and
for occurring in both eyes at the same time. While not
reported to have anomalous lenses, Beagles appear to
have small spherical lenses, as judged by the curvature of
the lens and the ease of observation of the lens equator
(12.34). The disease in Elkhounds appears similar to that
in the Beagle, except the age of onset of clinical signs is
 somewhat later (6-7 years) and small spherical lenses are
not observed.
348
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
12.35
PRIMARY CLOSED-ANGLE GLAUCOMA
This represents the largest group of primary glaucomas in
the dog but semantics and incomplete knowledge have
Narrow angle
created a great deal of confusion. The iridocorneal angle
may be described as closed as well as narrow. A narrow
        
Normal angle
angle and is due to a shallowing of the anterior chamber
(12.35). In veterinary medicine, the term narrow angle
has often been used to describe the apparent narrow or
collapsed “filtering zone or cleft" seen on low power
 gonioscopy, which is not necessarily related to a shallow
anterior chamber as in humans {12.36)80. This definition
 of narrow-angle glaucoma has been used to typify
glaucoma in the American Cocker Spaniel. To be
12.35 Concept of narrow angle in which the anterior chamber depth
accurate, the gonioscopic description should include
is reduced, bringing the peripheral iris closer to the cornea and being
descriptions of open, narrow, and collapsed ciliary cleft if
more susceptible to closure from pupil block.
possible, as well as open, narrow, and closed iridocorneal
angles81. It is possible to have a narrowed or closed
filtering cleft with a normal open angle (early to middle
12.36
 stage open-angle glaucoma) and an open ciliary cleft with
closed
or
almost  closed  iridocorneal_ angle
(normotensive eye with goniodysgenesis) (12.37)82
A histopathologic study of glaucomatous eyes, in
which closed iridocorneal angles were only diagnosed if
peripheral anterior synechiae were presentsi, added
further confusion to the terminology. In this study all
glaucomatous eyes, whether primary or secondary, 1)
had collapsed or closed ciliary clefts, and 2) all primary
glaucomas had obstructive tissue in front of the cleft that
was intrepreted as goniodysgenesis but were still
 classified as open-angle gla ucoma.
 For the purposes of this chapter, an angle is closed if
it is either covered or collapsed. Primary angle closure
may arise from developmental anomalies in the
pectinate ligament (goniodysgenesis, pectinate ligament
dysplasia), the result of adhesion of the iris base to the
12.36 Normotensive eye of a 4-year-old Cocker Spaniel with
inner sclera from an acquired collapse of the ciliary cleft,
unilateral glaucoma. Note the apparently narrow filtering cleft that is
or aquired obstruction from the peripheral
Iiris
actually closed or covered with a sheet that is not pigmented, except
(peripheral anterior synechiae due a narrow angle). The
for some streaks. This is typical of goniodysgenesis.
causes of acquired closure in primary glaucoma are not
known, and while most ophthalmologists believe this
phenomonon occurs, progressive closure has not been
12.37
documented in a systematic way. Acquired collapse of
the ciliary cleft is a universal histopathologic occurrence
with glaucoma but the causes for the collapse in primary
glaucoma that does not have obstruction in the angle are
 not usually understood.
One form of glaucoma that commonly occurs in the
American Cocker Spaniel is characterized by collapse of the
ciliary cleft, collapse of the pectinate ligament outward
against the cornea, and resultant angle closure. The closure
h
of an angle could also occur due to anatomic predisposition
 of a shallow anterior chamber that creates a narrow angle
(in degrees) between the plane of the iris and the cornea
(12.28, 12.29, 12.35). With a shallow anterior chamber or
narrowed iridocorneal angle, occlusion by the adjacent
peripheral iris may occur as a result of various conditions,
the most common probably being pupillary block.
Increased resistance of fluid flow through the pupil results
12.37 Photomicrograph of the normotensive eye from a Basset
 in pushing the iris base forward, which is more likely to
Hound with unilateral glaucoma. llustrates goniodysgenesis or closed
obstruct or close the iridocorneal angle because of the
angle with an open filtering cleft. Note how the base of the iris is
shallow peripheral anterior chamber. This closure may be
pulled forward. (1: anterior charmber: 2: iris; 3: limbus; 4: pectinate
acute or slow and insidious3. A gonioscopic study of
ligament dysplasia; 5: open ciliary cleft.)
Samoyeds found no relationship between goniodysgenesis
and ‘glaucoma but did correlate glaucoma with
GLAUCOMA
349
12.38
2.39
12.40
12.38 Goniophotograph of a normotensive eye of
12.39 Closed angle in a normotensive eye of
12.40 Scanning electron micrograph of a
a 2-year-old Samoyed with unilateral glaucoma.
 a Basset Hound with unilateral glaucoma.
normotensive eye of a Basset Hound with
The angle is covered or closed by a sheet of tissue
Note the narrow white zone that mimics the
unilateral glaucoma similar to 12.39. Note
that is lighter in pigmentation than the iris and 
opening of the ciliary cleft. If the eye is
the solid sheet with flow holes near the
has pigmented streaks. This simulates a narrow
normotensive, flow holes can be observed
 corneal insertion (arrows)]. (From Martin and 
cleft but open angle. This is typical of the
 around the circumference of the angle.
Wyman, 197882)
appearance and degree of goniodysgenesis that is
associated with glaucoma.
12.41  canning electron
12.41
mricrograph of the
ridocorneal angle from a
closed angles84. This study, for some reason, differentiated
1-day-old puppy Note 
between a closed angle from an unspecified cause and
the hammocking of a 
severe goniodysgenesis that manifests as a closed angle. No
fbrillar sheet (1] across
evidence for the presence of peripheral anterior synechiae
the angle with focal
was given. Further ultrasonography studies in Samoyeds
attachments to the
demonstrated that the anterior chamber is not as deep, the
 mmeal side (arrows]. The
lens is thicker and further forward, and the vitreous is
pores noted on sheets in
longer in eyes with a predisposition to glaucoma versus
the adult (12.39, 12.40)
controls84. These findings may be additive or eventual
mrespond to the
decompensating factors on a compromised closed angle
openings on the corneal
from goniodysgenesis. Every Samoyed presenting with
gide of the embryonic 
unilateral glaucoma when examined by the author has had
sheet. (2: corneal
closed angles from extensive goniodysgenesis  in the
endothelium; 3: iris.]
opposite normotensive eye (12.38).
(From Martin, 197487.)
High magnification is necessary to differentiate a
12.42
solid sheet that has linear pigment streaks that simulate
ligaments (as is common with goniodysgenesis) from a
12.42
collapsed cleft with ligaments that are pushed out and
adherent to the inner cornea {closed cleft, as is frequent
in the American Cocker Spaniel). High magnification
gonioscopy or scanning electron microscopy indicates
that they are not narrow, normal angles but closed
angles, and they are most compatible histologically
with developmental anomalies (12.37-12.40)34, 81, 8s
 To date, there is little if any evidence that the angles are
initially normal and then became closed. In fact, a
recent
study（
on Flat Coated Retrievers with
 goniodysgenesis found that the severity of the problem
 is not statistically related to age86.
 Goniodysgenesis is an arrest in the normal development
 ofthe pectinate ligament that may occur as late as 7-14 days
 post partum. The pectinate ligament arises from rarefaction
of a sheet of fibrils that arise diffusely from the peripheral
iris and insert by focal attachments to the peripheral cornea
(12.41)87. Various degrees of angle maldevelopment occur
but glaucoma is typically associated with the very severe
 Goniophotograph of a normotensive eye of a 6-month-old Basset
forms4, 34,8 86,88 9 Mie drees of arrest manifet a an
Hound. Note that about half of the angle has webbing of the
imperfectly developed but reoognizable pectinate ligament
 proximal pectinate ligament on the iris side. This is a mild anomaly
(12.42, 12.43); severe degrees of maldevelopment manifest
without significance for clinical disease.
350
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE In VeteRINAry MeDICINE
12.43
12.44
12.43 Scanning electron micrograph of a Basset Hound with modest
12.44 Photomicrograph of the iridocorneal angle of a Basset Hound
goniodysgenesis, consisting of webbing of ligaments, which is on the 
with goniodysgenesis and a closed ciliary cleft (arrows]. The opposite 
iridal side of the ligaments. (From Martin, 1975 34.85.)
eye had become glaucomatous 1 year previously and this eye had been 
quadrants and closed in others on histology and scanning electron
as a solid sheet that pulls the iris forward, creating the
microscopy. This may represent a preglaucomatous phase with
appearance of a narrow filtering cleft that is actually a
progressive closure of the cleft.
dosed angle, with small flow holes visible near the corneal
attachment if the eye is normotensive {12.36-12.40). If the
holes become obstructed, the sheet is forced outward against
the only ones) for glaucoma in eyes with goniodysgenesis.
the cornea and the ciliary cleft becomes collapsed (12.44).
Owners may relate the onset of glaucoma to a variety of
While the predisposition to primary closed-angle glaucoma
conditions such as weather (barometric changes), diet, and
is bilateral, glaucoma usually manifests sequentially. It is
stress. Many Basset Hounds are initially observed with
important to examine the “normal’ eye to determine the
miosis, flare, and low IOP that rapidly develops into florid
sequence of events in the affected eye and whether there is a
glaucoma with dilated pupils. While this might technically
nisk to the normotensive eye. The question arises, when
be called secondary glaucoma, the plasmoid aqueous
examining a diseased organ, whether the lesion is primary
humor is much more likely to obstruct an angle with a few
or secondary. This can be resolved by looking at the normal
flow holes than a normal angle. An analogy would be the
twin organ before the secondary effects of increased IOP
decompensation of a chronic nephritis patient into renal
become apparent. While the sheets of tissue are very
failure by stress such as surgery or water restriction. Is the
obvious, it may be questioned whether deeper angle
renal failure due to the stress or due to the chronic
structures are also involved  with aqueous  humor
nephritis? Whether an eye with goniodysgenesis manifests
obstruction, or what dynamics within the anterior chamber
glaucoma, at any age, is a combination of the severity of
result in sudden decompensation of a compromised
the abnormality and the presence of the appropriate stress
 iridocorneal angle. Some authors? prefer the term pectinate
to the eye. The stress may be of endogenous or exogenous
igament dysplasia as gonioscopically this is all that can be
origin and this variability will predict the difficulty in
 ascertained. Pectinate ligament dysplasia results in histologic
determining the genetics of glaucoma.
anatomic alterations in the angle, pulling the iris base
A study comparing the number of mast cells in globes
forward, and an altered relationship between the
eucleated for glaucoma and normal controls found fewer
termination of the corneoscleral trabecula and the ciliary
mast cells in the glaucomatous eyes, irrespective of the cause
deft and anomalous ligament (12.37). Thus the more
of glaucoma. The significance is unknown and it is possible
inclusive term of goniodysgenesis may be correct.
1aui ol anp payuapi uaaq aaeu iou Aew slla iseu 1eu
 Several interesting and unexplained statistics have
degranulation93. Other factors such as increased thickness of
arisen repeatedly from studies of closed-angle glaucoma.
the lens with age, forward placement of the iris and lens, and
 Several reports have found as high as a 3:1 predominance
enlargement of the vitreous may all contribute to pupillary
bock and shallowing of the peripheral anterior chamber
tends to be affected first in the American Cocker and
with eventual closure of the angle?4 (12.30). Much of this
Welsh Springer Spaniel39, 40, 89. Most cases of closed
configuration could  also be produced  l
by
severe
 angle glaucoma are presented in the winter months39-41.
uai raious jo laus e seu aeoii ieun sisauasapou
The age of onset of glaucoma varies a great deal, with
than the normal pectinate ligament. Consequently, the iris
most breeds affected by goniodysgenesis becoming
base is pulled forward (12.37) As previously cited, almost all 
tyes enucleated for goniodysplasia-related glaucoma had
but all ages, from the neonate to the aged animal, can be
pigment dispersion and inflammatory cells in the angle
affected. Closed-angle glaucoma in general occurs from
6-8 years of age39-41, 9.
 the blood-retinal barrier, and retinal inflammation were
A major unresolved 
d question  is  the  precipitating
factor(s) for glaucoma in an eye that has been
Saq sdeuad se paisaans uaag aaeu sauuy asal
compensated for years. Anterior uveitis, lipids in the
mntributory to the glaucoma, the author feels that it is more
anterior chamber, and decompressing. t
the anterior
lkely a secondary effect of acute high pressure elevations
chamber surgically have been precipitating factors fbut not
resulting in ischemia to most of the ocular structures.
GLAUCOMA
351
12.45
12.46
12.45 Goniophotograph of a normotensive eye of a 2-year-old
12.46 Goniophotograph of an American Cocker Spaniel with 
American Cocker Spaniel with an open angle, but a very tight 
moderate goniodysgenesis of half of the viewed angle (arrow].
iris-lens contact that outlines the lens through the iris (see also
12.27]. This view is not ideal for showing the angle.
The conformation of the anterior chamber may vary
12.47 Scanning
12.47
considerably between individuals, the significance of
 electron micrograph of
which is currently unknown. Individual dogs are
a 2-year-old American
observed in which the iris hugs* the lens very tightly and
Cocker Spaniel with
the outline of the lens is visible through the iris {12.30,
goniodysgenesis over
12.45). These individuals would presumably be more
about half of the angle
susceptible to pupil block and subsequent angle closure
circumference. The dog
but this has not been proven. Also, individuals are
was euthanized for
observed which have a flat plateau of an iris plane
nonocular reasons.
(plateau iris) but a recess at the iris root, which may be
(1 : cornea; 2: sheet
more susceptible to angle closure (12.29)
 over filtering cleft;
Closed-angle glaucoma is common in the Basset Hound
 3: iris; arrows: flow
and American Cocker Spaniel in the US, but a wide variety
holes.) (x56.] (From
of purebred and crossbred dogs have been observed with
Martin and Wyman,
similar gonioscopic findings41, 9s, The English Cocker
19782)
Spaniel, Samoyed, Siberian Husky, Chow Chow, Shar Pei,
Welsh Springer Spaniel, Bouvier des Flandres, Shiba Inu, and
 Hat Coated Retriever are also predisposed to closed-angle
(PLD) in Flat Coated Retrievers in the UK was found in 35%
of the examined dogs and, when graded on severity, only
 those with 63% or more ofthe angle involved had glaucoma.
If the offspring of severely affected dogs was examined, 83%
of the offspring had PLD86. The heritability was calculated as
0.7 in the Flat Coated Retriever?6. The Bouvier des Flandres
they did not correlate with glaucoma or goniodysgenesis8,
has a high incidence of goniodysgenesis (7s%) and glaucoma
illustrating again the differences between open angle
 a u sgadong us (sop sh ui saseo yo %ez)
 gaucoma and closed angle glaucoma.
Springer Spaniel, goniodysgenesis is possibly a dominant
Acquired causes for closed angles in primary
trait89. In Norway, English Springer Spaniels had a
 glaucoma are not understood and their progression is
 prevalence rate of 24% for PLD (goniodysgenesis)97. Bjerkas 
rarely documented. Elevation of IOP by itself will cause
et al.97 found a correlation between PLD and narrow angles,
the ciliary cleft to collapse and the angle to close, as
and PLD and narrow angles with glaucoma. Glaucoma is
 observed in the Beagle in the late stages of open-angle
often familial in English Springer Spaniels; breeding from
gaucoma78. In the American Cocker Spaniel, the
normal sire and dam produced 85% of offpring with
pectinate ligament appears to have been forced outward
normal iridocorneal angles, while breeding from either one
and is collapsed against the inner cornea. This could be
or both parents with PLD produced abnormal iridocorneal
explained by a collapse of the ciliary cleft from an
angles in 41-57% of offspring. A polygenetic trait was
unknown cause. PLD has been documented in the
postulated for PLD. While goniodysgenesis is probably
American Cocker Spaniel by the author (12.46, 12.47)
inherited and glauooma has been observed in numerous
but most American Cocker Spaniels with glaucoma
families of dogs, the genetic mode of transmission 
of
appear to have a collapsed and closed ciliary cleft
 goniodysgenesis or glaucoma in most breeds is unknown. In
without evidence of PLD.
352
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Diagnosis of closed-angle glaucoma
Etiology and mechanisms
Diagnosis of closed-angle or closed-cleft glaucoma is based
Hyphema
on gonioscopic examination. Often the angle of the affected
Glaucoma associated with hyphema usually has an open
eye cannot be examined because of corneal edema 
or
 angle that is occluded with blood and fibrin. Later, due
 aqueous humor turbidity. It is then necessary to examine the
to traumatic uveitis, synechiae may produce a closed-
opposite eye to give a prognosis for future glaucoma, as well
angle glaucoma.
as to determine the presumed cause of the affected eye. The
severe
degreeof
goniodysgenesis  on   gonioscopic
Trauma
examination typically manifests as a solid sheet with no
Trauma may result in open- or closed-angle glaucoma.
pectinate ligament visible (12.38, 12.39). On low-power
Trauma -induced anterior uveitis may result in anterior or
posterior synechiae, with res ultant obstruction of aqueous 
cleft with some fine darker radial streaks that may mimic a
humor flow (12.s0). Trauma may also produce a tear in
pectinate ligament. With magnification, the angle is covered
the pectinate ligament and the ciliary cleft, resulting in
with solid iridal tissue that is less pigmented as it crosses the
recession of the angle. The tear heals by fibrosis and the
angle. A few flow holes can often be detected near the
resultant loss of function may produce glaucoma months
corneal insertion of the sheet of tissue (12.39, 12.40). The
later. Perforating corneal trauma often results in the iris
sheet occupies 75% or more of the circumference when it is
moving forward to plug the defect, and the shallow
associated with glaucoma?6. The sheet is shorter than the
 anterior chamber, combined with inflammation, may
 ae jo as a sd ym  ad 
result in angle closure. Gaucoma is relatively rare in the
forward and produces a very flat iris plane and, rarely,
horse and trauma is a significant cause. Four of nine globes
iridodonesis due to lack of lens support. While clinically the
in  one histopathologic  series  showed  evidence of
angles with goniodysgenesis look similar whether the IOP is
perforating or nonperforating trauma101.
elevated or not, the changes in the deeper angle structures
are obvious on histopathologic examination. When flow
Inflammation
holes become obstructed the sheet, which is the pectinate
Intraocular inflammation {uveitis) from a  variety of
lgament precursor, is pushed outward against the limbal
causes is a common cause of secondary glaucoma. Uveitis 
region by the pressure gradient. The ciliary cleft is
may produce severe posterior synechiae that results in iris
obliterated and venous channels in the sclera collapse
bombe and sufficient shallowing of the anterior chamber
(12.44, 12.48). This lesion has erroneously been described
as a peripheral anterior synechia99. if the angle
is
normotensive, a sheet is present that pulls the iris root
12.48
forward and the ciliary cleft is open, indicating that aqueous
humor is passing behind the sheet (12.37, 12.49)73.
The role of goniscopic findings in predicting glaucoma
 risk is quite controversial within the veterinary
ophthalmology community and requires ongoing
systematic investigation and statistical analysis. What
began as clinical impressions are now being supported
by accumulating statistical data in a variety of breeds.
SECONDARYGLAUCOMA
Secondary glaucomas may be the predominant form of
glaucoma in a geographical region due to popularity of
12.48 Photomicrograph from the eye of a Basset Hound that has
glaucoma (from 12.14). Note the iris-like tissue lining the peripheral
rather obvious causes of angle obstruction but close
cornea (arrow), collapse of the ciliary cleft (ccc), and absence of
examination of both eyes may help to explain why some
scleral venous channels.
dogs develop ocular hypertension following an insult and
 others do not. The lens in particular should be looked at
critically when assigning it a role in secondary glaucoma.
12.49 Scanning electron
micrograph of the 
(Veterinary Medical Data Base) and found that 81% of
normotensive eye of the 
secondary glaucoma cases were associated with cataract
Basset Hound viewed in 
formation {lens induced uveitis), with 20% of cataracts
12.14, 12.44. Unlike the
developing glaucoma. Lens displacement accounted for
 quadrant viewed in
12%, postcataract surgery for 5%, uveitis unspecified for
12.44, this quadrant ha5
7%, hyphema for 7%, and intraocular neoplasia for 4%
an open ciliary cleft.
of the cases of secondary glaucoma. Johnson et al.100b
(From Martin
reported that secondary glaucomas were diagnosed in 7%
and Wyman, 197882]
of the population of an ophthalmology clinic and the
(1 : iris; 2: anterior
condition was bilateral in 21% of the patients. Uveitis (not
chamber; 3: pectinate
associated with surgery) was the precipitating factor in
ligament dysplasia :
45%, surgical uveitis (phakoemulsification) in 15%, and
4: limbus, 5: ciliary cleft.]
lens displacement in 1s% of the cases.
GLAUCOMA
12.50
12.51
12.50 Miniature Poodle that had blunt trauma from a golf ball
12.51 Peripheral anterior 5ynechia in the angle of 14-year-old
hitting the eye 6 months prior to presentation with glaucoma. The
eye developed a cataract and a difference in the width of the
induced uveitis. The opposite angle was normal. Note the irregular
fltering cleft is present, due to peripheral anterior synechiae (arrow].
hypermature lens surface. The angle has no visible pectinate
The open portion may represent angle recession as a pectinate
ligament, there is pigment dispersion in the angle, and the width
ligament is not visible.
of the angle is irregular.
to produce secondary closure of the angle with peripheral
12 months developed glaucoma. Median follow up for
anterior synechiae (12.31). Alternatively, inflammation
all dogs was only 5.8 months, so this figure might
 may produce peripheral anterior synechiae without
significantly
 underrepresent  the  true  long-term
posterior synechiae (12.51).
incidence. Risk factors for glaucoma in the study were
hypermature cataracts (1 in 4 develops glaucoma),
Aphakic and pseudophakic glaucoma
purebreds, aphakia, and male dogs. About 33%
of
Transient ocular hypertension after cataract surgery is
aphakic eyes developed glaucoma compared to 10% for
common in the dog. The cause is unknown and it is
pseudophakes; however, the multiple reasons for not
differentiated from glaucoma because of the lack of
placing an intraocular lens (IOL) at the time of surgery
optic nerve damage in most cases. The incidence (
of
might be the predisposing factor(s), rather than aphakia
aul pue %os yoeoudde Aeu uoisualadAq aaueiadoisod
per se. Transient hypertensive events after surgery were
[OP may exceed 50 mmHg (6.7 kPa). The IOP usually
not found to be predictive of later glaucoma, although
peaks by 3 hours and normalizes by 24 hours102. The
half of the eyes that had postoperative hypertension
cause of the hypertension is unknown but the concern
developed glaucoma.
is that these patients may be predisposed to glaucoma
at a later date. Miller et al.103, in a nonblinded study in
Neoplasia
mormal
dogs
undergoing
phacoemulsification,
Anterior uveal neoplasia may invade the ciliary body
demonstrated that the ciliary cleft was narrow 24 hours
and obstruct outflow, shed cells that clog the outflow
after surgery, despite IOP normalization. The cause and
channels, or have necrosis with inflammation and
significance of these findings are unknown. Two studies
hemorrhage that occludes the outflow channels (12.33).
on glaucoma after postcataract surgery found no
Neoplasia may also stimulate PIFMs or rubeosis iridis
 correlation with transient postoperative hypertension
that, when advanced, covers, obstructs, and collapses
 and later development of glaucoma104, 10s.
 the iridocorneal angle106, Lymphosarcoma in the dog
Glaucoma following cataract surgery may not
and cat is the most common secondary ocular neoplasia
deserve a separate category and is undoubtedly
and usually manifests as a bilateral inflammatory
associated with multiple mechanisms. If routine
secondary glaucoma (see Chapter 11, p.298, 11.48,
gonioscopy is performed prior to cataract surgery,
11.53). Melanoma in the dog and cat eventually
varying
degrees
of
acquired
closure
pue
10 guaydkq Aq paxseu aq Aeu pue euoonel aonpod
goniodysgenesis will often be noted. However, 
.the
inflammation (see Chapter 11, p.298, 11.67, 11.73).
frequency of postoperative glaucoma has not yet been
When presented at this stage, ultrasonography is
correlated with preoperative  gonioscopy. Finding
necessary for diagnosis. In a pathologic study
of
 gonioscopic lesions does not often abort the cataract
glaucoma in cats, 41% had glaucoma from one of
surgery but it may forewarn the owner and surgeon of
either of these two neoplasmsio7. This study is biased
increased postoperative risks.
beca use of being based on enucleated specimens.
factors for glaucoma in a series of cataract surgeries. Of
Uveal cysts
346 operated eyes, 17% developed glaucoma. More
Cysts in the ciliary body have been associated with
compelling was that 29% of the eyes followed for
glaucoma in the Great Dane and Golden Retriever.
354
OpHThAlMIC DisEASe In VeTeRINArY MeDICInE
12.52
12.53
12.52 Episcleral pigment in a Cairn Terrier
12.53 Goniophotograph of the normotensive
12.54 Anterior lens luxation in a dog
that may be the precursor to more extensive
eye of a Scottish Terrier with unilateral
 producing glaucoma. The clear lens may be
intraocular pigmentation and glaucoma. The
glaucoma. Note the heavy pigmentation of the
easily overlooked in the anterior charmber.
intraocular pressure was high-normal in this
angle that has obscured and filled up most of
patient.
the spaces of the pectinate ligament.
Normally, most cysts in the anterior chamber are
may physically obstruct aqueous humor flow or the
considered benign. In a pathologic study, 5% of
accompanying vitreous may obstruct the flow at the
glaucomatous globes were from Golden Retrievers and
pupil (12.32, 12.54). Subluxated lenses are less likely to
52% of their globes had iridociliary cysts103.
In
produce glaucoma and it is often less obvious how they
glaucoma the cysts may mechanically push forward on
interfere with aqueous humor dynamics. Subluxation of
the lens-iris diaphragm, closing the angle and interfering
the lens to one side may produce a regional shallowing of
pandni jo siuuoo au io mog rouny shoanbe um
the chamber and restriction of flow at the pupil (12.32).
cysts may obstruct the trabecular meshworkios, 109.
Vitreous herniation may produce pupil blockade or
What was not reported (because it was a pathology
strands of vitreous may obstruct the angle. Posteriorly
study) was the percentage of Golden Retrievers without
luxated lenses may produce a low-grade uveitis with
glaucoma that had cysts.
peripheral anterior synechiae or changes in the ciliary
cleft. (See also Chapter 13, p.369.)
Pigment proliferation
The Cairn Terrier, Scottish Terrier, Boxer, and Labrador
FELINE GLAUCOMA
Retriever have a form of glaucoma associated with
Cats are presented quite late in the course of glaucoma and
increased pigment deposition in the anterior 
and
owners either note an enlarged eye or a dilated pupil
(12.12). In the cat, most glaucomas are thought to be due
syndrome is most prevalent in the Cairn Terrier and
to, or associated with, inflammation. Sixty percent and
manifests initially as a progressive bilateral dark
87% respectively of cats in two clinical series113,114 and
peripheral thickening of the iris root followed by
41% of glaucomatous eyes in a pathologic series107 were
scleral/episcleral plaques of pigment adjacent to the
associated with inflammation. In the pathologic series, the
limbus (12.52). The latter two signs slowly increase in
inflammatory  lesion  was a lymphocytic-plasmacytic
severity, with pigment clumps in the aqueous and
uveitis that could be either diffuse or focal, or both. In
 pigmentation in the ventral iridocorneal angle and on the
most instances there were obstructive lesions from either
peripheral endothelium (12.53). Glaucoma develops in
the inflammatory cells or collapse of the ciliary cleft and
the latter stages and the tapetum may have encroachment
 peripheral anterior synechiae (12.55), but in 13% of these 
of pigment, causing a diminution of the normal tapetal
eyes there was no probable inflammatory mechanical
color. The age of onset and speed of progression of the
cause of glaucoma107. In light of the frequent if not
syndrome is highly variable. The cause of the glaucoma
universal mild histopathologic finding of inflammatory
appears to be obstruction of aqueous outflow pathways
cells in the anterior and posterior segment of dogs with
by the vast amounts of pigment, but the cause for the
primary glaucoma67a, 94a, perhaps these histopathologic
increased pigment is unknown. van de Sandt et al.111b
findings in cats should be re-evaluated. Three of the cats
found that most of the pigment-containing cells were
were classified as having primary glaucoma because no
macrophages. The condition is inherited in the Cairn
Terrier, possibly as a autosomal dominant traitilla.
described 8 cases of open angle glaucoma from a
Pigment proliferation is an insidious disease that has
retrospective histopathology study. The mean age was 9
been refractory to thera py.
 years and all had an open ciliary cleft. Why the ciliary cleft
in the cat remains open, while in the Beagle the ciliary cleft
Lens displacement
 closes as the disease progresses, is not known. Both species
Lens displacement is the most significant, cause of
develop buphthalmos with advanced disease. Hampson et
secondary glaucoma (65%) in terrier breedss, 6, 100, 112
al.is described a form of primary glaucoma in Burmese
but is not restricted to terriers. Anterior lens luxation
cats in Australia in which there was no evidence of
GLAUCOMA
355
inflammation and the angles were open, narrow, or closed.
12.55
12.55
Goniodysgenesis does not appear to be as common in cats
Goniophotograph of
with glaucoma as in dogs with glaucoma; however, case
a Siamese cat with 
reports are accumulating that indicate that it does exist as
glaucoma in the 
 s sss jo dna pan  us 
opposite eye. Note
multiple anterior segment congenital lesions, including
the irregularity of the 
goniodysgenesis, and early onset glaucoma is being
iris base that is
investigatedl1sb. Blocker and van der Woerdtl14 decribed
pulled forward
glaucoma in 82 cats, of which five were thought to be
 because of peripheral
primary glaucomas. Goniodysgenesis does not appear to
 anterior synechiae 
play a significant role in feline glaucoma. There is very
 over much of the
little documentation decribing the forms of primary
viewed angle.
glaucoma in the cat but it may be more prevalent than
suspected, based on bilateral involvement in many patients
without overt uveitis. As infectious diseases are a leading
cause of uveitis, titers should be performed on cats with
glaucoma.
Lens
 displacement 
is
frequent
with
 inflammation and may be associated with glaucomatous
12.56 Bilateral
12.56
or normotensive eyes, presuma bly because of the large
glaucoma in an 
anterior chamber of the cat (12.56).
aged cat with
 A unique form of glaucoma occurs in the cat in which
chronic uveitis.
the lens-iris diaphragm moves forward and collapses the
Note one eye with
anterior chamber completely. The lens is not luxated in
a widely dilated
that the zonules are still intact but the pupillary block and
 pupil and the other
 collapsed angle result in moderate pressure elevations. The 
with an anteriorly
condition is usually unilateral and may persist for months.
luxated opaque
It is thought to represent a form of 'malignant' glaucoma
lens.
in which the aqueous humor pools posteriorly in the
vitreous, pushing the lens-iris diaphragm forward (12.57).
The term aqueous humor misdirection is probably
preferable to malignant glaucoma, as neoplasia is not
involved inthe pathogenesis. Czederpilt et all1s reported
a relatively large series of cases with aqueous humor
misdirection and found a mean age of 12 years frange of
416 years) and females more often affected. The cause of
12.57
the aqueous humor misdirection is unknown, but it is
thought to result in compression of the anterior vitreal
elements, resulting in a dense membrane on the anterior
vitreal face that blocks the flow of fluid into the anterior
chamber. Medical therapy does not relieve the collapsed
anterior chamber, although the IOP may moderate. It is
obviously prudent not to aggrevate the papillary block by
avoiding drugs that are either strong miotics (ie.
latanoprost) or mydriatics.  Most clinicians have
recommended the use of topical carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors, although Dietrichiisd found only a minimal
response in the cat to dorzolamide and no additive affect
 of timolol with dorzolamide. Phakoemulsification alone or
 combined with a posterior capsulotomy and/or anterior 
vitrectomy would logically be indicated, but in the few
12.57 B-mode ultrasound of a 15-year-old domestic shorthaired cat
cases reported the results were variable, perhaps due to the
with a unilateral shallowing of the anterior chamber and forward 
chronicity of the condition.
displacement of the lens with intact zonules (right frame]. Compare 
the depth of the anterior chamber with the opposite normal eye (left
EQUINE GLAUCOMA
frame]. Phacoemulsification of the lens cured the peristent
Glaucoma in the horse is uncommon but is being
 moderately elevated intraocular pressure.
recognized with increasing frequency. The prevelence of
glaucoma in horses in one veterinary teaching hospital
was 0.11% and in a national data base of teaching
hospitals was 0.07 %116. Besides being infrequent, most
judicious in interpreting elevations of 30-40 mmHg
practitioners do not have the instrumentation to measure
(4.0-5.3 kPa) and take multiple readings and keep the
IOP in the horse, even when glaucoma may be suspected.
horse's head level with the plane of the heart. While
The IOP of horses can be quite labile, presuma bly due to
auriculopalpebral blocks are not reported to alter the
a strong retractor bulbi and orbicularis oris muscle. Both
IOP in horsest17, they are often important to minimize
muscles when contracted may place increased tension on
artifactual elevations. Digital tonometry is notoriously
the globe, thus elevating the IOP. The clinician must be
unreliable in the horse.
356
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
12.58
12.58 Unilateral
The author has observed possible primary glaucoma
eul euoneln
in horses with sequential bilateral involvement and no
horse that has
obvious intraocular inflammation (12.59).
buphthalmo5.
 pupillary dilation, 
 and multiple breaks 
THERAPY OF PRIMARY GLAUCOMA
in Descemet's
membrane with
Glaucoma is a therapeutic challenge, if not an enigma,
 edema localized to
for the veterinarian. Glaucoma, although theoretically
the break5s.
treatable, is a major cause of blindness. Therapy should
depend on the type of glaucoma, the functional status of
the eye {vision), and the resources and philosophy of the
owner. As glaucoma is a final common pathway for a
variety of intraocular diseases, specific therapy should
vary with the etiologic diagnosis; therefore, diagnosis
12.59
and therapy should be interdependent.
Despite the availability of new and more effective
topical glaucoma medications and new surgical
procedures, it is very difficult to maintain vision in
those forms of glaucoma characterized by markedly
elevated IOP.
Pragmatically, the prognosis for vision will also modify
the intensity and type of therapy. It is difficult to justify
 costly surgeries in an eye that is chronically blind. In
addition, the results of surgery are equivocal, and yet most
cases are not controlled with long-term medical treatment.
MEDICAL THERAPY
12.59 Photomicrograph of an equine eye that has glaucoma. This eye is
similar to a glaucomatous canine eye because the ciliary cleft and pectinate
Emergency therapy
ligament are collapsed against the inner sclera and cornea (arrow]. Uveitis is
All recently visual eyes with glaucoma should have
not apparent and this may represent a primary closed-angle glaucoma.
retina can survive for hours only rather than days in dogs
with glaucoma in which the IOP elevations are commonly
Glaucoma in the horse is usually unilateral and the
60-90 mmHg (8.0-12.0 kPa)119. Clines et al.120 correlated
e si sd a e n  a
the return of vision with the duration of the initial acute
buphthalmos, corneal edema and striae, dilated pupil, and
 episode and the ability to lower IOP. Forty-two percent of
blindness (12.58). The signs of glaucoma are often subtle
patients that had the IOP lowered to <20 mmHg {2.7 kPa)
and usually the horse is presented in a chronic state with an
and had signs of <3 days duration had return of vision. If
indefinite history of onset. In a series of nine cases with
the IOP was <50 mmHg (6.7 kPa) for <3 days, 52% had
histopathologic findings, about half had lesions suggestive
return of vision in the short term. Patients with both a
of previous perforating or nonperforating ocular trauma101.
history of 3 days duration and an IOP >50 mmHg (6.7 kPa)
Glaucoma as a complication from adhesions due.
to
responded less well and only 18% had return of vision.
recurrent uveitis is uncommon, but rubeosis iridis or PIFMs
Grozdanic et al.S7a and clinical experience indicate that
are common histopathologic lesions in glaucomatous
return of vision may occur as long as 2 weeks after a
globesl18. The PIFM traverses the pectinate ligament and
hypertensive episode, so there is no hurry to enucleate
blind, acute glaucoma globes. The difficulty is that while
igament or absorption from the iris surface. It is unclear
the problem may appear acute to the owner, frequently the 
whether the membrane is the cause of the glaucoma, as three
problem is actually chronic.
out of five cases still had an open ciliary cleft, which should
Traditionally, the most important emergency medical
have collapsed if an upstream obstruction to flow was
therapy was the use of osmotic diuretics that pull fluid from
present (12.59). The cause of the fibrovascular membrane
both the aqueous humor and the vitreous. While a variety of
was unknown since there was no obvious and classical
hypertonic solutions have an ocular effect, only glycerol and
 pathology of recurrent uveitis.
mannitol are in widespread use. The author prefers mannitol,
which is given i.v. in a slow push technique over 15 minutes.
glaucoma had evidence of previous or concurrent uveitis
Mannitol at 1-2 g/kg produces a reliable and dramatic
and were over 3 years of age. Because of the ERU
 decrease in IOP for 6 hours and, occasionally, for 2-3 days.
connection, it was not surprising that Appaloosas were at
Water should be restricted for the first 2-4 hours or the
increased risk; however, 1
 risk of glaucoma
1was
osmotic effect of the mannitol is decreased. Glycerine or
independent of risk of uveitis in Appaloosas. How ERU
 gycerol is given orally at 1-2 g/kg but, unless diluted, often 
produced glaucoma was not clinically evident as the
results in vomiting. The main advantage of glycerol is low
usual synechiae and angle closure were not present on
cost and not having to perform venepuncture. Both
gonioscopy, although transparent PIFMs that were noted
preparations can be repeated 2-3 times at 6-12 hour
intervals but it is important to monitor hydration carefully.
GLAUCOMA
357
The response progressively diminishes with multiple doses,
to concern of filtering failure if the eye had previously
due presumably to a rebound effect from leakage of the
been treated with timolol. Other prostaglandin analogs
 duretic molecules into the eye. Inflammatory glaucoma may
may be equally or more effective as latanoprost but
be poorly responsive to mannitol or glycerol, or may result
ha ve not yet been used as extensively as latanoprost {see
in increased IOP due to leakage of the large molecules into
Chapter 2, p.41).
the eye. The author is reluctant to use mannitol immediately
 Neuroprotective therapy is a new therapeutic strategy
before cyclodestructive surgery because the mannitol may
Vtg gsisioodo Aueu Aa pasn Suq s il
aggravate the postoperative rise in IOP due to the breakdown
variety of strategies are possible to interrupt the cascade
of the blood-aqueous humor barrier.
of events that leads to apoptosis of the retinal ganglion
 A CAI diuretic can be administered in combination
cells, but no specific drug has proven to be of benefit, and
with an osmotic diuretic to reduce aqueous humor
production. Oral acetazolamide is the most widely
Consequently, clinicians have resorted to available
available CAI but it also seems to have the most side-
calcium channel blockers used in treating systemic
effects. Acetazolamide is available as an i.v. preparation
hypertension. Amlodipine (0.125 mg q24h) has been
but is seldom administered as such when used with an i.v.
used empirically for this purpose in the dog.
osmotic diuretic. Dichlorphenamide has been a favorite
Maintenance therapy
withdrawn from the market and now must be obtained
Once IOP is normalized with emergency therapy,
through a compounding pharmacist. I
 Methazolamide
maintenance medical therapy should aim to maintain a
(2-5 mg/kg q12-8h) has supplanted dichlorphenamide
normal and consistent level of IOP. Dogs presented with
because of its availability. Skorobohach et al.12l found a
high IOP and closed-angle glaucoma are usually not
13-19% decrease in IOP in normal dogs given multiple
controlled well or for very long with traditional medical
doses of methazolamide, but they were unable to
 maintenance therapy. Animals presented with an IOP <50
 demonstrate a difference in the decrease between dosing
mmHg (6.7 kPa) or with open-angle glaucoma are more
at 2.5 mh/kg q8h and 5 mg/kg q8h. This would justify
utilizing the lower dose rate to minimize side-effects of
 past, maintenance medical therapy comprised a CAl
the drug. Despite administering the drug q8h,
the
diuretic with ancillary topical miotic, miotic-epinephrine,
morning IOP returned to baseline and the evening IOP
beta-blocker
therapy.
Epinephrine，
 dipivalyl-
consistently had a rebound increase.
epinephrine, pilocarpine, pilocarpine-epinephrine, timolol,
It is not uncommon to find a dog intolerant to one or
and carbachol have been demonstrated to lower the IOP in
all of the CAIs at therapeutic doses. Toxicity may manifest
 Beagles with open-angle glaucoma more than in normal
as vomiting, diarrhea, panting, weight loss, anorexia,
depression, irritability, and presumed parasthesias
Concentrations of 4-6% of timolol are necessary in the dog
(lameness). Long-term use of CAis has been linked to KCS
 and cati29. Unfortunately, these concentrations are not
{CAIs are chemically related to sulfa drugs). On a short-
available (the strongest concentration of commercial
term emergency basis, some of these signs can be tolerated
timolol available is 0.s%) and they also increase the
but they may be indicators that the main form of medical
incidence of systemic side-effects. Decreases of IOP of
maintenance therapy may not be tolerated, and thus 
6-10 mmHg (0.8-1.3 kPa) with 4-6% timolol appear
dictate alternative therapies (surgery). If surgery is
dramatic but must be compared to decreases of 5 mmHg
anticipated  after   emergency  1
 medical therapy,.
the
(0.7 kPa) in placebo controls given methylcellulose.
 It is unusual to control acute closed-angle glaucoma in
metabolic acidosis created by CAI diuretics must be
veterinary medicine with only classic topical glaucoma
 considered when assessing the anesthetic risk122.
medication. The newer topical medications of latanoprost 
Topical emergency therapy in the form of some
and dorzolamide {topical CAI) are more likely to control
combination of miotics, alpha agonists, beta blockers,
the IOP, but many cases that are initially controlled
 and CAIs is usually administered but by themselves they
become tolerant with time. Topical CAIs such as
are usually not adequate in the acute, high pressure,
 dorzolamide and brinzolamide are about 50% as effective
closed-angle
glaucoma
patient.
miotics
aré
as systemic therapy. Medical management of visual eyes 
administered frequently, as is the usual recommendation
may only delay surgical intervention and results in more
 for emergency therapy, potent cholinesterase inhibitors
ocular damage. In dogs, medical control of elevated
should not be used as significant systemic absorption
pressure was reported in one series to be successful in 10%
occurs. Also, if filtering procedures are anticipated, the
of cases after 6 months130 and 25% of cases in another
cholinesterase inhibitors will potentiate inflammation
study retained vision131. Both of these studies did not have
and hemorrhage for several days to weeks.
the ‘benefit of the newer topical agents such as
The author uses topical 0.o0s%
latanoprost
 prostaglandin analogs, CAIs, and alpha-adrenergic drugs.
routinely for emergency therapy in the dog, as it often
reduces IOP within 15-30 minutes if it is successful.
Owners may elect medical over surgical therapy for
Topical latanoprost use has often avoided the use of
financial considerations, not realizing that it is
mannitol and CAIs. Latanoprost is not effective in the
possible to spend US$200-300 per month on a
cat123 and produces frequent, moderately severe side-
combination of the newer topical medications and
effects and minimal response in the horsei24. Treatment
frequent visits for monitoring IOP.
of rabbits for 18 months with topical timolol and/or
latanoprost  resulted  in  increased   amounts 
of
In cats, only 15% of the cases treated medically were
subepithelial collagen in the timolol-treated rabbits but
controlled; successful retention of sight was very low due to
not in the latanoprost-treated rabbits125. The result led
the late stage of presentation to the veterinarian131. Blocker
358
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
and van der Woerdt114 reported that 72% of feline
12.60
glaucomatous eyes were blind at the time of initial
presentation, but that medical management maintained
vision in 44% of the visual eyes. In the horse, medical
thera py of glaucoma has only been an option if the IOP was
 marginally elevated, since it is not practical to keep horses 
indefinitely on oral CAIs. Topical medications have been
marginally effective in the horse. Topical atropine has been
recommended as a therapy for equine glaucoma because of
the presumed importance of the uveoscleral flow116.
However, it had no effect on IOP in the normal horse132
and the author has not had any notable clinical success
using it. Latanoprost may lower the IOP in the horse, but
the frequency of adverse side-effects of epiphora,
 blepharospasm, and blepharoedema was high 124.
SURGICAL THERAPY
 If most cases of closed-angle glaucoma in the dog are not
 controlled medically, what are the surgical alternatives?
Due to the severe obstruction in the outflow pathways,
surgical procedures that open the angle (cyclodialysis),
remove the obstruction (trabeculectomy), or circumvent
the obstruction (filtering procedures, shunts) would,
logically, be indicated. All of these procedures have failed
to give predicta ble or long-lasting results in the author's
experience, although individual cases are successful.
Filtering
Successful results {30-50%) with filtering surgeries have
been reported133, 134. The major cause for failure of
filtering procedures is fibrosis of the scleral defect. Future
improvement in the success of filtering surgeries will
depend on utilizing various additional medical protocols
with drugs such as glucocorticoids, S-fuorouracil, and
mitomycin13s, 136. Long-term complications of cataracts
and retinal detachment often occur, despite control of the
H
 IOP. In humans, 32% of patients receiving shunts have
serious retinal complications, with 67% requiring retinal
 attempts to include multiple surgical strategies to bypass
the angle is shown {12.60). It includes a cyclodialysis to
relieve obstruction due to peripheral anterior synechiae
or goniodysgenesis and resultant collapsing of the ciliary
cleft, an iridectomy to minimize iris obstruction under
the scleral defect, and a large sclerotomy to produce a
communication between the anterior chamber and the
R
subconjunctival space. Long-term results from this
strategy have been poor in the author's experience.
Reports on the use of antifibrotic therapy in filtering
 surgery have not been published.
Cyclocryotherapy
 Cyclocryotherapy for acute or chronic glaucoma of visual
 eyes was the procedure of choice for most surgeons before
it was replaced by laser cyclophotocoagulation. Unlike
 other surgical procedures that have the objective of
modifying the outflow of aqueous humor, cyclocryothera py
12.60 Combined sclerectomy, cyclodialysis, and peripheral iridectomy 
surgery for glaucoma in a dog. A, B: preparation of eye with a
Cyclocryotherapy is  a  transconjunctival/trans-scleral
canthotomy for exposure; C, D: preparation of a limbal-based
application of a cryogen to damage noninvasively part of
conjunctival flap to expose the sclerectomy site; E, F: dissection of full-
the ciliary body in order to decrease aqueous humor
thickness scleral block (preferably using an electroscalpel to minimize
 production. Cryogens evaluated have been either nitrous
bleeding);: G: cyclodialysis spatula introduced to open the angle
obstruction; H, I: retraction of iris at 12 o'clock to perform a peripheral
able to achieve a temperature of -10°C to -13°℃
iridectomy with cautery: J, K, L: suturing the conjunctival flap over the
{148.6°F), rather than -20°C {-4°F) necessary for tissue
sclerectomy to form a filtering bleb. (From Vainisi, 1973181)]
GLAUCOMA
359
necrosis. The goal of cyclocrotherapy is to impair rather
Cyclophotocoagulation
than destroy; therefore, the recommended procedure for
Trans-scleral YAG or diode laser cyclophotocoagulation
use of nitrous oxide as a cryogen is 2 minutes at a site.
(CPC) has been successful in canine, feline, and equine
Freezing 270° of the ciliary body will decrease the aqueous
a1 'otieo aui ui %0s se yonu se Aq uounpoud 1ouny
action of CPC is explained by cyclodestruction and a
histopathologic changes produced by freezing are reversed
6 months after cryotherapy138, 139.
functional changes and morphologic lesions of CPC and
The patient's IOP is normalized with emergency
cyotherapy are not as great in albino animals, which
medical therapy before cyclocryotherapy.  Presurgical
suggests that melanin absorbs the laser energy, although
antiPG therapy {flunixin meglumine 0.5 mg/kg i.y.) is
damage is also present in the ciliary body stroma, pigmented
administered. If a nitrous oxide probe is used, it is placed
epithelium, and nonpigmented epithelium1$2, 1s3. Due to the
5 mm posterior to the limbus and each site frozen for
expense of the YAG laser, the diode laser is the more popular
2 minutes (12.61). The probe is applied to the full
alternative. Low energy (2.5w) diode lasers are compact and
 circumference ofthe globe, except at the 3 and 9 o'clock
are marketed for the veterinarian {12.62) The wavelengths
positions to avoid the long posterior ciliary arteries. It is
of the YAG and diode lasers are very similar {1064 nm and
then thawed and repeated at each site. If a liquid nitrogen
810 nm, respectively) and are absorbed by pigment and
probe is used, it is placed at a similar location posterior
blood. Diode and YAG lasers produce similar ocular lesions
to the limbus but freezing is stopped when the ice ball
 in postmortem eyes: a zone of coagulation necrosis centered
reaches the cornea. Because of the larger probe, a fewer
 at the scleral-ailiary stroma interface that does not extend to
number of freezes is required. The freezing is repeated
the ciliary epithelium149 The diode laser produces lesions at
after thawing. A subconjunctival injection of 0.5 mg
lower energies than the YAG laser due to better scleral
dexamethasone is given and topical glucocorticoids and
transmittance and better absorption (x2) of energy by
CAIs are administered postoperatively.
several hours to several days. If the eye is visual, this
temporary elevation should be prevented. Most eyes have 
12.61 Application
12.61
normalized pressure by 3 days and the IOP continues to
of a nitrous oxide
decrease up to 7-8 days. Once the IOP is normal, CAIs are
probe to the globe
stopped. A variable degree of chenmosis occurs post freezing,
for cyclocryo-
 which can be moderated with glucocorticoid therapy.
 therapy. This is 
Dogs with eyes that are simply being salvaged may be
usually performed 
treated as an outpatient or hospitalized until the ocular
for 360°, avoiding 
 appearance is acceptable. This is not an ideal salvage
long posterior
procedure because a significant percentage of cases will
ciliary arteries at
 require repeat cryotherapy to control IOP. Patients with
op,o 6 pue g
recently visual eyes are hospitalized to monitor IOP for
3-5 days or until normalized. If completely successful,
additional antiglaucoma maintenance medication is not
it should be remembered that invariably they were not
medically controlled before freezing. Follow up checks are
 usually given at 2 weeks, 2-3 months, and quarterly unless 
 the response is borderline.
A significant number of dogs {about 30%) treated with
either nitrous oxide or liquid nitrogen cryotherapy have a
 recurrent increase in IOP within 6-12 months; therefore,
visual eyes should be periodically monitored.  Liquid
12.62
nitrogen gives better results than nitrous oxide, particularly
if refreezing is necessaryl30, 141 Retention of vision in acute
cases was 73% in one series and 25% in another131,142.
Chemosis, sometimes very dramatic, is expected for
several days post freezing. Transient increases in IOP are
 common and are the most serious complication that may
destroy the remaining vision in a marginally functional eye.
?
A variable degree of anterior uveitis is present with all
successful cryotherapies. Iris depigmentation may occur
with anterior segment necrosis if the anterior ciliary arteries
 are destroyed. Retinal detachment due to choroidal edema
is common and self-correcting. Phthisis bulbi is uncommon.
The main contraindications for cyclocryotherapy for
glaucoma are similar to other antiglaucoma therapies,
i.e. ocular neoplasia or infection. Cyclocryotherapy has
12.62 Commercial diode laser for veterinary ophthalmology.
the inherent disadvantage of a lack of quantitation, i.e. a
Attachments for use with the operating microscope, binocular
certain amount of freezing cannot be recommended for a
indirect ophthalmoscope, and probes for cyclophotocoagulation
 given elevation of IOP.
and retinopexy are available.
360
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
melanin144. The acute lesions produced by the diode laser
than humans {adult, Caucasian) which has resulted in
are hemorrhage and coagulation necrosis of the ciliary
veterinary medicine having difficulty in duplicating the
epithelium. This is centered in the inner sclera and radiates
 success of this operation in humans.
outward with time to involve the ciliary processes,
 aa i sa a  a ro a i a
peripheral retina, and trabecular meshworkist. Diode laser
to fibrin obstruction of the intraocular portion of the tube or,
lesions involve the ciliary epithelium more than the ciliary
more commonly, fbrosis of the region adjacent to the
 stroma or sclera154. Because of the lower energy levels
extraocular end of the tube. The latter creates a nonabsorbent
utilized with the diode laser, complications of cataract are
beb resulting in back pressure into the eye. The design of the
less common than with the YAG laser.
tube does not appear to alter the amount of encapsulation
 In the dog, lasering 3 mm posterior to the limbus, with
'uodut s leuaeuioiq jo adi aui inq igpanpoud si i
the beam aimed at the center of the eye to avoid the lens, will
with slicone having the least reactionls8Various tube designs
strike the ciliary processes, whereas lasering 5 mm posterior
can be made out of silicone tubing with bands and sheets.
a sng uoedde jo aue as an  snaw a a
Commercially produced shunts are now being marketed but
 pars plana (12.63). With the YAG laser, 3-7 J are delivered
they are quite expensive. The trend is to implamt less extensive
in 30-40 spots 3 mm posterior to the limbus in either a
devices than the original encircling Schocket and Joseph
implants, because of the extensive dissection these implants 
held constant, more tissue disruption occurs with the shorter
require (12.64, 12.65).
time duration, ie. high watts and short timelss. The
Bedfordi63 reported on the implantation of a modified
 se suna otoe sde sa yoq y an
Joseph device fconsisting of a silicone tube attached to a flat
posterior to the limbus. Postoperatively, the external
silicone strap that partially encircles the globe) into 21 eyes
reaction to laser CPC is not as severe as the usual
of 15 patients. At 9 months 24% were not controlled or
 Cyoreaction. The postlaser intraocular inflammation is less
were failures. Approximately 50% of cases also required
or comparable to the cryo-induced inflammationis3.
medical therapy to maintain control163. Another study,
Unfortunately, postlasering IOP spikes occur quite
utilizing the commercial Baerveldt shunt, only had a 30%
mnsistently with both YAG and diode lasers. The success
 success rate and, more importantly, only two of seven (29%)
rate in a series of 56 canine eyes using noncontact YAG laser
normotensive eyes remained normotensive, with most
was 83% during the 3-4 month follow up. Failures were
having a crisis shortly after implantationl64 This finding is
noted mainly in albinotic eyes of Siberian Huskies143. The
sgnificant in that shunts appear to be more successful in
main reported complications were intraocular hemorrhage
[16%), cataracts (37%, most were incipient cataracts), and
gaucomatous eyes. In humans, shunt surgery failures
phthisis bulbi in one eye. In one report, diode laser success
increase with time and of those 26% fail by 3 months, 63%
rates in dogs utilizing settings that averaged 1500 mW and
fail by 12 months, and 80% fail by 24 months16s.
1500 msec were reported as 65% at 6 months foff all
Complications of shunt surgery, in addition to bleb failure,
medications), and S3% of eyes that were judged to be
include extrusion of the tube or implant, bacterial infection,
potentially visual were still visual at 12 monthsl44. Attempts
αataract, collapse of the anterior chamber, hypotony, and
to deliver the laser more accurately with less collateral
mrneal edema. Despite these problems, shunt surgery is a
damage has led to endolasering of the ciliary processes
technique that holds promise and deserves much more work
through probes introduced via sclerectomies or at the
on tube design and pharmacologic manipulation of the
termination of lensectomies. The ciliary processes are directly
inflammatory reaction of  aqueous humor-stimulated
visualized and the effect of the laser observed at the time of
fbrosis.
Most effort has centered around the use of topical
positive, but the procedure is more complex than transcleral
 antifibrotic agents or placement of the tube in a variety
delivery of the laser. Postoperative pressure spikes can still be
 of alternative anatomic locations. Antifibrotic agents
a problem and the procedure may be combined with an
-ou pue horunonon-s iroidon aue pasn aensn
aqueous shunt to blunt the pressure spike.
In the horse, positioning of the laser probe should be
topical application to the surgical site at the time of
4-6 mm posterior to the limbus for the dorsal, temporal,
 surgery. Attempts to alter tissue fibrosis at the distal end
and ventral quadrants to target the ciliary processes. The
nasal quadrant should be avoided because the width of
the pars plicata and pars plana is very narrow in this
12.63
region156 Cyclophotocoagulation in the nasal quadrant
of the horse is likely simply to injure the retina.
Aqueous humor shunts
Implantation of a tube from the anterior chamber to the
auat po kaaau e si ards quo io launugns
that is undergoing a resurgence of interest as commercial
mnfigurations have been devised in conjunction with various
medical protocols, but to this point a relatively consistently
successful combination has not been found. In the author's
and other investigator's experience, the shunts function better
in normal eyes than in glaucomatous eyes. This may be due
12.63 Diode laser probe placed to deliver trans-scleral energy to the
stimulate fibroplasial60. Animals heal with more fibroplasia
diliary body.
GLAUCOMA
361
12.64 Pacement of an 
12.64
 Dorsal rectus m.
aqueous humor shunt. The 
shunt consists of a small 
Medial
silicone tube in the anterior
rectus m.
chamber that connects to an
encircling band to expand the 
area of aqueous humor
absorption. A, B: a limbal-
based conjunctival flap is
dissected and the silicone
strap placed under the rectu5 
muscles and sutured in place.
A partial-thickness limbal-
based scleral flap is made and 
 an 18-20 gauge needle enters 
Scleral flap 
the eye to make a tract for the
5maller silicone tube; C: the
Limbal based
Conjunctival
silicone tube is placed in the 
flap
anterior chamber and cut to
length and the corners of the
scleral flap are sutured and 
the tube is also sutured to the
sclera; D: the limbal-based 
conjunctival flap is sutured.
(From Martin, 1993182)
(m: muscle.)
have led some investigators to implant the distal end into
12.65
some very unlikely places such as the nasolacrimal duct,
various facial veins, and the frontal sinus166-168.
Currently, some clinicians combine laser CPC with
 aqueous humor shunts. The rationale is that while the shunts
may not function on an ongoing basis, they will probably
function long enough to neutralize the postlasering pressure
spike and either one or both of the procedures will control
the IOP on a long-term basis. Bentley et al.162 reported that
11 out of 19 cases (58%) were still visual after 1 year with a
mmbined shunt/ cycloablation procedure and 14 out of 19 
(74%) had an IOP <25 mmHg (3.3 kPa).
The quest should go on for the right combination of
tube design, materials, placement, and pharmacologic
control of fibrosis, as shunts are a more rational
approach to surgical therapy than cyclodestruction.
12.65 A commercial aqueous humor shunt (arrow] in place in a
THERAPY OF SECONDARY GLAUCOMA
Siberian Husky. Note the subluxated lens. The shunt functioned for 
only 3 weeks, when a fibrous walled subconjunctival cyst developed
SECONDARY GLAUCOMA DUE TO
where aqueous humor was accumulating. Attermpts to remove the 
LENS DISPLACEMENT
 Cyst and restore function were unsuccessful. No antifibrotic agents
Lens subluxation and complete luxation are frequently
 other than glucocorticoids were used.
associated with glaucoma and it is often difficult to decide
 whether they have an active or passive role in producing
362
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
gaucoma. The objectives of removing an anterior luxated
SECONDARY OPEN-ANGLE GLAUCOMA
lens are 1) to normalize IOP, 2) to retum or retain sight, and
Glaucoma associated with hyphema or other substances
3) to reverse corneal pathology. If the lens is luxated
that clog the angle are treated medically. The primary
anteriorly, examination of the opposite angle is important to
condition is treated if possible.
determine if there are other associated factors causing the
gaucoma. If the angle in the normotensive eye is closed, it is
very probable that removal of the luxated lens may not be
THERAPY OF ABSOLUTE GLAUCOMA
entirely curative on a long-term basis. This does not mean
that lens removal should not be performed but it does
Therapy for eyes that are chronically blind from a variety
indicate a more guarded prognosis for cure and the need for
of etiologies touches on humane and philosophical
 long-term postoperative surveillance of IOP.
questions. Most owners are not aware of the pain or
Acute anterior lens luxation should be treated by
suffering of an animal with glaucoma as it often
removing the lens but the clinician should be aware of the
manifests in subtle ways. Patient comfort should be a
many potential postoperative complications.  Persistent
consideration for veterinarians when advising clients on
postoperative corneal edema, usually focal, is not uncom-
chronic gla ucoma management.
mon, due to endothelial damage from the lens, surgery, and
postoperative vitreous adhesions. Recurrent IOP elevations
ENUCLEATION
may occur from pressure-induced angle pathology,
The most pragmatic treatment for absolute glaucoma is to
predisposing angle pathology, or pupillary blockage from
enucleate the globe but this has significant client
vitreous herniation or postoperative adhesions. Vision is
resistance, especially if the process is bilateral or
often lost due to the initial high preoperative IOP or, in the
potentially bilateral. Enucleation is indicated in secondary
long-term postoperative course, from retinal detachments,
glaucoma associated with neoplasia, infection, deep
which are relatively common in the first year.
corneal ulceration, and overwhelming inflammation such
Lens removal in an eye with chronic anterior lens 
as phacoanaphylaxis (see Chapter 6, p.138 for technique).
luxation is often problematic. The eye will usually be
The use of a methyl methacrylate or silicone orbital
irreversibly blind, the cornea will have permanent edema
prosthesis has been used in small animals and horses to
and scarring, and the IOP may not be normalized if, indeed,
minimize the postoperative sunken appearance that most
it is elevated. If the eye is blind with a markedly elevated
enucleated orbits develop169, 170. A 40-47 mm orbital
IOP, the author usually treats with ocular evisceration.
 prosthesis is recommended for the horse and 1422 mm
Posteriorly luxated lenses are rarely removed.
spheres for the dog and cat, to compensate for postsurgical
Subluxated lenses are removed if the angles are open, the
atrophy of orbital contents. However, cats are not good
pressures are not controlled medically, and the clinician can
candidates for sphere implantation; 40% fail due to fluid
find no other contributors to IOP elevation. Topical
accumulation in the orbit169. Brachycephalic dogs should
latanoprost q12h can be used to trap a subluxated lens in
 have smaller implants (14-16 mm).
place, since it is a very potent miotic as wellas a good ocular
Orbital 
prostheses   give   an  initial  cosmetic
Arwd paiean rsilo za rapu uase aaisuoday
 improvement but with time and fibrosis the prosthesis
subluxated or posteriorly luxated lenses with topical 0.25%
may be pushed forward in the orbit and appear simply as
demecarium bromide q12h and maintained vision in 100%
a round subcutaneous object that is sharply outlined,
of dogs at 3 months after diagnosis, 80% after 1 year, and
resulting in questionable long-term cosmetic improve-
58% after 2 years. The time until anterior luxation was a
ment over a sunken orbit.
mean of approximately 3 years if a miotic was used and less
than 2 years if no therapy was administered. No difference
OCULAR EVISCERATION WITH IMPLANT
was noted between when the opposite lens destabilized or
Pet owners, including horse owners, have an inherent
when glaucoma developed in the treated and control group.
aversion to enucleation and will almost always chose an
Forward displacement of the lens with intact zonules
alternative option if presented to them. Ocular evisceration 
in the cat has responded well to phacoemulsification with
with silicone sphere implantation is an attempt to overcome
a posterior capsulotomy.
the aesthetic objections to enucleation (12.66, 12.67)171. In 
the author's opinion, ocular evisceration is contraindicated
SECONDARY GLAUCOMA DUE TO INFLAMMATION
with ocular neoplasia and infection and the implant is likely
Glaucoma secondary to inflammation is generally not
 to be extruded when placed in an eye with deep corneal
treated surgically, unless the adhesions resulted from
ulceration. The buphthalmic eye will contract around the 
 cataract surgery. Secondary glaucoma associated with
silicone sphere and become more normal in size. The sphere
active inflammation is often very painful. If vision is still 
size implanted is equal to the normal corneal diameter but
present and if the process is not due to infection, medical
an additional 2-3 mm larger sphere may be implanted in
gaucoma therapy and glucocorticoid therapy are
the buphthalmic eye. The intraocular contents should be
indicated. Treating intraocular inflammation with gluco-
submitted for histopathologic examination to confirm the
corticoids may exacerbate glaucoma due to improve-
clinical diagnosis and avoid missing neoplasia or infectious
ment in ciliary body function as the inflammation
3q 04 lou si hl a zseoonea iepuos jo sasnes
resolves. As the aqueous humor production returns to
encouraged, prosthesis placement with undetected ocular
normal, intraocular adhesions in the aqueous humor
neoplasia may not have regrowth because most canine
 pathway may become manifest. If surgery is attempted
Ocular tumors are benign173.
to break down synechiae, viscoelastic agents should be
The postoperative recovery time for evisceration is
 "uouniedas anss uiiuieu ol idwann ue ul pasn
typically longer than for enucleation.  Postoperative
vision is lost and the eye is painful, the patient is treated
problems are usually limited to lid and orbital swelling
for absolute glaucoma.
 and can reduced by the use of systemic NSAID therapy
GLAUCOMA
363
12.66
12.67 A Shar Pei
12.67
with bilateral
ocular prostheses.
While the corneas
 may not appear
 normal in many
animals, the 
 appearance is
cosmetically
preferred to 
bila teral 
enuclea tion.
12.68 Phthisis
12.68
bulbi in an
American Cocker
Spaniel several 
 months after
intravitreal
 gentamicin
injection. A
 cataract is present
 and conjunctival 
vascular injection 
remains.
12.66 Technique for performing ocular evisceration with silicone
 sphere implantation. A: a limbal- or fornix-based flap is dissected to
exposure the sclera; B: a scleral incision is made with an
electro5calpel 3-4 mm posterior to the limbus of about 160°: C, D, E:
 Pena et al.174 described evisceration of the globe and
the contents of the globe are rermoved with an evisceration spatula 
injection of silicone oil rather than placement of a solid
or a lens loop, making sure to include the lens; F: the appropriate size
 prosthesis. Only five dogs were included in the study and
silicone sphere is introduced with a sphere inserter or by everting the
so this technique cannot yet be adequately compared for
scleral incision edges with forceps; G: the sclera is sutured with
complications and long-term cosmetic outcome to the
4-0 absorbable suture and the conjunctiva with a running 6-0
more common solid prosthesis.
absorbable suture. (From Martin, 1993182)
CHEMICAL ABLATION OF THE CILIARY BODY
Chemical destruction of the ciliary body is an inexpensive
and quite reliable means of lowering IOP in blind, painful
lowering IOP of 65% in the dog and cat, with about 9% of
pre- and postoperatively. If operating on a severely
the eyes developing phthisis. Most clinicians administer 
buphthalmic eye, a tarsorraphy postoperatively is
au oui uooalu Aq su o-sh jo asop p ie uua
 indicated to prevent exposure keratitis while the tissues
vitreous cavity after removal of an equal volume of
 are swollen. Intraocular hemorrhage cannot be avoided
vitreous. The intraocular dose should not exceed the
and most eyes undergo various color changes from the
maximum daily systemic dose of 4.4 mg/kg178 In general,
remaining blood. Also, some corneas undergo an intense
the higher the IOP, the higher the dose of gentamicin
vascular response that subsequently subsides. The author
necessary. Gentamicin at this concentration destroys the
has treated a horse that had postoperative evisceration
retina and the procedure is contraindicated if the eye is
discomfort that could not be controlled and required
visual or potentially visual. It also is contraindicated in
subsequent enucleation. The reason for the discomfort
secondary glaucoma due to neoplasia or nonresponsive
infectious agents such as systemic mycoses or prototheca.
Corneal ulceration may occur due to trauma to a blind
Repeat injections of gentamicin for those failing to respond
buphthalmic eye or be neurotrophically mediated; the ulcer
is only 50% successful178. Concurrent injection 
of
may perforate and result in extrusion of the implant.
dexamethasone into the vitreous cavity is of no benefit.
Anecdotally, many ophthalmologists feel there is an increase
Complications of chemical ablation of the ciliary body
 in KCs in patients with globes eviscerated for a long time.
are cataract formation, intraocular hemorrhage, and
Lastly, the occasional globe shrinks up to 2 years after
phthisis bulbi {12.68). The eye appears normal on a
 tvisceration, yet on enucleation the implant is still in place.
short-term basis but over several months a cataract
364
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
develops and phthisis bulbi is common, resulting in a
using a variety of drugs (timolol, dichlorphenamide,
poor cosmetic appearance. In an attempt to decrease the
echothiophate) lengthened the time before the onset of
incidence of phthisis bulbi, lower doses may be used but
glaucoma in the second eye from 5 to 10 months in
they are often not successful in softening the eye. The
breeds predisposed to glaucoma °0. A prospective study of
 author prefers evisceration as a salvage procedure, unless
 primary closed-angle glaucoma patients found that either
the animal's systemic health or the owner's financial
0.5% betaxolol q12h, or a cholinesterase inhibiting
limitations are the determining factors.
miotic plus a glucocorticoid q24h, increased the time
Cidofovir (Vistide) is a systemic antiviral agent that is
interval for the second eye to become glaucomatous to
used in humans for cytomegaly virus infections and was
31 months versus 8 months in a retrospective control
found to produce marked ocular hypotony. This led to it
 group?1. This study performed gonioscopy and used a
being used intraocularly, where itf is supposed to be
 consistent form of therapy, whereas the former study did
 selectively toxic to the ciliary epithelium, sparing the
not. A double-blind study is necessary due to the marked
retina and lens. The recommended dose in dogs and cats
variations observed in glaucoma.
is 100 μg (range from 100-500 μg) and it is usually given
The long-term use of echothiophate should be
intravitreally, although sometimes cidofovir is injected
cautioned due to colla pse and proliferative changes in the
into the anterior chamber. Almost all of the data are
lamellae of the corneoscleral meshwork, degenerative
anecdotal. Multiple injections may be needed to control
changes in the ciliary muscle, and inflammation of the
IOP. At a dose of 100 μg per injection, the success of
 ciliary body and iris in the monkey180.
lowering IOP below 20 mmHg {2.7 kPa) was 40%, and
90% at s00 μg per injection. Cats have not been as
responsive, with <30% success179.
An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure!
The clinician should remember to treat the normal
 eye prophylactically in patients with suspected
PROPHYLAXIS
unilateral primary glaucoma. Maintaining the eye for
an average of 31 months without glaucoma is far
The use of topical antiglaucoma medications in a
longer than the duration of success when treating
prophylactic manner has until recently been empirical91.
glaucoma with any surgical or medical protocol.
A retrospective study found that prophylactic therapy
REFERENCES
1 Anderson D {1980) Glaucoma: the
9 Troncoso M {1942) The intrascleral
17 Tripathi R {1971) Utrastructure of the
 damage caused by pressure. XLVI
vascular plexus and its relations to the
exit pathway of the aqueous in lower
 Edward Jackson Memorial Lecture.
aqueous outflow. American Journat of
 mammals (a preliminary report on the
American Journat of Ophthatmotogy
Ophthaimology 25:1153-1162.
'angular aqueous plexus'). Experimentat
108:484-495.
10 Uberreiter O {1959) Die
Eye Research 12:311-314.
kammerwasservenen reim hunde.
18 Lee WR, Grierson I (1975) Pressure
glaucoma. New Engiand Journat of
Wiener Tierarztliche Monetschrift
effects on the endothelium of the
Medic ime 328:1097-1106.
46:721-722.
trabecular wall of Schlemm's canal: a
3 Weinreb RN, Levin LA {1999) Is
 11 Martin CL {1969) Gonioscopy and
study by scanning electron microscopy.
neuroprotection a viable therapy for
anatomical correlations of drainage
Albrecht von Graefes Archives fur
glaucoma? Archives of Ophthaimology
angle of the dog. Journat of Smalt
Klinische und Experimentelle
117:1540-1544.
Animat Practice 10:171-184.
Ophthatmotogie 196:255-265.
4 Martin C (1974) Glaucoma. In: Current
12 Van Buskirk M (1979) The canine eye:
Veterinary Therapy IV, 4th edn. RW
the vessels of aqueous drainage.
 microscopic quantitation of the
Kirk (ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
endothelial vacuoles in Schlemm's canal.
pp. 513-518.
Visual Science 18:223-230.
K8opoupggdofo puinof ujiauy
5 Boeve M, Stades F {1985) Glaucoom bij
13 Rohen J {1956) Arteriovenose
84:234-246.
 hond en kat, overzicht en retrospectieve
 anastomosen im limbusreich des
 20 Epstein D, Rohen J (1991) Morphology
 evaluatie van 421 patienten. I.
hundes. Atbrecht von Graefes Archiv
of the trabecular meshwork and inner-
 Pathobiologische achtergronden,
fur Ophthaatmotogie 157:361-367.
wall endothelium after cationized ferritin
indeling en raspredisposities. Ttischrift
 14 Martin CL, Anderson BG {1981) 
perfusion in the monkey eye.
Voor Diergeneeskunde 6:219-227.
 Ocular anatomy. In: Veterinary
Investigative Ophthatotogy and Visuat
6 Boeve M, Stades F (1985) Glaucoom bij
Ophthaimotogy, 1st edn. K Gelatt
Science 32:160-171.
hood en kat. II. Klinische aspecten.
(ed). Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia,
21 Sit AJ, Coloma FM, Ethier CR,
Tijdschrift Voor Diergeneeskunde
pp. 12-121.
Johnson M (1997) Factors affecting the
6:228-236.
15 Bedford P, Grierson I (1986) Aqueous
pores of the inner-wall endothelium of
7 Green K {1984) Physiology and
drainage in the dog. Research in
Schlemm's canal. Investigative
pharmacology of aqueous humor
Veterinary Science 41:172-186.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
inflow.Survey of Ophthatmology
16 Samuelson D (1996) A re-evaluation
38:1517-1525.
29:208-214.
of the comparative anatomy of the
22 Ethier CR, Coloma FM, Sit AJ,
8 Caprioli J (1992) The ciliary epithelia
eutherian iridocorneal angle and
Johnson M (1998) The pore types in the
and aqueous humor. In: Adler 's
associated ciliary body musculature.
inner-wall endothelium of Schlemm's
Physiology of the Eye 9th edn. W Hart
Veterinary and Comparative
canal. Investigative Ophthatmology and
(ed). Mosby Year Book, St Louis, pp.
Ophthatmology 6:153-172.
Visuat Science 39:2041-2048.
228-247.
GLAUCOMA
365
23 Costa-Vila J, Ruano-Gil D {1988)
37 Samuelson D, Smith P, Brooks D
52 Priehs D, Gum G, Whitley D, Moore L
Scanning electron microscope study of
{1989) Morphologic features of the
(1990) Evaluation of three applanation
the communications between the
aqueous humor drainage pathways in
tonometers in dogs. American Journa!
 anterior chamber and the sinus venosus
horses. American Journat of Veterinary
of Veterimary Research 51:1547-1550.
sclerae in primates. Acta Anatomica
Research 50:720-727.
53 Dziezyc J, Millichamp N, Smith W
131:342-345
38 De Geest JP, Lauwers H, Simoens PDS
{1992) Comparison of applanation
24 Barany EH {1956) The action of
{1990) The morphology of the equine
tonometers in dogs and horses. Journat
different kinds of hyaluronidase on
 jridocorneal angle: a light and scanning
of the American Veterinary Medicat
resistance of flow through the angle of 
 electron microscopic study. Equine
Assoc iation 201:430-433.
the anterior chamber Acta
Veter inary Journat Veterinary
 54 Gelatt K (1977) Evaluation of
Ophthatmlogica 34:397-403.
Ophthatmology Supplement 10:30-35.
 applanation tonometers for the dog
 25 Gum GG, Samuelson DA, Gelatt K
 39 Magrane WG (1957) Canine glaucoma.
eye. Investigative Ophthatmology and
{1992) Effect of hyaluronidase on
1. Methods of diagnosis. Journat of the
Visuat Science 16:963-968.
aqueous outflow resistance in
American Veterinary Medicat
55 Miller P, Pickett P, Majors L (1990)
 normotensive and glaucomatous eyes of
Association 131:311-314.
 Evaluation of two applanation
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
40 Magrane WG (1957) Canine glaucoma.
tonometers in horses. Armer ican Journat
Research 53:767-770.
I1. Primary classification. Journat of the
of Veterimary Research 51:935-937.
26 Richardson T {1982) Distribution of
American Veter inary Medicat
56 Rutkowski P, Thompson S (1972)
glycosaminoglycan in the aqueous
Association 131:372-374.
 Mydriasis and increased intraocular
outflow system of the cat. Investigative
 41 Lovekin LG (1964) Primary glaucoma
 pressure. I. Pupillographic studies.
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
in dogs. Journat of the American
Archives of Ophthatmotogy 87:21-24.
22:319-329.
Veter inary Medicat Association
57 Rutkowski P, Thompson S (1972)
27 Gum GG, Gelatt KN, Knepper PA
145:1081-1091.
Mydriasis and increased intraocular
{1993) Histochemical localization of
42 Bryan G (1965) Tonometry in the dog
pressure. II. Iris fluorescein studies.
glycosaminoglycans in the aqueous
and cat. Journat of Smatl Anima!
Archives of Ophthatmotogy 87:25-29.
 outflow pathways in normal Beagles and
Practice 6:117-120.
 58 Minckler D, Spaeth G {1981) Optic
 Beagles with inherited glaucoma.
43 Heywood R {1971) Intraocular 
nerve damage in glaucoma. Survey of
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
pressures in the Beagle dog. Journat of
Ophthatmotogy 26:128-148.
Ophthatmology 3(2):52-57.
Smalf Anmat Practice 12:119-121.
59 Samuelson D, Gelatt K (1983)
28 Yue B {1996) The extracellular matrix
44 Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (1998)
Orthograde rapid axoplasmic transport
 and its modulation in the trabecular
Distribution of intraocular pressure in
and ultrastructural changes of the optic
meshwork. Survey of Ophthatmology
dogs. Veterinary Ophthatmology
nerve. Part I. Beagles with primary
40:379-390.
1:109-114.
open-angle glaucoma. Gtaucoma
29 McMaster P, Macri F {1968) Secondary
 45 Miller P, Pickett P, Majors L, Kurzman 
5:174-184.
aqueous humor outflow pathways in the
 I {1991) Evaluation of two applanation
60 Williams L, Gelatt K, Gum G (1983)
rabbit, cat, and monkey. Archives of
tonometers in cats. American Journat
Orthograde rapid axoplasmic transport
of Veterinary Research 52:19i7-1921.
and ultastructural changes in the optic 
 30 Gelatt K, Glenwood G, Williams L,
46 Miller PE, Pickett JP, Majors LJ.
 nerve. Part I. Normotensive and acute
Barrie K {1979) Uveoscleral flow of
Kurzman ID {1991) Clinical 
ocular hypertensive Beagles. Giatucomd
aqueous humor in the normal dog.
comparison of the Mackay-Marg and
5:117-128.
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Tono-Pen applanation tonometer in the
61 Brooks D, Samuelson D, Gelatt K
40:845-848.
dog. Progress in Veterinary and
{1989) Utrastructural changes in
31 Cruise L, McClure R {1981) Posterior
Comparative Ophthatmoiogy
laminar optic nerve capillaries of
pathway for aqueous humor drainage in
1:171-176.
Beagles with primary open-angle
the dog. American Journat of Veterinary
47 Gelatt K, Gum G, Barrie K, Williams 
glaucoma. American Jou rnat of
Research 42:992-995.
W {1981) Diurnal variations in
Veter inary Research 50:929-935.
 32 Samuelson D, Gum G, Gelatt K,
intraocular pressure in normotensive
62 Glovinsky Y, Quigley H, Dunkelberger
 Barrie K (1985) Aqueous outflow in the
 and glaucomatous Beagles. Glatucomd
G {1991) Retinal ganglion cell loss is
 Beagle: unconventional outlow using
3:21-24.
size dependent in experimental
different-sized microspheres. American
 48 Peiffer RL, Gelatt KN, Jessen CR,
gla ucoma. Invest igative
Journat of Veterinary Research
Gum GG, Swin RM, Davis J {1977)
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
46:242-248.
Calibration of the Schiotz tonometer 
32:484-491.
33 Smith PL, Samuelson D, Brooks D,
for the normal canine eye. Ammerican
63 Schumer R, Podos S {1994) The nerve
Whitley R (1986) Unconventional
Journat of Veterinary Research
of glaucoma! Archives of
aqueous hurmor outflow of microspheres
38:1881-1889.
Ophthatmology 112:37-44.
perfused into the equine eye. Armerican
49 Picket J, Miller P, Majors L {1988)
64 Brooks DE, Komaromy AM,
Journat of Veterinary Research
 Calibration of the Schiotz tonometer
Kallberg ME (1999) Comparative optic
47:2445-2453.
for the canine and feline eye.
 nerve physiology: implications for
34 Martin C {1975) The normal canine
Proceedings of the American College of
 glaucoma, neuroprotection, and
iridocorneal angle as viewed with the
Veter inary Ophthatmotogists 19:45-51.
neuroregeneration. Veterinary
scanning electron microscope. Journat of
50 Miller P, Pickett J (1992) Comparison 
Ophthalmology 2:13-25.
the American Animat Hospitat
 of the human and canine Schiotz
65 Dreyer E, Zurakowski D, Schumer R,
Association 11:180-184.
tonometry conversion tables in
Podos S, Lipton S (1996) Elevated 
35 Bedford P (1977) A gonioscopic study of 
clinically normal cats. Journat of the
glutamate levels in the vitreous body of
the iridocorneal angle in the English and
American Veter inary Medicat
humans and monkeys with glaucoma.
American breeds of Cocker Spaniel and 
Association 201(7):1017-1020.
Archives of Ophthatmology
the Basset Hound. Journat of Smalf
51 Miller P, Pickett J (1992) Comparison
114:299-305.
Animnat Practice 18:631-642.
 of the human and canine Schiotz
66 Brooks D, Garcia G, Dreyer E,
36 Troncoso M, Castroviejo R (1936)
tonometry conversion tables in
Zurakowski D, Franco-Bourland R
Microanatomy of the eye with the slit
clinicaly normal dogs. Journat of the
{1997) Vitreous body glutamate
lamp microscope. American Journat of
American Veter inary Medicat
concentration in dogs with glaucoma.
Ophthatmotogy 19:481-492.
Associat ion 201(7):1021-1025.
American Journat ofVeterinary
Research 58:864-867.
366
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
67 Dreyer E (1997) Amino acid
 82 Martin C, Wyman M (1978) Primary
96 Wood J, Lakhani K, Read R (1998)
abnormalities in the vitreous of the
glaucoma in the dog. Veterinary Clinics
 Pectinate ligament dysplasia and
buphthalmic rabbit. Veterinary and
of North America 8:257-286.
glaucoma in Flat Coated Retrievers. II.
Comparative Ophthatnology
83 Yeon Y, Jung H {1997) Clarifying the
Assessment of prevalence and
7:192-195.
nomenclature for primary angle-closure
heritability. Veterinary Ophthatmology
 68 Lovekin L {1971) Water provocative test
gaucoma. Survey of Ophthatmology
1:91-99.
for glaucoma: range of normal
42:125-136.
97 Bjerkas E, Ekesten B, Farstad W (2002)
tonometric responses of the canine eye.
84 Ekesten B, Narfstrom K (1991)
Pectinate ligament dysplasia and
American Joturnat of Veterinary Research
Correlation of morphologic features of
narrowing of the iridocorneal angle
32:1179-1183.
the iridocorneal angle to intraocular 
associated with glaucoma in the English
69 Gelatt K, Peiffer R, Jessen C, Gum G
pressure in Samoyeds. American Journat
Springer Spaniel.Veteinay
 (1976) Consecutive water provocative
of Veterimary Research 52:1875-1878.
Ophthatmotogy 5:49-54.
tests in normal and glaucomatous
85 Martin C (1975) Scanning electron
98 Kato K, Sasaki N, Matsunaga S,
Beagles. American Journat of Veterinary
microscopic examination of selected
 Nishimura R, Ogawa H (2007) Cloning
Research 37:269-273.
canine iridocorneal angle abnormalities.
of canine myocilin cDNA and molecular
70 Gelatt KN, Gwin RM, Peiffer RL,
Journat of the American Animat
analysis of the rryocilim gene in Shiba
Gum GG (1977) Tonography in the
Hospitat Association 11:300-306.
Inu dogs. Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
normal and glaucomatous Beagle.
86 Read R, Wood J, Lakhani K {1998)
10:53-62.
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Pectinate ligament dysplasia (PLD) and
99 Lovekin L, Bellhorn R (1968)
38:515-520.
gaucoma in Flat Coated Retrievers. I.
Clinicopathologic changes in primary
71 Gelatt K, Gum G, MacKay E (1996)
 Objectives, techniques, and results of a
gaucoma in the Cocker Spaniel.
 Estimations of aqueous humor outflow
PLD survey. Veterinary Ophthatmology
Armerican Journat of Veterinary Research
facility by pneumatonography in normal
1:85-90.
29:379-385.
genetic carrier and glaucomatous
 87 Martin C (1974) Development of the
100 Krahenmann A {1978) Sekundar-
Beagles. Veterinary and Comparative
 pectinate ligament structure of the dog:
gaukome beim hund. Schtueizer Archit
Ophthatmology 6:148-151.
study by scanning electron microscopy.
far Tierheilkunde 120:67-80.
72 Walde I {1984) Klassifikation des 
American Joturnat of Veterinary Research
101 Wilcock B, Brooks D, Latimer C {1991)
gaukomas beim hund. Tierarzttiche
35:1433-1439.
Glaucoma in horses. Veterinary
Praxis 12:65-78.
88 van der Linde-Sipman JS (1987)
Pathology 28:74-78.
73 Martin CL (1983) The pathology of
Dysplasia of the pectinate ligament and
102 Smith P, Brooks D, Lazarus J, Kubilis P,
glaucoma. In: Conparative Ophthatmic
prirmary glaucoma in the Bouvier des
GelattK (1996) Ocular hypertension
Pathology. RL Peiffer (ed). Charles C
Flandres dog. Veterinary Pathology
following cataract surgery in dogs: 139
Thomas, Springfield, pp. 137-169.
24:201-206.
cases {1922-1993). Jourmal of the
74 Gibson T, Roberts S, Severin S, Steyn P,
89 Cottrell B, Barnett K (1988) Primary
American Veterinary Medicat
Wrigley R {1998) Comparison of
glaucoma in the Welsh Springer Spaniel.
Association 209:105-111.
 gonioscopy and ultrasound
Journat of Small Animat Practice
103 Miller PE, Stanz KM, Dubielzig RR,
biomicroscopy for evaluating the
29:185-199.
Murphy CJ (1997) Mechanisms of acute
iridocorneal angle in dogs. Journat of the
 90 Slater M, Erb H {1986) Effects of risk
intraocular pressure increases after
American Veterinary Medicat
factors and prophylactic treatment on
phakoemulsification lens extraction in
Association 213:635-638.
primary glaucoma in the dog. Journat of
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
75 Gelatt K, Gum G {1981) Inheritance of
the American Veterinary Medicat
Research 58:1159-1165.
primary glaucoma in the Beagle.
Association 188:1028-1030.
104 Biros DJ, Gelatt KN, Brooks DE, et αf.
American Journat of Veterinary Research
91 Miller PE, Schmidt GM, Vainisi SJ.
(2000) Development of glaucoma after
42:1691-1693.
Swanson JF, Hermann MK (2000) The
cataract surgery in dogs: 220 cases
76 Martin C, Vestre W (1985) Glaucoma.
efficacy of topical prophylactic
{1987-1998). Joturnat of the American
In: Textbook of Small Animal Surgery.
 antiglaucoma therapy in primary closed-
Veterinary Medicat Association
vol.2. D Slatter {ed). WB Saunders,
angle glaucoma in dogs: a multicenter
216:1780-1786.
Philadelphia,pp. 1567-1584.
clinical trial. Journat of the American
105 Lannek E, Miller P (2001) Development 
77 Ekesten B, Bjerkas E, Kongsengen K,
Animat Hospitat Association
of glaucoma after phakoemulsification 
 Narfstrom K (1997) Primary glaucoma
36:431-438.
for removal of cataracts in dogs: 22 cases 
 in the Norwegian Elkhound. Veterinary
92 Corcoran KA, Koch SA, Peiffer RL
(1987-1997). Journat of the American
and Comparative Ophthatmology
(1994) Primary glaucoma in the Chow
Veterinary Medicat Association
7:14-18.
Chow. Veterinary and Comparative
218:70-76.
78 Gelatt K, Peiffer R, Gwin R, Gum G,
Ophthatmotogy 4:193-197.
106 Peiffer R, Wilcock B, Yin H {1990) The 
Williams L {(1977) Clinical
93 Louden C, Render J, Carlton W (1990)
pathogenesis and significance of pre-
 manifestations of inherited glaucoma in
 Mast cell numbers in normal and
iridal fibrovascular membrane in
the Beagle. Investigative Ophthatmotogy
glaucomatous canine eyes. American
domestic animals. Veterinary Pathology
cnd Visual Science 16:1135-1142.
Journat of Veterinary Research
27:41-45.
 79 Peiffer R, Gelatt K {1980) Aqueous
51:818-819.
107 Wilcock B, Peiffer R, Davidson M
humor outflow in Beagles with inherited
94 Ekesten B {1993) Correlation of
{1990) The causes of glaucoma in cats.
glaucoma: gross and light microscopic
 intraocular distances to the iridocorneal
Veterinary Pathology 27:35-40.
observations of the iridocorneal angle.
angle in Samoyeds with special reference
108 Deehr A, Dubielzig R (1998) A
American Joturnat of Veterinary Research
to angle-closure glaucoma. Progress in
histopathological study of iridociliary
41:861-867.
Veterinary and Comparative
cysts and glaucoma in Golden Retrievers.
 80 Bedford P (1975) The aetiology of
Ophthatmotogy 3:67-73.
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 1:153-158.
primary glaucoma in the dog. Journat of
 95 Martin C, Wyman M (1968) Glaucoma
Small Anmat Practice 16:217-239.
in the Basset Hound. Journat of the 
81 Smith RI, Peiffer RL, Wilcock BP {1993)
American Veterinary Medicat
Some aspects of the pathology of canine
Association 153:1320-1327.
glaucoma. Progress in Veterinary and
Comparative Ophthatmology 3:16-28.
GLAUCOMA
367
109 Spiess B, Bolliger J, Guscetti F.
121 Skorobohach B, Ward D, Hendrix D
133 Bedford P (1977) The surgical
Haessig M, Lackner P, Ruehli M (1998)
(2003) Effects of oral administration of
teatment of canine glaucoma. Journat of
Multiple ciliary body cysts and
 methazolamide on intraocular pressure
Smalf Animat Practice 18:713-730.
secondary glaucoma in the Great Dane:
and aqueous humor flow rate in
134 Peiffer R, Gwin R, Gelatt K, Schenk M
 a report of nine cases. Veterinary
clinically normal dogs. Ammerican Journat
{1977) Combined posterior sclerectomy.
Ophthatmotogy 1:41-45.
of Veterimary Research 64:183-187.
cyclodialysis, and trans-scleral
110 Covitz D, Barthold S, Diter R, Ris R
122 Haskins S, Munger R, Helphrey M,
iridencleisis in the management of
(1984) Pigmentary glaucoma in the
et af. (1981) Effect of acetazolamide on
primary glaucoma. Canadian Practice
Cairn Terrier. Proceedings of the
blood acid-base and electrolyte values in
4:54-61.
Scientific Meeting of the American
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
135 Tinsley D, Niyo Y, Tinsley L, Betts D
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
Medicat Association 179:792-796.
{1995) In vitro evaluation of the
15:246-250.
123 Studer M, Martin C, Stiles J (2000) The
effects of 5-fluorouracil and
111 Petersen-Jones S {1991) Abnormal
effect of latanoprost 0.005% solution on
mitomycin-C on canine
ocular pigment deposition associated
intraocular pressure in healthy dogs and
subconjunctival and subtenon's
with glaucoma in the Cairn Terrier
cats. Arerican Journat of Veterinary
fibroblasts. Veterinary and
Journat of Smatl Animat Practice
Research 61:1220-1224.
Comparative Ophthatmology
32:19-22.
124 Willis M, Diehl K, Hoshaw-Woodard S,
5:218-230.
112 Walde I (1982) Glaukom beim hunde.
 Kobayashi I, Vitucci M, Schmall M
136 Tinsley D, Niyo Y, Tinsley L, Betts D
IV. Mitteilung. Kenintier Praxis
(2001) Effects of topical administration
{1995) In vivo clinical trial of
27:387-410.
 of 0.005% latanoprost solution on eyes
 perioperative mitomycin-C in 
113 Ridgway M, Brightman A {1989) Feline
 of clinically normal horses. American
combination with a drainage device
glaucoma: a retrospective study of 29
Journat of Veterinary Research
implantation in normal canine globes.
clinical cases. Journat of the American
62:1945-1951.
Veterinary and Camparative
Animat Hospital Association
125 Mietz H, Schlotzer-Schrehardt U,
Ophthatmology 5:231-241.
25:485-490.
Strassfeld C, Krieglstein G (2001) Effect
137 Law S, Kalenak J, Connor T, Pulido
114 Bocker T, van der Woerdt A (1999)
of latanoprost and timolol on the 
J, Han D, Mieller W (1996) Retinal
Feline glaucoma: 82 cases (1995-1999).
histopathology of the rabbit conjunctiva.
complications after aqueous shunt
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Visuat
surgical procedures for glaucoma.
the American Coltege of Veterinary
Science 42:679-687.
Archives of Ophthatmology
Ophthatmologists 30:59.
126 Whitley R, Gelatt K, Gum G (1980)
114:1473-1480.
115 Hampson E, Smith R, Bernays M
Dose response to topical pilocarpine in
138 Vestre W, Brightman A {1983) Ciliary
(2001) Primary glaucoma in Burmese
the normotensive and glaucomatous 
 body temperatures during
cats. Proceedings of the Scientific
Beagle. American Journat of Veterinary
cyclocryotherapy in the clinically
Meeting of the American College of
Research 41:417-424.
normal dog. American Journat of
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 32:23.
127 Gelatt K, Gum G, Brooks D, Wolf D,
Veterinary Research 44:135-143.
116 Miller TR, Brooks DE, Gelatt KN, et
Bromberg N {1983) Dose response of
139 Vestre W, Brightman A {1983) Effects
at.(1995) Equine glaucoma: clinical
 topical pilocarpine-epinephrine
of cyclocryosurgery on the clinically
 fndings and response to treatment in 14
 combinations in normotensive and
normal canine eye. American Journat
horses. Veterinary and Comparative
glaucomatous Beagles. American Journat
of Veterinary Research 44:187-194.
Ophthatmology 5:170-182.
of Veterimary Research 44:2018-2027.
 140 Higginbotham E, Lee D, Bartels S,
117 van der Woerdt A, Gilger B, Wilkie D,
128 Gelatt K, Gum G, Wolf D, White M
Richardson T, Miller M (1988) Effects 
Strauch M {1995) Effect of
{1984) Dose response of topical
 of cyclocryotherapy on aqueous humor
auriculopalpebral nerve block and
carbamylcholine chloride (carbachol) in
dynamic in cats. Archives of
 intravenous administration of xylazine
normotensive and early glaucomatous
Ophthatmology 106:396-403.
on intraocular pressure and corneal
Beagles. American Journat of Veterinary
141 Roberts S, Severin G, Lavach J
thickness in horses. Armerican Journat of
Research 45:547-554.
{1984) Cyclocryotherapy. I. Evaluation
Veterinary Resedarch 56:155-158.
129 Gelatt KN, Larocca RD, Gelatt JK,
of a liquid nitrogen system. Journat of
118 Wilcock B, Wolfer J (1991)
Strubbe T, MacKay E {1995) Evaluation
the American Animat Hospitat
Neovascular glaucoma in five horses.
of multiple doses of 4% and 6% timolol,
Association 20:823-827.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
and timolol combined with 2%
142 Vainisi S, Schmidt G (1986)
the American Coltege of Veterinary
 pilocarpine in clinically normal Beagles
 Retrospective survey of
Ophthatrmologists 22:29-36.
 and Beagles with glaucoma. American
 cyclocryosurgery for the control of
119 Hayreh S, Weingeist T {1980)
 Journat of Veterinary Research
canine glaucoma. Proceedings of the
 Experimental occlusion of the central
56:1325-1331.
Scientific Meeting of the American
artery of the retina. IV. Retinal tolerance
130 Roberts S, Severin G, Lavach J (1984)
College of Veterinary
time to acute ischaemia. British Journat
Cyclocryotherapy I. Clinical
Ophthatmologists and Internationat
of Ophthatmology 64:818-825.
comparison of liquid nitrogen and
Society of Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
120 Clines J, Marrion R, Ring R, Stuhr CH,
 nitrous oxide cryotherapy on
17:194-201.
Covitz D, Roldan R {1999) A
glaucomatous eyes. Journat of the
143 Nasisse M, Davidson M, English R
retrospective study evaluating the
American Animat Hospitat Association
[1990) Treatment of glaucoma by use
 prognosis for intraocular pressure
20:828-833.
of trans-scleral neodymium: yttrium
reduction and restoration or
131 Stades F Boevé M (1986) Methods,
al uminum laser cyclocoagulation in
 maintenance of vision following
techniques, and results of glaucoma
dogs. Journat of the American
treatment for the acute onset of primary
therapy in the dog and cat. Proceedings
Veterinary Medicat Association
 glaucoma in the canine patient.
Of the Scientific Meeting of the American
197:350-354.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
144 Cook C, Davidson M, Brinkmann M,
the American College of Veterinary
and Internationat Society of Veterinary
Priehs D, Abrams K, Nasisse M (1997)
Ophthatnologists 30:58.
Ophthatmotogy 17:183-194.
Diode laser trans-scleral
132 Mughannam AJ, Buyukmihci NC, Kass
cyclophotocoagulation for the
PH {1999) Effect of topical atropine on
treatment of glaucoma in dogs: results
 jntraocular pressure and pupil diameter
 of six and twelve month follow up.
in the normal horse eye. Veterinary
Veterinary and Comparative
Ophthatmology 2:213-215.
Ophthaimology 7:148-154.
368
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
145 Whicham HM, Brooks DE,
156 Miller T, Willis M, Wilkie D, Hoshaw-
170 Provost P, Ortenburger A, Caron J
Andrew SE, Gelatt KN, Strubbe T,
Woodard S, Stanley J (2001). Description
(1989) Silicone ocular prosthesis in
Biros DJ (1999) Treatment of equine
of ciliary body anatomy and
horses: 11 cases {1983-1987). Journat of
glaucoma by trans-scleral
identification of sites for trans-scleral
the American Veterinary Medicat
neodymium: yttrium aluminum garnet
cyclophotocoagulation in the equine eye.
Association 194:1764-1766.
laser cyclophotocoagulation: a
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 4:183-190.
171 Brightman A, Magrane W, Huff R,
retrospective study of 23 eyes of 16
157 Pritchard D, Hamlet M (1970) A
Helper L (1977) Intraocular prosthesis in
horses. Veterinary Ophthatmology
silastic-dacron implant for the treatment
the dog. Journat of the American Animat
2:243-250.
of glaucoma. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl
Hospitat Association 13:481-485.
146 Nasisse M, Davidson M, MacLachlan J
Animal Clinician 65:1191-1194.
172 McLaughlin S, Render J, Brightman A,
(1988) Neodymium:ytrium, aluminum,
158 Lim KS, Allan BDS, Lloyd AW, Muir A,
Whiteley H, Helper L, Shadduck J
 -suen praap iaaua rse ruea pie
Khaw PT (1998) Glaucoma drainage
(1987) Intraocular findings in three dogs
sclerally to the ciliary body of dogs.
devices: past, present and future. British
and one cat with chronic glaucoma.
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Journal of Ophthatmology
Journat of the American Veterinary
49:1972-1978.
82:1083-1089.
Medicat Association 191:1443-1445.
147 Schuman J, Puliafito C {1990) Laser
159 Gelatt K, Gum G, Samuelson D,
173 McLaughlin S, Ramsey D, Lindley D,
cyclophotocoagulation. Internationa!
Mandelkorn R, Olander K,
Gilger B, Gerding P, Whitley R (1995)
Ophthatmology Clinics 30:111-119.
 Zimmerman T (1987) Evaluation of the
 Intraocular silione prosthesis
148 Sapienza Js, Miller TR, Gum GG,
krupin-denver valve implant in
 implantation in eyes of dogs and a cat
Gelatt KN (1992) Contact trans-scleral
normotensive and glaucomatous Beagles.
with intraocular neoplasia: nine cases
cyclophotocoagulation using a
Journat of the American Veterinary
(1983-1994). Jotrnat of the American
 neodymium:ytrium aluminum garnet
Medicat Association 11:1404-1409.
Veterinary Medicat Association
laser in normal dogs. Progress in 
160 Herschler J, Claflin A, Fiorentino G
207:1441-1443.
Veterinary and Comparative
 {1980) The effect of aqueous humor on
174 Pena M, Luera M, Garcia F {1997) A
Ophthatmotogy 2:147-153.
the growth of subconjunctival fibroblasts
 new type of intraocular prosthesis for
149 Quinn R, Parkinson K, Wilcock B,
in tissue culture and its implications for 
dogs. Veterinary Record 146:67-68.
Tingey D (1996) The effects of
gaucoma surgery. American Journat of
175 Vainisi S, Schmidt G {1983) Intraocular 
continuous wave Nd:YAG and
Ophthatrmotogy 89:245-249.
gentamicin for the control of
semiconductor diode laser energy on the
161 Peiffer R, Popovich K, Nichols D
endophthalmitis and glaucoma in
canine ciliary body: in vitro
{1990) Long-term comparative study of
animals. Proceedings of the Scientific
thermographic analysis. Veterinary and
the Schocket and Joseph glaucoma tube
Meeting of the American College of
Conparative Ophthatmology 6:45-50.
shunts in monkeys. Ophthatmic Sturgery
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 14:134.
150 Rosenberg LF, Karalekas DP, Krupin T,
21:55-59.
176 Moller I, Cook Cs, Peiffer Jr RL,
Hyderi A (1996) Cyclocryotherapy and
162 Bentley E, Miller PE, Murphy CJ,
Nasisse MP, Harling DE (1986)
noncontact Nd:YAG laser
Schoster JV (1999) Combined
Indications for, and complications of,
cyclophotocoagulation in cats.
 cycloablation and gonioimplantation for
pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary
Investigative Ophthatmoiogy and Visuat
treatment of glaucoma in dogs: 18 cases
body for the treatment of chronic
Science 37:2029-2036.
[1992-1998). Journat of the American
gaucoma in the dog. Journat of the
151 Nadelstein B, Wilcock B, Cook C,
Veterinary Medicat Association
American Animat Hospitat Association
Davidson M (1997) Clinical and
215:1469-1472.
22:319-326.
histopathologic effects of diode laser 
163 Bedford P (1989) A clinical evaluation
177 Spiess B (1986) Erfahrungen mit einer 
tans-scleral cyclophotocoagulation in
 of a one-piece drainage system in the
 neuen methode zur behandlung des
the normal canine eye. Veterinary and
teatment of canine glaucoma. Jotrnat of
absoluten glaukoms beim hund und bei
Comparative Ophthatnology
Small Animat Practice 30:68-75.
der katze. Schtweizer Archiv fur
7:155-162.
164 Bentley E, Nasisse M, Glover T, Nelms 
Terheikunde 128:469-473.
152 Cantor L, Nichols D, Katz J (1989)
 S {1996) Implantation of filtering devices
178 Bingaman D, Lindley D, Glickman N,
Neodymium-YAG trans-scleral
 in dogs with glaucoma: preliminary
Krohne S, Bryan G {1994) Intraocular
cyclophotocoagulation: the role of
results in 13 eyes. Vetermary and
gentamicin and glaucoma: a retrospective
 pigmentation. Investigative
Comparative Ophthalmotogy
study of 60 dog and cat eyes. Veterinary
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
6:243-246.
and Comparative Ophthatmology
30:1834-1837.
165 Lavin M, Franks W, Wormald R,
4:113-119.
153 Schubert H, Federman J (1989) A
Hitchings R {1992) Clinical risk factors
179 Peiffer R, Harling D {1998) Intravitreal
 comparison of CW Nd:YAG contact
for failure in glaucoma tube surgery.
cidofovir (Vistide) in the managerment of
tans-scleral cyclophotocoagulation with
Archiwes of Ophthatmotogy
gaucoma in the dog and cat.
cyclocryopexy. Investigative
110:480-485.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Ophthatmotogy amd Vistat Science
166 Raffan PJ (1990) A method of surgical
the American College of Veterinary
30:536-542.
 correction of glaucoma in a dog. Journat
Ophthatmologists 29:29.
154 Brancato R, Leoni G, Trabucchi G,
of Smalf Animat Practice 31:305-308.
180 Lutjen-Drecoll E, Kaufman PL (1979)
Cappellini A (1991) Histopathology of
167 Hakanson NW {1996) Extraorbital
 Echothiophate-induced structural
continuous wave neodymium:ytrium
diversion of aqueous in the treatment of
alterations in the anterior chamber angle
aluminum garnet and diode laser contact
glaucoma in the dog. Veterinary and
of the Cynomolgus monkey. Investigative
trans-scleral lesions in rabbit ciliary body.
Conparative Ophthatmology 6:82-90.
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Vistuat
168 Cullen CL, Allen AL, Grahn BH {1998)
18:918-929.
Science 32:1586-1592.
Anterior chamber to frontal sinus shunt
181 Vainisi S {1973) The diagnosis and
155 Echelman DA, Nasisse MP, Shields B,
for the diversion of aqueous humor: a
therapy of glaucoma. In: Veterinary
McGahan MC, Fleisher LN (1994)
pilot study in four normal dogs.
Clinics of North Aerica, Vol. 3. G.
Influence of exposure time on
Veterinary Ophthatmology 1:31-39.
Aguirre (ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
inflammatory response to enodymium:
169 Nasisse M, van Ee R, Munger R.
pp. 435-465.
YAG cyclophotocoagulation. Archiuves of
Davidson M (1988) Use of methy]
182 Martin C {1993) Glaucoma. In:
Ophthatmmotogy 112:977-981.
 methacrylate orbital prosthesis in dogs
Textbook of Smalt Anirmat Surgery.
and cats: 78 cases {1980-1986). Journat
Vl. 2. D. Slatter (ed). WB Saunders,
Of the Armerican Veterinary Medicat
Philadelphia, pp. 1263-1276.
Association 192:539-542.
369
13
Lens
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
EMBRYOLOGYANDANATOMY
The lens develops from a plate of surface ectoderm, the
INTRODUCTION
lens placode, that is formed by gestational day 15 in the
The lens is a biconvex clear structure located behind the
dog. The lens placode invaginates to form a pit and later
iris in the patellar fossa of the anterior vitreous. It is held
ai ou siai e (al ap iisl aisaa e s
in place by the zonules or the tertiary vitreous. While the
optic vesicle (gestational day 25). The periphery of the
lens is not the major refractive medium of the eye, its
original lens vesicle is lined with epithelium but the cells
ability to vary in refractive power with accommodation
from the posterior surface elongate and fill the vesicle
makes it unique. The lens is also unique in its
(gestational day 30) and are called the primary lens fibers
transparency, high protein content, high carbonic
(13.1)4. The primary lens fibers later lose their nuclei and
 anhydrase (CA) levels, high glutathione levels, and lack
form the embryonic nucleus in the adult. The original
of vascularity and innervationl, 2. The lens depends on
[eg sa, ai ad aisa al aul ree sa
the aqueous humor and vitreous for nutrition and
lamina, or lens capsule, by 35 days of gestation. After the
elimination of waste products. The lens is composed of
 elongation of the primary lens fibers, the epithelium is
the lens capsule, lens epithelium, and lens fibers, with
 present only under the anterior half of the lens capsule,
very minimal intercellular constituents. The lens in the
as in the adult. The presence of epithelium under the
 dog is about 10.5 mm in diameter and 7.5 mm in axial
anterior capsule is responsible for the continuing
thickness, in the cat is 9-10.4 mm in diameter and 7.5
development of the anterior and equatorial capsule,
mm in axial thickness, and in the horse is 21 mm in
resulting in thicknesses of 40-50 μm at the anterior pole
diameter and 12.75 mm in axial thickness3.
and 3-5 μm at the posterior pole. The anterior capsule
13.1 Stages of embryonic lens development.
13.1
(From Hamming and Apple, 1980186.)
Dboai
Lens plate 
Lens pit (early]
Lens pit (late)
Lens vesicle (early)
Lens vesicle (late)
Embryonic lens nucleus
370
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
13.2
13.3
13.3 Cortical len5
fibers of the dog a5
 seen on sagittal 
section. Note the
hexagonal cro55-
section, surface
convolutions, and 
the ball and socket 
joint along the
edges of the fibers
(SEM x4,212).
(From Martin and
Ander50n, 19817.)
13.2 Origin of lens sutures from abutment of lens fibers that do not
extend across the entire diameter of the lens. (Adapted from Hogan
et ol., 1971187.)
13.4
13.4 llustration of an adult dog lens with lens bow (A) and various
B
zones. Note the anterior capsule (B) is thicker than the posterior capsule
and the epithelium is only under the anterior capsule. (C: anterior cortex;
D: anterior adult nucleus; E: anterior fetal nucleus; F: ermbryonal nucleus.]
(From Martin and Anderson, 19817.)
D
is the thickest basal lamina in the body2. The cuboidal
lens bow (13.4). Older fibers are pushed and compacted
toward the middle and this region is called the nucleus.
 equator, become more columnar, and they form fibers 
The nucleus is often subdivided into chronological stages 
anteriorly and posteriorly that reach toward the opposite
 such as embryonal, fetal, and adult (13.4)8, 9.
equator. Where the fibers from opposite cells abut each
The various regions of the lens can be seen clinically
 other, a suture line or pattern is created that is clinically
as ‘zones of optical discontinuity' with a slit lamp or a
visible (13.2). Typically, this is an upright *Y' in the
 focal beam of light as the beam passes through the lens
anterior lens and an inverted *Y' in the posterior lens,
(13.5). The continued growth increases the size of the
although more complex branching patterns are not
lens with age but rather than filling the eye, it also
uncommon. The lens fibers are hexagonal in cross-
becomes more compact, causing a loss of elasticity with
section and interdigitate snugly. In addition, they attach
 age and an increase in light scattering.
to adjacent fibers by ball and socket junctions and
The embryonic lens is surrounded by a vascular tunic,
surface convolutions (13.3)6. 7.
the tunica vasculosa lentis, that develops posteriorly
The lens continues to form new fibers throughout most
from the anterior extension of the hyaloid artery and
of an animal's life. The region of most recent lens fiber
 anteriorly from the network of the pupillary membrane
formation is immediately under the ca psule and is termed
{13.6). The hyaloid artery begins to atrophy by 45 days
the cortex. Cell nuclei, which have been pushed inward
of gestation but remains of the tunic are normally seen
from the equator, form an arc which bends anteriorly, the
 until 14+ days post partum in the dog4.
LENS
371
13.5
13.5 Canine lens with optical zones of discontinuity viewed with a slit
lamp. The fetal nucleus is not viewed because the beam is off center.
(1: cornea; 2: anterior cortex; 3: anterior nucleus; 4: posterior nucleus:
5: posterior cortex.]
13.6 The embryonic vascular 5ystem of the dog
13.6
eye at different stages of fetal life. (1 : hyaloid 
artery; 2: tunica vasculosa lentis; 3: va5a
hyaloidea propria; 4: pupillary mem brane; 5:
annular vessel.) (From Stades, 1983188.)
Day 25
Day 30
Day 35
Day 45
Birth
372
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
13.7 SEM of the
The lens is held in place by zonules that attach at, and
13.7
feline zonular
adjacent to, the equator (13.7, 13.8). The zonules are
attachments to
 mllagenous fibrils that arise from the pars plana of the ciliary
the lens equator.
bodyi0. Helmholtz's theory of accommodation states that the
viewed from the
vitreal side. Note
relaxed state; with contraction of the ciliary muscles the
how the zonules
zonular tension is relaxed and the lens capsule molds the lens
pass between the
into a more spherical structure or a stronger converging
 ciliary processes
lensll. This process is termed accommodation. It is very
and attach both
lmited in domestic animals, being generally about 2-3 D
anteriorly and
(young humans, 15 D; >40 years, only 2-3 D)11a, and 1 D in
the horsel2, 13 Schachar et al14 proposed a different model
posteriorly to the
lens equator (x20].
of accommodation that remains controversiall5. Schachar's
model explains accommodation by increased tension on the
equatorial zonules from contraction of the radial ciliary
muscles, while the anterior and posterior zonules are more
13.8 SEM of
relaxed. This increased tension on the equator fattens the
13.8
zonular fiber
 peripheral lens and steepens the central lens. While most of
insertions into the
the theories on accommodation have concentrated on the
lens capsule of a 
iliary muscles and zonules, Kuszak et al.lla correlated
dog. Note how the 
accommodation to the difference in lens fibers shapes and
attachment
 Onsequent suture pattern shapes. Animals with a line or Y
surface area is
 sutures, such as the dog and cat, have very limited changes in
increased by the
lens shape due to the fibers having very little taper, resulting in 
'unraveling' of the
blunt ends that do not overlap at the end and effect
larger fibers into 
 accommodation.
the component
PHYSIOLOGY AND BIOCHEMISTRY
fibrils (x400].
(From Martin and
The lens is composed of 65% water and 34% protein, the
Anderson, 19817]
latter concentration being higher than in any other tissue in
the bodyl. It also contains a higher concentration of
gutathione than any other tissue. The proteins of the lens are
broadly divided into soluble and insoluble fractions. The
soluble fractions are termed crystallins and make up 90% of
the protein. In mammals there are three subgroups of
13.9
Glucose
Glycogen
[storage]
13.9 Pathways of
Aqueous
Facili tated 
 sugar metabolism
 transgort
Henodinase
Glucose-6-P
6n16-d-9
conate
in the lens. The 
Glucose
ATP
ADP
NADP
NADPH + Ht
Roman numerals
Lens
(NADP
Fructose-6-P
indicate the 
NADPH + H+
NADPH + Ht
[Aldose reductase
ATP
Erythrose-4-P
importance of the
NADP
Phosphofructo
Ribulose 5-P
respective
kinase
ADP
Sedoheptulose 7-P
pathways with I
Sorbitol
Fructose-1, 6-diP
Ribose 5-p
Xylulose 5-P
being the most 
NAD
important. (From
Polyol dehydrogenase
Dihydroxyacetone P
NADH+H*
Glyceraldehyde-3-P
 Hexose mon oph osphate shunt 
Jose, 19831)
NAD.P,
NADH + Ht
 Sorbitol pathway
1.3
phosphoglycerate
Fructose ‘
1-P
ADP
ATP
V Dihydroxy
3-P-glycerate
Acetone-P
Phosphoenol pyruvate
FPH2
NADH+H+
ADP
TCA cycle
Mitochondna
Cytoplasm
Pyruvate kinase
Glyceraldehyde
NAD
ATP
FP
Pyruvate
Glyceroghosghate
I/ NADH + H+
α-Glycerophosphate cycle
Lactate
dehydrogenase
T
NAD
actate
Embden-Meyerhof pathway of glycolysis
LENS
373
rystallins, alpha, beta, and gamma, based on molecular
ompacting of the lens center and, in combination with
weight. The crystallin proteins are structural proteins in the
biochemical protein changes, produces a noticeable increase
lens and are very closely related to various metabolic
in reflection of light. This appears clinically as a very hazy
enzymes. Alpha crystallin is ubiquitous in the animal
lens or what many owners interpret as a *cataract in the old
kingdom and is found in many tissues throughout the
animal. While the light is scattered, it is not blocked
bodyl6. Crystallins are very stable proteins that last for the
appreciably and vision is not lost. On pupil dlation the
life of the individual. The insoluble protein fraction is termed
central nucleus appears as a lens within the cortex {13.10).
albuminoid, and is formed from alpha crystallins.
ae po sieak  inoqe ie isayuu ot suaq sisoaps ieapn
The cortex contains high concentrations of the crystallins,
in the dog and 15 years in the horsel8. With experience the
which decrease toward the nucleus, where the albuminoids
lens density can be used to age an animal as easily and
increase in concentrationl. Also, the levels of albuminoids
accurately as dental examination. Utilizing a standard for
 increase with age. The clinical correlate is the ability of some
lens transparency and size of specular reflections
juvenile cataracts to undergo dramatic resorption, whereas
(Purkinje-Sanson images), a complicated formula was
cataracts in older patients rarely undergo complete
developed to predict the age of dogs and cats19.
resorption. Because the lens is walled off by the capsule early
in embryonic development, the proteins are sequestered from
 Nuclear sclerosis is not a senile cataract, does not
the body's immunologic surveillance system. This may result
 produce blindness, and can only be differentiated from 
a cataract by examination after pupillary dilation.
 if the capsule is ruptured or the proteins “leak out. This
 traditional explanation of lens-induced inflammation is being
questioned with an alternative hypothesis: that massive
DISEASES OF THE LENS
exposure of proteins of the lens results in overwhelming of
A ud au in s rssdns a
Pathological changes in the lens, which are limited in
reactions to lens proteins17.
type, will be discussed under the following headings:
Metabolism of the lens is mainly by anaerobic
absence, abnormal size, abnormal shape, opacification,
glycolysis, of which the first enzyme, hexokinase, is
 and displacement.
present in limited amounts and is the rate-limiting factor
(13.9). Only about 3% of glucose is metabolized
CONGENITAL DISEASES OF THE LENS
aerobically via the Kreb's cycle but it accounts for 25%
Aphakia
of the energy produced. Ninety percent of the energy is
Aphakia is a congenital absence of the lens. It is very rare
used for active transport. While anaerobic metabolism
and probably only occurs with multiple ocular anomalies.
can occur throughout the lens, the Kreb's cycle is limited
 Primary aphakia is a developmental lack of lens tissue and
to the epithelium. The hexose monophosphate shunt and
is associated with severe ocular malformations. The lens
the sorbitol pathway are also operative in the lens but do
plays a critical role in inducing the development of the
 not generate significant amounts of energy (13.9)1.
cornea and vitreous and the absence of the lens results in
The lens actively accumulates amino acids, potassium,
taurine, and inositol and actively extrudes sodium. A
refers to degeneration and resorption or expulsion of the 
Na/K-ATPase-activated pump results in the lens being
lens from the eye and may not be accompanied by severe
low in sodium and high in potassiuml. Lens clarity is
ocular anomalies. Microphthalmos, aphakia, acoria,
dependent on minimal intercellular water and the tight
anterior chamber dysgenesis, and retinal dysplasia and
regular packing of the lens fibers.
detachment have been described in St. Bernards (13.11) and
Nuclear sclerosis refers to the normal aging changes that
Doberman Pinschers and are thought to be inherited21-23.
ccur in the lens and does not result in any appreciable loss
Aphakia has also been described with multiple ocular
of vision. The continued growth of the lens results in
 anomalies in a colt but the genetics are unknown24.
13.10
13.11
13.10 Nuclear sclerosis in a dog when viewed against the tapetal
13.11 Central calotte of a buphthalmic globe from a St. Bernard
reflection and a dilated pupil. Note the lens within the lens' and that
 puppy with bilateral aphakia and acoria. Note the retinal detachment 
pinpoint cortical opacities are observed in the ventral half of the pupil.
and no lens behind the iris.
374
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Primary aphakia may not be diagnosed until
present.
Accompanying
lens
 displacement
1S
histopathologic  examination   because  of ocular
anomalies such as absence of the pupil and corneal
luxated or subluxated (13.12, 13.13) (see Lens luxation).
opacities that obscure examination of the lens region.
 Ultrasound is the antemortem method of diagnosing
Coloboma
aphakia when other ocular anomalies preclude direct
Introduction/etiology
 visualization. There is no therapy for aphakia. Owners
A coloboma ofthe lens is manifest as an equatorial defect
should be advised about possible inheritance.
or flattening of the lens and is relatively uncommon. Lens
coloboma may be associated with iris coloboma or, if
Microphakia
isolated, may be occult due to its peripheral location or
Microphakia (a small lens) is not uncommon and may be
may be observed incidentally when the pupil is dilated.
associated with future dislocation of the lens25, 26. Micro-
The lens coloboma may be secondary to a coloboma of
phakia may occur in a normal globe or be associated
the zonules in that area and a resultant lack of tension on
with a proportional decrease in globe size (microphthal-
 the lens equator26.
mos). Microphthalmos has been suggested to be a domi-
nant inherited trait in the Beagle27. Microphakia may be
 Clinical signs
associated with spherophakia (a round lens). Micro-
+
 Flattening of the peripheral equatorial lens that is
phakia is less common in the cat than in the dog. Most
visible on pupillary dilation (13.14).
of the reported cases of microphakia in cats have been
 Lack of zonules in the area of equatorial flattening
reported in the Siamese28, 28a.
(13.15).
Microphakia is recognized by C
observing the lens
The lens coloboma may or may not be associated
equator easily when the pupil is dilated. In the cat,
with other ocular anomalies or colobomas.
elongated ciliary processes that attach to the lens are
13.12
13.12 Young cat with bilateral microphakia and anterior luxation. Note
the few remaining anomalous zonules and the corneal neovascularization
from the lens contact.
13.13 Five-month-old Brittany with bilateral anterior luxations
associated with microphakia. Note the small clear lens behind the 
corneal edema.
13.14 Len5 coloboma observed in an 8-year-old Old English Sheepdog.
Note the flattened lens equator and focal cataract in the adjacent lens.
 Due to the lack of signs the congenital lesion was not detected in the 
young dog.
13.13
13.14
LENS 
375
13.15 SEM of a
13.15
13.16
lens coloboma
from a young
Australian 
Shepherd Dog 
with an iris
coloboma and 
multiple other 
ocular anomalies.
Note the lack of 
zonules in the 
colobomatous
region compared
to the adjacent
equa tor (x10].
(From Martin,
197826)
13.16 Posterior lenticonus in a young Siberian Husky. The lenticonu5 
 is demarcated by the axial circular lenticular opacity.
Differential diagnosis
13.17
from shrinkage of the lens with a hypermature cataract,
or it may be confused with an aphakic crescent with a
 subluxated lens.
Therapy
 No therapy is necessary.
Lenticonus and lentiglobus
Introd uction/etiology
Lenticonus is a rare lenticular anomaly characterized by
a conical protrusion of the lens, usually axially, on
either the anterior or posterior surfaces. Lenticonus
multiple
 ocular
 anomalies
ina
variety
of
ultrasound when accompanied by severe ocular
13.17 Young Scottish Terrier with a fetal nuclear cataract. All three
anomalies. The appearance of primary lenticonus may
dogs in the litter were affected with the same opacity. There was no
be confusing if it is not observed with a slit lamp.
history of orphan milk supplermentation. Opacities in this region are 
 Lentiglobus is a spherical protrusion. The protrusion
stable and do not progress.
 may be clear or opaque and is usually unilateral.
Clinical signs
Protrusion of the anterior or, more commonly, the
 posterior curvature of the lens is observed. An opacity at
the margin of the protrusion or over the entire protrusion
 may produce a circular opacity with a clear center or a
Congenital cataracts
 saucer-shaped opacity, respectively (13.16). Because the 
Introduction/etiology
posterior capsule is anomalous, rupture of the capsule
 A cataract is any opacity of the lens or its capsule. The
may occur, risking phacoclastic uveitis.
definition does not specify any particular degree of
 severity or that blindness is a consequence.
Therapy
 Congenital cataracts may be inherited or be due to other 
 Therapy is not usually necessary and lenticonus is not
in utero insults. They may be an isolated anomaly (primary)
 known to be a genetic trait when observed alone.
 or one of several ocular anomalies (secondary congenital
Gataract), such as with microphthalmos. If an isolated event,
Prophylaxis
the cataract is often stationary, with improvement in vision 
In the Akita, Doberman Pinscher, Cavalier King Charles
occurring with further growth of normal new fibers. When
Spaniel, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, Bloodhound, and
observed in the older animal, congenital cataracts are
Miniature Schnauzer, lenticonus is part of a more
typically in the center of the lens or on the anterior capsule
generalized ocular syndrome that is inherited.
(13.17). The center of the lens represents the embryonal and
376
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASe IN VeTeRINARY MeDICiNE
13.18
13.19
13.18 Anterior capsular cataract associated with persistent pupillary
13.19 Doberman Pinscher puppy with posterior capsular markings
membranes. All puppies in this litter of Walker Hounds were affected.
(arrow) associated with persistent tunica vasculosa lentis and 
but the parents were normal.
hyaloid artery. Wwhile the condition has been studied extensively
 in the Doberman Pinscher, these capsular markings are common
in a variety of breeds and are often familial with no documented
13.20
detrirmental effect.
fetal region, while anterior and posterior capsule opacities
are often associated with persistent remnants of the
 embryonic vascular tunic of the lens (PPMs and persistent
tunica vasculosa lentis [PTVL]) {13.18, 13.19). When the
retention of vascular elements on the posterior capsule is
associated with excessive glial or scar tissue, it is termed
persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis (PHTVL).
Dog
 Congenital cataracts as part of an inherited microph-
 thalmos have been described in the Akita, Cavalier King 
Charles Spaniel,  Miniature Schnauzer, Australian
13.20 Anterior axial capsular pigment deposit5, presumably from
pupillary membranes. These are common findings in a variety of 
Cataracts associated with PHTVL are often inherited.
breeds and are often familial.
Cataracts may be associated with PPMs in the Basenji,
Beagle, Red Cocker Spaniel, Welsh Corgi, and many other
breeds. A common appearance is a nest of pigmented dots
13.21
on the axial anterior capsule that is presumed to be an area
of touching or attachment of previous pupillary
membranes (13.20). These are familial and are seen in a
wide variety of breeds. Similarily, posterior capsular
vascular markings that are white are very common
(PTVL). However, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
{PHPV) and persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis
in the Doberman Pinscher, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, and
vitreal hemorrhage, and phacoclastic uveitis may develop
from spontaneous rupture of the lens capsule in the severe
 forms of PHPV/PHTVL. (See Chapter 14, p.401 for futher 
discussion of PHPV/PHTVL.)
 Minor anterior and posterior capsular markings
 produced by the embryonic tunica vasculosa lentis
13.21 Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis in a Bernese
are very common and are of minimal clinical
Mountain Dog puppy. Both puppies in a litter of two were affected.
significance as they do not progress.
Note the white capsular opacities in addition to the retrolental blood
vessels. A subsequent litter from the bitch was normal.
LENS 
377
13.22
13.23
13.22 Bouvier des Flandres puppy with persistent hyperplastic tunica
13.23 Congenital nuclear cataract in a cat about 6 months old. Note
vasculosa lentis and blood-filled pupillary membrane vessels. A puppy
the clear peripheral cortex. As new lens fibers are normal the opacity
band keratopathy and peripheral corneal pigmentation and sclerosis
will not progress in size.
are visible, in addition to posterior capsular opacities. The condition 
was bilateral.
13.24
Congenital cataracts and corneal opacification are
part of inherited retinal dysplasia-skeletal dysplasia in
the Labrador Retriever45, s
skeletal  dysplasia-retinal
detachment in the Samoyed+6, and retinal dysplasia in the 
 English Springer Spaniel47.
Cat
Complete congenital cataracts are relatively rare in the
cat48, although minor lens opacities are not uncommon.
 Congenital inherited cataracts have been occasionally
described in cats, usually in breeds with a Persian
background (13.23)49.
13.24 Mature cortical cataract in a foal. Note the lens suture which
Horse
was fractured due to fluid imbibition.
Congenital cataracts represent 35% of the ocular
anomalies in the horses0. While they may be associated
with microphthalmos, the remainder of the eye is usually
suture lines, in which case they are nonprogressive and
 and multiple ocular anomalies as well as hydrocephalus,
nonblinding?3, but they usually involve the entire nucleus
 cerebellar hypoplasia, and myopathy60, 61.
and produce visual impairment {13.24). Often the cause
of the cataracts is unknown but they are known or
 Clinical signs
suspected to be inherited in Belgian horses, Quarter 
●Visual impairment: in dogs and cats, if the lens 
horses, Morgan horses, and thoroughbredss4s6. In the
 opacities are complete or the cataracts are part of
 Morgan horse, the opacities are in the fetal nucleus
severe ocular anomalies, blindness is noted at 4-5
without any visual impairment. While familial, the mode
weeks of age when the puppies and kittens start to
of inheritance has not been determineds6. In the Belgian
move around. Improvement in vision may be noted
horse, cataracts may be observed with aniridia and as a
after a period of growth, if the opacities are 
dominant trait54. Lens subluxations were noted in one
 stationary and other ocular anomalies do not
foal with congenital cataracts$7.
preclude vision.
 Incidental capsular or nuclear opacities: congenital
Cow
opacities may be noted on either the anterior or
Inherited congenital cataracts have been reported in the
posterior capsule, or the central lens, as an
Jersey, Hereford, Holstein, Shorthorn, and Holstein-
incidental finding in the older animal and can
Friesians8-60 In the Jersey, lens displacement, microphakia
 and buphthalmos may occur as a simple recessive trait59.
location and, perhaps, vascular shape (13.17,
In Shorthorns, the cataracts occur with microphthalmos
13.19, 13.20).
378
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
● Cataracts associated with PHPV/PHTVL may be
Congenital cataracts are not synonymous with
 associated with the unusual occurrence of hemorrhage
inherited cataracts. The author has observed entire
into the lens (13.25). This may be associated with
litters of affected puppies with cataracts from
 acute blindness. Vascular remnants varying from
normal parents; repeat breeding from the parents
 pigment or gray markings on the capsule to obvious
resulted in normal litters.
vascular structures that may or may not have blood in
the lumen will be present with PHTVL (13.19-13.22).
ACQUIRED DISEASES OF THE LENS
Diagnosis of congenital origin
Cataracts
+ Observation in the first few weeks of life may date the
Introduction/etiology
origin of the opacity but in the dog, neonatal cataracts,
Cataracts can be classified by various schemes and the
such as those induced by orphan milk formulas, must 
classifications are often combined.
be differentiated from congenital cataracts.
 Cataracts classified according to anatomic location:
● Nuclear opacification of the lens or cataracts located
anterior capsular, anterior cortical, equatorial, anterior
on the capsule with associated embryonic vascular
nuclear, fetal nuclear, posterior nuclear, posterior
remnants will date the origin of the opacity.
cortical, posterior subcapsular, posterior capsular, axial,
 Lenticular opacities in association with other
and sutural are some of the anatomic descriptors.
 congenital anomalies.
Cataracts classified according to age: congenital,
neonatal, juvenile {up to 5-6 years in the dog), and
Therapy
 senile are age classifications. Nuclear sclerosis, a
Cataract surgery in the foal typically has been performed
normal physiologic process which begins at
with a needle irrigation-aspiration technique, through a
approximately 7 years of age in the dog, should be
small incision. While the larger eye of the horse would
differentiated from senile cataracts. All very old
uoesyisinuaooeud piepueis ot jlastl pual ot ieadde jou
animals will develop a significant gray cast to the
because of the short phacoemulsification needle, the
lens from the light scattering that occurs from
 author has, nevertheless, routinely been able to perform
nuclear sclerosis, and this is easily confused with a
this procedure successfully without resorting to the
senile cataract.
longer lithotriptor needle {13.26)62, Needle irrigation-
Cataracts classified according to stage or degree of
aspiration surgery is most successful (77%) in foals
 opacification: this is a common method of describing
<6 months of age and is 60% successful in foals 6-12
cataracts and is somewhat arbitrary. The incipient
 months of age63. when a lithotriptor needle is used on
Pnom siaumo ieul Aoedo lews Auea ue sl poereieo
cataracts in foals, the success rate is 90%62.
not observe {13.27), while the immature cataract is a
more diffuse cortical opacity but does not block all
Prophylaxis
light to the fundus and the animal is still visual if the
 Prophylaxis involves recognition of cataracts as a genetic
 pupil is dilated. The immature cataract is easily
trait in many instances. In addition, drugs or potential
observed (13.28). The mature cataract is a complete
teratogenic agents should be avoided during pregnancy.
cortical opacity that blocks the fundus or tapetal
reflection completely and the eye is blind (13.29).
Light still penetrates this opacity but is scattered and
does not form a coherent image. The PLR and dazzle
reflex are normal with a bright light but a menace
response is absent with a mature cataract. The mature
cataract is often swollen or intumescent from fluid
imbibition that produces dark fluid clefts through the
 anterior cortex and in the suture pattern where fluid
13.25
can accumulate. The hypermature cataract has
undergone a variable degree of resorption of water
and, often, protein. This is recognized by the resultant
shrinkage of the lens and wrinkling of the lens capsule
(13.30). The opacity often has a fine granular texture
that may be due to cholesterol crystals from
breakdown of cell membranes64. Lens resorption can
be partial or complete fusually in dogs <2 years of
age), resulting in the retention of the capsule with
variable amounts of calcific deposits {13.31). The
Morgagnian cataract is a hypermature cataract that
has a liquefied cortex with the solid nucleus settled
within the cortex (13.32). Animals with marked
resorption often regain variable amounts of their
vision if there is no other ocular pathology such as a
retinal detachment or retinal atrophy.
 Cataracts classified according to the cause: a variety
13.25 Intralenticular hermorrhage from persistent hyperplastic tunica
of etiologies are possible but in clinical practice only
vasculosa lentis in a Bernese Mountain Dog puppy.
 a few are of significance.
LENS
379
13.26
13.27
13.26 Setting up for phacoemulsification of a cataract in a foal.
13.27 Example of an incipient cataract in a dog. This would not be
 Despite the limitations of a short needl, this procedure has been
noted by the owner or produce visual symptoms.
very successful for soft cataracts in the foal.
13.29
13.30
13.28 Immature cortical cataract. Note the
 13.29 Mature cortical cataract in a dog that
13.30 A hypermature cortical cataract in a
green tapetal reflection around the periphery.
 blocks all tapetal reflection on pupillary 
dog that is shrinking in size and is subluxated.
Often these dogs are still functional.
dilation. Note the prominent anterior cortical
particularly with pupil dilation.
suture that is separated due to fluid imbibition
 and the selective hyperemia of large
 conjunctival vessels, indicating LIU.
13.31
13.32
13.31 Amost complete lens resorption in a young dog, leaving an empty 
13.32 Morgagnian cataract in a 2-year-old Miniature Poodle. Note the
capsular bag filled with a few crystals. The dog would have been visual
denser nudeus settled ventrally in the lens because the cortex is ligquified.
except that a retinal detachment also developed during the proces5.
380
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Table 13.1 Inherited or suspected inherited cataracts in the dog
Breed
Approx age
Mode of 
Characteristic
Course
 Associated
of onset
inheritance
early appearance
 ocular lesion5
 Afghan Hound 
6 months-2 years
AR
 Equatorial, cortical
P
Akita
C
？
Nuclear
Microph thalmos
American
1-2 years:
AR
Posterior, axial, cortical;
P
 Cocker Spaniel
3-5 years
anterior cortical
Australian 
C
 AR with incomplete
Nuclear, cortical
Microph thalmo5
Shepherd Dog 
 penetrance
Beagle
 Axial, anterior subcapsular
5
 Persistent pupillary
membranes +
Beagle
1 year
？
Axial, posterior subcapsular  S
Boston Terrier
 4-6 months;
？
Cortical; nuclear; equatorial  P; P - slow.
 3-4 years; senile
P - slow
Cavalier King.
?: -
 Nuclear posterior cortical;
P+; P
Lenticonus+;
 Charles Spaniel
 Posterior capsular, cortical
microphthalmos
Chesapeake
6 months-
Dominant
Axial, posterior
S (usually)
Retriever
G years
subcapsular triangle
 Doberman Pinscher
C
AR?
 Posterior capsular
P+
 Posterior lenticonus, PHP}
PHTVL, microphakia 
 English Cocker Spaniel C
AR
Nuclear, cortical, sutural
Retinal dysplasia
German Shepherd 
C; 8 weeks
Dominant, AR 
Axial, anterior; Posterior
S; P but 
Dog
sutural
not blindness
 Golden Retriever
6 months-
AR
Axial, posterior subcapsular
S (usually)
6 years
Labrador Retriever
C
？
Nuclear, cortical
Corneal opacity, retinal
chysplasia, retinal cetachment
Old English
C
？
Nuclear, cortical
P+
 Retinal detachment, +
Sheepdog 
microphthalmos
 Poodle, Miniature/Toy
2-10 years
？
Cortical
P
 Poodle, Standard 
 Several months 
AR
Equatorial 
P
 Red Cocker Spaniel 
C
？
 Axial, anterior subcapsular
S
PPM5+
Siberian Husky
 6 months-6 years
AR
 Posterior subcapsular
S
Schnauzer, Miniature 
C:J
AR: ?
Nuclear, cortical; cortical
P+:P
 Microph thalmos+; -
Staffordshire
2-6 months; C
AR; AR
 Nuclear: posterior capsular
P; S (usually)
-: PHPV/PHTVL,
Bull Terrier
microphthalmo5
Welsh Corgi
J
AR?
 Posterior cortical
 Welsh Springer Spaniel 8 weeks 
AR
 Posterior cortical vacuoles 
P - blind by 2 years -
West Highland
C?
AR?
 Posterior sutural
P- 5ome
White Terrier
AR: autosomal recessive; C: congenital; J: juvenile; P: progressive; PHPV/PHTVL: persistent hyperplastic vitreous/persistent tunica vasculosa lentis;
 S: stationary. For references see Chapter 1 5: Presumed inherited ocular diseases.
Inherited cataracts
13.33
 Cataracts that are inherited are very common in the dog.
 and are relatively uncommon in the cat48. The age of
onset of inherited cataracts may be congenital, juvenile,
or senile. Most have a recessive inheritance but some
are thought to be dominant. (See Table 13.1 for a list of
inherited cataracts.) The most common forms (
of
inherited cataracts are in the juvenile age range
{<6 years).
While many
juvenile
cataracts are
progressive and result in blindness, a common form
found in many retriever breeds, Malmutes, Siberian 
Huskies, and others is a focal axial posterior
subcapsular opacity that is either triangular or saucer-
shaped. These posterior subcapsular opacities 
aré
usually, but not invariably, nonprogressive (13.33).
Inherited cataracts in individual instances are often
diagnosed by association rather than by firm genetic
13.33Axial posterior subcapsular triangular ca taract in a Chesapeke Bay
evidence. Usually inheritance is presumed, based on the
Retriever that is typical of juvenile ca taracts in Retrievers. The opacity
typical appearance and age in'a breed known to be
has been moved off center to avoid the bright specular reflection.
LENS 
381
13.34
Glucose
Glucose
Glucose
Glucose
Glucose
Sorbitol
Sorbi tol
C
Sorbitol
Frutose
Fructose
CI
Inositol↓
Fructose
GSH↓
Protein Synthesis↓ Na
NE
ATPLAA
ATP ↓ GSH ↓
Na
Proteir
ATP↓GSH↓
Water
Water
13.34 Sequence of events leading to a diabetic cataract. As the glucose in the lens increases, it becomes shunted to the sorbital pathway due to
overwhelming of hexokinase in the glycolysis pathway. Sorbital cannot diffuse out of the capsule, resulting in an osmostic gradient to pull water into
the lens. (From Kinoshita, 198673)
 predisposed to cataracts. While more objective evidence
complete ophthalmic éxaminations, cataracts are noted in
such as having afflicted littermates, parents, or relatives
almost 60% of cases of canine diabetes mellitus6s, whereas
is preferred, the individual pet owner often cannot
they were noted in none of a series of 30 cats with
 provide this information. Gelatt and Mackay64b surveyed
diabetes66. Williams and Heath64a screened 50 diabetic
a large data base of teaching hospital medical records
patients and found cataracts in 48/50 cats; the mean age
(Veterinary Medical Data Base) and found the prevalence
was younger (5.6 years) than the normal group of cats that
of dogs presented with cataracts had increased by 255%
were examined. Roughly half of these cats had the same
from 1964 to 2003. Fifty-nine breeds had a cataract
type of minor opacities found in the normal group, while
prevalence above the base line for mixed breeds dogs.
26 had more significant, but not blinding, opacities. While
Those with the highest prevalence were: Smooth Fox
this study may contradict other papers, from a clinical
Terrier {11.7%),
Havanese {11.6%), Bichon Frise
 standpoint it appears that feline diabetic cataracts are not
{11.5%), Boston 
Terrier (11%), Miniature Poodle
 usually problematic and require surgery, as is the case in
(11%), Silky Terrier, (10%), and Toy Poodle (10%).
Breeds with the greatest number of cataracts were:
diabetes developed cataracts by 6 months and
1 75%
Boston Terrier
{11%), Miniature Poodle {11%),
 developed cataracts by 1 year. The importance of galactose 
American Cocker Spaniel (9%), Standard Poodle (7%),
 in veterinary medicine is uncertain.
and Miniature Schnauzer(5%). It should be emphasized
The proposed pathogenesis of sugar cataracts is that the
that many of these cataracts may not have been blinding.
increase in glucose in the aqueous humor is also manifested
in the lens, which overloads glycolysis and the hexose
Metabofic cataracts
monophosphate shunt (13.9). The extra sugar is shunted
Hyperglycemia. While
variety
of sugars are
into the sorbitol pathway where polyols (sorbitol) are
 experimentally capable of inducing cataracts, only glucose
formed. Polyols accumulate because they diffuse poorly out
and galactose are clinically important and the pathogenesis
 of the lens and are not metabolized rapidly68 This creates
studied extensively. On initial presentation and without
an osmotic gradient that pulls water into the lens, creating.
vacuolation and, later, protein aggregation (13.34). One of
the reason for species variation in susceptibility to diabetic
cataracts may be due to variable aldose reductase activities.
13.35
Those animals with high levels of aldose reductase, such as
the dog, convert more glucose into sorbitol and
found that lenses from dogs and young cats had high aldose 
reductase activity when incubated with glucose in vitro and
developed cataracts. Lenses from older cats (>4 years) in
titro had low aldose reductase activity and were resistant
 to glucose-induced cataracts. As most cats develop diabetes 
when older, this is probably the reason for the infrequent
 appearance of cataracts in the diabetic cat.
The younger dog is more susceptible to sugar
anterior and posterior sutures and then vacuoles at the
equator (13.35),
, extending into the anterior and
posterior cortex.
 This process often_progresses to
 complete cortical opacification69, 70. Experimentally,
inhibitors of aldose reductase can inhibit the onset and
13.35 Early diabetic cataract in a dog. Note the vacuoles from the
 severity of sugar cataracts70, 72, 73
lens equator extending axially.
382
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
13.36
Hypocalcemia.
Hypocalcemia
 associated
with
parathyroid dysfunction, postparturient hypocalcemia,
and severe nutritional imbalances in the young animal
 produces characteristic multifocal anterior and posterior
cortical opacities74, 7s. The opacities do not seem to
progress and thus do not produce signs of blindness
(13.36, 13.37). The mechanism is probably through
alterations of lens cell membrane permeability from
altered extracellular levels of calcium?.
Nutritional deficiencies. Feeding orphan diets to wolf
 puppies produced cataracts, which were attributed to an
 arginine deficiency in the diet76. Cataracts have also been
 observed clinically in the dog and cat with commercial
 orphan diets77, home formulated diets, and goat's milk.
Nutritional
cataracts
havé
been 
 reproduced
 experimentally in puppies and kittens, but were quite
13.36 Typical hypocalcermic cataracts characterized by dot and linear
opacities along a specific level of cortical lens fibers that were
experience, cataracts produced by orphan diets are more
forming during the hypocalcermic episode. This dog had 
severe when the diets are fed to nondomesticated species,
hypopara thyroidism.
such as wolves, racoons (13.38), and coyotes and,
perhaps, to large breeds of dogs. Additional arginine and
methionine has been added to commercial milk
13.37
 formulas80, but this does not appear to have completely
eliminated the problem. It is important to differentiate
nutritional cataracts from inherited forms. Typically, the 
 orphan diet cataract is posterior cortical in the puppy
(13.39), posterior sutural in wolf puppies, and becomes
nuclear in older animals.
 Suckling rats injected with sodium selenite develop
cortical and nuclear cataracts that are associated with
water influx and cortical liquifaction81. The lens opacities
clear over several months, indicating that the lens does
possess some reparative capability. Paradoxically, selenium
 og ano e se auoipaw Aieaiaa ul painoi uaaq seu
 cataracts and nuclear sclerosis82, 83.
 In hatchery raised fish, cataracts have been produced
by a variety of nutritional deficiencies. In trout and
Atlantic salmon, diets deficient in methionine, thiamine,
13.37 Hypocalcemic cataracts in a puppy with severe nutritional
13.38
13.39
13.38 Complete cortical cataract in a racoon raised on a commercial
13.39 Typical nuclear cataract in a Collie puppy raised on a
canine orphan milk substitute.
commercial orphan milk substitute.
LENS
288
13.40
13.41
13.40 A dog with a cataract induced by a perforating cat claw injury.
13.41 Blunt trauma- (proptosed globe] induced cataract in a dog
Note the scar in the cornea that is aligned with the lens opacity.
 outlining the anterior suture.
13.42
Trauma
 Blunt or perforating trauma is an etiology that must be
considered with a unilateral cataract. Perforating tra uma
that has ruptured the lens capsule is the most obvious
 cause and, potentially, it may initiate severe intraocular
inflammation, termed phacoana phylaxis or phacoclastic
uveitis. The hallmark of a cataract due to a perforating
injury is a duplicate opacity of the overlying cornea
(13.40). A history of blunt trauma may not be known
and the cataract not be observed until long after the
incident. Thus the appearance of the cataract may be
difficult to correlate with the cause (13.41).
 No matter what the cause of a cataract is, most
owners can associate it with a traumatic incident in
the dog's life.
13.42 Complicated cataract in a cat that had Felv-associated
anterior uveitis and lymphoma that were treated successfully for
Intraocufar disease
1 year. Note the opacity is mainly associated with capsular
Cataracts secondary to intraocular disease are often
infla mma tory debris.
termed complicated cataracts. Three common causes for
complicated cataracts are:
· Inflammation: cataracts associated with inflammation
 may be capsular due to deposition of cells, pigment,
and fibrin on the surfaces, or in the lens associated
with impaired nutrition. This is the most common
type of cataract in the cat and horse (13.42).
● Secondary to chronic glaucoma: animals with
 Secondary to retinal degenerations: certain breeds
chronic glaucoma often develop cataracts and the
with progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) almost
cause is unknown, although multiple causes are 
always develop cataracts, usually late in the course
 possible. The stagnation of aqueous humor that
of the disease. Whether the cataracts are associated
 occurs with glaucoma probably has a deleterious
with a diffusible product that is released by the
nutritional effect on the lens. In addition, the
degenerating retina or a gene associated with PRA is
prolonged elevated IOP may affect the lens
unknown. The appearance of these cataracts is not
epithelium. These factors, combined with the variety
unique so they cannot be distinguished from other
of drugs and surgical insults used to treat glaucoma,
forms of inherited cataracts.
 are possible contributing factors to cataractogenesis.
384
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Toxic cataracts
medicine. Most animals that develop drug-related
Various compounds either ingested or injected parenterally
cataracts have been given drugs because of systemic signs.
or intraocularly may produce cataracts. Toxic cataracts in the
Whether stress, disability, or the drug are causal factors, 
 dog have been described in two patterns. The first pattern is
either individually or in combination, is unknown.
the development of vacuoles at the equator or in a band in
 Antibiotics have usually been the suspected cause of
 the peripheral posterior cortex, which may extend axially
these transient cataracts. The vacuolar opacities may
 anteriorly and posteriorly in the subcapsular region (13.43).
resolve rapidly when the drugs are changed or the animal
The second pattern is development of opacification along the
improves. Oral paromomycin, an aminoglycoside that is
 posterior sutures and the junction of the posterior sutures, or
poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, induced
a combination of suture and equatorial vacuoles ({13.44).
acute renal failure and cataracts in four cats treated for
With progression, the anterior axial region is involved and
 enteritis9. It was postulated that toxic levels of the drug
tventually a total cataract may develop88.
were absorbed through the denuded mucosa. The cataracts
The author has observed toxic cataracts most
were noted in the recovery period of the acute renal failure
but the course of the lens opacities was not noted.
forms of cataracts are not specific for toxic cataracts as
Disophenol, an injectable whipworm medication, may
equatorial vacuoles may be seen with early diabetic
produce cataracts in puppies. However, the cataracts are
cataracts. While a variety of chemicals may produce
usually transient and the cataractogenic dose is 2-3x the
 cataracts in the laboratory, there are not many examples of
clinical dose90, 91 The cataracts consisted of vacuoles and
involvement of drugs that are routinely used in veterinary
were transient, indicating that osmotic changes were
probably responsible. Disophenol is not used as an
anthelmintic today so it is only of historical interest (13.45).
Diazoxide (an antihypertensive agent) administered
13.43
i.v. in the dog, produces transient cataracts consisting of
attributed to drug-induced hyperglycemia.
Dimethyl sulfoxide in the dog, administered orally or
applied dermally, may produce myopia that has been
reported to be associated with an increase in nuclear haze
or, conversely, a decrease in cortical relucency93, 94, These
changes persisted after cessation of therapy for the
duration of the observation period of 92 days.
Hypolipidemic drugs such as the hydroxymethyglutaryl-
CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors can produce
cataracts in dogs at doses of 40-60x the clinical dose. The
occasionally anterior subcapsular opacities. The posterior
 suture becomes increasingly prominent and may continue
 to a complete cortical cataracts.
Topical glucocorticoids and miotic agents are known to
13.43 Bilateral toxic cataract in an Abyssinian cat, possibly drug-
produce cataracts in humans but animals seem resistant
induced. The cataract is located in the anterior peripheral cortex.
and the risk is minimal. There are no documented accounts
13.44
13.45
13.44 Young cat with bilateral toxic cataracts from antibiotics. The
13.45 Experimental toxic cataracts in a dog given disophenol. The
 opacity consists of a ring of equatorial vacuoles and posterior sutural
opacity is a sheet of posterior cortical vacuoles that extend axially.
vacuoles. The cataracts resolved spontaneously on discontinuation of
 Severe cases also involve the anterior cortex. The cataracts resolve
the antibiotic therapy.
spontaneously.
LENS 
385
of cataracts in dogs from topical glucocorticoid or miotic
Diagnosis
use, although many clinicians have the impression that
Good pupil dilation is important to determine the full
many atopic dogs on oral glucocorticoids have an increased
extent of a cataract and to differentiate it from nuclear
nisk of cataracts. The cataracts may be associated with the
sclerosis. A focal slit beam is helpful in localizing the
 atopy (as in humans), rather than with the glucocorticoids.
depth of the opacity. The Purkinje-Sanson images from
In cats, topical dexamethasone has produced cataracts and
the anterior and posterior capsules are of some aid in
mild ocular hypertension. Topical prednisolone and
 depth localization. Nuclear sclerosis after pupil dilation
dexamethasone produce subcapsular opacities after
appears as a *lens within the cortex or a lens within the
40 days of application, and they continue to progress while
lens' but when viewed through a moderate to small sized
the  animal" is on therapy6.
 Significant  cataract
pupil, the light scattering it produces mimics a senile
development has been  documented in  groups.
of
 cortical cataract. The importance of differentiating
experimental cats given systemic dexamethasone to induce
nuclear sclerosis is that it does not produce blindness or
diabates mellitus. Since the cat is very resistant to diabetic
clinical signs, whereas a cortical cataract will often result
cataracts, the glucocorticoids were blamed for the cataract
 in blindness.
development (13.46).
Oral long-term ketaconazole administration  has
Prognosis
 produced bilateral, rapidly progressive cataracts in dogs.
The location of the cataract may be a clue to the
The mean duration of therapy before cataracts were
 potential progression and cause. Most cataracts have no
 noted was 15 months, with a range of 3.5-37 months of
 distinguishing features regarding cause or progresion
trea tment 97.
and only repeated examinations can help in giving a
prognosis. Capsular and subcapsular opacities are
Radiation
variable but usually stationary
 in their course
Ionizing radiation is cataractogenic and is recognized
(13.18-13.20). Fetal nuclear opacities do not progress
mainly after cancer teletherapy. Species variations may
(13.17,13.23) but equatorial and cortical opacities may
exist as gamma radiation exposure to cattle, swine, and
progress (13.35).
burros resulted in cataract formation in only 6.7% of
 In a given patient, the difference between eyes in their
cattle98. Cataracts were produced in 11% and 28% of
stage of cataract formation can be quite marked and thus
canine patients treated with cobalt-6099 or megavoltage
a unilateral cataract does not preclude genetic influences.
teletherapy, respectively100.
The speed of cataract progression is highly variable,
Cataracts develop 3-9 months after therapy, and are
ranging from days to years. Rapidly developing cataracts 
are usually accompanied by lenticular osmotic changes
microwave radiation can induce anterior and posterior
that pull water into the cortex and thus they are often
subcapsular cataracts experimentally in dogs, the clinical
swollen. These cataracts are characterized by vacuoles
importance of this form of radiation is unknown101.
and clefts when the opacity is viewed with magnification
Long-term exposure to UV from sunlight is thought to be 
 in the early stages.
a major cause of senile cataracts in humans?.
While rapid progression with vacuole formation may
occur with many forms of cataracts, diabetes mellitus
Electricity
should be considered when the condition is bilateral and
Animals that have had an electrical shock may develop a
symmetrical. Posterior synechiae or aqueous flare does
typical axial anterior subcapsular cataract months after
not necessarily indicate that a cataract is secondary to
the shock102.
inflammation. Phacogenic or lens-induced uveitis is a
13.46
13.47
13.46 Cortical cataracts in a cat that had been given 5ystemic
13.47 Radiation-induced cataracts in a cat 1 year after receiving
dexamethasone and growth hormone to induce diabetes mellitus.
 cobalt therapy to the head region.
All the cats in the research colony given the protocol developed
cataracts and several developed bullous keratopathy.
386
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
 very common phenomenon and, if an accurate history is
preoperative lens-induced uveitisl13. Another study
not available, may be confusing to the clinician. Lens-
compared the success rate of cataract surgery in eyes
induced uveitis usually develops with late immature to
with uveitis to the opposite eye without uveitis. The
hypermature cataracts.
success rate in the eyes with uveitis was 78% and 39% at
2 and 6 months respectively, while in the noninflammed
Therapy
 eye the success rate was 85% and 71%114.
Cataracts can either be ignored or surgically removed.
Through the years a variety of medical therapies have been
Medical therapy
empirically touted in veterinary medicine for treating nuclear
Medical therapy of central lens opacities consists of
topical atropine 2-3 times a week to maintain pupil
intraocular superoxide dismutase forgoteinj103, and topical
dilation and allow vision around the central opacity.
znc ascorbate were said to have anticataractogenic benefits
Topical glucocorticoids and/or NSAIDs are administered
but they have been discounted as effective medical therapy for
if a lens-induced uveitis develops, or to prevent lens-
stablished cataracts104,10s In humans during thelast decade,
induced uveitis.
aspirin and oxygen scavengers, including various vitamins,
have been variably reported in their effectiveness.
Surgical therapy in the dog
in
Cataract surgery should be performed by a specialist, or
evaluated an over-the-counter preparation of 2% N-acetyl
 at least by a surgeon who performs the procedure on a
carnosine, which also contains various other antioxidants,
regular ba sis. The investment in instruments, the practice
that has been marketed for its anticataractogenic effect in
necessary to perform the procedure smoothly, the
dogs. Therapy was administered q8h over 8 weeks to dogs
number of complications, and the fact that it is an
with varying degrees of cataract formation. Based on
elective procedure make it questionable whether the
generalist should carry out the surgery. Nevertheless, it is
 a small but statistically significant improvement in the group
very helpful for any veterinarian referring cataract
of immature cataracts and those with nuclear sclerosis. Eighty
patients to know some details about the procedure in
percent of owners thought that their dog's vision had
order to gain an understanding of the postoperative
improved while on the medication. Most ophthalmologists
complications and limitations of the procedure.
are skeptical of these results and point to flaws in the
Historically, cataract surgery in animals utilized an
methodology. Ideally, the study should be repeated using a
 extracapsular extraction (removing the anterior capsule and
masked study with the drug and a placebo. Therapy or
the lens) with an open sky or large incision approach.
cessation of therapy may arrest the advancement of certain
 Because of the significant postoperative complications, most
types of cataracts, such as diabetic and toxic cataracts. Aldose
 surgeons operated on one eye at a time and waited until both
cataracts were advanced or the animal was blind. This
dabetic and galactose cataracts70, 72.
Congenital, neonatal, and early juvenile cataracts can be
gain and nothing to lose was prevalent.
ignored for a period of time to assess whether they are
 Davidson et al.l1s evaluated the success rate of unilateral
arrested  or
will resorbl12.
With the advent
ot
versus bilateral extracapsular surgery. These authors found
 phacoemulsification and increased success rate of surgery,
the short-term (4-6 weeks) success rate of unilateral surgery
most surgeons would not wait for resorption in juvenile
was 80%; the success rate was the same when bilateral
cataracts since the rate of complications will increase. A
surgery was performed, when compared on an eye basis (no
concern in congenital cataracts is whether amblyopia will
significant  complications f
from  performing   bilateral
 Occur if the brain is not subjected to visual images at an
Suaq saaa qog 1o auo uo paienaa uaua isauaans
 early age. Amblyopia is known clinically in humans and
 successful, a 99% success rate at getting the animal visual
can be experimentally reproduced in animals.
was achieved, with only one animal having a failure in both
Waiting for resorption of cataracts does increase the
eyes. At 3-6 months follow up, the unilateral group had a
risk of lens-induced uveitis and luxation of the lens. The
69% success rate and the bilateral group had a 93% success
complication of lens-induced uveitis may result in mild to
when evaluated as one or both eyes having functional vision.
severe intraocular sequelae such as secondary glaucoma
However, only 45% of the patients had vision in both eyes.
or phthisis bulbi. Also, posterior segment changes occur
The major potential disadvantage of bilateral surgery is the
with hypermature cataracts as manifested by a low
danger of intraoperative contamination from the first eye
amplitude ERG and an increased incidence of retinal
carrying over into the second eye. Fortunately, intraoperative
detachment. Lens-induced uveitis is usually responsive to
infection is a relative rare complication in the dog but
paad aaans preies ui inq spiooonoon ieoidoi
 perhaps not so in the horse.
in _eyes with previous uveitis, t
the postoperative
Phacoemulsification or ultrasound to fragment the
inflammation is usually more severe.
lens and then aspirate the pieces has become the standard
technique for cataract surgery in small animals in the last
Ignoring cataracts is not an option. Chronic
decade. The advent of reconditioned phacoemulsification 
 cataracts that do not have LIU controlled often
equipment and machines targeted for veterinary surgeons
become luxated and the eye may become
has brought the price into a practical range. The
glaucomatous or, eventually, phthisical.
 cataract but requires considerable practice to master and
 The long-term success rate of extracapsular cataract
requires the use of an operating microscope.
 surgery in patients with lens-induced uveitis in one or
both eyes (not necessarily the operated eye) was 28%.
Patient selection. Patient selection should be based on
versus 53% success in patients without evidence of
ataract surgery being an elective surgery. Historically,
LENS
387
patients were selected that had advanced cataracts bilaterally
Schnauzers) is lipid developing in the anterior chamber
and were blind or severely vision impaired because of the
associated with lipemia.
cataracts, so the surgeon had everything to gain. With the
advent of better surgical results from phacoemulsifcation,
Preoperative therapy. Preoperative and postoperative
the ease of removing the softer earlier cataracts versus the
 protocols have been simplified over the years and this has
hard hypermature nucleus, and the documentation of
resulted in better outcomes, with fewer side-effects and
increased complication rates with late cataracts, the
better owner compliance. Obviously, some patients will
philosophy of patient selection has changed significantly.
require more intensive therapy but this should be specific
Surgeons now prefer to operate on the late immature
to the individual and not be based on a 'one protocol fits
cataracts while the lens is soft and before lens-induced uveitis
all patients’ approach. Preoperative therapy usually
Sop e uo sueado oui saeisuen uayo si padoaap sa
consists of obtaining maximal pupillary dilation, treating
that is still visual or has only a unilateral cataract. Operating
 and preventing infection with antibiotics, and treating
when only one eye is blind has the disadvantage that the
and minimizing  intraocular inflammation  with  anti-
owner may not note any improvement but, in the author's
inflammatory drugs. The route of administration,
experience, most owners note an increase in activity level in
frequency, and duration of preoperative medication vary
dogs and cats that have had unilateral cataract surgery. The
advantage of operating when one eye is blind is that the
pue raieae auosuand aurdoe ym adeaul iroidon
animal is never completely blind. Theoretically, diplopia
an antibiotic on the afternoon before surgery. A systemic
develops in patients with one phakic eye and one aphakic eye
NSAID is given during the preparation procedure or is
 if an intraocular lens is not implanted.
initiated topically on the morning of surgery.
 Patients selected for cataract surgery should have
cataracts that are not associated with other blinding lesions
Anesthesia. Anesthesia with intraocular surgery is greatly
such as PRA, retinal detachment, or optic nerve disease.
facilitated with neuromuscular blockade. The author has
Most retinal diseases are ruled out by an ERG but, in the
Ised neuromuscular blockade routinely for 20 years without
 absence of an ERG, practitioners must rely on early fundus 
any significant complications. Low-dose pancuronium has
examination before the cataracts are dense or, less ideally, the
been used without assisted ventilation but this is potentially
PLR and the dazzle reflex. PLRs are subjective and often
dangerous due to PCO, buildup. Animals breathe naturally
erroneously interpreted. PLRs should be normally reactive
but the depth of breathing is shallow and, unless arterial CO,
with dense cataracts but secondary changes such as uveitis,
is being monitored, the patient may be at risk long before the
adhesions, and atrophy of the iris sphincter interfere with iris
PO, reflects problemsi19. The author's preference is for
mobility and interpretation of the PLR. Ocular ultrasound is
 atracurium neuromuscular blockade because of its short
now routinely performed on all candidates for surgery to
duration. One dose of atracurium is adequate for one eye
detect retinal detachment and vitreal disease. Retinal
and, if a bilateral procedure is performed, a second dose is
 detachment was found on preoperative ultrasound in 19% of
administered. When using neuromuscular blockade the
ases with hypermature cataracts, 7% with mature cataracts,
dinician should be aware that a variety of systemic drugs
 and 4% with immature cataracts116.
may potentiate the length of paralysis. Drugs known to
 Secondary cataracts from inflammation are common
lengthen neuromuscular blockade include the amino-
in the horse and cat. Patients with secondary cataracts
 gycosides, lincomycin, clindamycin, bacitracin, polymixin B,
are not good candidates for surgery since the
verapamil, and anesthetics such as enflurane, isoflurane, and
postoperative complications are increased significantly
halothanel20, 12l. Retrobulbar anesthesia and analgesia are
 and posterior segment disease is common.
altermatives to neuromuscular blockade or a procedure that
Cataract
surgery patients should have a good
can be used in conjunction with low-dose neuromuscular
 temperament because they will be handled frequently and
bockade. Accola et al.121a evaluated 3 different sites for
struggling or senile patients are often destructive to the eye.
needle placement that resulted in deposition of anesthetic
Owners must be committed to the postoperative effort,
either inside the muscle cone, intra- and extraconal, or
which is often months in duration and is very important.
extraconal only. The preferred route was the injection site
Patients should have good systemic health. Age in itself is not
that entered through the ventral lid just above the orbital rim
a reason for denying surgery. Diabetes melitus should be
and directed a curved needle adjacent to the globe into the
nuled out as a cause of the cataracts. Diabetic patients can be
muscle cone. No adverse affects were noted following
operated on but control of diabetes and client education
injections in 4 live dogs, but it should be emphasized that the
should precede surgery. It is amazing how many owners are
needle passes close to the globe and perforation of the globe,
orbital hemorrhage, or even injecting into the nerve are well
not have the same dedication to the diabetes treatment and
known complications in humans, where retrobulbar
ontrol. Bagley and Lavachl17 found the complication rate
anesthesia has been routinely performed for decades. A
was no higher in diabetic dogs than in nondiabetic dogs
similar study in horses would be warranted, 
as
mdergoing phacoemulsification with no intraocular lens
neuromuscular blockade is not routine due to the cost and
(IOL) implants. The author has experienced increased
lack of adequate equipment or personnel.
mumbers of pre- and postoperative comeal erosions in
dabetic dogs, as have othersll18, Corneal erosions complicate 
Surgery. Different surgeons use different techniques for
the use of anti-inflammatory therapy. An increase in
extracapsular lens extraction. Variations in technique
postoperative corneal edema may also be noted in diabetic
include position of the animal; fixation of the eye for
animals, since the corneal endothelium may be compromised
surgery; method and location of entering the eye; method of
and surgical trauma hastens decompensation. One unique
opening the anterior lens capsule and removal of the lens;
and transient postoperative risk to diabetic patients and other
whether the iris is incised or excised; method of irrigation of
patients  with lipid metabolic problems (Miniature
lens fragments; placement of an intraocular lens; method of
388
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
suturing and type of suture used to close the eye; method of
opening of the capsulorrhexis should be centered so it
reforming the anterior chamber; and whether or not the eye
will be over and slightly smaller than the future IOL
is covered. A traditional open sky extracapsular extraction
optics. Hollick et al30 found that patients with a small
is rarely performed today, unless it is necessary to convert
capsulorrhexis with the edges on the IOL had fewer
from phacoemulsification because of a very hard nucleus or
posterior capsular opacities and better visual acuities
 technical diffculties.
than those with a larger capsulorrhexis.
 Patient positioning for phacoemulsification is usually in
 The actual technique of phacoemulsification varies
dorsal recumbency. Phacoemulsification techniques can be
but the goal is to preserve the posterior capsule and
carried out using a one-handed technique with one incision
remove all of the lens material. The most common (17%
or a two-handed technique with two incisions. The
of cases) intraoperative complication is rupture of the
phacoemulsification handpiece has the capability of
posterior capsule, which is only about 5 μm thick132. The 
irrigation, irrigation/aspiration, or irrigation/aspiration/
dorsal nucleus and cortex are the most difficult parts to
utrasound, depending on the position of the foot pedal.
reach and visualize.
Phacoemulsification  is performed through  a small
Placement of an IOL has been practiced for several
incision{s) and fluid infusion maintains the anterior
years and has become routine for many surgeons. Some
chamber throughout the procedure until an IOL is inserted
surgeons prefer not to place an IOL. The availability of
(13.48). This is obviously more physiologic than open sky
lenses specifically designed for the dog and at a modest
extracapsular lens extraction and, typically, results in less
S ad  a    s a
postoperative inflammation. Early techniques performed
increased dramatically to the current recommended
phacoemulsification  in the  anterior  chamber  after
rupturing the capsule and prolapsing the lens. This
necessary for functional vision postoperatively, the
technique was traumatic to the corneal endothelium and is
clinical impression is that the animals can see better and
not practiced unless emulsifying a luxated lens.
 are more rapidly visually rehabilitated. Vision in aphakic
The various methods of opening the anterior capsule,
patients can be quite variable, from clinically normal to
whether the central anterior capsule is removed before or
markedly disorientated. The author's impression is that
after emulsifying the lens, or whether the anterior capsule
older dogs do not adjust well to aphakia. Through
is even removed, all have their advocates. Emulsification
objective  measurements
utilizing
visual evoked
within the capsule or *bag" {endocapsular) through a small
responses, emmetropic Beagles’ visual acuity was
[ao aul ioaiond 0i saaas ansdeo aui un uoisiou qeis
Aoe [ensia yiyeude pue os/0z oi 0/oz ot jualeainba
 endothelium122. In the rabbit, 1.2% of corneal endothelial
{14 D defocus) was 20/850 in one study136.
cells were lost with endocapsular extraction versus 6.6%
While IOLs have historically been experimentally placed
when a capsulectomy was performed123. Early phaco-
in the anterior chamber and pupil of animals, the location
emulsification studies in the dog, where viscoelastic agents
of choice is now the capsular bag (13.49, 13.50y137-139 If a
to protect the corneal endothelium were not used,
apsular bag is not present, e.g. after removal of a luxated
produced a 22% loss of corneal endothelial cells versus a
lens, a posterior chamber implant with haptics sutured
34% loss with extracapsular extraction124.
through the sclera has been advocated140, 141. This is a
The management of the anterior capsule varies from
technique that has the potential for significant complications 
performing a simple incision and emulsification in the
 and is not universally endorsed by surgeons.
bag'  to performing 
various types of anterior
While not absolutely necessary, the use of viscoelastic
capsulectomies before phacoemulsification. In fact, in
agents to protect the corneal endothelium, to maintain
the dog the anterior capsule can be left without any
spatial relationships while performing the capsulor-
 apparent adverse effects such as secondary cataract or
rhexis, and to expand the capsular bag are highly
opacification as occurs in the rabbiti2s. The anterior
recommended before placing the IOL. If phaco-
capsule can be removed with a cystotome, forceps,
emulsification is performed, the 3 mm incision must be
enlarged to 8-9 mm to allow introduction of the IOL.
and the technique used will depend not only on the
The lens is then introduced, taking care to avoid the
surgeon's_preference but also on the nature of the
corneal endothelium. The distal haptic (loop), positioned
 capsule. Capsules with hypermature cataracts are often
away from the operator, is placed into the capsular bag.
very thick and difficult to tear without rupturing
The proximal haptic is placed into the bag with forceps
zonules, so scissors are often necessary for part of the
by flexing, or dialed into place by rotating the IOL in the 
capsulotomy. The preferred technique used by most
bag (13.49, 13.51). The dialing maneuver also helps to
surgeons is a continuous circular capsulorrhexis (CCC)
center the lens in the pupil.
performed with forceps (13.48). Performing a good
Once the lens is seated and centered, the incision is
capsulorrhexis can be the most demanding step in dogs
 sutured and remaining viscoelastic agent is irrigated out of
that are presented with such variable and extreme stages
 the eye. The use of an IOL and viscoelastic agents usually
of cataract maturation. The circular capsulorrhexis
adds about Us$150-200 to the cost of cataract surgery.
opening will not produce radial tears when stretched
Most lenses in use now are made of polymethylmethacrylate
during phacoemulsification, or when introducing an
and are rigid {13.51), but foldable acrylic lenses are now
IOL128
available that can be placed through a smaller (4-5 mm)
A capsulorrhexis can be difficult to perform in a
incision142.
mature cataract due to difficulty in visualization of the
IOLs for humans are currently made out of four
capsule against a dense white background. Staining of
materials: polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), silicone,
the capsule with indocyanine green or trypan blue
 acrylic, and hydrogels fpolyhydroxyethylmethacrylate or
applied intraoperatively has been used to facilitate
PolyHema). The latter three lenses can be folded to
visualization for capsulorrhexis manipulations129. The
introduce through a small incision. Lens design and
LENS 
389
13.48, 13.49
13.48
13.49
 Phacoemulsification and 
placement of an IOL. A: 3 mm 
H
 stab incision is made in a groove
 prepared for enlargement to
8 mm for IOL placerment: 
B: injection of viscoelastic agent;
C: a circular capsulorrhexis is
made with Utrata forceps:
 D: phacoemulsification; E: soft
cortex is rermoved with irrigation-
aspira tion handpiece; F: incision is
dosed if no IOL is placed;
G: enlargement of original 3 mm
ncision is made with scissors to
accommodate the IOL; H: capsular
bag and anterior chamber are
flled with viscoelastic; I: IOL is 
introduced into the anterior
chamber; J: distal haptic is placed 
in the capsular bag and the
proximal haptic is then dialed into 
the bag or placed with forceps:
K:IOL isin the bag and the eye is
sutured after removal of the
remaining viscoelastic.
13.50
13.51 Typical
13.51
 appearance of a one-
 piece polymethyl-
 methacrylate lens for
veterinary use. The 
haptics are the arms
that hold the lens in 
place. The holes at
the end of the
haptics and on the
 optics are variably
 present and are for
dialing the lens into
position.
13.50 Appearance of a dog immediately postoperative with an IOL in
place. Note the haptics (arms)] of the IOL.
materials may have an effect on postoperative
against the posterior capsule when in place. The physical
complications of cellular reactions and inflammation and
presence of the lens then inhibits the migration of lens
posterior capsular opacities. The silicone lens induces less
epithelial cells from the equator to the posterior axial
inflammation than the PMMA and PolyHema lenses in
region where they can form opacities.
the dog anterior chamberl43. PMMA lenses all develop
The results of cataract surgery have been frequently
epithelioid cell deposits and these can be visualized
reported but often the results are flawed by the design of
 clinically as lens precipitates.
amo aa uaag uao seu dn mo anis a
Ocular inflammation is not only related to the lens
 observation, the criteria for success are vague, and the
material but to how well it is manufactured.
duration of follow up has often been inadequate. The
 Unfortunately, manufacturers of animal lenses do not have
success rates reported based on a return of functional
to meet FDA regulations and so it is prudent to use those
that are manufactured under the same standards as for
success rate has increased with phacoemulsification,
human lenses. An early study found significant variation in
earlier
 surgical
intervention,
and
improved
the quality of lenses that were marketed at that time for
intraoperative and postoperative medical management.
 dogs144. Veterinary ophthalmologists eagerly await the
A success rate with phacoemulsification of >90% is
availability of more choices in materials for IOLs.
expected on a 3-week to 3-month postoperative evaluation.
Most lenses are now designed so that they push
The reported success rate of extracapsular surgery at
390
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
around 2 years postoperatively declines to 50-80% and to
lenses and hard lenses is quantifiable, but the optical
about 85% with phacoemulsification11s, 150, 151 This figure 
correction with soft lenses is not as good, leaving them
for phacoemulsification is considered rather optimistic by
mildly
hyperopic1 57a, 157b. *
Young
g animals  most
 many surgeons (see Complications, below).
consistently produce marked PCO. The use of heparin in
Complications. The technique and the preoperative and
 50% in rabbits and is routinely used by many surgeons for 
postoperative regimes vary greatly and yet the results of
minimizing_ intraoperative and postoperative fibrin
most experienced surgeons are similar.
Whereas
formationis. A heparin coated soft lens is now available
complications  from corneal trauma  and extensive
for veterinary use158a.
synechiae such as iris bombe are the most common
In the dog, Bras et al.1sa found no differences in PCO
complication of extracapsular extraction113, 147, 149, 152,
after one year between diabetic and nondiabetic patients 
phacoemulsification complications are mainly retinal
 o a   no nr  sd 
detachmentis1, posterior capsule opacification, corneal
Davidson et al.1s1 found that the most frequent blinding
 Dmplication of phacoemulsification was retinal detachment,
often present with phacoemulsification but are usually
which occurred in 5% or more of cases followed for a mean
very focal and do not disrupt function or create iris
0f 22 weeks. Retinal detachment may be present before
bombe, as with extraca psular extraction.
 surgery and preoperative ultrasound examination of the eye
 Posterior capsular opacification (PCO) of some degree
is used to detect these patients. Since posterior capsular
is common with phacoemulsification but it is usually not
rupture increases the risk for postoperative retinal
blinding (13.52). Beale et al.154a determined the threshold
detachment, focal trans-scleral cryopexy or laserpexy of the
of energy from a YAG laser for performing capsulotomies
retina at multiple spots is often performed following
and for inducing damage to the IOL. A thera peutic margin
vitrectomy. Random transcleral retinopexy in Bichon Frises 
was determined that allowed capsulotomies without IOL
with cataracts, who are genetically predisposed to retinal
damage, but this was in normal cadaver eyes that did not
detachments, decreased the incidence of retinal detachments 
require additional energy because of capsular fibrosis. As
from 55-60% in controls to 12% for those having
a result, the energy levels used are only a starting point and
sPreM pue uoisuuof ges aeans peieeo pue Axadoua
some IOL damage is likely from the higher energy
refuted the association of posterior capsule disruption and
 necessary in moderate to severe PCO. Minor or early PCO
retinal detachments. In their analysis of 244 cataract
has been treated in the dog, as in humans, with the Q-
surgeries, the posterior capsule was disrupted in 14%,
switched YAG laser but severe capsular fibrosis does not
whether accidental or planned, and they found no difference
respondis4, PCO is due to the proliferation, migration,
 in the visual outoome or complications.
and metaplasia of retained lens epithelial cells from the
 In the first 2-6 hours postoperatively, about 50% of
equatorial and anterior capsule regionsiss The epithelial
ases will spike an elevated IOP which may be in excess of
cells undergo metaplasia to fibrocytes that form plaques
 50 mmHg (6.7 kPa). This usually normalizes by the next
and have contractile properties, producing wrinkles in the
morning but the concern is that some elevations may be
capsule. The design of the IOL, the IOL material131, 156
sufficient to produce retinal and optic nerve damage, and
these patients might be at risk for glaucoma much later due
type of capsulorrhexisl30, and age of the animal all affect
the degree of PCOi5s. Design features of the IOL that
is unknown. Strategies for dealing with postoperative
decrease PCO are posterior angulation of the optic so it
hypertension have included ignoring the IOP, administration
presses against the posterior capsule and a square edge
of intraoperative carbachol after suturing the incision, and
profile to the optic that helps to prevent posterior
 preoperative CAIs. Stuhr et al.16l reported excellent results
migration of epithelial cells. The hydrophilicis7a, 157b
with intraoperative carbachol for prevention of the
a sianse re snoo pe sas r
postoperative hypertensive episode. A minor disadvantage is
associated with less PCO. The difference in PCO with soft
the marked miosis that occurs for the first day.
Glaucoma still remains the most significant long-term
mmplication with phacoemulsification, despite the lack of
13.52
obvious pupillary blockage. Biros et al153 reported that 16%
of eyes developed glaucoma postoperatively by 6 months,
 and 29% had glaucoma by 12 months. The mean follow up
was only 5.8 months so these percentages may
be
mderestimating the risk. Risk factors for glaucoma are
hypermature lenses (2s% develop glaucoma), purebred
breeds, aphakia, and female dogs. No relationship was
pue uisuaady aaiadosod aisueil uag parasno
later development of glaucoma. Aphakia per se may not
predispose to glaucoma but the reasons for not placing an
IOL may predispose to glaucoma, ie. uveitis and posterior
gaucoma in a select group of patients that had minimal or
no preoperative LIU. Sixteen percent of the dogs developed
gaucoma. Risk factors for glaucoma were breed, specifically
13.52 Same patient as 13.50, 4 months after surgery, with mild 
Boston Terriers, operative hemorrhage, and concurrent
capsular fibrosis. This would be considered an excellent postoperative
(often minor) ocular disease such as iris atrophy and iris
result by most surgeon5.
cysts. Transient postoperative hypertension, mild LIU, and
LENS
391
posterior capsule rupture with or without vitreous herniation
postoperative results have not been published, the impression
did not increase the risk of postoperative glaucoma.
is that the cat has less postoperative inflammation than the
Glaucoma developed from 1 week to 55 momths (mean 10
dog and consequently the results are very good. If an IOL is
months) after surgery and was often a gradual increase in
paced, the strength should be 52-53 D and the haptics 18
 jo uau e og sua oi ague sm ie do
mm in diameteri68, 169 Obviously, a dog IOL is not a good
months. The potential for glaucoma development to occur 
substitute for use in the cat.
months to years after surgery argues for periodic rechecks so
that therapy can be initiated before blindness develops. In
Cataract surgery in the horse
general, the pathogenesis of postoperative glaucoma and
The most common form of cataract operated on in the horse
how it is associated with various risk factors is speculative.
has been congenital. These traditionally have been removed
Gerardi et al163 examined 16 postcataract surgery
by an irrigation-aspiration technique but are now easily
 glaucomatous globes and found a membrane lining various
removed with phacoemulsification. The success rates with
 ae  ia sim r sas a ai
 the older aspiration techniques for equine cataracts operated
epithelial cells. Thus, like posterior capsular opacities,
on in the first year of life are 77% in foals <6 months and
exuberent proliferation by remaining lens epithelium may
60% in foals 6-12 months old63. Because the cataracts are
produce long-term complications of glaucoma.
soft in the young horse, phacoemulsification can be
 Postoperative infection is a relatively rare but devastating
 performed even though the available needles for most
 mmplication of intraocular surgery. Most bacterial infections
machines are short. The lens of the horse appears softer than
originate from the patient's flora but infections can originate
the dog's, allowing short phacoemulsifcation times. Because 
from improper sterilization of tubing and instruments.
 the vitreous face pushes forward, even with neuromuscular
Surgeons typically use antibiotics via a variety of routes
bockade tears in the posterior capsule are common. A
preoperatively and even intraoperatively, and prepare the eye
modified lithotriptor, which has a longer needle, has been
with antiseptics. However, it is disturbing to find that all of
utilized but additional equipment, a lack of coordinated fluid 
these precautions do not seem to lessen the ability to culture
infusion, postoperative corneal edema, and corneal
bacteria from the aqueous humor during surgery. Taylor et
ulceration adjacent to the needle from thermal bums indicate
al.164 found bacterial contamination of 24% of canine eyes
that this technique needs more modifications62, 170. Most
mdergoing lens removal, although no patients developed
recently, congenital cataracts undergoing phakoemulsifi-
endophthalmitis, nor was the surgical outcome affected. The
cation were reported to have an 88% success rate, traumatic
usual isolates were Gram-positive organisms but no
cataracts a 100% success rate, and LIU-induced cataracts an
mrrelation was found between cultures from the adnexa and
 80% success ratel70a. The latter statistic for LIU is very
 the aqueous humor. Phacoemulsification was associated with
optimistic, but the numbers in the group were very small.
As s us s 1 u u o 1
Lassaline et al.170b reported on 12 eyes from 10 horses with
and this was attributed to the smaller incision. The
acquired cataracts undergoing phakoemulsification. Six of
mntinuous infusion present with phacoemulsification may
the 10 horses had ERU and 5/6 were blind. Two of the 5 with 
also have diluted and washed out any contamination. In
ERU had sight restored. These statistics are more in line with
 humans, similar rates of aqueous humor contamination have
the traditional estimation of less than 50% success rate in
been found with similar 0rganisms (24%165, 20-29%166,
cataracts associated with ERU.
27-31%167). No statistical differences were found with the
Rigid and foldable IOL (14-21 D) are now available for
technique of lens extraction, or use of preoperative
the horse, but the aphakic horse performs very well. A
antibiotics or intaoperative heparin.
the behavior of the horse rather than the surgery.
While phacoemulsification and newer drug protocols
 Postoperative problems often result from trauma to the eye 
have increased the short-term success of cataract
 and contamination from lying down, despite the routine
surgery in veterinary medicine, it is not without
use of a protective mask. Postoperative infection several
serious ocular complications and usually requires
days after surgery appears to be more common in the horse
long-term follow up and reassessment. Owner
 than in other speciesi70
 compliance to therapy and rechecks is critical for the 
While most of the cataracts in adult horses are
long-term success of the procedure.
 secondary to inflammation or tra uma, primary cataracts 
are
observed and 
removed.
Traditionally,
an
extracapsular technique has been performed for removal
Postoperative therapy. Postoperative therapy consists of
mydriatics, antibiotics, and anti-inflammatory drugs
 technique has been described, it is not recommended171.
administered in a variety of routes, frequencies, and
Millichamp and Dziezyc170 reported a 58% success rate
 durations. Mydriatic therapy is not used as vigorously as
in horses of all ages, utilizing phacofragmentation.
in the past, with the usual intent only of keeping the
As in the dog, muscle paralysis with drugs such as
pupil mobile by letting it dilate and constrict. Some
atracurium is an important aid in minimizing forward
surgeons prefer the use of tropicamide rather than
bulging of the posterior capsule and iris prolapse
atropine for this, due to its short duration of action.
during surgery.
Postoperative topical glucocorticoids and/or NSAIDs are
often administered for months at a low frequency
Displaced lens
maintenance dose.
Introduction/etiology.
The lens may be displaced completely (luxated) anteriorly
Cataract surgery in the cat
 into the anterior chamber or posteriorly into the vitreous
sl 1nq bop au 01 1es s1 1eo aul u1 Aiaans oe1e1e
Gvity. Partial displacement (subluxation) may be dorsal,
 relatively  infrequently  performed.
While
 series  of
ventral, or sideways. Lens dislocation may or may not
392
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
produce other ocular complications and may or may not be
A very rare cause of primary lens luxation is complete
produced by other ocular conditions. Primary lens luxations
manifestation of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Barnett and
refer to those that occur without antecedent ocular disease
Cottrel181 described a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel cross-
and they are usually thought to be familial or inherited.
bred that exhibited skin fragility with joint laxity, lens
luxation, cataract, lens coloboma, corneal edema, and a thin
Primary lens dispfacement
blue sclera. Most cases of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome manifest
On rare occasions, congenital or early-onset lens
ld conformational problems without ocular lesions.
displacement may occur Martin26 described a case in an
Primary luxation is a bilateral disease, although the
8-week-old Brittany that had bilateral lens luxation
onset of displacement will vary between eyes. Primary
 accompanied by microphakia and moderately severe
uo on anp aq oi no sl tuaoeds sual
 corneal edema (13.13). On scanning electron microscopy
malformations, although lens-induced uveitis with
(SEM), the zonular attachments to the equator were
uaaq su saiaona suea ag sanuz aue jo uosa
signicantly reduced and abnormal in appearance (13.53).
proposed as a mechanism for primary lens luxation182.
Similarily, microphakia with lens luxation has been
All of the dogs in the study had cataracts and lens
reported rarely in the young cat2s,28. Lens luxation in a
displacement was probably not primary.
litter {ten puppies) of Soft Coated Wheaten Terriers has
Curtis183 found on SEM that the zonules attaching to the
been described172, Most of these puppies also had a wide
 posterior capsule in Tibetan and Jack Russell Terriers had a
variety of ocular lesions (PPM, choroidal coloboma,
fine reticular network over and between the ciliary processes 
posterior staphyloma, microphthalmos) and three had
that were not observed in normal dogs. He postulated that 
cardiovascular anomalies.
these represented weak abnormal zonules that fracture over
Primary lens displacement is
 observed
.most
time. Zonular pathology from primary luxations occurring
commonly in adult dogs usually 4-5 years of age. It is
in 4-5-year-old dogs has been reported from a variety of
breeds26 The lenses had evidence of prior attachment of torn
Terrier, Sealyham Terrier, Tibetan Terrier, Jack Russell
zonules at the equator {13.54), compatible with Curtis'
fnding that the zonular defect was more proximal near the
displacement without intraocular disease is also seen
iliary processes. Morris and Dubielzigi83a studied the
sporadically in a variety of other breeds, including the
m suonexni sua Areud jo asooudou aqy rejnuoz
Border Collie, Australian Blue Heeler, German Shepherd
histochemistry and light microscopy. They detected two
Dog, and Shar Pei1 78-180 These are usually isolated cases
abnormal staining patterns, which they temed zonular
 presented by pet owners and thus the genetic influence is
dysplasia and zonular collagenization. Both syndromes
unknown or questionable. In the Tibetan Terrier and
appear to have an abnormal protein, but only the zonular
Shar Pei, primary lens luxation has been documented as
dysplasia staining was unique and mainly in Terriers and
an autosomal recessive trait17s, 180 and it has been
Shar Peis. The type of staining was not consistent within
breeds and the tissues studied were end-stage glaucoma eyes
O eviscerated contents. When bilateral specimens were
Terrier lens luxation and cataracts were genetically
available, the same pattern of staining was present in both
 s an r  ro a  o5s
 specimens. While the study is not definitive, it does lend
not Mendelian. Neither trait was controlled by a single
support to the hypothesis that not only is the zonular
gene and the gene for the cataract was not the same as
arrangement and morphology abnormal, but the
the one described for Staffordshire Bull Terriers, Boston
bochemistry is probably also abnormal. The most likely
Terriers, and Australian Shepherd Dogs.
 protein abnormality is in the glyoprotein fibrillin-1.
13.53
13.54
13.53 SEM of the luxated canine lens seen in 13.13 with
13.54 SEM of an anterior luxated lens frorm an Australian Blue Heeler
microphakia and early luxation. Note the infrequent anomalous area5
with primary lens luxation. This area has numerous fractured zonules
of zonular attachment (arrows)]. Only one large anomalous zonule is
[1] indica ting a mechanical tearing. The anterior vitreous face (2] is
present in this quadrant (1). Vitreous fibrils (2] and anterior hyaloid 
mllap5ed on the lens. (3: artefact.) (SEM x24). (From Martin, 197826).
(3] face are collapsed onto the posterior lens (SEM x23]. Compare to
13.54. (From Martin, 197826.)
LENS 
393
Secondary lens dispiacement
While usually unilateral, bilateral displacement occurred in
An increased circumference of the globe with buphthalmos
21% of cases. Uveitis was commonly coincident (67%)
frequently results in rupture of some of the zonules and a
with lens luxation, which suggested zonulysis by
ose ueo sasual paoeidsia 'iss'eil sual paiexniqns
leukocytes. Of 31 tested cats, all were negative for FeLV but 
 precipitate glaucoma and thus the history, examination of
5/9 cases (55%) were positive for FIV.
the second eye, and degree of displacement may be clues as
Another study of Toxoplasma gondii serologic
to the role of the lens in glaucoma. The triad of glaucoma,
prevalence in cats with uveitis found that all cats with a
uveitis, and displaced lens is common; usually uveitis is
displaced lens were positive for T. gondii and 13% of the
 considered the basic underlying disease when all are found
cats studied with uveitis had displaced lenses18s.
together In the horse, lens subluxation is usually associated
Auanbay pue uasaid aq iou Xeu io Xeu euone
with uveitis or buphthalmos (13.56).
 animals are blind at the time of presentation despite
In the dog, lens displacement is a common sydrome 
being normotensive (13.58).
associated with advanced cataracts. The degenerative
Trauma is usually over-rated as an etiology and
process of cataract formation may extend to the zonules
excluding ruptures of the globe, trauma is not an
and capsular attachment, or lens-induced uveitis with
important cause of lens displacement.
inflammatory
cell zonulysis may result in
lens
displacements with advanced cataracts (13.57).
Lens luxations/subluxations and glaucoma represent
Lens luxation in aged cats is a distinct condition. A
the classic question of "which came first, the chicken or
study of 332 cases found Siamese cats and males to be over-
 the egg?". The answer has important implications for
represented, and the most common age was 7-9 years184.
therapy and prognosis of the condition.
13.55
13.56
13.55 Secondary posterior luxated lens in a 2-year-old American
13.56 Secondary and chronic anterior luxation of the lens in a horse
Cocker Spaniel with marked buphthalmos. Note the breaks in 
with glaucoma. Note the breaks in Descemet's membrane.
Descermet's mermbrane.
13.57
13.58
13.57 Secondary and chronic anterior luxation of a hypermature
13.58 Secondary anterior luxation of the lens in a cat with chronic
 cataract. Note the irregular lens outline, indicating lens shrinkage.
uveitis. In the cat the IOP is often normal with anterior luxation.
and the corneal neovascularization.
394
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Clinical signs
Subfuxation
Anterior luxation
Mild or early subluxated lenses may be asymptomatic,
Anterior lens luxation usually manifests with acute
with the only sign of ocular disease being vitreal strands
epiphora and blepharospasm. Luxation of the lens into
in the anterior chamber. Usually, the conjunctiva and
the anterior chamber is frequently, but not invariably,
 episclera is injected and, if the pupil is dilated, an
associated with increased IOP. Selective  vascular
aphakic crescent is visible (13.60). Iridonesis (iris
injection of the large conjunctival  vessels is almost
trembling) and phacodonesis may be present and the
invariable and will occur with or without an elevation of
IOP may be elevated. Localized shallowing of the
IOP. The lens will usually be readily visualized in the
anterior chamber may occur from the lens pushing the
anterior chamber if it is opaque or sclerotic {13.56-
iris forward. The mechanism of glaucoma with a
13.58) but it may be overlooked if corneal edema is
subluxated lens is often not clinically obvious and other
 severe or if the lens is perfectly clear (13.59). Chronic
predisposing factors for glaucoma should be ruled out
luxation results in cataract formation. Corneal edema
in the affected {as well as the normal) eye, since lens
will occur where the lens touches the endothelium and is
removal may not be curative.
often permanent, despite removal of the lens {13.59). The
lens may migrate back and forth through the pupil and
Posterior luxation
 the signs will vary depending on the location.
Posterior lens luxation into the ventral anterior vitreous
produces a large aphakic crescent and, if opaque, the lens
is visualized lying in the ventral vitreous (13.61). Often,
the only sign of posterior luxation is modest selective
conjunctival injection from low-gra de uveitis.
Diagnosis
13.59
 Unless the cornea is opaque or the pupil is not or cannot
be dilated, displaced lenses are easily diagnosed on the
clinical signs. It may be more difficult to differentiate
primary from secondary forms of displacement. Primary
displaced lenses are differentiated by breed, lack of other
 predisposing causes, and findings in the opposite eye.
Thera py
Posterior luxation is treated conservatively with topical
glucocorticoids in most instances. The therapy for a
subluxated lens is more controversial and is determined
by the severity of signs, the surgeon's preference, and the
 owner's financial resources and concern with surgery.
 Subluxation may be treated conservatively, if glaucoma is
pue A11 01 1so.doue1el 10 soo1u Su1sn Aq *wa[qo1d e 10u
trap the lens in the posterior chamber. Latanoprost
{1  drop ql2h) has been more successful in producing
13.59 Primary anterior lens luxation in a Beagle. Note the
vascular hyperemia was due to irritation rather than glaucoma.
13.60
13.61
13.60 Apakic crescent with subluxation of the lens in a terrier.
13.61 Aphakic crescent due to posterior lens luxation in an aged cat.
 The lens is tilted backwards and is visible because of the widely
dilated pupil from glaucoma.
LENS
395
sustained miosis than cholinergic drugs. Conservative
14% incidence of retinal detachment 46 weeks after
therapy with topical demecarium bromide for subluxated
intracapsular lens extraction   and this  percentage
lenses resulted in 80% of patients being visual at 1 year
and a median vision retention time of 1,313 days; this
surgeons now perform prophylactic laser retinopexy after
Pip lou sake paieauun oi luarap Aleonsheis lou sem
intracapsular extraction in an attempt to minimize this
therapy delay the onset of glaucoma or the second eye
complication1ssb. The use of a cryophake to attach to the 
from developing signs of lens instability. The median
lens for removal allows a less traumatic and more
time before anterior luxation occurred was 1,131 versus
controlled means of (
delivering the lens, while
602 days for nontreated eyes185a Topical steroids are
simultaneously wiping the vitreous from the posterior lens.
indicated if the eye is inflamed. If the IOP is elevated, the 
Closed techniques utilizing phacoemulsification can
lens should probably be removed if the angles appear
be performed on an anteriorly luxated lens but, if
open in both eyes. Medical therapy often only delays
performed on a hard subluxated lens, may result in the
surgery until complete luxation occurs.
lens falling into the vitreous. Typically, postoperative
Acute anterior luxations are surgically removed in
inflammation is less with intracapsular lens extraction
the dog, as most are associated with glaucoma. The
than with extracapsular extraction. Glover et al.179
surgical removal of a luxated lens is intracapsular and
reported a success rate of 72% 4 weeks after surgery but
carries a high risk of complications from vitreous
this is too short a follow up to give a true picture of the
herniated
.into the anterior chamber. Vitreous
 complications. Glaucoma persisted in 23% of cases at
herniation may produce pupillary block glaucoma, may
 4 weeks but this can be expected to increase over time.
touch the cornea and produce edema or posterior
Chronic anterior luxation is sometimes a dilemma. If
adhesions may produce retinal holes and tears resulting
the eye is blind from glaucoma, it is difficult to
 in retinal detachment.
rationalize an expensive lensectomy but the IOP may not
Preoperative i.v. mannitol to dehydrate and shrink the
be medically controlled. Cyclocryotherapy, cyclophoto-
 vitreous, positioning the animal in dorsal recumbency, and
coagulation, or evisceration with a silicone ball
excision of all prolapsed vitreous from the anterior
chamber are steps taken to minimize complications of
gla ucoma and a blind eye. If the eye is soft, no therapy is 
vitreous in the anterior chamber. Glover et al.179 reported a
needed unless uveitis is present.
REFERENCES
1 Jose J {1983) The lens. In: Biochemistry of
 9 Martin C {1969) Slit lamp examination
17 Marak G (1992) Phacoanaphylactic
the Eye. R Anderson (ed). American
of the normal canine anterior ocular
endophthalmitis. Survey of
Academy of Ophthalmology, San
segment: Part I. Description. Journat
Ophthatmology 36:325-339.
Francisco,pp. 111-144.
of Smalt Animat Practice 10:151-162.
18 Lavach J (1990) Lens. CV Mosby.
2 Paterson C, Delarmere N (1992) The lens.
10 Tucker R (1973) Comparative and
Philadelphia, pp. 185-208.
Adler's Physiology of the Eye, 9th edn.
functional studies on the suspensory
19 Tobias G, Tobias T, Abood S, Hamor R,
WHart (ed). Mosby Year Book, St
apparatus of the lens (Mammalia).
Ballam J (1998) Determination of age in
Louis, pp. 348-390.
Zeitschrift fur Morphologie und Tiere
dogs and cats by use of changes in lens
3 Bayer J (1914) Augenheilkunde. Wilhelm
74:171-191.
reflections and transparency. American
 Braumuller, Leipzig, pp. 1-630.
11 Helmholtz H {1855) Uber die
Joturnat of Veterinary Research
4 Aguirre G, Rubin L, Bistner S {1972)
accommodation des auges. Albrecht
59:945-950.
Development of the canine eye.
von Graefes Archives Klin
 20 Columbre A {1969) Regulation of ocular
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Ophthatmotogy 1:1-89.
morphogenesis. Investigative
33:2399-2414.
12 Henderson T {1926) The anatomy and
Ophthatmology 8:25-30.
5 Donovan R, Carpenter R, Schepens C,
physiology of accommodation in
21 Martin C, Leipold H (1974) Aphakia
Tolentino F (1974) Histology of the
Mammalia. Proceedings of the
and multiple ocular defects in Saint
normal Collie eye. Il. Lens, retina, and
Ophthatmology Society of the United
Bernard puppies. Veterinary
optic nerve. Annats of Ophthatmotogy
Kingdom 46:280-308.
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
6:1299-1307.
13 Knill L, Eagleton R, Harver R {1977)
69:448-453.
6 Dickson D, Crock G (1972) Interlocking
Physical optics of the equine eye.
22 Peiffer R, Fischer C {1983)
 patterns on primate lens fibers.
American Journat of Veterinary
Microphthalmia, retinal dysplasia, and
Investigative Ophthatmology
Research 38:735-737.
 anterior segrment dysgenesis in a litter of
11:809-815.
14 Schachar RA, Black TD, Kash RL,
Doberman Pinschers. Journat of the 
7 Martin CL, Anderson RS {1981) Ocular
Cudmore DP, Schanzlin DJ (1995) The
American Veter inary Medicat
anatomy. In: Textbook of Veterinary
 mechanism of accommodation and
Association 183:875-878.
Ophthatmotogy, 1st edn. K Gelatt (ed).
presbyopia in the primate. Annats of
23 Bergsjo T, Arnesen K, Heim P, Nes N
 Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia,
Ophthatmology 27:58-67.
(1984) Congenital blindness with ocular
pp. 12-121.
15 Glasser A, Kaufman PL {1999) The
 developmental anomalies, including
8 Berliner ML (1966) Biormicroscopy of the
 mechanism of accommodation in
retinal dysplasia, in Doberman Pinscher
Eye; Slit Lamp Microscopy of the Living
primates. Ophthatmology 106:863-872.
dogs. Joturnat of the American
Eye. Hafner Publishing, New York, p.
 16 Horwitz J (1993) The function of alpha-
Veter inary Medicat Assoc iation
152.
crystallin. Investigative Ophthatmology
184:1383-1386.
cnd Visual Science 34:10-22.
396
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
24 Trapp C (1957) Congenital
36 Leon A, Curtis R, Barnett K {1986)
49 Collier L, Moore C, Prieur D {1987)
maldevelopment of the eyes of a colt.
Hereditary persistent hyperplastic
Familial congenital cataracts in cats.
Cornell Veterinarian 57:467.
primary vitreous in the Staffordshire
Proceedings of the Scientifc Meeting of
25 Aguirre G, Bistner S {1973)
Bull Terrier. Journat of the American
the American College of Veterinary
Microphakia with lenticular luxation
Animat Hospitat Association
Ophthatrnologists 18:22-30.
and subluxation in cats. Veterinary
22:765-774.
50 Priester W (1972) Congenital ocular
Medic ine/Small An imat Clinic ian
 37 Venter IJ, van der Lugt JJ, van
defects in cattle, horses, cats, and dogs.
68:498-500.
Rensburg IB, Petrick SW (1996)
Journat of the Armerican Veterinary
26 Martin C (1978) Zonular defects in the
Multiple congenital eye anomalies in
Medicat Association 160:1504-1511.
dog: a clinical and scanning electron
Bloodhound puppies. Veterinary and
51 Garner A, Griffiths P {1969) Bilateral
microscopic study. Journat of the
Comparative Ophthatmology 6:9-13.
congenital ocular defects in a foal. British
American Animat Hospitat Association
38 Rubin L, Koch S, Huber R {1969)
Journat of Ophthatology 53:513-517.
14:571-579.
Hereditary cataracts in Miniature
52 Dziezyc J, Kern T, Wolf D {1983)
27 Rubin L {1971) Hereditary microphakia
Schnauzers. Journat of the American
Microphthalmia in a foal. Equine
 and microphthalmia syndrome in the
Veterinary Medicat Association
Veterinary Journat Supplement 2:15-17.
Beagle. Proceedings of the Scientific
154:1456-1458.
 53 Walde I {1983) Some observations on
Meeting of the American Coltege of
39 Gelatt K, Veith L {1970) Hereditary
congenital cataracts in the horse. Equine
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 2:50-55.
multiple ocular anomalies in
Veterinary Journat Supplement 2:27-28.
28 Molleda J, Martin G, Ginel P {1995)
Australian Shepherd Dogs. Veterinary
 54 Eriksson K {1955) Hereditary aniridia
 Microphakia associated with lens
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
with secondary cataract in horses.
luxation in the cat. Journal of the
65:39-42.
Nordisk Veterimaer Medicim 7:773-793.
American Animat Hospitat Association
40 Donovan R {1971) Congenital
55 Joyce J {1983) Aniridia in a Quarter
31:209-212.
cataracts in the Miniature Schnauzer.
horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
29 Aguirre G, Bistner S {1973) Posterior
Praceedings of the Scientific Meeting
Supplement 2:21-22.
lenticonus in the dog. Cornefl
of the American Caltege of Veterinary
56 Beech J, Aguirre G, Gross S (1984)
Veterinarian 63:455-461.
Ophthatmologists 2:36-43.
Congenital nuclear cataracts in the
30 Lavach J, Severin G {1977) Posterior
41 Barnett K, Knight G {1969) Persistent
Morgan horse. Journat of the American
lenticonus and lenticonus internum in a
 pupillary membrane and associated
Veterinary Medicat Association
dog. Journat of the American Animat
defects in the Basenji. Veterinary
184:1363-1365.
Hospitat Association 13:685-687.
Record 85:242-249.
57 Matthews A, Handscombe M (1983)
31 Barrie K, Peiffer R, Gelatt K, Williams L
 42 Hirth R, Greenstein E, Peer R {1974)
Bilateral cataract formation and 
{1979) Posterior lenticonus,
Anterior capsular opacities (spurious
subluxation of the lenses in a foal: a case
 microphthalmia, congenital cataracts,
cataracts) in Beagle dogs. Veterinary
report. Equine Veterinary Journat
and retinal folds in an Old English
Pathology 11:181-194.
Supplement 2:23-24.
Sheepdog. Journat of the American
43 Olesen H, Jensen O, Norn M (1974)
58 Detlefson J {1920) The inheritance of 
Animat Hospital Association
Congenital hereditary cataract in
 congenital cataract in cattle. American
15:715-717.
Cocker Spaniels. Journat of Smatt
Naturalist 54:277-280.
32 Stades F {1980) Persistent hyperplastic
Animat Practice 15:741-750.
59 Gregory P, Mead S, Regan W (1943) A
tunica vasculosa lentis and persistent
44 van Rensburg I , Petrick S, van der
congenital hereditary eye defect of cattle.
hyperplastic primary vitreous
Lugt J, Smit M (1992) Multiple
Journat of Heredity 34:125-128.
(PHPTVL/PHPV) in 90 closely related
 inherited eye anomalies including
60 Gelatt K {1971) Cataracts in cattle.
Doberman Pinschers: clinical aspects.
persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
Journat of the American Veterinary
Journat of the American Animat
Jentis in Bouvier des Flandres. Progress
Medicat Association 159:195-200.
Hospitat Association 16:739-751.
in Veterinary and Comparative
61 Leipold H, Gelatt K, Huston K {1971)
33 Gelatt K, Samuelson D, Barrier K, et
Ophthatmotogy 2:133-139.
Multiple ocular anomalies and
αf. (1983) Biometry and clinical
45 Carrig C, MacMillan A, Brundage S,
hydrocephalus in grade beef Shorthorn
characteristics of congenital cataracts
Pool R, Morgan J (1977) Retinal
cattle. American Journat of Veterinary
 and microphthalmia in the Miniature
dysplasia associated with skeletal
Research 32:1019-1026.
Schnauzer. Journal of the American
abnormalities in Labrador Retrievers.
62 Dziezyc J, Millichamp N, Keller C (1991)
Veterinary Medicat Association
Journat of the American Veterinary
 Use of phakofragmentation for cataract
183:99-102.
Medicat Association 170:49-57.
removal in horses: 12 cases (1985-1989).
34 Narfstrom K, Dubielzig R {1984)
46 Meyers V, Jezyk P, Aguirre G,
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
 Posterior lenticonus, cataracts, and
Patterson D {1983) Short-limbed
Medicat Association 198:1774-1778.
 microphthalmia; congenital ocular 
dwarfism and ocular defects in the
63 Gelatt K, Myers V, McClure R {1974)
defects in the Cavalier King Charles
Samoyed dog. Joturnat of the American
Aspiration of congenital and soft 
Spaniel. Journat of Smatt Animat
Veterinary Medicat Association
cataracts in foals and young horses.
Practice 25:669-677.
183:975-979.
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
35 Laratta L, Riis R, Kern T, Koch S
47 Lavach R, Murphy J, Severin G (1978)
Medical Association 165:611-616.
{1985) Multiple congenital ocular
 Retinal dysplasia in the English Springer
64 Brooks A, Drewe R, Grandt G, Billington
defects in the Akita dog. Cornelt
Spaniel. Journat of the American Animat
T, Gillies W (1994) Crystalline nature of
Veterinarian 75:381-392.
Hospitat Association 14:192-199.
the iridescent particles in hypermature
48 Peiffer R, Gelatt K {1975) Congenital
cataracts. British Journat of
 cataracts in a Persian kitten. Veter nary
Ophthatmology 78:581-582.
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
70:1334-1335.
LENS
397
65 Ling G, Lowenstine L, Pulley T, Kaneko J
79 Remillard RL, Pickett JP, Thatcher CD,
91 Martin C {1975) The formation of
{1977) Diabetes mellitus in dogs: a review
Davenport DJ (1993) Comparison of 
 cataracts in dogs with disophenol: age
of initial evaluation, immediate and long-
kittens fed queen's milk with those fed
susceptibility and production with
terrm rmanagement, and outcome. Journat
milk replacers. American Journat of
chemical grade 2,6-diodo-4-nitrophenol.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Research 54:901-907.
Comadian Veterinary Joturnat
Association 170:521-530.
80 Ralston S, Isherwood J, Chandler M,
16:228-232.
66 Schaer M (1977) A clinical survey of
 Poffenbarger E, Severin G, Olson P
 92 Schiavo D {1976) Reversible lenticular
thirty cats with diabetes mellitus. Joturna!
{1990) Evaluation of growth rates and
aberrations in Beagle dogs given
of the American Animat Hospitat
cataract formation in orphan puppies fed
dazoxide intravenously. Veterinary
Association 13:23-27.
two milk replacer formulas. Conference
Medicine/Small Animal Clinician
67 Bean S, Correa MT, Davidson MG
On Veterinary Perinatology in
71:190-195.
{1999) A retrospective cohort study on
Conjunction with the Neonatat Society.
 93 Rubin L, Mattis P {1966) Dimethyl
the development of cataracts in dogs with
Cambridge, England 2:56.
 sulfoxide: lens changes in dogs during
diabetes mellitus: 200 cases. Veterinary
81 Anderson RS, Trune DR, Shearer TR
oral administration. Science 153:83-84.
Ophthatmology 2:169-172.
(1988) Histologic changes in selenite
 94 Smith E, Mason M, Epstein E {1969) The
68 Kinoshita J (1974) Mechanisms initiating
cortical cataract. Investigative
ocular effects of repeated dermal
cataract formation. Investigative
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
applications of dimethyl sulfoxide to dogs
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
29:1418-1427.
 and monkeys. Journat of Pharmacology
12:713-724.
82 Poulos P {1966) Selenium-tocopherol
amd Experimentat Therapetutics
69 Wyman M, Sato S, Akagi Y (1988) The
treatment of senile lenticular sclerosis in
170:364-370.
dog as a model for ocular manifestations
dbgs (four case reports). Veterinary
95 Gerson R, MacDonald J, Alberts A
of high concentrations of blood sugars.
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
{1990) On the etiology of subcapsular
Journat of the American Veterinary
61:986-988.
lenticular opacities produced in dogs
Medicat Association 193:1153-1156.
83 Brooksby L0 (1979) A practitioner's
receiving HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors.
70 Sato S, Takahashi Y, Wyman M, Kador P
 experience with seleniurm-tocopherol in
Experimentat Eye Research 50:65-78.
{1991) Progression of sugar cataract in
treatment of cataracts and nuclear 
96 Zhan G, Miranda C, Bito L {1992)
the dog. Investigative Ophthatmology
sclerosis in the dog. Veterinary
Steroid glaucoma: corticosteroid-induced
cnd Visual Science 32:1925-1931.
Medicine/Small Animal Clinician
ocular hypertension in cats. Experirmentat
71 Richter M, Guscetti F, Spiess B (2002)
74:301-302.
Eye Research 54:211-218.
 Aldose reductase activity and glucose-
84 Poston HA, Ris RC, Rumsey GL,
97 da Costa PD, Merideth RE, Sigler RL
 related opacities in incubated lenses from
Ketola HG (1977) The effect of
 {1996) Cataracts in dogs after long-term
dogs and cats. American Journat of
supplemental dietary amino acids,
ketoconazole therapy. Veterinary and
Veterimary Research 63:1591-1597.
minerals, and vitamins on salmonids fed
Comparative Ophthatmology 6:176-180.
72 Fukushi S, Merola LO, Kinoshita JH
cataractogenic diets. Cornelt Veterinar ion
 98 Brown D, Margrane W, Cross F,
{1980) Altering the course of cataracts in
67:472-509.
Reynolds R {1972) Clinical observations 
diabetic rats. Investigative
 85 Ketola HG (1979) Influence of dietary.
of eyes of catte, swine, and burros
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
zinc on cataracts in rainbow trout (Satmo
surviving exposure to gamma and mixed
19:313-315.
gairdneri). Journat of Nutrition
neutron-gamma radiation. American
73 Kinoshita J {1986) Aldose reductase in
109:965-969.
Joturnat of Veterinary Research
the diabetic eye. American Journat of
86 Hughes SG, Ris RC, Nickum JG,
33:309-315.
Ophthatmmology 102:685-692.
Rumsey GL (1981) Biomicroscopic and
 99 Jamieson V, Davidson M, Nasisse M,
74 Goldman H {1929) Experimentelle
histologic pathology of the eye in
English R {1991) Ocular complications
tetaniekatarakt. Von Graefes Archiv fur
riboflavin deficient rainbow trout (Satmo
following cobalt 60 radiotherapy of
Ophthatmotogy 122:146.
gairdnei). Cornell Veterinarian
neoplasms in the canine head region.
75 Kornegay J, Greene C, Martin C,
71:269-279.
Journat of the American Animat Hospitat
Gorgacz E, Melcon D (1980) Idiopathic
87 Poston HA, Rumsey GL (1983) Factors
Association 27:51-55.
hypocalcemia in four dogs. Journat of the
 affecting dietary requirements and
100 Roberts S, Lavach J, Severin G,
American Animat Hospitat Association
deficiency signs of Ltryptophan in
Withrow S, Gillette E (1987) Ophthalmic
16:723-734.
rainbow trout. Journat of Nutrition
complications following megavoltage
76 Vainisi S, Edelhauser H, Wolf D,
113:2568-2577.
irradiation of the nasal and paranasal
Cotlier E, Reeser F {1981) Nutritional
 88 Heywood R {1971) Drug-induced
cavities in dogs. Joturnat of the American
cataracts in timber wolves. Journat of the
lenticular lesions in the dog. British
Veterinary Medicat Association
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Veterimary Journat 127:301-303.
190:43-47.
179:1175-1180.
89 Gookin JL, Riviere JE, Gilger BC,
101 Lipman R, Tripathi B, Tripathi R
77 Glaze M, Blanchard G (1983) Nutritional
Papich MG {1999) Acute renal failure in
{1988) Cataracts induced by microwave
cataracts in a Samoyed litter Journat of
four cats treated with paromomycin.
and ionizing radiation. Survey of
the American Animat Hosptiat
Journat of the American Veterinary
Ophthatmology 33:200-210.
Association 19:951-954.
Medicat Association 215:1821-1823.
102 Brightman A, Brogdon J, Helper L,
 78 Martin C, Chambreau T {1982) Cataract
90 Martin C, Christmas R, Leipold H (1972)
Everds N (1984) Electric cataracts in the
 production in experimentally orphaned
 Formation of temporary cataracts in dogs
canine: a case report. Journal of the
 puppies fed a commercial replacement for
 given a disophenol preparation. Journat
American Animat Hospitat Association
bitch's milk. Journat of the American
qf the American Veterinary Medicat
20:895-898.
Animat Hospitat Association
Association 161:294-301.
18:115-119.
398
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
103 Brainard J, Hanna C, Petursson G
115 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Rusnak R,
127 Spiess BM, Bolliger J, Ruhli MB (1996)
{1982) Evaluation of superoxide
Corbett W, English R {1990) Success
Radio-frequency anterior capsulotomy to
dismutase (orgotein) in medica]
rates of unilateral versus bilateral
facilitate phacoemulsification and
treatment of canine cataract. Archives of
cataract extraction in dogs. Veterinary
 intraocular lens implantation. Veterinary
Ophthatmology 100:1832-1834.
Surgery 19:232-236.
and Comparative Ophthatnology
104 Yakely W, Filby R {1971) Selenium in
116 van der Woerdt A, Wilkie D, Myer C
6:233-236.
the lens of the dog. Journat of the
{1993) Utrasongraphic abnormalities in
128 Assia EI, Apple D, Barden A, Tsai JC,
American Veterinary Medicat Association
the eyes of dogs with cataracts: 147 cases 
Castaneda VE, Joggatt JS {1991) An
158:1564-1571.
{1986-1992). Journat of the American
experimental study comparing various
105 MacMillian A, Nelson D, Munger R,
Veterinary Medicat Association
anterior capsulectomy techniques.
et af. (1986) A comparison of zinc
203:838-841.
Archives of Ophthatmology
 ascorbate versus saline placebo in the
117 Bagley L, Lavach J (1994) Comparison 
109:642-647.
 treatment of canine cataracts.
 of postoperative phacoemulsification
129 Horiguchi M, Miyake K, Ohto I, Ito Y
Praceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
results in dogs with and without diabetes
(1998) Staining of the lens capsule for 
the American Cotlege of Veterinary
mellitus: 153 cases {1991-1992). Journat
circular continuous capsulorrhexis in
Ophthatmologists and Internationat
of the American Veterinary Medicat
eyes with white cataracts. Archives of
Society of Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
Association 205:1165-1169.
Ophthatmology 116:535-537.
17:484.
118 Good K, Maggs D, Hollingsworth S,
130 Hollick EJ, Spalton DJ, Meacock WR
106 Cotlier E (1983) Aspirin and senile
Scagliotti R, Nelson R (2003) Corneal
[1999) The effect of capsulorrhexis size
cataract in rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet
sensitivity in dogs with diabetes mellitus.
 on posterior capsular opacification: 1-
1:338-339.
Armerican Journat of Veterinary Research
year results of a randomized prospective
107 West SK, Munoz MS, Newland HS,
64:7-11.
trial. American Journat of
Emmett E, Taylor HR (1987) Lack of
119 Sullivan TC, Hellyer PW, Lee DD,
Ophthatmotogy 128:271-279.
evidence for aspirin use and prevention
Davidson MG (1998) Respiratory
131 Hollick EJ, Spalton DJ, Ursell PG, et at.
of cataracts. Archives of Ophthatmology
function and extraocular muscle 
{1999) The effect of polymethyl-
105:1229-1231.
 paralysis following administration of
methacrylate, silicone, and polyacrylic
108 Seddon J, Christen W, Manson J (1991)
 pancuronium bromide in dogs.
intraocular lenses on posterior capsular
 Low-dose aspirin and risks of cataracts
Veterinary Ophthatmology 1:125-128.
opacification 3 years after cataract
 in a randomized trial of US physicians.
120 Forsyth S, Ikiw J, Hildebrand S {1990)
surgery. Ophthatmology 106:49-55.
Archives of Ophthatmology
 Effects of gentamicin administration on
132 Nasisse M, Davidson M, Jamieson V.
109:252-255.
 the neuromuscular blockade induced by
English R, Olivero D {1991)
109 Group U-T S {1992) Does aspirin affect
atracurium in cats. American Journat of
Phakoemulsification and intraocular lens
the rate of cataract formation? Cross-
Veterimary Research 51:1675-1678.
implantation: a study of technique in 182
sectional results during a randomised
121 Plumb D (2002) Veterinary Drug
dogs. Progress in Veterinary and
 double-blind placebo controlled trial to
Handbook. Iowa Press, Ames, pp.
Comparative Ophthatnotogy
 prevent serious vascular events. British
77-78.
1:225-232.
Joturnat of Ophthatmology 76:259-261.
122 Boldy K, Schanzlin D, Gindi J (1985)
133 Gaiddon J, Rosolen S, Steru L, Cook C,
110 Gupta SK, Joshi S, Velpandian T,
Endocapsular cataract surgery in dogs.
Peiffer R {1991) Use of biometry and
Varma SD (1997) Protection against
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
keratometry for determining optimal
 cataract by pyruvate and its ocular
the American College of Veterinary
power for intraocular lens implants in
kinetics. Annats of Ophthatmology
Ophthatmologists 16:4-15.
dogs. American Journat of Veter inary
29:243-248.
123 Solomon K, Gwin T, O'Morchoe D
Research 52:781-783.
111 Mares-Perlman JA, Lyle BJ, Klein R,
{1989) Protective effect of the anterior
134 Murphy C, Nasisse M, Olivero D,
et αf. (2000) Vitamin supplement use and
lens capsule during extracapsular
Brinkman M, Campbell L, Hellkamp A
incident cataracts in a population-based
cataract extraction. Ophthatmology
{1991) Refractive state of the
96:591-597.
pseudophakic canine eye. Proceedings of
118:1556-1563.
124 Gwin R, Warren J, Samuelson D,
the Scientific Meeing of the American
112 Rubin L, Gelatt K {1968) Spontaneous
Gum G (1983) Effects of
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
 resorption of the cataractous lens in
 phakoemulsification and extracapsular
22:95.
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
lens removal on corneal thickness and
135 Peiffer R, Gaiddon J (1991) Posterior
Medicat Association 152:139-152.
endothelial cell density in the dog.
chamber intraocular lens implantation in
113 Paulsen M, Lavach J, Severin G,
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Visuat
the dog: results of 65 implants in 61
 Eichenbaum J (1986) The effect of lens-
Science 24:226-227.
patients. Journat of the American Animat
induced uveitis on the success of
125 Gwon A, Gruber L, Mundwiller K
Hosp itat Association 27:453-462.
extracapsular cataract extraction: a
{1990) A histologic study of lens
136 Murphy C, Mutti D, Zadnik K,
retrospective study of 65 lens removals in
regeneration in aphakic rabbits.
 Hoeve J (1997) Effect of optical defocus
the dog. Joturnat of the American Animat
Investigative Ophthatmalogy and Visuat
on visual acuity in dogs. American
Hospitat Association 22:49-56.
Science 31:540-547.
Jotrnat of Veterinary Research
114 van der Woerdt A, Nasisse M,
126 Morgan JE, Ellingham RB, Young RD,
58:414-418.
Davidson M {1990) Phakolytic uveitis in
Trmal GJ (1996) The mechanica]
137 Fox S, Vainisi S, Gerstein M (1979)
the dog: a retrospective study of 151
 properties of the human lens capsule
Lens extraction with anterior chamber
cases. Proceedings of the Scientific
following capsulorrhexis or radio-
lens implantation in the Macaque.
Meeting of the American Callege of
frequency diathermy capsulotomy.
American Journal of Veterinary Research
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 21:161.
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
40:214-220.
114:1110-1115.
LENS
399
138 Olson R, Kolodner H (1981)
151 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Jamieson V.
161 Stuhr C, Miller P, Murphy C, Schoster J,
 Intraocular lens implantation in cats.
English R, Oliverso D {1991)
Thomas C {1998) Effect of intracameral
Annais of Ophthatmology 13:975-977.
Phakoemulsification and intraocular lens
administration of carbachol on the
139 Draeger J, Guthoff R, Kohler L,
implantation: a study of surgical results
 postoperative increase in intraocular
Allmeling G (1983)
in 182 dogs. Progress in Veterinary amd
pressure in dogs undergoing cataract
Veterinarmedizinische ophthalmologische
Comparative Ophthatmology
extraction. Journat of the American
mikrochirurgie. Kieintier Praxis
1:233-238.
Veterinary Medicat Association
28:65-68.
152 Startup F (1967) Cataract surgery in the
212:1885-1888.
140 Stark W, Goodman G, Goodman D,
dog. Il. Factors responsible for failure.
162 Lannek E, Miller P (2001) Development
 Gottsch J (1988) Posterior chamber
Journat of Small Animat Practice
of glaucoma after phacoemulsification for
intraocular lens implantation in the
8:675-679.
removal of cataracts in dogs: 22 cases
absence of posterior capsular support.
153 Biros DJ, Gelatt KN, Brooks DE, et af.
{1987-1997). Journat of the American
Ophthatmotogy Surgery 19:240-243.
(2000) Development of glaucoma after
Veterinary Medicat Association
141 Nasisse M, Glover TL, Davidson M,
cataract surgery in dogs: 220 cases
218:70-76.
 Nelms S, Sullivan T (1995) Technique
{1987-1998). Journat of the American
163 Gerardi JG, Colitz C, Dubielzig R,
for the suture fixation of intraocular
Veterinary Medicat Association
Davidson M {1999)
lenses in dogs. Veterinary and
216:1780-1786.
Immunohistochemical analysis of lens
Comparative Ophthatmotogy
154 Nasisse M, Davidson M, English R,
epithelial-derived membranes following
5:146-150.
Roberts S, Newman H (1990)
 cataract extraction in the dog. Veterinary
142 Gaiddon JA, Lallement PE, Peiffer RL.
Neodymium: YAG laser treatment of
Ophthatmotogy 2:163-168.
(2000) Implantation of a foldable
lens extraction-induced pupillary
164 Taylor MM, Kern TJ, Ris RC,
intraocular lens in dogs. Journat of the
opacifications in dogs. Journat of the
McDonough P, Erb HN (1995)
American Veterinary Medicat Association
American Animat Hospitat Association
Intraocular bacterial contamination
216:875-877.
26:275-281.
during cataract surgery in dogs. Journat
143 Ravalico G, Baccara F, Lovisato A,
155 Apple D, Solomon K, Tetz M, et af.
Of the American Veterinary Mediciat
 Tognetto D (1997) Postoperative cellular
{1992) Posterior capsule opacification.
Association 206:1716-1720.
reaction on various intraocular lens 
Survey of Ophthatmology 37:73-116.
165 Chitkara DK, Manners T, Chapman F,
materials. Ophthatmology
156 Hayashi J, Hayashi K, Nakao F.
Stoddart MG, Hill D, Jenkins D {1994)
104:1084-1091.
Hayashi F {1998) Quantitative
Lack of effect of preoperative norfloxacin
144 Olivero D, Davidson M, Nasisse M,
 comparison of posterior capsule
 on bacterial contamination of anterior
Dykstra M (1993) Canine intraocular
opaci fication after
 chamber aspirates after cataract surgery.
lens quality control: light and scanning
 polymethylmethacrylate, silicone, and
British Journat of Ophthatmology
electron microscopic evaluation. Progress
 soft acrylic intraocular lens implantation.
78:772-774.
in Veterinary and Comparative
Archives of Ophthatmology
166 Beigi B, Westlake W, Mangelschots E,
Ophthatmalogy 3:98-105.
116:1579-1582.
Chang B, Rich W, Riordan T (1997)
145 Knight G (1957) The extraction of
157 Ram J, Apple D, Peng Q, et af. (1999)
 Peroperative microbial contamination of
dislocations and the cataractous
Update on fixation of rigid and foldable
 anterior chamber aspirates during
crystalline lens of the dog with the object
 posterior chamber intraocular lenses.
extracapsular cataract extraction and
of preserving some useful vision.
 Part II. Choosing the correct haptic
phakoemulsification. British Journat of
Veterinary Record 68:318.
fxation and intraocular lens design to
Ophthatmology 81:953-955.
146 Startup F (1967) Cataract surgery in the
help eradicate posterior capsule
167 Manners TD, Turner D, Glenn AM
dog. I. Published results. Journat of
opacification. Ophthatmalogy
{1997) Heparinised intraocular infusion
Small Animat Practice 8:671-674.
106:891-900.
and bacterial contamination in cataract
147 Magrane W (1969) Cataract extraction:
158 Zaturinsky B, Naveh N, Saks D,
surgery. British Journal of
a follow up study (429 cases). Journal of
Solomon A {1990) Prevention of
Ophthatmotogy 81:949-952.
Small Animal Practice 10:545-553.
posterior capsular opacification by
168 Gilger BC, Davidson MG, Colitz CM
148 Spreull J, Chawla H, Crispin S (1980)
cryolysis and the use of heparinized
{1998) Experimental implantation of
 Routine lens extraction for the treatment
irrigating solution during extracapsular
posterior chamber prototype intraocular
of cataract in the dog. Journat of Smaff
lens extraction in rabbits. Ophthatmic
lenses for the feline eye. Armerican Journat
Anmat Practice 21:535-554.
Surgery 21:431-434.
of Veterinary Research 59:1339-1343
149 Rooks R, Brightman A, Musselman E,
159 Smith P, Brooks D, Lazarus J, Kubilis P.
169 Gilger BC, Davidson MG, Howard PM
Helper L, Magrane W (1985)
Gelatt K (1996) Ocular hypertension
{1998) Keratometry, ultrasonic biometry,
Extracapsular cataract extraction: an
following cataract surgery in dogs: 139
and prediction of intraocular lens power 
 analysis of 240 operations in dogs.
cases {1922-1993). Journat of the
in the feline eye. American Journat of
Journat of the American Veterinary
Americam Veterinary Medicat Association
Veterimary Research 59:131-134.
Medicat Association 187:1013-1015.
209:105-111.
170 Millichamp NJ, Dziezyc J (2000)
150 Miller T, Whitley D, Meek L, Garcia G,
160 Miller PE, Stanz KM, Dubielzig RR,
Cataract phacofragmentation in horses.
Wilson M, Rawls B {1987)
Murphy CJ {1997) Mechanisms of acute
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 3:157-164.
Phacofragmentation and aspiration for
intraocular pressure increases after
171 van Kruiningen H (1964) Intracapsular
cataract extraction in dogs: 56 cases
phakoemulsification lens extraction in
cataract extraction in the horse. Journat
{1980-1984). Journal of the American
 dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
of the Armerican Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Medicat Association
Research 58:1159-1165.
Association 145:773-785.
190:1577-1580.
400
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
172 van der Woerdt A, Stades FC, van der
179 Glover TL, Davidson M, Nasisse M,
184 Olivero D, Ris R, Dutton A,
 Linde-Sipman JS, Boevé MH {1995)
Olivero D (1995) The intracapsular
Murphy C, Nasisse M, Davidson M
Multiple ocular anomalies in two related
extraction of displaced lenses in dogs: a
{1991) Feline lens displacement: a
litters of Soft Coated Wheaten Terriers.
retrospective study of 57 cases
retrospective analysis of 345 cases.
Veterinary and Comparative
{1984-1990). Journat of the American
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
Ophthatmotogy 5:78-82.
Animat Hospital Association 31:77-81.
Ophthatmology 1:239-244.
173 Formston C (1945) Observations on
180 Lazarus JA, Pickett JP, Champagne E
185 Chavkin M, Lappin M, Powell C (1992)
subluxation and luxation of the
{1998) Primary lens luxation in the
Seroepidemiologic and clinical
crystalline lens in the dog. Journat of
Chinese Shar Pei: clinical and hereditary
observations of 93 cases of uveitis in cats.
Comparative Pathotogy 55:168-184.
characteristics. Veterinary
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
174 Lawson D (1969) Luxation of the
Ophthatmology 1:101-107.
Ophthatmaology 2:29-36.
crystalline lens in the dog. Journat of
181 Barnett KC, Cottrell BD (1987)
186 Hamming NA, Apple D {1980) In:
Small Anumat Practice 10:461-463.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in a dog: ocular,
Principles and Practice of Ophthatmology
175 Willis M, Curtis R, Barnett K,
cutaneous, and articular abnormalities.
Vol.1. G Peyman, D Sanders, M
Tempest W (1979) Genetic aspects of lens
Journat of Small Animat Practice
Goldberg(eds). WB Saunders,
luxation in the Tibetan Terrier Veterinary
28:941-946.
Philadelphia, p. 9.
Record 104:409-412.
182 Gwin R, Samuelson D, Powell G, Gelatt 
187 Hogan M, Alvarado J, Weddell J (1971)
176 Curtis R, Barnett K (1980) Primary lens
K, Wolf D, Meredith R (1982) Primary
Histology of the Hurman Eye. WB
luxation in the dog. Journat of Smatf
lens luxation in the dog associated with
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Anwmat Practice 21:657-668.
lenticular zonule degeneration and its 
188 Stades F {1983) Development of the
177 Curtis R, Barnett K, Lewis S {1983)
relationship to glaucoma. Journat of the
vitreous and related (vascular) structures
Clinical and pathological observations
American Animat Hospitat Association
 in persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
concerning the aetiology of primary lens
18:485-491.
 lentis and persistent hyperplastic primary
Juxation in the dog. Veterinary Record
183 Curtis R {1983) Aetiopathological
vitreous (PHTVL/PHPV) in the
112:238-246.
 aspects of inherited lens dislocation in the
Doberman Pinscher. Utrecht, p. 12.
178 Foster S, Curtis R, Barnett K (1986)
Tibetan Terrier. Journat of Comparative
 Primary lens luxation in the Border
Pathology 93:151-163.
Collie. Journat of Small Animat Practice
27:1-6.
401
14
Vitreous and
Ocular Fundus
VITREOUS
charged hyaluronic acid polymers fill the spaces2.
Hyaluronic acid is responsible for the viscosity of the
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
vitreous and the relative amounts of collagen and
The vitreous is the largest of the ocular structures,
 hyaluronic acid determine whether the vitreous is in a gel
 Occupying the space bounded anteriorly by the lens and
or fluid state. The negatively-charged hyaluronic
zonules and peripherally by the ciliary body, retina, and
molecules repulse each other, causing expansion of the
 optic nerve (14.i). The vitreous is a hydrogel consisting
 gel. The addition of positively-charged ions causes the
 of 99% water. It is relatively lacking in cell with the
vitreous gel to collapse, due to the neutralization of the
normal  cellular  components  being macrophages
 repulsive negative charges?. Hyaluronic acid is produced
(hyalocytes) that originate from the bloodl. Most of the 
by the hyalocytes and is in highest concentration in the
hyalocytes are located in the peripheral vitreous near the
peripheral vitreous4. The percentage of vitreous that is
 o  aa ss o 
fluid increases with age.
make up the framework and 'hydrated, negatively-
14.1
Sclera
Extraocular muscle
 Choroidal vein
Third eyelid
Sclera
Chorioca pillaris
 Choroid
Rod
 Pupil 
Retina
Inner nuclear cell 
Iris
Ganglion cell
Macula
Len5
To optic 
 Retinal   Cone  Pigmented 
 Tapetum
nerve
vessels
 epithelium
~ Retinal vessels
Cormea
~Optic disk
Iris
~Nontapetal retina
~ Hyaloid canal in the vitreous body
 Limbus 
-Zonules
Conjuctiva -
 Ciliary body
- Scleral plexu5
14.1 Schematic eye of a cat. Note the sinusoidal hyaloid or Cloquet's canal traversing the vitreous from the optic nerve to the back of the len5.
402
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Embryologically and anatomically, the vitreous is
anterior extremity of the hyaloid artery are a normal
 divided into primary, secondary, and tertiary vitreous.
finding, some dogs retain a very dense white straight
● Primary vitreous is the first tissue to develop in the
hyaloid artery. This trait is common in Australian
optic cup between the lens and the retina. It consists
Shepherd Dogs in Australial6a and has no known
of ectodermal components and the mesodermal origin
functional significance. The anterior extremity of
hyaloid artery system that supplies the fetal lens (see
Cloquet's canal attaches to the anterior vitreous face,
Chapter 13, p.369). The primary vitreous is
which is collapsed against the posterior lens capsule. This
surrounded (begins about 25 days post fertilization)
attachment is seen on biomicroscopy as an arcuate white
by the newer secondary vitreous of neuroectoderm
ring farcuate line of Vogt) near the lens axis. The dorsal
 origin, which is the majority of the postnatal vitreouss.
roof of Cloquet's canal is termed the dorsal plica and the
6. The primary vitreous passes through the secondary
floor of the canal is the ventral plica.
vitreous in a tunnel, called Cloquet's canal. In the
The retention of embryonal vascular remnants of the
 young animal, the tunnel is straight but sags with
primary vitreous may be mild, with only the continuity and
 growth, developing a sinusoidal curve (14.1)7.
patency of the artery maintained. This condition is relatively
 Secondary vitreous is most firmly attached to the
ansn pun sopdaaus pueaus jo sau aos u uom
peripapillary region, the peripheral retina/ora ciliaris
produces no clinical signs, although vitreous hemorrhage
retinae, and the posterior lens capsule. The peripheral
may occur Retention of remnants of the tunica vasculosa
attachment is called the vitreous base. The lenticular
lentis, as evidenced by small white linear or dot opacities or
 attachment is the hyaloideocapsular ligament ( Wieger's
pgmented dots on the posterior capsule,is a very frequent
ligament) and this is relatively firm in the dog and cat,
incidental finding and is often familial. More pronounced
 making intracapsular lens extraction difficult without
degrees of retention of the hyaloid artery may be associated
vitreous loss. The major portion of the vitreous face is
with proliferative changes that are fibrovascular or fibrous in
easily separated from the retina. The secondary vitreous
rature. These may manifest in the anterior and/or posterior
is divided into the peripheral cortical vitreous and
extremity of the hyaloid system. Anterior hyperplastic
 central vitreous. In the dog and cat, the cortical vitreous
dhanges are recognized as axial posterior capsular cataracts
 is fluid and the central vitreous is dense8, 9.
with vessels intermixed.
· Tertiary vitreous is the zonules that hold the lens in
 Mild glial proliferation on the surface of the disk from
place.
incomplete involution of the hyaloid artery is termed
Bergmeister's papilla. It is routinely visualized in ruminants
The vitreous has been demonstrated to have a
 such as the cow (14.2) and sheep, but not in the dog and
 cat. Posterior hyperplastic changes are usually recognized
antiangiogenic factor may be responsible for the lack of
by their association with anterior PHPV and manifest with
regression and overgrowth of the tunica vasculosa lentis
proliferative changes on the optic disk fpapillary) or
 in some breeds of dogs, e.g. the Doberman Pinscherll.
 adjacent to the optic disk (peripapillary) (14.3)f7. Folds in
the retina or retinal detachment may develop in the
peripapillary region as the glial tissue contracts or growth
DISEASES OF THE VITREOUS
of the eye occurs. The condition may be unilateral or
bilateral and may be accompanied by persistence of the
CONGENITAL DISEASES
tunica vasculosus lentis. Anterior PHPV is known to be a
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
genetic trait in the Doberman Pinscher, Staffordshire Bull
Introduction/etiology
Terrier, and Bouvier des Flandres but these breeds do not
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) is also
have posterior lesionss, 6, 18, 19.
discussed in Chapter 13 (p.369) with PHTVL. The
involution and disappearance of the primary vitreous is
somewhat variable in time. In the young pup or kitten,
the course of the hyaloid artery is straight and
14.2
continuous between the optic nerve and the lens and
occasionally it will be patent and contain blood. The
closure of the hyaloid artery in Beagle pups usually
found an intact hyaloid artery in the majority of foals up
to 4 days of age and Koch et al.14 found remnants up to
30 days. Blood was often present in the hyaloid artery in
the first neonatal day but only one foal had blood in the
 artery 2 days after birth13, 15.
With growth of the eye and involution of the artery,
the artery is disrupted and only the anterior extremity is
noted in the sinuous-shaped Cloquet's canal. The
anterior extremity is routinely observed as a white dot
(Mittendorf's dot) just behind the lens capsule and
ventral to the junction of the posterior cortical sutures16.
In the adult, the anterior hyaloid artery is observed as a
pig's tail-like remnant, coursing posteriorly for a short
14.2 Bovine fundus with a dark nonmyelinated oval disk. Note a
distance in the dark nonrelucent Cloquet's canal {see
pinkish white proliferation at the confluence of the retinal vessels
Chapter 11, p.298, 11.1). While small remnants of the
that is the remnant of the hyaloid artery (Bergmeister's papilla).
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
403
PHPV may occur spontaneously as an isolated
Pronounced vitreal veils are noted in some individuals,
unilateral condition but the clinician should be suspicious
particularly in Miniature Schnauzers, Italian Greyhounds,
of an inherited trait if the condition is bilateral.
 and many brachycephalic breeds. The significance of vitreal
PHPV/PHTVL is rare in the cat but has been reported
degeneration is unknown at this time, but ophthalmologists
 without indication of it being an inherited trait20.
are concemed about an association with lens instability
 and/or retinal detachments.
Clinical signs
+ Mild: pigmented dots and linear streaks on the posterior
ACQUIRED DISEASES
lens capsule. The hyaloid artery may be prominent and
Hemorrhage
may contain blood (see Chapter 13, p.369, 13.19).
Introduction/etiology
 Moderate: posterior axial subcapsular cataract, posterior
Hemorrhage into formed vitreous results in clots (14.4),
lenticonus, retained hyaloid artery, and possibly vitreal
whereas if the vitreous is liquefied, the hemorrhage will
hemorrhage may occur. The ciliary processes may rarely
become diffuse. Hemorrhage in a solid vitreous often
 be elongated and visible in the pupil21.
remains for extended periods of time. The blood exerts a
 Severe: extensive cataract, lenticonus, hemorrhage
destructive effect on the gel structure, resulting in liquefaction
into the lens, lens coloboma, extensive pigment on
and collapse of vitreal strands around the hemorrhage26.
posterior capsule, and extensive fibrovascular
Hemoglobin and iron stimulate macrophage migration into
 membrane on or adjacent to the optic disk may be
the vitreous to phagocytoze hemosiderin after cellular
present (14.3), (see Chapter 13, p.369, 13.21,
hemolysis27. The low-grade inflammation is an additional
13.22). Hyphema, uveitis, and secondary glaucoma
stimulation for glial cell migration into the vitreous, through
may be severe complications of PHPV22
small breaks in the inner limiting membrane of the retina.
Miller's cells, retinal astroglial cells, and retinal pigmented
Therapy
epithelium (PE) are additional sources of cells that can
aeiaou oi Pu ul Aiessaoau Alensn jou si Adriau
 produce fibrous membranes28. If the membrane is attached
 cases, except to advise on the genetic implications. If
to the retina, contraction of the membrane results in traction 
ultrasound is not routinely performed on all cataract
 and subsequent detachment.
patients, the surgeon may not be aware of PHPV/PHTVL
Iron toxicity or siderosis to the retina by the breakdown
before surgery. If cataract surgery is performed on the
of hemoglobin has been considered to be a complication of
severe manifestations of PHPV, the prognosis should be
vitreal hemorrhage but this has been questioned based on
guarded because of the risk of hemorrhage and the
necessity of doing an anterior vitrectomy.
extinguish the ERG but, if cleared, the ERG will return
fone of the few known causes for reversal of an
Miscellaneous conditions
extinguished ERG) and so the ERG may not be a useful
Several congenital vitreal anomalies of unknown significance
prognostic tool30. The extinguished ERG after vitreal
have been observed A congenital coloboma or absence of
hemorrhage is not due to iron toxicity or decreased
 the vitreous has been observed in a Collie with Collie eye
 electrical conductivity through tissue31.
anomaly. This would only be noted by slit lamp examination.
The causes of vitreal hemorrhage are numerous and may
Vitreous syneresis (a liquefied vitreous) is observed with
 be associated with either blunt or perforating trauma, blood
Collie eye anomaly, in microphthalmic-retinal dysplasia of
dyscrasia such as thrombocytopenia, hyperviscosity syn-
the Bedlington Terrier, and in retinal dysplasia-skeletal
dromes and leukemias, vascular lesions such as congenital
 malformations, systemic hypertension, inflammatory disease,
syneresis is probably more common than is reported.
and neoplasia.
14.3
14.4
14.3 Posterior persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous in a Poodle.
14.4 Vitreal hermorrhage in a young Collie. Note the blood is
confined in clots because of the gel state of the vitreous.
404
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
The course and resolution of vitreal hemorrhage is
striking. Vitreous herniation into the anterior chamber
very difficult to predict. The prognosis should be
is thought to indicate zonular defects and to be a risk
guarded beca use contractile forces during the
factor for subsequent lens displacement. While finding
resolution of clots may produce retinal detachments.
vitreal strands in the anterior chamber is obviously not
normal, the predictive value for future‘lens
Clinical signs
displacement has yet to be proven. The more subjective
Decreased vision will be noted if significant bilateral
fndings of an increased entanglement of vitreal
hemorrhage occurs. As little as 12.5 μl of blood in 5 ml
membranes  and
fluid vitreous awaits further
decreases vision in humans to hand motions or worse32.
investigation as to their significance. Despite this lack
The hemorrhage will be recognized as red clots
of knowledge and observer subjectivity, breeding dogs
 suspended in the vitreous (14.4), or diffuse redness if the
 are being culled for 'vitreal degeneration'.
vitreous is liquefied. Clots gradually shrink and turn to a
OTHER DISEASES
gray residue in the vitreous.
Inflammation of the vitreous (hyalitis)
Therapy
Introduction/etiology
Medical therapy is of no known value for vitreal
Hyalitis is part of any endophthalmitis and may be sterile
hemorrhage. In humans, vitrectomy or removal of the
or septic. Primary hyalitis may occur with penetrating
vitreous is performed for vitreal hemorrhage and
 injuries or postsurgically, and it can in turn spread to the
membrane formation. However, in veterinary medicine
retina and uvea. It presents as a haze in the vitreous from
the prognosis is so poor, because of the accompanying
infiltration of cells and results in an inability to focus
ocular lesions or the underlying cause, that vitrectomies
sharply on the fundus during ophthalmoscopy. Focal
are rarely performed for vitreal hemorrhage.
hyalitis is common over any active area of retinal or optic
nerve head inflammation, particularly if infectious in
DEGENERATIVEDISEASES
origin. If septic endophthalmitis is suspected, the vitreous
Asteroid hyalosis
is a more reliable source for culturing than the aqueous
Asteroid hyalosis is a degenerative condition of unknown
humor, due to the high turnover rate of fluid in the
cause. It is characterized by variable numbers of multiple
aqueous humor.
small spheroidal bodies, suspended mainly in the anterior
vitreous of one or both eyes (14.s). With ocular
 Clinical signs
movement they vibrate but the bodies do not completely
Loss of vision is common with hyalitis. Episcleral and
settle out in the ventral vitreous when the eye is
scleral vascular injection are externally visible. Hyalitis is
motionless. The incidence increases with age and the
recognized biomicroscopically by the presence of cells
condition is bilateral in about 50% of patients.
If
and haze in the anterior vitreous. Cells in the anterior
unilateral, the left eye is affected more frequently. While
vitreous are differentiated by color and size. Pigmented
there was no correlation with specific ocular disease, 33
cells are noted by color and large size, erythocytes by
of 40 dogs (82%) with asteroid hyalosis had lesions of
their color and small uniform size, and leukocytes by
their intermediate size and uniformity.
bodies may cause the fundus to be somewhat hazy but
signs referable to the asteroid hyalosis are unusual.
Therapy
Severe asteroid hyalosis is a common finding when
Adequate drug levels are very difficult to achieve in the
evaluating older and diabetic cataract patients with
vitreous because of its inert nature. If septic hyalitis is
ultrasound. Poor visual performance has been observed
suspected, high levels of antibiotics that penetrate the
 after cataract surgery on animals with asteroid hyalosis;
uui eauaeu pun ianq ounu snoanbe-poo
this improved after vitrectomy. Asteroid hyalosis is not
of antibiotics are indicated. Surgical removal of the
responsible for the "fly biting' syndrome in the dog.
vitreous combined with intravitreal antibiotics may one
Asteroid bodies are liquid crystals composed of
day be employed in veterinary ophthalmology as in
 calcium and phospholipids3s. Therapy is not necessary in
human ophthalmology.
the vast majority of patients.
Aberrant parasitic migrations
Syneresis
Parasite migration may occur through the vitreous with
Liquefaction
of
the vitreous can result from
Dirofilaria
Szittt?
{see
Chapter
11,
p.298),
inflammation,
, hemorrhage, as part of a congenital
Angiostrongyitus
vasorum35a,
various
fly
"larvae
 syndrome (Collie eye anomaly), or as a degenerative
(ophthalmomyiasis interna)36,
 and Toxocara canis
change that increases with age. Syneresis is of little
larvae37. Echinococcus cysts (hydatid cysts) may be
importance by itself.
found rarely in the vitreous.
Vitreal degeneration
Synchisis scintillans
Vitreal degeneration is a vague term used to describe
Synchisis is a rare condition of cholesterol crystals that
changes in the vitreous, ranging from strands of
 gravitate ventrally in a liquefied vitreous and disperse
vitreous appearing in the anterior chamber to increased
with movement of the eye. The crystals are usually the
membranes and disorganized membranes floating in the
result of an old vitreal hemorrhage. It should not be
 anterior vitreous that is often liquefied. The variation in
confused with the more common condition of
the appearance of the anterior vitreous between breeds
 asteroid hyalosis.
of dogs and between various age groups can be quite
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
405
14.5
14.6
14.5 Severe asteroid hyalosis in a dog viewed through a dilated
pupil. This can be differentiated from cataractous changes by the
vibration of the spherical bodies with ocular moverment and their
 position behind the lens.
OCULAR FUNDUS
14.6 Montage of kitten retina and inner choroid. (C: choroid with
The ocular fundus is that region in the posterior segment
numerous blood vessels and melanocytes; T: tapetal cells, arrows 
 that is viewed with the ophthalmoscope and, collectively,
point to capillaries penetrating tapetum; 1: retinal pigmented
consists of the retina, choroid, and optic disk or papilla.
epithelium (not pigmented over the tapetum] ; 2: layer of rods and
The healthy retina is transparent with the exception of
cones; 3: external limiting membrane; 4: external nuclear layer:
the retinal blood vessels and minor reflections off the
5: external plexiform layer; 6: internal nuclear layer: 7: internal
internal limiting membra ne.
plexiform layer; 8: ganglion cell layer; 9: nerve fiber layer:
10: internal limiting membrane; arrowheads indicate retinal blood 
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
vessels)] [1 μm section x175.) (From Martin and Anderson, 198151.)
Retina
 The retina is classically divided into ten layers, nine of
which are the neurosensory retina and the tenth being the
PE. The original embryonic optic vesicle space is the
potential space between the neurosensory retina and the
PE and it is loosely adherent. Retinal detachment is
essentially retinal separation since the separation
is
discrimination between objects. In addition, rods are
between the neurosensory layer and the pigment
more sensitive to shorter wavelength light (blue).
epithelium. The retina of the puppy or kitten is immature
Cones have less convergence so that one cone may
at birth, reaching maturity histologically and by
affect one ganglion cell, which results in more
electroretinography 6-9 weeks postnatally3840.
discrimination (14.1, insert). Rods greatly outnumber
The neurosensory retina is composed of: the outer
cones, although the ratio varies with the location in the
photoreceptor layer frod and cone inner and outer
retina. In the central retina, and specifically in the area
segments), external limiting membrane, outer nuclear
centralis or macula, the cones are at their highest
layer (nuclei of rods and cones), outer plexiform layer
concentration but are still outnumbered by rods {11:1).
(synapses between the photoreceptors and inner nuclear
This area is utilized for central or acute visual
layer), inner nuclear layer (contains the nuclei of
discrimination. The periphery of the retina has a ratio
amacrine cells, horizontal cells, bipolar cells, and
of 6S-100:1 of rods to cones, although the absolute
Miller's cells), inner plexiform layer (synapses of inner
 number of rods may be less than in the central retina41,
42. Rods are used in dim light (scotopic vision) and
nuclear layer to the ganglion cells), ganglion cell layer,
nerve fiber layer (axons of ganglion cells), and the
cones for daylight (photopic vision), discrimination,
internal limiting membrane (14.6).
 and color vision. The degree of color vision among
Several rods are connected to a single ganglion cell
 animals is controversial. In general, most domestic
(convergence or summation) that makes them more
 animals, except swine, are reported to have limited
color vision (See Chapter 6, p.113).
406
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
14.7
The double membrane disks of the outer segments of the
rods and cones contain the photopigments (14.7). Four
y saiads ur uasaud aq Aeu shuauaidooud jo sada
color vision: three in the cones with peak absorption
sensitivity at blue, green, and red wavelengths, and
 rhodopsin in the rods. The photopigment's main function is
transduction, or converting light energy into a neurologic
electrical signal. Rhodopsin, the most studied form of the 
photopigments, consists of a vitamin A aldehyde (retinal)
and a glycoprotein (opsin). The 11-cis isomer of retinal is
the photoactive form. Light striking the 11-cis isomer ipeak
absorption is 500 nm or dark green light) converts it to the 
all-trans isomer through a series of unstable conforma-
tional changes, which are the earliest events in trans-
duction. Light is only necessary for the first step and energy
is not necessary for this transformation. The final step is the
 separation of the retinal from the opsin and the reduction
of retinal to retinol (alcohol) (14.8)43.
Regeneration of active rhodopsin does require energy
 and takes place mostly in the PE, although a small amount
of regeneration occurs in the outer segments. Retinol is
 stored in the PE as an ester. The photoreceptors in the dark
 are maintained in a depolarized state by being permeable to
sodium and pumping out calcium. Activation of the
photopigment alters the calcium pump so that calcium
accumulates in the cytoplasm; it in turn alters the channels 
for sodium leakage, blocking sodium influx, and resulting
14.7 Canine rod outer segment composed of disks or lamella that 
in hyperpolarization jincreased intracellular electro-
 are separated from each other. (From Martin and Anderson, 198151.)
14.8
14.8 Proposed steps in transduction and
Light
regeneration of rhodopsin. (Modified from
Marmor, 198043)
Rhodopsin
Disc
 Unstable intermediary molecules
membrane 
Metahodpsin Il 
[380 mm]
Parahodopsin
[465 mm]
Opsin
Il-cis-retinal
 All-trans-retinal
Isomerase
(380 mm]
4
Outer
segment
Il-cis-retinal
 All-trans-retinal
Inner
segment
ll-cis-retinal esters 4
 All-trans-retinal esters
1
 Pigment 
epithelium 
Il-cis-retinal
 All-trans-retinal
Vitamin A
Blood
Retinal binding protein
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
407
negativity). The summation of this hyperpolarization is
The tapetum lucidum is a reflective structure that is
seen clinically as the A-wave in the ERG. The B-wave of the
present in most domestic animals except the pig and
birds. It is located in the dorsal one-half to one-third of
cells and Miller's cells, and the C-wave is generated by the
the choroid and lies just external to the choriocapillaris.
PE cells++ (see Chapter 1, p.11).
Its
function is to reflect light back onto the
PE cells are hexagonal and are loosely adherent to the
photoreceptors, in order to amplify light in dim or dark
photoreceptors. They have occluding junctions between
conditions. Consequently, it is best developed in
them which act as the blood-retinal barrier for the outer
nocturnal animals where it is located dorsally to receive
half of the retina against diffusion of substances or drugs
light originating from the ground and not the sky. Two
from the very leaky underlying choriocapillaris4s. The PE
forms of tapetum exist in domestic animals: a cellular
does not contain melanin granules over the tapetum or in
form that is found in carnivores {14.6) and a fibrous
individuals with an albinoid fundus. The function of the
form, composed of collagenous fibers, found in ungulates
pigment is not certain but has been postulated to act as a
(14.9). The color varies between individuals and the
scavenger for free radicals, minimize light reflection
pigment in the tapetum varies with the species. The
between photoreceptors, and to absorb and convert light
fibrous tapetum is not pigmented; the color is due to the
energy into heat+6. One of the functions of the PE is to
refraction of light. The cat has a high concentration of
phagocytoze the shedding disks of the distal rod and
riboflavin in the tapetum and the dog has a high
 cone outer segments. This serves to conserve vitamin A
concentration of zinc cysteine. Many fish have a tapetum
and polyunsaturated lipids. As a byproduct of this
with guanine as the pigment52. A more detailed review of
process, lipofuscin accumulates in the PE. The disks of
 the types of tapetum in various species can be found in
the rods and cones are produced at the base of the outer
Ollivier et al.s2a.
segment. Older ones are shed and phagocytozed at the
distal or scleral end, so that every 6 days there is a
turnover of the entire average canine outer rod
is cyclic and requires a photoperiod. The period of most
14.9
aun jo suuuaq aui ie si spou aun 1oy supaus asuaiu
light cycle fmorning), and for the cones is at the
10
beginning of the dark cycle (night or sleep)49.
The PE is important in collecting and storing vita min A
from the blood for future use in the photoreceptors. It also
 actively takes up taurine and fatty acids from the blood.
The degree of retinal vascularization between species
varies from abundant to absent. Retinal vessels are
autoregulated or unaffected by moderate changes in
perfusion pressure and have tight cellular junctions,
unlike the leaky uveal vasculature. The retinal vessels are
part of the blood-retinal barrier for the inner half of the
retina. In general, when they are present, the retinal
vessels supply nutrition to the inner half of the retina.
The retinal vascular pattern has been categorized into:
holangiotic, in which the entire retinal surface receives a
 direct blood supply (cat, dog, cow, sheep); merangiotic,
in which the vessels are localized to a region of the retina
(rabbit); paurangiotic, where the vessels are limited to the
immediate peripapillary region fhorse, guinea pigl; and
anangiotic, in which retinal blood vessels are absent
(certain rodents, bat, armadillo, sloth, birds)50.
Choroid
The choroid is the posterior portion of the vascular uveal
tract. It consists mainly of blood vessels, pigment and, in
 some species, a tapetum (14.1, insert). The vascular beds
are supplied mainly by the short ciliary arteries that enter
around the optic nerve and end in the choriocapillaris
that lies just under the PE. The choriocapillaris supplies
nutrition by diffusion to the outer half of the retina. The
14.9 Inner choroid and outer retina of a young horse. Large
capillaries are fenestrated and leaky but the diffusion of
choroidal veins (1] lie under the fibrous tapetum (2] that is separated 
substances is obstructed by the tight junctions of the PE.
from the outer retinal pigmented epithelium by the choriocapillaris
The venous system is freely anastomotic and drains
[3] and Bruch's mermbrane [4). The pigmented epithelium (5] contains
anteriorly via the vortex veins and posteriorly around
very few pigment granules over the tapetum. (6: photoreceptor outer
the optic nerve to the orbital veins (see Chapter 11,
segments; 7: photoreceptor inner segments; 8: external limiting
p.298, 11.2), Sensory nerves have been demonstrated in
membrane; 9: outer nuclear layer: 10: outer plexiform layer: 11 : inner
the choroid>1.
nuclear layer.] (x375.] From (Martin and Anderson, 198151.)
408
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASe IN VeTeRINARY MeDICINE
14.10
14.11
14.10 Future tapetal region in a 4-week-old puppy.
14.11 Immature fundus of a 6-7-week-old puppy with a blue-violet
colored tapetum and a small incompletely myelinated optic disk.
14.12
Normal canine fundus
The first task, once the technique of ophthalmoscopy is
ma stered, is to recognize normal variations in the fundus.
 This challenge of differentiating normal from abnormal
is greatest in the dog, where there is an infinite
variability. Even the experienced examiner will have
difficulty in differentiating extremes in normal variation
 from mild pathologic changes.
apia aa lm snpuny aui sasodnd uossnosip 1om
into the tapetum, optic disk, blood vessels, and
nontapetum.
 In the adult dog, the tapetum is a brightly colored
right scalene triangle, with the right angle at top and the
 most acute angle positioned nasallys3. Its function is to
collect light under dim illumination and reflect light back
to the retina, to stimulate it once again.
14.12 Adult canine fundus with a well developed tapetum. This is
The tapetum is part of the choroid (behind the retina)
a large breed of dog and the disk is within the tapetum and is well
and develops after birth. Thus adult coloration may not
myelinated, imparting a triangular shape and white color. Note the 
be present until 10-12 weeks of age. In the 4-5-week-old
dark spot in the center of the disk. This is the physiologic pit.
1003 Aeia oi ysumoq e st uoisau 1eiadei aun kddnd
(14.10), which changes to blue and violet colors at about
6-7 weeks (14.11), becoming adult in color by 3 months
14.13
in most puppies (14.12). The absence of a visible
tapetum can be a normal variation and is most common
in animals with blue irides or albinoid eyes. Albinoid
eyes typically lack retinal and choroidal pigment ( 14.13).
Conversely, pigment in the PE and/or hypoplasia of the 
tapetum may obscure the view of the tapetum (14.14).
An inherited tapetal anomaly in Beagles is characterized
by a diffuse reddish-brown fundus without an observable
tapetum (see Tapetal dysplasia, p.422)54.
The tapetal coloration varies a great deal, with no
correlation to coat color. The tapetum may have
 predominant hues of blue, green, yellow, or orange. The 
tapetum is thickest in the center. The mosaic aspect of the
tapetum increases with age and varies from very uniform
 and homogeneous in color (14.15) to being composed of
individual beads or clumps of beads (14.16). The size of
the tapetum varies with the size of the dog: larger dogs
14.13 Normal canine albinotic fundus with an absence of tapetum
 and pigment. The dense choriocapillaris imparts the diffuse rednes5,
within the tapetum (14.12), whereas smaller dogs have a
although the white sclera can be observed in small patches. This dog
small tapetum, usually with the disk outside the
will have blue irides.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
409
14.14
14.15
14.14 Canine fundus with a poorly developed tapetum represented
14.15 Canine fundus with a very homogeneous yellow tapeturm.
by a few islands of color, but the overall area is gray or pigrmented.
 The optic disk has very little myelination and is 'cat like!
This is common in breeds such as the Labrador Retriever.
14.16
lapioq [eiadeuou-[iaden aut jo uojsunl aul 'esunadei
is sharp in shorthaired dogs, whereas longhaired dogs
have a transitional zone (14.12).
Changes in tapetal reflectivity, whether dull or
hyperreflective, generally indicate pathology, although
minor variations of normal may be seen. Conus is an
area of hyperreflectivity around part or all of the optic
disk and is considered normal. Hyperreflectivity of the
tapetum is usually attributed to thinning of the overlying
retina, the latter acting as a neutral density filter. Electron
microscopy is probably necessary to study the disruption
and alteration of the tapetal rodlets with subtle reflective
 cha nges of the ta petum.
The optic disk or papilla in the dog is unique, in that it
is routinely myelinated. In most species, myelination stops
at the lamina cribrosa or the sclera. The disk of the dog has 
14.16 Canine fundus with a tapetum that is very granular, composed
great variations in shape, elevation, and color due to the
 of individual yellow, green, and orange beads.
amount of myelination in individual animals. Extreme
amounts of myelin may occur in large breed dogs and can
produce marked elevation of the entire disk or the rim of
the disk. In these individuals it is difficult to detect mild
papilledema. The added myelin may also give the disk an
14.17
overlying white appearance, instead of a pinkish-white
color (14.17). Myelin tends to follow the larger blood
B  k s ue (t Ans) y a uo sassa
triangular shape to the disk. Occasionally, myelin does
 extend more peripherally into the retina (medullated nerve
fibers). The disk is 1.5-2 mm in diameter and is located
ventrotemporally to the anatomic axis.
A small dark spot, the physiologic pit, can be very
prominent in the center of some disks and this is where
the embryonic hyaloid artery has atrophied (14.12,
14.14). Some optic nerves are normally quite cupped and
this variation may be difficult to differentiate from
glaucomatous cupping or minor degrees of congenital
coloboma of the disk.
The retinal vessels in domestic animals are cilioretinal
(originate from short posterior ciliary or choroidal
 arteries) in origin and a central retinal artery is absent. The
14.17 Canine ocular fundus with a well myelinated optic disk.
largest vessels are the primary veins (2-5 in number). Most 
The disk is triangular and elevated around the rim from the myelin
dogs have 3-4 primary veins and these have an
and is more depressed in the center.
410
OpHThAlMIC DisEASe In VeTeRINArY MeDICInE
14.18
14.19
14.18 Canine ocular fundus. Note the optic disk is in the
14.19 Canine fundus that has a lightly pigmented nontapetum that
nontapetum, the presence of two primary veins dorsally, and the
 is typical for individuals with liver coat colors.
dark nontapetum that is lighter in a zone adjacent to the disk.
 anastomotic arc or a circle in the center of the disk (14.13,
14.20
14.17, 14.18). The arc often appears to pulsate when
under observation but the pulsations do not correlate with
the cardiac pulse. The pulsations are caused by the
blanching of the vessels when increased pressure is placed
on the globe during retraction of the eye into the orbit.
Secondary veins are the same size as the arteries but
can be differentiated by their origin from the anastomotic
arc. The arteries are up to 20 in number (but are usually
10-12), are small, and originate from the edge of the
optic nerve (not the papilla, due to the myelin). The
arteries are not paired with a vein as in some species. The
tortuosity of the vessels, their size, and number varies
greatly with age, breed, and family of dogs.
The retinal capillaries extend to the interface of the
outer plexiform layer and the inner nuclear layerss. The 
choroidal vessels are not visualized in most dogs.
However, in eyes with a blue iris the pigment in the PE is
14.20 Wicde-angle photograph of a feline fundus.Note the disk
decreased or absent and the tapetum may be absent,
 is within the tapetum, the avascular macular area dorsotemporal
resulting in complete or partial visualization of the
 to the disk, and the pairing of arteries and veins. (Courtesy of
choroidal vessels (tigroid fundus) (14.13).
Dr. A. MacMillan, San Diago, CA.)
The ventral fundus has been called the tapetum
nigrum but this is considered an incorrect term in that it
implies the presence of a tapetum. In the ventral fundus,
most dogs have fairly dense pigmentation of the PE that
in turn obscures visualization of the choroid and sclera.
Normal feline fundus
Usually, the ophthalmoscope light will need to be
The feline fundus has much fewer variables than the
brighter to see any detail in this region. The peripapillary
canine fundus. The tapetum is usually present, except in
region is often lighter and may have pigment disruption
blue-eyed, white-furred cats {14.20, 14.21). The blue-
and clumping, before merging into the more peripheral
eyed Siamese has a tapetum but the nontapetal region is
homogeneous darker nontapetum (14.18). Dogs with a
albinotic. The tapetum in the cat is large, with the optic
liver or reddish-tan coat color often have less pigment in
disk always well within it (14.20). The color of the
the nontapetum. This, combined with the pattern of the 
tapetum can vary from yellow to blue to blue-green and
underlying choroidal vessels, imparts an orange color to
does not have as much beadiness or mosaic appearance
the nontapetum (14.19).
as is present in some dogs. The myelination of the cat
optic nerve stops at the lamina cribrosa and thus the
The variations in the normal dog fundus are quite
optic disk does not have the varia bility in size, shape, and
remarkable and often make it difficult to determine
 elevation that is present in dogs.
early pathology of the fundus. Despite the extreme 
Occasionally, medullation of the nerve fiber layer
variation, owners do not seem to detect any
 adjacent to the disk will be observed (14.22). The optic
functional change in vision, i.e. owners of atapetal
nerve is almost always within the tapetum, is round, and
dogs do not note nyctalopia in their dogs.
is peach-colored to dark in color, and is slightly cupped
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
411
14.21 Normal
14.21
14.22
tigroid atapetal 
fundus of a 
white-furred,
blue-eyed cat.
The sclera is
visible between
the choroidal 
veins. Note the 
small circular 
disk with the
retinal blood
vessels at the
 periphery of 
the disk.
14.22 Medullation of the nerve fiber layer adjacent to the disk
of a cat. This produces a blurred region that may be erroneously
 interpreted as inflamma tion.
14.23
14.24
14.23 Normal equine fundus. Note the blue-green tapetum, which is
14.24 Normal equine fundus from a Palomino. Note the yellow
the most common color, and the oval disk in the nontapetum with
tapetum and the retinal blood vessels are more easily visualized
fine barely visible blood vessel5.
 because the fundus is not as dark. A narrow white rim is present 
 above the optic disk.
 Normal equine fundus
below the level of the retina. Fine focusing on the surface
The horse has a paurangiotic fundus, with retinal vessels 
will often demonstrate a grid-like pattern that is the 
limited to the peripapillary region. The horse has about
 exposed lamina cribrosa. All blood vessels originate from
50 vessels radiating in a kidney-shaped pattern 15 mm
the circumference of the disk. There are usually three
horizontally and 10 mm vertically {1-2 disk diameters).
pairs of primary arteries and veins, with one pair
The arteries cannot be distinguished from veins and the
dorsonasally
that
curves temporally, 
one
pair
vessels traverse only in the nerve fiber layer. The vessels
ventronasally, and one pair ventrotemporally. A
all originate from just within the optic disk border. The
relatively
avascular area is
.present3-4
mm
'uniadeuou aui u paieool Aleoidai si ysip odo
dorsotemporally from the optic disk, which represents 
ventrolateral to the posterior pole. The disk is
the area centralis or macula (14.20). Smaller vessels are
nonmyelinated, pinkish-white in color, oval with the long
 present between the major pairs of vessels that supply the 
axis horizontal, and cupped {14.23, 14.24). The disk
peripapillary region57, 58.
dimensions are 5-7 mm horizontally and 3.s-5 mm
The nontapetum is dark, except in blue-eyed cats
vertically. Foals have a more circular disk. Often a faint
where it lacks pigment, thus exposing the choroidal
grid can be seen in the center, which is the lamina
 vasculature (tigroid fundus). All Siamese cats, while
cribrosa. A narrow nonpigmented zone frequently partly
possessing a tapetum, have a tigroid nontapetum.
surrounds the optic disk (14.24).
412
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASe IN VeTeRINARY MeDICINE
14.25
14.26
14.25 Normal equine fundus of a Palomino that has a slash of
14.26 Normal equine fundus with a hypoplastic violet tapetum
hypoplastic pigmentation of the retinal pigmented epithelium 
allowing visualization of underlying choroidal vasculature. Retinal
and choroid that exposes the choroidal vasculature.
vessels are easily seen against this background.
14.27
Horses typically have a blue-green tapetum with
distinct fine dark spots (stars of Winslow) but the color
may be more yellow to red {14.23, 14.24). The most
common fundus variable is related to color dilute
 animals, that may lack part or all of a tapetum and have
varying degrees of choroidal vasculature exposed (14.25,
14.26)39, 60. While the optic disk is normally cupped and
nonmyelinated, myelination occurs occasionally as a
minor anomaly (14.27). A distinct ophthalmoscopically
visible macula is not present but a linear horizontal band
above the disk, that parallels the lower edge of the
tapetum, is said to represent the maculaso. A second
macula temporal to the first may also exist. The
nontapetum is typically homogeneous dark brown,
except in color dilute animals. The nontapetal
multifocal depigmented lesions.
14.27 Myelination of the optic nerve of a horse. The condition was
bilateral and it was found on a soundness examination where it may
Normal bovine and ovine fundus
have created a question for the examiner.
The bovine optic disk is oval with the long axis
horizontal, and it is located in the nontapetum, with the
azis aaeuaae aui wuniadei aui suuonol isnl yoadse lesio
is 4.2 mm x 3.5 mm; however, in bulls the disk may be
14.28
more circular. The optic disk is typically nonmyelinated,
resulting in a dark to pinkish-white color (14.2). The
disk is cupped and the veins originate from near the
center. Three to four primary veins are present that are
 accompanied by arterioles. The dorsal pair of arteries
and veins are usually intertwined. The arterioles
originate more peripherally on the disk. Fifteen to
 20 smaller vessels originate from the disk and disappear
1-2 disk diameters away from the disk. The larger vessels
 are epiretinal (on the surface) rather than running in the
nerve fiber layer. A gray spot in the center of the disk
   an no n an s
Bergmeister's papilla. In calves, the hyaloid vessel usually
has blood present. Partial myelination of the optic disk
may 0ccasionally be observed (14.28)61.
Tapetal colors vary but are usually dark green and
 stippled, with dark spots or stars of Winslow. Distinct
14.28 Mlyelination of the optic disk of a cow producing a dramatic
pigment islands are frequently present in the nasal ta petal
departure from the normal dark, cupped disk. Compare to 14.2.
region and are bilateral. Albino cattle, like other species
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
413
14.29
14.30
14.29 Normal ovine fundus with a kidney-shaped disk and
14.30 Typical coloboma found in a young calf. Note the white
Bergmeister's papilla.
hyaloid artery remnant. The coloboma is cupped, a5 evidenced 
by the deviation of the vessel passing over the center.
with albinoid eyes, variably have a tapetum and the
14.31
 nontapetum is tigroid with the choroidal vasculature
visible against the sclera62.
The ovine fundus is similar to the cow but the disk is
kidney-shaped (14.29) with a hilus or indention on the
ventral surface.
DISEASES OF THE RETINA AND CHOROID
CONGENITAL DISEASES
Coloboma
Introduction/etiology
Coloboma is a cup or pit-like lesion that is congenital
and nonprogressive. Unless extreme, colobomas are not
classified as typical if located ventronasal on or from the
 disk, since they arise from incomplete closure of the optic
14.31 Intercalary staphyloma and coloboma in the far periphery of the
fissure {cleft in the optic cup where the hyaloid
fundus in an Australian Shepherd Dog. This is not the optic disk but a
 vasculature gains entry into the fetal eye) (14.30), and
cupped lesion in the far periphery. Note the relative lack of choroidal 
are considered atypical if located elsewhere. Colobomas
vesculature and cilioretinal vessels emerging from the coloboma.
frequently involve the optic disk or the immediate region
 around the disk but may be located in the peripheral
fundus (14.31).
14.32
Coloboma manifests as a sharply circumscribed,
usually pale, (
depigmented area with reduced or
anomalous vasculature and is often cupped. Examples of
inherited colobomatous defects are found in albino
Herefords, Collie eye anomaly, Australian, Shepherd
Dogs (14.31), Basenjis, and Charolais cattle62-65
 In the cat, multiple ocular coloboma syndrome (MOC)
has been described in snow leopards and the domestic
choroidal colobomas, scleral ectasia, retinal dysplasia, and
tapetal hypoplasia (14.32). Entire litters will be affected,
with variable degrees of anomalies, but the cause is
unknown, although in utero viral infection is suspected.
In Charolais cattle, the colobomas are inherited as a
dominant trait, with complete penetrance in bulls and
 incomplete penetrance in cows (14.30)6s. Colobomas are 
also observed as a sporadic syndrome, without evidence
14.32 Posterior pole coloboma in a kitten with multiple ocular
 of genetic transmission68.
coloboma.
414
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Posterior colobomas involving the optic nerve and
Chorioretinal hypoplasia appears to be the basic lesion
peridisk region have been observed sporadically in the
 and, therefore, the most common lesion of CEA. The original
horse69. Colobomas have been observed in the foal
terminology for this lesion was chorioretinal dysplasia but
(14.33) with dermoids and malformed third eyelids. No
dhe to the lack of pathologic features common to retinal
therapy is availa ble except genetic counselling.
dysplasia and confusion of the term with retinal dysplasia,
this term was discontinued. Chorioretinal hypoplasia is a
Collie eye anomaly
variably-sized pale region located temporal to the disk. The
Introduction/etiology
pale area may be separated or confluent with the disk. It is a
Collie eye anomaly (CEA) is a congenital, nonprogressive,
region of attenuated pigment in the choroid and retina, with
 a thinned hypoplastic choroid and tapetum. The choroidal
common and widespread geographically in the Collie
vasculature in this white area is decreased in density (14.34).
breed, and it is also found less frequently in the Shetland
Chorioretinal hypoplasia is essentially a staticlesion, with the
Sheepdog, Australian Shepherd Dog, Border Collie, Nova
exception of the 45-week-old puppy. In the very young
Scotia Duck‘
Trolling Retriever, 
Boykin Spaniel,
puppy, very mild degrees of chorioretinal hypoplasia can be
Longhaired Whippet, and Lancashire Heeler71-73b. The
observed as small breaks in the pigmentation temporal to the
incidence in Collies has been reported to be 80% or higher
dsk. By 6-8 weeks these become pigmented and appear
in surveys in the US74, 75, 41% in Norway76, 13% in
 normal. These puppies are significant in that they later breed
Austria77, and 32% in Switzerland78. The incidence in the
as affected (homozygous) individuals. Breeders refer to this
Shetland Sheepdog is much less in the US but was 48% in
mndition as 'go normals'. In the Blue Merle Collie with a
one small series in the Netherlands72. The primary
bue iris, the fundus is albinotic and mild to moderate
phenotype of chorioretinal hypoplasia (CRH) is a simple
chorioretinal  hypoplasia  is difficult or impossible to
recessive gene with almost complete penetrance. The
recognize with confidence. One study found that when
responsible gene has been identified for CRH and a DNA
examining puppies, all puppies with colobomas had
test is available for the previously mentioned breeds73a, 73b.
chorioretinal hypoplasia but in older dogs 11 of 66 (17%)
Early studies found no relationship to sex or coat color.
had colobomas without chorioretinal hypoplasia. This was
Wallin-Hakanson et al.80, 81 disputed the recessive mode of
Jo ae ym uauid oum sn suasaau oi uno
inheritance and postulated a polygenetic trait. The authors
 the go normal population76.
additionally noted that mating of parents with colobomas
 Dogs that manifest with only chorioretinal hypoplasia
resulted in smaller litter size.
have no visual disturbance and will function well as a pet
but they should not be used for breeding. Affected dogs,
 Clinical signs
no matter how mild, are of course genetically undesirable
CEA lesions are often not symmetrical between eyes.
but most breeders use mildly affected dogs rather than
Tortuous retinal vasculature is considered the mildest
sign but, because of normal variation between individual
mildly affected offspring but others will produce litters
animals, the clinician is often reluctant to call these
with the entire range of lesions for CEA. Wallin-
animals affected. Breeding trials indicate that these
Hakanson et al.80, 81 found that breeding Collies with
animals are homozygously affected and thus should not
chorioretinal hypoplasia  increases the incidence of
be used for breeding7s.
chorioretinal hypoplasia from 54% to 68%. However,
14.33
14.34
14.33 A 3-month-old Quarter horse that has bilateral coloboma and
14.34 Collie eye anomaly in a 6-week-old puppy with moderate
optic nerve atrophy. The coloboma involves the disk and peridisk
chorioretinal hypoplasia temporal to the disk and a small typical
region and is cupped and avascular. The animal is blind.
coloboma under the disk. Note the lack of pigment, hypoplastic
choroidal vasculature, and tortuous retinal vessels.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
415
the prevalence of dogs with colobomas (8%) is not
located beside the disk, or involve the entire peripapillary
affected and thus is not compatible with a simple
region, resulting in the disk being positioned at the
recessive gene for the entire CEA. The author has noted
bottom of a large staphyloma {14.37, 14.38). Most
that certain matings breed true whereas others do not,
colobomas are very evident on examination but some are
with mildly affected animals begetting the gamut of
 masked by glial tissue. Despite the frequent dramatic
lesions from mild to severe.
 appearance, little or no visual deficits are noted. The disk
Pits, cups, or colobomas are all terms used to describe
is often misshaped and tilted. The vast majority of
the same phenomenon (14.35, 14.36). Other terms used
Collies with these colobomas also have chorioretinal
with severe manifestations of coloboma involvement are
hypoplasia but not the reverse. In breeds such as the
posterior scleral ectasia and posterior staphyloma. These
Shetland Sheepdog and German Shepherd Dog,
colobomas may be observed without chorioretinal
that they are not limited to the ventronasal region of the 
hypoplasia. About one-third of affected Collies in early
optic disk or peripapillary region82. The colobomas may
 surveys had colobomas but this has decreased due to
affect any portion of the disk or the entire disk, may be
 selective breeding74, 75, 83.
14.35
14.36
14.35 Collie eye anormaly with retinal vascular tortuosity.
14.36 Collie eye anomaly with vascular tortuosity, chorioretinal
chorioretinal hypoplasia adjacent to the disk, and an oval pit or
hypoplasia, and a coloboma that involves the entire nerve head.
 coloboma in the disk. The pit is a different color, has no vasculature,
Note the vessels originating from the edge of the anormalous disk.
 and has a vertical ridge.
14.37
14.38
14.37 Collie eye anomaly with a large posterior scleral ectasia
14.38 Histopathology of a Collie eye with a retinal detachment
involving not only the optic disk but the peridisk region as well.
 and a large optic nerve coloboma/posterior scleral ectasia such
a5 in 14.37.
416
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
 Retinal detachment occurs in 4-5% of affected eyes75, 83
Ancillary findings found in Collie puppies unrelated
It may start as focal bullous detachment adjacent to a
sul 1ouaisod aul 1o sd al ie saoedo raie vi 01
coloboma (14.39) but most are complete detachments, with
sutures, band opacities on the cornea, and vermiform
dalysis or large tears at the periphery (14.40). Detachment
folds in the retina, all of which disappear with age.
 is present in most cases in the 6-week-old puppy and may
Vermiform folds {14.41) are curvilinear lines in the
represent retinal nonattachment. Bullous detachment may
 puppy retina, which represent folds that subsequently
progress to complete detachment or actually regresses over
flatten out as the eye grows.
a matter of months. Bullous detachment is associated with
holes in the retina that allows fluid vitreous to gain access to
CEA is still very prevalent in the breed due to the
the subretinal space84. CEA is asymptomatic in most
continued breeding from dogs with chorioretinal
 instances, unless retinal detachments are present, and this is
hypoplasia. However, it is difficult to fault breeding
undoubtedly why the gene became so disseminated through
from mildly affected dogs when the vast majority of
the Collie population.
the gene pool for the breed would be culled for a
Vitreal or anterior chamber hemorrhage may occur
condition that only produces visual complaints or
when the retina detaches. Vascular anomalies may also
blindness in about 4-s% of affected animals.
contribute to intraocular hemorrhage in some families of
dogs. Ocular hemorrhage is not considered a basic part
Diagnosis
of the disease, rather a result of it.
The preferred age of examination for CEA is 6-8 weeks
of age, because of the eye size. Puppies may be examined
as early as 4-5 weeks of age to detect mild cases of
Aue si aaul f! inq fsjewou oa,) eiseldoday leuaoo
doubt they should be examined again later.
14.39
Therapy
Therapy is not usually necessary except to cull affected
 animals from breeding programs. Mildly affected dogs
Most dogs with mild to moderate colobomas will make
 acceptable pets with little risk of later vision problems.
 Focal posterior bullous detachments associated with
colobomas have been
  successfully
treated
by
photocoagulationss, Occasional attempts at retinal
performed routinely. Most cases presented in the
advanced stages of detachment are not good candidates 
for surgery.
14.39 Collie eye anomaly with a optic nerve coloboma and a bullous
detachment adjacent to the disk. The detachment is recognized by
the slightly blurred background from subretinal fluid.
14.40
14.41
14.40 Collie puppy with a complete retinal detachment recognized
14.41 Vermiform folds or retinal folds in a Collie puppy.
by the presence of retinal blood vessels in focus through the pupil.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
417
Peripheral albinotic spots
Defining a clinical syndrome with a pathologic term
 ae su au u sods anm peuo paud
that has such diverse connotations to the eye has
 observed in the Siberian Husky and in other individuals
created a great deal of confusion among veterinarians
with blue irides*9. Anomalous cilioretinal vessels may be
and breeders regarding the prognosis, significance,
 associated with the anomaly and, when present, help
cause, and amount of overlap between conditions.
differentiate the lesions from postinflammatory scars.
The white spots may be multiple and are usually not
Although retinal dysplasia is usually considered a
more than a disk diameter in size. The choroidal
 static disease, small focal folds of dysplastic retina may
vasculature is attenuated in the area. The spots have no
flatten out and become less evident with age or
known significance.
degeneration, and gliosis of the dysplastic areas may
occur with time?1, making them larger and more visible.
Retinal dysplasia
While considered congenital and thus visible in young
Introduction/etiology
puppies, some forms of presumed retinal dysplasia have
Retinal
dysplasia is a congenital or neonatal
not been observed until after 10 weeks of age92. The
malformation that is characterized on histopathologic
 nature of the lesions was not documented but they were
examination by rosettes, formed of tubules of primitive
characteristic of what most examiners have assumed to
photoreceptors cut on cross-section (14.42)90.
The
be retinal dysplasia.
rosettes may be classified according to the number of cell 
 Retinal dysplasia has been described in the Rocky
layers from one to three. Three-layered rosettes are
Mountain horse with anterior segment dysgenesis
basically the normal retina which is thrown into a fold.
(ASD)93 (see Chapter 6, p.113) and in kittens with
The two- and single-layered
 rosettes represent
MOC67. ASD in horses is genetic but the cause of MOC
maldevelopment of a more
 primitive retina. Retinal
in cats is unknown.
dysplasia  is  a pathologic 
diagnosis but, through
 Retinal dysplasia may be due to a variety of in utero
correlation with the clinical appearance and known
insults that result in hyperplastic extension of the
syndromes in certain breeds, it is often used as a clinical
retina away from the retinal pigmented epithelium
diagnosis. Retinal dysplasia is a manifestation of the
(RPE), retinal nonattachment, defective RPE, 
or
[uo e ie Auniu oi puodsau o Ale paiul seuan
necrosis of developing retina94. The RPE is thought to
stage of development and may result from a variety of
play a critical role in retinal development and loss of
 injuries (see Table 14.1). Retinal dysplasia may range in
contact or damage to the RPE results in retinal
 severity from mild, with focal maldevelopments,
dysplasia. In utero insults that have resulted in retinal
severe associated with multiple ocular anomalies and
 dysplasia are listed in Table 14.1.
retinal detachment. Retinal dysplasia is likely to be found
with any severe ocular anomaly and is often the least
significant lesion.
14.42
Table 14.1 in utero insults known to cause retinal
dysplasia
Trauma
Viral infection: panleukopenia in the cat, BvD in cattle,
blue tongue virus in sheep, parvovirus and herpesvirus
infection in the dog
Radiation
Nutrition: vitamin A deficiency
Drug toxicity: antimitotic drugs
Inherited syndromes
14.42 Retinal rosettes on histopathologic examination of a retinal
deta chment (H&tE].
418
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASe IN VeTeRINARY MeDICINE
Table 14.2 Inherited retinal dysplasia
14.43
Breed
Type of 
Mode of
dysplasia
inheritance
Australian
Generalized 
Recessive
 Shepherd Dog
Akita
Multifocalf
Recessive
 microphthalmo5
American
Multifocal
Recessive
 Cocker Spaniel
Beagle
Multifocal
？
Bedlington
Genera lized
Recessive
Terrier
Cavalier King.
Circinate and
？
 Charles Spaniel
multifocal
14.43 Geographic retinal dysplasia in a young Labrador Retriever.
 The lesion is focal and located at 12 o'clock above the disk. A gray
Doberman
Genera lized
Recessive
lesion with a small orange and pigment spot represents the lesion.
 Pinscher
Labrador
Focal
Incomplete
Retriever
dominant
14.44
 Old English
Multifocalf
?Recessive
Sheepdog
microphthalmos
Rottweiler
Multifocal
？
Saint Bernard
Generalized
？
 Sealyham
Genera lized
Recessive
Terrier
 Springer Spaniel
Focal
Recessive
Yorkshire Terrier
Generalized 
Recessive
14.44 Geographic retinal dysplasia in an adult Labrador Retriever.
The location of the lesion is similar to 14.43, but the lesion is more
 sharply demarcated and mimics a postinflammatory scar.
Inheritedretinal dysplasia
+ Focal or geographic retinal dysplasia: overlaps with
The terminology used in retinal dysplasia is confusing when
 generalized retinal dysplasia, in that some
attempts are made to correlate findings with the prognosis
individuals develop retinal detachment and have
for sight. For purposes of prognosis, retinal dysplasia will 
multiple ocular anomalies. Because of the
be discussed in three categories of severity. However,
possibility of detachments, the author does not feel
 Overlaps occur between categories in the eyes of individuals
it should be grouped with the milder condition of
 and between individuals of the same breed (Table 14.2).
multifocal retinal dysplasia. Geographic retinal
Further evidence that inherited retinal dysplasias have
dysplasia is most common in field trial strains of
fundamental differences in embryonic origin is illustrated in
the Labrador Retriever and the English Springer
differences in RPE between diseases. Detailed examination
Spaniel.
of English Springer Spaniels has found no morphologic
changes in the RPE, whereas RPE morphologic changes are
The condition in the Labrador Retriever is quite complex
evident in the Australian Shepherd Dog91, 9
 genetically and in its manifestations. Mild cases of
· Generalized retinal dysplasia: is associated with
geographic retina dysplasia in the Labrador Retriever
retinal nonattachment or detachment, vitreal
have focal hyperreflective perivascular lesions or focal
liquefaction and, usually, multiple ocular anomalies
lesions of irregular size, often with pigment clumping
including microphthalmos. It is inherited in many
(14.43, 14.44). The lesions are typically above and
breeds and species64,96-106 Animals with this
adjacent to the disk. Dogs with focal lesions may have a
condition are usually unilaterally or bilaterally blind.
loss of central vision that manifests as an inability to see
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
419
14.45
14.46
14.45 Complete retinal detachment in a Labrador Retriever with
14.46 Labrador Retriever littermates with skeletal dysplasia.
retinal dysplasia. Note the retinal vessels are in focus, indicating
 Note the bowed forelimb5.
forward placem ent.
14.47
14.47 Fundus of an English Springer Spaniel puppy with geographic
retinal dysplasia evidenced by aberrent coloration above the disk.
Retinal dysplasia is difficult to diagnose at this age, but possible.
nonmoving objects. Some dogs may develop a retinal
 skeletons have mild ocular lesions and homozygotes with
detachment up to 1-2 years of age (14.45). Skeletal
skeletal lesions have severe ocular lesions.
 dysplasia and severe ocular lesions may occur. Skeletal
 The use of the term retinal dysplasia has perhaps given
dysplasia manifests with bowed short forelimbs with less
too much emphasis to the relationship with retinal
involvement of the hindlimbs, hip dysplasia, ununited
 detachment. Blair et al.24, 25 found that the detachments are
anconeal 
 coronoid  processes, and  delayed
 due to giant peripheral circumferential tears or dialysis and
 development of epiphysis (14.46). Animals with skeletal
 are associated with vitreous syneresis and peripheral
dysplasia are more likely to have retinal detachments,
proliferative vitreous changes that tear the retina. In the
corneal opacities, cataracts, and optic nerve atrophy. A
author's experience the retinal dysplasia may not be the basic
litter may have both mild focal dysplasia and severe
lesion, as puppies with skeletal dysplasia and detachments
ocular anomalies with skeletal dysplasia.
often have little or no clinical or histopathologic evidence of
The problem of retinal dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers
 retinal dysplasia, i.e. rosette formation.
 in the US is unique to the field trial strains. The genetics
 Retinal dysplasia in the English Springer Spaniel usually
are more controversial, and have been variably reported to
manifests similarly to the moderately affected Labrador
be a recessive or dominant, gene with incomplete
Retriever, i.e. focal
perivascular or irregularly shaped
hyperreflective areas, dorsal and adjacent to the optic disk.
that the condition is caused by a single gene that is
 The lesions are often asymmetrical in degree of involvement.
recessive for skeletal dysplasia and incompletely dominant
The 6-week-old puppy has very subtle but observable
for ocular lesions. In general, heterozygotes with normal
lesions {14.47). Pigmentary clumping may 0occur and retinal
420
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
detachments may develop. Hyperreflectivity and pigment
Aguirrel13 bred from two Samoyeds with multifocal
dumping occur with maturity as secondary atrophy occurs
dysplasia and produced a litter with skeletal dysplasia,
(14.48). Retinal detachments are reported to occur in the
normal skeletons, and multifocal dysplasia, and a puppy
frst 6 months of life91. Congenital cataracts and superficial
with multifocal cataracts and persistent hyaloid artery.
band keratopathies may be present, the latter resolving with
The conclusion was that dogs with multifocal dysplasia
agel10 The condition is inherited as an autosomal recessive
should be considered heterozygous carriers of the more
traitlli.
serious skeletal dysplasia and retinal detachment
A condition in the Samoyed dog has been described,
condition. The condition is probably a simple recessive
with unilateral or bilateral complete retinal detachment,
trait. This is an example where multifocal retinal
modest multifocal cortical cataracts, and skeletal
dysplasia may not be an innocuous condition.
 dysplasiali2. The cataracts are congenital, but the retinal
 Circinate retinal dysplasia: is uniquely shaped and is a
detachments occur from 4-6 months of age due to
 supposed form of focal retinal dysplasia found in a
peripheral dialysis or tears. The fundus before detachment
variety of breeds including the Labrador and Golden
has red-brown streaks in the tapetal region, converging to
Retriever, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, and Siberian
the optic disk {14.49). Some authors have categorized this
Husky. The shape is circular or U-shaped, with a
condition as similar to that in Labrador Retrievers with
depressed center and raised periphery (14.50), and may
skeletal dysplasia and retinal dysplasia. In a breeding
have retinal folds adjacent to it. The condition is usually
experiment, two littermates with unilateral detachment
unilateral and, in Retrievers, may not necessarily be
and skeletal dysplasia produced offspring with unilateral
congenital, thus raising the question whether it is
detachment {at 4 months), focal cataracts, and prominent
actually dysplasia92. The author has observed circinate
hyaloid arteries but no clinical or histopathologic
lesions of the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel in 5-6-
evidence of retinal dysplasia. Conversely, Acland and
week-old puppies and it has also been diagnosed in 4-5-
year-old adults that have had up to three normal annual
examinations by other ophthalmologists. The location
14.48
may be in either the tapetum or nontapetum and is often
in the midperiphery. To date, retinal detachments have
not been associated with the condition and the
histopathology has not been reported. How it is related
to geographic retina dysplasia in the Labrador Retriever
is unknown.
 Multifocal retinal dysplasia: deserves a separate clinical
 category from focal dysplasia, at least in some breeds, in
that it has not been documented to result in retinal
 detachment or visual impairment. Perhaps a better term
would be retinal folds rather than retinal dysplasia. It
has been described as an isolated syndrome in the
Beagle, American Cocker Spaniel (14.51), and
Rottweilerl14-116. The condition may be bilateral or, in
milder cases, unilateral. In the Cocker Spaniel, it is
 common with a 12-20% prevalence reported, and it is
14.48 Adult English Springer Spaniel with hyperreflective lesions and
thought to be inherited as a recessive traitl1s, i17 In the
pigment dumping in the typical position for retinal dysplasia in this breed.
Beagle, 3% of a colony had dysplastic lesions, and while
14.49
14.50
14.49 Ocular fundus of a young Samoyed with skeletal cysplasia and
14.50 Circinate or geographic retinal dysplasia in a Cavalier King
retinal detachment syndrome. The histopathologic correla tion of these
Charles Spaniel (arrows]. The periphery of the lesion is elevated and
breaks in the tapetum are not known, but they were the only lesions 
displaces the retinal blood vessels, while the center is depressed.
before retinal detachment occurred at 4 months of age. No evicdence
of retinal dysplasia was found on histopa thologic examination.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
421
thought to be inherited, the mode is unknown114, 118, 119.
the nerves and a corresponding decrease in retinal ganglion
Long and Crispin120 postulated a simple recessve trat
for multifocal retinal dysplasia for the Golden Retriever
development of the ganglion cells but it may actually be
in the UK. Crispin et al.21 found a prevalence of 3%.
 Ongenital atrophy. Normally, many more axons are found
Multifocal retinal dysplasia manifests with one or many
in the embryonic optic nerve than in the adult. In the
 dot, linear, or linear branching streaks, anywhere in the
maturation of the optic nerve, there is a normal loss or
fundus. Tapetal lesions are darker than the tapetum and
atrophy of these supernumerary axons to the level of the
may have a surrounding hyperreflective border. In the
adultstatel24 Inhypoplasia of theopic nerve, tis theorized
nontapetum, lesions are white {14.51, 14.52). The
that this atrophy does not stop but is carried to an
lesions usually become fainter and disappear with time.
extremel2s. The histopathologic finding in dogs of excess
 gliosis of the nerve suggests that atrophy may play more of a
 Retinal dysplasia semantics and the genetic and
role than hypoplasia126. Garcia da Silav et al.126a reported on
clinical interplay of the various forms is confusing
these syndromes from a large histopathology collection that
to the lay person as well as the professional.
served mainly to demonstrate the bias of this form of study
when extrapolating the epidemiologic information from the
Diagnosis
dinical syndrome. Unless the condition is bilateral and
Diagnosis is made on the clinical signs in a known
profound it rarely results in enucleation or euthanasia;
affected breed. Some lesions of focal retinal dysplasia
therefore, investigators could report on only 13 cases in a
mimic a postinflammatory chorioretinal scar.
large collection. Most case were r
reported as bilateral
(unilateral neither enucleated or euthanized), the peripheral
Therapy
retina was avascular, and two cases of hypoplasia were visual
 Genetic counseling is indicated in diffuse and focal forms
(clinically micropapilla??).
of retinal dysplasia. It is prudent to advise dog breeders
 The condition is observed sporadically in a variety of
to avoid inbreeding dogs with multifocal dysplasia.
SI 11 inq Aleuoue 1ejnoo paielost ue se zzispaaiq sop
thought to be inherited in the Miniature Poodl128.
Micropapilla, hypoplasia, and aplasia of optic nerves
Breeding of affected animals may be difficult. In the
Introd uction/etiology
author's experience, repeat breedings of parents with
Micropapilla is a clinical syndrome that is observed
affected pups has given variable results and, when
complicated by small litter size, interpretation is difficult.
by a unilateral or bilateral, small, nonmyelinated optic disk 
Hypoplasia of the optic nerve may also occur with more
without visual complaints. In the author's experience it is
 generalized ocular anomalies, such as microphthalmos.
usually found in large breeds of dogs such as the Irish Setter,
In the cat, hypoplasia of the optic nerve may result
Flatcoat Retriever, and Belgian Tervuren. Optic nerve
from in ttero or neonatal panleukopenia infection and
hypoplasia is a nonprogressive unilateral or bilateral
may be associated with generalized CNS anomalies129.
mndition characterized clinically by a small optic disk(s),
Complete aplasia of the optic nerve has been described in
 dlated pupils, and blindness. Optic nerve aplasia is a very
rare, unilateral condition characterized by blindness and no
vertebrae may occur as part of this condition.
visible optic disk, although in the author's experience retinal
 blood vessels may still be present. Optic nerve hypoplasia is
the most significant of these syndromes because of the
14.52
frequency and clinical manifestations.  Optic nerve
hypoplasia is characterized by a reduced number of axons in
14.51
14.51 Multifocal retina dysplasia or folds in the nontapetum and
14.52 Multifocal retinal dysplasia in a dog in which the lesions are
tapetum of a young adult American Cocker Spaniel. The lesions in
mainly dots with a few curvilinear streaks.
this dog are mainly curvilinear.
422
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
 A condition termed optic nerve hypoplasia has been
Tapetal dysplasia
reported in the horse. However, the condition may
Introduction/etiology
represent a neonatal or congenital optic nerve atrophy,
An inherited trait has been observed in the Beagle and
 since the disk is relatively normal in size and the retinal
other breeds, where the tapetum appears to be absent in
vasculature is lost131 Optic nerve hypoplasia has been
a pigmented fundus (14.54). This is often considered a
described in Shorthorn cattle with multiple ocular
normal variation but is more likely a pathologic trait.
anomalies of retinal dysplasia, (
cataract,
retinal
Histologically, the tapetum is present and the overlying
detachment, microphthalmos, and hydrocephalus. The
RPE is nonpigmented. The tapetum has irregularly
 condition is thought to be genetic98.
shaped cells and, ultrastructurally, the tapetal rodlets are
In women, the use of anticonvulsants such as
absent. Abnormally spaced inclusions are present in
phenytoin has been implicated as causing optic nerve
place of the tapetal rodlets§4. On chemical analysis the
hypoplasia. Veterinarians should therefore be on the alert
tapetum is lacking in both zinc and cysteine133. Not only
for drug-induced optic nerve hypoplasia in veterinary
are the tapetal rodlets abnormal but the cells of the PE of
medicine1 32.
the iris, ciliary body, and retina lack pigment granules. In
 addition, pigment granules are reduced in the stroma of
 Clinical signs
the uvea134. The condition is thought to be due to a
Optic nerve hypoplasia may be unilateral or bilateral.
simple recessive gene.
Blindness with dilated pupils is the presenting sign at 5-8
weeks of age if the condition is bilateral and severe. On
 Clinical signs
ophthalmoscopy the optic disk(s) is very small and
 Dogs with tapetal dysplasia have an absence of tapetum
appears '
'cat
like", i.e. small, round, cupped,
with a pigmented fundus but have no visual complaints.
nonmyelinated disk with the vessels at the periphery
(14.53). The retinal vasculature may be either normal or
ACQUIRED DISEASES
tortuous and either a hyperreflective or dark ring may
This group of retinal diseases may not always belong in
surround the disk. Unilaterally affected patients are often
the category of “acquired', since detailed studies have
 detected later in life while incidentally looking at the
shown that while a disease may manifest later in life it
fundus, or if the good eye has suffered a blinding disease
starts as dysplasia or maldevelopment.
or injury. When the condition is unilateral, the unaffected
(or less affected) eye can be observed for comparison.
Progressive retinal atrophy
Mild to moderate degrees of hypoplasia are difficult
Introduction/etiology
to diagnose because of the subjectivity and range of
 Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) is an umbrella name
normals. If the diameter of the disk is half of normal, the
for
avariety of familial or hereditary retinal
area or volume to hold fibers is a quarter of normal. The
degenerations that have a similar clinical manifestation
term micropapilla is used for animals with small disks
but a diversity of origins. By definition, PRA is an
but normal vision. This is inherited in several breeds,
inherited, bilateral, progressive degeneration of the retina
 most commonly in Belgium Terruvians and Irish Setters.
that eventually results in blindness. Generally, PRA is
initially a disease of the photoreceptors that eventually
Therapy
involves all of the retinal layers.
 There is obviously no therapy but owners should be
advised to be cautious about breeding, because of the
potential genetic implications.
14.53
14.54
14.53 Optic nerve hypoplasia in a 3-month-old Miniature Poodle
14.54 Beagle with tapetal dysplasia. The lack of a visible tapetum
presented for blindness. The optic nerve is small and 'cat like'
results in an overall pigmentation to the fundus from choroidal
pigment.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
423
If the photoreceptors do not reach their adult
14.55
maturation before degenerating, the process is termed a
photoreceptor dysplasia (not to be confused with retinal
dysplasia). If the photoreceptors reach their adult
maturation and then begin to degenerate, even at a young
age, it is termed an abiotrophy or degeneration. Some
conditions initially involve either the rods, the cones, or
both the rods and cones. Therefore, the possibilities exist
for a rod dysplasia, cone dysplasia, rod-cone dysplasia,
rod degeneration, cone degeneration, or rod-cone
 degeneration. Additionally, initial dysplasia of one type
of photoreceptor may be paired “with or initiate
subsequent degeneration of the opposite photoreceptor.
Without detailed studies, it cannot be anticipated which
form of degeneration/dysplasia is occurring in each breed
with PRA.
Clinical signs
14.55 Progressive retinal atrophy in an American Cocker Spaniel.
Despite the dissimilarities in the origin of the PRA, the
 The condition is moderately advanced with diffuse tapetal
 clinical signs are usually quite similar.
hyperreflectivity and moderate retinal vascular attenuation.
Externai signs or those noted by the owner
● Night blindness is often the first sign but may not be
14.56
appreciated or given as the presenting complaint.
Night blindness progresses to day blindness over 
months to years.
 Dilated pupils with increased eyeshine or tapetal
reflection.
 Cortical cataracts (appear late in the course). Most
dogs in the late stages of PRA develop cortical
cataracts and it is not known whether this is
associated with a separate gene or due to the
liberation of a substance from the degenerating
retina that is toxic to the lens. One such potential
substance is docosahexenoic acid liberated from the
 photoreceptor outer segments. Docosahexenoic acid
pue apryapieipuoieu oi uouepixo-oine oauapun ueo
lipid radicals and has been demonstrated to produce 
 cataracts in rabbits13s. The PRA literature generally
avoids discussion of the cause of the associated
14.56 Advanced progressive retinal atrophy in a 7-year-old 
cataracts.
Miniature Poodle. Note the gray disk, bright tapetum with striations.
+ Usually a purebred dog.
 and loss of almost all retinal vasculature.
Ophthaimoscopic signs
The lesions of PRA are bilateral and symmetrical.
Lesions consist of increased reflectivity to the tapetum,
14.57
and many breeds may develop fan-shaped striations of
altered tapetal reflectivity that converge at the disk. The
hyperreflectivity is generally diffuse and is thought to be
due to retinal thinning. Concurrently, retinal blood
vessels decrease in number and size. PRA is not, however,
a vascular disease since the photoreceptor degeneration
occurs long before the vascular changes are evident
(14.5s-14.57). The retinal vascular attenuation is
thought to be associated with thinning of the retina that
brings the retinal vasculature in closer apposition to the
choroidal vasculature. This increases the oxygen tension
 in the retina, which is a stimulant to vasoconstriction136.
14.57 Peripheral tapetum of the case in 14.56 with a low strobe
light to illustrate the fan-like striations toward the optic nerve.
424
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Late in the course of PRA the nontapetum may develop
This seems to occur with photoreceptor dysplasia (rod-cone
 clumping of pigment or depigmentation (14.58, 14.59).
dysplasia, rcd)141 or early-onset PRA. Photoreceptor
Generalized depigmentation is more common. Optic
degeneration (rod-cone degeneration, prcd) is a mid- to late-
 atrophy is also a late sign, manifested by a whitish-gray
onset disease and may occur on allelic genes since Miniature
disk, scalloped borders, and disk cupping (14.59).
Poodle-American
Cocker
Spaniel,
Miniature
Poodle-English
 Cocker
 Spaniel,
pUB
American
Inheritance
Cocker-English Cocker Spaniel crosses will manifest
In all breeds studied in detail, PRA has been an
 PRA142, In a breeding colony of Miniature Poodles, when
autosomal recessive trait except for a form in the
affected females are bred with heterozygous males, the
Siberian Husky and Samoyed, where it is sex-linked137
number of affected offspring is 50%. When affected males
and in the Mastiff and ‘Bull Mastiff where it is a
 are bred with heterozygous females, the number of affected
dominant traiti38. Recessive traits pose a dilemma; if
pups is fewer than expected (19%), possibly due to gamete
 only one dog in 1,000 is affected, then one dog in ten
selection. The implication of this data is that when test
breeding, the results from one liter of seven pups (99%
Miniature/Toy Poodle, Irish Setter, and Labrador
probability of normal subject if all pups are normal) are
Retriever have an increased risk, while the Dachsund,
reliable when testing a male but not when testing a
Boxer, Beagle, German Shepherd Dog, and mixed breeds
female143. The Canine Eye Registration Foundation (1985)
have a low risk. The male Irish Setter has 4.5 times the
reported 79 breeds affected by PRA (as diagnosed by
risk as the femalel40. Because PRA is recessive in the vast
veterinary ophthalmologists) but the vast majority of these
majority of breeds studied, it can be expected to be found
 cases have not been confirmed or studied in detailed.
predominantly in purebreds.
When affected (homozygous) dogs of different breeds are
Age of onset
bred, the offspring may be normal due to nonallelic genes.
The age of onset of clinical signs varies both with the breed
and within the breed. External influences may hasten the
 course of PRA in individuals. The onset of clinical signs 
14.58
varies from 6 months to 10+ years (Table 14.3).
Rod-cone dysplasia (rcd, early-onset PRA)
The Irish Setter, Sloughi, Collie, Welsh Corgi, Miniature
Schnauzer and, perhaps, the Tibetan Terrier have rcd
mnditions that have been studied in detail. The outer
segments of the rods and cones fail to develop normally and
subsequent progressive degeneration of the photoreceptors
and the inner retina occurs. Degeneration of the cones is
slower than that of the rods. Despite these similarities, the
 diseases are different biochemically and genetically in being
nonallelic genes between breed144The disease in the Collie,
Welsh Corgi, Sloughi, and Irish Setter, but not in the
Miniature Schnauzer, is characterized by defects in retinal
 cyclic nucleotide metabolism that leads to elevations of cyclic
 guanosine monophosphate (GMP) in the retina. This is the
14.58 Pigment clumping in a bone corpuscular pattern in a
result of a deficiency in the beta subunit of cyclic GMP
Miniature Poodle with progressive retinal atrophy.
phosphodiesterase (PDE) in Irish Setters and Sloughis
14.59
Table 14.3 Age of onset of ophthalmic signs of
progressive retinal atrophy
Early onset,
Late onset of
rapid progression
clinical signs
Akita
 5-18 months
Golden
Retriever
American
1-3 years
Cocker Spaniel
2-3 years
Minia ture
Collie
3-6 months
Poodlle 
3-5 years
<1 year
Miniature
Da chshu nd
Schnauzer
English
2-3 years
Cocker Spaniel
2-4 years
Norwegian
 Elkhound 
1-2 years
Gordon Setter 
3-6 months
Samoyed
3-5 years
Irish Setter
3-6 months
Tibetan Terrier
1.5-2.5 years
14.59 Advanced progressive retinal atrophy in an English Springer
Longhaired
Dachsund 
<1 year
Toy Poodle
Spaniel. The tapetum is hyperreflective, almost all the retinal vessels
3-5 year5
have disappeared, the nontapetum has lost pigment, and the optic
Welsh Corgi
3-6 months
disk is atrophied.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
425
(rcd1j14s-146a and the alpha subunit in the Welsh Corgi
Progressive rod-cone degeneration (prcd)
(rcd3)147. The defect in PDE in not known in the Collie
Rod-cone degeneration is the most common form of
(rcd2). These biochemical changes can be demonstrated
 PRA and is typically later in onset. It has been extensively
before the subsequent photoreceptor degeneration. In the
studied in the Miniature Poodle, Tibetan Terrier, and
Irish Setter, Welsh Corgi, and Collie the photoreceptor and
American and   English
Cocker Spaniel. While
 subsequent retinal degeneration progresses rapidly over a few
degeneration can be demonstrated in the Poodle
months, while in the Miniature Schnauzer it progresses
electrophysiologically and ultrastructurally as early as 9
weeks of age, the progression is slow and clinical signs
not develop blindness until mid-life140, it usually is the same
often do not manifest until >3 years of age. The Poodle
dsease as rcd1 as shown by breeding1$2 and DNA studies146.
with prcd was initially reported to have an altered ERG
The late-onset PRA in Irish Seters may also have other
at 9 weeks of age but this is unusual and 8-12 months is
mutations than the rcd1 mutation, as one affected dog tested
more commonly the age of earliest ERG changes. In the
did not have the rcd1 mutation.
Miniature Poodle, the rod amplitudes are initially
PRA in the Miniature Schnauzer has been designated
reduced at a rate of about 7% per month, followed by
a rod-cone dysplasia but a PDE deficiency is not present.
reduced cone amplitudes. Implicit times may be
While abnormal photoreceptor morphology can
be
prolonged if a focal light is applied but they are not
observed at 4 weeks of age and the rod density decreased
increased with a Ganzfeld (diffuse) illumination160 161.
by 50% by 19 weeks, the process slows down and
 In the Poodle, the earliest recognized abnommality is a
clinical signs are not evident until 1-2 years of age and
defect in renewal of photoreceptor outer segment mem-
blindness is not evident until 4-6 years133
branes but the visual pigment in the photoreceptors is
normall62. The cones degenerate more slowly than the rods
Cone-rod dystrophy
and, consequently, night blindness is an early sign. Most of
 A progressive retinal degeneration characterized by early
the prcd conditions investigated to date have an autosomal
degeneration of the rods and cones, but with the cones being
recessive trait and many involve allelic genes, as indicated by
more severly affected, has been described in the Standard
affected offspring from affected parents of different breeds.
Wire-haired Dachshund (SWHD) and Pit Bull Terrier1S3a. In
No other systemic or local abnormalities (such as deafness)
the SWHD, affected animals have abnommal cone ERG
have been associated with prcd150, 152, 163-166. In the Poodle
responses and may have difficulty navigating in very bright
with progressive rod-cone degeneration, plasma levels of
light, but they usually navigate well in ambient light and have
docosahexenoic acid, which is an important constituent of
very small pupils at 8 weeks of age. The condition slowly
 the phospholipids of the outer segments of the photorecep-
progresses and the fundus is normal until 10 months to 3
 tors, are reducedl67. To date, this has not been utilied or
years of age, when the typical ophthalmoscopic changes of
advocated as a screening test for affected or carrier animals.
PRA develop and the pupils dilate. At this stage there is
 In the Tibetan Terrier, congenital stationary night
advance cone and rod dysfunction.
blindness was subsequently shown to progress slowly to
retinal degeneration. Most recently, it was demonstrated
Rod dysplasia (rd] in the Norwegian Elkhound
to be a metabolic storage disease, with accumulation of
 Rod dysplasia with subsequent cone degeneration has
ceroid lipofuscin systemically and in various layers of the
been described in the Norwegian Elkhound. This is not a
disease of cyclic GMP, as observed in rod-cone dysplasia
Tibetan Terriers which is widespread in Europe and is
in the Collie and Irish Setter. Despite being dysplasia, the
characterized by a reduction of the B-wa ve by 10 months
progression of degeneration is, relatively  slow,
of age, although patchy disorganization of the outer
 segments of the rods and cones has been observed as
be made as early as 6 weeks with meticulous ERG
early as 9 weeks of age. It is thought to be degeneration
techniques utilizing controls. The ERG utilizing a white
rather than dysplasia and the cyclic GMP levels are
light is diminished in rod dysplasia but is nonspecific,
normal. Night blindness is usually present at 1 year and
while the diminished amplitude with red light and dark
 adaptation is specifici ss, f56.
 In the Akita, two ophthalmoscopic patterns of PRA are
observed. Night blindness occurs from 1-3 years of age and
Early retinal degeneration in the Norwegian Elkhound
at this time a hyperreflective horizontal band, that originates
 A separate disease, early retinal degeneration (ERD), has
from the area centralis and extends outward, is observed in
been characterized in the Norwegian Elkhound This disease
most dogs. This eventually involves the entire tapetum. A
manifests clinically with night blindness at 6 weeks of age
second pattern begins as peripheral tapetal reflectivity that
and progresses to blindness at 6-12 months of age. The rod
progresses   to
 generalized
hyperreflectivity171, 172.
and cone outer segments develop abnormally, fail to develop
Morphologic changes are present in the retina at 11 weeks of
mature synaptic terminals, and subsequently degenerate. The
age but ERG changes may not be noted until 15 months of
renewal process of the rods is abnormal, appearing cone-like,
age. The condition is a rod-oone degeneration.
and may suggest that the disk membranes are contiguous.
The condition differs from rod dysplasia in this breed
Cone degeneration
morphologically, electrophysiologically, and in the rate of
Hemeralopia or day blindness has been described in
degeneration. The ERG is characterized by failure
of
detail in the Alaskan Malamute. In its classical form,
development of the B-wave. In the young dog, the A-wave is
the condition is characterized by a profound blindness
normal but this slowly deteriorates with age. The lack of a B-
in daylight conditions but not in dim light. The PLRs
wave corresponds to the lack of development of the synaptic
 and the ocular fundus are normal173, 174. The condition
photoreceptor terminals. This produces a predominantly
develops in the young puppy and does not progress to
the rodsi73, 174. The cones develop normally but the
426
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
cone outer segments degenerate, leaving a pure rod
Therapy
No currently practical or proven therapy is available to
recessive trait177.
mrrect or arrest the progression of the inherited retinal
 More recent reports of hemeralopia in Alaskan
degenerations. Experimentally, gene therapy utilizing
Malamutes in Australia describe a more complex
subretinal injection of a recombinant adenovirus carrying the
condition that varies from mild to severe day
RPE65 gene for RPE65 deficient Briard dogs was successful
blindness178. The fundus in the Australian dogs is
in improving ERG and function177a, 177b. Neonatal
normal, similar to other Malamutes, and the ERG
neuroretina has also been transplanted subretinally in
flicker is fused above 30 Hz. A condition similar to that
Abysinnian cats with inherited rod-cone degeneration, but
 a   a  i 
the functional success was not evaluated177c, Various vitamin
Shorthaired Pointer1 79.
 supplements with antioxidants are frequently prescribed and
Electroretinography confirms the cone defect by
are usually considered placeboes for the owner as well as the
demonstrating a flicker fusion with low intensity white
dispensing veterinarian.
light at frequencies >25/second (normal is 45-80) and a
reduced response to red light in early dark adaptation.
Atypical PRA in the dog
White light single flash and blue light ERGs are
Because of the diversity of breeds and diseases included
normal148
under PRA, it is not surprising to find conditions that do
not fit the usual description of PRA.
Diagnosis of PRA
The Greyhound has retinal atrophy of unknown
 Ophthalmoscopic appearance: PRA is characterized
genetics. It manifests in dogs as early as 12 months of
by bilateral, symmetrical, altered tapetal reflectivity
age, with decreased vision but no evidence of night
and vascular attenuation. Nongenetic forms of
blindness. It is atypical in the earlier stages because
diffuse retinal atrophy will usually be asymmetrical
Greyhound retinal atrophy is focal and is usually close
in their presentation and may have focal or
to the optic disk. Vascular attenuation is not a
multifocal scars with pigment clumping.
 prominent feature. With advanced disease, the fundus
 History: night blindness progressing to day blindness
is similar to classical PRA fundus descriptions.
is typical of PRA but owners seldom volunteer the
Affected dogs may have equatorial cataracts and
information unless specifically asked. If the dog is of
 corneal stromal opacities180.
 a breed known to be affected and there is a history
 Progressive retinal degeneration has been described in the
 of affected relatives, genetic retinal degeneration may
Borzoi that begins as a multifocal degeneration and
 be sus pected.
progresses to a diffuse degeneration. It may be detected as
● Electroretinography: abnormalities in ERG
young as 6 months of age and blindness occurs from 3 years
 amplitude and latency will occur much earlier than
onward. On initial examination the lesions may be confined
ophthalmoscopic changes but the ERG is not a
to one eye but progress to bilateral involvement. The earliest
viable screening technique for large numbers of dogs.
lesions are multifocal alterations of tapetal coloration,
Early detection requires general anesthesia and
usually at the peripheral temporal tapetal-nontapetal
 exacting techniques. Late in the course the ERG is
junction. Pigment disruption is present in the nontapetal
extinguished or very flat and can be readily detected
 region and the retinal blood vessels are normal until late in
without anesthesia, utilizing computer averaging
the course. A recessive mode of inheritance is suggested181.
techniques. An extinguished ERG is not specific for
Storey and Grahn182
were unable to demonstrate any
PRA since a variety of other severe retinal diseases
 progression of the peripheral pigmented lesions to a general
will extinguish the ERG. Due to the common
retinal degeneration in S5 Borzois over S years. The lesions
occurrence of cataracts late in the course, it is
 developed between 6-18 months of age and were not noted
important to perform ERGs before undertaking
 to progress. Dominant and sex-linked modes of inheritance 
cataract surgery in purebred dogs.
were ruled out.
 Genetic testing: Genetic testing is now available to
detect a variety of forms of photoreceptor
 Stationary night blindness
degenerations and dysplasias, with over 35 breeds
Introduction/etiology
having DNA tests available. Initially, many of the
Night blindness that does not progress to day blindness with
tests were linkage or marker gene tests and these
a normal fundus on ophthalmoscopy is an inherited
created some confusion, with loss of confidence in
mndition in the Appalo0sa horse183 and the dog184, 185. A
the tests by some breeders. The vast majority of tests
dramatic difference in the ability to se under dark
 are now specific mutation tests that are 100%
adaptation or dim light and normal daylight conditions is
accurate. The sample type required may vary
easily demonstrated. The condition has been demonstrated
between laboratories, but usually either blood
in a 1-month-old foal and was thought to be congenital but
samples or cheek swabs are acceptable, with blood
 animals may not be noted to have a deficit until several
samples having less chance for extraneous
months of age. In the Appaloosa, stationary night blindness
contamination.
(SNB) is associated with the leopard complex or spotting
patterns that is a dominant trait. SNB manifested in horses
Genetic testing, if widely utilized by breeders, holds
that were homozygous exhibited few dark spots, and were
the promise of significantly affecting the prevalence
mostly white. While most horses are only night blind, a
 of PRA of the prcd (adult type) where screening.
 subset have day vision problems as well. The corneas of
ophthalmoscopic examinations have not succeeded.
horses that were either homozygous or carriers for the
leopard complex also had small diameter corneas in the
dorsal and vertical dimensions185a Congenital SNB has also
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
427
been reported in a Thoroughbred and in a Paso Fino
be a simple recessive trait194. In other breeds, the genetics are
horse18sb, SNB is differentiated from early PRA with night
still not known but it has been suggested to be a dominant
blindness by the characteristic ERG and lack of progression
trait with incomplete penetrance195,196 The clinical signs of
to day blindness. An ERG in a horse and in a Collie was
CPRA are very similar to those of experimental and clinical
characterized by only having an A-wave, that increased on
vitamin E deficiency on the canine retina {see Nutritional
dark adaptation. Histologically, the retina in the horse was
retinopathies, p.430). The disease seems to have decreased
normal and this, combined with the ERG, indicated that the
markedly both in the US and in Europe, perhaps indicating
site of the lesion was in the transmission of the neural
impulse from the photoreceptors to the bipolar cells186, 187.
vitamin E levels have been found in affected Briards and in 
A reduction of the scotopic ERG B-wave may indicate a
affected Cocker Spaniels and Nizzinis197. The latter two
carrier state, although Sandmeyer et al.185a were unable to
breeds show the greatest decrease in vitamin E levels and
detect ERG changes in heterozygous and normal horses
ommonly also have accompanying neurologic signs of
with the leopard complex. In a case report on a Collie, the
proprioceptive deficits, ataxia, and altered spinal refexes198
number of nuclei in the inner nuclear layer was decreased,
The biokinetics of vitamin E appear to be abnomal in that
although the tissues were poorly fixed for ultrastructural
vitamin E absorption from an oral dose is near normal but
analysis187
 the plasma levels decline much faster after peaking197
 Briards have a simple recessive SNB, but it may be more
omplex than is found in other breeds and species184.
 Clinical signs
Affected dogs varied from having only night blindness,
Signs are usually bilateral and symmetrical but one eye
having night blindness with reduced day vision, or animals
may be more advanced. Early changes are brown clumps
that were completely blind. The fundus was normal in
of pigment in the macular and perimacular region. The
affected dogs although the resting pupil diameters were
area of pigmentation increases with time, coalesces, and
increased over controls. Differences in the ERG and
09'til asgasi aul yo asno aul ul ahel apey 4eu uaul
ultrastructure indicate that the condition may be related to
The nontapetal region is usually normal.
rcd or a lipid metabolic defect (see Disorders of lipid
The tapetum develops mild increases in sheen between
 metabolism, p.430). The ERG is characterized by a decreased
the pigment clumps and the retinal vascular caliber
Bwave as well as reduced flicker fusion, which indicates
decreases but not to the extremes found in PRA. Central
 One dysfunction184. Ultrastructurally, large lipid inclusions 
vision is lost and this results in complaints of inability to
are found in the retinal PE at S weeks of age that progress to
see stationary objects. Visual loss is slow and variable.
photoreceptor degeneration with timeiss. Plasma lipid
The earlier the onset, the more rapid the loss of vision.
abnormalities may also be noted in the Briard189, 190. The
Dilated pupils may occur late in the course of the disease.
disease in Briards has been extensively studied. It is an animal
model for Leber's amaurosis in humans and is due to a
CPRA is rare today in North America and has
deletion of 4 base pairs in the RPE65 gene19oa. A DNA test
almost become an historical disease.
is available for the disease in Briards.
Therapy
Clinical signs
Animals with SNB are presented with obvious night
mentation would be prudent.
blindness when tested in dim light. Typically, the history
indicates problems since the animal was young, with no
 progression to day blindness except in some Briards. On
ophthalmoscopy the fundus is normal and the scotopic
14.60
ERG has a relatively normal A-wave but no B-wave.
Retinal pigment epitheliopathy (central progressive
retinal atrophy [CPRA]]
Introductionjetiology
Retinal pigment epitheliopathy is a rare disease in the US
today. Unlike PRA, which is a disease of the
 photoreceptors, CPRA is a disease of the RPE and is
probably related to vitamin E deficiency. It is a disease of
the Briard, Labrador Retriever, Shetland Sheepdog,
slowly progressive, causing central vision to be lost so
that stationary objects are not recognized. The condition
progresses so slowly that the animal may never become
completely blind.'The lipopigment from the RPE
migrates into the neurosensory retina, resulting in
secondary retinal degeneration191. It is postulated that
the lipofuscin pigment in the neurosensory retina reflects
a failure of the PE to phagocytoze adequately the
photoreceptor outer segmentsi92, In contrast to PRA,
cataracts are rarely associated with CPRA193.
14.60 Retinal pigment epitheliopathy or CPRA in a Labrador
 In the Briard, a survey in England indicated that about
Retriever. Note the multiple light brown accumulations in the tapetal
30% of the population was affected and it was postulated to
region. Mild vascular attenuation may be present.
428
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Multifocal retinopathy
 Retinopathy characterized by multifocal bullous detachment
 ages of onset have been described. The Scandinavian cats
has been described in the Great Pyrenees, Coton de Tulears,
have visible lesions by 1.5-2 years of age, while the English
 group has a later onset at 6 years of age. Clinical signs are
visual complaints and develops in the Great Pyrenees at
similar to the dog, i.e. bilateral tapetal hyperreflectivity and
 approximately 13 weeks of age and then slowly regresses.
vascular attenuation (see Taurine deficiency, p.430). The
The lesions consist of focal detachment of the RPE with
process affects the peripheral fundus first and progresses to
owerlying serous detachment of the neurosensory retina. The
the central retina when advanced. The disease in the older
focal bullae vary in color from gray to tan/orange and are
predominantly in the tapetal region (14.61, 14.62).
 severe disorganization of the outer segments of the rods
Secondary  focal  retinal 
degeneration  occurs   with
and, later, of the cones217-220. In the Swedish colony, the
hypertrophy of the PE. The ERG is normal and the condition 
 defect was a simple recessive trait221.
is inherited, probably as a simple recessive trait199. The
 Instances of suspected inherited retinal atrophies ha ve
 mndition is thought to be a focal defect in the RPEi99. A
been reported occasionally in other breeds. A suspected
 DNA test is now available for the condition.
rcd has been reported in the young Persian, in the DSH,
Inherited PRA in the cat
Abyssinian cats is rapid, with blindness ocurring by 6
Introduction/etiology
weeks to 4 months of age.
Inherited retinal degeneration in the cat appears to be
 Diffuse retinal degenerations are still observed in cats
rather uncommon, except in the Abyssinian in Scandinavia
despite the improvement in taurine supplementation to
cat food. Patients are typically presented very late,
usually blind. The condition is usually presented in older
Siamese (12 years) or in DSHs at 8 years of age22s.
14.61
Whether this condition is a form of feline PRA is
unknown, but it is suggestive.
 Clinical signs
The  ophthalmoscopic 
signsof  inherited
retinal
 degeneration in the cat are detected in an advanced stage
with
bilateral,
symmetrical,
diffuse
tapetal
hyperreflectivity and with an almost complete loss of
retinal vasculature {14.63). In the Siamese and DSH, the
early lesions of PRA have not been described. In the
Abyssinian, gray mottling of the peripapillary region of the
fundus and the macular region is an early sign. The gray
 discoloration progresses and mixes with hyperreflectivity
of the tapetum. Retinal vascular attenuation begins in the
periphery and progresses to complete loss of vessels. Late
 in the course the nontapetum develops pigment clumping
 and depigmentation.
14.61 Multifocal subretinal bulla in a Coton de Tulears, noted on
screening examination. Some lesions are tan while others are clear.
 The condition improved spontaneously over a year.
14.62
14.63
14.62 Multifocal bullous retinopathy in a young English Bulldog. A
14.63 Advanced bilateral retinal degeneration in an aged Siamese
lesion beside the disk is tan, while a lesion under the disk is clear.
that had normal taurine blood levels. Since dietary corrections may
have occurred, the normal blood levels are of unknown significance.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
429
Diagnosis
fibroblasts, corneal endothelium, and lens epithelium,
The diagnosis of PRA in the cat is on the clinical signs of
and lamellated bodies, representing glycolipids, are
bilateral, diffuse, retinal degeneration, supplementing a
history that is often incomplete. Inherited atrophies should be
with GM-gangliosidosis also have neurologic lesions
differentiated from other causes such as nutritional, toxic,
that develop near weaning. The neurologic signs are
and glaucoma-induced retinal degeneration.
ataxia and tremors with hypermetria that progress in
severity. Abdominal distention and an enlarged liver
Retinal degeneration associated with systemic
may be present. Dogs with gangliosidosis have not
metabolic disease
been reported to have corneal lesions.
A variety of metabolic storage diseases have associated
The mucopolysaccaridoses: are a group of recessively
histopathologic lesions in the retina but the animal may
inherited diseases that result from the defective
not manifest ophthalmoscopic signs. The neurologic
degradation of GAGs. Three different forms have
signs are often so severe that they overshadow the
been described in the cat and dog, based on the
 ophtha lmic lesions.
specific lysosomal enzyme deficiency.
Mucopolysaccaridosis types I, VI, and Vll have been
Disorders of amino acid metabolism
described in the cat. All forms have skeletal
Ornithinuria associated with a deficiency of ornithine
deformities and facial dysmorphia (shortening),
aminotransferase has been described in the cat. The
ocular lesions consisting of a diffuse hazy cornea and
significant findings are limited to the eye and result in a
retinal degeneration, and neurologic deficits.
diffuse retinal atrophy when observed late in the course.
 Metachromatic granules are present in leukocytes in
The histopathologic changes are extensive neuroretinal
and pigmented epithelial damage, with a variable
diagnosis of mucopolysaccaridosis is by a toluidine
decrease in the size of the choriocapillaris2o1 Progressive
blue spot test on the urine. Mucopolysaccaridosis
 gyrate atrophy of the choriocapillaris is the typical
types I and Vll have been described in the dog. Both
ophthalmoscopic finding in humans with ornithinuria.
forms have corneal clouding and histopathologic
This manifests as scalloped white areas of sclera that are
 accumulation of inclusions in the RPE but only type
visible when the choroid atrophies. The clinical
Vll has retinal degeneration208.
manifestations have been observed occasionally by the
Mannosidosis: is a recessively inherited condition of
author but whether they represent ornithinurea
.or
defective breakdown of mannose-rich glycoproteins. The
choroidal  vascular atrophy from other causes is
defect has been recorded in Persians and DSHs. The cats 
unknown (14.64). The diagnosis is made by finding
exhibit retarded growth, tremors, ataxia, corneal haze,
marked elevations of ornithine in the urine or plasma.
lenticular vacuoles, and a horizontal gray retinal band
that extends from either side of the macula209
Disorders of lysosomal enzymes
 No clinically visible ocular lesions have been reported
· GM1- and GM2-gangliosidosis: has been described in
with lipidoses in the dog and cat. Optic nerve lesions
 the cat, with ocular lesions similar to both lipid storage
may be extensive and blindness a clinical sign
diseases and mucopolysaccaridosis, in that two distinct
associated with severe neurologic deficits.
types of material accumulate. Ocular signs consist of a
diffuse haze to the cornea and focal gray spots in the
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
retina, although vision is normal. Clear vacuoles
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) is a group of inherited
representing accumulations of GAGs are present in
metabolic diseases characterized by the accumulation of
lpopigments (predominantly ceroid) in neurons and other
tissues, including the retina. They are not considered
lysosomal storage diseases and the defects are thought to be
14.64
associated with lipid peroxidation, but the biochemical
has been described in a wide variety of species, including
humans, and in a variety of breeds. It is usually a simple
recessive trait, but the mutation varies between species and
breeds of dogs. Multiple forms or mutations may even affect
a single breed. The disease has been studied in most detail in
the English Setter. While reduced ERG amplitudes in rod-
and cone-mediated A- and B-waves and inclusions were
 present in all the retinal layers, no ophthalmoscopic lesions 
were reported2l1.
Other affected breeds are the Australian Blue Heeler,
Chihuahua, Border Collie, Saluki, Dachshund, Tibetan
Terrier, Miniature Schnauzer, Polish Owczarek Nizinny,
Terrier, Polish Owczarek Nizinny, and Miniature Schnauzer
manifest clinical fundus changes that are similar to vitamin
14.64 Gyrate atrophy of the choroidal vasculature and diffuse retinal
atrophy in a Siamese. The cat was hyperthyroid and was noted to be
214a. DNA tests are now available for the American
blind after multiple bouts of ketamine anesthesia for diagnosis and
Bulldog, Border (
Collie, and English
Settersee
trea tment of the hyperthyroidism.
http://www.caninegeneticdisea ses.net).
430
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
NUTRITIONAL RETINOPATHIES
stored in the liver and the degree of deficiency of the diet,
Taurine deficiency in the cat
dinical signs may occur from 10-45 weeks after
Introd uction/etiology
For years, veterinary ophthalmologists have been aware
of onset of the deficiency may affect the rapidity of the
of two forms of retinal degeneration that occur in the cat.
lesion's development. Young animals are thought to be
The first is a blinding, bilateral, diffuse “PRA-like*
more susceptible; cats 6 months of age took only
 disease, that often has a history of a nontraditional diet
11 months to develop focal lesions240, 241
or a dog food diet226, This concept of a nutritionally-
Taurine is low in commercial dog foods, probably
induced diffuse retinal degeneration is reinforced by the
because many diets are plant-based. Plant products and
production of a similar condition induced by feeding a
cow's milk are low to devoid of taurine. Most animal
diet high in casein227. The second form of retinal
products are high in taurine but heat treatment will
degeneration is focal macular degeneration which, 
in
most instances, is nonprogressive. The lesions are usually
 require twice as much added taurine as dry, extruded foods
round to oval and are hyperreflective but some extend as
to maintain similar levels of taurine, due to bacterial
a hyperreflective band above the optic disk. The focal
 degradation of intestinal taurine244. Focal and diffuse
lesions are asymptomatic and are picked up on routine
retinal degeneration have been described in households
with multiple cats fed dog food that is low in taurine24s.
different stages of a taurine nutritional deficiency.
Taurine is a sulfur-containing amino acid that, in species
 Clinical signs
other than the cat, is not essential, being manufactured in
Ocular lesions of taurine deficiency initially manifest
the liver from methionine and cystine. The cat, however,
with bilateral focal mottling or hyperreflective lesions in
requires taurine in the diet and the known results of a
the macula {14.65, 14.66). The macular lesions progress
deficiency are: degeneration of the photoreceptors and
to a hyperreflective band across the top of the optic disk
tapetum, lack of development of the olfactory bulb,
(14.67). The lesion initially follows the area of highest
cardiomyopathy,
reproductive
failure,
growth
cone concentration and, at this stage, the condition can
retardation, platelet hyperaggregation, and altered
be arrested by supplementation. If the diet remains
immune function232-237.
deficient, a diffuse tapetal hyperreflectivity  with
Although taurine is present in the brain as a
concurrent decrease in retinal vessel numbers and size
neurotransmitter, neurologic signs have not.
been
occurs {14.68). Blindness is present with diffuse retinal
sh mol se aip aui u aunei ap e o paina
 atrophy. Advanced lesions are nonreversible.
0.1% will prevent deficiency. Due to the variable levels
14.65
14.66
14.65 Early taurine deficiency in a cat with mild alterations in
14.66 More advanced macular degeneration in a cat attributable to
the ma cula.
 taurine deficiency.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
431
Diagnosis
whereas meat and seafood are high. Cow's milk has
Historically,
, presumptive taurine deficiency
was
one-third the amount of taurine that is in cat's milk.
diagnosed by the typical bilateral ophthalmoscopic signs
Taurine supplementation of 50-100 mg/day will meet
of either macular lesions or diffuse retinal degeneration.
the taurine requirements of the cat. If treating for
Often the cat had a history of eating food deficient in
cardiomyopathy, the recommended therapy is 500 mg
taurine, such as canned dog food. The condition was
of taurine q12h246. There is no therapy for diffuse
undoubtedly overdiagnosed and included diffuse retinal
retinal atrophy.
degeneration that is observed today and is thought to be 
possible PRA. Plasma amino acid analysis can be
Thiamin deficiency in the cat
performed but dietary alterations can negate the value of
Thiamin deficiency in the cat is characterized by
current plasma levels correlating with past disease.
anorexia and neurologic signs of tremors, ataxia,
Normal cat taurine values are 60-120 μmol/l.
ventroflexion of the head (14.69), and convulsions.
Ocular signs usually consist only of bilateral mydriasis,
Therapy
due to midbrain hemorrhages. Rarely, retinal neo-
Early cases of taurine deficiency
with macular
vascularization, vascular tortuosity, and peripapillary
degeneration can  be  arrested  by 
correcting the
edema are present (14.70)247, 248
nutrition. Vegetable and cereals are low in taurine,
14.67
14.68
14.67 A cat with a band of retinal atrophy progressing from the
14.68 A cat with advanced taurine-induced retinal degeneration
macula across the top of the optic disk from taurine deficiency.
evidenced by diffuse hyperreflectivity and marked attenuation and 
loss of retinal vascula ture.
14.69
14.70
14.69 Ventroflexion of the head when suspended in a cat with
14.70 Fundus of a cat presented with neurologic signs and
thiamin deficiency. Deficiency was induced by feeding commercial cat
responsive to thiarmin injections. Retinal hemorrhages.
food that had the thiamin content destroyed by heat treatment.
 neovascularization, vascular tortuosity, and retinal edema are
 present. Most cats with thiamin deficiency have a normal fundus.
432
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
Vitamin E deficiency in the dog
of deficiency in the diet. The conditions under which it is
Puppies fed a diet deficient in vitamin E develop
observed are usually in young growing animals on
retinopathy 3 months after weaning. The lesions develop
 drought stricken pastures, in animals fed poorly cured
by 3 months of age as a fine mottling in the posterior
and stored forage, or feedlot cattle being fed diets high in
tapetal region. By 4 months of age, the puppies are night
alnuauduad peauds sey Suou aui pue pu
 exists, with males being more susceptible254.
6 months of age, the mottled areas are surrounded by
The dura mater becomes thickened in response to
hyperreflectivity of the tapetum and vascular attenuation
vitamin A deficiency and this results in decreased
is noted. At 8-12 months of age the tapetum has discrete 
absorption of CSF by the arachnoid villi. This results 
multifocal yellow-brown areas and is hyperreflective
in increased CSF pressure, which is thought to be the
{14.71). The vasculature is attenuated and has focal
earliest detectable change with vitamin A deficiency
constrictions. On histopathology, the focal pigment is
and is the cause of seizures. In young animals
lipofuscin and photoreceptor degeneration is present in 
<6 months of age that have normal remodeling of the
the central retina249,250 These lesions are very similar to
skull during growth, the sphenoid bone with the optic
the presumed inherited retinal pigment epitheliopathy, to
canal has a predominant production of bone without
Briard RPE6S SNB, and in those breeds with NCL that
resorption. This overproduction of bone and thickened
manifest fundus lesions190a, 214a.
dura mater produces direct compressive forces on the
Davidson et al.251 described a cluster of spontaneous
optic nerve, as well as vascular ischemic changes. The
vitamin E deficiency in hunting dogs fed food scraps,
compression produces demyelination and malacia of
cattle offal, and turkey carcasses and associated with
the optic nerve. This does not occur experimentally in
slowly progressive blindness. Ophthalmoscopic signs
older (2-year-old) animals2ss-258.
were identical to experimental vitamin E deficiency,
consisting of multifocal golden brown accumulations in
 Clinical signs
the central tapetal fundus that gradually increased in
 In yearling and younger cattle, night blindness is often
severity with age (14.71). Mild tapetal hyperreflectivity
the first sign but it is frequently not noted because of
and vascular attenuation were also present. Optic nerve
husbandry conditions259, 260, This progresses to total
atrophy, a decrease in pigment clumping, asteroid
blindness, which is often the first sign noted. This is
hyalosis, and minor cataracts eventually developed with
accompanied by pupillary dilation. The blindness is
 end-stage disease. Serum level of vitamin E was <3 μg/ml
irreversible.
(normal is 6-10 μg/ml).
Bilateral papilledema is the first useful objective sign
(14.72). It is reversible in the early stages and is present
Equine motor neuron disease
before blindness occurs. Papilledema precedes optic nerve
Equine motor neuron disease is characterized by diffuse
constriction and is due to increased CSF pressure.
neuromuscular disease, weight loss with good appetite,
Papilledema is not as consistent in adults as it is in growing
generalized weakness, excessive lying down, sweating,
 animals261. It is manifest by the loss of distinct borders,
and muscle tremors2s2. Ophthalmoscopic lesions 
are
 enlargement, and elevation of the disk. The disk color
 similar to vitamin E deficiency in the dog, specifically
 multifocal brown spots in the tapetum and, in addition,
a brown band at the junction of the tapetum and
nontapetum. Visual deficits are not usually appreciated
by the owner. Autofluorescent ceroid
lipofuscin
14.71
accumulates in the PE and retina with photoreceptor
degeneration252. Ophthalmoscopy is an excelent field
test for diagnosing equine motor neuron disease.
Vitamin A deficiency in the dog
Vitamin A deficiency is a rare disease in carnivores but,
when experimentally produced, results in similar
neurologic and ophthalmologic signs as in the cow.
Neurologic signs of circling, ataxia, agitation, and
convulsions are noted. Despite normal cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) pressures, ophthalmic signs of blindness and
papilledema develop2s3.
Vitamin A deficiency in cattle
Introduction/etiology
Vitamin A deficiency is a significant disease in cattle. The
is provided in cattle feed as retinoids or as a provitamin
beta-carotene that is found in leafy green plants. Cereal
14.71 Spontaneous vitamin E deficiency retinopathy in a hunting
grains are deficient in beta-carotene, except for corn.
dog with a bizzare home-made diet. Note the multifocal brown
Deficiency can produce signs in 48 months, with
accumulations in the tapetal fundus. Compare to 14.60, a ca5e of
younger animals developing signs more rapidly. The lag
central retinal atrophy. (Courtesy of Dr. M. Davidson, North Carolina
period depends on the residual liver stores and the degree
State University, Raleigh, NC.)
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
433
changes to pinker-white with obscuration of the vessels by
Prog nosis
Adult animals will show improvement of night blindness
 adjacent to, the disk (14.72). If the condition is chronic,
 Or vision loss but young animals, if blind, will not have 
the optic disk becomes atrophic with a gray color and loss
reversal of blindness due to optic nerve changes. Night
of elevation. Retinal degeneration occurs. This is most
blindness and papilledema are reversible if treated before
obvious in the nontapetal peripapillary region as pigment
 complete blindness occurs.
 disruption (14.73). Vitamin A is necessary for production
au po uonnsp ui snsau auip pue usdoouu jo
DRUG-
AND TOXIN-INDUCED
 photoreceptors as well as damage to the RPE260.
RETINAL/UVEAL DEGENERATION
Miscellaneous ophthalmic signs consist of bilateral
Methylnitrosurea and ketamine hydrochloride
exophthalmos and a decrease in corneal sensitivity.
A dramatic, rapid, diffuse retinal degeneration with
Nonophthalmic signs consist of tono-clonic seizures 
of
blindness develops when ketamine is administered to cats
short duration, ataxia, gaunt and unthrifty animals,
 also given methylnitrosurea. Either drug alone does not
poor growth, 
decreased mental status, diarrhea,
produce the retinal lesion. Twenty-four hours after the
anasarca, and pneumonia.
combination of ketamine and methylnitrosurea is given,
Vitamin A deficiency in older animals results in less
diffuse retinal edema is detected but PLRs are normal.
dramatic signs of night blindness that probably will not
Retinal degeneration develops S days after drug
 progress, papilledema without constriction of the optic
administration and  is  characterized by  vascular
nerve, and mottling of the tapetal colors and the nontapetal
 attenuation and a hyperreflectivity of the tapetum that is
pigment261 Nonophthalmic signs are incoordination,
most severe at the tapetal-nontapetal junction. The
seizures, diarrhea, anasarca, and pneumonia.
 appearance in chronic cases is similar to advanced retinal
atrophy from taurine deficiency. Pathologically, acute
Diagnosis
lesions are a diffuse and severe loss of photoreceptors
Clinical  signs  of papilledema, l
 blindness, retinal
 and the outer nuclear layer264.
degeneration, and seizures are highly suggestive when
 A variety of drugs have been demonstrated to have 
 combined with supportive historical data regarding feed.
 toxicity to the retina or choroid; however, most are not
 Plasma vitamin A levels <200 μg/l (<20 μg/dl) and liver
drugs that are used for therapeutic purposes in veterinary
vitamin A levels <2 μg/g are diagnostic. Liver levels are
medicine or they are not used in doses sufficient to
more reliable than plasma levels in diagnosis as they are
 produce lesions. Examples of such drugs are chloroquine,
not as variable.
iodoacetate, phenothiazine derivatives, diphenylalkane
derivatives, diethylidthiocarbimate, and hydroxy-
Therapy
pyridinethione264.
Cattle with papilledema but which are not blind will
respond to 440 IU/kg vitamin A injection i.m. or p.o.
 Dietary supplementation should be up to 80 IU/kg if on
a high energy diet262, 263.
14.72
14.73
14.72 Severe papillederma in a steer with vitamin A deficiency. Note
14.73 Retinal pigment disruption in the nontapetal region in a steer
the change in color, elevation, hyperemia, and splinter hemorrhages 
with vitamin A deficiency.
in the disk. Compare to the normal bovine fundus in 14.2.
434
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Fluoroquinolones, specifically enrofloxacin, are
The toxic effects of enrofloxacin appear to be dose
known to produce an acute blindness with pupillary
related and not idiosyncratic. The clinical report
dilation and reduced ERG amplitudes in cats264a. Typical
suggested that increasing age, i.v. administration of the
ophthalmoscopic signs in symptomatic cats are usually a
drug, the dose, and other systemic factors that may
diffuse tapetal hyperreflectivity and mild to severe retinal
interfere with drug metabolism may be contributing
vascular attenuation {14.74). Earlier lesions, which are
less likely to be observed unless screening patients on
orbifloxacin may also induce retinal changes of focal
therapy, are granular to gray discoloration of the area
hyperreflectivity264c, If enrofloxacin is used in cats, it is
centralis  and 
lvisual streak and focal
tapetal
recommended that the dose does not exceed 5 mg/kg
hyperreflectivity.  Generalized tapetal  reflectivity
is
 present by day 5-7 post administration of high doses of
 antibiotic is discontinued, vision may return. The
 pathogenesis of the blindness is unknown.
signs, weight loss, and decreased food consumption was
also noted at experimentally high doses.
Ethylene glycol intoxication
 Retinal hemorrhages, focal transudative retinal detachment,
 and a mosaic or gyrate pattern of retinal folds from edema
have been described in a cat that survived ethylene glycol
 poisoning (14.75). The cause of the retinal lesions was
 postulated to be due to obstruction of choroidal capillaries
with transudation of fluid from the choroid to the
14.74
subretinal space26. The author has also observed retinal
detachment and retinal vitreal hemorrhage in the dog
 associated with experimental ethylene glycol intoxication.
Ivermectin toxicity
 Massive overdosage of ivermectin to dogs has resulted in
temporary blindness, tremors, ataxia, emesis, and
 salivation. The overdosage usually occurs when large
animal ivermectin preparations are used carelessly in
dogs. Acute blindness is noted, with poor PLRs.
 Ophthalmoscopic findings may be papilledema and
 retinal edema, producing retinal folds, but in the author's
experience, most patients have a normal fundus, dilated
pupils, and blindness that improves within 48 hours.
Improvement in vision occurs even when animals have
been comatose for days267, 268. Atrophy of the PE has
been noted with chronic ivermectin therapy (14.76).
14.74 Siamese cat presented with acute blindness after receiving
enrofloxacin orally. The tapetum is mildly hyperreflective and the 
retinal vasculature is attenuated. vision may return if the antibiotic
is stopped.
14.75
14.76
14.75 Retinopathy observed with ethylene glycol toxicity in a cat. The
14.76 Atrophy of the pigmented epithelium in a dog with decreased
retina is thrown into gyrate folds due to subretinal fluid transudation 
vision that had been treated with ivermectin for mange.
fror the choroid. The condition resolved following recovery of the cat
from the intoxica tion. (Courtesy of Dr. R. Riis, Ithaca, NY.)
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
435
Locoweed poisoning
the process, degree of IOP elevation, and individual
Cattle, sheep, and horses with locoweed {Astragalus
variation in IOP tolerance will produce variable fundus
mollissimus) poisoning are blind, with a dull corneal
lesions. The pathogenesis of glaucomatous retinal and
surface. While the dull appearance is due to tear film
optic nerve changes may be twofold: {1) interference in
problems from lacrimal gland lesions, blindness is
 axoplasmic flow, which damages axons and neurons,
probably due to lesions observed in the ganglion and
and {2) ischemia to the nerve and retina. Acute high
bipolar cells of the retina. Ophthalmoscopic lesions have
tension glaucoma probably has both mechanisms at
 not been described269
work because a full-thickness retinal atrophy usually
develops. Lower tension glaucoma may be characterized
Bracken poisoning
only by atrophy of the optic nerve, nerve fiber layer, and
ganglion cells, which may occur from a mechanical
produced retinal degeneration. The long-term ingestion
restriction at the disk, interfering with axoplasmic flow
of bracken produces blindness in sheep usually older
 of the nerves. This may create retrograde degeneration of
than 2 years of age. Ophthalmoscopic signs are a diffuse
hyperreflective tapetum,
 optic disk atrophy, and
more detailed discussion and figures.) Whiteman et al.275
attenuated retinal vessels.
. The histologic
 lesions are
found evidence of a progressive retinal degeneration
initially photoreceptor degeneration and, later, inner
retinal cell loss270.
in the ganglion cell layer and progressed to full thickness 
retinal cell death. The massive apoptosis began about 3
Male fern poisoning
isal ie luun paisel pue yoeue euoonela aul iaye saep
Cattle ingesting male fern (Dryopteris felix mas) may
the 7th day after the attack.
develop acute blindness, weakness, and constipation. In
the acute stages the ophthalmoscopic signs are dilated
Knowledge of the progressive nature of
pupils, papilledema, and papillary and peripapillary
glaucomatous retinal degeneration after the IOP
hemorrhage. Some animals will recover vision but, with
has been normalized adds to the frustration and
chronicity, the acute signs develop into optic nerve
pessimism associated with treating gla ucoma.
atrophy, retinal vascular attenuation, and disruption of
the pigment in the peripapillary nontapetal region.
Clinical signs
Histopathologically,
the primary.
lesion
is
a
The most typical fundus lesion with glaucoma is a
noninfla mmatory
destruction of the axons and
variable degree of optic disk cupping and atrophy. Unless 
 medullary nerve sheaths of the retrobulbar nerve271.
the optic nerve changes are unilateral or observed
GLAUCOMA-INDUCED RETINAL DEGENERATION
early stages due to the great variability in the canine
Introduction/etiology
fundus. The evidence for optic nerve cupping and
Glaucoma is a common cause of retinal and optic nerve
 atrophy is loss of myelin, often with a pigmented ring
degeneration. Depending on the cause of the glaucoma,
around the disk visible after receding of the myelin, a
the fundus changes will be unilateral or bilateral, and
 gray color to the disk, and posterior deviation of vessels 
sequential or simultaneous in occurrence. The rapidity of
on the disk surface (14.77). These changes are not
recognized in the cat unless extreme. In very acute
elevations of IOP, papilledema and peripapillary
hemorrhages and triangular patches of retinal edema,
that may represent infarcts adjacent to the disk, may be
present (see Chapter 12, p.331, 12.20, 12.21). Vascular
14.77
attenuation is common but variable, and retinal atrophy
pattern of hyperreflectivity may be quite diffuse, patchy,
or peripapillary. Choroidal atrophy may be visible in the
albinoid fundus as a loss of vasculature and may follow
an arcuate pattern. On histopathology the retina over the
gla ucoma than the nonta petum, but this difference is not
 appreciated on ophthalmoscopy.
Diagnosis
Usually the specific cause of the retinal atrophy is
identified by accompanying ocular signs. Lower tension
glaucoma should be considered when optic disk cupping
 and atrophy are present.
Glaucoma preferentially affects the ganglion cells and
axons. In the lower pressure insidious forms of
14.77 A dog with diffuse tapetal hyperreflectivity and optic nerve
glaucoma, the ERG may be normal but the animal is
 atrophy and cupping, associated with glaucoma.
blind. In this instance it will mimic optic neuritis. In
 advanced cases of high pressure glaucoma, the ERG is
usually flat or extinguished.
436
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
PERIPHERAL RETINAL DEGENERATION
14.78
Peripheral retinal cysts {Blessig-Iwanoffs cysts) are very
common degenerative changes adjacent to the ora ciliaris
retina (14.78, 14.79). They are usually multiple and are
 most easily observed with the indirect ophthalmoscope at
 the temporal and ventral ora ciliaris retina. They vary in
size, number, and degree of elevation and are considered a
senile aging change. In a series of 86 Beagles 8 years of age,
85% had peripheral retinal cysts276. Pathologically, the
cysts represent the condition of retinoschisis (splitting of the
neurosensory retina). They are usually present without
evidence of retinal detachment, although idiopathic retinal
detachment associated with giant tears of the peripheral
retina is not uncommon in the dog. Small to moderate
numbers of peripheral cysts are considered normal277. In
one study of senile retinal breaks, five out of 100 eyes had
ruptured cysts that produced retinal holes278. The same
study demonstrated that 24% of the eyes had complete
14.78 Peripheral retinal cysts adjacent to the ora ciliaris retinae in
retinal breaks, although none of the eyes had retinal
'bop e
detachments and an additional 38%
6 of the eyes had
incomplete breaks. Thus a total of 62% of the senile eyes
had lesions predisposing them to retinal detachment.
14.79
RETINAL DEGENERATIONS OF UNKNOWN CAUSE
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome
[SARDS]
introduction/etiology
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS)
has also been termed toxic retinopathy or silent retina.
This is a syndrome of sudden blindness in dogs, that has
been recognized with increased frequency in the Us. It is a
bilateral selective loss of the photoreceptors that clinically
mimics retrobulbar neuritis, because there are minimal, if
any, ophthalmoscopic changes in acute cases. No breed or
contemporary reports_ indicate that the Dachshund,
Miniature Schnauzer, Brittany, and Beagle may be at
14.79 Pathologic specimen from a Cocker Spaniel opened to reveal
the posterior globe. Note the multiple cysts at the ora ciliaris retinae.
affected. SARDS occurs in mid-life to older animals, with
The retina is gray from fixation and the pars plana of the ciliary body
 is the heavily pigmented side.
dimorphism with 70-86% of cases occurring in females; 
the vast majority are in neutered animals. Approximately
50% of the patients have systemic complaints
of
mmpared SARDS with normal dogs and dogs with cancer.
polyphagia, weight gain, polyuria, and polydipsia281.
Gilmore et al.283b also could find no evidence of either
A variety of exotic and routine laboratory examinations
 adrenal or pituitary neoplasia in dogs with SARDS using
have
 found no consistent abnormality, nor have
ultrasound and CT imaging. There does not appear to be a
epidemiologic questionnaires. Elevation of liver enzymes,
mmparable syndrome in humans, although paraneoplastic
white blood cell counts consistent with a stress leukogram,
syndromes associated with pulmonary carcinomas and
and an abnormal ACTH stimulation test or low-dose
melanomas may have some similarities. These cancer
dexamethasone suppression test are found in many, but not
retinopathies are thought to induce an autoimmune reaction
all, animals with SARDS. Twelve to 17% of the cases have
 to retinal proteins such as recoverin and enolase.
laboratory profiles compatible with Cushing's disease but not
 Abnormal melanin synthesis and metabolism in the
all of the series were evaluated critically for Cushing's279.
RPE has been postulated to affect the phagocytosis of the
Holt et al.280 found 21% of 38 dogs had a positive screening
 photoreceptor outer segments, that leads to a degenerative
test for Cushing's disease. Carter et al.280a in studying 
10
process of the photoreceptors. Adrenocorticotropic
neutered dogs with SARDS found 9 had systemic signs of
hormone (ACTH) and melanocyte-stimulating hormone
 gucocorticoid excess and 8 of these had systemic elevations
(MSH) may have a hormonal influence on the RPE that
of sex hormone levels and only 5 had elevations of cortisol
levels post-ACTH stimulation. The investigators interpreted
A neurotoxic reaction has also been postulated.
 this as evidence of increased adrenal activity. Preliminary
Excitotoxins which produce sustained plasma membrane
results have demonstrated an antiretinal compliment-fixing
depolarization have been suggested, based on similar
antibody in the serum of dogs (S/5) affected with SARDS283
histopathologic changes in SARDS and the experimental
Keller et al.283a ould not duplicate the finding of serum
model in the rat. Examples of excitotoxins are the
autoantibodies against retinal proteins when screening 13
frequently used food additives such as glutamate, ibotenic
dogs with SARDS, nor could Gilmore et al.283b, who
acid, aspartane, and cysteine-s-sulfonic acid284. Elevated
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
437
14.80
 project to the nuclei in the midbrain, but not the superior
colliculus or lateral geniculate. The ganglion cells also
 interplay with the rod and cone photoreceptors286a, 286b.
Grozdanic et al.286c were ableto demonstrate PLRs to a very
bright white light in dogs with SARDS, but the PLR response
was more sensitive to a blue light, which matches more
dosely the absorption spectra of melanopsin. The rod and
mne driven PLR was more sensitive to white light than the
 ganglion cells and was more reactive to the red light than the
 ganglion cell component. Thus, through the sensitivity both
0l aqissod si 1n unads nojmo o pue Asuaun suo 0
determine which part of the retina has the pathology. On
electroretinography of SARDS dogs, the tracing is
extinguished or flat. The ERG differentiates retinal blindness
 from optic nerve blindness, where the ERG is normal.
Therapy
14.80 Fundus of a dog with acute sudden acquired retinal
 To date, no therapy, including anti-infammatory doses 
degeneration syndrome, with mild vascular attenuation and
of glucocorticoids, has been successful.
a near normal fundus except for a small linear 'scar.
RETINAL DETACHMENT
Introduction/etiology
glutamate levels have been found in the vitreous of dogs
As mentioned previously, retinal detachments are a
with SARDS but whether glutamate is the cause or the
separation of the neurosensory retina from the REP.
result of the retinal degeneration is unknown. Glutamate
Retinal detachments develop from three mechansims:
 has a preferential toxicity for ganglion cells and SARDS
 Rhegmatogenous, or those due to holes and tears in 
preferentially affects the photoreceptors. It must be
the retina.
emphasized that the cause of SARDS is unproven at this
 Proliferative preretinal membranes that produce
time. SARDS may be a syndrome rather than a specific
traction forces on the retina.
disease. Anecdotal reports of partial blindness, slowly
 Subretinal effusion or exudation of fluid.
progressive blindness, and unilateral involvement only
 serve to confuse the issue by adding more variables. A
Congenital
nonattachment
may
occur
in
some
 corollary would be our understanding of PRA 30 years ago,
inherited/congenital conditions. Retinal detachment may be
when it was considered one disease, but we now know it to
bilateral or unilateral and is often associated with
be an umbrella term for multiple specific diseases.
In the early stages of the disease, the histopathologic
as retinal dysplasia and CEA, glaucoma288, and intraocular
lesions are mainly a total loss of photoreceptor outer
surgery. The basic cause is often unknown, although trauma,
microtrauma, and vascular and zonular tension on the
swelling of amacrine cells, bipolar cells, and ganglion cells in
peripheral retina may play a role. Posterior capsular rupture 
a very acute case. The RPE was reported as attenuated and
with cataract surgery or intracapsular lens extraction is a risk
lacking apical processes in a chronic case. With chronicity,
 the remainder of the retina undergoes degeneration282.
discounted the increased risk of retinal detachment after
posterior capsular rupture in the dog. Degenerative changes
SARDS is unique to the dog but if it is associated
 in the peripheral retina may create holes or circumferential
with environmental factors, it might ha ve
 tears and result in retinal detachment. On routine screening.
significant implications for humans.
62% of senile dog eyes have been shown to have partial or
omplete retinal breaks but no retinal detachments were
Clinical signs
found in this series. The lack of either posterior vitreous
Acute SARDS
5 patients are presented as blind and
aul pauaaad aaey Aeu sno payanby io uuuri
confused, with dilated pupils and a normal fundus. The
retina from detaching with these degenerative changes278.
retinal  vessels 
may
havé
 vascular
 sacculations
In horses, equine recurrent uveitis {68%) and trauma
(inconsistent) or be mildly attenuated in size. This
(25%) are the major causes of retinal detachment. In one
contrasts with most retinal diseases where, if the process
study, bullous detachments were the only form observed,
is severe enough to produce blindness, obvious retinal
although they also had varying degrees of peripheral giant
changes are usually present.
retinal tears and holes288b, Despite this, the authors did not
Chronic SARDS cases develop mild-modest tapetal
think the detachments were rhegmatogenous in origin.
hyperreflectivity and vascular attenuation {14.80). While the
In the cat, although no series of detachments have
pupils are dilated at rest, they react sluggishly to light. This
been reported, the author's experience is that most are
dsconnect beween having an animal that is blind with a
due to exudation (i.e. systemic diseases or tra uma).
photoreceptor disease yet still having quite robust PLRs with
a strong white light is thought to be associated with special
 Clinical signs
ganglion cells that contain the photopigment melanopsin.
Uunilateral complete retinal detachment will present with a
Retinal ganglion cells containing melanopsin are thought to
Marcus Gunn (MG) pupil, when testing the PLR with the
be responsible for regulating nonvisual photoreceptions such
swinging light test. The MG response manifests as a very
as circadian rhythms and the PLR. These ganglion cells
lmited direct reflex in the involved eye but the pupil
438
OpHThAlMIC DisEASe In VeTeRINArY MeDICInE
14.81
14.82
14.83
14.81 Peripheral dialysis in a English Springer
14.82 A dog with complete peripheral dialysis  1
14.83 Low-lying retinal detachment with a
Spaniel associated with retinal dysplasia. The 
 of the retina that is visible hanging limply
visible hole in the retina. The dog had aplastic
folded retina is visible behind the len5.
from the optic disk.
anemia and the lesion was picked up on a
without an ophthalmoscope.
 screening consultation exa mination.
14.84
the aqueous humor of dogs with rhegmatogenous
 detachments,_ they have not been associated with
 glaucoma292 Effusive retinal detachments are discussed with
dhorioretinitis (p.439) and hypertension (p.454).
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of retinal detachment is made on
ophthalmoscopic examination if the media is clear, or by
ocular B-mode ultrasound if opacities are present.
Therapy
Detachments associated with tears or holes are
candidates for retinal detachment surgery, whereas
exudative/transudative detachments are treated by
treating the underlying cause fe.g. inflammation,
systemic hypertension). Retinal detachment surgery is
14.84 Preretinal membrane on the retina causing a focal traction
still in its infancy in yeterinary medicine, but it is
detachment. The detachment was observed originally on a screening
becoming more available each year. With the newer
genetic eye examination in a Siberian Husky and did not change over
techniques utilizing intraocular perflurocarbon gases and
several years.
silicone oil to tamponade and laser retinopexies, retinal
detachment surgery is quite successful. Unilateral retinal 
detachments are often diagnosed late, but surprisingly,
even with chronic detachments {i.e. up to 4 weeks or
to the good eye. When the light is then swung back to the
greater duration), visual function may return with
 involved eye for a repeat of the direct response, the pupil
dlates rather than remains constricted.
with complicating circumstances for the detachment and
 If the media is clear, variable degrees of retinal detachment
duration of detachment and may be measured in terms of
may be directly observed with a simple light because the torn
retinal reattachment and/or return of functional vision
 retina has moved forward behind the lens (14.81). Low
rates. Overall, Vainisi and Wolfer292a reported a 90%
partial detachments or complete peripheral dialysis can often
reattachment rate and 76% had vision.
only be visualized with an ophthalmoscope {14.82, 14.83).
Traction membranes may occasionally be visible on the
Prophylaxis
High risk patients (e.g. animals with partial detachments or
 marked vitreal degeneration, the opposite eye previously
vitreous and anterior chamber. Chronic retinal detachments
having a retinal detachment, a torn posterior capsule during
are often associated with neovascularization of the anterior
ataract surgery, breed susceptibility to retinal detachments,
segment of the eye, which often results in hyphema and/or
benefit from prophylactic laser or cryo retinopexy. The laser
rhegmatogenous retinal detachment may be obstruction of
retinopexy may be random and transclerally applied around
 the outflow channels by photoreceptor outer segments. This 
 the peripheral retina, or be applied to specifc sites if lesions 
mechanism has been implicated in producing glaucoma in
 are present. Alternative delivery modes for the laser may be
humans291, and while outer segments have been detected in
through the pupil or intraocularly utilizing sclerotomies292c.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
439
INFLAMMATION OF THE RETINA AND CHOROID
14.85
Introduction/etiology
When  evaluating
g a suspected inflammatory fundus
lesion, four questions should arise:
· Is this an inflammatory lesion or some other process?
· Is the inflammation active or inactive?
● Is the inflammation granulomatous or
nongranulomatous?
●What are the possible causes of the inflammation?
Inflammation of the posterior segment is usually referred
to as chorioretinitis or posterior uveitis. If the primary
focus is in the retina, it is termed retinochoroiditis; if the
 primary focus is in the choroid, it is termed chorioretinitis.
 Clinical signs
The signs of inflammation of the structures of the fundus
 are often not specific or dramatic enough to make it
14.85 Acute nongranulomatous inflammation over the tapetum in
 obvious whether a lesion is inflammatory, degenerative,
vascular, or neoplastic. Furthermore, once a lesion is
 associated with acute distemper infection.
recognized as inflammatory, there is little evidence
morphologically that can determine the cause of the
inflammation.
14.86
Active inflammation is characterized by edema that
may manifest as an opacification of the retina, increased
reflections from the internal limiting membrane, loss of
tapetal mosaic detail, decreased tapetal reflectivity and,
perhaps, elevation of the retina (14.85).
 Retinal vascular hyperemia is often difficult to
 recognize beca use of the subjectivity of vascular size and
tortuosity. Damage to vascular walls may result in
hemorrhages at various levels in the fundus (see
Ophthalmoscopy, p.22).
Cellular exudation may be recognized by a haze in the
vitreous and “exudates" in the retina. The term retinal
 exudates is used loosely in human ophthalmoscopy to
 describe a focal lesion that may have sharp or fuzzy
borders. Sharp bordered exudates are termed “hard
exudates’ and are usually degenerative lesions such as
hyaline deposits. "Soft exudates' have fuzzy borders and
14.86 Acute and chronic granulomatous lesions in a dog with
histologically are usually cytoid bodies {a swollen area of
cryptococcosis. The acute lesions have a halo of edema, wherea5
ganglion cells and axons) that are infarcts of the ganglion
the chronic dark lesions are sharply circumscribed.
cells. In veterinary ophthalmoscopy the term hard
exudate' is rarely used or observed and the term exudate
is used to describe acute inflammatory lesions of
14.87
exudation and edema. Acute cellular exudation produces
soft exudates (14.86). Occasionally, cellular exudation
may be perivascular in distribution. Depending on the
intensity, perivascular cuffing variably manifests as a
white sheath, a perivascular altered reflective zone, or
perivascularly aligned focal exudates.
Inflammation in the nontapetal region in the acute
stages often obscures the pigment with white exudation
or edema (14.87). Pigment clumping and disruption
 Occurs in the acute stages if the RPE reacts, and in the 
chronic stages as macrophages sca venge.
 Presumptive confirmation of active inflammation is
often made by watching the dynamic course, i.e. it either
progresses in severity or improves with or without
therapy. Fluorescein angiography will demonstrate active
inflammation by vascular leakage.
14.87 Acute inflammation in the nontapetum of an Akita dog with
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada 5yndrome.
440
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Inflammation of the optic papilla or disk is manifested
In the nontapetum, postinflammatory scars are sharply
 by hyperemia of the disk, hemorrhages on and around
 defined and depigmented lesions (14.89, 14.90). When 
the disk, elevation of the disk from edema, retinal vessel
inflammation of the fundus has been diffuse, the
deviation, haze over the disk from cellular exudation,
postinflammatory appearance may be very similar to
 and peripapillary edema (14.88). Post inflammation, the 
PRA (14.91). However, inflammatory retinal atrophies
optic nerve usually manifests varying degrees of atrophy.
are usually asymmetrical in severity between the two
Atrophy of the optic nerve is recognized by a gray-white
eyes, whereas PRA is almost always symmetrical.
coloration, loss of myelin that may convert an elevated
 When possible, it is pertinent to define the inflammation
disk to a fat or cupped disk, a decrease in size and
dinically into granulomatous or nongranulomatous lesions,
number of retinal vessels and, sometimes, peripapillary
although  this is essentially  a pathologic diagnosis.
pigmentary changes.
Granulomatous lesions usually have an easier definable
When evaluating lesions, one should attempt to
infectious  etiology  than 
 nongranulomatous
slesions.
determine whether they are quiescent or active. Active
Granulomatous lesions typically have size or mass to them,
lesions usually have blurred borders, a haziness or
resulting in deviated retinal blood vessels and elevation of the
 dullness, or lack of tapetal detail over the lesion (14.85,
retina (14.86, see Blastomycosis). The causes
of
14.86). Postinflammatory scars are hyperreflective over
chorioretinitis are the same as for anterior uveitis {see
the tapetum, have sharp borders, and may have pigment
Chapter 11, p.298) plus a few additional agents.
clumping in the center or at the periphery of the lesion.
14.88
14.89
14.88 Acute inflamma tion of the optic nerve (papillitis, optic neuritis),
14.89 Focal chorioretinal scar in a dog, evidenced by
evicdenced by a hyperemic, swollen blurred disk, and hemorrhages. The
hyperreflectivity with sharp borders and pigment clumping within
dog was also blind, which differentiates this from papilledema.
the lesion. The cause was, and is often, unknown at this stage.
14.90
14.91
14.90 A dog with focal, sharply circumscribed, depigmented scars
14.91 Unilateral diffuse retinal degeneration with focal scars in a
with an overlying glial reaction on the retinal surface.
6-year-old Chesapeake Bay Retriever. The tapetum is diffusely
hyperreflective, with marked retinal vascular attenuation and optic
nerve atrophy. Superimposed on the diffuse changes are typical focal
postinflammatory scars, with pigment clumping and hyperreflective 
regions. The cause is unknown.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
441
Etiology of chorioretinitis
Specific diseases
Dog
Viral
● Infectious: distemper, parvovirus, and herpesvirus {in
Canine distemper
the neonate), bacterial embolism from focal sepsis,
The distemper virus is a common etiology for
Brucella canis, tuberculosis, systemic mycoses,
 nongranulomatous chorioretinitis and optic neuritis in
Aspergillus fumigatus, prototheca, Ehrlichia canis
the dog. Distemper ocular lesions are most commonly
and E. platys, Rickettsia rickettsi, Toxoplasma
 observed in animals during the encephalitic phase, but
gondii, Hepatozoon americanum, and migrating
they may be found during the typical acute catarrhal
metazoan parasites.
phase or in animals that have no systemic signs.
 Immune-mediated: VKH syndrome, steroid-
Typically, distemper produces multifocal retinitis that is
 responsive retinal detachments.
characterized by ill-defined altered reflective areas in the
 Trauma: blunt or perforating injuries.
tapetum (14.85) and focal white hazy lesions in the
 Neoplasia.
 nontapetum (14.92). The lesions are usually bilateral,
although asymmetrical. The lesions have been reported
Cat
 to be more common in the ventral nontapetal region but
● Infectious: FIP, FeLV, panleukopenia {in utero and
this has not been the author's experience. Lesions may
neonate only), FIV, systemic mycoses, Toxoplasma
coalesce to become large and fewer in number.
gondi, bacterial embolism from focal sepsis,
Occasionally, perivascular cuffing is recognized.
tuberculosis, and migrating metazoan parasites.
Optic neuritis may be completely retrobulbar without
 Immune-mediated.
changes on the optic disk, or it may extend to the nerve
Trauma: blunt or perforating.
head (14.93). If the inflammation extends to the papilla,
+ Neoplasia.
it is hyperemic, elevated, and hazy and the animal is
blind in the involved eye(s). Distemper fundus lesions are
Horse
usually asymptomatic, unless the optic nerve or chiasm is
+ Infectious: leptospirosis, Streptococcus equi,
involved. Blindness with dilated pupils associated with
toxoplasmosis, neonatal and adult septicemia, and
distemper is usually due to bilateral optic nerve lesions,
metazoan parasites such as Oncbocerca cervicalis.
chiasm, or bilateral optic tract lesions. If the animal
 Immune-mediated: ERU.
 survives the systemic involvement, the postinflammatory
 appearance of severe distemper chorioretinitis and optic
Cow
neuritis may mimic PRA.
 Infectious: bovine virus diarrhea {BVD), rabies,
 The histopathologic lesions with distemper are more
 malignant catarrhal fever (MCF), infectious
degenerative than inflammatory. Although perivascular
thromboembolic meningoencepha litis, listeriosis,
cuffing with mononuclear cells may be observed in the
septicemia particularly in calves with scours and
retina, more typical changes are neuronal degeneration,
umbilical infections, tuberculosis, and toxoplasmosis.
edema, atrophy of the photoreceptors, and swelling and
proliferation of the PE. Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
may be observed in the glial cells of the retina and optic
nerve293-295
14.92
14.93
14.92 A dog with acute distemper lesions in the nontapetum.
14.93 Optic neuritis in a dog that was acutely blind and had
Note the hazy borders.
distemper. The optic disk is elevated and hazy and the retinal
vessels are hyperermic.
442
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Parvovirus
produce posterior segment lesions but, rarely, the author
 In both the puppy and kitten, parvoviruses, with their
has observed blindness with pupillary dilation in cats after
 affinity for rapidly dividing cels, may affect the developing
recovery from upper respiratory disease. The fundus and
retina in utero or in the early neonatal period. Active
ERGs are normal and the assumption is that the blindness
 inflammation is not present when examined later in life and
is due to a retrobulbar neuritis.
the changes are usually noted as an incidental finding.
Inflammation in the developing retina results in retinal
Feline infectious peritonitis
dysplasia and retinal atrophy. These lesions are noted as
Posterior segment lesions with FIP are highly variable.
multifocal or solitary, sharply demarcated lesions of altered
Ophthalmoscopic lesions include diffuse alterations in
reflectivity in the tapetal region, and depigmentation with
tapetal coloration from choroiditis, retinal edema, focal
 sharp borders in the nontapetum296-298.
and total exudative retinal detachment, retinal vasculitis,
and optic neuritis {14.94, 14.95). The severe form of the
Herpesvirus
 disease causes panophthalmitis, which often precludes
Herpesvirus in the canine neonate produces a marked
detailed fundus examination. Ocular disease is most
panuveitis with keratitis, cataracts, retinal necrosis and
common with the noneffusive form of FIP (see Chapter
disorganization, retinal atrophy and dysplasia, and optic
11, p.298)300
neuritis and atrophy299. Since the infection is fatal in most
 puppies, it is not a recognized clinical syndrome. Surviving
Feline feukemia virus
 puppies would probably demonstrate retinal dysplasia and
Lesions of the posterior segment associated with FeLV
retinal scars. Feline herpesvirus has not been proven to
are usually due to blood dyscrasias. The most common
14.94
 14.94 Focal bullous detachment dorsal to the disk (arrows) in a cat with FIP
and Felv. The detachment is recognized by the change in texture compared to
 the adjacent tapetum. Note the vascular hyperemia.
 14.95 More advanced FIP choroiditis in a cat with exudative detachment
in the dorsal fundus. Note the altered tapetal coloration from the
inflamma tory infiltration of the choroid.
pancytopenia associated with Felv. Note how pale the retinal vessels are
from the anemia.
14.95
14.96
VITrEOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
443
lesions are various types of hemorrhages associated with
Bacterial
 severe anemia or thrombocytopenia (14.96). Occasional
Bacterial embolism to the eye from a focal source of
 u  a lm    
infection is not very common in small animals. However,
retina, representing neoplastic 
C infiltration. Retinal
it is common in large animals with neonatal septicemia.
detachment may also be observed.
Many cases are undoubtedly missed if the eyes are not
examined. If lesions are limited to the ocular fundus, they
Bovine virus diarrhea (BVD)
 are usually ‘silent with only focal hemorrhages and
BVD, which is caused by a member of the genus
retinal/subretinal exudates noted30s. Lesions have been
Pestivirus, will produce ocular and cerebellar lesions in
noted in dogs with bacterial meningitis, endocarditis, and 
the fetus if infected during 76-150 days of gestation. The
dental infections (14.98).
neonate has neurologic signs of ataxia, intention tremors,
Endocarditis in a horse has been reported to result in
 and may not be able to stand. Ocular lesions include
 a unilateral optic neuritis and blindness 306 Calves with
microphthalmos, cataracts, tapetal color changes and
scours and infections centered around the joints and
loss of texture, attenuated retinal vessels, and focal
umbilicus often develop signs of anterior uveitis, with 
depigmentation of the nontapetum (14.97)301,302
miosis and a large fibrin clot in the anterior chamber.
Embolic lesions may also be visualized in the retina and
Mafignant catarrhal fever
include hemorrhages, soft exudates, retinal detachment,
MCF, which has two forms caused by herpesviruses,
 and papilledema (14.99). Agents include streptococci,
 produces vasculitis of the entire eye but anterior uveitis
Corynebacterium, E. coli, Rhodococcus equi, Listeria
and corneal edema preclude fundus examination in most
 monocytogenes, and Pasturella spp.
cases303, 304
14.97 A calf that had been infected in utero with bovine viru5
14.97
diarrhea and was born with cerebellar ataxia. The tapetum ha5
multifocal patches of pigmentation and altered color and the 
nontapetum has numerous sharply demarcated depigmented lesion5.
14.98 Multiple small hemorrhagic lesions near the termination of
end arterioles in a dog with bacterial endocarditis.
14.99 Bullous retinal detachment from exudate with multiple
hemorrhages and exudates in a calf with vestibular signs. The
condition was responsive to antibiotics.
14.98
14.99
444
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
In the dog, contagious bacterial infections characterized
be found in about 50% of cases and help to make a rapid
by septicemia, such as Brucella canis infections, are more
dagnosis. Extemally visible lesions may include strabismus,
likely to produce ocular lesions. Unilateral or bilateral
nystagmus, keratitis, and anterior uveitis with miosis and
uveitis has been frequently noted with canine brucellosis
hypopyon. The most common lesions are in the posterior
(see Uveitis, p.310). In countries with adequate controls,
 segment. Ophthalmoscopic lesions are relatively specific, and
tuberculosis has been rarely reported as a cause of
mnsist of multifocal retinal hemorrhages and exudates that
granulomatous chorioretinitis in the cat307. Bartonella
are often seen at the end of retinal vessels {14.100, 14.101).
vinsoni ( berkboff) has been reported as producing a mild
The exudative lesions consist of inflammatory exudates as
multifocal chorioretinitis in a dog307a. As Bartonella
well as ganglion cell necrosis. Focal retinal detachment and
infections in man may produce a yariety of posterior
papilledema may be present308
 segment inflammatory lesions and are suspected of
 Leptospirosis is considered a major etiology of ERU.
 producing uveitis in cats, perhaps it will be recognized as
Histopathologically, chorioretinal inflammatory lesions
a significant cause in the dog.
were observed in all cases of ERU308a. Although clinically
Infectious  thromboembolic  meningoencephalitis
visible, these are not observed with this frequency in the
produced in cattle by Hemopbilus somnus and 
is
author's experience. The fundus lesions are typically
characterized by peracute to acute death in young feedlot
located in the peripapillary region, as multifocal
cattle. If the animals do not die peracutely, ocular lesions will
 alterations in the nontapetal pigment. The lesions are
14.100
14.101
14.100 Multiple retinal hermorrhages in a yearling feedlot steer
14.101 Subretinal exudate and hemorrhages associated with end
with acute neurologic signs associated with thromboembolic
arterioles in a steer with thromboembolic meningoencephalitis.
meningoencephalitis. Note how many of the hemorrhages are 
associated with end arterioles.
14.102
14.103
14.102 Typical butterfly' scar adjacent to the disk associated with
14.103 A very hyperemic optic disk with overlying cellular reaction
recurrent uveitis in a horse. The lesions are sharply dermarcated 
in a horse with recurrent uveitis. The hyperermia indicates active 
indicating that they are scars, and while the disk looks pale, the
inflammation, but the marked pigment disruption around the disk 
retinal vessels are visible so optic nerve atrophy is not observed.
appears chronic and sharply demarcated.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
445
often described as butterfly lesions because of their
the body through the respiratory system and reach the
distribution {14.102). The optic nerve, in the acute
eye hematogenously, although CNS cyptococcosis may
stages, is hyperemic with haze from cellular effusion
extend up the optic nerve to the eye. Systemic mycoses
{14.103) in the vitreous. Later the nerve atrophies, with
involve the posterior segment (choroid) preferentially,
loss of retinal vessels and a pale color fsee Uveitis,
where they are readily demonstra ble on histopathologic
 p.310)309. Retinal detachments are seen in the late stages
examination. The lesions are characteristically bilateral,
of the disease (14.104) and may be difficult to recognize
focal to multifocal granulomatous lesions that elevate the
because of the paurangiotic vascular pattern of the horse
retina (14.86, 14.105, 14.106) or, alternatively, a
retina288b. Leptospirosis in a dog was reported with
complete exudative retinal detachment is produced
bilateral
exudative
retinal
detachments
DuB
(14.107). Optic nerve involvement is common. Vitreous
chorioretinitis sca rs309a.
centesis is a rapid means of confirming the etiology.
 Systemic aspergillosis with panuveitis is found
in
Systemic mycoses
German Shepherd Dogs. I
 Immunosuppression
is
The systemic mycoses are a significant etiology for
 considered a predisposing factor for such an ubiquitous
chorioretinitis/endophthalmitis in the dog on a regional
 organism to become disseminated but the underlying
 cause in this breed has not been determined311
Chapter 11, p.298). The mycotic organisms usually enter
14.104
14.105
14.104 Complete retinal detachment in a horse with advanced
14.105 Focal subretinal granuloma and retinal hemorrhages in a
recurrent uveitis. Detachment may be confused with vitreal
Labra dor Retriever with blastomycosis.
membranes as there are no retinal blood vessels visible to allow
differentia tion.
14.106
14.107
14.106 Multifocal subretinal bullae associated with cryptococcosis
14.107 Complete exudative retinal detachments in a Beagle with
in a cat. The lesions changed minimally over months of treatment.
blastomycosis. Note the multiple retinal hermorrhages. The condition
The cat was initially blind but vision returned rapidly with therapy
was bilateral and the dog was presented for blindness, not for
 and no other CNS signs were present.
 5ystemic disease.
446
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Protothecosis
tick, Rhipicepbalus sanguineus. The disease is divided into
Prototbeca is a ubiquitous algae and infections are
the acute (1-3 weeks), subclinical (average 11 weeks), and
relatively rare. When present, the posterior ocular segment
chronic stages. While ocular signs may be present in all
is involved in about 50% of cases12. The vast majority of
stages, animals are not usually presented for diagnosis
Aru suais ois aui ing paae aesas ae so
until the chronic stage. Experimentally, 50% of inoculated
be occult and the animal is presented for blindness313 The
dogs developed ocular lesions and ocular lesions were
author has ma de the diagnosis on multiple occa sions from
present in the acute state3is, The prevalence of ocular
vitreous centesis and, on rechecking a urinalysis, has found
lesions has been given as 10-15% and, when present, can
the organism present in the urine, which was missed by the
laboratory on the initial examination. Lesions vary from
reported that 37% of dogs diagnosed with ehrlichiosis had
bilateral, multifocal, dark chorioretinal granulomas to
ocular lesions, and that 65% of those with ocular lesions
large areas of massive, white subretinal accumulations
had no apparent systemic signs.
(14.108). Exudative retinal detachment is the end stage of
The ocular lesions are the result of either platelet
the process. Inflammatory cell reaction is minimal. No
deficiency and/or, more commonly, vasculitis. Massive
effective therapy has been reported in animals, although
orbital and ocular hemorrhage has been observed but,
itraconazole is used in humans.
more commonly, uveitis with ocular hemorrhage is the
basic lesion (see Chapter 11, p.298). Retinal hemorrhage
Rickettsial infection 
is common and retinal detachment may be observed
Canine ehrlichiosis is a tick borne disease produced by
 either from massive subretinal hemorrhage or exudates
Ehrlichia canis, E.platys, and E.equi314. E.canis is the
(14.109)316. Optic neuritis with engorged retinal vessels
most important agent and is transmitted by the brown dog
and papillary hemorrhage may occur. Experimentally,
discrete perivascular infiltrates have been described in the
 subacute stage but have not been described in clinical
14.108
cases 317
Rickettsia rickettsii, the agent of RMSF, produces
 Ocular lesions that are similar but milder than E. canis.
The vector and reservoir are the ticks Dermacentor
andersoni, D. variabilis, and Amblyomma americanum.
Retinal petechiae, retinal vasculitis, and mild anterior
 uveitis are common, occurring in nine out of 11 dogs
(82%) in one series (14.110)313.
Protozoa
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis is a well publicized disease, due to its
 zoonotic potential. While exposure is widespread based on
serologic surveys, toxoplasmosis as a systemic clinical
 disease is not very common. Ocular lesions have been
 described for both the dog and the cat and posterior
segment lesions are described as retinochoroiditis, due to
14.108 A dog with extensive subretinal exduate associated with
the organism's predilection for the retina. Ophthal-
Prototheca. The lesions began as small multifocal dark lesions and
moscopic lesions range from small multifocal infiltrates
progressed to retinal detachrment. Diagnosed by vitreal centesis.
(14.111) with a ring of edema, to focal retinal detachments.
14.109
14.110
14.109 Massive retinal detachment due to subretinal hermorrhage in
14.110 Multiple retinal hemorrhages in a dog with Rocky Mountain
a dog with ehrlichiosis.
spotted fever. Note how many hemorrhages are associated with
end arterioles.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
447
Granulomatous anterior uveitis may develop but organisms
mutton has been postulated to be responsible for the
are often not present with anterior uveal involvement.
difference between the incidence in urban and rural dogs.
Lesions often improve without therapy319. In the dog.
Angiostronglus vasorum larvae may be observed in the
toxoplasmosis is frequently associated with distemper and
 anterior chamber or the vitreous. Additional ocular
both agents may produce ocular lesions. (See Chapter 11,
lesions may be hemorrhage and inflammation3sa, 322a, 322b.
p.298 for a more thorough discussion of toxoplasmosis.)
Intraocular migrating Diptera (fly) larvae (ophthal-
Many of the previously diagnosed cases of toxoplasmosis
momyiasis interna) have been observed in both the dog
may have been caused by Neosporum caninum.
and cat fundus, and they leave characteristic curvilinear
wandering paths in the subretinal space. The lesions can
Hepatozoon americanum
be observed as chronic scars without evidence of an
Hepatozoon americanum  is  a protozoan  parasite
active larva, or acute with the larva present {14.112,
transmitted by the ticks Amblyomma maculatum and
14.113). The larvae can be very motile and seem to be
Riphicephalus sanguineus; reported cases in the US have
photophobic. The tracts have characteristic dark clumps
been limited to the Gulf coast states. It produces a
 and hemorrhages may be present if the tracts are recent36,
chronic wasting disease with myalgia and lymph-
323. The larva in most cases of ophthalmomyiasis interna
adenopathy.
 Ocular signs consist of ocular discharge,
is
usually not identified but t
the cattle bot
fly
uveitis, and chorioretinal scars. Radiographs of affected
(Hypoderma
bovis).
and
_reindeer
warble
fly
dogs in the US reveal periostitis. Diagnosis is usually
(Oedemagena   tarandi)  have   been   identified 
in
made on muscle biopsy. In other parts of the world,
association with the condition. Cuterebra larva have
hepatozoonosis is often asymptomatic, the organism is
been removed or found in the anterior chamber and the
found in large numbers in the blood, and bone lesions are
vitreous of both the dog and the cat 323a-s.
rare320. Death usually occurs within 24 months of the
initial signs. Despite initial improvement in signs with
various anticoccidial therapies, relapses occur unless
long-term therapy is administered.
14.111
Metazoan parasites
Metazoan parasites are an uncommon but interesting
etiology for posterior uveitis. Migrating Toxocara larvae
were initially reported to produce small focal retinal and
choroidal  
 granulomas that were of litle clinical
found associated with severe posterior chorioretinitis and
endophthalmitis that often results in blindness37, 322
Usually, the dogs are of rural origin. Lesions observed are
multifocal  areas  of  tapetal l
hyperreflectivity
and
hyperpigmentation. When histopathologic exa mination is
performed on young dogs, the inflammation is active,
Toxocara larvae are found, and the dogs are still visual.
Older dogs are often blind and have more diffuse lesions
of retinal and choroidal atrophy, perivascular plasma cell 
 infiltration, hyalitis, and characteristic peripapillary
14.111 Cat with multifocal chorioretinitis associated with
necrosis of the nontapetal retina. The feeding of raw
toxoplasmosis. Note the larger lesions have fuzzy edges.
14.112
14.113
14.112 Cat with extensive wandering curvilinear retinopathy and
14.113 Cat with curvilinear tracts with residual debris in the tracts,
retinal hermorrhages, typical of ophthalmomyiasis.
typical of ophthalmomyiasis. The lesions are not as obvious in the
tapetum but are visible.
448
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Onchocerca cervicalis has been considered to be one
Immune-mediated chorioretinitis
 of the main known etiologies of ERU and migrating
Most instances of nongranulomatous chorioretinitis are not
larvae have been demonstrated in the posterior uvea on
definitively diagnosed. Immune-mediated disease is often
suspected, based on associated systemic signs or lack thereof,
is characteristic {14.102). The optic nerve in the acute
histopathologic examination in which no infectious agents
 stages may be hyperemic but it is more often found with
are found or cultured, and inflammation which is
a loss of retinal blood vessels and a pale color later, in the
mononuclear or the result of vascular insult.
atrophic stage.
A transient multifocal serous *chorioretinitis' has been
 In sheep, goats, and wild ruminants, Elaeopbord
 described as an incidental finding in Beagles. On
sch neideri, which inhabits the common carotid and other
histopathologic examination, only focal serous
 arteries, may produce ocular lesions in addition to the
accumulations of fluid without inflammatory cells
typical cutaneous lesions of the head. Ocular lesions
between the neurosensory retina and the PE are observed.
consist of keratitis, cataract, anterior uveitis, retinal
The cause is unknown32s, Similar multifocal retinal lesions
edema, chorioretinal atrophy, retinal vessel attenuation,
were described in a series of Doberman Pinschers 10-30
 and optic nerve atrophy.
 s i a g a   s
glomerulonephropathy, polymyositis, skin rash, fever,
anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia, in addition to
 retinal lesions. The fundus lesions were one-quarter to
one-half disk diameter in size and resolved 2 weeks after
14.114
cessation of therapy. This was hypothesized to be an
immune complex disease or a type Ilf hypersensitivity326.
Rapidly developing bilateral retinal detachment due to
subretinal exudates has been observed in predominantly
large breeds of dogs. Associated focal dark choroidal lesions
are often present and the condition is thought to represent
choroiditis and choroidal vasculitis {14.114, 14.115). Optic
neuritis is observed with choroiditis. A lack of systemic signs,
negative cultures from the subretinal fluid, histopathologic
fndings, and improvement with systemic glucocorticoids are
Suggestive of an immune-medated choroiditis27, 328 Some
 animals have circulating autoantibodies.
 Many dogs in the late stages of VKH symdrome develop
exudative retinal detachment. The choroid typically has a
marked infiltrate of mononuclear cells. The RPE is destroyed 
and the neurosensory retina undergoes milder perivascular
inflammatory changes and degenerates (14.87). The
14.114 Geman Shorthair Pointer presented with acute blindness.
pigmented portions of the fundus develop patchy
Both retinas had low lying detachments and hyperemic vessels, and
depigmentation, which later becomes confluent (14.116).
the choroid had large multifocal infiltrates that progressed to
The lesions are presumably due to an immune reaction
confluence. Vitreous centesis was sterile and the condition responded
against melanin (see Chapter 7, p.145).
to 5ystemic immunosuppressive doses of prednisone. This condition
may be difficult to differentiate from systemic mycoses.
14.115
14.116
14.115 A dog with steroid-responsive retinal detachment and focal
14.116 An Akita with Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada 5yndrome and 
choroidal infiltrates. Note the vascular hyperemia, swollen disk and 
depigmented lesions in the nontapetum. The uveitis was being treated
detachment ventrally.
 aggressively at this time and was quiescent. Compare to 14.87.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
449
Phacoanaphylaxis or phacoclastic uveitis that is
an usually be defined, whereas bilateral optic neuritis in
induced by lens capsule rupture predominantly produces
systemically healthy animals is ofen idiopathic3,332
a severe anterior uveitis, but the majority of patients also
 In the dog, distemper should be considered as a cause in 
have a lymphocytic-plasmacytic retinal perivascular
 all bilateral cases of optic neuritis, even if the animal is
reaction329, The latter lesions are rarely noted clinically
vaccinated and there are no systemic complaints {14.93).
due to the severe anterior uveal reaction.
The virus of tick-borne encephalitis has been reported to
apua u sop au u aus snau odo un anond
Diagnosis of chorioretinitis
areas of Europe332a.
● Like anterior uveitis, nongranulomatous
 Systemic mycoses, toxoplasmosis, ehrlichiosis, orbital
chorioretinitis is often not definitively diagnosed,
neoplasia, orbital cellulitis, orbital trauma such as
 despite exhaustive testing. Appearances are not 
 proptosis, and granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
a bsolute.
{GME, inflammatory reticulosis) are all possible causes of
 Lesions should be categorized into granulomatous or
optic neuritis in the dog. GME may extend down both
nongranulomatous, to limit the etiologies.
optic nerves from the brain to produce blindness,
 Lesions should be correlated with systemic signs and
papilledema, retinal hemorrhage, and retinal detachment
history, i.e. environment, exposure. Laboratory tests 
{14.117, 14.118). The condition is usually responsive to
such as CBC, chemistry profile, immune profile,
systemic glucocorticoids on a short-term basis and should
radiographs of the chest, and serology for various
be considered with multifocal neurologic lesions and optic
infectious diseases such as brucellosis, systemic
nerve lesions333-33s. The Miniature Poodle and other
mycoses, ehrlichiosis, RMSF, and toxoplasmosis, are
 small breeds have an increased incidence of GME.
often indicated in the acute stages. Culture and
cytology of vitreous or subretinal fluid are usually
reserved for cases with severe active lesions. Patients
14.117
should be screened for antigens such as FeLV,
Toxoplasma, and Cryptococcus. Enucleation for
histopathologic examination is a valid procedure if
the eye is nonfunctional.
Procedures for biopsy of the choroid-retina have been
devised. However, the cost, lack of surgical experience,
and problems with obtaining representative samples with
focal lesions make this procedure rarely performed, even
in a specialty practice330.
Chorioretinal lesions with systemic disease are
frequently of diagnostic, therapeutic, and
prognostic importance. Infectious organisms may
remain sequestered in the globe and blindness may
alter the owner's desire to treat the infectious
disease aggressively.
14.117 A dog with optic neuritis associated with granulomatou5
 meningoencephalomyelitis. Note the peripapillary hemorrhages,
Therapy
elevated disk deviating the retinal vessels, haze over the disk, and
Therapy is directed at the underlying disease, if associated
vascular hyperemia. The condition was bilateral.
with systemic disease. Because of the difficulty of obtaining
therapeutic drug levels in the posterior globe, systemic
antibiotics are often administered if infection is suspected, or
14.118
 immune suppressors administered for immune-mediated or
traumatic problems. If acute bacterial infection is known or
 anticipated, intravitreal antibiotics may be injected (see 
Chapter 2, p.41).
DISEASES OF THE OPTIC NERVE
Optic neuritis
Introd uction/etiology
The term optic neuritis is usually used to connote a disease
that interferes with optic nerve function, whether or not it is
inflammatory. Optic neuritis may be part of a condition with
generalized fundus lesions (neuroretinitis) or it may be
isolated to the optic nerve(s). Optic neuritis may be unilateral
or bilateral, and may involve the optic disk or be confined to
 the retrobulbar nerve. The condition is associated with loss of
14.118 Optic neuritis in a dog with granulomatous
nerve conduction, ie. blindness in the involved eye, and is
meningoencephalomyelitis. Blindness was the first sign:
often sudden in onset. The etiology of unilateral optic neuritis
later, multilfocal neurologic signs developed.
450
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Optic neuritis can be produced by FIP and crypto-
Therapy
coccosIs in the cat, male fern ingestion in cattle, and
If an infectious disease is diagnosed, this should be
guttural pouch infection with Aspergillus spp. in the
treated specifically. Idiopathic cases or those thought to
horse. In many instances the cause of optic neuritis is
be due to GME should have 2-4 mg/kg. of systemic
idiopathic, and these cases are typically systemically
prednisone divided daily and then decreased over a 3-4-
normal, acute in onset, and bilateral.
week period. If GME is diagnosed, the therapy should be
Clinical signs
doses with glucocorticoids have been strong immuno-
Optic neuritis may present either unilaterally 
or
 suppressive drugs such as cyclosporine and cytosine
bilaterally. If presented with bilateral involvement, the
 ara binoside. Remissions with these drugs have been more
patient is blind with dilated pupils that typically respond
complete and with fewer side-effects337a, 337b. Treatment
very sluggishly and incompletely to light. Affected dogs,
with cytosine arabinoside requires infrequent dosing
even though they are blind, often act photophobic in that
compared with glucocorticoids or cyclosporine and is
they resist the examination light.
administered at 50 mg/m2 s.c. q12h for 2 days every 3
The fundus may be normal if the condition is
weeks. Therapy should be initiated as soon as possible,
completely retrobulbar but the typical appearance is of a
 and if the patient is going to respond, improvement is
swollen optic disk with deviation of retinal blood vessels.
generally seen in the first S-7 days. Many of the
The retinal vessels are usually congested, as are the
idiopathic cases, if treated early, have a partial response
capillaries of the disk. Hemorrhages are common on and
with a return of some vision and an improvement in
adjacent to the disk, and peripapillary edema may be
 PLRs. The optic disk swelling is slower to regress and,
present. Inflammation may create a mild haze over the
over a period of several weeks, variable degrees of optic
optic disk and, if it is part of a more diffuse disease,
nerve atrophy become evident.
chorioretinal lesions may be present {14.88, 14.117,
The treatment of distemper optic neuritis is a dilemma
14.118).
for the clinician. Due to the severity of the signs, i.e.
blindness, the psychological pressure to treat is great. The
Diagnosis
risk of immunosuppressive drugs creating a fulminating
A presumptive diagnosis of optic neuritis is made when a
disease is possible but there is also rationale for anti-
patient is presented with a sudden onset bilateral
inflammatory therapy of distemper demyelinating lesions.
blindness and a swollen optic disk. If the condition is
retrobulbar neuritis, the main differential diagnosis is
Papilledema (choked disk)
SARDS. The ERG of optic neuritis patients is normal but 
Introduction/etiology
is extinguished with SARDS. If electroretinography is not
Papilledema is a passive swelling of the optic disk or
available, it is better to err on the side of optic neuritis,
papilla, as opposed to the active swelling and hyperemia
which may be a treatable disease.
with optic neuritis. It is usually associated with increased
Optic neuritis is often responsive to glucocorticoid
CSF pressure and does not result in blindness, although the
therapy but such therapy is contraindicated with many of
basic cause of the increased CSF pressure may produce
 the infectious causes. To avoid inappropriate therapy a
blindness. The pathogenesis of papilledema is disputed but 
good history, physical and neurologic examination,
it is probably not simply a restriction of venous drainage
screening laboratory tests of CBC and serum chemistry
 from the disk. Interference with axoplasmic flow results in
profile, and a cerebrospinal tap are indicated. A CT or
swollen axons and is common to most of the etiologies of
MRI scan may also provide diagnostic information.
papilledema. An increase in interstitial fluid in the nerve
 Definitive diagnosis of GME may be difficult
tbut
head from the peripapillary choroid and local blood
increased protein and pleocytosis of plasma-lymphocytic
vessels also occurs but is not as important as the
cells and, rarely, reticulum cells in the CSF, multifocal
interference in axoplasmic flow in producing swelling338
neurologic disease, and a temporary response to systemic
The condition may be unilateral or bilateral. If bilateral,
 glucocorticoids is suggestive of the diagnosis336.
marked asymmetry may still be present. Early pa pilledema
is difficult to recognize in the dog beca use of the variable
Differential diagnosis
amounts of myelin in the nerve head. Serial examinations
Differential diagnosis should include any of the diffuse
and comparisons to the opposite eye, if it is normal, allow
retinal diseases since they produce similar signs of dilated
more critical evaluation. Papilledema is rarely manifest in
pupils and blindness. Most diffuse retinal diseases that
the cat and horse optic disk, unless very severe.
are severe enough to produce blindness are advanced and
Any space-occupying mass of the CNS may cause
dramatic, with the major exception of SARDS.
 papilledema but the usual cause is a brain tumor In one
Cortical blindness is accompanied by brisk PLRs.
study of brain tumors, 48% of the patients had
Papilledema  appears   S
similar toopticneuritis
papilledema337 but the myth still persists that the dog
ophthalmoscopically but pure papilledema does not
does not manifest papilledema with brain tumors. Space-
cause blindness. However, the causes of papilledema,
occupying lesions of the orbit such as neoplasia,
such as CNS neoplasia, may produce blindness. In
hemorrhage, and inflammation may impinge on the optic
general, the pupils should be reactive if the animal is
 nerve, producing papilledema.
blind from cortical lesions. Since cortical lesions can also
be accompanied by midbrain lesions with pupillary
 abnormalities, differentiation may be more complex337.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
451
Hydrocephalus is a rare a cause of papilledema, with
Proliferative optic neuropathy in horses
most cases having normal optic disks. Hyperviscosity
Proliferative optic neuropathy is an asymptomatic
syndromes such as polycythemia or gammopathy are
condition that is usually found as an incidental finding
relatively rare causes of papilledema. Severe systemic
on the nerve head of older horses. The condition is
ue pue sop aul ui ewapaded aonpoud keu uoisuahady
unilateral and consists of an elevated grayish cauliflower-
 association with pancreatitis has been made.
like proliferation on the optic nerve (14.120).
Acute severe hypotony or acute glaucoma
are
The lesion consists of plump cells filled with an
potential ca uses of papilledema but are rarely recognized.
eosinophilic foamy cytoplasm. The cytoplasm is partially
Vitamin A deficiency in young cattle produces dramatic
positive for PAS stain and oil-red-O but negative for
papilledema; papilledema is an early sign in this
luxol-fast blue. The lesion was originally described as
condition that is present before blindness (14.72)260.
neoplastic and termed an astrocytoma 339 The neoplastic
 origin is not accepted today and the lesion has been
Clinical signs
The optic disk with papilledema becomes elevated and
The author has recognized this condition as an
enlarged, causing the retinal vessels to bend upward onto
incidental finding on examination. He has also seen acute
the surface. The disk is typically congested and may have
lesions of extrusion of myelin from the nerve head after
small hemorrhages on or adjacent to the disk. A halo of
colic surgery, and in postmortem eyes after enucleation
peripapillary edema may be present in the subretinal
with a chain echraser that resemble proliferative optic
space (14.119).
neuropathy in appearance. Crushing the optic nerve near
the globe may result in myelin extrusion onto the optic
Differential diagnosis
disk, as well as into the vitreous.
In the dog, the normal heavily myelinated optic disk
Platt et al342 reviewed the equine literature on
typical of many large breeds of dogs can be difficult to
 degenerative optic nerve lesions and found proliferative
differentiate from mild to moderate papilledema. In all 
reactions described on the optic nerve in many cases.
species, aberrant myelination of the retinal fiber layer
Common to many was a history of acute blood loss or
may simulate papilledema (14.27, 14.28). Papillitis or
suspected trauma. Similar lesions are reported in two
optic neuritis may be identical in appearance t
to
horses that had undergone occlusion of the internal and
papilledema but is accompanied by blindness.
external carotid arteries and the greater palatine artery
for treatment of guttural pouch mycosis. The horses were
A fundus examination with critical evaluation of
blind upon recovery from anesthesia but the optic disk
the optic disk should be part of the physical
lesions were not observed until the third postoperative
examination of patients with neurologic signs.
day343. It is tempting to consider proliferative optic
neuropathy lesions as chronic and milder variations of
 acute blinding myelin extrusion syndrome.
14.119
14.120
14.119 Papilldema in a dog with a brain tumor. Note the
14.120 Proliferative optic neuropathy found as an incidental
swollen disk that deviates the retinal blood vessels and the
finding in one eye of an aged horse. This probably represents 
peripapillary edema.
extrud ed myelin.
452
OpHTHAlMIC DISEASE In VeteRINARY MeDICINE
BLOOD-VASCULAR DISEASES OF THE FUNDUS
14.121
A variety of blood dyscrasias and vascular diseases are
manifest in the ocular fundus since it is a convenient
window to the body's microvasculature. Most of these
are systemic diseases and the fundus lesions may be
either a diagnostic clue or the presenting sign.
Polycythe mia
Polycythemia, an absolute increase in erythrocytes, must
become quite extreme before manifesting in the retinal
vasculature. The usual causes are cyanotic congenital
heart disease and polycythemia rubra vera. When the
packed  cell  volume (PCV)  reaches  approximately
66-69%, the retinal vasculature must accommodate to
the increased volume by dilating and increasing in length
(tortuous vessels). The blood is also darker in color
(14.121,14.122). Transudative retinal detachment may
develop, perhaps associated with hyperviscosity. If the
14.121 A 4-month-old English Bulldog with cyanotic congenital
condition is chronic and extreme, retinal and vitreal
heart disease and secondary polycythemia. Note the dark ruddy
hemorrhage will eventually occur344, 345.
color and distension of the vessels.
Serum hyperviscosity syndrome
Thrombocytopenia
myeloma and, occasionally, lymphosarcoma are the usual
The level of platelets that is necessary to prevent
etiologies for most hyperviscosity syndromes. The
uj uoneuea lenpiaipu aaru ol sueadde saeuiouau
 increased colloidal pressure results in an increased blood
general, platelet counts below 50,000/μl usually result in 
volume and dilated, kinked retinal vessels, and may
 petechiation. The fundus is a good microvasculature bed
produce sausage-like sacculation. Hemorrhagic diathesis
to
detect petechiation {14.126).  Common causes of
results in retinal hemorrhage, which is the most common
thrombocytopenia
are  immune-mediated
I  diseases,
lesion, but its cause is not fully understood (14.123)346-348.
rickettsial diseases, and neoplasia.
Retinal detachment may occur and multiple focal
intraretinal cysts under the internal limiting membrane
Clotting disorders
have been observed {14.124). These cysts were initially
Inherited or acquired clotting disorders may occasionally
thought to be focal retinal detachments but their
 manifest as retinal hemorrhages.
relationship to the retinal blood vessels and biomicroscopy
of the retina indicate they are intraretinal. The retinal cysts
Leukemia
persist, despite improvement in the systemic disease. In
Fundus lesions from various types of leukemias
humans, ciliary body cysts are common with multiple
usually manifest as hemorrhages but neoplastic
myeloma. Anterior segment lesions of glaucoma and
infiltrates may develop. Patients with myelogenous
 anterior uveitis may also be present349.
leukemia seem especially prone to retinal hemorrhage.
Hemorrhagic diathesis with neoplasia may develop
Severe anemia
despite normal platelets, and this is thought to
Acute anemia with PCVs <7% regularly manifest with
represent vasculitis.
pale retinal vessels and varying degrees of retinal
hemorrhage, irrespective of the thrombocyte count
Lipemia
(14.96, 14.125). When the condition is combined with
Hyperlipemia has been associated with lipids in the
thrombocytopenia, the hemorrhage is more extensive.
 anterior chamber, secondary glaucoma, anterior uveitis,
Chronic profound anemia has been associated with
 corneal lipidosis, and lipemia retinalis352. Increases in
retinal detachment in the dog316. In the horse, acute
 serum triglycerides above 2,500 mg/100 ml may manifest
blood loss may rarely result in blindness associated with
with a pinkish color of the retinal vessels (lipemia
a retinopathy and optic nerve atrophy. The retinal lesions
retinalis). In animals with a tapetum, it is easier to detect
 are multifocal with marked pigment disruption350.
the color change in the vessels over the nontapetum
The relationship of blindness to hemorrhage is tenuous
(14.127)3s3. Elevations in cholesterol do not result in a
but a similar condition occurs in elderly people, usually
lipemic fundus.
with gastrointestinal bleeding. Blindness from optic nerve
Lipemia is usually associated with diabetes mellitus,
infarction is not immediate but in huma ns it usually occurs
hypothyroidism, pancreatitis, liver disease, and familial
within 3-10 days after bleeding. It is hypothesized that
hyperlipidemia354.
Whiteretinal
deposits 
with
hemorrhage superimposed on existing vascular disease
hemorrhage and optic disk hyperemia have been
may result in the condition since it is not observed in
described in a dog with diabetes mellitus that was lipemic
 young adults such as soldiers with war wounds351.
but did not manifest lipemia retinalis. The white deposits
Aeia um paaosa aaui se spid aq oi nou ara
restriction of fat. The hemorrhages and papilledema may
have resulted from systemic hypertension33s.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
453
14.122
14.123
14.122 Calf with cyanotic congenital heart disease that resulted
14.123 A dog with a hypergammopathy with multiple retinal
in severe secondary polycythemia. The vessels have lengthened.
hemorrhages, peripapillary edema, papilledema, and vascular 
resulting in tortuosity, and have dilated to accommodate the 
engorgement.
additional vascular volume. The blood is also darker than normal.
14.124
14.125
14.124 Multiple faint intraretinal cysts (arrows] and retinal
14.125 Canine fundus manifesting severe anemia with almost no
hermorrhages in a dog with multiple myeloma and a
visible blood in the vessels, a pale disk, and some increased tapetal
hypergammopathy.
reflectivity. This mimics progressive retinal atrophy, but the dog is
visual and the retinal signs will correct with systemic improverment.
14.126
14.127
 14.126 Dog with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia and multiple
14.127 Lipemia retinalis in a dog with acute pancreatitis.
retinal hemorrha ges.
The pink hue to the vessels is most easily observed against
the nontapetal background.
454
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VeTERINARY MeDICINE
Arteriosclerosis/atherosclerosis and hypertension
Clinical signs
Introduction/etiology
Ocular signs are usually the presenting signs of
Examination of the ocular fundus is an excellent method
hypertension but cardiac and neurologic signs may also
of observing a vascular bed. On ophthalmoscopic
examination, the normal vessel walls are transparent and
 of hypertension, such as renal failure or hyperthyroidism,
the clinician is observing the column of blood within the
also often contributes to the patient's signs. The cat
vessel. With early arteriosclerosis the blood column is
appears to manifest ocular lesions with systemic
narrowed and the vessel is straighter. With increased
hypertension more readily than the dog. The mean age of
severity the vessel walls become opaque and the vessel is
cats presented with signs was 15 years368,370.
then observed as a white or silver line of irregular width,
The lesions observed with hypertension in the dog and
which obscures the blood column. Vascular changes in the
cat are typically advanced unless observed on a screening
small vessels of the choroid produce circular alterations in
examination. The most common ocular lesions noted in
reflectivity, corresponding to the distribution of the
affected end arterioles {14.128). Arteriosclerosis is
varying degrees of retinal detachment (62%) and 52%
infrequently recognized clinically in the dog. When
had bilateral detachments; retinal vessel tortuosity; and
recognized, it is usually because of hypertension and is
preretinal, vitreal, retinal, or subretinal hemorrhages in
 associated with hypothyroidism356,357
56% of eyes368, Multifocal bullae of the retina may be
Hypertension in the dog and cat is being diagnosed
noted early in the course.
with increasing frequency, often because of sudden
Hypertension is manifested in the ocular fundus as
blindness associated with retinal detachment, retinal
 dilated tortuous vessels, retinal edema, retinal hemorrhages,
hemorrhage, or hyphema. The systemic signs of
vitreous hemorrhages, perivasculitis, papilledema, and focal
hypertension are minimal or vague and it is often the
or
generalized
 transudative  retinal
detachment
fundus lesions that are symptomatic and suggestive of the
{14.129-14.132). Sustained increases in blood pressure
diagnosis. Hypertensive retinopathy is probably the
result in vasoconstriction of autoregulated (as in the retina)
leading cause of blindness in old cats.
 peripheral arterioles. This results in hypertrophy and
Causes
 of arteriosclerosis/atherosclerosis
 and
hyperplasia of the tunica media, loss of the internal elastic
hypertension include:
membrane and, eventually, fibrinoid necrosis371. Hayreh
Hypothyroidism356-358
et al.372, 373 divided the fundus lesions in primates into
+
 Renal disease: hypertension has been recognized in
hypertensive retinopathy, choroidopathy, and optic
61% of dogs with renal tubular disease and 80% of
neuropathy. The retinal changes occur significantly earlier
aui inq sasueup aaiau oudo pue jepionouo aui ueul
 percent of cats with chronic renal failure were found
choroidal changes may predominate in the dog and cat368
to have hypertension 360
The earliest retinal lesions in primates are intraretinal, focal,
+ Pheochromocytoma fcatecholamine secreting tumor
periarteriolar white transudates that are pinhead size and
of the adrenal medulla) is a rare cause of
round and last 2-3 weeks. They are distinguishable from
hypertension361.
'cotton wool spots', which are ischemic lesions in the nerve
Hyperparathyroidism.
fber layer that appear later The transudates arise from loss
Hyperthyroidism: while untreated hyperthyroidism
of autoregulation of the retinal arterioles which dilate and,
 has been variably reported to cause hypertension in
due to damage to the endothelium, become permeable to
cats (87% 360; 23%362), the link between
hyperthyroidism, hypertension, and hypertensive
been described with hypertension in the dog and cat.
retinopathy is more tenuous. Stiles et al.362 found
 If retinal detachment is present, resolution of the 
m apns riaul u sie aaisuaaday aui jo auo auo
hypertension will be accompanied by resolution of the
Pue ipuaoM iap uea pue Auiedouuau aaisuauaday
retinal detachment. However, secondary retinal atrophy
Peterson363 examined 100 hyperthyroid cats without 
a single case of hypertensive retinopathy. Sansom
glaucoma and hyphema may be noted.
et al364 found one cat out of 16 presented for lesions
of ocular hypertension had hyperthyroidism. In two
Diagnosis
 years of screening hyperthyroid cats prior to I-131
The measurement of blood pressure is easily performed by
therapy, the author failed to find a single cat with
indirect techniques but the interpretation of modest
hypertensive retinopathy.
elevations in untrained animals in unfamiliar circumstances
High salt diet365.
Hyperaldosteronism361.
animals of at least moderate elevations in blood pressure
· A primary form or essential hypertension has been
are necessary in order to be confident of the results. A
described as a familial trait in dogs36, 367. Primary
common source of error when performing indirect blood
hypertension may also be a very significant cause of
pressure measurements is not using the appropriate size
hypertension in the cat. About 50% of 69 cases of
cuff. The cuff width should be 40% and the length 150%
hypertension in the cat had no underlying cause
 of the circumference of the limb. Small cuffs will give
diagnosed368.
erroneously high readings and large cuffs will give low
●Hyperadrenocorticism: 86% of dogs with untreated
 pituitary dependent hyperadrenocorticism and 100%
pressure is 60-110 mmHg (8-14.7 kPa) and the systolic
of dogs with adrenocortical tumors were
pressure is 110-190 mmHg (14.7-25.3 kPa). Blood
 documented as having systemic hypertension369.
pressures >160 mmHg (21.3 kPa) systolic and 95 mmHg
(12.7 kPa) diastolic are considered hypertensive375.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
455
14.128
14.129
14.128 Arteriosclerosis in an aged obese dog with hypothyroidism.
14.129 Multiple retinal hemorrhages, papilledema, and vascular
Nuclear sclerosis interferes with photography. The retinal vessels are
congestion in a dog with systemic hypertension.
straight, narrow, and irregular in width and the underlying scalloping 
pattern is presumably from involvement of the chorioca pillaris.
14.130
14.131
14.130 Hypertensive retinopathy in an older cat. Multiple retinal
14.131 Complete bullous retinal detachment associated with
and subretinal hermorrhages, a low lying retinal detachment, and 
 Systemic hypertension in a cat.
choroidal streaks are visible.
14.132
Feline hypertension is usually established as systolic
in a relaxed cat. Multiple readings may be necessary if
the animal is obviously stressed and resisting restraint.
When utilizing Doppler ultrasound for measuring blood
 pressure, the author has simply taped the probe and cuff
in place and placed the animal in a cage; multiple
readings can then be taken without handling the cat.
Most cats with clinical signs and systemic hyper-
tension have systolic blood pressures  in excess of
200 mmHg (26.7 kPa).
 Evaluation of the retinal vascular system is often an
Aue sey juaed e uaum isat osouaep aaisuadxau
systemic disease that involves the vascular system
14.132 Fundus of a cat that has controlled systemic hypertension.
Or blood elements.
Multiple lesions are presurmed to be previous bullae that had formed 
during the hypertensive crisis. In most cases, evidence of previous bullou5
detachments are folds in the retina from stretching (see 14.135].
456
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Therapy
[oo on kinssu aq oi sheadde sonaui av pun 
When acute blindness is the presenting sign of hypertension,
hypertension in many canine patients. Obviously if the
 emergency therapy to reduce the blood pressure is indicated.
cause of the hypertension  is‘
treatable, such
as
Delay in reducing retinal detachment may result in
hyperadrenalcorticoidism or hyperthyroidism, this
 permanent blindness. Pharmacologic therapy of hypertension
should be addressed. Dietary restriction of salt to
has not been well established in veterinary medicine.
 0.1-0.3% dry weight is recommended for hypertension.
Traditionally, veterinarians mimicked the approach by
physicians of utilizing drugs with the fewest side-effects first
Solute fluid overload
and monitoring for 2-4 weeks. This is not acceptable when
Patients with renal failure frequently receive very
Aa paaond seu li pue panoo sey sssu aine 
aggressive fluid therapy. The author has noted on several
 frustrating to ophthalmologists who feel a sense of urgency to
 occasions that multiple retinal bullae which progress to
minimize ocular sequelae. In cats, the drug of choice is the
complete transudative retinal detachment may occur
calcium channel blocker amlodipine. Amlodipine (0.625 mg
bilaterally in these patients {14.133-14.135). Initially, it
 q12-24h) has proven very reliable in producing a rapid
was thought this was due to hypertension related to renal
(within a few days) drop in blood pressure. Large cats or
disease, although the typical retinal hemorrhages of
those not responding to 0.625 mg may have the dose
hypertension are not present. The blood pressures are
normal and it is suggested that the detachments are due
reported that amlodipine was successful in lowering blood
 to solutes diffusing out of the leaky chorioca pillaris into
the choroid and subretinal space, pulling water with
In dogs with hypertension, the therapy of choice is not
them. Discontinuing the fluids or improvement of renal
esta blished. A combination of calcium channel blockers
function will correct the bullous detachments.
Diabetic retinopathy
14.133
Retinal vascular lesions are infrequently observed in the
 dabetic dog and cat. The basic vascular lesion with diabetes 
mellitus is the microaneurysm (14.136). Experimentally,
retinal microaneuryism requires 4 years to develop but most
dogs have developed cataracts by this stage that obscure
retinal examination376. Most of the reports of diabetic
retinopathy have been pathologic, utilizing flat retinal
preparations with trypsin digestion to isolate the vasculature.
The pathologic vascular lesions are degeneration and a
decrease in numbers of intramural pericytes, resulting in 
acellular or hypocellular retinal capillaries and a few
microaneurysms in the posterior pole376-380 Proliferative
diabetic  retinopathy
(hemorrhage, 
glial
membrane
proliferation, retinal detachment) has not been reproducible
and the dog is thought to be spared from this disabling
 uy a a paunb uaa sy s auo
microaneurysm, hemorrhage, irregularity in vascular width,
14.133 A dog in acute renal failure and on fluid therapy that is
retinal atrophy, and vitreous degeneration in a dog with a 7-
developing bullous retinal detachments in each eye. The 5ystemic
year history of diabetes381. Monti et al382 reported on the
blood pressure was normal.
ophthalmoscopic findings in 13 spontaneous  canine
14.134
14.135
14.134 Severe bullous detachment as the result of overhydrating a
14.135 Residual retinal folds in a cat that previously had bullous
dog in renal failure. The 5ystemic blood pressure was normal.
detachment from overhydration. The condition can both manifest
and resolve rapidly.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
457
dabetics. They reported clinical findings of dilatation of
bows to the globe may produce a contra-coup injury that
retinal veins, localized venous sacculations, venous
results in fundus hemorrhage and bullous retinal detachment
tortuosity, microaneurysm, retinal hemorrhage, focal
(14.137). Severe blunt injury may rupture the globe and the
hyperreflectivity of the tapetum, depigmentation of the
sudden decompression will create retinal and choroidal
nontapetal fundus, and retinal exudate. However, the
detachments and expulsion of the lens.
documentation of exudates and microaneurysms in this
Perforating injuries such as BB shot or pellet injuries
study is not convincing and the alterations in venous caliber
may be obscured by anterior segment pathology or
are subjective and not dramatic. The focal retinal atrophy or
vitreous hemorrhage. Posterior exit wounds may be
scars are nonspecific and may not be related to diabetes. The
observed in the acute or chronic stages. Wounds with
ISe of an age-matched control population would help
vitreous hemorrhage that have a tract that extends to the
determine whether focal retinal atrophy is found with
retina are in danger of producing traction retinal
detachment as the hemorrhage organizes.
ompared the fundus findings of postoperative diabetic and
In the horse, a distinct syndrome of blunt trauma to the
 nondiabetic cataract patients and found that at a mean of 1.4
back of the head or poll may result in unilateral or bilateral
years, 21% of the diabetic patients and 0.6% of nondiabetic
blindness. Injuries to the poll are usually associated with
patients 
had
retinal
hemorrhages
Or
 presumed
rearing and hitting the head on a beam, or falling over and
microaneurysms. Undoubtedly, the improved success rate
hitting the poll on the ground. Mild epistaxis is often
with cataract surgery has unmasked this long-term
 present but the amount of blood loss and the resultant
 mmplication of diabetes. Unlike this report, the author has
pathology are not consistent with neuroretinopathy. On
found retinal petechiation not uncommonly in long-term
examination of the eyes, they are usually normal within
postoperative follow-up of post-cataract surgery dogs that
days of the trauma, except for dilated, fixed pupils. The
were neither diabetic nor had obvious systemic hypertension.
ERG with a diffuse light source is normal.
Warren et al.382b preoperatively screened their cataract
patients and found 16% had systemic hypertension, and
14.136
dabetes did not correlate with the presence of hypertension.
 Diabetes is usually diagnosed in the aged dog and it may
be that most animals do not live long enough to manifest the
more serious retinal changes unless the diabetes is juvenile in
onset. Long-term administration of megestrol acetate in two
cats was thought to be responsible for diabetes mellitus and
associated bilateral retinal hemorrhage and exudative retinal
detachment. The ocular changes were thought to be due to
dabetes but complications, such as hypertension, were not
eliminated as factors in producing retinal detachment383.
Galactose-fed dogs develop microaneurysmal vascular
changes similar to diabetic dogs but at an accelerated
rate. Microaneurysms developed by 24 months in this
model and proliferative retinopathy developed by
 48-60 months of feeding384. Lens removal is necessary to
observe the retinal changes. Aldose reductase inhibitors
14.136 Presumed microaneurysms in a diabetic dog. These appear
 Retinal arteriolar aneurysm, independent of diabetes 
35 minute red dots in the fundus. Fluorescein angiography would 
mellitus, has been documented in the dog, possibly due
 be needed to confirm that they are microaneurysms.
to a congenital defect, and this may result in vitreous
hemorrhage388
14.137
Oxygen-induced retinopathy
Increased arterial oxygen tension as the result of pure
 Oxygen administration in the early neonatal kitten and
puppy (first 2-3 weeks of life) is toxic to the developing
retinal vasculature. The developing retinal blood vessels in
the peripheral retina undergo vasoconstriction and vaso-
obliteration in response to increases in pO, Later, a
secondary vasoproliferative phase develops at the terminal
ends of the developing vascular bed when the patient is
returned to normal atmospheric oxygen tension. The
vasoproliferation invades the vitreous, hemorrhage from
fragile vessels may occur, and contraction of vitreal and
vascular membranes may detach the retina 389, 390.
TRAUMA OF THE FUNDUS
Traumatic injury to the fundus and optic nerve may be in the
form of blunt injuries to the eye, perforating missile injuries,
14.137 Choroidal hermorrhage with overlying retinal folds and 
and avulsion of the retinal-choroidal vessels from proptosis
retinal and preretinal hemorrhages in a Siamese kitten after
of the globe. Proptosis is discussed in Chapter 6, p.134. Blunt
head trauma.
458
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
14.138
14.139
14.138 Unilateral optic nerve atrophy in a 3-month-old foal after
head trauma. Note the lack of retinal blood vessels and the white
color of the disk.
14.139 Optic nerves and chiasm of a horse that had bilateral
blindness 5econdary to trauma to the poll 6 weeks earlier. Note
the marked constriction of the nerves anterior to the chiasm
that corresponds to the region of the optic foramen.
After a period of 4-6 weeks the ophthalmoscopic
aui alensn tsanlui suenopaduou se paiean aq pinogs
examination reveals loss of the retinal vessels and a pale
corneal wound is self-sealing. If the lens capsule has been
optic disk. I
 Peripapillary pigment disruption may be
ruptured and the tear is larger than 2 mm, the lens should
present but is not consistent {14.138). On pathologic
be
removed
toavoid
phacoclastic
uveitis
or
examination of the nerves, the intracanalicular portion of
phacoanaphylaxis392. R
Ruptured  globes should
the optic nerveis) has marked constriction associated
enucleated or the rupture sutured and the globe
with malacia of the nervous tissue (14.139). The
eviscerated and a silicone sphere placed. These globes will
pathogenesis of the lesion is thought 
t to be due to
undergo phthisis bulbi and are not worth the expense and
stretching of the nerve and associated vessels by the
long-term discomfort that will be experienced to retain
backward momentum of the brain against the fixed
the globe in the animal.
 intracanalicular portion of the optic nerve391.
The recommendation for treatment of acute cases of
 traumatic nerve damage have included high dose systemic
Clinical signs of posterior pole trauma
glucocorticoids, mannitol i.v., PG inhibitors, and DMSO
Ocular hemorrhage at any or multiple levels of the eye is
(1 g/kg in 5% dextrose i.y.over 30 minutes)393 In humans
common with trauma. Contra-coup lesions may evidence
with traumatic optic neuropathy, no clear benefit was
retinal edema and bullous 
detachment, and
found 
with
systemic
glucocorticoid t
 perforating missile injuries may evidence as exit wounds
Neuroprotective therapy in the form of calcium channel
in the fundus. Chronic changes are pigment disruption in
 blockers may also be considered39s 396.
 the fundus and, potentially, complete retinal atrophy or 
NEOPLASIA OF THE FUNDUS
optic nerve atrophy (14.140).
Primary neoplasia of the ocular fundus is very rare. The
Diagnosis
most common tumor described is melanoma or, more
Diagnosing traumatic fundus lesions is based on the
correctly, melanocytoma. Melanomas described in the
history and evidence from physical examination of
 dog are flat, sharply circumscribed, slow-growing, and
 concurrent trauma to the head. Perforating missiles may
have benign behavior. As the lesion grows, the retina may
 have entrance wounds in the anterior segment and skull
 detach and extension through the sclera and into the optic
radiographs will detect metallic missiles.
nerve may develop, but metastasis has not been
 documented397. Preiridal fibrovascular membranes may
Therapy
result in hyphema or secondary glaucoma, obscuring
Nonperforating injuries should be treated as nonseptic
visualization of the posterior tumor397, On histopatho-
uveitis, ie. atropine and topical and systemic
did e aua Ansn si adai lo aun 'uouxa o
glucocorticoids. Pellet injuries are usually sterile and
pigment-filled cell without evidence of mitosis or a spindle
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
459
14.140
14.141
14.140 Marked optic nerve atrophy in a herding dog that had been
14.141 A dog with metastatic hemangiosarcoma in the fundus. The
previously kicked in the head by a horse. There was no history of a
condition was bilateral. The ocular lesions must be differentiated 
proptosed globe.
from ocular hermorrhages. Lesions may be very small or large.
 Pulmonary metastasis was also present.
14.142 Gordon Setter with an orbital osteosarcoma that deforrmed
14.142
the globe and produced scleral depression.
observed in the epibulbar melanoma. The cell type and
beha vior indicate similarities to melanocytoma, which is a
benign tumor, rather than melanoma399402
Retinoblastoma is a congenital tumor arising from the
developing retina, from either the glial or photoreceptor
elements. Contemporary literature has reclassified older
case reports of retinoblastoma in animals as being
medulloepitheliomas03, One case report of a retino-
 -ouu Aq sop an un pauuo uaq sy eunse
 cytochemical analysis404.
 Metastatic ocular neoplasia rarely develops in the
fundus. Metastatic lesions are more aggressive and
nonpigmented in most instances, which helps to
differentiate them from primary neoplasia. Bilateral
metastatic lesions rarely occur.
Metastatic hemangiosarcoma will mimic fundus
hemorrhage (14.141).
When sudden hemorrhage or retinal detachment
interferes with a thorough fundus examination,
ultrasonography of the eye should be considered to rule
out neoplasia.
In the cat, a unique angioinvasive pulmonary
carcinoma has been observed in the choroidal and retinal
vasculature, which results in large infarcts in the retina
 Primary neoplasia of the fundus is rare in all of our
and choroid4os. The condition may be unilateral or
domestic animals.
bilateral and manifests with retinal detachment, retinal
hemorrhage, and retinal vascular attenuation. Unlike 
Aeu uoisal susadnmo-aoeds Aue 1o eiseldoau peqio
other metastatic lesions, this disease does not have mass
put compressive forces on the globe and deform it.
lesions but rather thrombi or emboli in the retinal and
Ophthalmoscopically, manifestations may yary from
choroidal vasculature. Similar ischemic lesions are often
pressure striae to indentations of the globe that appear
found in the digits.
similar to (but are not) bullous detachments (14.142).
460
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
REFERENCES
1 Gloor B {1973) Zur entwicklung des
10 Lutty G, Thompson D, Gallup J,
22 Bayon A, Tovar M, Fernandez del
glaskorpes und der zonula. III.
Mello R, Patz A, Fenselau A {1983)
Palacio M, Agut A {2001) Ocular
Herkunft, lebenszeit und ersatz der 
Vitreous: an inhibitor of retinal
complications of persistent hyperplastic
glaskorperzellen beim kaninchen.
extract-induced neovascularization.
primary vitreous in three dogs.
Atbrecht von Graefes Archiv ftur
Investigative Ophthatmatogy and
Veterinary Ophthatmology 4:35-40.
Klinische und experimentelle
Visuat Science 23:52-56.
23 Rubin L {1963) Hereditary retinal
Ophthatmologie 187:21-44.
11 Boeve M, Linde-Sipman T, Stades F
detachment in Bedlington Terriers.
2 Snowden J, Swann D (1980) Vitreous
{1988) Early morphogenesis of
Veterinary Medicine/Small Animat
structure. V. The morphology and
persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
Clinician 3:387-389.
thermal stability of vitreous collagen
Jentis and primary vitreous.
24 Blair N, Dodge J, Schmidt G {1985)
 fibers and comparison to articular
Investigative Ophthatmatogy and
Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in
cartilage (type II) collagen.
Visuat Science 29:1076-1086.
Labrador Retrievers. I. Development of
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
12 Duddy J, Powzaniuk W, Rubin L
retinal tears and detachment. Arcbives
Visual Science 19:610-618.
(1983) Hyaloid artery patency in
of Ophthatmology 103:842-847.
3 Balazs E (ed) (1961) Molecular
neonatal Beagles. American Journat of
 25 Blair N, Dodge J, Schmidt G (1985)
morphology of the vitreous. In: The
Veterinary Research 44:2344-2346.
Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in
Structure of the Eye. Academic Press,
13 Munroe G {2000) Study of the hyaloid
Labrador Retrievers. II. Proliferative
New York, pp. 293-310.
 apparatus in the neonatal
vitreoretinopathy. Archives of
4 Osterlin S, Jacobson B (1968) The
thoroughbred foal. Veterinary Record
Ophthatmotogy 103:848-854.
synthesis of hyaluronic acid in
146:579-584.
26 Forrester J, Lee W, Williamson J
vitreous. I. The presence of soluble
14 Koch SA, Cowles RR, Schmidt GR,
{1978) The pathology of vitreous
transferase and nucleotide sugar in the
Mayo JA, Bowman RW (1978) Ocular
hemorrhage. I. Gross and histological 
acellular vitreous gel. Experimentaf
disease in the newborn horse: a
appearances. Archives of
Eye Research 7:511-523.
preliminary report. Journat of Equine
Ophthatmology 96:703-710.
 5 Stades F {1983) Persistent hyperplastic
Medicine and Surgery 2:167-170.
27 Burke J, Smith J {1981) Retinal
tunica vasculosa lentis and persistent
15 Munroe G (1999) Subconjunctival
proliferation in response to vitreous
hyperplastic primary vitreous in
haemorrhages in neonatal
hemoglobin or iron. Investigative
 Doberman Pinschers: genetic aspects.
thoroughbred foals. Veterinary Record
Ophthaimotogy and Visuat Science
Joturnat of the American Animat
144:279-282.
20:582-592.
Hospitat Association 19:957-964.
16 Martin C (1969) Slit lamp examination 
28 Miller B, Miller H, Ryan S {1986)
6 Stades F {1983) The development of the
 of the normal canine anterior ocular
Experimental epiretinal proliferation 
vitreous and related (vascular)
segment. I. Description. Journat of
induced by intravitreal red blood cells.
structures in persistent hyperplastic
Small Animat Practice 10:151-162.
American Journat of Ophthatmalogy
tunica vasculasa tentis and persistent
17 Kern T {1981) Persistent hyperplastic
102:188-19.
byperplastic primary vitreous
primary vitreous and microphthalmia
29 Ehrenberg M, Thresher R,
(PHTVL/PHPV) in the Doberman
in a dog. Journal of the American
Machemer R {1984) Vitreous
Pinscher. Thesis, Utrecht, pp. 11-21.
Veterinary Medicat Association
 hemorrhage nontoxic to retina as a
 7 Tolentino F, Donovan R, Freeman H
178:1169-1171.
stimulator of glial and fibrous
{1965) Biomicroscopy of the vitreous
18 Leon A, Curtis R, Barnett K {1986)
 proliferation. American Journat of
in Collie dogs with fundus
Hereditary persistent hy perplastic
Ophthatmology 97:611-626.
 abnormalities. Archives of
primary vitreous in the Staffordshire
30 Abrams G, Knighton R {1982) Falsely
Ophthatmology 73:700-706.
Bull Terrier. Journal of the American
extinguished bright-flash
8 Eisner G, Bachmann E {1974)
Animat Hospitat Association
electroretinogram. Archives of
Vergleichend morphologische
22:765-774.
Ophthatmology 100:1427-1429.
spaltlampenuntersuchung des
19 van Rensburg I, Petrick S, van der
 31 Daslak M, Hsu P {1984) A theoretical
glaskorpers bei der katze. Aibrecht von
Lugt J, Smit M (1992) Multiple
study of the effect of vitreous
Graefes Archiv fur Klinische und
inherited eye anomalies including
hemorrhage on the electroretinogram.
Experimentelte Ophthatmologie
persistent hy perplastic tunica vasculosa
Investigative Ophthatmology and
191:343-350.
lentis in Bouvier des Flandres. Progress
Visuat Science 25:233-235.
9 Eisner G, Bachmann E (1974)
in Veterinary and Comparative
 32 Thompson J, Stoessel K (1987) An
Vergleichend morphologische
Ophthatmology 2:133-139.
analysis of the effect of intravitreal
spaltlampenuntersuchung des
 20 Allgoewer I, Pfefferkorn B (2001)
 blood on visual acuity. American
glaskorpers von schaf, schwein, hund,
Persistent hy perplastic tunica vasculosa
Journal of Ophthatmotogy
affen, und kaninchen. Atbrecht von
lentis and persistent hyperplastic
104:353-357.
Graefes Archiv fur Klinische und
primary vitreous (PHTVL/PHPV) in
33 Rubin L {1963) Asteroid hyalosis in
Experimentelle Ophthatmologie
two cats. Veterinary Ophthatmology
the dog. American Journat of
192:9-17.
4:161-164.
Veterinary Research 24:1256-1262.
21 Rebhun W (1976) Persistent
34 Schaffer E {1985) Asteroide hyalose
hyperplastic primary vitreous in a dog.
beim hund. Tierarzttiche Praxis
Journat of the American Veterinary
13:71-75.
Medicat Association 169:620-622.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
461
35 Miller H, Miller B, Rabinowitz H,
49 Hollyfield J, Basinger S {1978) Cyclic
65 Barnett K, Ogden A {1972) Ocular
Zonis S, Nir I {1983) Asteroid bodies:
metabolism of photoreceptor cells.
colobomata in Charolais cattle.
an ultrastructural study. Investigative
Investigative Ophthatmology and
Veterinary R ecord 91:592.
Ophthatmology and Vistuat Science
Visuat Science 17:87-89.
66 Gripenberg U, Blomqvist L, Pamilo P
24:133-136.
 50 Prince J, Diesem C, Eglitis I, Ruskell G
{1985) Multiple ocular coloboma
36 Kaswan R, Martin C {1984)
{1960) The globe. In: Anatomy and
(MOC) in snow leopards (Pather
Ophthalmoyiasis interna in a dog and
Histology of the Eye and Orbit in
ncia): clinical report, pedigree
cat. Canine Practice 11:28-34.
Dormestic Animats. CC Thomas,
analysis, chromosome investigations,
37 Johnson B, Kirkpatrick C, Whiteley H,
Springfield, pp. 13-42.
and serum protein studies. Hereditas
Morton D, Helper L {1989) Retinitis
51 Martin C, Anderson B {1981) Ocular
102:221-229.
and intraocular larval migration in a
anatomy. In: Veterinary
67 Martin C, Stiles J, Willis M (1997)
group of Border Collies. Journat of the
Ophthatmology, 1st edn. K Gelatt (ed).
 Feline colobomatous syndrome.
American Animal Hospitat Association
Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, pp. 88,
Veterinary and Comparative
25:623-629.
92, 98
Ophthatmology 7:39-43.
38 Parry HG {1953) Degenerations of the
 52 Pirie A (1965) The chemistry and
68 Rubin L {1963) Atypical coloboma of
dog retina. I. Structure and
structure of the tapetum lucidum in
the choroid in a dog. Journat of the
development of the retina of the
animals. In: Aspects of Comparative
American Veterinary Medicat
normal dog. British Journat of
Ophthatmology. O Graham-Jones (ed).
Association 143:841-842.
Ophthaimology 37:385-404.
Pergammon Press, London, pp. 57-75.
69 Schuh JC (1989) Bilateral colobomas
39 Donovan A {1966) The postnatal
53 Wyman M, Donovan E {1965) The
in a horse. Journat of Comparative
development of the cat retina.
ocular fundus of the normal dog.
Pathology 100:331-335.
Experimentat Eye Research 5:249-254.
Journat of the American Veterinary
70 Roberts S, Dellaporta A {1965)
40 Gum G, Gelatt K, Samuelson D {1984)
Medicat Association 147:17-26.
Congenital posterior ectasia of the
Maturation of the retina of the canine
54 Bellhorn R, Bellhorn M, Swarm R,
sclera in Collie dogs. I. Clinical 
neonate as determined by
Impellizzeri C (1975) Hereditary
features. American Journal of
electroretinography and histology.
tapetal abnormality in the Beagle.
Ophthatmology 59:180-186.
American Journat of Veterinary
Ophthatmic Research 7:250-260.
71 Brahm V, Brahm E, Saers K {1978)
Research 45:1166-1171.
 55 Engerman R, Molitor D, Bloodworth J
Collie-augen-anomalie {CEA). Kleinter
41 Koch S, Rubin L {1972) Distribution of
{1966) Vascular system of the dog
Praxis 23:221-224.
 cones in the retina of the normal dog.
retina: light and electron microscopic
72 Barnett K, Stades F (1979) Collie eye
American Joturnat ofVeterinary
studies. Experiental Eye Research
anomaly in the Shetland Sheepdog in
Research 33:361-363.
5:296-301.
the Netherlands. Journat of Smmal!
42 Steinberg R, Reid M, Lacy P {1973)
57 Henkind P {1966) The retinal vascular
Animat Practice 20:321-329.
The distribution of rods and cones in
system of the domestic cat.
73 Rubin L, Nelson E, Sharp C {1991)
the retina of the cat (Fetis dormesticus).
Experimentat Eye Research 5:10-20.
Collie eye anomaly in Australian
Journal of Comparative Neurology
 58 De Schaepdrijver L, Simoens P,
 Shepherd Dogs. Progress of Veterinary
148:229-248.
Lauwers H (1997) Morphologic and
and Comparative Ophthatmology
43 Marmor M (1980) Clinical physiology
fluorangiographic study of the feline
1:105-108.
Of the retina. In: Principtes and
retina. Veterinary and Comparative
74 Donovan E, Wyman M {1965) Ocular
Practice of Ophthatmology. G Peyman,
Ophthatmotogy 7:216-225.
fundus anomaly in the Collie. Jou rnat
D Sanders, M Goldberg (eds). WB
59 Gelatt K, Finocchio E {1970)
of the American Veterinary Medicat
 Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 823-856.
Variations in the normal equine eye.
Association 147:1465-1469.
44 Brown KT (1968) The
Veterinary Medicine/Smatl Animat
75 Yakely W (1972) Collie eye anomaly:
 electroretinogram: its components and
Clinician 63:569-574.
 decreased prevalence through selective
their orgins. Vision Research
60 Barnett K {1972) The ocular fundus of
breeding. Journat of the American
8:633-677.
the horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
Veterinary Medicat Association
45 Hudspeth A, Yee A {1973) The
4:17-20.
161:1103-1107.
intercellular junctional complexes of
61 McCormack J (1977) Appearance of
 76 Bjerkas E (1991) Collie eye anomaly in
retinal epithelium. Investigative
the normal optic disk in cattle.
the Rough Collie in Norway. Journaf
Ophthaimotogy 12:354-365.
Veterinary Medicine/Smalt Animat
of Small Animat Practice 32:89-92.
46 Records R {1986) Retina: metabolism
Clinician 72:1494-1496.
77 Holzhacker W (1988) Uber die
and photochemistry. In: Biocheicat
62 Gelatt K, Huston K, Leiopold H
verbreitung der Collie-atgen-anomalie
Foundations of Ophthatmotogy, vol 2.
(1969) Ocular anomalies of incomplete
(CEA) in ostosterreich. Doctor
T Duane, E Jaeger (eds). Harper and
 albino cattle: ophthalmoscopic
medicinae veterinariae thesis,
Row, Philadelphia, p. 1-23.
examination. Ammerican Journat of
Veterinarmedizinischen, University of
47 Buyukmihci N, Aguirre G (1976) Rod
Veterinary Research 30:1313-1316.
Wien, pp.1-102.
 disk turnover in the dog. Investigative
63 Roberts S {1969) Collie eye anomaly.
78 Kellner S, Leon A {1985)
Ophthaimotogy 15:579-584.
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Augenanomalie bei Collies in der 
48 Anderson D, Fisher S, Steinberg R
Medicat Association 155:859-865.
schweiz. Kleintierpraxis 31:63-65.
{1978) Mammalian cones: disk
64 Gelatt K, Veith L {1970) Hereditary
79 Yakely W, Wyman M, Donovan E,
shedding, phagocytosis, and renewal.
multiple ocular anomalies in Australian 
Fechheimer N {1968) Genetic
Investigative Ophthatmology and
 Shepherd Dogs. Veterinary
transmission of an ocular fundus 
Vistat Science 17:117-133.
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
anomaly in Collies. Journat of the
65:39-42.
American Veterinary Medica!
Association 152:457-461.
462
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
80 Wallin-Hakanson B, Wallin-
92 Holle D, Stankovics M, Sarna C,
105 Lewis D, Kelly D, Sansom J (1986)
Hakanson N, Hedhammar A {2000)
Aguirre G {1999) The geographic form
Congential microphthalmia and other 
 Influence of selective breeding on
of retinal dysplasia in dogs is not
developmental ocular anomalies in the
prevalence of chorioretinal dysplasia
always a congenital abnormality.
Doberman. Journat of Small Animat
and coloboma in the Rough Collie in
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 2:6i-66.
Practice 27:559-566.
Sweden. Journat of Smalt Animat
93 Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA,
106 Kaswan R, Collins L, Blue J.
Practice 41:56-59.
Cook Cs, Latimer CA (1999)
Martin C (1987) Multiple hereditary
81 Wallin-Hakanson B, Wallin-
Congenital ocular abnormalities of
ocular anomalies in a herd of cattle.
Hakanson N, Hedhammar A (2000)
Rocky Mountain horses. Veterinary
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Collie eye anomaly in the Rough Collie
Ophthatmotogy 2:47-59.
Medicat Association 191:97-99.
in Sweden: genetic transmission and
 94 Silverstein A, Osburn M, Bennie I,
107 Barnett K, Bjorck G, Kock E {1970)
influence on offspring vitality. Journat
 Prendergast R {1971) The pathogenesis
Hereditary retinal dysplasia in the
of Small Animat Practice 41:254-258.
of retinal dysplasia. Ammerican Journat
Labrador Retriever in England and
82 Latshaw W, Wyman M, Venzke W
of Ophthatmotogy 72:13-21.
Sweden. Journat of Small Anima!
(1969) Embryologic development of an
95 Cook C, Burling K, Nelson E {1991)
Practice 10:755-759.
anomaly of the ocular fundus in the
Embryogenesis of posterior segment
108 Carrig C, MacMillan A, Brundage S,
Collie dog. American Journat of
colobomas in the Australian Shepherd
Pool R, Morgan J (1977) Retinal
Veterinary Research 30:211-217.
Dog. Progress in Veterinary and
dysplasia associated with skeletal
83 Donovan R, Freeman H, Schepens C
Comparative Ophthatmology
 abnormalities in Labrador Retrievers.
{1969) Anomaly of the Collie eye.
1:163-170.
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Journat of the AmericanVeterinary
96 Ashton N, Barnett K, Sachs D {1968)
Medicat Association 170:49-57.
Medicat Association 155:872-875.
Retinal dysplasia in the Sealyham
109 Carrig C, Sponenberg D, Schmidt G,
84 Brown G, Shields J, Patty B, Goldberg
Terrier. Journat of Pathology and
Tvedten H (1988) Inheritance of
R {1979) Congenital pits of the optic 
Bacterialogy 96:269-272.
 associated ocular and skeletal dysplasia
nerve head. 1. Experimental studies in
97 Rubin L {1968) Hereditary of retinal
in Labrador Retrievers. Journat of the 
Collie dogs. Archives of
dysplasia in Bedlington Terriers.
American Veterinary Medica!
Ophthaimotogy 97:1341-1344.
Journat of the American Veterinary
Association 193:1269-1277.
85 Vainisi S, Peyman G, Wolf D, West C
Medicat Association 152:260-262.
110 Lavach R, Murphy J, Severin G
{1989) Treatment of serous retinal
98 Leipold H, Gelatt K, Huston K {1971)
{1978) Retinal dysplasia in the English
detachments associated with optic disk
Multiple ocular anomalies and
Springer Spaniel. Journat of the
pits in dogs. Journat of the American
hydrocephalus in gradebeef Shorthorn
American Animat Hospitat Association
Veterinary Medicat Association
cattle. American Journat of Veterinary
14:192-199.
195:1233-1236.
Research 32:1019-1026.
111 Schmidt G, Ellersieck M, Wheeler C,
86 Rubin L {1970) Correction of retinal
99 Martin C, Leipold H {1974) Aphakia
Blanchard G, Keller W (1979)
detachment in a dog. Journat of the
and multiple ocular defects in Saint
 Inheritance of retinal dysplasia in the
American Veterinary Medicat
Bernard puppies. Veterinary
English Springer Spaniel. Journat of the
Association 157:461-466.
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
American Veterinary Medicat
87 Dziezyc J, Wolf D, Barrie K {1986)
69:448-453.
Association 174:1089-1090.
Surgical repair of rhematogenous
100 Stades F {1978) Hereditary retinal
112 Meyers V, Jezyk P, Aguirre G,
retinal detachments in dogs. Journat of
dysplasia (RD) in a family of Yorkshire
Patterson D (1983) Short-limbed
the American Veterinary Medicat
Terriers. Ttjdschrift Voor
dwarfism and ocular defects in the
Association 188:902-904.
Diergeneeskunde 103:1087-1090.
Samoyed dog. Journat of the American
88 Vainisi SJ, Packo KH (1995)
101 Arnbjerg J, Jensen O {1982)
Veterinary Medical Association
Management of giant retinal tears in
Spontaneous microphthalmia in two
183:975-979.
dogs. Journat of the American
 Dobermann puppies with anterior
113 Acland G, Aguirre G {1991). Retinal 
Veterinary Medicat Association
chamber cleavage syndrome. Journat of
dysplasia in the Samoyed dog is the
206:491-495.
the American Animat Hospitat
heterozygous phenoty pe of the gene
 89 Herrmann M, Junziker J, Szymanski C,
Association 18:481-484.
{drds) for short-limbed dwarfism and
Koch S {1973) Peripheral retinal
102 Peiffer R, Fischer C {1983)
ocular defects. Proceedings of the
 albinotic spots in three dogs. Jou rnat of
Microphthalmia, retinal dysplasia, and 
Scientific Meeting of the American
the American Veterinary Medicat
anterior segment dysgenesis in a litter 
College of Veterinary
Association 163:1175-1176.
of Doberman Pinschers. Journat of the
Ophthatmologists 91:44.
90 Wilcock B (1983) Ocular anomalies.
American Veterinary Medical
114 Hey wood R, Wells G {1970) A retinal
In: Comparative Ophthatmic
Association 183:875-878.
dysplasia in the Beagle dog. Veterinary
Pathology. R Peiffer (ed). CC Thomas,
103 Bergsjo T, Arnesen K, Heim P, Nes N
Record 87:178-180.
Springfield, pp. 3-46.
{1984) Congenital blindness with
115 MacMillian A, Lipton D {1978)
91 Toole D, Severin G, Neumann S {1983)
ocular developmental anomalies,
Heritability of multifocal retinal
 Retinal dysplasia of English Springer 
including retinal dysplasia, in
dysplasia in American Cocker Spaniels.
 Spaniel dogs: light microscopy of the
 Doberman Pinscher dogs. Journat of
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
postnatal lesions. Veterinary Pathology
the American Veterinary Medicat
Medicat Association 172:568-572.
20:298-311.
Association 184:1383-1386.
116 Bedford P {1982) Multifocal retinal
104 Laratta L, Riis R, Kern T, Koch S
dysplasia in the Rottweiler. Veterinary
{1985) Multiple congenital ocular
Record 111:304-305.
defects in the Akita dog. Corneff
Veterinarian 75:381-392.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
463
117 Williams L, Peiffer R, Gelatt K,
131 Gelatt K, Leipold H, Coffman J
143 Acland G, Boughman J, Aguirre G
Gum G {1979) A survey of ocular
{1969b) Bilateral optic nerve
{1981) Inheritance of progressive rod-
findings in the American Cocker
hypoplasia in a colt. Journat of the
cone degeneration: a case of gamete
Spaniel. Journat of the American
American Veterinary Medicat
selection? Proceedings of the Scientific
Animat Hospitat Association
Association 155:627-631.
Meeting of the American Cottege of
15:603-607.
132 Hoyt C, Billson F {1978) Maternal
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 12:115-
118 Weisse I, Stotzer H, Seitz R {1973)
anticonvulsants and optic nerve
128.
 Die neuroepitheliale invagination, eine 
hypoplasia. British Journat of
144 Acland G, Fletcher R, Chader G,
form der netzhaut-dysplasie beim
Ophthatmology 62:3-6.
Aguirre G {1989) Nonallelism of three
Beagle-hund. Zentratbiatt der
133 Wen G, Sturman J, Wisniewski H,
 genes (rcd1, rcd2, and erd) for early-
Veterinarmedizin 20:89-99.
MacDonald A, Niemann W (1982)
onset hereditary retinal degeneration.
119 Schiavo D, Field W {1974) Unilateral
 Chemical and ultrastructural changes
Experimentat Eye Research
focal retinal dysplasia in Beagle dogs.
in the tapetum of Beagles with a
49:983-998.
Veterinary Medicine/Smatt Animat
hereditary abnormality. Investigative
145 Aguirre G, Farber D, Lolley R,
Clinician 69:33-34.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Fletcher R, Chader G (1978) Rod-cone
120 Long SE, Crispin SM (1999)
23:733-742.
dysplasia in Irish Setters: a defect in
 Inheritance of multifocal retinal
134 Burns MS, Tyler NK, Bellhorn RW
cyclic GMP metabolism in visual cells.
dysplasia in the Golden Retriever in
{1988) Melanosome abnormalities of
Science 201:1133-1134.
the UK. Veterinary Record
ocular pigmented epithelial cells in
146 Ray K, Baldwin VJ, Ackland GM,
145:702-704.
Beagle dogs with hereditary tapetal
Blanton SH, Aguirre GD (1994)
121 Crispin SM, Long SE, Wheeler CA
degeneration. Current Eye Research
Cosegregation of codon 807 mutation
{1999) Incidence and ocular
7:115-123.
of the canine rod cGMP
manifestations of multifocal retinal
135 Goosey J, Tuan W, Garcia C {1984) A
 phosphodiesterase B gene and rcd1.
 dysplasia in the Golden Retriever in
lipid peroxidative mechanism for
Investigative Ophthatmology and
the UK. Veterinary Record
posterior subcapsular cataract
Visual Science 35:4291-4299.
145:669-672.
formation in the rabbit: a possible
147 Petersen-Jones SM, Entz DD,
122 Gelatt K, Leipold H {1971) Bilateral
model for cataract formation in
Sargan DR (1999) cGMP
optic nerve hypoplasia in two dogs.
tapetoretinal diseases. Investigative
 phosphodiesterase-alpha mutation
Canadian Veterinary Journat
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
causes progressive retinal atrophy in
12:91-96.
25:608-612
the Cardigan Welsh Corgi dog.
123 Ernest J {1976) Bilateral optic nerve
136 Gerstein D, Dantzker D (1969)
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
hypoplasia in a pup. Journat of the
Retinal vascular changes in hereditary
Vistat Science 40:1637-1644.
American Veterinary Medicat
visual cell degeneration. Arcbives of
148 Aguirre G, Rubin L {1975) The
Association 168:125-128.
Ophthaimology 18:99-105.
electroretinogram in dogs with
124 Sengelaub D, Finlay B {1982) Cell
137 Acland G, Blanton S, Hershfield B,
inherited cone degeneration.
 death in the mammalian visual system
Aguirre G (1994) XLPRA: a canine
Investigative Ophthatmology
during normal development. I. Retinal
retinal degeneration inherited as an X-
14:840-847.
ganglion cells. Journat of Comparative
linked trait. American Journat of
149 Wolf E, Vainisi S, Santos-Anderson R
Neurology 204:311-319.
Medicat Genetics 52:27-33.
{1978) Rod-cone dysplasia in the
125 Lambert S, Hoyt C, Narahara M
138 Kijas J, Cideciyan A, Aleman T, et af.
Collie. Joturnat of the American
{1987) Optic nerve hypoplasia. Survey
(2002) Naturally occurring rhodopsin
Veterinary Medicat Association
of Ophthatmatogy 32:1-8.
mutation in the dog causes retinal
173:1331-1333.
126 Saunders L, Rubin L (1975)
dysfunction and degeneration
150 Aguirre G, Farber D, Lolley R, et af.
Ophthatmic Pathology of Animats, 1st
mimicking human dominant retinitis
{1982) Retinal degenerations in the dog.
edn. S Karger, Munchen, pp. 154-155.
 pigrmentosa. Proceedings of the
IIl. Abnormal cyclic nucleotide
127 Weisse V, Stotzer H {1973)
National Academy of Science
metabolism in rod-cone dysplasia.
Hypoplasie des nervus opticus und
99:6328-6333.
Experimentat Eye Research 35:625-642.
kolobom der papille bei einem jungen
139 Black L {1972) Progressive retinal
151 Chader G {1991) Animal mutants of 
Beagle. Berliner und Munchene!
atrophy: a review of the genetics and
hereditary retinal degeneration: general
Terarzttiche Wochenschrift 86:1-2.
 an appraisal of the eradication scheme.
considerations and studies on defects
128 Kern T, Riis R {1981) Optic nerve
Journat of Smatt Animal Practice
in cyclic nucleotide metabolism.
hy poplasia in three Miniature Poodles.
13:295-314.
Progess in Veterinary and Comparative
Journat of the American Veterinary
140 Priester W (1974) Canine progressive
Ophthatmology 1:109-126.
Medical Association 78:49-54.
retinal atrophy: occurrence by age.
152 Parry HG (1953) Degenerations of
129 Greene C, Gorgacz E, Martin C
breed, and sex. American Journal of
the dog retina. I. Generalized
{1982) Hydranencephaly associated
Veterinary Research 35:571-574.
 progressive atrophy of hereditary
with feline panleukopenia. Journat of
141 Aguirre G {1976) Inherited retinal
origin. British Journat of
the American Veterinary Medicat
degeneration in the dog. Transactions
Ophthatmotogy 37:487-502.
Association 180:767-768.
of the American Academy of
153 Parshall CJ, Wyman M, Nitroy S,
130 Barnett K, Grimes T {1974) Bilateral
Ophthatmology and Otolaryngalogy
Acland G, Aguirre G (1991)
aplasia of the optic nerve in a cat.
81:667-676.
Photoreceptor dysplasia: an inherited
British Journal of Ophthatmology
142 Aguirre G, Acland G {1988) Variations
progressive retinal atrophy of Miniature
57:663-667.
 in retinal degeneration phenotype
Schnauzer dogs. Progress in Veterinary
 inherited at the prcd locus. Experientat
and Comparative Ophthaimology
Eye Research 46:663-687.
1:187-203.
464
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
154 Cogan D, Kuwabara T (1965)
166 Aguirre G, O'Brien P {1986)
178 Stanley RG, Acland GM, Vingrys A,
 Photoreceptive abiotrophy of the retina
Morphological and biochemical studies
et αf. (1998) Day blindness in Alaskan
in the Elkhound. Veterinary Pathology
of canine progressive rod-cone
Malmutes in Australia: clinical and
2:101-128.
degeneration. Investigative
electroretinographic findings.
155 Aguirre G, Rubin L {1971) The early
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
diagnosis of rod dysplasia in the
27:635-655.
the American College of Veterinary
Norwegian Elkhound. Jotrnat of the
167 Anderson R, Maude M, Alvarez R,
Ophthaimologists 29:22.
American Veterinary Medicat
Acland G, Aguirre G {1991) Plasma
179 Acland G (1998) Day blindness in
Association 159:429-433.
lipid abnormalities in the Miniature
 German Shorthaired Pointers in the
156 Aguirre G, Rubin L {1971)
Poodle with progressive rod-cone
United States: clinical and
 Progressive retinal atrophy {rod
degeneration. Experimentat Eye
electroretinographic findings.
 dysplasia) in the Norwegian Elkhound.
Research 52:349-355.
Praceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Journat of the American Veterinary
168 Loew E, Riis R {1983) Congenital
the American Cattege of Veterinary
Medicat Association 158:208-218.
nyctalopia in the Tibetan Terrier.
Ophthatmotogists 29:33.
157 Acland G, Gustavo A, Parkes J,
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
180 Slatter D, Blogg J, Constable I {1980)
 Liebman P {1983) A new early-onset
the American Coltege of Veterinary
Retinal degeneration in Greyhounds.
inherited retinal degeneration in the
Ophthatmotogists 14:82-97.
Austratian Veterinary Journat
Norwegian Elkhound. Proceedings of
169 Riis R, Loew E {1988) Pathological
56:106-115.
the Scientific Meeting of the American
notations of retinal degeneration (rdij) 
181 Scagliotti R, MacMillian A {1977)
College of Veterinary
in Tibetan Terriers. Proceedingss of the
Retinal degeneration in the Borzoi: a
Ophthatmologists 14:98-103.
Scientific Meeting of the American
preliminary report. Proceedings of the
158 Acland G, Aguirre G {1987) Retinal
Coltege of Veterinary
Scientific Meeting of the American
degenerations in the dog. IV. Early
Ophthaimologists 19:89.
Cottege of Veterinary
retinal degeneration {ERD) in
170 Millichamp N, Curtis R, Barnett K
Ophthatmotogists 18:67-68.
Norwegian Elkhounds. Experimentat
{1988) Progressive retinal atrophy in
182 Storey E, Grahn B {2002) Borzoi
Eye Research 44:491-521.
the Tibetan Terrier. Journal of the
retinopathy. Proceedings of the
159 Acland G, O'Brian P, Aguirre G
American Veterinary Medicat
Scientific Meeting of the American
{1989) Rod renewal is cone-like in
Association 192:769-776.
Cotlege of Veterinary
early retinal degeneration (erd).
171 O*Toole D, Roberts S (1984)
Ophthatmotogists 33:36.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
183 Witzel D, Riis R, Rebhun W.
the American Coltege of Veterinary
in two Akita dogs. Veterinary
Hillman R {1977) Night blindness in
Ophthaimologists 20:152.
Pathotogy 21:457-462.
the Appaloosa: sibling occurrence.
160 Aguirre G, Rubin L {1972)
172 Paulsen M, Severin G, Young S, et af.
Journat of Equine Medicine and
 Progressive retinal atrophy in the
{1988) Progressive retinal atrophy in a
Surgery 1:383-386.
Minature Poodle: an electrophysiologic
colony of Akita dogs. Proceedings of
184 Narfstrom K, Wrigstad A, Ekesten B,
study. Journat of American Veterinary
the Scientific Meeting of the American
 Nilsson SE (1994) Hereditary retina]
Medicat Association 160:191-201.
Coltege of Veterinary
dystrophy in the Briard dog: clinical
161 Sandberg M, Pawlyk B, Berson E
Ophthatmologists 19:1-3.
and hereditary characteristics.
{1986) Full-field electroretinograms in
173 Rubin L {1971) Clinical features of
Veterinary and Comparative
 Miniature Poodles with progressive
hemeralopia in the adult Alaskan
Ophthaimology 4:85-92.
rod-cone degeneration. Investigative
Malamute. Journat of the Ammerican
185 Aguirre G, Baldwin V, Pearce-
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Veterinary Medicat Association
Kelling S, Narfstrom K, Ray K, Acland
27:1179-1184.
158:1696-1698.
G {1998) Congenital stationary night
162 Parkes J, Aguirre G, Rockey J,
174 Rubin L {1971) Hemeralopic in
blindness in the dog: common
 Liebman P (1982) Progressive
Alaskan Malamute pups. Journat of
mutation in the RPE65 gene indicates 
rod-cone degeneration in the dog:
the American Veterinary Medicat
founder effect. Molecutar Vision
 characterization of the visual pigment.
Association 158:1699-1701.
4:23-36.
Investigative Ophthatmology and
175 Koch S, Rubin L {1971) Distribution
186 Witzel D, Smith E, Wilson R,
Vistal Science 23:674-678.
of cones in the hemeralopic dog.
Aguirre G {1978) Congenital stationary
163 Barnett K {1965) Canine
Journat of the American Veterinary
might blindness: an animal model.
 retinopathies. I. The Miniature and
Medicat Association 159:1257-1259.
Investigative Ophthatmology and
Toy Poodle. Journat of Small Animat
176 Aguirre G, Rubin L {1974) Pathology
Visuat Science 17:788-795.
Practice 6:93-109.
of hemeralopia in the Alaskan
187 Pickett J, Lindley D, Boosinger T,
164 Aguirre G, Alligood J, O'Brien P,
Malamute dog. Investigative
Toivio-Kinnucan M (1991) Stationary
 Buyukmihci N (1982) Pathogenesis of
Ophthatmology 13:231-235.
night blindness in a Collie. Progress in
progressive rod-cone degeneration in
177 Rubin L, Bourns T, Lord L {1967)
Veterinary and Comparative
Minature Poodles. Investigative
 Hemeralopia in dogs: hereditary of
Ophthatmology 1:303-308.
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
hemeralopia in Alaskan Malamutes.
188 Wrigstad A, Nilsson SE, Narfstrom K
23:610-630.
American Journat of Veterinary
{1992) Utrastructural changes of the
165 Acland G, Marsh R, Northington J
Research 28:355-358.
retina and the retinal pigment
(1985) Auditory testing of dogs with
epitheliurm in Briard dogs with
inherited retinal degeneration.
hereditary congenital night blindness
Investigative Ophthatmology and
and partial day blindness.
Visual Science 26:785-788.
Experimentat Eye Reseaich
55:805-818.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
465
189 Riis R, Siakotos A {1989) Inherited
202 Murray J, Blakemore W, Barnett K
213 Smith RE, Sutton RH, Jolly RD,
lipid retinopathy within a dog breed.
{1977) Ocular lesions in cats with
Smith KR (1996) A retinal
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
GM1-gangliosidosis with visceral
degeneration associated with ceroid
Visual Science 30(Supplement):308.
involvement. Journat of Small Animat
lipofuscinosis in adult Miniature
190 Watson P, Simpson K, Bedford P
Practice 18:1-10.
Schnauzers. Veterinary and
{1993) Hypercholesterolaemia in 
203 Cork L, Munnell J, Lorenz M {1978)
Comparative Ophthatmotogy
Briards in the United Kingdom.
The pathology of feline GM2
6:187-191.
Research in Veterinary Science
gangliosidosis. American Journat of
214 Minatel L, Underwood SC,
54:80-85.
Pathotogy 90:723-734.
Carfagnini JC (2000) Ceroid
191 Parry H {1954) Degeneration of the
204 Cowell K, Jezyk P, Haskins M,
lipofuscinosis in a Cocker Spaniel dog.
dog retina. VI. Central progressive
Patterson D (1976)
Veterinary Pathalogy 37:488-490.
atrophy with pigment epithelial
Mucopolysaccharidosis in a cat.
215 Ris R, Aguirre G {1983) The Briard
dystrophy. British Jaurnat of
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
problem. Proceedings of the Scientific
Ophthaimotogy 38:653-668.
Medical Association 169:334-339.
Meeting of the American College of
192 Aguirre G, Laties A (1976) Pigment
205 Langweiler M, Haskins M, Jezyk P
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
epithelial dystrophy in the dog.
{1978) Mucopolysaccharidosis in a
14:62-81.
Experimentat Eye Research
litter of cats. Journat of the American
216 Riis R, Siakotos A {1988) The Briard
23:247-256.
Animat Hospitat Association
lipid retinopathy update. Proceedings
193 Curtis R {1988) Retinal diseases in
14:748-751.
of the Scientific Meeting of the
the dog and cat: an overview and
206 Haskins M, Jezyk P, Desnick R,
American College of Veterinary
update. Journat of Smatl Anima!
McDonough S, Patterson D (1979)
Ophthaimotogists 19:87.
Practice 29:397-415.
Mucopolysaccharidosis in a domestic
217 Barnett K (1982) Progressive retinal
194 Bedford P {1984) Retinal pigment
shorthaired cat, a disease distinct from
atrophy in the Abyssinian cat. Journa!
epithelial dystrophy (CPRA): a study of
that seen in the Siamese cat. Journat of
of Small Animat Practice 23:763-766.
the disease in the Briard. Journaf of
the American Veterinary Medicat
218 Carlile J, Carrington S, Bedford P
Small Animat Practice 25:129-138.
Association 175:384-387.
{1984) Six cases of progressive retinal
195 Barnett K {1969) Genetic anomalies
207 Breton L, Guerin P, Morin M {1983)
atrophy in Abyssinian cats. Journat of
 of the posterior segment of the canine
A case of mucopolysaccharidosis VI in
Small Animat Practice 25:415-420.
eye. Transactions of the
a cat. Journat of the American Animat
 219 Narfstrom K (1985) Progressive
Ophthatmotogy Society 89:301-313.
Hospitat Association 19:891-896.
 retinal atrophy in the Abyssinian cat.
196 Barnett K {1969) Primary retinal
208 Aguirre G, Stramm L, Haskins M,
Investigative Ophthatmology and
dystrophies in the dog. Journat of the
Jezyk P {1984) Animal models of 
Visuat Science 26:193-200.
American Veterinary Medicat
metabolic eye diseases. Proceedings of
220 Narfstrom K, Nilsson S (1986)
Association 154:804-808.
the Scientific Meeting of the American
Progressive retinal atrophy in the
197 McLellan GJ, Watson P, Paganga G,
Cottege of Veterinary
Abyssinian cat. Investigative
Elks R, Lybaert P, Bedford PG {1997)
Ophthatmologists 15:174-240.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Vitamin deficiency in canine retinal
209 Jezyk P, Haskins M, Newman L
27:1569-1576.
pigment epithelial dystrophy {central
{1986) Alpha-mannosidosis in a
221 Narfstrom K {1983) Hereditary
retinal atrophy). Proceedings of the
Persian cat. Journat of the American
progressive retinal atrophy in the
Scientific Meeting of the American
Veterinary Medical Association
Abyssinian cat. Jou rnat of Heredity
189:1483-1485.
74:273-276.
Ophthatmotogists 28:38.
210 Siakotos A, Armstrong D,
222 Rubin L, Lipton D (1973) Retinal
 198 McLellan GJ, Cappello R, Mayhew IG,
Koppang N, Connole E {1978) Studies
degeneration in kittens. Journal of the
et afl. (2000) Systemic manifestations of 
 on the retina and the pigment
American Veterinary Medicat
vitamin E deficiency in canine RPED
epithelium in hereditary canine ceroid
Association 62:467-469.
(CPRA). Proceedings of the Scientific
lipofuscinosis. II. The subcellular
223 West-Hyde L, Buyukmihci N (1982)
Meeting of the American Callege of
distribution of lysosomal hydrolases
 Photoreceptor degeneration in a family
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 31:41.
and other enzymes. Investigative
of cats. Journat of the American
199 Grahn BH, Philibert H, Cullen CL,
Ophthatmology and Visual Science
Veterinary Medicat Association
Houston DM, Semple HA, Schmutz
17:618-633.
181:243-247.
SM (1998) Multifocal retinopathy of 
211 Berson E, Watson G {1980)
224 Kelly D, Lewis D {1985) Rapidly
Great Pyrenees dogs. Veterinary
Electroretinograms in English Setters
progressive diffuse retinal degeneration
Ophthatmology 1:211-221.
with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
in a kitten. Journat of Smaft Animat
200 Grauwels M (1999) Multifocal
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
Practice 26:317-322.
retinopathy in a population of Coton
Visuat Science 19:87-90.
225 Giuliano E, van der Woerdt A (1999)
de Tular dogs. Proceedings of the
212 Sisk D, Levesque D, Wood P, Styer E
Feline retinal degeneration: clinical
Internationat Society of Veterinary
{1990) Clinical and pathologic features
experience and new findings
Ophthaimology/Eturopean Caltege of
of ceroid lipofuscinosis in two
{1994-1997). Joturnat of the American
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists Meeting.
Australian Cattle Dogs. Journal of the
Animat Hospitat Association
Netwstetter 11:10.
American Veterinary Medicat
35:511-514.
201 Valle D, Boison A, Jezyk P, Aguirre G
Association 197:361-364.
226 Rubin L {1963) Atrophy of rods and
{1981) Gyrate atrophy of the choroids
cones in the cat retina. Journat of the
 and retina in a cat. Investigative
American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
Association 142:1415-1420.
20:251-254.
466
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
227 Morris M (1965) Feline degenerative
242 Brewer N (1982) Nutrition of the cat.
255 Moore L, Huffman C, Duncan C
retinopathy. Cornelt Veterinarian
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
{1935) Blindness in cattle associated
60:295-308.
Medicat Association 180:1179-1182.
with a constriction of the optic nerve
228 Brucker R {1949) Uber den
243 Erbersdobler VH {1983) Durch
and probably of nutritional origin.
 ophthalmoskopischen nachweis von
ta urinmangel bedingte
Jourmat of Nutrition 9:533-551.
fovea und arei bei tieren.
256 Wetzel J, Moore L {1940) Blindness
Ophthaimologica 118:969-980.
ta urinversorgung von katzen.
in cattle due to papilledema. American
229 Bellhorn R, Fischer C {1970) Feline
Tierarztfiche Umschau 38:340-344.
Journat of Ophthatmotogy
 central retinal degeneration. Journat of
 244 Hickman MA (2000) Bioavailability
23:499-513.
the American Veterinary Medicat
of taurine for cats. Compendiurm on
257 Blakemore F, Ottaway C, Sellers K,
Association 157:842-849.
Continuing Education for the
Eden E, Moore T {1957) The effects of
230 Soure E {1972) Observations of feline
Practicing Veterinarian 22:33-35.
a diet deficient in vitamin A on the
retinal degenerations. Veterinary
245 Aguirre G {1978) Retinal
development of the skull, optic nerves,
Medicine/Smatt Animal Clinician
degeneration associated with the
and brain of cattle. Jotrnat of
67:983-986.
feeding of dog foods to cats. Journat of
Comparative Pathotogy 67:277-288.
231 Bellhorn R, Aguirre G, Bellhorn M
the American Veterinary Mediciat
258 Hayes K, Nielsen S, Eaton H {1968)
{1974) Feline central retinal
Association 172:791-796.
Pathogenesis of the optic nerve lesion
degeneration. Investigative
246 da Costa P, Hoskin J (1990) The role
in vitamin A-deficient calves. Archives
Ophthaimotogy 13:608-616.
of taurine in cats: current concepts.
of Ophthatotlogy 80:777-787.
232 Rabin A, Hayes K, Berson E (1973)
Compenditum on Continting
259 Spratling F, Bridge P, Barnett K,
Cone and rod responses in
Education for the Practicing
Abrams J, Palmer A {1965)
nutritionally-induced retinal
Veterinarian 12:1235-1240.
Experimental hypovitaminosis-A in
degeneration in the cat. Investigative
 247 Loew F, Martin C, Dunlap R,
calves. Veterinary Record
Ophthatmotogy 12:694-704.
Mapletoft R, Smith S {1970) Naturally
77:1532-1542.
233 Hayes K, Carey R, Schmidt S {1975)
occurring and experimental thiamine
260 Barnett K, Palmer A, Abrams J.
 Retinal degeneration associated with 
deficiency in cats receiving commercial
Bridge P L, Spratling F, Sharman I
taurine deficiency in the cat. Science
cat food. Canadian Veterinary Journat
{1970) Ocular changes associated with
188:949-951.
11:109-113.
hypovitaminosis A in cattle. British
234 Anderson P, Baker D, Corbin J,
248 Rubin L {1974) Attas of Veterinary
Veterinary Journat 126:561-573.
Helper L {1979) Biochemical lesions
 Ophthatmology. Lea and Febiger,
261 Moore I (1941) Some ocular changes
 associated with taurine deficiency in
 Philadelphia, pp. 1-470.
and deficiency manifestations in
the cat. Journat of Animat Science
249 Hayes K, Rousseau J, Hegsted D
mature cows fed a ration deficient in
49:1227-1234.
{1970) Plasma tocophero]
vitamin A. Journat of Dairy Science
235 Wen G, Sturman J, Wisniewski H,
concentrations and vitamin E
24:893-902.
Lidsky A, Cornwell A, Hayes K (1979)
deficiency in dogs. Journat of the
 262 Divers T, Blackmon D, Martin C,
 Tapetum disorganization in taurine-
American Veterinary Medicat
Worrell D {1986) Blindness and
depleted cats. Investigative
Association 157:64-71.
convulsions associated with vitamin A
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
250 Riis R, Sheffy B, Loew E, Kern T,
deficiency in feedlot steers. Journat of
18:1200-1206.
Smith J (1981) Vitamin E deficiency
the American Veterinary Medicat
236 Pion P, Kittleson M, Rogers Q,
retinopathy in dogs. Ammerican Journat
Association 189:1579-1582.
Morris J {1987) Myocardial failure in
ofVeterinary Research 42:74-86.
 263 Van Donkersgoed J, Clark E (1988)
cats associated with low plasma 
251 Davidson MG, Geoly EJ, Gilger BC,
 Blindness caused by hypovitaminosis A
taurine: a reversible cardiomyopathy.
McLellan GJ, Whitley W (1998)
in feedlot cattle. Canadian Veterinary
Science 237:764-768.
Retinal degeneration associated with
Jou rma! 29:925-927.
237 Williams-Retz L, O'Brien S {1990)
vitamin E deficiency in hunting dogs.
264 Schaller J, Wyman M, Weisbrode S,
The role of taurine in the feline well
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Olsen R {1981) Induction of retinal
being. Iotwa State University
Medicat Association 213:645-651.
degeneration in cats by
Veterinarian 52:23-26.
252 Jackson CA, Ris RC, Rebhun WC,
methylnitrosurea and ketamine
238 Berson E, Hayes K, Rabin A,
et αf. {1995) Ocular manifestations of
hydrochloride. Veterinary Pathotogy
Watson G {1976) Retinal degeneration
equine motor neuron disease.
18:239-247.
in cats fed casein. II. Supplementation
Proceedings of the American
265 Evans E (2000) Bayer, Agricultural
with methionine, cy steine, or taurine.
Association of Equine Practitioners
Division (letter sent to veterinarians).
Investigative Ophthatmotogy
41:225-227
266 Barclay S, Riis R {1979) Retinal
15:52-58.
253 Tvedten H, Whitehair C {1977)
detachment and reattachment
239 Schmidt S, Berson E, Hayes K {1976)
Torutopsis gtabrata and vitamin A
associated with ethylene glycol
 Retinal degeneration in cats fed casein.
deficiency in dogs. American Journat of
intoxication in a cat. Journat of the
1. Taurine deficiency. Investigative
Veterinary Research 38:1941-1948.
American Animat Hospitat Association
Ophthatmotogy 15:47-52.
254 Paulsen M, Johnson L, Young S
15:719-124.
 240 Barnett K, Burger I (1980) Taurine
(1989) Blindness and sexual
267 Hopkins K, Marcella K, Strecker A
deficiency retinopathy in the cat.
dimorphism associated with vitamin A
(1990) Ivermectin toxicosis in a dog.
Journat of Smatt Animat Practice
deficiency in feedlot cattle. Journat of
Journat of the American Veterinary
21:521-534.
the American Veterinary Medicat
Medicat Association 197:93-94.
241 Ricketts J {1983) Feline central retinal
Association 194:933-937.
268 Ketring K (1990) Presumed ocular
degeneration in the domestic cat.
toxicity of ivermectin. Proceedings of
Journat of Smatf Animat Practice
the Kal Kan Synposium, Colombus,
24:221-227.
Ohio 13:109-110.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
467
269 Van Kampen K, James L {1971)
280 Holt E, Feldman E, Buyukmihci N
290 Nelms SR, Nasisse MP, Davidson
Ophthalmic lesions in locoweed
{1999) The prevalence of hyperadreno-
MG, Kirschner SE (1993) Hyphema
 poisoning of cattle, sheep, and horses
corticism (Cushing's syndrome) in dogs
associated with retinal disease in dogs:
American Journal of Veterinary
with sudden acquired retinal
17 cases {1986-1991). Journat of the
Research 32:1293-1295.
degeneration (SARD). Proceedings of
American Veterinary Medicat
270 Watson W, Barnett K, Terlecki S
the Scientific Meeting of the American
Association 202:1289-1292.
{1972) Progressive retinal degeneration
Coltege of Veterinary
291 Netland PA, Mukai S, Covington H
(bright blindness) in sheep: a review.
Ophthaimologists 30:35.
{1994) Elevated intraocular pressure
Veterinary Record 91:665-670.
281 Abrams K, Gareen I, Marchand K
secondary to rhegmatogenous retinal
271 Rosen E, Edgar J, Smith J (1970)
(2001) Factors assocoiated with canine
detachment. Survey of Ophthatmology
 Male fern retrobullar neuropathy in
sudden acquired retinal detachment
39:234-240.
cattle. Journat of Smatt Animat
syndrome (SARDS): 350 cases.
 292 Smith PJ, Mames RN, Samuelson DA,
Practice 10:619-625.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Lewis PA, Brooks DE {1997)
272 Quigley H, Addicks E {1980) Chronic
the American College of
 Photoreceptor outer segments in
 experimental glaucoma in primates. I.
Ophthatmologists 32:17.
aqueous humor from dogs with
 Effect of extended intraocular pressure
282 Acland G, Irby N, Aguirre G, Gross
rhegmatogenous retinal detachments.
elevation on optic nerve head and
S, Nitroy S, Notarfrancesco K {1984)
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
axonal transport. Investigative
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
Medicat Association 211:1254-1256.
Ophthaimology and Vistuat Science
in the dog: clinical and morphologic
293 Parry H {1954) Degenerations of the
19:137-152.
characterization of the 'silent retina*
dog retina. IV. Retinopathies associated
273 Williams L, Gelatt K, Gum G,
syndrome. Proceedings of the Scientific
with distemper-complex virus
 Samuelson S, Merideth R {1980)
Meeting of the American Coltege of
infections. British Journat of
 Orthograde rapid axoplasmic transport
Veterinary Ophthatmologists
Ophthatmotogy 38:295-309.
and ultrastructural changes of the optic
15:86-104.
294 Jubb K, Saunders L, Coates H (1957)
nerve of normotensive, acute ocular
283 Bellhorn R, Murphy C, Thirkill C
The intraocular lesions of canine
hy pertensive, and glaucomatous
{1988) Antiretinal immunoglobulins in
distemper. Jaurnat of Comparative
Beagles. Proceedings of the Scientific
canine ocular diseases. Seminars in
Pathology 67:21-29.
Meeting of the American Coltege of
Veterinary Medicine and Surgery
295 Fischer C {1971) Retinal and
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
3:28-32.
retinochoroidal lesions in early
11:172-206.
284 Riis R {1990)EM observations of a
neuropathic canine distemper. Journaf
274 Minckler D, Spaeth G (1981) Optic
SARD case. Proceedings of the
Of the American Veterinary Medicat
nerve damage in glaucoma. Sturvey of
Scientific Meeting of the American
Association 158:740-752.
Ophthatmotogy 26:128-148.
Cotltege of Veterinary
296 MacMillian A {1974) Retinat
275 Whiteman A, Klaus G, Miller P,
Ophthatmologists 21:112-113.
dyspiasia and degeneration in the
Nayden D, Dubielzig R {1999)
285 O*Toole D, Nunmaker R (1992)
young cat: fetine panteukopenia virus
 Progressive retinal degeneration in
 Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
as an etiologic agent. Davis, PhD
spontaneous canine primary glaucoma
(silent retina syndrome) in two dogs.
dissertation, University of California.
during the seven days following the
Veterinary Record 130:157-161.
297 Percy D, Scott F, A1bert D {1975)
onset of clinical disease in Cocker 
 286 Miller PE, Glbreath EJ, Kehren JC,
Retinal dysplasia due to feline
Spaniels and Basset Hounds.
Steinberg H, Dubielzig R {1998)
panleukopenia virus infection. Journat
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Photoreceptor cell death by apoptosis
of the American Veterinary Medicat
the American Cotlege of Veterinary
in dogs with sudden acquired retinal
Association 167:935-937.
Ophthatmotogists 30:43.
degeneration syndrome. Armerican
298 Severin G {1995) Severin's Veterinary
276 Heywood R, Hepworth P, van
Jotrnal of Veterinary Research
Ophthatology Notes. Design Pointe
Abbe N (1976) Age changes in the eyes
59:149-152
Communications, Fort Collins, pp.
of the Beagle dog. Journat of Small
287 van der Woerdt A, Wilkie D, Myer C
1-546.
Animat Practice 17:171-177.
{1993) Utrasonographic abnormalities 
 299 Albert D, Lahav M, Carmichael L
277 Bellhorn R, Haring B {1974)
in the eyes of dogs with cataracts: 147
{1976) Canine herpes-induced retinal
 Peripheral retinal cysts. Veterinary
cases {1986-1992). Journal of the
dysplasia and associated ocular
Medicine/Smalt Anmat Clinician
American Veterinary Medicat
anomalies. Investigative
69:1528-1530.
Association 203:838-841.
Ophthatmotogy 15:267-278.
278 Okun E, Rubin L, Collins E {1961)
288 Hendrix DV, Nasisse M, Cowen P,
300 Doherty M (1971) Ocular
 Retinal breaks in the senile dog eye.
 Davidson M (1993) Clinical signs,
 manifestations of feline infectious
Archives of Ophthatmology
concurrent diseases, and risk factors 
 peritonitis. Journat of the American
66:702-707.
associated with retinal detachment in
Veterinary Medical Association
279 van der Woerdt A, Nasisse M,
dogs. Progress in Veterinary and
159:417-424.
Davidson M {1991) Sudden acquired
Comparative Ophthatmology 3:87-91.
301 Bistner S, Rubin L, Saunders L {1970)
retinal degeneration in the dog: clinical
289 Peiffer R, Wilcock B, Yin H {1990)
The ocular lesions of bovine viral
and Jaboratory findings in 36 cases.
The pathogenesis and significance of
diarrhea mucosal disease. Veterinary
Progress in Veterinary and
 preiridal fibrovascular membrane in
Pathotogy 7:275-286.
Comparative Ophthatmology 1:11-18.
domestic animals. Veterinary Pathotogy
 302 Martin C {1981) Retinopathies of
27:41-45.
food animals. In: Current Therapy of
Food Animats. J Howard (ed). WB
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
1067-1072.
468
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
303 Jubb K, Saunders L, Stenius P {1960)
316 Martin C {1982) Ocular signs of
330 Constable I, Slatter D, Horne R
 Die histologischen augenveranderungen
systemic diseases. Modern Veterinary
{1980) Chorioretinal biopsy in dogs.
beim bosartigen kartarrhalfieber des
Practice 63:799-804.
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
rindes. Schweizer Archiv fu!
317 Ellett E, Playter R, Pierce K {1973)
Visuat Science 19:603-609.
Terheitkunde 102:392-400.
 Retinal lesions associated with induced
 331 Fischer C, Jones G {1972) Optic
304 Whiteley H, Young S, Liggitt H,
canine ehrlichiosis: a preliminary
neuritis in dogs. Journat of the
Demartini J {1985) Ocular lesions of 
report. Journat of the American Animat
American Veterinary Medicat
bovine malignant catarrhal fever.
Hospitat Association 9:214-218.
Association 160:68-79.
Veterinary Pathotogy 22:219-225.
318 Davidson M, Nasisse M,
332 Walde V, Swoboda R {1980) Die,
305 Meyers S, Wagnild J, Wallow I, et af.
 Breitschwerdt E, Roberts S,
plotzliche Erblindung des hundes,
(1978) Septic choroiditis with serous
Armstrong P (1986) Ocular
diagnostik-therapie-prognose. Kleintier
detachment of the retina in dogs.
manifestations of Rocky Mountain
Praxis 25:61-78.
Investigative Ophthatmology and
spotted fever in dogs. Proceedings of
333 Fischer C, Si-Kwang L {1971) Neuro-
Visuat Science 17:1104-1109.
the Scientific Meeting of the American
ophthalmologic manifestations of
306 Hatfield C, Rebhun W, Dietze A,
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
 primary reticulosis of the central
Carlisle M (1987) Endocarditis and
117:335-337.
nervous system in a dog. Journat of the
 optic neuritis in a Quarter horse mare.
319 Vainisi S, Campbell H {1969) Ocular
American Veterinary Medicat
Compenditum on Continting Education
toxoplasmosis in cats. Jotrnat of the 
Association 158:1240-1248.
for the Practicing Veterinarian
American Veterinary Medicat
334 Russo M {1979) Primary reticulosis of
9:451-454.
Association 154:141-152.
the central nervous system in dogs.
307 Formston C (1994) Retinal
320 Macintire DK, Vincent-Johnson N,
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
detachment and bovine tuberculosis in
Dillon AR, et αf. (1997)
Medicat Association 174:492-500.
cats. Journat of Smatl Animat Practice
Hepatozoonosis in dogs: 22 cases
335 Garmer N, Naeser P, Bergman A
35:5-8.
{1989-1994). Journal of the American
{1981) Reticulosis of the eyes and the
 308 MacDonald D, Christian R,
Veterinary Medicat Association
 central nervous system in a dog.
Chalmers G (1973) Infectious
210:916-922.
Journat of Smatl Animat Practice
thromboembolic meningoencephalitis:
321 Rubin L, Saunders L {1965)
22:39-45.
 literature review and occurrence in
 Intraocular larva migrans in dogs.
336 Bailey C, Higgins R {1986)
Alberta. Canadian Veterinary Journat
Veterinary Pathatogy 2:566-573.
Characteristics of cerebrospinal fluid
14:57-61.
 322 Hughes P, Dubielzig R, Kazacos K
associated with canine granulomatous
309 Roberts S (1962) Fundus lesions in
{1987) Multifocal retinitis in New
meningoencephalomyelitis: a
equine periodic ophthalmia. Journat of
Zealand Sheepdogs. Veterinary
retrospective study. Journal of the
the American Veterinary Medicat
Pathology 24:22-27.
American Veterinary Medicat
Association 141:229-239.
323 Brooks D, Wolf E, Merideth R {1984)
Association 188:418-421.
310 Walde V, Burtscher H {1980) Ablatio
Ophthalmoyiasis interna in two cats.
337 Palmer A, Malinowski W, Barnett K
retinae infolge kryptokokkose beim
Journat of the American Animat
{1974) Clinical signs including
hund. Kleintier Praxis 25:251-264.
Hospital Association 20:157-160.
 papilloedema associated with brain
311 Gelatt K, Chrisman C, Samuelson D,
324 Cello R {1971) Ocular onchocerciasis
tumors in twentyone dogs. Journat of
Shell L, Buergelt C {1991) Ocular and
in the horse. Equine Veterinary Joturnat
Small Animal Practice 15:359-386.
systemic aspergillosis in a dog. Journat
3:148-153.
338 Hayreh S {1978) Fluids in the anterior
of the American Animat Hospitat
 325 Weisse I, Seitz R, Stegmamn H (1981)
part of the optic nerve in health and
Association 27:427-431.
 Eine multifokale serose chorioretinitis
disease. Survey of Ophthatmology
312 Migaki G, Font R, Sauer R {1982)
beim Beagle. Veterinary Pathology
23:1-24.
Canine protothecosis: a review of the
18:1-12.
339 Gelatt K, Leipold H, Finocchio E,
literature and report of an additional
326 Giger U, Werner L, Millichamp N,
Coffman J {1971) Optic disk
case. Journat of the American
Gorman N {1985) Sulfadiazine-induced
astrocytoma in a horse. Canadian
Veterinary Medicat Association
 allergy in six Doberman Pinschers.
Veterinary Journat 12:53-55.
181:794-797
Journat of the American Veterinary
340 Saunders L, Bistner S, Rubin L {1972)
313 Schultze AE, Ring RD, Morgan RV,
Medicat Association 186:479-484.
 Proliferative optic neuropathy in the
Patton CS {1998) Clinical, cytologic,
327 Gwin R, Wyman M, Ketring K,
horse. Veterinary Pathology 9:368-378.
and histopathologic manifestations of
Winston S {1980) Idiopathic uveitis and 341 Vestre W, Turner T, Carlton W (1982)
protothecosis in two dogs. Veterinary
exudative retinal detachment in the
Proliferative optic neuropathy in a
Ophthatotogy 1:239-243.
dog. Journat of the American Animat
horse. Journal of the Ammerican
314 Glaze M, Gaunt S {1986) Uveitis
Hospitat Association 16:163-170.
Veterinary Medicat Association
associated with Ehrlichia ptatys
328 Andrew SE, Abrams KL, Brooks DE.
181:490-491.
infection in a dog. Joturnat of the
Kubilis PS (1997) Clinical features of
 342 Platt H, Barnett K, Barry D, Bell A
American Veterinary Medicat
steroid-responsive retinal detachments 
{1983) Degenerative lesions of the optic
Association 188:916-918.
in twenty-two dogs. Veterinary and
nerve in Equidae. Equine Veterinary
315 Swanson J, Dubielzig R (1986)
Comparative Ophthatmology 7:82-87.
Jotu rnat Supplement 2:91-97.
Clinical and histopathological 
329 Wilcock B, Peiffer R {1987) The
343 Hardy J, Robertson J, Wilkie D
characteristics of acute canine ocular
 pathology of len-induced uveitis in
(1990) Ischemic optic neuropathy and
ehrlichiosis. Proceedings of the
dogs. Veterinary Pathology
blindness after arterial occlusion for
Scientific Meeting of the American
24:549-553.
treatment of guttural pouch mycosis in
Coltege of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
two horses. Journal of the American
117:219-232.
Veterinary Medicat Association
196:1631-1634.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
469
344 Martin C, Leipold H, Radostits O
356 Gwin R, Gelatt K, Terrell T, Hood C
 367 Paulsen M, Allen T, Jaenke R,
{1972) Polycythemia in a calf: ocular
{1978) Hypertensive retinopathy
Ching S, Severin G, Hammond T
findings. Veterinary Medicine/Smatt
associated with hypothyroidism,
{1989a) Arterial hypertension in two
Animal Clinician 67:885-889.
 hypercholesterolemia, and renal failure
canine siblings: ocular and systemic
345 Lombard C, Twitchell M (1978)
in a dog. Journat of the American
manifestations. Journat of the
 Tetralogy of fallot, persistent left
Animat Hospital Association
American Animat Hospitat Association
cranial vena cava, and retinal
14:200-209.
25:287-295.
detachment in a cat. Journat of the
357 Manning P (1979) Thyroid gland and 
 368 Maggio F, DeFrancesco TC,
American Animat Hospitat Association
arterial lesions of Beagles with familial
Atkins CE, Pizzirani A, Gilger BC,
14:624-630.
hypothyroidism and
 Davidson MG (2000) Ocular lesions
346 Shull R, Osborne C, Barrett R, et af.
hyperlipoproteinemia. American
associated with systemic hypertension
{1978) Serum hyperviscosity syndrome
Journat of Veterinary Research
in cats: 69 cases {1985-1998). Journat
associated with IgA multiple myeloma
40:820-828.
of the American Veterinary Mediciat
in two dogs. Journat of the American
 358 Rubin L {1975) Ocular manifestations
Association 217:695-702.
Animat Hospitat Association 14:58-70.
of arteriosclerosis and hypertension in
369 Ortega T, Feldman D, Nelson R,
347 Center S, Smith J {1982) Ocular
dogs. Proceedings of the Scientific
Willits N, Cowgill L (1996) Systemic
lesions in a dog with serum
Meeting of the American Cotlege of
arterial blood pressure and urine
hy perviscosity secondary to an IgA
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 6:56-68.
protein/creatinine ratio in dogs with
myeloma. Journat of the American
359 Cowgill L, Kallet A (1983)
hperadrenocorticism. Journal of the
Veterinary Medicat Association
 Recognition and management of
American Veterinary Medicat
181:811-813.
hypertension in the dog. In: Current
Association 209:1724-1729.
348 Bublot M, Thiriart C, Grauwels M,
Veterinary Therapy VIll. RW Kirk {ed).
370 Elliott J, Barber P, Syme H,
et αf. {1985) Myelome multiple a IgG
WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
 Rawlings J, Markwell P (2001) Feline
complilque du syndrome
pp. 1025-1028.
hypertension: clinical findings and
d'hy perviscosite chez un chien. Annales
 360 Kobayashi D, Peterson M, Graves T,
 response to antihypertensive treatment
de Medicine Veterinaire 129:555-564.
Lesser M, Nichols C {1990)
in 30 cases. Journat of Small Animat
349 Hendrix DV, Gelatt K, Smith PJ,
Hypertension in cats with chronic renal
Practice 42:122-129.
Brooks DE, Whittaker C {1998)
failure or hyperthryoidism. Journat of
371 Keyes J, Goldblatt H {1938)
Ophthalmic disease as the presenting
Veterinary Internat Medicine 4:58-62.
 Experimental hy pertension. VIII.
complaint in five dogs with multiple
 361 Dukes J(1992) Hypertension: a
Vascular changes in the eyes. Archives
myeloma. Journat of the American
review of the mechanisms,
of Ophthatmotogy 20:812-825.
Animat Hospitat Association
manifestations, and management.
372 Hayreh S, Servais G, Virdi P {1985)
34:121-128.
Journat of Smatt Animat Practice
Fundus lesions in malignant
350 Gelatt K {1979) Neuroretinopathy in
33:119-129.
hypertension. Il. Arterial blood 
the horse. Equine Medicine and Surgery
362 Stiles J, Polzin DJ, Bistner SI {1994)
pressure, biochemical, and fundus
3:91-96.
 The prevalence of retinopathy in cats
changes. Ophthatmotogy 92:45-59.
351 Ballen P, Fox M, Weissman G {1985)
with systemic hypertension and chronic:
 373 Hayreh S, Servais G, Virdi P {1985)
 Ischemic optic neuropathy secondary to
renal failure or hyperthyroidism.
 Fundus lesions in malignant
intestinal hemorrhage. Annats of
Journat of the American Animal
hypertension. IV. Focal intraretinal
Ophthatmotogy 17:486-488.
Hospital Association 30:564-572.
periarteriolar transudates.
352 Kern T, Riis R {1980) Ocular
363 van der Woerdt A, Peterson ME
Ophthatmotogy 92:60-73.
 manifestations of secondary
{1998) Prevalence of ocular
 374 Morgan R (1986) Systemic
hy perlipidemia associated with
abnormalities in cats with
hypertension in four cats: ocular and
hypothyroidism and uveitis in a dog.
hyperthyroidism. Proceedings of the
medical findings. Jou rnat of the
Journat of the American Animat
Scientific Meeting of the American
American Animat Hospitat Association
Hospitat Association 16:907-914.
Coltege of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
22:615-621.
353 Wyman M, McKissick G (1973)
29:26.
 375 Ross L (1990) Hypertensive disease.
 Lipemia retinalis in a dog and cat: case
 364 Sansom J, Barnett KC, Dunn KA,
In: Current Veterinary Therapy, 10th
reports. Journat of the American
 Smith KC, Dennis R {1994) Ocular
edn. R Kirk {ed). WB Saunders,
Animat Hospitat Association
 disease associated with hypertension in
 Philadelphia, pp. 2047-2056.
9:288-291.
16 cats. Journat of Smafl Animat
376 Engerman R, Bloodworth J (1965)
354 Rogers W, Donovan D, Kociba G
Practice 35:604-611.
 Experimental diabetic retinopathy in
{1975) Idiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia
365 Turner L, Brogdon J, Lees G, Greco D
dogs. Archives of Ophthatmatogy
in dogs. Journat of the American
{1990) Idiopathic hypertension in a cat
73:205-210.
Veterinary Medicat Assaciation
with secondary hypertensive
377 Patz A, Berkow J, Maumenee A, Cox
166:1087-1091.
retinopathy associated with a high-salt
 J (1965) Studies on diabetic
355 Halenda RM, Moore CP {1998)
diet. Journat of the American Animat
retinopathy. I1. Retinopathy and
 Presumed lipid retinopathy in a diabetic
Hospitat Association 26:647-651.
nephropathy in spontaneous canine
dog. Veterinary Ophthatmology
 366 Bovee K, Littman M, Crabtree B,
diabetes. Diabetes 14:700-708.
1:171-174.
Aguirre G {1989) Essential
378 Gepts W, Toussaint D (1967)
hypertension in a dog. Journat of the
Spontaneous diabetes in dogs and cats:
American Veterinary Medicat
a pathologic study. Diabetologid
Association 195:81-86.
3:249-265.
470
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
379 Sibay T, Hausler H (1967) Eye
388 Schiavo D, Field W {1975) Retinal
398 Schoster JV, Dubielzig RR, Sullivan L
findings in two spontaneously diabetic
arteriolar macroaneurysms in a Beagle
(1993) Choroidal melanoma in a dog.
related dogs. American Journat of
dog. Veterinary Medicine/Small Animat
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Ophthatmotogy 63:289-294.
Clinician 70:733-736.
Medicat Association 203:89-91.
380 Toole D, Miller G, Hazel S {1984)
 389 Patz A (1965) The effect of oxygen on
399 Weisse V, Stotzer H (1971)
 Bilateral retinal microangiopathy in a
immature retinal vessles. Investigative
Intraokulares melanom bei einem
dog with diabetes mellitus and
Ophthatmology 4:988-999.
jungen Beagle kasuistische mitteilung.
hy poadrenocorticism. Veterinary
390 McLeod DS, D'Anna SA, Lutty GA
Bertiner und Munchener Tierarztliche
Pathofogy 21:120-121.
{1998) Clinical and histopathologic
Wochenschrift 84(17):328-330.
 381 Barnett K {1981) Diabetic retinopathy
features of canine oxygen-induced
400 O'Toole D, Murphy J (1983) Spindle
in the dog. British Journat of
 proliferative retinopathy. Investigative
B cell melanoma in the choroid of a
Ophthaimotogy 65:312-314.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
dog. Journat of Small Animatl Practice
382 Monti F, Bellan B, Berardi S,
39:1918-1932.
24:561-567.
Peruccio C {1976) The clinical picture
391 Martin C, Kaswan R, Chapman W
401 Aguirre G, Brown G, Shields J,
of diabetic retinopathy in the dog. Folid
(1986) Four cases of traumatic optic
Dubielzig R (1984) Melanoma of the
Veteriniaria Latina 6:249-274.
nerve blindness in the horse. Equine
choroid in a dog. Journat of the
 383 Herrtage M, Barnett K, MacDougall
Veterinary Journat 18:133-137.
American Animal Hospitat Association
 D {1985) Diabetic retinopathy in a cat
 392 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Jamieson V,
20:471-476.
with megestrol acetate-induced
English R, Olivero D {1991) Traumatic
402 Dubielzig R, Aguirre G, Gross S,
diabetes. Journat of Smatt Animat
anterior lens capsule disruption. Journa!
 Diters R (1985) Choroidal melanomas
Practice 26:595-601.
of the American Animat Hospitat
in dogs. Veterinary Pathotogy
384 Takahashi Y, Wyman M, Ferris F,.
Association 27:410-414.
22:582-585.
Kador P {1992) Diabetes-like
 393 Rebhun W (1986) Traumatic optic
403 Hogan RN, Albert DM {1991) Does
 preproliferative retinal changes in
neuropathy: how to prevent permanent
retinoblastoma occur in animals?
galactose-fed dogs. Archives of
blindness. Veterinary Medicine/Smalf
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
Ophthaimotogy 110:1295-1302.
Animat Clinician 81:350-353.
Ophthaimotogy 1:73-82.
385 Kador PF, Akagi Y, Terubayashi H,
394 Levin LA, Beck RW, Joseph MP,
404 Syed NA, Nork M, Poulsen GL,
Wyman M, Kinoshita JH (1988)
Seiff S, Kraker R {1999) The treatment
Ris RC, George C, Albert DM (1997)
Prevention of pericyte ghost formation
of traumatic optic neuropathy: the
Retinoblastoma in a dog. Archives of
in retinal capillaries of galactose-fed
international optic nerve trauma study.
Ophthatmotogy 115:758-763.
dogs by aldose reductase inhibitors.
Ophthatmology 106:1268-1277.
405 Cassotis NJ, Dubielzig RR, Gilger BC,
Archives of Ophthatmology
395 Brooks DE, Komaromy AM,
Davidson MG (1999) Angioinvasive
106:1099-1102.
Kallberg ME (1999) Comparative optic
 pulmonary carcinoma with posterior
386 Kador PF, Akagi Y, Takahashi Y,
 nerve physiology: implications for
segment metastasis in four cats.
Ikebe H, Wyman W, Kinoshita JH
glaucoma, neuroprotection, and
Veterinary Ophthatmology 2:125-131.
{1990) Prevention of retinal vessel
neuroregeneration. Veterinary
changes associated with diabetic
Ophthatmotogy 2:13-25.
retinopathy in galactose-fed dogs by
396 Weinreb RN, Levin LA (1999) Is
 aldose reductase inhibitors. Archives of
neuroprotection a viable therapy for
Ophthatmology 108:1301-1309.
glaucoma? Archives of Ophthatmotogy
387 Mansour SZ, Hatchell DL,
117:1540-1544.
Chandler D, Saloupis P, Hatchell MC
397 Collinson PN, Peiffer RL (1993)
(1990) Reduction of basement
Clinical presentation, morphology, and
membrane thickening in diabetic cat
 behavior of primary choroidal
retina by sulindac. Investigative
 melanomas in eight dogs. Progress in
Ophthaimology and Visuatl Science
Veterinary and Comparative
31:457-563.
Ophthatmology 3:158-164.
471
15
Presumed Inherited
Ocular Diseases
R. David Whitley
Kristina R. Vygantas
INTRODUCTION
Other countries are also making efforts to formalize
 certification schemes for inherited ocular diseases3, 6
Diagnosis and clinical assessment of visual changes in the
 The utilization of molecular genetic techniques has
dog are important aspects of small animal practice. Pet
revolutionized the diagnosis of hereditary ocular
owners often assume that an eye problem affects an animal
disease. Many of the first veterinary diagnostic DNA
to the same extent as it would a person. Thus the owner
tests were developed in the field of veterinary
can become extremely apprehensive about the disorder.
Knowing or suspecting that the underlying cause of a
retinal degeneration. Genetic diagnostic techniques are
disorder is heritable has considerable influence on the
Aienauau suaisas iauo iof padolaap suiaq ose mou
advice a veterinarian gives an owner or breederl, 2. To
diseases such as von Willbrand's disease, pyruvate
provide an accurate diagnosis and prognosis, and to offer
kinase deficiency of Basenjis, and copper toxicosis of
genetic counseling, veterinarians should be aware of
Bedlington Terriers7.
breed predispositions and  inheritability  of ocular
 If the specific mutation responsible for a given disease
diseases. Signalment, history, and ophthalmic examin-
is known, then a mutation based test can be developed
ation findings form the diagnostic data base.
that can very precisely identify the presence or absence of
The Canine Eye Registry Foundation {CERF), which
that mutation in a given dog's test sample. In autosomal
was established in 1974, serves as a data collection
recessive diseases, two copies of the mutant allele are
agency for purebred dogs. The CERF also functions as a
necessary for expression of the given disease. Dogs that
registry for *clear-eyed dogs" (dogs free of major heritable
 are *carriers' do not have the disease but carry one copy
eye diseases such as cataracts, PRA, and corneal
of the mutant gene that they can pass on to offspring.
dystrophies). To register a dog with the CERF an owner
Most canine hereditary retinal degenerations are caused
must have the dog examined by a member of the
by autosomal recessive disorders. Mutation based tests
American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists
can identify with 100% accuracy dogs that are
(ACVO) before applying for a CERF registry number.
genetically normal with respect to a particular gene, dogs
The examination is performed after the pupils are
that are carriers, or dogs that are affected. These tests can
dilated, utilizing slit lamp biomicroscopy and indirect
be performed at a very early age, even before the onset of
ophthalmoscopy. The registration is valid for 1 year from
clinical signs of the disease&.
the date of examination. A CERF number is evidence
Commercially available mutation based tests currently
that the dog was examined and determined to be
exist for three specific forms of retinal degeneration in
phenotypically free of major hereditary eye disease as of
the dog. In Irish Setters, rod-cone dysplasia 1 {rcd-1) is
the date examined.
characterized by abnormal development of rod and cone
The CERF and the veterinary medical database at Purdue
photoreceptors due to a mutation in the cGMP
University recently began offering an equine eye registry
phosphodiesterase β-subunit, 10, an essential component 
 mainly for certification of Rocky Mountain horses124.
of phototransduction in the retina. Through the
The European College of Veterinary Ophthalmolgists
 technique of mismatch PCR, the test is able to determine 
(ECVO) has developed a process to certify animals free
whether a dog is genetically *clear', is a carrier that will
of inherited eye disease. A common certificate is used
never develop rcd-1, or is affected due to the presence of
throughout Europe3 4. Examinations are performed by
two copies of the mutant allele.
ECVO diplomates, ACVO diplomates, or nonECVO
 Rod-cone dysplasia type 3 (rcd-3) is a disease of
diplomates who are trained and tested by the ECVO to
u uoein1 e Aq pasneo si ieui siao ysea ueaipie
become eye scheme examiners {ESEs), under the
the C-subunit of cGMP phosphodiesterase (PDE6A),
leading to nonfunctional, prematurely truncated protein 
performed, following pharmacological mydriasis, using
productll. The rod photoreceptors are abnormally
slit lamp biomicroscopy and indirect ophthalmoscopy. In
formed, whereas the cones initially develop normally but
some breeds in which iridocorneal angle anomalies occur,
are quick to degeneratel1. The technique of allele specific
gonioscopy is also used. Currently each country
is
PCR is employed in the commercially available test
offered by Michigan State University. Allele specific PCR
exchange data between countries'.
utilizes two sets of primers: one to amplify only the
472
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
C dogs are mated with A dogs, none of the puppies wil
It is therefore possible to determine whether a given
be affected, although they will all be carriers. Following
sample contains only normal copies of the genes
these guidelines, no dog must be removed from the
(genetically *clear' or normal), one normal copy and one
breeding pool17.
mutant copy (carrier), or only mutant copies (affected).
Unfortunately, since marker based testing is not
Congenital stationary  night blindness is  an
looking for the mutation itself, but instead for a
autosomal recessive disease of Briard dogs caused by a
relationship to a given set of genetic markers, the
mutation in RPE65, a highly conserved gene that is
possibility for a “false positive' allele exists. A false
expressed in the RPE of the retinal3. Affected Briards
positive allele can occur because numerous generations
are congenitally night blind and have varying degrees of
ago the marker haplotype existed even before the
visual impairment in bright light conditions. The
 genetic mutation occurred. When the prcd mutation
disease is a progressive disorder that does not cause
occurred, it was passed on to subsequent generations in
 ophthalmoscopic abnormalities until later in lifel4. The
conjunction with the marker haplotype. The normal
gene that had not undergone mutation was passed on in
the mutation site using PCR. The mutant gene copy will
conjunction with the same marker haplotype as well.
be four-base pairs shorter than a normal DNA segment.
Although it is unusual, a dog that is categorized as
This four-base pair difference can be visualized on a
pattern B may actually have a copy of the false positive
high resolution agarose gel, allowing accurate
allele, together with a normal copy of the gene. This
identification of the presence of normal as well as
would make the dog genetically normal, not a carrier of
mutant copies of the gene&.
aq Aenoe Aeu sop o uaned e klareu aiou uaag poid
The diagnosis of genetic diseases for which the specific
a carrier or even normal. Once the prcd mutation is
ag iou se asas al 1og aiisuods uonu
specifically identified, a mutation based test can be
definitively identified is still possible, although the results
developed that will eliminate the ambiguity created by
are not as definitive as with mutation based tests.
 the false positive allele17.
Linkage or marker based tests are often used when the
 The implications of genetic testing for breeding are
specific mutation has not yet been discovered. These tests
 tremendous. By selectively breeding normals to carriers,
rely on the relationship of a set of markers fmicro-
phenotypic expression of disease can be avoided. The
satellites, for example) to the given gene of interest.
argument may also be made that even affected dogs can
Consistent inheritance of a particular marker in dogs
affected by the genetic disease allows testing for that
resultant puppies will be carriers, but will not be affected
particular marker, instead of for the specific mutation
by disease. Affected dogs with other exceptional traits
itself. Since markers are easier to identify than the
may therefore still be able to pass these valuable traits on
specific genes, this can facilitate the development of the
to future generations. Significant narrowing of the gene
test. Individuals inherit alleles of the markers, just as they
pool has previously occurred in some breeds, when
inherit allles of the gene determining the disease1s.
breeders were trying to eliminate hereditary defects by
A marker based test is utilized in the diagnosis of
eliminating
known carriers from the breeding
progressive rod cone degeneration (prcd), a widespread
population. In some cases, this narrowing of the gene
form of retinal degeneration that affects many breeds of
pool has resulted in the promotion of other genetically
dogs. Prcd is an autosomal recessive disorder that
based disea ses.
generally causes night blindness by 2-5 years of age and
 This chapter provides a list of breed predispositions
complete blindness by S-12 years of age. Since it affects
for ocular diseases. The information is derived from
many breeds of dogs, the phenotypic expression of the 
current veterinary ophthalmic texts, journal articles,
disease can vary according to the breed. The gene
newsletters, personal communication with colleagues,
responsible for prcd has been localized to a specific
and personal experience. Although the authors suspect
region of canine chromosome 916. Even though the exact
these disorders are inherited, inheritance has not been
gene has not been identified, it has been associated with
proved in all instances.
a set of genetic markers. The marker based test for prcd
has been developed for four breeds: the Labrador
Retriever, Chesapeake Bay Retriever, English Cocker
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Spaniel, and Portuguese Water Dog17.
The test for prcd is able to identify genetically normal
This list was made possible in part by Raymond and
dogs with 100% accuracy. These dogs have been
Margaret (deceased) Hammond, Ponte Vedra Beach,
1of pasn aq Aew pue ssop y uaned, se payuap!
Fla.;t
the K-9 Obedience Club of Jacksonville,
breeding with dogs of any other pattern type. Pattern B'
Jacksonville, Fla.; Seminole Dog Fanciers Association,
S iei (uud aaul adaodeu 1au e aaey sao
Longwood, Fla.; Greater Orange Park Dog Club, Orange 
always associated with the normal gene, as well as a
 Park, Fla.; Greater Daytona Dog Fanciers Association,
marker haplotype that has been linked to the prcd
Daytona Beach, Fla.; Brevard Kennel Club, Coca, Fla.;
mutation. In almost all instances these dogs are carriers
Treasure Coast Kennel Club of Florida, Fort Pierce, Fla.;
of the disease but are not affected themselves. Mating of
and Okaloosa Kennel Club, Fort Walton Beach, Fla.
dogs, although some will still be carriers of the disease.
Pattern C' dogs have two copies of the marker haplotype
that has been associated with the mutant gene, and
almost always are affected by retinal degeneration. If
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
473
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs
 Affenpinscher
American Cocker Spaniel 
Australian Kelpie
Cataracts (rare]18
Cataracts: recessive trait32, 33
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
Corneal dystrophy20: posterior
 Afghan Hound
Australian Shepherd Dog
 Cataracts: recessive trait18. 19
 polymorphous, epithelial;/stromal
Cataracts: anterior cortical, nuclear (5-8
 Congenital retinal detachment (complete
Distichiasis: dominant trait suspected
years of age]18, posterior polar
retinal dysplasiaj1s
Ectopic cilium
subcapsular, triangular (18
Ectropion 
Eversion of the third eyelid 23
Eetropion/entropion
 Collie eye anomaly18
 Medial canthal pocket syndromel8 
Encireling third eyelid
Corectopia/dyscoria/coloboma/equa torial
 Mesodermal dysgenesis
Entropion 
staphyloma (homozygons merle):
(goniodysgenesis) (some affected
Exposure keratopathy syndrome
Glaucoma
 autosomal recessive trait36
dogs will develop glaucoma)25
Microcornea37
 Cversized palpebral fissure
Imperforate lacrimal punctum 
Microphthalmia/heterochromia
(euryblepharon)20. 23
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Ocular coloboma/staphyloma without
 Persistent pupillary membranes18. 20
Lens subluxation (secondary
microphthalmiazi
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 glaucoma)20., 24
Persistent pupillary membranes
 Mesodermal dysgenesis glaucoma
 Airedale Terrier
Progressive retinal atrophy (2-7 years of
Microphakia, nuclear and perinuclear
Cataracts
agel
cataracts, and persistent pupillary
 Retinal detachment
 Chronic superficial keratitis
membranes
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds 
(pannus) 18, 21, 22
Optic nerve coloboma2
Uveodermatologic syndrome (vitiligo and
 Congenital retinal detachment 
 Optic nerve hypoplasia
uveitis syndrome)31
(complete retinal dysplasia)18
 Oversized palpebral fissue
 Corneal dystrophy26
(macroblepharon)
Australian Terrier
Distichiasis20, 21, 23
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progresive retinal atrophy
Entropion18
Posterior polymorphous dystrophy18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Progressive retinal atrophy
Basenji
Akbash Dog
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid 
Corneal dystrophy: endothelial,
Proliferative episcleritis (fibrous
Cataracts22
histiocytoma]
epithelial/stromal
Redundant forehead skin23
 Optic nerve coloboma
Akita
Cataracts
Retinal dysplasia:
 Persistent pupillary membranes:
inherited traiti8. 38
 Corneal dystrophy18. 27
geographic/detachment?', retinal
folds: autosomal recessive trait34
 Posterior segment coloboma
Distichiasis
 Progressive retinal atrophy18
Entropion18
Trichomegaly: inherited trait
Retinal detachment18
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
American Eskimo Dog
eyelid2
Cataracts
Basset Hound
Glaucomal8
Cataracts22
Multiple ocular anomalies:
Progressive retinal atrophy
Ectropion
microphthalmia, congenital
American Pit Bull Terrier
Entropion 
cataracts, posterior lenticonus,
Progressive retinal atrophy
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third 
 retinal dysplasia28
American Staffordshire Terrier
eyelid2
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Iris cysts39
Cataracts
 Progressive retinal atrophy (most
Mesodermal dysgenesis glaucoma25. 40 
Distichiasis
commonly diagnosed in 2-3-year-
 Oversized palpebral fissure23
Entropion21. 22
old males]29
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous21
Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
 Progressive retinal atrophy18
Primary glaucoma (narrow- or closed-
Uveodermatologic syndrome (vitiligo and
 angle!
uveitis syndrome]30. 31
American Water Spaniel
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Cataracts18
Redundant forehead skin23
 Alaskan Malamute
Distichiasis
 Secondary glaucoma (subluxation of the
Cataracts18
 Coloboma of the optic nervel8
Entropion 
lens]20 
 Corneal dystrophy1. 20
Microphthalmia
Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsi8,21, 22
Beagle
Glaucoma
Cataracts: incomplete dominant trait
Hemeralopia (cone dysplasia): autosomal 
Australian Cattle Dog (Queensland 
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
recessive trait18
Heeler, Blue Heeler)
 Distichiasis18
Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataracts21, 2
Ectropionz7
 Progressive retinal atrophy (diagnosed at
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis22
Encircling third eyelid
2-4 years of age!
Lens luxation 
Iris cyst39
Refractory superficial corneal ulcer2 18
Persistent pupillary membranes18
Micropapilla
 Retinal dysplasia
 Progressive retinal atrophy3s
(continued overleaf)
474
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Beagle (continued)
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Entropion (media1)20
 Microphthalmia/multiple ocular 
Systemic histiocytosis
Glaucoma23
anomalies
Hypertrophy (prolapse) of the gland of
Optic nerve hypoplasia 
Bichon Frise
Cataracts
the third eyelid
 Oval corneal opacity (corneal dystrophy)
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal18. 27
Iris cyst2 39
 Palpebral neoplasia41
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Entropion1s
Strabismus (exotropia)18
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Primary glaucoma (open- or narrow-
Progressive retinal atrophy
anglel: autosomal recessive trait42
Distichiasis
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Refractory supericial corneal ulcer18. 47
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds 
 Strabismus (exotropia)18. 23
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Retinal dysplasia
Bloodhound
Boykin Spaniel
Ectropion20
Cataracts21
Tapetal cell degeneration: autosomal
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
recessive trait
Eetropion/entropion
Distichiasis
En tropion 
Bearded Collie
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Progressive retinal atrophy (retinal
Cataracts (2-5-year old males)18
eyelid 
 atrophy: generalized)
 Congenital retinal detachment (complete
 Prolapse of the gland of third eyelidz1
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
retinal dysplasia]43
Keratoconjunetivitis sicca!
 Corneal dystrophy
Bouvier des Flandres 
Macroblepharon
Cataracts (congenital),48
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Persistent pupillary membranes18
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Entropion 18, 2
Redundant forehead skin20 23
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds21
Glaucoma49
 Mesodermal dysgenesis glaucoma
 Bedlington Terrier
 Black and Tan Coonhound
 Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
Cataracts
Cataracts
lentis 
 Distichiasis
Border Collie
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous50
 Entropion44
Cataracts (4-6 years of age]18
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Imperforate lacrimal punctum
Central progressive retinal atrophy
Boxer
Micropalpebral fissure
[1-3 years of age)
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Cataracts18
 Central progressive retinal atrophy2, 18
Microphthalmia
Collie eye anomaly (choroidal
 Nasolacrimal duct stenosis18
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
hypoplasia]18
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Fibrous histiocytoma
Distichiasis
 Retinal dysplasia and detachment:
Ectropion
Lens luxation
Entropion
 autosomal recessive18
Persistent pupillary membranes 
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Nonpigmented third eyelid
Progressive retinal atrophy (2-5 years of
agel
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Belgian Malinois
Proliferative keratoconjunctivitisa, 23
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Ca taracts
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
 Refractory superficial corneal ulcer
Progressive retinal atrophy21
(basement membrane dystrophy)
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Border Terrier
Cataracts18, 21, 22
Briard
Belgian Sheepdog (Belgian Shepherd 
Cataracts
Dog - Groenendael)
Progressive retinal atrophy
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
Congenital stationary night blindness
Cataracts18
(hereditary retinal dystrophy in 
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)2. 45 
Borzoi
Briards)22
Micropapilla
 Cataracts (posterior pole; 1-4 years of
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
 Persistent pupillary membranes
age)18
 Central progressive retinal atrophy
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Chronic superficial keratitis
(inherited vitamin E deficiency)s-53
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
(pannus)2
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Retinopathy (congenital blindness):
Microphthalmia (multiple ocular
British Bulldog
recessive trait
 anomalies)
Persistent pupillary membranes18
Cataracts18
 Belgian Tervuren
Progressive retinal atrophy
Distichiasis
Cataracts18
 Retinal degeneration
 Ectopic cilium
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Retinal dysplasia 
Eetropion
 Micropapilla21
 Ectropionfentropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Boston Terrier
Entropion (medial aspect of the lower
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Cataracts, congenital: juvenile27 ; late-
eyelid)
Bernese Mountain Dog
onset45
Iris cyst39
Cataracts
Corneal endothelial dystrophy (average
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Cataracts/retinal detachment39
age 7.5 years)
Nasal fold trichiasis
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Oversized palpebral fissure
 Entropion 
Distichiasis
(euryblepharon)
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
475
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
 Persistent pupillary membranes20
Persistent corneal epithelial erosionl. 18
 Entropion (lateral canthus)
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Persistent pupillary membranes 
Glaucoma2, 61
Redundant forehead skin23
Progressive retinal atrophy (rod-cone
Micropalpebral fissure
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
dysplasia)]: recessive trait12, 22, 56
(blepharophimosis)
Refractory superficial corneal ulcer
 Cversized palpebral fissure23
Brittany
Retinal dysplasia: focal or
Persistent pupillary membranes:
Cataracts
multifoca/12 18, 21
inherited trait2, 62
 Distichiasis18
Progressive retinal atrophy
Glaucoma25
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
Redundant forehead skin 
Iris cyst20
Cataracts18
Lens luxation21
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Clumber Spaniel
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Distichiasis23
Amaurosisi8
 Retinal dysplasia
Entropion 
Cataracts
Exposure keratopathy/macroblepharon22
Ectropion
 Brussels Griffon 
Microphthalmia with multiple ocular
Entropion 
Ca taracts
 anomalies
Distichiasis
 Distichiasis20. 23
 Posterior lenticonus, cataracts, and
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Ectopic cilium21
microphthalmia (reported in
Macroblepharon22
 Exposure keratopathy syndrome22
Swedenj57
 Microphthalmia21
 Optic nerve colobama
Progressive retinal atrophy (1-5 years of
Persistent pupillary membranes
Persistent pupillary membrane22
age/ 18 22
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds21
 Progressive retinal atrophy18
Vitreous degeneration
Retinal dysplasia:
Collie (Rough or Scotch, and Smooth)
 geographic/detachment)22, retinal
folds18
Cataracts18
Bu llmastiff
Central progressive retinal atrophy18, 23
Cataracts21
 Chesapeake Bay Retriever
 Collie eye anomaly: autosomal recessive
Distichiasis
Cataracts: dominant trait with
trait (choroidal hypoplasia,
 Entropion
incomplete penetrances8
staphylomafcoloboma, retinal
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third
 Central progressive retinal atrophy23
detachment, retinal hemorrhage,
eyelid
Distichiasis
optic nerve coloboma)63
 Glaucoma18. 22
Entropion: lateral canthus, lower eyelid
 Corneal dystrophy
 Persistent pupillary membranesz2
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Distichiasis
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
eyelid
Entropion secondary to enlarged
Bull Terrier
 Persistent pupillary membranes21
orbit/enophthalmos
Ectropion22
Progressive retinal atrophy
 Fibrous histiocytoma
 Entropion
Retinal dysplasia:
Microcornea23
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca54
 geographic/detachment22, retinal
Micropalpebral fissure
 Micropalpebral fissure
folds 18
(blepharophimosis)64
(blepharophimosis)
Microphthalmia
Chihuahua
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Optic nerve hypoplasia?
Cataracts
 Prolapse (hypertrophy) of the gland of
 Corneal endothelial dystrophy (average
Persistent pupillary membranes
the third eyelidzi
Progressive retinal atrophy (rod-cone
age of onset 9.5 years]
dysplasia): autosomal recessive 
Bull Terrier (Miniature)
Entropion 
trait16
Entropion22
Glaucoma18
 Proliferative keratoconjunctivitisz0
Lens luxation55
Ilridal atrophy20
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Keratoconjunetivitis sicca
Cairn Terrier
 Stationary night blindness 
Lens luxation and secondary glaucoma
Cataracts18
Persistent pupillary membranes
Coonhound
 Ectopic cilium20
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Cataracts18
Lens luxation with secondary
Trichiasis2
Central progressive retinal atrophy
glaucoma
Vitreous degeneration
Ectropion 
 Pigmentary glaucoma (ocular melanosis 
Entropion21
with secondary glaucoma)
Chinese Crested Dog
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Progressive retinal atrophy: recessive
Cataracts
trait56
Vitreous degeneration21
Coonhound (Redbone Hound)
 Retinal dysplasia18
Central progressive retinal atrophy2, 20 23
Chow Chow
Cardigan Welsh Corgi
Ectropion
Anterior chamber cleavage syndrome2
 Entropion: inherited traitzz
Ca taracts
Cataracts59
 Central progressive retinal atrophy
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus]60
Coton de Tulear
 Distichiasis
Corneal dystrophy, endothelial2]
Cataracts65
Entropion18
 Displaced lacrimal punctum20 
Retinal dysplasia: folds/bullaezz
 Lens luxation with secondary
Ectropion 18
 Retinal atrophy (generalized)22
glaucoma
Entropion 
(continued overleaf)
476
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
 Curly Coated Retriever
Distichiasis
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus]18
Cataractsz
 Enophthalmos18. 26
Coloboma of the optic nerveis
Corneal dystrophy, epithelial/stromal
Entropion: lower eyelid, secondary to
Corneal dystrophy
Distichiasis
enlarged orbit/enophthalmos/large
Distichiasis23
Eetropion 18
zygoma
Ectropion?
Entropion20
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Entropion20
Progressive retinal atrophy2
eyelid20, 21
Glaucoma73
Microphakia, nuclear cataracts (7
 Optic nerve hypoplasia17
Dachshund
months of age)
 Persistent pupillary membranes23
Cataracts18
Microphthalmia with multiple ocular
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus):
Progressive retinal atrophy
 inherited trait23. 45
 anomalies
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds:
 Persistent hyperplastic primary
 Corneal dystrophy: endothelial inherited 
autosomal recessive trait
vitreous
Geographic detachment: autosomal
 trait, epithelia l/stromal 
 Dermoid: inherited traitz, 18
Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
recessive trait74
lentis48, 70
Distichiasis
Persistent pupillary membranes37
English Toy Spaniel (King Charles.
 Eetopie cilium
Progressive retinal atrophy
 Prince Charles, Ruby, Blenheim)
Entropion18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
Cataracts21
Glaucomal8
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca23
Dogue de Bordeaux
Distichiasis
Micropapillazi
Ectropion'
Entropion 
Microphthalmiafmultiple ocular
Entropion
Persistent hyaloid artery22
 anomalies
 Persistent hyperplastic primary
English Cocker Spaniel
 Multiple ocular defects (homozygous
Cataracts: recessive trait suspected
vitreous/persistent hyperplastic
merle)21
tunica vasculosa lentis22
Central progressive retinal atrophy
 Optic nerve coloboma
(inherited vitamin E deficiency)13 51. 52
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds21
 Optic nerve hypoplasia2, 63
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Distichiasis: dominant trait
Entlebu cher
 Progressive retinal atrophy: recessive
suspected
Cataracts2
Ectropion2z
trait suspected20
 Ectropion/entropion
Field Spaniel
Punctate keratitisz2
Entropion (lower eyelid)
Cataracts18
 Recurrent epithelial erosion 
Glaucoma (narrow-angle)
Distichiasis22
 Uveodermatologic syndrome 
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
Imperforate lacrimal punctum
Lens luxation18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds,
Dachshund (Miniature)
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Optic nerve coloboma (pits)
geographic21
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Persistent pupillary membranes
Fila Brasileiro
(degeneration): autosomal
 Progressive retinal atrophy (progressive
Eetropion?
recessive20, 23, 66
rod-cone degeneration: autosomal
Entropion
Dalmatian
recessive)71
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Fnnish Spitz
Cataracts22
Cataracts22
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis57
English Setter
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus]183
Cataracts24
Flat Coated Retriever
Dermoid23
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis2. 72
Cataracts18
 Distichiasis18
 Chalazion
Distichiasis
Entropion?
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Ectropion18
Glaucoma24. 68
Entropion
Distichiasis
Microphthalmia3s
Ectropion 
Glaucoma2z
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Ectropion/entropion?
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
Entropion
 Dandie Dinmont Terrier
Fox Terrier (Smooth)
Cataracts
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Cataracts22 75
eyelid
 Corneal epithelial dystrophy23
Entropion18
Glaucoma
Kera toconjunctivitis sicca?
Glaucoma21. 22
 Mesodermal dysgenesis glaucoma61 
Macroblepharon 18
Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Palpebral neoplasia41
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Refractory superficial corneal ulcer
Persistent pupillary membranes
Progressive retinal atrophy18
Progressive retinal atrophy
Trichiasis
 Doberman Pinscher
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
 Anterior chamber cleavage
Fox Terrier (Toy)
English Springer Spaniel
Lens luxation with secondary
 Syndrome/microphthalmia/retinal
Cataractsi8
dysplasia2 69
glaucoma
 Cataracts/lenticonus2
Trichiasis23
Cataracts
Central progressive retinal atrophy
 Coloboma
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
477
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Fox Terrier (Wire)
 Golden Retriever
Corneal dystrophy
Cataracts (juvenile)
Cataracts79-81
Distichiasis
 Corneal endothelial dystrophy
Central progressive retinal atrophy
Lens luxation22
Corneal epithelial dystrophy23
Coloboma of the optic nerve18
Distichiasis23
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stroma l18. 47
Persistent hyperplastic primary
Entropion18
Distichiasis2
vitreous84
 Glaucoma2. 76
Ectropion
Progressive retinal atrophy
Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma
Enophthalmo5
Griffon
(3-7 years of age)2
Entropion 
Iris cyst
See Brussels Griffon
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Refractory corneal ulcer?
Glaucoma
Havanese (Toy)
 French Bulldog
 Optic nerve hypoplasia18
Cataracts
Persistent pupillary membranes52
Distichiasis2z
Cataracts
Progressive retinal atrophy
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Distichiasis21
Pigmentary keratitis22
 Entropion
Progressive retinal atrophy
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds,
 Retinal detachment21
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
 geographic/detachment
Vitreous degeneration22
 German Pinscher
 Uveodermatologic syndrome (vitiligo and 
 Corneal dystrophy, epithelial/stroma|22
uveitis syndrome]31
Ibizan Hound
Cataracts 18, 21
Cataracts2z
Gordon Setter
 Retinal dysplasia2
 German Shepherd Dog
Cataracts18
Irish Setter
Cataracts: congenita177, cortical
Ectropion
 Central progressive retinal atrophy
 En tropion (lower eyelid)/macroblepharon
 Anterior chamber cleavage
(reported in Europe)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca2
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)45
Persistent pupillary membraneszz
syndrome2
Cataracts
Coloboma
Progressive retinal atrophy
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds2
Central progressive retinal atrophy
 Corneal dystrophy23
Dermoid, conjunctiva, cornea, eyelid 
Ectropion 18
Great Dane
Distichiasis
Cataracts
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Enophthalmo5
 Ciiary body cystz
Entropion
eyelid 
Distichiasis
Lens luxation 18
Entropion secondary to enlarged
 Optic nerve hypoplasia2. 18
Ectropion 
orbit/enophtha lmos;large zygoma
Ectropion/entropion
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Oversized palpebral fissue
Enophthalmos 
(euryblepharon], juvenile,
eyelid18
Entropion secondary to enlarged
transient23
Lens luxation2. 18
 orbit/enophthalmos
 Optic nerve hypoplasia2
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third 
Persistent hyperplastic primary
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds,
eyelidz
vitreous'8
geographicz
Glaucoma2. 25 
 Third eyelid conjunctivitis (plasma cell
Persistent pupillary membranes
Hemeralopia 18
Progressive retinal atrophy (rod-cone
 infiltrationj20
Mesodermal dysgenesis
dysplasia): autosomal recessive
 German Shorthaired Pointer
Microphthalmia
trait18, 87
Cataracts18
Multiple ocular anomalies (homozygous
 Uveodermatologic syndrome (vitiligo and
 Corneal dystrophy
merle)79
uveitis syndrome)31
Distichiasis22
Progressive retinal atrophy
 Persistent hyaloid artery22
Entropion (lower eyelid)
Retinal dysplasia (harlequin)
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Irish Terrier
Great Pyrenees (Pyrenean Mountain
Cataracts
eyelid78
Dog)
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
Hemeralopia22
 Persistent hyperplastic primary
Ectropion (lateral aspect of the
 Irish Water Spaniel
eyelid)/entropion (medial aspect of 
vitreous/persistent hyperplastic
Cataracts18
tunica vasculosa lentis22
the eyelid)
Distichiasis
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
En tropion
Entropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Strabismus20
Progessive retinal atrophy21
 Progressive retinal atrophy18, 21
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Greater Swiss Mountain Dog
Irish Wolfhound
Cataracts22
German Wirehaired Pointer
Cataracts18
Distichiasis
Cataracts18
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stroma|22
 Entropion
Greyhound 
Distichiasis
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Cataracts
Entropion21
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)83
(continued overleaf)
478
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Irish Wolfhound (continued)
Entropion (lateral canthus)
Distichiasis
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Entropion (lower eyelid)2
Entropion 
eyelid18
Iris melanoma 
Epiphora 
Nystagmus23
Italian Greyhound
Glaucoma18
Persistent hyaloid
 Persistent hyaloid remnant22
Cataracts?
Persistent hyperplastic primary
Progressive retinal atrophy
 Corneal dystrophy18
vitreous;persistent hyperplastic
Retinal dysplasia, retinal folds 18
Glaucoma21
Iris cyst
tunica vasculosa lentiszz
Persistent pupillary membranes22
Manchester Terrier (Toy and Standard)
Micropapilla22
Cataracts22, 44
 Optic nerve hypoplasia1s
Progressive retinal atrophy (progressive
Lens luxation with secondary
 Persistent pupillary mermbranes
rod-cone degeneration): autosomal
glaucoma18. 75
 Progressive retinal atrophy
recessive
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Retinal degeneration (generalized)22
Retinal detachment (retinal dysplasia)18
 Retinal dysplasia: autosomal recessive 
Mastiff
Vitreal degeneration21
trait
Cataracts22
Jack Russell Terrier
Focal or geographic detachment,
 Corneal dystrophy18
Cataracts22
 without skeletal dysplasia: presumed 
Ectropion23
Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma
autosomal recessive
Entropion
 Folds, geographic/detachment with 
 Macroblepharon/exposure keratopathy
Japanese Chin
Cataracts
skeletal defects: presumed
syndrome
incomplete dominant traite, 88
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Distichiasis22
Progressive retinal atrophy21
Entropion
Lakeland Terrier
 Progressive retinal atrophy18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Cataracts18
Keeshond
Distichiasis23
Miniature Bull Terrier
Lens luxations9
Cataracts18
Lens luxation2z
Persistent pupillary membranes17
 Persistent pupillary membrane22
 Central progressive retinal atrophy
Distichiasis22
Large Munsterlander
Miniature Pinscher
 Ectopic ciium20
Cataracts90
Cataracts
Glaucoma
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)18
Leonberger
 Optic nerve hypoplasia18
Persistent pupillary membranes22
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stroma|21
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Entropion (medial canthus)23
Cataracts
 Keratoconjunetivitis sicca 
Kerry Blue Terrier
Lhasa Apso
 Progressive retinal atrophy20
Cataracts18
Aberrant dermis
Vitreous degeneration
Distichiasis
 Entropion (lower eyelid)
Cataracts2. 18
 Ciliated carunclezz
Neapolitan Mastiff
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca2. 54
Corneal dystrophy18
Cataracts21
 Micropalpebral fissure 
Distichiasis
Dermoid
(blepharophimosis)
 Ectropion/macroblepharon21
Ectopic cilium2. 23
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Entropion
Entropion 
 Trichiasis (upper lateral]23
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third
 Entropion (medial lower eyelid)z
Komondor
eyelid2
Exposure keratopa thy
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataracts18
 syndrome/macroblepharon 
 Imperforate lacrimal puncta22
Progressive retinal atrophy
 Entropion 
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelidz
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca54
Kuvasz
Lagophthalmos/exophthalmos
Cataracts18
Newfoundland
Macroblepharon
Entropion22
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Distichiasis2
Cataracts21
Progressive retinal atrophy21
Ectropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid 
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Ectropion (lateral aspect of the
Traumatic proptosis
eyelid)/entropion (medial aspect of
Labrador Retriever
the eyelid)
 Cataracts: dominant or incomplete 
Lowchen 
Entropion (lateral canthus)
Cataracts
dominant trait81
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
 Central progressive retinal atrophy:
Persistent pupillary membranes22
eyelid
 incomplete dominant trait suspected
Iris cyst
Retinal atrophy (generalized)22
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
 Macroblepharon21. 64
Vitreous degeneration
Corneal opacity2, 23
Prolapse of the gland of the third
Distichiasis23
Maltese
eyelid22
Ectropion18
 Caruncular trichiasisz
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsz2
 Enophthalmos
Ca taracts
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
479
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Norbottenspets
Exposure keratopathy
Corneal dystrophy: endothelial,
Cataracts22
 syndrome/macroblepharon'. 2
 epithelia|20. 27
Keratoconjunetivitis sicca
Distichiasis: dominant trait suspected
Norfolk Terrier
Cataracts18
Lacrimal punctum atresia 
 Entropion (medial lower eyelid)
 Coloboma of the optic disk18
Lagophthalmos/exophthalmos 
Epiphora
Lens luxation18
Glaucoma (open- or narrow-angle)
 Lens luxation89
Macroblepharon
Hemeralopia (Miniature Poodle)
Norwegian Buhund
Nasal fold trichiasis
Imperforate lacrimal punctum
Cataracts22
Pigmentary keratitis
Iridal atrophy0. 23
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Lens luxation24
Norwegian Elkhound
Traumatic proptosis
Microphthalmia 
Cataracts
Trichiasis (iateral upper eyelid)
 Optic nerve hypoplasia63
 Distichiasis23
Ulcerative keratitis
Optic nerve micropapilla
 Entropion (lateral canthus]2 91
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
Glaucoma2.92, 93
Pembroke Welsh Corgi
Lens luxation 
Cataracts18
Progressive retinal atrophy (progressive
 Corneal dystrophy (vascularization]18
 rod-cone degeneration): autosomal
 Progressive retinal atrophy:
 Rod dysplasia: autosomal recessive
Distichiasis2z
recessive97
 Recurrent epithelial erosion (basement 
trait
Lens luxation
 Early rod degeneration: autosomal
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
membrane dystrophy]27
Retinal detachment18
recessive trait
Progressive retinal atrophy21 
 Trichomegaly20, 23
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds,
Vitreous degeneration22
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsz2
 geographic/detachment18. 22
Norwich Terrier
 Petit Basset Griffon Vendeen
Poodle (Standard)
 Cataracts: recessive trait suspected8
Corneal dystrophy18
Cataracts
Congenital night blindness18
Lens luxa tion89
 Corneal dystrophy: endothelial22
Distichiasis
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Entropion 
Cataracts21
Pigment deposition on posterior corneal
Glaucoma
 surface; possible persistent pupillary
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Imperforate lacrimal punctum
 membranes18
Distichiasis
Microphthalmia21
 Persistent pupillary membraneszz
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
Microphthalmia/ca taracts/persistent
Progressive retinal atrophy
Pharoah Hound 
pupillary membranes/keratopathy2
 Old English Sheepdog
Cataracts22
Optic nerve hypoplasia2
 Optic nerve micropapilla
 Cataracts (congenital): recessive trait
Pointer
 Persistent pupillary membranes
suspected94
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Distichiasis20
 Cataracts: dominant trait
Vitreous degenerationz2
Entropion
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
 Microphthalmia/cataracts: multiple
 Corneal dystrophy18
 Portuguese Water Dog
 ocular anomalies
Entropioni8, 23
Cataracts21
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
Progressive retinal atrophy
Distichiasis
Progressive retinal atrophy18, 23
Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsz2
Microphthalmia and multiple congenital
 Retinal detachment/cataracts21
anomalies18, 21
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
Polski Owczarek Nizinny (Polish
Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Uveodermatologic syndrome 
Owczarek Nizinni, Polish Lowland 
Sheepdog)
Progressive retinal atrophy (progressive
 Central progressive retinal atrophy22
rod-cone degeneration): autosomal
 Papillon 
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis7z
recessive
Cataracts18
 Corneal dystrophy21
 Persistent pupillary membranes2z
Pug
Entropion
 Aberrant dermis (medial). 18
Pomeranian
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
Blepharophimosis18
Caruncular trichiasis18
Progressive retinal atrophy95 96
Cataracts (2-4 years of age)18
 Corneal dystrophy23
Vitreous degeneration2z
Distichiasis2
Distichiasis27
Pekingese
Entropion
Entropion (medial lower eyelid)
Exposure keratopathy
 Aberrant dermis (medial canthus)
Epiphora
 Caruncular trichiasis (ciliated
syndrome/macroblepharon 
Lacrimal punctum atresia
 Progressive retinal atrophy2l
Lagophthalmos/exophthalmos/macroblep
 caruncle)18, 21
Cataracts
haron 
Trichiasis27
Nasal fold trichiasis 
Distichiasis: dominant trait
Poodle (Miniature and Toy)
Pigmentary keratitis 
 suspected
 Caruncular trichiasis18
 Progressive retinal atrophy2l
 Eetopic cilium23
 Cataracts (juvenile): autosomal recessive
 Entropion (lower medial eyelid)
Traumatic proptosis
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
(continued overteaf)
480
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Pug fcontinued)
Posterior suture line imperfection?
Schnauzer (Standard)
Trichiasis2
Progressive retinal atrophy
Cataracts
Ulcerative keratitis
 Retinal detachment20 
Congenital cataracts and microcornea18
Retinal dysplasia23
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stroma|22
Puli
Distichiasis
Cataracts18
Samoyed
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous20
 Progressive retinal atrophy18
Ca taracts
Retinal atrophy (generalized]22
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Coloboma of the optic nerve
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Corneal dystrophy: stromal2 37, epithelial
 Rhodesian Ridgeback
Cataracts18
Distichiasis18
Scottish Deerhound
Entropion
Cataracts18
Distichiasis22
 Glaucoma22, 25
 Entropion 
Scottish Terrier
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third
 Mesodermal dysgenesis
Cataracts
(goniodysgenesis)25
eyelid
Lens luxa tion
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Microphthalmos
 Persistent pupillary membranes23
Persistent pupillary membranes23
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
 Primary glaucoma
Rottweiler
Progressive retinal atrophy (3 years of
Sealyham Terrier
Amaurosis22
age at onset: presumed autosomal
Cataracts: recessive trait suspected
Cataracts: congenital, inheritd 9
recessive 102
Glaucoma? 25
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stroma|22
Refractory superficial corneal ulcer2. 18
Imperforate lacrimal punctum 
Distichiasis
Retinal detachment and cataracts with
Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma
 Entropion, lateral canthus and lower
 skeletal dwarfism 18, 103
Progressive retinal atrophy
eyelid2 23 27, secondary to enlargd
Retinal dysplasia: folds/detachment with
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds: presumed 
orbitfenophthalmos/large zygoma
skeletal dwarfism22
autosomal recessive
Iris coloboma (inherited)21
Geographic/detachment20. 27
Geographic/detachment: presumed
Iris cyst18
Uveodermatologic syndrome30
autosomal recessive18
 Microphthalmia
Schipperke
Shar Pei
 Cversized palpebral fissure
Cataracts18
 Blepharitis
(macroblepharon)
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Distichiasis
Cataracts
 Progressive retinal atrophy43
Entropion
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Refractory superficial corneal ulcerl8
Narrow palpebral fissure23
Ectropion/entropion
 Retinal degeneration 
Persistent pupillary membranes
Entropion
Progressive retinal atrophy
Glaucoma
 Retinal detachment18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds21, 43
Lens luxation
Schnauzer (Giant)
 Mesodermal dysgenesis glaucoma
Saint Bernard
Cataracts18
Progressive retinal atrophy21
Cataracts
Glaucoma18
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid 
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Dermoid 
Redundant facial skin
 Distichiasis
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Retinal dysplasia (cataracts)18
Ectropion 
Schnauzer (Miniature)
 Strabismus (esotropia)18
 Ectropion (lateral aspect of the lower
Cataracts: congenital (microphthalmia,
Shetland Sheepdog
 eyelid)/entropion (medial aspect of
 posterior lenticonus): simple
the lower eyelid) 
Amaurosis18
autosomal recessive traiti04
Cataracts21
 Entropion (lateral canthus)27
Juvenile: autosomal recessive 
 Central progressive retinal atrophy39
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third
trait21, 44
Choroidal hypoplasia (Collie eye
eyelid
Ceroid lipofuscinosis: presumed
anomaly!
 Microphthalmia
 autosomal recessive2z
Multiple ocular anomalies21. 100
Corneal dystrophy (bilateral, central,
Corneal dystrophy20
 Cversized palpebral fissure
circular) (6 months-4 years at
Distichiasis
diagnosis]2, 18, 103
 (macroblepharon)23
 Entropion (medial lower eyelid)27
Distichiasis2
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Kera toconjunctivitis sicca
 Ectopic cilium20
 Redundant facial skin20, 23
Lacrimal punctum atresia
Micropalpebral fissure
Uveodermatologic syndrome (vitiligo and
Microcornea
(blepharophimosis)20
uveitis syndrome]31
Optic nerve coloboma
 Saluki
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous2?
 Optic nerve hypoplasia18
Persistent pupillary membranes23
Cataracts21
Persistent pupillary membranes
 Corneal dystrophy101
Progressive retinal atrophy (rod-cone 
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Entropion2z
dysplasia}105
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds2 18
 Iridocorneal angle abnormality
Retinal atrophy: low amplitude
Uveodermatologic syndrome30. 107
(glaucoma)25
electroretinogram22
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
 Persistent pupillary membranes
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
481
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Shiba Inu
 Spinoni Italiani
Welsh Springer Spaniel
Cataracts22
Cataractsz2
Cataracts: autosomal recessive traitl4 
Distichiasis22
Ectropion21
Distichiasis2l
 Persistent pupillary membrane522
Glaucoma: autosomal dominant trait73
Spitz
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Shih Tzu
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Progressive retinal atrophy (5-7 years
Aberrant dermis
Staffordshire Bull Terrier (English)
 Caruncular trichiasis (ciliated 
of agel
Cataracts (juvenile): recessive trait
caruncle)18, 22
 suspected
Welsh Terrier
Cataracts18
Entropion21
Cataracts18
Distichiasis
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Distichiasis22
 Eetopic cilium
Glaucoma73
 and lenticonus109
 Entropion (medial lower eyelid)
Kera toconjunctivitis sicca2z
 Exophthalmos/lagophthalmos
Progressive retinal atrophy
Lens luxation (secondary
 Exposure keratopathy
Sussex Spaniel
glaucoma)20,24, 89, 90
 syndrome/macroblepharon
Cataracts
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
 Oversized palpebral fissure
Distichiasis
Entropion21
West Highland White Terrier
(macroblepharon)
 Cataracts: autosomal recessive trait15
 Pigmentary keratitis
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds8, 21
Kera toconjunctivitis sicca
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Swiss Hound
 Retinal detachment18
Lens luxa tion
 Traumatic proptosis
 Progressive retinal atrophy (rare)2z
Microphthalmia18
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Ulcerative keratitis
Tibetan Mastiff
Retinal atrophy (generalized)22
Vitreous degeneration18
 Persistent pupillary membranes18 
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Siberian Husky
Tibetan Spaniel
Cataracts
Whippet
Cataracts22
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)23
Distichiasis22
Cataract 18. 21
 Corneal dystrophy: endothelial27
 Corneal stromal lipid dystrophy
Entropion 
Lens luxation (8-10 years of age))
Epithelial/stromal: presumed 
Micropapilla
Microphthalmia18
Micropapilla18
 autosomal recessive108
Persistent pupillary membranes18
Progressive retinal atrophy
Distichiasis22
Vitreous degeneration21. 22
 Entropion
 Progressive retinal atrophy18, 21
 Glaucoma (goniodysgenesis)61, 92, 93
Yorkshire Terrier
Glaucoma2. 68
Tibetan Terrier
Cataracts (3-6 years of age)
Cataracts
Lens luxation2z
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stroma18, 2
Central progressive retinal atrophy
Palpebral neoplasia
 Distichiasis20
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous22
(rare)18
Entropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes2 23
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Distichiasis22
 Progressive retinal atrophy: presumed 
 Persistent pupillary membranes (rare)
Lens luxation: autosomal recessive trait
 x-linked21
 Progressive retinal atrophy (5-11 years
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
 suspected l10. 111
 Persistent pupillary membranes23 
of age)2 18, 21
Uveitis22
Progressive retinal atrophyl2, 13
Retinal dysplasia:
 Uveodermatologic syndrome30, 54
geographic/detachment18, (reported 
Nyctalopial12
Silky Terrier
Retinal dysplasia: geographic2l
in Europe]: hereditary/recessive trait
Cataracts
suspected
Vizsla
Subepithelial geographic corneal
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Cataracts21
dystrophy (in puppies)2 18
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal22
Skye Terrier
Entropionis
 Distichiasis
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Lens luxation 18
Weimaraner
 Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier
 Cataracts and retinal dysplasia18
Cataracts18
 Corneal dystrophy (1-8 years of age]18
Distichiasis22
Distichiasis2
 Microphthalmia with multiple ocular
Enlarged orbit
 anomalies2z
Entropion: lower eyelidz7, secondary to
 Optic nerve hypoplasia18
 enlarged orbitfenophthalmos
 Persistent hyaloid arteryz2
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
 Persistent pupillary membranes
eyelid 
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
Medial canthal pocket syndrome18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsz2
 Progressive retinal atrophy18
Refractory superficial corneal ulcerls8, 47
482
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Table 15.2 Breed predisposition to eye disease in cats
Abyssinian
Himalayan 
Persian
 Retinal degenerationl6, 17
 Corneal sequestration 
Corneal sequestration
Burmese
Manx
Siamese
 Dermoid
Corneal dystrophyll 8
Corneal sequestration
 Third eyelid gland prolapse
Table 15.3 Breed predisposition to eye disease in horses
 American Saddlebred
Ciliary body cyst
Retinal cyst
Cataracts11 9
 Dyscoria: presumed semidominant127
Retinal detachment 
Goniosynechialfabsence of iridocorneal
Retinal dysplasia: presumed 
Appa loosa
anglefprimary pectinate ligament
semidominant124, 127
Cataracts120, 121
dysplasia 124, 127
 Congenital hypertropia122
Retinal pigment epithelial proliferation
Hypertelorism 
('high-water marker') of previous
Iris coloboma
retinal detachment127
 Equine recurrent uveitisi21
Iris hypoplasia: presumed semidominant
Vitreous degeneration
Glaucoma optic disc coloboma
 lris hypoplasia124
Lens subluxa tion
Paso Fino
 Microphthalmos124
Macroblepharon
Congenital stationary night blindness129
 Scleral ectasia124
Macroconea (cornea globosa]: presumed
Glaucoma ll!9
 semidominant127
Arabian
Macrophthalmos with multiple ocular
Rocky Mountain Horse
Cataracts
 anomalies
Anterior segment dysgenesis127
Miosis
 Cataracts: presumed semidominant124
 Belgian Draft Horse
 Optic nerve hypoplasia
Choroidal hypoplasia
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cilliary body cyst
Cataracts24
Limbal dermoid124 
Retinal cyst 
Dyscoria: presumed semidominant
Retinal detachment 
Goniosynechiaefabsence of iridocorneal
Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horse 
Retinal dysplasia: presumed
anglefprimary pectinate ligament 
 Cataracts: presumed semidominant 
semidominant
dysplasia 124, 127
Choroidal hypoplasia
Retinal pigment epithelial proliferation 
Hypertelorism
Ciliary body cyst
('high-water marker') of previous
Iris coloboma
Dyscoria: presumed semidominant
retinal detachment127
Iris hypoplasia: presumed
Goniosynechialfabsence of iridocorneal
Vitreous degeneration
semidominant127
anglefprimary pectinate ligament 
Lens subluxation
Morgan Horse
dysplasia 124, 127
 Cataracts, nuclear128
Macroblepharon 
Iris coloboma
Glaucoma
Macroconea (cornea globosa] presumed
Iris hypoplasia: presumed semidominant
 Retinal dysplasia and detachment
 semidominant127
Hypertelorism 
Macrophthalmos with multiple ocular
 Macroblepharon
Mountain Pleasure Horse
 anomalies127
 Macrocornea (cornea globosa): presumed
 Cataracts: presumed semidominant
Miosis
semidominant
 Choroidal hypoplasia 127
 Optic nerve hypoplasia
 Microphthalmos with multiple ocular
 Ciliary body cyst
 Persistent pupillary membranes
anomalies 
Dyscoria: presumed semidominant
 Retinal cyst
Miosis
Goniosynechiae/absence of iridocorneal
 Retinal detachment
 Optic nerve hypoplasia
angle/primary pectinate ligament
Retinal dysplasia: presumed 
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
dysplasia 124, 127
semidominant127
 Lens subluxation
Hypertelorism
 Retinal pigment epithelial proliferation
Retinal cyst
Iris coloboma
('high-water marker') of previous
 Retinal dysplasia: presumed
Iris hypoplasia: presumed semidominant 
retinal detachment124. 127
semidominant
Lens subluxation
 Vitreous degeneration
 Retinal detachment
Macroblepharon
 Retinal pigment epithelial proliferation
Macroconea (cornea globosa): presumed 
Quarter Horse
Cataracts 120
(high-water marker') of previous 
 semidominant127
Coloboma
retinal detachment127
Macrophthalmos with multiple ocular 
Entropion
Vitreous degeneration
 anomalies
lris hypoplasia (aniridia)121
Miosis
Miniature Horse
 Optic nerve hypoplasia124
Limbal dermoid124
 Cataracts: presumed semidominant 
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Choroidal hypoplasia 
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
483
Table 15.3 Breed predisposition to eye disease in horses (continued)
 Shetland Pony
Macrophthalmos with multiple ocular
Standardbred
 Cataracts: presumed semidominant124
 anomalies
 Congenital stationary night blindness
Choroidal hypoplasia
Miosis
 Retinal detachments119 
 Ciliary body cyst
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Thoroughbred
Dyscoria: presumed semidominant
Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Goniosynechiae/absence of iridocorneal 
Retinal cyst
Cataracts: presumed dominant
angle/primary pectinate ligament
Retinal detachment
trait120, 130
 Nuclear: presumed dominant trait124
dysplasia 124,. 127
Retinal dysplasia: presumed 
 semidominant 
Entropion 
Hypertelorism
Microphthalmia associated with multiple
Iris coloboma
 Retinal pigment epithelial proliferation
 Iris hypoplasia: presumed semidominant
 ocular anomalies
('high-water marker') of previous
 Progressive retinal atrophy123. 131
Lens subluxation
 retinal detachment127
 Retinal dysplasia and detachment131
Macroblepharon
Vitreous degeneration
 Macrocornea (cornea globosa): presumed
Warmbloods
 semidominant127
Glaucoma ll9
Table 15.4 Breed disposition to eye disease in cattle
 Aberdeen Angus
Guernsey
Holstein
Heterochromia iridis
Heterochromia iridis132
 Esotropia 133 134, 135
Jersey
Heterochomia iridis13z
 Austrian Murboden 
 Heterochromia iridis132
Aniridia
Holstein-Friesian
Congenital cataracts: autosomal
Congenital cataracts139
Ayrshire
Esotropia 133, 134,135
recessive 139
Convergent strabismus with
Shorthorn 
Heterochomia iridis132
Convergent strabismus with
 exophthalmia: recessive 133 135. 140
Microphthalmia
exophthalmia133, 135. 140
Brown Swiss (Braunviek)
Multipie ocular anomalies144 145. 146
 Estropia 133 134. 135
Multiple ocular anomalies141
Retinal dysplasia with multiple ocular
Heterochromia iridis132
 Supranumerary openings of the
Hereford
anomalies144, 145
 Coloboma with albinism 142
 nasolacrimal system 136
 Congenital cataracts139
 Charolais
Dermoid143
 Coloboma 137. 138
Retinal dysplasia
484
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASe IN VeTeRINARY MeDICiNE
REFERENCES
1 Whitley RD (1988) Focusing on eye
15 Ostrander EA (2000) Proceedings of the
29 O'Toole D, Roberts S (1984)
 disorders among purebred dogs.
 18th American Collge of Veterinary
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
Veterinary Medicine 83:50-63.
 Internal Medicine Meeting. Seatte, pp.
in two Akita dogs. Veterinary
2 Whitley RD, McLaughlin SA, Gilger BC
299-301.
Pathotogy 21:457-462.
{1995) Update on eye disorders among 
16 Acland GM, Ray KN, Mellersh CS et αt.
30 Bussanich MN, Rootman J, Dolman 
 purebred dogs. Veterinary Medicine
(1998) Linkage analysis and comparative
CT {1986) Granulomatous pan uveitis
90:574-592.
 mapping of canine progressve rod-cone
 and dermal depigmentation in dogs.
3 Speiss BM (2000) Personal
degeneration (prcd) establishes potential
Journat of the American Animat
communication.
locus homology with retinitis pigmentosa
Hospitat Association 22:121-124.
4 Stades FC (2000) Personal
(RPI7) in humans. Proceedings of the
31 Kern TJ, Walton DK, Ris RC,
communication.
Nationat Acadeny of Sciences
Manning TO, Laratta LJ, Dziezyc J
5 Bedford PGC (2000) Personal
95:3048-3053.
{1985) Uveitis associated with poliosis
communication.
17 Optigen@ (2000) Optigen for the genetic
and vitiligo in six dogs. Journat of the
6 Ofri R (20o0) Personal communication.
advantage. Optigen LLC.
American Veterinary Medicat
7 Mostoskey, UV, Padgett GA, Stinson
<http://ww w.optigen.com/>
Association 187:408-414.
AW, Duffendack JC (2000) Canine
18 Rubin LF {1989) Inherited Eye Diseases
 32 Olesen HP, Jensen OA, Norm MS
molecular genetic diseases.
in Purebred Dogs. LF Rubin (ed).
{1974) Congenital hereditary cataracts
Compendium on Continting
Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore.
in Cocker Spaniels. Journat of Smatt
Education for the Practicing
19 Roberts SR, Helper LC (1972) Cataracts
Animimat Practice 15:741-750.
Veterinarian 22:480-489.
in Afghan Hounds. Journat of the
33 Yakely WL {1978) A study of
8 Peteersen-Jones SM (2000) Personal
American Veterinary Medicat Association
heritability of cataracts in the American
communication.
160(4):427-432.
Cocker Spaniel. Journat of the
9 Aguirre GD, Lolley R, Farber D,
20 Blogg JR (1980) Appendix A. In: The Eye
American Veterinary Medicat
Fletcher T, Chader G {1978) Rod-cone
 in Veterinary Practice: Extraocular
Association 172(7):814-817.
dysplasia in Irish Setter dogs: a defect
Disease. Vol. 1. JR Blogg (ed). WB
34 Millan AD, Lipton DE (1978)
in cyclic GMP metabolism in visual
 Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 501-510.
Heritability of multifocal retinal
cells. Science 201:1133-1135.
21 ACVO Genetics Committee {1992)
dysplasia in American Cocker Spaniels.
10 Aguirre GD, Farber D, Lolley R, et αf.
Ocular Disorders Proven or Suspected to
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
{1982) Retinal degenerations in the
be Hereditary in Dogs. American College
Medicat Association 172:568-572.
dog. I1. Abnormal cyclic nucleotide
of Veterinary Ophthalmology, Baton
35 Laratta LJ {1988) Personal
metabolism in rod-cone dysplasia.
Rouge, pp. 1-289.
communication.
Experimentat Eye Research
 22 ACVO Genetics Committee (1999)
36 Gelatt KN, Powell NG, Huston K
35:625-642.
Ocular Disorders Presumed to be
{1981) Inheritance of microphthalmia
11 Petersen-Jones SM , Entz DD, Sargan
Inherited in Purebred Dogs, 3rd edn.
with coloboma in the Australian
DR (1999) cGMP phosphodiesterase-
American Collge of Veterinary
Shepherd Dog. American Journat of
alpha mutation causes progressive
Ophthalmology, Baton Rouge, pp. 4-270.
Veterinary Research 42:1686-1690.
retinal atrophy in the Cardigan Welsh
23 Slatter DH (2001) Appendix 1. In:
37 Nelson DL, MacMillan AD (1986)
Corgi dog. Investigative
 Fundamentals of Veterinary
Diseases of the cornea. In: Current
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
Ophthalmology, 3rd edn. WB Saunders,
Veterinary Therapy IX (Small Animal
40:1637-1644.
Philadelphia, pp. 609-616.
Practice). RW Kirk (ed). WB Saunders,
12 Petersen-Jones SM, Zhu FX (2000)
 24 Slatter DH (2001) Lens. In: Fundamentals
Philadelphia, pp. 642-649.
 Development and use of a polymerase
of Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd edn.
38 Bistner SI, Rubin LF, Roberts SR
chain reaction-based diagnostic test for
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 393-410.
{1971) A review of persistent pupillary
the causal mutation of progressive
25 Brooks DE (1986) Canine and feline
membranes in the Basenji dog. Journat
retinal atrophy in Cardigan Welsh
glaucomas. In: Current Veterinary
of the American Animat Hospitat
Corgis. American Journat of Veterinary
Therapy IX (Small Animal Practice). RW
Association 7:143-157.
Research 61:844-846.
Kirk (ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
 39 Wyman M (1986) Manual of Small
13 Aguirre GD, Baldwin V, Pearce-Kelling
656-659.
Animal Ophthalmology. Churchill 
S, Narfstrom K, Ray K, Acland GM
 26 Gelatt KN {1991) Textbook of Veterinary
Livingstone, New York, pp. 196;
{1998) Congenital stationary night
 Ophthalmology, 2nd edn. KN Gelatt (ed).
235-236.
 blindness in the dog: common
Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, pp.
40 Wyman M, Ketring K (1976)
mutation in the RPE 65 gene indicates
437-440, 478-498.
Congenital glaucoma in the Bassett
founder effect. Motecuiar Vision
27 Bistner SI, Aguirre G, Batik G {1977)
Hound: a biological model.
4:23-27.
Appendix 1. In: Atlas of Veterinary
Praceedings of the American Academy
14 Narfstrom K, Wrigstad A, Ekesten B,
Ophthalmic Surgery. WB Saunders,
of Ophthatmalogy and Otolaryngalogy
Nillsson SE (1994) Hereditary retinal
Philadelphia, pp. 279-290.
81:645-657.
dystrophy in the Briard dog: clinical
28 Laratta LJ, Ris RC, Kern TJ, Koch SA
41 Roberts SM, Severin GA, Lavach JD
and hereditary characteristics.
{1985) Multiple congenital ocular defects
(1986) Prevalence and treatment of
Veterinary and Comparative
in the Akita dog. Carnefl Veterinarion
palpebral neoplasms in the dog: 200
Ophthatmology 4:85-92.
75:381-392.
cases (1975-1983). Journal of the
American Veterinary Medicat
Association 189:1355-1359.
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
485
42 Gelatt KN, Gum GG {1981) Inheritance
 55 Curtis R, Barnett KC {1983) Primary lens 
 70 Stades FC {1983) Persistent
of primary glaucoma in the Beagle.
luxation in the Miniature Bull Terrier.
hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis and
American Journat of Veterinary
Veterinary Record 112:328-329.
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Research 42:1691-1693.
 56 Keep JM (1972) Clinical aspects of
in Doberman Pinschers: genetic
43 Bedford PGC {1982) Multifocal retinal 
 progressive retinal atrophy in the 
aspects. Journat of the American
dysplasia in the Rottweiler. Veterinary
Cardigan Welsh Corgi. Austration
Animal Hospitat Association
Record 113:304-305.
Veterinary Journat 48:197-199.
19:957-964.
44 Rubin LF, Koch SA, Huber RJ (1969)
57 Narfstrom, K, Dubielzig R {1984)
71 Aguirre G, Acland G (1983)
Hereditary cataracts in Miniature
Posterior lenticonus, cataracts and
Progressive Retinal Atrophy in the
Schnauzers. Journat of the American
 microphthalmia: congenital ocular defects
English Cocker Spaniel. Proceedings of
Veterinary Medical Association
in the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel.
the Scientific Meeting of the American
154:1456-1458.
Journat of Small Animat Practice
Colege of Veterinary Ophthatmology
45 Slatter DH, Lavach JD, Severin GA,
25:669-677.
14:104-108.
Young S {1977) Uberreiter's syndrome
 58 Gelatt KN, Whitley RD, Lavach JD,
72 Narfstrom K, Wrigstad A {1995)
(chronic superficial keratitis) in dogs in
Barrie KP, Wiliams LW (1979) Cataracts
Clinical, electrophysiological, and
the Rocky Mountain area: a study of 
in Chesapeake Bay Retrievers. Journat of
morphological findings in a case of
463 cases. Journat of Small Animat
the American Veterinary Medicat
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in the
Practice 18:757-772.
Association 175(11):1176-1178.
 Polish Owezarek Nizinny (PON) dog.
46 Curtis R {1984) Late-onset cataracts in
59 Collins BK, Collier LL, Johnson GS,
Proceedings of the ISVO, EsVO,
the Boston Terrier Veter inary Record
Shibuya H, Moore CP, daSilva-Curiel JM
ECVO Joint Meeting, Amsterdam,
115:577-578.
{1992) Familial cataracts and concurrent
April 22-23 1995.
47 Whitley RD, Gilger BC (1999) Diseases
ocular anomalies in Chow Chows.
73 Cottrell BD (1986) Primary glaucoma
 of the canine cornea and sclera. In:
Journat of the American Veterinary
in the Welsh Springer Spaniel.
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd edn. KN
Medicat Association 200:1485-1491.
Proceedings of the International
Gelatt (ed). Lippincott Williams and
 60 Hamor RE (1990) Personal
Society of Veterinary
Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 635-673.
communication.
 Ophthalmologists, New Orleans, pp.
48 Stades FC (1986) Diseases of the lens
61 Corcoran KA, Koch SA, Peiffer RL
165-176.
and vitreous. In: Current Veterinary
(1994) Primary glaucoma in the Chow
 74 Schmidt GM, Ellersisck MR, Wheeler
Therapy IX (Small Animal Practice). RW
Chow. Veterinary and Conparative
CA, Blanchard GL, Keller WF (1979)
Kirk {ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
Ophthatmology 4:193-197.
Inheritance of retinal dysplasia in the
pp. 660-668.
62 Nelson DL, MacMillan AD (1983)
English Springer Spaniel. Journat of the
49 Boevé MH, Stades FC {1985) Glaucom
Multifocal retinal dysplasia in field trial
American Veterinary Medicat
bij hond en kat. Oversicht en
Labrador Retrievers. Journat of the
Association 174:1089-1090.
retrospectieve evaluatie van 421
American Animat Hospital Association
75 Helper LC (1989) Appendix 1. In:
 patients. 1. Pathobiologische achter
19:388-392.
Magrane's Canine Ophthalmology, 4th
gronding indeling en raspredisposities.
63 Moore CP, Whitley RD {1984) Visual
edn. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, pp.
Tijdschr Diergeneeskd 110:219-227.
disturbance in the dog. I. Disease of the 
275-277.
50 van Rensburg IBJ, Petrick SW, van der
retina and optic papilla. Conpendium on
76 Martin CL, Wyman M (1978) Primary
Lugt JJ, Smit MME (1992) Multiple
Continuing Education for the Practicing
glaucoma in the dog. Veterinary
 inherited eye anomalies including
Veter imarian 6(7):585-607.
Clinics of North Ammerica 8:257-286.
persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
64 Munger RJ (1983) Disease of the eyelid.
 77 Barnett KC {1986) Hereditary
lentis in Bouvier des Flandres. Progress
 In: Current Veterinary Therapy VI
 cataracts in the German Shepherd Dog.
in Veterinary and Camparative
(Small Animal Practice). RW Kirk (ed).
Journal of Small Animal Practice
Ophthatmnology 2:133-139.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 537-543.
27:387-395.
 51 Bedford PGC {1984) Retinal pigment
65 Clerc B (2o00) Personal communication.
78 Martin CL, Leach R {1970) Everted
epithelial dystrophy (CPRA): study of
66 Curtis R, Barnett KC (1993) Progressive
membrana nictitans in German
the disease in the Briard. Journat of
retinal atrophy in Miniature Longhaired
Shorthaired Pointers. Journat of the
Smafl Animat Practice 25:129-138.
Dachshund dogs. British Veterinary
American Veterinary Medicat
52 McLellan GJ, Richelle M, Elks R,
Journat 149:71-85.
Association 157:1229-1232.
 Lybaert P, Bedford PGC (1997) Vitamin
67 Slater MR, Erb HN {1986) Effects of risk
 79 Rubin LF {1974a) Cataracts in Golden
 E deficiency in canine retinal epithelial
factors and prophylactic treatment on
Retrievers. Journat of the Ammerican
dystrophy {RPED) - results of the oral
primary glaucoma in the dog. Journat of
Veterinary Medicat Association
vitamin E tolerance test in clinically 
the American Veterinary Medicat
165:457-458.
normal dogs and in RPED affected
Association 188:1028-1030.
 80 Barnett KC {1980) Cataracts in the
cocker spaniels. Proceedings of the
68 Goebel HH, Dahme E (1986)
Golden Retriever. Veterinary Record
World Small Animal Veterinary
Utrastructure of retinal pigment epithelial
111:315-316.
Association Congress, Birmingham, UK.
 and neural cells in the neuronal ceroid
 81 Curtis R, Barnett K {1989) A survey of 
53 McLellan GJ (2002) Personal
lipofuscinosis-affected Dalmatian dog.
cataracts in Golden and Labrador 
communication.
Retina 6:179-187.
Retrievers. Journat of Small Animat
54 Kern TJ {1986) Disorders of the lacrimal
69 Peiffer RL Jr, Fischer CA {1983)
Practice 30:277-286.
 systerm. In: Current Veterinary Therapy
Microphthalmia, retinal dysplasia in a
 82 McLaughlin SA (1983) Multiple ocular
IX (Small Animal Practice). RW Kirk
litter of Doberman Pinschers. Journat of
 defects associated with partial albinism
(ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
the American Veterinary Medicat
in three Great Dane puppies. Canine
634-641.
Association 183:875-878.
Practice 10:12-16.
486
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
83 Peiffer RL, Gelatt KN, Gwin RM
 97 Acland GM, Boughman JA, Aguirre GD
110 Curtis R {1983) Aetiopathological
{1977) Chronic superficial keratitis
{1981) Inheritance of progressive
aspects of inherited lens dislocation in
(pannus) in related Greyhounds.
rod-cone degeneration: a case of genetic
the Tibetan Terrier. Journat of
Veterinary Medicine/Smalt Animat
selection. Proceedings of the Scientific
Comparative Pathology 93:151-163.
Clinician 72:35-37.
Meeting of the American Callege of
111 Willis MB, Curtis R, Barnett KC,
84 Grimes TD, Mullaney J (1969)
Veterinary Ophthatmology 12:115-128.
Tempest WM (1979) Genetic aspects of
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous 
 98 Rubin LF, Flowers RD {1972) Inherited
lens luxation in the Tibetan Terrier.
in a Greyhound. Veterinary Record
cataracts in a family of Standard
Veterimary Record 104:409-412.
85:607-611
Poodles. Journat of the American
112 Loew E, Ris R (1983) Congenital
85 Palmer AC, Payne JE, Wallace ME
Veterinary Medicat Associat ion
nyctalopia in the Tibetan Terrier.
{1973) Hereditary quadriplegia and
161:207-208.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
amblyopia in the Irish Setter. Journat
 99 Bjerkas E, Bergsjo T (1991) Hereditary
the American College of Veterinary
of Smalf Animal Practice 14:343-352.
cataracts in the Rottweiler dog. Progress
Ophthalmologists, pp. 82-97.
86 Sakai T, Harashima T, Yamamura H,
in Veterinary and Camparative
113 Millichamp NJ, Curtis R, Barnett KC
Nitaya R, Ikeda T {1994) Two cases of
Ophthatmology 1:7-10.
{1988) Progressive retinal atrophy in
hereditary quadriplegia and amblyopia
100 Martin CL, Leipold H (1974) Aphakia
Tibetan Terriers. Journat of the American
in a litter of Irish Setters. Journat of
and multiple ocular defects in Saint 
Veterinary Medicat Association
Small Animat Practice 35:221.
Bernard puppies. Veterinary
192(6):769-776.
87 Aguirre GD (1976) Inherited retinal
Medic ine/Small Animat Clinic ian
114 Barnett KC (1980) Hereditary cataracts
degenerations in the dog. Proceedings
14:448-453.
in the Welsh Springer Spaniel. Journat of
of the American Academy of
101 Lavach JD {1985) Personal
Small Anmat Practice 21:621-625.
Ophthatmotogy and Ototaryngotogy
comm unication.
115 Narfstrom K (1981) Cataracts in the
81:667-676.
100 Dice PF {1980) Progressive retinal
West Highland Terrier. Journat of Smalf
88 Carrig CB, Sponenberg DP, Schmidt 
atrophy in the Samoyed. Modern
Anmat Practice 22:467-471.
GM, Tvedten HW (1988) Inheritance
Veterinary Practice 61:59-60.
116 Narfstrom K {1985) Progressive retinal
of associated ocular and skeletal
103 Meyers VN, Jezyk GD, Aguirre G,
atrophy in the Abyssinian cat: clinical
dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers.
Patterson DF {1983) Short-limbed 
characteristics. Invest igative
Journat of the American Veterinary
dwarfism and ocular defects in the
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Medicat Association 193:1269-1272.
Samoyed dog. Journat of the American 
26:193-200.
89 Curtis R, Barnett KC (1980) Primary
Veterinary Medicat Association
117 Seeliger MW, Narfstrom K (2000)
lens luxation in the dog. Journat of
183:975-979.
Functional assessment of the regional
Small Animat Practice 21:657-668.
104 Gelatt KN, Samuelson DA, Bauer JE, et 
distribution of disease in a cat model of
90 Barnett KC {1985) The diagnosis and
al. {1983) Inheritance of congenital
hereditary retinal degeneration.
differential diagnosis of cataracts in the
cataracts and microphthalmia in the
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
dog. Journat of Smatl Animat Practice
Miniature Schnauzer. American Journa!
Science 41:1998-2005.
26:305-316.
of Veterinary Research
118 Bistner SI, Aguirre G, Shively JN (1976)
91 Schmidt GM (1977) Diseases of the
44(6):1130-1132.
Hereditary corneal dystrophy in the
eyelids. In: Current Veterinary Therapy
105 Aguirre G, Parshall C, Acland G
Manx cat: a preliminary report.
VI {Small Animal Practice). RW Kirk
{1985) Progressive retinal atrophy in the
Investigative Ophthatmotogy 15:15-26.
(ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia , pp.
Miniature Schnauzer. Proceedings of the
119 Brooks DE (1999) Equine
603-604.
Scientific Meting of the American
 ophthalmology In: Veterinary
92 Brooks DE {1990) Glaucoma in the
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
Ophthalmology, 3rd edn. KN Gelatt (ed).
dog and cat. Veterinary Clinics in
16:226-237.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins,
North America (Smatl Animat Practice)
 106 Dice PF (1986) Corneal dystrophy in
Philadelphia, pp. 1053-1116.
20:775-797.
the Shetland Sheepdog. Proceedings of
120 Whitley RD, Meek LA, Millichamp NJ,
93 Whitley RD {1987) Recent advances in
the Scientific Meeting of the American
McRae EE, Priehs DR {1990) Cataract 
glaucoma therapy. Proceedings of the
College of Veterinary Ophthatmatogists
surgery in the horse: a review of six
World Small Animal Veterinary.
15:241-242.
cases. Equine Veterinary Journat
Association Congress, Montreal, pp.
107 Campbell K, McLaughlin SA, Reynolds
Suppternent 10:85-90.
148-163.
HA (1986) Generalized leukoderma and
121 McLaughlin SA, Whitley RD, Gilger BC
94 Koch S {1972) Cataracts in interrelated
poliosis following uveitis in a dog.
(1992) Diagnosis and treatment of lens
Old English Sheepdogs. Jou rnat of the
Journat of the American Animat
diseases. Veterinary Clinics of North
American Veterinary Medicat
Hospitat Association 22:121-124.
Ammerica (Equine Practice) 8:575-585.
Association 160:299-301.
108 Waring GO, MacMillan A, Reveles P
122 Gelatt KN, McClure JR (1979)
95 Hakanson N, Narfstrom K {1995)
{1986) Inheritance of crystalline corneal
 Congenital strabismus and its correction
Progressive retinal atrophy in Papillon
dystrophy in Siberian Huskies. Journat
in two Appaloosa horses. Journat of
dogs in Sweden: a clinical survey.
of the American Animat Hospitat
Equine Medicine and Surgery
Veterinary and Comparative
Association 22:655-658.
3:240-241.
Ophthatmotogy 5:83-87.
109 Leon A, Curtis R, Barnett KC (1986)
123 Rebhun WC, Loew ER, Ris RC,
96 Narfstrom K, Ekesten B (1998)
Hereditary persistent hyperplastic
Larratta LJ {1984) Clinical
Electroretinographic evaluation of 
 primary vitreous in the Staffordshire Bull
manifestations of night blindness in the
Papillons with and without hereditary
Terrier Journat of the American Animat
Appaloosa horse. Compendiarm on
retinal degeneration. American Journat
Hospitat Association 22:765-774.
Continuing Education for the Practicing
of Veterinary Research 59:221-226.
Veterimariam 6:S103-S106.
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
487
124 ACVO Genetics Committee (1999)
132 Huston R, Leipold HW, Freeman AE
139 Gelatt KN (1971) Cataracts in cattle.
Ocular Disorders Presumed to be
{1968) Heterochromia irides in dairy
Journal of the American Veterinary
 Inherited in Purebred Horses. Equine
cattle. Journat of Dairy Science
Medicat Association 159:195-200.
Eye Registration Foundation, Baton
51:1101-1102.
140 Willoughby RA (1968) Congenital
Rouge, pp. 1-16.
133 Regan WM, Gregory PW, Mead SW
eye defects in cattle. Modern 
125 Erikson R {1955) Hereditary aniridia
{1944) Hereditary strabismus in Jersey
Veterinary Practice 49:36-40.
with secondary cataracts in horses.
cattle. Journat of Heredity
141 Saunders LZ, Fincher MG {1951)
Nordic Veterinary Medicine
32:233-234.
Hereditary multiple eye defects in
7:773-779.
134 Willoughby RA {1970) The eye and
grade Jersey calves. Cornetf
126 Joyce JR {1983) Aniridia in Quarter
its adnexa. In: Bovine Medicine and
Veterinarian 41:351-366.
horses. Equine Veterinary Journat
Surgery, 1st edn. American Veterinary
142 Gelatt KN, Huston K, Leipold HW
Supptement 2:21-22.
 Publications, Santa Barbara, pp.
{1969) Ocular anomalies of incomplete
127 Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA,
617-630.
albino cattle: ophthalmic examination.
Cook CS, Latimer CA {1999)
135 Rebhun WC, Loew ER, Ris RC,
American Journatl of Veterinary
Congenital ocular abnormalities of
Larratta LJ {1979) Diseases of the
Research 30:1313-1316.
Rocky Mountain horses. Veterinary
bovine orbit and globe. Journat of the
143 Barkyoumb SD, Leipold HW (1984)
Ophthatmology 2:47-59.
American Veterinary Medicat
Nature and cause of bilateral ocular 
128 Beech J, Aguirre G, Gross S {1984)
Association 175:171-175.
dermoids in Hereford cattle. Veterinary
Congenital nuclear cataracts in the
136 Heider L, Wyman M, Burt J, Root C,
Pathotogy 21:316-324.
Morgan horse. Journat of the
Gardner H {1975) Nasolacrimal duct
144 Leipold HW, Gelatt KN, Huston K
American Veterinary Medicat
anomaly in calves. Journat of the
{1971) Multiple ocular anomalies and 
Association 184:1363-1365.
American Veterinary Medicat
hy drocephalis in grade Shorthorn
129 Rebhun WC, Loew ER, Riis RC,
Association 167:145-147.
cattle. American Journat of Veterinary
Larratta LJ {1992) Retinal and optic
137 Barnett KC, Ogden AI (1972) Ocular
Research 32:1019-1026.
nerve diseases. Veterinary Clinics of
colobomata in Charolais cattle.
145 Greene HJ, Leipold HW (1974)
North America 8:587-608.
Veterinary Record 91:592-593.
Hereditary internal hydrocephalus and
130 Barnett KC {1975) The eye of the
138 McCormack J, Powers RD, Albert
retinal dysplasia in Shorthorn calves.
newborn foal. Journat of Reproduction
RA {1975) Typical colobomas in
Cornefl Veterinarian 64:327.
Fetility Supptement 23:701-703.
Charolais cattle. Veterinary
146 Miller TR, Gelatt KN (1991) Food
131 Rubin LF {1974) Atlas of Veterinary
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
 animal ophthalmology. In: Veterinary
Ophthalmoscopy. Lea and Febiger,
70:182-185.
 Ophthalmology, 2nd edn. KN Gelatt 
Philadelphia.
(ed). Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, pp.
611-655.
This page intentionally left blank
489
Appendix 1
Systemic Disease
Rule Outs E
Based
on Ocular Lesions
EYELIDS
 Bacterial septicemia
Trauma
BLEPHARITIS
Mycoplasmosis
Leishmaniasis
 Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
Pemphigus complex
Warfarin toxicity
Dermatophytosis
Feline infectious peritonitis
Bullous pemphigoid
Sulfonamide toxicity
Systemic mycoses
Feline leukemia virus infection
 Discoid lupus erythematosus
Lymphoma
Ocular myiasis
Salmon poisoning
Dermatomyositis
Hypertension
 Demodectic mange
Toxemia
Atopy
 Sarcoptic mange
VKH
CORNEA/SCLERA
Notoedric ma nge
Drug eruption
ULCERATIVE AND NONULCERATIVE
Cheyletiellosis
Canine herpes virus infection (neonate)
Seborrhea
CNS neoplasia involving Vth or VIIth cranial nerves
Onchocerciasis {dog)
 Feline herpesvirus infection
 Eosinophilic granuloma complex
Systemic mycoses
Ha bronemia sis
Equine herpes virus I and II infection 
Juvenile pyoderma
Canine ehrlichiosis
Viral papillomatosis
 Malignant catarrhal fever
Generalized pyoderma
Trauma
Bite wound infection
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
Trauma
Hyperadrenocortis m
Burns
Canine hepatitis
Lymphosarcoma
 Feline infectious peritonitis
CONJUNCTIVA
 Burns
 Feline leukemia virus complex infection
CoNJuNCtIvitis, CoNJuNCtIvAL
 Chemical caustics
HYPEREMIA, HEMORRHAGE
Canine distemper (KCS)
Canine distemper
Bullous skin diseases
 Polycythemia
Chlamydiosis
Canine adenovirus 1 and 2 infection
Masticatory myositis {exposure)
Chlamydiosis
Intraocular dirofilaria
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Riboflavin deficiency
Herpesvirus infection (all species of animals)
Listeriosis
Leptos pirosis
Bovine thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
Dehydration
Calicivirus infection
Borreliosis
CORNEA/SCLERA
Atopy
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
DEGENERATIVE
 Hepatazoonosis
Hypothyroidism
Thrombocytopenia
Mucopol ysacca ridosis
Ehrlichiosis
Dia betes mellitus
490
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Lipid storage disease
Hypocalcemia
Hypercalcemia
Toxoplasmosis
Gangliosidosis
Trauma
Hyperlipoproteinemia
Radiation
 Phenothiazine toxicity
Atopy
Hyperadrenocorticism
 Dia betes mellitus
Chronic ketaconazole therapy
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
ANTERIOR UVEA/GLAUCOMA
Canine adenovirus 1 infection
FUNDUS
Encephalitozoonosis
Malignant catarrhal fever
HEMORRHAGE
Systemic mycoses
Trauma
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
 Systemic mycoses
Intraocular filaria
Hypertension (renal-, thyroid-, adrenal-related)
Canine neonatal herpesvirus infection
Ehrlichiosis
 Systemic aspergillosis
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Feline herpesvirus infection
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
 Toxoplasmosis
 Thrombocytopenia (immune-mediated, infection-related,
 Feline leukemia virus infection
toxicity-related, neoplasia-related)
Neosporosis
Borreliosis
 Feline infectious peritonitis
Vasculitis finfection-related, neoplasia-related, immune-
Protothecosis
mediated)
 Feline immunodeficiency virus infection
Bacterial septicemia, i.e. endocarditis, neonatal
Leishmaniasis
Neoplasia {metastatic, multicentric, leukemia)
Ehrlichiosis
Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
Hepatazoonosis
Anemia (severe, rapid onset)
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Vitamin A deficiency
VKH
 Polycythemia
Bartonellosis
Immune-mediated
OPTIC NEURITIS/PAPILLEDEMA
Brucellosis
Trauma
Tuberculosis
Canine distemper
Metastatic neoplasia
 Masticatory myositis
Bacterial septicemia
Systemic mycosis
Lymphosa rcoma
Orbital cellulitis
Ehrlichiosis
VKH
HYPHEMA
 Feline infectious peritonitis
 Brain tumor
Ehrlichiosis
 Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
Canine brucellosis
 Toxoplasmosis
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Vitamin A deficiency
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
Trauma
Borreliosis
 Pancreatitis
Hypertension
Feline leukemia virus infection
Lymphosa rcoma
RETINAL DEGENERATION
 Feline infectious peritonitis
Trauma
Taurine deficiency
Leptospirosis
In utero bovine virus diarrhea
Bone marrow aplasia
Vitamin A deficiency
Clotting disorders
In utero feline panleukopenia 
 Metastatic neoplasia
Vitamin E deficiency
Leukemia
 Posthypertensive retinal detachment
Vasculitis
Enrofloxacin toxicity
Aberra nt parasitic migration
Ivermectin toxicity
LENS (CATARACT, LENS DISPLACEMENT)
 Metabolic storage disease
Trauma
Bovine virus diarrhea
 Neonatal canine parvovirus infection
Orphan milk replacers
Angioinvasive carcinoma
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection
Postinflammatory {all infectious causes of uveitis)
491
Appendix 2
Glossary
blepharo pertaining to the eyelid
bedewing delicate or mild edema of the corneal
 core central part; in the eye, the pupil
epithelium, recognizable by biomicroscopy
cyclo pertaining to the ciliary body
bifocal double lens usually prescribed for older persons
dacryo pertaining to tears
who can no longer accommodate; the lower portion
 gonio pertaining to the iridocorneal angle
focuses for near vision
hyal pertaining to the vitreous
binocular vision normal simultaneous use of both eyes
iridic pertaining to the iris
(which results in depth perception)
 kerato pertaining to the cornea
biomicroscope clinical examination instrument (slit lamp
papilla pertaining to the optic nerve head
microscope) that combines a microscope with a very
phaco pertaining to the lens 
thin beam of light and permits observation of detail
within the transparent eye
abducens nerve VIth cranial nerve that innervates the
blepharitis inflammation of the eyelid
lateral rectus muscle
blepharospasm involuntary contraction of the orbicularis
abduction rotation of an eye temporally or laterally
muscle
accommodation near focusing of the eye; accomplished
blindness although the ophthalmologist usually considers
Aq paaaiuoe pue sual aul jo yauas ui aseau ue Aq
blindness to mean inability to see, legal blindness is
contractions of the ciliary muscle
defined as vision {corrected by eyeglasses) of 20/200
acuity ability of the eye to see fine detail
or less or <20° of visual field in the better eye
adduction turning of an eye medially
bombe {of iris) forward displacement of the iris caused
adnexa adjacent structures of the eye, e.g. lids or
by blockage of the pupil that prevents forward flow
extra ocular muscles
of aqueous humor
amaurosis little-used synonym for blindness; frequently
buphthalmos enlargement of the eye due to glaucoma
used to designate visual loss in a structurally normal
 canaliculus portion of the lacrimal drainage apparatus
eye (as from a pituitary tumor)
between the punctum and the lacrimal sac
amblyopia reduced vision in an eye that appears normal
canthus outer or inner angle between the eyelids
on examination; this term is most commonly used as
511 o sual aul jo Aouaedsue ui agap u 
'suppression amblyopia', which refers to cerebral
ca ps ule
 blocking of vision in an eye that is deviated or suffers
chalazion granulomatous inflammation of the eyelid
from a refractive error more marked than that of the
associated with lipids from meibomian glands, that
good eye
have had blocked ducts
aniridia absence of the iris
ciliary body portion of the uveal tract between the iris
anisocoria difference in size of the two pupils
and choroid that contains the muscles of
ankyloblepharon adhesion between the margins of the
ounq snoanbe saaoas pue uonepowwomg
upper and lower eyelids
cilium eyelash
anophthalmia total failure of the eye to develop
 collyriuum synonym for eye drops
anterior chamber space between the cornea and iris that
coloboma any notch-like defect in the eye or lids
 contains aqueous humor
concave lens an incurved (center thinner than edges) lens
 aphakia absence of the lens
luall aui suaiaaip Aq ssaupauaisieau sioauuoo ie
applanation tonometry mea surement of intraocular
ra ys
pressure by an instrument that flattens a
concomitant strabismus nonparalytic stra bismus that
predetermined area of the cornea
does not change in amount with different position of
aqueous humor clear fluid secreted by the ciliary
the eyes
processes that fills the anterior and posterior
cone retinal cell used for daylight vision
chambers
conjunctiva mucous membrane lining the back of the lids
asteroid hyalosis condition of the vitreous body, in which
(palpebral) and the front of the eye (bulbar) except
 degenerative vitreous change causes numerous tiny
for the cornea
white nodules to develop within the vitreous
convergence turning of the two eyes toward each other
framework; it rarely impairs vision
convex lens an outcurved {center thicker than edges) lens
astigmatism optical distortion usually caused by irregular
 that corrects farsightedness by converging the light
corneal curvature that prevents a clear focus of light
ra ys
at any point
492
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
 corectopic eccentric position of the pupil; a small
entropion abnormal inward displacement of the lid margin
 deviation is normal
toward the eye
couching primitive surgical practice of dislocating a cataract
 enucleation surgical removal of the entire eye, including the
into the vitreous; visual improvement obtained in this 
sclera
way is transient since lens-induced inflammation usually
epiphora tearing due to blockage of the lacrimal drainage
destroys the eye
 apparatus or overproduction of tears
cross-eyes lay term for convergent strabismus
episclera loose connective tissue on the scleral surface
cul-de-sac upper or lower (conjunctival) recess 
episcleritis inflammation of the episclera
cyclitis inflammation of the ciliary body
equator midportion of the globe between the anterior and
cyclodialysis antiglaucoma operation that separates the
posterior poles
ciliary body from the sclera, thereby creating a new exit
evisceration removal of the contents of the eye with
for the aqueous humor
retention of the sclera in the orbit
cyclocryotherapy antigla ucoma operation that partially
exenteration removal of the eye and orbital contents
 destroys the ciliary body by freezing, thereby reducing
exophthalmos abnormal displacement of the eye forward in
aqueous humor formation
the orbit due to an increase in volume of the orbital
cycloplegia paralysis of accommodation
 contents or to an abnormally shallow orbital bony
cyclophotocoagulation antiglaucoma therapy that destroys
structure
the ciliary body epithelium by laser energy
extraocular pertaining to structures outside the
dacryoadenitis inflammation of a lacrimal gland
sclerocorneal covering of the eye
dacryocystitis inflammation of a lacrimal sac, usually due
farsightedness (hyperopia) refractive error in which parallel
to faulty drainage
light is focused behind the retina; accommodation is
descemetocele protrusion or baring of Descemet's
required in order to see clearly in the distance
membrane; occurs after loss of corneal stroma from
feld of vision entire area that can be seen by the eye
disease or injury
floaters opacities within the vitreous space that cause
Descemet's membrane modified basal lamina of corneal
moving shadows on the retina
endothelium on the posterior corneal surface
formix conjunctival recess, where the bulbar conjunctiva
detachment separation of one layer of the eye from the
reflects onto the lids; cul-de-sac
adjacent layer; a choroidal detachment is separated
fundus (ocular) internal surface of the posterior eye,
from the sclera, a retinal detachment is separation of
including the optic disc, the retina, and the choroidal or
the neurosensory layer from the pigment layer, and a
scleral details visible through the retina
vitreous detachment is separation of the vitreous from
fusion cerebral synthesis of the two ocular pictures into a
the retina
single mental picture
diopter unit in which the refracting strength of a lens is
glare irregularly scattered light that interferes with the
designed; calculated as the reciprocal of the focal length
focused retinal picture and reduces visual acuity
of a lens measured in meters
glaucoma abnormally increased intraocular pressure that is
diplopia double vision; usually due to faulty alignment of
 not compatible with ocular health
the two eyes
goniolens special type of contact lens that permits
disc portion of the optic nerve visible with an
examination of the periphery of the anterior chamber;
ophthalmoscope
 Study of this portion of the eye is of importance in
distichiasis reduplication of the eyelashes; the inner lashes
patients with glaucoma
originate from the meibomian gland orifices and may
gonioscopy study of the angle of the anterior chamber with
irritate the cornea
the aid of a special contact lens
dyscoria distorted pupil shape
hemeralopia inability to see well in daylight illumination,
dystrophy inherited degenerative change, e.g. the cornea
with preservation of good night vision
and retina may be affected by a number of different
hemianopia loss of vision in approximately 50% of the 
types of dystrophy
visual field
ectasia bulging outward of a weakened cornea or sclera;
heterochromia difference in color of the two irides or in
ectasia is differentiated from staphyloma, which is a
parts of the same iris
bulging area lined with uveal tissue
hippus rapidly alternating increase and decrease of pupil
ectropion abnormal outward displacement of the lid away
size associated with neurologic disturbances or
from the eye
occurring, to a lesser degree, physiologically
electro-oculogram recording of the electrical potential of
homonymous indicates involvement of the same side of the
the whole eye
two visual fields, e.g. right homonymous hemianopia
electroretinogram recording of the electrical potential of the
 hordeolum (sty) acute inflammation of a gland near the 
retina
eyelid margin
emmetropia refractive condition of an eye that is perfectly
hyalitis inflammation of the vitreous body
focused for distance without the aid of accommodation
hyperopia farsightedness; the refractive error in which light
endocapsular extraction performing phacoemulsification
rays focus behind the retina
 geq aui u, 1o suuado ajnsdeo iouaue leus e qanou
hyphema blood in the anterior chamber
endophthalmitis inflammation of the entire interior of the 
hypopyon accumulation of neutrophils and fibrin in the
eye
 anterior chamber
enophthalmos abnormal displacement of the eye backward
iridectomy procedure in which a small portion of the iris is
into the orbit due to atrophy of tissue or loss through a
excised, usually for treatment of glaucoma
fracture
APPENDIX 2 - GLOSSARY
493
iridencleisis antiglaucoma operation in which a wick of iris
orbicularis oculi muscle that closes the eyelids
 is used to maintain a scleral opening through which
palpebral referring to the eyelids 
aqueous humor drains to sub-Tenon's space
panmus superficial vascular corneal scar
iridocyclitis inflammation of the iris and ciliary body
panophthalmitis generalized inflammation of all tunics of
 iridodialysis tearing of the iris from the ciliary body
the eye
 iridodonesis trembling of the iris with eye movement,
indicating loss of lens support, e.g. in aphakia or with a
ophthalmoscopically; due to increased intracranial
dislocated lens
pressure or interference with axoplasmic flow
iridoplegia paralysis of the iris
papillitis (optic neuritis) inflammatory swelling of the optic
iris colored portion of the eye surrounding the pupil
disc
keratectomy excision of a superficial portion of the cornea
 periorbita periosteum lining the inside of the orbit
 keratic precipitates inflammatory deposits on the posterior
 peripapillary surrounding the optic disc
surface of the cornea
 peritomy surgical separation of the conjunctiva from the
keratitis inflammation of the cornea
shouea ui dais Aieuuad e se pauopad isnqul
keratoconus cone-shaped distortion of the central cornea due
surgical procedures
to degeneration of the stromal lamellae
phacoanaphylaxis intraocular reaction resulting from
 keratoplasty corneal grafting
sensitivity to lens material
autogenous graft is from the patient
phacoemulsification surgical procedure of brea king the lens
lamellar replacing a portion of the anterior cornea
up with ultrasound and aspiration of the fragments
 penetrating replacing the full thickness of a section of
phoria refers to latent ocular deviation; phoria is
cornea
differentiated from tropia, which is a manifest ocular
refractive placing and autogenous or homologous graft
deviation
that has been shaped to improve the optical
photopic vision vision at daylight illumination
properties of the cornea
photoreceptor rod or cone cell
tectonic grafting cornea to fill a defect in the cornea
phthisis bulbi acquired soft, disorganized, small eye due to
lacrimation excessive tearing
very severe infection or injury
 lagophthalmos failure of the eyelids to close completely
pinkeye acute bacterial conjunctivitis
leukocoria white pupil caused by opaque tissue within the
plano lens having no refractive strength
eye
plus lens convex lens
 leukoma dense scar of the cornea
polycoria congenital anomaly in which an eye has more
Hmbus junction of cornea and sclera
[dnd auo ueui
 loupe binocular magnifier; useful in ophthalmic surgery
 presbyopia loss of accommodation due to age
meibomian glands sebaceous glands within the tarsal plates
pseudophakia state of having an intraocular lens implanted
that open on the lid margin
pseudopterygium superficial vascularized corneal scar
 microphthalmia abnormally small eyeball
 pterygium elastic degenerative change that slowly
minus lens concave lens
proliferates from the conjunctiva onto the cornea
miotic medication causing the pupil to constrict
ptosis drooping of the upper eyelid due to deficient
 monocular pertaining to one eye
 innervation or muscular strength
 morgagnian cataract hypermature, partially liquefied
refraction clinical measurement of the error of focus in an
cataract, with a freely movable central nucleus 
eye
mydriatic medication causing the pupil to dilate
retinopathy noninflammatory disease of the retina
 myopia nearsightedness; the refractive error in which
retrobulbar behind the eye
parallel light rays focus in front of the retina
retroillumination valuable technique of examination of
nasolacrimal duct channel between the lacrimal sac and the
translucent tissues by light reflected from behind; useful 
nasal cavity
 in biomicroscopy and ophthalmoscopy
nearsightedness myopia
rhodopsin light-sensitive pigment contained in the rods
rod visual cell used when the eye is dark adapted
choroid, iris, or conjunctiva; pigmented tumors may
rubeosis iridis neovascularization of the iris
arise from a nevus
scotoma area of loss of vision within the visual field
nyctalopia night blindness; in Europe it is a term for night
scotopic vision night vision; mediated by the rods
vision
slit lamp microscope (biomicroscope) instrument for
nystagmus rhythmic involuntary oscillation of the eyes
examining the eye under high magnification and in
oculomotor nerve Illrd cranial nerve
optical section, using a finely focused slit of light
ophthalmologist medically and surgically trained eye
squint synon ym for strabismus
specialist
staphyloma bulging defect of the cornea or sclera that is
ophthalmoplegia paralysis of ocular muscles
lined with uveal tissue
ophthalmoscope instrument for clinical examination of the
stereopsis binocular depth perception
posterior portion of the eye
strabismus failure of straightness of the eyes; one eye {the
opsin the protein constituent of the visual pigment
fixing eye) looks directly at the object of attention,
rhodopsin
whereas the other eye {the deviating eye) does not 
optician technician who prepares and dispenses eyeglasses
sty (hordeolum) acute infection of a gland of the eyelid
 optometrist medically trained refractionist and primary eye
margin
care specialist
subluxation of lens partial displacement of the lens from its
ora ciliaris retina anterior boundary of the retina with the
normal position
ciliary body
494
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
suture junction of the ends of lens fibers, which results in
trabeculum meshwork in the anterior chamber angle
the formation of *Y' and stellate figures within the lens
through which the aqueous humor flows to leave the
synechia adhesion of the iris to the lens or cornea
eye
tarsorrhaphy partial or complete fusion of the lids for the
 transillumination method of determining whether a lesion
 purpose of protecting the cornea from exposure
 is solid or cystic, using transmitted light
tears lacrimal secretion
 tichiasis aberrant lashes that turn against the cornea
Tenon's capsule connective tissue or fascial sheath
 Uvea vascular and pigmented layer of the eye, including
encircling the eyeball posteriorly
the choroid, ciliary body, and iris
 tonography measurement of the rate of aqueous humor
 vitreous gel that fills the eye behind the lens
outflow
xerophthalmia dryness of the eyes
tonometer instrument for measuring intraocular pressure
 zonule system of fibrils that suspends the lens
495
Appendix 3
Additional References
for Softcover Edition
CHAPTER 1
51a Pearce JW, Giuliano EA, Moore CP {2006)
 Susceptibility patterns of Aspergillus and Fusarium
27a Taylor NR, Stanley RG, Vingrys AJ, Zele AJ {2007)
species isolated from horses with ulcerative
Variation in intraocular pressure following application of
keratomycosis. Proceedings ofthe 37th Anmual
tropicamide in three different dog breeds. Veterinary
Conference of the American College of Veterinary
Opbthalmology 10:8-11.
Ophthalmologists 37:4.
27b Stadtba umer K, Frommlet F, Nell B {2006) Effects of
64a Maggs DJ, Clarke HE (2004) In vitro efficacy of
 ganciclovir, cidofovir, penciclovir, foscarnet,
mydriatics on intraocular pressure and pupil size in the 
idoxuridine, and acyclovir against feline herpesvirus 
normal feline eye. Veterinary Opbthalmology
9:233-237.
type-1. American fournal of Veterinary Research
51a Broadwater J, Schorling JJ, Herring IP, Elvinger F
65:399-403
{2008) Effect of body position on intraocular pressure
64b Maggs DJ (2005) Update on pathogenesis, diagnosis,
in dogs without glaucoma. American Journal of
and treatment of feline herpesvirus type 1. Clirnical
Technigues in Small Animal Practice 20:94-101.
Veterinary Research 69:527-530.
56a Komaromy AM, Garg CD, Ying GS, Liu C (2006)
65a VOPH-L@LISTSERVE.UGA.EDU
 Effect of head position on intraocular pressure in
90a Stadtba umer K, Frommlet F, Nell B (2006) Effects of
horses. American fournal of Veterinary Research
mydriatics on intraocular pressure and pupil size in the
normal feline eye. Veterinary Opbthalmology
67:1233-1235.
9:233-237.
58a Leiva M, Naranjo C, Pena MT {2006) Comparison 
of the rebound tonometer {ICare?) to the applanation
91a Taylor NR, Stanley RG, Vingrys AJ, Zele AJ (2007)
Variation in intraocular pressure following application
tonometer (TonopenXL) in normotensive dogs.
 of tropicamide in three different dog breeds. Veterinary
Veterinary Ophthaimology 9:17-21.
58b Knollinger AM, La Croix NC, Barrett PM, Miller PE
Ophthalmology 10:8-11.
{200s) Evaluation of a rebound tonometer for
149a Herring I, Bobofchak MA, Landry MP, Ward DL
measuring intraocular pressure in dogs and horses.
{200s) Duration of effect and effect of multiple doses
fournal of the American Veterinary Medical
of topical ophthalmic application of 0.5%
Association 227:244-248.
 proparacaine hydrochloride in clinically normal dogs.
75a Tuntivanich N, Mentzer AL, Eifler DM, Montiani-
American Journal of Veterinary Research 66:77-80.
Ferreira F, Forcier JQ, Johnson CA, Petersen-Jones SM
207a Gelatt KN, MacKay EO {2004) Effect of different
 dose schedules of travoprost on intraocular pressure 
(2005) Assessment of the dark-adaptation time
required for recovery of electroretinographic responses
and pupil size in the glaucomatous Beagle. Veterinary
papul pue Aqdesoioud snpuny iaye shop u1
Ophthalmology 7:53-57.
ophthalmoscopy. American fournal of Veterinary
207b Carvalho AB, Laus JL, Costa VP, Barros PS, Silveira
Research 66:1798-1804.
PR (2006) Effects of travoprost 0.004% compared
with latanoprost 0.005% on the intraocular pressure
 of normal dogs. Veterinary Ophthalmology
CHAPTER 2
9:121-125.
213a Regnier A, Lemagne C, Ponchet A, Cazalot G,
35a Schlech BA, Alfonso E (2005) Overview of the potency
Concorder D (2006) Ocular effects of topical 0.03%
bimatoprost solution in normotensive feline eyes.
of moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% (Vigamox).
Veterinary Ophthalmology 9:39-43.
Survey of Opbthalmology 50:S7-S15.
213b Bartoe Jt, Davidson HJ, Horton MT, Jung Y,
35b Robertson SM, Curtis MA, Schlech BA, Rusinko A,
Owen GR et al. (2005) Ocular pharmacokinetics of
Brightman AH (2005) The effects of bimatoprost and
unoprostone isopropyl on the intraocular pressure of
moxifloxacin after topical treatment of animals and
normal cats. Veterinary Ophthalmology 8:247-252.
humans. Survey of Ophthalmology 50:S32-S45.
234a Ofri R, Lambrou GN, Allgoewer I, Graenitz U,
Pena TM, Spiess BM, Latour E {2009) Clinical
evaluation of pimecrolimus eye drops for treatment of
canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca: a comparison with
cyclosporine A. The Veterinary Journal 179:70-77.
496
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
234b Nell B, Walde I, Billich A, Vit P, Meingassner JG
43b Read RA, Broun HC (2007) Entropion correction in
{2005) The effect of topical pimecrolimus on
dogs and cats using a combination Hotz-Celsus and
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and chronic superficial
lateral eyelid wedge resection: results in 311 eyes.
keratitis in dogs: results from an exploratory study.
Veterinary Opbthalmology 10:6-11.
Veterinary Opbthalmology 8:39-46.
 57a Holland JL, Outerbridge CA, Affolter VK, Maggs DJ
234c Berdoulay A, English RV, Nadelstein B {2005) Effect
(2006) Detection of feline herpesvirus 1 DNA in skin
of topical 0.02% tacrolimus aqueous suspension on
biopsy specimens from cats with or without dermatitis.
tear production in dogs with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Veterinary Opbthalmology 8:225-232.
Association 229:1442-1446.
140 Klauss G, Giuliano EA, McCaw DL, MacDonald I,
Johnson PJ et al. (2004) Treatment of equine
CHAPTER 6
periocular squamous cell carcinoma with
photodynamic therapy: 5 cases. Proceedings of the
61a Laus, JL, Canola C, Mamede FV, Almeida DE,
3Sth Anmual Conference of the American College of
Godoy GS et al. (2003) Orbital cellulitis associated
Veterinary Ophthalmologists 35:10.
with Toxocara canis in a dog. Veterinary
141 Giuliano EA, Ota J, Tucker SA (2007) Photodynamic
Ophthatmology 6:333-336.
therapy: basic principles and potential uses for
61b Tova MC Gomezi MA (2005) Orbital cellulitis and
veterinary ophthalmologists. Veterinary
 intraocular abscess caused by migrating grass in a cat.
Opbthalmology 10:337-343.
Veterinary Ophthalmology 8:353-356.
72a Billson FM, Miller-Michau T, Mould JRB, Davidson
CHAPTER 8
MG (2006) Idiopathic sclerosing orbital pseudotumor
 in seven cats. Veterinary Ophthatmology 9:45-51.
78a Bartoe JT (2007) Modified lateral orbitotomy for
43a Ledbetter EC, Riis RC. Lerm TJ, Haley, NJ,
vision-sparing excision of a zygomatic mucocele in a
Schatzberg SJ (2006) Corneal ulceration associated
dog. Veterinary Opbthalmology 10:127-131.
with naturally occurring canine herpesvirus-1 infection
83a Headrick JF, Bentley E, Dubielzig RR (2004) Canine
in two adult dogs. fournal of the American Veterinary
lobular orbital adenoma: a report of 15 cases with
Medical Association 229:376-384.
distinctive features. Veterinary Opbthatmology
59a Volopich S, Benetka V, Schwendenwein I, Mostl K,
7:47-51.
 Sommerfeld-Stur I, Nell B (2005) Cytologic findings
92a Boroffka SA, Verbruggen A, Grinwis GC, Voorhout
 and feline herpesvirus DNA and Chlamrydopbila felis
G, Barthez PY (2007) Assessment of ultrasonography
antigen detection rates in normal cats and cats with
and computed tomography for the evaluation of
conjunctival and corneal lesions. Veterinary
unilateral orbital disease in dogs. Journal of the
Ophthalmology 8:25-32.
American Veterinary Medical Association
59b Maggs, DJ, Clarke HE {2005) Relative sensitivity of
230:671-680.
polymerase chain reaction assays used for detection of
92b Stiles J,Townsend W, Willis M, Moore PA, Smith E
feline herpesvirus type 1 DNA in clinical samples and
{2003) Use of a caudal auricular axial pattern flap in
commercial vaccines. American Journal of Veterinary
three cats and one dog following orbital exenteration.
Research 66:1550-1555.
Veterinary Opbthalmology 6:121-126.
60a Maggs DJ, Clarke HE (2004) In vitro efficacy of
98a Munoz E, Leiva M, Naranjo C, Pena T (2007)
 ganciclovir, cidofovir, penciclovir, foscarnet,
Retrobulbar dermoid cyst in a horse: a case report.
idoxuridine, and acyclovir against feline herpesvirus
Veterinary Opbthalmology 10:394-397.
type-1. American Journal of Veterinary Research
102a Townsend WM, Renninger M, Stiles J, Townsend
65:399-403.
JR, Krohne SG (2003) Dexamethasone-induced
60b Williams DL, Robinson JC, Lay E, Field H {2005)
exophthalmos in a group of Holstein calves. Veterinary
Efficacy of topical aciclovir for the treatment of feline
Ophthatmology 6:265-268.
herpetic keratitis: results of a prospective clinical trial
and data from in vitro investigations. Veterinary
Record 157:254-257.
CHAPTER 7
60c Fontenelle JP, Powell CC, Veir JK, Radecki SV,
Lappin MR (2008) Effect of topical ophthalmic
23a Raymond-Letron I, Rousseau T, De Geyer G,
application of cidofovir on experimentally induced
Bourges-Abella N, Regnier A (2005) Origin of aberrant
primary ocular feline herpesvirus-1 infection in cats.
lashes in canine distichiasis: histologic study. Abstracts,
American Journal of Veterinary Research 69:289-293.
European College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists and
62a Maggs DJ, Sykes JE, Clarke HE, Yoo SH, Kass PH et
European Society of Veterinary Ophthalmologists.
al. (2007) Effects of dietary lysine supplementation in
Veterinary Ophthalmology 8:427.
cats with enzootic upper respiratory disease. fournal of
37a D'Anna N, Guerriero A, Guandalini A, Sapienza JS
Feline Medicine and Surgery 9:97-108.
(2007) Use of a dermal biopsy punch for removal of
67a Browning GF (2004) Is Chlamrydopbila felis a
ectopic cilia in dogs: 19 cases. Veterinary
significant zoonotic pathogen? Australian Veterinary
Ophthalmology 10:65-67.
fournal 82:695-696.
43a Williams DL (2004) Entropion correction by fornix-
76a Dean R, Harley R, Helps C, Caney S, Gruffydd-Jones
based suture placement: use of the Quickert-Rathbun
T {2005) Use of quanatitative real-time PCR to
technique in ten dogs. Veterinary Ophthaimology
monitor the response of Chlamydopbila felis infection
7:343-347.
to doxycycline treatment. Journal of Clinical
Microbiology 43:1858-1864.
APPENDIX 3 - ADDITIONAL REFERENCES FOR SOFTCOVER EDITION
497
76b Hartmann AD, Helps CR, Lappin MR, Werckenthin
183b Vascellari M, Multari D, Mutinelli F (2005)
C, Hartmann K (2008) Efficacy of pradofloxacin in cats
 Unicentric extranodal lymphoma of the upper eyelid
with feline upper respiratory tract disease due to
conjunctiva in a dog. Veterinary Ophthatmology
Chlamydophila felis or Mycoplasma infections. fournal
8:67-70.
of Veterinary Internal Medicine 22:44-52.
183c Holt E, Goldschmidt MH, Skorupski K (2006)
76c Berhardt N, Schulz BS, Werckenthin C, Hartmann K
Extranodal conjunctival Hodgkin's-like lymphoma in a
(2006) Pharmacokinetics of enrofloxacin and its efficacy
cat. Veterinary Opbthalmology 9:141-144.
 in comparison with doxycycline in the treatment of
Chlamydopbila felis infection in cats with conjunctivitis.
Veterinary Record 159:591-594.
CHAPTER 9
76d Sturgess C, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Harbour DA, Jones RL
{2001) Controlled study of the efficacy of clavulanic
26a Lim CC, Cullen CL (2005) Schirmer tear test values 
acid-potentiated amoxycillin in the treatment of
and tear film break-up times in cats with conjunctivitis.
Chlamydia psittaci in cats. Veterinary Record
Veterinary Opbthalmology 8:305-310.
149:73-76.
28a Sanchez RF, Innocent G, Mould J, Billson FM (2007)
76e German AJ, Cannon MJ, Dye CB, Malcom J, Pearson
Canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca: disease trends in a
GR et al. (2005) Oesophageal strictures in cats
review of 229 cases. Journal of Small Animal Practice
associated with doxycycline therapy. Journal of Feline
48:211-217.
Medicine and Surgery 7:33-41.
29a Herrera HC, Weichsler N, Rodriguez Gomez J,Garcia
84a Heather L, Powell CC, Veir JK, Hawley JR, Lappin
de Jalon JA {2007) Severe, unilateral, unresponsive
MR (2007) Prevalence of feline herpesvirus 1,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in 16 juvenile Yorkshire
Chiamydophila felis, and Mycoplasma spp. DNA in
Terriers. Veterinary Opbthalmology 10:285-288.
conjunctival cells collected from cats with and without
29b Barnett KC (2006) Congenital keratoconjunctivitis
conjunctivitis. American fournal of Veterinary Research
 sicca and ichthyosiform dermatosis in the Cavalier King
68:643-648.
Charles Spaniel. Journal of Small Animal Practice
113a Bianciardi P, Otranto D (2005) Treatment of dogs
47:524-528.
with thelaziosis caused by Tbelazia callipaeda (Spirurida,
50a Naranjo C, Fondevilla D, Leiva M, Roura X, Pena T
Thelaziidae) using a topical formulation of imidacloprid
(2005) Characterization of lacrimal gland lesions and 
10% and moxidectin 2.5%. Veterinary Parasitology
 possible pathogenic mechanisms of keratoconjunctivitis
129:89-93
sicca in dogs with leishmaniosis. Veterinary Parasitology
123a Johnstone NS, Ward DA, Hendrix DV, Donnell RL,
133:37-47.
[lha MR (2008) Ligneous conjunctivitis secondary to a
95a Berdoulay A, English RV, Nadelstein B (2005) Effect of
congenital plasminogen deficiency in a dog. Journal of
topical 0.02% tacrolimus aqueous suspension on tear
the American Veterinary Medical Association
production in dogs with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
232:715-721.
Veterinary Opbthalmology 8:225-232.
123b Torres MD, Leiva M, Naranjo C, Tabar L, Ramis T,
95b Nell B, Walde I, Billich A, Vit P, Meingassner JG
Pena T (2006) Ligneous conjunctivitis in a dog: a case
{200s) The effect of topical pimecrolimus on
report. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and chronic superficial
the American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists
keratitis in dogs: results from an exploratory study.
37:25.
Veterinary Ophthalmology 8:39-46.
132a Barsotti G, Abramo F, Marchetti V (2007) Primary
95c Ofri R, Lambrou GN, Allgoewer I, Graenitz U, Pena
conjunctival mast cell tumor in a Labrador Retriever.
TM, Spiess, BM, Latour E {2009) Clinical evaluation of
Veterinary Opbthalmology 10:60-64.
pimecrolimus eye drops for treatment of canine
133a Moore CP, Collins BK, Linton LL, Collier LL (2000)
keratoconjunctivitis sicca: a comparison with
Conjunctival malignant melanoma in a horse. Veterinary
cyclosporine A. The Veterinary Journal 179:70-77.
Ophthalmology 3:201-206.
102a Koch S (2008) Listserv VOP-L @uga.edu
143a Pirie CG, Knollinger AM, Thomas CB, Dubielzig, RR
104a Gelatt KN, MacKay EO, Widenhouse C, Widenhouse
(2006) Canine conjunctival hemangioma and
TS, Stopek JB (2006) Effect of lacrimal punctual
hemangiosarcoma: a retrospective evaluation of 108
occlusion on tear production and tear fluorescein
cases {1989-2004). Veterinary Ophthalmology 9:215-
dilution in normal dogs. Veterinary Opbthalmology
226.
9:23-27.
145a Allgoewer I, Malho P, Schulze H, Schaffer E (2008)
 Aberrant conjunctival stricture and overgrowth in the
rabbit. Veterinary Opbthalmology 11:18-22.
CHAPTER 10
153a Brudenall DK, Ward DA, Kerr LA, Newman SJ
{2008) Bilateral corneoconjunctival dermoids and nasal
90a Fyfe Ja, Wayne J, Barrs VRD, Hughes MS, Malik R et
choristomas in a calf. Veterinary Ophthatmology
al. (2008) Molecular characterization of a novel
11:202-206.
 fastidious Mycobacterium causing lepromatous lesions
175a Pirie CG, Dubielzig RR {2006) Feline conjunctival
of the skin, subcutis, cornea and conjunctiva of cats
hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma: a retrospective
living in Victoria, Australia. Journal of Clinical
evaluation of eight cases {1993-2004). Veterinary
Microbiology 46:618-626.
Ophthalmology 9:227-231.
183a Radi, ZA, Miller DL, Hines ME {2004) B-cell
conjunctival lymphoma in a cat. Veterinary
Ophthalmology 7:413-415.
498
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
102a Moore PA, Dietrich UM, Barton MH, Mosunic CB,
209a Vennebusch T (2006) Interferon: topical application
Chandler MJ, Carmichael KP, Sanchez BS (2006)
for treatment of herpesvirus keratitis in the cat.
Bacterial isolates cultured in conjunction with equine
Kleintierpraxis 51:274-277.
fungal keratitis. Proceedings of the 37th Anmual
 209b Haid C, Kaps S, Gonczi E, Hassig M, Metzler A,
Conference of the American College of Veterinary
Spiess BM, Richter M (2007) Pretreatment with feline
Ophthalmologists 37:62.
interferon omega and the course of subsequent
110a Pearce JW, Giuliano EA, Moore CP {2006)
infection with feline herpesvirus in cats. Veterinary
Susceptibility patterns of Aspergillus and Fusarium
Opbthalmology 10:278-284.
species isolated from horses with ulcerative
227a Cullen CL, Wadowska DW, Singh A, Melekhovets Y
keratomycosis. Proceedings of the 37th Annual
{2005) Ultrastructural findings in feline corneal
Conference of the American College of Veterinary
sequestra. Veterinary Opbthalmology 8:295-303.
Opbthalmologists 37:4.
233a Featherstone HJ, Sansom J (2004) Feline corneal
110b Clode AB, Davis JL, Salmon J, Miller Michau T,
sequestra: a review of 64 cases {80 eyes) from
Gilger BC (2006) Evaluation of concentration of
1993-2000. Veterinary Ophthalmology 7:213-227.
voriconazole in aqueous humor after topical and oral
235a Dietrich UM, Moore PA, Chandler MJ, Mosunic
administration in horses. American fournal of
CB, Williams CO, Carmichael KP, Martin CL (2004)
Veterinary Research 67:296-301.
Acute corneal hydrops in horses: 16 cases. Proceedings
111a Betbeze CM Wu CC, Stiles J, Krohne SG, Finn MJ
of the3Sth Annual Conference of theAmerican
{200s) In vitro fungistatic and fungicidal activity of
College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists 35:17.
 silver sulfadiazine and natamycin on pathogenic fungi
262a Featherstone HJ, Sansom J, Heinrich CL {2001) The
isolated from equine eyes. Proceedings of the 36th
use of porcine small intestinal submucosa in ten cases
Annual Conference of the American College of
of feline corneal disease. Veterinary Ophthalmology
Veterinary Ophthalmologists 36:26.
4:147-153.
130a Chandler HL, Kusewitt DF, Colitz CMH {2006)
262b Vanore M, Chahory S, Payen G, Clerc B (2007)
Modulation of matrix metalloproteinases by ultraviolet
Surgical repair of deep melting ulcers with porcine
radiation in the cornea. Proceedings of the 37th
small intestinal submucosa (SIS) graft in dogs and cats.
Annual Conference of the American College of
Veterinary Ophthalmology 10:93-99.
Veterinary Ophthalmologists 37:38.
264a Barros PS, Safatle MV, Godoy CA, Souza Ms,
131a Nell B, Walde I, Billich A, Vit P, Meingassner JG
Barros LF, Brooks, DE (2005) Amniotic membrane
(200s) The effect of topical pimecrolimus on
transplantation for the reconstruction of the ocular
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and chronic superficial
 surface in three cases. Veterinary Ophthaimology
keratitis in dogs: results from an exploratory study.
8:189-192.
Veterinary Ophthalmology 8:39-46.
 264b Lassaline ME, Brooks, DE, Ollivier FJ, Komaromy
131b Berdoulay A, English RV, Nadelstein B {2005) Effect
AM, Kallberg ME, Gelatt KN {2005) Equine amniotic
of topical 0.02% tacrolimus aqueous suspension on
membrane transplantation for corneal ulceration and
tear production in dogs with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
keratomalacia in three horses. Veterinary
Veterinary Opbthalmology 8:225-232.
Ophthalmology 8:311-317.
156a Townsend WM, Stiles J, Guptill- Yoran L, Krohne
310a Breaux CM, Sandmeyer LS, Grahn BH (2007)
SG {2004) Development of a reverse transcriptase-
Immunohistochemical investigation of canine
polymerase chain reaction assay to detect feline
 episcleritis. Veterinary Ophthalmology 10:168-172.
herpesvirus-1 latency-associated transcripts in the
310b Moore CP, Grevan VL, Champagne ES, Collines K,
trigeminal ganglia and corneas of cats that did not
Collier LL (2000) Equine conjunctival pseudotumors.
have clinical signs of ocular disease. American fournal
Veterinary Opbthalmology 3:57-63.
of Veterinary Research 65:314319.
314a Donaldson D, Sansom J, Scase T, Adams V,
156b Stiles J, Pogranichniy R (2008) Detection of virulent
Mellersh C (2006) Canine limbal melanoma: 30 cases
feline herpesvirus-1 in the corneas of clinically normal
(1992-2004). Part I. Signalment, clinical and
cats. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery
histological features, and pedigree analysis. Veterirary
10:154-159.
Ophthalmology 9:115-119.
179a Michau TM, Schwabenton B, Davidson MG, Gilger 
332a Kanai K, Kanemaki N, Matsuo S, Ichikawa Y,
 BC (2003) Superficial, nonhealing corneal ulcers in
Okujima H, Wada Y (2006) Excision of a feline limbal
horses: 23 cases (1989-2003). Veterinary
melanoma and use of nictitans cartilage to repair the 
Ophthalmology 6:291-297.
resulting corneoslceral defect. Veterinary
179b Brunott A, Boeve MH, Velden MA (2007) Grid
Ophthalmology 9:255-258.
keratotomy as a treatment for superficial nonhealing
 332b Donaldson D, Sansom J, Adams V (2006) Canine
corneal ulcers in 10 horses. Veterinary Ophthaimology
limbal melanoma: 30 cases (1992-2004). Part 2.
10:162-167.
Treatment with lalmellar resection and adjunctive
207a Williams DL, Robinson JC, Lay E, Field H {2005)
Efficacy of topical acyclovir for the treatment of feline
morbidity. Veterinary Ophthalmology 9:179-185.
herpetic keratitis: results of a prospective clinical trial
336a Plummer CE, Smith S, Andrew SE, Lassaline ME,
and data from in vitro investigations. Veterinary
Gelatt, KN et al. (2007) Combined keratectomy,
Record 157:254-257.
strontium-90 irradiation and permanent bulbar
207b Fontenelle JP, Powell CC, Veir JK, Radecki SV,
conjunctival grafts for corneolimbal squamous cell
Lappin MR (2008) Effect of topical ophthalmic
carcinomas in horses (1990-2002): 38 horses.
application of cidofovir on experimentally induced
Veterinary Opbthalmology 10:37-42.
primary ocular feline herpesvirus-1 infection in cats.
American fournal of Veterinary Research 69:289-293.
APPENDIX 3 - ADDITIONAL REFERENCES FOR SOFTCOVER EDITION
499
336b Mosunic CB, Moore PA, Carmichael KP, Chandler
194a Wollanke B, Rohrback BW, Gerhards H {2001)
MJ, Vidyashankar A et al. (2004) Effects of treatment
Serum and vitreous humor antibody titers in and
with and without adjuvant radiation therapy on
isolation of Leptospira interrogans from a horse with
 recurrence of ocular and adnexal squamous cell
recurrent uveitis. Journal of the American Veterinary
carcinoma in horses: 157 cases (1985-2002). Journal
Medical Association 219:795-800.
Of the American Veterinary Medical Association
196a Finn MJ, Stiles J, Krohne SG {2007) Visual outcome
225:1733-1738.
in a group of dogs with ocular blastomycosis treated
339a Karasawa K, Tanaka A, Matsuda H {2008)
with systemic antifungals and systemic corticosteroids.
Superficial keratectomy and topical mitomycin C as 
Veterinary Ophthalmology 10:299-303.
therapy for a corneal squamous cell carcinoma in a
196b Brooks DE, Legendre AM, Gum GG, Laratta LJ,
dog. Journal of Small Animal Practice 49:208-210.
Abrams, KL, Morgan RV {1991) The treatment of 
339b Boehm MD, Huang AJ {2005) Treatment of
canine ocular blastomycosis with systemically
recurrent corneal and conjunctival intraepithelial
administered itraconazole. Progress in Veterinary and
neoplasia with topical interferon alfa 2b.
Comparative Ophthalmology 1:263-268.
Ophthalmology 112:1319.
196c Bloom JD, Hamor RE, Gerding PA {1996) Ocular 
343a Komnenou AA, Mylonkis ME, Kouti V, Tendoma L,
blastomycosis in dogs: 73 cases, 108 eyes {1985-1993].
Leontides L et al. (2007) Ocular manifestations of
fournal of the American Veterinary Medicat
natural canine monocytic ehrlichiosis {Ehrlichia canis):
Association 209:1271-1274.
 a retrospective study of 90 cases. Veterinary
205a Zarfoss MK, Dubielzig RR (2007) Solid intraocular
Opbthalmology 10:137-142.
 xanthogranuloma in three miniature Schnauzer dogs.
346a Sreter T, Szell Z (2008) Onchocercosis: a newly
Veterinary Opbtbalmology 10:304-307.
recognized disease in dogs. Veterinary Parasitology
215a Naranjo C, Dubielzig RR, Friedrichs KR (2007)
151:1-13.
 Canine ocular histiocytic sarcoma. Veterinary
Ophthalmology 10:179-185.
215b Heath S, Rankin AJ, Dubielzig RR (2003) Primary
CHAPTER 11
ocular osteosarcoma in a dog. Veterinary
Ophthalmology 6:85-87.
47a Gemensky AJ, Wilkie DA, Cook CS {2004) The use
215c Zarfoss MK, Jones Y, Colitz CM, Dubielzig RR,
of semiconductor diode laser for deflation and
Klauss G et al. (2007) Uveal spindle cell tumor of blue-
coagulation of anterior uveal cysts in dogs, cats and
eyed dogs: an immunohistochemical study. Veterinary
horses: a report of 20 cases. Veterinary Opbthalmology
Pathology 44:276-284.
7:360-368.
73a Komnenou AA, Mylonakis ME, Kouti V, Tendoma L,
CHAPTER 12
Leontides L et al. (2007) Ocular manifestations of
natural canine monocytic ehrlichiosis {Ebrlichia canis):
 a retrospective study of 90 cases. Veterinary
28a Weinstein WL, Dietrich UM, Sapienza JS, Carmichael
Ophthalmology 10:137-142.
KP, Moore PA, Krunkosky TM (2007) Identification of
73b Leiva M, Naranjo C, Pena MT (2005) Ocular signs 
ocular matrix metalloproteinases present within the
of canine monocytic ehrlichiosis: a retrospective study
aqueous humor and iridocorneal drainage angle tissue
 in dogs from Barcelona, Spain. Veterinary
of normal and glaucomatous canine eyes. Veterinary
Opbthalmology 8:387-393.
Opbthalmology 10:108-116.
108a Dubielzig RR, Pirie CG (2005) Septic implantation
28b MacKay EO, Kallberg ME, Gelatt KN (2008)
syndrome; analysis of 29 canine and 11 feline cases.
Aqueous humor myocilin protein levels in normal,
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
genetic carrier, and glaucomatous Beagles. Veterinary
American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists
Ophthalmology 11:177-185.
36:21.
28c Hart H, Samuelson DA, Tajwar J. MacKay EP, Lewis
114a Yamaki K, Takiyama N, Itho N, Mizuki N, Seiya
PA et al. (2007) Immunolocalization of myocilin
M, Sinsuke W et al. (2005) Experimentally induced
protein in the anterior eye of normal and primary
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease in two Akita dogs.
open-angle glaucomatous dogs. Veterinary
Experimental Eye Research 80:273-280.
Ophthalmology 10:28-37.
115a Sigle KJ, McLellan GJ, Haynes JS, Myers RK, Betts
 46a Knollinger AM, La Croix NC, Barrett PM, Miller PE
DM (2006) Unilateral uveitis in a dog with
{2005) Evaluation of a rebound tonometer for
uveodermatologic syndrome. Journal of the American
measuring intraocular pressure in dogs and horses.
Veterinary Medical Association 228:543-548.
Journal American Veterinary Medical Association
146a Fontenelle JP, Powell CC, Hill AE, Radecki SV,
227:244-248.
Lappin MR (2008) Prevalence of serum antibodies
 46b Leiva M, Naranjo C, Pena MT (2006) Comparison 
 against Bartonella species in the serum of cats with or
of the rebound tonometer {ICareR) with the
without uveitis. fournal of Feline Medicine and Surgery
applanation tonometer (TonopenXL) in normotensive
10:41-46.
dogs. Veterinary Ophthalmology 9:17-21.
154a Deeg CA, Ehrenhofer M, Thurau SR, Reese S,
47a Del Sole MJ, Sande PH, Bernades JM, Aba Ma.
Wildner G, Kaspers B (2002) Immunopathology of
Rosenstein RE (2007) Circadian rhythm of intraocular
recurrent uveitis in spontaneously diseased horses.
pressures in cats. Veterinary Opbthalmology
Experimental Eye Research 75:127-133.
10:155-161.
500
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEeDICINE
47b Komaromy AM, Garg CD, Ying GS, Liu C (2006)
168a Binder DR, Herring IP, Gerhard T (2007) Outcomes 
Effect of head position on intraocular pressure in
 of nonsurgical management and efficacy of
horses. American Journal of Veterinary Research
 demedarium bromide treatment for primary lens
67:1233-1235.
instability in dogs: 34 cases (1990-2004). Journal of
57a Grozdanic SD, Matic M, Betts DM, Sakaguchi DS,
the American Veterinary Medical Association
Kardon RH (2007) Recovery of canine retina and optic
231:89-93.
nerve function after acute elevation of intraocular
pressure: implications for canine glaucoma treatment.
Veterinary Opbthalmology 10:101-107.
CHAPTER 13
67a Keilly CM, Morris R, Dubielzig RR (2005) Canine
11a Kuszak JR, Mazurkiewicz M, Jison L, Madurski A,
review of 100 cases looking at inflammation and
Ngando A, Zoltoski RK (2006) Quantitative analysis of
pigment dispersion. Veterinary Ophthalrology
 animal model lens anatomy: accommodative range is
8:253-258.
related to fiber structure and organization. Veterinary
94a Mangan BG, Al-Yahya K, Chen C, Gionfriddo JR,
Opbthalmology 9:266-280.
Powell CC, Dubielzig RR et al. (2007) Retinal pigment
28a McLellan GJ, Betts D, Sigle K, Grozdanic S {2004)
epithelial damage, breakdown of the blood-retinal
Congenital glaucoma in the Siamese cat. Proceedings of
barrier, and retinal inflammation in dogs with primary
the 3Sth Anmual Conference of the American College of
glaucoma. Veterinary Ophthalmology 10:117-124.
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 35:36.
95a Kato K, Sasak N, Matsunaga S, Mochizuki M,
64a Williams DL, Heath MF (2006) Prevalence of feline
Nishimura R, Ogawa H (2006) Possible association of
cataract: results of a cross-sectional study of 2000
glaucoma with pectinate ligament dysplasia and
normal animals, 50 cats with diabetes and one hundred
narrowing of the iridocorneal angle in Shiba Inu dogs
cats following dehydration crises. Veterinary
in Japan. Veterinary Ophthalmoiogy 9:71-75.
Opbthalmology 9:341-349.
100a Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (2004) Secondary
64b Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (2005) Prevalence of primary
glaucomas in the dog in North American. Veterinary
breed-related cataracts in the dog in North America.
Ophthalmology 7:245-259.
Veterinary Opbthalmology 8:101-111.
100b Johnsen DA, Maggs DJ, Kass PH (2006) Evaluation 
111a Williams DL, Munday P (2006) The effect of a
of risk factors for development of secondary glaucoma
topical antioxidant formulation including N-acetyl
in dogs: 156 cases {1999-2004). Journal of the
carnosine on canine cataract: a preliminary study.
American Veterinary Medical Association
Veterinary Opthalmology 9:311-316.
229:1270-1274.
121a Accola PJ, Bentley E, Smith LJ, Forrest LJ, Baumel
111a Petersen-Jones SM, Forcier J, Mentzer AL (2007)
CA, Murphy CJ (2006) Development of a retrobulbar
Ocular melanosis in the Cairn Terrier: clinical
u eisaalue pue aaans ieo ioj anbuua uoau
description and investigation of mode of inheritance.
dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Veterinary Opbthalmology 10:63-69.
Assocdation 229:220-225.
111b van de Sandt R, Boeve MH, Stades FC, Kik MJ
154a Beale BA, Salmon J, Michau TM, Gilger BC (2006)
(2003) Abnormal ocular pigment deposition and 
 Effect of ophthalmic Nd:YAG laser energy on
glaucoma in the dog. Veterinary Ophthalmology
intraocular lenses after posterior capsulotomy in normal
6:273-278.
dog eyes. Veterinary Opbthalmology 9:335-340.
114a Jacobi S, Dubielzig RR (2008) Feline primary open
157a English RV, Nadelstein B, Weigt A, Gilger BC (2007)
angle glaucoma. Veterinary Opbthatmology
 Influence of lens design and material on capsular
11:162-165.
 opacification and refractive status after
115a Trost K, Peiffer RL, Nell B {2007) Goniodysgenesis
 phacoemulsification cataract removal and replacement
associated with primary glaucoma in an adult 
intraocular implantation in dogs. Proceedings of the
European Short-haired cat. Veterinary Opbthatmology
38th Annual Conference of the American College of
10:3-7.
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 38:56.
115b McLellan GJ, Betts d, Sigle K, Grozdanic S {2004)
157b Watson JL, Bras Id, Webb TR, Stone SG, Saville WJ
Congenital glaucoma in the Siamese cat. Proceedings
(2007) A quantitative comparison of posterior capsular
ofthe 3Sth Anmual Conference of the American
opacification in canine patients following intraocular
College of Veterinary Opbthalmologists 35:36.
implantation with polymethylmethacrylate and foldable
115c Czederpiltz JM, La Croix NC, van der Woerdt A,
acrylic lenses. Proceedings of the 38th Anmual
Bentley E, Dubielzig RF, Murphy CJ, Miller PE {2005)
Conference of the American College of Veterinary
Putative aqueous humor misdirection syndrome as a
Ophthalmologists 38:78.
cause of glaucoma in cats: 32 cases {1997-2003)
158a Bras I D, Colitz CM, Saville WJ, Gemensky-Metzler
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
AJ, Wilkie DA (2006) Posterior capsular opacifcation in
Association 227:1434-1431.
diabetic and nondiabetic canine patients following
115d Dietrich UM, Chandler MJ, Cooper T,
cataract surgery. Veterinary Opbthalmology 9:317-327.
Vidyashankar A, Chen G (2007) Effects of topical 2%
158b Schmidt GM, Vainisi SJ (2004) Retrospective study of
dorzolamide hydrochloride alone and in combination
prophylactic random transscleral retinopexy in the
with 0.s% timolol maleate on intraocular pressure in
Bichon Frise with cataract. Veterinary Ophthatmology
normal feline eyes. Veterinary Ophthalmology
7:307-310.
10:95-100.
158c Johnstone N, Ward DA (2005) The incidence of
posterior capsule disruption during phacoemulsification
and associate postoperative complication rates in dogs:
244 eyes. Veterinary Opbthalmology 8:47-50.
APPENDIX 3 - ADDITIONAL REFERENCES FOR SOFTCOVER EDITION
501
170a Gemensky-Metzler AJ, Bras ID, Colitz CM, Wilky
185a Sandmeyer LS, Breau CB, Archer S, Grahn BH (2007)
 DA, Klages DC (2004) Clinical features and outcomes
Clinical and electroretinographic characteristics of
 of phacoemulsification in 39 horses: a retrospective
congenital stationary night blindness in the Appaloosa
study {1993-2003). Proceedirgs of the 35th Anmual
and the association with the leopard complex.
Conference of the American College of Veterinary
Veterinary Opbthalmology 10:368-375.
Ophthalmologists 35:30.
185b Nunnery C, Pickett JP, Zimmerman KL (2005)
170b Lassaline ME Plummer CE, Brooks DE, Kallberg ME,
Congenital stationary night blindness in a Thoroughbred
Gelatt KN (2005) Phacofragmentation for acquired
 and a Paso Fino. Veterinary Opbthalmology 8:415-419.
cataracts in adult horses. Proceedings of the 36th
190a Aquire GD, Baldwin V, Pearce Kelling S, Nargstrom
Annual Conference of the American College of
K, Ray K, Acland GM (1998) Congenital stationary
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 36:41.
night blindness in the dog: common mutation in the
177a Oberbauer AM, Hollingsworth SR, Belanger JM,
RPE6S gene indicates founder effect. Molecular Vision
Regan KR, Famula TR (2008) Inheritance of cataracts
4:23.
and primary lens luxation in Jack Russell Terriers.
214a Narfstrom K, Wrigstad A, Ekesten B, Berg AL (2007)
American Journal of Veterinary Research 69:222-227.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis: clinical and morphologic
183a Morris RA, Dubielzig RR (2005) Light-microscopy
findings in nine affected Polish Owczarek Nizinny
evaluation of zonular fiber morphology in dogs with
(PON) dogs. Veterinary Ophthalmology 10:111-120.
glaucoma: secondary to lens displacement. Veterinary
264a Gelatt, KN, van der Woerdt A, Ketring KL, Andrew
Opbthalmology 8:81-84.
SE, Brooks DE, Biros DJ et al. {2001) Enrofloxacin-
185a Binder DR, Herring IP, Gerhard T {2007) Outcomes
 associated retinal degeneration in cats. Veterinary
of nonsurgical management and effcacy of demedarium
Ophthatmology 4:99-106.
bromide treatment for primary lens instability in dogs:
264b Fond MM, Dubielzig RR, Giuliano EA, Moore CP,
34 cases {1990-2004). Journal of the American
 Narfstrom KL (2007) Ocular and systemic
Veterinary Medical Association 231:89-93.
manifestations after oral administration of a high dose
of enrofloxacin in cats. American Journal of Veterinary
Research 68:190-202.
CHAPTER 14
264c Wiebe V, Hamilton P (2002) Fluoroquinolone-
induced retinal degeneration in cats. Journal of the
16a Munyard KA, Sherry CR, Sherry L {2007) A
American Veterinary Medical Association
 retrospective evaluation of congenital ocular defects in
221:1568-1571.
Australian Shepherd dogs in Australia. Veterinary
280a Carter RT, Bentley E, Oliver JW, Miller PE, Herring
Ophthalmology 10:19-22.
IP (2003) Elevations in adrenal sex hormones in canine
35a Manning SP (2007) Ocular examination in the
diagnosis of angiostrongylosis in dogs. Veterinary
Veterinary Ophthalmology 6:360.
Record 160:625-627.
283a Keller RL, Kania SA, Hendrix DV, Ward DA, Abrams
52a Ollivier FJ, Samuelson DA, Brooks DE, Lewis PA,
K {2006) Evaluation of canine serum for the presence of
Kallberg ME, Komaromy AM (2004) Comparative
antiretinal autoantibodies in sudden acquired retinal
morphology of the tapetum lucidum famong selected
degeneration syndrome. Veterinary Ophthalmology
species). Veterinary Ophthalmology 7:11-22.
9:195-200.
73a Lowe JK, Kukekova AV, Kirkness EF, Langlois MC,
283b Gilmour MA, Cardenas MR, Blaik M, Bahr R,
Aguirre GC et al. (2003) Linkage mapping of the
 McGinnis JF (2004) Analysis of dogs with sudden
 primary disease locus for collie eye anomaly. Genomics
acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS).
82:86-95.
Proceedings of the 3Sth Anmual Conference of the
73b www//optigen.com/opt9_test
American College of Veterinary Opbthatmologists
126a Garcia da Silva E, Dubielzig RR, Zarfoss MK, Anibal
35:40.
A {2008) Distinctive histopathologic features of canine
286a Gooley JJ, Lu K. Fischer D. Saper CB (2003) A broad
optic nerve hypoplasia and aplasia: a retrospective
role for melanopsin in nonvisual photoreception. journal
review of 13 cases. Veterinary Ophthalmology
of Neuroscience 23:7093-7106.
11:23-29.
286b Gooley JJ, Lu J, Chou TC, Scammell TE, Saper CB
146a www://optigen.com/opt9_test_rec1_pra
(2001) Melanopsin in cells of origin of the
153a Ropstad EO, Bjerkas E, Narfstrom K (2007) Clinical
retinohypothalamic tract. Nature Neuroscience 4:1165.
findings in early onset cone-rod dystrophy in the
286c Grozdanic SA, Matic M, Sakaguchi DS, kardon RH
 Standard Wire-haired Dachshund. Veterinary
(2007) Evaluation of retinal status using chromatic pupil
Opbthalmology 10:69-75.
light reflex activity in healthy and diseased canine eyes.
177a Acland GM, Aguirre GD, Ray J, Zhang Q, Aleman 
Investigative Ophthalmology C Visual Science
TS et al. (2001) Gene therapy restores vision in a canine
48:5178-5183.
model of childhood blindness. Nature Genetics 
288a Johnstone N, Ward DA (2005) The incidence of
28:92-95.
posterior capsule disruption during phacoemulsification
177b Narfstrom K, Vaegan, Katz M, Bragadottir R,
and associate postoperative complication rates in dogs:
Rakoczy EP, Seelinger M (2005) Assessment of structure
244 eyes. Veterinary Ophthalmology 8:47-50.
and function over a 3-year period after gene transfer in
288b Strobel, BW, Wilkie DA, Gilger BC (2007) Retinal
RPE645-1- dogs. Documenta Ophthalmologica
detachment in horses: 40 cases {1998-2005). Veterinary
111:39-48.
Opbthlalmology 10:380-385.
177c Bradadottir R, Narfstrom K (2003) Lens sparing pars
 292a Vainisi SJ, Wolfer JC (2004) Canine retinal surgery.
plana vitrectomy and retinal transplantation in cats.
Veterinary Opbthaimology 7:291-306.
Veterinary Opbthalmology 6:135-139.
502
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
292b Grahn BH, Barnes LD, Breaux CB, Sandmeyer LS
 323b Wyman M, Weisbrode S, Filko D, Grandstaff R,
(2007) Chronic retinal detachment and giant retinal
 Ferrebee E (2005) Ophthalmomyiasis (interna posterior)
tears in 34 dogs: outcome comparison of no treatment,
of the posterior segment and central nervous system:
topical medical therapy, and retinal reattachment after
Cuterebra spp. in a cat. Veterinary Ophthalmology
vitrectomy. Canadian Veterinary Journal 48:1031-1039.
8:77-80.
292c Schmidt GM, Vainisi SJ (2004) Retrospective study of
323c Stiles J, Rankin A (2006) Ophthalmomyiasis interna
 prophylactic random transscleral retinopexy in the
 anterior in a cat: surgical resolution. Veterinary
Bichon Frise with cataract. Veterinary Ophthatmology
Ophthalmology 9:165-168.
7:307-310.
332a Stadtbaumer K, Leschnik MW, Nell B (2004) Tick-
307a Michau TM, Breitschwerdt EB, Gilgr BC, Davidson
borne encephalitis virus as a possible cause of optic
MG {2003) Bartonella vinsoni subspecies berfboffi as a
neuritis in a dog. Veterinary Opbthalmology 7:271-277.
 possible cause of anterior uveitis and choroiditis in a
337a Tanja M, Powell CC, Gionfrriddo JR, Cuddon PA
dog. Veterinary Ophthalmology 6:299-304.
(2002) Treatment of granulomatous
308a Deeg CA, Ehrenhofer M, Thurau SR, Reese S,
meningoencephalomyelitis in a dog. Veterinary
Wildner G, Kaspers B (2002) Immunopathology of
Ophthalmology 5:29-33.
recurrent uveitis in spontaneously diseased horses.
337b Adamo FP, O'Brien RT (2004) Use of cyclosporine to
Experimental Eye Research 75:127-133.
treat granulomatous meningoencephalitis in three dogs.
309a Townsend WM, Stiles J, Krohne SG (2006)
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Leptospirosis and panuveitis in a dog. Veterinary
225:1211-1216.
Opbthatmology 9:169-173.
382a Landry MP, Herring IP, Panciera DL {2004)
315a Leiva M, Naranjo C, Pena MT (2005) Ocular signs of
 Funduscopic findings following cataract extraction by
canine monocytic ehrlichiosis: a retrospective study in
means of phacoemulsification in diabetic dogs: 52 cases 
dogs from Barcelona, Spain. Veterinary Ophthalmology
(1993-2003). Journal ofthe American Veterinary
8:387-393.
Medical Association 225:709-716.
322a Perry AW, Hertling R, Kennedy MJ (1991)
382b Warren JR, Ring RD, La Croix NC, Munger RJ
Angiostrongylosis with disseminated larval infection
(2006) Prevalence of systemic hypertension in canine
associated with signs of ocular and nervous disease in an
cataract patients. Proceedings of the 37th Anmual
imported dog. Caradian Veterinary Journal 32:430-431.
Conference of the American College of Veterinary
322b King MCA, Grose RM, Startup G {1994)
Ophthaimologists 37:6.
Angiostrongylus vasorum in the anterior chamber of a
dog's eye. Journal of Small Antmal Practice 35:326-328.
323a Ollivier FJ, Barrie KP, Mames RN, Kallberg ME.
Griener EC et al. (2006) Pars plana vitrectomy for the
treatment of ophthalmomyiasis interna posterior in a
dog. Veterinary Ophthalmology 9:259-264.
503
Index
Note: page numbers in bold type.
anemia 452
antiviral agents 49
indicate major discussions of topics.
anesthesia 105-6,387
aphakia 373-4
topical 56
apraclonidine 52
 angioedema 104
aqueous humor 337
abscess  74
angiokeratoma 203, 212
centesis 36, 323
eyelid 104
angularis oculi vein 146-7
 changes in uveitis 325-6
orbital/retro-orbital  120-3
aniridia 303-4
egress 337-9
see also corneal abscessation
anisocoria 97-9, 302
plasmoid 311
acetazolamide 55, 357
causes 99
shunts 360-1
acetylcysteine 57,228
dynamic 301, 302
aqueous plexus 328-9
actinic-related conjunctivitis 197
evaluation 14-15, 97-9, 301
arteriograms 118
acute inflammation  71-80
static 99, 302
arteriosclerosis 254-6
appearance of 74-5
ankyloblepharon 148
artificial tears 55,227-8
biochemical changes 79-80
anophthalmos 131
aspirin S9
 plasma-derived factors 79-80
antazoline phosphate 61
asteroid hyalosis 404
causes 75-6
anterior chamber 300
atherosclerosis 254-6
 cellular events 73-4
centesis 36
atropine 15, 51, 53
manifestations of 76-9
cysts 354
pre-operative 106
mediators of 80
examination 17
side-effects 53
vascular events 71-3
flare in 344
uveitis therapy 324
changes in vessel caliber 72
lipids in 103, 326
a utoimmune-mediated a denitis
 increased vascular
anterior chamber-associated immune
224
 permea bility  72-3
deviation {ACAID)  310
azathioprine 61
 see also inflammation
 anterior segment dysgenesis 131-2,
acyclovir 49, 270
307
B-lymphocytes 78
adenine arabinoside 49, 270
anterior uveitis 100, 199, 310-26
bacterial infection
adenitis, autoimmune-mediated 224
causes 310, 312-19
anterior uveitis and 312, 321,
adenocarcinoma 213, 327
cat 316-19
322
adenoma 327
dog 312-16
blepharitis 166-7, 170
adenoviruses
horse 320-1
chorioretinitis 443-5
canine adenovirus (CAV) 262,
clinical signs 310-11
conjunctivitis 190-5
312
equine recurrent uveitis
acute 194
conjunctivitis 187
319-20
chronic 194-5
adrenergic agents S1-2
diagnosis 322-3
therapy 194,195
alacrima, congenital 222
equine recurrent uveitis 323
corneal ulceration 264-5, 273-4,
alkylating agents 61
prevention 325
277-9
allergic conjunctivitis 196
prognosis 325
keratitis 253-4
allergic hypersensitivity 84
sequelae 325
therapy 255-6
American College of Veterinary
therapy 53, 100, 324-5
orbital cellulitis 120
Ophthalmologists {(ACVO)  471
surgery 325
see also specific infections
 amino acid metabolism disorders
antibody-dependent cellular
band keratopathy 248-9
429
cytotoxicity {ADCC) 84-5
 puppy band keratopathy 246
 aminoglycosides 47
antifi brin agents 62
Bartonella benselae 318
amiodarone 260
 antifungal preparations 47-9
basophils 77-8
amphotericin B 48, 255
antihistamines 60-1
beta adrenergic blockers 53-4
anamnesis 11-12
antimicrobial agents 45-7
indications for use
54
anaphylactic hypersensitivity 84
indications for use 46-7, 228
pharmacology  53-4
anaplasia 88-9
prophylaxis 47, 112
side-effects S4
androgen deficiency 225
selection of 45-6
 binocular indirect ophthalmoscope
androgen therapy 229
see also antifungal preparations
{BIO}  30-3
504
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
biomicroscopy 36-8
cataracts, congenital (contirmued)
chronic inflammation  81-4
 direct focal illumination 37
cat 377
cornea 82
oscillatory illumination 38
cow 377
granulation tissue 82
 posterior segment examination
dog 376-7
 granulomatous inflammation 
38
horse 377
83-4
proximal/indirect illumination  38
diagnosis 378, 385
lens 83
retroillumination 38
inherited 380-1
 posterior segment 83
biopsy, iris 323
metabolic 381-2
uveal tract 82-3
blastomycosis 313
diabetic 104, 381, 387
see also inflammation
blepharitis 165-71
prognosis 385-6
cidofovir 364
atopic 168, 170
prophylaxis 378
cilia 147
causes 165-9
systemic disease rule outs 4
494
diseases of 150-5
diagnosis 169-70
therapy 53, 378,386-92
 adventitious, ectopic or
 systemic disease rule outs 493
anesthesia 387
aberrant cilia 154-5
 therapy 170-1
cat 391
ciliary body 299-300
blepharoedema 164-5
complications 390-1
acquired diseases 304-7
blepharophimosis 156
dog 386-91
 chemical ablation 363-4
 blepharospasm_99
horse 391
congenital diseases 303-4
blindness 94-7
medical therapy 386
cysts 305-7, 353
causes 94-7
patient selection 386-8
neoplasia 326-9
hemorrhage and 452
postoperative glaucoma 353
glaucoma and 353
history 11, 94
 postoperative therapy 391
ciliary pr0cesses 302-3
hypertension and 454-6
preoperative therapy 388
cimetidine 329
stationary night blindness 426-7
toxic 384-5
cisplatin 177-8
genetic test 472
see also opacities
clindamycin 319
blinking 147-8
catarrhal inflammation  74-5
Cloquet's canal 402
blood tests 323
cavernous sinus syndrome 130
clotrimazole 48
Borrelia burgdorferi 312, 321
cell-mediated hypersensitivity 85-6
coagulation system 80
bovine herpesvirus 188
centesis 36, 323
cocaine 52, 56
bovine virus diarrhea {BVD) 443
central progressive retinal atrophy
coccidioidomycosis 313
brachytherapy 177
{CPRA} 427
collagen inserts 43
 bracken poisoning 435
chalazion 165, 170
collie eye anomaly {CEA) 414-16
breed predispositions to eye disease
chalazion clamp 108
clinical signs 414-16
473-87
chemical injury 104
diagnosis 416
brinzolamide 55, 357
corneal ulceration and 264
therapy 416
Brucella spp. 312, 321
inflammation and 75
coloboma 148-50
bullous keratopathy (corneal
keratitis and 256
iris 304
hydrops) 273
chemokines 80
lens 374-5
buphthalmos 12, 117
chemosis 185-6
retina 413-14,415
glaucoma 342
 see aiso edema
therapy 149-50
lens displacement and 392
chemotaxins 79
third eyelid 204
burns 168, 170
chemotherapy 129, 177-8, 329
color changes see ocular color
cherry eye 205-9
changes
canaliculops 236
clinical signs 205-6
color vision 405
cancer see neoplasia; tumors
therapy 206-9
complement system 79-80
canine distemper 187
Chlamydopbila sp. infection 189,
hypersensitivity and 84-5
chorioretinitis  441
190-2
complete blood count (CBC) 323
Canine Eye Registry Foundation
clinical signs 190-1
computed tomography (CT) 118,
{CERF} 471
diagnosis 191
323
cannulation, lacrimal outflow system
prophylaxis 192
cones 405-7
19
therapy 192
degeneration 425-6
canthal tenotomy 160
chlorambucil 61
 progressive rod-cone
canthoplasty
156, 160
chlorhexidine 256
degeneration (prcd)  425
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 54-5,
cholinergic agonists see miotics
genetic test 472
337,357
chondroitin sulfate-sodium
rod-cone dysplasia 424-5
side-effects SS
hyaluronate 63
genetic tests 471-2
carcinoma see pulmonary
chorioretinal dysplasia 414 
congenital alacrima 222
carcinoma; squamous cell
chorioretinal hypoplasia 414
conjunctiva 147
ca rcinoma
chorioretinitis 439
anatomy 183
carprofen 60
causes 441-9
cytology 20
cataracts 96, 312, 375, 378-92
immune-mediated 448-9
ectopic lacrimal gland tissue 203
acute onset 103-4
diagnosis 449
examination 17, 19-20, 184
classification 378
choroid 407
follicles 186
clinical signs 377-8
inflammation 439-49
 inclusion cysts 204
congenital 375-8
 see aiso fundus
microbiologic cultures 14, 184
INDEX
505
conjunctiva (continued)
cornea (continued)
cyclophotocoagulation  359-60
neoplasia 201-3
trauma
cycloplegics 51
overgrowth 204
lacerations 280-1
cyclosporine 61-2, 325
palpebral conjunctiva 19-20,
penetrating and perforating
topical 228-9, 258
147
wounds 280
cysts
 surgical instrumentation 109-10
rupture 281
inclusion 204, 283
trauma 104,200-3
turgescence 244-5
lacrimal 236
see also conjunctivitis
vascularization 244
orbital 130
conjunctival flaps 275-6
wound healing 243-4
peripheral retinal 436
conjunctival hyperemia 101
epithelial healing 243-4
third eyelid 212
conjunctivitis 185-200
scar formation and
uveal 305-7
classification by etiology 187-98
opacification  244
glaucoma and 353-4
clinical signs 185-7
stromal healing 244
cytokines 80
cornea globosa 247-8
cytotoxic hypersensitivity 84-5
follicular conjunctivitis of the
corneal abscessation 253
third eyelid 209-10
stromal 74
dacryocystitis 234-5
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
therapy 255, 256
dacryocystorhinography 235
and 225
corneal grafts 276-7
dacryops_ 236
laterality 187
corneal hydrops 273
dazzle reflex 34, 94
plasma cell conjunctivitis 210
corneal sequestrum (nigrum)  272
debridement 268
 systemic disease rule outs 493
corneal sutures 2745
I-0g stu eisasuo 
therapy 200
corneal tattooing 277
 delayed hypersensitivity 85-6
conjunctivorhinostomy 234
corneal tumors 284-6
dermatomycosis 167
continuous circular capsulorrhexis
cow285
dermoid 150
{CCC)388
t87 ieo pue sop
conjunctiva 205
cornea 115
horse 2845
cornea/sclera 282-3
anatomy 241-3
prophylaxis 286
eyelid 150
calcium deposition 103, 248-9
therapy 284
descemetocele 100
cytology 20
corneal ulceration 264-80
Descemet's membrane, glaucoma
diseases of 245-86
causes 264-6
and 342
 acquired noninflammatory
deep corneal ulcers 273-7
desmoplasia 88
disease 248-52
anterior uveitis and 315
dexamethasone 58
 congenital noninflammatory
epithelial 100, 266-8
diabetic cataracts 104, 381, 387
disease 246-8
 pain and 99, 100
diabetic retinopathy 456-7
nonulcerative inflammatory
perforated ulcers 279-80
dichlorphenamide 55, 357
disease 253-64
prophylaxis 270, 271
diclofenac 60
systemic disease rule outs
stromal 100
dipteran larvae 447
493-4
systemic disease rule outs 493
discharge see ocular discharge
ulcerative inflammatory
therapy 52-3, 57, 266-77
 discoid lupus erythematosus 169
disease 264-80
surgery 106-7, 268-70,
distemper 187, 223
see also corneal abscessation;
274-7
chorioretinitis 441
corneal tumors; corneal
viral 270-2
distichiasis 150-3
ulceration; specific
cats 270-1
therapy 151-3
diseases
horses 271-2
diuretics 54-5
drug penetration 41
cotton ball test 35
 carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
edema 71,102-3
creatine phosphokinase (CPK)
54-5, 357
glaucoma and 342
elevation 123
indications for use 54
endothelial
cryoepilation 150
osmotic diuretics 54, 356-7
dystrophy/degeneration 251-2,
cryotherapy
side-effects SS
266
distichiasis 152-3
dorzolamide 55, 357
examination 17
eyelid tumors 176-7
drug administration routes 41-5
foreign bodies 281-2
glaucoma 358-9
glucocorticoids 58
inflammation 82
pannus 258
intracameral 45
masses 282-4
cryptococcosis 120, 210, 313
intraocular 45
dermoids 282-3
crystallins 372-3
retrobulbar injection 45
pseudotumors 283-4
Cushing's disease 266
subconjunctival  44-5
see also corneal tumors
cutaneous metaplasia 86
systemic 45
metabolism 244
Cuterebra larvae 166
topical 41-4
metaplasia 86-7
Cutler-Beard procedure 149, 176
ability to penetrate the
microbiologic cultures 14
cyclo-oxygenase 59
cornea  41
surgery
inhibitors 59-60
application frequency 41
instrumentation 109-10
collagen inserts 43
surgical field preparation
cyclodialysis spatula 110
 continuous and intermittent
106-7
cyclopentolate  51
irrigation 43-4
 transparency 243
cyclophosphamide 61
drug placement 41
506
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
drug administration routes, topical
eosinophilic granuloma 169, 171,
eyelids (continued)
(continwed)
210
swelling 104
excibients of topical drugs 42
eosinophilic keratitis 103, 258-9
taut lid-globe conformation 232
 membrane controlled delivery
eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis  74
see also third eyelid
system 42
eosinophilic myositis 123-4
 packaging of topical
eosinophils 77
facial nerve 146
medications 42
epinephrine 52
feline herpesvirus 187-8, 263
pellets 43
epiphora 230-4
corneal ulceration and 270-1
soft contact lenses 43
clinical signs 232-3
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
vehicle 42
diagnosis 233
317-18, 323, 442
drug-induced disorders 168, 170
therapy 233-4
feline leukemia virus (FeLV) 317,
cataracts 384-5
episcleritis 200, 287-8
318, 323, 442-3
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 223
simple 287
fern poisoning 435
retinal/uveal degeneration 433-5
episclerokeratitis, nodular 287
fibrin clots 103, 325
 dry eye see keratoconjunctivitis sicca
equine herpesvirus 188
fibrinolytic system 80
dyscoria  303
equine motor neuron disease 432
fibrinous inflammation  75
dysplasia 87, 89
equine recurrent uveitis (ERU)
fibrosarcoma 213
chorioretinal 414
319-21
filtering surgery 358
pectinate ligament 
350,351
acute 319
fine needle aspiration (FNA) 118
retinal 87,417-21
causes 320-1
flare in the anterior chamber 344
rod 425
chronic 320
Florida spots 253-4
rod-cone 424-5
diagnosis 323
fluconazole 48
genetic tests 471-2
ethacrynic acid 55
flunixin meglumine 59
tapetal 422
ethylene glycol intoxication 434
fluorescein angiography 35
European College of Veterinary
fluorescein staining 18, 55-6
early retinal degeneration (ERD)
Ophthalmologists (ECVO) 471
fluoroquinolones 46-7
425
euryblepharon i55-6
toxicity 434
ectropion 155, 161-2
 everting mattress sutures 158
flurbiprofen 59
therapy 156, 161-2
examination 12-38
focal pyogranuloma 165, 170
uvea 304
see also specific conditions;
folic acid analogs 61
edema 72
specific techniques
follicles 186
corneal 72, 102-3
excibients of topical drugs 42
follicular conjunctivitis of the third
glaucoma and 342
exophthalmos 12, 102, 117-19
eyelid 209-10
see also chemosis
causes 117
forceps 108, 109-10
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 392
diagnosis 117-18
foreign body 100
Ehrlichia spp. 312, 446
laterality 118
cornea 281-2
Elaeophora schneideri 448
extraocular muscles
third eyelid 211
electro-oculography
35
 agenesis/hypoplasia 119
fracture, orbital 125
electrocautery 152
myositis 124
fundus
electrolysis 152
eyelids
anatomy 405-13
electrophysiologic tests 35
acquired diseases 164-78
bovine and ovine 412-13
electroretinography {ERG) 35,
anatomy 145-7
canine 408-10
426
blood vessels
146-7
equine 411-12
patterned (PERG) 35
fascia 146
feline 410-11
emphysema 129-30
lid margins
147
blindness evaluation 94-6
Encephalitozoon cuniculi 322
ligaments 146
blood-vascular diseases 452-7
endophthalmitis 139-40
muscles 145-6
glaucoma-induced changes
therapy 140
nerves 146
342-3, 435
endothelial dystrophy/degeneration
skin 145
neoplasia 458-9
251-2, 266
blinking 147-8
ophthalmoscopy
24-5
endothelitis 85, 263-4
congenital diseases 148-64
trauma 457-8
enophthalmos 102, 118-19
double eversion 19-20, 184
see also choroid; optic disk;
causes 119
examination 16-17
retina
enrofloxacin 434
function 147
fungal infection
entropion 155, 157-60
lacerations 104, 171-2, 232
anterior uveitis and 313, 318
cicatricial 157
neoplasia 172-8
blepharitis 167, 170
clinical signs 157-8
cat 174
chorioretinitis 445
conformational 157
cow 175
conjunctivitis 195
diagnosis 158
dog 172-4
keratitis 254-6
spastic 157
horse 174-5
therapy 255-6
therapy 158-60
therapy 176-8
see also specific infections
enucleation 135
surgery
furunculosis 165
 glaucoma therapy 362
instrumentation 108-9
eosinophilic conjunctivitis of cats
surgical field preparation
gangliosidosis 250
196-7
106-7
genetic tests 471-2
INDEX
507
gentamicin 47, 363
glycerol 54,356-7
hypersensitivity reactions
glands of Krause and Wolfring 147
GM1-gangliosidosis 429
(continued)
glands of Moll 147
GM2-gangliosidosis 429
type II (cytotoxic)845
glands of Zeiss 147
goblet cells 183
type Ill (immune complex)  85
glaucoma 101, 199
goniodysgenesis 348-50, 351
type IV (cell-mediated/delayed)
anatomy and physiology 337-40
gonioscopy 22, 339-40, 352
85-6
cataracts and 383
 granulomatous inflammation 83-4
hypertension 454-6
 surgery complications 390-1
granulation tissue 82
hyperthermic therapy
177
classification 345-56
granuloma 83-4, 253, 329
hyphema 74, 103
aphakic 353
eosinophilic 169, 171, 210
glaucoma and 352
congenital 345
episcleral 288
iris 308-10
equine 355-6
parasitic 288
 systemic disease rule outs 494
feline 354-5
therapy 50, 103, 309-10
primary closed-angle 348-52
Habronema larvae 166, 170
hypocalcemia 382
primary open-angle 347
Harderian gland 184
hypoplasia
pseudophakic 353
haws 211
chorioretinal  414
secondary 352-4
head shaking in horses 140
extraocular muscles 119 
clinical signs 340-4
hemangioma 203, 212
optic nerve 421-2
buphthalmos 342
hemangiosarcoma 203, 285
hypopyon 103
corneal opacification 342
metastatic 459
hypothyroidism  224
flare in the anterior chamber
hemeralopia 96
344
hemorrhage 28, 103, 122
idoxuridine {IDU) 49, 270
increased intraocular pressure
iris 308-10
imidazoles 48, 255
341
retinal 452
immune-mediated disorders
lenticular changes 344
subconjunctival  200-1
anterior uveitis 315-17, 321
 pupil and iris changes 341
 systemic disease rule outs 493,
chorioretinitis  449-50
retinal and optic nerve
494
conjunctivitis 196
changes 342-3
vitreal 403-4
keratitis 256
va scular congestion 
342
hemostasis 110
skin disorders 168-9
vision loss 343-4
heparin  62
immune-mediated inflammation 
definition 337
Hepatozoon americanum 447
84-6
diagnosis 344, 352
hereditary diseases 471-2
 type I (anaphylactic or allergic
prophylaxis 50, 364
breed predispositions 473-87
hypersensitivity)  84
 retinal degeneration and 435
herpesvirus 187-8, 442
type II {cytotoxic
systemic disease rule outs 494
bovine 188
hypersensitivity)  845
therapy 50, 53-5, 60, 356-64
equine 188
type IlI (immune complex
 absolute glaucoma 362-4
feline 187-8,263
hypersensitivity) 85
 emergency medical therapy
corneal ulceration and 270-1
type IV (cell-mediated/dela yed
356-7
keratitis 256, 263
hypersensitivity)  85-6
 maintenance therapy 357-8
heterochromia 304
 see also inflammation
primary glaucoma  356-61
hirudin 62
immunosuppressive drugs 61-2,
secondary glaucoma 361-2
histamine 80
271, 324-5
surgery 358-61, 362-3
histiocytoma 173-4
immunotherapy 178
see also intraocular pressure
fibrous 283
inclusion cysts 204, 283
globe
histoplasmosis 313, 318
 indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA)
 acquired conditions of 133-6
history 11-12
staining 190
anatomy 113-15
blindness 94
indocyanine green 56
congenital diseases of 131-3
exophthalmos 117
indolent epithelial erosion 266-70
inflammation 139-40
homatropine 51
prophylaxis 270
position 113-14
hordeolum 165, 170
therapy 267-9
changes in 102
Horner's syndrome, lesion
indomethacin 60
trauma 136-9
localization  52
infection
perforating and penetrating
Hotz-Celsus procedure 158-9
 anterior uveitis and 312-14
injuries 136-7,280
hyalitis 404
corneal opacities and 103
 ruptured globe 137-9, 281
hyaloid artery 402
corneal ulceration and 264-5
glucocorticoids 57-9
hyaluronic acid 55, 63, 227-8, 401
 inflammation and 75
contraindications and
hydroxypropylmethylcellulose 63
 postoperative, prophylaxis 112
 nonresponsive conditions
hyperemia 72
see also specific infections
58-9
conjunctival
1 101, 185, 493
infectious bovine
indications for use 58, 228,
hyperglycemia 381
keratoconjunctivitis {IBK)
257-8,324
hyperlipemia 452
277-9
pharmacology 57-8
hyperplasia 87
clinical signs 278
route of therapy 58
hypersensitivity reactions 75, 84-6
enhancing factors 277
side-effects and complications
type I {anaphylactic or allergic)
prophylaxis 279
59,385
84
therapy 278-9
508
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
infectious canine hepatitis {ICH)
ivermectin toxicity  434
lacrimal evaluation 17, 101, 184
262-3
phenol red thread tear test 17
infectious ovine keratoconjunctivitis
keratectomy, superficial 269
Schirmer tear test 15, 184
279
keratic precipitates (KPs) 312
tear break-up time {BUT) 17
inflammation 71
keratinization disorder 168, 170
lacrimal gland 219-21
cataracts and 383
keratitis 73, 103
ectopic 203,236
glaucoma and 352
anterior uveitis and 31s, 321
hypersecretion 232
therapy 362
eosinophilic 103, 258-9
primary tumors 236
globe 139-40
interstitial 261-4
lacrimal punctum 147
retina and choroid 439-49
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and
congenital atresia 230
causes 441-9
226
malplacement 230
clinical signs 439-40
macular 265
micropuncta 230
diagnosis 449
pigmentary 260-1
occlusion 230
vitreous 404
 proliferative keratitis in the cat
lacrimal system 219-36
 see also acute inflammation;
259-60
chronic inflammation;
stromal 73-4, 261-4, 312
diseases of 222-36
 immune-mediated
superficial 253-6
outflow system cannulation 19
inflammation 
chemical 256
lacrimation 230-4
interferon therapy 270.
immune-mediated 256
reflex 232
interstitial keratitis 261-4
infectious 253-6
lagophthalmos 163
intracameral drug administration
mechanical 253
laser therapy
45
parasitic 256
corneal tumors 286
intraocular drug administration 45
punctate 265
cyclophotocoagulation  359-60
intraocular lens {IOL) implants 388,
ulcerative see corneal ulceration
distichiasis 153
390
keratoconjunctivitis, eosinophilic 74
uveal tumors 329
intraocular pressure {IOP)
see also infectious bovine
latanoprost 60, 357
drug effects on 51-5
keratoconjunctivitis {IBK);
side-effects 60
beta blockers 53-4
infectious ovine
lateral canthal ligament, creation
diuretics S4-5
keratoconjuncti vitis
and cutting of 159-60
mydriatics 51
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
laterality
 prostaglandin analogs 60
101,222-30
anterior uveitis 322
increased  341
causes 222-5
conjunctivitis 187
 postoperative 353
clinical signs 225-7
exophthalmos 118
meas urement
diagnosis 227
leishmaniasis 167, 256, 314
tonography 21, 344
keratitis and 256
therapy 170
tonometry 20
prevention 230
lens
see also glaucoma
sicca-related conjunctivitis 196
anatomy 369-72
iridocorneal angle 337-8, 348
therapy 50,61-2,227-30
color changes 11
gonioscopy 22, 339-40
surgery 229-30
diseases of 373-95
iridocyclitis see anterior uveitis
third eyelid gland problems and
acquired diseases 378-95
iridoplegia 307-8
205-7, 224
congenital diseases 373-8
iridorhexis 308
keratomalacia 75
systemic disease rule outs 494
iris
keratopathy
see also cataracts
acquired diseases 304-10
band 248-9
displacement
anatomy 298-9, 300-2
puppy band 246
{luxation/subluxation) 100,
atrophy 305
bullous (corneal hydrops) 273
391-5
color 302
lipid 249-50
anterior luxation 394
changes in 11, 311
striate 252
diagnosis 394
 congenital diseases 303-4
superficial punctate 249
glaucoma and 344, 354,
cysts 305-7
keratotomy, punctate/linear 268-9
361-2
examination 17
ketaconazole 48, 255
 posterior luxation 394
glaucoma and 341
ketamine hydrochloride, retinal
primary 392
hemorrhage and hyphema
toxicity 433
secondary 392-3
308-10
kinins 80
subluxation 394
inflammation 82-3, 310
Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure 161
systemic disease rule outs
see also anterior uveitis
494
neoplasia 326-9
L-lysine 271
therapy
50, 361-2, 395
 pigmentation changes 304-5
lacerations
embryology 369-70
tears 307
conjunctiva 201
examination 17
iritis see anterior uveitis
cornea 280-1
inflammation 83
 irradiation see radiation therapy
eyelids 104, 171-2, 232
nuclear sclerosis 373
irrigation 43-4
iris 307
physiology 372-3
solution 111
third eyelid 210
lens-induced uveitis {LIU)  316
isosorbide 54
lacrimal cyst 236
lenticonus 375
itraconazole 48, 255
lacrimal ductule obstruction 223-4
lentiglobus 375
INDEX
509
 Leptospira spp. (leptospirosis)
metabolic storage disease 250-1
neoplasia (continued)
320-1, 323, 444-5
metaplasia 86-7
conjunctival 201-3
vaccination 325
metastasis 89-90, 328
diagnosis 91, 328
leukemia 452
routes of 91
etiology90
leukocytes 76-9
metastatic hemangiosarcoma 459
fundus 458-9
activation 80
methazolamide
：357
 growth characteristics of tumor
chemotaxis of 79
methotrexate 61
cells 88
levator palpebrae superioris 146
methylnitrosurea, retinal toxicity
morphologic alterations 90-1
lid margins 147
433
orbital 126-9, 459
nonpigmented 204-5
metronidazole 233
third eyelid 212-13
lid plate 108
miconazole 48, 255
see also eyelids; tumor cells;
lid speculum 108
microaneurysm 456-7
tumors
lid trough 147
microbiologic cultures
14, 184
neuritis
ligneous conjunctivitis 197-8
microblepharon  156
optic 441, 449-51
lipemia 452
microphakia 374, 392
retrobulbar 97
lipid keratopathy 249-50
microphthalmos 131, 376
neuromuscular blockade 106
lipid metabolism disorders 430
micropuncta 230
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
lipidoses 429
miosis 302, 310
429-30
lipids in the anterior chamber 103,
miotics 49-51
neutrophils 76-7
326
diagnostic use 50
activation  79
lipogranuloma 197
indications for use 50, 357
nodular fascitis 284
locoweed poisoning 435
pha rmacology
49-50
nodular gra nulomatous
lodoxamide tromethamine 61
side-effects 50-1
episclerokeratitis (NGESK) 283
loupes 16 
mites 166, 170
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
lymphocytes  78
 mononuclear phagocytes 79
drugs {NSAIDs) 59-60, 324
lymphoma 202
Moraxella bovis 277, 278
nutritional deficiencies 382
lymphosarcoma 314-15, 328, 353
motor neuron disease, equine 432
orbital 126
mucin deficiencies 226
obstacle course 35
lysosomal enzyme disorders 429
mucocele, orbital 125
ocular color changes 11, 245
mucolytic agents 228
ocular discharge
 11, 100-1
macroblepharon 155-6
mucomyst 57
conjunctivitis 186
macrophages 79
mucopolysaccharidosis 250-1, 429
evaluation 100-1
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Miller's muscle
146
keratoconjunctivitis sicca  226
118, 323
multifocal retinopathy
428
ocular emergencies 93-4
malar artery 146
multiple ocular colobomas (MOC)
 emergencies that do not threaten
male fern poisoning 435
148,413
sight 104
malignancies see neoplasia; tumors
Mycoplasma 192-3, 279
see also specific emergencies
 malignant cata rrhal fever (MCF)
mycotic infections see fungal
ocular evisceration with implant
263, 443
infection
362-3
mange 166
mydriasis 15-16
ocular fundus see fundus
mannitol 54, 356-7
mydriatics 51-3
ocular pain 11-12, 99-100
preoperative use 105
indications for use 52-3, 324
causes 100
mannosidosis 429
pharmacology 51-2
conjunctivitis 186
mast cell tumor
 adrenergic agents 51-2
glaucoma 342
conjunctival 202
 parasympatholytic agents 51
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 225
of the lid 173
sympathomimetic agents  51-2
evaluation
99
mast cells 77-8
side-effects S53
with exophthalmos
118
masticatory myositis see eosinophilic
 myositis
ocular staining 18-19
myositis
eosinophilic 123-4
fluorescein 18, 55-6
 matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
extraocular 124
indocyanine green 56
inhibitors 56-7, 273
restrictive 124
rose bengal
1 18-19, 56
maze test 35,94
trypan blue 56
 medial canthal ligament 146
nasal folds, large 162
oculomotor nerve 146
medulloepithelioma 328
nasolacrimal ducts 222
ofloxacin 46
Meibomian glands 147, 184
 anomalous 230
Onchocerca spp. 2
256,288,320,
melanoma 202-3, 213, 326-8
 congenital atresia of the nasal
448
epibulbar 284
end 230
opacities 12, 102-4, 245
fundus 458
natamycin 47, 255
blindness and 96
glaucoma and 353
necrosis 75-6
glaucoma 342
therapy 329
necrotizing inflammation  75
lipids in the anterior chamber
 membrana nictitans see third eyelid
needle holders 110
103, 326
membrane controlled drug delivery
neoplasia 87
ocular color changes 11
system 42
anterior uveal 326-9
ophthalmoscopy 24
menace response 34, 94, 147-8
 glaucoma and 353
posterior capsular opacification
meningioma, canine orbital 126
uveitis and 314-15
{PCO)390
510
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
opacities (contirnued)
oscillatory potentials (OPs) 35
phenylbutazone 60
see also cataracts
osmotic diuretics 54, 356-7
phenylephrine 16, 52
ophthalmic examination 12-38
osteosarcoma, multilobular 126
side-effects S3
see also specific conditions;
 oxygen-induced retinopathy 457
photopigments 406
specific technigues
phthisis bulbi 133-4, 364
ophthalmic surgery 105-12
pain see ocular pain
pigmentary keratitis 260-1
anesthesia/sedation  105-6
palpebral nerve block
13
pigmentary uveitis 316
hemostasis 110
pancuronium 106
 pigmentation changes
instrumentation 108-12
pannus 256-8
glaucoma and 354
 conjunctival and corneal
therapy 257-8
iris 304-5
surgery 109-10
panophthalmitis 139-40
 pigmented epithelium (PE) 407,
 lid and third eyelid surgery
therapy 140
417-18
108-9
papilledema 27, 433, 450-1
pilocarpine 228
 storage and cleaning of
systemic disease rule outs 494
pinkeye see infectious bovine
instruments 111
papillitis  27
keratoconjunctivitis
patient positioning 107-8
papilloma 212-13
plasma cell conjunctivitis 210
patient selection 105
viral 173
pneumatosis 129-30
postoperative care 112
paradrine 52
 see also emphysema
surgical field preparation 106-7
paraganglioma 127
polycoria 303
tumor therapy 129, 176
parallax 29, 32
polycythemia 452
see also specific conditions
parasitic infection
polyene antifungals
47-8,255
ophthalmic vein  147
anterior uveitis 314
polymyositis
123
ophthalmoscopy 22-35
blepharitis 166
posterior ca psular opacification
direct 22-9
chorioretinitis 447-8
{PCO} 390
indirect 30-3
conjunctivitis
195-6
 posterior polymorphous dystrophy
lesion location 27-9
keratitis 256
247
optic disk 25, 26-7,409-12
scleritis 288
 posterior segment
disk diameter {DD)  27-8
vitreous 404
 biomicroscopy 38
glaucoma and 342-3
see also specific infections
inflammation 83, 439
inflammation  440
parasympatholytic agents 51
postoperative care 112
see also fundus
side-effects S53
prednisolone 58
optic nerve
paromomycin  47
progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)
atrophy 27,440
(IOd) uouisodsunun pnp puoued
422-31
diseases of 449-51
229-30
age of onset 424
glaucoma and 342-3
parvovirus 442
atypical, in the dog
426
hypoplasia 421-2
patching 325
cataracts and 383
injury 125
 pectinate ligament 339-40
clinical signs 423-4
myelination 26
dysplasia (PLD)
350,351
cone degeneration 425-6
 optic neuritis 441, 449-50
goniodysgenesis
348-50, 351
diagnosis 426
 systemic disease rule outs 494
pedicle graft 149
early retinal degeneration (ERD)
orbicularis oculi muscle 145
pellets 43
425
orbit
pemphigus complex 169
inheritance 424
anatomy 113-14
penetrating injuries 136-7, 280
inherited, in the cat 428-9
cysts 130
perforating injuries 136-7, 280,
 progressive rod-cone
diseases of 116-30
457
degeneration (prcd) 425
acquired disease 120-9
periorbita 113-14, 146
 genetic test 472
clinical signs 116-19
peripheral albinotic spots 417
rod dysplasia (rd) 425
congenital disease 119
peripheral retinal cysts 436
rod-cone dysplasia fred, early-
exploration of 118
 persistent hyperplastic primary
onset (PRA) 424-5
mucocele 125
vitre0us {PHPV) 376, 402-3
genetic tests 471-2
shallow orbit 119
persistent hyperpla stic tunica
 systemic meta bolic disease and
trauma 125
vasculosa lentis {PHTVL) 376,
429-31
see also orbital cellulitis; orbital
402-3
progressive rod-cone degeneration
neoplasia
persistent pupillary membrane
(prcd)425
orbital apex syndrome 130
{PPM) 246-7, 303
genetic test 472
orbital cellulitis 102, 120-3
 persistent tunica vasculosa lentis
prolapse
clinical signs 121
{PTVL} 376
subconjunctival prolapse of
diagnosis 122
petechiae 308
orbital fat 201
therapy 122-3
Peter's anomaly 246-7
third eyelid gland 205-9
orbital neoplasia 126-9, 459
phacoanaphylaxis 316, 449
clinical signs 205-6
clinical signs 127-8
phacoemulsification 386-7,
therapy
206-9
diagnosis 128-9
388-90, 391
uveal 104
therapy_ 129
complications.
 390-1
 proliferative keratitis in the cat
orbitography 118
phagocytosis 79
259-60
ornithinuria 429
phenol red thread tear test 17
proliferative optic neuropathy 451
INDEX
511
proparacaine 56
retinal detachment 25, 40s, 416,
serous inflammation 74
proptosis 102, 134-6
437-8
serum hyperviscosity syndrome 452
therapy 135-6
clinical signs 437-8
sicca-related conjunctivitis 196
enucleation 135
retinal dysplasia and 419-20
silver sulfadiazine 256
replacement of the globe
therapy 438
slit lamps 16, 36-8
135-6
retinal dysplasia 87, 417-21
sodium cromolyn 61
prostaglandin analogs 60
inherited 419-21
sodium fluorescein see fluorescein
side-effects 60
circinate 420
staining
 prostaglandin inhibitors see
focal/geographic 418-20
sodium hyaluronate 63
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
generalized 418
soft contact lenses, drug delivery 43
drugs (NSAIDs)
multifocal  421
solute fluid overload 456
prostaglandins (PG) 59
 retinal pigment epitheliopathy 427
sphincter colli profundus muscle
prothecosis 446
retinoblastoma 459
145
Prototheca 314
retinochoroiditis 439
sphincter iris atrophy 305
 protozoan infection
retinoic acid 228
spindle cell sarcoma 328
anterior uveitis 313-14
retinopathy
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) 88,
blepharitis 167
diabetic 456-7
89
chorioretinitis 446-7
hypertensive 454
conjunctival 201-2
pseudotumors 283-4, 329
multifocal  428
corneal  284-6
ptosis 163-4
nutritional 432-3
eyelid 174, 175
pulmonary carcinoma 459
oxygen-induced 457
therapy 176-8
pupillary changes 
12
retractor angularis oculi muscle 145
third eyelid 212
glaucoma 341
retro-orbital cellulitis 120-3
staining see ocular staining
 pupillary light reflex (PLR) 14-15,
retrobulbar drug injection 45
staphyloma 286-7
94, 300-2
retrobulbar neuritis 97
stationary night blindness 426-7
puppy band keratopathy 246
retroillumination 38
genetic test 472
 purine analogs 61
Rhodococcus equii 321
strabismus 132-3
pyoderma 166
rhodopsin 406
strabismus hook 110
rickettsial infection 446
striate keratopathy 252
radiation therapy
rods 405-7
stromal iris atrophy 305
cataracts and 385
dysplasia {rd) 425
stromal keratitis 73-4, 261-4,
eyelid tumors 177
 progressive rod-cone
312
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and
 degeneration ( prcd) 425
herpesvirus stromal keratitis
225
genetic test 472
263
orbital tumors 129
rod-cone dysplasia
424-5
Strongylus vulgaris 321
pannus 258
 genetic tests 471-2
subconjunctival drug administration
radiography 117, 323
rose bengal staining 18-19, 56
44-5
restraint 12-13, 106
rubeosis iridis  312
subconjunctival hemorrhage 200-1
restrictive myositis 124
ruptured globe 137-9, 281
subconjunctival prola pse of orbital
retina 405-7
fat 201
blood vessels 2s-7, 407,
sarcoid 175
subpalpebral lavage (SPL) 43-4
409-13
sarcoma, spindle cell 328
 sudden acquired retinal degeneration
diseases of 413-49
Schiotz tonometer 20
{SARD) 96-7, 436-7
acquired diseases 422-31
Schirmer tear test (STT) 15, 184
sunburn 168, 170
 congenital diseases 413-22
scissors 109
superciliaris muscle 145
drug/toxin-induced retinal
sclera 115
superficial keratitis see keratitis
degeneration 433-5
anatomy 241-3
superficial punctate keratopathy
 glaucoma-induced retinal
diseases of 286-8
249
degeneration 342-3, 435
systemic disease rule outs
superficial temporal artery 146
inflammation  439-49
493-4
 suppurative (purulent) inflammation
 nutritional retinopathies
masses 282-4
75
432-3
rupture 281
surgery see ophthalmic surgery
peripheral degeneration
see also cornea
suture material 111
436
scleritis 200, 287-8
suture technique 111
sudden acquired retinal
deep non-necrotizing 287
sutures
degeneration (SARD}
necrotizing 287-8
corneal 274-5
96-7, 436-7
superficial non-necrotizing 287
everting mattress 158
 systemic disease rule outs
sclerocornea 246
symblepharon, acquired 232
494
scopolamine 51
 sympathomimetic agents 51-2
see also progressive retinal
seborrhea 168, 170
side-effects 53
atrophy {PRA);
sedation
synchisis scintillans 404
retinal detachment; retinal
for examination 12-13
synechiae 311
dysplasia; retinopathy
for ophthalmic surgery 105-6
syneresis 404
 ophthalmoscopy 25
 self-mutilation prevention 112
systemic drug administration 45
see aiso fundus
serology 323
systemic lupus erythematosus 169
512
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
T-lymphocytes 78
tra uma (continued)
viral infection {contimued)
 delayed hypersensitivity and
fundus 457-8
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and
85-6
glaucoma and 352
223
tacrolimus 62, 229
globe 136-9
see also specific infections
tapetal dysplasia 422
 perforating and penetrating
viral papilloma 173
tapetum 407, 408-13
injuries 136-7, 280
viscoelastic agents 62-3
tarsus 147
ruptured globe 137-9
side-effects 63
taurine deficiency 430-1
hyphema and 103
vision 115-16
tear break-up time (BUT)
17
inflammation and 75
 color vision 405
tear production 219-22
orbital 125
evaluation 34-5, 94
wicking of tears 232
 see aiso lacerations
visual cliff 35
see also epiphora; lacrimation
triage 93-4
visual deficiency 11, 118
tear tests see lacrimal evaluation
trichiasis 153-4
glaucoma and 343-4
tears see lacerations
trichomegaly 155
see also blindness
Tenon's capsule 183
trifluorothymidine (TFT) 49, 270
visual evoked potentials {VEPs) 35
tetracycline 57, 233
trigeminal nerve 146
visual placing 34-5
Thelazia 195-6
tropicamide 16, 51
vitamin A deficiency 432-3
thiabendazole 48, 255
trypan blue 56
cattle 432-3
thiamin deficiency 431
tumor cells
dog 432
third eyelid
embolization 89-90
vitamin E deficiency 427, 432
 acquired diseases of 20s-10
extravasation 90
vitreal degeneration  404
anatomy 183-4
growth characteristics 88
vitrectomy 140
congenital diseases of 204-5
invasion 89
vitreous
cysts 212
proliferation 91
anatomy 401-2
eversion 204
 see also neoplasia
centesis 36, 323
double eversion 19-20, 184
tumors 88-9
diseases of 402-4
follicular conjunctivitis 209-10
benign 88
acquired 403-4
foreign bodies 211
corneal 284-6
congenital 402-3
infectious causes of inflammation
growth of 91
degenerative 404
210
iris and ciliary body
326-9
inflammation  404
lacerations 210
lacrimal gland 236
primary 402
neoplasia 212-13
malignant 88-9
secondary 402
protrusion
102, 104,205,
orbital 126-9
tertiary 402
211-12
see also neoplasia; specific
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
surgical instrumentation 108-9
tumors
syndrome 169, 316,448
third eyelid flap 269
third eyelid gland 219-21
ulcers see corneal ulceration
water loading 344
eversion 104
ultrasonography 36, 118
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and
uvea 298
xerophthalmia see
205-7, 224
drug/toxin-induced degeneration
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
prolapse 205-9
433-5
removal 224
ectropion  304
thrombocytopenia 452
neoplasia 326-9
timolol 357
glaucoma and 353
tissue glue 274
see also ciliary body; iris
tissue necrosis
75-6
uveal cysts 353-4
tissue plasminogen activator 62,
uveal prolapse 104
324
uveal tract inflammation 82-3
Tono-Pen 21
uveitis see anterior uveitis;
tonography 21, 344
inflammation
tonometry 20-1
uveoscleral flow 329
topical drugs see drug
administration routes; specific
vascular congestion, with glaucoma
drugs
342
toxin-induced retinal/uveal
vascular permea bility 72-3
degeneration 433-5
venograms 118
Toxocara 447
viral culture 189-90
Toxoplasma gondii (toxoplasmosis)
viral infection
313-14, 318-19, 323, 393
chorioretinitis 441-3
retinochoroiditis  446-7
conjunctivitis 187-90
trauma 104
therapy 190
anterior uveitis and 314
corneal ulceration 270-2
cataracts and 383
cats 270-1
conjunctiva 104, 200-3
horses 271-2
eyelid 104, 171-2
keratitis 256