SMALL ANIMAL
Endoscopy
3rd
Edition
Todd R. TamS, DVM, DACVIM
 Chief Medical Officer
VCA Antech, Inc.
Los Angeles, California
Clarence A. Rawlings, DvM, PhD, DAcVS
Professor Emeritus
 College of Veterinary Medicine
 The University of Georgia
 Athens, Georgia 
ELSEVIER
MOSBY
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
ELSEVIER
MOSBY
3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri 63043
SMALL ANIMAL ENDOSCOPY,THIRD EDITION
ISBN: 978-0-323-05578-9
Copyright @ 201l, 1999, 1990 by Mosby, Int., aun affliate of Elsevier Int.
 No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center
and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other
than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this feld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden
our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become 
necessary.
 Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and
using anyiformaton,ethods,comoundorexperiments describeherein.Inusing suchnformatin
ormethodsthyhulbindlfthewaftyandthsafetyftherndingatiewhm
they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identifed, readers are advised to check the most
current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to be
administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and
contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own experience and knowledge of
theirpatientstmakeagnosestetemindosagesndtheest teatment foreachindividual ptint
and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume
aaau k inod jo au e e ladod rosuad o aepopenu uey aqe ue
 or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the 
material herein.
ISBN: 978-0-323-05578-9
Vice President and Publisher: Linda Duncan
Publisher: Penny Rudolph
Senior Developmentat Editor: Shelly Stringer
Publishing Services Manager: Julie Eddy
Senior Project Manager: Laura Loveall
Designer: Teresa McBryan
Working togcthcr to grow
libraries in developing countries
Printed in the United States
www.elsevier.com |www.bookaid.org
www.sabre.org
BOOK AID
ELSEVIER
 Sabre Foundation
Last digitis the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
International
Contributors
Joseph W. Bartges, DVM, PhD, DACVIM,
Michael G. Dearmin, DVM, MS, DACVS
Albert E. Jergens, DVM, PhD, DACVIM 
DACVN
Staff Surgeon
Professor
Professor of Medicine and Nutrition
Sierra Veterinary Specialists
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Carson City, Nevada.
CVM, lowa State University
The University of Tennessee
Ames, lowa.
Knoxville, Tennessee
Stephen J. Divers, BVetMed, DZooMed,
Staff Internist
The Acree Endowed Chair of Small Animal
DACZM, DECZM, FRCVS
Lloyd Veterinary Medical Center
Research
 Professor of Zoological Medicine
Ames, lowa.
The University of Tennessee
Department of Small Animal Medicine and
Knoxville, Tennessee
Surgery
Susan E. Johnson, DVM, MS, DACVIM
 University of Georgia.
Associate Professor, Service Head of Small
Allyson C. Berent, DVM, DACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine
Animal Internal Medicine 
Interventional Radiology and Endoscopy
Athens, Georgia.
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Services
 The Ohio State University
Internal Medicine
Peter H. Eeg, BSc, DVM
Columbus, Ohio
The Animal Medical Center
Director
Associate Professor
New York, New York
 Small Animal Services/Laser Medicine and
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Surgery
Veterinary Medical Center
Christopher J. Chamness, DVM
 Poolesville Veterinary Clinic LLC
Companion Animal Hospital 
 Director of International Marketing
Poolesville, Maryland
Columbus, Ohio
Veterinary Department
Karl Storz GmbH & Co.KG
Lynetta Freeman, DVM, MS, DACVS, MBA
Michael S. Leib, DVM, MS, DACVIM
 Tuttlingen, Germany
Associate Professor of Small Animal Surgery
C.R. Roberts Professor Small Animal Medicine
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Virginia Maryland Regional College of
Lynette K. Cole, DVM, MS, DACVD
Purdue University
Veterinary Medicine
Associate Professor of Dermatology
School of Veterinary Medicine
Virginia Tech
Veterinary Clinical Sciences 
West Lafayette, Indiana
Blacksburg, Virginia
The Ohio State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
John C. Huhn, DVM, MS
Phillipp D. Mayhew, BVMS, MRCVS,
 Columbus, Ohio
Director
DACVS
Veterinary Clinical Support
Assistant Professor of Small Animal Surgery
Autumn P. Davidson, DVM, MS, DACVIM
 Animal Health
Department of Surgical and Radiological
Clinical Professor
Covidien
Sciences
Department of Medicine and Epidemiology
Mansfield, Massachusetts 
School of Veterinary Medicine
 School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis 
Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital
 Randy Hutchison, DVM
Davis, California.
University of California, Davis
Owner
Davis, California
 Animal Clinic Northview
Nathan A. Miller, DVM, DACVS
 North Ridgeville, Ohio
Staff Surgeon
Michael J. Day, BSc, BVMS (Hons), PhD,
Santa. Cruz Veterinary Hospital
 DSc, DECVP, FASM, FRCPath, FRCVS
Santa. Cruz, California.
Professor of Veterinary Pathology
University of Bristol
School of Clinical Veterinary Science
Langford, North Somerset
United Kingdom
vi
CONTRIBUTORS
Eric Monnet, DVM, PhD, FAHA, DACVS,
David K. Saylor, VMD
Craig B. Webb, PhD, DVM, DACVIM
DECVS
Senior Surgeon
Assistant Professor
 Professor
Medical Director
Clinical Sciences 
Clinical Sciences
VCA Veterinary Referral Associates
Colorado State University
Colorado State University
Gaithersburg, Maryland 
Fort Collins, Colorado
Fort Collins, Colorado
Robert G. Sherding, DVM, DACVIM
Jacqueline Whittemore, DVM, PhD,
Phillip A. Padrid, DVM
Professor of Internal Medicine
DACVIM
Associate Professor of Molecular Medicine
Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Veterinary
Assistant Professor of Medicine
University of Chicago
 Medical Center
Small Animal Clinical Sciences 
Pritzker School of Medicine
 The Ohio State University
University of Tennessee 
Chicago. Illinois 
Columbus, Ohio
Knoxville, Tennessee
Southwest Regional Medical Director
Veterinary Centers of America.
 Donna J. Spector, BS, DVM, DACVIM
Michael D. Willard, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Owner, Chief Medical Officer
Professor
Associate Professor
SpectorDVM Consulting
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
 Small Animal Medicine
Deerfield, llinois
Texas A&M University
The Ohio State University
College Station, Texas
Columbus, Ohio
David R. Stoloff, DVM, MS, DACVS
Research Fellow
Jarod E. Williams, DVM, DACVIM
John T. Payne, DVM, MS, DACVS
Ethicon, Inc.
Internist 
Staff Surgeon/Owner
Somerville, New Jersey
Soft Tissue Surgery
 Surgery Department
VCA Veterinary Referral Associates
Pittsburgh Veterinary Specialty and
David C. Twedt, DVM, DACVIM
Gaithersburg, Maryland
Emergency Center
 Professor
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
 Clinical Sciences
Colorado State University
MaryAnn G. Radlinsky, DVM, MS, DACVS
 Fort Collins, Colorado
Associate Professor
University of Georgia
 Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
 Athens, Georgia
Preface
The third edition continues the initial goal of Small Anima!
and that the minimally invasive procedure is either supe-
Endoscopy; it provides a comprehensive reference work for
rior to or likely to be superior to traditional and accepted
 veterinarians and their staff that encompasses all aspects of
techniques. Descriptions of such procedures are included
 endoscopic diagnostic and treatment maneuvers for canine,
in this textbook to assist both developing and more experi-
feline, and exotic patients. As with the publication of the sec-
enced endoscopic surgeons. Because of the highly advanced
 ond edition, the third edition is expanded so that this text
technical aspects of endoscopic surgery and the new range
returns to being the most comprehensive for the compan-
of skills to be developed, most novices that are not in resi-
ion animal practice. The largest area of expansion is rigid
dency training programs participate in “hands-on" courses,
endoscopy with most chapters being two to three times their
 and many have an experienced minimall-invasive surgeon
 size in the second edition. Since the second edition was pub-
teach in their practice. This demonstrates that minimally-
lished in 1999, many rigid endoscopy treatments have been
invasive surgery can be performed in their practice/hospital
 developed and are now standard in many practices commit-
 and convinces the entire staffthat endoscopic surgery is prac
ted to performing endoscopy. Some of the innovative clini-
fical and frequently preferred. Thousands of veterinarians
cians, who both developed techniques and are authors, were
have attended “hands-on" endoscopy courses. Veterinarians
not even veterinarians in 1999. Despite the development of a
large list of new procedures, many ofthese endoscopy proce-
tice frequently state that endoscopy has increased their sense
dures are being performed in general small animal practices
of satisfaction in daily practice and the quality of patient
as well as by specialists. Many of the endoscopy advances
care they are able to provide. They like the ability to see the
and their applications have occurred in private practice,
inside of the body in living color in a quicker and more eff-
rather than academia. To develop endoscopic capabilities
cient approach than is possible with other common imag-
 in any practice, all that is required is dedication to achieve
 ing modalities. Examinations and treatments done through
needed skills, identification of patients with indications for
natural orifices or through small incisions are also much
endoscopy, appropriate equipment, and the ability to prop-
more attractive to clients and staff, confirming their recogni-
erly apply equipment and skills to perform the procedures.
tion that less trauma is better.
 The advantages of using endoscopy in patients are that the
The present and future are exciting times to be involved
minimally invasive approach reduces trauma, postopera-
 in developing endoscopy and endoscopic surgery. So much
tive pain, and recovery time. In addition, if one is unable to
has already been done in the experimental laboratories and
human medicine/surgery that is applicable to our animal
can be converted to the traditional, more invasive proce-
patients. There are many opportunities to collaborate with
dure with the only disadvantage being the longer anesthesia
human and research specialists in order to improve our
required to do both procedures.
patient care. Endoscopy is a real frontier for the innovative
Endoscopy and endoscopic, or minimally invasive, sur-
clinician committed to providing better care for their patients.
 gery are some of the most useful tools for diagnosis and
There are many opportunities to develop and apply new tech-
treatment in small animal medicine. Endoscopy affords
niques, to report case applications, to conduct prospective
the clinician a minimally invasive method to examine all of
studies using new procedures, and to better define the indica-
the body cavities and orifices. Routine procedures include
tions and contraindications for endoscopy in practice.
examination of the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract,
upper and lower airways, urogenital tract, abdominal cavity
■ ORGANIZATON
(laparoscopy), thoracic cavity (thoracoscopy), joint spaces
(arthroscopy), and external and middle ear (video-otoscopy).
The primary goal of Small Animal Endoscopy is to teach.
In addition, the experienced endoscopist may need to exam-
The third edition uses the same systematic approach of
ine other areas such as the prepuce, fistula tracts, and areas
viewing the inside of the body while providing practical
such as the biliary tract and renal pelvis during traditional
information about the role of endoscopy. Each author was
surgeries. When minimally invasive (endoscopic) proce-
instructed to provide information on patient indications/
dures are developed, it is essential that these procedures be
contraindications, instrumentation needed to perform the
applied to conditions needing either diagnosis or therapy
procedure, patient evaluation and preparation, the procedure
vii
vil·PREFACE
from access to completion, potential intraoperative problems
· Chapter 9, “Endoscopic Placement of Gastrostomy
including problem solving and correction, care and potential
uo iaideuo papuedxa ue si saqn auoisouniaf pue
 problems after the procedure, and monitoring that is appro-
endoscopy-guided placement of feeding tubes.
 priate following the procedure. Selected chapters include an
· Marked expansion in Chapter 15, “Laparoscopy." Some
“Atlas" section. The “Atlas" sections begin with a series of
of the new procedures include gastropexy (preventive and
 photographs of normal appearances, and abnormal findings 
 treatment), enterostomy tube placement, cryptorchid cas-
have been grouped by type of disorder (e.g., inflammatory,
tration, ovariohysterectomy, ovariectomy, cystopexy for
motility, neoplastic). Additional Atlas features are on the web-
retroflexed bladder in perineal hernia, cystoscopic calculi
site, especially techniques and cases with videos to highlight
and polyp removal, colopexy for recurrent rectal prolapse,
key points.
gastrostomy for foreign body removal, attenutation of por-
tosystemic shunts, adrenalectomy, and cholecystectomy.
■ CONTRIBUTORS
 mally invasive approach with sufcient traditional maneu-
Our selection of contributors was critical; they had to be
vers to simplify endoscopic procedures for the novice.
accomplished and actively performing the endoscopic pro-
cedures that they were asked to author. Many are the innova-
 many new treatments such as pericardial resection for peri-
 tors of the procedures, and it is within their clinical practice
cardial effusion, lung lobectomy, correction of persistent
expertise. Most are co-workers, collaborators, former resi-
right arotic arch, thoracic duct ligation for chylothorax, and
dents, and co-instructors in endoscopy classes. The con-
 management of persisting pneumothorax and hydrothorax.
tributors operate in private practice, academia, and industry
 Chapter 17, “Cystoscopy," has been expanded with new
with a representation for both specialists and general small
approaches to managing urinary calculi and ectopic
animal veterinarians. We can directly vouch for their exper-
ureter(s). This chapter should change your approach to
tise and enthusiasm for performing endoscopy. Some sec-
calculi disease.
tions (such as, arthroscopy and exotic animal endoscopy)
■ Chapter 18, “Vaginoscopy and Transcervical Catheriza-
could have been much larger, and the contributors were cer-
tion in the Bitch,” describes using scopes to diagnose
tainly capable and wanted to do so. Our goals included being
reproductive disease and especially for transcervical
efficient to provide useful material for the price of the book
insemination in standing and conscious dogs.
for most readers, and at times we needed to edit sufficiently
■ Chapter 19, “Rhinoscopy," has been expanded with a new
to provide an introduction to how and what could be done.
 approach to nasal cancer.
 For arthroscopy, we encourage the beginning arthroscopist
 Chapter 20, “Otoscopy," is a new chapter with contri-
who desires to further develop their skills to purchase Small
butions by a dermatologist, internist, and surgeon. New
Animal Arthroscopy by Brian Beale.
treatments are included for external and middle ear
disease, including both dogs and cats.
 FEATURES OF THE THIRD EDITION
■
 Expansion of the number of species and procedures in
Significant additions have been made in the third edition
Chapter 22, “Exotic Pets."
while maintaining the strong features of the earlier editions.
■
 Exam room discussion tips and other marketing tools to
Specific features in the third edition include:
increase the use of endoscopy and endoscopic treatments
 Over 1,0o0 color illustrations are included with many as
are included in Chapter 23, “Marketing Endoscopic
 original medical art and improved endoscopic images
Services in the Clinic," and with several comments in
using newer digital capture devices.
other chapters.
 aao e s osodos, e rd
 Continued development of the traditional application of
dated discussion on management of esophageal strictures.
flexible endoscopes for examination of the GI and respira-
 Chapter 7, “Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal
tory tracts. In addition to its widely accepted clinical appli-
cation, use of flexible GI endoscopes for Natural Orifice
retrieval of foreign bodies from the GI tract utilizing
 Translumenal Endoscopic Surgery (NOTES) to perform
flexible endoscopes and ancillary grasping instruments.
minimally invasive abdominal surgery is included in
 There are newer instruments that improve our abilities to
Chapter 24, “New Technologies on the Horizon."
remove foreign bodies via endoscopy.
Chapter 8, “Endoscopic Biopsy Specimen Collection and
WEBSITE
Histopathologic Considerations," includes updates on
sample procurement from the GI tract, principles ofinter-
 pretation of samples, and collaborative efforts in the pro-
fession to enhance consistency in interpretation among
pathologists. Chapter 15, “Laparoscopy," includes a dis-
The companion website includes downloadable discharge
cussion on samples obtained via rigid endoscopy.
instructions for many of the procedures included in the text.
PREFACE■
ix
High-quality videos and animations present content
Additional cases can be reviewed by visiting the website,
s  n   p  n 
www.vet.uga.edu/mis.
looking at illustrations and reading text. The videos feature
isq pue u nou pu us un nonosd
Todd R.Tams
endoscopy techniques. These are important as endoscopic
Clarence A. Rawlings
surgeons begin to expand their surgical treatments.
 Each of the laparoscopy and cystoscopy case studies on
the website is presented as a PowerPoint presentation with
videos highlighting important aspects of each case.
Acknowledgments
We are indebted to the contributors. They are experienced
New illustrations were provided by illustrators and
and highly competent clinicians with expertise in the areas
photographers at the University of Georgia, particularly
presented in their chapters. This expertise has been gained in
Kip Carter and Chris Herron, and also Elsevier. Ms. Allison
private practice, academic practice, and industry. We thank
Wright also provided illustrations during her time at the
them sincerely for their willingness to share their expertise
 University of Georgia and as an independent consulta nt.
and to tolerate our editing. They are also excellent teachers
We offer special thanks to the Elsevier team, Penny
and the reader would be advised to learn from them by read-
 Rudolph, Publisher; Shelly Stringer, Senior Developmental
ing this book and attending lectures and courses taught by
 Editor; and Laura Loveall, Senior Project Manager.
them. We have the greatest respect for their contributions to
the profession, their patients, and clients. We also treasure
the endoscopic nurturing and advice from our “unofficial"
editor, Dr. Christopher Chamness. He participated during
the development of the table of contents and production of
thetext.
Xi
Endoscopic Instrumentation and
Documentation for Flexible and
Rigid Endoscopy
Christopher J. Chamness
ost endoscopic instrumentation is produced for human
fiberoptic endoscope, the image is carried from the distal tip
medicine and surgery. There are literally thousands of prod-
of the endoscope to the eyepiece via bundles of optical glass
ucts designed for every possible application of endoscopy in
fbers. In a true video endoscope, the image is transmitted
people. From this overwhelming array of sometimes cost-
electronically to a video monitor from the distal tip of the
prohibitive choices, the savvy veterinary practitioner must
endoscope where it is “sensed" by a charge-coupled device
carefully select the most versatile products that provide an
(CCD) chip.
effcacious solution to the medical and surgical challenges
Video imaging offers distinct advantages in terms of
best addressed by a minimally invasive approach. This chap-
operator comfort, client relations, teaching, and documen-
ter presents a general and practical overview of the most
tation. Video imaging also enables the endoscopist to work
popular flexible and rigid instrumentation—-its proper care,
more effectively with any assistants who are helping with
economic implications, and common applications in veteri-
the procedure. For these reasons, it is advised that all prac-
nary medicine.
fices performing endoscopy have at least some type of video
imaging capability, as will be described later on.
■ ENDOSCOPE SYSTEM
The ability to view the endoscopic image on a video
monitor and record or print this information is not unique
The endoscopy imaging chain includes a light source, light-
to
video endoscopes. Indiret video endoscopy can be
transmitting cable, endoscope, camera, and monitor (Figure
accomplished by attaching an endoscopic CCD video cam-
1-1). Each component is essential, and the resulting endo-
era to the eyepiece of a fberscope or rigid endoscope (see
 u s sem a e pooi se a o o  sido
"Endoscopic Imaging Systems" later in this chapter, Figure
chain. On many flexible endoscopes, the light-transmitting
1-25). Although true video endoscopes are preferred for
cable is permanently attached to the endoscope and has a con-
superior visualization in gastrointestinal endoscopy, CCD
nector that plugs directly into the light source (Figure 1-2).
video cameras are still necessary for use with rigid endo-
Numerous accessories and ancillary instruments may
scopes (e.g-, laparoscopes and arthroscopes), as well as
be added to the basic endoscope system. This equipment
smaller diameter fiberscopes. Fortunately, the combination
enhances functionality, diagnostic or therapeutic capabil-
 of a good quality video camera and fberoptic endoscope can
ity, and documentation of findings. Accessories may include
 provide very good images. The smallest flexible video endo-
various sheaths and instruments for biopsy, grasping aspira-
scopes currently available for medical use are approximately
tion, fluid infusion, cytologic sampling, electrosurgery, and
 5 or 6 mm in outer diameter, depending on chip technology
laser surgery, pumps for suction, insufflation, and irrigation;
and mechanical functions, such as channel size and deflec-
and image management systems for recording, printing,
tion capability. Until the technologic limitations on the
and digital storage or transmission of still photographs and
miniaturization of CCD chips are overcome, the production
video.
of very small diameter video endoscopes is not feasible.
Although fiberscopes are less expensive than video endo-
 FLEXIBLE ENDOSCOPES
scopes, the cost ofthe latter has recently come down and the
image quality of video endoscopes is far superior to that of
The two basic types of flexible endoscopes are the fiberscope
fberscopes (Figure 1-3). Because the image produced by a
and the video endoscope. The difference between the two
video endoscope is not fiberoptic, it will never contain the
is in the method of sensing and transmitting images. In a
honeycomb pattern or broken fibers seen as black dots in
3
4
PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
Video cables
 Light source 
Camera CCU
日
14617
apinb
cable
Monitor
Endoscope
Camera head
Figure 1-1 Endoscopy imaging chain begins with a light source
and ends with a monitor. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH @
Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Hgure 1-3 A, Video endoscopic image of a gastric biopsy site with
an average amount of bleeding after sample procurement (center
of feld on a rugal fold). B, Fiberoptic image (older model scope
with compromised image and broken fbers).
Figure 1-2 Multipurpose flexible video endoscope with an outer
Table 1-1 Features of Fiberscopes versus Vide0
diameter of 9 mm and working length of 140 cm. The umbilical
Endoscopes
cord has a connector (far right) that attaches directly to the
light source with an integrated air pump for insufflation. ( Photo
courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH  Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Feature
Fiberscope
Video endoscope
 mage quality
poo5
Excellent
a fiberoptic image. The features of fberscopes and video
Broken fibers seen Likely over time
N/A (image is electronic.
 endoscopes are compared in Table 1-1.
as "black dots"
not fiberoptic)
 Flexible endoscopes are available in diameters ranging
1503
Moderate
High
from 14 mm to less than 1 mm. Most flexible scopes greater
Diarmeters
Wide range
Smaller diameters not 
than 2 mm in diameter are equipped with an accessory chan-
available
available
available*
nel and a deflectable tip. The working channel is the section
Video capability
 Requires attachable Integral
of the endoscope through which ancillary instruments like
charge coupled
biopsy forceps (Figure 1-4) are advanced into the patient.
device (CCD)
Because of their versatility, the most popular endoscopes in
camera
small animal practice are gastroscopes, which have four-way
tip deflection. The tip's two-plane deflection capability (i.e.
*Due to limitations on chip miniaturiza tion.
up, down, left, and right) is crucial to the successful navi-
 gation of the gastrointestinal tract, particularly in the most
cats for such procedures as bronchoscopy, rhinoscopy, and
challenging maneuvers through the pylorus and ileocolic
urethrocystoscopy. Consequently, the second and third
 orifice. A gastroscope less than 9 mm in diameter and at
most popular flxible endoscopes in small animal practice
least 130 cm in length is suitable for both upper and lower
are small-diameter fiberscopes that are used primarily for
gastrointestinal endoscopy in most cats and dogs, as well as
endoscopy of the airways and urinary tract (Figure 1-5).
 tracheobronchoscopy in medium and large size dogs.
These smaller diameter fiberscopes, ranging from 2 mm
Because most gastroscopes have an outer diameter of
to 6 mm, generall have limited tip deflection capability
7.8 mm or greater, they cannot be used in smaller dogs and
(one- way or two-way) and smaller working channels.
CHAPTER 1
 Endoscopic Instrumentation and Documentation for Flexible and Rigid Endoscopy
Biopsy forceps
Snares
A
Round jaws
35 mm
Y
Large
Round jaws with pin
人
30 mm
Oval jaws
 Medium
 Oval jaws with pin 
A
Grasping forceps
30 mm
Hexagonal
Aligator jaws
 Alligator jaws, round 
Universal (spoon-shaped, serrated jaws)
25 mm
 Alligator jaws with teeth
40 mm
60 mm
Rat tooth
Crescent
Two-prong. 1 x 2 teeth 
Cytology brush
A
S
Two-prong, 2 x 2 teeth 
With protective tube
Two-prong, serrated
Coagulating electrode
 Unipolar or bipolar
Three-prong, sharp
Injection/Aspiration needle
 Three-prong, blunt 
With retractable tip
Dislodger
Scissors
With four-wire basket
Fgure 1-4 Flexible instruments for use with endoscopes that have an accessory channel.
 bundles; channels for suction, irrigation, and insufflation;
Basic Construction and Handling
four deflection cables; and several layers of protective mate-
 A flexible endoscope has three major sections (Figure 1-6):
rials along the entire length of the tube. All of these compo-
the insertion tube, the handpiece, and the umbilical cord.
nents must be contained within an insertion tube that has
 Construction of the insertion tube is the most complex
the smallest possible diameter, largest possible accessory
and technically challenging aspect of gastroscope design
channel, and maximal tip deflection capabilities. Because 
because this portion of the instrument contains fiberoptic
of the complexity of construction and the fragile nature
6
■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
endoscopes designed for gastrointestinal use (gastroscopes)
are equipped with four-way angulation (i.e., up, down, left,
 and right), which allows the endoscopist to deflect the tip in
any direction by coordinating the simultaneous movement
of the up/down and left/right control knobs. Two-plane
deflection capability is essential for a thorough endoscopic
examination of the gastrointestinal tract. The degree of tip
deflection varies among models, but complete retroflexion
(180 degrees or greater) in at least one direction is desirable.
A close-up inspection of the distal tip of an insertion
tube shows the cross-sectional location of several of the
internal structures (Figure 1-6, see “Distal Tip" box). The
A
insufflation channel allows room air to be blown into the
 gastrointestinal tract, distending the viscus and enabling
clearer and more thorough examination of the mucosa.
The water jet exiting the irrigation nozzle is directed over
the distal objective lens to remove debris and mucus when
necessary. The accessory channel is used for suction of air
and fluids, as well as the passage of flexible instruments
 into the patient (see Figure 1-4). Because of this fact, the
effectiveness of suction is greatly reduced when an instru-
ment is inside the channel.
The handpiece contains the air/water and suction valves;
deflection control knobs and locks; the opening to the
accessory channel; and, in some models, programmable
buttons that control various functions such as light gain and
B
image freeze. The handpiece of a fiberscope also contains the
Figure 1-5 A, Small animal bronchofiberscope, 5.2-mm diameter,
 eyepiece with its diopter adjustment ring, for direct viewing
pe addn oq ry ans si adosoq s 'yuan -
without video. The handpiece is designed to be held in the
left hand (see Figure 1-6, B). The index finger controls suc-
scope, 3-mm diameter, 100-cm working length. This endoscope is
ideal for urethrocystoscopy in male dogs and can also be used for
tion by fully depressing the first valve. The air/water valve
respiratory endoscopy. (Photos courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co.
can be controlled by the index or middle finger. Insufflation
KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
is activated when the fingertip is placed on the hole in the
top of the valve without depressing it, and irrigation is acti-
vated when the valve is fully depressed. The thumb ofthe left
of some components, damage to the insertion tube is the
hand is used to control the up/down deflection knob, which
is the larger, inner knob. The right hand controls the leff/
Most insertion tube damage can be prevented by observing the
right deflection knob (smaller, outer knob), inserts channel
following:
accessories, and advances the insertion tube into the patient,
1. Always handle the insertion tube carefully, avoid sharp
applying rotational torque when necessary. Excessive torque
bends, tight coiling, or accidental striking of the tube 
should not be applied to the insertion tube, and care should
against hard surfaces.
be taken to ensure that deflection locks are in the unlocked
 2. Always use a mouth speculum when passing the tube
 position before deflection knobs are used. The deflection
through the oral cavity of a patient.
locks are the two levers that lock each of the deflection
 3. Never force instruments or pass foreign objects through
knobs in position. Theoretically, they could be used to lock
the accessory channel (see Figure 1-7).
the deflected tip in a desired position during a procedure;
 If these rules are consistently followed, the life span of an
however, in practice they are rarely used, and it is generally
a ue sida pue paoid ais aq u adossou
recommended that they be left in the unlocked position.
minimized.
(More information on the handling and maneuvering of
 The last several centimeters of an endoscope with tip
 gastrointestinal endoscopes is provided in Chapter 2.)
deflection capability is called the bending section. Controlled
 The umbilical cord contains the portion of the fiberscope
by the deflection knob(s) in the handpiece, this portion of
that connects to the light source, including connectors for
the insertion tube may be deflected in one or two planes.
insuflation and irrigation in gastroscopes. Although the
 Deflection in a single plane (one-way or two-way angulation)
umbilical cord is not as fragile as the insertion tube, it still
is common in small-diameter endoscopes used for proce-
contains light-carrying fiber bundles and therefore should
 dures such as bronchoscopy and urethroscopy. However,
be handled with caution. Light sources for gastrointestinal
CHA PTER 1   Endoscopic Instrumentation and Documentation for Flexible and Rigid Endoscopy  · 
Air/watervalve
Suctionvalve
Deflection control knob(left/right)
Deflection lock(left/right)
Deflectioncontrol knob(up/down)
-lnstrumentchannelcap
Deflection lock(up/down）
Instrument channel
Programmable buttons
Insertiontube
Video cable conn
Pressure
compensation valve
Light post
Bendingsection
Irigation
-bottle
Airinlet
connection
Connection for/
dnduoons
Distal Tip
Objectivelens
Tight cap for
Light guide lenses (2)
video cableconnection
-lrrigatiannozzle
Insufflationnozzle
InstrumentSuctionchanne
A
Figure 1-6 A, Multipurpose video endoscope with four-way tip deflection. B, Position in which the endoscope is held. (Photo courtesy of
Karl Storz GmbH  Co.KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
fiberscopes may contain an integral air pump that provides
A manometer-type pressure tester attached to this valve is
d  sd dd ne ss    i
used to check for internal leaks in the endoscope. When the
pressure that forces water from an attached bottle through the
 pressure tester is attached (Figure 1-8), the bulb is repeatedly
 irrigation channel when the irrigation button on the hand-
squeezed until the desired pressure is reached according to
 piece is depressed. A separate connector for suction allows 
the manufacturer's specifications. The needle of the pressure
a tube to be attached to an independent suction pump. A
 gauge should remain stable if the system is free of leaks. Pres-
pressure compensation valve in this region prevents dam-
 sure testing is quick and easy and should be done as a matter
 age from external pressure changes that may occur during
of routine before and after each procedure. Early detection of
 ethylene oxide (ETO) gas sterilization or shipping by air
leaks may prevent costly water damage to the internal compo-
when the pressure compensation cap is attached to the valve.
nents of a fiberscope.
8
■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
face of the IG bundle. The focal point of this lens system
Fiberscope Optics
determines the depth of field, which is the range of distances
The image- and light-transmitting components of a fber-
 Over which the image is in focus. Modern fiberscopes com-
scope consist of bundles of optical fibers. Each fiber, typically
monly have a depth of field from about 3 to 100 mm. The
 8 to 12 μm in diameter, has a core of optical-quality glass.
ocular lenses are in the eyepiece of a fiberscope. Their basic
This core is surrounded by glass cladding that must have
purpose is to magnify the image transmitted to the proximal
 a lower refractive index than the core. The differential in
face of the IG bundle so that it can be comfortably seen by
refractive indices results in a state of nearly total internal
the viewer. Several factors contribute to the overall magnifi-
reflection, which allows the fiber to transmit light with only
cation of structures seen through an endoscope, but perhaps
negligible losses.
the most important one is the distance between the tip of the
 Because each fiber is only capable of transmitting a spot
endoscope and the subject.
of uniform color and brightness, several thousand fibers
Hllumination lensesat each end ofthe LG bundles maximize
must be arranged in a coherent order to transmit an image.
the amount of light carried to the object being illuminated.
Coherent bundles are formed by fusing the individual fiber
The development of higher quality illumination lens systems
faces of each end of the bundle in exactly the same pattern
and improvements in fiberoptic technology have been cru-
(Figure 1-9, A). The resolution and size of a fiberoptic image
cial in providing adequate brightness in the newer endo-
are determined in part by the number and size of individ-
 scopes with smaller diameters and greater fields of view.
ual fibers. Naturally, the possible size of an image bundle is
limited in smaller diameter fiberscopes; consequently, the
image size is reduced in these models. The optical benefits
of reducing individual fiber diameter are also limited. With
a reduction in fber diameter, the ratio of cladding to core
 glass increases, resulting in reduced light transmission and
 a prominent honeycomb pattern that is more easily seen by
the viewer.
 In addition to the image bundle (also called an image guide,
 IG), a fiberscope typically contains one or two light guide (LG)
bundles that transmit light from the light source to the distal
Hgure 1-8 Pressure tester attached to the umbilical cord of a
tip of the fiberscope to illuminate the area being examined.
flexible endoscope. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH  Co. KG,
Although the fibers in the LG bundles may be similar to those
Tuttlingen, Germany.)
 -ied ied ue u paue pou aie Aaq sapuq Di au
tern because they do not need to transmit an image. These
fiber bundles are called incoherent bundles (see Figure 1-9, B).
The lens systems in an endoscope, which are located at
each end of the fiber bundles, also contribute significantly
to image quality. The objective lenses are at the distal tip
and serve to focus the image of the mucosa on the distal
Original image projected here
B
A
B
C
Figure 1-9 A, Coherent fiber bundle: the image is transmitted
Figure 1-7 A, Do not force instrument through a deflected tip.
perfectly from one end of the fiber bundle to the other. B, Incoherent 
B, Pass instrument through the nondeflected tip. C, Deflect tip after
fiber bundle: the image projected on one face ofthe fiber bundle is lost
al jo d aul apisul Aiaeq st o dil paiaapuou shixa juasu
at the other end because ofthe random order of the fibers. (Courtesy
endoscope.
Karl Storz Veterinary Endoscopy-America,Inc.,Goleta, Calif.)
CHAPTER 1   Endoscopic Instrumentation and Documentation for Flexible and Rigid Endoscopy  
4. Before instruments are passed through a deflected tip, the
Video Endoscope Optics
manufacturer's recommendations should be reviewed.
The mechanical functions of a video endoscope are similar
In most cases, before the tip is deflected it is advisable to
to those of a fiberscope. Furthermore, the insertion tube still
place forceps through the bending section of the tip until
 contains glass fibers as LG bundles, needed to deliver light to
they can be seen in the field of view (see Figure 1-7).
the tip of the endoscope and illuminate the area being viewed.
The primary difference lies in the way the image is transmit-
■ RIGID AND SEMIRIGID ENDOSCOPES
ted. Instead of a fiberoptic image, the video endoscope trans-
mits an electronic image that is sensed by a CCD chip at the
 Flexible endoscopes are needed to thoroughly examine the
distal tip of the insertion tube just behind the objective lens.
 depths of tubular structures that turn corners (e.g., intestine,
A CCD is a semiconductor capable of converting an optical
bronchial tree, and male canine urethra), but rigid endo-
image (photons) into an electrical signal (electrons) that is
 scopes are more convenient for examining nontubular struc-
then carried via wires along the length of the video endoscope
tures, such as the abdominal cavity, thoracic cavity, or joint
to a processor. The processor converts this electronic infor-
spaces. Rigid endoscopes, also known as telescopes, are also
mation into a standard video signal that can be distributed to
much simpler in design and less expensive than flexible endo-
devices such as monitors, digital capture systems, and printers.
scopes (Figure 1-10). Although they do contain glass lenses
and fiberoptics, they do not contain the moving parts, flexible
 materials, and instrument channel of a flexible endoscope and
Flexible Instruments
can therefore easily last for many years with proper care.
A variety of flexible instruments are available for use with
The original rigid endoscope was simply a hollow tube
endoscopes that have an accessory channel (see Figure 1-4).
through which light was directed into a body cavity. The
Both flexible and rigid endoscopes may accommodate the pas-
conventional telescope lens system (Figure 1-11, A) was first
sage of flexible instruments, depending on their design. The
developed by Nitze in 1879. The next crucial breakthrough
most widely used instruments are for biopsy and foreign body
occurred in 1966, when Hopkins invented the rod lens sys-
retrieval. Biopsy instruments are described in detail in Chap-
tem (Figure 1-1l, B), which is still recognized as the gold
ter 8, and foreign body retrieval instruments are described in
standard of the industry. By employing complex optical
Chapter 7. Other popular flexible instruments include cytol-
ogy brushes (Chapter 8), aspiration tubing, injection/aspira-
tion needles, polypectomy snares, and coagulating electrodes.
A vast number of styles and sizes are available; user preference
 and experience generally dictate which models work best.
Most flexible instruments are classified as either “reus-
able" or “disposable" (i.e., designed for single use). Reusable
instruments are more expensive and durable, although vet-
erinarians frequently reuse disposable instruments. Quality
does vary, however, and it is advised that instruments be
selected carefully for best function and durability rather than
allowing cost toguide which instrumentsare selected. Caution
should be used when instrumentation made by a manufac-
turer other than that of the endoscope itself is selected, as
it is not uncommon to damage the working channel of an
endoscope with the use of instruments that are not compat-
ible with a particular scope.
Hgure 1-10 Rigid endoscopes (telescopes): 33-cm working
To prevent costly damage to the accessory channel of a flex-
length, 10-mm, 5-mm, and 3-mm diameter, respectively.
ible endoscope, the endoscopist should observe the following
general recommendations:
1. The instrument diameter should not exceed that recom-
mended by the manufacturer.
2. The instrument should never be forced through the chan-
A
nel when resistance is met.
3. Foreign objects should not be retrieved through the
accessory channel; instead, the entire endoscope should
be removed from the patient once the object has been
firmly grasped and pulled up close to the endoscope tip
B
(see Chapter 7 for more detailed guidance on foreign
Hgure 1-11 A, Traditional telescope optical system. B, Hopkins
object retrieval).
rod lens system.
10·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
physics algorithms, high-quality optical glass lenses, and
 scopes are less invasive and fit into smaller areas (e.g., nasal
robust manufacturing practices, a state-of-the-art rod lens
 passages, female urethras, and joints). Some of the more
system offers several significant improvements in image
 common applications of rigid endoscopy in small animal
quality, including better light transmission, higher resolu-
medicine include laparoscopy, thoracoscopy, urethrocystos-
tion and contrast, greater magnification, and a wider feld
copy, rhinoscopy, laryngoscopy, arthroscopy, vaginoscopy,
 of view. The wide variety of available rigid endoscopes and
 otoscopy, and avian and exotics endoscopy. As with flexible
the visual access provided by even the smallest models open
endoscopes, no one size of rigid or semirigid endoscope is
up an enormous field of minimally invasive diagnostic and
suitable for all procedures in all patients. The appropriate-
therapeutic possibilities to veterinary practitioners. Indeed,
sized telescope should be selected on the basis of the pro-
the use of this technology in veterinary practice has expanded
cedures most commonly performed (Table 1-2). Although
considerably since the mid- 1990s.
smaller telescopes tend to be more versatile, they are also
When trying to determine the optical quality of an endo-
more prone to breakage and illumination is limited when
scope, it is tempting to refer to seemingly objective specification
these scopes are used in larger, more light-absorptive cavities
data (i.e., degree of magnification, resolution, and brightness).
(e.g, thorax and abdomen).
These specifications may be helpful, but it is much more use-
ful to evaluate and compare complete endoscopy systems in a
 eration because it affects both orientation and visual access
controlled clinical setting. The reason for this is that the end
(Figure 1-12). Forward-viewing telescopes (0 degrees) pro-
results important to the operator will vary widely depending
vide the simplest orientation but a relatively limited view-
on numerous variables such as the anatomy being examined,
ing field, centered on the axis of the telescope. A 25- or
distance from the subject, light source, video camera, moni-
30-degree viewing angle allows the endoscopist to view a
tor, cables, and many other factors. For example, an endo-
larger area by simply rotating the telescope on its longitu-
dinal axis. S
 Spatial orientation becomes more challenging
m aa s s s   d, ss
with an oblique-viewing scope, but as more experience is
knowing which endoscope, used at what distance from the sub-
 gained, the operator can become quite proficient in its use.
ject, and with which camera and what size monitor. Isolated
Some telescopes are available in even more acute angles of
specifications can often be misleading, as they do not take into
view (e.g-, 70, 90, and 120 degrees), but these instruments
 account the many variables that contribute to the final image
are rarely used in veterinary practice. The choice of telescope
 seen on a video monitor during clinical endoscopy.
an pe pad q ad a uo suadap ae
Rigid and semirigid endoscopes have outer diameters
experience of the endoscopist.
ranging from about 1 to 10 mm. Larger scopes have greater
Rigid endoscopes are typically used in conjunction
light-carrying capacity and produce larger images. Smaller
with some type of sheath or cannula, which serves several
Table 1-2 Recommended Applications of Common Telescopes by Size*
Telescope size (mm)
Procedure
Sheath length (cm)
Laparoscopy
Thoracoscopy
Urethrocystoscopyt
Rhinoscopy
Arthroscopy
Avian
1.9 mm
+++
+++
+++
+++
14 cm
(n female cats and
 srmall dogs)
2.7 mm
+
+
+++
+++
+++
+++
15 cm
(In bitches 5 to 45 Ib)
4 mm 
++
++
+++
22 cm
 (In bitches more than
15 Ib)
 5 mm 
+++
+++
Transabdominal
cystoscopy only
+, Fair; ++, good; +++, excellent.
*These recommendations are based on the most common adult patient sizes seen in small animal practice. The ratings of excellent, good, and fair are based on the best
"rsixa suoeyen paag pue lenppu uoelndod puaed pawnsse au uaalh ssauaniseau! lewjuw pue uoezlensiA lewixew uaaaq aswoidwos
ui pasn aq ue jappelq aut ot (leuwopqesue siqndaid) yeodde snoaueinjad  salewaf ui alqissod Auo s! sadoosopua pibu buisn Adoosos leyansuel
males; this approach can be used in females when a scope is too large to pass transurethrally. A small-diameter flexible endoscope is required for complete endoscopic
exa mination of the male canine urethra.
11
purposes: it provides access to the anatomic site, protects the
urethrocystoscopy in females, rhinoscopy, otoscopy, and
telescope and patient, and facilitates the ingress or egress of
avian celioscopy. The popular “operating sheath" for this tele-
fluids or gas, as well as the introduction of diagnostic or sur-
scope, originally designed for human pediatric cystoscopy,
gical instruments. By convention, a sheath is usually locked
accommodates 5F flexible instruments and allows the intro-
onto the telescope, as in the case of an arthroscope sheath
duction of fluids or gas (Figure 1-15). A variety of sheaths
(Figure 1-13) or cystoscope sheath. A cannula, on the other
and cannulae are available for the Multi-Purpose Rigid
 hand, usually refers to a tube through which the telescope or
 endoscope (Figure 1-16), each designed to suit the anatomy
instrument passes freely (without locking), as in the case of
 and functional requirements of different procedures.
a laparoscope cannula (Figure 1-14) or arthroscope instru-
Larger telescopes (5 to 10 mm in diameter) are better
ment cannula.
 suited to endoscopic examination of larger cavities such as
The most popular telescope used today in small animal
the abdomen and thorax of adult dogs. Although smaller
practice is the 2.7-mm Multi-Purpose Rigid endoscope.
 sd     o  ss
Frequently referred to as an arthroscope, this versatile tele-
and image size are limited. The 5-mm laparoscope (also used
scope is ideally suited for many other procedures including
for thoracoscopy) is the second most popular telescope for
 small animal use (Figure 1-17). It is typically used through
 a cannula that is placed through the abdominal or thoracic
wall by means of a sharp trocar. Once the trocar and can-
nula have been inserted to provide access to the body cav-
ity, the trocar is removed from the cannula and replaced by
the telescope. Additional cannulae are placed for the passage
Hgure 1-14 A 5-mm laparoscope with cannula used for
laparoscopy and thoracoscopy. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH
eCo. KG,Tuttlingen,Germary.)
B
Figure 1-12 Telescope viewing angles. A, 0 degrees. B, 30 degrees.
(Photos courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG, Tuttlingen,
Germany.)
Hgure 1-15 Multi-Purpose Rigid endoscope with operating
sheath and 5F flexible biopsy forceps inserted through the sealing
bonnet at the opening of the instrument channel. The tip of the
Figure 1-13 The 2.7-mm Multi-Purpose Rigid endoscope locked
aul jo dil [eisip au puonaq isn! papuaixa si juaumusul Asdoq
in place in an arthroscope sheath. ( Photo courtesy of Karl Storz
instrument sheath. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH & Co. KG,
GmbH & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Tutlingen, Germany.)
12■PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
Hgure 1-18 A variety of instruments for laparoscopy and
thoracoscopy. From top to bottom: Hook scissors for cutting
Figure 1-16 Top to botto: Multi-Purpose Rigid endoscope in
suture; curved blunt-tip sissors for tissue cutting; biopsy forceps
protection sheath, arthroscope sheath, laparoscopy trocar and
for liver and masses; curved Kelly forceps for tissue grasping and
cannula, operating sheath. Each sheath contains a Luer-Lok
connector port that can be used for the ingress of fluids or gas,
jo gudseia aimsas ioy sdaray suidsena mer-iaa, duoass
which help to establish and maintain a clear viewing feld. The
tissues such as the ovary during ovariectomy; Babcock grasping
forceps for atraumatic grasping or knot-pushing; long, fenestrated,
operating sheath contains two side ports, one for ingress and
one for egress, which allow the endoscopist to control the flow
and serrated grasping forceps for atraumatic grasping of tissues
 of fluids both in and out ofthe bladder and nasal cavity during 
such as bowel. ( Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH  Co. KG,
Tuttlingen,Germany.)
cystoscopy and rhinoscopy. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e
Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Figure 1-17 Right to left: Laparoscope (5-mm), standard trocar
Hgure 1-19 A laparoscopic palpation probe, grasping forceps,
and cannula,EndoTIP cannula. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz
and biopsy forceps (top to bottorm). (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz
GmbH & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
GmbH Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
 of hand instrumentation, as needed for the procedure being
discussions of the instrumentation required for laparos-
performed. A large selection of laparoscopic instruments is
copy and thoracoscopy can be found in Chapters 15 and 16,
available (Figure 1-18), but the most common instruments
respectively.)
for the beginning veterinary laparoscopist are a palpation
Most rigid endoscopes are simple in design and are
probe, grasping forceps, and biopsy forceps (Figure 1-19).
used with one or more of the sheaths or cannulae already
An alternative to the sharp puncture method of cannula
 described, but others are built with integrated working chan-
placement is offered with the EndoTIP cannula (see Figure
nels that permit the passage of instruments, fluid, or gas into
1-17). This recent invention enables the surgeon to screw
the cannula in place through a small abdominal stab inci-
more convenient for certain applications and less prone to
sion, thus preventing the possibility of inadvertent organ
damage while being inserted or removed from sheaths or
 puncture with the sharp tip of a standard trocar. (Complete
 cannulae, but they lack the versatility of simpler telescopes.
CHAPTER   Endoscopic Instrumentation and Documentation for Fexible and Rigid Endoscopy    13
previously unavailable for endoscopic evaluation such as the
urethra of male cats and the trachea of small birds.
 LIGHT SOURCES
Historically, endoscopic illumination was achieved by plac-
 ing a fragile, heat-emitting incandescent bulb at the distal
tip of the endoscope. In 1960, Dr. Karl Storz discovered that
a fberoptic light cable could transmit light from a remote
light source through an endoscope to the examination site.
A
This discovery heralded the birth of cold light endoscopy,
which is the basis for the design of all modern endoscopic
light sources. Although the light is not actually “cold," the
technology represents a marked reduction in the incidence
of thermal injury during endoscopic procedures.
Factors that contribute to the illumination or brightness
 of an endoscopic image include the technology type and
 power of the light source, the number of hours clocked on 
bulbs of certain types, and the diameter of the endoscope
being used. Other important factors are the length of the
illumination chain, the light-carrying capacity and condi-
tion of any LGs and lenses in the chain, the cleanliness of any
lens surfaces or other interfaces through which light must
pass, and the size of the cavity being examined. When a video
camera is being used, the light sensitivity of the camera is
also a contributing factor.
C
Power and Type
Figure 1-20 A, Operating laparoscope, 10 mm with 5-mm
channel. B, Rod lens otoendoscope with 5F channel (channel inlet
Endoscopic light sources can be categorized by two variables:
at bottom of photo). C, Integrated telescope, 9.5F with 3F channel
the power of the source (usually expressed in watts) and the
and irrigation ports for inflow and outflow of fluids. ( Photos
type of illumination technology. The two most common
courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
types of endoscopic light sources are xenon and halogen.
They range in power from 25 W to 300 W.
The power of a light source is only a rough measure of
its brightness in that the higher the wattage, the brighter
the illumination. This measure is generally true for com-
 parison of light sources of the same technology type but
is not always valid for comparison of light sources of dif-
ferent types. Naturally, a common, household lightbulb of
100 W is brighter than one of 40 W. However, the power
 rating of a lightbulb or light source is actually the measure
Figure 1-21 Semirigid endoscope, 1-mm diameter, 20-cm
of how much power it consumes, not how much light power
working length. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG,
it produces. The 40-W lightbulb consumes 40 W of electri-
Tuttlingen, Germany.)
cal power but does not produce 40 W of light; in fact, this
incandescent bulb produces mostly heat. A 40 W fluores-
cent lamp, on the other hand, produces much more light
Rod lens telescopes are generally not available in diameters
than the incandescent bulb while consuming the same 40 W
less than approximately 1.9 mm. However, very small-diam-
of electrical power. Furthermore, the fluorescent bulb pro.
eter endoscopes are available and classified as “semirigid"
duces a different color of light than the incandescent bulb.
because their flexibility falls between that of completely rigid
These two characteristics (wattage and color variation)
endoscopes and flexible scopes (Figure 1-21). These tiny
 are also true of endoscopic light sources. As a general rule,
scopes rely on fused silica bundles to transmit an image.
xenon light sources are both whiter and brighter than halo-
Although the optical quality cannot match that of the rod
gen light sources.
lens or even traditional fiberoptic systems, these semirigid
Xenon light sources offer excellent color reproduc-
 scopes enable practitioners to examine anatomic structures
tion for video endoscopy. They have become the standard
14·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
in endoscopy primarily because their quality of light most
Light-Transmitting Cables
closely approximates that of pure sunlight. A 100- to 300-W
 xenon light source is recommended for general purpose
Once a light source with acceptable color and brightness has
veterinary endoscopy when video is used. Because the spec-
been selected, a vehicle is needed to transmit this light to the
tral intensity of the output is relatively continuous, all of
endoscope or directly to the examination site. As discussed
the colors in the visible spectrum are reproduced. A xenon
 previously, the advent of fiberoptics has made this possible.
lamp burns for 400 to 1000 hours before it must be replaced.
Although LGs are frequently built into the umbilical cord
Spare bulbs should always be kept in stock at the hospital for
of flexible endoscopes, they are also available as separate
immediate replacement when a bulb burns out.
 detachable cables for use with some models and with rigid
Halogen lamps are similar in intensity and color to
endoscopes (Figure 1-23). Thousands of fibers ranging in
 household incandescent lightbulbs. The color they produce
 size from 30 μm to several hundred microns are bundled
is toward the red/yellow end of the color spectrum. These
together, surrounded by a protective jacket, and equipped
light sources are relatively inexpensive. Although they do not
with metal end fittings so that an endoscopic light-transmit-
provide the same quality of light as xenon lamps, halogen
ting cable can be produced. The cable is typically inserted 
light sources can be acceptable when light intensity and color
into the light source at one end and attached to the LG post
reproduction are not critical. The bulbs on halogen light
of the endoscope at the other end (Figure 1-24).
sources must be changed regularly because they lose much
Light-transmitting cables are available in different diam-
of their intensity after only a fraction of the estimated life
eters. The correct diameter depends on the size of the endo-
 span (approximately 100 hours).
scope that is being used. Matching the right cable to the right
Important factors in the selection of a light source for
scope prevents overheating or underillumination. Generally
flexible gastrointestinal endoscopy include the availability of
 speaking, a smaller scope requires a smaller LG cable.
a pump for insufflation and irrigation and the style ofattach-
 ment to the light connector (Figure 1-22). The compatibility
 of the light source and the endoscope must be considered. If
the two are not compatible, the availability of an adapter to
connect them becomes a crucial issue.
Hgure 1-23 Fiberoptic light-transmitting cable. (Photo courtesy of
A
Karl Storz GmbH  Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
ZAOIS"
B
Figure 1-22 A, Xenon light source with integrated air pump and
connection for gastroscopes. B, Xenon light source with connector
Hgure 1-24 Laparoscope (5-mm) with light cable and camera
for simple fiberoptic light cable. (Photos courtesy of Karl Storz
head attached. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH  Co. KG,
GmbH é Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Tuttlingen, Germany.)
CHAPTER   Endoscopic Instrumentation and Documentation for Fexible and Rigid Endoscopy    15
 The construction of light-transmitting cables also varies
Although most CCUs are specifically designed for video endo-
from manufacturer to manufacturer. A cable with additional
scopes, rigid scopes, or fberscopes, some newer models are
armoring lasts longer than one without this protection. Han-
compatible with all types of endoscopes. These newer, more
 ding a light cable with care prolongs its life span and keeps
versatile systems offer a considerable savings to practitioners
it in top condition for use in endoscopy. Discoloration and
wishing to expand their endoscopy services at a minimal cost
breakage are the two ways an LG degrades over time. Dis-
(Figure 1-26). They also save space in the veterinary practice.
coloration changes the color appearance of the light that is
The endoscopic adapter on the camera head connects to
emitted from the LG. An operator can check for discolor-
the eyepiece of rigid endoscopes and fiberscopes, where it
ation by holding one end of the cable to a lightbulb or fluo-
focuses and magnifies the endoscopic image onto the imag-
rescent lamp and looking at the other end. If the LG cable is
ing sensor of the camera head. The amount of magnification
discolored, it probably looks considerably more yellow than
depends on the focal length of the adapter, and greater focal
the source light. Breakage of individual fbers is the other
lengths correspond to higher magnification. Lenses with dif-
type of degradation. When the same viewing arrangement is
ferent focal lengths (12 to 38 mm) are available for use in
used, the finding of small black dots indicates that the cable
has broken fibers. A few broken fibers does not necessarily
affect the transmission of light, but when one third of the
fibers are broken, it is time to replace the light cable.
 ENDOSCOPIC ImAGING SYSTEMS
STORZ
69236020
Modern endoscope systems include a video camera that
小
projects the endoscopic image onto a television screen or
monitor. This video projection enables the endoscopist to
work more comfortably and share information during a pro-
cedure with any number of observers. Furthermore, video
imaging facilitates the documentation of procedures as still
 photographs or streaming video, which can be enormously
useful for client education, medical records, and referral,
teaching, or consulting purposes.
A basic endoscopic video camera system consists of
the endoscopic adapter, camera head, camera control unit
(CCU), and monitor (Figure 1-25). Depending on the design,
the endoscopic adapter and camera head may be individual
units joined by a threaded connector, or they may be per-
 manently attached. In the case of true video endoscopes, no
camera head or adapter is needed, as these electronic com-
 ponents (including the CCD chip) are contained within the
B
video endoscope itself, which connects directly to the CCU.
STORE
Figure 1-25 Clockwise frorm bottor left: Camera head and adapter
with integrated cable, flat screen monitor, camera control unit
Hgure 1-26 A single camera control unit capable of connecting
(CCU), and xenon light source with light cable. (Photo courtesy of
to nigid telescopes (A), fiberscopes (B), and video endoscopes (C).
Karl Storz GmbH e Co.KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
(Photos courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH eCo. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
16·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
different situations. If a variety of focal lengths are desired, a
components of the optical system (endoscopic adapter,
camera with a built-in, variable, focal-length zoom adapter
endoscope, light-transmitting cable, and light source) must
should be purchased. This zoom adapter enables the surgeon
be connected to the camera. The operator then points the
to vary the magnification and consequently the image size at
endoscope at a white object (e.g-, a piece of gauze or a clean
any point throughout the procedure without the inconve-
white laboratory coat) and depresses the white-balance but-
 nience of changing lenses. This optical zoom feature should
ton on the camera control unit or camera head. Once the
not be confused with digital zoom, which merely increases
 camera is white balanced, all colors should be accurately rep-
pixel size without increasing pixel number. The result of an
resented. With automatic exposure control, a patented feature
image enlarged by digital zoom will not be as clear as that of
of some cameras, the correct shutter speed for the CCD is
 an image enlarged with an optical zoom because of a reduc-
 automatically selected so that the best exposure is provided,
tion in resolution.
regardless of scene illumination.
The camera head contains the semiconductor (CCD) that
The monitor completes the basic video chain. The image
transforms the optical image into an electronic signal. This
presented on the video monitor is a representation of all
signal can then be transmitted down the head cable to the
 previous transformations from the light source, light-trans-
CCU. The optical image is projected onto the CCD surface,
 mitting cable, endoscope, camera head, and CCU. Analog
which is subdivided into many individual picture elements
video signals are sent to a monitor in three common for-
referred to as pixels. The continuous optical image should
mats: composite (or BNC), Y/C (or S-video), and RGB. The
be reproduced as faithfully as possible. This can be done by
signal formats differ in the way portions of the video signal
maximizing the number of pixels. The greater the number of
are transmitted to the monitor. The video signal comprises
 pixels, the higher the resolving power of the CCD.
chrominance (color), luminance (brightness), and symc (i.e.,
Two basic camera types are available: single-chip cam-
synchronization of the signal information on the monitor).
eras, which use one CCD, and three-chip cameras, which
Composite video combines the elements of luminance,
use three CCDs. The camera types differ in their horizontal
 chrominance, and sync into one signal. The combined signal
resolution, a factor that affects detail recognition, color, and
reduces the amount of bandwidth available to each indi-
 price. Most single-chip cameras use a mosaic filter pattern
vidual element. The monitor also has to separate the three
to reproduce color. One of four different-colored filters is
elements, and the decoding process often produces artifacts.
placed over each pixel. This filter array requires an electronic
As a result, a herringbone fuzziness occurs at the boundaries
 proces to reconstruct the colors and detail of the original
between different colors. Composite video offers the least
image. Because every color is not available at each pixel, the
detail at the lowest cost.
reconstructive process does not fully recover all of the color
 The Y/C or S-video format separates the brightness and
and detail that was present in the original optical image.
color information into two distinct signals. This standard is
Therefore single-chip cameras theoretically have lower reso-
capable of higher resolution than composite video because
lution and less accurate color reproduction than three-chip
of the wide bandwidth available on each channel. With
cameras. However, current state-of-the-art single-chip tech-
brightness and color already on separate bandwidths, signals
nology produces images that are very close to those obtained
do not have to be divided at the monitor; thus artifacts are
with three-chip cameras.
avoided, and color is better than with the composite stan-
 Three-chip cameras use a prism to separate light into the
 dard. In addition, the synchronizing signals are encoded with
three primary colors: red, green, and blue (RGB). Each of
the luminance signal, which provides greater bandwidth for
the three sensors transmits one color to the video monitor.
chroma. The S-video format is highly recommended for
Because no electronic process is required for color conver-
 deriving the full benefit from high-quality single-chip cam-
sion, the colors are more accurate. In addition, all informa-
eras with analog output.
tion available for resolution is used solely for that purpose.
The RGB standard separates the sync, luminance, and
The electronic image information is transmitted via the
chrominance information into four channels: red, green,
camera cable to a connector that fastens the cable to the
blue, and sync. The outcome is true color and high resolu-
processor or CCU. The CCU houses the power supply and
tion. The RGB format is strongly recommended for use with
electronics that decode the information from the sensor and
three-chip cameras. The different types of cables commonly
convert the picture information into a standard video signal.
used to transmit analog video are shown in Figure 1-27.
This signal can then be distributed to monitors, printers, and
For cameras with digital output, several new interface
digital image capture systems.
 standards have been developed, and new ones are emerging
The CCU also contains the electronics for functions such
frequently as the consumer electronics industry continues
as white balance and automatic exposure control. White bal-
to evolve. The commonly used serial digital interface (SDI)
ancing is the process by which the camera adjusts for the light
standard makes use of the same composite cables already
color (color temperature) of the ilumination source (e.g--
mentioned but transmits uncompressed digital video signals
yellowish light with a halogen lamp). Unlike the human
 optimized for display on flat screens or for digital recording.
eye, a video camera cannot compensate for variations in
 Another frequenty encountered standard is the IEEE
the color of light. Before white balancing is performed, all
1394 interface, also known as DV. This signal, commonly
CHA PTER 1 Endoscopic Instrumentation and Documentation for Flexible and Rigid Endoscopy
Composite
SDI
S-video
DVI
RGB
Firewire
Figure 1-27 Cables commonly used to transmit analog video
Hgure 1-28 Cables commonly used to transmit digital video
signals. (Photos courtesy of KarlStorz GmbH  Co.KG,Tutlingen,
signals.(Photos courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH  Co. KG, Tuttlingen,
Germany.)
Germany.)
called Fire Wire, is useful for connecting to digital recording
 devices, PCs, or Macs with DV input.
ZHOIS'
 One of the highest standards available for transmitting
digital video data is the digital video interface standard (DVI)
typically reserved for high-definition (HD) video cameras
(see next section). Three different types of cables commonly
used to transmit digital video are shown in Figure 1-28.
Monitors vary greatly in size and resolution. Size is a matter
of preference, but 13- to 20-inch monitors are most commonly
used. Because of their size and weight, flat screen monitors are
 rapidly replacing the standard CRT monitors of the past, just
as they are in consumer electronics. To provide the optimal
image, the monitor must match or surpass the horizontal
resolution of the video camera. By today's standards the mini-
STORZ
mum monitor resolution should be 500 lines for single-chip
cameras and 750 lines for three-chip cameras. The monitor
should also have the correct input to accept the highest quality
video signal (cable) coming from the camera processor.
For mobile practices, examination rooms, or simply to
Hgure 1-29 The TELE PACK portable imaging system combines
save space, the new compact “all-in-one" units that some
light source, camera, monitor, keyboard, and digital image capture
manufacturers now produce are gaining popularity (Figure
capability into one compact unit. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz
1-29). These units typically include a camera processor, light
GmbH  Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
source, and folddown flat screen monitor all in one box.
Some may also include an integrated air pump (for gastro-
need to be recalibrated. Always keep in mind the optical and
intestinal endoscopy), text entry keyboard, or digital cap-
 electronic chain that has been put together, and remember
ture capability. The device pictured in Figure 1-29 is capable
that the quality of the final image can only be as good as the
of capturing still images onto a PC card that can then be
weakest link in the chain.
inserted into a computer for downloading.
If the desired image is not being well produced by an endo.
■ HIGH-DEFINITION VIDEO
scope system, the operator should start at the beginning of
the imaging chain (the light source) and check every device
Many people have become familiar with high-definition tele-
along the way. Over time, bulbs lose their intensity, light-
vision (HDTV) through personal experience as a consumer.
transmitting fibers may break, and lens surfaces may become
Simply put, broadcast HDTV is based on a set of standards
stained. Because endoscopes are complex optical devices,
that offer the highest resolution and sharpest picture. Today,
they can be damaged ifthey are not handled with care. Video
HD technology is being combined with the latest camera
 cameras sometimes malfunction, and video monitors may
and imaging systems used for endoscopy to enhance the
18
■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
In summary, the benefits that veterinarians may gain
Standard definition
from HD endoscopy are as follows:
Natural, panoramic views when a wide-screen sensor
and display are used
Less fatigue
 Improved depth perception
 Improved recognition of anatomic landmarks and
pathologic features
Earlier viewing of laparoscopic instruments reaching
the surgical site
■ ENDOSCOPIC PHOTO AND VIDEO
DOCUMENTATION
High definition 
ai (a uoap-uu e yo on adse a oel an
 Until the recent boom in digital technologies, endoscopists
more closely matches the natural, wide viewing feld of a human
would attach any of a variety of analog cameras, printers, and
being. Traditional, standard definition images show onlythe
recording devices to the output of their endoscopic video
portion of the image between the dotted lines. The wider HD
 cameras or even directly to the eyepiece of their endoscopes.
image allows the operator to see the entry of instruments into the
However, those days of documenting endoscopic procedures
visual feld sooner. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH  Co. KG,
Tuttlingen, Germany.)
with SLR cameras and VCRs have given way largely to digital
capture of both still images and streaming video.
 The possibilities for digital capture of endoscopic images
capabilities of surgeons performing minimally invasive pro-
 are limited only by the outputs of one's camera processor and
cedures. For endoscopic images to be displayed in HD, each
the inputs of the digital recording devices or computers at
component of the imaging chain must be HD compatible,
a veterinarian's disposal. With the dizzying array of options
from the camera head to the transmission media and sys-
 available, the busy veterinary practitioner wil consider “ease
tems (CCU and cables) to the monitor.
 of use” as a critical factor, second only to image quality.
There are currently a number of different HDTV formats
While the computer-savvy practitioner may choose to rig
as adopted by the Advanced Television Systems Committee
 an acceptable “homemade” connection between imaging sys-
(ATSC), based on 720p, 1080i, and 1080p. The lowercase
 tem and computer to achieve digital image capture at minimal
i appended to the numbers denotes interlaced; the lowercase
 expense, others will prefer a more complete solution designed
p denotes progressive. With the interlaced scanning method,
for medical image management, capable of capturing, stor-
the 1080 lines of resolution are divided into pairs. The first
ing, and archiving image data in a dedicated unit (Figure
540 alternating lines are painted on a frame and then the sec-
1-31). With such sophisticated units, the data become part
 ond 540 lines are painted on a second frame. The progres-
of a searchable database of patient records that may include
sive scanning method simultaneously displays all 1080 lines
captured still images and video clips, as well as patient- and
on every frame and is therefore capable of producing the
 case-specific information that can be entered as text or audio.
smoothest, clearest image, especially when the video content
Some digital capture systems can also be linked to the hos-
is motion intensive (i.e., scanning the abdomen or thorax
pital's computer network with the use of an Ethernet cable,
quickly for exploratory purposes). Progressive scanning is
which makes remote retrieval of data or incorporation into
also advantageous when still images are being captured so
the central medical record-keeping system relatively simple.
that “interlacing artifacts,” which appear as jagged edges in
Storing still images and video clips in digital format has
the still image, are avoided. The 1080p format, being the cur-
several advantages, including the following:
 rent gold standard, is sometimes referred to as full HD.
 Image quality does not degrade over time
 Another significant advantage to HD endoscopic imag-
 Physical space is not required for storage
ing is the wide-screen display, which enables the endoscopist
Data can be duplicated or printed for sharing with
to experience more natural vision. An HD monitor displays
owners or colleagues
images in 16:9 format rather than the 4:3 format of most
Data can be emailed, posted on websites, or included
standard definition monitors (Figure 1-30). In humans, our
in electronic presentations
horizontal field of view is wider than our vertical field of view.
Data can be backed up onto CDs, DVDs, or USB drives
For surgeons, this wider, more natural view is less fatiguing
for safe keeping (Important!)
during procedures. Additionally, during laparoscopic sur-
■
Cost of data storage, duplication, and transmission is
gery as surgeons are viewing full-screen endoscopic images,
minimal
 trocars and hand instruments that normally approach the
 Traditional analog video printing and video recording
surgical area laterally can be seen earlier with a 16:9 monitor
 devices are still available and widely used in veterinary practice,
than they can with a standard monitor.
although they are rapidly being replaced with digital systems.
CHAPTER   Endoscopic Instrumentation and Documentation for Fexible and Rigid Endoscopy    19
STORZ
STOR
A
HOIS
Hgure 1-32 An insufflator regulates the flow rate and pressure of
 carbon dioxide used to distend the abdomen during laparoscopy.
(Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
■ RIGID ENDOSCOPY
B
It is important to recognize that room air cannot be safely
 recommended for distension of the abdominal cavity (lap-
aroscopy), bladder, or joint space because air embolism is
paides sumaia ioy isidossopua aul se rouou auues aul sasmn iaa
possible, which could, in rare instances, result in the death
images and video. B, AIDA DVD has a pull-out touch screen to
manage recorded content. (Photos courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e
of the patient. Instead, a CO, insufflator is recommended
Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
(Figure l-32), which not only eliminates the chance of air
embolism but also automatically controls flow rate and pres-
sure throughout the procedure, freeing up the veterinarian
These devices should be chosen on the basis of their capability
to focus on the procedure. The source of CO2 gas is a pres-
to reproduce images of diagnostic value, which will hopefully
surized tank, which is connected to the back of the insuf-
be of a quality similar to that produced by the camera.
flator with a high-pressure hose. The gas is delivered to the
patient via sterilized tubing that connects from the front of
■ PUMPS AND INSUFFLATORS
the insufflator to the hub of the Veress needle or Luer-Lok
 connector on a laparoscope cannula.
 Most endoscopic procedures require some combination of
A Veress needle is used to initially establish pneumo-
insufflation, irrigation, or suction so that a clearly visible
peritoneum in a patient undergoing laparoscopy. It con-
 space is created and maintained between the distal lens ofthe
sists of a sharp outer cannula with a spring-loaded, hollow,
endoscope and the subject being examined. That space may
blunt-tipped stylet (Figure 1-33). When the needle punc-
be gaseous, as in gastroscopy or laparoscopy, or the medium
tures through the abdominal wall, the blunt stylet springs
 may be fluid, which is typical of cystoscopy and arthroscopy.
forward, preventing the needle from inadvertently lacerat-
ing abdominal organs. Once the needle is placed, it can be
■ FLEXIBLE ENDOSCOPY
connected to the insufflation tubing, and the delivery of CO2
 distends the abdomen, creating the necessary working space
For both upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, the
to view structures and place trocars for the telescope and
gaseous distension medium is simply room air. As noted in
instruments.
the previous section, an air pump either may be included in
The fluid distension or irrigation employed during cystos
the same housing as the gastroscope light source or may be a
copy, arthroscopy, rhinoscopy, and otoscopy may be simply
separate pump that is connected to the scope with an appro-
fed by gravity from a fluid bag or bottle that is hung above
priate adapter and tubing. In either case, the pressure of the
the level of the patient. When higher pressures or flow rates
air pump must be of appropriate power to drive the insuffla-
 are desired (especially during arthroscopy), a pressure bag or
tion and irrigation of the endoscope, without being so pow-
specialized fluid pump can be used that accurately regulates
erful that it causes damage to the instrument. Note that the
the amount and speed of fluid delivery (Figure 1-34).
air pump also provides the positive pressure needed to force
Any standard suction pump should be sufficient for most
the irrigation fluid from the small bottle that connects to the
umbilical cord, allthe way to the tip of the endoscope, where
now available for veterinary use that offer powerful and pre-
it cleans the distal lens.
cise fingertip control of both suction and irigation pressures
20·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Hgure 1-35 The VETPUMP 2 provides insufflation, irrigation,
and suction for a variety of endoscopic procedures. (Photo courtesy
of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
instruments. No general discussion of endoscope care and
cleaning can replace the prudent use of the manufacturer's
B
recommendations for each instrument. However, the general
guidelines given in this section apply to the vast majority of flex-
Figure 1-33 Veress needle. A, The sharp outer needle with spring-
loaded stylet retracted. B, The hollow, blunt stylet that delivers
ible and rigid endoscopes and accessories in most situations.
CO, to the abdominal cavity. (Photos courtesy of Karl Storz
Immediately after a procedure is performed, organic
GmbH Co.KG,Tuttlingen, Germany.)
material should be mechanically removed from all sur-
faces of the endoscope and other instruments with the use
 of sponges, soft cloths, and brushes. For this initial phase of
cleaning, a commercially available, nonabrasive, neutral pH
enzymatic detergent designed for endoscopes and accesso-
ries is highly recommended (e.g., Enzol, EZ-Zyme, Metri-
STORZ
28330020
Zyme). The biopsy channel of a flexible scope should be
flushed repeatedly with the enzymatic detergent and rinsed
until clean distilled or demineralized water runs clear for
several seconds. Cleaning brushes should also be passed
through all channels several times to remove adherent debris
before it has an opportunity to dry (Figure 1-36). The clean-
ing brush should be passed all the way through the channel
 of a flexible endoscope until the head of the brush exits the
other end (Figure 1-37) before it is pulled back through the
entry site. A repeated back-and-forth scrubbing motion within
the channel should be avoided; this action may cause damage
Figure 1-34 An Arthropump accurately regulates the flow rate
 and pressure of sterile fluids, which distend the joint space during
because the tiny bristles of a cleaning brush have the potential
arthroscopy. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG,
to puncture the lining of the channel.
Tuttlingen, Germany.)
 It is recommended that a select group of support staff be
well trained on the cleaning procedures. A laminated quick
(Figure 1-35). The VETPUMP 2 is especially useful dur-
 reference cleaning guide and supply list (Boxes 1-1 and 1-2)
ing lavage of the external or middle ear under endoscopic
specifc to the model of endoscope used in the practice can
visualization.
be posted in a convenient location to help expedite the pro-
cedure for flexible endoscopes. Once a system is in place, a
■ CLEANING, DISINFECTION,
full cleaning of a flexible endoscope need not take more than
AND STERILIZATION
10 to 15 minutes. Although thorough mechanical cleaning of
a flexible endoscope used for upper gastrointestinal endos-
The proper cleaning, disinfection, and storage of endoscopes
copy is usually suffcient between cases, sterilization or high-
and instruments not only will prevent iatrogenic infection of
level disinfection as described later in this section is indicated
the patient but also may significantly prolong the life of the
after use in a patient suspected of harboring transmissible
CHAPTE R 1   Endoscopic Instrumentation and Documentation for Flexible and Rigid Endoscopy  · z
21
Figure 1-36 A cleaning brush being inserted into the accessory
Hgure 1-37 The cleaning brush exits the tip of the endoscope
channel of a flexible endoscope. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz
before it is pulled back though the channel to avoid potential
GmbH & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
damage. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG, Tuttlingen,
Germany.)
BOX1-1
Quick Reference Guide for Cleaning Flexible Video Endoscopes
NoTE: This quick cleaning guide is not intended as a replacement for the user's manual specific to each endoscope, as cleaning
recommendations vary by model.
CAuTion: Improper cleaning can result in damage to any endoscope.
1.
Attach the tight-sealing cap securely to the video cable connector to prevent fluid from entering this area. Perform a leakage test on
the endoscope using the leakage tester. (Note: If it fails the pressure test, do not immerse the endoscope in any fluid, and do not 
suction fluid through the channel. Simply wipe the endoscope with a damp cloth and contact your endoscope supplier immediately.)
 2. If there are no leaks, then flush or suction enzymatic detergent through the suction channel until fluid runs clear.
 3. Remove irrigation valve, suction valve, and biopsy channel cap: then place therm in enzymatic detergent to soak.
4. Wipe down the outside of the endoscope with a soft cloth soaked in enzymatic detergent.
5. The endoscope can now be immersed in a tub filled with enzymatic detergent (approximately 10 minutes). There are typically
three ports that need to be cleaned with the channel cleaning brush. Do not use a back and forth motion within the channel.
Always advance the brush until the tip passes out of the scope, clean the brush, and then pullit back through. Do this for each
 of the following channels until the brush comes out clean:
 a. The instrument channel, until it exits at the tip of the scope.
b. The front hole inside the suction button port, until it reaches the forceps channel inlet.
C. The rear hole inside the suction button port, until it exits at the suction connector.
 6. Attach any cleaning adapters supplied with your endoscope for manual flushing through the suction and imigation valve ports
as well as the instrument channel port. Using a syringe, inject enzymatic detergent through each port until it flows completely
through each of the channels.
7.F
Remove the endoscope from the enzymatic detergent bath, and rinse it thoroughly with clean dermineralized water. Rinse the
 channels by flushing copious amounts of dermineralized water through each of the channels (see Step 6), until water runs clear.
 8. Attach the cleaning adapters one at a time to an air pump or to a pressunized air gun (not to exceed the pressure deemed safe
by the manufacturer) and inject air until all the water is expelled. Altermatively a large syringe can be use to blow air through
the channels. Wipe down the endoscope with a soft, dry. lint-free cloth until it is completely dry. Rinse and dry valves and chan-
 nel cap from Step 3 above.
 9. Store the endoscope in a hanging position, in a protected area to prevent damage.
10. Note: Before the next procedure, replace the valves and channel cap. perform a leakage test, and check that all channels are
 patent and functioning.
 Nore: The above recommendations are for manual cleaning only. When sterilization or high-level disinfection is indicated, see owner's manual for recommendations
 pertaining to the specific endoscope.
22
■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
BOX1-2
Supplies for Cleaning Flexible Endoscopes
Leakage tester (supplied by endoscope manufacturer)
Suction pump (same pump used for endoscopic
procedure)
 Two stainless steel bowls
Enzymatic detergent (diluted as per instructions for
deaning endoscopes)
Soft cloths or sponges
Channel cleaning brushes (supplied by endoscope
 manufacturer)
 Demineralized or distilled water
Figure 1-39 The endoscope is completely immersed in enzymatic
Large basin or sink for immersing entire endoscope
detergent and carefully wiped clean with a soft sponge. (Photo
Cleaning adapters (supplied by endoscope manufacturer)
courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Large syringe (60 mL)
Air pump or pressurized air gun (optional)
Hgure 1-40 The external surface ofthe endoscope is dried with a
clean, soft, lint-free towel. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GrmbH é
Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Although most modern endoscopes and video camera
heads are completely soakable, the manufacturer's instruc-
tions should be consulted before a piece of equipment is
Figure 1-38 Bottom: Assembled trocar and cannula. Middle:
immersed in fluids. Immersible fberscopes are generally
Trocar only. Top: Disassembled cannula with trocar pin in place
equipped with a pressure tester, or manometer, which is
holding valve open to expose all surfaces to disinfectant. ( Photo
used to detect small leaks before they cause major damage
courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
(see Figure 1-8). A leakage test should be performed before a
flexible scope is immersed in any liquid.
infectious agents and before any endoscopic examination of
After initial cleaning, all instruments should be thor-
the respiratory or reproductive tract.
 oughly rinsed and dried before sterilization, reassembly, or
For each piece of equipment, the operator should refer to
storage. A soff cloth may be used to dry external surfaces
the manufacturer's instructions for disassembly that may be
(Figure l-40). Accessory channels and other unexposed
required for thorough mechanical cleaning of all parts that
areas where moisture has entered may also be dried with a
might have been exposed to organic matter. This is especially
high-pressure air gun (Figure 1-41). Rigid endoscopes and
true for rigid endoscopy equipment such as trocars, cannulae
instruments are best stored in a protective case that may
(Figure 1-38), sheaths, and hand instruments. Without proper
 also serve as a sterilization tray, depending on the method
disassembly, many of these items will retain blood, moisture,
of sterilization employed (Figure 1-42). When feasible, flex-
and debris in hard-to-reach areas, which may cause contami
ible endoscopes should be stored in a hanging position rather
nation ofthe patient or prevent the smooth functioning ofthe
than in storage cases (Figure 1-43). Storage in a hanging
instrument's moving parts. A soft brush or sponge should be
position allows for drainage and airing of residual moisture
used to clean all surfaces meticulously (Figure 1-39).
and also minimizes the stress placed on fiberoptic bundles.
CHA PTER 1   Endoscopic Instrumentation and Documentation for Flexible and Rigid Endoscopy 
23
Figure 1-41 A high-pressure air gun may be used to dry accessory
channels and other hard-to-reach areas. (Photo courtesy of Karl
Storz GmbH  Co. KG,Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Hgure 1-43 Endoscopy cart with flexible endoscope stored in a
hanging position. ( Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG,
Tuttlingen,Germany.)
 parts of instruments, such as jaws, hinges, and screws, should
also be routinely lubricated according to the manufacturer's
recommendations, with silicone oil, or with instrument milk.
High-level disinfection or sterilization of most high-
quality endoscopes may be accomplished with the use of
ETO gas sterilization or cold disinfection in a glutaraldehyde
solution (Figure 1-44). The specific manufacturer's instruc-
tions should be consulted before an endoscope is soaked
or gas sterilized. The attachment of a pressure compensa-
tion cap is typically required to prevent damage during gas
sterilization of flexible endoscopes. That same cap must be
removed during soaking so that fluid da mage is prevented.
A 2%, 14-day, low-surfactant glutaraldehyde solu-
B
tion such as Cidex or MetriCide is usually recommended
Figure 1-42 Sterilization and storage trays for rigid endoscope and
for cold disinfection because the 28- and 30-day solutions
instruments (A) and endoscopic video camera head (B). (Photos
 contain surfactants. Surfactants are wetting agents, which
courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
reduce the surface tension of the solution, making it wetter
than water, thus allowing the disinfectant to penetrate into
Ultrasonic cleaners provide an excellent adjunct to
small cracks and crevices. The rinse water, however, may not
 mechanical cleaning of instruments with moving parts, such
get into all the same cracks and crevices and therefore may
as laparoscopic graspers and flexible biopsy forceps. Ultrasonic
leave a residue that can build up over time when small par-
cleaning should not be applied to instrumentation with optics,
ticles of organic matter contact the residual glutaraldehyde.
such as a telescope, fiberscope, or camera head. The moving
After soaking for the appropriate time in the glutaraldehyde
24■PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
Hgure 1-46 A sterilized miniature laparoscopy set (3 mm) ready
camera head, bipolar coagulating forceps with cable, scissors, grasp-
STORZ
ing forceps, telescope, Veress needle, and trocars with threaded
cannulae.
Figure 1-44 A flexible endoscope and valves being soaked in a 2%
glutaraldehyde solution for high-level disinfection. ( Photo courtesy
B0X 1-3
of Karl Storz GmbH  Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Common User-Related Causes of Endoscope
Damage
1. Bitten-insertion tube resulting from failure to use an
oral speculum
2. Damage to the channel caused by forced passage of
instruments or use of oversized or broken instruments
 3. Sticky or inoperable biopsy forceps and other accesso-
nies caused by delayed or improper cleaning
4. Kinked biopsy forceps or brushes caused by failure
to grasp the accessory dlose to the channel valve and 
advance using short, repeated strokes
 5. Progressive damage leading to a major repair as a
result of postponed repair of minor problems
6. Rough handling such as sharply bending the insertion
Figure 1-45 After soaking in glutaraldehyde solution, all endo-
tube or light-guide cord, closing the instnument in the
scopes and instruments should be thoroughly rinsed in sterile water.
hinge of the carrying case, or dropping the endoscope
7. Damage caused by cleaning or disinfection using a
method not approved by the manufacturer (e.g..
autoclaving)
solution according to the ma nufacturer's recommendations,
8. Use of inappropniate cleaning agents or disinfectants;
the instrumentation should be thoroughly rinsed with sterile
use of acceptable agents with improper dilution and 
water (Figure 1-45), dried with sterile towels, and then laid
contact time
 out on a sterile drape ready for surgery (Figure 1-46).
9. Sticky air/water and suction valves caused by improper
Although most instrumentation not containing optics
deaning and lubrication 
(e.g, forceps, cannulae, and sheaths) is autoclavable, the
10. Obstruction or sticking of small parts of the instrument
endoscopes and camera heads may not be. For autoclavable
caused by failure to clean the instrument immediately
after the procedure
endoscopes and camera heads, verify with the manufacturer
which cycles and temperatures are approved. As an alterna-
tive to sterilizing camera heads for surgical procedures, the
Modified from Barlow DE: Fiberoptic instrument technology. In Tams TR, editor:
use of sterile, disposable, plastic sleeves available from most
Small animal enooscooy, St Louis, 1990, Mosby.
endoscope suppliers is both simple and cost-effective. The
busy practice may find it worthwhile to purchase as many
 Proper care and handling of endoscopes and associated
autoclavable components as possible, or even duplicate tele-
instruments definitely increase the life span of this equip-
 scopes and instruments, in the interest of accommodating
 ment. User-related damage is often caused by inappropriate
multiprocedure days, when the turnaround time of sterile
cleaning practices (Box 1-3). By thoroughly training selected 
equipment is essential to the productivity of the practice.
 staff in endoscope care as described by the manufacturer, a
Alternatively, the endoscopy technician should be trained
veterinary practice should benefit from the routine use of a
in fast turnaround using the glutaraldehyde soaking method
quality endoscope for many years, and only minimal repairs
(only to be employed after thorough mechanical cleaning of
should be required.
the instruments), which can be accomplished in about 30 to
 A troubleshooting guide that reviews various problems
45 minutes.
and solutions pertaining to endoscopes appears in Table 1-3.
CHA PTE R   Endoscopic Instrumentation and Documentation for Fexible and Rigid Endoscopy   Z
25
 Table 1-3 Troubleshooting Guide for Endoscopes
Symptom
Possible problem
Remedy
mage is not clear
Fogged or dirty objective lens
Feed water to remove stool, mucus, and other debris
from objective lens. Blot distal lens of nigid scopes on
live tissue and apply antifog agent to lens.
Dirty eyepiece, carmera, or adapter
 Clean using cotton swab moistened with alcohol.
Lens not adjusted to operator's eyesight 
Rotate diopter adjustment rings on endoscope and/or
camera until image is clear.
 Internal fluid damage
 Moisture within instrument will permanently cloud lenses
 in distal end or eyepiece (repair by manufacturer)
mage is too dark or too bright
Dirty light guide
 Clean light-guide connector and distal tip using gauze
moistened with alcohol.
Improper light source or camera settings
 Adjust brightness control knob, camera gain, or manual
aperture setting.
Old or improperly installed lamp
 Properly install lanp: replace old lamp.
Air or water feeding is absent or
Air/water nozzle clogged
Soak distal end in enzymatic cleaning solution; feed water
insufficient
saueuo laemyle yonoiun uonjos deos sewzua io
Air/water nozzle missing or deformed
Send instrument for repair.
Air/water valve dirty
Rermove valve; clean and lubricate with silicone oil.
Air pump not operating
Turn on switch on light source or pump.
Water bottle not airtight
Tighten or replace cap or bottle.
No water is feeding 
Water bottle either empty or too full
 Fill two-thirds full.
Air/water valve is sticky
Dirty valve
Remove valve; cdlean and lubricate with silicone oil.
 Constant air is feeding
Dity air/water valve
Remove valve; clean and replace.
Suction is absent or insufficient 
 Suction channel obstructed
Remove suction valve and pass cleaning brush through
suction channels in both insertion tube and universal
cord.
 Instrument channel cap is open
 Close cap on instrument channel. Replace cap, if
necessary.
Dirty suction valve
Remove valve; clean and lubricate with silicone oil.
Suction pump problems
 Check suction tube connections, pump collection jar cap,
float valve, and settings
Suction valve is sticky
Dirty valve
Remove valve; clean and lubricate with silicone oil
 Resistance is present when
Angulation locks engaged
Place locks in "free" position
rotating angulation control
knobs
Tip deflection is not normal 
Amount of tip deflection less than
Send instrument for repair.
 specifications
Accessory does not pass through
 Bent or kinked forceps shaft. Wrong size
 Discard and replace with new forceps: when inserting
 channel smoothly
instrument
accessory, use repeated short strokes, grasping
accessory close to biopsy valve.
 Forceps do not operate smoothly
 Bent or kinked forceps shaft
Discard and replace with new forcep5.
Dirty forceps cups
Soak in enzymatic cleaning solution and brush to remove
debris; routine use of an ultrasonic cleaner to aid in
cleaning small cup hinges is recommended if problem
persists; lubricate forceps with silicone oil or surgical
instrument milk
No image on TV monitor, or black Connector into front of camera processor
 Clean and dry connector and replace securely
 and white inmage only
is not fully inserted, dirty, or wet
Video cables between carmera processor
Tighten connections and replace cables, if necessary.
and monitor are faulty or not tightly
connected
One or more devices in video chain not
Check that all devices in video chain are turmed on.
activated
Modified from Barlow DE: Fiberoptic instrument technology In Tams TR, editor: Sma/f anima/ endoscooy, St Louis, 1990, Mosby,
26·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
SUGGesteD
READING
Barlow DE: Fiberoptic instrument technology. In Tams TR, editor:
Coller JA, Murray JI: Equipment. In Ballantyne GH, Leahy PF, Modlin
Small animal endoscopy, St Louis, 1990, Mosby.
 IM, editors: Laparoscopic surgery, Philadelphia, 1994, Saunders.
Chamness CJ: Endoscopic instrumentation. In Tams TR, editor: Small
Hulka JF, Reich H: Textbook of laparoscopy, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1994,
animal endoscopy, St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
Saunders.
Chamness CJ: Instrumentation. In Lhermette P, Sobel D, editors:
Lamar AM: Standard fberoptic equipment and its care. In Traub-
BSAVA manual of canine and feline endoscopy and endosurgery,
Dargatz JL, Brown CM, editors: Equine endoscopy, St Louis, 1990,
Quedgeley, 2008, British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Mosby.
 Chamness Ci: Introduction to veterinary endoscopy and endoscopic
McCarthy TC, McDermaid SL: Cystoscopy, Vet Clin North Am 20:5,
instrumentation. In McCarthy TC, editor: Veterinary endoscopy for
1990.
the small animal practitioner, St Louis, 2005, Saunders.
CHAPTER
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy:
Instrumentation, Handling
Technique, Training, and
Implementation in Practice
Todd R. Tams
 many potential applications for the use of flexible endoscopy
most fundamental methods of examining the GI tract. It is
instrumentation is essential (Box 2-1), and success in fully
a well-established procedure in veterinary medicine. The
implementing endoscopy services into the practice's core
opportunity to examine directly and obtain tissue samples
procedures program depends on the veterinarian's ability to
from the esophagus, stomach, and intestinal tract has greatly
effectively educate clients about the value of endoscopy as a
altered the clinical approach to diagnosis and made signifi-
diagnostic procedure and to make clear and effective recom-
cantly more accurate the treatment of disorders of the diges-
mendations on proper diagnostic assessment.
tive system. Despite the tremendous diagnostic advantages
Subsequent chapters on the digestive system deal individ-
that endoscopy offers, it is still best used by the clinician
ually with the technical points of examining the esophagus,
as an adjunctive procedure in the evaluation of GI disease.
stomach, duodenum, ileum, and colon. The beginner learn-
A thorough history, physical examination, and selected labo-
ing to perform GI endoscopy naturally gives more thought
ratory and diagnostic imaging procedures (e.g-, radiography
to trying to move the instrument from one point to another
and ultrasonography) as appropriate for each individual case
than to careful gross examination and diagnosis of the areas
are still important for thorough patient evaluation. When
 being traversed. As the endoscopist becomes more skilled,
used judiciously, endoscopy offers a valuable alternative to
an almost effortless maneuvering of the endoscope becomes
exploratory surgery for direct examination of tissues, pro-
second nature and the greater part of the time used to per-
curement of biopsy samples, retrieval of foreign bodies, and
form an examination is taken up with careful observation
placement of gastric and jejunal (percutaneous gastrostomy-
 and synthesis of findings in relation to the clinical problem
jejonostomy tube placement) feeding tubes.
 and prior experience. As the reader will find on review of
Endoscopic equipment is no longer considered a luxury
the subsequent digestive system chapters, a combination
that only large referral centers or veterinarians practicing
of impressions from observation and microscopic review of
in affluent areas can justify purchasing. A variety of quality
biopsy samples is often needed for definitive diagnosis (see
instruments, both new and used, are available. This chapter
Chapter 8 for details on gross assessment and pathology).
is concerned with key aspects to be considered in the pur-
Because many disorders affect the upper and lower GI tract,
chase of an endoscope, the technical points of maneuvering
a variety of appearances may be seen with an endoscope. The
GI chapters carefully review the technical points of maneu-
ing an endoscope so that thorough examinations can be
vering the endoscope through these areas and provide an
consistently performed (i.e., gaining proper training), and
recommendations for increasing the use of endoscopy in
suu Ared e aie Adossouono pue Adossopua I saddn
the practice setting (recognizing indications for endoscopy
 of physical diagnosis for the gastroenterologist.
and marketing the procedure successfully). Proper mainte-
nance to promote the maximum life span of the equipment
■ THE DECISION TO PURCHASE
was discussed in Chapter 1. While there are now many small
AN ENDOSCOPE
animal and mixed practices that have purchased endoscopes,
there are also many practices that still vastly underutilize their
For the veterinarian, the selection of equipment to be used
equipment. Patient care can be clearly enhanced through ear-
for performing endoscopy often depends on its versatil-
lier and more frequent use of endoscopy. Recognition of the
 ity of application, durability, and expense. Many practices,
27
28
■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
most skilled endoscopist may find performing a complete
examination and making the correct diagnosis diffcult while
BOX 2-1
using an endoscope of poor quality. High-quality endoscopy
Applications for Flexible Endoscopy (Areas of
equipment will pay for itselfin most practices in 1 to 3 years,
Examination and Procedures)
as long as it is used as often as it can and should be. With
 proper care an endoscope should last many more years.
Flexible Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
■ TRAINING
Esophagoscopy
Gastroscopy
Once the decision is made to purchase an endoscope,
 Enteroscopy (duodenoscopy, jejunoscopy, ileoscopy)
whether new or used, every effort should be made to become
Colonoscopy
 proficient in its use. Internal medicine residency training
 Biopsy of gastrointestinal tissues
programs include extensive training in endoscopy and many
Procurement of brush cytologic samples from gastrointes-
 opportunities to perform procedures under the guidance of
tinal mucosa
experienced faculty through the course of the program ( usu-
Foreign body retrieval
Gastric and intestinal feeding tube placement
ally 3 years). The learning curve for general practice veterinar-
 Ballooning techniques for esophageal and colonic strictures
ians in a private clinical practice setting is more challenging;
Guided rectal and colonic polypectomy procedures (with
nonetheless, learning the basic skills can best be accomplished
cautery)
through aftending at least several formal wet lab courses and
then practicing the skills of maneuvering an endoscope and
Respiratory Endoscopy
procuring biopsy samples within a limited time period after
Nasopharyngoscopy (retroversion of a flexible scope over
the courses while the training information is still freshly in
the soft palate)
mind. Look for courses that offer at least several consecutive
Rhinoscopy (rigid scopes used more conmonly)
days of formal lecture and laboratory skills training. Single-
Laryngoscopy
day introductory classes are offered at some of the large
Tracheoscopy
national or regional veterinary conferences. Although these
Bronchoscopy
 provide good introductory level experience, there simply is
Guided bronchoalveolar lavage
 not enough time with the instructor(s) to gain the necessary
Guided airway brush cytology
endoscope handling skills in a single-day class. That is why it
Foreign body retrieval
is best to enroll in a much more in-depth course where there
will be plenty of laboratory time to repeat newly learned skills
Flexible Urinary Tract Endoscopy
Urethroscopy and cystoscopy in male dogs (rigid
also to learn upper GI endoscopy in cats. I also advise that,
endoscopes are used in female dogs and cats)
if more than one veterinarian at a practice will be perform-
ing endoscopic procedures, it is best that each attend formal
training courses rather than a practice relying on one general-
ist who has attended a course to then train others.
recognizing the full range of capabilities of endoscopy, have
Skills training should include proper handing tech-
been able to financially justify the purchase of high-quality
niques, maneuvering the endoscope through the upper GI
endoscopy equipment. A single scope can be used for a
tract smoothly and efficiently, techniques for traversing the
variety of GI and respiratory procedures. In addition, the
pyloric canal to enter the duodenum, colonoscopy and ileos-
availability of an endoscope often allows earlier access to
 copy, biopsy techniques, and foreign body retrieval. There
examination of the GI tract than if surgery is the only other
is significant value in taking another course to fine-tune the
alternative. Clients almost always opt to have a less invasive
 m pds a yo pod e e is is assi
procedure performed if the capabilities are present, and they
cases at one's practice. This is an excellent opportunity to
often consent to this type of procedure much sooner than
work with experienced instructors to correct any *bad habits"
they would to surgery. Therefore, when consideration is given
that may have been picked up and to simply continue practic.
to the purchase of an endoscope, the most important factors to
ing with the aid of experienced coaches. Endoscopy courses
bereviewed should be the probable frequency of usage and ver-
are advertised through university websites, brochures, semi-
satility of the endoscope rather than the purchase price. Other
 nars, and some of the endoscope company websites (e.g--
important considerations are the quality of the optical system,
www.lifelearn.com, www.ksvea.com, www.vetmed.wsu.edu,
the length and diameter of the insertion tube, the diameter of
www.vet.uga.edu, www.cvmbs.colostate.edu).
the instrument channel, and ease of operating the endoscope.
 Textbooks offer detailed descriptions of procedures and
Significant differences exist! Too frequently veterinarians
an array of normal and abnormal appearances for veterinar-
rank a lower purchase price as one of the most important
ians to refer to in their own practice setting. Training CDs
factors. This can be a significant mistake because even the
are also available (e.g-, www.lifelearn.com). Please see the
■
29
companion website for a demonstration of normal exam
technique.
BOX 2-2
Common Clinical Signs Warranting
Gastrointestinal Flexible Endoscopy
As is the case with successfully mastering any technical pro-
cedure, frequent practice definitely makes a significant differ-
Regurgitation
observation, and sample procurement are not developed, even
Dysphagia
Retching
the most sophisticated endoscopes are oflittle value and exami-
Unexplained salivation/nausea
nation quality will be inferior. Frustration resulting from unfa-
Vomiting
Hermatemesis
of necessary ancillary equipment too often lead to disuse.
Diarrhea
Melena 
 SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION AND
Dyschezia
MARKETING OF ENDOSCOPY SERVICES
Hematochezia
Tenesmus
For any new medical service to be successfully implemented,
Unexplained scooting
the medical staff needs to become properly trained in the
Hatulence
techniques (builds confidence); and the support staff needs
happetence/anorexia
Weight loss
to be included in training and focus on the value they pro-
Abdominal pain
vide in assisting with the procedures and educating clients
(engenders enthusiasm), thoroughly understand the value of
the medical services offered, and ensure that clients are edu-
cated about the various dia gnostic options available for their
pets. Ifthe doctors and support staffully believe in the value
esophagus and entire stomach can be examined immediately
of medical services and are enthusiastic about educating and
before any surgery for linear intestinal foreign body remova!
encouraging clients, success is achievable!
The main reasons practices that have endoscopy equip-
with α history of unexplained vomiting. It is important to
ment do not use the instruments more frequently are failure to
examine the stomach endoscopically in this situation because
recognize and appreciate the many indications for endoscopic
 it is not possible to examine it entirely during exploratory
examination, a lack of expertise in performing the procedures,
laparotomy. This endoscopic examination of the esophagus
being too conservative in recommending earlier use of more
and stomach can be done easily at any hospital that has GI
advanced diagnostic techniques, and not marketing the medi-
ll p si auaadxa radod aso diba adoss
cal services to clients with more enthusiasm and conviction.
 only takes a minute or two to thoroughly examine the esoph-
There are many indications for performing GI endos-
agus and a few more minutes to evaluate the stomach. In this
copy in dogs and cats (Box 2-2), and these are discussed in
way a patient that has esophagitis is recognized early, and
 subsequent chapters. A simple but often overlooked exam-
appropriate therapy can be instituted along with any surveil-
ple of not recognizing indications is the need to check for
lance that will be necessary during the ensuing weeks for any
esophagitis in patients with frequent vomiting. For example,
animal that has significant esophageal injury. In addition,
some dogs and cats with a linear intestinal foreign body
patient care is clearly enhanced. A quick endoscopic exami-
will develop esophagitis, sometimes of a moderate to severe
 nation of the esophagus and stomach done before surgery is
degree, secondary to frequent vomiting ofactivated enzymes,
 charged at a reasonable fee and somewhat lower than what a
acid, and toxins from the GI tract (the same can occur in ani-
full examination (including biopsies) would cost.
mals vomiting frequently from any cause, including parvovi-
 One of the most important advantages of endoscopy is that
rus enteritis and pancreatitis). Esophagitis causes significant
it allows early examination of the GI tract. Too often patients
pain, and significant injury can also result in fbrosis and
with GI disorders do not have a definitive diagnosis established
even stricture formation (see Chapter 3).
soon enough. It is still important to perform basic diagnostic
Veterinarians are at a disadvantage compared with physi-
tests and consider therapeutic dietary trials early in the clini-
cians when faced with determining whether a patient may
cal course, but sometimes the preliminary assessment coupled
have esophagitis. Physicians rely on clinical signs described
with various trial therapies goes on for far too long before more
by the patient. Veterinarians do not have this luxury. Many
definitive diagnostic steps are taken. Although pet owners may
 animal patients with esophagitis are missed because clinicians
do not consider the possibility of gastroesophageal reflux dis-
usually because of concerns related to the requirement for
ease (GERD) and because our patients are simply unable to
anesthesia or cost constraints, an important part of the mar-
“"tell us.” Therefore, I recommend that endoscopy be done rou-
keting of endoscopy is to educate clients about the value of
early examination, especially in patients with intermittent or
30·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
early chronic vomiting (10 to 14 days or longer). Of course,
(working length) and have four-way distal tip deflection
routine baseline tests should be done first as part of the ini-
with at least 180-degree upward deflection, water flushing,
tial screening diagnostic plan (e.g, a complete blood count,
 air insufflation and suction capabilities, independent locking
complete biochemical profle, urinalysis, fecal examination
deflection controls, an accessory (instrument) channel with
[centrifugal flotation combined with a Giardia antigen test],
a diameter of 2 mm or greater, and forward-viewing optics.
abdominal radiographs, and dietary trials, as deemed appro-
Most newer endoscopes now feature an upper deflection
 priate). When a definitive diagnosis is established early it not
capability of 210 degrees, and the latest model endoscopes
only can decrease overall costs to the client but also, very
made specifically for use in small animals have insertion tube
importantly, can effect better patient care through an earlier
lengths of 140 cm. Newer instruments that are fluid tight and
 determination of specific therapy for the patient's condition.
immersible are easier to clean.
Further, endoscopy is a very successful method for removing
Veterinarians are cautioned against purchasing endo-
foreign bodies from the upper GI tract of dogs and cats; its
scopes with two-way, rather than four-way, distal tip deflec-
success rate is greater than 80% (see Chapter 7 for details on
tion capability for use in examining the GI tract. Many of
foreign body retrieval). Clients naturally are very pleased when
these endoscopes are also relatively short (50 to 80 cm) and
foreign bodies can be removed via endoscopy at less cost and
were originally manufactured as bronchoscopes. Although
 in a much less invasive way as compared with surgery.
 often less expensive (especially when sold as used equip-
Besides the value of early diagnosis, another key feature
ment), these endoscopes are not versatile enough to facilitate
 of endoscopy is that it is safe and minimally invasive. The
a smooth and thorough examination of the stomach, antral
anesthetic risk factors of each individual patient are the only
canal, duodenum, and colon. A complete examination can
consideration. Clients almost always opt to have a less inva-
be performed in some cases, but maneuvering through the
sive procedure performed if the capabilities are present, and
 antral canal, pylorus, and duodenum is considerably more
they often consent to this type of procedure much sooner
 difficult with a two-way rather than a four-way endoscope.
than they would to surgery.
Also, the shorter length precludes duodenal examination in
 Finally, other marketing techniques can include providing
many dogs, which is important in all cases in which vomiting.
clients with a few representative photos from their pet's proce-
diarrhea, or weight loss is part of the clinical presentation.
dure (see Chapter 1 for a discussion on image capture devices),
The ability to routinely perform a thorough examination of
using a library of photos (e.g-, textbook atlas photos or photos
the stomach and descending duodenum in the majority of
from the hospital'sfles)toexplain the value ofendoscopy,pro-
patients who undergo endoscopy is well worth the added
viding client handouts describing endoscopy for animals, and
expense of a more versatile endoscope.
illustrating case reports in client newsleters or on examination
Careful thought must be given to the insertion tube diam-
room walls. The bottom line is that when the doctors and staff
eter and length of the endoscope. Until recently, most endo-
make recommendations with enthusiasm and conviction, the
number of procedures that are done will increase significantly.
humans and often classified as adult or pediatric. Insertion
 For hospitals that do not offer endoscopy, this section provides
tube diameters ofendoscopes manufactured for examination
many reasons to consider referral for endoscopy.
of the human upper GI tract range from 6.0 (pediatric size) to
12.8 mm and often have a working length of around 100 cm.
Fiberscopes manufactured for veterinary use are available in
■ SELECTION OF ENDOSCOPIC
an insertion tube diameter size as small as 7.8 mm. Smaller
INSTRUMENTS: MAKING THE
diameter video endoscopes with larger instrument chan-
CORRECT CHOICE
nels (up to 2.8 mm) are now available (see Chapter 1 for
mechanical details on fiberscopes and video endoscopes).
Many types of endoscopes are available. A standard upper
Most endoscopes used currently in small animal practice are
GI endoscope suitable for esophagogastroduodenoscopy
in the range of 7.8 to 9.8 mm (Figure 2-1), and even smaller
(EGD) in dogs and cats should be a minimum of 100 cm long
diameter video endoscopes will be available in the future.
viewing field of view, 140-cm working length, 2.2-mm instrument channel, and four-way tip defection. The range of tip bending is 210
CHAPTER 2  Gastrointestinal Endoscopy: Instrumentation, Handling Technique, Training, and Implementation in Practice  ■ 31
The inner working channel diameter of the human and vet-
before suction can be used to remove a large amount of air
erinary endoscopes varies based on insertion tube diameter
or fluid. However, this is not a significant drawback because
but ranges from 2 to 2.8 mm.
simultaneous use of instruments and suction is not usually
Veterinarians purchasing their first endoscope should con-
required, except during some procedures for retrieval of gas-
sider a single high-quality endoscope that may be used for both
tric foreign bodies. The smaller working channel does not
upper (EGD) and lower (colonoscopy and ileoscopy) GI endos-
accommodate certain accessory instruments such as larger
copy in cats and small dogs,in which scope diameter is a key
biopsy instruments and some of the larger foreign body
consideration, and in larger breed dogs, in which scope length
graspers. However, other instruments can be used effectively
is α more important consideration. Although specialty hospi-
for biopsy and foreign body removal, so these limitations are
tals will generally have a variety of endoscopes available to
quite minor. No substitute exists for a thorough examina-
facilitate all types of examinations in the smallest to largest
tion, and the pediatric endoscope offers this capability to the
 of small animal patients, it is not feasible for most general
endoscopist better than any other type of endoscope. With
practices to purchase more than one to two flexible endo-
the use of proper instruments for biopsy and foreign body
scopes. Thus, for general practices, the key consideration is
 retrieval in addition to good ancillary instrument technique,
focused on the versatility of a single scope. Referral to a well-
endoscopes with 2-mm biopsy channels still work well.
equipped specialty center should be considered in situations
 The ideal working length of an endoscope for small ani-
in which the available scope is not suitable for the size of
mal practice is 140 cm because it provides suffcient length to
the patient. GI scopes can also sometimes be used for bron-
reach the duodenum in the largest of dogs. A 100-cm scope,
choscopy procedures in medium to large size dogs. Human
the type that is still commonly found in general small animal.
pediatric scopes have an excellent diameter for small animal
 practices, is too short to reach the duodenum of larger dogs,
 patients, but their length of 100 cm is too short to reach the
which could include any dog weighing more than 27 kg
duodenum of many larger dogs. This, however, is an excel-
(60 1bs). A 100-cm scope can actually be long enough to reach
lent scope for feline-only practices (100-cm working length
the duodenum of some dogs weighing 35 to 40 kg (77 to
 and 7.8-mm diameter, e.g., Olympus XP-20).
90 lbs), but in dogs of certain breeds that weigh less, the
The insertion tube diameter should range from 7.8 to
length simply may be insufficient (Figure 2-2). There are
9.8 mm. The major limitation of a larger insertion tube
significant differences among breeds, so for maximal versa-
(greater than 9 mm) is that passing it through the pyloric
tility the longer scope is best. The 140-cm veterinary scopes
canal to the duodenum in cats and small dogs is more dif-
have a small enough diameter (7.8 to 9 mm) that they can be
ficult. This is a function of both the level of expertise of the
used for duodenoscopy in most cats. Most specialty practices
endoscopist and the size of the pyloric canal. Even experts
will maintain both a long scope and a shorter one of smaller
will be unable to advance a 9.8-mm endoscope through the
pylorus of some cats. Great care must be taken when attempt-
because it is possible to cause a perforation in the stomach iftoo
much force is exerted in a tight canal. The endoscopist who
acquires adequate maneuvering skills will be able to rou-
tinely traverse the pyloric canal to enter the duodenum, even
in most animals as small as 1.4 to 1.8 kg (3 to 4 1bs), when
using a smaller diameter endoscope (7.8 to 9.0 mm). The
larger endoscopes can be used effectively in many animals,
but a complete examination in very small patients is inher-
ently more difficult. This becomes an important consider-
ation for any urban practice in which many feline and small
canine patients are seen.
What is sacrificed when a pediatric or small animal vet-
erinary endoscope is purchased rather than a larger diameter
endoscope? Pediatric endoscopes have instrument channels
of 2 to 2.5 mm, whereas the larger units often have instru-
 ment channels with diameters up to 2.8 mm. This is chang-
ing, however, with newer technology video endoscopes
that have a larger instrument channel in a small-diameter
insertion tube. The larger instrument channel (2.5 mm to
Hgure 2-2 Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed on a
 23-kg (50-lb) dog using an endoscope with a working length of
2.8 mm) allows for the use of suction while biopsy forceps or
 another instrument is present in the channel. Simultaneous
100 cm. The endoscope has been maximally advanced, and the
control knobs are very close to the patient's mouth. The endoscope
suction with a smaller working channel is not as effective; the
siul un wmuaponp [euixoid al yean on yanoua Suol Aiaieq s5m
instrument usually needs to be withdrawn from the channel
particular dog.
32·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Indications for endoscopic cannulation of the biliary and
pancreatic ducts are extremely limited in veterinary medicine
because cholelithiasis, one of the major indications for ERCP
in people, is uncommon. In addition, endoscopes designed
for ERCP in people can often only be used in medium to
large dogs because of the diameter of these instruments
(greater than 10.5 mm). Despite the advantage of more thor-
ough circumferential examination of the duodenal bulb and
descending duodenum that side-viewing endoscopes offer,
their acquisition for use in animal patients is not practical.
■ ANCILLARY EQUIPMENT
A variety of ancillary instruments are available for use in
EGD procedures. Minimal equipment should include excel-
  oq    -
 ments, and brushes for cytologic specimen procurement.
Selection and use of these accessory instruments is described
in subsequent chapters (see Chapters 7 and 8).
Figure 2-3 Upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy performed on a
77-kg (170-lb) Irish wolfhound using an endoscope with a working
■ PURCHASE OF USED EQUIPMENT
length of 140 cm. The endoscope has been maximally advanced, and
there was suffcient length to reach the mid descending duodenum
First consider what the endoscope will be usedforin the major-
in this giant-breed dog. A 100-cm-long endoscope would have been
ity of procedures. In the selection of an endoscope, it may be
inadequate for performing a complete upper GI endoscopy in this
 more feasible for a veterinary practice to acquire used equip-
8op
ment, which is often available at a reduced cost. Attention
should first be paid to the types of procedures that will be
diameter (e.g., 100 cm in length and 7.8 mm or less in diam-
 done and the versatility required of an endoscope (see previ-
eter) to facilitate examination of the smallest cats and dogs.
ous section describing endoscope dimensions most suitable
For practices that do not have a scope longer than 100 cm,
for small animal practice). The majority of used endoscopes
referral should be considered if an upper small bowel exami-
available today and suitable for use in small animal patients
nation will be needed for a large dog (Figure 2-3).
have an insertion tube length of 100 cm. There are fewer
140-cm used scopes on the market (the most recommended
THE SIDE-VIEWING ENDOSCOPE
model today for small animal practice) because these models
made for veterinary medicine only became available recently.
Oblique-viewing and side-viewing endoscopes have been
A 100-cm used endoscope as the sole endoscope would be
designed for the technique of endoscopic retrograde chol-
feasible for an emergency practice in which the majority of
angiopancreatography (ERCP) in human medicine, more
procedures performed would be esophagoscopy and gastros-
thorough visualization of “blind areas" of the duode-
 copy examinations for retrieval of foreign bodies. Specialty
num that cannot always be visualized well with a standard
forward-viewing endoscope, and accurate biopsy of lesions
for backup and for use in very small patients in whom the
in cases in which maintaining ideal alignment is difficult
 scope is easier to advance through the pyloric canal.
with a forward-viewing endoscope. These potentially blind
The buyer should first be satisfied that no excessive wear
areas in animals and humans include the medial wall of the
or damage to any part of the instrument is present. With
descending duodenum and the area of the duodenal bulb
fberscopes, the objective lens (eyepiece) should be looked
just beyond the pylorus; however, the majority of these
through for any clouding of the field, which may indicate
areas may be seen with skillful maneuvering of a forward-
that water has entered the insertion tube as a result of dam-
viewing endoscope. Although recesses beyond the pylorus
age or mishanding. The covering of the insertion tube of
may be difficult to view, lesions in those areas offen pro-
any used endoscope, whether a fberscope or video endo-
duce secondary regional changes that can be detected. These
scope, should be checked for holes, cracks, or roughened
changes, which may include edema, erythema, or deformity
areas that might allow leakage. The endoscope should be
of the pylorus, alert the endoscopist to examine the area
 connected to the power supply, and the light transmission
thoroughly in case a surgical exploratory examination may
bundle should be checked for the intensity of the light. If
 be warranted for defnitive diagnosis. Lesions in the blind
broken fiber bundles in a fiberscope exist, they will appear
 areas primarily include ulcers and neoplasia and are rare in
through the eyepiece as black dots (Figure 2-4). An exces-
dogs and cats.
 sive number of broken fiber bundles may preclude proper
CHAPTER 2  Gastrointestinal Endoscopy: Instrumentation, Handling Technique, Training, and Implementation in Practice  ■ 33
endoscope, and other errors may lead to expensive repair
bills or destruction of an endoscope. Fortunately, as endo-
scopic technology has advanced, instrument durability has
 improved and the margin for error has decreased. Neverthe-
less, an endoscope should always be handled with the great-
est possible care.
 Proper care involves checking the basic function of the
endoscope before each use, using correct and uniform han-
 ding methods during each procedure, and employing cor-
rect cleaning and storage methods. Great care should be
taken to ensure that the distal tip is not allowed to strike a
hard surface, as can occur if the insertion tube is carelessly
allowed to swing into a wall or sink. One blow can result in
serious damage. The distal deflecting portion of the insertion
tube should not be directly manipulated by the fingers; the
control knobs should be used to check the range of motion
of the deflecting tip. Excessive force on the directional con-
uodu aeioadsa si s papioae aq saemie pnous sion
to remember in procedures with diffcult-to-traverse areas
because the natural tendency is to aggressively force the con-
Figure 2-4 Note the multiple black dots in the field of view in an
trols in an attempt to quickly change the direction of the tip,
older model fiberscope. These dots represent broken fiber bundles.
which enhances the endoscope's movement. Although tech-
nologic advances in the production of flexible endoscopes
 endoscopic visualization; thus an endoscope damaged in this
have improved durability considerably, all these precau-
way should not be purchased. There should be no scratches
tions are still necessary. A linear motion (i.e., straight in and
or fluid condensation on the inside of either the eyepiece or
straight out) is used to connect and disconnect the endo-
the distal-tip viewing window.
scope from the light source. Twisting or rocking motions
To determine whether tip angulation approximates
 during disconnection may cause malalignment of the con-
original manufacturer specifications and whether the con-
 necting pins or result in even more serious damage.
trol knobs work smoothly and effectively, the buyer should
use the control knobs to deflect the distal tip of the inser-
Immediately Before Starting a Procedure
tion tube through its full range of motion. Over the course
of many procedures, the cables that control tip deflction
An endoscope should be checked before each use to ensure
become stretched, causing the degree of tip angulation
that it works. For verifying that the air/water and suction
to gradually decrease. This may cause difficulties when
valves are functional and that the air/water nozzle at the
attempting to maneuver the endoscope through the nar-
distal tip is not plugged, the best method is to place the distal
row, sharply curving channels of the pylorus and proximal
tip in a bowl of water and check each function independently.
 duodenum and when a retroversion maneuver is performed
The distal tip deflection controls are checked to ensure that
in the stomach. The air/water and suction devices should
they are functional, and the objective lens is looked through
also be checked.
(fberscopes) for any clouding of the feld or any abnormal
 Because repair work on endoscopy equipment can be
accumulation of moisture. This “spot check" takes less than
expensive, used endoscopes should not be purchased with
a minute and is especially important when more than one
-bq aq pmom Aauo 'dn paxy, aq ueo Aaul ieyi eapi a
clinician is using the endoscope. In addition, as described in
ter spent on a new high-quality scope, which, with proper
Chapter 1, a leak testshould ideally be done before each use and
 care, can be fully functional for hundreds or even thousands
before any thorough cleaning.
of procedures. In addition, the sophisticated technologic
Any ancillary instruments or supplies that might be
advances available with new endoscopes make many proce-
needed during a procedure should be ready before the proce-
dures much easier to perform than with older endoscopes.
dure is started. If they are not, the procedure may have to be
interrupted to search for a necessary piece of equipment. If
 CARE, HANDLING, AND PREPARATION
working with minimal technical assistance, the endoscopist
FOR PROCEDURES
may even have to remove the endoscope from the patient
 and leave to find needed equipment.
Endoscopes should be cared for meticulously. Routine
Suction capability is essential for all GI endoscopy exa m-
attention to detail promotes maximal endoscope life span
inations and is used to remove air and fluid from the GI
and efficiency. Mishandling, overly aggressive or forceful use
tract. A portable suction unit is either kept on the endos-
 of the controls, failure to prevent an animal from biting the
 copy cart or positioned close by. Tubing from the suction
34·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
unit is attached to the suction port on the endoscope. With
the suction unit turned on, suction is activated by depress-
ing the suction button on the endoscope housing. During
 a GI endoscopy procedure, air must be insufflated into the
area being examined so that there is sufficient distension
to facilitate clear visualization. Fluids can be removed via
suctioning so that a clearer view is afforded, and if there is
excessive air, the endoscopist has direct control in quickly
removing it. Before finishing a procedure and awakening
the patient, as much air should be removed via suction
from the stomach and esophagus as possible. The suction
unit is also used after the procedure during the cleaning
process. Some hospitals continue to use older model and
Hgure 2-5 Biopsy forceps cups and adjacent hinge. The cups
disturbingly loud suction units. Newer, very quiet suction
sometimes lock in an open or closed configuration after drying.
units are available (e.g., Medela Vario 18, Medela Inc.,
McHenry, Ill.) and are convenient for use in animal hos-
 pitals, where they also keep the work environment quieter
and more pleasant.
an a ps sq ao p sa aso
available. Because cup biopsy forceps tend to lock in the
position in which they dry, any tension must be relieved
before the instrument can be used. A locked forceps can
break if it is opened or closed too forcefully. If the forceps
cups are locked in a closed position, they can be soaked in
warm water or mineral oil for several seconds, then gently
separated with the use of a small-gauge needle or gentle fin-
Hgure 2-6 Sheathed (guarded) cytology brush for obtaining
gernail pressure. Once the forceps cups are freed, the finger
 mucus samples or brushings from masses.
control at the top of the instrument is used to open and close
the forceps cups several times to ensure that they are mov
ing freely. If the cups are locked in an open position, they
 are soaked for several seconds in warm water; gentle digital
pressure is then applied to the cups to initiate closure, and
finger control is used as previously indicated to ensure that
the cups are moving freely. Dipping the forceps cups and
the hinge adjacent to the cups (Figure 2-5) in mineral oil
 before storage or leaving a small sponge soaked with mineral
 oil between the cups during storage may help prevent their
locking.
A sheathed cytology brush may sometimes be needed to
obtain specimens, such as brushings from a gastric or duo-
 denal mass or intestinal mucus for parasitic analysis. (See
Chapter 8 for further information on the use of cytology
brushes in GI endoscopy.) Commercially available dispos-
 able cytology brushes (e.g., Boston Scientific, Natick, Mass.)
are relatively inexpensive (Figure 2-6). A new brush should
Hgure 2-7 Oral speculum securely in place for an esopha-
be used for each procedure. Because these brushes are diffi
gogastroduodenoscopy procedure.Ideal placement is on the
cult to clean adequately, cells from one sample may be trans-
dependent canine teeth. The endotracheal tube is tied ventrally,
ferred to the cytologic sample of another patient if a brush is
and the patient's head is positioned at the end ofthe table.
used on more than one patient.
One of the most important pieces of ancillary equipment
has been removed. Expensive endoscopes have been ruined
for any upper GI study in small animals is an oral specu-
 by neglecting to prevent this possibility. Ideal placement is
 pauad ane sanpanod i addn (-7 anbi) 
 on the dependent canine teeth so that interference to the
the animal under general anesthesia, and the use of an oral
 endoscopist's right hand is minimized when the insertion
speculum is imperative for guarding against an animal bit-
tube is grasped close to the patient's mouth (i.e., as much
ing the insertion tube either when not anesthetized deeply
 open space should be created around the patient's nose and
 enough or when unexpectedly awaking before the endoscope
mouth as possible).
■35
If photographs will be taken, the image capture device
should be turned on and a ledger prepared so that each
photograph is recorded (see Chapter 1 for information
 on image capture devices). Two pans of clean distilled or
demineralized water, of which one should contain an enzy.
matic cleansing solution (e.g-, Enzol, EZ-Zyme, or Metri-
Zyme), should be prepared before the start of a procedure
and should be placed nearby so thatthe cleaning process can
be started as soon as the endoscope is withdrawn from the
 patient. The instrument channel should be suctioned clean
immediately after each procedure before any body fluids
such as saliva, gastric fluid, and bile are allowed to dry in
the working channel. Cleaning procedures are discussed in
detail in Chapter 1.
The Work Area
Hgure 2-8 Standard equipment positioning. The endoscopy cart
A limited amount of space is needed to perform endo-
and equipment are positioned to the right, and the anesthesia
machine is positioned to the left. The endoscopist stands directly
scopic procedures. If convenient, the use of a sink table
at the head of the table, not off to the side.
with a grate is recommended so that any removal of patient
secretions or cleaning of equipment can be performed
conveniently during a procedure. A single cart with sey.
■ THE ENDOSCOPY ASSISTANT
eral shelves, such as a unit custom made by the endoscope
manufacturing company, allows for safe storage and easy
The number of veterinarians in a private practice or institu-
transport of the light source, suction unit, and all ancil-
tion who use the endoscopy equipment should be restricted to
lary equipment necessary to perform endoscopy. Custom
 carts can be obtained from endoscopy supply companies at
ment safely and effectively and maintain it properly. In some
 a reasonable cost and are the best suited for keeping every-
institutions, the use of endoscopy equipment is limited to
thing secure, convenient, and ready to use. The cart should
 one or two specialists; in other institutions all clinicians have
be wired with an electrical system so that the light source
access to the equipment. Regardless of the situation, a lim-
 and suction unit cords can be plugged directly into the cart.
ited number of technicians should also be trained to assist
Only a single electrical outlet is then needed for the exten-
 with all aspects of endoscopic procedures, including patient 
sion cord from the cart. Some carts include a built-in rack
and equipment preparation, patient monitoring during the
for hanging a GI scope.
 procedure, and cleanup (Box 2-3).
I prefer to have the endoscopy cart positioned to the right
The endoscopy assistant is responsible for preparing the
at the front of the procedure table and the anesthesia unit
procedure area before each use. The light source, suction
 positioned on the leff side. The endoscopist stands at the
unit, patient monitoring devices, and anesthesia machine
front of the table, not to one side or the other. The endos-
should be checked carefully to ensure that the equipment is
copy assistant is seated on the left side with the anesthesia
in working order. Biopsy jars, laboratory request forms, pre-
machine and monitoring equipment (Figure 2-8).
anesthetic agents, an oral speculum, and any needed acces-
For mobile endoscopy services, where a full-size custom
sory instruments such as biopsy forceps should be available
cart may not be available, smaller carts (e.g-, video projec-
and ready for use (see previous section).
tion carts) can be used and are compact and convenient. A
Because general anesthesia is used for upper and lower
somewhat less convenient alternative is to use either a gur-
GI endoscopy, it is strongly advised that an intravenous (IV)
 ney or adjacent counter space to support the light source and
 catheter be placed to facilitate induction of anesthesia, pro-
vide ready access to the vascular system in case of any anes-
carried manually from its storage area to the procedure area.
thetic complication during the procedure, and deliver any
For lighter, portable units this is not a problem, but a large
necessary fluid support. It is the assistant's job to make sure
unit can be cumbersome to carry. The greatest advantages
that the IV catheter is placed before the procedure.
of having a cart to permanently house the light source and
One of the most important roles of the endoscopy assis-
suction unit are easy mobility, safe storage, and minimal
 tant is to assist with induction of general anesthesia and
handling of the light source, which minimizes the possibility
 monitoring the patient's cardiopulmonary status during the
of damage if it were to be dropped or knocked from a coun-
 procedure. Because the endoscopist is usually engrossed in
tertop. A single room for all endoscopy procedures, as exists
performing the procedure and not able to monitor the patient
 in some larger institutions, provides for convenient and safe
closely, the assistant must be able to monitor vital signs
use and storage of the equipment.
 and accurately assess any indications of cardiopulmonary
36·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
 handling tissue and cytologic specimens, accurately identify-
ing all samples, and completing the laboratory request forms.
BOX 2-3
Some endoscopists prefer that the assistant operate the biopsy
Role of the Endoscopy Assistant: Preprocedure
forceps. (Subsequent chapters discuss recommended biopsy
and tissue handling procedures in detail.) Specific and sim-
Equipment setup
ple instructions regarding forceps use, such as “open" and
Light source
"close," should be given. Because the forceps may break if
Suction 
opened or closed too forcefully, care must be taken to avoid
Anesthesia machine (check working order carefully)
opening them while they are in the instrument channel of the
Ancillary instruments (biopsy forceps, cytology brnushes, oral
endoscope. The endoscope may be damaged if this occurs.
speculum, etc.)
Any photographs that are taken should be recorded
Preparation of disinfecting and rinse solutions
promptly, including such information as client and patient
name, case number, and a brief description of the area or
 Preparation of specimen supplies
structure photographed. Failure to do this may result in
Biopsy jars
confusion later when the endoscopist tries to identify pho-
Slides
tographs from cases that can no longer be clearly remem-
 Laboratory forms
bered. A procedure form that can be inserted in the chart
 provides a convenient means of recording important data,
Patient preparation
including examination findings, anesthesia parameters, and
Check body weight
photographs that were taken. There are standardized proce-
Pace IV catheter 
dure forms now conveniently available online that were pro-
Assist with premedication and induction of general anesthesia
duced by the World Small Animal Veterinary Association
(WSAVA) Gastrointestinal Standardization Group (www.
Procedure
wsava.org/StandardizationGroup.htm). One of the goals of
Monitoring of patient (top priority)
this group was to ensure that there are standardized guide-
Color/refill
lines for performing complete endoscopic examinations. The
Heart rate and rhythm 
forms include valuable features such as tick boxes, the ability
Respirations
to comment on the presence/absence of all possible lesions,
Degree of gastric distension (i.e., observe for overinsufflation
and an area for identification of the extent of the examination,
during the procedure and ensure gastric decompression at
the equipment used, and any complications associated with
procedure conclusion)
the procedure. The WSAVA Gastrointestinal Standardization
Pulse oxirnetry
Group's efforts are described in detail in Chapter 8.
Bood pressure and capnography. if indicated
 Assistance to endoscopist with sample procurerment, when
The endoscopy assistant or other appropriate support staff
member is responsible for recovering the patient from anes-
 indicated
thesia and ensuring that the patient is closely observed until it
 Postprocedure
is fully awake. Complications after GI endoscopy are rare but
may include retching, vomiting, and abdominal pain.
Patient monitoring and recovery
Completion of laboratory forms
Equipment cleanup and storage
■ HANDLING THE ENDOSCOPE
Preparation of patient for discharge
Proper technique in holding and maneuvering the endo-
scope is important; improper technique can be a major hin-
drance to a smooth and thorough endoscopic examination.
problems related to the general anesthesia. The endoscopist
Every beginning student of endoscopy should concentrate
 should be alerted at the earliest sign of any problems.
on developing sound techniques as a foundation for exper-
During gastroscopy, air is usually insufflated into the
tise in endoscopy This section discusses correct methods of
stomach for dilation so that visualization is enhanced. If too
holding an endoscope and reviews the proper endoscope-
much air is insufflated, especially in cats and small dogs, the
body position relationship.
stomach can become quite distended, causing significant
All currently designed endoscopes are made to be held
compromise of respiratory capacity. The endoscopy assis-
 in the left hand. The angulation control knobs are located
 tant must watch for this problem and advise the endoscopist
 on the right side of the control housing of the endoscope,
to suction air from the stomach if there is evidence that it has
precluding use of the right hand to hold the endoscope.
become too distended. The problem is usually solved within
The top of the endoscope has two valves, one for suction and
seconds of suction being applied.
the other for air/water instilation. When the junction of the
The endoscopy assistant can significantly shorten total
universal cord and the upper endoscope body is held in the
procedure time by assisting with sample procurement,
crux of the left hand, the index and middle fingers can each
CHAPTER 2  Gastrointestinal Endoscopy: Instrumentation, Handling Technique, Training, and Implementation in Practice  ·  37
be used to operate one of the valves. The fourth and fifth
fingers give stability to this two-finger grip (Figure 2-9). For
most individuals with long fngers the middle of the index
and middle fingers lies across the valves. The fingers are
then bent to apply fingertip pressure when use of the valves
is indicated. Short fingers in this situation do not cause any
disadvantage because the fingertips come to lie squarely over
the valves in the recommended holding position.
Ease of ha ndling is an extremely important consideration
in the purchase of an endoscope. The ergonomic design of
the endoscope control area can vary depending on the man-
ufacturer. Some are quite user friendly, others are not.
The control knobs can be maneuvered in several ways.
cent control knobs: a larger inner knob to control up/down
movement and a smaller outer knob to control side-to-side
movement. Most endoscopists are able to use the left thumb
comfortably and effectively to maneuver the larger up/down
a  si q      o 
it can also be used to deflect the outer knob. Some individuals
with long fingers are also able to use the index and middle fin-
 gers to manipulate the control knobs by extending them over
the valves. One drawback is that a firm grip on the control
section of the endoscope with the left thumb may be more dif-
ficult to maintain. For individuals with short fingers who may
find it too difficult to reach the outer control knob with the
left thumb, the left thumb can at least still be used to deflect
the large inner control knob, while the right hand is used to
maneuver the outer, smaller control knob, when necessary.
The right hand is used mostly to advance the insertion
tube and apply torque, as needed, to maneuver the endo-
B
scope. The right hand must also be used to assist with move-
Hgure 2-9 A, Two-finger method of holding the control section
ment of the control knobs and operate the control knob
xapu ya au siauy uy pue yuny aui um adospua aui o
locking devices. The goal is to use the left hand for operating
and middle fngers operate the suction (posterior) and air/water
the valves and control knobs and the right hand for assis-
(anterior) valves, respectively. B, The thumb maneuvers one or
tance, as needed. Right-hand assistance on the control knobs
both directional control knobs. ( Photos courtesy of Karl Storz
is most commonly needed when the endoscope tip is being
GmbH & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
maneuvered through the antrum, pylorus, and duodenum
and when a colonoscopy is being performed. The right hand 
housing (Figure 2-10). This method allows for greater use
is used whenever one of the control knob locking devices
of the left thumb to work both control knobs, thus mini-
is engaged. Each knob has one locking device, which will,
mizing the need to use the right hand for that purpose. The
when activated, hold the endoscope tip in a locked position.
left index finger is used to operate both valves. This method
This frees the fingers from one or both control knobs, which
has two disadvantages. First, the last three fingers of the leff
 allows them to perform some other function, such as using
 hand must almost entirely support the endoscope. Second,
an accessory instrument, applying torque to the insertion
on newer endoscope models, in which the instrument chan-
tube, or obtaining photographs.
 nel valve is located close to the insertion tube, the fifth finger
Using the left thumb solely for support of the endo-
(depending on the size of the endoscopist's hand) may lie
scope is not recommended because this technique requires
directly over the valve. This makes the grip more uncomfort-
the right hand to be used to turn both control knobs. The
able, and introducing instruments down the working chan-
right hand is then required to perform two major functions:
nel is a bit more awkward.
turning the control knobs and advancing and torquing the
The right hand is usually used to operate the lateral
insertion tube. This prolongs procedure time and makes a
deflection knob (the outer control knob on coaxial systems)
smooth, coordinated effort difficult to achieve.
because, regardless of the grip used to hold the endoscope, it
An alternative method of holding the endoscope is the
would be diffcult for any but the most dexterous individuals
three-finger grip, in which the third, fourth, and ffh fin-
to use the left hand to manipulate the air/water and suction
 gers are used to hold the lower, narrower area of the control
valves and both control knobs during the entire procedure.
38·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
beginning endoscopists tend to do, promotes loop or coil
formation of the proximal insertion tube. Maintaining a rea-
 sonable distance maximizes the effect of bending the left wrist
in either direction to enhance a torque effect on the insertion
tube. Another positioning mistake typically made by begin-
ning endoscopists is the tendency to try to advance the endo-
 ran pud a prm aoq a u aq ados
simply using the right hand to advance the insertion tube.
Among endoscopes, degrees of flexibility (or “stiffness")
 vary depending on such factors as manufacturer and inser-
tion tip diameter. One advance in technology in newer
endoscopes is their increased flexibility, which necessitates
that the right hand be positioned on the insertion tube fairly
close (approximately 6 to 10 inches) to the patient's mouth
Figure 2-10 Three-finger method of holding the endoscope
so that the tube does not flex each time an attempt is made to
with the third, fourth, and fifth fingers. The left thumb is used
advance it (see Figure 2-1l, A). The beginning endoscopist
to manipulate both control knobs. The left index finger operates
soon learns that holding the right hand far back on the inser-
both the suction and air/water valves. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz
tion tube leads to inefficient motion (Figure 2-12).
GmbH & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
The flexibility of the newer small-diameter (less than
8-mm) endoscopes is a disadvantage in some cases in that
 If proper technique is used to advance the insertion tube,
undesirable coil formation occurs more easily when the
 torque is applied as needed to aid in deflecting and rotating
insertion tube is in the stomach. This is most commonly a
the tip of the endoscope so that clear luminal views away
problem in large dogs, in which excess coil formation in the
from the walls of the esophagus and stomach are facilitated,
stomach may leave insufficient endoscope length to reach
and up/down deflection is accomplished with the use of the
the duodenum.
large inner control knob, then the use of the lateral deflec-
The insertion tube seems to coil more easily in a dilated
 tion knob is often unnecessary until the lower gastic body
stomach and other dilated structures, such as a mega-
and antral areas of the stomach are reached.
esophagus and air-dilated colon. Once a loop has formed, it
 becomes more diffcult to advance the tip of the endoscope
■ THE ENDOSCOPE-BODY POSITION
to the gastric antrum. As the right hand advances the inser-
RELATIONSHIP
tion tube farther, the loop formation in the gastric body
becomes greater. Also, any torque applied to the insertion
Advancing the endoscope smoothly and effciently requires
tube by the right hand or flexion or rotation of the left arm is
that the endoscopist's body position relative to both the
absorbed in the coil, which minimizes or voids any effective
 patient and the configuration of the control housing and
directional control. Because the most effective way to con-
insertion tube be fundamentally correct. It is much easier
 trol and maneuver an endoscope is to maintain the insertion
to advance the endoscope and apply effective torque when
tube in as straight a line as possible, the correct procedure
the instrument is in a straight configuration. In this posi-
to remove coil formation is to retract the insertion tube a
tion any twisting (torque) action applied to the insertion
 sufficient length to straighten the coil. Once the endoscope
tube as it is advanced will be transmitted along its long axis
is repositioned, excess air is suctioned and another advance
to the distal tip (Figure 2-11). Any necessary endoscope tip
 can be made in a new direction. (Maneuvering techniques
direction changes can then be made easily with the use of
for performing a complete examination of the stomach are
the leff thumb to maneuver the up/down control. The use
reviewed in Chapter 4.)
of the lateral directional control is often not necessary. This
 technique maximizes the use ofthe right hand for advancing
■ CONVENTIONAL TERMINOLOGY
a nd twisting the insertion tube.
Torque may become significantly less effective for direc-
Conventional terminology is used to describe directions of
tional control when a loop configuration is allwed to form in
endoscopic tip deflection so that written or verbal descrip-
the insertion tube, either inside or outside the patient. The loop
tions of a procedure can be clearly understood. This is
tends to absorb any twisting force applied proximal to it; there-
 especially useful in helping the beginning endoscopist to
fore the distal tip cannot be controlledas predictably and quickly
determine the location of the endoscope tip in relation to
when proximal torque is applied to the tube. The straighter the
various anatomic structures and the movements of the
instrument, the more precisely it can be controlled.
directional controls needed to reach and view important
 A mechanically advantageous endoscope-body position
landmarks.
relationship clearly enhances maximal endoscope maneu-
The simple terms upward, downward, left, and right
verability and control. Standing too close to the patient, as
 are used to describe tip deflection. For a starting point of
CHAPTER 2  Gastrointestinal Endoscopy: Instrumentation, Handling Technique, Training, and Implementation in Practice β ■ 
6E
Hgure 2-12 Incorrect position of the right hand for advancing
or applying torque to the endoscope. Gripping the endoscope too
far back from the patient's mouth can lead to loop formation and
inefficiency in advancing or twisting the scope.
reference, the insertion tube is straight and a standard con-
 trol housing grip is used with the directional controls to
the right. The air/water and suction valves face upward in
this configuration. Control knob direction is termed either
clockwise (forward motion) or counterclockwise (backward
motion). The distance the knobs can be turned in either
direction has a fixed limit. The greatest range of motion of
most endoscope tip bending sections is upward.
The inner control knob is turned counterclockwise, and
the corresponding upward deflection bends the tip back ward
B
along the insertion tube in the direction of the valves. With
the newer endoscopes a deflection angle of 210 degrees can
be achieved in this direction (Figure 2-13). For downward
direction the inner control knob is turned clockwise and the
tip turns away from the valves. The outer control is used for
left and right deflection (i.e., counterclockwise for a turn
to the left and clockwise for a turn to the right). The endo-
scope tip can be moved through a circular rotation when
both control knobs are used simultaneously. The terms of
direction for the endoscope tip do not refer to physical sur-
roundings. Depending on patient position and various axial
torque forces applied on the insertion tube during the course
of a procedure, the position of the endoscope tip within a
patient on upward flexion, for example, may actually not
be upward at all. This can be confusing to the beginner, but
C
when the endoscopist develops complete familiarity with
Figure 2-11 A, Correct position ofthe right hand for advancing
the technique required to perform a thorough examination,
the endoscope. The hand is placed fairly close to the patient's 
expertly maneuvering an endoscope becomes almost auto-
mouth, and the scope is advanced aborally, with the right hand
matic and the controls can be used with little thought. The
sliding back along the insertion tube in short increments. B, To
 endoscopist focuses on recognizing key landmarks and the
apply left torque, the insertion tube is gripped and the hand is
turned (*rolled") to the left. The hand is positioned close to the
direction of the lumen of the structure being examined and
patient's mouth. This provides leftward turning ofthe endoscope
maneuvers the control knobs or applies torque as needed to
tip without the use ofthe endoscope control knobs. C, To apply
direct the scope tip in the desired direction (inner control
right torque, the hand is turned to the right.
knob counterclockwise for upward deflection and clockwise
for downward; outer control knob counterclockwise to go
left and clockwise to turn right).
40·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 2-13 Maximum upward tip bending (210 degrees) of a
newer model veterinary gastrointestinal endoscope.
 For descriptive purposes the endoscopic visual field is
divided conventionally (and conveniently) like the face of a
clock. Upward deflection of the endoscope tip (large/innel
control knob turned counterclockwise) causes the visual
field to move toward the 12-o'clock position, and downward
deflection (large/inner control knob turned clockwise) causes
the field to move toward the 6-o'clock position. Clock face
terminology is used in this text to describe locations of points
of interest on many of the photographs that are presented.
■ CLEANING
The endoscope should be cleaned affter each examina-
tion. Careful, meticulous, and timely cleaning is essential
for proper endoscope functioning and for maximizing the
equipment life span. If several patients are to be examined, a
Fgure 2-14 Cabinet for storage of endoscopes and accessory
limited cleaning procedure is usually used between patients,
instruments. Two gastrointestinal fberscopes, a bronchoscope (far
followed by a more thorough protocol after the last patient,
right), and biopsy instruments are shown.
before the endoscope is returned to its storage area. Thor-
ough cleaning and disinfection are also necessary after the
endoscope is used on a patient that may harbor a transmis-
When a cabinet or rack system is available, temporary
sible infectious agent or before a bronchoscopy procedure if
  d     s
the same endoscope is used to perform both GI and respi-
much safer and more convenient. An endoscope should
ratory tract examinations. Details on cleaning procedures
never be left, even temporarily, on a table or countertop or in
for endoscopes and ancillary instruments are described in
 any other precarious position from which it could fall or be
Chapter 1.
knocked onto the floor. Great care must be taken if an endo-
scope is to be stored on an open rack, especially if it is located
■ EQUIPMENT STORAGE
 in a heavily trafficked area of the hospital, because the risk
that the instrument might accidentally be bumped and fall
Endoscopes can be stored either in a custom padded case,
from the rack always exists. Serious damage and expensive
such as the type in which the manufacturer delivers the endo-
repair bills can result from such a careless mistake.
scope, or in a hanging position in a cabinet (Figure 2-14) or
on a rack. The hanging position is strongly recommended
for stora ge. In this position any residual droplets of moisture
SuGGEsted
READING
in the insertion tube are more likely to drain. Residual mois-
 ture in the working channel can promote growth of bacteria
and fungi and can also result in clogging of the tiny air/water
Berkowitz E: Marketing the gastrointestinal practice: strategic con-
channel. When an endoscope is stored in the custom pad-
siderations, Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am 16:657-669, 2006.
 ded case, there is no opportunity for air movement to the
Greenwald D, Cohen J: Evolution of endoscopy simulators and their
application, Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am 16:389-406, 2006.
channels and residual moisture-related problems are much
Sum S, Ward CR: Flexible endoscopy in small animals, Vet Clin North
more likely to develop.
Am Small Anim Pract 39:881-902, 2009.
CHAPTER
Esophagoscopy
Robert G. Sherding and Susan E. Johnson
he term esophagoscopy refers to examination of the
 deployment of esophageal stents, to remove esophageal for-
lumen and mucosal lining ofthe esophagus with endoscopic
eign bodies (see Chapter 7), to place indwelling gastrostomy
equipment. In most cases, esophageal disease is diagnosed by
(see Chapter 9) or esophagostomy feeding tubes, and to
the clinical history combined with contrast radiography of
ablate neoplastic tissue with lasers.
the esophagus, esophagoscopy, or both. Radiography is the
Esophagoscopy is most often indicated for diagnostic
 preferred method for documenting megaesophagus, motil-
evaluation of patients with regurgitation. Regurgitation is
ity dysfunction, vascular ring anomalies, and hiatal hernia.
the passive retrograde expulsion of food or fluid from the
Esophagoscopy is most reliable for the diagnosis of disor-
esophagus. Regurgitation must be distinguished from vom-
ders that disrupt the mucosa or obstruct the lumen, such as
iting, which is a centrally mediated reflex characterized by
esophagitis, stricture, foreign body, and neoplasia. Esopha-
the forceful ejection of gastroduodenal contents preceded by
goscopy not only is a valuable diagnostic procedure but also
hypersalivation, retching, and abdominal contractions. The
is useful as a therapeutic intervention for removing foreign
timing of regurgitation in relation to eating is determined
bodies, performing balloon or bougie dilation of strictures,
by the location of the esophageal abnormality, the pres-
 placing indwelling feeding tubes, placing endoluminal stents,
ence and degree of obstruction, and the reservoir effect of
and assisting laser treatment of esophageal tumors.
esophageal dilation. Regurgitation immediately after eating
is most likely to occur with proximal esophageal lesions or
■ INDICATIONS
 complete esophageal obstruction. However, regurgitation
may be unassociated with eating when dilation of the esoph-
Esophagoscopy is indicated for the diagnostic evaluation of
agus provides a reservoir for prolonged retention of food and
 animals with signs of esophageal disease, including regur-
fluid. The selective retention of fluids over solid food is more
gitation, dysphagia, odynophagia, and excessive salivation.
likely to occur with partial obstruction. Regurgitated mate-
Esophagoscopy is also indicated for evaluation of animals
rial is usually composed of undigested food (often tubular)
known or suspected to have ingested a potential foreign body
and white to clear frothy liquid (mucus and saliva), but fresh
(see Chapter 7). This minimally invasive procedure allows
blood may be seen with mucosal trauma or erosions. Putre-
visual examination of the esophageal mucosa and lumen
faction of food may occur after prolonged sequestration in
 and facilitates the procurement of specimens for biopsy,
a dilated esophagus. In comparison, vomitus usually con-
cytology, and culture. Thus esophagoscopy is most effective
sists of partially digested food mixed with bile-stained fluid.
for obtaining a definitive diagnosis of conditions involving
Both regurgitation and vomiting may be observed in ani-
the mucosa or abnormalities within the lumen, including
mals with hiatal hernia, gastroesophageal intussusception,
esophageal foreign body, esophagitis, esophageal stricture,
 and acid-induced esophagitis secondary to severe vomiting.
esophageal neoplasia, and gastroesophageal intussusception.
Hematemesis is usually a sign of gastric disease but is occa
 Compared with contrast radiography, esophagoscopy is less
sionally seen in animals with esophageal neoplasms that are
 definitive for diagnosing megaesophagus and other motil-
bleeding extensively.
ity disorders, diverticulum, hiatal hernia, and compression
The age of onset is important because regurgitation
by periesophageal masses, although it often provides valu-
beginning at the time of weaning suggests a vascular ring
able diagnostic information in these situations. Esophagos-
anomaly, congenital idiopathic megaesophagus, or con-
copy can also be used as therapeutic intervention to guide
genital stenosis. An acute onset of regurgitation suggests the
balloon catheters for dilating esophageal strictures, to assist
 presence of an esophageal foreign body or acute esophagitis,
41
42·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
whereas a chronic history of regurgitation is more consis-
 INSTRUMENTATION
tent with idiopathic megaesophagus, vascular ring anomaly,
hiatal hernia, chronic reflux esophagitis, or esophageal neo-
Esophagoscopy can be performed with flexible or rigid
plasia. Intermittent signs are often seen in animals with hia-
endoscopes; however, flexible video endoscopes are most
tal hernia and reflux esophagitis. The history may indicate
versatile because of their superior optics, illumination, insuf
potential exposure to foreign bodies or caustic medications
flation, recording functions, and maneuverability. Flexible
(e.g-, doxycycline or clindamycin), a recent anesthetic pro-
video endoscopes for examination of the gastrointestinal
cedure that could cause reflux esophagitis and esophageal
(GI) tract should have a working length of at least 110 cm,
stricture, or signs of neurologic or neuromuscular dysfunc-
a diameter less than 9.8 mm, suction and air/water insuffla-
tion that could be associated with secondary megaesophagus.
tion capability, four-way tip deflection of at least 180 degrees
Dysphagia, or difficulty in swallowing, is another indi-
by 90 degrees, and a 2.0- or 2.8-mm instrument channel (see
cation for esophagoscopy. Difficulty in swallowing often
Chapter 1). Flexible endoscopes readily enable thorough
suggests the presence of oropharyngeal disease, cranial
evaluation of the stomach and duodenum during the same
esophageal obstruction, a motility disturbance, or pain
 procedure, which is not possible with rigid scopes.
caused by a foreign body, stricture, esophagitis, or another 
Rigid endoscopes for esophagoscopy are available in vari-
abnormality in the cranial esophagus. Dysphagia is usually
ous lengths and diameters and are most useful for removal of
associated with repeated or exaggerated attemptsto swallow,
certain types of esophageal foreign bodies. Even when a flex-
odynophagia (pain on swallowing), and ptyalism (excessive
ible endoscope is the primary instrument, one or two multi-
salivation). Dysphagia can be characterized by observing the
 purpose rigid scopes should be available for selected situations,
animal while it is drinking and eating both dry and canned
 such as esophageal foreign body removal with rigid grasping
food. Unexplained salivation is also an indication for esoph-
instruments or flexible endoscope extraction of sharp foreign
agoscopy. In some animals with esophagitis or neoplasia
(especially early in the course), unexplained salivation may
Chapter 7). Most rigid endoscopes marketed for procedures
be the most apparent clinical sign. Dysphagia and ptyalism
 in people have a light source, an air insufflation mechanism,
 must also be differentiated from oropharyngeal and salivary
 and a blunt-tipped obturator that fits inside the scope to facili-
gland causes, such as sialadenitis and sialadenosis.
tate insertion into the lumen of the esophagus. Pediatric rigid
Other clinical signs of esophageal disease can also be
scopes have a diameter of approximately 12 mm, whereas
indications for esophagoscopy. Weight loss occurs second-
 adult rigid scopes are approximately 25 mm in diameter.
ary to inadequate food intake and is related to the severity
The accessory instruments needed for esophagoscopy
of esophageal dysfunction. An otherwise healthy animal
include biopsy forceps, cytology brushes, foreign body
with persistent regurgitation may have a ravenous appetite
retrieval instruments, injection needles, and a set of balloon
because of an inability to retain ingested food. This situation
catheters or bougies of various sizes (6- to 30-mm diameter)
is common in animals with a megaesophagus, vascular ring
for dilation of esophageal strictures. Accessory instruments
anomaly, or esophageal stricture. In contrast, anorexia can
for foreign body removal are discussed in Chapter 7. Oval-
occur in animals that have painful and difficult swallowing
associated with severe esophagitis, an esophageal foreign
central spike) are adequate for obtaining mucosal biopsy
body, or neoplasia. Anorexia can also occur in conjunction
 specimens of the stomach, small intestine, and large intes-
with coughing, dyspnea, and fever in animals that have sec-
tine, but they are generally less effective for obtaining diag-
ondary aspiration pneumonia, esophageal perforation, or a
nostic biopsy specimens from the tough mucosa of the
bronchoesophageal fistula. Occasionally, larymgeal stridor
esophagus. Forceps with a central spike can improve the
and change or loss of voice as a result of chronic laryngitis
results of esophageal biopsies.
from exposure to gastric acid may be the primary present-
Optional accessory instruments can include equipment
ing signs of severe gastroesophageal reflux. Hypomotility and
for electrocautery, electrosurgery, polypectomy (snares),
 endoluminal stenting (for strictures or inoperable tumors),
laryngeal paralysis.
 and photo/laser/argon therapy for the ablation of neoplastic
The clinical signs of diseases of the esophagus, stomach,
 tissue as a paliative measure to relieve obstruction and stop
and intestinal tract often overlap, and diseases may involve
hemorrhaging.
more than one region of the digestive tract. As a result,
endoscopic examinations limited to the esophagus are not
 PATIENT PREPARATION
 usually appropriate. Most animals that undergo esophagos-
AND RESTRAINT
copy should have a thorough endoscopic examination of
the entire upper gastrointestinal tract so that the informa-
Esophagoscopy requires general anesthesia, and food should
tion necessary for an accurate assessment can be obtained
be withheld for a minimum of 12 hours before the proce-
and so that associated or unsuspected abnormalities can
dure. Throughout the procedure the anesthetized patient
be detected in other regions. This complete examination is
should have an endotracheal tube and mouth gag in place.
termed esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)
 The patient is positioned in left lateral recumbency.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy
■43
When an esophageal perforation, foreign body, or stric-
Alternatively, the scope may be lubricated with oral secre-
ture is suspected, additional precautions should be taken.
tions as it is passed into the oral cavity.
 Insufflation of air into a perforated esophagus can produce
With the animal's head and neck extended, the endo-
life-threatening tension pneumothorax. Foreign bodies,
 scope is directed centrally through the oropharynx and
 especially bones and other sharp objects, can cause esopha-
guided dorsal to the endotracheal tube and larynx so that
 geal perforation, as can iatrogenic tearing from balloon or
the cranial esophageal sphincter (CES) comes into view. The
bougie dilation of strictures. Therefore, before endoscopic
 CES is the entrance to the esophagus and is normally closed,
retrieval of foreign bodies, it is advisable to review cervical
appearing as a star-shaped area of folded mucosa dorsal to
and thoracic radiographs for signs of perforation such as
the larynx (see Figure 3- 1, A-B). With insufflation and mini-
increased periesophageal mediastinal density, pleural effu-
 mal pressure of the endoscope tip against the CES, the scope
sion, pneumomediastinum, or pneumothorax. Esophageal
is easily advanced through the low-resistance sphincter into
perforation is usually an indication for surgical exploration
the cervical esophagus. Resistance is occasionally felt when
rather than endoscopy. If the radiographs reveal no evidence
the endoscope tip is misdirected into one of the piriform
 of perforation in the patient with an esophageal foreign body,
recesses located on either side of the larynx. Withdraw-
the esophagoscopic examination can proceed. Thoracic radi-
 ing and redirecting the endoscope more toward the dorsal
 ography for pneumothorax from iatrogenic perforation is
midline easily corrects this problem. If the endoscope tip is
also indicated after foreign body removal or stricture dilation
passed blindly in large-breed dogs, it may inadvertently be
procedures that cause excessive esophageal trauma. During
advanced through the laryngeal opening into the proximal 
examination of esophageal obstructive lesions, such as stric-
 trachea. Resistance is felt when the endoscope comes into
tures, excessive insufflation of air should be avoided because
contact with the endotracheal tube. If this occurs, the endo-
it can be difficult to evacuate the air through the stenotic area
scope tip should be pulled back to the oropharynx and redi-
if the caudal esophagus and stomach become overdistended.
rected into the CES.
Barium contrast radiography should ideally be completed
The cervical esophagus is normally collapsed, so as the
 24 hours before esophagoscopy so that retained contrast
 endoscope passes through the sphincter, a brief “red out"
 medium does not compromise the mucosal examination.
usually obscures visibility. Insufflation of air should begin
A clear, water-soluble, nonionic iodinated contrast agent
immediately and continue until the esophageal lumen is
(e.g-, iohexol [Omnipaque]) should be used instead of bar-
clearly visualized ahead of the scope as it advances (see
Figure 3-2, A-B). The esophageal lumen forms a straight tube
a few hours of contrast radiography. If esophagoscopy has
except for a slight flexure at the thoracic inlet, where the cer-
to be done shortly after a barium esophagram, lavage of the
vical and thoracic regions of the esophagus meet. The endo-
esophagus and stomach with water may be necessary for the
 scope should meet litle or no resistance as it is advanced. The
barium to be evacuated. If barium has pooled in the esopha-
 endoscopist should advance the scope down the esophagus in
gus because of esophageal obstruction, hypomotility, or gas-
a slow continuous motion, using only minor adjustments in
troesophageal reflux, a suction tube should be used to remove
tip deflection and torque to maintain a full panoramic view
as much of the contrast medium as possible before anesthesia
of the lumen and mucosal surfaces. Air should be insufflated
is induced so that the risk of barium aspiration is minimized
intermittently, as needed, to keep the lumen distended ahead
 during the procedure and so that mucosal visibility is maxi-
of the scope. To maintain distension in some patients, it may
mized. Alternatively, an animal with a motility disorder may
be necessary to have an assistant help occlude the esophagus
be held upright so that contrast material can flow into the
just caudal to the larynx to prevent the escape of insufflated
stomach by gravity. The accessory channel of a flexible endo-
air. The lumen of the thoracic esophagus generally opens with
scope should rot be used to suction a large volume of undi-
minimal insufflation. Pulsations of the aorta against the wall
luted barium from the esophagus because the barium residue
of the esophagus are seen at the level of the base of the heart.
may adhere to the walls and occlude the channel. Further-
At the gastroesophageal junction the esophagus passes
more, once the residue dries, it can be difficult to remove.
 obliquely through the diaphragm to open into the stomach.
 The gastroesophageal sphincter (GES) is not a true anatomic
 ESOPHAGOSCOPY PROCEDURE
sphincter but rather a high-pressure zone that keeps the dis-
tal esophagus closed between swallows (see Figure 3-3, A).
The anesthetized and intubated patient is positioned in leff
To advance the endoscope through the slitlike opening of
lateral recumbency with a mouth speculum securely in place
the GES and into the stomach, the endoscopist deflects the
to protect the scope. The endotracheal tube is important for
tip approximately 30 degrees to the left and slightly upward
preventing the aspiration of refluxed or regurgitated mate-
(see Figure 3-3, B). This can be done easily under direct visu-
rial from the oropharynx during the procedure. During rigid
alization, and minimal or no resistance should be encoun-
endoscopy procedures the endotracheal tube also prevents
tered as the endoscope advances through the GES.
collapse of the cervical trachea from the pressure of the rigid
A description of the normal appearance of the esophagus
scope. The insertion tube of the endoscope should be prelu-
in dogs and cats and corresponding images are found in the
bricated with water-soluble lubricant gel for ease of passage.
"Atlas" section of this chapter (see Figures 3- 1 through 3-10).
44· PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
 SAMPLE PROCUREMENT
 POSTOPERATIVE CARE
AND COMPLICATIONS
Esophageal biopsy is not usually required for diagnosis of
 most esophageal diseases. Visual inspection alone is gener-
 Patients undergoing routine diagnostic esophagoscopy are
ally adequate. The primary indications for mucosal biopsy
recovered routinely from anesthesia and discharged the same
ofthe esophagus include the presence of a mass or mucosal
day. Normal food and water intake can resume after a few
abnormalities indicative of esophagitis. It can be difficult
hours once anesthetic recovery is complete. Complications
to obtain adequate esophageal mucosal biopsy specimens
related to diagnostic esophagoscopy are rare and primarily
with standard endoscopic pinch biopsy forceps, especially
limited to inadvertent aspiration of oropharyngeal secretions
when the mucosa is normal. It is difficult to orient the for-
 or refluxed gastroesophageal fluid caused by improper pro-
ceps perpendicular to the wall of the esophagus, and the
tection of the airway with an endotracheal tube during the
mucosa is often too tough to cut with the forceps, so the
procedure and anesthetic recovery. In esophageal stricture,
biopsy cups tend to slide off as they are closed. Rigid biopsy
excessive insufflation of air should be avoided because it can
forceps with larger biopsy cups can be used with rigid
sometimes be difficult to evacuate the air through the stricture
 endoscopy equipment to improve the quality of esophageal
if the caudal esophagus and stomach become overdistended.
biopsies. Alternatively, a biopsy forceps with a central spike
Esophageal perforation is a rare but serious complication
(bayonet type) can be used (see Figure 8-1). The spike is
of esophageal foreign bodies (e.g., bones and other sharp
helpful for anchoring the biopsy forceps on the mucosa
 objects) or their removal or the result of iatrogenic tearing of
so that the “bite" is more perpendicular and slipping is
the esophagus during balloon or bougie dilation of esopha-
prevented.
 geal strictures. Insufflation of air into a perforated esopha-
 Standard biopsy forceps are most effective for obtaining
gus can produce life-threatening tension pneumothorax. If
adequate biopsy specimens from proliferative esophageal
the esophagus is perforated, esophagoscopy should not be
masses and diseased mucosa with increased friability. Six to
performed. If esophagoscopy is under way and perforation
10 biopsy specimens are usually adequate for definitive diag-
is suspected, the procedure should be discontinued and tho-
nosis. Preferentially, the tissue sa mples should be taken from
racic radiographs obtained immediately. Evacuation of air
viable areas of tumors and from border areas between obvi-
or fluid from the pleural cavity may be necessary, as well as
ous proliferative growth and the area of invasion. Central
immediate surgical repair.
 necrotic, ulcerated areas should be avoided because the diag-
Most patients do not require medication after routine
nostic yield is lower in these areas. Brush cytology specimens
esophagoscopy. Postoperative medications to control pain
 are sometimes useful for diagnosing esophageal neoplasia or
and esophagitis are usually indicated after interventional
characterizing unusual forms of esophagitis such as mucosal
 esophagoscopy procedures such as esophageal foreign body
candidiasis. A guarded (sheathed) cytology brush prevents
removal and stricture dilation. Esophagitis is treated with a
contamination and loss of specimen material as the brush
 proton pump inhibitor for acid control, sucralfate as a muco-
is withdrawn through the accessory channel of the endo-
sal protectant, and metoclopramide or cisapride as prokinet-
 scope. Brush cytology specimens should be collcted first to
ics to increase GES tone and prevent acid reflux. Analgesics
avoid diluting a cytology specimen with blood from a recent
 are prescribed according to the anticipated level of discom-
biopsy site.
fort from the procedure and associated mucosal injury.
CHAPTER 3 Esophagoscopy
■45
Atlas ＰaGes 46-94
NORMAL CANINE ESOPHAGUS
Figure 3-21, p. 58, Persistent right aortic
Figure 3-46, p. 74, Videofluoroscopy
Figure 3-1, p. 46, Cranial esophageal
 arch in a cat
 sequence of stricture dilation with a
sphincter (closed and open)
Figure 3-22, p. 58, Persistent right aortic
 guide-wired balloon
Figure 3-2, p. 46, Cervical esophagus-
arch in a dog
Figure 3-47, p. 75, Sequential endoscopic
 partially and fully distended
Figure 3-23, p. 59, Persistent right aortic
views of a balloon dilation procedure
Figure 3-3, p. 47, Gastroesophageal sphincter
 arch in a dog
Figure 3-48, p. 76, Esophageal stricture
Figure 3-4, p. 47, Midthoracic
 Figure 3-24, p. 59, Persistent right aortic
series——initial examination and balloon 
esophagus—distended
 arch in a dog
therapy
Figure 3-25, p. 59, Persistent right aortic
Figure 3-49, p. 76, Moderate to severe
NORMAL FELINE ESOPHAGUS
arch in an 8-year-old Labrador retriever 
mucosal tearing and hemorrhaging after
Figure 3-5, p. 48, Cervical and thoracic
balloon dilation
 esophagus—distended
ESOPHAGITIS
Figure 3-50, p. 77, Rupture of an
Figure 3-26, p. 60, Severe esophagitis
esophageal stricture in a cat
and hemorrhaging in a dog with a
Figure 3-51, p. 78, Positioning of an
PIGMENTED ESOPHAGEAL MUCOSA
hoof-claw foreign body
endotherapy injection needle for
IN DOGS
Figure 3-27, p. 61, Hairball-induced 
 intralesional injection
Figure 3-6, p. 49, Pigmented esophageal
mucosa in a Chow
esophagitis in a cat
Figure 3-52, p. 79, Metal, olive-tipped 
 Figure 3-7, p. 49, Pigmented esophagus in
Figure 3-28, p. 62, Reflux esophagitis in 
 bougies and Savary-Gilliard dilators 
 a Shar-Pei with a hiatal hernia
a dog with chronic vomiting
Figure 3-29, p. 62, Reflux esophagitis in
ESOPHAGEAL PERFORATION
a dog with chronic intermittent vomiting 
Figure 3-50, p. 77, Rupture of an
 NORMAL GASTROESOPHAGEAL
Figure 3-30, p. 63, Reflux esophagitis in
esophageal stricture in a cat
JUNCTION
 a dog with vascular ring anomaly
Figure 3-8, p. 49, Canine caudal thoracic
esophagus and closed gastroesophageal
Figure 3-31, p. 63, Reflux esophagitis 
ESOPHAGEAL FISTULA
in a dog with hypergastrinemia and
 sphincter
Figure 3-53, p. 81, Chronic esophageal
Figure 3-9, p. 50, Feline caudal thoracic
hypertrophic gastropathy
fistula after esophageal perforation by
Figure 3-32, p. 63, Esophagitis after anes-
esophagus and closed gastroesophageal
a sharp stick
 thesia for ovariohysterectomy
sphincter
Figure 3-33, p. 63, Chemically induced 
Figure 3-10, p. 50, Retroflex view of
HIATAL HERNIA
 erosive esophagitis
Figure 3-54, p. 83, Severe gastroesopha-
gastroesophageal junction
Figure 3-34, p. 64, Eosinophilic esophagitis
 geal reflux in a cat with megaesophagus 
 in a cat 
and hiatal hernia—-contrast radiographs
MEGAESOPHAGUS
Figure 3-35, p. 65, Esophageal candidiasis
and endoscopic views
Figure 3-11, p. 51, Congenital
 in a dog with persistent right aortic arch
Figure 3-55, p.84, Hiatal herniain a Shar-Pei
 megaesophagus in a Great Dane
Figure 3-56, p. 85, Hiatal hernia and reflux
survey and contrast radiographs
ESOPHAGEALSTRICTURE
esophagitis——canine
Figure 3-12, p. 51, Megaesophagus in a
Figure 3-36, p. 67, Barium contrast 
Figure 3-57, p. 85, Paraesophageal hiatal
cat—radiographs
esophagram——esophageal stricture 
hernia—canine
 Figure 3-13, p. 52, Megaesophagus in a dog
Figure 3-37, p. 67, Mature fibrotic
Hgure 3-58, p. 86, Hiatal hernia and gastro-
Figure 3-14, p. 52, Megaesophagus with
esophageal stricture
esophageal intussusception——-canine 
marked dilation
Figure 3-38, p. 68, Hairball-induced 
 Figure 3-15, p. 53, Megaesophagus with
esophageal stricture
 extensive pooling of fluid
GASTROESOPHAGEAL
Figure 3-39, p. 68, Triple esophageal
INTUSSUSCEPTION
stricture in a dog after general
Figure 3-59, pp.87-88, Hiatal hernia with
DIVERTICULA
anesthesia for fracture repair
 gastroesophageal intussusception—feline
Figure 3-16, p. 54, Diverticulum secondary
Figure 3-40, p. 69, Partial stricture with
Figure 3-60, p. 88, Gastroesophageal
 to esophageal stricture——radiograph
thin fibrotic ridges
 intussusception in a cheetah
Figure 3-17, p. 54, Diverticulum secondary
Figure 3-41, p. 69, Chronic esophageal
Figure 3-61, p. 89, Gastroesophageal 
to megaesophagus—radiograph and 
stricture with a network of fibrotic bands 
intussusception in a cheetah
 endoscopic view with retained ingesta
 and sacculations
Figure 3-62, p. 89, Gastroesophageal 
and esophagitis
Figure 3-42, pp. 70-71, Barium contrast
 intussusception in a cheetah
 Figure 3-18, p. 55, Diverticulum in a cat 
esophagram and esophageal stricture
Figure 3-63, p. 89, Gastroesophageal 
with a trichobezoar
series-feline
 intussusception in a cheetah
Figure 3-43, p. 72, Various sizes of balloon
VASCULAR RING ANOMALIES
dilators (inflated)
ESOPHAGEAL NEOPLASIA
Figure 3-19, p. 56, Persistent right aortic
Figure 3-44, p. 72, Balloon inflation device
Figure 3-64, p. 90, Squamous cell 
arch—schematic
 with integrated pressure gauge
carcinoma—feline
 Figure 3-20, p. 57, Persistent right aortic
Figure 3-45, p. 73, Through-the-scope
Figure 3-65, p. 91, Papillary
 arch in a cat 
 balloon dilator
carcinoma—canine
46·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas PaGes 46-94
Figure 3-66, p. 91, Mast celltumor of the
Figure 3-68, p. 92, Leiomyoma at gastro-
PERIESOPHAGEAL MASSES
esophagus—canine
esophageal junction—canine
Figure 3-71, p. 94, Poorly differentiated 
 Figure 3-67, p. 92, Undifferentiated
Figure 3-69, p. 93, Mass at gastroesopha-
sarcoma—canine 
sarcoma—feline
 geal junction—probable leiomyoma 
Figure 3-70, p. 93, Lymphoma—canine
Atlas fOr APPearanCe Of tHe NOrmal esOPHaGuS
The normal esophagus in the fasted animal is empty or contains a minimal amount of
clear fluid or foam (Figures 3-1 through 3-4). If the esophagus contains food residue, a
large pool of fluid, or bilious fluid, then gastroesophageal reflux, hiatal hernia, motility
 contents may occasionally reflux into the esophagus during gastroduodenoscopy, the
Figure 3-1 A, The closed cranial esophageal sphincter as the endoscope is passed dorsal to the
larynx. B, The open cranial esophageal sphincter as the endoscope is advanced through the 
 sphincter into the esophagus.
Figure 3-2 The cervical esophagus in a normal dog. A, The lumen is partially distended at
first entry. B,After the lumen is fully distended with air the longitudinal folds disappear, and
the outline ofthe trachea is observed against the ventral wall of the flaccid esophagus (10 to
12 o'clock in the field of view).
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy·47
esophagus should be thoroughly assessed before advancing the scope into the stomach. In
anesthetized animals the normal esophagus becomes flaccid and dilated, which makes the
adep on sndosa a smoe ue ie ym pinsu um s readde u sea
over the trachea and mediastinal structures. Without other supportive clinical findings, this
flaccid appearance should not be misinterpreted as megaesophagus. In some animals the
head and neck need to be extended so that a redundant flexure of the normal esophagus
at the thoracic inlet that can be mistaken for a diverticulum is eliminated. The cervical
esophagus has pliable, longitudinal, mucosal folds, which are more pronounced in dogs
than in cats. In the fully inflated cervical esophagus these longitudinal folds disappear, and
the imprint of the tracheal rings is observed against the ventral wall of the flaccid esophagus
(see Figure 3-2, B). As the esophagus passes over the base of the heart, the outline of the
pulsating aorta against the esophageal wall forms a useful landmark (see Figure 3-4).
Because the aorta is pulsatile, its imprint is easily distinguished from the imprints of other
periesophageal structures or masses.
Figure 3-3 The normal canine gastroesophageal sphincter. A, Inthe normal closed position,
the radial folds converge to forma rosette-shaped sphincter.B, The sphincter opens slightly
with the insufflation of air in preparation for advancing the endoscope into the stomach.
Figure 3-4 The distended midthoracic esophagus in a normal dog. A, The endoscope is 
approaching the base ofthe heart (where aortic pulsations are observed). B,The lumen is empty
and distended with insufflated air. The closed gastroesophageal sphincter is coming into view.
48·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
The feline esophagus is composed of striated muscle in the proximal two thirds and
smooth muscle in the distal one third, whereas the canine esophagus is composed almost
 entirely of striated muscle. Longitudinal folds are found throughout the canine esophagus
and in the cranial portion of the feline esophagus. In the cat, circumferential mucosal folds
 in the caudal esophagus form prominent annular ridges that have a herringbone pattern on
This ringlike appearance is not seen in the dog.
 The normal esophageal mucosa in cats and dogs is smooth, glistening, and pale pink
or grayish pink in color. It is noticeably less red than the gastric mucosa. Superficial
submucosal vessels are normally visible in the feline esophagus (see Figure 3-5) but are not
usually seen in the canine esophagus. In heavily pigmented dog breeds such as Chow Chow
and Chinese Shar-Pei, the esophagus may contain variably sized confluent gray or black
patches of pigmented mucosa (Figures 3-6 and 3-7).
When the GES is first visualized, its configuration should be noted. The lumen of the
GES usually forms a slitlike opening that is eccentrically located at the confluence of small
Hgure 3-5 The inflated esophagus in a normal cat as the endoscope is advanced from the cervical
esophagus to the stomach. A, The feline cervical esophagus. Note the pale pink color of the normal
 au  sdosa ayn m  su s nao uau ae eso
esophagus at the thoracic inlet. Note the superficial mucosal vessels that are normally visible in
cats. C, The midthoracic esophagus. Note the distinctive circular ring pattern found in the caudal
thoracic feline esophagus. D, The caudal thoracic esophagus with pronounced circular ring
(herringbone) pattern.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy·49
junction the normal pale pink color of esophageal mucosa changes abruptly to the vivid
pink or red color of normal gastric mucosa. In most normal dogs and cats, the GES is closed
at the time of endoscopic examination, but this can be affected by anesthetic protocols that
decrease the tone of the sphincter and by the degree of air insufflation. In some normal
patients the GES can be gaping wide open; however, this is unusual and should raise the
the open GES is accompanied by esophagitis and pooling of gastric contents (e.g., food,
fluid, or bile) in the esophagus. The GES and cardia should also be examined from the
stomach side with the scope in the retroflexed position within the stomach (Figure 3- 10);
see Chapter 4.
Hgure 3-6 Pigmented mucosa of the caudal
Hgure 3-7 Pigmented caudal esophagus in a
esophagus adjacent to the gastroesophageal
 5-month-old female Chinese Shar-Pei with a
sphincter in a 7-year-old Chow.
hiatal hernia and a 1-week history of vomiting.
Compare the pigment color with the pale pink
color of the distal esophagus and the bright red
hemorrhage adjacent to the gastroesophageal
sphincter, which is located slightly left of center.
Hgure 3-8 Normal canine gastroesophageal sphincter. A, Normal caudal thoracic esophagus and
 gastroesophageal sphincter. Note the sphincter is eccentrically located and closed. B, Closer view of
the normal canine gastroesophageal sphincter. Note the slitlike sphincter lumen at the confluence of
radial mucosal folds.
50·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 3-9 Feline caudal thoracic esophagus and
gastroesophageal sphincter.
Hgure 3-10 Normal gastroesophageal junction (cardia) as seen in a retroflexed view from the
stomach. A, Canine. B, Feline.
Atlas fOr meGaesOPhaGus
Megaesophagus is a term that refers to a flaccid dilated esophagus resulting from diffuse
hypomotility. Regurgitation associated with impaired esophageal transport of food is the
may be complications. Primary megaesophagus is usually idiopathic and can be either
congenital or acquired. Less frequently megaesophagus occurs secondary to other diseases.
Congenital idiopathic megaesophagus is characterized by severe dilation of the esophagus
and persistent regurgitation of food beginning shorly after weaning. Evidence suggests
that the congenital form is inherited in several canine breeds and possibly in Siamese
cats. Acquired adult-onset megaesophagus is usually idiopathic, but it also can occur
secondary to various underlying neuromuscular diseases that impair esophageal motility,
including myasthenia gravis, polymyositis, muscular dystrophies, other polymyopathies,
 peripheral neuropathies, central nervous system disease, dysautonomia, botulism, tick
 paralysis, tetanus, anticholinesterase toxicity, lead toxicity, hypoadrenocorticism, and
hernia, and obstructing esophageal lesions, such as leiomyomas.
CHAPTER 3 Esophagoscopy  · 51
B
Figure 3-11 Congenital megaesophagus in a 3-month-old male
Great Dane with regurgitation of solid food since weaning. A, The
lateral radiograph shows generalized distension ofthe esophagus
with food and fluid. Note the displacement of the trachea. B, Severe
megaesophagus and evidence of aspiration pneumonia are seen on
the lateral barium esophagram.
Hgure 3-12 Megaesophagus in a l-year-old neutered male
domestic short hair cat. The cervical and thoracic regions of
the esophagus are distended with air. A, Lateral radiograph.
B, Ventrodorsal radiograph.
Survey radiography confrms the diagnosis of megaesophagus in most cases and is
 generally more reliable than endoscopy (Figures 3-11 and 3-12). In normal animals the
esophagus is not usually visualized on survey thoracic radiographs, but in megaesophagus
the enlarged esophagus distended with air, fluid, or food is readily identified. Disorders
 of esophageal motility without overt megaesophagus are best characterized by barium
swallow videofluoroscopy.
Endoscopic examination is not routinely necessary for confrming megaesophagus and
is rarely beneficial for determining the underlying cause; however, esophagoscopy can help
rule out obstructive causes of esophageal dilatation (e.g-, vascular ring anomalies, strictures
and tumors) and is useful for identifying associated esophagitis that develops in some
animals with megaesophagus. Esophagoscopy is not reliable for evaluating motility and
the caliber of the esophageal lumen because the normal esophagus becomes flaccid with
general anesthesia and dilated affer insufflation of air. Furthermore, the esophagus may
appear endoscopically normal in animals with mild or focal disturbances of esophageal
motility.
The typical endoscopic appearance of megaesophagus is a markedly dilated, flaccid
esophagus extending from the cranial cervical region to the GES, with variable amounts
52· PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
of froth, fluid, and fermenting food residue in the lumen (Figures 3-13 through 3-15).
A motility or GES disorder should be suspected when the esophagus contains fluid and ingesta
at the start of the examination. Dilation of the entire length of the esophagus distinguishes 
 megaesophagus from segmental dilations or sacculations that develop proximal to luminal
 obstructions caused by vascular ring anomalies, strictures, tumors, or periesophageal
masses. However, diverticulum of the cranial thoracic esophagus is an occasional
 complication of chronic megaesophagus. The esophageal mucosa in megaesophagus is 
usually normal in appearance, but secondary esophagitis (mucosal erythema, erosions, and
friability) is occasionally observed.
Figure 3-13 Idiopathic megaesophagus in a
10-year-old spayed female Springer Spaniel 10 days
after surgery for gastric dilatation-volvulus. The
esophagus is markedly dilated and flaccid, and a
small pool of foamy fluid is present in the lumen.
Hgure 3-14 Megaesophagus in a 7-year-old female dog. A, Because of marked dilation, the esophagus
aun isuiee padeip ane sneeudosa aui yo sem jupunan piseg aui aueeadde smoaaes e seu
trachea, producing an outline of that structure. B, Fluid is pooled in the caudal esophagus.
CHAPTER 3 Esophagoscopy· 53
Figure 3-15 Congenital megaesophagus in a
1-year-old female Borzoi. Two other littermates
were also affected. A pool of bile-stained fluid is
seen in the dilated esophagus.
AtlaS fOr dIVErtICUlA
uncommon and can be congenital or acquired. Most occur in the cranial mediastinal and
epiphrenic regions of the esophagus. Congenital diverticula are caused by abnormalities
of embryologic development that result in the herniation of mucosa through a defect in
the muscularis. Acquired diverticula can result from external traction and distortion of
the esophagus caused by periesophageal inflammatory adhesions (traction diverticula) or
most often from increased intraluminal pressure and food impaction (pulsion diverticula)
obstruction (e.g, vascular ring anomaly, foreign body, stricture, or tumors). Small
diverticula may be of little clinical significance, but larger ones can become impacted with
ingesta or hair, causing postprandial distress, retching, odynophagia, and regurgitation.
Anorexia, lethargy, and fever may also occur.
Diverticula can be diagnosed by radiography or endoscopy (Figures 3-16, 3-17, and
3-18). Survey thoracic radiographs show an air-, fluid-, or food-filled mass (pouch)
adjacent to the esophagus, and contrast-enhanced radiographs demonstrate filling of the
pouch with barium. Esophagoscopy reveals a saclike outpouching from the esophageal
lumen, often with erosive esophagitis of the mucosa lining the diverticulum (see Figure
3- 17, C). Food, fluid, or hair may have to be removed from the sac before the diverticulum
can be adequately visualized (see Figure 3-18). Because of the thin, weakened wall of
the diverticular sac, caution must be taken to avoid perforation. Without adequate air
distension, the endoscope may enter a blind pouch and be inadvertently forced into
the wall. If a diverticulum is small, the only obvious finding may be pooling of fluid.
Redundancies in the esophagus that can be mistaken for diverticula are frequently found
at the thoracic inlet in clinically normal brachycephalic and Chinese Shar-Pei dogs. Unlike
true diverticula, these false diverticula lack associated impaction or esophagitis, and they
may decrease or disappear with extension of the neck.
54·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Hgure 3-16 Lateral thoracic radiograph showing a diverticulum of the cranial thoracic esophagus
secondary to esophageal stricture in a 5-year-old male German Shepherd with a lifelong history
of regurgitation. The pouchlike diverticulum is distended with radiopaque bone chips and
fluid, and the rest of the esophagus is distended with gas.
一
Hgure 3-17 Diverticulum of the cranial thoracic esophagus secondary to idiopathic megaesophagus in 
a7-year-old male German Shepherd with a 4-month history of intermittent regurgitation and weight 
loss. A, Lateral thoracic radiograph showing the diverticulum distended with fluid and dense radiopaque 
bone fragments ingested 10 days previously. B, Endoscopic view of the diverticulum, which contains
bone fragments and foul-smelling greenish brown fluid. C, Prolonged exposure to putrefied food
residue has caused esophagitis and two well-circumscribed mucosal ulcers in the diverticular pouch.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy·55
before (A) and after (B) removal of a trichobezoar from the diverticulum. The diverticulum is at the
11-o'clock position and the esophageal lumen is at 6 o'clock.
AtLaS FOR VaSCuLaR RING ANOmalIeS
Vascular ring anomalies are congenital malformations of the great vessels and their
branches that entrap the intrathoracic esophagus and cause clinical signs of esophageal
 obstruction. Persistent right aortic arch accounts for 95% of vascular ring malformations
and occurs when the functional adult aorta forms from the embryonic right rather than
left fourth aortic arch (Figure 3-19). The ligamentum arteriosum continues to develop
from the left side and forms a fibrous band that crosses over the esophagus to connect
the main pulmonary artery and the anomalous aorta. The esophagus becomes entrapped
and constricted circumferentially by the ligamentum, aorta, and base of the heart. Various
other anatomic configurations of vascular ring anomaly that entrap the esophagus occur
rarely.
Dogs and cats with vascular ring anomaly are usually seen for regurgitation ofundigested
food beginning at or shortly after weaning. Occasionally, however, vascular ring anomalies
are identified in mature animals as old as 8 years of age. The regurgitation usually occurs
immediately after eating but is sometimes delayed because ingesta are retained in a large
esophageal pouch that develops cranial to the obstruction. Vascular ring anomalies have
been reported in many dog breeds and in cats, but German Shepherds, Irish setters, and
Labrador retrievers may be predisposed.
Survey thoracic radiographs usually show an esophagus dilated with food and fluid
cranial to the heart (Figure 3-20, A). A leftward deviation of trachea near the cranial
border of the heart is a consistent finding on ventrodorsal or dorsoventral views. The
 normal shadow ofthe aortic arch to the left may be absent. A barium contrast esophagram
can confirm obstruction of the esophagus at or just cranial to the base of the heart (see
Figure 3-20, B).
 Endoscopyis useful for distinguishing the extraluminal compression caused bya vascular
ring anomaly from esophageal stricture and other causes of esophageal obstruction and
dilation (Figures 3-21 through 3-25). Pulsations of the major vessels against the wall of
the esophagus are seen at the level of the narrowed lumen, and the outline of the bandlike
wall of the esophagus. In some cases the stenotic lumen is only a tiny slitlike opening. The
esophageal entrapment at the level of the heart base causes the cranial thoracic esophagus to
be dilated and often distended with ingesta and fluid at the time of endoscopy. Putrefaction
of food may produce esophagitis cranial to the obstruction. Long-standing obstruction
 may lead to the sacculation of the cranial thoracic esophagus resulting in a diverticulum.
56·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
Common
,Internal
carotid
Extemal
Aortic
Mainpulmonaryartery
archLeft
Right
subclavian a.
subclaviana.
Ligamentum
Aortic arch
Main
Ligamentum
arteriosum
pulmonary
arteriosum
a.
Brachiocephalic
trunk
Esophagus
A
Right subclavian a.
,Internal
External
Common
carotid a.
Main pulmonary artery
Left subclavian a.
Aortic arch
Brachiocephalictrunk
Ligamentum
arteriosum
Main
pulmonary a.
aortic
Ligamentum
arch/
arteriosum
Esophagus
B
Figure 3-19 Persistent right aortic arch. A, Normal development of the aortic arch viewed from
the animal's left side. The inset shows normal embryonic development of the great vessels from a
 dorsoventral view. B, When the aorta develops abnormally from the embryonic right fourth aortic
arch, esophageal constriction occurs. The inset shows a dorsoventral view of the vascular malformation.
(From fohnson SE, Sherding RG: Disorders of the esophagus and disorders of swallowing. In Birchard Sf,
Sherding RG, editors: Saunders' manual of small animal practice, ed 3, St Louis, 2006, Saunders.)
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy·57
B
Figure 3-20 Vascular ring anomaly (persistent right aortic arch) in a 1-year-old spayed female
domestic long hair cat with a 2-week history of regurgitation shortly after eating. A,The lateral
thoracic radiograph shows amotled cranial mediastinal density fromthe distensionofthe esophagus
with ingesta and fluid. B, The barium contrast esophagram shows marked dilation of the thoracic
esophagus cranial to the heart, with a radiolucent bandlike structure (ligamentum arteriosum)
superimposed over the esophagus at the base ofthe heart. (Frorn fohrson SE: Diseases of the esophagus.
In Sherding RG, editor: The cat: diseases and clinical management, Philadelphia, 1994, Saunders.)
58
■PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
Figure 3-21 Vascular ring anomaly
(persistent right aortic arch) in a 2-year-
old domestic short hair cat that has had
postprandial regurgitation since it was
found as a young kitten. A, The esophagus is
distended proximal to the constricted lumen 
 of the esophagus, where it is compressed by
the ligamentum of the vascular ring. The
indentation of the trachea in the ventral wall
of the esophagus is seen at the right. B, Closer
view of the narrowed lumen. C, Close-up view
ofthe narrowed lumen where the esophagus
passes through the vascular ring. The
indentation of the ligamentum arteriosum is
seen at the left margin of the lumen, which is
the dorsal wall of the esophagus.
a -- e un (e e i siia)   rns - a
Labrador retriever with regurgitation since 5 weeks of age and a history of one episode of aspiration
pneumonia. A, Extreme dilation of the cranial thoracic esophagus has occurred proximal to the 
base of the heart where the slitlike lumen is constricted by the vascular ring anomaly. The outline of
the trachea is seen indenting the flaccid ventral esophageal wall(top of the photograph). B, A feeding
tube is passed into the narrowed esophageal lumen where it passes through the vascular ring.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy
■
65
Hgure 3-23 Persistent right aortic arch in a 4-month-old male Labrador retriever that has had
regurgitation since it began to eat solid food at 4 weeks of age. A, The cranial thoracic esophagus is
of the trachea is seen indenting the flaccid ventral esophageal wall. B, Close-up view of the slitlike lumen
where the esophagus is constricted by the ligamentum arteriosum as it crosses over the esophagus.
Hgure 3-24 Persistent right aortic arch (vascular ring anomaly) in a 3-month-old female German
 Shepherd with regurgitation. A, The lumen is narrow in the area where the esophagus is constricted
by the malformation. B, Close-up view of the esophageal lumen where it is constricted by the
ligamentum arteriosum.
Hgure 3-25 Vascular ring anomaly (persistent right 
aortic arch) in an 8-year-old Labrador retriever 
with a lifelong history of intermittent regurgitation
 and episodes of aspiration pneumonia. Because
the opening through the anomalous vascular ring
was relatively large,the lumen was less restricting
than in most cases and allowed the condition to go
udiagnosed for 8 years.
60·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOr EsOPHaGItis
Esophagitis is characterized by acute or chronic inflammation of the esophagus, most often
resulting from mechanical, chemical, or acid reflux injury of the esophageal mucosa. Mild
esophagitis may be self-limiting or resolve with medical treatment, whereas severe esophagitis
may lead to serious complications of esophageal necrosis, perforation, or stricture formation.
■ETIOLOGY
The causes of esophagitis include injury from esophageal foreign bodies, gastroesophageal
reflux of gastric contents (secondary to general anesthesia, hiatal hernia, persistent
vomiting, or malpositioned feeding tubes), and ingestion of irritant medications (e.g--
doxycycline or clindamycin) or corrosive chemicals. Esophagitis can also occur secondary
to putrefaction of ingesta and secretions that accumulate in esophageal diverticula,
megaesophagus, and esophageal sacculation associated with vascular ring anomalies.
Other rare causes include eosinophilic esophagitis, esophageal infections (e.g., pythiosis,
candidiasis, and spirocercosis), radiation injury, and thermal injury from the ingestion of
overheated (microwaved) food.
 Caudal esophageal inflammation causes disturbances in esophageal motility and GES
tone. This results in a vicious cycle whereby decreased GES tone promotes acid reflux,
and decreased esophageal motility impairs normal peristaltic clearance, thus prolonging
mucosal contact with acid and worsening the esophagitis. Therefore once esophagitis
occurs from any cause, it may be perpetuated by gastroesophageal reflux.
Esophageal Foreign Bodies
Esophageal foreign bodies are common causes of esophagitis (especially in dogs); some
examples include bones, chew treats, plastic, rubber, pins, needles, fishhooks, string, and
 partially vomited trichobezoars (especially in cats). Small dogs (<10 kg) have increased risk.
Foreign bodies may injure the esophageal mucosa during passage or through impaction
 and pressure necrosis when they become entrapped (Figure 3-26). Most esophageal foreign
bodies lodge at the thoracic inlet, base of the heart, or GES, which are the least distensible
regions of the esophagus. The extent of secondary esophageal mucosal injury depends on
the type of object, its size and shape, and the length of time it is in contact with the mucosa.
apaun y 'shep s roy iaiuuds leaeudosaonsi aul oi reuens ismi pao uaaq peu ieun apog
postextractionview of the severe mucosal trauma with hemorrhaging andulceration at the site where
the foreignbody was lodged.The gastroesophageal sphincter is at thebottomcenter.B,Progressionof
aas ae suoisoa iesosnu enyadns suneay aug suaeanl iespatu jo saep oi iae sueau iesosnu
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy· 61
Foreign bodies with sharp edges and points, especially bones, can become deeply embedded 
and lacerate or even perforate the esophagus, whereas tightly wedged objects can cause
circumferential pressure necrosis of the mucosa. Large trichobezoars that become lodged in
the esophagus after they are vomited from the stomach can cause severe erosive esophagitis
and stricture formation, presumably through the effects of pressure and prolonged mucosal
contact with gastric acid and pepsin absorbed into the impacted hairball (Figure 3-27).
Techniques for the endoscopic retrieval of foreign bodies are described and illustrated in
A
Hgure 3-27 Trichobezoar-induced esophagitis in a 7-year-old neutered
male domestic short hair cat with the acute onset of dysphagia, gagging.
 in the craniodorsal mediastinum in the region ofthe esophagus. The
trachea is displaced ventrally. B, Emergency esophagoscopy reveals a
large trichobezoar obstructing the esophageal lumen. C, Immediately
after endoscopic removal, esophagoscopy reveals severe esophagitis
with mucosal ulceration and hemorrhage where the trichobezoar had
been lodged. D, A barium contrast esophagram 4 days after extraction
of the trichobezoar shows a narrowed indistensible lumen and mucosal
irregularity of the cranial thoracic esophagus indicative of persistent
esophagitis and possibly a developing stricture. (The round filling
defects are incidental air bubbles). E, Esophagoscopy performed
3 weeks later because of continuing regurgitation reveals an esophageal
stricture at the site of the trichobezoar injury.
62·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Chapter 7. Sharp, pointed, or tightly wedged objects must be extracted cautiously from the
esophagus to avoid causing further mucosal damage. After a foreign body has been removed
or advanced into the stomach, the esophageal mucosa should be evaluated endoscopically
for secondary esophagitis, perforation, or bronchoesophageal fistula (see Figure 3-26).
Reflux Esophagitis
Gastroesophageal reflux refers to the movement of gastric contents into the esophagus
unassociated with normal eructation or vomiting. Causes of esophagitis associated with
 gastroesophageal reflux include general anesthesia, anatomic impairment of GES function
(e.g, hiatal hernia and tumors involving the GES), abnormal gastric retention associated
with delayed gastric emptying, and malposition of indwelling esophageal feeding tubes
through the GES (Figures 3-28 through 3-30). Acid-induced esophagitis secondary
to persistent vomiting or hypergastrinemia (gastrinoma) has a similar pathogenesis
(Figure 3-31). Reflux is normally restricted by the GES, which in turn is influenced by
anatomic, neural, and endocrine factors. Transient reflux events are normal in dogs and
cats, but because of effcient esophageal clearance mechanisms, these events do notproduce
esophagitis. Esophageal damage caused by gastroesophageal reflux is primarily attributed
 to prolonged mucosal contact with refluxed gastric acid, digestive enzymes (e.g-, pepsin
and trypsin), and bile acids. The severity of reflux injury to the esophagus depends on the
frequency, composition, and contact time of the reflux.
General anesthesia has been associated with reflux esophagitis and subsequent
 esophageal stricture formation in dogs and cats ( Figure 3-32). This is attributable primarily
to GES relaxation, acid reflux, and delayed clearance of acid from the esophagus in the
anesthetized animal. This has been associated with many of the agents used routinely
in anesthetic protocols, including the routine gas anesthetics, propofol, thiopentone,
morphine, acepromazine, and anticholinergics. Other factors that may contribute to
anesthesia-related esophagitis include suppressed swallowing and secondary peristalsis and
 increased abdominal pressure during surgical manipulation.
Irritant Medications and Chemicals
Corrosive injury to the esophagus can result from various oral medications and ingested
chemicals, and the severity of the injury depends on the concentration, pH, and duration of
contact with the mucosa. Oral tablet and capsule medications with high acidity, especially
doxycycline hyclate or hydrochloride and clindamycin hydrochloride in cats, can cause
Figure 3-28 Reflux esophagitis in a dog, which shows erythematous
Hgure 3-29 Reflux esophagitis in an 8-year-old male bulldog.
mucosal streaks and erosions on the mucosal folds that radiate from
Erythema and erosions are present in the caudal thoracic
the gastroesophageal sphincter into the caudal thoracic esophagus.
esophagus, and the gastroesophageal sphincter is partially open.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy· 63
 esophagitis and strictures. This is because ofthe corrosive effect ofthe medication combined
with prolonged esophageal retention and mucosal contact time when tablets or capsules
 are administered to cats as a “dry swallow." Several other oral medications, including
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs and bisphosphonates, also have the potential to cause
esophagitis.
 Ingested chemical irritants may cause acute esophagitis, especially concentrates that
have highly acidic, alkaline, or oxidant qualities. Concurrent mucositis (ie., stomatitis,
glossitis, pharyngitis) may be present. Esophagitis has been reported in a dog that ingested
chlorine granules (Figure 3-33). The fastidiousness of cats makes the purposeful ingestion
of caustic chemicals unlikely; however, cats can ingest chemical irritants they lick off their
 paws or haircoat, which has occurred with undiluted benzalkonium chloride.
Figure 3-30 Reflux esophagitis in a 4-month-old male Labrador
Hgure 3-31 Erosive esophagitis in a 4-year-old neutered male
retriever with vascular ring anomaly. Hemorrhagic mucosal
miniature poodle with chronic vomiting, hypergastrinemia (fasting
 Streaks are seen just cranial to the gastroesophageal sphincter.
gastrin, 1793 ng/L; normal, 10 to 40 ng/L),and hypertrophic gas-
tropathy. The mucosa is ulcerated, friable, and hemorrhagic. Spon-
taneous esophageal perforation subsequently occurred. Gastrinoma
(Zollinger-Ellison syndrome) was suspected but unproved.
Figure 3-32 Erosive esophagitis in a 9-year-old female Labrador
Hgure 3-33 Chemically-induced erosive esophagitis with pseudo-
retriever after the dog underwent an anesthetic procedure (ovario-
 membrane formation in the cranial esophagus of an 8-month-old
hysterectomy for pyormetra). Large, confluent mucosal erosions and
 male Golden retriever that had ingested concentrated chlorine 
hemorrhages are seen in the caudal thoracic esophagus.
tablets. Note the yellow-gray pseudomembrane separating from the
 mucosal surface into the lumen.
64·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 3-34 Eosinophilic esophagitis in a cat. A, View of the caudal thoracic esophagus showing
diffuse irregular mucosal thickening granularity, and accentuated folding. B, Close-up view of the
abnormally infiltrated mucosa. (Courtesy of Dr. Michael Leib; Virginia Tech.)
Eosinophilic Esophagitis
A case report describes diffuse eosinophilic esophagitis in a dog with dysphagia, regur
gitation, and a midthoracic esophageal stricture.l Mucosal biopsies found greater than
50% of the inflammatory cells to be eosinophils and greater than 25 eosinophils per high-
powered feld. The dog responded to systemic and intralesional corticosteroids combined
with an elimination diet, bougienage of the stricture, and acid control therapy. Esophagitis
with similar eosinophilic infiltrate in a cat is depicted here (Figure 3-34). Eosinophilic
esophagitis has emerged as an increasingly prevalent disease in people with allergies. The
characteristic endoscopic findings include linear furrowing of the mucosa, concentric
circular rings, increased mucosal friability, strictures, surface exudates (white papules or
plaques) composed of eosinophils, and tissue eosinophilia on biopsy.
Esophageal Infections
Pythium insidiosum as a cause of severe necrotizing pyogranulomatous esophagitis has been
reported in two dogs from rural Tennessee. Infection is believed to occur from ingestion of
zoospores in stagnant fresh water. A presumptive diagnosis of pythiosis is based on finding
characteristic broad poorly septate hyphae with Grocot's methenamine silver stain in
anti- P. insidiosum antibodies or culture with polymerase chain reaction ( PCR) identification.
Response to therapy is poor. The esophagus occasionally becomes heavily colonized with
Candida albicans, producing widespread white mucosal deposits of yeast in patients
with chronic retention of decomposing ingesta in the esophagus from megaesophagus,
 diverticulum, or vascular ring anomaly (Figure 3-35). Spirocerca lupi is a nematode parasite
develop into fibrosarcoma or osteosarcoma.
■ CLINICAL SIGNS
The clinical signs of esophagitis are similar to those of other esophageal diseases and
include dysphagia, regurgitation, odynophagia, retching gagging, repeated swallowing, and
excessive salivation. With mild esophagitis, clinical signs may be subtle or absent. Vomiting
and regurgitation may occur together when esophagitis is associated with a hiatal hernia
or is secondary to persistent vomiting. When esophagitis is caused by gastroesophageal
reflux during anesthesia, clinical signs usually are noted within 2 to 4 days ofthe anesthetic
procedure. Nonspecific lethargy and vague discomfort may be seen in the immediate
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy·65
Figure 3-35 Esophageal candidiasis in an English bulldog with persistent right aortic arch. A, Endoscopy
shows multifocal white mucosal plaques. B, Collction of a brush cytology specimen ofthe mucosa.
C, Cytology of similar lesions from another dog reveals abundant yeast (ovoid bodies) and septate
nonbranching hyphal forms of Candida albicans.
postoperative period, before regurgitation becomes apparent. When esophagitis is severe
or is complicated by aspiration pneumonia or esophageal perforation, clinical signs
may include anorexia, depression, and fever. Weight loss and dehydration occur when
esophagitis is severe enough to interfere with adequate intake of food and water. The
ingestion of a corrosive chemical should be suspected in any animal with concomitant
stomatitis and oropharyngeal ulcerations.
■ DIAGNOSIS AND ENDOSCOPIC FINDINGS
Esophagitis should be considered whenever signs of esophageal dysfunction are present
but particularly when an animal has a recent history of general anesthesia, foreign body or
chemical ingestion, or persistent vomiting. Because reflux esophagitis can be a “silent" disease
with minimal clinical signs, it is a diffcult disorder to diagnose definitively in many dogs and
cats. Sometimes radiography may determine the underlying cause (e.g, foreign body, hiatal
hernia, caudal esophageal mass in S. lupi). Otherwise, survey radiographs in esophagitis
esophagus. Contrast esophagrams are often normal; however, when esophagitis is severe,
the mucosal surface may appear irregular, and secondary hypomotility may cause variable
esophageal dilation. Segmental narrowing of the lumen may occur because of spasticity,
intramural edema, and focal indistensibility caused by inflammation (see Figure 3-27, D).
This radiographic appearance can be diffcult to differentiate from a developing stricture.
 Reflux of contrast media or a sliding hiatal hernia can be demonstrated by videofluoroscopy.
66·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Endoscopic examination of the esophageal mucosa is the most sensitive and specific
method for diagnosing esophagitis. The mucosal abnormalities can include hyperemia,
increased friability, ease of bleeding when rubbed by the endoscope tip, granular surface
texture, accentuated folding, erosions, ulcers, focal necrosis, pseudomembranes, pale white
areas of fbrosis with indistensibility, strictures (see figures in the “Stricture” section), and
GES abnormalities (see Figures 3-26 through 3-35). Inflammatory lesions in the caudal
thoracic esophagus accompanied by a wide-open GES and the pooling of fluid in the distal
esophagus are indicative of reflux esophagitis and potentially suggestive of a hiatal hernia
(see the “Hiatal Hernias" section). Linear erythematous streaks and erosions may be seen
on the top of mucosal folds radiating from the GES (see Figure 3-28). Reflux of gastric
contents may be observed during endoscopy. The diagnosis of reflux esophagitis cannot be
based solely on the visual examination because in some cases microscopic inflammation
occurs before abnormalities can be seen with an endoscope. When reflux esophagitis is
suspected, mucosal biopsies adjacent to the GES may reveal hyperplastic, dysplastic, or
 metaplastic epithelial changes comparable to Barrett's esophagus in people. Manometry
of the GES and continuous ambulatory monitoring of the distal esophageal pH with a pH
 Atlas fOr esOPHaGeal strIcture
Esophageal strictures are caused by severe injury or inflammation that extends deep into
the submucosa and muscularis layers of the esophagus, resulting in healing by intramural
fibrosis. Esophagitis is characterized initially by erythema, edema, erosion, necrosis, and an
influx of inflammatory cells, but in severe cases this is followed by deposition of collagen
that restricts distensibility ofthe lumen and results in a fibrous stricture. Stricture formation
depends on the severity, depth, and circumference of the injury.
■ETIOLOGY
Approximately 65% of esophageal strictures in dogs and cats are attributable to reflux esoph-
agitis associated with anesthesia. Iatrogenic corrosive esophagitis associated with dry swallow
of oral doxycycline and clindamycin is an important cause in cats. Other causes include acid
injury from vomiting, trauma from esophageal foreign bodies, esophageal trichobezoar
impaction in cats, and gastroesophageal reflux associated with hiatal hernia. In a study that
assessed the severityofesophagitisin60 dogs after removal ofvarioustypesofesophageal foreign
bodies, 5 of 60 dogs (12%) with moderate to severe esophagitis went on to develop strictures.2
 Esophageal foreign body obstruction caused by dental chew treats resulted in strictures in 6 of
25 dogs (24%) in another report. Stricture formation can also be a complication of esophageal
surgery and esophagostomy tube placement. Stenotic fibromuscular rings or membranous
webs that are presumed to be congenital are identified rarely in young animals that begin
regurgitating when started on solid food. Additional information on the etiopathogenesis of
esophagitis is provided in the preceding “Esophagitis"” section.
 CLINICAL SIGNS
 The clinical signs of stricture, which are atributable to esophageal obstruction and
associated esophagitis, include regurgitation, odynophagia, hypersalivation, dysphagia
(solids more than liquids), and weight loss. The appetite is often good or even ravenous
because of the inability to swallow food past the strictured area. In many cases regurgitation
occurs shortly after eating, but liquids are preferentially retained. In general, the narrower
the stricture the more severe the regurgitation. Regurgitation can be more delayed affer
eating in caudal thoracic strictures because the spacious dilated esophagus cranial to the
obstruction acts as a food reservoir.
An esophageal stricture should be suspected when regurgitation develops after
a nesthesia, vomiting, or ingestion ofa foreign object or corrosive medication or substance.
CHAPTER 3 Esophagoscopy· 67
The onset of clinical signs is usually within 1 to 2 weeks after the inciting esophageal injury,
although initial signs of esophagitis may occur within 1 to 3 days. Occasionally signs are not
evident for up to 4 weeks after an injury.
■ RADIOGRAPHY
 The diagnosis of esophageal stricture can be confrmed by barium contrast radiography of
the esophagus or esophagoscopy. Survey radiographic results are often normal unles the
esophagus is distended cranial to the stricture with food, fluid, or air. Barium contrast-
enhanced radiography can usually determine the location, length, and number of strictures
(Figure 3-36). It can be difficult to radiographically differentiate a fibrous stricture from
severe inflammation or neoplasia. The length of a stricture can also be overestimated
radiographically because of associated inflammation and esophageal spasm.
■ ESOPHAGOSCOPY
Esophagoscopy is the most reliable method for diagnosis of esophageal strictures and
for determination of the luminal diameter, stricture length, and presence of associated
esophagitis. Approximately 80% to 90% of strictures in dogs and cats are located in the
intrathoracic esophagus, most commonly between the heart base and gastroesophageal
junction. The degree of narrowing at the stricture site varies, but the lumen is often reduced
to less than 10 mm in diameter (median, 5 mm); occasionally it can be imperforate. The
length of the stricture averages 1 cm, but it can vary from a thin band, web, or ridge of
fbrotic tissue to a segmental narrowing up to 10 to 15 cm in length. Diffuse esophagitis
can result in multiple strictures. In five retrospective studies reporting a total of 112 dogs
and cats with esophageal strictures, single strictures were found in 80% of cases and two or
three strictures were found in the remaining 20%.
The endoscopic appearance of esophageal strictures is variable, but most appear as a
focal circumferential narrowing formed by a smooth glistening-white ring or ridge of firm
that impedes passage of the endoscope is usually the endoscopist's first indication of
Figure 3-36 Lateral barium contrast esophagram showing a stricture
Hgure 3-37 A typical-appearing mature fibrotic esophageal
1.5 cm in length in the caudal cervical region of a 3-year-old female
stricture.
Doberman Pinscher with a 3-week history of regurgitation that
began shortly after an anesthetic procedure (ovariohysterectomy).
Contrast material is accumulated in the dilated esophagus cranial to
the well-delineated narrowing of the lumen caused by the stricture.
68·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 3-38 Trichobezoar-induced esophageal stricture in an 11-year-old neutered male domestic
long hair cat. A, The 2-mm stricture before balloon dilation. B, Immediately after dilation the stricture 
 site shows evidence of mucosal tearing and mild hemorrhaging that are typical after this procedure.
Figure 3-39 Triple esophageal stricture in a
2-year-old Chinese Shar-Pei that was seen for
regurgitation 2 weeks after anesthesia for surgical
repair of multiple fractures. Through the annular
ring of one stricture, a second stricture is seen a
 short distance farther down the esophagus.
a stricture. The esophageal lumen at the stricture is typically less than 10 mm in diameter;
to 20 mm) that allws passage of the scope, and these can be more diffcult to identify,
especially in the spacious esophagus of larger dogs. The adjacent mucosa may be inflamed,
hemorrhagic, friable, or ulcerated if concurrent esophagitis is present. Active esophagitis
was found at initial examination in 41% of 112 stricture cases reported in five studies.
The esophagoscopic findings that indicate esophagitis are described and illustrated in the
 preceding “Esophagitis” section. The degree of dilation of the esophagus cranial to the
stricture depends on the duration and extent of obstruction. With chronicity (weeks),
contraction of deep fibrotic tissue can cause the tubular axis of the esophagus to be
 angulated rather than straight. Multiple or diffuse stricture formations can appear as a
series of thin, white, annular or semiannular fbrotic ridges projecting into the lumen with
sacculated regions in between, resulting in a narrowed indistensible lumen that is distorted
and irregular (nontubular) in shape (Figures 3-40 and 3-41). In some cases, fibrotic ridges
may form a spiral configuration that extends for several centimeters down the esophagus.
Occasionally strictures develop a membranous web across the lumen or an imperforate
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy·69
Figure 3-40 A-B, Partial stricture in a 9-year-old male neutered Collie, showing thin fibrotic bands
or ridges.
Figure 3-41 A 10-year-old male neutered Golden retriever with chronic esophageal strictures after
several dilation procedures. A-B, Diffuse esophageal fibrosis and extensive distortion of the tubular
lumen by a network of fibrotic bands and interspersed sacculations of the esophageal wall. In B, a
balloon dilator is being inserted at the left side of the photograph.
membrane that completely occludes the lumen, presenting the appearance of a blind pouch
to the endoscopist (Figure 3-42).
Esophageal obstruction from a benign stricture must be differentiated from esophageal
mass (see the “Vascular Ring Anomalies" and “Periesophageal Masses" sections in this
 chapter). Esophageal neoplasia is rare and usually appears as a bulging proliferative mass.
Malignant tumors usually have a mucosal surface that is more ulcerated, lobulated, and
friable than a benign stricture. Biopsy is recommended to determine whether an atypical-
appearing stricture is benign or malignant. In periesophageal compression the mucosa at
the site of narrowing appears normal but is indented by an extraluminal structure.
 ENDOSCOPIC TREATMENT OF STRICTURES
Endoscopically guided mechanical dilation is the most successful and least invasive method
for initial treatment of esophageal strictures. Balloon catheter dilation or bougienage can
be used, and favorable outcomes are reported in 70% to 88% of strictures treated by these
techniques. In addition to being less invasive, endoscopic dilation is more successful
than surgical resection because of the high rate of stricture recurrence with surgery.
70PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 3-42 Imperforate stricture and fibrous web of the cervical esophagus in a 2-year-old neutered male
domestic short hair cat with a 1-month history of dysphagia and regurgitation. A, Lateral view barium
contrast esophagram shows barium filling a blind pouch in the cervical esophagus proximal to the site of
complete obstruction by the stricture. B, The stricture has formed a complete occlusive membrane over
the lumen (in the center), producing a blind pouch with no identifiable opening. C, Probing with the tip
of a balloon catheter fails to identify a lumen. D, A small opening in the stricture membrane, made with a
 2-mm pinch biopsy forceps, reveals the location of the lumen. E, Stricture site immediately after dilation.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy·71
Figure 3-42, cont'd F, As the endoscope enters the dilated stricture, a second stricture is seen a few
centimeters farther down the esophagus. G,A close-up view of the second stricture shows fibrotic
strands that cross the lumen to produce a weblike effect. H-I, The second stricture after balloon dilation.
The dilation procedure can be performed with either endoscopic or fluoroscopic guidance.
Esophagoscopyenables visual assessment ofthe extent of the stricture, visual guidance ofthe
balloon dilator or bougie into the stricture lumen, and then immediate reassessment of the
esophagus after dilation. Esophagoscopy also allows identification of associated esophagitis
and underlying predisposing causes of stricture formation (e.g- gastroesophageal reflux
and hiatal hernia). In addition, endoscopically assisted placement of self-expanding
 endoluminal esophageal stents is emerging as a potential pallative procedure for strictures
that fail to respond to dilation.
Endoscopic dilation of strictures is performed under general anesthesia. The
instrumentation, patient positioning, anesthetic considerations, and procedure for
endoscope insertion are the same as described previously in this chapter for routine
diagnostic esophagoscopy. Additional equipment needed is a set of bougies or balloon
catheter dilators and balloon-inflation device. During the procedure, if the endoscope
cannot advance beyond the stricture, insufflation should be used sparingly so that
 overdistension of the stomach with air does not occur, which could compromise an
anesthetized patient (especially cats and small dogs). Postoperative dietary considerations
and medical management for esophagitis are discussed in the following section.
 Inflatable balloon catheters dilate strictures by radial stretch forces on the esophageal
wall, whereas bougies exert longitudinal shearing forces. Studies comparing these two
techniques in human patients with strictures have found them to be equally safe and
72·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
effective. Based on the ability to eat softened or solid food and drink water with minimal
dysphagia or regurgitation, studies in dogs and cats report an overall favorable outcome of
70% to 88% with balloon catheter dilation and comparable results with bougienage (71%).
Esophageal perforation, the most serious complication of stricture dilation, occurred in 1
of 28 animals (3.6%) treated by bougienage, compared with 4% to 9% of animals treated
by balloon dilation. In both balloon dilation and bougienage the likelihood of success of
dilation is not influenced by the cause, duration, location, or initial luminal diameter of the
stricture. The presence or absence of concurrent esophagitis also does not affect the overall
outcome, but cases with esophagitis might require more dilations.
Endoscopic Balloon Dilation
This procedure requires a set of balloon dilators that are either passed through the
endoscope channel (through-the-scope [TTS] type) or advanced over a guidewire
(over-the-wire [OTW] type)  with endoscopic guidance. Esophageal balloon dilators
are designed to become extremely rigid when inflated to the pressure designated by the
manufacturer, which ranges from 45 to 150 psi (3 to 10 atm), depending on the specific
 product. A spectrum of balloon sizes is needed to accommodate animals of varying sizes,
strictures of varying diameters, and sequential increases in the dilation diameter during
the procedure (Figure 3-43). Controlled radial expansion balloon dilators (CRE; Boston
Scientific/Microvasive, Natick, Mass.) are designed to provide three distinct pressure-
controlled diameters with minimal “waisting" at the point of contact with the stricture.
The CRE balloon dilators are available in both TTS (fixed wire) and OTW guidewire styles
in a total of six balloon sizes that each inflate to three distinct diameters, beginning with the
smallest balloon at 6-7-8 mm up to the largest CRE balloon at 18-19-20 mm; the balloons
increase in 3-mm increments. Therefore, a complete set of six CRE multidiameter balloons
 provide 18 different dilation diameters in 1-mm increments from 6 to 20 mm. The TTS
balloons are 8 cm in length, and the OTW ones are 5.5 cm in length. Larger balloons of
25 mm and 30 mm (Z-MED 1I Balloon, B. Braun; Wilson-Cook Balloon; Cook Medical)
are sometimes useful in large dogs. To inflate the balloons to the appropriate pressure, a
Boston Scientific/Microvasive, Natick, Mass.) is also needed (Figure 3-44).
Balloon dilators are intended for a single use in people; however, they are readily
reused several times in animal patients until eventual rupture. The TTS balloons are
2.8 mm in diameter when deflated and can be passed through the accessory channel of an
Hgure 3-44 Alliance Inflator II, inflation device with integrated
pressure gauge that ensures the appropriate dilation pressures are
Figure 3-43 Various sizes ofballoon dilators (inflated)
achieved and maintained.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy·73
endoscope when used the first time (Figure 3-45). With subsequent uses the deflated TTS
balloons do not usually compact enough to pass easily through the endoscope channel,
so they need to be guided into place alongside the endoscope while visualization of the
catheter tip is maintained so as to avoid snagging or traumatizing the mucosal surface.
Once the TTS balloon is centered in the stricture it is inflated. Alternatively, with OTW
balloon dilators a guidewire is first advanced through the scope channel into the stricture
lumen under direct visualization, and then the scope is withdrawn, leaving the guidewire
in position. The deflated OTW balloon is then advanced over the wire and positioned in
the lumen of the stricture with endoscopic or fluoroscopic guidance. With either style
of balloon dilator, once the balloon is centered in the stricture it is slowly inflated to the
manufacturer-designated pressure with distilled water with the use of the inflator device
(see Figure 3-44). Positioning of the balloon so that it straddles the stricture can be verified
by fluoroscopy if available, but this is not routinely necessary. The indentation of the center
q a se reades pous ie siem, e sond as ais a ie uooiq a go
reaches designated pressure and the stricture is fully dilated (Figure 3-46).
 ro   a    snd n  
guidelines have not been established for (1) the initial balloon size (dilation diameter),
(2) the optimal final dilation diameter, (3) the optimal hold time for each balloon inflation,
(4) the number of sequential dilations per session, (5) the total number of dilation sessions,
(6) the interval of time between repeated dilation sessions, (7) ancillary procedures during
dilation, or (8) postdilation treatment.
We select an initial balloon diameter that is approximately 4 mm larger than the estimated
starting diameter ofthe stricture lumen.3 A balloon that is 50% to 100% larger than the stricture
lumen is an alternative guideline.4 The luminal diameter can be estimated by comparing the
stricture opening to the known diameter of the balloon tip, a 2.8-mm endoscopic biopsy
forceps, a catheter passed alongside the scope, or the endoscope tip when it can be advanced
through the stricture. A conservative estimate for the initial balloon size during each session
is prudent; then sequentially larger balloons are used for subsequent dilations to achieve
an adequate opening balanced with what is judged to be an acceptable degree of mucosal
tearing at the stricture site. Balloons are inflated and held at the designated pressure for 1 to
1.5 minutes, then deflated and withdrawn, and the stricture is reexamined for size, mucosal
damage, and hemorrhage (Figures 3-47 and 3-48). In most cases we perform two or three
dilations per session with sequentially larger balloons, unless the mucosal damage after the
initial ballooning is judged to be too severe to risk further dilation. The balloon diameter for
subsequent dilation sessions is based on luminal diameter and subjective appearance of the
stricture resulting from the previous dilation session. If more than one stricture is encountered,
each one is dilated in a similar manner. By the end of the first session, in most cases, the
Figure 3-45 Through-the-scope balloon dilator for esophageal stricture dilation. A, Appearance of
a 10-mm by 8-cm balloon when it is deflated for passage through the 2.8-mm channel of a flexible
endoscope and into the lumen of an esophageal stricture. B, Appearance of the balloon when it is fully
inflated tothe designated pressure, as would ocur during the endoscopic dilation of an esophageal
stnicture.
74·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
C
Figure 3-46 Lateral videofuoroscopy sequence of stricture dilation with a guidewire balloon
inflated with iohexol. A-B, Note the progressive dilation of the stricture lumen at the “waist” in
the middle of the balloon. C, The balloon has reached full pressure and diameter (10 mm), and the
stricture waist has disappeared. (Courtesy of Dr. Aimee Kidder; The Ohio State University.)
lumen should be dilated to at least 10 mm, which should allow thorough examination of the
 remainder of the esophagus and gentle advancement of the endoscope into the stomach.
The number ofrepeat dilation sessions required and interval between sessions is variable.
 In most studies the median number of dilation sessions has been from two to four; however,
some patients have been successfully treated with one dilation session, and others have
required 10 or more. In one case series that achieved an initial dilation diameter of 12 to
18 mm in many of the cases, 67% of animals required only one or two dilation sessions.3
The median interval between dilation sessions has averaged approximately 1 week (range,
4 to 1l days) in some studies, which is typically when we repeat endoscopy after the frst
dilation session in our patients. Some diffcult cases are dilated twice weekly. However,
other studies have reported success with the use of a longer median interval of 2 or 3 weeks
Some of the variability between studies is explained by lack of consensus on optimal
dilation endpoint on the size of the patient, the lumen size and whether it has plateaued
with repeated dilations, the degree of mucosal tearing, and the clinical response (i.e., the
ability of the patient to tolerate soft food or gruel with minimal regurgitation). General
 guidelines for the final dilation endpoints are 10 to 12 mm for cats and small dogs weighing
less than 8 kg, 12 to 16 mm for dogs weighing 8 to 20 kg, 16 to 20 mm for dogs weighing
20 to 40 kg, and 20 to 30 mm for dogs more than 40 kg.
CHAPTER 3 Esophagoscopy · 75
Figure 3-47 Sequential endoscopic views
of a balloon dilation procedure. A, The
deflated balloon inserted into the stenotic
lumen of an esophageal stricture before
dilation. B, The fully inflated balloon
catheter within the lumen of the stricture.
C, The dilated stricture immediately after
the balloon has been deflated and removed.
The stricture site should be visualized after each dilation. Complications are relatively
infrequent except for mild bleeding and tearing of the mucosa (see Figures 3-38 and 3-48).
Moderate to severe mucosal tearing and hemorrhaging are reported in 5% to 10% of
patients (Figure 3-49). Life-threatening esophageal perforation is reported in 4% to 9%
of patients, and clinical characteristics that would help predict the risk of perforation have
 not been identifed (Figure 3-50). Esophageal diverticulum and aspiration pneumonia
 are occasional complications of stricture dilation. A favorable outcome of 70% to 88% is
 reported with balloon catheter dilation.
Ancillary procedures that have been used empirically to augment the stricture
 dilation procedure include intralesional injection of triamcinolone into the stricture
site, endoscopically guided laser or electrosurgical incision of the stricture ring, and
application of mitomycin-C to the stricture site as an antifbrotic agent. In place of systemic
corticosteroids, we routinely administer a four-quadrant intralesional submucosal injection
of triamcinolone into the stricture ring immediately before balloon dilation, as reported by
others.4,5 A disposable endotherapy injection needle (23G, 4-mm needle; 165-cm working 
length; with reusable sheath; Olympus Injector Needle; Olympus America, Inc.; Center
Valley, Pa.) is positioned through the endoscope channel, and triamcinolone acetonide
(Vetalog, 6 mg/mL; Pfizer Animal Health, New York, N.Y.) is injected submucosally into
the cranial edge of the stricture at 0.4 mg/kg or 0.5 to 1.0 mL is divided into four quadrants
creating noticeable blebs (Figure 3-51).
■PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
76
Figure 3-48 Balloon dilation of an anesthesia-
induced esophageal stricture in a 3-year-old 
Siamese cat. A, The stricture immediately
before balloon dilation. B, A 10-mm balloon
catheter inflated in the lumen of the stricture.
C, The stricture immediately after balloon 
dilation. The lumen has been reopened, and
remnants of the torn stricture are seen.
Figure 3-49 Moderate to severe mucosal tearing
and hemorrhaging immediately after balloon
dilation of a stricture.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy
Figure 3-50 Perforation of an esophageal stricture in a 3-year-old neutered male domestic long hair
cat with a 1-month history of regurgitation. A, Extremely narrow stricture with a 1-mm lumen,before
treatment. B, The stricture is so narrow that the endoscopist has diffculty passing the tapered tip of the
balloon catheter into it. C, A 10-mm balloon catheter inflated within the stricture. D-E, Examination
of the stricture site immediately after deflation and removal ofthe balloon reveals severe tearing of the
 mucosa, with mucosal strands, hemorrhaging, and a full-thickness perforation.
78·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 3-51 A, Positioning and extruding an endotherapy injection needle for intralesional
injection of triamcinolone into an esophageal stricture. B, The first of four injections around the
circumference ofthe stricture.
Another ancillary technique is to use an endoscopy-directed laser or electrocautery to
make four-quadrant radial cuts or notches in mature fibrous strictures immediately before
ballooning (or bougienage) or as a primary means of treatment in place of dilation. This
is proposed to enhance the effectiveness of balloon dilation in some cases and reduce the
degree of mucosal tearing.
Finally, in cases in which strictures repeatedly recur after dilation, the direct application
of mitomycin-C to the stricture site immediately after dilation may help to reduce
collagen formation and stricture recurrence.6 Mitomycin-C (5 mL of 0.1% solution) can
be infused directly onto the stricture site through polyethylene tubing passed through
the endoscope channel, or it can be applied by means of soaking the drug into a cotton
 or gauze pledget that is then carried and held against the lesion for 5 minutes by an
 endoscopic forceps. After 5 minutes of contact time with either method of application,
the residual mitomycin-C is then removed by water flush. Adverse effects have not been
described, but the potential for adverse effects on the adjacent normal esophageal mucosa
should be considered.
Adjunctive therapy for esophagitis should be instituted during the series of dilations and
should continue for 2 to 3 weeks after the last procedure. To reduce the potential for further
damage from reflux of gastric acid, a proton pump inhibitor such as omeprazole (0.7-1.0 mg/
kg q24h PO) or an H-receptor antagonist is given to control acid secretion, and cisapride
(0.5 mg/kg q8h PO) or metoclopramide (0.4 mg/kg q8h PO) is given to decrease reflux by
 promoting gastric emptying and enhancing GES tone. Sucralfate suspension (100 mg/kg
q8h PO, up to a maximum of 1 g) can be added as a mucosal protectant. Some authors
recommend a broad-spectrum antibiotic (e.g-, amoxicillin clavulanate) to control bacterial
colonization of the torn mucosa. The efficacy of systemic corticosteroids for preventing
 postdilation fibrosis and stricture recurrence is controversial and not well supported with
evidence; however, some authors have included oral prednisone or prednisolone (1 to 2 mg/
kg/day for the first 3 weeks and then tapered over the next 2 to 3 weeks) in the medical
management of many of their stricture patients. If intralesional triamcinolone is given at the
time of dilation, then systemic corticosteroids should not be needed. Corticosteroids should
not be given to animals with aspiration pneumonia.
Animals can usually be fed and will tolerate softened food or gruel after the procedure.
In most cases we encourage oral intake of soffened food as soon as possible, even
observing that swallowing boluses of softened food may help to maintain an open lumen.
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube feeding has been used after dilation
in some reports, especially in patients with poor body condition scores, severe mucosal
tearing or esophagitis, or an inability to tolerate food intake after dilation without persistent
dysphagia, odynophagia, and regurgitation.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy·79
Bougienage
Bougienage involves the passage of a lubricated rigid or semirigid mechanical dilator or
si irq a aissd o ssd as a s a  a
in stretching and dilation of the stricture. A variety of bougies are available, including
metal, olive-tipped bougies and tapered, wire-guided Savary-Gilliard dilators (Figure
3-52). Various diameters of these devices are needed to incrementally dilate the stricture
lumen. Bougies have either rounded tips or tapered ends, and their bases are wider than
their tips. The narrow tip is advanced into the stricture lumen, and the widest part of the
bougie dilates the stricture as it is advanced.
and cats has been reported with the use of wire-guided Savary-Gilliard dilators,7 which
are available as sets of bougies sized in 1-mm increments from 5 to 20 mm in diameter
(Cook Medical; Winston-Salem, N.C.). Before each bougienage procedure the stricture
site is carefully assessed by endoscopy and the diameter of the stricture lumen is
estimated by comparing it with various sizes of bougies. Initial bougienage is performed
with a dilator the same size or 2 mm larger than the starting lumen diameter of the
stricture. A guidewire is first advanced through the endoscope channel into the stricture
lumen under direct visualization; then the scope is withdrawn with the guidewire left
in position. A well-lubricated bougie is then advanced over the guidewire and into the
lumen of the stricture. This can be done blindly or with the endoscope tip situated
several centimeters proximal to the stricture site so that the bougie can be observed as
it is advanced through the stricture. The bougie is advanced until its widest part has
passed through the stricture, and then it is withdrawn, leaving the guidewire in place
for the next bougie. The mucosa is inspected for hemorrhaging and tearing after each
one are then used in succession for a total of two to four bougie passes per session,
depending on the degree of mucosal trauma. The largest bougie in a session is usually
no more than 6 mm larger than the starting lumen diameter of the stricture. Excessive
force should be avoided so that the risk of esophageal perforation is reduced. Dilation
sessions are repeated, as needed, to relieve clinical signs and maintain a lumen diameter
of at least 10 mm.
In the report of 28 dogs and cats undergoing bougienage, the median number of sessions
was 3 for dogs and 4.5 for cats, and the final bougie diameters were 9 to 15 mm in most
dogs and 9 to 12 mm in most cats. Ancillary medical management is the same as described
for balloon dilation (see preceding section). Owners considered the outcome to be good
in 20 of the 28 patients (71%); a good outcome was defined as tolerance of solid food
B
Figure 3-52 A,Metal olive-tipped bougies; B,Savary-Glliard dilators. (Fro Selon RK, Willard MD: Esophagitis and esophageal strictures, Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33:945-967, 2003.)
80· PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
with minimal regurgitation (less than once per week). The only serious complication was
nonfatal perforation in one cat (3.6%). Thus, bougienage in this study appeared to be as
safe and effective as that reported for balloon dilation.
Although less safe and effective than an actual bougie, the endoscope tip can be
improvised as a dilator under certain circumstances. If the diameter of a stricture is only
through to dilate the stricture. The esophageal lumen should be maintained within the
center of the feld, and excessive force, which could cause either esophageal perforation
ah qm passd aq pou adosoua a Jn papio aq isn adoss a o sp 1o
 pressure, another type of dilator should be used.
Stenting of Esophageal Strictures
 Intraluminal stenting is emerging as a potential palliative intervention for esophageal
strictures when repeated dilations (>5 to 10) fail to maintain a luminal diameter
sufficient for the animal to tolerate eating and drinking without frequent regurgitation.
The technique is used extensively for treatment of malignant neoplasia of the esophagus
and refractory benign strictures in people. Several different compositions and styles
of self-expanding mesh stents are available. Stents made of silicone-covered metallic
nitinol and biodegradable polydioxanone (PDS) have been used in a limited number of
deployment of esophageal stents. Immediately before insertion of the stent, the stricture
is balloon-dilated. Several complications are possible, especially aborad migration of
the stent, pressure necrosis at the ends of the stent, and occlusion of the stent by food,
hair, or ingrowth of tissue. Anchoring the stent to the esophageal wall with sutures is
sutured in place through a small cervical incision, but intrathoracic stents are more
diffcult and must be sutured with specialized endoscopic equipment (GI Stitch device
and a double-channel endoscope) or anchored in place surgically by thoracotomy or
thoracoscopy.
 AtlaS fOr esOＰHaGeal PerfOratiON
Esophageal perforation isa rare complication ofesophageal foreign bodies, especiallyobjects
with irregular or sharp edges such as bones, or chronically lodged foreign bodies that cause
foreign body extraction or stricture dilation (see Figure 3-50) and as a complication of
esophageal surgery or laser treatment. Penetrating injuries of the esophagus can be caused
by bite wounds, gunshot injuries, and stick impalings during retrieving or play. In general,
perforation of the intrathoracic esophagus has more serious consequences than perforation
of the cervical esophagus.
Clinical signs of perforation include anorexia, depression, odynophagia, fever, and
 pain. Coughing and dyspnea occur when perforation of the thoracic esophagus leads to
 mediastinitis and pleuritis. Perforation of the cervical esophagus can lead to local swelling,
cellulitis, abscesses, and draining fistulas. These may be accompanied by leff-shifted
thoracic radiographs may reveal cervical soff tissue emphysema, pneumomediastinum,
pneumothorax, and mediastinal and pleural effusion. For contrast esophagography when
perforation is suspected, a water-soluble nonionic iodinated contrast agent such as iohexol
(Omnipaque) is advisable because it is less irritating to periesophageal tissues than barium
and is also more readily reabsorbed.
Because of the potential for tension pneumothorax and leakage of contaminated
fluids into the thorax, endoscopy should not be performed in patients with perforation
of the thoracic esophagus. A deep laceration or tear in the esophagus, discovered during
 s e    s e   oa
a defect in the thoracic esophagus in synchrony with respirations is indicative of acute
CHAPTER 3 Esophagoscopy · 81
perforation. If perforation occurs during endoscopic manipulation of a foreign body
or stricture, life-threatening tension pneumothorax may occur that is accentuated by
insufflation. This situation requires immediate thoracocentesis.
Atlas fOr esOＰHaGEal fistula
Esophageal fistulas are congenital or acquired fistulous communications between the
esophagus and adjacent structures, such as the tracheobronchial tree, lung, mediastinum,
or pleural space. Congenital fistulas resulting from incomplete separation of the
embryonic esophagus and the tracheobronchial structures have been reported. Acquired
fistulas result from perforations, especially those caused by foreign bodies (Figure 3-53).
Esophagobronchial fistulas of the caudal esophagus are reported most often. The clinical
signs are regurgitation and signs of contamination of the respiratory tract with food and
esophageal secretions, such as coughing and dyspnea from complicating pneumonia,
 pulmonary abscess, or pleuritis.
 The abnormal fistulous communication can be identified by endoscopy, but a contrast
 esophagram with a dilute barium mixture (20% to 30% w/v) is more reliable for definitive
diagnosis. Iodinated contrast agents should be avoided when esophagobronchial fistula
is suspected because these agents are hypertonic and can cause pulmonary edema. An
esophageal fistula appears endoscopically asa small erythematous opening inthe esophageal
wall that drains purulent, bloody, or frothy fluid. Esophagobronchial fistulas are offen
accompanied by an esophageal diverticulum. Chronic perforations can seal off to become
 blind pouches or fistulas that extend deep into the mediastinum and appear endoscopically
as dual openings; one opening is the normal lumen and the other one opens into a blind
fistulous pouch (see Figure 3-53).
B
Hgure 3-53 Two views of a chronic esophageal fistula in a 2-year-old spayed female Labrador
retriever. The fistula developed after the esophagus was perforated by a sharp stick. The fistulous
tract extends deep into the cranial mediastinum. A, A flap of tissue (free edge of the esophageal
wall) is in the center. The lumen of the esophagus passes to the left of the flap, and the fistula is to
the right. B, Close-up view.
82·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr Hiatal Hernia
Hiatal hernia is a protrusion ofa portion ofthe stomach through the esophageal hiatus ofthe
diaphragm. Hiatal hernia can be congenital or acquired, and in many cases the herniation
and clinical signs are intermittent. A sliding hiatal hernia, which is most common, is a
 Tranial displacement of the abdominal segment of the esophagus, gastroesophageal
junction, and cardia region of the stomach through the esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm
into the thorax. A paraesophageal hiatal hernia occurs when a portion of the stomach
(usually the fundus) herniates through the hiatus into the caudal mediastinum alongside
the caudal thoracic esophagus.
Congenital hiatal hernias are the result of malformation of the hiatus and are most
prevalent in young Chinese Shar- Pei. Acquired hiatal hernias can result from enlargement
of the esophageal hiatus and laxity of the surrounding support structures caused by
 increased intraabdominal pressure associated with vomiting or blunt abdominal trauma
obstruction and inspiratory dyspnea. In obstructive airway conditions such as laryngeal
paralysis and brachycephalic syndrome, the animal must generate a much greater negative
intrapleural pressure during breathing to overcome the increased upper airway resistance,
and this negative intrapleural pressure dra wsthe stomach across the hiatus of the diaphragm
into the caudal thorax.
The clinical signs of hiatal hernias are mostly attributable to secondary reflux esophagitis
caused by displacement of the GES into the thorax. The most common clinical signs are
chronic intermittent vomiting, regurgitation, and excessive salivation, but animals with small
hernias may have minimal clinical signs. Intermittent stomach herniation may cause signs
that are intermittent. Respiratory distress can be seen in patients with large hiatal hernias.
Diseases of the hiatus can usually be diagnosed radiographically, especially when the
hernia is persistent (Figures 3-54 and 3-55). Survey thoracic radiographs may demonstrate
a gas-filled soft tisue mass (the stomach) in the dorsocaudal mediastinum. The normal
 gastric gas bubble that is usually seen in the cranial abdomen can be smallr and displaced.
A contrast esophagram usually confirms the presence of hiatal hernia. The gastroesophageal
junction and gastric rugae are visible cranial to the diaphragm, but the linear relationship
between the esophagus and stomach is preserved. Gastroesophageal reflux of barium is
sometimes identified (see Figure 3-54, A-B). Hiatal hernias that are small and reduce
spontaneously are a dia gnostic challenge because of their intermittent nature and unknown
clinical significance. Fluoroscopy improves the chances of identifying an intermittent
hernia and episodic reflux.
Endoscopy is useful for confrming hiatal hernia and identifying secondary reflux
esophagitis (Figures 3-56, 3-57, and 3-58; see also Figure 3-54, C-D, and Figure 3-55, C).
Findings indicative of hiatal hernia include enlargement of the esophageal hiatal opening,
dilatation and cranial displacement of the GES into the thorax, protrusion of the rugal folds
of the stomach through the hiatus into the caudal thorax as viewed from the esophageal
and gastric retroflex positions, and evidence of reflux esophagitis. A pseudopouch effect
sometimes results as the endoscope first encounters the cranially displaced gastroesophageal
junction. This is followed by a dilated region ofthe lumen lined by rugal folds representing
the intrathoracic portion of the stomach lumen, which is followed by a narrowing of
the lumen where the displaced region of the stomach passes through the hiatus of the
diaphragm. Pooling of fluid in the caudal esophagus, reflux esophagitis lesions (see the
"Esophagitis” section), and an open GES suggest a presumptive endoscopic diagnosis of
hiatal hernia.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy
■
E8
A
Figure 3-54 Severe gastroesophageal reflux in a 3.5-year-old neutered male Siamese cat with
 megaesophagus and hiatal hernia. Radiographs taken after liquid barium was instilled into the
 stomach through a gastrostomy tube reveal severe gastroesophageal reflux associated with hiatal
hernia and megaesophagus. A, Lateral radiograph. B, Ventrodorsal radiograph. C, Fluid is pooled
 in the caudal thoracic esophagus, and the gastroesophageal sphincter is dilated. Reflux episodes 
 Occurred repeatedly during the examination. D, This retroflex view of the cardia from the stomach
lumen shows a widely dilated gastroesophageal junction.
84·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Hgure 3-55 Hiatal hernia in a 5-month-old female Chinese Shar-Pei with regurgitation. A, The 
ateral thoracic radiograph shows a caudal mediastinal fluid density in the region of the esophagus 
along with the mottled appearance of ingesta. B, A lateral barium contrast esophagram shows 
cranial displacement of the stomach into the thorax through a hiatal hernia. C, This endoscopic
view of the gastroesophageal junction shows the hiatal hernia with displacement of the cardia and
rugal folds of the stomach through the diaphragm.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy
■
85
Hgure 3-56 Two views of a hiatal hernia and reflux esophagitis in a 1-year-old male bulldog with
syncope, vomiting, and chronic obstructive upper airway disease (everted laryngeal saccules).
A, Gastroesophageal reflux of food and hemorrhagic fluid is flling the esophagus. The caudal
wide open, allowing direct viewing of the gastric rugae from the esophagus.
Figure 3-57 Paraesophageal hiatal hernia
with displacement of the stomach, spleen,
and duodenum into the thorax in a 7-year-
old male Chinese Shar-Pei with a 3-year
history of occasional vomiting (once per
month). For 3 days before this examination
the animal vomited frequently. A, Refluxed
gastric fuid is pooled inthe esophagus.
The bulge of herniated abdominal viscera
alongside the wall of the esophagus is seen
cranial to the gastroesophageal sphincter.
B, Refluxed bile and food are seen in the 
caudal esophagus, but the sliding hernia has 
replaced itself. C, Erythematous mucosal
 streaks in the caudal esophagus indicate
reflux esophagitis.
86·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 3-58 Hiatal hernia and gastroesophageal intussusception in a 6-month-old male Chinese
Shar-Pei with a 1-month history of chronic vomiting, weight loss, lethargy,and retching shortly
after eating. A, The lateral thoracic radiograph shows a gas-filled structure in the dorsocaudal 
mediastinum. B, A barium contrast esophagram outlines the esophagus passing around the gas-
flled structure with rugae, which is the stomach displaced into the thorax through a right-sided
hiatal hernia. C, The distal esophagus is dilated and contains small accumulations of foam. The
gastroesophageal junction is slightly dilated. Note the outpouching appearance of esophagus
in the lower right aspect of the field of view. This is most likely caused by marked laxity of the
diaphragmatic hiatus. D, Gastric rugal folds (arrows) have filled the lumen at the gastroesophageal
sphincter. E, Close-up view showing the rugal folds (arrows) running up into the hernia pouch of
thedistalesophagus.
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy·87
 Atlas fOr GaStrOEsOPHaGeal IntuSsusceＰtIOｎ
 Gastroesophageal intussusception is an invagination of the stomach into the lumen of the
caudal esophagus. Like hiatal hernia, it can be a consequence of laxity of the esophageal hiatus 
and may occur intermittently. It can also be a complication of esophageal hypomotility or
megaesophagus. Gastroesophageal intussusceptions can cause reflux esophagitis and esophageal
obstruction. The severity of the clinical signs depends on the degree of intussusception and
whether it is spontaneously reversible. Chronic intermittent gastroesophageal intussusception
with a mild degree of invagination can cause mild and intermittent signs, similar tothose ofhiatal
hernia. A large gastroesophageal intussusception with gastric dilation can cause hematemesis,
Gastroesophageal intussusception can be diagnosed by radiography or esophagoscopy
    sn oa   (   s
lumen of the esophagus and esophageal obstruction. Endoscopically the rugal folds of the
invaginated stomach form a bulging intraluminal mass that flls the lumen of the caudal
esophagus. If intussusception is encountered, the endoscopist should maximally insufflate
the esophagus and occlude it in the cervical region to retain the air. The combination of
 inflation pressure and advancement of the endoscope tip against the invaginated rugae may
reduce a small intussusception and allow entry into the repositioned stomach.
Figure 3-59 A, Barium contrast esophagram in a 9-year-old cat with a hiatal disorder. The primary
clinical sign was chronic intermittent vomiting 10 to 30 minutes after eating. The vomiting had
recently become more frequent. The barium bolus was not transported normally through the caudal
esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. This lateral radiograph shows an accumulation of barium
in the caudal esophagus. B, The endoscopic examination revealed mild erythema and outpouching of
the distal esophagus to the left ofthe lower esophageal sphincter. C, This close-up view ofthe caudal
esophagus shows the gastroesophageal sphincter to be moderately dilated.
Continued
88
■PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
D
Figure 3-59, cont'd D, During gastroscopy the cat began to retch. The endoscope was withdrawn 
to the esophagus, and the gastric mucosa then prolapsed into the distal esophagus (gastroesophageal
intussusception). (Note the gastric fold and the barium adhering to the mucosa.) E, The stomach 
 returned to normal position, and residual barium from the retching episode is visualized in the distal 
esophagus. (Courtesy of Todd R. Tams.)
人
Hgure 3-60 A, Gastroesophageal intussusception in an adult cheetah with chronic intermittent
thoracic esophagus has occurred, and hemorrhagic fluid is pooled in the esophagus. B, Gastro-
esophageal sphincter moments after the intussusception is reduced by pushing on it with the tip of
the endoscope.
CHAPTER 3 Esophagoscopy 
■
68
sphincter in a second adult cheetah with chronic intermittent vomiting. B, During the few minutes
 of observation, the amount of stomach that prolapsed into the esophageal lumen progressively
increased until the rugal folds filled the caudal esophageal lumen.
Hgure 3-62 Gastroesophageal intussusception
Fgure 3-63 Gastroesophageal intussuscep-
in a third adult cheetah with chronic inter-
tion in a fourth adult cheetah with chronic
mittent vomiting.
intermittent vomiting. Note the lumen in the
center of the mass of rugal folds.
90
■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr esOPhaGeal NeOPlasIa
Primary esophageal neoplasms are rare. Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common
primary malignant tumor in cats. In regions where S. lupi is an endemic parasite,
fibrosarcomas and osteosarcomas may develop from spirocercal granulomas. Leiomyoma
is the most common benign tumor of the esophagus. It most often arises near the
 gastroesophageal junction of dogs and is usually an incidental finding unless it is large
enough to partially obstruct the lumen. Leiomyosarcoma, lymphoma, metastatic carcinoma,
and various other tumor types occur rarely in the esophagus.
Esophageal neoplasia causes progressive signs of regurgitation, dysphagia, ptyalism,
weight loss, and anorexia, but signs can be minimal until the disease is advanced. Survey
radiographs may be normal, or they may reveal a soft tissue mass in the region of the
esophagus. An irregular intraluminal filling defect on a barium esophagram is indicative
of esophageal neoplasia (Figure 3-64). Spondylitis of the caudal thoracic vertebrae and
hypertrophic osteopathy may be seen in dogs with S. lupi esophageal lesions.
 Endoscopy and biopsy are indicated for the definitive diagnosis of esophageal neoplasia
(see Figures 3-64; see also Figures 3-65 through 3-70). The intrathoracic esophagus is most
often involved. With obstruction the esophagus may be dilated with air, fluid, or food
 proximal to the tumor site. Endoscopically, a carcinoma usually appears as a proliferative
mass with a friable, lobulated, or ulcerated surface (see Figures 3-64 and 3-65). Nematodes
may be seen protruding from the lesionsin dogs with S. lupi-associated esophageal sarcoma,
and eggs may be identified by fecal sedimentation examination. Lumenal occlusion varies,
depending on the size and position of the mass. Forceps biopsies should be obtained from
all esophageal masses and infiltrative lesions identified on endoscopy.
B
Fgure 3-64 Esophageal squamous celcarcinoma in an 11-year-
old neutered male domestic short hair cat with a 3-week history
ofprogressivelyworsening regurgitation.A,The lateral barium
esophagram shows an iregular filling defect that is obstructing the
cranial thoracic esophagus. B, Endoscopic view of the irregular
proliferative mass in the lumen of the thoracic esophagus. C,
Necropsy view of the esophagus opened up (cranial end on the
left), showing the intramural neoplastic mass. The histopathologic
diagnosis was squamous cell carcinoma. (From fohnson SE: Diseases
of the esophagus. In Sherding RG, editor: The cat: diseases and clinical
management, Philadelphia, 1994, Saunders.)
CHAPTER 3Esophagoscopy
■
91
Hgure 3-65 Papillary carcinoma of the terminal esophagus and cardia of the stomach in a 13-year-
old Pug with intermittent vomiting anorexia, and dyspnea for 1 week. Thoracic radiography
showed pulmonary nodules (metastases) and pleural effusion. Thoracic ultrasonography showed
a large hypoechoic mass in the caudal esophagus. A, Irregular proliferation at the gastroesophageal
'uoon! easeudosaonsa au ie ssu aeded ieinsann an mous maia dn-aso 'g uoun
Hgure 3-66 Mast cell tumor of the esophagus in
a 12.5-year-old canine mix.
92
·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
B
Figure 3-67 Undifferentiated sarcoma of the caudal thoracic esophagus in a 15-year-old neutered
mass in the dorsocaudal thorax. B, A lateral barium contrast esophagram shows compression of
the lumen, with nearly complete obstruction except for a thin line of barium. C, Endoscopic view
of the cranial edge of the intramural mass. Normal-appearing mucosa and mucosal vessels are seen
 on the surface of the bulging tumor mass. D, The esophageal lumen in the center of the mass shows 
 irregular, lobulated neoplastic proliferations.
Hgure 3-68 Leiomyoma at the gastroesophageal
junction discovered as an incidental finding in a
14-year-old male Cairn terrier with pharyngeal
dysphagia. A large protruding mass is seen in the
caudal esophagus in front of the gastroesophageal
 sphincter. Normal-appearing mucosa covers the
surface of the mass.
CHAPTER3Esophagoscopy
■
E6
Hgure 3-69 Well-circumscribed mass involving the gastroesophageal junction, presumed to be a
leiomyoma,but biopsies were inconclusive. A, View of the tumor at the gastroesophageal sphincter.
B, Biopsy of the turmor with a rigid forceps passed alongside the endoscope. C, Retroflexed view of
the tumor from the stomach side.
Figure 3-70 Esophageal lymphoma in an 8-year-old male Golden retriever with vomiting, diarrhea, and
 protein-losing enteropathy (total serum protein, 4.2 g/dL; serum albumin, 1.9 g/dL) caused by concurrent
small intestinal lymphoma. Numerous smooth mucosal nodules from lymphomatous infiltration have
 produced a diffuse cobblestone pattern in the esophageal mucosa.
94·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas for periesophaGeal masses
Masses arising from periesophageal tissues may cause extraluminal compression of the
esophagus or may invade locally into the wall of the esophagus. Mediastinal lymphoma is
 most common, although any large tumor or abscess arising from cervical or mediastinal
structures (e.g, thyroid, thymus, lymph node, lung, and heart base) can cause secondary
esophageal compression.
The clinical signs associated with external compression of the esophagus include
regurgitation, dysphagia, and hypersalivation. Mediastinal lymphoma also causes dyspnea
(pleural effusion), decreased thoracic compressibility, and Horner's syndrome. Survey
thoracic radiography usually identifies the compressive mass in the region of the esophagus.
If not, a barium esophagram can be used to identify the location and extent of the obstruction
(Figure 3-71, A). Large mediastinal and pulmonary masses can be examined by fine-needle
aspiration cytology. Thoracocentesis and cytology of the pleural fluid may also be diagnostic.
 Endoscopy is useful for evaluating the extent of obstruction and determining whether
the mass is extramural or intramural (see Figure 3-71, B). A stenotic region of esophagus
mass rather than a stricture or primary esophageal neoplasia. A transmural endoscopic-
guided fine-needle aspirate can be obtained for cytologic examination with the use of a 21G
to 23G TTS schlerotherapy needle.
Hgure 3-71 Periesophageal mass (poorly differentiated sarcoma) in a 3-year-old male Chinese Shar-Pei with
a 3-week history of weight loss and a 1-week history of coughing gagging, vomiting, and anorexia. A, The
lateral barium contrast esophagram shows the esophagus to be distended with barium. The esophagus narrows
abruptly just caudal to the heart because of compression by an intramural or extramural mass. Indistinct
pulmonary nodules (metastases) are also noted. B, This endoscopic view ofthe thoracic esophagus at the
base of the heart shows compression ofthe lumen suggestive ofa periesophageal mass. The mucosa appears
mormal, and no evidence of intraluminal strictures or masses is seen. Necropsy revealed a poorly differentiated
sarcoma surrounding the esophagus and aorta just caudal to the base of the heart.
CHAPTER 3 Esophagoscopy· 95
SUGGESTED
READING
Adamama-Moraitou KK, Ralis TS, Prassinos NN, et al: Benign
Lorinson D, Bright RM: Long-term outcome of medical and surgical
esophageal stricture in the dog and cat: a retrospective study of 20
treatment of hiatal hernias in dogs and cats: 27 cases (1978-1996),
cases, Can J Vet Res 66:55-59, 2002.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 213:381-384, 1998.
Gianella P, Pfammatter NS, Burgener IA: Oesophageal and gastric
Melendez LD, Twedt DC, Weyrauch EA, et al: Conservative therapy
endoscopic foreign body removal: complications and follow-up of
using balloon dilation for intramural, inflammatory esophageal
102 dogs, J Small Anim Pract 50:649-654, 2009.
strictures in dogs and cats: a retrospective study of 23 cases (1987-
Glanemann B, Hildebrandt N, Schneider MA, et al: Recurrent single 
1997), Eur J Comp Gastroenterol 3:31-36, 1998.
oesophageal stricture treated with a self-expanding stent in a cat,
 Poncet CM, Dupre GP, Freiche VG, et al: Prevalence of gastrointestinal
J Feline Med Surg 10:505-509, 2008.
tract lesions in 73 brachycephalic dogs with upper respiratory
Han E, Broussard J, Baer KE: Feline esophagitis secondary to
syndrome, J Small Anim Pract46:273-279, 2005.
gastroesophageal reflux disease: clinical signs and radiographic,
van Geffen C, Saunders JH,Vandevelde B,et al: Idiopathic megaoesophagus
endoscopic, and histopathological findings, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
and intermittent gastro-oesophageal intussusception in a cat, J Srmall
39:161-167, 2003.
Anim Pract 47:471-475, 2006.
Harai BH, Johnson SE, Sherding RG: Endoscopically guided balloon
Wilson DV, Walshaw R: Postanesthetic esophageal dysfunction in 13
 dilatation of benign esophageal strictures in 6 cats and 7 dogs, J Vet
dogs, JAr Anir Hosp Assoc 40:455-460, 2004.
Intern Med9:332-335,1995.
REFERENCES
1. Mazzei MJ, Bissett SA, Murphy KM, et al: Eosinophilic esophagitis
 5. Fraune C, Gaschen F, Ryan K: Intralesional corticosteroid injec-
in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 235:61-65, 2009.
tion in addition to endoscopic balloon dilation in a dog with
 2. Rousseau A, Prittie J, Broussard JD, et al: Incidence and char-
benign oesophageal strictures, ∫ Small Anim Pract 50:550-553.
acterization of esophagitis following esophageal foreign body
2009.
removal in dogs: 60 cases (1999-2003),J Vet Emerg Crit Care(San
 6. Rosseneu S, Afzal N, Yerushalmi B, et al: Topical application of
Antonio) 17:159-163, 2007.
mitomycin-C in oesophageal strictures, ∫ Pediatr Gastroenterol
3. Leib MS, Dinnel H, Ward DL, et al: Endoscopic balloon dilation
Nutr 44:336-341, 2007.
of benign esophageal strictures in dogs and cats, J Vet Intern Med
7. Bissett SA, Davis J, Subler K, et al: Risk factors and outcome of
15:547-552, 2001.
sop u samss [eaeqdosa uguaqjo juaueauoy aseuaisno
4. Richter K: Esophageal strictures—update on therapeutic options.
and cats: 28 cases (1995-2004), JArm Vet Med Assoc 235:844-850,
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine forum,
2009.
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 2009.
Gastroscopy
Todd R. Tams
astroscopy mainly identifes abnormalities of the gastric
elicited. Gastroscopy is not commonly performed in patients
mucosa, but it may also reveal distortion of the stomach's
with acute vomiting unless a gastric foreign body or gastric
normal anatomic relationships by displacement or extrin-
ulceration is suspected. This examination is much more
sic compression as a result of a mass or enlargement of an
commonly done in animals with a history of acute vomit-
adjacent organ. Gastroscopy has become the most valuable
ing that has continued for a period of time without relief
diagnostic method available for evaluating primary gastric
(i.e., greater than 3 to 4 days), chronic intermittent vomiting
disorders because it permits unparalleled observation of the
(i.e., recurrent for more than 2 to 3 weeks), and vomiting
gastric mucosa. This modality significantly increases the
that includes blood. (Gastroscopy should be considered any
diagnostic yield in comparison with contrast radiographic
time hematemesis is observed.) The most common causes
studies, which are somewhat less sensitive in the evaluation
of hematemesis in dogs and cats are chronic gastritis and
of mucosal disorders. The diagnostic yield in animals with
acute gastric mucosal erosions from factors such as drugs
neoplasia that is in the deeper layers of the stomach or in
(especially  nonsteroidal  antinflammatory  medications)
the pyloric wall but that is not visible in the mucosa is sig-
and hypotension with subsequent decreased gastric mucosal
nificantly enhanced when both ultrasound and endoscopic
 blood flow. Gastric ulcers and neoplasia are somewhat less
examinations are performed. Endoscopy-guided biopsy
common causes of hematemesis. Occasionally the only clini-
provides rapid and reliable assessment of many disorders.
 cal manifestations of chronic gastritis are inappetence and
Endoscopic examination of the stomach has improved early
salivation.
diagnostic capability significantly and has highlighted the fact
An initial diagnostic plan for an animal with a chronic
that gastric mucosal disorders occur fairly often.
vomiting disorder should include a complete history, physi-
cal examination, complete blood count, complete biochemi-
■ INDICATIONS
cal profle (including thyroid evaluation for vomiting cats),
urinalysis, fecal examination for parasites (both centrifugal
Indications for gastroscopy include clinical signs referable
flotation and a Giardia antigen test), evaluation for heart-
to gastric diseases, including nausea, salivation, vomit-
worm disease in cats (starting with a heartworm antibody
 ing, hematemesis, melena, unexplained abnormal breath
test), and survey abdominal radiographs. Once disorders
changes, and anorexia. The most common disorders diag-
such as metabolic abnormalities (e.g, renal failure, diabetes
nosed include chronic gastritis ( with or without overgrowth
mellitus, and liver disease), a foreign body that can be read-
of Helicobacter organisms), superficial gastric erosions, gas-
ily diagnosed on survey abdominal radiography, and dietary
tric foreign bodies, and gastric motility disorders. Ulcers and
 indiscretion or food sensitivity are ruled out, the decision
neoplasia can be readily diagnosed but are somewhat less
to perform more in-depth diagnostic tests is made. This
commonly found. The antral-pyloric canal can be exam-
may include testing for disorders that may not be identified
ined, and significant narrowing of the pylorus or the pres-
on baseline screening tests (e.g-, consider the possibility of
ence of prominent folds of tissue in the antrum may suggest
pancreatitis not diagnosed in the acute phase, leptospirosis,
the possibility of hypertrophic gastropathy.
 and atypical hypoadrenocorticism), barium contrast study,
Vomiting is one of the most common reasons animals
ultrasonography, or upper gastrointestinal (Gl) endoscopy
are presented to veterinarians for examination. In many
(or a combination of ultrasonography and gastroscopy).
cases a history of dietary indiscretion (e.g., overeating or
Clinical acumen is important in deciding which tests make
an acute dietary change) or foreign body ingestion can be
the most sense, based on patient presentation and recent
97
98·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
history and physical examination findings. Given the insen-
Under certain circumstances, fasting alone is insufficient
sitivity of barium contrast studies for diagnosing mucosal
to ensure an empty stomach. If gastric emptying is signifi-
 disorders, the thoroughness of a complete gastric endoscopic
cantly impaired because of abnormal gastric motility (e.g-)
 examination combined with the ability to examine the upper
idiopathic gastric hypomotility or severe chronic gastritis)
small intestine at the same time, and the cost-containment
 or obstruction (e.g-, hypertrophic gastropathy or antral or
factor that concerns many pet owners, the decision to choose
pyloric neoplasia), significant amounts of ingesta, debris,
gastroscopy over contrast radiography is usually a sound
or retained gastric or duodenal fluid may compromise the
one. Ultrasonography is especially useful for evaluating wall
examination. In these situations, biopsy specimens may still
thickness. The conclusion that endoscopy is an excellent way
be obtained if areas of mucosa can be visualized, but because
to examine for gastric disease should come as no surprise
lesions can be easily missed, the examination may need to be
to the increasing number of small animal practitioners who
repeated later. Finding retained ingesta in a properly fasted
are performing endoscopy. If radiographs identify a lesion
animal can be an important diagnostic clue. For example,
or foreign body, gastroscopy or surgery is still necessary for
the presence of retained ingesta may strongly suggest that the
 defnitive diagnosis and treatment. Furthermore, a normal
patient has a gastric motility disorder.
 gastric contrast radiographic examination does not rule out
When clots or pooled blood is present, the endoscopist
the presence of a gastric disorder.
may find it difficult to determine the source of bleeding. Free
 In patients with chronic upper GI disorders, gastros-
fluid can be suctioned through the accessory channel, but
copy should be performed in conjunction with esophagos-
copious lavage through a large-bore tube may be necessary
copy and duodenoscopy. Important diagnostic clues may
to dislodge clots before the endoscope is reintroduced.
be evident in any or all of these areas during the course of
Gastroscopy is generally not performed within 12 to
an examination. Follow-up gastroscopy is a valuable aid for
24 hours of a barium contrast examination unless a gastric
monitoring the therapeutic response in patients with chronic
foreign body has been identifed. This usually allows suff-
gastritis or ulcers. Follow-up examination and biopsies are
cient time for complete clearing of the barium and subse-
 especially important in animals with chronic, severe histio-
 quent thorough mucosal evaluation. The accessory channel
cytic and granulomatous gastritis, chronic fbrosing gastritis,
 of an endoscope should not be used to suction undiluted
and gastric lymphosarcoma. Important information that is
barium because residue may adhere to the channel wall.
useful in treatment protocol decisions can often be obtained.
(Case examples highlighting this point can be found in the
■ ANESTHESIA AND POSITIONING
“Atlas" section at the end of this chapter.)
 Finally, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is a most
 As with any endoscopic procedure of the upper GI tract, gen-
useful aid when clients have limited financial means but
eral anesthesia is required for gastroscopy. Anesthetic agents
earnestly wish more than palliative treatment for their pet's
can affect intestinal motility and sphincter function (includ-
discomfort. If inexpensive routine tests have proved unre-
ing the lower esophageal sphincter and the pylorus), and con-
warding in diagnosing a disorder characterized by GI signs,
sideration should be given to selecting anesthetic agents that
money may be better spent on early endoscopic examination.
will minimally hinder the endoscopist's ability to advance
the endoscope through the stomach and pylorus. Atropine
 INSTRUMENTATION
and other anticholinergic agents are not used unless they
 are required to increase heart rate. These drugs alter gastric
For small animal patients a complete evaluation of the stom-
motility patterns, which may cause increased gastric flaccid-
ach is best accomplished with the use of a flexible endoscope
ity and dilation. In addition, pyloric tone may increase, mak
with a diameter of 9.8 mm or less and four-way tip deflection
ing it diffcult to advance an endoscope through the pylorus.
capability (see Chapter 2). In cats and in dogs weighing less
Atropine can also decrease lower esophageal sphincter tone.
than 5 kg (11 lb) an endoscope insertion-tube diameter of 9
 In most animals, however, the lower esophageal sphincter is
 ss      s  n
 closed on initial examination regardless of whether atropine
ideal). The use of a smaller endoscope makes it much more
was administered before the procedure. Pure opioid agonist 
likely that the pyloric canal and proximal duodenum can be
drugs (e.g., morphine and hydromorphone) should not be
traversed and examined in these small patients than when a
used because they may increase pyloric tone. While expe-
larger diameter scope is used, especially if the operator has
rienced endoscopists may not have any added diffculty in
limited experience.
 traversing the pylorus no matter what anesthetic protocol is
used, the guidelines listed here work well for a majority of
 PATIENT PREPARATION
 patients undergoing upper GI endoscopy.
Commonly used protocolsfor upper GI endoscopy include
The main requirement for a successful gastroscopy is that
the use of acepromazine and butorphanol for premedica-
the patient's stomach be empty. No food should be given for
tion tranquilization/sedation, which will help calm patients
12 to 18 hours before the examination, and water should be
before catheter placement and lower the induction and
withheld for 3 to 4 hours.
 inhalant anesthetic dose requirements, thereby improving
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■99
cardiovascular performance and easing recovery. Drugs
Pylorus
Cardia
that potentiate vomiting should be avoided in animals with
esophageal or gastric foreign bodies (e.g-, medetomidine or
 pure opioid agonists). The patient should be induced with an
injectable anesthetic (propofol is most commonly used, but
the combination of ketamine/diazepam is also acceptable)
Fundus
Antrum
and intubated quickly. The endotracheal tube cuff should be
tion of fluid during the procedure is avoided. The cuff should
Body
not be deflated until the patient is extubated. Anesthesia is
maintained with isoflurane or sevoflurane. Fluid support
should be given throughout the procedure as needed (e.g-)
a balanced, isotonic crystalloid fluid such as Normosol-R or
lactated Ringer's solution administered at 10 mL/kg/hr for
patients with normal oncotic pressure and plasma proteins
Figure 4-1 Five basic regions of the stomach. The most important
 as inhalant anesthetics can cause vasodilation and decreased
landmarks for endoscopy are the cardia, angulus, and pylorus.
venous return). Patients that are dehydrated should have
their deficits corrected as much as possible before induction
■ GASTROESOPHAGEAL JUNCTION
of anesthesia. Hypoproteinemic patients may benefit from
colloid administration. If there is a need to prevent or con-
Because the esophagus is essentially in a posterior plane
trol vomiting after the procedure, maropitant (Cerenia) or
compared with the stomach, the endoscope tip needs to be
dolasetron (Anzemet) are highly effective choices
deflected in the distal esophagus before it can be successfully
Minimal monitoring during upper GI endoscopy includes
advanced to the stomach. As the endoscope is advanced to
 an assessment of heart rate, respirations, and pulse oximetry,
the distal esophagus, the position and configuration of the
and ensuring that the degree of gastric distension does not
 gastroesophageal junction are noted (see Chapter 3). The
hinder respirations. Insufflation of the stomach is impor-
endoscope tip should be centered at the gastroesophageal
tant for ensuring a complete gastric exa mination. Prolonged
orifice. As the scope is advanced, the tip is deflected to the lefft
overinsufflation, however, can cause cardiovascular and res-
piratory compromise. Both the endoscopist and the anes-
deflection as the gastroesophageal junction is passed. In
thetist should monitor the degree and effects of insufflation
 most patients this is easily accomplished by rotation of the
throughout the procedure. If there is too much air in the
outer control knob counterclockwise for left deflection and
stomach, it can be easily and quickly decreased with the use
the inner control knob counterclockwise for upward deflec-
of suction through the endoscope. Capnometry, blood pres-
tion. In some patients, minimal or no upward deflection is
sure, and ECG can be useful for assessing and maintaining
needed. When the endoscope tip is properly directed, no
normal physiologic variables.
resistance should be encountered as the scope is advanced to
The patient should always be placed in left lateral recum-
the stomach. If the tip is advanced too far before deflection
bency for gastroscopy. With the animal in this position the
is begun, the endoscope is usually directed into the esopha-
antrum and pylorus are away from the tabletop. This sig-
 geal wall bordering against the posterior aspect of the lesser
nificantly improves the endoscopist's ability to completely
curvature of the stomach. If this occurs, the endoscope tip
examine and more readily traverse these structures with the
should be retracted and repositioned. Variable degrees ofair
 scope. When an animal is in right lateral recumbency, it is
insufflation of the distal esophagus may be necessary to aid
much more difficult to clearly identify and pass the endo-
visualization and positioning. In general, air is continually
scope around the incisura angularis and through the antrum
insufflated as the endoscope is advanced along the esopha-
to the pylorus.
 gus and through the gastroesophageal junction (keep finger-
tip on the air insufflation button).
■ PROCEDURE
 PROXIMAL STOMACH AND GASTRIC
All areas of the stomach should be examined completely
BODY
in every patient that undergoes gastroscopy. Therefore
the beginning endoscopist must learn to identify land-
The endoscope tip should be positioned just through the gas-
marks properly (Figure 4-1). Only after the endoscopist has
troesophageal junction so that the endoscopist can become
become familiar with luminal gastric anatomy do maneuver-
spatially oriented and obtain an overview of the gastric
ing the endoscope to obtain a retroflexed view of the cardia,
lumen. As the tip enters the stomach, the rugal folds, gen-
 advancing the scope around the incisura angularis to reach
 erally on the greater curvature of the body, are seen. Often
the antrum, and traversing the pyloric canal become consis-
the stomach walls are partially or completely collapsed, espe-
tent and effortless procedures.
cially in medium to large dogs or if only a small volume of
100■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
E
Figure 4-2 Appearance of the stomach at varying degrees of insufflation. A, The endoscope has just been advanced into a collapsed
stomach. The gastric walls are closed in around the tip of the endoscope, and it is not possible to examine the stomach. Before attempting
to advance farther, the endoscopist should first pause to insufflate air, which will begin to effectively distend the stomach for enhanced
visualization. B, With moderate gastric distension the rugal folds are clearly separated, and the mucosa can be thoroughly examined.
C, Additional insufflation has caused the rugal folds to become flattened. D, The stomach has been markedly distended with air. Rugal
folds are no longer evident, and submucosal vessels are clearly visualized. The endoscope is in a retroversion position, and the cardia and
gastroesophageal junction are observed at the top of the feld of view (12-o'clock position). Overdistension is unnecessary and should
be avoided. Some of the air should be suctioned off at this point as marked overdistension may cause cardiopulmonary compromise.
E, Appearance of the gastric body after most of the insufflated air has been suctioned. At the conclusion of any upper gastrointestinal
 endoscopy procedure, as much air as possible should be removed from the stomach to avoid awaking an animal with a bloated stomach.
air was insufflated during esophagoscopy. In this situation
point that the rugal folds begin to separate. This allows
the view of the stomach is quite limited, and it is necessary
for spatial orientation and the identification of most gross
to first pause and insufflate air before attempting to advance
abnormalities, such as an ulcer, a mass, or a foreign body.
the scope. Without sufficient gastric distension, the endos-
 In cats and small dogs the degree of insufflation can be
copist will have difficulty identifying the key landmarks and
achieved within seconds; in giant breeds, constant insufla-
performing a complete examination of the stomach.
tion may be necessary for 30 to 120 seconds before adequate
The ideal degree of gastric distension is a matter of judg-
distension is achieved. Later in the procedure it may be nec.
ment. Generally the distension should be at least to the
essary to distend the stomach to a greater degree so that
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy
■101
the entire gastric mucosal surface can be carefully examined
(Figure 4-2).
Occasionally, the stomach will not readily distend on air
insufflation. Causes may include a blocked air/water port
(located a the tip of the endoscope; always check before each
 procedure for patency), rapid reflux of air after it is insuf-
flated to the stomach (assistant should apply digital pressure
to the neck area to block air loss from the esophagus), or gas-
tric wall disease that limits its ability to stretch and distend
(uncommon occurrence).
 On the other hand, during insufflation the endoscopist
must be careful not to overdistend the stomach because this
may result in significant cardiopulmonary compromise.
When the stomach is overdistended, the rugal folds become
almost completely flattened or undetectable, superficial blood
vessels can sometimes be observed, and the mucosa may
A an si a ( ai as) q rde
increase significantly. The endoscopy assistant should be con-
stantly aware of changes in the character of the patient's respi-
rations and any increase in anterior abdominal distension. As
soon as possible a sufficient volume of air should be suctioned
off to moderately deflate the stomach. During most gastric
examinations, both air insuflation and suction are commonly
used to maintain a proper and safe balance of distension.
 Several observations should be made during the initial
examination of the stomach. These include the presence of
fluid or ingesta, the ease with which the gastric walls distend
when air is insufflated, and the gross appearance of the rugal
folds and mucosa.
 In most properly fasted patients the stomach is completely
empty. Occasionally a small pool offluid is present in the fun-
Hgure 4-3 The initial view as the endoscope is advanced from
dus or at the proximal aspect of the greater curvature. This
the esophagus into the stomach is of the greater curvature. As
is not considered abnormal. However, the presence of larger
described in the text and in Figure 4-2, the endoscopist first pauses
to insufflate air to begin distending the stomach. Ifthe endoscope
volumes of fluid, especially green or yellow bilious fluid, may
be abnormal. This finding suggests the possibility of reflux of
is advanced straight ahead without adequate insufflation, the
scope tip will engage the gastric wall and visualization will not be
intestinal fluid to the stomach, which may occur in animals
possible. A,Areas ofthe stomach not in view (shaded)as a standard
that have undergone enemas or that have a duodenogastric
forward-viewing endoscope is advanced into the proximal stomach.
 reflux disorder, an intestinal obstruction, or a primary gas-
A retroversion maneuver is required to completely view the cardia
tric motility disorder. Bile is irritating to the gastric mucosa.
and fundus. B, Corresponding endoscopic image with moderate air
insufflation. The rugal folds and greater curvature ofthe stomach
 Thus if significant bilious fluid is retained, the gastric mucosa
are clearly visualized, and this appearance is normal. The angulus
may appear reddened. Mucosal erythema should be noted,
fold is not in view.
but the patient should not be assumed to have gastritis. The
diagnosis of gastritis requires histologic evidence.
the accessory channel of one of my endoscopes, and it could
 If only a small amount of fluid is present, aspiration of
not be dislodged. Replacement of the accessory channel was
the fluid is probably unnecessary If, however, a pool of fluid
required.
obscures the rugal folds, aspiration should be done. The
As the scope is gradually advanced through the proximal
endoscope tip should be positioned as parallel to the gastric
 stomach, the endoscopist can thoroughly evaluate the gastric
wall as possible, and alternating suction and air insufflation
 body by using the control knobs to deflect the endoscope tip
should be used. When suction is applied with the endoscope
 or by rotating the insertion tube with the right hand (torque).
tip perpendicular to the mucosa, the tendency is to draw
With the patient in lef lateral recumbency and the endoscope
a portion of the mucosa into the accessory channel. This
held in a conventional manner (ie., buttons up), the endo-
delays aspiration and may ca use superficial mucosal lesions.
scopic view is predictable. The smooth lesser curvature is on
Great care should be taken when attempting to suction fluid
the endoscopist's right, and the rugal folds of the greater cur-
that is present in conjunction with particulate matter such
vature are seen below and to the left (Figure 4-3). Required
as food or foreign body debris. The accessory channel can
directional changes can usually be made with the left thumb
become obstructed if debris is suctioned along with fluid.
on the inner control knob and the right hand controlling
In one instance a fragment from a small pebble obstructed
rotation (torque) of the insertion tube. In most cases, only
102■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
angle ofillumination, a portion ofthe proximal stomach can-
not be seen as the scope enters the stomach (see Figure 4-3).
 For the cardia and fundus to be visualized the endoscope
must be retroflexed (termed retroversion or J maneuver) so
that it is possible to see the portion of the scope entering
through the cardia, as well as the surrounding area (Figure
4-4). The retroversion maneuver should be done either at
this point or after duodenoscopy. It can be advantageous to
proceed directly from the angulus to the pylorus and duo-
denum. The physiologic function of the pylorus is to close
in response to gastric distension. When gastric distension
has been kept to a minimum and the antrum is not actively
contracting, the pylorus is in a relatively lax state and the
endoscope can pass through it with only minimal resistance.
However, if a large volume of air has been insufflated and the
endoscope has been significantly manipulated in the stom-
ach, the pylorus may be tight and difficult to traverse. In my
 eo paa sr  d ea e i s ada
as the endoscopist becomes more experienced, it becomes
easier to maneuver through difficult areas. I usually prefer to
 perform at least a cursory examination of the entire stomach
before proceeding to the duodenum (ie., the retroversion
maneuver is performed before advancing to the pylorus). In
most cases I perform a final, more thorough gastric exami-
aossuonp e suds adiq aod pue o
 RETROVERSION (J MANEUVER)
 The importance of the retroversion maneuver is that it pro-
vides an en face view of the angulus and the cardia and fun-
Figure 4-4 A, Schematic diagram of retroversion maneuver
dus. On forward view after the endoscope is advanced from
(J maneuver). The endoscope tip has been deflected fully in the
the esophagus to the stomach, only a tangential view of the
upward direction. B, Corresponding endoscopic image. The 20-
angulus is obtained, and the cardia and part of the fundus
cm marker on the endoscope insertion tube is in view. There is
are not seen at all. Failure to thoroughly examine the proxi-
white foam in the gastric fundus.
 mal stomach may cause the endoscopist to miss lesions (e.g--
erosion, ulceration, or neoplasia) or a foreign body located
minor directional changes are needed to provide a panoramic
in the cardia or fundus.
view. The endoscope is advanced along the greater curvature
To provide an en face view of the angulus, the endosco-
until the angulus is identifed. The angulus appears as a large
pist must initiate the retroversion maneuver at a point proxi-
fold that extends from the lesser curvature. The angulus is an
 mal to or opposite the angulus (see Figures 4-24, 4-25, and
important landmark that separates the body of the stomach
4-26). The scope is advanced along the greater curvature to
from the antrum. Once the angulus is identifed, the lesser
the level of the distal body. The inner control knob is turned
 curvature can be easily differentiated from the greater cur-
 counterclockwise with the left thumb, and as the endoscope
vature of the stomach. With the patient in left lateral recum-
is gradually advanced, the angulus can be seen en face. Varia-
 bency, the antrum is directed up or away from the tabletop.
tions of normal appearance may be present (see Figures 4- 18
As viewed from the gastric body, the angulus and entrance to
through 4-32). The endoscope tip is then deflected upward
the antrum usually appear as a circular or crescent-shaped
 as far as possible (full counterclockwise rotation of the inner
orifice that is smaller than the distended body of the stom-
control knob) as the scope is advanced a little farther with
ach (see Figures 4-18, D; 4-19, B; and 4-41). The endoscopist
the right hand. This maneuver generally requires at least
must be able to maneuver around the angulus to advance the
180 degrees of tip deflection. Most newer endoscopes are
endoscope to the antrum, pylorus, and duodenum.
Once the angulus and proximal antrum are visualized,
tion provides a retroflexed view of the endoscope as it enters
the endoscopist has the option of advancing directly through
the stomach through the cardia (see Figure 4-4). Pulling the
the pyloric canal to the duodenum or completing the gastric
 endoscope back once this view is attained draws the endo-
examination. The cardia and fundus have not yet been com-
 scope tip closer to the cardia (Figure 4-5 and see Figure 4-25).
pletely evaluated. Depending on the particular endoscope's
A circumferential examination of the proximal stomach is
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
103
A
Figure 4-5 For a close-up view ofthe fundus and gastroesophageal
junction, the insertion tube has been rotated 180 degrees to the left
and retracted toward the esophagus.
completed by rotation of the insertion tube (torque) or by
turning the outer control knob in each direction for lateral
 deflection. Air insufflation is usually necessary to keep the
proximal stomach dilated. If there is insufficient distension,
the stomach walls will collapse around the endoscope and it
will not be in view. During most ofthe examination the right
hand is kept on the insertion tube to keep the tube in place
with respect to forward and backward motion.
In cats the retroversion maneuver is started when the
endoscope tip is in the midbody area (see Figure 4-43).
The tip is deflcted upward as the endoscope is advanced.
 Because the working area is smaller than in most dogs, an en
face view of the angulus similar to what is seen in dogs is not
B
achieved as often in cats.
Figure 4-6 A, Effect of forward force by the endoscope as it
Retroversion should be reversed gradually so that the
pushes against the flexible greater curvature wall. The endoscope
tip may not move forward in response to advancement of the
mucosa can be further inspected. The endoscopist can
insertion tube because the wall stretch accommodates some of its
accomplish this by moving the deflection controls to a neu-
length. B, The point of paradoxic motion has been passed, and the
tral position while the instrument tip is still in the proximal
endoscope tip is being advanced to the pylorus.
stomach. Alternatively, the tip can be advanced to the proxi-
mal antrum while it is still in the partially retroflexed con-
insertion tube as it passes along the greater curvature. As the
figuration. This provides an additional view of the proximal
tip of the endoscope is advanced toward the antrum and pylo-
stomach and lesser curvature. When the angulus comes into
rus, the insertion tube invariably comes to lie along the greater
view, the deflection knobs are returned to a neutral position.
curvature. The stomach can stretch considerably to accom-
The antrum and pylorus should then be in view.
modate intraluminal forces, and much of the forward force
 generated by the advancerment of the scope is absorbed by the
■ PARADOXIC MOTION AND
greater curvature so that the curvature is pushed caudally in
INADVERTENT RETROVERSION
the abdomen. A loop may form against the greater curvature
(Figure 4-6). Endoscopically it may appear that as the inser-
Once the endoscopist has mastered a few basic techniques,
tion tube is advanced farther, the instrument tip is not moving
the body and antrum can be quickly traversed in most cats
 in response or is actuall moving away from the pylorus; this
and small- and medium-sized dogs. Occasionally, however,
is termed paradoxic motion. Loop formation can occur readily,
in some medium- and large-sized dogs, advancing the endo-
especially with newer, more flexible endoscopes and longer
scope to the antral canal and pylorus can be quite diffcult.
narrow-diameter instruments, as well as when the stom-
Many beginning endoscopists often feel “lost" as they try to
 ach contains a large volume of air. To reach the pylorus, the
maneuver a scope in the stomach of a large dog. The most
endoscopist should continue to advance the endoscope until
bothersome occurrence is the formation of a loop in the
the greater curvature loop is fully formed and the tip begins
104 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
to move forward again (see Figure 4-6, B). Further upward
"swings by” the angulus and curves back into the gastric body
deflection of the tip using the leff thumb on the inner control
as the endoscopist pushes it forward, despite efforts to control
knob may be necessary. There will be mild resistance in some
tip direction with the control knobs (Figure 4-7); this is called
cases as the endoscope is advanced along the greater curva-
inadvertent retroversion. In this situation the insertion tube
ture, and the endoscopist should continue to push through
usually *hugs" a considerable length of the wall of the greater
this area while making tip direction changes, as needed, to
curvature (see Figure 4-7, B). The shape of the wall curvature
keep the scope tip in line for passage into the antral canal.
may then be more in control of the direction of advance than
Occasionally, if the gastric wall is considerably stretched,
is the endoscopist, who is only able to direct the short distal
getting the endoscope into position to advance from the
tip with the control knobs. This problem is best solved if the
gastric body to the antrum may seem quite diffcult. Rather
 endoscopist withdraws the endoscope tip to an area proximal
than advancing directly into the antrum, the tip of the scope
to but still in view (forward view) of the angulus and antral
canal, suctions much of the luminal air, and then readvances
the scope as close to the lesser curvature and angulus as pos-
sible. If this does not rectify the situation, a highly effective
maneuver is to then rotate the patient from left lateral to dorsal
recumbency to change the configuration ofthe stomach and the
approach angle to the antrum.This usually immediately makes
it much easier to advance the endoscope directly into the antral
canal. This position change maneuver can save considerable
time when dealing with inadvertent retroversion.
Use of both tip directional changes by using the con-
trol knobs and simultaneous torque on the insertion tube
with the right hand provides the best means for advancing
the endoscope to the antral canal. This does not have to be
done as one continuous motion. In some cases, it is best to
advance the scope gradually, then stop to reorient the tip,
then advance again, then continue with the same pattern.
A
(The same maneuvering technique is used to traverse the
pylorus in difficult cases.) Once the endoscopist becomes
more adept at the maneuver, the advance can be made more
quickly. The key point is that both control knobs and torque
 are important maneuvering components in this situation.
For torque the right hand grasps the insertion tube close to
the patient's mouth and applies a twisting motion.
It may still take several attempts before the antrum and pylo-
rus are successfully reached. The beginning endoscopist needs
to maintain patience while working through these problem
BOX 4-1
Maneuvering Tips for Overcoming Inadvertent
Retroversion in the Stomach
If loop formation continues to occur, retract the endo-
scope to the lower gastric body.
Suction air from the stomach if it is too distended.
B
Use both tip directional changes (by manipulating the
Figure 4-7 A, Effect of forward force by the endoscope as it pushes
control knobs) and rotation (torque) of the insertion tube
against the greater curvature wall (same as Figure 4-6, A). The
to provide optimal maneuverability when advancing the
endoscope tip may not move forward in response to advancement
endoscope
of the insertion tube because the wall stretch accommodates some of
If advancement of the endoscope into the antral canal
its length. B, Excessive wall stretch causes inadvertent retroversion 
remains difficult, rotate the patient from left lateral to
as the endoscope is advanced. In this situation the endoscope should
dorsal recumbency to alter the approach angle to the
be repositioned to a forward view of the angulus, and air should
antrum.
be suctioned before another attempt is made to advance the scope
toward the antrum.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy· 105
cases. With experience the maneuvers become routine. Impor-
the exact location of the pyloric opening may be diffcult to
 tant maneuvering steps are summarized in Box 4-1.
identify because of an overlapping fold of the pyloric ring or
because the opening is obscured by fluid.
 The cardinal rule in successfully advancing the endoscope
ANTRUM
through the pylorus is to keep the pylorus in the center of
The antrum differs from the body of the stomach in that it
the endoscopic field. Because the pyloric position commonly
 has no rugal folds. Furthermore, peristaltic contractions are
 changes slightly every time the patient breathes, small adjust-
 sometimes observed in the antrum but not in the gastric body.
 ments of the up/down deflection knob and minor changes
To advance the scope from the distal body to the antrum,
in insertion tube rotation are required as the endoscope tip
upward deflection (counterclockwise rotation of the inner
is gradually advanced toward the pylorus. The endoscopist
deflection knob) is applied as the instrument tip is passed
makes these adjustments using the left thumb to turn the
along the distal greater curvature. This usually reveals a view
inner control knob and the right hand to rotate the insertion
 of the angulus. From this position the endoscopist can appre-
tube or to deflect the outer deflection knob. When a shorter
ciate the appearance of two separate “tunnels," one on each
e Auo saop paaiq saie aos u pasn si adossopua (us-oon)
side of the angulus (see Figure 4-23, A). The upper area is the
little of the insertion tube length is outside the dog's mouth at
 gastric body—the first area viewed is the lesser curvature as
this point. As described in detail in Chapter 2, the ideal endo-
it extends beyond the angulusthe more dependent tunnel
scope length for medium to large breed dogs is 140 cm because
is the antrum. From this location the retroversion maneuver
there will always be sufficient length to enter the duodenum
can be performed, or the endoscope can be advanced to the
with this length scope, no matter how large the dog. It must
antrum. As previously discussed, the endoscopist may elect
be remembered that when the pyloric area is being examined,
to complete a thorough examination of the cardia and fun-
slow, gradual forces applied to the endoscope tip are generally
dus at this time or may proceed directly to the duodenum
with the intention of examining the proximal stomach later.
In many canine patients the endoscope tip can be passed
   s q     s 
through the pyloric ring without diffculty. This is especially
smooth and rapid transition from the gastric body into the
true when the pyloric canal is open to any degree. In some
 antrum. This is described in the *Feline Gastroscopy Special
cases the endoscope can be advanced from the mouth to the
Considerations" section.
duodenum in as little as 30 seconds. Usually what has hap-
Antral peristaltic waves may be observed when the endo-
pened is that the endoscope is advanced through the stom-
scope is in the mid to distal gastric body. These are seen as
ach at a uniform rate to the angulus, and as the antrum is
round, symmetrical rings that form in the proximal antrum
viewed, the pylorus can be clearly identified and is open.
and sweep toward the pylorus as a rolling wave (see Figure
Because minimal air insufflation and manipulation of the
4-26). The contractions are generally not observed in cats
stomach have occurred, the pylorus remains open and can
unless metoclopramide or cisapride has been administered.
be readily traversed. In this situation, it may be best to per-
When present, they usually occur at a frequency ofthree to four
form duodenoscopy and biopsies and to examine the fundus
contractions per minute. Occasionally the endoscopist may
 and cardia ofthe stomach later. This approach is more com-
sod radod u d adosua a daa on i i pu
 mon when an animal is suspected of having a primary small
in the distal antrum to facilitate smooth passage through the
intestinal disorder rather than a gastric disorder.
pylorus when antral contractions are occurring. The pylorus is
In some cases the pylorus may be closed and may offer sig-
 often persistently closed during periods of antral contractions.
nificant resistance when the endoscopist tries to advance the
Usually the antrum has no folds. Refluxed duodenal bile
 scope into the duodenum. This may represent normal pyloric
may be present, and in some cases active reflux can be observed
 closure, or it may be an indication of disease, such as pyloric
during the procedure. The antrum should be evaluated care-
 mucosal hypertrophy, an extrinsic mass, or another disorder.
fully for the presence of mucosal hypertrophy or folds that
Based on experience, the endoscopist must judge how hard to
may result from chronic inflammatory diseases or chronic
push the tip of the scope against the pyloric ring. If consider-
gastric hypertrophy, polyps, ulcerations, and masses. When
 able resistance is encountered and the endoscope tip can be
present, gastric neoplasia commonly involves the antrum and
 only slightly advanced into the pylorus, it may not be possible
lesser curvature of the body. In dogs, adenocarcinoma is the
to enter the duodenum. In my experience with dogs, closure
 most common malignant tumor of the stomach. Lymphosar
of the pylorus strongly suggests a diagnosis of pyloric muco-
 coma is the most common gastric malignancy in cats.
 sal hypertrophy. In Siamese, Burmese, and Tonkinese cats the
 pyloric canal tends to be quite narrow, but in most cases the
■ PYLORUS
duodenum can still be entered when a small-diameter endo-
 scope is used (7.8 mm or less is preferred in small cats). Once
In most animals the pylorus can be easily identified as the
 adequate experience and manual dexterity are developed, the
endoscope is advanced through the antrum. Variable degrees
endoscopist can usually recognize a situation in which it is
of dilation of the pyloric canal may be observed. In some
highly unlikely that the pylorus can be traversed. It is signifi-
cases the pylorus is persistently closed, and occasionally
 cantly more diffcult to advance an endoscope greater than
106 ■PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
9 mm in diameter through the pylorus of some cats. It is best
the inner large control and right hand on the outer smaller
not to apply excessive force in attempting to enter the duode-
control). This way, more precise tip directional changes can
num, as it is possible to perforate the pyloric area.
be made when one is trying to advance the scope into a tight,
The most important rule in negotiating a spastic or per-
 moving pyloric orifice. However, when both hands are on
sistently closed pylorus is to keep the pyloric ring in the cen-
the control knobs, the endoscope tip will tend to slip back
ter of the endoscopic field as the endoscope tip is advanced.
away from the pylorus. It is important to maintain forward
The pattern of motion of the pylorus as the animal breathes
 pressure. This can be accomplished if the endoscopist turns
should be carefully noted. It may be beneficial to leave the
sideways and uses the hip to hold the insertion tube in place
 endoscope tip stationary in the distal antrum for a minute
and prevent it from backing away from the pylorus. Alterna-
or two while the pylorus is studied. Then as the endoscope
tively, an assistant can grasp the insertion tube and advance
tip is gradually advanced, it should be kept in line with the
 or retract it, following directions from the endoscopist.
 most common location of the pylorus. Gentle but constant
forward pressure should be maintained. In small patients
Traversing the Pyloric Canal
the pressure is applied with the right hand as it advances
the insertion tube. Air insufflation is continued much of the
A distinct sensation is often felt as the pylorus relaxes and
time during approach and passage through the pyloric ori-
 allows the endoscope to enter the duodenum. Recognizing
fice, and monitoring is continued so that the gastric body
this sensation is important because the endoscopic view is
does not become overdistended.
obscured by a reddish hue as the tip advances through a com-
pacted area. Because of the sharp angle between the pylorus
Length for Passing through the Pylorus
and duodenum, it is necessary to make a directional change
as soon as the pylorus is passed so that the endoscope tip falls
Short Scope
into the duodenal canal. If the directional change is not made
 Short scope (approximately 100-cm insertion tube length):
the endoscope tip can become wedged against the wall of the
Several maneuvers may help provide sufficient insertion
 proximal duodenum (Figure 4-8). Turning both control knobs
tube length for examination of the proximal duodenum in
 clockwise to deflect the endoscope tip in a downward and right
some larger dogs when a short GI endoscope is being used.
direction facilitates advancement to the proximal duodenum
When the proximal end of the insertion tube has already
 in most dogs and cats. Once there, a view of the duodenal canal
been advanced through the mouth in large dogs, the endos-
is obtained by turning the inner control knob counterclock-
copist places both hands on the endoscope control housing
wise. (This technique is described in detail in Chapter 5.)
and applies pressure by leaning in toward the patient. At this
Occasionally the opening of the pyloric canal is difficult
to identify, usually because pooled fluid, a fold, or a mucosal
position. Occasionally the entire control housing is in the
rosette formation is obscuring the opening of the canal or the
dog's mouth before the endoscope tip reaches the duode-
pyloric canal is at an obtuse angle in relation to the antrum.
 num. When both hands are on the control housing, the right
In the latter instance a forward edge of the canal may be
 hand makes necessary directional changes by adjusting the
 detectable, but it is quite diffcult to turn the endoscope tip
outer control knob, while the left thumb maneuvers the inner
sharply enough to enter the canal (see Figure 4-37). In these
control knob. If there is insufficient scope length on the ini-
occasional instances it is sometimes beneficial to rotate the
tial approach to the pylorus, deflating the stomach as much
patient from left lateral to dorsal recumbency. The change in
as possible while still being able to visualize the antral canal
 position may alter the antral-pyloric configuration enough
may bring the pylorus close enough that it can be traversed.
that the canal can be identified and then traversed. Once
the endoscope is advanced to the duodenum, the patient is
Longer Scope
returned to lateral recumbency. (Various pyloric configura-
 Longer scope (approximately 140-cm insertion tube length):
tions are shown in the “Atlas for Entering the Pylorus;" see
 The newer, longer veterinary pediatric endoscopes have
Figures 4-47 through 4-50.)
insertion tube lengths ranging from 140 to 150 cm. These
 Even when al proper steps are taken, advancing the endo-
insertion tubes provide extra length for advancing the scope
scope through the pylorus can still be difficult in some patients.
to the duodenum in large dogs (see Chapters 2 and 5). With
The most commonly encountered problem is deflection of
this extra length there is usually still a considerable inser
the endoscope tip away from the pyloric canal as a result of
tion tube length (20 to 50 cm) outside the patient's mouth
 misdirection against a tightly closed pylorus. The endoscopist
when the pylorus is reached. If the pylorus is tight and more
feels considerable resistance as the scope is moved into the
diffcult to traverse, precise endoscope tip control is offen
 pyloric orifice, and it is also diffcult to discern the location
required for the scope to pass through the pylorus. The
of the orifice because of tight contact with the wall. Then as
endoscopist may find it difficult to do this with one hand
the tip is deflected away from the orifice, the scope suddenly
on the control housing and the other on the insertion tube,
advances easily. The shaft of the insertion tube can usually
advancing and retracting the scope. It is sometimes best to use
 be seen as the endoscope becomes retroflexed (Figure 4-9).
 both hands on the control knobs (left thumb manipulating
During subsequent attempts, every effort should be made
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 107
Hgure 4-9 Retroversion at the antral-pyloric junction. This occurs
when the endoscope tip is not precisely aligned to enter the pylorus.
to align the endoscope tip properly with the pyloric canal. If
the stomach is overinflated, air should be suctioned. Occa-
sionally it may help to lock the lateral deflection knob (outer
knob) in place, but I usually prefer to maintain control of the
endoscope tip by leaving the knobs free to move. This is espe-
cially important as the pyloric sphincter is passed.
 An additional step that can be tried is to pass the biopsy
instrument blindly through the pylorus and then use it as
a guidewire over which the endoscope can be passed to the
duodenum (see Figure 4-38). However, in some cases, it
is diffcult to pass the biopsy instrument through the tight
angle between the pylorus and duodenum and far enough
B
 into the proximal duodenum to make this maneuver effec-
tive. In addition, when this maneuver is used, the endos-
copist must be careful not to cause undue damage to the
duodenal mucosa as the scope is advanced over the guide-
wire. Sometimes as the endoscope is advanced over the
biopsy instrument, the force generated by the scope pushes
the tip of the biopsy instrument more deeply into the duode-
nal mucosa. Then the instrument creates troughs along the
duodenum as it is advanced farther. In this situation, once
the scope begins to pass through the pylorus, the best way to
prevent damage is to retract the biopsy instrument simulta-
neously and gradually as the scope is advanced. By the time
the endoscope is in the duodenal canal, the biopsy instru-
 ment should be fully retracted inside the tip of the scope.
Traversing a narrow pylorus can be diffcult and frus-
trating. In this situation the endoscopist should maintain
patience and maneuver the endoscope methodically rather
C
than abruptly and forcefully.
Figure 4-8 A,Advance ofthe endoscope through the pylorus. B, The
endoscope tip is wedged against the wall of the most proximal aspect
 FELINE GASTROSCOPY: SPECIAL
 of the duodenum. C,A directional change is required to obtain a view
 of the duodenal lumen.
CONSIDERATIONS
In cats, several special factors must be considered when the
endoscope is maneuvered through the gastric body and
 pylorus. One of the challenges in cats, because of the small
108 ■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
size of the stomach and the sometimes acute angle of the
deflated. Once the patient is stabilized, the procedure can
junction between the body and the antrum, is to smoothly
be resumed. It is rarely necessary for an endoscopist who is
advance the endoscope around the angulus fold. It may be
proficient in gastroscopy and duodenoscopy in cats to cancel
 more diffcult to do that than to pass through the pylorus in
 a procedure because of transient complications. The cardi-
some cases. The antrum can be easily entered in one of two
nal rule is to recognize complications at their outset and to
ways. It is often helpful to rotate (torque) the insertion tube
work as efficiently as possible to minimize procedure time in
to the right when the endoscope tip is in the distal body, just
patients with a greater-than-normal anesthetic risk.
 after the scope tip is passed beyond the angulus fold. Once
the insertion tube is rotated, it is advanced and the tip is
■ GASTRIC BIOPSY TECHNIQUES
simultaneously deflected upward (i.e., the inner control knob
is turned counterclockwise). This reveals a view of both the
Gastroscopy is usually used to obtain biopsy samples. Sam-
 antrum and pylorus. In some cats the crescent-shaped angu-
ples should be obtained regardless of whether gross abnor-
lus is not located in the typical upward position (i.e., away
malities are present. The purpose of endoscopic biopsy is to
from the tabletop). If the angulus is in a deviated position,
confirm the nature of a lesion and to exclude other diseases
the tip of the endoscope should be advanced to a position
that have a similar endoscopic appearance. Many patients
just beyond the angulus, and the control knobs should be
with a histologic diagnosis of mild to moderate gastritis have
used as indicated by the direction ofthe antral canal to point
no gross gastric mucosal lesions, whereas patients with gas-
the tip in the proper direction. The insertion tube should
tric motility disorders may have mucosal erythema but no
be advanced simultaneously as the tip direction is adjusted.
histologic abnormalities. Gastric biopsy with endoscopic
Applying torque to the insertion tube is often quite effective
forceps is a very safe procedure.
Biopsy forceps with serrated edges or bayonet-type instru-
Because considerable force may be generated against the
ments usually obtain good-quality mucosal biopsy samples.
opening of the canal or at the angle of the pyloroduodenal
Commonly the submucosa is also sampled. Sample size is
junction as the endoscope is being advanced through a rela-
 often smaller when straight-edge forceps are used (see Chap-
tively narrow area, it is often necessary for the endoscopy
 ter 8 for additional details on instrumentation and biopsy
assistant to hold the patient's body stationary to prevent it
techniques). An adequate number of biopsy specimens must
from being pushed along the table by the endoscope. Plac-
be taken to establish whether the stomach is normal. The
ing a hand behind the patient's head is usually sufficient. In
best area to obtain biopsy samples is the rugal folds of the
addition, the endoscope can sometimes be advanced even if
gastric body. These elevated areas are easy to grasp with the
 the tip cannot be lined up directly with the pylorus. In these 
forceps, and adequate size samples for histologic evaluation
instances, as the endoscope tip contacts a peripyloric wall,
are routinely obtained (Figure 4-11).
it often deflects into and through the canal in response to
The entire biopsy procedure can be performed by the
stretching of the orifice area by the advance of the insertion
endoscopist. Alternatively an assistant can manipulate
tube. The amount of force that should be applied is a mat-
the biopsy instrument for the endoscopist. Gastric biopsy
ter of judgment and experience. Although a 9-mm-diameter
 samples are usually obtained after duodenoscopy has been
endoscope can be passed through the pylorus of most cats,
completed. Once the entire stomach has been thoroughly
it is often easier to advance smaller scopes (e.g, 7.8 mm to
examined, biopsy sites are selected. If the stomach is grossly
 8.6 mm in diameter). These smaller endoscopes can more
normal, six to eight samples are obtained from various areas
routinely be advanced to the duodenum in cats weighing
of the gastric body and fundus. Several samples are also
less than 2.25 kg (5 1b). The endoscope configuration as the
obtained from the antrum. However, because the antrum
scope is advanced toward the antrum and pylorus of a cat is
 generally has no folds and the mucosa tends not to separate
demonstrated in Figure 4- 10.
as easily, it is more difficult to obtain adequate samples from
Great care must be exercised in monitoring cardiopul-
this area. The stomach should not be overinflated during the
monary status during passage of the endoscope through
 biopsy procedure. If the rugal folds are markedly decreased
the pylorus, especially in small cats and in any cat in which
in size or are completely flattened as a result of overinflation,
the pylorus seems narrow and particularly difficult to tra-
the biopsy samples obtained are likely to be quite small and.
verse. The pylorus of the cat is unique in that it is narrow
thus are more likely to be lost during processing. Meaning-
 and has a high constant resistance. In response to stretching
ful histologic evaluation is also more diffcult when small
 and displacement of the gastric body and the pylorus, tran-
tissue samples are examined. The most common errors
sient bradycardia secondary to vagal stimulation may occur.
 made in obtaining gastric biopsy samples are summarized in
Significant respiratory depression also occurs occasionally.
Table 4-1.
More commonly, the respiratory rate increases when mod-
The biopsy forceps are extended beyond the endoscope
erate force is required to advance the endoscope through the
tip and advanced to the area to be sampled (Figure 4-12).
pylorus. If cardiopulmonary status is significantly compro-
The endoscopist maintains control of endoscope tip direc-
 mised, the endoscope should be withdrawn to the proximal
tion using the lef thumb on the inner control knob or on
stomach or esophagus and the stomach should be completely
both controls if the thumb is long enough. When the biopsy
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 109
D
Figure 4-10 Endoscope position and configuration during routine gastroscopy in a cat (see also Figures 4-41 and 4-42 and Figures 4-45
and 4-46 [antrum and pylorus]). Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) radiographs with the endoscope tip situated in the midgastric body. The
mucosa. Lateral (C) and ventrodorsal (D) radiographs with the endoscope tip positioned in the antral pylorus. In both views the incisura 
angulus fold can be seen as a distinct band of tissue (just to the right of the endoscope tip). Note the length of endoscope that is in contact
with the greater curvature of the stomach. In this position any advance of the endoscope tip is a result of force generated by the endoscopist
si aosoua auo di au aen iaean an ue sapis aq uoasn ai s aeai iaiea aun isue aq uasu aui uusnd
Buuassap an un uaas ae saqnq sea iousip omi maia ieaiel an un aonp au ou uau pue ayo soad an on aso paeae
duodenum (center of the feld of view).
B
 e 'ie aie siy [enu auii saldues uieiqo oi eaie isaq aui ae siog lean juaunoid 'eou Aissoa si yoeois at jn ' llt ani
 should be suctioned so that the folds become more prominent and therefore easier to grasp. B, Advance of biopsy forceps onto a rugal fold.
110 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
instrument is close to the sampling site, it is opened and
endoscope tip, and then a firm steady tug should be applied
advanced firmly into the tissue. The stomach wall is usually
to tear a tissue sample free. Once the sample is freed, the
pushed away to some degree as the instrument is advanced
 narrow area of gastric wall that was drawn up quickly returns
against the tissue. Once resistance to movement is met, the
to its normal position. The biopsy instrument is removed
forceps are closed frmly. If an assistant is manipulating
from the endoscope as the scope remains in position in the
the forceps, the endoscopist should use simple, agreed-on
stomach. Biopsy-related mucosal hemorrhaging is usually
directions such as “open” and “close." As the forceps are
minimal (Figure 4-13). When gastritis or some other disor-
withdrawn in the closed position, the mucosa that has been
der causing mucosal damage (e.g., bile retention) is present,
 grasped is drawn up to the objective lens. A tissue sample is
biopsy sample size and mucosal hemorrhage are often a little
then torn off as the forceps are withdrawn into the accessory
greater than normal.
channel (see Figure 4-12). The endoscopist learns byexperi-
It is usually preferable to advance the forceps directly into
ence the correct degree of force to apply on the biopsy instru.
the mucosal folds at a 45- to 90-degree angle rather than to
ment to remove a quality tissue sample. It is best not to tease
make a parallel approach in which the forceps tend to slide
a sample free gently or to tear a sample abruptly or force-
 along the mucosal wall rather than make a firm tisue pur-
fully away once mucosal contact is made with the accessory
 chase. This may not be possible in some small patients with
channel. These actions often result in a distorted or damaged
 a narrow lumen where it may be diffcult to turn the endo-
sample. Rather, the biopsy forceps should be pulled to the
scope tip to a precise degree so that the biopsy forceps can
be directed into a small lesion (Figure 4-14). In this situa-
Table 4-1 Most Common Errors in Attempting
 quite effective for obtaining an adequate sample. Removing
to Obtain Gastric Biopsy Samples
air from the lumen to create more of a fold effect may also
be helpful. If a specific lesion is to be sampled, the endoscope
should be maneuvered into position before a biopsy attempt
Error
Reason
is made. Samples can be obtained from the prominent angu-
Overdistending the stomach Rugal folds are too flat, which
lus if difficulty is encountered in sampling other areas.
with air
makes it more difficult to obtain
Biopsy samples of erosive or ulcerative lesions should be
adequate tissue purchase.
obtained at the upper wall where the lesion merges with nor-
 Attempting to obtain a
Normally the antrum has no folds;
mal-appearing mucosa. The endoscopist must exercise cau-
majority of the samples
it is difficult to obtain adequate-
tion when maneuvering around the pit of an ulcer because of
from the antrum rather
 size samples unless a raised fold
concern about causing perforation. Biopsy samples of super-
than the gastric body
 or lesion is present.
ficial erosions can be obtained without concern.
Using straight-edge biopsy
Samples, although adequate in
Masses should be sampled as deeply as possible. Lympho-
forceps rather than
 somme cases, are often smaller
sarcoma and benign gastric polyps can be readily diagnosed
serrated-edge or bayonet-
when straight-edge forceps are
on biopsy, but adenocarcinoma and other neoplastic masses
type biopsy forceps
used.
Failing to bury the forceps 
often must be sampled deeply to obtain diagnostic tissue.
Only superficial samples are 
obtained and histologic lesions
Superficial biopsy attempts may onlyretrieve fibrous or gran-
 deeply enough into the
ulomatous tissue. Because it is not possible to obtain deep
tissue
may be missed.
biopsy samples from a firm mass with standard endoscopy
A
Figure 4-12 Gastric biopsy technique. A, A rugal fold has been grasped and is being drawn up toward the objective lens. B, The sampled
area quickly returns to its normal position as soon as the biopsy sample is torn free. Note the hemorrhage at the biopsy site (center ofeld).
CHAPTER4Gastroscopy
■111
C
Figure 4-13 Appearance of the mucosa and the normal amount of hemorrhage that can routinely be expected after endoscopic forceps
 sampling of a rugal fold. A, A small area of hemorrhage is usually evident immediately after a mucosal sample is obtained and the area
 sampled falls away from the endoscope back to its normal position. B, At 30 seconds after sampling (same patient but a different site),
the degree of hemorrhage in most patients is similar to what is shown here. C, Mucosal appearance immediately after a deeper sample is
obtained.
A
Figure 4-14 Biopsy of a focal gastric erosion in a cat. A, Forward view of the distal gastric body with two small erosive lesions. The angulus
is at the upper right. B, The endoscope tip could not be positioned at a 45- to 90-degree angle to the lesions. Obtaining biopsy samples from
as su ui em au ot laeied st adosoua au uaum esou au ue apis ot puat sdaiy aui asesaq any aq ues uoisago adii s
serrated-edge forceps were used to obtain samples.
112·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 4-15 The biopsy sample is gently removed with a small-
Hgure 4-16 Size of a typical gastric biopsy sample obtained with
gauge needle.
endoscopic forceps.
forceps on any one attempt, the endoscopist should sample
the same site several times, each time advancing the forceps a
little deeper. Closure of the forceps should not be too abrupt
or forceful. Brusque closure may cause the forceps cups to
shear off a frm lesion without obtaining a specimen. On
closing the forceps, an experienced endoscopist or biopsy
assistant can usually appreciate that a lesion is unusually
frm or hard. This tactile perception is often associated with
malignancy. Usually, 10 to 20 biopsy samples are obtained
when neoplasia is considered a likely diagnostic possibility so
that the pathologist has adequate tissue to examine. A skilled
endoscopist can accurately identify the site that is most likely
to yield a positive biopsy result.
-ds io paiedaid pue papueq aq ues sadues Asdo
Hgure 4-17 Biopsy samples gently wrapped in moistened lens
ment to the laboratory in several ways (see Chapter 8 for a
paper before submersion in formalin. Currently specially designed
detailed discussion of sample handling). I prefer to lift sam-
ples out of the forceps cups with a 22- to 25-gauge needle
for the submission of endoscopic biopsy specimens (see Chapter 8
and gently place them on formalin- or saline-moistened lens
and Figure 8-8 for more information).
 paper (Figure 4-15) or into a cassette supplied by the labora-
tory. A typical biopsy sample size is shown in Figure 4-16.
After all samples from a particular organ area are obtained,
ue p nuo aeedas e pue sades bueadde-eu
the thoroughly moistened paper is folded in several different
area that appears significantly abnormal). This way, the his-
 directions to form a packet that is then submerged in a jar
tologic interpretation can be matched with what the endos-
of 10% formalin solution (Figure 4-17). Filter paper, small
copist noted grossly.
cassettes, or small sections of cucumber can also be used for
affixing samples (see Chapter 8). The samples should not be
■ CYTOLOGY
allowed to dry on the paper material because they may then
adhere tightly to the paper and subsequently be damaged
It is sometimes useful to obtain cells from the surface of a
when they are removed at the histopathology laboratory. I
lesion for cytologic study. The endoscopist can accomplish
 do not attempt to orient the specimen in any way because
this with a sheathed cytology brush or can make impression
attempts to rearrange the specimen may damage the tissue.
smears from a biopsy sample. A tentative diagnosis of gastric
 The number of tissue samples obtained from each organ area
lymphosarcoma can often be made based on cytologic anal-
should be indicated on the histopathology request form so
ysis. A new cytology brush should be used for each proce-
-du, A mo sou unn os n i
dure and then discarded because this instrument is difficult
pet" samples have been submitted. Biopsy samples obtained.
to clean adequately. If a cytology brush is reused, malignant
from each area (e.g-, stomach, duodenum, ileum, and colon)
cells from one patient may be transferred to the cytologic
 are placed in separate containers. If dissimilar areas or lesions
 sample of another animal. (See Chapter 8 for a more detailed
in the stomach or other area are sampled, a separate biopsy
 description of the clinical utility of cytology in endoscopic
jar should be used for each lesion (e.g-, one container for
procedures.)
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy
■113
■ COMPLICATIONS OF GASTROSCOPY
possible, and if resistance is too great (e.g-, a narrow pyloric
canal in a small cat along with the use of a larger diameter
 Complications related to gastroscopy are uncommon. In cats
endoscope), know when to back off (see Figure 4-50). Occa-
and small dogs, retching occasionally occurs as a result of
sionally, even a very talented and experienced endoscopist
endoscope manipulation in the pyloric area. In this situation,
encounters a pyloric canal that cannot be safely traversed.
 air should be suctioned from the stomach, and the endoscope
Good technique and the use of proper instrument size can
 should be withdrawn to the distal esophagus. In some cases,
minimize the occurrence of complications.
forceful retching results in transient prolapse of a portion of
Cardiac and pulmonary complications can result from
the stomach into the esophagus. An attempt should be made
anesthesia-related problems or prolonged overdistension
to suction any fluid that is forced into the esophagus. Once
of the stomach with air. Gaseous distension of the stomach
the retching subsides, the examination can be resumed.
can cause hypotension and bradycardia, which result from
Gastric perforation by an endoscope can occur but is
interference with venous return to the right heart, vasovagal
extremely uncommon. To my knowledge, most reported
stimulation, and compromise of respiratory muscles. Care-
cases of gastric perforation have occurred at the hands of
ful monitoring during the procedure and avoiding excessive
experienced operators and have been directly related to
 gastric distension can prevent the majority of complications.
excessive force applied during attempts to advance the scope
The stomach should always be deflated as much as possible at
through a region that was narrow and difficult to pass (espe-
the conclusion of the procedure so the patient is not awakened
cially the pyloric canal of a small cat). Significantly com-
with a bloated stomach.
promised gastric tissue can increase the risk of perforation.
Perforation related to examination of an ulcer pit, an
 Experienced endoscopists have learned the range of force
endoscopic biopsy, or the maneuvering of a sharp-edged
that can safely be applied in tight areas. When this degree
gastric foreign body can occur but is extremely rare in small
of pressure is exceeded, perforation occasionally occurs. The
animals. The integrity of the gastric wall would have to be
keys to avoiding perforation are to always proceed with cau-
severely compromised for a routine biopsy technique to
 tion in diffcult areas, use maneuvering skills to keep the tip
cause perforation. Great care should always be exercised
of the endoscope as close to the lumen of narrow areas as
when obtaining biopsy samples from deep ulcers.
SuGGEsteD
READING
 DeNovo RC: Diseases of the stomach. In Tams TR, editor: Handbook of
Matz ME, Leib MS, Monroe WE, etal: Evaluation ofatropine,glucagon,
small animal gastroenterology, St Louis, 2003, Saunders.
and metoclopramide for facilitation of endoscopic intubation of the
Donaldson LL, Leib MS, Boyd C, et al: Effect of preanesthetic
duodenum in dogs, Am J Vet Res 52( 12):1948- 1950, 1991.
 medication on ease of endoscopic intubation of the duodenum in
Neiger R: Gastric ulceration. In Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, editors:
anesthetized dogs, Amr J Vet Res 54(9):1489-1495, 1993.
Current veterinary therapy XIV, St Louis, 2009, Saunders.
Guilford WG, Strombeck DR: Chronic gastric diseases. In Guilford
Smith AA, Posner LP, Goldstein RE, et al: Evaluation of the effects of
WG,et al, editors: Strombeck's small anirmal gastroenterology, ed 3,
premedication on gastroduodenoscopy in cats, JArm Vet Med Assoc
Philadelphia, 1996, Saunders.
225{4):540-544, 2004.
Leib MS, Duncan RB: Gastric Helicobacter spp. and chronic vomiting
Weil WB: Anesthesia for endoscopy in small animals, Vet Clin North
in dogs. In Bonagura ID, Twedt DC, editors: Current veterinary
Am Small Anim Pract 3(5):881, 2009.
therapy XIV, St Louis, 2009, Saunders.
ATlAS PAGeS115-172
NORMAL APPEARANCES: CANINE
ANGULUS AND RETROVERSION
Figure 4-29, p. 123, Antral rings
STOMACH
(J maNeuver)
Figure 4-30, p. 124, Pylorus, duodenal
Figure 4-18, p. 115, Gastric body, angulus,
Figure 4-23, p. 118, Angulus and
reflux
gastroesophageal junction (retroversion
retroversion
Figure 4-31, p. 124, Closed pylorus:
view)
Figure 4-24, p. 119, Retroversion technique
rosette appearance
Figure 4-25, pp. 120-121,Retroversion
Figure 4-32, p. 125, Pylorus before and
RUGAL APPEARANCES
maneuver: radiographs
after passage of endoscope
Figure 4-19, p. 116,Rugal appearances
Figure 4-20, p. 116, Rugal appearances: dis-
ANTRAL CONTRACTIONS
PYLORUS: DIFFICULT CASES
tal body, patchy mucosal color changes
Figure 4-26, p. 122, Antral contractions
Figures 4-33 through 4-37, pp. 126-128,
Techniques for traversing a narrow or
closed pyloric canal
RESIDUAL GASTRIC JUICE
CANINE ANTRUM AND PYLORUS:
Figure 4-21, p. 117,Residual gastric juice
Figure 4-38, p. 129, Diffcult pylorus,
NORMAL APPEARANCES
 guidewire technique
Figure 4-22, p. 117, Residual gastric juice,
Figure 4-27, p. 123, Proximal antral canal
white foam
Figure 4-28, p. 123, Antrum, pylorus
114 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas PaGes 
 1 1 5 - 1 7 2
PYLORUS: OBSTRUCTED VIEWW
GASTRITIS: VARIOUS APPEARANCES
ABNORMAL APPEARANCES OF THE
Figure 4-39, p. 130,Food residue
(FELINE)
ANTRUM
 obstructing view of pylorus
Figure 4-64, p. 145, Acute severe erosive 
Figure 4-88, p. 158, Pronounced antral 
Figure 4-40, p. 130,Antral polyp
gastritis
folds (canine)
Figure 4-65, p. 146, Day 5 follow-up to
Figure 4-89, p. 158, Hypertrophic gas-
 NORMAL APPEARANCES: FELINE
Figure 4-64
tropathy (canine)
Figure 4-66, p. 146,Eosinophilic gastritis,
Figure 4-90, p. 158, Proliferative gas-
STOMACH
follicular mucosal lesions
tropathy (feline)
Figure 4-41, p. 131,Gastric body, angulus
Figure 4-67, p. 147, Erosive and prolifera-
Hgure 4-91, p. 159, Hypertrophic gastrop
Figure 4-42, p. 132, Complete examina-
tion of stomach: technique
tive mucosal lesions
athy and thickened rugal folds (canine)
 Figure 4-43, p. 133, Retroversion maneuver
Figure 4-68, p. 147, Superficial pocklike
lesions
GASTRIC POLYPS
FELINE ANTRUM AND PYLORUS:
Figure 4-92, p. 159, Large polyp in gastric
CHRONIC FELINE HISTIOCYTIC
body (canine)
NORMAL APPEARANCES
GASTRITIS
Figure 4-93, p. 160, Smallantral polyps
Figure 4-44, p. 134, Advance from gastric
Figure 4-69, p. 148, Histiocytic gastritis
(canine)
body to pylorus: technique
Figure 4-70, p. 149, Histiocytic gastritis
Figure 4-94, p. 160,Distal antral polyp
Figure 4-45, p. 135, Antrum
Figure 4-46, p. 135, Pylorus: open and
causing pyloric obstruction (feline)
Figure 4-95, p. 161,Antral polyp (canine)
close sequence
EROSIONS AND HEMORRHAGES
Figure 4-96, p. 161, Pyloric polyp causing
Figure 4-71, p. 150, Focal subepithelial
hemorrhages
obstruction (canine)
ENTERING THE PYLORUS
Figure 4-47, p. 136, Antrum, open pylorus 
Figure 4-72, p. 151, Focal erosion associ-
Figures 4-48 and 4-49, pp. 136-137,
ated with gastritis
GASTRIC NEOPLASIA
Figure 4-73, p. 151, Focal erosions in
Hgure 4-97, pp. 162-163, Lymphosarcoma
 Pylorus: variations
gastric body
(feline)
Figure 4-50, p. 137, Narrow pyloric canal,
Figure 4-74, p. 151, Superficial gastric
Figure 4-98, p. 163, Day 19 follow-up to
 not possible to traverse
erosions associated with subacute mild
Figure 4-97
erosive gastritis
Figure 4-99, p. 164, Week 19 follow-up to
CHRONIC GASTRITIS: VARIOUS
Figure 4-75, p. 151, Erosions associated
Figure 4-97
APPEARANCES (CANINE)
with nonsteroidal antinflammatory
Figure 4-100, p. 164, Month 9 follow-up
Figure 4-51, p. 137,Chronic gastritis with
 medication and prednisone
to Figure 4-97
erythema
Figure 4-101, p. 165, Lymphosarcoma
Figure 4-52, p. 138, Severe erythema with
(feline)
GASTRIC ULCERS
mucosal hemorrhage
Figure 4-76, p. 152, Large gastric body
Figure 4-102, p. 165, Antral lymphosar-
Figure 4-53, p. 138, Eosinophilic gastritis,
coma (feline)
 thickened rugal folds 
ulcer (feline)
Figure 4-103, p. 166, Antral lymphosar-
Figure 4-77, p. 152, Shallow ulcer,proxi-
Figure 4-54, p. 138, Thickened antral
coma (feline)
mal antrum (feline)
mucosa
Figure 4-104, p. 167, Week 5 follow-up
Figure 4-78, p. 152, Drug-induced large
 Figure 4-55, p. 138, Irregularity of rugal
 to Figure 4-103
antral ulcer (canine)
folds
Figure 4-79, p. 153, Drug-induced large
Figure 4-105, pp. 167-168, Adenocarci-
Figure 4-56, p. 139, Follicular mucosal
noma (feline)
lesions
angulus ulcer (canine)
Figure 4-106, p. 169, Pyloric adenocarci-
Figure 4-57, p. 139, Multifocal superfcial
Figure 4-80, pp. 153-154, Large perforated
ulcer with omental seal (canine)
noma with long-term follow-up (canine)
erosive lesions
Figure 4-81, p. 155, Two peripyloric
Figure 4-107, p. 170, Adenocarcinoma
Figure 4-58, p. 140, Severe pyogranulo-
drug-induced ulcers (canine)
(canine)
matous gastritis
Figure 4-59, p. 141, Pyogranulomatous
MISCELLANEOUS FINDINGS
gastritis: 6-week follow-up to Figure
ABNORMAL GASTRIC MOTILITY
Hgure 4-108, p. 170, Thickened rugal folds
4-58
Figure 4-82, p. 156, Idiopathic gastric
Figure 4-60, p. 141,Pyogranulomatous
motility disorder with gastric fluid and
secondary to a gastrinoma (canine)
gastritis: photomicrographs
bile retention
Figure 4-83, p. 156, Retained food and
HAIRBALLS IN CATS
grass
Figure 4-109, p. 171,Gastric hairball
HELICOBACTER-ASSOCIATED
Figure 4-84, p. 156, Large amount of food
(incidental finding)
GASTRITIS
retention 30 hours after ingestion
Figure 4-110, p. 171,Large antral hairball
Figure 4-61, p. 143, Chronic gastritis with
Figure 4-85, p. 156, Food and fluid
in a cat undergoing chemotherapy
Helicobacter
retention
for gastric lymphosarcoma (same cat
Figure 4-62, p. 144, Helicobacter
Figure 4-86, p. 157, Gastric fluid and bile
 as described in Figures 4-97 through
 overgrowth without significant
retention
4-100)
inflammation
Figure 4-87, p. 157, Gastric fluid
Figure 4-63, p. 144, Helicobacter over-
retention and marked pyloric dilation 
growth with mild gastritis and gastric
PHYSALOPTERA
(feline)
Figure 4-111, p. 172, Physaloptera parasite
adenocarcinoma
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy
115
Atlas fOr NOrmal APPearanCes: CanIne
StOmacH
D
Figure 4-18 A, The first view of the stomach as the endoscope is advanced through the
insufflation of the esophagus has reached the stomach, and the way forward may not be readily
apparent. In this view there is suffcient distension to appreciate that there is some cloudy fluid in the
proximal stomach and the rugal folds are in a horizontal confguration.To advance along the gastric
body the endoscopist moves the endoscope along the gastric body parallel with the rugal folds; the
folds should be in a straight rather than horizontal configuration. B, Moderate insufflation quickly
makes orientation easier. The endoscope tip has been deflected rightward (either rnight torque on 
the insertion tube or turning the outer control knob clockwise) and advanced, and the rugal folds
are now aligned correctly for farther advance of the endoscope to view the angulus fold. Normal-
appearing rugal folds are in the forefront. C, Advancing the endoscope tip and deflecting the tip in
an upward direction (inner control knob counterclockwise) bring the angulus into view (upper field
12- to 2-o'clock position). The stomach has been further distended with air. D, Farther advance with
upward tip deflection has brought the scope into position to provide a direct view of the angulus fold
and the antral canal, which is below. E, An en face view of the angulus fold, the antral canal below,
and the gastric body above. For viewing of the fundus and cardia, the endoscope is advanced farther
and the endoscope tip is defected a full 180 degrees in the upward position (large control knob fully
counterclockwise). F, This view provides excellent visualization of the gastric body from the angulus
fold back up toward the fundus and cardia. The endoscope is in a partially retroverted confguration
laddn aul ui si uooun! [eaeqdosaaisea aui (di adossopua aul jo uosagap premdn juesyiusis)
field of view, and a small section ofthe endoscope insertion tube is seen at the 12-o'clock position.
See Figure 4-22 for more detailed retroversion views.
116 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas FOr RuGal APPearanCes
A
B
C
Figure 4-19 The gastric rugae normally appear as smooth linear folds. The mucosa of the gastric body
is whitish-pink and usual a little darker than the esophagus. A, Midgastric body in a Chihuahua with
mild gastric distension. B, During further insufflations (same endoscope location) the rugae appear more
flattened and linear. The angulus is in the lower right aspect of the field (3- to 5-o'clock position). C,
the gastric body is at the 12-o'clock position (run parallel along the path of the rugal folds). To advance 
smoothly to view the angulus fold landmark, the endoscopist should insufflate air while simultaneously
deflecting the scope tip upward (large control knob counterclockwise) while advancing the scope forward.
A
B
those ofthe lesser curvature (right and lower aspect of feld of view). The angulus is just below center
in the field of view. B, Occasionally, patchy color changes ofthe mucosa may be observed (here
 pink- and cream-colored changes). These changes, which are not considered abnormal, may occur in
 response to alterations in mucosal blood flow as a result ofthe effects of anesthesia or insuflation.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy
117
Atlas fOr resIdual GastrIC JuiCe
It is not always possible to obtain good views when entering the stomach. Refluxed bile
stained duodenal fluid or residual gastric juice may obscure visualization of gastric mucosa.
Small amounts of fluid are not considered abnormal. Fluid may be present in the stomach
in animals that have undergone enemas or that have a gastric motility disorder. It is
recommended that fluid be suctioned so that the mucosa can be more closely examined
 and also so that any chances of reflux to the esophagus during the procedure and possible
subsequent aspiration are decreased.
B
Figure 4-21 A, Frothy saliva and bile-stained fluid in a Schipperke that had received several enemas.
No clinical signs suggested a gastric motility disorder. B, Frothy and bile-stained fluid. Residual fluid
 can usually be easily aspirated, but the excessive use of suction may traumatize the mucosa, causing
suction artifacts.
Figure 4-22 Frothy white fluid in
the proximal stomach, visualized
immediately on advancing the
endoscope from the esophagus to
the stomach. Rugal folds can be seen
coursing left to right. In this situation
the fluid should be suctioned clear,
and the endoscope tip will then be
deflected to the night to align with the
rugal folds for further advance along
 the gastric body.
118·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr anGulus and retrOVersIOn
(J MaNEUVER)
The angulus appears as a fold that extends from the lesser curvature. In medium- to large-
sized dogs the angulus may not be seen until the endoscope is advanced to the lower gastric
body. In small dogs it can sometimes be identified after insufflating a small amount of air in
the proximal stomach. The angulus may appear as either a sharp or flattened fold.
Gastric body
Angulus
Antral canal
C
Figure 4-23 A, In this patient the angulus appears as a sharp fold in the center of the field. The
endoscope tip has been retroflexed. The antral canal is at the lower aspect of the field. The gastric
body is in the upper feld. A smallsection of the endoscope can be seen at 12 o'clock. B and C,
Schematics depicting the endoscope position and the view seen in Figure 4-23, A. D, Completion
of the J maneuver. After the angulus is viewed, the insertion tube is advanced while the endoscope 
tip is still flexed (large control knob deflected fully counterclockwise). This slides the insertion
tube farther along the gastric body and into the retroversion position. The insertion tube is clearly
visualized in the center aspect of the field. The gastroesophageal junction area and surrounding folds
appear normal. With the endoscope in this position it can be retracted,therebybringing the tip of
the endoscope into close proximity of the fundus and cardia (see Figure 4-25).
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■119
Figure 4-24 Retroversion maneuver technique. A, Midgastric body with moderate insufflation.
Tip deflection is initiated in the mid to distal body (large inner control knob counterclockwise to 
 provide more upward tip deflection) to provide an en face view of the angulus. B, This angulus
is a normal variant, although it appears flatter. Deflection of the tip or rotation of the endoscope 
provides a more thorough view ofthe antrum (4- to 6-o'clock position) and pylorus. C,For a
view of the cardia and gastroesophageal junction the insertion tube is advanced further while the
endoscope tip is still fully flexed. Panoramic views to thoroughly examine the fundus and cardia
in large dogs are best attained by rotating the endoscope shaft with the right hand or by deflecting
the control knobs to rotate the endoscope tip through various angles. D, Close-up view of the
gastroesophageal junction from below, in retroversion.
120·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
一
Figure 4-25 Endoscope positions in the stomach of a 35-kg (77-lb) dog through a retroversion
maneuver. A, The endoscope tip is angled to enter the proximal stomach from the esophagus. B,
After advancing through the gastric body, the endoscope tip is deflected to a maximal degree in the
area ofthe distal body to provide an en face view of the angulus (the fold beyond the endoscope tip 
in this radiograph). The position corresponds to Figures 4-23, A, and 4-24, B. This radiograph shows
an air-filled antrum anterior to the endoscope. Lateral (C) and ventrodorsal (D) projections made
after the insertion tube is retracted in the flexed position to provide a close-up view of the fundus,
cardia, and gastroesophageal junction from below.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy· 121
一
Figure 4-25, cont'd In D the endoscope tip has been rotated through 180 degrees by applying.
torque to the insertion tube to provide a more complete view of the fundus. E, Endoscope position
before (dashes) and after (solid) rotation of the entire insertion tube described in D. The degree of
tip deflection can also be adjusted to provide a thorough view of the fundus and cardia. F, Close-up
endoscopic view of the gastroesophageal junction from below after nearly maximal withdrawal of 
the endoscope in the flexed position.
122 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOR ANTRal CONTRaCtIONS
Antral contractions are occasionally observed during gastroscopy. The contractions travel
along the antrum in circumferential symmetrical fashion and sweep toward the pylorus as
a rolling wave.
A
B
C
D
Figure 4-26 A, The endoscope tip is in the distal gastric body. The angulus is in the center of the 
field, and the antral canal is at the 7-o'clock position. B, As the wave begins, the angulus is seen 
si shod aui 'a piay aui jo rauas aul ie si shod aui ' piay aui jo iadse isoaddn aui ie
obscured by white foam. The endoscope tip has not moved during this sequence.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
123
Atlas fOr CanIne Antrum and PylOrus: nOrmal
APPEARANCES
Figure 4-27 Proximal antral canal in a
Greyhound as viewed from the distal body.
The fold at the upper aspect of the field is the
angulus. The pyloric orifice is not in view.
B
Figure 4-28 A, Antral canal in a Chihuahua. The pylorus is at the 2-o'clock aspect of the field and is
closed. Two focal erosions are visualized (6- and 9-o'clock positions). Normally no folds are present
 in the proximal and midantrum. B, The endoscope has been advanced toward the closed pylorus,
which is visualized as a small darkened area just to the right of the center of the field (arrow). In this
situation, changes in tip deflection are necessary to properly align the endoscope with the pylorus.
Figure 4-29 Occasionally, small circular rings or a
single flap surrounds the pylorus. This is a normal
variant, as shown here in a Doberman.
124·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
oa uae pasa ai sm paaus  eua sud   an
Note the alignment of the pylorus in the center of the field. B, It is not unusual to see yellow bile-stained
froth being blown into the antrum through the pylorus. Water flushing followed by suction usually
 restores clear vision and a readily identifiable path.
Hgure 4-31 Closed pylorus with rosette formation in a German shepherd. With minimal gastric
insufflation before antral examination, careful alignment, and smooth control of tip deflection,the
 pylorus was not difficult to traverse.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy· 125
D
Figure 4-32 Normal pylorus in a mixed-breed dog. A, Normal antral canal with the pylorus in the
upper center of the field. B, The endoscope tip has been advanced close to the pyloric orifice. The
pylorus remained only slightly open on approach but was readily traversed with steady pressure.
The pyloric orifice is best traversed with the use of slow steady motion, and the orifice should be 
kept as close to the center of the feld as possible. “Jabbing" is counterproductive and must be 
avoided. C, Close-up view of the pyloric orifice. The pyloric canal can be seen curving to the right.
The endoscopist should be prepared to deflect the scope tip to the right (turn small control knob
clockwise) as the endoscope is passed through the canal. D, Appearance of the pylorus after the
endoscope has been retracted to the stomach after duodenoscopy. The orifice is slightly more open.
Atlas for pylorus: difficult cases
In some dogs the duodenum can be easily entered within 15 to 30 seconds of beginning the
endoscopic procedure at the esophagus. In others, however, advancing an endoscope to
the duodenum requires great skill and patience. The following cases illustrate some of the
difficulties that may be encountered.
126·PART ONEFlexibleEndoscopy
B
D
二
Figure 4-33 Pylorus of a Bull terrier. A, On initial approach from the antrum, the pylorus was slightly open. B, The orifice closed on initial
 aui  'adoss aul aoueape oi apeiu sem idiuane ue uaum Apoq leisip aul oi Aeme paiaap sem di adoosopua al pue ^iaaamoy ^ioeiuos
pylorus configuration changed slightly. Note the flap above the pylorus, the appearance of a thickened rim around the orifice, and the mild
mucosal erythema caused by endoscope trauma. The pyloric orifice is the slightly darkened area just beneath the upper flap. The endoscope 
 roeiado idape uy uoisod suolad ui saaueus uo paseq paismipe sem uosaip di au pue ^(iduuane qinoy) pasueape Alenpeia sem dil
can do this by using the fingers ofthe left hand to deflect both control knobs while advancing and withdrawing the insertion tube with the right
luisisse ue aaey oi iaisea ll puy Aeuu isidossopua suuuaq aui uinou ssuaed aul oi aso Aiey padsea si aqni uoiasui au pueu
 no aeu oi puey i aun pue qou laiuos nauu aun uo qun yal aui sasn isidossopua aul am adoss aul jo aueape aun laiuo
control knob adjustments. D, Once the pyloric canal was entered, the walls pressed tightly around the endoscope. E, End of the pyloric canal
just anterior to the duodenum. The linear off-white object in the left aspect of the field is a roundworm. Visualization routinely remains
obscured through the pylorus until the duodenal canal (2- to 3-o'clock position) is reached and insufflated.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy· 127
B
D
上
Figure 4-34 Gastroscopy of a Greyhound in which the entire working length of an endoscope with an insertion tube length of 110 cm was 
taken up by the time the endoscope tip reached the antrum. The endoscope had formed a large loop along the greater curvature. A, Angu-
-s sun rode pue uosod jua an m iaey ou pauae aq pos adosua a (uado ais) sd pue ue s
tion the endoscope should be withdrawn to the proximal stomach. Then the stomach should be moderately deflated to shorten the distance
to the antrum. B, The endoscope was then readvanced as directly to the antrum as possible. The angulus is the crescent-shaped fold in the
right aspect of the field. Minimizing distension often helps slightly decrease the length of insertion tube used during the advance along the
greater curvature. C, The first several attempts to traverse the then tightly closed pylorus were unsuccessful. The endoscope control housing
was nearly in the dog's mouth at this point. D, The configuration around the pylorus changed slightly during the course of the procedure.
This is not uncommon when more than several attempts are made to traverse the pylorus. E, The dog was moved from left lateral to dorsal
recumbency. This maneuver occasionally provides improved visualization or a better approach angle and consequently may facilitate entry
to the pyloric canal. In this case the pyloric orifice has become obscured but is in the center of the field immediately below the flap. Because 
rotation was not particularly beneficial, the dog was returned to left lateral recumbency, and the endoscope was finally advanced successfully
to the duodenum. The endoscopist negotiated the final short distance through the pylorus by placing both hands on the control housing
(the right hand controlled tip deflection) and slowly leaning in, while in a kneeling position, to provide forward movement. These maneu-
vers are not necessary when a standard length veterinary endoscope with an insertion tube length of 140 cm is used.
128 ·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
Figure 4-35 A, Tightly closed pylorus in a Greyhound (different patient from Figure 4-34). The 
 orifice is obscured by a small amount of white foam. The pylorus is properly aligned with the endo-
scope tip (i.e., in the center of the feld). B, A small amount of hemorrhage has occurred because
 of trauma from several attempts to pass the 7.9-mm-diameter endoscope through the pylorus. The
endoscope was passed after 4 minutes of maneuvering. The minor mucosal hemorrhage here is 
inconsequential.
Figure 4-36 In some dogs it is at first difficult to
Hgure 4-37 In this dog the edges of the pyloric
identify the exact location of the pyloric orifice.
 orifice are flat, and the pyloric canal is at a sharp
 In this standard poodle the pylorus is closed and
angle to the left It would be extremely diffcult
the orifice is located at the upper confluence of
 to gain proper alignment ofthe endoscope with
the vertical folds (immediately above the small
the pylorus in this confguration. Rotating the
pool of hemorrhage). The endoscope was suc-
dog to dorsal recumbency allowed for better
cessfully passed to the duodenum. If the pyloric
alignment, and the pylorus was successfully
orifice cannot be identifed after examination of
traversed.
the distalantrum and folds,the dog should be
rotated to dorsal recumbency.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy· 129
B
Figure 4-38 If the pylorus proves particularly diffcult to traverse,the biopsy forceps can sometimes
be used as a guidewire over which the endoscope can be advanced to the duodenum. With the endo-
scope situated in the distal antrum, the closed forceps are advanced through the pylorus and down
the descending duodenal canal. Because of a sharp angle at the pylorus, duodenal bulb, and descend-
ing duodenum, the forceps cannot be advanced far enough in some dogs for this maneuver to be
successful. Excessive force should not be applied to the duodenal bulb. A, This closed pylorus in a
Collie was particularly diffcult to enter. B, The biopsy forceps has been advanced through the pylo-
rus and into the descending duodenum. C, View of the descending duodenum. The streaks of hem-
orrhage resulted from duodenal mucosal trauma that occurred during attempts to pass the biopsy
forceps. The biopsy forceps should be simultaneously retracted ("backed out") as the endoscope is 
advanced through the pylorus in an attempt to minimize mucosal trauma.
AtlaS FOr PylOruS: ObstruCted vIeW
 Food or other material (e.g., hair or foreign body) in the antrum at the time of gastroscopy
may obscure the pylorus. The endoscope tip can be deflected in various directions to move
soft material away, and water flushing may help displace cloudy liquid. It may also help to
use a biopsy instrument extended to the area to help deflect material away. Suction should
be used cautiously, otherwise, the accessory channel may become blocked with particulate
matter.
130·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
B
Figure 4-39 A, Rice and other food in the stomach of a Boxer with a gastric motility disorder. The
dog had been fasted for 20 hours before gastroscopy. Much of the distal body and antral mucosa are
obscured. B, The endoscope tip was used to move material away from the center of the field in the 
distal antrum, thereby providing a view of the pylorus (dark area in center of feld). C, Close-up view
of the pylorus. Note the direction of the pyloric canal as it angles to the right.
Figure 4-40 Gastric antral polyp obscuring the
pylorus in a 7-year-old Great Dane with inter-
mittent vomiting. The angulus fold is at the top
of the field of view. Once the endoscope was
 passed beyond the mass, the pylorus was clearly
visualized.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■131
Atlas fOr nOrmal ApPearances: feline stOmacH
The normal feline stomach is pale pink and has smooth rugal folds that are more prominent
along the greater curvature, as well as a readily identifiable angulus and flat antral walls.
Small folds are present in the distal antrum around the pylorus in some cats. Although
the stomach is completely empty in almost all cats that have been properly fasted, it is
not unusual to find small amounts of hair material present. Occasionally a small pool of
residual gastric fluid or streaks of bile-tinged fluid are present, and this is not considered
abnormal. Only minimal intermittent air insufflation is generally necessary to maintain
 gastric dilation sufficient for thorough examination in cats.
Figure 4-41 A, Gastric body as viewed from the proximal stomach in a cat. A small amount of air
was insufflated to separate the gastric walls. Note the crescent-shaped angulus in the right aspect of
the endoscopic field of view (2- to 5-o'clock position). B, The endoscope position is the same. More
 air has been insufflated to further distend the stomach. The folds are somewhat flatter and the angu-
lus fold is visualized in the right field.
132 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
C
一
ing the endoscope tip to the left (turning the outer control knob counterclockwise) in the distal esophagus as the endoscope was directed
through the gastroesophageal junction. Invariably the greater curvature is the frst area of the stomach that is visualized. B, Air has been in-
sufflated to moderately distend the stomach. This allows for more thorough mucosal examination. C, Small pocklike lesions in the fundus
 are a normal variant occasionally found in cats. Obtain this view by pulling the endoscope back and deflecting the tip downward (turning
the inner control knob clockwise) or by deflecting the tip downward immediately after entering the stomach. D, E, and F, En face view of
the angulus in the sequence of its examination. D, Retroversion was begun in the distal body. The antrum is in the lower aspect of the en-
-uo paxag aui ul di adossoua aui uim sauiey paoeape uaui sem aqni uoilasui aui 't (uoiiisod yoo-/ oi -o) maia jo piay sidosso
figuration. The wall of the lesser curvature fills most of the feld. A small area of the antrum is seen at the 6- to 8-o'clock position. The shaft
of the insertion tube can be faintly seen as it enters the stomach (1-o'clock position). F, With advancement of the insertion tube, which is 
partly wedged against the greater curvature, the angulus could be visualized at a different angle. The proximal stomach is in the upper right
aspect of the field, and the antrum is in the lower left.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
133
C
Figure 4-43 Retroversion maneuver in a cat. A, The lower gastric body at nearly full distension. The angulus fold is in view. The retrover-
sion maneuver is initiated with the endoscope tip in the mid to lower gastric body. B, Proximal stomach at nearly maximal distension. C, As
the endoscope is advanced a little farther with the scope tip in full deflection, the cardia and gastroesophageal junction area come into view.
D, With slight rotation and farther advance the fundus and gastroesophageal junction area are in full view. The 20-cm marker on the endo-
retracts the endoscope while simultaneously deflecting the endoscope tip forward (larger inner control knob turned clockwise); the endo-
scope is then advanced toward the antrum.
134·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr feline Antrum and PylOrus: normal
A P PEA RAN C E S
Hgure 4-44 Sequence showing the advance ofthe endoscope from the gastric body to the pylorus.
A, View from the midgastric body with moderate distension. The greater curvature rugal folds are
clearly visualized, and the angulus fold is barely in view at the 12-o'clock position. B, The endoscope
has been advanced to the distal body, and the stomach is more distended. The angulus fills the lower
right aspect ofthe feld. Immediately after the endoscope tip passes the angulus, the insertion tube 
is rotated to the right (with the use of the right hand) and the endoscope tip is deflected upward.
Simultaneous gradual forward motion is continued throughout this maneuver. These maneuvers will 
 facilitate advance of the endoscope into the antral canal. C, Close-up view of the proximal antral mu-
cosa as the endoscope is passed through the tight angle between the gastric body and the antrum. D,
Antral canal with the pylorus in view. Note the flat antral walls. E, Close-up view of an open pylorus.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
135
Figure 4-45 Proximal antral canal. Note the
flat walls. It is not unusual to observe small
amounts of refluxed duodenal fluid or active
reflux occurring during examination of the
 antrum and pylorus. Note the slightly open
pylorus at the 2-o'clock position.
B
C
Figure 4-46 Sequence of antrum and pylorus photographs in a Siamese cat. A, Note the small folds
 around the pylorus. B, The pylorus has opened slightly. As this structure is gradually approached, it
shouldbe kept in the center of the field. C,The pylorus has closed as the endoscope is advanced to
the orifice. The endoscope tip is properly aligned. With minimal force the 7.9-mm endoscope was 
advanced through the pylorus (time sequence of Athrough C: 10 seconds).
136·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOR ENTeRING tHe PylOruS
Figure 4-47 A, View of the distal antrum as a slightly open pylorus is approached. B, The pylorus
has remained open. Note the curving wall within the pyloric canal (just beyond the pyloric orifice).
To advance the endoscope through the pylorus to the duodenum, the endoscopist should deflect the
tip of the scope downward and to the left (turning both control knobs clockwise) once the canal has
been entered.
B
C
Figure 4-48 Examples of normal pylorus with a narrow appearance. A, A small amount of hemor-
rhage is seen along the upper border ofthe pylorus. The bleeding was induced by the endoscope tip.
The pylorus was traversed on the second attempt with moderate force with a 9-mm endoscope.
B, During close observation in a different cat, this pyloric orifice did not dilate to any significant
degree. However a 7.9-mm endoscope was advanced without significant difficulty. C, The same
pylorus immediately after duodenoscopy was completed and the endoscope was withdrawn back
through the pyloric orifice.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 137
Figure 4-49 In some cats it is diffcult to align
Figure 4-50 Narrow pyloric canal in a Sia-
the pylorus in the center of the endoscopic
 mese cat that could not be traversed with a
feld. In this view,the endoscope tip is almost
7.9-mm endoscope. Although the orifice could
touching the antral wall adjacent to the pyloric
be entered, the pyloric canal was quite narrow
orifice. The pylorus was entered by sliding
and did not stretch sufficiently. The pylorus of
the endoscope tip along the wall and applying
 Siamese cats commonly seems to be narrower 
steady forward pressure until the scope slipped
than that of other cats. After making several at-
into the orifice.
tempts, the experienced endoscopist is able to
recognize that the pylorus cannot be success-
fully traversed. When this point is reached, no
further efforts should be made.
Atlas fOr chrOnIc GastrItis: varIOus
APPEaraNCES (CaNINe)
Various endoscopic appearances can be seen in patients with gastritis, ranging from
 normal in some patients with mild gastritis to marked mucosal irregularity and friability
in patients with severe gastritis. Because gastritis is a diagnosis that can be established and
 characterized based only on biopsy, tissue should be routinely obtained during gastroscopy
for histologic evaluation. A diagnosis of gastritis cannot be excluded based on normal gastric
mucosal appearance.
B
Figure 4-51 Moderate lymphocytic, plasmacytic gastritis with mild fibrosis in a 6-year-old Irish
setter with chronic intermittent vomiting. The vomiting had recently increased in frequency. A, Note 
the generalized mucosal erythema. The rugal folds ofthe greater curvature are in the foreground,
along with foam and several streaks ofbile-tinged fluid. The angulus is at the uppermost aspect of
the field of view, and the proximal antral canal is just below it. B, Erythema ofthe distal antrum and
pyloric orifice. The pylorus is to the left at the 11-o'clock position.
138 ·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
Figure 4-52 Severe erythema, mucosal hemor-
Hgure 4-53 Thickened gastric folds and a
rhage, and bile-stained foam along the mucosa
superficial “blister" (upper middle in the feld
in a 3-year-old Great Dane with severe acute 
of view) in a 5-year-old German shepherd
gastritis. This is an en face view of a wide angu-
with eosinophilic gastritis. The antral canal is 
lus. The gastric body is to the leff.
to the right (3-o'clock position).
Figure 4-54 Thickened raised areas of mu-
Hgure 4-55 Irregularity of the rugal folds in a
cosa in the antrum of a mixed-breed dog with
 Basset Hound with intermittent vomiting and
chronic intermittent vomiting. Note the pylo-
salivation. The histologic diagnosis was mild
 rus at the convergence of folds at the 11-o'clock
to moderate lymphocytic, plasmacytic gastritis
position. The histologic diagnosis was moder-
with fibrosis. No erosive changes or erythema
ate fibrosing lymphocytic, plasmacytic gastritis.
is seen.
Gastric lymphosarcoma was the leading differ-
ential diagnosis.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 139
B
Hgure 4-56 A, Multiple follicular, raised areas in the antrum of a 10-month-old standard poodle
with chronic vomiting of 6 months' duration. The pylorus is closed (to the right of midline at the 
2- to 3-o'clock position). B, En face view of the angulus, showing two nodular lesions on the lower
border. Bile-tinged fluid is seen on the surface. The histologic diagnosis was mild to moderate
lymphocytic, plasmacytic, eosinophilic gastritis.
B
C
D
Figure 4-57 Chronic gastritis in a 13-year-old Schnauzer with recent onset of persistent vomiting.
A, Multifocal superficial erosive lesions in the distended gastric body. B, Mucosa of the fundus and
cardia as viewed on retroversion maneuver. Foam and erosions are seen. C, Mucosal erythema of the
rhage that occurred after a single mucosal biopsy (foreground). This is a retroversion view with the
angulus at the bottom right (5-o'clock position), the lesser curvature in the right foreground, and
just to the right of midline. The histologic diagnosis was multifocal erosive gastritis with fibrosis.
140·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
一
Figure 4-58 A, Close-up view of the rugal folds of the distal greater curvature (moderate gastric
distension). The folds appeared edematous and bled easily on contact (note the focal areas of hem-
 orrhage). B, Distal greater curvature just beyond the view shown in A. The angulus extends from 
the 12- o'clock to 4-o'clock positions at the edge of the field. Note the severe erythema and the fri-
ability of the mucosa. C, Proximal stomach (mild distension) as viewed on retroversion maneuver.
The insertion tube shaft is at the 11-o'clock position. The proximal one half of the stomach was
 grossly normal. D, Distal antrum and pylorus (narrow horizontal opening in center of field) as seen
before biopsy. Note the vesicle-like changes around the pyloric orifice. E, After two biopsy samples 
were obtained, marked hemorrhage occurred around the pylorus. Normally it is difficult to obtain
adequate-size tissue samples from the antrum and pylorus. Furthermore, minimal to no hemorrhage
 usually occurs. The cause of the pyogranulomatous gastritis was undetermined.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■141
Figure 4-59 Follow-up gastroscopy
conducted 6 weeks after the initial
diagnosis in the patient depicted in
Figures 4-57 and 4-58. The animal's
clinical condition had improved, and
no vomiting had occurred for 4 weeks.
Treatment included prednisone,
A
B
metronidazole, famotidine 
(2 weeks), and sucralfate (4 weeks). A,
 Distal gastric body mucosa (compare 
with Figure 4-57, A). The mucosa has a
reticular pattern. B, Distal gastric body
with the angulus just to the right of
midline (from the 11- o'clock to 5-o'clock
 positions). The dark spots in the upper
right,midlerightand faftarefocal
areas of hemorrhage (*coffee-ground"
color). This is nearly the same endoscope
position as in Figure 4-57, B. C, En face
view of the angulus showing the pinpoint
areas of hemorrhage. The mucosa was
significantly less friable at follow-up. D,
Antrum and pylorus. A small amount 
of fluid residue is present in the antral
canal. Note the dramatic improvement
compared with Figure 4-58, D-E.
Figure 4-60 Comparison photomicrographs. A, The photomicrograph
of a biopsy sample obtained at initial endoscopic examination shows a
massive infiltration of neutrophils, histiocytes, and lymphocytes, X200).
 Surface erosion and necrosis are also seen. The diagnosis was severe, ero-
sive, ulcerative necrotizing and pyogranulomatous gastritis. B, Photomi-
crograph obtained at a 6-week follow-up shows dramatic resolution ofthe
erosive and inflammatory lesions (x200). Mild fbrosis, probably a sequela 
to the previous necrotizing process,is the only significant lesion. (Courtey
of Stephen f.Engler.)
142■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr Helicobacter-associated Gastritis
of various forms of upper GI problems in humans, including chronic gastritis with varying
degrees of inflammation (nonerosive nonspecific gastritis is the most common type seen),
nonulcer dyspepsia, and gastric and duodenal ulcers. Furthermore, epidemiologic evidence
supports an association between H. pylori infection and gastric cancer in humans.
Helicobacter organisms have long been known to be present in the stomachs of animals
and it is speculated that these organisms are normal inhabitants. However, in some
animals, it is likely that Helicobacter infection can cause chronic gastritis and in rare cases
gastric ulceration. Helicobacter felis, Helicobacter heilmanni, Helicobacter bizzozeroni, and
Helicobacter salomonis are the most common types found in dogs. H. felis, H. heilmani,
and H. pylori are the most common types found in cats. In ferrets, Helicobacter mustelae
is known to cause significant GI disease (both ulceration and neoplasia). The organisms
can be indentified in clinically normal animals as well as in animals with signs of chronic
 gastritis and with histologic findings of gastritis.
Endoscopic examination and biopsy have become very important for the diagnosis
of H. pylori-associated disease in humans. Endoscopy is also important in the ongoing
investigation of Helicobacter-associated problems in animals as researchers and clinicians
work to determine more specifically the true role of these bacteria in animal diseases.
Tests for Helicobacter infection include histopathologic examination, urea broth test,
rapid urease testing on gastric biopsy specimens, fecal test (humans), and serologic assays.
A more recent approach in humans is in vivo identification of H. pylori using acriflavine-
guided endomicroscopy (frst positive case identified in 2005).
Endoscopy plays an important role in the diagnosis of Helicobacter-associated disease
in animals. Clinical signs of Helicobacter gastritis may include chronic vomiting (food,
bile, and sometimes mucus), intermittent inappetence, unthriftiness, weight loss, breath
changes, belching, and abdominal discomfort. However, a variety of GI disorders can
cause these clinical signs. Endoscopy is highly useful for more clearly defining a specific
problem or problems based on the findings of gross examination and the identification of
histopathologic abnormalities. Helicobacter-associated disease is considered a possibility
when the histologic examination shows evidence of gastric infla mmation in conjunction
with the presence of a significant number of Helicobater organisms. Variable degrees of
inflammation may occur.
Because of the patchy distribution of organisms within the stomach, biopsy specimens
should be obtained from various regions of the stomach, including the fundic area, gastric
body, and antrum (midregion and close to the pyloric orifice). As was described in the
"Gastric Biopsy Techniques" section of this chapter, it can be difficult to procure adequate-
sized tissue samples from the antral region because the mucosa is denser in this area. Good
biopsy technique is essential in helping the pathologist identify Helicobacter organisms and
determine whether significant inflammation is present. Cytologic examination of biopsy
samples can also be useful for quick screening. In the future, veterinarians may be able
to use noninvasive tests such as antibody titers or antigen tests to make a presumptive
diagnosis of Helicobacter-associated disease. At present, however, correlation of biopsy
findings with other tests is very important. Endoscopy and urease testing of tissue samples
may be done concurrently.
Endoscopic findings in the stomach of dogs and cats range from a normal gastric
appearance to variable degrees of inflammation (e.g-, erythema or superficial patchy
erosions). Some patients will have diffuse nodular gastritis with a raised follicular
appearance. The appearance may be the same as the examples of chronic gastritis shown in
this “Atlas" section, but in my experience, gross changes are more commonly minimal in
animals thought to have significant Helicobacter gastritis.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■143
C
old Cocker Spaniel with chronic intermittent vomiting. The animal responded well to amoxicillin,
 omeprazole, and metoclopramide. A, Normal appearance of the rugal folds in the gastric body (fore-
 ground) and erythema of a rugal fold (top right). B, Patchy erythema with bilious fluid retention in
the upper gastric body. C, Patchy erythema in the antrum and peripyloric region. D, Chronic gastri-
tis. Examination of multiple sections revealed patchy foci of fibrosis with infiltrates of lymphocytes,
plasma cells and neutrophils. This photomicrograph shows numerous Helicobacter organisms in the
overlying surface mucous layer (×20).
144 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Figure 4-62 Helicobacter overgrowth in a 7-year-old Dachshund with a 2-month history of intermittent vomiting after eating. A, Lesser cur-
mal,it is unlikely that Helicobacter was a significant cause ofthis dog's problem.
Figure 4-63 Photomicrograph from an 11-year-old Chow
with a 3-week history of intermittent vomiting and 10 days
of anorexia. A gastric ulcer was found in the lesser curva-
ture of the stomach (endoscopic photo not available) with
marked thickening around the upper rim. Multiple biopsy
specimens were obtained, and a suspected diagnosis of
gastric carcinoma was confirmed. This photomicrograph
shows large numbers of Helicobacter organisms in the
gastric pits. The pits are widened. Many organisms were
also present in the surface mucus. The accumulations of
Helicobacter organisms were most prominent in regions
of the stomach away from and not around the ulcer and
carcinoma tissue. Mild diffuse subacute gastritis and mild
lymphocytic, plasmacytic, eosinophilic duodenitis were
also present.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy
■145
Atlas fOr Gastritis: variOus aPＰearances
(FELINE)
A
B
D
Figure 4-64 Diffuse patchy erythema and superficial erosive changes in the gastric fundus and body
ofa 1-year-old cat that was presented for evaluation of acute vomiting. Gastroscopy was performed
18 hours after hospital admission, primarily because of marked depression and hematemesis. A, Mod-
 erate distension of gastric body at the greater curvature. Note the diffuse erythema. An area of normal
 mucosa is at the left aspect of the field of view. B, Retroversion view ofthe cardia and gastroesopha-
geal junction from below, revealing focal erosive and ulcerative lesions. The white objectto the left of
the endoscope is a fragment from a sucralfate tablet. C, Gastric mucosa ofthe proximal gastric body.
The erosive lesions have been covered by the gastric protectant agent sucralfate. Biopsies of the lesions
revealed severe pseudomembranous and erosive gastritis. D, Distal gastric body. A small section of the 
 angulus is observed at the 3-o'clock position, and the antrum extends to the right. The erosive lesions
extended only slightly into the antrum. The cause ofthis cat's acute gastritis was not proved, but the 
owner thought the animal had ingested parts of fresh flowers recently brought into the house. Treat-
 ment consisted of sucralfate, famotidine, and chlorpromazine (first 2 days only for antiemetic effect).
The follow-up examination is shown in Figure 4-65.
146 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
Hgure 4-65 Follow-up gastroscopy on day 5 in the cat shown in Figure 4-64. A, Distal gastric body
and angulus (upper right aspect of the field at the 1-o'clock to 3-o'ciock position). The remaining
(  a  a a    g  u ae s aia
 Follow-up biopsies were markedly improved. B, Retroversion view of the proximal stomach. C, The
antrum and pylorus were normal. The lesions were confined to the gastric body and fundus.
Hgure 4-66 Multiple raised follicular lesions in
the gastric body of a cat with a 3-month history
of intermittent vomiting and peripheral eosino-
philia (a white blood cell count of 24,000/mm²
with 4500 eosinophils). The histologic diagnosis
was eosinophilic gastritis. Although some cats
with Helicobacter gastritis have follicular changes
in the stomach, this particular animal showed no
significant evidence of Helicobacter overgrowth.
Only transient improvement occurred with dietary
therapy conducted before biopsy. However, the
 animal responded well to corticosteroid therapy.
B
C
D
Hgure 4-67 Moderate to severe lymphocytic, plasmacytic gastritis in a 16-year-old cat with chronic intermittent vomiting (2 years) that
Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs obtained 5 minutes after the administration of barium. A filling defect is seen in the cardia area.
C, Endoscopic examination revealed focal erosions of the gastric body mucosa. D, Proliferative and erosive mucosal lesions are present 
iies aul u paiensia suoisal au aqni uoiasui adossoua al moiaq uaas aie sdary Asdoq aui uoun leaeudosaaise aul pumoe
o aansans aissar aram suisat aaenaod au unou sdeopn ises au ra payiai siaap u au pasnes snuy pue
neoplasia. Biopsies revealed moderate to severe lymphocytic, plasmacytic gastritis. The animal responded well to corticosteroids.
Figure 4-68 Superficial pocklike lesions in the
distal gastric body of a cat with intermittent 
vomiting. The histologic diagnosis was mild focal
fibrosis of the lamina propria. These lesions may
have been chronic.
148 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOR CHRONIC 
 FELINE 
 HistiOcytic Gastritis
Figure 4-69 A 12-year-old, 9-kg (20-1b)
cat with a history of chronic vomiting.
most recently on a daily basis. A, Gastric
body with normal rugal fold on the left
and an irregular adjacent fold with an 
erosive lesion. B, Area of the greater cur-
vature with marked disruption ofthe con-
tinuity of the rugal folds and thickening 
and irregularity of the folds in view. C and
D, Photomicrographs showing distorted
mucosal architecture with marked widen-
 ing of the rugae and marked infiltration
by sheets oflarge histiocytes. (Note the
dense superficial infiltration.) E, Normal
feline stomach for comparison. All biopsy
samples were obtained with endoscopic
forceps. (Courtesy of Stephen f. Engler.)
CHAPTER4Gastroscopy
■149
一
cat with chronic vomiting and weight loss. The animal was treated aggressively with corticosteroids. A, Irregularity and distortion of the
greater curvature rugal folds. Note hemorrhage at bottom of photo. B, Retroversion view with moderate gastric distension. Note the follicu-
-raea ' uosod yoo- a ie piay algo aaa auiie pazensia si adossoua aui aiao iaeana au uoe esonu aui ui saueuo ie
at the time of original diagnosis shows focally severe infiltrations of macrophages and smaller numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells
infltrations of small lymphocytes and histiocytic cells. Azathioprine was added to the therapeutic regimen, and the animal showed mild
clinical improvement. Note: Histiocytic gastritis is a rare but serious disorder in cats. Aggressive treatment is required, and surveillance of
lesions via periodic endoscopic examination (every 3 to 6 months) is recommended. (Courtesy of Stephen f Engler.)
150 ·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas for erosiOns and HemorrhaGes
Erosions and hemorrhages may be found anywhere in the stomach and may be single or
multiple. An erosion is a shallow defect in the mucosa that does not extend through the
muscularis mucosa into the submucosa. Typically an erosion is flat or minimally depressed
 and is focal. The base may be reddish, yellowish, or black. Many beginning endoscopists
tend to incorrectly identify erosions as ulcers.
The term hermorrhage refers to the endoscopic appearance of discrete petecchiae or
bright-red confluent streaks that are not associated with any visible breaks in the mucosa.
The intactnessof the mucosa can be ascertained from the appearance of mucosal highlights.
The hemorrhages are usually described as subepithelial.
 Biopsy specimens from grossly hemorrhagic areas or from erosions commonly reveal
 no histologic abnormalities. Occasionally partial- or full-thickness necrosis with minimal
 inflammation is identified. It is rarely necessary to obtain more than one or two biopsy
 specimens from erosions or areas of hemorrhage. In many cases it is doubtful that erosions
cause symptoms. They are usually associated with another disorder that is responsible
for the patient's discomfort. When identifed endoscopically, hemorrhages and erosions
should not automatically be incriminated as the cause of clinical signs.
 Clinical settings for nonspecific erosions or hemorrhages include stress lesions, critical
illness localized gastric trauma (e.g., retching or vomiting and foreign bodies), ingestion of
corrosives, radiation, drugs (especially nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs [NSAIDs]), a
discrete ischemic insult, and idiopathic chronic erosions.
B
Figure 4-71 Focal streaks of subepithelial hemorrhages in a cat with chronic diarrhea. A, Midgastric
body. B, Gastric body. Biopsies were unremarkable, and the history did not suggest a gastric disorder.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
151
Figure 4-72 Isolated erosion in the stomach
Fgure 4-73 Focal erosions in the distal
of a cat with mild lymphocytic, plasmacytic
 gastric body of an 8-year-old Labrador
gastritis.
retriever with intermittent nausea. No
histologic abnormalities were found.
Figure 4-74 Superficial gastric erosions with
hemorrhage along the greater curvature of the
stomach in a 3-year-old Boxer with intermittent
vomiting, chronic diarrhea, anorexia, and weight
loss. Gastric biopsy specimens showed histologic
evidence of mild erosive subacute gastritis. His-
tiocytic ulcerative colitis was also identified.
B
Hgure 4-75 Erosions in the distal antrum of two dogs that were receiving both prednisone and
flunixin meglumine in an experimental study. A, Day 4 of combination drug administration. B,
Multiple erosions at day 2 in a dog receiving prednisone at 1.1 mg/kg (0.5 mg/lb) once daily and
flunixin meglumine at 1.1 mg/kg (0.5 mg/lb) twice daily. It is recommended that nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs not be used in combination or in conjunction with corticosteroids because of
the risk of gastric ulceration. (Courtesy of Steven W. Dow.)
152 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr GaStrIC UlCeRS
 Breach of the muscularis mucosa distinguishes an ulcer from an erosion. The pathogenesis
 of ulcer disease is not yet completely understood. Ulcers have a variety of causes, including
drugs, foreign bodies, disorders that cause higher than normal release of gastric acid,
Helicobacter infection,* and others. Ulcers probably begin as erosions, which then increase
in depth of damage. Fortunately, erosions rarely become ulcers in animals. The incidence
 of gastric ulcers in dogs and cats is quite low. In dogs, ulcers most commonly occur in
conjunction with the use of NSAIDs or in the presence of hepatic disease or mastocytosis.
 Ulcers associated with the use of NSAIDs most often occur in the antral-pyloric area. To
avoid missing a lesion such as an ulcer, the endoscopist must carefully examine the entire
stomach.
Figure 4-76 Large ulcer with a shallow
Hgure 4-77 Shallow ulcer in the proximal
crater in the gastric body of a cat (6-o'clock
 antrum of a cat (arrow). A small amount of
position). Note the normal appearance of the
hemorrhage is associated with the ulcer. An
surrounding mucosa.
open pylorus is seen at the far end of the field.
B
Figure 4-78 Large antral ulcer in a 14-year-old Cocker Spaniel. Methylprednisolone acetate had
been administered for severe degenerative joint disease, and the dog's owner instituted ibuprofen
without notifying the clinician. A, Antral canal from the distal gastric body. A large ulcer is seen in 
the right aspect of the field of view (3-o'clock to 4-o'clock position), and the pylorus is in the center
of the field. The tissue projection on the antral wall at the 6-o'clock position is a polyp (an incidental
finding and insignificant lesion). B, Close-up view of the gastric ulcer. Much of the ulcer pit is filled 
with hemorrhages. The antral canal is to the left. On initial approach this ulcer was poorly visualized
because it was covered by thick foam, mucus, and bile. Once the fluid and mucus were suctioned
away, the ulcer was clearly seen.
*Helicobacter infection rarely causes ulcers in animals but is a more common factor in the development of ulcers in humans.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy· 153
B
Hgure 4-79 Large angulus ulcer in a 12-year-old Chow with severe degenerative joint disease. Aspi-
rin and corticosteroids were administered simultaneously. A, Ulcer in the angulus. Biopsy samples
were obtained from the upper wall (shown here) and the rim. No evidence of neoplasia was found.
ae d-moy ae-l ie sueau yo suis ieg 'a aneenns pue auiiouy papniu suaai
ulcers may take 8 to 16 weeks to heal.
B
D
Figure 4-80 Perforated gastric ulcer in an 8-year-old Chow that had received naproxen (a non-
steroidal antinflammatory) once daily for 7 days. On the sixth day, vomiting and inappetence 
were first noted by the owmer. Naproxen was discontinued after the seventh day, but the clinical 
signs persisted. Famotidine and misoprostol were started 3 days later. The vomiting soon subsided,
but inappetence persisted. Nine days after naproxen was discontinued, the dog was presented for
 endoscopy. The dog was bright and alert. The complete blood count and biochemical profle were
completely normal except for mild leukocytosis. The packed cell volume was 48%. A, View toward
the antrum from the lower gastric body. Two ulcers are seen: a smallr lesion at the 9-o'clock position
and a much larger ulcer to the right of center (midantrum). B, On advancement into the antrum the 
endoscope revealed a very deep ulcer with a thick rim (entire upper left quadrant). C, Straight-forward
view into the ulcer. The whitish meshlike tissue seen through the ulcer crater is omentum. The pyloric
orifice is at the lower left (7-o'clock position). D, Close-up view of the ulcer crater with an omental seal.
Continued
154·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 4-80, cont'd E, To determine whether the omental seal was incomplete and whether
surgery needed to be performed immediately ratherthan on the following day (the endoscopy was
being conducted late in the day), survey abdominal radiographs were obtained to look for evidence
of free air in the abdominal cavity (air was insufflated to the stomach as for routine gastroscopy).
The radiograph shows no evidence of free air in the abdominal cavity. Barium was present in the
colon from a contrast series started by another veterinarian a few days before. Barium transit was
thought to be delayed by anticholinergic therapy that had been started several days earlier in an
effort to control vomiting. (Anticholinergic treatment is not advisable.) F, For comparison, a survey
abdominal radiograph from a different patient with a perforated gastric ulcer shows free air in the
abdominal cavity between the liver and stomach. Note: The Chow underwent surgery the following
day, and the ulcer was found to have a frmly adhered, complete omental seal. A partial antrectomy
was done, and the histologic diagnosis was focal chronic ulcerative gastritis. (Ulcer tissue should
always be sampled to rule out neoplasia.) An incidental finding at surgery was a mass in the left
medial lobe of the liver. The lobe was resected, and the mass was determined to be a hepatocellular
carcinoma. The dog was fed via jejunostomy tube for 12 days and had an uneventful recovery. The
 Chow lived for 3 years after surgery with no evidence of tumor recurrence.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy■ 155
Figure 4-81 Two peripyloric ulcers ina 14-year-
old dog that was receiving nonsteroidal antin-
flammatory drug (NSAID) therapy for severe
osteoarthritis. The pyloric orifice (center) is open,
and ulcers are seen to the left and above the pylo-
rus ( with hemorrhage). In animals that are sensi-
tive to NSAIDs the prostaglandin drug misoprostol
 has proved very effective in preventing gastrointes-
tinal ulceration.
 Atlas fOr abnOrmal GastrIc mOtilIty
Gastric motility disorders are usually diagnosed based on the history, clinical signs, and
radiographic findings (e.g-, prolonged retention of liquid barium, radiopaque markers
[BIPS], or a barium meal or decreased antral contractions observed at fluoroscopy).
When used alone, endoscopy is of limited value in assessing disorders of gastric motility.
However, important clues can sometimes be recognized during gastroscopy. This is
important because some animals with a gastric motility disorder do not have diagnostic
contrast radiographic studies (i.e., a normal liquid barium series does not rule out a gastric
motility disorder). Endoscopic examination is also important in patients with clinical signs
of a motility disorder because mucosal biopsy specimens should be evaluated whenever
 possible for evidence of a potential underlying cause, including gastritis, fbrosis, or an
infltrative bowel disorder (e.g., IBD). These disorders can alter gastric motility. Findings
that should alert the endoscopist to the possibility of a motility disorder include retention
of food or fluid admixed with bile in a properly fasted patient and generalized erythema
with or without the presence of streaks of bile-stained fluid.
Fluid may be present in the stomach as a result of reflux from the colon after high
enemas. Also, any time a large pool of fluid is found in the stomach, the possibility of
fluid retention as a result of a small intestinal obstruction (e.g-, foreign body, stricture, or 
 mass) must be considered. In this situation fluid is usually also pooled in the duodenum.
As much fluid as possible should be suctioned from the stomach so that the mucosa can be
thoroughly evaluated.
Gastric mucosal erythema commonly occurs in animals with gastric retention of bile-
stained fluid. Erythema may be secondary to superficial mucosal damage from bile. Biopsies
are routinely unremarkable in idiopathic gastric motility disorders.
156·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
Figure 4-82 Gastric fluid and bile retention
Hgure 4-83 Grass blades and food in the
in a 7-year-old Pekingese with an idiopathic
gastric body of a 3-year-old Doberman with
 gastric motility disorder. Note the mucosal
lymphangiectasia. The dog was quite weak and
erythema. Mucosal biopsy specimen results
had a total protein concentration of 2.3 g/dL.
were normal. Clinical signs included inter-
The dog had not eaten or been outdoors in 3
mittent vomiting, frequent nausea and loud
days. Gastric mucosal biopsy specimen results 
gastric gurgling sounds, periodic inappetence.
were normal.
and occasional bloating episodes.
Figure 4-84 Large amount of retained food
Hgure 4-85 Food and fluid retention in
(canned) in a 6-year-old Cocker Spaniel with
the gastric body of a 10-year-old miniature
a disorder characterized by the vomiting of
 poodle. The surrounding mucosa appears 
undigested or partially digested food 18 to
normal.
24 hours after eating. At the time of endos-
copy the dog had not eaten in 30 hours. The
 endoscope was maneuvered beyond the food,
and the pylorus was traversed without dif-
ficulty. A thyroid-stimulating hormone test 
was consistent with hypothyroidism. Gastric
and duodenal biopsy specimen results were 
normal. The animal responded well to thyroid
 supplementation and metoclopramide.
CHAPTER 4  Gastroscopy · 157
Figure 4-86 Retroversion view ofthe proximal
stomach of a 1-year-old Kuvasz with a 6-month
history of intermittent vomiting. Note the pres-
ence ofbile-stained fluid. No metabolic abnormal-
ities were found, and gastric and duodenal biopsy
 results were normal. An idiopathic gastric motility
disorder was diagnosed, and the animal responded
well to metoclopramide.
B
C
Hgure 4-87 A, Gastric fluid retention in a 2-year-old Balinese with anorexia (5 days) and vomiting.
Several of the vomiting episodes were projectile in nature. B, Retroversion view of the fundus and
gastroesophageal junction. Most ofthe gastric fluid was suctioned so that a thorough examination
could be completed. No evidence of a foreign body was found. C, The pylorus was unusually dilated
in this cat. The duodenal wall can be seen at the far end of the canal. Duodenal biopsies revealed
chronic active enteritis. Esophagitis was most likely secondary to vomiting. The result of a barium
series done after endoscopy to rule out a lower small bowel obstruction was normal. The increased
 gastric fluid was most likely secondary to marked duodenal-gastric reflux and abnormal gastric
motility. Treatment included metoclopramide and prednisone.
158 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOR abnOrmal APPearanCES Of tHe
ANTRUM
Pronounced folds are occasionally identified in the antrum. This is a rare finding in
inflammatory disease, or they may be a healing sequela to an ulcer, neoplasia, or chronic
hypergastrinemia. In some cases the pronounced folds may not be clinically significant,
but their appearance should always be noted in the endoscopy report. Examples of antral
neoplasia appear in the “Atlas for Gastric Neoplasia" section.
B
Hgure 4-88 Pronounced antral folds in a 16-year-old dog with chronic diarrhea and a ravenous
appetite. The animal had no clinical signs that were specific for gastric disease. Biopsies showed
antral fibrosis, which was probably the sequela of a previous inflammatory disorder. A, Endoscopic
view from the proximal end of the insufflated antrum. B, Distal antrum with smooth folds. The
 pylorus is near the top in the field of view at the 12-o'clock position.
Figure 4-89 Pronounced folds in the
Hgure 4-90 Pronounced folds around the
distal antrum of a 10-year-old Beagle with
pylorus of a 14-year-old cat with intestinal
intermittent vomiting. This dog had mild
and hepatic lymphoma. The closed pylorus is 
hypertrophic gastropathy. The pyloric orifice
to the left of center at the 9-o'clock position.
is obscured by foam to the left of center
 Biopsy samples obtained from the thickened
(10-o'clock position).
tissue around the pylorus showed no histologic
evidence of neoplasia. (This was confirmed
 at necropsy.) The diagnosis was proliferative
gastropathy with mild inflammation.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 159
Hgure 4-91 Hypertrophic gastritis in a 10-year-
old poodle with a 3-month history of intermittent
vomiting. Survey abdominal radiographs showed
marked gastric distension with fluid and gas, and a
barium series revealed marked delay in the empty-
ing of barium from the stomach. At endoscopic ex-
amination the pyloric orifice was extremely narrow
(slitlike area in center of field), and it did not open
to any degree during the examination. The tissue
around the pylorus tended to bulge up (as shown
here) any time gastric contractions occurred. A
Y-U pyloroplasty was performed, and hypertrophic
gastritis was diagnosed based on the results of fill-
thickness biopsy. (Courtesy of Susan E. fohnson.)
AtLaS FOR GaStRIC POlYPS
Gastric polyps usuallyare not clinically significant, and theyare often discovered incidentally
on GI radiographs or at endoscopy or surgery. Rarely, there may be bleeding from an
eroded surface or transient obstruction of the pylorus by an antral polyp protruding into
the pyloric canal. Bloating, nausea, and vomiting may occur during periods of obstruction.
 Gastric polyps are only rarely found in dogs and cats. Endoscopically they appear as sessile
 or pedunculated protuberances that do not disappear with maximal insufflation. Polyps 
are most commonly found in the antrum and pyloric areas. These growths are usually
idod e no au s a   p  s ss dog 
 If clinically significant, the polyp should be removed with a polypectomy snare loop and
cautery or by surgical excision.
B
Hgure 4-92 Large,benign polyp in the midgastric body of a 12-year-old Chow. This is an unusual
location. The polyp was not clinically significant. A, Forward view from the proximal gastric body.
B, Close-up view of the polyp.
160·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
Hgure 4-93 Two small antral polyps, an incidental
finding in a 16-year-old dog.
Figure 4-94 A, Barium contrast
radiograph of a 6-year-old domestic
 short hair cat with a history of lifelong 
 intermittent vomiting. For some time 
 before this presentation the cat had been
vomiting daily, with some episodes being
1
 projectile in nature. The pyloric antrum
has a flling defect (a consistent finding
throughout the series). B, A large polyp
with irregular surface was identifed in 
the distal antrum. In this view the polyp
occludes the pyloric orifice. The antral
mucosa also displayed erythema and
 irregularity. C, Biopsy forceps were used
to move the polyp to the side, providing
 a partial view of the pyloric orifice. The
 polyp was freely movable on a stalk. D,
 Polyp biopsy procedure. The polyp had
a soft surface. Note the irregularity of
the antral walls. The histologic diagnosis
was benign inflammatory polyp. Chronic
gastritis and moderate lymphocytic
enteritis were also present.
C
1
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 161
A
F
Figure 4-95 Gastric polyp in a 7-year-old Great Dane with intermittent vomiting, diar-
rhea, and occasional hematochezia. A, View of the antrum from the lower gastric body.
The angulus fold extends right to left at the top of the field. A soft, movable mass is pres-
ent in the antrum near the pylorus. B, Close-up view of the mass. C, The endoscope was
passed beyond the mass to the pylorus, which was open and readily traversed. Note: En-
revealed a mass (adenocarcinoma) in the mid-descending colon. The gastric mass was
subsequently resected because the vomiting was thought to be due, in part, to the size and
location of the lesion. Surgical biopsies confirmed the diagnosis of benign gastric polyp.
H
B
Figure 4-96 Pyloric polyp in a 7-year-old Pug with
frequent vomiting. Some episodes were projectile in
nature. A, The polyp caused distortion of the pyloric
onifice and occlusion of the pyloric canal. In this pho-
tograph the pyloric orifice appears as an inverted V
with the polyp protruding through it. B, The biopsy
forceps have been passed through the pyloric canal.
 Note that the polyp has compromised the lumen.
This is an unusual location for a polyp. C, Surgically
 excised tissue from the pylorus.
162·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr GastrIC neOPlasia
Adenocarcinoma is the most common malignant tumor in the stomach of the dog, and
lymphosarcoma is the most common malignant tumor in the cat. Cancerous lesions may
diffusely infiltrating mass invading the stomach wall.
C
D
Figure 4-97 Initial endoscopic series in a 10-year-old cat with vomiting, weight loss, and inap-
petence. A, Immediate view on entering the stomach. A small amount of air has been insufflated.
A large mass is seen at the lower aspect of the field of view. The angulus is at the 12-o'clock to
1-o'clock position. B, The edge of the mass is at the 7-o'clock to 8-o'clock position. Note the ir-
regularity and thickening of the rugal folds around the mass in both views. C, Close-up view of the
large mass in the proximal stomach. D, View of the mass and surrounding irregular folds after the 
 retroversion maneuver. The cat lived for 8 years after the diagnosis was made.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■163
E
Figure 4-97, cont'd E, A significant amount
of bleeding occurred after a single biopsy
sample was obtained from the center ofthe
mass. F, Samples were obtained from the 
mass and surrounding tissue. The mass was
sampled several times in the same location 
in an effort to obtain tissue as deeply as
 possible. G, The mass is in the upper leff
aspect, and hemorrhage from a mucosal-
fold biopsy site is seen in the center ofthe
field.
B
Figure 4-98 Endoscopic examination ofthe
cat shown in Figure 4-97, done 19 days after 
the initial examination. Treatment involved
only chemotherapy (prednisone, cyclophos-
phamide, and vincristine). A, Forward view
of the proximal stomach at slightly more than
moderate distension. The mass, which had
decreased dramatically in size, is in the center
ofthe field. (Compare with Figure 4-97,C.)
B, Retroversion view. The site ofthe mass is
barely detectable (focal reddened area to left
of center). (Compare with Figure 4-97, D.)
C, Retroversion view at a different angle. The
mass can be seen at the 7-o'clock position.
164 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
Figure 4-99 Endoscopic photographs of
the cat discussed in Figures 4-97 and 4-98,
obtained 19 weeks after the initial exami-
nation. The patient was doing extremely
well while undergoing chemotherapy. No
evidence of a gastric mass is seen, and the 
 mucosa at the original site ofthe lesion ap-
pears whiter than the surrounding mucosa.
A,Forward view of the proximal stomach 
in mild distension. Note that the rugal folds
 no longer appear thickened or irregular. B,
Same site as in A but with moderate disten-
sion. C, Close-up view ofthe gastric mu-
 cosa. Note the smooth mucosal surface.
Hgure 4-100 Endoscopic photographs of the cat in Figures 4-97, 4-98, and 4-99, taken 9 months
after the animal was first examined. A, Forward view of the proximal stomach in mild distension.
 B, Forward view of the stomach in moderate distension. The stomach is grossly normal except
for the small, whitened area where the mass was previously located (compare with Figures 4-97,
C; 4-98,A; and 4-99, A). Biopsy samples showed no evidence of lymphosarcoma. The cat was still
receiving chemotherapy and was clinically normal. Chemotherapy was discontinued at 12 months;
at 18 months, no evidence of tumor recurrence was found. Note: The cat lived 8 years after the di-
agnosis was made. Chemotherapy never had to be resumed. This case highlights the importance of
using endoscopy relatively early in animals with unexplained chronic vomiting. This cat's history
was easily consistent with a diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease or chronic gastritis, yet endos-
copy revealed lymphosarcoma. Early initiation of the most indicated therapy resulted in an excellent
outcome. (Also see Figure 4-110 for illustration of an additional incident involving this patient: 
gastric hairball.)
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 165
Figure 4-101 Lymphosarcoma involving
the gastric body and fundus in a 12-year-
old Siamese cat. A readily palpable mass
was found in the anterior abdomen
(stomach). Lymphosarcoma was also
B
identified in the colon. A,Forward view
 in the gastric body. The stomach has not
 been insufflated. Note the dramatic dis-
tortion of the normal rugal fold structure
 and the ulcerative change at the 5-o'clock
position. B, Retroversion view showing
the multiple mass effect in the proximal
stomach and fundus. C, Forward view in
the gastric body. Note the irregular rugal 
fold adjacent to the mass. The animal re-
sponded fairly well to chermotherapy for
 6 weeks, but then clinical signs worsened
 and the cat was euthanized. D, Distal
gastric body. A short edge of the angulus
is seen at the far lower right (5-o'clock
position). The proliferative effect from
the lymphosarcoma stopped abruptly in
the lower body. The antrum was com-
C
D
pletely normal.
B
Hgure 4-102 Antral lymphosarcoma in a 14-year-old cat with a short history of inappetence and
occasional hematemesis. A, The gastric body was completely normal. B, The antrum was infiltrated
with proliferative tissue. Failure to examine the antrum would have resulted in a missed diagnosis.
The histologic diagnoses were normal gastric body, antral lymphosarcoma, and moderate lym-
phocytic, plasmacytic enteritis. The cat did well on chemotherapy for 5 months, but then bilateral
renomegaly developed quite rapidly. The cat was subsequently euthanized because of anorexia and
vomiting. The blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels were normal. Histologic examination of
tissues obtained at necropsy identifed lymphoma in both kidneys and the antrum.
166·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
C
D
上
Hgure 4-103 Gastric lymphosarcoma in an 8-year-old cat with inappetence. The animal had tested
positive for the feline leukemia virus. A physical examination revealed a palpable abdominal mass.
A and B, Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs showed a soft tissue massinvolving the stomach.
Gastroscopic examination showed a single mass along the distal lesser curvature and several promi-
nent linear masses in the antrum. C, Retroversion view showing the normal fundus and gastro-
esophageal junction. D and E, Mass effect in the antral canal has caused marked occlusion. At the 
top of the field of view, note the cavernous area with debris. The pylorus is not in view. The endo-
'sudeioioud al yo uonoq aul ie uaas lauuml al yanoiun shioid aul on paoueape sem adoss
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 167
Hgure 4-104 Examination of the cat shown in
Figure 4-103,performed 5 weeks after presenta
tion. Chemotherapy dramatically decreased the
size of the antral masses. The endoscope is in the
same position as in Figure 4-103, D-E. The py-
lorus is closed, but its orifice is seen in the center
of the field. One of the antral masses, although
somewhat smaller, is still evident in the left aspect
of the feld. The debris-filled cavern is no longer
present.
Figure 4-105 Gastric adenocarcinoma in a 14-year-old Siamese cat with a 2-week history of anorexia but only occasional vomiting. A and
B, Barium contrast radiographs showed incomplete gastric flling and mucosal irregularity.
Continued
168·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
D
E
一
Figure 4-105, cont'd C, Immediate view when the endoscope entered the stomach. Note the thickened, irregular rugal folds. The walls of
the stomach were poorly distensible in response to air insufflation. D, Mucosal irregularity and focal hemorrhages along the distal greater
curvature. E, White plaque material (left of center) adhering to the mucosa of the greater curvature. F, Prominent folds in the antral canal.
The pylorus is to the left of center at the 11-o'clock position. Multiple biopsy samples were obtained from the gastric-body lesions. The tis-
sue felt unusually hard when the biopsy forceps were closed. This tactile perception is often associated with malignancy.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy169
B
per week and no worrisome associated signs). The complete blood cell count, biochemical profle, serum thyroxine concentration, uri-
nalysis, fecal examination for parasites, and survey radiographs of the thorax and abdomen were unremarkable. The dog was referred for
endoscopy because the owner was anxious to determine why the animal was vomiting. A, View from the proximal antrum. The antral walls
are smooth and normal. However, a proliferative mass was found in the pylorus. B, Close-up view of the pyloric mass, which is occluding
most of the pyloric orifice. C, View of the pyloric canal near the pyloroduodenal junction after the endoscope was advanced into the py-
loric canal, beneath the mass. The mass extended into the proximal duodenum. The histologic diagnosis was adenocarcinoma. D, Grossly
 normal duodenum in the area of the major duodenal papilla (upper center). This very important finding indicates that resection would not
need to extend very far down the descending duodenum. The duct area appeared unaffected. Note: A 30-cm section of antrum, pylorus, and
duodenum was resected during a 4-hour surgical procedure. No evidence of metastasis was found, and the adenocarcinoma did not involve
 -op asearap diau oi paqsaid se Aderau apeidoionau uan-uot 'uaaaun sm aaaonau saop aui 'sod al jo siaae dap a
denogastric reflux because the animal no longer had a pylorus. The dog lived 3 years after surgery, with no evidence of tumor recurrence.
E, Endoscopic view of the antral-duodenal junction (site of the anastomosis) 8 months after the dog was first examined. The anastomosis
 0h yoi o-g aul ony suipuaixa eaie paapu aul aion) maia jo piay aul ul si umuaponp aul pue uue suseg ieixond aul uaamiaq aiis
12-o'clock position). Results of biopsy specimens obtained from the area were normal (as they were at 12 and 24 months after surgery).
170 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
Figure 4-107 Gastric adenocarcinoma. A, Marked prolif-
erative changes in the lower gastric body, with complete
loss of the normal rugal fold architecture. B, Lower gastric
body with an area of superficial ulceration seen in the lower
feld. C, Close-up view of a mass in the midgastric body.
The mass was rigid and had a very dense wall (suggestive of
neoplasia).Masses such as this one should be sampled as
deeply as possible. If only superficial tissue is obtained, the 
endoscopist may fail to retrieve neoplastic cells. The first 
 four attempts to biopsy the mass yielded very small tissue
samples, but on the fifth attempt the biopsy instrument 
advanced inside the mass (the view in this photo). A num-
ber of large tissue samples were obtained,and the diagnosis
 of adenocarcinoma was confrmed. Biopsy specimens were
also obtained from the ulcerated area shown in B.
Atlas fOr mIscellaneOus fIndINGs
Hgure 4-108 Secondary changes (thickening) of
the rugal folds in a 12-year-old mixed-breed dog
with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. In this syndrome,
 gastrin is released into the circulation by a gastri-
noma (a tumor usually located in the pancreas).
The release of gastrin leadsto expansion ofthe pa-
 rietal cell mass with an enhanced capacity to secrete
gastric acid. The rugal folds thicken because ofthe
 trophic effect of gastrin. This dog also had hyper-
emia ofthe distal esophagus. Between 90% and
 95% of humans with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
have upper gastrointestinal ulceration at some time
during the course of their disease. No ulceration
was identified in this dog. A gastrinoma was found
 in the pancreas at surgery. (Courtesy of Robert G.
Sherding.)
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
171
AtlaS fOr HaIrballs IN CatS
It is not unusual to encounter small accumulations of hair during gastroscopy in cats. In
many cases a hairball is an incidental finding and is not diagnostic of a specific disorder.
Occasionally a large tubular hairball in the antrum causes outflow obstruction. Hairballs
can usually be easily removed with the use of a foreign body grasper. Gastric and duodenal
biopsy specimens should stillbe obtained if clinical signs include vomiting, inappetence, or
weight loss. Vomiting in cats is less likely to be caused by hairballs than by inflammatory
 disorders, which may disrupt normal motility patterns.
Hgure 4-109 Small accumulation of hair in the
distal gastric body and proximal antrum of a cat
with chronic intermittent vomiting. The angulus
is at the lower right aspect of the field. Gastric
biopsy results were normal, and duodenal biopsy
results revealed inflammatory bowel disease. The
hair was thought to be an incidental finding.
B
Figure 4-110 A, A large tubular hairball extends
slightly into the distal gastric body from the
antrum. The angulus is in the right aspect of the 
feld. B, The hairball has been grasped with a two-
prong foreign body grasper and is being pulled
into the gastric body. C,The retrieved hairball
Note: These photographs are of the cat with gastric
lymphosarcoma that was discussed in Figures 4-97
through 4-100. The owner reported recurrence
 of intermittent vomiting 19 weeks after the
animal began receiving chemotherapy. Based on
gastroscopy (no evidence of any mass recurrence)
and the cessation of vomiting after the hairball 
removal,the vomiting was caused bythe hairball
 and rot loss of remission from lymphosarcoma.
172 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOr PHySALOPTerA
 Physaloptera species are small, stout nematode parasites occasionally found in the stomach
of dogs and cats. Adult worms are creamy white, sometimes tightly coiled, and 1 to 4 cm
long, but the smaller larvae are difficult to visualize. Chronic intermittent vomiting is the
 observed. Fecal centrifugation tests will occasionally reveal Physaloptera ova. The dia gnosis
is not established in some cases until one or more worms are visualized at endoscopy.
 There may be gastric erosions and a moderate lymphoplasmacytic or eosinophilic gastritis.
Parasites observed at endoscopy can be manually removed. Definitive treatment with a
single dose of pyrantel pamoate eliminates the parasite from dogs while two doses given 3
weeks apart are required for cats.
Hgure 4-111  Physaloptera parasite on the gastric
mucosa of a dog (center of feld). The white image
at the right (3-o'clock position) is due to light
reflection. See also Figure 8-18 for another example
of Physaloptera parasites observed at gastroscopy.
(Courtesy of Michael S. Leib.)
Gastroscopy
Todd R. Tams
astroscopy mainly identifes abnormalities of the gastric
elicited. Gastroscopy is not commonly performed in patients
mucosa, but it may also reveal distortion of the stomach's
with acute vomiting unless a gastric foreign body or gastric
normal anatomic relationships by displacement or extrin-
ulceration is suspected. This examination is much more
sic compression as a result of a mass or enlargement of an
commonly done in animals with a history of acute vomit-
adjacent organ. Gastroscopy has become the most valuable
ing that has continued for a period of time without relief
diagnostic method available for evaluating primary gastric
(i.e., greater than 3 to 4 days), chronic intermittent vomiting
disorders because it permits unparalleled observation of the
(i.e., recurrent for more than 2 to 3 weeks), and vomiting
gastric mucosa. This modality significantly increases the
that includes blood. (Gastroscopy should be considered any
diagnostic yield in comparison with contrast radiographic
time hematemesis is observed.) The most common causes
studies, which are somewhat less sensitive in the evaluation
of hematemesis in dogs and cats are chronic gastritis and
of mucosal disorders. The diagnostic yield in animals with
acute gastric mucosal erosions from factors such as drugs
neoplasia that is in the deeper layers of the stomach or in
(especially  nonsteroidal  antinflammatory  medications)
the pyloric wall but that is not visible in the mucosa is sig-
and hypotension with subsequent decreased gastric mucosal
nificantly enhanced when both ultrasound and endoscopic
 blood flow. Gastric ulcers and neoplasia are somewhat less
examinations are performed. Endoscopy-guided biopsy
common causes of hematemesis. Occasionally the only clini-
provides rapid and reliable assessment of many disorders.
 cal manifestations of chronic gastritis are inappetence and
Endoscopic examination of the stomach has improved early
salivation.
diagnostic capability significantly and has highlighted the fact
An initial diagnostic plan for an animal with a chronic
that gastric mucosal disorders occur fairly often.
vomiting disorder should include a complete history, physi-
cal examination, complete blood count, complete biochemi-
■ INDICATIONS
cal profle (including thyroid evaluation for vomiting cats),
urinalysis, fecal examination for parasites (both centrifugal
Indications for gastroscopy include clinical signs referable
flotation and a Giardia antigen test), evaluation for heart-
to gastric diseases, including nausea, salivation, vomit-
worm disease in cats (starting with a heartworm antibody
 ing, hematemesis, melena, unexplained abnormal breath
test), and survey abdominal radiographs. Once disorders
changes, and anorexia. The most common disorders diag-
such as metabolic abnormalities (e.g, renal failure, diabetes
nosed include chronic gastritis ( with or without overgrowth
mellitus, and liver disease), a foreign body that can be read-
of Helicobacter organisms), superficial gastric erosions, gas-
ily diagnosed on survey abdominal radiography, and dietary
tric foreign bodies, and gastric motility disorders. Ulcers and
 indiscretion or food sensitivity are ruled out, the decision
neoplasia can be readily diagnosed but are somewhat less
to perform more in-depth diagnostic tests is made. This
commonly found. The antral-pyloric canal can be exam-
may include testing for disorders that may not be identified
ined, and significant narrowing of the pylorus or the pres-
on baseline screening tests (e.g-, consider the possibility of
ence of prominent folds of tissue in the antrum may suggest
pancreatitis not diagnosed in the acute phase, leptospirosis,
the possibility of hypertrophic gastropathy.
 and atypical hypoadrenocorticism), barium contrast study,
Vomiting is one of the most common reasons animals
ultrasonography, or upper gastrointestinal (Gl) endoscopy
are presented to veterinarians for examination. In many
(or a combination of ultrasonography and gastroscopy).
cases a history of dietary indiscretion (e.g., overeating or
Clinical acumen is important in deciding which tests make
an acute dietary change) or foreign body ingestion can be
the most sense, based on patient presentation and recent
97
98·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
history and physical examination findings. Given the insen-
Under certain circumstances, fasting alone is insufficient
sitivity of barium contrast studies for diagnosing mucosal
to ensure an empty stomach. If gastric emptying is signifi-
 disorders, the thoroughness of a complete gastric endoscopic
cantly impaired because of abnormal gastric motility (e.g-)
 examination combined with the ability to examine the upper
idiopathic gastric hypomotility or severe chronic gastritis)
small intestine at the same time, and the cost-containment
 or obstruction (e.g-, hypertrophic gastropathy or antral or
factor that concerns many pet owners, the decision to choose
pyloric neoplasia), significant amounts of ingesta, debris,
gastroscopy over contrast radiography is usually a sound
or retained gastric or duodenal fluid may compromise the
one. Ultrasonography is especially useful for evaluating wall
examination. In these situations, biopsy specimens may still
thickness. The conclusion that endoscopy is an excellent way
be obtained if areas of mucosa can be visualized, but because
to examine for gastric disease should come as no surprise
lesions can be easily missed, the examination may need to be
to the increasing number of small animal practitioners who
repeated later. Finding retained ingesta in a properly fasted
are performing endoscopy. If radiographs identify a lesion
animal can be an important diagnostic clue. For example,
or foreign body, gastroscopy or surgery is still necessary for
the presence of retained ingesta may strongly suggest that the
 defnitive diagnosis and treatment. Furthermore, a normal
patient has a gastric motility disorder.
 gastric contrast radiographic examination does not rule out
When clots or pooled blood is present, the endoscopist
the presence of a gastric disorder.
may find it difficult to determine the source of bleeding. Free
 In patients with chronic upper GI disorders, gastros-
fluid can be suctioned through the accessory channel, but
copy should be performed in conjunction with esophagos-
copious lavage through a large-bore tube may be necessary
copy and duodenoscopy. Important diagnostic clues may
to dislodge clots before the endoscope is reintroduced.
be evident in any or all of these areas during the course of
Gastroscopy is generally not performed within 12 to
an examination. Follow-up gastroscopy is a valuable aid for
24 hours of a barium contrast examination unless a gastric
monitoring the therapeutic response in patients with chronic
foreign body has been identifed. This usually allows suff-
gastritis or ulcers. Follow-up examination and biopsies are
cient time for complete clearing of the barium and subse-
 especially important in animals with chronic, severe histio-
 quent thorough mucosal evaluation. The accessory channel
cytic and granulomatous gastritis, chronic fbrosing gastritis,
 of an endoscope should not be used to suction undiluted
and gastric lymphosarcoma. Important information that is
barium because residue may adhere to the channel wall.
useful in treatment protocol decisions can often be obtained.
(Case examples highlighting this point can be found in the
■ ANESTHESIA AND POSITIONING
“Atlas" section at the end of this chapter.)
 Finally, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is a most
 As with any endoscopic procedure of the upper GI tract, gen-
useful aid when clients have limited financial means but
eral anesthesia is required for gastroscopy. Anesthetic agents
earnestly wish more than palliative treatment for their pet's
can affect intestinal motility and sphincter function (includ-
discomfort. If inexpensive routine tests have proved unre-
ing the lower esophageal sphincter and the pylorus), and con-
warding in diagnosing a disorder characterized by GI signs,
sideration should be given to selecting anesthetic agents that
money may be better spent on early endoscopic examination.
will minimally hinder the endoscopist's ability to advance
the endoscope through the stomach and pylorus. Atropine
 INSTRUMENTATION
and other anticholinergic agents are not used unless they
 are required to increase heart rate. These drugs alter gastric
For small animal patients a complete evaluation of the stom-
motility patterns, which may cause increased gastric flaccid-
ach is best accomplished with the use of a flexible endoscope
ity and dilation. In addition, pyloric tone may increase, mak
with a diameter of 9.8 mm or less and four-way tip deflection
ing it diffcult to advance an endoscope through the pylorus.
capability (see Chapter 2). In cats and in dogs weighing less
Atropine can also decrease lower esophageal sphincter tone.
than 5 kg (11 lb) an endoscope insertion-tube diameter of 9
 In most animals, however, the lower esophageal sphincter is
 ss      s  n
 closed on initial examination regardless of whether atropine
ideal). The use of a smaller endoscope makes it much more
was administered before the procedure. Pure opioid agonist 
likely that the pyloric canal and proximal duodenum can be
drugs (e.g., morphine and hydromorphone) should not be
traversed and examined in these small patients than when a
used because they may increase pyloric tone. While expe-
larger diameter scope is used, especially if the operator has
rienced endoscopists may not have any added diffculty in
limited experience.
 traversing the pylorus no matter what anesthetic protocol is
used, the guidelines listed here work well for a majority of
 PATIENT PREPARATION
 patients undergoing upper GI endoscopy.
Commonly used protocolsfor upper GI endoscopy include
The main requirement for a successful gastroscopy is that
the use of acepromazine and butorphanol for premedica-
the patient's stomach be empty. No food should be given for
tion tranquilization/sedation, which will help calm patients
12 to 18 hours before the examination, and water should be
before catheter placement and lower the induction and
withheld for 3 to 4 hours.
 inhalant anesthetic dose requirements, thereby improving
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■99
cardiovascular performance and easing recovery. Drugs
Pylorus
Cardia
that potentiate vomiting should be avoided in animals with
esophageal or gastric foreign bodies (e.g-, medetomidine or
 pure opioid agonists). The patient should be induced with an
injectable anesthetic (propofol is most commonly used, but
the combination of ketamine/diazepam is also acceptable)
Fundus
Antrum
and intubated quickly. The endotracheal tube cuff should be
tion of fluid during the procedure is avoided. The cuff should
Body
not be deflated until the patient is extubated. Anesthesia is
maintained with isoflurane or sevoflurane. Fluid support
should be given throughout the procedure as needed (e.g-)
a balanced, isotonic crystalloid fluid such as Normosol-R or
lactated Ringer's solution administered at 10 mL/kg/hr for
patients with normal oncotic pressure and plasma proteins
Figure 4-1 Five basic regions of the stomach. The most important
 as inhalant anesthetics can cause vasodilation and decreased
landmarks for endoscopy are the cardia, angulus, and pylorus.
venous return). Patients that are dehydrated should have
their deficits corrected as much as possible before induction
■ GASTROESOPHAGEAL JUNCTION
of anesthesia. Hypoproteinemic patients may benefit from
colloid administration. If there is a need to prevent or con-
Because the esophagus is essentially in a posterior plane
trol vomiting after the procedure, maropitant (Cerenia) or
compared with the stomach, the endoscope tip needs to be
dolasetron (Anzemet) are highly effective choices
deflected in the distal esophagus before it can be successfully
Minimal monitoring during upper GI endoscopy includes
advanced to the stomach. As the endoscope is advanced to
 an assessment of heart rate, respirations, and pulse oximetry,
the distal esophagus, the position and configuration of the
and ensuring that the degree of gastric distension does not
 gastroesophageal junction are noted (see Chapter 3). The
hinder respirations. Insufflation of the stomach is impor-
endoscope tip should be centered at the gastroesophageal
tant for ensuring a complete gastric exa mination. Prolonged
orifice. As the scope is advanced, the tip is deflected to the lefft
overinsufflation, however, can cause cardiovascular and res-
piratory compromise. Both the endoscopist and the anes-
deflection as the gastroesophageal junction is passed. In
thetist should monitor the degree and effects of insufflation
 most patients this is easily accomplished by rotation of the
throughout the procedure. If there is too much air in the
outer control knob counterclockwise for left deflection and
stomach, it can be easily and quickly decreased with the use
the inner control knob counterclockwise for upward deflec-
of suction through the endoscope. Capnometry, blood pres-
tion. In some patients, minimal or no upward deflection is
sure, and ECG can be useful for assessing and maintaining
needed. When the endoscope tip is properly directed, no
normal physiologic variables.
resistance should be encountered as the scope is advanced to
The patient should always be placed in left lateral recum-
the stomach. If the tip is advanced too far before deflection
bency for gastroscopy. With the animal in this position the
is begun, the endoscope is usually directed into the esopha-
antrum and pylorus are away from the tabletop. This sig-
 geal wall bordering against the posterior aspect of the lesser
nificantly improves the endoscopist's ability to completely
curvature of the stomach. If this occurs, the endoscope tip
examine and more readily traverse these structures with the
should be retracted and repositioned. Variable degrees ofair
 scope. When an animal is in right lateral recumbency, it is
insufflation of the distal esophagus may be necessary to aid
much more difficult to clearly identify and pass the endo-
visualization and positioning. In general, air is continually
scope around the incisura angularis and through the antrum
insufflated as the endoscope is advanced along the esopha-
to the pylorus.
 gus and through the gastroesophageal junction (keep finger-
tip on the air insufflation button).
■ PROCEDURE
 PROXIMAL STOMACH AND GASTRIC
All areas of the stomach should be examined completely
BODY
in every patient that undergoes gastroscopy. Therefore
the beginning endoscopist must learn to identify land-
The endoscope tip should be positioned just through the gas-
marks properly (Figure 4-1). Only after the endoscopist has
troesophageal junction so that the endoscopist can become
become familiar with luminal gastric anatomy do maneuver-
spatially oriented and obtain an overview of the gastric
ing the endoscope to obtain a retroflexed view of the cardia,
lumen. As the tip enters the stomach, the rugal folds, gen-
 advancing the scope around the incisura angularis to reach
 erally on the greater curvature of the body, are seen. Often
the antrum, and traversing the pyloric canal become consis-
the stomach walls are partially or completely collapsed, espe-
tent and effortless procedures.
cially in medium to large dogs or if only a small volume of
100■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
E
Figure 4-2 Appearance of the stomach at varying degrees of insufflation. A, The endoscope has just been advanced into a collapsed
stomach. The gastric walls are closed in around the tip of the endoscope, and it is not possible to examine the stomach. Before attempting
to advance farther, the endoscopist should first pause to insufflate air, which will begin to effectively distend the stomach for enhanced
visualization. B, With moderate gastric distension the rugal folds are clearly separated, and the mucosa can be thoroughly examined.
C, Additional insufflation has caused the rugal folds to become flattened. D, The stomach has been markedly distended with air. Rugal
folds are no longer evident, and submucosal vessels are clearly visualized. The endoscope is in a retroversion position, and the cardia and
gastroesophageal junction are observed at the top of the feld of view (12-o'clock position). Overdistension is unnecessary and should
be avoided. Some of the air should be suctioned off at this point as marked overdistension may cause cardiopulmonary compromise.
E, Appearance of the gastric body after most of the insufflated air has been suctioned. At the conclusion of any upper gastrointestinal
 endoscopy procedure, as much air as possible should be removed from the stomach to avoid awaking an animal with a bloated stomach.
air was insufflated during esophagoscopy. In this situation
point that the rugal folds begin to separate. This allows
the view of the stomach is quite limited, and it is necessary
for spatial orientation and the identification of most gross
to first pause and insufflate air before attempting to advance
abnormalities, such as an ulcer, a mass, or a foreign body.
the scope. Without sufficient gastric distension, the endos-
 In cats and small dogs the degree of insufflation can be
copist will have difficulty identifying the key landmarks and
achieved within seconds; in giant breeds, constant insufla-
performing a complete examination of the stomach.
tion may be necessary for 30 to 120 seconds before adequate
The ideal degree of gastric distension is a matter of judg-
distension is achieved. Later in the procedure it may be nec.
ment. Generally the distension should be at least to the
essary to distend the stomach to a greater degree so that
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy
■101
the entire gastric mucosal surface can be carefully examined
(Figure 4-2).
Occasionally, the stomach will not readily distend on air
insufflation. Causes may include a blocked air/water port
(located a the tip of the endoscope; always check before each
 procedure for patency), rapid reflux of air after it is insuf-
flated to the stomach (assistant should apply digital pressure
to the neck area to block air loss from the esophagus), or gas-
tric wall disease that limits its ability to stretch and distend
(uncommon occurrence).
 On the other hand, during insufflation the endoscopist
must be careful not to overdistend the stomach because this
may result in significant cardiopulmonary compromise.
When the stomach is overdistended, the rugal folds become
almost completely flattened or undetectable, superficial blood
vessels can sometimes be observed, and the mucosa may
A an si a ( ai as) q rde
increase significantly. The endoscopy assistant should be con-
stantly aware of changes in the character of the patient's respi-
rations and any increase in anterior abdominal distension. As
soon as possible a sufficient volume of air should be suctioned
off to moderately deflate the stomach. During most gastric
examinations, both air insuflation and suction are commonly
used to maintain a proper and safe balance of distension.
 Several observations should be made during the initial
examination of the stomach. These include the presence of
fluid or ingesta, the ease with which the gastric walls distend
when air is insufflated, and the gross appearance of the rugal
folds and mucosa.
 In most properly fasted patients the stomach is completely
empty. Occasionally a small pool offluid is present in the fun-
Hgure 4-3 The initial view as the endoscope is advanced from
dus or at the proximal aspect of the greater curvature. This
the esophagus into the stomach is of the greater curvature. As
is not considered abnormal. However, the presence of larger
described in the text and in Figure 4-2, the endoscopist first pauses
to insufflate air to begin distending the stomach. Ifthe endoscope
volumes of fluid, especially green or yellow bilious fluid, may
be abnormal. This finding suggests the possibility of reflux of
is advanced straight ahead without adequate insufflation, the
scope tip will engage the gastric wall and visualization will not be
intestinal fluid to the stomach, which may occur in animals
possible. A,Areas ofthe stomach not in view (shaded)as a standard
that have undergone enemas or that have a duodenogastric
forward-viewing endoscope is advanced into the proximal stomach.
 reflux disorder, an intestinal obstruction, or a primary gas-
A retroversion maneuver is required to completely view the cardia
tric motility disorder. Bile is irritating to the gastric mucosa.
and fundus. B, Corresponding endoscopic image with moderate air
insufflation. The rugal folds and greater curvature ofthe stomach
 Thus if significant bilious fluid is retained, the gastric mucosa
are clearly visualized, and this appearance is normal. The angulus
may appear reddened. Mucosal erythema should be noted,
fold is not in view.
but the patient should not be assumed to have gastritis. The
diagnosis of gastritis requires histologic evidence.
the accessory channel of one of my endoscopes, and it could
 If only a small amount of fluid is present, aspiration of
not be dislodged. Replacement of the accessory channel was
the fluid is probably unnecessary If, however, a pool of fluid
required.
obscures the rugal folds, aspiration should be done. The
As the scope is gradually advanced through the proximal
endoscope tip should be positioned as parallel to the gastric
 stomach, the endoscopist can thoroughly evaluate the gastric
wall as possible, and alternating suction and air insufflation
 body by using the control knobs to deflect the endoscope tip
should be used. When suction is applied with the endoscope
 or by rotating the insertion tube with the right hand (torque).
tip perpendicular to the mucosa, the tendency is to draw
With the patient in lef lateral recumbency and the endoscope
a portion of the mucosa into the accessory channel. This
held in a conventional manner (ie., buttons up), the endo-
delays aspiration and may ca use superficial mucosal lesions.
scopic view is predictable. The smooth lesser curvature is on
Great care should be taken when attempting to suction fluid
the endoscopist's right, and the rugal folds of the greater cur-
that is present in conjunction with particulate matter such
vature are seen below and to the left (Figure 4-3). Required
as food or foreign body debris. The accessory channel can
directional changes can usually be made with the left thumb
become obstructed if debris is suctioned along with fluid.
on the inner control knob and the right hand controlling
In one instance a fragment from a small pebble obstructed
rotation (torque) of the insertion tube. In most cases, only
102■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
angle ofillumination, a portion ofthe proximal stomach can-
not be seen as the scope enters the stomach (see Figure 4-3).
 For the cardia and fundus to be visualized the endoscope
must be retroflexed (termed retroversion or J maneuver) so
that it is possible to see the portion of the scope entering
through the cardia, as well as the surrounding area (Figure
4-4). The retroversion maneuver should be done either at
this point or after duodenoscopy. It can be advantageous to
proceed directly from the angulus to the pylorus and duo-
denum. The physiologic function of the pylorus is to close
in response to gastric distension. When gastric distension
has been kept to a minimum and the antrum is not actively
contracting, the pylorus is in a relatively lax state and the
endoscope can pass through it with only minimal resistance.
However, if a large volume of air has been insufflated and the
endoscope has been significantly manipulated in the stom-
ach, the pylorus may be tight and difficult to traverse. In my
 eo paa sr  d ea e i s ada
as the endoscopist becomes more experienced, it becomes
easier to maneuver through difficult areas. I usually prefer to
 perform at least a cursory examination of the entire stomach
before proceeding to the duodenum (ie., the retroversion
maneuver is performed before advancing to the pylorus). In
most cases I perform a final, more thorough gastric exami-
aossuonp e suds adiq aod pue o
 RETROVERSION (J MANEUVER)
 The importance of the retroversion maneuver is that it pro-
vides an en face view of the angulus and the cardia and fun-
Figure 4-4 A, Schematic diagram of retroversion maneuver
dus. On forward view after the endoscope is advanced from
(J maneuver). The endoscope tip has been deflected fully in the
the esophagus to the stomach, only a tangential view of the
upward direction. B, Corresponding endoscopic image. The 20-
angulus is obtained, and the cardia and part of the fundus
cm marker on the endoscope insertion tube is in view. There is
are not seen at all. Failure to thoroughly examine the proxi-
white foam in the gastric fundus.
 mal stomach may cause the endoscopist to miss lesions (e.g--
erosion, ulceration, or neoplasia) or a foreign body located
minor directional changes are needed to provide a panoramic
in the cardia or fundus.
view. The endoscope is advanced along the greater curvature
To provide an en face view of the angulus, the endosco-
until the angulus is identifed. The angulus appears as a large
pist must initiate the retroversion maneuver at a point proxi-
fold that extends from the lesser curvature. The angulus is an
 mal to or opposite the angulus (see Figures 4-24, 4-25, and
important landmark that separates the body of the stomach
4-26). The scope is advanced along the greater curvature to
from the antrum. Once the angulus is identifed, the lesser
the level of the distal body. The inner control knob is turned
 curvature can be easily differentiated from the greater cur-
 counterclockwise with the left thumb, and as the endoscope
vature of the stomach. With the patient in left lateral recum-
is gradually advanced, the angulus can be seen en face. Varia-
 bency, the antrum is directed up or away from the tabletop.
tions of normal appearance may be present (see Figures 4- 18
As viewed from the gastric body, the angulus and entrance to
through 4-32). The endoscope tip is then deflected upward
the antrum usually appear as a circular or crescent-shaped
 as far as possible (full counterclockwise rotation of the inner
orifice that is smaller than the distended body of the stom-
control knob) as the scope is advanced a little farther with
ach (see Figures 4-18, D; 4-19, B; and 4-41). The endoscopist
the right hand. This maneuver generally requires at least
must be able to maneuver around the angulus to advance the
180 degrees of tip deflection. Most newer endoscopes are
endoscope to the antrum, pylorus, and duodenum.
Once the angulus and proximal antrum are visualized,
tion provides a retroflexed view of the endoscope as it enters
the endoscopist has the option of advancing directly through
the stomach through the cardia (see Figure 4-4). Pulling the
the pyloric canal to the duodenum or completing the gastric
 endoscope back once this view is attained draws the endo-
examination. The cardia and fundus have not yet been com-
 scope tip closer to the cardia (Figure 4-5 and see Figure 4-25).
pletely evaluated. Depending on the particular endoscope's
A circumferential examination of the proximal stomach is
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
103
A
Figure 4-5 For a close-up view ofthe fundus and gastroesophageal
junction, the insertion tube has been rotated 180 degrees to the left
and retracted toward the esophagus.
completed by rotation of the insertion tube (torque) or by
turning the outer control knob in each direction for lateral
 deflection. Air insufflation is usually necessary to keep the
proximal stomach dilated. If there is insufficient distension,
the stomach walls will collapse around the endoscope and it
will not be in view. During most ofthe examination the right
hand is kept on the insertion tube to keep the tube in place
with respect to forward and backward motion.
In cats the retroversion maneuver is started when the
endoscope tip is in the midbody area (see Figure 4-43).
The tip is deflcted upward as the endoscope is advanced.
 Because the working area is smaller than in most dogs, an en
face view of the angulus similar to what is seen in dogs is not
B
achieved as often in cats.
Figure 4-6 A, Effect of forward force by the endoscope as it
Retroversion should be reversed gradually so that the
pushes against the flexible greater curvature wall. The endoscope
tip may not move forward in response to advancement of the
mucosa can be further inspected. The endoscopist can
insertion tube because the wall stretch accommodates some of its
accomplish this by moving the deflection controls to a neu-
length. B, The point of paradoxic motion has been passed, and the
tral position while the instrument tip is still in the proximal
endoscope tip is being advanced to the pylorus.
stomach. Alternatively, the tip can be advanced to the proxi-
mal antrum while it is still in the partially retroflexed con-
insertion tube as it passes along the greater curvature. As the
figuration. This provides an additional view of the proximal
tip of the endoscope is advanced toward the antrum and pylo-
stomach and lesser curvature. When the angulus comes into
rus, the insertion tube invariably comes to lie along the greater
view, the deflection knobs are returned to a neutral position.
curvature. The stomach can stretch considerably to accom-
The antrum and pylorus should then be in view.
modate intraluminal forces, and much of the forward force
 generated by the advancerment of the scope is absorbed by the
■ PARADOXIC MOTION AND
greater curvature so that the curvature is pushed caudally in
INADVERTENT RETROVERSION
the abdomen. A loop may form against the greater curvature
(Figure 4-6). Endoscopically it may appear that as the inser-
Once the endoscopist has mastered a few basic techniques,
tion tube is advanced farther, the instrument tip is not moving
the body and antrum can be quickly traversed in most cats
 in response or is actuall moving away from the pylorus; this
and small- and medium-sized dogs. Occasionally, however,
is termed paradoxic motion. Loop formation can occur readily,
in some medium- and large-sized dogs, advancing the endo-
especially with newer, more flexible endoscopes and longer
scope to the antral canal and pylorus can be quite diffcult.
narrow-diameter instruments, as well as when the stom-
Many beginning endoscopists often feel “lost" as they try to
 ach contains a large volume of air. To reach the pylorus, the
maneuver a scope in the stomach of a large dog. The most
endoscopist should continue to advance the endoscope until
bothersome occurrence is the formation of a loop in the
the greater curvature loop is fully formed and the tip begins
104 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
to move forward again (see Figure 4-6, B). Further upward
"swings by” the angulus and curves back into the gastric body
deflection of the tip using the leff thumb on the inner control
as the endoscopist pushes it forward, despite efforts to control
knob may be necessary. There will be mild resistance in some
tip direction with the control knobs (Figure 4-7); this is called
cases as the endoscope is advanced along the greater curva-
inadvertent retroversion. In this situation the insertion tube
ture, and the endoscopist should continue to push through
usually *hugs" a considerable length of the wall of the greater
this area while making tip direction changes, as needed, to
curvature (see Figure 4-7, B). The shape of the wall curvature
keep the scope tip in line for passage into the antral canal.
may then be more in control of the direction of advance than
Occasionally, if the gastric wall is considerably stretched,
is the endoscopist, who is only able to direct the short distal
getting the endoscope into position to advance from the
tip with the control knobs. This problem is best solved if the
gastric body to the antrum may seem quite diffcult. Rather
 endoscopist withdraws the endoscope tip to an area proximal
than advancing directly into the antrum, the tip of the scope
to but still in view (forward view) of the angulus and antral
canal, suctions much of the luminal air, and then readvances
the scope as close to the lesser curvature and angulus as pos-
sible. If this does not rectify the situation, a highly effective
maneuver is to then rotate the patient from left lateral to dorsal
recumbency to change the configuration ofthe stomach and the
approach angle to the antrum.This usually immediately makes
it much easier to advance the endoscope directly into the antral
canal. This position change maneuver can save considerable
time when dealing with inadvertent retroversion.
Use of both tip directional changes by using the con-
trol knobs and simultaneous torque on the insertion tube
with the right hand provides the best means for advancing
the endoscope to the antral canal. This does not have to be
done as one continuous motion. In some cases, it is best to
advance the scope gradually, then stop to reorient the tip,
then advance again, then continue with the same pattern.
A
(The same maneuvering technique is used to traverse the
pylorus in difficult cases.) Once the endoscopist becomes
more adept at the maneuver, the advance can be made more
quickly. The key point is that both control knobs and torque
 are important maneuvering components in this situation.
For torque the right hand grasps the insertion tube close to
the patient's mouth and applies a twisting motion.
It may still take several attempts before the antrum and pylo-
rus are successfully reached. The beginning endoscopist needs
to maintain patience while working through these problem
BOX 4-1
Maneuvering Tips for Overcoming Inadvertent
Retroversion in the Stomach
If loop formation continues to occur, retract the endo-
scope to the lower gastric body.
Suction air from the stomach if it is too distended.
B
Use both tip directional changes (by manipulating the
Figure 4-7 A, Effect of forward force by the endoscope as it pushes
control knobs) and rotation (torque) of the insertion tube
against the greater curvature wall (same as Figure 4-6, A). The
to provide optimal maneuverability when advancing the
endoscope tip may not move forward in response to advancement
endoscope
of the insertion tube because the wall stretch accommodates some of
If advancement of the endoscope into the antral canal
its length. B, Excessive wall stretch causes inadvertent retroversion 
remains difficult, rotate the patient from left lateral to
as the endoscope is advanced. In this situation the endoscope should
dorsal recumbency to alter the approach angle to the
be repositioned to a forward view of the angulus, and air should
antrum.
be suctioned before another attempt is made to advance the scope
toward the antrum.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy· 105
cases. With experience the maneuvers become routine. Impor-
the exact location of the pyloric opening may be diffcult to
 tant maneuvering steps are summarized in Box 4-1.
identify because of an overlapping fold of the pyloric ring or
because the opening is obscured by fluid.
 The cardinal rule in successfully advancing the endoscope
ANTRUM
through the pylorus is to keep the pylorus in the center of
The antrum differs from the body of the stomach in that it
the endoscopic field. Because the pyloric position commonly
 has no rugal folds. Furthermore, peristaltic contractions are
 changes slightly every time the patient breathes, small adjust-
 sometimes observed in the antrum but not in the gastric body.
 ments of the up/down deflection knob and minor changes
To advance the scope from the distal body to the antrum,
in insertion tube rotation are required as the endoscope tip
upward deflection (counterclockwise rotation of the inner
is gradually advanced toward the pylorus. The endoscopist
deflection knob) is applied as the instrument tip is passed
makes these adjustments using the left thumb to turn the
along the distal greater curvature. This usually reveals a view
inner control knob and the right hand to rotate the insertion
 of the angulus. From this position the endoscopist can appre-
tube or to deflect the outer deflection knob. When a shorter
ciate the appearance of two separate “tunnels," one on each
e Auo saop paaiq saie aos u pasn si adossopua (us-oon)
side of the angulus (see Figure 4-23, A). The upper area is the
little of the insertion tube length is outside the dog's mouth at
 gastric body—the first area viewed is the lesser curvature as
this point. As described in detail in Chapter 2, the ideal endo-
it extends beyond the angulusthe more dependent tunnel
scope length for medium to large breed dogs is 140 cm because
is the antrum. From this location the retroversion maneuver
there will always be sufficient length to enter the duodenum
can be performed, or the endoscope can be advanced to the
with this length scope, no matter how large the dog. It must
antrum. As previously discussed, the endoscopist may elect
be remembered that when the pyloric area is being examined,
to complete a thorough examination of the cardia and fun-
slow, gradual forces applied to the endoscope tip are generally
dus at this time or may proceed directly to the duodenum
with the intention of examining the proximal stomach later.
In many canine patients the endoscope tip can be passed
   s q     s 
through the pyloric ring without diffculty. This is especially
smooth and rapid transition from the gastric body into the
true when the pyloric canal is open to any degree. In some
 antrum. This is described in the *Feline Gastroscopy Special
cases the endoscope can be advanced from the mouth to the
Considerations" section.
duodenum in as little as 30 seconds. Usually what has hap-
Antral peristaltic waves may be observed when the endo-
pened is that the endoscope is advanced through the stom-
scope is in the mid to distal gastric body. These are seen as
ach at a uniform rate to the angulus, and as the antrum is
round, symmetrical rings that form in the proximal antrum
viewed, the pylorus can be clearly identified and is open.
and sweep toward the pylorus as a rolling wave (see Figure
Because minimal air insufflation and manipulation of the
4-26). The contractions are generally not observed in cats
stomach have occurred, the pylorus remains open and can
unless metoclopramide or cisapride has been administered.
be readily traversed. In this situation, it may be best to per-
When present, they usually occur at a frequency ofthree to four
form duodenoscopy and biopsies and to examine the fundus
contractions per minute. Occasionally the endoscopist may
 and cardia ofthe stomach later. This approach is more com-
sod radod u d adosua a daa on i i pu
 mon when an animal is suspected of having a primary small
in the distal antrum to facilitate smooth passage through the
intestinal disorder rather than a gastric disorder.
pylorus when antral contractions are occurring. The pylorus is
In some cases the pylorus may be closed and may offer sig-
 often persistently closed during periods of antral contractions.
nificant resistance when the endoscopist tries to advance the
Usually the antrum has no folds. Refluxed duodenal bile
 scope into the duodenum. This may represent normal pyloric
may be present, and in some cases active reflux can be observed
 closure, or it may be an indication of disease, such as pyloric
during the procedure. The antrum should be evaluated care-
 mucosal hypertrophy, an extrinsic mass, or another disorder.
fully for the presence of mucosal hypertrophy or folds that
Based on experience, the endoscopist must judge how hard to
may result from chronic inflammatory diseases or chronic
push the tip of the scope against the pyloric ring. If consider-
gastric hypertrophy, polyps, ulcerations, and masses. When
 able resistance is encountered and the endoscope tip can be
present, gastric neoplasia commonly involves the antrum and
 only slightly advanced into the pylorus, it may not be possible
lesser curvature of the body. In dogs, adenocarcinoma is the
to enter the duodenum. In my experience with dogs, closure
 most common malignant tumor of the stomach. Lymphosar
of the pylorus strongly suggests a diagnosis of pyloric muco-
 coma is the most common gastric malignancy in cats.
 sal hypertrophy. In Siamese, Burmese, and Tonkinese cats the
 pyloric canal tends to be quite narrow, but in most cases the
■ PYLORUS
duodenum can still be entered when a small-diameter endo-
 scope is used (7.8 mm or less is preferred in small cats). Once
In most animals the pylorus can be easily identified as the
 adequate experience and manual dexterity are developed, the
endoscope is advanced through the antrum. Variable degrees
endoscopist can usually recognize a situation in which it is
of dilation of the pyloric canal may be observed. In some
highly unlikely that the pylorus can be traversed. It is signifi-
cases the pylorus is persistently closed, and occasionally
 cantly more diffcult to advance an endoscope greater than
106 ■PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
9 mm in diameter through the pylorus of some cats. It is best
the inner large control and right hand on the outer smaller
not to apply excessive force in attempting to enter the duode-
control). This way, more precise tip directional changes can
num, as it is possible to perforate the pyloric area.
be made when one is trying to advance the scope into a tight,
The most important rule in negotiating a spastic or per-
 moving pyloric orifice. However, when both hands are on
sistently closed pylorus is to keep the pyloric ring in the cen-
the control knobs, the endoscope tip will tend to slip back
ter of the endoscopic field as the endoscope tip is advanced.
away from the pylorus. It is important to maintain forward
The pattern of motion of the pylorus as the animal breathes
 pressure. This can be accomplished if the endoscopist turns
should be carefully noted. It may be beneficial to leave the
sideways and uses the hip to hold the insertion tube in place
 endoscope tip stationary in the distal antrum for a minute
and prevent it from backing away from the pylorus. Alterna-
or two while the pylorus is studied. Then as the endoscope
tively, an assistant can grasp the insertion tube and advance
tip is gradually advanced, it should be kept in line with the
 or retract it, following directions from the endoscopist.
 most common location of the pylorus. Gentle but constant
forward pressure should be maintained. In small patients
Traversing the Pyloric Canal
the pressure is applied with the right hand as it advances
the insertion tube. Air insufflation is continued much of the
A distinct sensation is often felt as the pylorus relaxes and
time during approach and passage through the pyloric ori-
 allows the endoscope to enter the duodenum. Recognizing
fice, and monitoring is continued so that the gastric body
this sensation is important because the endoscopic view is
does not become overdistended.
obscured by a reddish hue as the tip advances through a com-
pacted area. Because of the sharp angle between the pylorus
Length for Passing through the Pylorus
and duodenum, it is necessary to make a directional change
as soon as the pylorus is passed so that the endoscope tip falls
Short Scope
into the duodenal canal. If the directional change is not made
 Short scope (approximately 100-cm insertion tube length):
the endoscope tip can become wedged against the wall of the
Several maneuvers may help provide sufficient insertion
 proximal duodenum (Figure 4-8). Turning both control knobs
tube length for examination of the proximal duodenum in
 clockwise to deflect the endoscope tip in a downward and right
some larger dogs when a short GI endoscope is being used.
direction facilitates advancement to the proximal duodenum
When the proximal end of the insertion tube has already
 in most dogs and cats. Once there, a view of the duodenal canal
been advanced through the mouth in large dogs, the endos-
is obtained by turning the inner control knob counterclock-
copist places both hands on the endoscope control housing
wise. (This technique is described in detail in Chapter 5.)
and applies pressure by leaning in toward the patient. At this
Occasionally the opening of the pyloric canal is difficult
to identify, usually because pooled fluid, a fold, or a mucosal
position. Occasionally the entire control housing is in the
rosette formation is obscuring the opening of the canal or the
dog's mouth before the endoscope tip reaches the duode-
pyloric canal is at an obtuse angle in relation to the antrum.
 num. When both hands are on the control housing, the right
In the latter instance a forward edge of the canal may be
 hand makes necessary directional changes by adjusting the
 detectable, but it is quite diffcult to turn the endoscope tip
outer control knob, while the left thumb maneuvers the inner
sharply enough to enter the canal (see Figure 4-37). In these
control knob. If there is insufficient scope length on the ini-
occasional instances it is sometimes beneficial to rotate the
tial approach to the pylorus, deflating the stomach as much
patient from left lateral to dorsal recumbency. The change in
as possible while still being able to visualize the antral canal
 position may alter the antral-pyloric configuration enough
may bring the pylorus close enough that it can be traversed.
that the canal can be identified and then traversed. Once
the endoscope is advanced to the duodenum, the patient is
Longer Scope
returned to lateral recumbency. (Various pyloric configura-
 Longer scope (approximately 140-cm insertion tube length):
tions are shown in the “Atlas for Entering the Pylorus;" see
 The newer, longer veterinary pediatric endoscopes have
Figures 4-47 through 4-50.)
insertion tube lengths ranging from 140 to 150 cm. These
 Even when al proper steps are taken, advancing the endo-
insertion tubes provide extra length for advancing the scope
scope through the pylorus can still be difficult in some patients.
to the duodenum in large dogs (see Chapters 2 and 5). With
The most commonly encountered problem is deflection of
this extra length there is usually still a considerable inser
the endoscope tip away from the pyloric canal as a result of
tion tube length (20 to 50 cm) outside the patient's mouth
 misdirection against a tightly closed pylorus. The endoscopist
when the pylorus is reached. If the pylorus is tight and more
feels considerable resistance as the scope is moved into the
diffcult to traverse, precise endoscope tip control is offen
 pyloric orifice, and it is also diffcult to discern the location
required for the scope to pass through the pylorus. The
of the orifice because of tight contact with the wall. Then as
endoscopist may find it difficult to do this with one hand
the tip is deflected away from the orifice, the scope suddenly
on the control housing and the other on the insertion tube,
advances easily. The shaft of the insertion tube can usually
advancing and retracting the scope. It is sometimes best to use
 be seen as the endoscope becomes retroflexed (Figure 4-9).
 both hands on the control knobs (left thumb manipulating
During subsequent attempts, every effort should be made
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 107
Hgure 4-9 Retroversion at the antral-pyloric junction. This occurs
when the endoscope tip is not precisely aligned to enter the pylorus.
to align the endoscope tip properly with the pyloric canal. If
the stomach is overinflated, air should be suctioned. Occa-
sionally it may help to lock the lateral deflection knob (outer
knob) in place, but I usually prefer to maintain control of the
endoscope tip by leaving the knobs free to move. This is espe-
cially important as the pyloric sphincter is passed.
 An additional step that can be tried is to pass the biopsy
instrument blindly through the pylorus and then use it as
a guidewire over which the endoscope can be passed to the
duodenum (see Figure 4-38). However, in some cases, it
is diffcult to pass the biopsy instrument through the tight
angle between the pylorus and duodenum and far enough
B
 into the proximal duodenum to make this maneuver effec-
tive. In addition, when this maneuver is used, the endos-
copist must be careful not to cause undue damage to the
duodenal mucosa as the scope is advanced over the guide-
wire. Sometimes as the endoscope is advanced over the
biopsy instrument, the force generated by the scope pushes
the tip of the biopsy instrument more deeply into the duode-
nal mucosa. Then the instrument creates troughs along the
duodenum as it is advanced farther. In this situation, once
the scope begins to pass through the pylorus, the best way to
prevent damage is to retract the biopsy instrument simulta-
neously and gradually as the scope is advanced. By the time
the endoscope is in the duodenal canal, the biopsy instru-
 ment should be fully retracted inside the tip of the scope.
Traversing a narrow pylorus can be diffcult and frus-
trating. In this situation the endoscopist should maintain
patience and maneuver the endoscope methodically rather
C
than abruptly and forcefully.
Figure 4-8 A,Advance ofthe endoscope through the pylorus. B, The
endoscope tip is wedged against the wall of the most proximal aspect
 FELINE GASTROSCOPY: SPECIAL
 of the duodenum. C,A directional change is required to obtain a view
 of the duodenal lumen.
CONSIDERATIONS
In cats, several special factors must be considered when the
endoscope is maneuvered through the gastric body and
 pylorus. One of the challenges in cats, because of the small
108 ■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
size of the stomach and the sometimes acute angle of the
deflated. Once the patient is stabilized, the procedure can
junction between the body and the antrum, is to smoothly
be resumed. It is rarely necessary for an endoscopist who is
advance the endoscope around the angulus fold. It may be
proficient in gastroscopy and duodenoscopy in cats to cancel
 more diffcult to do that than to pass through the pylorus in
 a procedure because of transient complications. The cardi-
some cases. The antrum can be easily entered in one of two
nal rule is to recognize complications at their outset and to
ways. It is often helpful to rotate (torque) the insertion tube
work as efficiently as possible to minimize procedure time in
to the right when the endoscope tip is in the distal body, just
patients with a greater-than-normal anesthetic risk.
 after the scope tip is passed beyond the angulus fold. Once
the insertion tube is rotated, it is advanced and the tip is
■ GASTRIC BIOPSY TECHNIQUES
simultaneously deflected upward (i.e., the inner control knob
is turned counterclockwise). This reveals a view of both the
Gastroscopy is usually used to obtain biopsy samples. Sam-
 antrum and pylorus. In some cats the crescent-shaped angu-
ples should be obtained regardless of whether gross abnor-
lus is not located in the typical upward position (i.e., away
malities are present. The purpose of endoscopic biopsy is to
from the tabletop). If the angulus is in a deviated position,
confirm the nature of a lesion and to exclude other diseases
the tip of the endoscope should be advanced to a position
that have a similar endoscopic appearance. Many patients
just beyond the angulus, and the control knobs should be
with a histologic diagnosis of mild to moderate gastritis have
used as indicated by the direction ofthe antral canal to point
no gross gastric mucosal lesions, whereas patients with gas-
the tip in the proper direction. The insertion tube should
tric motility disorders may have mucosal erythema but no
be advanced simultaneously as the tip direction is adjusted.
histologic abnormalities. Gastric biopsy with endoscopic
Applying torque to the insertion tube is often quite effective
forceps is a very safe procedure.
Biopsy forceps with serrated edges or bayonet-type instru-
Because considerable force may be generated against the
ments usually obtain good-quality mucosal biopsy samples.
opening of the canal or at the angle of the pyloroduodenal
Commonly the submucosa is also sampled. Sample size is
junction as the endoscope is being advanced through a rela-
 often smaller when straight-edge forceps are used (see Chap-
tively narrow area, it is often necessary for the endoscopy
 ter 8 for additional details on instrumentation and biopsy
assistant to hold the patient's body stationary to prevent it
techniques). An adequate number of biopsy specimens must
from being pushed along the table by the endoscope. Plac-
be taken to establish whether the stomach is normal. The
ing a hand behind the patient's head is usually sufficient. In
best area to obtain biopsy samples is the rugal folds of the
addition, the endoscope can sometimes be advanced even if
gastric body. These elevated areas are easy to grasp with the
 the tip cannot be lined up directly with the pylorus. In these 
forceps, and adequate size samples for histologic evaluation
instances, as the endoscope tip contacts a peripyloric wall,
are routinely obtained (Figure 4-11).
it often deflects into and through the canal in response to
The entire biopsy procedure can be performed by the
stretching of the orifice area by the advance of the insertion
endoscopist. Alternatively an assistant can manipulate
tube. The amount of force that should be applied is a mat-
the biopsy instrument for the endoscopist. Gastric biopsy
ter of judgment and experience. Although a 9-mm-diameter
 samples are usually obtained after duodenoscopy has been
endoscope can be passed through the pylorus of most cats,
completed. Once the entire stomach has been thoroughly
it is often easier to advance smaller scopes (e.g, 7.8 mm to
examined, biopsy sites are selected. If the stomach is grossly
 8.6 mm in diameter). These smaller endoscopes can more
normal, six to eight samples are obtained from various areas
routinely be advanced to the duodenum in cats weighing
of the gastric body and fundus. Several samples are also
less than 2.25 kg (5 1b). The endoscope configuration as the
obtained from the antrum. However, because the antrum
scope is advanced toward the antrum and pylorus of a cat is
 generally has no folds and the mucosa tends not to separate
demonstrated in Figure 4- 10.
as easily, it is more difficult to obtain adequate samples from
Great care must be exercised in monitoring cardiopul-
this area. The stomach should not be overinflated during the
monary status during passage of the endoscope through
 biopsy procedure. If the rugal folds are markedly decreased
the pylorus, especially in small cats and in any cat in which
in size or are completely flattened as a result of overinflation,
the pylorus seems narrow and particularly difficult to tra-
the biopsy samples obtained are likely to be quite small and.
verse. The pylorus of the cat is unique in that it is narrow
thus are more likely to be lost during processing. Meaning-
 and has a high constant resistance. In response to stretching
ful histologic evaluation is also more diffcult when small
 and displacement of the gastric body and the pylorus, tran-
tissue samples are examined. The most common errors
sient bradycardia secondary to vagal stimulation may occur.
 made in obtaining gastric biopsy samples are summarized in
Significant respiratory depression also occurs occasionally.
Table 4-1.
More commonly, the respiratory rate increases when mod-
The biopsy forceps are extended beyond the endoscope
erate force is required to advance the endoscope through the
tip and advanced to the area to be sampled (Figure 4-12).
pylorus. If cardiopulmonary status is significantly compro-
The endoscopist maintains control of endoscope tip direc-
 mised, the endoscope should be withdrawn to the proximal
tion using the lef thumb on the inner control knob or on
stomach or esophagus and the stomach should be completely
both controls if the thumb is long enough. When the biopsy
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 109
D
Figure 4-10 Endoscope position and configuration during routine gastroscopy in a cat (see also Figures 4-41 and 4-42 and Figures 4-45
and 4-46 [antrum and pylorus]). Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) radiographs with the endoscope tip situated in the midgastric body. The
mucosa. Lateral (C) and ventrodorsal (D) radiographs with the endoscope tip positioned in the antral pylorus. In both views the incisura 
angulus fold can be seen as a distinct band of tissue (just to the right of the endoscope tip). Note the length of endoscope that is in contact
with the greater curvature of the stomach. In this position any advance of the endoscope tip is a result of force generated by the endoscopist
si aosoua auo di au aen iaean an ue sapis aq uoasn ai s aeai iaiea aun isue aq uasu aui uusnd
Buuassap an un uaas ae saqnq sea iousip omi maia ieaiel an un aonp au ou uau pue ayo soad an on aso paeae
duodenum (center of the feld of view).
B
 e 'ie aie siy [enu auii saldues uieiqo oi eaie isaq aui ae siog lean juaunoid 'eou Aissoa si yoeois at jn ' llt ani
 should be suctioned so that the folds become more prominent and therefore easier to grasp. B, Advance of biopsy forceps onto a rugal fold.
110 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
instrument is close to the sampling site, it is opened and
endoscope tip, and then a firm steady tug should be applied
advanced firmly into the tissue. The stomach wall is usually
to tear a tissue sample free. Once the sample is freed, the
pushed away to some degree as the instrument is advanced
 narrow area of gastric wall that was drawn up quickly returns
against the tissue. Once resistance to movement is met, the
to its normal position. The biopsy instrument is removed
forceps are closed frmly. If an assistant is manipulating
from the endoscope as the scope remains in position in the
the forceps, the endoscopist should use simple, agreed-on
stomach. Biopsy-related mucosal hemorrhaging is usually
directions such as “open” and “close." As the forceps are
minimal (Figure 4-13). When gastritis or some other disor-
withdrawn in the closed position, the mucosa that has been
der causing mucosal damage (e.g., bile retention) is present,
 grasped is drawn up to the objective lens. A tissue sample is
biopsy sample size and mucosal hemorrhage are often a little
then torn off as the forceps are withdrawn into the accessory
greater than normal.
channel (see Figure 4-12). The endoscopist learns byexperi-
It is usually preferable to advance the forceps directly into
ence the correct degree of force to apply on the biopsy instru.
the mucosal folds at a 45- to 90-degree angle rather than to
ment to remove a quality tissue sample. It is best not to tease
make a parallel approach in which the forceps tend to slide
a sample free gently or to tear a sample abruptly or force-
 along the mucosal wall rather than make a firm tisue pur-
fully away once mucosal contact is made with the accessory
 chase. This may not be possible in some small patients with
channel. These actions often result in a distorted or damaged
 a narrow lumen where it may be diffcult to turn the endo-
sample. Rather, the biopsy forceps should be pulled to the
scope tip to a precise degree so that the biopsy forceps can
be directed into a small lesion (Figure 4-14). In this situa-
Table 4-1 Most Common Errors in Attempting
 quite effective for obtaining an adequate sample. Removing
to Obtain Gastric Biopsy Samples
air from the lumen to create more of a fold effect may also
be helpful. If a specific lesion is to be sampled, the endoscope
should be maneuvered into position before a biopsy attempt
Error
Reason
is made. Samples can be obtained from the prominent angu-
Overdistending the stomach Rugal folds are too flat, which
lus if difficulty is encountered in sampling other areas.
with air
makes it more difficult to obtain
Biopsy samples of erosive or ulcerative lesions should be
adequate tissue purchase.
obtained at the upper wall where the lesion merges with nor-
 Attempting to obtain a
Normally the antrum has no folds;
mal-appearing mucosa. The endoscopist must exercise cau-
majority of the samples
it is difficult to obtain adequate-
tion when maneuvering around the pit of an ulcer because of
from the antrum rather
 size samples unless a raised fold
concern about causing perforation. Biopsy samples of super-
than the gastric body
 or lesion is present.
ficial erosions can be obtained without concern.
Using straight-edge biopsy
Samples, although adequate in
Masses should be sampled as deeply as possible. Lympho-
forceps rather than
 somme cases, are often smaller
sarcoma and benign gastric polyps can be readily diagnosed
serrated-edge or bayonet-
when straight-edge forceps are
on biopsy, but adenocarcinoma and other neoplastic masses
type biopsy forceps
used.
Failing to bury the forceps 
often must be sampled deeply to obtain diagnostic tissue.
Only superficial samples are 
obtained and histologic lesions
Superficial biopsy attempts may onlyretrieve fibrous or gran-
 deeply enough into the
ulomatous tissue. Because it is not possible to obtain deep
tissue
may be missed.
biopsy samples from a firm mass with standard endoscopy
A
Figure 4-12 Gastric biopsy technique. A, A rugal fold has been grasped and is being drawn up toward the objective lens. B, The sampled
area quickly returns to its normal position as soon as the biopsy sample is torn free. Note the hemorrhage at the biopsy site (center ofeld).
CHAPTER4Gastroscopy
■111
C
Figure 4-13 Appearance of the mucosa and the normal amount of hemorrhage that can routinely be expected after endoscopic forceps
 sampling of a rugal fold. A, A small area of hemorrhage is usually evident immediately after a mucosal sample is obtained and the area
 sampled falls away from the endoscope back to its normal position. B, At 30 seconds after sampling (same patient but a different site),
the degree of hemorrhage in most patients is similar to what is shown here. C, Mucosal appearance immediately after a deeper sample is
obtained.
A
Figure 4-14 Biopsy of a focal gastric erosion in a cat. A, Forward view of the distal gastric body with two small erosive lesions. The angulus
is at the upper right. B, The endoscope tip could not be positioned at a 45- to 90-degree angle to the lesions. Obtaining biopsy samples from
as su ui em au ot laeied st adosoua au uaum esou au ue apis ot puat sdaiy aui asesaq any aq ues uoisago adii s
serrated-edge forceps were used to obtain samples.
112·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 4-15 The biopsy sample is gently removed with a small-
Hgure 4-16 Size of a typical gastric biopsy sample obtained with
gauge needle.
endoscopic forceps.
forceps on any one attempt, the endoscopist should sample
the same site several times, each time advancing the forceps a
little deeper. Closure of the forceps should not be too abrupt
or forceful. Brusque closure may cause the forceps cups to
shear off a frm lesion without obtaining a specimen. On
closing the forceps, an experienced endoscopist or biopsy
assistant can usually appreciate that a lesion is unusually
frm or hard. This tactile perception is often associated with
malignancy. Usually, 10 to 20 biopsy samples are obtained
when neoplasia is considered a likely diagnostic possibility so
that the pathologist has adequate tissue to examine. A skilled
endoscopist can accurately identify the site that is most likely
to yield a positive biopsy result.
-ds io paiedaid pue papueq aq ues sadues Asdo
Hgure 4-17 Biopsy samples gently wrapped in moistened lens
ment to the laboratory in several ways (see Chapter 8 for a
paper before submersion in formalin. Currently specially designed
detailed discussion of sample handling). I prefer to lift sam-
ples out of the forceps cups with a 22- to 25-gauge needle
for the submission of endoscopic biopsy specimens (see Chapter 8
and gently place them on formalin- or saline-moistened lens
and Figure 8-8 for more information).
 paper (Figure 4-15) or into a cassette supplied by the labora-
tory. A typical biopsy sample size is shown in Figure 4-16.
After all samples from a particular organ area are obtained,
ue p nuo aeedas e pue sades bueadde-eu
the thoroughly moistened paper is folded in several different
area that appears significantly abnormal). This way, the his-
 directions to form a packet that is then submerged in a jar
tologic interpretation can be matched with what the endos-
of 10% formalin solution (Figure 4-17). Filter paper, small
copist noted grossly.
cassettes, or small sections of cucumber can also be used for
affixing samples (see Chapter 8). The samples should not be
■ CYTOLOGY
allowed to dry on the paper material because they may then
adhere tightly to the paper and subsequently be damaged
It is sometimes useful to obtain cells from the surface of a
when they are removed at the histopathology laboratory. I
lesion for cytologic study. The endoscopist can accomplish
 do not attempt to orient the specimen in any way because
this with a sheathed cytology brush or can make impression
attempts to rearrange the specimen may damage the tissue.
smears from a biopsy sample. A tentative diagnosis of gastric
 The number of tissue samples obtained from each organ area
lymphosarcoma can often be made based on cytologic anal-
should be indicated on the histopathology request form so
ysis. A new cytology brush should be used for each proce-
-du, A mo sou unn os n i
dure and then discarded because this instrument is difficult
pet" samples have been submitted. Biopsy samples obtained.
to clean adequately. If a cytology brush is reused, malignant
from each area (e.g-, stomach, duodenum, ileum, and colon)
cells from one patient may be transferred to the cytologic
 are placed in separate containers. If dissimilar areas or lesions
 sample of another animal. (See Chapter 8 for a more detailed
in the stomach or other area are sampled, a separate biopsy
 description of the clinical utility of cytology in endoscopic
jar should be used for each lesion (e.g-, one container for
procedures.)
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy
■113
■ COMPLICATIONS OF GASTROSCOPY
possible, and if resistance is too great (e.g-, a narrow pyloric
canal in a small cat along with the use of a larger diameter
 Complications related to gastroscopy are uncommon. In cats
endoscope), know when to back off (see Figure 4-50). Occa-
and small dogs, retching occasionally occurs as a result of
sionally, even a very talented and experienced endoscopist
endoscope manipulation in the pyloric area. In this situation,
encounters a pyloric canal that cannot be safely traversed.
 air should be suctioned from the stomach, and the endoscope
Good technique and the use of proper instrument size can
 should be withdrawn to the distal esophagus. In some cases,
minimize the occurrence of complications.
forceful retching results in transient prolapse of a portion of
Cardiac and pulmonary complications can result from
the stomach into the esophagus. An attempt should be made
anesthesia-related problems or prolonged overdistension
to suction any fluid that is forced into the esophagus. Once
of the stomach with air. Gaseous distension of the stomach
the retching subsides, the examination can be resumed.
can cause hypotension and bradycardia, which result from
Gastric perforation by an endoscope can occur but is
interference with venous return to the right heart, vasovagal
extremely uncommon. To my knowledge, most reported
stimulation, and compromise of respiratory muscles. Care-
cases of gastric perforation have occurred at the hands of
ful monitoring during the procedure and avoiding excessive
experienced operators and have been directly related to
 gastric distension can prevent the majority of complications.
excessive force applied during attempts to advance the scope
The stomach should always be deflated as much as possible at
through a region that was narrow and difficult to pass (espe-
the conclusion of the procedure so the patient is not awakened
cially the pyloric canal of a small cat). Significantly com-
with a bloated stomach.
promised gastric tissue can increase the risk of perforation.
Perforation related to examination of an ulcer pit, an
 Experienced endoscopists have learned the range of force
endoscopic biopsy, or the maneuvering of a sharp-edged
that can safely be applied in tight areas. When this degree
gastric foreign body can occur but is extremely rare in small
of pressure is exceeded, perforation occasionally occurs. The
animals. The integrity of the gastric wall would have to be
keys to avoiding perforation are to always proceed with cau-
severely compromised for a routine biopsy technique to
 tion in diffcult areas, use maneuvering skills to keep the tip
cause perforation. Great care should always be exercised
of the endoscope as close to the lumen of narrow areas as
when obtaining biopsy samples from deep ulcers.
SuGGEsteD
READING
 DeNovo RC: Diseases of the stomach. In Tams TR, editor: Handbook of
Matz ME, Leib MS, Monroe WE, etal: Evaluation ofatropine,glucagon,
small animal gastroenterology, St Louis, 2003, Saunders.
and metoclopramide for facilitation of endoscopic intubation of the
Donaldson LL, Leib MS, Boyd C, et al: Effect of preanesthetic
duodenum in dogs, Am J Vet Res 52( 12):1948- 1950, 1991.
 medication on ease of endoscopic intubation of the duodenum in
Neiger R: Gastric ulceration. In Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, editors:
anesthetized dogs, Amr J Vet Res 54(9):1489-1495, 1993.
Current veterinary therapy XIV, St Louis, 2009, Saunders.
Guilford WG, Strombeck DR: Chronic gastric diseases. In Guilford
Smith AA, Posner LP, Goldstein RE, et al: Evaluation of the effects of
WG,et al, editors: Strombeck's small anirmal gastroenterology, ed 3,
premedication on gastroduodenoscopy in cats, JArm Vet Med Assoc
Philadelphia, 1996, Saunders.
225{4):540-544, 2004.
Leib MS, Duncan RB: Gastric Helicobacter spp. and chronic vomiting
Weil WB: Anesthesia for endoscopy in small animals, Vet Clin North
in dogs. In Bonagura ID, Twedt DC, editors: Current veterinary
Am Small Anim Pract 3(5):881, 2009.
therapy XIV, St Louis, 2009, Saunders.
ATlAS PAGeS115-172
NORMAL APPEARANCES: CANINE
ANGULUS AND RETROVERSION
Figure 4-29, p. 123, Antral rings
STOMACH
(J maNeuver)
Figure 4-30, p. 124, Pylorus, duodenal
Figure 4-18, p. 115, Gastric body, angulus,
Figure 4-23, p. 118, Angulus and
reflux
gastroesophageal junction (retroversion
retroversion
Figure 4-31, p. 124, Closed pylorus:
view)
Figure 4-24, p. 119, Retroversion technique
rosette appearance
Figure 4-25, pp. 120-121,Retroversion
Figure 4-32, p. 125, Pylorus before and
RUGAL APPEARANCES
maneuver: radiographs
after passage of endoscope
Figure 4-19, p. 116,Rugal appearances
Figure 4-20, p. 116, Rugal appearances: dis-
ANTRAL CONTRACTIONS
PYLORUS: DIFFICULT CASES
tal body, patchy mucosal color changes
Figure 4-26, p. 122, Antral contractions
Figures 4-33 through 4-37, pp. 126-128,
Techniques for traversing a narrow or
closed pyloric canal
RESIDUAL GASTRIC JUICE
CANINE ANTRUM AND PYLORUS:
Figure 4-21, p. 117,Residual gastric juice
Figure 4-38, p. 129, Diffcult pylorus,
NORMAL APPEARANCES
 guidewire technique
Figure 4-22, p. 117, Residual gastric juice,
Figure 4-27, p. 123, Proximal antral canal
white foam
Figure 4-28, p. 123, Antrum, pylorus
114 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas PaGes 
 1 1 5 - 1 7 2
PYLORUS: OBSTRUCTED VIEWW
GASTRITIS: VARIOUS APPEARANCES
ABNORMAL APPEARANCES OF THE
Figure 4-39, p. 130,Food residue
(FELINE)
ANTRUM
 obstructing view of pylorus
Figure 4-64, p. 145, Acute severe erosive 
Figure 4-88, p. 158, Pronounced antral 
Figure 4-40, p. 130,Antral polyp
gastritis
folds (canine)
Figure 4-65, p. 146, Day 5 follow-up to
Figure 4-89, p. 158, Hypertrophic gas-
 NORMAL APPEARANCES: FELINE
Figure 4-64
tropathy (canine)
Figure 4-66, p. 146,Eosinophilic gastritis,
Figure 4-90, p. 158, Proliferative gas-
STOMACH
follicular mucosal lesions
tropathy (feline)
Figure 4-41, p. 131,Gastric body, angulus
Figure 4-67, p. 147, Erosive and prolifera-
Hgure 4-91, p. 159, Hypertrophic gastrop
Figure 4-42, p. 132, Complete examina-
tion of stomach: technique
tive mucosal lesions
athy and thickened rugal folds (canine)
 Figure 4-43, p. 133, Retroversion maneuver
Figure 4-68, p. 147, Superficial pocklike
lesions
GASTRIC POLYPS
FELINE ANTRUM AND PYLORUS:
Figure 4-92, p. 159, Large polyp in gastric
CHRONIC FELINE HISTIOCYTIC
body (canine)
NORMAL APPEARANCES
GASTRITIS
Figure 4-93, p. 160, Smallantral polyps
Figure 4-44, p. 134, Advance from gastric
Figure 4-69, p. 148, Histiocytic gastritis
(canine)
body to pylorus: technique
Figure 4-70, p. 149, Histiocytic gastritis
Figure 4-94, p. 160,Distal antral polyp
Figure 4-45, p. 135, Antrum
Figure 4-46, p. 135, Pylorus: open and
causing pyloric obstruction (feline)
Figure 4-95, p. 161,Antral polyp (canine)
close sequence
EROSIONS AND HEMORRHAGES
Figure 4-96, p. 161, Pyloric polyp causing
Figure 4-71, p. 150, Focal subepithelial
hemorrhages
obstruction (canine)
ENTERING THE PYLORUS
Figure 4-47, p. 136, Antrum, open pylorus 
Figure 4-72, p. 151, Focal erosion associ-
Figures 4-48 and 4-49, pp. 136-137,
ated with gastritis
GASTRIC NEOPLASIA
Figure 4-73, p. 151, Focal erosions in
Hgure 4-97, pp. 162-163, Lymphosarcoma
 Pylorus: variations
gastric body
(feline)
Figure 4-50, p. 137, Narrow pyloric canal,
Figure 4-74, p. 151, Superficial gastric
Figure 4-98, p. 163, Day 19 follow-up to
 not possible to traverse
erosions associated with subacute mild
Figure 4-97
erosive gastritis
Figure 4-99, p. 164, Week 19 follow-up to
CHRONIC GASTRITIS: VARIOUS
Figure 4-75, p. 151, Erosions associated
Figure 4-97
APPEARANCES (CANINE)
with nonsteroidal antinflammatory
Figure 4-100, p. 164, Month 9 follow-up
Figure 4-51, p. 137,Chronic gastritis with
 medication and prednisone
to Figure 4-97
erythema
Figure 4-101, p. 165, Lymphosarcoma
Figure 4-52, p. 138, Severe erythema with
(feline)
GASTRIC ULCERS
mucosal hemorrhage
Figure 4-76, p. 152, Large gastric body
Figure 4-102, p. 165, Antral lymphosar-
Figure 4-53, p. 138, Eosinophilic gastritis,
coma (feline)
 thickened rugal folds 
ulcer (feline)
Figure 4-103, p. 166, Antral lymphosar-
Figure 4-77, p. 152, Shallow ulcer,proxi-
Figure 4-54, p. 138, Thickened antral
coma (feline)
mal antrum (feline)
mucosa
Figure 4-104, p. 167, Week 5 follow-up
Figure 4-78, p. 152, Drug-induced large
 Figure 4-55, p. 138, Irregularity of rugal
 to Figure 4-103
antral ulcer (canine)
folds
Figure 4-79, p. 153, Drug-induced large
Figure 4-105, pp. 167-168, Adenocarci-
Figure 4-56, p. 139, Follicular mucosal
noma (feline)
lesions
angulus ulcer (canine)
Figure 4-106, p. 169, Pyloric adenocarci-
Figure 4-57, p. 139, Multifocal superfcial
Figure 4-80, pp. 153-154, Large perforated
ulcer with omental seal (canine)
noma with long-term follow-up (canine)
erosive lesions
Figure 4-81, p. 155, Two peripyloric
Figure 4-107, p. 170, Adenocarcinoma
Figure 4-58, p. 140, Severe pyogranulo-
drug-induced ulcers (canine)
(canine)
matous gastritis
Figure 4-59, p. 141, Pyogranulomatous
MISCELLANEOUS FINDINGS
gastritis: 6-week follow-up to Figure
ABNORMAL GASTRIC MOTILITY
Hgure 4-108, p. 170, Thickened rugal folds
4-58
Figure 4-82, p. 156, Idiopathic gastric
Figure 4-60, p. 141,Pyogranulomatous
motility disorder with gastric fluid and
secondary to a gastrinoma (canine)
gastritis: photomicrographs
bile retention
Figure 4-83, p. 156, Retained food and
HAIRBALLS IN CATS
grass
Figure 4-109, p. 171,Gastric hairball
HELICOBACTER-ASSOCIATED
Figure 4-84, p. 156, Large amount of food
(incidental finding)
GASTRITIS
retention 30 hours after ingestion
Figure 4-110, p. 171,Large antral hairball
Figure 4-61, p. 143, Chronic gastritis with
Figure 4-85, p. 156, Food and fluid
in a cat undergoing chemotherapy
Helicobacter
retention
for gastric lymphosarcoma (same cat
Figure 4-62, p. 144, Helicobacter
Figure 4-86, p. 157, Gastric fluid and bile
 as described in Figures 4-97 through
 overgrowth without significant
retention
4-100)
inflammation
Figure 4-87, p. 157, Gastric fluid
Figure 4-63, p. 144, Helicobacter over-
retention and marked pyloric dilation 
growth with mild gastritis and gastric
PHYSALOPTERA
(feline)
Figure 4-111, p. 172, Physaloptera parasite
adenocarcinoma
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy
115
Atlas fOr NOrmal APPearanCes: CanIne
StOmacH
D
Figure 4-18 A, The first view of the stomach as the endoscope is advanced through the
insufflation of the esophagus has reached the stomach, and the way forward may not be readily
apparent. In this view there is suffcient distension to appreciate that there is some cloudy fluid in the
proximal stomach and the rugal folds are in a horizontal confguration.To advance along the gastric
body the endoscopist moves the endoscope along the gastric body parallel with the rugal folds; the
folds should be in a straight rather than horizontal configuration. B, Moderate insufflation quickly
makes orientation easier. The endoscope tip has been deflected rightward (either rnight torque on 
the insertion tube or turning the outer control knob clockwise) and advanced, and the rugal folds
are now aligned correctly for farther advance of the endoscope to view the angulus fold. Normal-
appearing rugal folds are in the forefront. C, Advancing the endoscope tip and deflecting the tip in
an upward direction (inner control knob counterclockwise) bring the angulus into view (upper field
12- to 2-o'clock position). The stomach has been further distended with air. D, Farther advance with
upward tip deflection has brought the scope into position to provide a direct view of the angulus fold
and the antral canal, which is below. E, An en face view of the angulus fold, the antral canal below,
and the gastric body above. For viewing of the fundus and cardia, the endoscope is advanced farther
and the endoscope tip is defected a full 180 degrees in the upward position (large control knob fully
counterclockwise). F, This view provides excellent visualization of the gastric body from the angulus
fold back up toward the fundus and cardia. The endoscope is in a partially retroverted confguration
laddn aul ui si uooun! [eaeqdosaaisea aui (di adossopua aul jo uosagap premdn juesyiusis)
field of view, and a small section ofthe endoscope insertion tube is seen at the 12-o'clock position.
See Figure 4-22 for more detailed retroversion views.
116 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas FOr RuGal APPearanCes
A
B
C
Figure 4-19 The gastric rugae normally appear as smooth linear folds. The mucosa of the gastric body
is whitish-pink and usual a little darker than the esophagus. A, Midgastric body in a Chihuahua with
mild gastric distension. B, During further insufflations (same endoscope location) the rugae appear more
flattened and linear. The angulus is in the lower right aspect of the field (3- to 5-o'clock position). C,
the gastric body is at the 12-o'clock position (run parallel along the path of the rugal folds). To advance 
smoothly to view the angulus fold landmark, the endoscopist should insufflate air while simultaneously
deflecting the scope tip upward (large control knob counterclockwise) while advancing the scope forward.
A
B
those ofthe lesser curvature (right and lower aspect of feld of view). The angulus is just below center
in the field of view. B, Occasionally, patchy color changes ofthe mucosa may be observed (here
 pink- and cream-colored changes). These changes, which are not considered abnormal, may occur in
 response to alterations in mucosal blood flow as a result ofthe effects of anesthesia or insuflation.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy
117
Atlas fOr resIdual GastrIC JuiCe
It is not always possible to obtain good views when entering the stomach. Refluxed bile
stained duodenal fluid or residual gastric juice may obscure visualization of gastric mucosa.
Small amounts of fluid are not considered abnormal. Fluid may be present in the stomach
in animals that have undergone enemas or that have a gastric motility disorder. It is
recommended that fluid be suctioned so that the mucosa can be more closely examined
 and also so that any chances of reflux to the esophagus during the procedure and possible
subsequent aspiration are decreased.
B
Figure 4-21 A, Frothy saliva and bile-stained fluid in a Schipperke that had received several enemas.
No clinical signs suggested a gastric motility disorder. B, Frothy and bile-stained fluid. Residual fluid
 can usually be easily aspirated, but the excessive use of suction may traumatize the mucosa, causing
suction artifacts.
Figure 4-22 Frothy white fluid in
the proximal stomach, visualized
immediately on advancing the
endoscope from the esophagus to
the stomach. Rugal folds can be seen
coursing left to right. In this situation
the fluid should be suctioned clear,
and the endoscope tip will then be
deflected to the night to align with the
rugal folds for further advance along
 the gastric body.
118·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr anGulus and retrOVersIOn
(J MaNEUVER)
The angulus appears as a fold that extends from the lesser curvature. In medium- to large-
sized dogs the angulus may not be seen until the endoscope is advanced to the lower gastric
body. In small dogs it can sometimes be identified after insufflating a small amount of air in
the proximal stomach. The angulus may appear as either a sharp or flattened fold.
Gastric body
Angulus
Antral canal
C
Figure 4-23 A, In this patient the angulus appears as a sharp fold in the center of the field. The
endoscope tip has been retroflexed. The antral canal is at the lower aspect of the field. The gastric
body is in the upper feld. A smallsection of the endoscope can be seen at 12 o'clock. B and C,
Schematics depicting the endoscope position and the view seen in Figure 4-23, A. D, Completion
of the J maneuver. After the angulus is viewed, the insertion tube is advanced while the endoscope 
tip is still flexed (large control knob deflected fully counterclockwise). This slides the insertion
tube farther along the gastric body and into the retroversion position. The insertion tube is clearly
visualized in the center aspect of the field. The gastroesophageal junction area and surrounding folds
appear normal. With the endoscope in this position it can be retracted,therebybringing the tip of
the endoscope into close proximity of the fundus and cardia (see Figure 4-25).
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■119
Figure 4-24 Retroversion maneuver technique. A, Midgastric body with moderate insufflation.
Tip deflection is initiated in the mid to distal body (large inner control knob counterclockwise to 
 provide more upward tip deflection) to provide an en face view of the angulus. B, This angulus
is a normal variant, although it appears flatter. Deflection of the tip or rotation of the endoscope 
provides a more thorough view ofthe antrum (4- to 6-o'clock position) and pylorus. C,For a
view of the cardia and gastroesophageal junction the insertion tube is advanced further while the
endoscope tip is still fully flexed. Panoramic views to thoroughly examine the fundus and cardia
in large dogs are best attained by rotating the endoscope shaft with the right hand or by deflecting
the control knobs to rotate the endoscope tip through various angles. D, Close-up view of the
gastroesophageal junction from below, in retroversion.
120·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
一
Figure 4-25 Endoscope positions in the stomach of a 35-kg (77-lb) dog through a retroversion
maneuver. A, The endoscope tip is angled to enter the proximal stomach from the esophagus. B,
After advancing through the gastric body, the endoscope tip is deflected to a maximal degree in the
area ofthe distal body to provide an en face view of the angulus (the fold beyond the endoscope tip 
in this radiograph). The position corresponds to Figures 4-23, A, and 4-24, B. This radiograph shows
an air-filled antrum anterior to the endoscope. Lateral (C) and ventrodorsal (D) projections made
after the insertion tube is retracted in the flexed position to provide a close-up view of the fundus,
cardia, and gastroesophageal junction from below.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy· 121
一
Figure 4-25, cont'd In D the endoscope tip has been rotated through 180 degrees by applying.
torque to the insertion tube to provide a more complete view of the fundus. E, Endoscope position
before (dashes) and after (solid) rotation of the entire insertion tube described in D. The degree of
tip deflection can also be adjusted to provide a thorough view of the fundus and cardia. F, Close-up
endoscopic view of the gastroesophageal junction from below after nearly maximal withdrawal of 
the endoscope in the flexed position.
122 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOR ANTRal CONTRaCtIONS
Antral contractions are occasionally observed during gastroscopy. The contractions travel
along the antrum in circumferential symmetrical fashion and sweep toward the pylorus as
a rolling wave.
A
B
C
D
Figure 4-26 A, The endoscope tip is in the distal gastric body. The angulus is in the center of the 
field, and the antral canal is at the 7-o'clock position. B, As the wave begins, the angulus is seen 
si shod aui 'a piay aui jo rauas aul ie si shod aui ' piay aui jo iadse isoaddn aui ie
obscured by white foam. The endoscope tip has not moved during this sequence.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
123
Atlas fOr CanIne Antrum and PylOrus: nOrmal
APPEARANCES
Figure 4-27 Proximal antral canal in a
Greyhound as viewed from the distal body.
The fold at the upper aspect of the field is the
angulus. The pyloric orifice is not in view.
B
Figure 4-28 A, Antral canal in a Chihuahua. The pylorus is at the 2-o'clock aspect of the field and is
closed. Two focal erosions are visualized (6- and 9-o'clock positions). Normally no folds are present
 in the proximal and midantrum. B, The endoscope has been advanced toward the closed pylorus,
which is visualized as a small darkened area just to the right of the center of the field (arrow). In this
situation, changes in tip deflection are necessary to properly align the endoscope with the pylorus.
Figure 4-29 Occasionally, small circular rings or a
single flap surrounds the pylorus. This is a normal
variant, as shown here in a Doberman.
124·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
oa uae pasa ai sm paaus  eua sud   an
Note the alignment of the pylorus in the center of the field. B, It is not unusual to see yellow bile-stained
froth being blown into the antrum through the pylorus. Water flushing followed by suction usually
 restores clear vision and a readily identifiable path.
Hgure 4-31 Closed pylorus with rosette formation in a German shepherd. With minimal gastric
insufflation before antral examination, careful alignment, and smooth control of tip deflection,the
 pylorus was not difficult to traverse.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy· 125
D
Figure 4-32 Normal pylorus in a mixed-breed dog. A, Normal antral canal with the pylorus in the
upper center of the field. B, The endoscope tip has been advanced close to the pyloric orifice. The
pylorus remained only slightly open on approach but was readily traversed with steady pressure.
The pyloric orifice is best traversed with the use of slow steady motion, and the orifice should be 
kept as close to the center of the feld as possible. “Jabbing" is counterproductive and must be 
avoided. C, Close-up view of the pyloric orifice. The pyloric canal can be seen curving to the right.
The endoscopist should be prepared to deflect the scope tip to the right (turn small control knob
clockwise) as the endoscope is passed through the canal. D, Appearance of the pylorus after the
endoscope has been retracted to the stomach after duodenoscopy. The orifice is slightly more open.
Atlas for pylorus: difficult cases
In some dogs the duodenum can be easily entered within 15 to 30 seconds of beginning the
endoscopic procedure at the esophagus. In others, however, advancing an endoscope to
the duodenum requires great skill and patience. The following cases illustrate some of the
difficulties that may be encountered.
126·PART ONEFlexibleEndoscopy
B
D
二
Figure 4-33 Pylorus of a Bull terrier. A, On initial approach from the antrum, the pylorus was slightly open. B, The orifice closed on initial
 aui  'adoss aul aoueape oi apeiu sem idiuane ue uaum Apoq leisip aul oi Aeme paiaap sem di adoosopua al pue ^iaaamoy ^ioeiuos
pylorus configuration changed slightly. Note the flap above the pylorus, the appearance of a thickened rim around the orifice, and the mild
mucosal erythema caused by endoscope trauma. The pyloric orifice is the slightly darkened area just beneath the upper flap. The endoscope 
 roeiado idape uy uoisod suolad ui saaueus uo paseq paismipe sem uosaip di au pue ^(iduuane qinoy) pasueape Alenpeia sem dil
can do this by using the fingers ofthe left hand to deflect both control knobs while advancing and withdrawing the insertion tube with the right
luisisse ue aaey oi iaisea ll puy Aeuu isidossopua suuuaq aui uinou ssuaed aul oi aso Aiey padsea si aqni uoiasui au pueu
 no aeu oi puey i aun pue qou laiuos nauu aun uo qun yal aui sasn isidossopua aul am adoss aul jo aueape aun laiuo
control knob adjustments. D, Once the pyloric canal was entered, the walls pressed tightly around the endoscope. E, End of the pyloric canal
just anterior to the duodenum. The linear off-white object in the left aspect of the field is a roundworm. Visualization routinely remains
obscured through the pylorus until the duodenal canal (2- to 3-o'clock position) is reached and insufflated.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy· 127
B
D
上
Figure 4-34 Gastroscopy of a Greyhound in which the entire working length of an endoscope with an insertion tube length of 110 cm was 
taken up by the time the endoscope tip reached the antrum. The endoscope had formed a large loop along the greater curvature. A, Angu-
-s sun rode pue uosod jua an m iaey ou pauae aq pos adosua a (uado ais) sd pue ue s
tion the endoscope should be withdrawn to the proximal stomach. Then the stomach should be moderately deflated to shorten the distance
to the antrum. B, The endoscope was then readvanced as directly to the antrum as possible. The angulus is the crescent-shaped fold in the
right aspect of the field. Minimizing distension often helps slightly decrease the length of insertion tube used during the advance along the
greater curvature. C, The first several attempts to traverse the then tightly closed pylorus were unsuccessful. The endoscope control housing
was nearly in the dog's mouth at this point. D, The configuration around the pylorus changed slightly during the course of the procedure.
This is not uncommon when more than several attempts are made to traverse the pylorus. E, The dog was moved from left lateral to dorsal
recumbency. This maneuver occasionally provides improved visualization or a better approach angle and consequently may facilitate entry
to the pyloric canal. In this case the pyloric orifice has become obscured but is in the center of the field immediately below the flap. Because 
rotation was not particularly beneficial, the dog was returned to left lateral recumbency, and the endoscope was finally advanced successfully
to the duodenum. The endoscopist negotiated the final short distance through the pylorus by placing both hands on the control housing
(the right hand controlled tip deflection) and slowly leaning in, while in a kneeling position, to provide forward movement. These maneu-
vers are not necessary when a standard length veterinary endoscope with an insertion tube length of 140 cm is used.
128 ·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
Figure 4-35 A, Tightly closed pylorus in a Greyhound (different patient from Figure 4-34). The 
 orifice is obscured by a small amount of white foam. The pylorus is properly aligned with the endo-
scope tip (i.e., in the center of the feld). B, A small amount of hemorrhage has occurred because
 of trauma from several attempts to pass the 7.9-mm-diameter endoscope through the pylorus. The
endoscope was passed after 4 minutes of maneuvering. The minor mucosal hemorrhage here is 
inconsequential.
Figure 4-36 In some dogs it is at first difficult to
Hgure 4-37 In this dog the edges of the pyloric
identify the exact location of the pyloric orifice.
 orifice are flat, and the pyloric canal is at a sharp
 In this standard poodle the pylorus is closed and
angle to the left It would be extremely diffcult
the orifice is located at the upper confluence of
 to gain proper alignment ofthe endoscope with
the vertical folds (immediately above the small
the pylorus in this confguration. Rotating the
pool of hemorrhage). The endoscope was suc-
dog to dorsal recumbency allowed for better
cessfully passed to the duodenum. If the pyloric
alignment, and the pylorus was successfully
orifice cannot be identifed after examination of
traversed.
the distalantrum and folds,the dog should be
rotated to dorsal recumbency.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy· 129
B
Figure 4-38 If the pylorus proves particularly diffcult to traverse,the biopsy forceps can sometimes
be used as a guidewire over which the endoscope can be advanced to the duodenum. With the endo-
scope situated in the distal antrum, the closed forceps are advanced through the pylorus and down
the descending duodenal canal. Because of a sharp angle at the pylorus, duodenal bulb, and descend-
ing duodenum, the forceps cannot be advanced far enough in some dogs for this maneuver to be
successful. Excessive force should not be applied to the duodenal bulb. A, This closed pylorus in a
Collie was particularly diffcult to enter. B, The biopsy forceps has been advanced through the pylo-
rus and into the descending duodenum. C, View of the descending duodenum. The streaks of hem-
orrhage resulted from duodenal mucosal trauma that occurred during attempts to pass the biopsy
forceps. The biopsy forceps should be simultaneously retracted ("backed out") as the endoscope is 
advanced through the pylorus in an attempt to minimize mucosal trauma.
AtlaS FOr PylOruS: ObstruCted vIeW
 Food or other material (e.g., hair or foreign body) in the antrum at the time of gastroscopy
may obscure the pylorus. The endoscope tip can be deflected in various directions to move
soft material away, and water flushing may help displace cloudy liquid. It may also help to
use a biopsy instrument extended to the area to help deflect material away. Suction should
be used cautiously, otherwise, the accessory channel may become blocked with particulate
matter.
130·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
B
Figure 4-39 A, Rice and other food in the stomach of a Boxer with a gastric motility disorder. The
dog had been fasted for 20 hours before gastroscopy. Much of the distal body and antral mucosa are
obscured. B, The endoscope tip was used to move material away from the center of the field in the 
distal antrum, thereby providing a view of the pylorus (dark area in center of feld). C, Close-up view
of the pylorus. Note the direction of the pyloric canal as it angles to the right.
Figure 4-40 Gastric antral polyp obscuring the
pylorus in a 7-year-old Great Dane with inter-
mittent vomiting. The angulus fold is at the top
of the field of view. Once the endoscope was
 passed beyond the mass, the pylorus was clearly
visualized.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■131
Atlas fOr nOrmal ApPearances: feline stOmacH
The normal feline stomach is pale pink and has smooth rugal folds that are more prominent
along the greater curvature, as well as a readily identifiable angulus and flat antral walls.
Small folds are present in the distal antrum around the pylorus in some cats. Although
the stomach is completely empty in almost all cats that have been properly fasted, it is
not unusual to find small amounts of hair material present. Occasionally a small pool of
residual gastric fluid or streaks of bile-tinged fluid are present, and this is not considered
abnormal. Only minimal intermittent air insufflation is generally necessary to maintain
 gastric dilation sufficient for thorough examination in cats.
Figure 4-41 A, Gastric body as viewed from the proximal stomach in a cat. A small amount of air
was insufflated to separate the gastric walls. Note the crescent-shaped angulus in the right aspect of
the endoscopic field of view (2- to 5-o'clock position). B, The endoscope position is the same. More
 air has been insufflated to further distend the stomach. The folds are somewhat flatter and the angu-
lus fold is visualized in the right field.
132 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
C
一
ing the endoscope tip to the left (turning the outer control knob counterclockwise) in the distal esophagus as the endoscope was directed
through the gastroesophageal junction. Invariably the greater curvature is the frst area of the stomach that is visualized. B, Air has been in-
sufflated to moderately distend the stomach. This allows for more thorough mucosal examination. C, Small pocklike lesions in the fundus
 are a normal variant occasionally found in cats. Obtain this view by pulling the endoscope back and deflecting the tip downward (turning
the inner control knob clockwise) or by deflecting the tip downward immediately after entering the stomach. D, E, and F, En face view of
the angulus in the sequence of its examination. D, Retroversion was begun in the distal body. The antrum is in the lower aspect of the en-
-uo paxag aui ul di adossoua aui uim sauiey paoeape uaui sem aqni uoilasui aui 't (uoiiisod yoo-/ oi -o) maia jo piay sidosso
figuration. The wall of the lesser curvature fills most of the feld. A small area of the antrum is seen at the 6- to 8-o'clock position. The shaft
of the insertion tube can be faintly seen as it enters the stomach (1-o'clock position). F, With advancement of the insertion tube, which is 
partly wedged against the greater curvature, the angulus could be visualized at a different angle. The proximal stomach is in the upper right
aspect of the field, and the antrum is in the lower left.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
133
C
Figure 4-43 Retroversion maneuver in a cat. A, The lower gastric body at nearly full distension. The angulus fold is in view. The retrover-
sion maneuver is initiated with the endoscope tip in the mid to lower gastric body. B, Proximal stomach at nearly maximal distension. C, As
the endoscope is advanced a little farther with the scope tip in full deflection, the cardia and gastroesophageal junction area come into view.
D, With slight rotation and farther advance the fundus and gastroesophageal junction area are in full view. The 20-cm marker on the endo-
retracts the endoscope while simultaneously deflecting the endoscope tip forward (larger inner control knob turned clockwise); the endo-
scope is then advanced toward the antrum.
134·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr feline Antrum and PylOrus: normal
A P PEA RAN C E S
Hgure 4-44 Sequence showing the advance ofthe endoscope from the gastric body to the pylorus.
A, View from the midgastric body with moderate distension. The greater curvature rugal folds are
clearly visualized, and the angulus fold is barely in view at the 12-o'clock position. B, The endoscope
has been advanced to the distal body, and the stomach is more distended. The angulus fills the lower
right aspect ofthe feld. Immediately after the endoscope tip passes the angulus, the insertion tube 
is rotated to the right (with the use of the right hand) and the endoscope tip is deflected upward.
Simultaneous gradual forward motion is continued throughout this maneuver. These maneuvers will 
 facilitate advance of the endoscope into the antral canal. C, Close-up view of the proximal antral mu-
cosa as the endoscope is passed through the tight angle between the gastric body and the antrum. D,
Antral canal with the pylorus in view. Note the flat antral walls. E, Close-up view of an open pylorus.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
135
Figure 4-45 Proximal antral canal. Note the
flat walls. It is not unusual to observe small
amounts of refluxed duodenal fluid or active
reflux occurring during examination of the
 antrum and pylorus. Note the slightly open
pylorus at the 2-o'clock position.
B
C
Figure 4-46 Sequence of antrum and pylorus photographs in a Siamese cat. A, Note the small folds
 around the pylorus. B, The pylorus has opened slightly. As this structure is gradually approached, it
shouldbe kept in the center of the field. C,The pylorus has closed as the endoscope is advanced to
the orifice. The endoscope tip is properly aligned. With minimal force the 7.9-mm endoscope was 
advanced through the pylorus (time sequence of Athrough C: 10 seconds).
136·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOR ENTeRING tHe PylOruS
Figure 4-47 A, View of the distal antrum as a slightly open pylorus is approached. B, The pylorus
has remained open. Note the curving wall within the pyloric canal (just beyond the pyloric orifice).
To advance the endoscope through the pylorus to the duodenum, the endoscopist should deflect the
tip of the scope downward and to the left (turning both control knobs clockwise) once the canal has
been entered.
B
C
Figure 4-48 Examples of normal pylorus with a narrow appearance. A, A small amount of hemor-
rhage is seen along the upper border ofthe pylorus. The bleeding was induced by the endoscope tip.
The pylorus was traversed on the second attempt with moderate force with a 9-mm endoscope.
B, During close observation in a different cat, this pyloric orifice did not dilate to any significant
degree. However a 7.9-mm endoscope was advanced without significant difficulty. C, The same
pylorus immediately after duodenoscopy was completed and the endoscope was withdrawn back
through the pyloric orifice.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 137
Figure 4-49 In some cats it is diffcult to align
Figure 4-50 Narrow pyloric canal in a Sia-
the pylorus in the center of the endoscopic
 mese cat that could not be traversed with a
feld. In this view,the endoscope tip is almost
7.9-mm endoscope. Although the orifice could
touching the antral wall adjacent to the pyloric
be entered, the pyloric canal was quite narrow
orifice. The pylorus was entered by sliding
and did not stretch sufficiently. The pylorus of
the endoscope tip along the wall and applying
 Siamese cats commonly seems to be narrower 
steady forward pressure until the scope slipped
than that of other cats. After making several at-
into the orifice.
tempts, the experienced endoscopist is able to
recognize that the pylorus cannot be success-
fully traversed. When this point is reached, no
further efforts should be made.
Atlas fOr chrOnIc GastrItis: varIOus
APPEaraNCES (CaNINe)
Various endoscopic appearances can be seen in patients with gastritis, ranging from
 normal in some patients with mild gastritis to marked mucosal irregularity and friability
in patients with severe gastritis. Because gastritis is a diagnosis that can be established and
 characterized based only on biopsy, tissue should be routinely obtained during gastroscopy
for histologic evaluation. A diagnosis of gastritis cannot be excluded based on normal gastric
mucosal appearance.
B
Figure 4-51 Moderate lymphocytic, plasmacytic gastritis with mild fibrosis in a 6-year-old Irish
setter with chronic intermittent vomiting. The vomiting had recently increased in frequency. A, Note 
the generalized mucosal erythema. The rugal folds ofthe greater curvature are in the foreground,
along with foam and several streaks ofbile-tinged fluid. The angulus is at the uppermost aspect of
the field of view, and the proximal antral canal is just below it. B, Erythema ofthe distal antrum and
pyloric orifice. The pylorus is to the left at the 11-o'clock position.
138 ·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
Figure 4-52 Severe erythema, mucosal hemor-
Hgure 4-53 Thickened gastric folds and a
rhage, and bile-stained foam along the mucosa
superficial “blister" (upper middle in the feld
in a 3-year-old Great Dane with severe acute 
of view) in a 5-year-old German shepherd
gastritis. This is an en face view of a wide angu-
with eosinophilic gastritis. The antral canal is 
lus. The gastric body is to the leff.
to the right (3-o'clock position).
Figure 4-54 Thickened raised areas of mu-
Hgure 4-55 Irregularity of the rugal folds in a
cosa in the antrum of a mixed-breed dog with
 Basset Hound with intermittent vomiting and
chronic intermittent vomiting. Note the pylo-
salivation. The histologic diagnosis was mild
 rus at the convergence of folds at the 11-o'clock
to moderate lymphocytic, plasmacytic gastritis
position. The histologic diagnosis was moder-
with fibrosis. No erosive changes or erythema
ate fibrosing lymphocytic, plasmacytic gastritis.
is seen.
Gastric lymphosarcoma was the leading differ-
ential diagnosis.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 139
B
Hgure 4-56 A, Multiple follicular, raised areas in the antrum of a 10-month-old standard poodle
with chronic vomiting of 6 months' duration. The pylorus is closed (to the right of midline at the 
2- to 3-o'clock position). B, En face view of the angulus, showing two nodular lesions on the lower
border. Bile-tinged fluid is seen on the surface. The histologic diagnosis was mild to moderate
lymphocytic, plasmacytic, eosinophilic gastritis.
B
C
D
Figure 4-57 Chronic gastritis in a 13-year-old Schnauzer with recent onset of persistent vomiting.
A, Multifocal superficial erosive lesions in the distended gastric body. B, Mucosa of the fundus and
cardia as viewed on retroversion maneuver. Foam and erosions are seen. C, Mucosal erythema of the
rhage that occurred after a single mucosal biopsy (foreground). This is a retroversion view with the
angulus at the bottom right (5-o'clock position), the lesser curvature in the right foreground, and
just to the right of midline. The histologic diagnosis was multifocal erosive gastritis with fibrosis.
140·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
一
Figure 4-58 A, Close-up view of the rugal folds of the distal greater curvature (moderate gastric
distension). The folds appeared edematous and bled easily on contact (note the focal areas of hem-
 orrhage). B, Distal greater curvature just beyond the view shown in A. The angulus extends from 
the 12- o'clock to 4-o'clock positions at the edge of the field. Note the severe erythema and the fri-
ability of the mucosa. C, Proximal stomach (mild distension) as viewed on retroversion maneuver.
The insertion tube shaft is at the 11-o'clock position. The proximal one half of the stomach was
 grossly normal. D, Distal antrum and pylorus (narrow horizontal opening in center of field) as seen
before biopsy. Note the vesicle-like changes around the pyloric orifice. E, After two biopsy samples 
were obtained, marked hemorrhage occurred around the pylorus. Normally it is difficult to obtain
adequate-size tissue samples from the antrum and pylorus. Furthermore, minimal to no hemorrhage
 usually occurs. The cause of the pyogranulomatous gastritis was undetermined.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■141
Figure 4-59 Follow-up gastroscopy
conducted 6 weeks after the initial
diagnosis in the patient depicted in
Figures 4-57 and 4-58. The animal's
clinical condition had improved, and
no vomiting had occurred for 4 weeks.
Treatment included prednisone,
A
B
metronidazole, famotidine 
(2 weeks), and sucralfate (4 weeks). A,
 Distal gastric body mucosa (compare 
with Figure 4-57, A). The mucosa has a
reticular pattern. B, Distal gastric body
with the angulus just to the right of
midline (from the 11- o'clock to 5-o'clock
 positions). The dark spots in the upper
right,midlerightand faftarefocal
areas of hemorrhage (*coffee-ground"
color). This is nearly the same endoscope
position as in Figure 4-57, B. C, En face
view of the angulus showing the pinpoint
areas of hemorrhage. The mucosa was
significantly less friable at follow-up. D,
Antrum and pylorus. A small amount 
of fluid residue is present in the antral
canal. Note the dramatic improvement
compared with Figure 4-58, D-E.
Figure 4-60 Comparison photomicrographs. A, The photomicrograph
of a biopsy sample obtained at initial endoscopic examination shows a
massive infiltration of neutrophils, histiocytes, and lymphocytes, X200).
 Surface erosion and necrosis are also seen. The diagnosis was severe, ero-
sive, ulcerative necrotizing and pyogranulomatous gastritis. B, Photomi-
crograph obtained at a 6-week follow-up shows dramatic resolution ofthe
erosive and inflammatory lesions (x200). Mild fbrosis, probably a sequela 
to the previous necrotizing process,is the only significant lesion. (Courtey
of Stephen f.Engler.)
142■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr Helicobacter-associated Gastritis
of various forms of upper GI problems in humans, including chronic gastritis with varying
degrees of inflammation (nonerosive nonspecific gastritis is the most common type seen),
nonulcer dyspepsia, and gastric and duodenal ulcers. Furthermore, epidemiologic evidence
supports an association between H. pylori infection and gastric cancer in humans.
Helicobacter organisms have long been known to be present in the stomachs of animals
and it is speculated that these organisms are normal inhabitants. However, in some
animals, it is likely that Helicobacter infection can cause chronic gastritis and in rare cases
gastric ulceration. Helicobacter felis, Helicobacter heilmanni, Helicobacter bizzozeroni, and
Helicobacter salomonis are the most common types found in dogs. H. felis, H. heilmani,
and H. pylori are the most common types found in cats. In ferrets, Helicobacter mustelae
is known to cause significant GI disease (both ulceration and neoplasia). The organisms
can be indentified in clinically normal animals as well as in animals with signs of chronic
 gastritis and with histologic findings of gastritis.
Endoscopic examination and biopsy have become very important for the diagnosis
of H. pylori-associated disease in humans. Endoscopy is also important in the ongoing
investigation of Helicobacter-associated problems in animals as researchers and clinicians
work to determine more specifically the true role of these bacteria in animal diseases.
Tests for Helicobacter infection include histopathologic examination, urea broth test,
rapid urease testing on gastric biopsy specimens, fecal test (humans), and serologic assays.
A more recent approach in humans is in vivo identification of H. pylori using acriflavine-
guided endomicroscopy (frst positive case identified in 2005).
Endoscopy plays an important role in the diagnosis of Helicobacter-associated disease
in animals. Clinical signs of Helicobacter gastritis may include chronic vomiting (food,
bile, and sometimes mucus), intermittent inappetence, unthriftiness, weight loss, breath
changes, belching, and abdominal discomfort. However, a variety of GI disorders can
cause these clinical signs. Endoscopy is highly useful for more clearly defining a specific
problem or problems based on the findings of gross examination and the identification of
histopathologic abnormalities. Helicobacter-associated disease is considered a possibility
when the histologic examination shows evidence of gastric infla mmation in conjunction
with the presence of a significant number of Helicobater organisms. Variable degrees of
inflammation may occur.
Because of the patchy distribution of organisms within the stomach, biopsy specimens
should be obtained from various regions of the stomach, including the fundic area, gastric
body, and antrum (midregion and close to the pyloric orifice). As was described in the
"Gastric Biopsy Techniques" section of this chapter, it can be difficult to procure adequate-
sized tissue samples from the antral region because the mucosa is denser in this area. Good
biopsy technique is essential in helping the pathologist identify Helicobacter organisms and
determine whether significant inflammation is present. Cytologic examination of biopsy
samples can also be useful for quick screening. In the future, veterinarians may be able
to use noninvasive tests such as antibody titers or antigen tests to make a presumptive
diagnosis of Helicobacter-associated disease. At present, however, correlation of biopsy
findings with other tests is very important. Endoscopy and urease testing of tissue samples
may be done concurrently.
Endoscopic findings in the stomach of dogs and cats range from a normal gastric
appearance to variable degrees of inflammation (e.g-, erythema or superficial patchy
erosions). Some patients will have diffuse nodular gastritis with a raised follicular
appearance. The appearance may be the same as the examples of chronic gastritis shown in
this “Atlas" section, but in my experience, gross changes are more commonly minimal in
animals thought to have significant Helicobacter gastritis.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■143
C
old Cocker Spaniel with chronic intermittent vomiting. The animal responded well to amoxicillin,
 omeprazole, and metoclopramide. A, Normal appearance of the rugal folds in the gastric body (fore-
 ground) and erythema of a rugal fold (top right). B, Patchy erythema with bilious fluid retention in
the upper gastric body. C, Patchy erythema in the antrum and peripyloric region. D, Chronic gastri-
tis. Examination of multiple sections revealed patchy foci of fibrosis with infiltrates of lymphocytes,
plasma cells and neutrophils. This photomicrograph shows numerous Helicobacter organisms in the
overlying surface mucous layer (×20).
144 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Figure 4-62 Helicobacter overgrowth in a 7-year-old Dachshund with a 2-month history of intermittent vomiting after eating. A, Lesser cur-
mal,it is unlikely that Helicobacter was a significant cause ofthis dog's problem.
Figure 4-63 Photomicrograph from an 11-year-old Chow
with a 3-week history of intermittent vomiting and 10 days
of anorexia. A gastric ulcer was found in the lesser curva-
ture of the stomach (endoscopic photo not available) with
marked thickening around the upper rim. Multiple biopsy
specimens were obtained, and a suspected diagnosis of
gastric carcinoma was confirmed. This photomicrograph
shows large numbers of Helicobacter organisms in the
gastric pits. The pits are widened. Many organisms were
also present in the surface mucus. The accumulations of
Helicobacter organisms were most prominent in regions
of the stomach away from and not around the ulcer and
carcinoma tissue. Mild diffuse subacute gastritis and mild
lymphocytic, plasmacytic, eosinophilic duodenitis were
also present.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy
■145
Atlas fOr Gastritis: variOus aPＰearances
(FELINE)
A
B
D
Figure 4-64 Diffuse patchy erythema and superficial erosive changes in the gastric fundus and body
ofa 1-year-old cat that was presented for evaluation of acute vomiting. Gastroscopy was performed
18 hours after hospital admission, primarily because of marked depression and hematemesis. A, Mod-
 erate distension of gastric body at the greater curvature. Note the diffuse erythema. An area of normal
 mucosa is at the left aspect of the field of view. B, Retroversion view ofthe cardia and gastroesopha-
geal junction from below, revealing focal erosive and ulcerative lesions. The white objectto the left of
the endoscope is a fragment from a sucralfate tablet. C, Gastric mucosa ofthe proximal gastric body.
The erosive lesions have been covered by the gastric protectant agent sucralfate. Biopsies of the lesions
revealed severe pseudomembranous and erosive gastritis. D, Distal gastric body. A small section of the 
 angulus is observed at the 3-o'clock position, and the antrum extends to the right. The erosive lesions
extended only slightly into the antrum. The cause ofthis cat's acute gastritis was not proved, but the 
owner thought the animal had ingested parts of fresh flowers recently brought into the house. Treat-
 ment consisted of sucralfate, famotidine, and chlorpromazine (first 2 days only for antiemetic effect).
The follow-up examination is shown in Figure 4-65.
146 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
Hgure 4-65 Follow-up gastroscopy on day 5 in the cat shown in Figure 4-64. A, Distal gastric body
and angulus (upper right aspect of the field at the 1-o'clock to 3-o'ciock position). The remaining
(  a  a a    g  u ae s aia
 Follow-up biopsies were markedly improved. B, Retroversion view of the proximal stomach. C, The
antrum and pylorus were normal. The lesions were confined to the gastric body and fundus.
Hgure 4-66 Multiple raised follicular lesions in
the gastric body of a cat with a 3-month history
of intermittent vomiting and peripheral eosino-
philia (a white blood cell count of 24,000/mm²
with 4500 eosinophils). The histologic diagnosis
was eosinophilic gastritis. Although some cats
with Helicobacter gastritis have follicular changes
in the stomach, this particular animal showed no
significant evidence of Helicobacter overgrowth.
Only transient improvement occurred with dietary
therapy conducted before biopsy. However, the
 animal responded well to corticosteroid therapy.
B
C
D
Hgure 4-67 Moderate to severe lymphocytic, plasmacytic gastritis in a 16-year-old cat with chronic intermittent vomiting (2 years) that
Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs obtained 5 minutes after the administration of barium. A filling defect is seen in the cardia area.
C, Endoscopic examination revealed focal erosions of the gastric body mucosa. D, Proliferative and erosive mucosal lesions are present 
iies aul u paiensia suoisal au aqni uoiasui adossoua al moiaq uaas aie sdary Asdoq aui uoun leaeudosaaise aul pumoe
o aansans aissar aram suisat aaenaod au unou sdeopn ises au ra payiai siaap u au pasnes snuy pue
neoplasia. Biopsies revealed moderate to severe lymphocytic, plasmacytic gastritis. The animal responded well to corticosteroids.
Figure 4-68 Superficial pocklike lesions in the
distal gastric body of a cat with intermittent 
vomiting. The histologic diagnosis was mild focal
fibrosis of the lamina propria. These lesions may
have been chronic.
148 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOR CHRONIC 
 FELINE 
 HistiOcytic Gastritis
Figure 4-69 A 12-year-old, 9-kg (20-1b)
cat with a history of chronic vomiting.
most recently on a daily basis. A, Gastric
body with normal rugal fold on the left
and an irregular adjacent fold with an 
erosive lesion. B, Area of the greater cur-
vature with marked disruption ofthe con-
tinuity of the rugal folds and thickening 
and irregularity of the folds in view. C and
D, Photomicrographs showing distorted
mucosal architecture with marked widen-
 ing of the rugae and marked infiltration
by sheets oflarge histiocytes. (Note the
dense superficial infiltration.) E, Normal
feline stomach for comparison. All biopsy
samples were obtained with endoscopic
forceps. (Courtesy of Stephen f. Engler.)
CHAPTER4Gastroscopy
■149
一
cat with chronic vomiting and weight loss. The animal was treated aggressively with corticosteroids. A, Irregularity and distortion of the
greater curvature rugal folds. Note hemorrhage at bottom of photo. B, Retroversion view with moderate gastric distension. Note the follicu-
-raea ' uosod yoo- a ie piay algo aaa auiie pazensia si adossoua aui aiao iaeana au uoe esonu aui ui saueuo ie
at the time of original diagnosis shows focally severe infiltrations of macrophages and smaller numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells
infltrations of small lymphocytes and histiocytic cells. Azathioprine was added to the therapeutic regimen, and the animal showed mild
clinical improvement. Note: Histiocytic gastritis is a rare but serious disorder in cats. Aggressive treatment is required, and surveillance of
lesions via periodic endoscopic examination (every 3 to 6 months) is recommended. (Courtesy of Stephen f Engler.)
150 ·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas for erosiOns and HemorrhaGes
Erosions and hemorrhages may be found anywhere in the stomach and may be single or
multiple. An erosion is a shallow defect in the mucosa that does not extend through the
muscularis mucosa into the submucosa. Typically an erosion is flat or minimally depressed
 and is focal. The base may be reddish, yellowish, or black. Many beginning endoscopists
tend to incorrectly identify erosions as ulcers.
The term hermorrhage refers to the endoscopic appearance of discrete petecchiae or
bright-red confluent streaks that are not associated with any visible breaks in the mucosa.
The intactnessof the mucosa can be ascertained from the appearance of mucosal highlights.
The hemorrhages are usually described as subepithelial.
 Biopsy specimens from grossly hemorrhagic areas or from erosions commonly reveal
 no histologic abnormalities. Occasionally partial- or full-thickness necrosis with minimal
 inflammation is identified. It is rarely necessary to obtain more than one or two biopsy
 specimens from erosions or areas of hemorrhage. In many cases it is doubtful that erosions
cause symptoms. They are usually associated with another disorder that is responsible
for the patient's discomfort. When identifed endoscopically, hemorrhages and erosions
should not automatically be incriminated as the cause of clinical signs.
 Clinical settings for nonspecific erosions or hemorrhages include stress lesions, critical
illness localized gastric trauma (e.g., retching or vomiting and foreign bodies), ingestion of
corrosives, radiation, drugs (especially nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs [NSAIDs]), a
discrete ischemic insult, and idiopathic chronic erosions.
B
Figure 4-71 Focal streaks of subepithelial hemorrhages in a cat with chronic diarrhea. A, Midgastric
body. B, Gastric body. Biopsies were unremarkable, and the history did not suggest a gastric disorder.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
151
Figure 4-72 Isolated erosion in the stomach
Fgure 4-73 Focal erosions in the distal
of a cat with mild lymphocytic, plasmacytic
 gastric body of an 8-year-old Labrador
gastritis.
retriever with intermittent nausea. No
histologic abnormalities were found.
Figure 4-74 Superficial gastric erosions with
hemorrhage along the greater curvature of the
stomach in a 3-year-old Boxer with intermittent
vomiting, chronic diarrhea, anorexia, and weight
loss. Gastric biopsy specimens showed histologic
evidence of mild erosive subacute gastritis. His-
tiocytic ulcerative colitis was also identified.
B
Hgure 4-75 Erosions in the distal antrum of two dogs that were receiving both prednisone and
flunixin meglumine in an experimental study. A, Day 4 of combination drug administration. B,
Multiple erosions at day 2 in a dog receiving prednisone at 1.1 mg/kg (0.5 mg/lb) once daily and
flunixin meglumine at 1.1 mg/kg (0.5 mg/lb) twice daily. It is recommended that nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs not be used in combination or in conjunction with corticosteroids because of
the risk of gastric ulceration. (Courtesy of Steven W. Dow.)
152 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr GaStrIC UlCeRS
 Breach of the muscularis mucosa distinguishes an ulcer from an erosion. The pathogenesis
 of ulcer disease is not yet completely understood. Ulcers have a variety of causes, including
drugs, foreign bodies, disorders that cause higher than normal release of gastric acid,
Helicobacter infection,* and others. Ulcers probably begin as erosions, which then increase
in depth of damage. Fortunately, erosions rarely become ulcers in animals. The incidence
 of gastric ulcers in dogs and cats is quite low. In dogs, ulcers most commonly occur in
conjunction with the use of NSAIDs or in the presence of hepatic disease or mastocytosis.
 Ulcers associated with the use of NSAIDs most often occur in the antral-pyloric area. To
avoid missing a lesion such as an ulcer, the endoscopist must carefully examine the entire
stomach.
Figure 4-76 Large ulcer with a shallow
Hgure 4-77 Shallow ulcer in the proximal
crater in the gastric body of a cat (6-o'clock
 antrum of a cat (arrow). A small amount of
position). Note the normal appearance of the
hemorrhage is associated with the ulcer. An
surrounding mucosa.
open pylorus is seen at the far end of the field.
B
Figure 4-78 Large antral ulcer in a 14-year-old Cocker Spaniel. Methylprednisolone acetate had
been administered for severe degenerative joint disease, and the dog's owner instituted ibuprofen
without notifying the clinician. A, Antral canal from the distal gastric body. A large ulcer is seen in 
the right aspect of the field of view (3-o'clock to 4-o'clock position), and the pylorus is in the center
of the field. The tissue projection on the antral wall at the 6-o'clock position is a polyp (an incidental
finding and insignificant lesion). B, Close-up view of the gastric ulcer. Much of the ulcer pit is filled 
with hemorrhages. The antral canal is to the left. On initial approach this ulcer was poorly visualized
because it was covered by thick foam, mucus, and bile. Once the fluid and mucus were suctioned
away, the ulcer was clearly seen.
*Helicobacter infection rarely causes ulcers in animals but is a more common factor in the development of ulcers in humans.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy· 153
B
Hgure 4-79 Large angulus ulcer in a 12-year-old Chow with severe degenerative joint disease. Aspi-
rin and corticosteroids were administered simultaneously. A, Ulcer in the angulus. Biopsy samples
were obtained from the upper wall (shown here) and the rim. No evidence of neoplasia was found.
ae d-moy ae-l ie sueau yo suis ieg 'a aneenns pue auiiouy papniu suaai
ulcers may take 8 to 16 weeks to heal.
B
D
Figure 4-80 Perforated gastric ulcer in an 8-year-old Chow that had received naproxen (a non-
steroidal antinflammatory) once daily for 7 days. On the sixth day, vomiting and inappetence 
were first noted by the owmer. Naproxen was discontinued after the seventh day, but the clinical 
signs persisted. Famotidine and misoprostol were started 3 days later. The vomiting soon subsided,
but inappetence persisted. Nine days after naproxen was discontinued, the dog was presented for
 endoscopy. The dog was bright and alert. The complete blood count and biochemical profle were
completely normal except for mild leukocytosis. The packed cell volume was 48%. A, View toward
the antrum from the lower gastric body. Two ulcers are seen: a smallr lesion at the 9-o'clock position
and a much larger ulcer to the right of center (midantrum). B, On advancement into the antrum the 
endoscope revealed a very deep ulcer with a thick rim (entire upper left quadrant). C, Straight-forward
view into the ulcer. The whitish meshlike tissue seen through the ulcer crater is omentum. The pyloric
orifice is at the lower left (7-o'clock position). D, Close-up view of the ulcer crater with an omental seal.
Continued
154·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 4-80, cont'd E, To determine whether the omental seal was incomplete and whether
surgery needed to be performed immediately ratherthan on the following day (the endoscopy was
being conducted late in the day), survey abdominal radiographs were obtained to look for evidence
of free air in the abdominal cavity (air was insufflated to the stomach as for routine gastroscopy).
The radiograph shows no evidence of free air in the abdominal cavity. Barium was present in the
colon from a contrast series started by another veterinarian a few days before. Barium transit was
thought to be delayed by anticholinergic therapy that had been started several days earlier in an
effort to control vomiting. (Anticholinergic treatment is not advisable.) F, For comparison, a survey
abdominal radiograph from a different patient with a perforated gastric ulcer shows free air in the
abdominal cavity between the liver and stomach. Note: The Chow underwent surgery the following
day, and the ulcer was found to have a frmly adhered, complete omental seal. A partial antrectomy
was done, and the histologic diagnosis was focal chronic ulcerative gastritis. (Ulcer tissue should
always be sampled to rule out neoplasia.) An incidental finding at surgery was a mass in the left
medial lobe of the liver. The lobe was resected, and the mass was determined to be a hepatocellular
carcinoma. The dog was fed via jejunostomy tube for 12 days and had an uneventful recovery. The
 Chow lived for 3 years after surgery with no evidence of tumor recurrence.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy■ 155
Figure 4-81 Two peripyloric ulcers ina 14-year-
old dog that was receiving nonsteroidal antin-
flammatory drug (NSAID) therapy for severe
osteoarthritis. The pyloric orifice (center) is open,
and ulcers are seen to the left and above the pylo-
rus ( with hemorrhage). In animals that are sensi-
tive to NSAIDs the prostaglandin drug misoprostol
 has proved very effective in preventing gastrointes-
tinal ulceration.
 Atlas fOr abnOrmal GastrIc mOtilIty
Gastric motility disorders are usually diagnosed based on the history, clinical signs, and
radiographic findings (e.g-, prolonged retention of liquid barium, radiopaque markers
[BIPS], or a barium meal or decreased antral contractions observed at fluoroscopy).
When used alone, endoscopy is of limited value in assessing disorders of gastric motility.
However, important clues can sometimes be recognized during gastroscopy. This is
important because some animals with a gastric motility disorder do not have diagnostic
contrast radiographic studies (i.e., a normal liquid barium series does not rule out a gastric
motility disorder). Endoscopic examination is also important in patients with clinical signs
of a motility disorder because mucosal biopsy specimens should be evaluated whenever
 possible for evidence of a potential underlying cause, including gastritis, fbrosis, or an
infltrative bowel disorder (e.g., IBD). These disorders can alter gastric motility. Findings
that should alert the endoscopist to the possibility of a motility disorder include retention
of food or fluid admixed with bile in a properly fasted patient and generalized erythema
with or without the presence of streaks of bile-stained fluid.
Fluid may be present in the stomach as a result of reflux from the colon after high
enemas. Also, any time a large pool of fluid is found in the stomach, the possibility of
fluid retention as a result of a small intestinal obstruction (e.g-, foreign body, stricture, or 
 mass) must be considered. In this situation fluid is usually also pooled in the duodenum.
As much fluid as possible should be suctioned from the stomach so that the mucosa can be
thoroughly evaluated.
Gastric mucosal erythema commonly occurs in animals with gastric retention of bile-
stained fluid. Erythema may be secondary to superficial mucosal damage from bile. Biopsies
are routinely unremarkable in idiopathic gastric motility disorders.
156·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
Figure 4-82 Gastric fluid and bile retention
Hgure 4-83 Grass blades and food in the
in a 7-year-old Pekingese with an idiopathic
gastric body of a 3-year-old Doberman with
 gastric motility disorder. Note the mucosal
lymphangiectasia. The dog was quite weak and
erythema. Mucosal biopsy specimen results
had a total protein concentration of 2.3 g/dL.
were normal. Clinical signs included inter-
The dog had not eaten or been outdoors in 3
mittent vomiting, frequent nausea and loud
days. Gastric mucosal biopsy specimen results 
gastric gurgling sounds, periodic inappetence.
were normal.
and occasional bloating episodes.
Figure 4-84 Large amount of retained food
Hgure 4-85 Food and fluid retention in
(canned) in a 6-year-old Cocker Spaniel with
the gastric body of a 10-year-old miniature
a disorder characterized by the vomiting of
 poodle. The surrounding mucosa appears 
undigested or partially digested food 18 to
normal.
24 hours after eating. At the time of endos-
copy the dog had not eaten in 30 hours. The
 endoscope was maneuvered beyond the food,
and the pylorus was traversed without dif-
ficulty. A thyroid-stimulating hormone test 
was consistent with hypothyroidism. Gastric
and duodenal biopsy specimen results were 
normal. The animal responded well to thyroid
 supplementation and metoclopramide.
CHAPTER 4  Gastroscopy · 157
Figure 4-86 Retroversion view ofthe proximal
stomach of a 1-year-old Kuvasz with a 6-month
history of intermittent vomiting. Note the pres-
ence ofbile-stained fluid. No metabolic abnormal-
ities were found, and gastric and duodenal biopsy
 results were normal. An idiopathic gastric motility
disorder was diagnosed, and the animal responded
well to metoclopramide.
B
C
Hgure 4-87 A, Gastric fluid retention in a 2-year-old Balinese with anorexia (5 days) and vomiting.
Several of the vomiting episodes were projectile in nature. B, Retroversion view of the fundus and
gastroesophageal junction. Most ofthe gastric fluid was suctioned so that a thorough examination
could be completed. No evidence of a foreign body was found. C, The pylorus was unusually dilated
in this cat. The duodenal wall can be seen at the far end of the canal. Duodenal biopsies revealed
chronic active enteritis. Esophagitis was most likely secondary to vomiting. The result of a barium
series done after endoscopy to rule out a lower small bowel obstruction was normal. The increased
 gastric fluid was most likely secondary to marked duodenal-gastric reflux and abnormal gastric
motility. Treatment included metoclopramide and prednisone.
158 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOR abnOrmal APPearanCES Of tHe
ANTRUM
Pronounced folds are occasionally identified in the antrum. This is a rare finding in
inflammatory disease, or they may be a healing sequela to an ulcer, neoplasia, or chronic
hypergastrinemia. In some cases the pronounced folds may not be clinically significant,
but their appearance should always be noted in the endoscopy report. Examples of antral
neoplasia appear in the “Atlas for Gastric Neoplasia" section.
B
Hgure 4-88 Pronounced antral folds in a 16-year-old dog with chronic diarrhea and a ravenous
appetite. The animal had no clinical signs that were specific for gastric disease. Biopsies showed
antral fibrosis, which was probably the sequela of a previous inflammatory disorder. A, Endoscopic
view from the proximal end of the insufflated antrum. B, Distal antrum with smooth folds. The
 pylorus is near the top in the field of view at the 12-o'clock position.
Figure 4-89 Pronounced folds in the
Hgure 4-90 Pronounced folds around the
distal antrum of a 10-year-old Beagle with
pylorus of a 14-year-old cat with intestinal
intermittent vomiting. This dog had mild
and hepatic lymphoma. The closed pylorus is 
hypertrophic gastropathy. The pyloric orifice
to the left of center at the 9-o'clock position.
is obscured by foam to the left of center
 Biopsy samples obtained from the thickened
(10-o'clock position).
tissue around the pylorus showed no histologic
evidence of neoplasia. (This was confirmed
 at necropsy.) The diagnosis was proliferative
gastropathy with mild inflammation.
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 159
Hgure 4-91 Hypertrophic gastritis in a 10-year-
old poodle with a 3-month history of intermittent
vomiting. Survey abdominal radiographs showed
marked gastric distension with fluid and gas, and a
barium series revealed marked delay in the empty-
ing of barium from the stomach. At endoscopic ex-
amination the pyloric orifice was extremely narrow
(slitlike area in center of field), and it did not open
to any degree during the examination. The tissue
around the pylorus tended to bulge up (as shown
here) any time gastric contractions occurred. A
Y-U pyloroplasty was performed, and hypertrophic
gastritis was diagnosed based on the results of fill-
thickness biopsy. (Courtesy of Susan E. fohnson.)
AtLaS FOR GaStRIC POlYPS
Gastric polyps usuallyare not clinically significant, and theyare often discovered incidentally
on GI radiographs or at endoscopy or surgery. Rarely, there may be bleeding from an
eroded surface or transient obstruction of the pylorus by an antral polyp protruding into
the pyloric canal. Bloating, nausea, and vomiting may occur during periods of obstruction.
 Gastric polyps are only rarely found in dogs and cats. Endoscopically they appear as sessile
 or pedunculated protuberances that do not disappear with maximal insufflation. Polyps 
are most commonly found in the antrum and pyloric areas. These growths are usually
idod e no au s a   p  s ss dog 
 If clinically significant, the polyp should be removed with a polypectomy snare loop and
cautery or by surgical excision.
B
Hgure 4-92 Large,benign polyp in the midgastric body of a 12-year-old Chow. This is an unusual
location. The polyp was not clinically significant. A, Forward view from the proximal gastric body.
B, Close-up view of the polyp.
160·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
Hgure 4-93 Two small antral polyps, an incidental
finding in a 16-year-old dog.
Figure 4-94 A, Barium contrast
radiograph of a 6-year-old domestic
 short hair cat with a history of lifelong 
 intermittent vomiting. For some time 
 before this presentation the cat had been
vomiting daily, with some episodes being
1
 projectile in nature. The pyloric antrum
has a flling defect (a consistent finding
throughout the series). B, A large polyp
with irregular surface was identifed in 
the distal antrum. In this view the polyp
occludes the pyloric orifice. The antral
mucosa also displayed erythema and
 irregularity. C, Biopsy forceps were used
to move the polyp to the side, providing
 a partial view of the pyloric orifice. The
 polyp was freely movable on a stalk. D,
 Polyp biopsy procedure. The polyp had
a soft surface. Note the irregularity of
the antral walls. The histologic diagnosis
was benign inflammatory polyp. Chronic
gastritis and moderate lymphocytic
enteritis were also present.
C
1
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 161
A
F
Figure 4-95 Gastric polyp in a 7-year-old Great Dane with intermittent vomiting, diar-
rhea, and occasional hematochezia. A, View of the antrum from the lower gastric body.
The angulus fold extends right to left at the top of the field. A soft, movable mass is pres-
ent in the antrum near the pylorus. B, Close-up view of the mass. C, The endoscope was
passed beyond the mass to the pylorus, which was open and readily traversed. Note: En-
revealed a mass (adenocarcinoma) in the mid-descending colon. The gastric mass was
subsequently resected because the vomiting was thought to be due, in part, to the size and
location of the lesion. Surgical biopsies confirmed the diagnosis of benign gastric polyp.
H
B
Figure 4-96 Pyloric polyp in a 7-year-old Pug with
frequent vomiting. Some episodes were projectile in
nature. A, The polyp caused distortion of the pyloric
onifice and occlusion of the pyloric canal. In this pho-
tograph the pyloric orifice appears as an inverted V
with the polyp protruding through it. B, The biopsy
forceps have been passed through the pyloric canal.
 Note that the polyp has compromised the lumen.
This is an unusual location for a polyp. C, Surgically
 excised tissue from the pylorus.
162·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr GastrIC neOPlasia
Adenocarcinoma is the most common malignant tumor in the stomach of the dog, and
lymphosarcoma is the most common malignant tumor in the cat. Cancerous lesions may
diffusely infiltrating mass invading the stomach wall.
C
D
Figure 4-97 Initial endoscopic series in a 10-year-old cat with vomiting, weight loss, and inap-
petence. A, Immediate view on entering the stomach. A small amount of air has been insufflated.
A large mass is seen at the lower aspect of the field of view. The angulus is at the 12-o'clock to
1-o'clock position. B, The edge of the mass is at the 7-o'clock to 8-o'clock position. Note the ir-
regularity and thickening of the rugal folds around the mass in both views. C, Close-up view of the
large mass in the proximal stomach. D, View of the mass and surrounding irregular folds after the 
 retroversion maneuver. The cat lived for 8 years after the diagnosis was made.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
■163
E
Figure 4-97, cont'd E, A significant amount
of bleeding occurred after a single biopsy
sample was obtained from the center ofthe
mass. F, Samples were obtained from the 
mass and surrounding tissue. The mass was
sampled several times in the same location 
in an effort to obtain tissue as deeply as
 possible. G, The mass is in the upper leff
aspect, and hemorrhage from a mucosal-
fold biopsy site is seen in the center ofthe
field.
B
Figure 4-98 Endoscopic examination ofthe
cat shown in Figure 4-97, done 19 days after 
the initial examination. Treatment involved
only chemotherapy (prednisone, cyclophos-
phamide, and vincristine). A, Forward view
of the proximal stomach at slightly more than
moderate distension. The mass, which had
decreased dramatically in size, is in the center
ofthe field. (Compare with Figure 4-97,C.)
B, Retroversion view. The site ofthe mass is
barely detectable (focal reddened area to left
of center). (Compare with Figure 4-97, D.)
C, Retroversion view at a different angle. The
mass can be seen at the 7-o'clock position.
164 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
Figure 4-99 Endoscopic photographs of
the cat discussed in Figures 4-97 and 4-98,
obtained 19 weeks after the initial exami-
nation. The patient was doing extremely
well while undergoing chemotherapy. No
evidence of a gastric mass is seen, and the 
 mucosa at the original site ofthe lesion ap-
pears whiter than the surrounding mucosa.
A,Forward view of the proximal stomach 
in mild distension. Note that the rugal folds
 no longer appear thickened or irregular. B,
Same site as in A but with moderate disten-
sion. C, Close-up view ofthe gastric mu-
 cosa. Note the smooth mucosal surface.
Hgure 4-100 Endoscopic photographs of the cat in Figures 4-97, 4-98, and 4-99, taken 9 months
after the animal was first examined. A, Forward view of the proximal stomach in mild distension.
 B, Forward view of the stomach in moderate distension. The stomach is grossly normal except
for the small, whitened area where the mass was previously located (compare with Figures 4-97,
C; 4-98,A; and 4-99, A). Biopsy samples showed no evidence of lymphosarcoma. The cat was still
receiving chemotherapy and was clinically normal. Chemotherapy was discontinued at 12 months;
at 18 months, no evidence of tumor recurrence was found. Note: The cat lived 8 years after the di-
agnosis was made. Chemotherapy never had to be resumed. This case highlights the importance of
using endoscopy relatively early in animals with unexplained chronic vomiting. This cat's history
was easily consistent with a diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease or chronic gastritis, yet endos-
copy revealed lymphosarcoma. Early initiation of the most indicated therapy resulted in an excellent
outcome. (Also see Figure 4-110 for illustration of an additional incident involving this patient: 
gastric hairball.)
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 165
Figure 4-101 Lymphosarcoma involving
the gastric body and fundus in a 12-year-
old Siamese cat. A readily palpable mass
was found in the anterior abdomen
(stomach). Lymphosarcoma was also
B
identified in the colon. A,Forward view
 in the gastric body. The stomach has not
 been insufflated. Note the dramatic dis-
tortion of the normal rugal fold structure
 and the ulcerative change at the 5-o'clock
position. B, Retroversion view showing
the multiple mass effect in the proximal
stomach and fundus. C, Forward view in
the gastric body. Note the irregular rugal 
fold adjacent to the mass. The animal re-
sponded fairly well to chermotherapy for
 6 weeks, but then clinical signs worsened
 and the cat was euthanized. D, Distal
gastric body. A short edge of the angulus
is seen at the far lower right (5-o'clock
position). The proliferative effect from
the lymphosarcoma stopped abruptly in
the lower body. The antrum was com-
C
D
pletely normal.
B
Hgure 4-102 Antral lymphosarcoma in a 14-year-old cat with a short history of inappetence and
occasional hematemesis. A, The gastric body was completely normal. B, The antrum was infiltrated
with proliferative tissue. Failure to examine the antrum would have resulted in a missed diagnosis.
The histologic diagnoses were normal gastric body, antral lymphosarcoma, and moderate lym-
phocytic, plasmacytic enteritis. The cat did well on chemotherapy for 5 months, but then bilateral
renomegaly developed quite rapidly. The cat was subsequently euthanized because of anorexia and
vomiting. The blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels were normal. Histologic examination of
tissues obtained at necropsy identifed lymphoma in both kidneys and the antrum.
166·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
C
D
上
Hgure 4-103 Gastric lymphosarcoma in an 8-year-old cat with inappetence. The animal had tested
positive for the feline leukemia virus. A physical examination revealed a palpable abdominal mass.
A and B, Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs showed a soft tissue massinvolving the stomach.
Gastroscopic examination showed a single mass along the distal lesser curvature and several promi-
nent linear masses in the antrum. C, Retroversion view showing the normal fundus and gastro-
esophageal junction. D and E, Mass effect in the antral canal has caused marked occlusion. At the 
top of the field of view, note the cavernous area with debris. The pylorus is not in view. The endo-
'sudeioioud al yo uonoq aul ie uaas lauuml al yanoiun shioid aul on paoueape sem adoss
CHAPTER 4 Gastroscopy · 167
Hgure 4-104 Examination of the cat shown in
Figure 4-103,performed 5 weeks after presenta
tion. Chemotherapy dramatically decreased the
size of the antral masses. The endoscope is in the
same position as in Figure 4-103, D-E. The py-
lorus is closed, but its orifice is seen in the center
of the field. One of the antral masses, although
somewhat smaller, is still evident in the left aspect
of the feld. The debris-filled cavern is no longer
present.
Figure 4-105 Gastric adenocarcinoma in a 14-year-old Siamese cat with a 2-week history of anorexia but only occasional vomiting. A and
B, Barium contrast radiographs showed incomplete gastric flling and mucosal irregularity.
Continued
168·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
D
E
一
Figure 4-105, cont'd C, Immediate view when the endoscope entered the stomach. Note the thickened, irregular rugal folds. The walls of
the stomach were poorly distensible in response to air insufflation. D, Mucosal irregularity and focal hemorrhages along the distal greater
curvature. E, White plaque material (left of center) adhering to the mucosa of the greater curvature. F, Prominent folds in the antral canal.
The pylorus is to the left of center at the 11-o'clock position. Multiple biopsy samples were obtained from the gastric-body lesions. The tis-
sue felt unusually hard when the biopsy forceps were closed. This tactile perception is often associated with malignancy.
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy169
B
per week and no worrisome associated signs). The complete blood cell count, biochemical profle, serum thyroxine concentration, uri-
nalysis, fecal examination for parasites, and survey radiographs of the thorax and abdomen were unremarkable. The dog was referred for
endoscopy because the owner was anxious to determine why the animal was vomiting. A, View from the proximal antrum. The antral walls
are smooth and normal. However, a proliferative mass was found in the pylorus. B, Close-up view of the pyloric mass, which is occluding
most of the pyloric orifice. C, View of the pyloric canal near the pyloroduodenal junction after the endoscope was advanced into the py-
loric canal, beneath the mass. The mass extended into the proximal duodenum. The histologic diagnosis was adenocarcinoma. D, Grossly
 normal duodenum in the area of the major duodenal papilla (upper center). This very important finding indicates that resection would not
need to extend very far down the descending duodenum. The duct area appeared unaffected. Note: A 30-cm section of antrum, pylorus, and
duodenum was resected during a 4-hour surgical procedure. No evidence of metastasis was found, and the adenocarcinoma did not involve
 -op asearap diau oi paqsaid se Aderau apeidoionau uan-uot 'uaaaun sm aaaonau saop aui 'sod al jo siaae dap a
denogastric reflux because the animal no longer had a pylorus. The dog lived 3 years after surgery, with no evidence of tumor recurrence.
E, Endoscopic view of the antral-duodenal junction (site of the anastomosis) 8 months after the dog was first examined. The anastomosis
 0h yoi o-g aul ony suipuaixa eaie paapu aul aion) maia jo piay aul ul si umuaponp aul pue uue suseg ieixond aul uaamiaq aiis
12-o'clock position). Results of biopsy specimens obtained from the area were normal (as they were at 12 and 24 months after surgery).
170 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
Figure 4-107 Gastric adenocarcinoma. A, Marked prolif-
erative changes in the lower gastric body, with complete
loss of the normal rugal fold architecture. B, Lower gastric
body with an area of superficial ulceration seen in the lower
feld. C, Close-up view of a mass in the midgastric body.
The mass was rigid and had a very dense wall (suggestive of
neoplasia).Masses such as this one should be sampled as
deeply as possible. If only superficial tissue is obtained, the 
endoscopist may fail to retrieve neoplastic cells. The first 
 four attempts to biopsy the mass yielded very small tissue
samples, but on the fifth attempt the biopsy instrument 
advanced inside the mass (the view in this photo). A num-
ber of large tissue samples were obtained,and the diagnosis
 of adenocarcinoma was confrmed. Biopsy specimens were
also obtained from the ulcerated area shown in B.
Atlas fOr mIscellaneOus fIndINGs
Hgure 4-108 Secondary changes (thickening) of
the rugal folds in a 12-year-old mixed-breed dog
with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. In this syndrome,
 gastrin is released into the circulation by a gastri-
noma (a tumor usually located in the pancreas).
The release of gastrin leadsto expansion ofthe pa-
 rietal cell mass with an enhanced capacity to secrete
gastric acid. The rugal folds thicken because ofthe
 trophic effect of gastrin. This dog also had hyper-
emia ofthe distal esophagus. Between 90% and
 95% of humans with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
have upper gastrointestinal ulceration at some time
during the course of their disease. No ulceration
was identified in this dog. A gastrinoma was found
 in the pancreas at surgery. (Courtesy of Robert G.
Sherding.)
CHAPTER 4Gastroscopy
171
AtlaS fOr HaIrballs IN CatS
It is not unusual to encounter small accumulations of hair during gastroscopy in cats. In
many cases a hairball is an incidental finding and is not diagnostic of a specific disorder.
Occasionally a large tubular hairball in the antrum causes outflow obstruction. Hairballs
can usually be easily removed with the use of a foreign body grasper. Gastric and duodenal
biopsy specimens should stillbe obtained if clinical signs include vomiting, inappetence, or
weight loss. Vomiting in cats is less likely to be caused by hairballs than by inflammatory
 disorders, which may disrupt normal motility patterns.
Hgure 4-109 Small accumulation of hair in the
distal gastric body and proximal antrum of a cat
with chronic intermittent vomiting. The angulus
is at the lower right aspect of the field. Gastric
biopsy results were normal, and duodenal biopsy
results revealed inflammatory bowel disease. The
hair was thought to be an incidental finding.
B
Figure 4-110 A, A large tubular hairball extends
slightly into the distal gastric body from the
antrum. The angulus is in the right aspect of the 
feld. B, The hairball has been grasped with a two-
prong foreign body grasper and is being pulled
into the gastric body. C,The retrieved hairball
Note: These photographs are of the cat with gastric
lymphosarcoma that was discussed in Figures 4-97
through 4-100. The owner reported recurrence
 of intermittent vomiting 19 weeks after the
animal began receiving chemotherapy. Based on
gastroscopy (no evidence of any mass recurrence)
and the cessation of vomiting after the hairball 
removal,the vomiting was caused bythe hairball
 and rot loss of remission from lymphosarcoma.
172 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOr PHySALOPTerA
 Physaloptera species are small, stout nematode parasites occasionally found in the stomach
of dogs and cats. Adult worms are creamy white, sometimes tightly coiled, and 1 to 4 cm
long, but the smaller larvae are difficult to visualize. Chronic intermittent vomiting is the
 observed. Fecal centrifugation tests will occasionally reveal Physaloptera ova. The dia gnosis
is not established in some cases until one or more worms are visualized at endoscopy.
 There may be gastric erosions and a moderate lymphoplasmacytic or eosinophilic gastritis.
Parasites observed at endoscopy can be manually removed. Definitive treatment with a
single dose of pyrantel pamoate eliminates the parasite from dogs while two doses given 3
weeks apart are required for cats.
Hgure 4-111  Physaloptera parasite on the gastric
mucosa of a dog (center of feld). The white image
at the right (3-o'clock position) is due to light
reflection. See also Figure 8-18 for another example
of Physaloptera parasites observed at gastroscopy.
(Courtesy of Michael S. Leib.)
CHAPTER
Colonoscopy
Michael S.Leib
 here are many indications for an endoscopic examina-
 a thorough and logical diagnostic plan should be followed.
 tion of the colon in small animal practice. In my practice,
An initial diagnostic plan for a dog or cat with chronic large
colonoscopy is a safe, minimally invasive, and high-yield
bowel diarrhea should include the following: complete his-
diagnostic procedure. Because the large intestine of dogs and
tory, thorough physical examination including digital rectal
cats is simple anatomically (Figure 6- 1, A-B, and Figure 6-2),
examination, multiple fecal examinations for parasites by a
Giardia-sensitive technique, direct saline fecal smear, rectal
appreciation of normal and abnormal endoscopic anatomy,
cytologic analysis, a highly digestible diet trial, and therapeu-
a sound understanding of the colonoscopy technique, and
tic deworming for whipworms (dogs).
only minimal endoscopic experience to become proficient
 If fecal examination results are negative and diarrhea does
at performing colonoscopy. The endoscopic techniques
 not resolve after the diet trial and deworming, further diag-
described and the photographs contained within this chap-
nostic evaluation is necessary. The next step is to perform a
ter will assist veterinarians in developing sound colonoscopic
fecal enterotoxin assay or treat with amoxicillin, ampicillin,
skills. However, it must be emphasized that colonoscopy
or metronidazole to investigate the possibility of Clostridium
must be utilized as part of a rational diagnostic plan for it
perfringens enterotoxicosis. If signs of large bowel diarrhea
to effectively help in the diagnosis of an animal's large bowel
continue, colonoscopy should be performed. Many of the
 problem. Many animals with signs of large bowel disease
diseases listed in Box 6-1 can only be definitively diagnosed
may not need colonoscopy for an accurate diagnosis to be
or excluded by mucosal biopsy. Although full-thickness
reached and for appropriate therapy to be administered.
biopsy samples can be collected via exploratory celiotomy,
mucosal samples can be obtained in a much less invasive
■ INDICATIONS
 manner via colonoscopy. Rarely, bacteriologic cultures for
Salmonella spp. or Campylobacter spp. or a barium enema is
Colonoscopy is an important component of the diagnostic plan
required for diagnosis. Barium enemas are useful in evalu-
for dogs and cats with problems such as chronic large bowel
ating the cecum and ascending and transverse colons when
diarrhea, or tenesmus, excess fecal mucus, or hematochezia
only a rigid endoscope is available for endoscopic assessment
that accompanies formed feces. Less commonly, colonoscopy
of the descending colon. When a flexible endoscope is avail-
 may be indicated for animals with obstipation or severe acute
 able for colonoscopy, a barium enema is not necessary for
hematochezia, with or without diarrhea. Therapeutically,
the diagnosis of chronic large bowel diarrhea.
balloon dilation (discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3) of
Colonoscopy permits direct postoperative observation of
colonic strictures can be performed with colonoscopic guid-
the sites of submucosal or colonic resection and anastomosis
ance. In addition, colonoscopy may be used for therapeutic
 performed to remove tumors. Early detection of tumor recur-
monitoring of inflammatory and neoplastic colonic disorders.
 rence increases the animal's chances for effective therapy.
The most common indication for performing colonos-
I recommend surveillance colonoscopy every 3 to 6 months
copy is to grossly and microscopically evaluate the colonic
 after removal of a malignant colonic tumor. Colonoscopy
mucosa of dogs and cats with chronic large bowel diarrhea.
also allows evaluation of the effectiveness of chemotherapy
Clinical signs of large bowel diarrhea include frequent def-
used to treat colonic lymphoma. Accurate staging of lym-
ecation of small fecal volumes, tenesmus, hematochezia, and
phoma by assessment of mucosal biopsy samples during che-
excess fecal mucus. Weight loss is uncommon. Because there
motherapy allows for appropriate reduction of the frequency,
are many causes of chronic large bowel diarrhea (Box 6-1),
or termination, of chemotherapy. In humans, malignant
217
218·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
C
B
Figure 6-1 A, Ventrodorsal radiograph after barium enema in a dog. R, Rectum within the pelvic canal; D, descending colon, moving
The arrow shows the location of the cecocolic sphincter. The flexure between the descending and transverse colon is not as distinct as
usual, at an approximate 45-degree angle. B, Ventrodorsal radiograph after barium enema in a dog. The flling of the colon with barium
is incomplete. The small arrow shows the location ofthe ileocolic sphincter. The medium-sized arrow points to a large deflection of the
descending colon toward the left body wall from the pelvic canal. The large arrow shows an area of redundancy in the transverse colon. This
area could present another flexure to maneuver the endoscope past. Opioid premedication might increase colonic tone and make this area
easier to pass the endoscope through (see Figure 6-9). (A, Courtesy of Dr. Don Barber, Blacksburg, Va.)
transformation of adenomatous polyps occurs. Because the
is particularly useful in cats and small dogs. The maximum
tendency exists for polyps to recur in a susceptible individual,
length of rigid endoscopes of approximately 25 cm lim-
 periodic endoscopic surveillance is routinely used to identify
its examination to the descending colon. However, most
 and remove additional polypoid lesions before they develop
inflammatory disorders diffusely involve the colon, so visu-
into adenocarcinoma. Although polyps are relatively uncom-
alization and biopsy limited to the descending colon is usu-
mon in dogs, I recommend colonoscopic surveillance every
 ally diagnostic. In addition, many tumors are located within
 6 to 12 months after the removal of an adenomatous polyp.
the distal colon and rectum and can be adequately evalu-
Colonoscopy is also a vital component of the diagnostic
ated with a rigid endoscope. Cecal inversion, whipworms,
 plan if defecation of formed stool is accompanied by tenes-
 and inflammatory or neoplastic diseases located only in the
mus, dyschezia, hematochezia, or excessive mucus produc-
ascending and transverse colons and the cecum cannot be
tion. These signs often accompany disorders of the distal
diagnosed with the use of rigid endoscopy. Rectal or uterine
colon and rectum. A diagnosis can often be reached by per-
 a e (s  s) s a
formance of either rigid or flexible colonoscopy. Finally,
than the rigid endoscope are suitable for obtaining biopsy
animals with obstipation that have obstructive lesions vis-
samples (Figure 6-4, A-B). Visualization of mucosal detail
ible on radiographs should have colonoscopy performed to
and biopsy forceps control are not as good with rigid endo-
obtain biopsy specimens so that the cause of obstruction can
scopes as with flexible ones.
be assessed further.
Flexible Colonoscopy
■ INSTRUMENTATION
Flexible colonoscopy allows evaluation of the mucosal sur-
Rigid Colonoscopy
face of the entire colon, cecum, and, in some medium or
large dogs, the distal ileum. A flexible endoscope with an
Rigid proctosigmoidoscopes are relatively inexpensive and
outside diameter less than 10 mm and a working length of
easy to use (Figure 6-3). They are available in both adult
 100 crm is my endoscope of choice for colonoscopy in dogs
(18-mm) and pediatric (9-mm) diameters, and the latter
 and cats (Figure 6-5). Occasionally, a 140-cm-long endoscope
CHAPTER 6（
Colonoscopy
219
Hgure 6-3 Welch Allyn rigid proctosigmoidoscopy equipment.
A,Bulb insufflators. B, Adult endoscope with obturator inserted.
Working length is 25 cm and outside diameter is 18 mm. Air
insuflation tube is attached to endoscope. C, Viewing lens is
open due to placement of obturator. D, Angled rotating biopsy
forceps. E, Shorter endoscope with obturator inserted. Working
length is 15 cm and outside diameter is 14 mm. F, Light source
transformer. G, Light source that can be attached to endoscope.
Figure 6-2 Ventrodorsal radiograph after barium enema in a cat.
The descending colon,the continuationofthe rectum,goes from
the midline, within the pelvic canal, toward the left body wall. The
■ PATIENT PREPARATION
transverse colon, ascending colon, and cecum (large arrow) are
short. The slitlike ileocolic sphincter enters the ascending colon
Preparation for rigid colonoscopy requires removal of feces
(small arrow). The majority ofthe colon is contained within the left
from the descending colon. Fasting and administration of
side ofthe abdomen. (Courtesy of Dr. Don Barber, Blacksburg, Va.)
two to three enemas, as described further on, is usually ade-
quate. Proper preparation for flexible colonoscopy requires
complete evacuation of fecal material from the colon and
production of a clear ileal effluent (Figure 6-6, A-F). Food
BOX6-1
should be withheld from the animal 24 to 36 hours before
Common Causes of Chronic Large Bowel
the procedure. I administer a high-volume colonic lavage
Diarrhea
solution (i.e., GoLYTELY, Braintree Laboratories, Braintree,
Mass.) and multiple enemas. Colonic lavage solutions are
Dietary indiscretion/intolerance
 iso-osmotic mixtures of water, electrolytes, and polyethyl-
Trichuris vuipis (dogs)
ene glycol. As the gastrointestinal (GI) lavage solution moves
 Inflammatory bowel disease 
through the intestines, there is little net absorption or secre-
Lymphoplasmacellular colitis
tion of fluid or electrolytes. As the solution exits the GI tract,
 Eosinophilic colitis
Idiopathic large bowel diarrhea (dogs)
it physically flushes feces and cleanses the colonic mucosal
surface. Dogs are given two doses of 60 mL/kg body weight,
Ilrritable bowel syndrome
Fiber-responsive large bowel diarrhea
2 to 4 hours apart, via orogastric intubation the afternoon
Clostridium perfringens enterotoxicosis
before colonoscopy. Cats are given two doses of 30 mL/kg,
Neoplasia
2 to 4 hours apart, via nasoesophageal intubation the after-
Adenomatous polyp (dog)
noon before colonoscopy. In addition, a warm water enema
Adenocarcinoma
(20 mL/kg body weight) should be given after each admin-
Lymphoma
istration of GI lavage solution, as well as a third enema 1 to
Histoplasmosis
2 hours before colonoscopy. The well-lubricated enema tube
should be gently (Figure 6-7) inserted a length equal to that
from the anus to the last rib.
Care should be exercised during the administration of
may be necessary to reach the cecum in giant breeds of dogs.
the GI lavage solution as aspiration can be fatal. Vomit-
Four-way control of the endoscope tip is vital for making the
ing or regurgitation of high-volume GI lavage solutions is
turns into the transverse and ascending colons. Obtaining
relatively common in dogs, so veterinarians should be ready
adequate size tissue samples for histologic interpretation will
to quickly remove an orogastric tube, to allow the dog to
be facilitated by a biopsy channel of at least 2.8 mm.
 expel the liquid from the pharynx and mouth and reduce
220 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
shaped rigid biopsy forceps.
the chances of aspiration. I do not recommend sedating
animals for orogastric or nasogastric intubation because
it depresses protective cough and gag reflexes. Aggressive
animals or those too diffcult to restrain are prepared with
three to five additional enemas in lieu of oral lavage solu-
tions. Colonic preparation is often suboptimal in these ani-
mals. Vigorous flushing (via an accessory pump attached to
the biopsy channel) (see Figure 6-6, G) and suctioning of
fluid may be necessary in animals prepared without lavage
solutions so that a complete endoscopic examination can
be performed. Because of the labor intensity associated
with administration of lavage solutions and the potential
a   ai sid as se 
enemas for colonic preparation. In these cases, visualiza-
tion ofthe ascending colon and cecum is often reduced, and
Hgure 6-5 Olympus GIF XQ10 flexible endoscope with a working
as already described, additional flushing with an accessory
length of 102.5 cm, an outside diameter of 9.8 mm, and a 2.8-mm
biopsy channel.Four-way tip control allows bending 210 degrees
pump and suction is necessary to complete the examina-
up, 90 degrees down, 100 degrees right, and 100 degrees left.
tion. However, some cats can be adequately prepared with
only multiple enemas because of their relatively short colons
(see Figure 6-2).
phosphate bowel preparation. These findings have greatly
 In humans, low-volume hypertonic phosphate solu-
decreased the use of hypertonic phosphate solutions in
tions have been shown to be as effective for bowel cleans-
humans, especially in the elderly and in those with preex-
ing as high-volume GI lavage solutions. Potential benefits
isting renal disease.
of low-volume preparations include ease of administra-
tion, less discomfort, and a greater percentage of patients
Restraint
completing preparation. The hypertonic solution osmoti-
 cally draws water into the bowel lumen, flushing feces and
Sedation or general anesthesia is needed for a thorough
cleansing the mucosal surface. Hypertonic phosphate solu-
colonic evaluation and for minimizing the discomfort and
tion, 1 mL/kg, was shown to be safe in a group of healthy
 anxiety of the animal. Rigid colonoscopy can often be per-
dogs undergoing colonoscopy, although clinically occult
formed with only chemical restraint (i.e., 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg
hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia occurred. Unfor-
IV oxymorphone and 0.05 mg/kg IV acepromazine),
tunately, bowel preparation with and without enemas
although some patients may require general anesthesia.
and bisacodyl was inadequate, and colonic cleansing was
Passage of the flexible endoscope into the transverse and
ascending colons and cecum causes stretching of mes-
(Figure 6-8). Since this study was performed, renal fail-
enteric attachments, which results in discomfort. Thus,
 ure has been identified in some humans after hypertonic
flexible colonoscopy should usually be performed with
CHAPTER 6 Colonoscopy · 221
B
have flushed feces from the colon, and the mucosal surface is clearly visible. The mucosa is smooth and shiny, and submucosal blood vessels
are clearly visible.B,Formed fecal material is exiting the ileum. Scatteredbits offeces are visible throughout the image,making visualization
ofthe mucosa and collection ofbiopsy samples diffcult. The ileocolic sphincter can be seen surrounding the feces (arrow). The cecocolic
sphincter is open (midportion of image toward the 9-o'clock position), and the cecal wall (C) can be visualized. This image demonstrates the
C, Very inadequate preparation in the descending colon, where an adherent mat of feces covers most ofthe mucosal surface. This material
is very diffcult to flush away from the mucosal surface and can plug the endoscope's suction channel if aspirated. Small areas of colonic
mucosa can be seen from 10 o'clock to 1 o'clock. The lumen is the dark area at 12 o'clock. D, Large volume ofliquid feces in the descending
colon. This fluid can be suctioned and the mucosal surface washed off with an external pump through the biopsy channel.
Continued
 general anesthesia. I have found that premedication of
Rigid endoscopes have a smooth obturator (see Figure
dogs with opiates may increase colonic tone, making pas-
6-3, B) that can be inserted to assist the passage of a well-
sage of the endoscope through the descending colon easier
lubricated endoscope through the anal sphincters into the
(Figure 6-9).
rectum. The obturator should be removed, the viewing lens
(see Figure 6-3, C) closed over the end ofthe endoscope, and
the rigid endoscope advanced under direct visualization while
■ PROCEDURE
the bulb is manually squeezed (see Figure 6-3, A) and air is
Rigid Colonoscopy
insufflated into the colon. Advancing the endoscope without
a clear luminal view can lead to colonic perforation. Insuffla-
Rigid colonoscopy can be performed with the animal stand-
tion distends the colon and flattens out mucosal folds, which
 are most prominent in the rectum and distal descending
tion of the endoscope a digital rectal examination should be
colon (Figure 6-10, A-B). An inability to distend the colon
performed to rule out the possibility of a rectal obstruction,
may indicate severe fibrosis secondary to chronic inflamma-
mass, ulcer, diverticulum, or perineal hernia into which
tion or the presence of a stricture. The endoscope should be
inadvertent placement of the endoscope could lead to rectal
slowly advanced with constant air insufflation as far into the
perforation.
descending colon as possible, as long as it advances easily.
222■PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
The Endopump
Figure 6-6, cont'd E, It is best to try to advance the endoscope past this fecal mass rather than to break it apart by flushing with an external
pump. Air should be insufflated to distend the colon, and the endoscope should be advanced along the 6-o'clock to 11-o'clock side (dorsal
surface) of the feces, where a small area of black lumen is visible. When the endoscope is being withdrawn, distending the colon and
nudging the mass with the tip of the endoscope may move the fecal mass, which may allow adequate visualization of the mucosa beneath
it. The preparation in the remainder of the colon was adequate. F, A moderate amount of adherent fecal material in the colon of a cat. The
fecal material is obscuring visualization of the mucosa and must be flushed away from the mucosal surface. G, Fujinon endopump. The 
tubing is attached to the endoscope's biopsy channel. The rate of fluid administration can be regulated, and administration of fluid can be 
'aens iesom ai moy [eaie leag iaiaue aeme susng roy imyasn Aiaa si duund leuaixa uv iepad jooy e Aq palouos 
Figure 6-7 Iatrogenic mucosal hemorrhage in the descending
Hgure 6-8 Adherent fecal material in the colon of a dog that received
colon of a dog secondary to the trauma of enema tube insertion.
low-volume hypertonic phosphate for preparation. The adherent
The linear nature of the lesions suggests an iatrogenic origin.
fecal material was very difficult and time-consuming to flush away
Additionally, the mucosa surrounding the lesion is normal, and
from the mucosal surface with an accessory pump attached to the
 submucosal blood vessels are clearly visible.
sady auo-mo papns sop au ui leiao jauueu Asdoq
phosphate consistently produced inadequate preparation.
CHAPTER 6 Colonoscopy· 223
Complete evaluation of the colon is performed as the endo-
scope is slowly withdrawn. Air must be constantly insufflated
to allow clear visualization of the descending colon.
To obtain biopsies, the endoscopist should place the tip
of the endoscope within 1 cm of the area to be sampled.
 The viewing lens should be opened, which allows the colon
to collapse as air moves out through the open end of the
endoscope. The area to be sampled should be visible at or
within the tip of the endoscope. The rigid biopsy forceps are
advanced through the endoscope and opened, and the area
to be sampled is gently grasped (see Figures 6-3, D, and 6-4,
A-B). Before the forceps are completely closed, they should
 be gently moved back and forth. If only mucosa and sub-
mucosa have been grasped, the tissue should be freely moy-
able. However, if the grasped tissue remains frmly attached
Figure 6-9 Tonic concentric rings in the descending colon of a
 to the colonic wall, the forceps has gathered muscular layers
dog that received morphine as premedication. This increased tone
makes passage of the endoscope to the cecum much easier than if 
 and colonic perforation is possible. The forceps should be
the colon is flaccid (see Figure 6-1, B).
 opened, and a new site at least 1 cm away should be selected.
Figure 6-10 A, Initial endoscopic appearance of mucosal folds in the rectum. The large arrow shows the most likely location of the lumen.
However, the small arrow shows another potential location of the lumen. Additional air insufflation and tightening the grip of the perianal
pouair e jo uolos supuassap aul ui spioy [esoon g uaum au puaisip pue spiy aul uane diau lm adossopua aui punoe sanss
after some air insufflation and distension of the lumen. The arrow points to the lumen that must be further distended so that the endoscope
 can be safely advanced. C, An assistant grasps the perianal tissue tightly around the endoscope, allowing insufflated air to distend the rectal
mucosal folds.
224 ■PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Biopsy samples should be collected from visible lesions and
normal-appearing mucosa. A minimum of three locations
within the descending colon should be sampled.
FlexibleColonoscopy
Flexible colonoscopy is performed with the animal in leff lat-
eral recumbency. Before insertion of the endoscope a digital
rectal examination should be performed to rule out the pos-
sibility of a rectal obstruction, mass, ulceration, diverticu-
lum, or perineal hernia, into which inadvertent placement
of the endoscope could lead to rectal perforation. The well-
lubricated endoscope should be advanced several centime-
ters into the rectum, air insuflated to distend the colon, and
the endoscope advanced slowly as long as a patent lumen can
be visualized. An assistant should grasp the perianal tissues
Hgure 6-11 The endoscope has been advanced several
tightly around the endoscope to prevent insufflated air from
centimeters, and the luminal view has been lost. The angulation
escaping from the colon and to allow the rectal mucosal folds
control knobs must be turned,the tip of the endoscope centralized
within the center of the lumen, air insufflated, and the endoscope
to distend (see Figure 6- 10, A-C). Advancement of the endo-
scope, with a clear view of the center of the colonic lumen,
safely advanced as long as the lumen is clearly visible. Normal
smooth and shiny mucosa and submucosal blood vessels are
will reduce the possibility for colonic damage or perfora-
visible. A small amount of translucent fecal debris is present
tion. The central portion of the lumen should be visualized
(arrows). This debris does not impair visualization of the mucosa
by turning the two angulation control knobs, air should be
and does not need to be flushed away.
insufflated to distend the lumen and flatten the mucosa, and
the insertion tube should be advanced as long as the lumen
is clearly visible. In some locations the endoscope can only
be advanced 1 to 2 cm before the central luminal view is lost
(Figure 6-11), while in others it may be possible to advance
5 to 10 cm or more. If the central view of the lumen can-
not be located, the endoscope should be slowly withdrawn
until the lumen becomes visible. Visualization of the cen-
tral lumen of a long segment of intestines is called a “tunnel 
view" (Figure 6-12). The three-part philosophy of safe and
effective colonoscopy, “centralize, insufflate, and advance,"
is repeated as the endoscope is advanced toward the cecum.
 Flexible endoscopes have automatic air insufflation,
which can be controlled by fingertip pressure covering the
opening on the lower button (air/water valve) on the con-
trol handle. Insufflation distends the rectum and colon and
flattens out mucosal folds, which are most prominent in the
Hgure 6-12 A tunnel view of the colon. The lumen is visible
rectum and aboral descending colon (see Figure 6-10, A-B).
as the dark area at the top of the image. The endoscope may be
 Inability to distend the colon may indicate severe fibrosis
safely advanced up the lumen, usually 5 to 10 cm, until the central
luminal view is lost. The mucosal surface is smooth and shiny.
secondary to chronic inflammation or the presence of a
and submucosal blood vessels are clearly visible. A small amount
stricture.
of translucent brown fecal debris is present. This debris does
As the endoscope is advanced through the rectum, a par-
not impair visualization of the mucosa and does not need to be
flushed away.
tial fold, or flexure, is encountered as the distal colon leaves
the midline of the pelvic canal and is located on the left side
of the abdomen (see Figures 6-1, A-B, and 6-2). In most ani-
transverse colon courses across the abdomen from the left
mals, advancement past this flexure requires continued air
to the right side. This junction may be less distinct in cats
insufflation and a slight directional change of the endoscope's
and some dogs and the angle less than 90 degrees. Contin-
tip, while in others a maneuver similar to that described fur-
ued air insufflation will reduce the angle of this flexure if the
ther on for entering the transverse colon is necessary. As
endoscopist is patient. The tip of the endoscope should be
the endoscope is advanced “up" the descending colon, the
deflected in a dorsal direction (from the left body wall toward
splenic flexure (the junction of the descending and transverse
the right), air insufflation continued, and the insertion tube
colons) is encountered (Figure 6-13, A-B). This flexure rep-
advanced slowly into the transverse colon. The novice endos-
resents an approximate 90-degree change of direction as the
 copist should determine how to rotate the two angulation
CHAPTER 6 Colonoscopy· 225
1777
B
C
06 um oi sieadde uauni aui (a) so e ui pue (v) ies e un uonouni uoos asiasuen-uoos suipuassap io ^anxa sualds el-g aanb
pauape aq pinous adossoua au uoos asiaasueil aul iatua oi (smoun) amxag ro piog aut puonaq duoisod yoio-e aut premoi saara
orad to the flexure against the mucosa,the tip of the endoscope deflected dorsally, and the endoscope gently slid along the mucosa until
atunnel view of the transverse colon is obtained. C, Diagrammatic representation of the “mucosal slide-by” technique used to advance
aae si dau dpas a u aaaue si aosuago daudd auaxae isd dsua 
past the flexure and is against the mucosa, producing a “red out." In the third panel,the tip is deflcted as previously mentioned. As the
endoscope is slowly advanced the lumen is not visible for 2 to 4 cm, but the mucosa can be seen to slide by the endoscope's tip. After further
advancement of the tip and insufflation of air,the lumen orad of the fexure will once again become visible (bottom panel).
control knobs to achieve this 90-degree deflection, straighten
angulation control knob (left/right) is maximally deflected,
the endoscope's tip, advance the endoscope orad to the flex-
 application of slight clockwise or counterclockwise torque on
ure against the mucosa (producing a “red out"), angulate the
the insertion tube and control handle will often help obtain a
endoscope's tip as previously memorized, and slowly advance
clear luminal tunnel view.
the endoscope into the transverse colon. Visualization of the
The transverse colon is short in the dog (5 to 8 cm) and
lumen wil be lost for approximately 2 to 4 cm (as the endo-
cat (2 to 4 cm) and crosses the abdomen from the left to
scope is against the mucosa, producing a “red out"), but
the right (see Figures 6-1, A-B, and 6-2). In cats, the trans-
will return as the transverse colon is entered and distended
verse colon joins the ascending colon just past the midline.
with air. The endoscope should easily slide along the mucosa
Another fold, the hepatic flexure, will be reached at the junc-
(Figure 6-13C), and movement should be distinctly visible
tion of the orad portion of the transverse colon and aborad
 on the monitor or through the viewing lens. If movement is
 ascending colon. Again, this flexure may be less distinct in
not visualized or the endoscope does not advance easily, the
cats than in dogs. The tip of the endoscope must be deflected
endoscope should be slowly withdrawn, visualization of the
caudally (toward the anus), and the endoscope should be
lumen of the orad descending colon reestablished, and the
 slowly advanced into the ascending colon in a manner simi-
procedure repeated. If, after the transverse colon is entered,
lar to that utilized to enter the transverse colon (Figure 6- 14).
a tunnel view of the lumen is not visible and the outer
The ascending colon is a very short region in the dog
226 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Hgure 6-16 Ascending colon in a cat. The cecocolic sphincter
is open (sall arrows), and the entire cecum (C)is visible. The
slitlike ileocolic sphincter (large arrow) is partially open.
Figure 6-14 Ventrodorsal abdominal radiograph of a dog with
the tip of the endoscope positioned in the ascending colon. Notice
the gas-distended small bowel (arrow) that developed during
colonoscopy.
Hgure 6-17 Cecum in a Greyhound. Notice the clearly visualized
submucosal blood vessels. This long corkscrew-like organ contin-
ues past the fold from 8 o'clock to 6 o'clock.
 is reached or resistance to advancement occurs (Figure 6- 17).
If resistance is met anywhere in the colon, the endoscope
should never be forced forward, as this can lead to colonic
damage or perforation. Careful evaluation for the presence
of whipworms should be performed in dogs (Figure 6-18).
The cecum of the cat is extremely short (1 to 3 cm). Because
Figure 6-15 Ascending colon in a dog. The cecocolic sphincter is
open (11 o'clock).It should be easy to pass the endoscope into the
the sphincter is usually open, the entire cecum can be
 inspected from the ascending colon (see Figure 6- 16).
cecum. The ileocolic sphincter is closed (arrow).
The ileocolic sphincter enters into the ascending colon
adjacent to the cecocolic sphincter (see Figures 6-1, B, and
(3 to 6 cm) and cat (1 to 2 cm) (see Figures6-1, A-B, and 6-2).
6-2). In dogs, it often protrudes into the lumen and appears 
as a thick sphincter (see Figure 6-15). In some dogs, both
and can usually be entered in medium or large dogs (Figure
sphincters may be open (Figure 6-19), which makes iden-
6-15). It is usually open or partially open in cats (Figure
tification of the ileum or cecum difficult. The edge of the
6- 16). It is often open in dogs, but when closed, it appears as
cecocolic sphincter is usually flat, while the edge of the
a flat sphincter. In dogs, if it is partially or completely closed,
ileocolic sphincter is usually raised. If the location of each
the tip of the endoscope should be placed within the center of
sphincter is in doubt, the endoscope can be advanced into
the sphincter, air insufflated, and the endoscope slowly and
the largest opening: the cecum will have a smooth appear-
gently advanced. The endoscope should be advanced into
ance, whereas the ileum will be rough and granular due to
this spiral structure (8 to 30 cm in length) until the blind end
its villus structure. Passage of the endoscope into the ileum
CHAPTER 6(
Colonoscopy· 227
Hgure 6-20 Blind passage of abiopsy forceps (B) into the ileum
Figure 6-18 Massive numbers of whipworms in the ascending
of a cat. The cecocolic sphincter is open, and the entire cecum
colon of a dog. (Courtesy of Dr. Robert DeNovo, Knoxville, Tenn.)
(C) is visible. This procedure should be performed carefully by
an aq a, aq is aisisan se isidosua paaadxa ue
endoscopist as the forceps lodges against the ileal wall. (Courtesy of
Dr. Todd Tams, Los Angeles, Calif.)
Figure 6-19 Ascending colon in a dog. Both sphincters are open.
The edge of the cecocolic sphincter is usually flat (large arrow),
whereas the edge of the ileocolic sphincter is usually raised (small
arrow).
Hgure 6-21 Ascending colon of a cat. The ileocolic sphincter is
visible at 9 o'clock and in a more lateral position than the head-on
view often obtained in dogs. The cecocolic sphincter (arrows) is
can be accomplished in medium or large dogs. If the ileum
 open, and the entire cecum (C) can be visualized.
 cannot be entered, a blind biopsy can be performed (Figure
6-20). The closed biopsy forceps is slowly advanced through
circumference ofthe colon is observed. As the endoscope tip
the sphincter, opened, gently advanced until the ileal wall is
is withdrawn past flexures, it often is pushed distally and the
area adjacent to the flexure may not be completely visual-
then withdrawn with the biopsy sample. To reduce the risk 
ized. The endoscopist should advance the endoscope and
of ileal perforation, an experienced endoscopist should do
visualize this region carefully.
this procedure gently, and the endoscopist must “feel" the
forceps purchasing against the mucosa. In cats, the ileocolic
areas and from normal areas from each segment of the
sphincter is usually visible on the periphery of the ascending
colon (i.e., cecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, and
colon at the 9-o'clock position. It appears more slitlike than
orad, mid, and aborad descending colon) should be col-
the sphincter in dogs (see Figures 6-16 and 6-21). I do not
lected. No matter how normal the mucosa grossly appears,
recommend ileal intubation in cats because of their small
biopsy specimens should always be collected. Examination
ileal diameter. If necessary, a blind biopsy specimen can be
and collection of biopsy samples should continue until the
collected as just described.
endoscope nears the rectum. In dogs weighing more than 10
Complete evaluation of the colon is performed as
kg, the flexible endoscope should be retroflexed 180 degrees
the endoscope is slowly withdrawn. The tip of the endo-
(full counterclockwise rotation of the inner [up/down]
scope should be slowly rotated to ensure that the entire
angulation control knob) so that the terminal rectum can
228 ■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
B
Figure 6-22 A, The endoscope's tip has been retroflexed 180 degrees by rotation of the inner angulation control knob counterclockwise.
B, Diagrammatic representation of the retroflexion maneuver in the rectum (progression is from top to bottom).
the tip is retroflexed, the endoscope should be slowly
withdrawn toward the terminal rectum (Figure 6-23). Air
should be continuously insufflated, and the grasp of the
perianal tissue around the endoscope should be tightened.
As mucosal folds are encountered, clockwise and counter-
clockwise torque may need to be applied to the insertion
tube and control handle so that the terminal rectum can
be visualized (Figure 6-24). When the anorectal junction is
reached, clockwise and counterclockwise torque should be
applied to the insertion tube and control handle so that the
mucosa behind the insertion tube can be visualized. This
common site for neoplasia is often incompletely examined
when the endoscopist is viewing forward. The tip of the
endoscope should be straightened out before withdrawal
through the anus.
Figure 6-23 The endoscope has been fully retroflexed in the
 To obtain a biopsy sample, the endoscopist should place
distal descending colon in a dog. The insertion tube is visible in
the center of the image. As the endoscope is slowly withdrawn,
the tip of the endoscope approximately 1 cm from the
the retroflexed tip may get caught on a mucosal fold (arrows).
intended biopsy site. Some air should be suctioned from
By application of clockwise and counterclockwise torque on
the lumen to allow the mucosa to relax, which will enable
the insertion tube and control handle,the endoscope can be
a larger piece of tissue to be collected. A biopsy forceps
withdrawn past the fold toward the anorectal junction.
should be placed into the biopsy channel and advanced
until it protrudes from the endoscope tip and is clearly
be better visualized (Figure 6-22, A-B). Retroflexion is best
visible. The endoscopy assistant opens the forceps (Figure
achieved when a tunnel view of the descending colon is
6-25, A), and the endoscopist advances the forceps until it
 obtained about 20 cm from the anus. The lumen should
touches the mucosa. The forceps should be advanced with
be maximally distended, the inner angulation control knob
gentle pressure, after making initial contact, to ensure an
 completely deflected in a counterclockwise direction (up),
adequate sample is grasped. Biopsy samples can be obtained
the control knob held in place by the lef thumb, and the
with the forceps perpendicular to the mucosa at all flexures
insertion tube vigorously advanced for 5 to 10 cm. After
 and in the cecum. However, many lesions or areas must be
CHAPTER 6 Colonoscopy · 229
A
Figure 6-24 Retrofexed view of the anorectal junction in a dog.
The retroflexed endoscope has been completely withdrawn past
mucosal folds to provide visualization of the anorectal junction.
The mucosal surface is normal, and submucosal blood vessels are
visible.
sampled with the endoscope parallel to the colonic lumen.
Often, this makes it diffcult to grasp the intended tissue 
 a, r d a sdn so  
colon. After the forceps has exited the endoscope and is vis-
ible,the endoscope's tip should be angled toward the colonic
wall to provide a more head-on view. Forceps with needles
can be helpful because the needle enters the tissue, holding
the forceps over the biopsy site. The assistant then closes the
forceps (Figure 6-25, B), and the biopsy sample is “broken
off" by the endoscopist by withdrawing the forceps through
the biopsy channel (Figure 6-25, C). The tissue should be
put on a moist, flat surface (i.e., foam pad) and placed into
formalin (Chapter 8). A rigid biopsy forceps can be used to
obtain a large tissue sample from a mass in the rectum or
distal descending colon. The forceps can be passed along-
side of the flexible endoscope so that the sample is procured
under direct visualization. A larger sample may allow an
accurate diagnosis when the surface of the mass is necrotic
or inflamed.
The risk ofbiopsy-associated colonic perforation with the
use of a flexible endoscope is lessthan with a rigid endoscope
because of the small size of the forceps. It is rare that tis-
Hgure 6-25 Obtaining a biopsy sarmple with flexible forceps in the
sue samples deeper than the submucosa would be obtained
colon of acat.A,The biopsy forceps have been passed through
when a flexible endoscope is used. However, flexible for-
the biopsy channel and are protruding from the tip of the endo-
ceps can be advanced through an abnormal colonic wall if
scope, approximately 1 to 2 cm from the area to be sampled. The
too much pressure is applied as the forceps approaches the
endoscopy assistant gently opens the biopsy forceps. The endos-
mucosa.
copist advances the forceps until it contacts the mucosa. B, The
 Brush cytology can be a helpful diagnostic technique if
biopsy forceps have been closed by the endoscopy assistant. The
endoscopist begins to slowly withdraw the forceps. If the sample
 neoplasia is suspected. A guarded cytology brush can be
has been collected from the correct location, the endoscopist con-
advanced into the biopsy channel, extended from its protec-
tinues to withdraw the forceps, tearing off the biopsy. C, Close-
tive sheath, and rubbed back and forth across the intended
up view of the biopsy site. A small amount of hemorrhage flls in
area, gently exfoliating cells. The brush is withdrawn into
the iatrogenic ulcer crater.
its protective sheath, and the entire accessory is withdrawn
from the endoscope. The brush is extended from its protec-
tive sheath and gently rolled across a glass slide. Staining
230 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
with a Romanowsky stain and microscopic evaluation may
provide a rapid diagnosis of colonic tumors.
If a foreign body is encountered, it can be removed from
the colon as described in Chapter 7. Benign strictures can
be balloon dilated as described in Chapter 3. In a recent
review of 19 dogs with benign rectal strictures, balloons up
to 35 mm in diameter were utilized, depending on the dog's
size. Most of the dogs required only one or two dilations.
Most of the dogs received 5 to 10 mg triamcinolone intra-
lesionally before balloon dilation.
 NORMAL APPEARANCE
Normal colonic mucosa is pale pink, smooth, and glistening,
and submucosal blood vessels are commonly seen through-
out the colon (see Figures 6-6, A; 6-11; 6-12; and 6-13, A-B).
Scattered lymphoid follicles, 2 to 3 mm in diameter, often
with umbilicated centers, occur in the rectum and cecum
(Figure 6-26, A-C). Usually a small amount of liquid fecal
and can easily be suctioned so that the underlying mucosal
surface can be visualized. Adherent particular debris can
be flushed away from the mucosal surface with the use of
B
a pump attached to the biopsy channel. Occasionally, espe-
cially in cats, clumps of hair may be encountered (Figure
6-27). Small amounts of hair can be flushed away from the
mucosal surface, but larger clumps may need to be grasped
with a foreign body forceps and removed.
Hyperemia (increased mucosal redness) (see Figure
6-32) is a common endoscopic finding that must be care-
fully interpreted. Hyperemia can be a normal physiologic
response and can occur secondary to a warm water enema,
mild trauma from the endoscope, or an inflammatory lesion.
Hyperemia by itself may not be a significant finding but usu-
ally is important when accompanied by other lesions. Failure
to visualize submucosal blood vessels may be due to muco-
sal edema or infiltration of inflammatory or neoplastic cells.
C
Increased mucosal granularity (roughness of the mucosa)
Hgure 6-26 A, Multiple smooth lymphoid follicles in the cecum of a
(see Figure 6-33), often accompanied by increased friabil-
l-year-oldGolenretriever withditary hersensitivityB,Mutle
ity (excessive bleeding associated with mucosal contact with
umbilicated lymphoid follicles in the rectum of a 1.5-year-old Belgian
the endoscope or biopsy forceps) (Figure 6-28, A-B), can
Tervuren with eosinophilic colitis. C, Multiple lymphoid follicles in 
the cecum of a cat.
 be seen with inflammatory or neoplastic disorders. Colonic
erosion or ulceration (see Figure 6-32) is occasionally seen
in the dog and cat. Necrotic debris may be seen adhering to
the ulcerated mucosal surface. Hemorrhaging may or may
not be present. Masses can be visualized as pedunculated
(Figure 6-29) or sessile structures (Figure 6-30). Cecal inver-
sion and ileocolic intussusception appear as intraluminal
smooth masses and must be differentiated from neoplasia
(Figure 6-31, A-B).
■ COMPLICATIONS
When performed properly, colonoscopy is a relatively safe
Hgure 6-27 Small amount of white hair remains within the
procedure in dogs and cats. Recently, I reviewed the complica-
colon of a 1-year-old Egyptian Mau. The hair was flushed away
tions described in the medical records for 355 colonoscopies
to visualize the mucosal surface.
CHAPTER 6 Colonoscopy
231
B
Figure 6-28 Increased mucosal friability in the ascending colon of a 4-year-old Cocker Spaniel with a platelet function defect. A, Small
amount of mucosal hemorrhage is visible before endoscopic manipulation. The open cecum is visible at slightly past the 1-o'clock position,
and the ileocolic sphincter is at 6 o'clock. B, More hemorrhage is visible after endoscopic contact with the friable mucosa. The open cecum 
is visible at 12 o'clock, and the ileocolic sphincter is at 9 o'clock.
Fgure 6-30 A large sessile adenocarcinoma in the rectum-
descending colon junction in a 6-year-old Golden retriever. The 
mass is visible from 12 o'clock to 4 o'clock and then extends into
the middle of the image. The lumen is barely visible (arrow).
Figure 6-29 A small pedunculated adenocarcinoma in the rectum
of a 10-year-old mixed breed dog with hematochezia.
A
B
 Figure 6-31 Cecal inversion in a 2-year-old Weimaraner. A, Large, smooth mass occupies the ascending colon. B, Further endoscopic
evaluation identified the ileocolic sphincter (arrow). The mass was observed to be protruding through the cecocolic sphincter.
232 ■PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
in dogs at a veterinary teaching hospital. Major complications
anesthesia or colonoscopy occurred during 3.4% of proce-
were defined as adverse events in which the dog's life was
 dures. Vomiting of the GI lavage solution occurred during
 potentially jeopardized and the complication required inten-
the administration of 4.6% of doses in 6.5% of dogs. Overall,
sive treatment or monitoring. Major complications consisting
minor or major complications developed during 30 (8.5%) of
of fatal aspiration of a GI lavage solution, colonic perforation,
 355 procedures. In this study, flexible colonoscopy was con-
and excessive hemorrhaging after biopsy of an adenocarci-
 sidered to be a safe procedure in dogs with diseases of the
noma with rigid forceps 0ccurred in only three dogs (0.85%).
large intestine, despite the fact that 33 different veterinarians
Mortality was rare (0.28%), and only the dog that aspirated
performed the colonoscopies. Veterinarians that had per-
the GI lavage solution died. Complications were classified
formed less than 10 colonoscopies in their careers did 19%
as minor if the adverse event required minimal treatment
 of these procedures. Similar data are not available for cats,
or monitoring and the complication was not considered a
but in my practice, the complication rate in cats undergoing
threat to the dog's life. Minor complications associated with
colonoscopy appears to be similar to that of dogs.
SUGGESTED
READING
Burrows CF: Evaluation of a colonic lavage solution to prepare
Leib M, Zajac A: Giardiasis in dogs and cats, Vet Med 94:793-802, 1999.
the colon of the dog for colonoscopy, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 195:
Marks S, Kather E, Kass P, et al: Genotypic and phenotypic
1719-1721, 1989.
characterization of Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium diffcile
 Daugherty MA, Leib MS, Rossmeisl JH, et al: Safety and efficacy of oral
in diarrheic and healthy dogs, J Vet Inrern Med 16:533-540, 2002.
low-volume sodium phosphate bowel preparation for colonoscopy
 Marschall H, Bartels F: Life-threatening complications of nasogastric
in dogs, J Vet Intern Med 22:31-36, 2008.
administration of polyethylene _ glycol-electrolyte solutions
DiPalma JA, Brady II CE, Stewart DL, et al: Comparison of colon
(GoLYTELY) for bowel cleansing, Gastrointest Endosc 47:408-410,
1998.
86(5Pt1):856-860, 1984.
Miller WW, Hathcock IT, Dillon AR: Cecal inversion in eight dogs,
Happe RP: Gastrointestinal endoscopy in the dog, VerQ 7:231-234, 1985.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:1009- 1013, 1984.
 Hsu C, Imperiale TF: Meta-analysisandcost comparison of polyethylene
 Richter KP: Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enterocolitis in dogs, Sermin Vet
glycol lavage versus sodium phosphate for colonoscopy preparation,
Med Surg (Small Anim) 7:134-144, 1992.
Gastrointest Endosc 48:276-282, 1998.
Richter KP, Cleveland MB: Comparison of an orally administered
Jergens A, Andreasen C, Miles K: Gastrointestinal endoscopic exfoliative
gastrointestinal lavage solution with traditional enema admin-
cytology: techniques and clinical application, Compend Contin Educ
istration as preparation for colonoscopy in dogs, I Arm Vet Med
Vet 22:941-951, 2000.
Assoc 195:1727-1731, 1989.
Jergens AE, Moore FM, Haynes JS, et al: Idiopathic inflammatory
Roth L, Leib MS, Davenport DJ, et al: Comparisons between
bowel disease in dogs and cats: 84 cases (1987-1990), JAm Vet Med
endoscopic and histologic evaluation of the gastrointestinal
Assoc 201:1603-1608, 1992.
tract in dogs and cats: 75 cases (1984-1987), J Ar Vet Med Assoc
Johnson G: Proctoscopy. In Anderson N, editor: Veterinary gastro-
196:635-638, 1990.
enterology, Philadelphia, 1980, Lea & Febiger.
Russmann S, Lamerato L, Marfatia A, et al: Risk of impaired renal
Kitchell BA: A review of gastrointestinal fiberoptic endoscopy, Calif Vet
function after colonoscopy: a cohort study in patients receiving
8:17-21, 1984.
either oral sodium phosphate or polyethylene glycol, Am J
Leib M: Treatment of chronic idiopathic large-bowel diarrhea in dogs
Gastroenterol 102:2655-2663, 2007.
with a highly digestible diet and soluble fiber: a retrospective review
Simpson Kw: Gastrointestinal endoscopy in the dog, J Smal Anim
of 37 cases, J Vet Intern Med 14:27-32, 2000.
Pract 34:180-188, 1993.
Leib M, Baechtel M, Monroe W: Complications associated with 355
Valerius K, Powers B, McPherron M, et al.: Adenomatous polyps and
flexible colonoscopic procedures in dogs, I Vet Intern Med 18:642-646,
carcinoma in situ of the canine colon and rectum: 34 cases (1982-
2004.
1994), J Am1 Anim Hosp Assoc 33:156-160, 1997.
 Leib MS, Codner EC, Monroe WE: A diagnostic approach to chronic
Webb CB, McCord KW, Twedt DC: Rectal strictures in 19 dogs: 1997-
large bowel diarrhea in dogs, Vet Med 86:892-899, 1991.
2005, JArm Anir Hosp Assoc 43:332-336, 2007.
Leib MS, Monroe WE, Codner EC: Performing rigid or flexible
Willard M: Colonoscopy, proctoscopy, and ileoscopy, Vet Clin North
colonoscopy in dogs with chronic large bowel diarrhea, Vet Med
Arm Small Anim Pract 3 1:657-669, 2001.
86:900-912, 1991.
CHAPTER 6 Colonoscopy
233
AtlasPAGEs234-244
CANINE AND FELINE
Figure 6-45, p. 237, Pythiosis with mul-
LYMPhOMA
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
 tiple nodules
Figure 6-58, p. 241, Large intraluminal
Figure 6-32, p. 234, Hyperemia in a dog
Figure 6-46, p. 237, Protothecosis with
 lymphoma in a cat
with inflammatory bowel disease
 erosions and increased mucosal gran-
Figure 6-59, p. 241, Diffuse nodular lym-
Figure 6-33, p. 234, Increased mucosal
ularity and friability
 phoma in a dog
 granularity in a dog with inflamma-
Figure 6-47, p. 237, Pyogranulomatous
Figure 6-60. p. 241, Diffuse mucosal lym-
tory bowel disease
proctitis
phoma in a dog
Figure 6-34, p. 234, Scattered mucosal
hemorrhages in a dog with inflamma-
WHIPVORMS
MISCELLANEOUS NEOPLASIA
tory bowel disease
Figure 6-48, p. 238, Three whipworms
Figure 6-61, p. 242, Hemangiosarcoma
Figure 6-35, p. 234, Suppurative colitis
in a dog
 occupying most of the colonic lumen
in a dog
of a dog
Figure 6-36, p. 235, Ulcerative lympho-
ADENOMATOUS POLYPS
Figure 6-62, p. 242, Carcinoid in the
 plasmacellular colitis in a dog
Figure 6-49, p. 238, Adenomatous polyps
descending colon of a dog 
Figure 6-37, p. 235, Diffuse erosive sup-
 in the rectum of a Great Dane
Figure 6-63, p. 242, Multinodular leio-
 purative colitis in a dog
Figure 6-50, p. 239, Multiple adeno-
myosarcoma in a dog
Figure 6-38, p. 235, Lymphoplasmacellu-
 matous polyps in the rectum and
Figure 6-64, p. 242, Necrotic leiomyosar-
 lar and suppurative colitis in a cat
 descending colon of a mixed breed dog
coma in the rectum of a dog
Figure 6-39, p. 235, Erosive plasmacellu-
Figure 6-65, p. 243, Multifocal ganglio-
 lar and eosinophilic colitis in a cat
neuroma in the ascending colon of a
Figure 6-40, p. 235, Severe ulcerative
ADENOCARCINOMA
young (2.5 years) dog
 lymphoplasmacellular colitis in a cat
Figure 6-51, p. 239, Sessile adenocarci-
Figure 6-66, p. 243, Sessile plasmacytoma
noma in a cat
 in a dog with rectal prolapse
HISTIOCYTIC ULCERATIVE
 Figure 6-52, p. 240, Ulcerative sessile
COLITIS
 adenocarcinoma in a cat
Figure 6-53, p. 240, Irregular polypoid
MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERS
Figure 6-41, p. 236, Histiocytic ulcerative
adenocarcinoma in a dog
Figure 6-67, p. 243, Colonic vascular
 colitis in an English bulldog
Figure 6-54, p. 240, Nodular adenocarci-
dysplasia in an 8-year-old Golden
Figure 6-42, p. 236, Multiple superficial
noma in the rectum of a dog
retriever with severe anemia and
ulcers in a Boxer with histiocytic
Figure 6-55, p. 240, Retroflexed view of
hematochezia
ulcerative colitis
 a multi-nodular adenocarcinoma in
Figure 6-68, p. 243, Colonic vascular
Figure 6-43, p. 236, Multiple ulcers and
a dog
dysplasia in an 11-year-old Golden
intraluminal hemorrhage in a Boxer
Figure 6-56, p. 240, Annular adenocarci-
retriever presented with severe anemia
with histiocytic ulcerative colitis
 and hematochezia
noma occupying most of the colonic
lumen in a dog.
Figure 6-69, p. 244, Rectal stricture in an
MISCELLANEOUSCOLITIDES
Figure 6-57, p. 240, Diffuse nodular
 8-month-old cat
Figure 6-44, p. 237, Histoplasmosis with
 adenocarcinoma in the rectum and
Figure 6-70, p. 244, Rectal stricture in a
ulceration and increased mucosal
 descending colon of a dog
dog with colitis
 granularity and friability
Figure 6-71, p. 244, Colonic spasm in a
dog with irritable bowel syndrome
234 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOR CanIne And FelINe INflammatOry
BOWEL DISEASE
The most common form of colitis in dogs and cats is lymphoplasmacellular colitis.
Eosinophilic colitis is the second most common form of inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD) but occurs much less frequently than lymphoplasmacellular colitis. The endoscopic
appearance of IBD is highly variable. Most often, the colon appears hyperemic, granular,
and friable. Scattered mucosal hemorrhages may be present. The entire colon may not be
affected, and the distribution of lesions may be multifocal. Less commonly, erosions or
through 6-40).
Figure 6-32 Hyperemia, or increased mucosal
Hgure 6-33 Increased mucosal granularity
 redness, in the descending colon of a 7-year-old
in the descending colon of a 7-year-old mixed
mixed breed dog with inflammatory bowel
breed dog with inflammatory bowel disease.
disease. The mucosa is also rough, irregular
Hyperemia is present at the 9-o'clock position.
(granular),and ulcerated. Submucosal blood
Submucosal blood vessels are not visible.
vessels are not visible.
Figure 6-34 &attered mucosal hemorrhages in
Hgure 6-35 Suppurative colitis in a 6-year-old
a 6-year-old Beagle with lymphoplasmacellular
Welsh Corgi. Multiple erosions are visible in
colitis. This case is unusual because a large por-
the top portion ofthe image. The mucosa is
tion of the mucosa appears normal, the surface
 granular and fiable and does not glisten, and
is smooth and glistening, and submucosal blood
submucosal blood vessels are not visible.
vessels are clearly visible.
CHAPTER 6
Colonoscopy
235
Figure 6-36 Ulcerative lymphoplasmacellular colitis in a 7-year-old 
Figure 6-37 Diffuse erosive suppurative colitis in a 9-year-old
 mixed breed dog. The mucosa is fiable, and spontaneous hemorrhage
 Labrador retriever. The mucosa is very granular. Submucosal
fills the multiple ulcer craters (arrows). Submucosal blood vessels are 
blood vessels are not visible.
not visible.
Hgure 6-39 Erosive lymphoplasmacellular and eosinophilic colitis
in a 13-year-old domestic long hair. The mucosa is friable, and
 Figure 6-38 Lymphoplasmacellular and suppurative colitis in a
 submucosal blood vessels are not visible.
9.5-year-old domestic short hair cat. Linear erosions with sponta-
neous hemorrhages are visible. The mucosa was extremely friable.
 Similar to Figure 6-34, the mucosa is smooth and glistening and
 submucosal blood vessels are visible.
Figure 6-40 Severe ulcerative lymphoplasmacellular
colitis in a 9-year-old domestic short hair. Spontaneous
hemorrhage fills some of the ulcer craters. The mucosa 
was extremely friable, and some of the hemorrhage in the
 image occurred after mucosal contact with the endoscope.
236 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr HistiOcytic ulcerative cOlitis
 Histiocytic ulcerative colitis is an uncommon form of colitis that most often affects young
 Boxer dogs. Erosions and ulcerations commonly occur. The diagnosis is based on finding
 infiltration of histiocytes within the lamina propria that are engorged with material that
stains positive with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain. Recently, a novel strain of Escherichia
o aqeoa papuodsai aey aueu pue siop iaxo paioae u payuai uaaq seu o
antibiotic treatment with enrofloxacin (Figures 6-41 through 6-43).
Hgure 6-42 Multiple superficial ulcers in the
descending colon of a 2-year-old Boxer dog with
Hgure 6-41 Histiocytic ulcerative colitis in a
histiocytic ulcerative colitis.
1.5-year-old English bulldog. Multiple super-
ficial ulcers are present in the descending colon
(arrows). The nonulcerated mucosa is smooth
 and shiny, although submucosal blood vessels
are not visible.
Figure 6-43  Multifocal ulcers and intraluminal
hemorrhage in the descending colon of a 1-year-old
Boxer dog with histiocytic ulcerative colitis. All the
mucosa is abnormal, and submucosal blood vessels
are not visible.
CHAPTER 6
Colonoscopy
237
Atlas for miscellaneous colitides
 Other forms of colitis occur less commonly in dogs and cats. The endoscopic appearance
is often similar to IBD, and diagnosis requires histologic assessment of mucosal biopsy
samples. Some of these miscellaneous conditions are more proliferative than IBD (Figures
6-44 through 6-47).
Hgure 6-45 Multiple nodules in the descending colon of a 3-year-
old mixed breed dog with pythiosis. The nodules have an irregular
 Figure 6-44 Ulceration and increased mucosal granularity and
surface and were friable. Nodular lesions were present throughout
friability in the colon of a dog with histoplasmosis. Submucosal
the colon.
blood vessels are not visible. (Courtesy of Dr. Mike Willard, College
Station, Tex.)
Figure 6-46 Erosions and increased granularity and friability in
the descending colon of an 8-year-old mixed breed dog with diffuse 
Hgure 6-47 Multiple nodules in the rectum and descending colon 
gastrointestinal protothecosis. Submucosal blood vessels are not
of a 4-year-old Pomeranian with chronic large bowel diarrhea
visible.
and rectal prolapse. Histopathologic evaluation of biopsy samples
revealed pyogranulomatous proctitis/colitis. Special stains did not 
identify infectious agents.
238 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
ATLAS FOR WHIPWORMS
Whipworms can occasionally be seen in the cecum or ascending colon of dogs (see Figure
6- 18). Veterinarians should only perform colonoscopy after eliminating whipworms from
 the differential diagnosis of chronic large bowel diarrhea via multiple fecal examinations
and treatment of all dogs not receiving milbemycin for monthly heartworm prophylaxis
with fenbendazole (Figure 6-48).
Figure 6-48 Three whipworms in a 2.5-year-old
Bluetick coonhound with chronic diarrhea with
hematochezia.
AtlaS FOr adenOmatOuS POlyPS
 Benign masses in the rectum and distal descending colon can occasionally be seen in dogs.
 The masses may be sessile (broad based) or pedunculated. In most affected dogs, a single
(Figures 6-49 and 6-50).
Figure 6-49 Retroflexed image of an adenomatous
polyp in the rectum of a 7-year-old Great Dane. The
smooth-surfaced mass is approximately 2 cm in
diameter. The endoscope's insertion tube is visible 
at 12 o'clock. A small amount of fecal material is 
adjacent to the endoscope (1 o'clock).
CHAPTER 6Colonoscopy
239
Figure 6-50 A, Multiple adenomatous polyps in the rectum and descending colon of a 5-year-old
 mixed breed dog with chronic large bowel diarrhea, tenesmus, and hematochezia. B, Close-up image
 of the polyp at 12 o'clock in A. The hemorrhage is from a biopsy. The irregular surface ofthe mass is
unusual because most adenomatous polyps in dogs are smooth-surfaced, as seen in Figure 6-49.
Atlas fOr AdenOCarcINOmA
Adenocarcinomas are the most common type of malignant tumor that occurs in the
 colon of dogs and the second most common type in cats. Most commonly, it occurs in the
rectum or distal descending colon. The endoscopic appearance varies: it may appear as a
pedunculated (see Figure 6-29), sessle (see Figure 6-30), ulcerated, or annular obstructing
mass or, uncommonly, as diffuse thickening of the mucosa. For deeper tissue to be obtained
and an accurate diagnosis to be reached, multiple biopsy samples should be collected with
flexible forceps from the same region of the mass or rigid forceps should be passed alongside
 of the endoscope (Figures 6-51 through 6-57).
Figure 6-51 A, Sessile adenocarcinoma in the rectum of an 11-year-old Siamese cat. The mass is
approximately 2.5 cm long. The hemorrhage in the center of the image occurred after biopsy.
B, Close-up image of the ulcerated mass.
240·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
 Figure 6-52 Ulcerated sessile adenocarcinoma in the descending
colon of a 15-year-old domestic short hair.
Hgure 6-53 Irregular polypoid adenocarcinoma in an 11.5-year-
old Shetland sheepdog.
Hgure 6-54 Biopsy of a nodular adenocarcinoma in the rectum
Hgure 6-55 Retroflexed view of a multinodular adenocarcinoma
 of a 10-year-old Scottish terrier. The biopsy forceps (9 o'clock)
involving approximately 180 degrees of the rectal circumference
has grasped a piece of the mass and is being withdrawn from the
in a 10-year-old mixed breed dog. The tumor involved the distal
emdoscope. Hemorrhage is present at 10 o'clock to 12 o'clock.
10 cm of the descending colon and rectum. The endoscope can be
seen at 12 o'clock.
Hgure 6-57 Diffuse nodular adenocarcinoma throughout the
rectum-descending colon of an 11-year-old German shepherd.
Figure 6-56 Annular adenocarcinoma occupies most of the colonic
lumen in a 10-year-old Basset hound. The surface of the mass is
irregular. The endoscope could be advanced orad to the mass. A
 small area of lumen is visible in the center of the image (arrow).
CHAPTER 6
Colonoscopy
■241
Atlas fOr lymPhOmA
Colonic lymphoma is the most common malignant tumor in the colon of cats and is the
second most common in dogs. The endoscopic appearance varies and may appear as a
 sessile ulcerated or annular obstructing mass, multifocal masses, or as diffuse thickening
of the mucosa. Concurrent involvement of the small bowel, stomach, or both is common.
For deeper tissue to be obtained and an accurate diagnosis to be reached, multiple biopsy
samples should be collected with flexible forceps from the same region of the mass or rigid
forceps should be passed alongside of the endoscope (Figures 6-58 through 6-60).
Hgure 6-59 Diffuse nodular lymphoma of the descending colon
and rectum in a 7-year-old Bichon Frise.
Figure 6-58 Large intraluminal lymphoma in a 12-year-old cat
 occupying most of the colonic lumen.
Figure 6-60 Diffuse mucosal lymphoma in a 9-year-old Rottweiler. The mucosa is granular and
 irregular with superficial erosions (arrows). Submucosal blood vessels are not visible.
242■PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
Atlas fOr miscellaneOus neOPlasiA
Rarely, other types of malignant tumors affect the colon of dogs and cats. As with
adenocarcinomas and lymphomas, obtaining deeper tissue (avoiding superficial inflam-
mation or necrosis) is necessary so that a definitive diagnosis may be reached (Figures 6-61
through 6-66).
Figure 6-61 Large red hemangiosarcoma occupying most of the
lumen of the descending colon in a 12.5-year-old Poodle. Normal-
Hgure 6-62 A 3-cm greenish carcinoid occupying the entire de-
 appearing colon orad to the mass is visible from 3 o'clock to 6
scending colon 17 cm orad to the anus in a 13-year-old miniature
 o'clock. Necrotic and ulcerated areas of the mass are present from
Schnauzer. The flexible biopsy forceps have grasped a portion of
9 o'clock to 12 o'clock.
the mass at 6 o'clock. A rigid rectal forceps was also passed along-
side of the endoscope to obtain large biopsy samples.
Figure 6-63 Multinodular leiomyosarcoma in the descending
 colon of a 7-year-old Cairn terrier.
Figure 6-64 Necrotic leiomyosarcoma in the rectum of a 5-year-
old Labrador retriever. Because of the surface necrosis of the mass,
nigid biopsy forceps was passed alongside of the flexible endoscope
to obtain large, deeper samples and allow an accurate diagnosis to
be made.
CHAPTER 6Colonoscopy
243
Hgure 6-66 A 2-cm sessile plasmacytoma, 15 cm orad to the anus
Figure 6-65 Multifocal ganglioneuroma in the ascending colon of
in an 8-year-old Labrador retriever with rectal prolapse. A second
a 2.5-year-old Shih Tzu. The open cecum is visible at 12 o'clock.
mass was present 4 cm orad to the anus.
Masses were present throughout the entire colon and rectum.
Atlas fOr mIsCellaneOuS [
DISORdErS
In addition to vascular dysplasia, rectal stricture, and colonic spasm depicted here, cecal
 inversion rarely can be visualized in the ascending colon (see Figure 6-31, A-B) (Figures
6-67 through 6-71).
Figure 6-67 Colonic vascular dysplasia in an 8-year-old Golden 
retriever that presented with severe anemia and hematochezia.
Abnormal blood vessels (small arrow) and mucosal hemorrhages 
Hgure 6-68 Colonic vascular dysplasia in an 11-year-old Golden
(large arrows) occurred throughout the colon.
retriever with severe anemia and hematochezia. Abnormal blood
vessels were present throughout the colon.
244·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
Figure 6-69 Rectal stricture in an 8-month-
Figure 6-70 Rectal stricture (arrows)in a 5-year-
old Siamese cat that presented with painful 
 old Walker hound with colitis. Mucosal folds are 
 defecation. Fecal material is present orad to
 present orad to the stricture. The lumen is visible
the stricture.
at 12 o'clock. A small amount of feces and enema 
solution adhere to the mucosa.
Figure 6-71 Colonic spasm in an 11-year-old mixed breed dog with irritable bowel syndrome.
The endoscopic appearance is similar to a stricture. However, the colon was of normal diameter
until contact with the endoscope caused spasm and narrowing. The mucosa is smooth and shiny.
 and mucosal blood vessels are visible. Multiple rings of spasm are present in dogs premedicated
with opioids (see Figure 6-9).
Endoscopic Removal of
Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies
Todd R. Tams and Donna J. Spector
astrointestinal foreign bodies are frequently encountered
which a rigid endoscope was used. Subsequently little mate.
in small animal clinical practice. In many instances these
rial appeared in the literature until the late 1970s, when scat-
objects pass uneventfully and asymptomatically through the
tered reports described the successful retrieval of foreign
gastrointestinal tract. However, foreign bodies occasionally
 bodies from humans with the use of flexible endoscopes. The
become impacted in the esophagus, stomach, or intestinal
use of rigid or flexible endoscopes for removal of esopha-
tract or are freely movable but trapped within the stomach.
 geal foreign bodies is still discussed controversially in human
In such cases, removal is required. Until the late 1970s rigid
medicine, and a recent report recommends flexible endos-
esophagoscopy under general anesthesia was the procedure
 copy as the first-line approach because it carries a lower
of choice for retrieving esophageal foreign bodies. Into the
rate of severe complications (esophageal rupture), better
early 1980s surgical removal via gastrotomy and enterotomy
patient comfort with a lower rate of dysphagia, and lack of a
was the standard therapy for foreign bodies of the stomach
requirement for general anesthesia. Rigid endoscopy is cur-
and intestinal tract, respectively. With improvements in flex-
rently recommended as a second-line therapy for humans.
ible gastrointestinal endoscopes and associated foreign body
More important than the endoscopic technique utilized is
grasping forceps, retrieval baskets, and snares, endoscopic
the experience of the endoscopist. A study of 501 human
retrieval has become the procedure of choice for manag-
patients with esophageal foreign bodies revealed that more
ing retained esophageal and gastric foreign bodies. Another
experienced endoscopists (those with more than 45 cases)
viable although less widely available option is the use of fluo-
had a higher success rate (98.1%) than did less experienced
roscopy for the removal of esophageal foreign bodies. Fluo-
endoscopists (87.9%). Our collctive veterinary experi-
roscopy, coupled with balloon extraction, is a commonly
ence supports the use of flexible endoscopy as the preferred
used technique for esophageal foreign bodies in children
method of gastrointestinal foreign body removal, and expe-
with success rates between 84% and 88%. A fluoroscopic
rience is vital to a successful outcome. This chapter presents
technique utilizing orally placed retrieval forceps has been
 current information regarding guidelines and detailed tech-
described in 61 dogs. Forceps manipulation was successful
niques for the endoscopic removal of foreign bodies. The
 in 51 cases (84% success rate), which is similar to reports
information is based on our personal experiences as well as
of endoscopic retrieval of foreign bodies. One limitation of
those of other veterinary endoscopists.
fluoroscopy is the lack of direct visualization of the esopha-
geal mucosa; however, if fluoroscopy is available, it can be
 ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
considered an effective method of treatment and long-term
complications are uncommon. Physicians and veterinarians
Foreign bodies become impacted in the gastrointestinal tract
who are skilled in endoscopy or fluoroscopy have become
at both normal anatomic and pathologic points of narrow-
adept at retrieving foreign bodies of various sizes and shapes.
ing. The major factors that determine whether a foreign
 Today it is uncommon for patients with a foreign body in the
body will pass uneventfully or be retained are its size and
esophagus, stomach, or colon to undergo surgical removal
configuration (e.g., rough versus smooth edges, presence or
when presented to hospitals with expertise in endoscopic
absence of projections, and width). Once pointed objects
techniques.
(e.g-, needles or wishbones) are beyond the oropharynx, they
A classic monograph on the management of foreign bod-
Occasionally become lodged in the pyriform processes. These
ies of the upper airway and esophagus in humans was pub-
areas can be seen with an endoscope but are best evaluated
lished in 1937. This monograph was based on 3266 cases in
with a laryngoscope.
245
246 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
The four areas of normal anatomic narrowing in the
reflex relaxation, tends to facilitate passage around the
esophagus include the upper esophageal sphincter, the
numerous curves of the intestinal tract. In some cases the
 thoracic inlet, the heart base, and the distal esophagus just
 objects actually turn around so that the sharper end trails
proximal to the gastroesophageal junction. Most sharp or
rather than leads. Once in the colon, foreign objects often
pointed foreign bodies become impacted in one of the lat-
 become covered by fecal material, which protects the bowel
ter three areas in dogs and cats. If blunt objects fail to pass
wall.
through the esophagus spontaneously, the presence of an
Although we have observed numerous clinical cases in
esophageal motility disorder or a pathologic area of narrow-
which needles have successfully traversed the intestinal tract,
ing (e.g-, benign or malignant esophageal stricture) should
we have also evaluated animals with peritonitis caused by
be suspected.
foreign body perforation of the intestinal wall. In several
Many foreign bodies that enter the stomach pass through
cases, needles passed as far as the descending colon before
the remainder of the gastrointestinal tract without difficulty.
migrating through the bowel wall and into the abdominal
However, large smooth objects (e.g-, rocks, balls, and lead
cavity. Because the retrieval of needles from the stomach
sinkers), nonpliable materials (e.g., leather or plastic), and
with flexible endoscopic instrumentation is a quick and
 objects with sharp or irregular edges may be retained in the
relatively easy procedure, early intervention is currently our
stomach because they are either too large to pass through the
treatment of choice rather than the more conservative but
pylorus or their sharp edges become impacted in the antrum,
 uncertain wait-and-see approach.
 pylorus, or cardia. A tubular hairball or other material may
be retained because of a gastric motility disorder rather than
 PATIENT PROFILES
its size or configuration.
Other points of normal anatomic narrowing in the gas-
Although foreign body ingestion is certainly more common
trointestinal tract that occasionally become impacted with
in young animals than middle-aged to older animals, the
foreign material include the angles of the duodenum, ileoce-
possibility of a foreign body-related disorder must always be
cal valve, and anus. Additionally, pathologic abnormalities
considered in any animal with suggestive signs. We have seen
 in the intestine, such as strictures, tumors, and areas ofprior
many cases of older animals with endocrinopathies causing
surgical intervention, predispose to lodgment of foreign
polyphagia or intestinal disease causing pica that present
bodies.
with gastrointestinal foreign body impactions. Most com-
monly, foreign bodies are ingested during a foray through
■ TYPES OF FOREIGN BODIES
 garbage (*dietary indiscretion") or when an animal is play-
ing (e.g-, whole or partial sections of toys chewed and eaten,
Foreign bodies should be characterized as sharp or dull
balls swallowed suddenly after being caught in flight, or fish-
pointed or blunt, and toxic or nontoxic. If the objects are
 hooks and needles ingested during an inquisitive investiga-
visible radiographically, their length and width should be
tion). Dogs that chew rocks occasionally swallow partial or
measured and the likelihood of their passing through the
whole rocks, which may then become retained in the gastro-
gastrointestinal tract without the need for endoscopic or
intestinal tract. In some instances an animal ingests an object
surgical intervention should be clinically assessed. The con-
for no readily apparent reason. Included in our case files are
figuration and physical makeup of an object, as well as its
such examples as an ingested 1l-cm potato nail (see Figure
location, help determine whether endoscopic removal is
 7-39, C), a rigid patch of leather ingested by a cat (see Fig-
feasible. An attempt should be made as early as possible to
ure 7-33), and an accumulation of ingested pine needles that
retrieve objects impacted in the esophagus. A variety of for-
caused gastric impaction in a cat (see Figure 7-38). These
eign bodies can be involved, but in our experience, bones
 and many other interesting cases were successfully managed
are the most common objects found in the esophagus; most
by endoscopy-guided retrieval.
bones, fishhooks, and other objects retained in the esopha-
Our physician counterparts encounter two dissimilar
gus can be successfully removed with endoscopy. Sewing
patient population profles when dealing with foreign bod-
 needles are most commonly ingested by kittens or young
ies. In most instances, ingestion of foreign bodies occurs in
cats, and frequently the alimentary tract is capable of pass-
 children, particularly between 1 and 5 years of age, who swal-
ing these objects without incident. If possible, the clinician
low objects accidentally. Most of these foreign bodies tend to
should determine whether any significant length of thread
be small, blunt, and nontoxic (e.g-, coins or small toys) and
was attached to the ingested needle because this would
pass without intervention. In contrast, five groups of adults
increase the potential for a dangerous sequela of intestinal
have been identified as being prone to ingesting foreign bod-
 plication if the needle were to become impacted at the pylo-
 ies or to suffer from impaction of food boluses. These five
rus with the thread moving progressively down the intestine.
 groups include persons with preexisting esophageal disease
The ability of the alimentary tract to pass sharp objects
(e.g, stricture, diverticulum, motility disorder, or neoplasia)
such as needles is thought to be attributable to reflex mural
 or gastric disease (e.g-, postgastrectomy or hiatal hernia),
relaxation of the intestinal musculature. Axial flow in the
 alcoholics, psychopaths, mentally retarded handicapped per-
intestinal lumen, combined with slowing of peristalsis and
 sons, and prisoners. Older adults (greater than 60 years) are
 much more likely to have food bolus foreign bodies. Young
Sometimes the clinical signs that are exhibited seem
adults (less than 40 years) are more likely to ingest true for-
incongruous with the type or size of foreign body present.
eign bodies (inorganic objects). It is not uncommon for pris-
For example, some small breed dogs become completely
 oners and persons with psychiatric disorders to intentionally
anorectic as a result of a small gastric foreign body such as
swallow a foreign body as a manipulative measure. The
a peach pit. The appetite predictably returns to normal as
resulting hospital admission period with endoscopic therapy
soon as the foreign body is removed. In other cases some
is preferable to prison or institutionalization.
foreign bodies that have been present for weeks to months
 cause minimal or no clinical signs.
 CLINICAL SIGNS
■ DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
Presenting symptoms resulting from a gastrointestinal for-
eign body vary and depend on the area oflodgment. Clinical
The diagnosis of a retained foreign body may be readily
signs related to a foreign body in the oral cavity or pharynx
 apparent from the history. For example, an owner may have
are usually peracute and include marked salivation (often
 observed the garbage foray during which a bone was ingested,
bloody), dysphagia, pawing at the mouth and neck, avoid-
a section of a toy may be missing, or fishing line attached to a
ance of head or neck handling, pain, general anxiety, and
hook may be observed dangling from a pet's mouth. In other
often dysphonia or respiratory distress. Many of these clini-
 cases no specific contributory historical information is avail-
cal signs mimic foreign body impaction in the esophagus,
 able. In yet other cases the client may deny any possibility of
which also includes regurgitation, odynophagia, dysphagia,
foreign body ingestion.
forceful retching, and anorexia. Occasionally an esopha-
 Survey radiographs of the thorax and abdomen should
geal foreign body remains undetected for a number of days.
be the first study performed because radiopaque objects can
Chronic signs usually include depression, anorexia, saliva-
easily be localized in most cases. Cervical soft tissue radio-
tion, and regurgitation. Clinical evidence of an esophageal
 graphs are also obtained if an esophageal foreign body is sus-
foreign body complication, such as esophageal perforation
pected. Lateral flms of the neck are particularly important
with resultant pleuritis, mediastinitis, and pyothorax, may
for detecting bone fragments impacted in the cervical esoph-
also be present. Other potential sequelae resulting from
agus. Esophageal dilation anterior to a foreign body may be
esophageal foreign body impaction include esophageal stric-
seen. Thoracic radiographs should be carefully evaluated for
ture, diverticula, and severe esophagitis.
evidence of esophageal perforation, including pneumome-
Gastric foreign bodies are commonly associated with par-
diastinum or pleural effusion. The addition of a left lateral
tial or complete outlet obstruction with accompanying char-
view to standard survey abdominal radiographs is often
 acteristic symptoms. If the foreign object is freely movable,
helpful in outlining a duodenal foreign body. More than
vomiting may occur only intermittently, and especially if the
object is small, there may be many days when the animal dis-
evaluate survey radiographs carefully for evidence of additional
plays no clinical signs whatsoever. Large foreign bodies are
foreign bodies that may be less obvious than an easily recog-
usually associated with frequent vomiting, and signs are usu-
nized radiopaque object.
ally most pronounced when the foreign body lodges in the
Many commonly ingested foreign bodies (fish bones,
antrum. Occasionally a tubular hairball lodges in the pyloric
plastic, and wood) are not radiopaque and therefore pose
canal, causing complete outflow obstruction and frequent
 a signifcant diagnostic challenge. Some foreign bodies may
vomiting (see Figure 4- 110). The presence ofa gastric foreign
be composed of both radiopaque and radiolucent materials,
 body may also cause inappetence or complete anorexia, mal-
and as a result their size may be underestimated on survey
 aise, and nonspecific mild abdominal tenderness. The com-
radiographs. Stomach size is important in the assessment
  d s a  d no 
of radiolucent gastric foreign bodies. Gastric distension is
be associated with signs of peritonitis or which may be walled
a finding compatible with a long-standing gastric foreign
 off with minimal or no abdominal signs evident. Toxic for-
body. Increased width of a localized portion of the stom-
eign objects may cause other clinical signs such as seizures
ach, attributable to an inability of the stomach to collapse
(e.g, seizure activity related to lead toxicity) or hemolysis
in the involved segment, is seen with foreign bodies of lesser
(e.g-, zinc from pennies minted affter 1982, nails, zippers,
duration. A negative contrast gastrogram is useful in cases of
or jewelry containing zinc). Small disk bateries used as an
 a suspected radiolucent foreign body (Figure 7-1) because
energy source for watches, hearing aids, and cameras contain
it may help outline a foreign body and because a negative
alkali, such as potassium hydroxide, and the heavy metals
 so oe  n   s s ne n
mercury and cadmium. Toxicity depends on the leakage of
barium tends to do. A nonionic iodinated contrast agent
these substances from their casings, the duration of contact
(e.g-, iohexol [Omnipaque]) can also be used in an attempt
with the mucosa, and the inherent toxicity of the chemicals
to outline a suspected esophageal or gastric foreign body.
themselves. Endoscopic or surgical removal of a toxic foreign
Because of the hypertonic nature of ionic contrast agents
body is mandatory if the object remains in the stomach for
(e.g, diatrizoate [Hypaque]), a nonionic iodinated contrast
longer than 24 hours or if it lodges in the intestinal tract.
 agent should be used so that the chance of complications is
248 ■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
 chronic signs and the findings of the history and physical
examination are not diagnostic. Such patients are highly
regardless of the radiographic findings. If a foreign body is
found during diagnostic endoscopy, an attempt can be made
to remove the object. If the foreign body cannot be removed,
the patient can be taken to surgery while still under anes-
thesia. When a foreign body is removed, gastric and small
intestinal biopsy specimens still should be obtained in ani-
mals with chronic vomiting so that concurrent problems
 may be identified. Sometimes a foreign body may not pass
spontaneously because the patient has a motility disorder or
 an inflammatory disease with a secondary motility disorder.
 In such cases it is best to be thorough.
 OVERVIEW OF TREATMENT
OF INGESTED FOREIGN BODIES
Once a foreign body has been localized, the clinician must
decide whether to observe for its passage or remove the
object endoscopically or surgically. Most esophageal and
gastric foreign bodies are amenable to endoscopic retrieval.
As a rule, any foreign object retained in the esophagus should
be removed as soon as possible; if this cannot be done, the
object should at least be advanced to the stomach. Esopha-
geal perforation is uncommon but is always a risk, especially
B
when a sharp or pointed object is involved.
 In most cases an esophageal foreign body does not have
Figure 7-1 A lateral abdominal radiograph from a 10-year-old
to be removed as a true emergency procedure. Exceptions
cat with intestinal lymphoma. The animal was also positive for
 include foreign body impaction in the proximal esophagus
feline immunodeficiency virus. The cat was presented because
of a gradually decreasing appetite, recent onset of intermittent
that is causing respiratory distress because of tracheal com-
vomiting, and occasional episodes of nonproductive retching.
 pression and a wedged sharp object such as a bone that is
Abdominal palpation revealed a doughy mass in the region of the
causing significant patient distress. These situations may be
stomach. A, Radiograph showing a distended stomach and a soft
evidenced by groaning, copious salivation, or forceful gag-
tissue/fluid opacity. The small intestine and colon are normal.
ging. If rapid intervention is not required, the patient should
B, Gastrogram taken after 50 mL of air was injected into the
stomach of the tranquilized patient through a small feeding
be stabilized as needed with intravenous fluids, antibiotics,
tube. A large mass within the lumen of the stomach is consistent
and pain medications (e.g-, hydromorphone or morphine
with a gastric trichobezoar. This simple procedure allowed rapid
 plus a transdermal fentanyl patch if ongoing pain is antici-
confirmation that a foreign body was present in the stomach. The
 pated), and a thorough radiographic assessment should be
trichobezoar was removed surgically (this mass was too wide to
completed. Ideally endoscopy should be undertaken within
consider endoscopic retrieval). (From Tams TR: Gastrointestinal
4 to 12 hours of presentation. Endoscopy is indicated as the
symptoms. In Tams TR, editor: Handbook of small animal
gastroenterology, St Louis, 2003, Elsevier.)
initial procedure of choice for all esophageal foreign bodies.
If endoscopic equipment is not available, the patient should
decreased; for example, volume depletion may occur when
 be referred to an appropriate facility.
 an ionic contrast agent is given orally, and pulmonary edema
Sharp or pointed objects, such as pieces of plastic, nee-
may occur if the agent is aspirated.
dles, and safety pins, should be removed from the stomach
Foreign bodies are sometimes identified unexpectedly
endoscopically. As discussed previously, needles frequently
during routine endoscopy undertaken to evaluate patients
pass through the gastrointestinal tract uneventfully, but early
with unexplained inappetence or vomiting. Often survey
removal is recommended because of the increased potential
radiographs are unrevealing in these patients, and contrast
for complications with such objects and the high success
studies to look for a radiolucent foreign body are not per-
rate of endoscopic retrieval. Rounded or blunt gastric for-
formed. Occasionally, when clients have significantly limited
eign bodies often pass spontaneously, therefore, if significant
financial means, endoscopy is performed as a preliminary
clinical signs such as frequent vomiting are not present, such
diagnostic step to avoid the expense of radiographs in
patients may be managed conservatively with close observa-
 patients with chronic intermittent vomiting. This is some-
tion and radiographic surveillance for 3 to 7 days. If signs of
times a reasonable approach, especially when patients have
obstruction develop and the foreign body has passed out of
CHAPTER 7  Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies · 249
the stomach, surgical intervention is indicated. Performing
 grasping the object ( which prevents movement), or severity
esophagoscopy and gastroscopy immediately before surgery
 of esophageal damage (e.g-, perforation). Historical studies
is still recommended so that the esophagus and stomach
 of esophagotomy have reported a discouraging combined
 can be quickly assessed for any injury resulting from either
survival rate of 70% with a range of 43% to 100% and sig-
foreign body trauma or esophagitis secondary to reflux and
nificant complications associated with incisional dehiscence.
vomiting or any signs of concurrent disease. If only surgery is
done, these types of problems will go undetected. Although
 in 14 dogs that had a success rate of 93% for foreign body
 some animals can retain gastric foreign bodies for long peri-
removal from the thoracic esophagus without increased risk
ods of time with minimal untoward effects, it is always best to
of complications.
remove objects retained for a prolonged period (greater than
2 to 3 weeks) so that chronic mucosal damage is avoided.
■ CLIENT EDUCATION
Some foreign bodies can be successfully retrieved from
the upper small intestine endoscopically, but if an object
 Although endoscopic retrieval of foreign bodies is highly
becomes impacted to any degree, it is usually quite diffcult
 successful and done routinely in small animal clinical prac-
to grip it firmly enough with foreign body graspers to move
tice, there are complications and outcomes that owners must
it. An enterotomy is then required.
be made aware of before the procedure begins.
 Endoscopic foreign body removal has numerous advan-
 Because most foreign body retrieval procedures are done
tages over other means of treatment. The procedure is highly
within minutes to hours of an animal ingesting the offending
successful, minimally invasive, and not appreciably time-
object, the animal has not been properly fasted for anesthe-
consuming. In our experience, endoscopic foreign body
sia. This involves a slightly higher risk of reflux, regurgita-
retrieval generally requires 5 to 15 minutes once anesthe-
fion, and possible aspiration of gastrointestinal contents
sia is induced. Especially troublesome objects may require
during anesthesia and after the procedure. The resulting
up to an hour, but endoscopy is still less expensive and less
possible complications include reflux esophagitis, esopha-
 invasive than surgery. Patients are often discharged within 4
 geal stricture formation, and aspiration pneumonia. If the
hours to 2 days of the procedure. Endoscopy allows for rapid
foreign body does not require emergency removal, wait-
S      
ing a few hours can significantly reduce this risk by allow-
sions such as jewelry or coins are ingested. Rather than rely
 ing ingesta to leave the stomach. If more than one hour has
on observation and radiographic surveillance in such clini-
 passed, radiographs should be taken to judge the position of
cal situations, the clinician can use endoscopic equipment
the foreign body before beginning the procedure.
to quickly retrieve the object in question. The main limiting
If a foreign body is impacted within the esophagus, own-
factor with endoscopy is the necessity for general anesthesia.
ers need to be educated about potential life-threatening risks.
Foreign bodies that are not likely to be removed endo-
 Although extremely rare, sharp objects within the esophagus
scopically include corncobs, large rocks (bigger than the
have the potential to perforate the aorta at the level of the aor-
rocks shown in Figure 7-39, A), large hard rubber balls
tic arch or pierce through the esophagus into the chest cavity.
(e.g-, Superball), large wide hairballs in cats, Gorilla Glue
These complications would require extensive emergency care
concretions, and sometimes heavy objects such as lead sink-
and could prove fatal. In most cases, one of three outcomes
ers. Problems with retrieval of foreign objects are related to
can generally be expected with esophageal foreign bodies:
their size in relation to the width of the grasping range of
(1) the foreign body may be removed uneventfully, (2) the
 pronged foreign body retrieval instruments, the diameter of
foreign body may be advanced into the stomach and may
basket and snare instruments, the weight or surface texture
require a gastrotomy to remove, or (3) a thoracotomy and
 of the foreign body, and the grasping strength and quality of
 esophagotomy may be required to remove the foreign body.
the foreign body retrieval instruments being used. Smooth
Obtain advance permission for any of these procedures so
objects are sometimes difficult to grasp firmly enough for
the anesthesia time is not prolonged while waiting for owner
retrieval through the narrow areas of the lower and upper
consent. Regardless of the technique utilized to remove the
esophageal sphincters. Recently, larger basket and rigid
 esophageal foreign body, the owner should also be informed
 grasping instruments have been developed, and previously
that a temporary gastrotomy feeding tube may be necessary
irretrievable objects such as golf balls can now be more rou-
depending on the extent of damage done to the esophagus.
tinely removed (see the “Instrumentation" section).
Although the majority of gastrointestinal foreign bodies
■ INSTRUMENTATION
will be successfully removed endoscopically, those that are
not can be managed surgically. There have been conflicting
A variety of instruments are available for foreign body
 opinions about the indications for and success of transtho-
retrieval. A laryngoscope and forceps (e.g, Kely clamp,
racic esophagotomy for the removal of esophageal foreign
 sponge forceps) should be immediately available for remov-
bodies. Indications for surgical removal of an esophageal
ing oral and pharyngeal foreign bodies and any object that is
foreign body include an inability to push the object into
difficult to pull through the upper esophageal sphincter with
the stomach because of firmness of impaction, difficulty in
standard prong-type endoscopic grasping instruments. Until
250 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
the 1970s the rigid endoscope was always used for retriev-
 grasping many foreign objects and can be used with a pedi-
ing esophageal foreign bodies. Today, however, the flexible
atric endoscope that has a narrow working channel. Sturdy
 endoscope is the instrument of choice because visualization
three-pronged (tripod) graspers usually require a 2.8-mm
and maneuverability are greatly enhanced. In some cases it
channel. Sheathed four-pronged graspers can be purchased
might be best to use a flexible endoscope in conjunction with
for use in small working channels, but these instruments do
a rigid scope. Areas such as the stomach and duodenum,
 not tend to be as durable. Alligator-jaw forceps (Figure 7-3)
which are inaccessible to a rigid endoscope, can easily be
 are particularly useful for grasping smooth flat objects. Rat-
reached with a flexible endoscope as long as it has sufficient
tooth forceps (Figure 7-4) have excellent gripping power and
length. Nonetheless, it is still advantageous to have several
are especially useful for retrieving heavy cloth objects such as
rigid scopes of different lengths and diameters available for
large socks or towels or large trichobezoars.
selected esophageal bone foreign body cases and for possible
Polypectomy snares are among the most versatile instru-
 use as an overtube for the flexible endoscope.
ments for removing foreign bodies (Figure 7-5). The snare
A variety of foreign body forceps are available for use
 loop can be extended around an object to provide a much
with flxible endoscopes. The diameter of the working chan-
stronger grasp than can sometimes be achieved by the single-
nel of the endoscope limits to some degree the type and size
saao puoy juansu pauoid e aq pandde dsena pua
of grasping instruments that can be used. Larger, sturdier
with a smooth surface (e.g., balls) are much more easily
instruments made by some manufacturers require a 2.8-mm
 grasped with a snare than with a pronged instrument, which
or larger working channel. Pediatric endoscopes that are
typically slips offthe object as the prongs are closed around
less than 8 mm in diameter usually have a 2-mm channel,
it (Figure 7-6). Basket retrievers (Figures 7-7 and 7-8) are
 although smaller diameter endoscopes with a 2.8-mm diam-
less commonly required but may be a litle more effective in
eter instrument channel wil soon be available. In our experi-
 extracting smooth, rounded objects. The large basket shown
ence, however, a majority of gastric and esophageal foreign
 in Figure 7-8 has improved capabilities for retrieving larger
bodies can be successfully retrieved with instrumentation
 objects. It was designed by Dr. Vicente Torrent, a veterinar-
that can be used through a 2-mm channel.
ian from Spain with extensive case experience in endoscopic
Two-, three-, and four-pronged grasping instruments
removal of bones and other large objects, including many
are most commonly used for foreign body retrieval. A
cases of golf ball ingestion. Net retrievers (Figure 7-9), such
sturdy two-pronged instrument (Figure 7-2) is adequate for
as the Roth Net, feature a flexible, durable pouch that can be
helpful in the removal of round, blunt, or otherwise hard-
 to-grasp foreign bodies. We have found the net retriever to
be useful for coin removal. When a stack of coins is present,
  au a  -  n
the grasping teeth ( when fully separated) is approximately 1.4 cm.
This is a versatile instrument because of its grasping teeth and
long arms, as well as the adequate space between the grasping ends
when the arms are fully extended. (Courtesy of Olympus America,
Hgure 7-3 Alligator-jaw grasping forceps. (Courtesy of Olympus
Inc., Center Valley, Pa.)
America, Inc., Center Valley, Pa.)
they can often be scooped out simultaneously with a net
Experienced endoscopists have personal  preferences
instead of individually. Standard endoscopic biopsy forceps
  n  s  s  
 generally are not useful for removing foreign bodies other
use in certain situations. Our advice to veterinarians who
than thin, light objects. In fact, it is strongly advised that
 are purchasing foreign body retrieval instrumentation is
to obtain high-quality sturdy instruments that are built to
retrieval because such use may damage the forceps or cause
last. Avoid, if possible, disposable endoscopic foreign body
the edges to become dull and thus less effective for procuring
 retrieval equipment as it tends to be less sturdy and of lower
adequate-size tissue samples.
quality. Lower quality instruments may cost less, but they
tend to be somewhat less effective and less durable, and sig-
nificant frustration often results from their use. A minimum
Hgure 7-6 Snare technique used to remove a hard, smooth-
surfaced ball from the stomach. A prong-type instrument would
be inadequate for grasping this object.
Figure 7-4 Sharp (rat-tooth) grasping forceps with an opening
width of 4.7 mm. This instrument requires a 2.8-mm instrument
channel. (The two-pronged instrument shown in Figure 7-2 can
 be passed through a 2-mm instrument channel.) The grasping
strength of the rat-tooth forceps is excellent, and the instrument
(n s a)    ry  a s
and other pliable or relatively thin objects. (Courtesy of Olympus 
America,Inc.,Center Valley,Pa.)
Hgure 7-7 Basket-type grasping forceps. This instrument can be
Figure 7-5 Oval (left) and crescent (right) grasping snares.
passed through a 2-mm instrument channel. (Courtesy of Olympus
(Courtesy of Olympus America, Inc., Center Valley, Pa.)
America, Inc., Center Valley, Pa.)
252 ■PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
Figure 7-8 Large six-wire foreign body basket. A, Full instrument
including tubing and basket extended and opened. This large 
instrument requires a 2.8-mm instrument channel. B, Close-up with
basket opened to full extent. When opened completely, the basket
is 14 cmlong and 10 cm wide (spacing between the wires), which
makes this a very versatile instrument for retrieving large objects.
(Courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH  Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Figure 7-9 Roth Net retriever. This instrument is useful for scooping
 of two types of instruments is advised: a two-prong grasper
up stacks of coins. (Courtesy of US Endoscopy, Mentor, Ohio.)
with long arms (see Figure 7-2) and a snare loop instrument
(see Figure 7-5). Once experience has been gained, an endos-
copist can successfully retrieve a majority of gastric foreign
before the endoscope and tube apparatus are withdrawn
bodies with one of these two instruments. Our next prefer-
from the patient. Overtubes may be purchased commer-
ence would be a rat-tooth instrument (see Figure 7-4) if the
cially, or they can be made from tubing. The inner diameter
endoscope working channel can accommodate an instru-
of an overtube should be approximately 2 mm larger than
ment of this size. Finally, net and basket instruments com-
the outside diameter of the endoscope. The end should be
plete the basic endoscopic instrument armamentarium.
beveled smooth to facilitate passage and to prevent muco-
Another invaluable instrument in esophageal foreign
sal trauma from sharp edges. An endotracheal tube or rigid
body removal is a rigid grasping forceps designed for lapa-
endoscope can also be employed as an overtube. For use
roscopic use (e.g., Duval forceps, Figure 7-10). While visu-
in the stomach, an overtube should be 50 to 60 cm long; a
alizing the foreign body using a flexible endoscope, the
 shorter tube usually suffices in the esophagus.
endoscopist advances the forceps alongside the endoscope
The tube is frst passed over the endoscope to the level
and grasps, frmly holds, and removes the offending object.
of the control handle (Figure 7-12). The endoscope is then
These forceps have significantly more holding power than
inserted in the usual manner, and the overtube is advanced
any other piece of equipment used through the scope and
as needed. The inner walls of the overtube should be well
have been particularly helpful in removing large bones. As
lubricated to allow easy passage of the endoscope through it.
they are such frm graspers, care must be taken to apply only
When a foreign body is being removed, the grasping forceps
gentle traction during removal to avoid esophageal perfora-
should withdraw the foreign body into the overtube, thereby
tion. Even larger graspers are now available for retrieving
 protecting the mucosal surface (Figure 7-13). An overtube
objects such as golf balls from the stomach (Figure 7-11).
can be useful even if a sharp object cannot be completely
An overtube is another extremely useful ancillary instru
drawn into its lumen. Because it has a wider diameter than
ment that protects the esophageal mucosa when sharp or
the endoscope, the overtube serves to maintain better dila-
pointed foreign bodies must be removed. This tube fts over
tion at the lower and upper esophageal sphincters, thus mak-
the endoscope, and sharp objects are drawn into its lumen
ing it less difficult to pull an object through these orifices.
most significant advantage provided by an overtube has
been in facilitating passage of wide foreign bodies through
the narrow areas of the lower and upper esophageal
sphincters.
 ENDOSCOPIC REMOVAL OF
ESOPHAGEAL FOREIGN BODIES
Safe extraction of an esophageal foreign body requires an
adequate preliminary evaluation and the selection of proper
equipment, including the appropriate grasping forceps or
snare. An overtube, laryngoscope, and curved grasping for-
ceps should also be readily available in case their use becomes
necessary. Patient evaluation includes a thorough physical
examination that would identify problems directly related
to the foreign body, such as dyspnea, gagging, bloody saliva,
fever, and dehydration, and problems that may complicate
the use of general anesthesia, such as preexisting cardiac dis-
ease. After the physical examination is performed, analge-
sia must be provided to enhance patient comfort. If there is
concern about analgesics causing vomiting (e.g-, pure opioid
B
agonists), a problem that should be controlled if at all pos-
 sible in an animal with an esophageal foreign body, maropi-
tant (Cerenia) or dolasetron (Anzemet) are highly effective
antiemetic drugs that can be administered to control this
potential problem. Preanesthetic laboratory work should be
 performed to help identify other preexisting conditions such
as renal disease or complications from the foreign body.
Leukocytosis with a left shift may be present in some cases of
long-standing bone impaction causing secondary infection
 of the esophageal mucosa or in cases of esophageal perfo-
ration with resulting pleuritis or mediastinitis. Cervical and
thoracic radiographs are carefully reviewed to determine
Figure 7-10 A, Duval atraumatic laparoscopic grasping forceps
foreign body conformation and location and to look for evi-
(bottom) and Claw grasping forceps (top). These instruments
 dence of esophageal perforation. If pleural fluid is present,
provide exceptional gripping strength and are particularly
the chest should be tapped to obtain a sample for cytology,
useful for esophageal bone foreign body retrieval. Instrument
specifications: Duval: 5-mm diameter and 36-cm long, double-
Gram stain, and culture and sensitivity studies. Pyothorax is
best managed with the placement of a chest tube for drain-
action jaws with length of 4 cm, opening 4 cm at full extent;
Claw: 10-mm diameter and 43-cm long single-action jaws with
 age and lavage. Once the patient is stabilized, a thoracotomy
length of 3 cm, opening 3 cm at full extent. B, Close-up of jaws
is done as soon as possible, either alone or in conjunction
of the Duval grasper. C, Close-up of jaws of the Claw grasper.
with endoscopy, to remove the foreign body and to evalu-
(Courtesy of Kari Storz GmbH and Company KG, Tuttingen,
ate and repair the esophageal wall. In general, it is rare for
Germany.)
bone foreign bodies that have been lodged in the esopha-
gus for several days to weeks to cause complete esophageal
Use of an overtube has several minor disadvantages. With
perforation.
an overtube in place, it may be more diffcult to read the
As with any type of esophagogastroduodenoscopy proce-
measure markings on the endoscope; thus the total length
dure, the patient is maintained under general anesthesia in a
of insertion may not be readily apparent. A more trouble-
left lateral recumbent position. In this position the esophagus
some problem is that the overtube may interfere with torqu-
lies above the aorta. A properly inflated endotracheal tube is
ing of the endoscope, which makes thorough scanning in the
 especially important in preventing tracheal compression as a
stomach somewhat more diffcult. Therefore, when dealing
large foreign body is pulled retrograde through the esopha-
with a gastric foreign body, the endoscopist should usually
 i iiqo Ae jo use huud u pue sns
complete the diagnostic portion of the procedure before or
be inadvertently dropped in the pharynx during retrieval.
after using the overtube.
After complete oral examination, the endoscope should be
In our experience it has rarely been necessary to use an
 passed under direct visual guidance through the pharynx
overtube in retrieving foreign bodies from animals. The
 and upper esophageal sphincter to avoid striking any foreign
254 ■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
A
B
D
E
Figure 7-11 Rigid instrument set for removal of esophageal and gastric foreign bodies (Richard Wolf GmbH, Knittlingen, Germany). The
set includes a long telescope, two types of optical foreign body grasping forceps (one designed for small and the other for large objects), and
a u aap panasui si adossalan an 'roeznsia oa iapun aaa palqo og 'adossalan an um uixa o yieaus ados e
optical grasping forceps. Air can be insufflated through the Luer ftting on the sheath and the grasping forceps. Instrument specifications:
(for large objects) and 95.5 cm long (for small objects) and 15.8 mm in diameter. A, Telescope (top),sheath (middle),and optical grasping
forceps (bottorn). B, Telescope inserted and locked into optical grasping forceps. C, Large grasping forceps with jaws closed. D, The large
grasping forceps has oversized jaws capable of grasping large objects such as the golf ball shown in this photo. E, Smaller grasping forceps
with jaws open. These instruments were designed by two Spanish veterinarians (Dr. Vicente Torrent and Dr. Elena Mora) with extensive
experience in endoscopic retrieval of large foreign bodies from dogs (e.g.,bones and golf balls).
body material that may be present in the proximal esopha-
 gus and that subsequently may damage the mucosa. As the
endoscope is advanced, the esophageal mucosa should be
carefully evaluated for any foreign body-related damage. For
enhanced visualization, air should be insufflated to distend
the esophageal walls, but the patient's respiratory status must
be carefully monitored while this is done. Air may be forced
around an impacted foreign body and into the stomach,
which can lead to significant gastric distension with resultant
respiratory and cardiovascular compromise. Cats and small
dogs are most at risk. The distension should be relieved as
 quickly as possible. In most cases this can be done by peri-
odically passing the endoscope or narrow diameter tubing
around the foreign body and into the stomach so that the air
Figure 7-12 Overtube in position on a flexible endoscope.
can be suctioned. Air insufflation to a perforated esophagus
CHAPTER 7Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies· 255
Figure 7-13 Example ofthe usefulness of an overtube in the removal of a sharp foreign body. A, An opened safety pin is grasped frmly
at the blunt end with a forceps instrument before withdrawal into an overtube. B, The endoscope with safety pin is being pulled into the
overtube. C, The safety pin has been totally withdrawn into the overtube. The use of this technique keeps the sharp point of the safety pin
from coming into contact with mucosa. The overtube and endoscope can be safely withdrawn at the same time.
can also result in acute respiratory signs. The anesthetist is
at the site of foreign body impaction in the esophagus. The
advised to monitor both respiratory character and degree of
extent of damage should be carefully evaluated, and appro-
gastric distension during the procedure.
 priate medication should be instituted after the procedure.
Successful extraction of a foreign body requires adequate
The most commonly encountered esophageal foreign
visualization, a firm grasp of the object, and removal with
bodies in dogs are bones and fishhooks. Techniques for their
minimal force so that further damage is avoided. The endo-
removal are discussed in detail in the following sections.
 scope tip should not be used as a ramming rod to dislodge
Rigid sections of plastic may also become impacted, and
or advance an object because significant damage could be
these objects behave similarly to bones. Esophageal foreign
incurred to the endoscope. Once freed, most objects can be
bodies are encountered much less commonly in cats, but the
pulled back to the tip of the endoscope. The endoscope and
 management principles are identical.
foreign body are then gently removed simultaneously. Undue
force should never be exerted; gentle manipulation is the rule.
Esophageal Bone Foreign Bodies
If possible, pointed objects such as bones and needles should
be withdrawn with the pointed edge trailing. If a sharp end
Bones are usually not easily dislodged once they become
is positioned proximally, the grasping prongs can sometimes
impacted in the esophagus. Wishbones are an exception, espe-
be used to cover it (e.g, toothpick or needle), thus protecting
cially if the furcular process of the bone is positioned cranially.
the esophageal mucosa, or the object can be advanced to the
Usually one or both of the furcular rami of the bone have a
stomach and repositioned so that the sharp end trails. This
 sharp edge (caused by trauma during ingestion) that impales
latter technique works well when irregular pieces of a mate-
the esophageal mucosa during transit (see Figure 7-19). Once
rial such as plastic are involved. Alternatively, objects with
the edge becomes wedged into the esophageal wall,the wish-
sharp or irregular edges can be removed with the aid of an
bone is unlikely to pass. The bone is usually easily removed
overtube to prevent mucosal damage. After an esophageal
if the endoscopist simply grasps the furcular process with a
foreign body is removed, the scope should be reintroduced;
pronged instrument, pulls it directly to the endoscope tip, and
the entire esophagus should be inspected for damage, and the
simultaneously retrieves the endoscope and bone as a unit.
stomach should be examined for the presence of any foreign
Chicken, pork, or rib bones are usually more diffcult to
material. Some degree of mucosal laceration usually occurs
dislodge. Often a bone has been lodged for several days or
256 ■PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
more before a definitive diagnosis of esophageal obstruction
Another method that we have used successfully is to pass
is made. In most cases some degree of mucosal laceration
one or more pilling bougies alongside the endoscope shaft to
acts as an anchoring site. Spasm of esophageal muscle may
a point just beyond the distal bone tip. The base of the bou-
also prevent movement of the bone.
 gie section is then drawn back and hooked against the bone
As the bone is approached, an accumulation of foam,
so that it is possible to apply more retraction force than can
saliva, and bits of food is usually seen just proximal to the
be generated with the foreign body graspers alone. A narrow
foreign body. The area should be suctioned and lavaged
 bougie can sometimes be used to pry an impacted bone away
through the endoscope to obtain as clear a view as possible
from the mucosa by sliding the tip gently between the bone
of the foreign body and the points of lodgment. If chunks
and the esophageal mucosa. Ifit is apparent thata sharp lower
 of food are present, lavage and suction may need to be per-
end of a bone is deeply wedged into the mucosa, caudally
formed through an overtube. If possible without causing a
directed force should not be applied. Doing so may cause the
 perforation or further damage to the mucosa, the endoscope
 esophageal wall to perforate. If esophageal spasm is consid-
should be eased around the foreign body so that the esopha-
ered a significant problem, glucagon may be administered
 gus distal to the obstruction can be examined. Occasionally a
 intravenously (0.05 mg/kg [0.11 mg/lb], not to exceed a total
stricture or diverticulum is identifed and can be implicated
dose of 1 mg) to promote relaxation. Once freed, the bone
as an underlying cause of the foreign body obstruction.
and endoscope are retracted simultaneously, with the bone
The endoscope or a bougie can be used to dilate a stricture.
 preferably pulled snugly against an overtube. The overtube
Excess air should be suctioned from the stomach before the
 helps maintain dilation of the upper esophageal sphincter,
endoscope is retracted to the foreign body site.
thereby improving the likelihood of pulling the bone through
 The bone must be dislodged from the site of impingement
the sphincter area without having it dislodge from the grasper.
before it can be retrieved. Air insuflation can be attempted in
If the bone does dislodge at the sphincter area, forceps can be
an effort to distend the walls of the esophagus away from the
used to regrasp and retrieve it the final distance.
bone, but impingement of sharp edges into the mucosa often
 If a foreign body cannot be retrieved in a retrograde man-
 prevents this from being a useful maneuver. If air insufflation
ner, an attempt should be made to advance it to the stom-
fails, we, and our physician counterparts, have successfully used
ach. Bones are usually decalcified by gastric juices, and the
balloon dilation of the esophagus proximal to the bone foreign
remaining fragments pass through the intestinal tract with-
body to release the impacted sharp edges from the esophageal
 out incident. Ifa bone is firmly wedged in the distal esopha-
wall to facilitate removal. Once the bone is dislodged, position
gus at the time of presentation, it may be best to direct all
the endoscope tip proximal to the bone and advance a sturdy
efforts at advancing it to the stomach rather than risking any
pronged grasping instrument through the scope to the bone.
 problems by pulling it retrograde. If all attempts to dislodge
A firm grasp is applied to an available prominence, and an
the bone are unsuccessful, the procedure is converted to a
 attempt is made to retract the bone toward the endoscope tip.
thoracotomy for esophagotomy.
 A grooved area around a prominence is an ideal place to grasp
The esophageal wall is invariably damaged from bone
 because it may be easier to effectively anchor the prongs. The
 impaction and subsequent retrieval efforts. Most lacerations
 esophageal wall must not be included in the grip of the prongs.
heal uneventfully, and when careful endoscopic technique is
If the bone does not move in response to this initial effort
used, surgical intervention is rarely necessary. The mucosa
(as is often the case), several procedures can be attempted.
 should be carefully inspected once the bone is removed. The
As stated previously, the endoscope tip should not be used
 degree of damage is usually directly related to the time the
to forcefully push against the foreign body because the scope
foreign body was lodged and can be worsened by retrieval
may be damaged. An overtube can be used, however, to
efforts. If significant erosive damage has occurred, the patient
 apply caudally directed force under direct visualization. Any
is treated with a liquid sucralfate suspension for topical protec-
force should be carefully applied. The goal at this juncture is
tive effect (1 g per 30 kg [66 Ib] three to four times daily); a his-
to first disengage the bone from the esophageal wall so that it
tamine 2 (H2)-receptor blocker to decrease the acidity of any
can be freely moved. Caudal force followed by grasping and
gastric contents that may be refluxed to the esophagus (e.g--
pulling in short interchangeable motions may help free the
ranitidine 1 to 2 mg/kg [0.45 to 0.90 mg/lb] intravenously or
foreign body. If a wide diameter rigid endoscope (e.g- proc-
orally twice daily, famotidine 0.5 mg/kg [0.23 mg/lb] intrave-
toscope) is used, a rigid grasping instrument can be passed
nously twice daily or 0.5 to 1.1 mg/kg [0.23 to 0.5 mg/lb] taken
through it to the bone. Once a firm purchase is obtained,
orally twice daily); and an antibiotic such as amoxicillin or a
an attempt is made to twist the bone back and forth in
cephalosporin. Sucralfate is available in suspension form, or
short motions to disengage it from the wall. Standard flex-
alternatively it can be mixed into solution by dissolving a tablet
ible grasping forceps cannot be used effectively in this man-
 in 15 mL to 30 mL of lukewarm water. Hz-receptor blockers
 ner. Rigid laparoscopic or other rigid grasping forceps (see
 do not decrease gastric acid levels enough to prevent digestion
Figures 7-10 and 7-11) can also be passed alongside a flexible
of a bone that may have been advanced from the esophagus to
endoscope and are often very successful at retrieving bones
 the stomach instead of being removed retrograde.
from the esophagus. The grasper shown in Figure 7-1l can
 If the esophagitis associated with foreign body impac-
 also be used as a rigid endoscopy examination unit.
 o d ud e ns id si u
recommended as the antacid of choice (e.g-, omeprazole 0.7
line in an effort to pull the hook out. Unfortunately this usu-
to 2 mg/kg [0.32 to 0.9 mg/lb] orally once daily). In these
ally embeds the hook into the esophageal or gastric mucosa.
more severe cases, other medications to consider include
Most patients are presented within several hours of
metoclopramide (0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg [0.1 to 0.2 mg/lb] orally or
 ingestion of the hook. Signs of discomfort are usually mini-
subcutaneously three to four times daily) or cisapride (0.25
mal, and because the esophageal lumen is not significantly
to 0.5 mg/kg [0.1 to 0.25 mg/lb] orally three times daily) to
occluded in most cases, signs consistent with obstruction are
 decrease esophageal reflux by increasing lower esophageal
rarely exhibited. Cervical and thoracic radiographs should 
sphincter pressure and to promote gastric emptying. The
be obtained to identify the position of the hook, and general
recommended duration of drug therapy depends on the
anesthesia is induced in preparation for fishhook retrieval.
severity of mucosal damage caused by the foreign body. Mild
A skilled clinician may first try a blind two-tube tech-
mucosal injury should be treated for 5 to 7 days, whereas
nique that does not require endoscopy. The two-tube tech-
moderate to severe mucosal lesions should be treated for at
nique is usually successful as long as the line is still attached
least 2 to 3 weeks. If the patient has no evidence of infection
to the hook and coming out of the animal's mouth. If the
(eg pyrexia, lukocytosis with lef shift, mediastinitis, n-
line has been pulled out or is missing, sometimes the eye of
monia), corticosteroids are used (e.g- prednisone 0.5 mg/kg
the hook can be rethreaded with the use of endoscopic guid-
[0.23 mg/lb] twice daily for 3 days and then tapered over the
ance. Relatively rigid endotracheal tubes, polyvinyl chloride
 next 7 to 10 days) to decrease the fibroblastic response and
(PVC) pipe, or even wide-bore flexible tubing works well for
stricture formation. Although no proof exists that cortico-
the two tubes. One tube has to fit inside the other, and the
steroids are absolutely effective in this regard, their antin-
inner tube must be longer than the outer tube. First, if the
flammatory effect is still likely to be of some benefit to the
length of line coming out of the mouth is short, attach more
patient. Pain relief may also be necessary in some cases, and
line for a more convenient working length. Then the inner
its thoughtful use should not be overlooked (e.g., hydromor-
tube should be placed over the line and down the esopha-
 phone, morphine, transdermal fentanyl patch, etc.).
gus. After this step, the end of the fishing line protrudes from
Temporary gastrotomy feeding tubes should be con-
one end of the inner tube, and the distal end of the inner
sidered in patients with severe esophageal damage so that
tube should rest in the inner curve of the fishhook within
further abrasive injury from food particles is avoided. If
the esophagus. Slide the larger outer tube over the smaller
the esophageal damage is not extensive, water is generally
inner tube. While keeping tension on the line, frmly push
offered 12 hours affer bone removal, and small amounts
the inner tube toward the stomach. This movement pulls the
of soft food can be offered at 18 to 24 hours. The best food
fishhook barb from the esophageal wall. Hold the inner tube
choice initially is a diet low in fat and high in protein so that
 still and slide the larger tube over it. This effectively hides the
lower esophageal sphincter tone is enhanced and acid reflux
hook within the larger tube or buries the hook into the wall
into the esophagus is minimized. If esophageal perforation
of the larger tube. Then pull both tubes out together. If the
is a possibility, thoracic radiographs should be obtained
two-tube technique is unsuccessful, proceed to esophagos-
immediately and at 12 and 24 hours after bone removal and
 copy for actual visualization of the hook.
 compared with preprocedure films. Pneumomediastinum,
At first it may be difficult to visualize a hook that is
pneumothorax, or pleural fluid may be present if esopha-
embedded in the cranial esophagus because this section of
geal perforation has occurred. Most patients are discharged
the esophagus expands just caudal to the upper esophageal
from the hospital 1 to 4 days after a foreign body has been
sphincter (Figure 7-14). A hook in this location can easily be
removed.
 bypassed by a standard forward-viewing endoscope as it is
 If the esophageal mucosa has been severely damaged,
passed through the sphincter. This problem usually occurs
 periodic endoscopic surveillance during the frst 1 to 3 weeks
 only if the hook is not attached to any fishing line that can
after a bone has been removed is recommended so that the
be followed from the oral cavity. With knowledge of the
 esophagus can be evaluated for stricture formation (see Fig-
fishhook's location based on radiographs, the endoscopist
ure 7-20). Once weekly examination is usually adequate. If
should perform a thorough, full circumferential examina-
damage has been particularly severe, the frst examination
tion of the proximal esophagus if the hook is not seen on
should be done at 3 to 5 days. If a stricture occurs, it should
first view. A laryngoscope and curved forceps may be useful
be treated according to the guidelines presented in Chapter 3.
for dislodging the hook if it is difficult to maneuver a flexible
 endoscope into proper position in this area.
Fishhooks that are located beyond the most cranial aspect
Esophageal Fishhook Foreign Bodies
 of the esophagus are easily found at esophagoscopy. Little
Veterinarians are occasionally presented with dogs or cats
 or no debris is usually present around the site of impinge-
that have swallowed a fishhook. The diagnosis is generally
ment. The depth of esophageal wall penetration should be
straightforward because the client usually has either observed
estimated, and if a treble hook is involved, the number of
the hook being swallowed or has seen fishing line dangling
 hooks that are embedded should be determined. If the depth
from the animal's mouth. Because most animal owners rec-
 of penetration is shallow, two-pronged endoscopic graspers
ognize the gravity of the situation, they tug on the fishing
can be used to grab the curved portion just beyond the stem.
258 ■PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
esophageal sphincter will most likely be traversed with mini-
mal difficulty in most cases. If there is still concern about a
hook becoming snagged in the esophagus or upper esopha-
 geal sphincter, an overtube should be used.
If a hook cannot be freed from the esophageal wall, a
thoracotomy is necessary. This approach is usually neces-
sary when hook and barb have penetrated the outer wall of
the esophagus. The hook should be removed endoscopi-
cally after the surgeon cuts the end of the hook free from the
esophageal wall. With this approach the surgeon does not
have to incise the esophageal wall, thus minimizing chances
of postoperative complications, particularly esophageal
 dehiscence and stricture formation.
■ GASTRIC FOREIGN BODIES
Many types of gastric foreign bodies can be removed with
endoscopic techniques. As stated previously, all retained for-
eign bodiesshould be removed, especially iftheyare large,long.
sharp, or potentially toxic. If minimal or no significant clinical
signs are present and a foreign object is small and nontoxic, an
observation period is reasonable to allow for possible sponta-
neous passage; however, objects retained for longer than 2 to
 3 weeks should be removed. If signifcant clinical signs (e.g-,
persistent vomiting, dehydration, or inappetence) are present,
a foreign body should be removed as soon as possible.
An abdominal radiograph should be obtained shortly
Figure 7-14 Radiograph showing a small fishhook located just
before the induction of anesthesia to reconfrm the posi-
caudal to the upper esophageal sphincter. The hook was not visible
tion of the foreign body because the location identified on
with a forward-viewing endoscope untilthe tip of the scope was
radiographs made 1 hour or more earlier may no longer
angled considerably to provide a view of the area just beyond the
sphincter. The barb and most of the curved portion of the hook
be the same. A foreign body may exit the stomach and tra-
were embedded in the mucosa, leaving only the straight section in
 verse a portion of the intestinal tract by the time endoscopy
the lumen. Initially the hook was diffcult to find. This radiograph
is begun if a period of several hours has elapsed between
was taken to reconfirm the location. Note air in the esophagus
radiographs and the induction of anesthesia for endoscopy
from previous endoscope insufflation. Once located, the hook was
(Figure 7-15). Failure to recognize that the foreign body
successfully removed.
has moved may result in undertaking the unnecessary risk
 of anesthesia. An inexperienced endoscopist may spend a
The hook is then rotated outwardly by deflecting the tip
considerable amount of time searching the stomach for an
of the endoscope. When a hook is embedded more deeply,
already departed foreign body while feeling concern that lack
grasp the hook firmly, align it snugly against the tip of the
 of experience is causing the difficulty in locating the object.
endoscope or an overtube, and then forcefully thrust it in
Even experienced generalists and specialists have made the
a caudal direction, thus wrenching the hook and barb away
mistake of not repeating radiographs shortly before the
from the esophageal wall and into the lumen. Rigid grasping
induction of anesthesia to reconfirm the location of the for-
forceps can also be advanced alongside the endoscope and
eign object. Once this error is made, it is rarely repeated!
can be used to push the hook in a caudal direction until it
The stomach should be as empty offood as possible so that
is no longer embedded. These maneuvers can cause small,
the foreign body can be easily located. The patient should be
usually insignificant tears in the inner wall Once the hook
placed in the left lateral recumbent position, as foreign bod-
is free in the lumen, it can be easily pulled retrograde. It is
ies tend to migrate to the dependent fundus or body, which
often helpful to use endoscopic grasping forceps to hold the
facilitates removal. If food or debris is present and difficulty
sharp barb of the fishhook to protect the esophagus dur-
is experienced in finding the foreign body, the patient should
ing retrieval. Alternatively, a snare can be placed over the
be rotated from the left lateral to dorsal recumbent position
fishhook barb near the point. Typically, when the snare is
and then to the right lateral position, if necessary, to shift and
tightened up against the scope, the sharp point tends to
separate the gastric contents. This may need to be repeated
flip around so the sharp barb points back toward the stom-
one or more times during the procedure if a particularly slip-
ach, making it safe to pull the scope out with the hook. Air
 pery foreign body is dropped back into the food or debris
should be insufflated through the endoscope, and the upper
after it has been grasped. Objects with irregular surfaces
CH APTER 7 Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies·  259
A
B
Figure 7-15 A, Radiograph showing a buckle in the pylorus of a Cocker spaniel that ingested the end of a belt. Endoscopic examination
of the stomach was begun 4 hours after this radiograph was obtained. Belt fragments were identifed in the stomach and removed, but the
buckle could not be found during a thorough examination of the stomach and duodenum. B, Radiograph made 5 hours after the previous
radiograph, while the dog was still under anesthesia. The buckle had separated into two main sections, both of which were in the small
intestine beyond the duodenum and the reach of the endoscope. Both buckle sections passed uneventfully through the remainder ofthe
intestinal tract. Had this radiograph been made immediately before endoscopy, the procedure could have been avoided.
that are wedged in the antrum usually remain there despite
 body at the blunter end, with the sharper end trailing, so that
positioning changes. The stomach should be thoroughly
it can be removed in a longitudinal position. Objects that
examined for the presence of any additional foreign material
are flat (e.g-, coins) or that have irregular surfaces or nar-
that may not have been identifed on radiographs. Failure to
 row projections can usually be grasped without diffculty. In
examine the fundus and cardia carefully with the use of the
contrast, considerable skill and patience may be required to
retroflexion maneuver (see Chapter 4) may result in a small
 achieve a firm grip on objects that are smooth or slippery
foreign body wedged in this area being missed (Figure 7-16).
either because of their physical makeup or because of an
Once a foreign body is frmly grasped, it is pulled to
accumulation of gastric or duodenal fluid on their surface.
the endoscope tip. The scope and foreign body are then
Time allotted for careful maneuvering to apply a firm grip
retracted as a unit (Figure 7-17). Having an assistant pres-
to an object at a favorable position or angle for successful
ent to control the grasping instrument, retraction of the
retrieval is well spent.
endoscope shaft, or both while the endoscopist controls tip
 If difficulty is experienced in retracting a foreign body
deflection may be helpful. However, once proper experience
through the lower esophageal sphincter, the endoscope tip
is gained, the endoscopist can often easily perform the entire
should be deflected approximately 30 to 40 degrees (the nor-
procedure alone. An endoscopist working alone can main-
mal angle between esophagus and stomach) as the foreign
tain the foreign body in position against the endoscope tip
body is pulled toward the cardia and locked in this position.
by bending the pliable stem of the grasping instrument at the
This often facilitates the maneuvering of a large or irregular
 point where it exits the working channel port while using the
object through the curve at the gastroesophageal junction.
thumb on the handle to hold the prongs in a closed position
Failure to do this when attempting to pull a large foreign
 around the foreign body (Figure 7-18). The left hand is then
 body through the junction may result in the object being
used to withdraw the endoscope.
dropped during a number of attempts before it ever reaches
The key to successful retrieval of a gastric foreign body
the esophagus. Problems involving traversing the upper
is to obtain as firm a grip as possible and to maintain the
esophageal sphincter are dealt with according to guidelines
object in proper alignment for retrograde movement from
 presented in the “Esophageal Bone Foreign Bodies" section.
the stomach through the lower esophageal sphincter to
An overtube can also be used to maintain dilation of the
the esophagus, cranially along the esophagus, and through
lower esophageal sphincter so that the foreign body may slip
the upper esophageal sphincter. When the foreign body is
through more easily as it is held snugly against the overtube
initially approached in the stomach, its size and configura-
tion should be carefully studied to determine the best way
body as a unit. If multiple small pieces of foreign material
 s  o d s  oq  n d 0
(e.g., fragmented chunks of Tupperware or plant material)
prominences on which an anchored grip can be obtained)
 need to be removed, the procedure time can be shortened
and easiest direction for removal. For example, although a
by insertion of an overtube into the stomach and removal of
long bone can be easily grasped horizontally along its shaft,
the objects through this tube with the endoscope. The endo
it could not be pulled in a horizontal position through the
scope can be returned quickly to the stomach each time it is
lower or upper esophageal sphincters if it is longer than the
removed. Furthermore, esophageal mucosa and sphincters
width of these areas. It would be best to grasp such a foreign
 undergo less iatrogenic trauma when this method is used.
260 ■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
D
Figure 7-16 Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) radiographs from a 6-year-old mixed-breed dog with a 6-week history of intermittent vomiting.
No radiographic abnormalities are seen. The complete blood count, biochemical profile, and urinalysis results were normal. C, Endoscopic view
of the fundus and cardia with the tip of the scope in retroflexion. A plastic foreign body with an irregular surface was found superficially impaled
in the mucosa. The foreign body could not be seen with a standard forward view from the gastroesophageal junction, and the body and antrum
were normal. Failure to perform a retroflexion maneuver would have resulted in an incorrect diagnosis. The endoscope shaft is faintly visible at
the 1-o'clock position. D, Close-up view of the foreign body. It was pried away from the mucosa with a two-pronged grasper and then retrieved.
Hairballs (trichobezoars) can sometimes be removed
alternative retrieval approach includes the use of strong
endoscopically with foreign body forceps or snares, espe-
monofilament nylon suture (or cotton umbilical tape).
cially if the hairball has a tubular shape and can be easily
Standard endoscopic graspers should be introduced
grasped at either end for retrieval in one section (see Fig-
through the biopsy channel until the grasper exits the dis-
ure 4-110). Large trichobezoars that fill much of the stom-
tal tip. The grasping forceps are then opened; one end of
ach cannot be removed with endoscopic methods because
the suture is grasped while the other end is held securely
they are usually oblong and quite hard, and the entwined
outside of the patient. The endoscope is then advanced
hair prevents fragmentation of the mass into smaller sections
into the stomach with the suture. Once the foreign body
that are more suitable for removal. These large trichobezoars
is visualized, advance the forceps with the suture through
should be removed surgically. A case involving an esopha-
the open ring for several centimeters and then open the
 geal hairball in a cat is presented in Figure 7-26.
forceps to release the suture material. Reposition the scope
 Some open ring gastric foreign bodies (e.g., complete or
and forceps to regrasp the suture material so the suture will
partial collars with open ring leash attachments, key fobs,
be looped through the ring. Withdraw the scope and the
pieces of choke chain, and other such items) will not be
 grasping forceps holding the suture material. Once out-
 amenable to removal with typical endoscopic graspers. An 
side the patient, open the forceps and grasp the retrieved
一
Figure 7-17 A, Ventrodorsal radiograph showing a radiodense object in the antral region of the stomach in a 10-year-old terrier with a
body. A smallsection of the endoscope shaft is visible in the center of the field, beyond the foreign object. When the dog was placed in the
left lateral recumbent position, the foreign body migrated to a dependent area of the gastric body. C, Forward view of the foreign object in
Pand si ioalqo au se uei aq lm sua dis au e aon uamsu pauidamie um padsi uaaq sei iaqo au oq ssee a
into the esophagus. D, Grasping technique used during the procedure. The object was a piece of plastic from a large toy.
suture. You are now holding both ends of the suture and
separate at any time before endoscopy and scatter to differ-
the open ring foreign body can be withdrawn orally via the
ent sites in the stomach (see Figure 7-32).
looped suture. Reintroduction of the endoscope is advised
 It is not commonly necessary to administer gastric muco-
to observe the foreign body's movement and advance-
sal protectant agents (e.g-, sucralfate) or H-receptor block-
 ment, especially through the lower and upper esophageal
ers to animals that have had a retained gastric foreign body.
sphincters.
 The stomach mucosa usually heals quickly, and clinical signs
Once a foreign body has been successfully retrieved, the
directly related to the foreign body generally abate as soon as
entire stomach and proximal duodenum must be thoroughly
the object has been removed. Food and water can usually be
inspected for any remaining foreign material before the pro-
resumed within 8 to 12 hours after the procedure is completed.
cedure can be considered complete. Even when radiographs
suggest that only one foreign body is present, there may be
■ DUODENAL FOREIGN BODIES
more. This may involve either radiolucent material or sev-
eral pieces of radiodense objects that may have been stacked
Duodenal foreign bodies are more diffcult to remove than
when the radiographs were made, giving the appearance
 are gastric foreign bodies because foreign bodies retained in
 of a single isolated object. Stacked objects can potentially
this area often become wedged and there is limited space for
262 ■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
the anus. Occasionally an object with a sharp point, such as
a needle, impacts the colonic mucosa and becomes wedged
there or even passes completely through the colonic wall
 into the abdomen. Bone fragments may become impacted
in the colonic mucosa and cause partial- or full-thickness
lacerations. A thermometer may inadvertently be passed
completely into the rectum or accidentally broken off inside
during attempts to retrieve it. Occasionally an animal is the
unfortunate victim of malicious intent in having a foreign
object advanced through the anus to the rectum. Because of
sphincter spasm, these objects may not be passed out spon-
taneously in due course.
If a rectal foreign body is suspected, a rectal examination
may reveal its presence and also provide important infor-
mation about rectal damage, hemorrhage, and pain. A sur-
vey radiographic assessment of the abdomen is necessary to
 determine the location of the object and to check for signs
 of perforation. If evidence of perforation is found, surgical
intervention is required.
If no evidence supports the presence of perforation, colo-
noscopy should be performed under general anesthesia with
the use of either rigid or flexible endoscopic equipment. If
the foreign body is in the transverse or ascending colon, a
Figure 7-18 Technique for solo removal of a foreign body. The
right hand holds the endoscope at the lower end of the control
flexible endoscope must be used. Bones in the descending
housing while maintaining the shaft of the grasping instrument
colon or rectum can most safely be removed through a rigid
in position. This keeps the grasped object in position against
the endoscope tip. The thumb maintains the prongs in a closed
scope, which is used both for visualization and as an over-
tube, thus protecting the mucosa from damage as the bone
position with upward pressure on the handle of the grasping
fragments are retrieved. Foreign body graspers or polypec-
instrument.
 tomy snares are the most versatile instruments for removing
foreign bodies, but a clamp such as a sponge forceps may
be required if the object is large and resistance is met in the
maneuvering. In addition, an overtube usually cannot be
distal rectum and anal sphincter area. After the foreign body
used in the small intestine because of diffculty encountered
has been removed, the entire rectum and colon should be
in advancing the tube around the angulus and through the
 inspected for lacerations.
pylorus. If a foreign body is found, an attempt is made to
 grasp it. If the object slides freely with minimal resistance,
 COMPLICATIONS OF ENDOSCOPIC
it is retracted to the stomach and repositioned, if necessary,
FOREIGN BODY REMOVAL
for retrieval through the esophagus. Glucagon (0.05 mg/
kg [0.23 mg/lb] not to exceed a total dose of 1 mg) can be
Complications rarely occur with endoscopic retrieval of
administered intravenously to relax the pylorus and duode-
foreign bodies. Potential complications include perfora-
num so that bothersome contractions are minimized. This
tion, hemorrhage, worsened impaction of a foreign body,
may improve visualization and help decrease resistance in
and respiratory problems (e.g-, pyothorax, pneumomedias-
pulling the foreign body retrograde. String foreign bodies
tinum, or pneumothorax) related to an esophageal foreign
that are found in the small intestine may be grasped and
body.
gently tugged, but if resistance is encountered, further trac-
 The veterinary literature increasingly contains reports
tion should not be applied because a perforation may occur
detailing the success and complication rates for endoscopi-
farther down the intestinal tract. Surgical exploration is
cally managed foreign body cases. In these studies, as well in
indicated.
 our experience, an overall successful removal rate of 85% to
 90% can be expected with endoscopic management. Based
■ RECTAL FOREIGN BODIES
 on experience to date it is clear that endoscopy can be used
safely and effectively with minimal complications in the
Retained rectal foreign bodies are an uncommon problem in
 management of the majority of foreign body ingestions in
dogs and cats. Foreign bodies that successfully traverse the
dogs and cats. Once proper skills are developed, endoscopy
 can be successfully used to extract foreign bodies in almost
 material in the colon and are passed uneventfully through
 any type of practice setting.
CHAPTER 7  Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies · 263
SUGGESTED
READING
Altman AR, Gottfried EB: Intragastric closure of an ingested open
Llompart A, Reyes J, Ginard D, et al: Endoscopic management of
safety pin, Gastrointest Endosc 24:294, 1978.
foreign bodies in the esophagus. Results of a retrospective series of
Gmeiner D, von Rahden BH, Meco C, et al: Flexible versus rigid
501 cases, Gastroenterol Hepatol 25(7):448-451, 2002.
endoscopy for treatment of foreign body impaction in the
Moore AH: Rermoval of oesophageal foreign bodies in dogs: use of
esophagus, Surg Endosc 21( 11):2026-2069, 2007.
the fluoroscopic method and outcome, J Small Anim Pract 42(5):
Hedlund CS, Fossum TW: Surgery of the digestive system. In Fossum
227-230,2001.
TW,editr:mal anmalsurgery,d3,St Louis,00,lsvi.
Rogers BHG, et al: An overtube for the flexible fiberoptic
Houlton JEF, Herrtage ME, Taylor PM, et al: Thoracic esophageal
esophagogastroduodenoscope, Gastrointest Endosc 28:256, 1982.
foreign bodies in the dog: a review of ninety cases, J Small Anirm
 Sale CS, Williams JM: Results of transthoracic esophagotomy retrieval
Pract 26:521-536, 1985.
of esophageal foreign body obstructions in dogs: 14 cases (2000-
Jackson C, Jackson CL: Diseases of the air and food passages of foreign
2004), J Am Ani Hosp Assoc 42:450-456, 2006.
body origin, Philadelphia, 1937, Saunders.
 Spielman BL, Shaker EH, Garvey MS: Esophageal foreign body in dogs:
 Jergens AE: Diseases of the esophagus. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC,
a retrospective study of 23 cases, JAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 28:570-574,
editors: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 7, St Louis,
1992.
2010, Saunders.
 Tams TR: Diseases of the esophagus. In Tams TR, editor: Handbook of
Kyles AE: Surgical diseases of the esophagus. In Slatter D, editor:
small animal gastroenterology, ed 2, St Louis, 2003, Saunders.
Textbook ofsmall anirmat surgery,ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, Saunders.
Little DC, Shah SR, St Peter SD, et al: Esophageal foreign bodies in
the pediatric population: our first 500 cases, J Pediatr Surg 41(5):
914-918, 2006.
Atlas paGes
264 -292
ESOPHAGEAL FOREIGN BODIES
Figure 7-28, p. 275, Peach pit (canine)
Hgure 7-38, p. 288, Pine needle impac-
Figure 7-19, pp. 264-265, Wishbone
Figure 7-29, p.276, Coin (canine)
tion (feline)
Figure 7-20, pp. 266-267, Chicken bone,
Figure 7-30, p. 277, Glass fragments
Hgure 7-39, pp. 288-289,Additional
lodged 8 days
(canine)
foreign body examples: rocks, sock,
Figure 7-21, pp. 268-269, Pork bone,
Figure 7-31, p. 278,Food container frag-
potato nail, bone chips, roast wrap-
lodged 4 days
ments (canine)
ping, leather leash
Figure 7-22, p. 270, Chicken rib bone,
Figure 7-32, pp. 278-279, Buckles
lodged 30 days
(canine)
Figure 7-23, p. 270,Perforated esophagus
DUODENAL FOREIGN BODIES
Figure 7-33, pp. 280-281,Rigid leather
Hgure 7-40, p. 290, Panty hose in stom-
Figure 7-24, p. 271,Fishhook
patch (feline)
ach and duodenum, with attendant
Figure 7-25, p. 271,Fishhook
Figure 7-34, pp. 282-283, Multiple varied
esophagitis (canine)
Figure 7-26, pp. 272-273, Esophageal
objects (canine)
hairball in a cat, causing complete
Hgure 7-41, p. 291, Section of rubber ball
Figure 7-35, pp. 284-285, Plastic popsicle
(feline)
obstruction
base (canine)
Hgure 7-42, p. 291, Nectarine pit
Figure 7-36, p. 286, Bottle cap (canine)
(canine)
Figure 7-37, p. 287, Gastric perforation
GASTRIC FOREIGN BODIES
Hgure 7-43, p. 292, String attached to a
Figure 7-27, p. 274,Sewing needle with
by a thin wood foreign body
nigid object (canine)
thread (feline)
(canine)
264 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr esOphaGeal fOreiGn bOdies
Figure 7-19 Bone foreign body (wishbone) in the esophagus of a 3-year-old male Pomeranian.
The bone had been swalowed 2 days previously. Clinical signs included periodic gagging and
lodged over the base of the heart with the furcular rami directed caudally. No radiographic signs
of esophageal perforation are present. B, Close-up view highlighting the position of the bone.
C, Clearly visualized bone on first approach with the endoscope. The furcular process is at the
11-o'clock position. The shorter furcular ramus is embedded suffciently in the esophageal mucosa
(4-o'clock position) to prevent further passage of the bone toward the stomach. The exact site
of impingement is obscured by foam. A small area of mucosal damage is seen at the 12-o'clock
position.
CHAPTER 7Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies · 265
D
Figure 7-19, cont'd D, Close-up view at the site of impingement. The bone was easily retrieved by
grasping the junction area of the furcular process and ramus with a two-pronged instrument. No
 resistance was encountered when the bone was pulled cranially to a position against the endoscope
tip, and no impedance was met at the upper esophageal sphincter. E, Site of focal mucosal damage
in the esophagus where the bone was embedded. A lesion of this degree would be expected to heal
shep voy aieens jo uoeredard pinb e pue auiauio um aeai sem sop a aimuaaun
after the procedure. The animal had no abnormal clinical signs after the bone was removed.
 F, Wishbone foreign body. The shorter ramus with the sharp tip was embedded in the mucosa.
266·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
C
D
Figure 7-20 Esophageal bone foreign body in a 2-year-old West Highland terrier. The dog was
found on the kitchen table swallowing a chicken bone wrapped in paper towel. The dog was
presented on a referral basis for endoscopy on the eighth day after ingestion when serial radiographs
 at the referring hospital showed that the bone had remained lodged in the esophagus. The complete
blood count showed leukocytosis (23,000 cells/mm?) with a left shift (2500 band cells). The dog was
not febrile. A, Lateral thoracic radiograph showing dilation of the lower esophagus with increased
density in the lumen. Barium was administered to highlight the features of the foreign body. The
radiograph showed no evidence of esophageal perforation. B, Endoscopic view in the esophagus as
the foreign body was approached. The light-colored material is paper towel. A putrid odor emanated
from the esophageal lumen,and the mucosa was quite friable. Note the hemorrhage (upper aspect
of the field) that occurred after gentle mucosal contact by the endoscope. C, Section of paper towel 
being removed with foreign body graspers (two-prong instrument). The initial part of the procedure
invoived removing the moistened paper towel in chunks so that the areas of bone impingement
could be more carefully assessed and asfrm a grip as possible could be applied to the bone with
the graspers. The endoscope was removed each time a section of paper was freed. The bone can
be seen under the paper. D, Appearance of the bone once it was uncovered. Note the surrounding
mucosal erythema. The shaft of the grasping instrument is in view, extending to the distal point 
of impingement. Despite the presence of numerous potential grasping sites at the proximal end of
the bone (note irregular prominences that are ideal for grasping),the bone could not be moved to
 any degree when traction was applied at the proximal end. In addition, small fragments were easily
broken from the bone when it was firmly grasped, making it extremely diffcult to maintain an
effective grip. The distal end of the bone was gripped, and alternate cranial and caudal forces were
applied in an effort to dislodge the bone. When these efforts failed, a rigid plastic overtube was used
to push the bone into the stomach. Once dislodged by the overtube,the bone was easily advanced
through the gastroesophageal junction. The bone was left in the stomach for digestion.
CHAPTER 7Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies · 267
G
H
Figure 7-20, cont'd E, Appearance ofthe esophagus immediately after the bone was dislodged
and advanced to the stomach. Note the fll circumferential erosive damage and hemorrhage. The
gastroesophageal junction is closed (slightly to the right of center). A postprocedure radiograph
showed no evidence of esophageal perforation. F, A 48-hour postprocedure radiograph showing
 no increased density in the area of the distal esophagus. A small amount of food is present in the 
stomach, but no bone is seen. Postprocedure treatment included cimetidine, metoclopramide (to
reduce the potential for gastroesophageal reflux), and amoxicillin. Sucralfate was not available when
this case was managed, but its use in this clinical situation would currently be recommended. Soft 
food was initially offered 24 hours after the procedure. G, Follow-up esophagoscopy to evaluate for
stricture formation 8 days after the foreign body was removed. Full circumferential narrowing of the
lumen has occurred at the foreign body site. A 9-mm endoscope was easily passed through without 
center). The dog was completely asymptomatic. Prednisone therapy (1.1 mg/kg/day [0.5 mg/lb/day]
for 10 days and then gradually decreased) was initiated to decrease the potential for further stricture
formation. In retrospect, prednisone could have been started sooner. H, Follow-up esophagoscopy
at 41 days afer foreign body removal. The foreign body site is well healed, and clinically insignificant
mild narrowing (ring formation) is present in the distal esophagus. The gastroesophageal junction is
closed. Prednisone use was discontinued after a total of 5 weeks.
268·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
C
Figure 7-21 Esophageal pork bone foreign body in a4-year-old 6-kg (13.2-lb) mixed-breed dog.
The owner had given the bone to the dog as a treat; 1 hour later the animal began having frequent 
gagging episodesRadiographs were notmade at thereferringhospital until 3 days second
 presentation of the patient) after bone ingestion. The radiographs showed a bone density in the
 esophagus, and the dog was referred for endoscopy. Clinical signs included intermittent gagging.
thoracic radiograph showing alarge irregular bone lodged in the esophagus at the heart base. B, First
 endoscopic view of the bone. Saliva and foam were accumulated around the bone, making it diffcult 
to sustain a firm grip. The bone was tightly wedged. C, Erosions and hemorrhage of the esophageal
wall, which began once the bone was pried away with pilling bougies. The endoscope tip has been
 passed beyond the proximal aspect of the bone. When all efforts to dislodge the bone failed (both 
 pulling and pushing forces at the proximal end), two large pilling bougies (32F and 36F) were gently
passed singly around the bone. This helped pry one end of the bone away from the esophageal wall.
Aeuen aidde oi auoq aljo iapiog ies aui suie papenan uaui aiam sanog yoq go saseq a
directed force. Simultaneously traction was applied at the cranial end with use of a two-pronged
grasper passed through the endoscope. (Alternatively asnare could have been used.) This dislodged
the bone, and it was retrieved through the mouth using the grasping instrument. D, Site of lodgment
immediately after the bone was removed. Note the grooved (lacerated) area in the uppermost aspect
of the feld. If a rigid instrument had been used to force the bone caudally, an edge of the bone
 could have been forced through the wall of the esophagus. The animal was treated with injectable
cimetidine, ampicillin, and prednisone (0.8 mg/kg/day [0.35 mg/lb] initially), intravenous fluids,
sucralfate suspension, and meperidine (the dog seemed to be in a great deal of pain after the
 procedure). Morphine or hydromorphone would be used if the case were managed today.
CHAPTER 7Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies · 269
G
H
Figure 7-21, cont'd E, Retrieved pork bone. F, View on esophagoscopy at a 3-day follow-up. The
integrity of the esophageal walls has improved dramatically (i.e., the walls distended readily on
air insufflation). G, At a 7-day follow-up the dog was completely asymptomatic. The esophageal
 mucosa was healed. Mild erythema was still evident, but the esophagus was healing well with no
evidence of stricture formation. All medications except prednisone were discontinued. H, At a
14-day follow-up the dog was completely asymptomatic, and the esophageal mucosa was healed.
Mild erythema was still evident, and small follicular changes were observed (sometimes seen in 
 conjunction with healing esophageal lesions). The prednisone was gradually tapered. Recovery was
uneventful.
270 ·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 7-22 Endoscopic view of a small chicken rib bone lodged in the esophagus of
 aojaq shep oe roy snaeqdosa aul ul juasand uaaq pey auoq aul apood pio-ieak-I e
endoscopy. Clinical signs included gagging and intermittent salivation. Despite the
owner's belief that the dog had ingested a bone, it was treated after an initial examination
for a collapsing trachea. No improvement occurred, and survey radiographs were made
probably because of the thin nature of the bone. Contrast studies were not performed. A
change in antibiotics failed to effect improvement of the suspected respiratory condition,
and when the owner still insisted that a bone was “lodged in the dog's throat," the animal 
was referred for endoscopy. The owner's diagnosis was correct, and the bone, which was
located at the thoracic inlet, was successfully retrieved at endoscopy. (Courtesy of Dennis
A.Zawie.)
Figure 7-23 Esophageal perforation (3-o'clock position) in a dog, caused by a bone
foreign body. Note the mucosal damage surrounding the perforation site. The dog had
pleural effusion caused by pyothorax and died before treatment could be instituted. As a
point of clinical interest, the esophagus was examined endoscopically after the dog died.
Esophagoscopy should not be attempted if there is an esophageal perforation because of
the strong potential for life-threatening complications. (Courtesy of Dennis A. Zawie.)
CHAPTER 7  Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies ·  271
Figure 7-24 Fishhook in the thoracic esophagus of a 3-year-old mixed-breed dog. The
owner had attempted to retrieve the hook by pulling on the attached fishing line. Both the
hook and the stem became embedded in the esophageal mucosa. When the hook could not
 be freed with two-pronged foreign body graspers, a uterine biopsy punch was advanced
alongside the endoscope to grasp the stem of the hook. With distally directed movement
the hook was forced away from the mucosa. It was difficult to position the rigid instrument
in the exact spot necessary to grasp the hook without also grasping the mucosa in the cups
of the biopsy instrument. Once dislodged, the hook was retrieved without difficulty.
Figure 7-25 A, Radiograph showing a fishhook in the thoracic esophagus of a dog. B, The hook was
dislodged using atwo-pronged grasping instrument. The hook was then turned around (maneuver
shown in this photograph) and finally grasped at the curved base for retrieval. Removing a hook in
this direction minimizes the chance of impaling the upper esophageal sphincter as the foreign body
is pulled through.
272 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
A
D
Figure 7-26 Esophageal foreign body with subsequent development of esophagitis and later a
severe esophageal stricture in a 6-year-old Maine Coon cat. The history included an acute onset
of respiratory distress and salivation. The cat was presented as an emergency patient. A, Lateral
thoracic radiograph demonstrating a long area of increased opacity in the dorsocaudal thorax
(later confirmed to be a hairball) and ventral deviation of the trachea. The cardiac silhouette was
normal, and no evidence of pleural effusion was seen. Early on, cardiac disease (cardiomyopathy
and heartworm disease),bronchial disease, and pleural effusion were excluded. B, Esophagoscopy
confirmed a diagnosis of esophageal foreign body (hairball). The cranial edge of the hairball can
be seen from the cervical esophagus. C, Close-up view of the hairball, which was found to be so
tightly wedged in the esophagus that it could not be advanced toward the stomach to any degree.
 As expected, attempts to pull the hairball cranially were futile. (Small fragments were pulled off
 as graspers were used to pull on the hairball.) Gastrotomy was performed to remove the hairball
through the stomach. Forceps were advanced from the stomach into the esophagus to pull the
hairball back into the gastric body. D, Retrieved hairball. Smaller fragments of the hairball were in
the lower stomach (not pictured).
CHAPTER 7 Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies· 273
E
C
Figure 7-26, cont'd E, Endoscopic appearance of the esophagus immediately after the hairball was removed. A full-
circumference thin layer of hair adhered to the esophageal mucosa along much ofthe esophagus. Based on the rough 
texture of the hair and the likelihood that gastric acid and activated enzymes accompanied the hairball into the esophagus,
after some of the hair residue was gently scraped and washed away from the esophageal walls (thoracic esophagus). G,
Eroded and inflamed mucosa of the lower esophagus at the gastroesophageal junction. Immediate treatment for esophagitis
included sucralfate suspension, famotidine, metoclopramide, and prednisone. The possibility that an esophageal stricture
might develop over the following 7 to 14 days was a concern because vomition of a large hairball is a known risk factor
for esophageal strictures in cats. Follow-up endoscopic examinations were planned to evaluate for this possibility. H,
Esophagus at 5 days after surgery. The mucosa was quite irregular and friable. At 9 daysthe esophagus had narrowed, and
at 12 days a stricture prevented the advancement of a7.9-mm endoscope beyond the midthoracic esophagus. The cat had
begun to regurgitate shortly after eating. Medical management for esophagitis had been continuously administered. Balloon
dilation procedures were initiated to resolve the stricture. See Chapter 3 fora complete description of management of
esophageal strictures.) I, Fully distended 20-mm balloon dilator in the thoracic esophagus. Contrast material was added
to sterile water to enhance visualization of the balloon (for photographic purposes). Multiple balloon procedures were
required to resolve the stricture in this cat. This was one of the most difficult to manage esophageal strictures in one of the
author's case series (TT). Six years later the cat was doing extremely well and had no signs of an esophageal disorder.
274 · PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr Gastric fOreiGn bOdies
C
Hgure 7-27 Sewing needle foreign body in a 4-year-old cat. The
owner saw the cat swallow the needle and approximately 8 inches
of attached thread 30 minutes before presentation. A, Radiograph
showing the needle surrounded by soft tissue, dense material in 
the stomach. B, Radiograph obtained 4 hours later, immediately
before anesthetic induction for endoscopy,to determine the current
 position of the needle. The needle is located in the antral region of
the stomach. C, First endoscopic view in the antrum. A hairball flls
much of the field, and the needle can be seen extending from the
center of the field to the 3-o'clock position. D, The needle,thread
(7-o'clock position), and remaining hair are visualized after much of
the hair was removed as the initial step of the procedure. The pyloric
orifice is obscured by the hair. E, The needle has been repositioned
in the distal gastric body (the angulus extends from the 2:30 position
toward the center of the field). This was done so that the point of the
needle could be enclosed completely within the teeth ofthe grasping
PEC.
DATE.
instrument. This alleviates any opportunity for the needle point
to impale the gastric or esophageal mucosa during retrieval. Once
grasped, the needle and thread were removed within seconds. An
overtube could have been used but was not considered necessary.
F, Needle, thread, and an attached clump of hair.
CHAPTER 7Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies · 275
C
Figure 7-28 Peach pit gastric foreign body in an 8-year-old Dachshund with an 8-day history of
complete anorexia and two known episodes of vomiting. The owner considered it likely that the
dog had swallowed a peach pit. A, The lateral view suggested the possibility of a small foreign body
in the antral-pyloric region. B,The ventrodorsal radiograph was unremarkable.Because the owner
was convinced that a foreign body had been ingested, endoscopy was considered the most useful
 procedure. C, A peach pit was found in the stomach, unattached to the mucosa, and was removed by
grasping it longitudinally. It would have been quite diffcult to pull the object horizontally through
the esophageal sphincters.
276·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
C
Figure 7-29 Coin foreign body in the stomach of a 10-year-old poodle. At the time of referral
for endoscopy the coin had been in the stomach for 2 weeks. Other than an occasional episode of
vomiting, no gastrointestinal signs were present. A, Abdominal radiograph showing a single coin in 
the stomach. A small unidentified radiodense object is also present in the descending colon. B, A 1980 
 penny was found in the gastric body. C, The coin was freely movable and easily grasped with a two-
pronged instrument. D, The retrieved coin.
CHAPTER 7 Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies ·  277
B
Figure 7-30 Glass fragments in the stomach of a young German shepherd. The dog had undergone
surgeryfor anintussusception36 hours previously.Whileexercisingfreey intheintensive care
room, the dog jumped on a countertop and in an effort to lick baby food from an open jar knocked
it to the floor where it shattered. The dog then ingested both baby food and glass fragments from
the floor. A,Abdominal radiograph showing glass fragments in the stomach. Endoscopy was
 performed shorly after the glass was ingested. B, The pieces of glass were each grasped and retrieved
di au isuiele Aiaso piau aam aau eaaa suna adser pauod-ami e dusn aleniaiu
 of the endoscope, and the mucosa of the esophagus and esophageal sphincters was not damaged.
 An overtube could have been used to provide greater mucosal protection but was considered
unnecessary. C, Retrieved glass fragments.
278·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
Figure 7-31 Multiple Tupperware fragments in the antrum
of a 7-year-old Labrador retriever with persistent vomiting for
4 days. A, Multiple Tupperware fragments wedged together
in the antrum. The pyloric orifice is obscured by the foreign
 objects. Several ofthe fragments were impaled in the antral
mucosa, thus preventing most of the conjoined material to
move elsewhere in the stomach. Fragments were removed
individually using a two-pronged grasper. B, Endoscopic
view of the antrum after much of the foreign material was
removed. The pyloric orifice is at the lower end of the field
(6-o'clock position). C, Multiple retrieved Tupperware
fragments. It is highly unlikely that this material would have
passed spontaneously out of the stomach. No further vomiting
occurred after the endoscopic procedure was completed.
B
Figure 7-32 Three buckle foreign bodies in the stomach that appeared radiographically to be a
 single foreign body. The patient was a 5-year-old Basset hound with a single episode of vomiting and
 no known recent history of foreign body ingestion. A buckle foreign body was seen on radiographs.
The owner elected not to pursue treatment unless significant clinical signs developed. A and B,
 Lateral and ventrodorsal abdominal radiographs made 3 months later when the dog was referred for
 endoscopy. A buckle-shaped object is best appreciated on the ventrodorsal view. The dog had not 
vomited in 3 months and had a normal appetite. The owner had finally decided to have the foreign
body removed on the recommendation of the referring veterinarian.
CHAPTER 7 Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies ·  279
D
Figure 7-32, cont'd C, First endoscopic view of the stomach at the start of the procedure. A buckle
is clearly in view. The buckle was retrieved longitudinally with a two-pronged grasper without
 resistance. D, Endoscopic view during immediate subsequent examination of the stomach. A
 portion of a second buckle is seen in the upper left aspect of the field. This photograph represents a
 retroflexion view of the fundus and cardia. The endoscope shaft can be seen faintly at the 1-o'clock 
 position. A third buckle was subsequently found and retrieved. E, The three retrieved buckles as they
appeared after being in the stomach for at least 3 months. Apparently the buckles were stacked at
the time radiographs were obtained but separated between the time of radiography and endoscopy.
After aforeign body isremoved,the esophagus and stomach must always becarefully inspected before the
procedure can be considered complete.Failure to do so in this case would have resulted in two buckles
being left in the stomach.
280 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
B
C
D
Figure 7-33 Rigid leather patch in the stomach of a 1-year-old cat with a 6-week history of
vomiting. Interestingly,the vomiting always occurred between 5:00 and 7:00 AM and was limited to
 one to two episodes per day. Multiple treatments had been tried empirically without benefit. The cat
was referred for a diagnostic workup. A and B, Lateral and ventrodorsal abdominal radiographs. On
close inspection a square foreign body was identified. On the ventrodorsal view much of the foreign
body overlies the junctional area of the first and second lumbar vertebrae so that only a corner
of the foreign body is visualized to the right of the second lumbar vertebra. C, Foreign body as it
appeared on initial approach. It was wedged between the distal body and the antrum at the angulus.
D, The object was grasped at two corners using a two-pronged instrument. In this view the stomach
is distended, and the angulus is at the 1- to 3-o'clock position. Once the foreign body was grasped,
it was apparent that it might be difficult to pull such a nonpliable object through the esophageal
sphincters.
CHAPTER 7  Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies ·  281
G
Figure 7-33, cont'd E, Typical blurred view of a foreign body as it is held in position against the
endoscope tip during retrieval. The object was pulled smoothly from the stomach into the esophagus
by maintaining the endoscope tip at a 30-degree angle (the natural gastroesophageal angle).
 However, a sharp corner of the object impaled the wall of the distal esophagus and caused the
object to become wedged. The object was pushed caudally and gently rotated using the endoscopic
graspers. Once freed, the object was gradually retracted against minimal resistance through the
remaining esophagus and upper esophageal sphincter. F, Site of foreign body impingement in the
esophageal wall (torn reddened area in center of field). A small area of stomach is seen protruding
 into the lower esophagus (upper aspect of the field). The esophageal laceration was expected to heal
ao uag a  'aad a rae sis u re ou p uaid a au
was a rigid piece of leather, an unusual type of foreign body to be swallowed by a cat!
282 ·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
B
D
Figure 7-34 Multiple foreign bodies in the stomach of a 14-year-old poodle mix (8 kg [17.5
Ib]) with a 6-day history of intermittent vomiting. When different types of objects are identifed
on radiographs,the possibility that the objects may be grouped together in some way as a
 conglomeration should be considered. When foreign bodies are composed of both radiodense
 and radiolucent materials, the total size of the foreign material may be underestimated. A, Survey
abdominal radiograph showing four different types of radiodense foreign objects in the stomach. A
paper clip can be readily identifed, and the faintly visible object cranial to it is most likely a piece of
wire. The paper clip and wire could potentially traverse the gastrointestinal tract, but it is unlikely
that the other two objects,based on their shape, could pass through the pylorus of an 8-kg (17.5-lb)
dog. Endoscopic retrieval was planned. B, Close-up a radiograph made just before endoscopy. The
paper clip is clearly visualized,and the other object appears to be (but in fact was not) the base of a
broken lightbulb. The trapezoid-shaped object and wire are dorsal. C, First endoscopic view in the
gastric body. The tip of the paper clip is to the left of center (9-o'clock position). A rubber band is in
the foreground, with other unidentifiable material beyond it. The paper clip, rubber band, a group 
of small twigs, and a small amount of string were all hooked together and retrieved as a single group
(see F). D, The object with the screw top as it appeared when wedged in the antrum. Attempts to
grasp the threaded area were unsuccessful (the object was too slippery to maintain a grip).
CHAPTER 7 Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies ·  283
G
Figure 7-34, cont'd E, Once the rim of the object was grasped, it was pulled away from the
antrum into the gastric body. F, Appearance of the object wedged just caudal to the upper
 esophageal sphincter. It was diffcult to pull the foreign body through the sphincter using the 
renau aui ' asueisi ieuy aui li aaaai ci pasn anam sdaoy auodg siadsea pauoid-ol
object was actually the rim of a Nutri-Cal tube. Much of the retrieved material shown here was not
radiographically visible (including the wrapper clip). The wire and trapezoid-shaped radiodense 
object arenot shown.
284 ·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 7-35 Large (3.7-cm diameter) rounded plastic foreign body in the stomach of a 12-year-
old Great Dane/German shepherd cross. A, Lateral (shown here) and ventrodorsal survey
abdominal radiographs were unremarkable. Because the owner strongly suspected that the
dog had ingested the plastic object, a barium series was performed next. A negative-contrast 
gastrogram is more useful for identifying a radiolucent object in the stomach (barium tends to
mask a foreign body), but an intestinal study was also desired; hence barium was used. B and
C, Start of the barium series. D and E, Radiographs obtained at 15 minutes. Note the circular
 configuration in the pyloric antral area and the beaklike projection just above it in the lateral view.
CHAPTER 7   Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies  ·  285
G
Figure 7-35, cont'd F and G,
Radiographs taken at two hours. Only
a small amount of residual barium is in
the stomach. Barium is retained around
what appears to be a foreign object in
the pyloric antrum. Endoscopy was done
 shortly after the 2-hour radiographs were
 obtained. H, The foreign body, with
 barium in and around it, was found freely
movable in the distal gastric body. A two-
 pronged instrument was used to grasp an
edge of the rim. No significant resistance
was encountered until the object was
pulled against the upper esophageal
H
sphincter. I, Position of the foreign body
in the cranial esophagus after the grip was
lost at the upper esophageal sphincter.
 J, The object was grasped and rotated,
 and several more unsuccessful attempts 
were made to pullit through the upper
esophageal sphincter with the use of the
endoscopic graspers. A curved clamp
was then passed alongside the endoscope
to grasp the object and retrieve it the
final distance. When clamps are used,
care must be taken rotto grasp mucosa
along with the object. The esophagus and
stomach were subsequently reexamined,
and no evidence of mucosal damage was
found. K, The object was the plastic base
of a yogurt popsicle push-up (3.7-cm 
diameter).
286 ·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 7-36 Bottle cap foreignbody inthe stomach ofa 3-year-old English Springer spaniel. The
owner saw the dog ingest the cap and immediately took the animal to an emergency clinic. A, Lateral
abdominal radiograph confirming the presence of a bottle cap and food in the stomach. Vomiting
 was induced, and a large volume of food was produced. B, Radiograph taken 90 minutes after
vomiting was induced. The bottle cap was still in the stomach. The dog was referred for endoscopic
foreign body retrieval. C, Endoscopic view of the bottle cap in the gastric body. The cap was initially
 found adhering to one of the antral walls. Strong antral contractions made it diffcult to grip the 
cap firmly enough to pull it out of the antrum. Once the cap was freed from the antrum, it fell to
the fundus (patient in left lateral recumbent position). It was then grasped and placed in the gastric
body so that it could be aligned for retrieval. D, Bottle cap as it was pulled toward the endoscope tip.
No significant resistance was encountered as the cap was pulled through the esophageal sphincters.
E, Superficial erosions of antral mucosa from contact with the rim of the bottle cap. The pyloric
orifice is at the 12-oclock position. F, Best method of grasping a bottle cap with an endoscopic
retrieval instrument. Bottle caps can be easily retrieved by frmly gripping the rim. It is extremely
'ans don a uo dua uy Aidde on imy
CHAPTER 7 Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies ·  287
B
Figure 7-37 Gastric perforation by a stick foreign body in a 10-year-old Schnauzer with a 5-week
history of intermittent vomiting, inappetence, and weight loss. The animal had no known history
 of foreign body ingestion. Survey abdominal radiographs were unremarkable. A, View from the
 proximal gastric body. Mild generalized erythema and superficial patchy erosions are present.
 A foreign object is observed impaled in the gastric wall at the junction of the gastric body and
antrum (opposite the angulus). The angulus fold extends from the 12- to 3-o'clock position.
 B, Close-up of the foreign body as it passes through the gastric wall. When gently manipulated
with a grasping instrument, the object could not be moved. At laparotomy the wooden object
was found extending through the duodenum and impaling the body wall. The object and a
section of duodenum were removed, and the dog recovered uneventfully. C, The wood foreign
body was thought to be a food stick. The owner considered it likely that construction personnel
working at the house 5 to 6 weeks previously had not disposed of the stick properly. The dog
weighed only 5 kg (11 lb).
288PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
D
Figure 7-38 Large accumulation of pine needles in the stomach of a 3-year-old cat. The cat had
a history of intermittent hematemesis for 24 hours. Financial constraints prohibited radiography.
Because the owner had observed the cat ingest pine needles, endoscopy was considered the procedure
of choice. A, First view as the stomach was entered. Amazingly the stomach was impacted with pine
 needles. B, View in the midgastric body. During a tedious procedure the pine needles were removed in
clumps using a four-pronged grasper. Because of cost, gastrotomy was not an option. C, Section of the
 gastric body wall after a number of pine needles had been removed. Note the superficial erosive damage
of the mucosa. The cat was discharged several hours after the procedure was completed, and sucralfate
and famotidine were administered for 5 days. The animal had no further clinical signs. D, Pine needles.
Figure 7-39 In addition to the foreign bodies described in the previous figures, other types of
objects can be removed under endoscopic guidance. Several interesting examples are shown here.
A, Two rocks retrieved with a two-pronged grasper (see Figure 7-2) from a Golden retriever with a
6-day history of anorexia but no vomiting. B, Endoscopy-guided retrieval of a sock from a 5-year-
old Cocker spaniel cross. The sock had been in the stomach for 6 days. A two-pronged grasper 
was used. A rat-tooth grasper (see Figure 7-4) is also excellent for retrieving heavy cloth or pliable
objects. Socks are most easily removed in a stretched rather than bunched configuration.
CHAPTER 7 Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies ·  289
Figure 7-39, cont'd C, An 11-cm potato nail removed from the stomach of a dog. The nail was
grasped at the head using a two-pronged instrument. D, Multiple bone chips. E, Plastic and cord
wrappings of a roast removed from the stomach of a Dachshund. Frequent episodes of vomiting
during a 10-hour period shortly after this material was ingested failed to eject the foreign objects.
F, A 5-foot-long leather leash ingested by a young Labrador retriever as it was sitting in the back of
its owner's car en route to a park for a run. The dog ingested the entire leash while it was hooked to
its collar, leaving only the hook on the collar. The leash was ingested in two sections. Both segments
were retrieved under endoscopic guidance using a two-pronged grasper. The segments were grasped
at the free ends. (C, Courtesy of David S. Bruyette.)
290·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOr duOdenal fOreIGn bOdIes
Duodenal foreign bodies are often difficult to retrieve endoscopically (see the “Duodenal
   i os     s o s
procedure for confirming suspected foreign bodies, assessing mucosal damage, and
determining early in the clinical course whether surgery is indicated. The smallintestines of
animals that have fragmented gastric foreign bodies should always be examined carefully,
as far as the endoscope can reach, to check for the presence of additional fragments.
C
Hgure 7-40 Gastric and intestinal foreign body (panty hose) in a 10-month-old Doberman with a history
of acute severe vomiting for 2 days. Clinical signs were consistent with a high intestinal obstruction. Survey
abdominal radiographs suggested but did not definitively identify small bowel obstruction. Endoscopy was done
to confirm clinical suspicions before proceeding to exploratory surgery. Also, if a foreign body was present, an
attempt could be made to remove it via endoscopy. A, A section of pantyhose was found in the gastric body and
is shown here extending around and beyond the angulus fold (center of feld from 1- to 7-o'clock position).
A blade of grass is seen on the material. B, View at pylorus. A long section of panty hose extended beyond the
pylorus and along the small bowel. The endoscope was advanced to the middescending duodenum. Attempts
to retract the panty hose toward the stomach failed. The foreign material was removed surgically. Recovery
was uneventful. C, An important endoscopic finding in this patient was esophagitis. Bilious fluid was pooled
in the thoracic esophagus (not shown here),and significant inflammation and erosive injury were present at
the gastroesophageal junction.Note also that the junction area is open, making it easier for fluid to refux to
the esophagus. Esophagitis should be considered in any animal that has persistent vomiting. Esophagitis is also
a relatively common sequela of vomiting associated with intestinal foreign bodies, especially high intestinal
obstructions and linear foreign bodies. It no doubt causes pain, as it does in humans. Treatment for esophagitis
should be instituted for animals with these problems, regardless of whether endoscopy is performed. For
hospitals with endoscopy equipment it is advised that esophagoscopy be done routinely just before surgery
for removal of a linear intestinal foreign body or in any patient with frequent vomiting caused by an intestinal
foreign body. The examination can be done quickly and will help enhance patient care by identifying animals
that have gross evidence of esophagitis. If only the surgery is done,there will be no clear determination of
whether erosive esophagitis is present.
CHAPTER 7Endoscopic Removal of Gastrointestinal Foreign Bodies · 291
Figure 7-41One half of a hollow rubber ball
removed through an enterotomy of the proximal
jejunum in a cat with persistent vomiting. The
diagnosis was made during an endoscopic
Examination. When it was recognized that the ball 
was not freely movable, surgery was performed.
The open end had been facing proximally.
METRIC1
Figure 7-42 Nectarine pit foreign body removed from the midjejunum of a 10-kg (22-lb) dog with
a history of intermittent vomiting (one to two episodes per week) for 1 year. The animal had no
history of weight loss or inappetence. The dog was presented because of an acute onset of persistent 
vomiting of two days' duration. Other than evidence of dehydration,the findings of baseline tests 
were unremarkable. Abdominal radiographs were also unremarkable. The animal had a minimal
response to intravenous metoclopramide (constant rate infusion). Endoscopy was performed to
evaluate the stomach and small intestine. The findings included bilious fluid accumulation in the
 esophagus and stomach, which suggested either a motility disorder (unlikely because of the minimal
response to metoclopramide) or an obstruction in the small bowel. The endoscope was advanced to
the jejunum, and a nectarine pit was found, firmly lodged in the midjejunum. Although it was not 
 possible to remove the foreign body via endoscopy, the endoscopic examination played an extremely
important role in establishing the diagnosis. In most similar cases, survey abdominal radiographs
would be helpful in establishing a diagnosis, but no radiographic signs of obstruction whatsoever
were seen in this patient. The animal recovered uneventfully from surgery. Note: The owner
reported that she had seen the dog ingest the nectarine pit 1 year earlier (at the time the intermittent
vomiting began). The nectarine pit remained in the stomach for a year until it spontaneously passed
into the small intestine, at which time the acute frequent vomiting began.
292PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
一
D
Figure 7-43 String attached to an irregular foreign object in the duodenum of a 2-year-old
 Bull terrier. There had been intermittent vomiting for 10 days. Gastroscopy revealed numerous
leatherlike foreign objects that were removed endoscopically. The duodenum was then routinely
examined for the presence of foreign material. A, On close examination of the duodenal lumen, a
thin linear streak of yellow fluid was detected (extending from the 12-o'clock position to the center
 of the field) on the intestinal wall. B, Close-up view suggesting the presence of a threadlike or string
foreign body along the wall. C, A biopsy forceps instrument was advanced through the endoscope
 and was used to grasp a small area where fluid had accumulated. As the instrument was retracted,
 the thin linear foreign material was pulled away from the wall. The string was firmly attached to
something farther distal in the intestine. With gentle retraction force, the string could not be moved.
A laparotomy was then performed. D, The string material is attached to an irregular and stiff piece
of material. The foreign body was found wedged along the duodenal wallbut was not causing a
significant degree of obstruction. Failure to perform a careful duodenal examination after the gastric
 foreign bodies had been retrieved would have resulted in the small intestinal object being missed.
CHAPTER
Endoscopic Biopsy Specimen
Collection and Histopathologic
Considerations
Albert E. Jergens, Michael D. Willard, and Michael J. Day
dvances in endoscopic techniques have revolution-
This chapter will provide commentary on the following
ized the visualization and biopsy of parenchymal organs.
topics:
Endoscopy facilitates direct, minimally invasive examina-
1. An overview of practical matters relating to endoscopic
tion of mucosal and serosal surfaces and permits tissues
biopsy
to be obtained for histopathologic and cytologic examina-
2. A summary of endoscopic accessories available to the
tion or fluids to be procured for laboratory evaluation. The
dinician
evaluation of endoscopically obtained tissue samples can
 3. Standards for performing proper endoscopic examination
be helpful in establishing a diagnosis, prognosis, and thera-
of the alimentary tract including reporting of findings
peutic approach. Sequential biopsy results might be useful
 4. Technical concerns regarding the handling and process-
in monitoring the response to therapy or progression of
ing of biopsy specimens
the disease process in specific cases, although results to date
 5. Succinct morphologic descriptions of disease entities
have not shown consistent benefit from follow-up biopsies.
diagnosed most often by endoscopic biopsy
Endoscopic biopsy of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract has both
6. Introduction to recently published World Small Ani-
advantages and disadvantages. Being able to directly visual-
mal Veterinary Association (WSAVA) guidelines for
ize mucosal lesions that cannot be detected from the serosal
defining the histopathologic changes that occur in GI
surface allows targeted biopsy of abnormal tissue to be per-
inflammation
formed. Also, the ability to obtain six to ten or more endo-
Standardized terminology for describing endoscopic
scopic samples over a 5- to 15-cm length of the intestinal
abnormalities and their correlation to histopathologic find-
mucosa might be more likely to reveal the presence oflesions
 ings are also reviewed. Emphasis is placed on the evaluation
that are focal in distribution or severity, such as lymphoplas-
of biopsy specimens from the alimentary tract of dogs and
macytic enteritis.
cats.
However, endoscopic biopsy specimens are small and
delicate pieces of tissue. Pathologists often must examine
■ PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR
multiple, minute, poorly oriented tissue specimens that
ENDOSCOPIC BIOPSY
are prone to a variety of handling and processing arti-
facts. This is particularly true of small intestinal biopsy
Endoscopic examination and biopsy of the GI tract can be
specimens, which, if taken with improper technique, often
diagnostic of many mucosal disorders. However, endos-
 contain only villus fragments or lack subvillus lamina pro-
copy is an adjunctive procedure that complements infor-
pria. In addition, pathologists must be able to recognize
mation gained from a history, physical examination,
the wide range of normal mucosal cellularity in intestinal
selected laboratory and imaging studies, and well-designed
mucosal biopsy specimens. Historicall, interpretation of
therapeutic trials. Endoscopic biopsy is useful in detecting
these specimens has been subjective (even for commonly
morphologic disease but typically fails to detect functional
diagnosed disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease
 disorders, including abnormal GI motility, GI secretory
[IBD]) and relied heavily on the experience and bias of
 disorders, and biochemical injury such as brush border
the pathologist performing the histopathologic evaluation.
enzyme deficiencies. A variety of clinical disorders char-
These considerations are important if a meaningful corre-
acterized by primary or secondary GI signs but no signif-
lation of abnormal histopathology and intestinal function
cant changes in tissue morphologic features are commonly
is to be made.
encountered (Box 8-1).
293
294 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
summaries of normal endoscopic mucosal examinations
are provided elsewhere in this book. Recently, an attempt
BOX 8-1
to standardize the procedure for upper and lower GI endo-
Gastrointestinal Diseases That Can Often Be
scopic examinations, as well as the descriptive terminology
 Unaccompanied by Significant Histopathologic
used to record the findings of the process, was produced by
Lesions
the WSAVA Gastrointestinal Standardization Group. The
 goal of this group was to ensure that a standardized pro-
Motility abnormalities
tocol for performing thorough and complete endoscopic
Ilrritable bowel syndrome
examinations was available for clinicians to use in practice.
 Brush border defects
 These protocols should also prove valuable for investigators
 Antibiotic-responsive diarrhea/enteropathy
undertaking multicenter clinical trials in which consistent
Secretory diarrheas
Food intolerance
endoscopic examination and biopsy specimen procurement
 Permmeability defects
are essential. Clinicians using these forms simply check off
endoscopic observations, and these forms can then become
a quick and convenient part of the patient's medical record.
The forms are available online and have been endorsed by
The decision to perform endoscopic biopsy should be
the Comparative Gastroenterology Society and the European
made after salient clinicopathologic variables have been con-
Society of Comparative Gastroenterology (http://www.
 sidered and the procedure has been discussed with the cli-
wsava.org/StandardizationGroup.htm). These forms were
ent. Patient status, procedural time, costs, and inherent risks
 not intended to be the final answer; rather, they incorporate
should all be considered. Abdominal ultrasound is typically
features that are deemed valuable such as tick boxes, the
performed before endoscopy to ensure that there are not
ability to comment on the presence/absence of all possible
obvious lesions extending beyond the reach of the endoscope
lesions, and an area for identification of the extent of the
or that there are not lesions that can be diagnosed by fine-
examination, the equipment used, and any complications
 needle aspiration. Once endoscopic biopsy is deemed appro-
associated with the procedure. Videotape or photographic
priate, the instrumentation needed for optimal specimen
records serve to complement the endoscopic report on each
 collection must be considered. Different alimentary organs
 animal. The important features of each endoscopic proce-
require the use of different diagnostic sampling instruments
dure should be documented (Box 8-2).
and techniques to yield maximum results. Esophageal biopsy
Consistent endoscopic terminology has been proposed
 is uncommonly required. If examination of the esophagus
to aid in lesion description and the formulation of a defini-
is desirable and there is not a mass lesion, then exfoliative
tive diagnosis (Box 8-3). Erythema denotes mucosal red-
(brush) cytology is sometimes useful. Mucosal biopsy of the
ness, which may be a pathologic condition or a normal
stomach, small intestine, and colon is a much more com-
physiologic response to excessive insufflation or blood flow
 mon procedure and is best performed with the use of pinch
changes associated with anesthesia. Friability describes the
biopsy forceps. Whether the mucosal disease is focal or dif-
ease with which the mucosa is damaged by contact with
fuse is a major consideration. Localized lesions (e.g-, ulcers,
the endoscope or biopsy instrument. Alterations in surface
solitary masses, and malignant strictures) require precise,
 texture are described as increased granularity. Granularity
directed biopsy (often at the periphery of normal- and
of the small intestinal mucosa may be influenced by villus
abnormal-appearing tissue) to be diagnostic. In contrast,
height and crypt depth as the light of the endoscope reflects
more generalized mucosal disorders (e.g., IBD, diffuse gas-
 off these structures. Mass lesions are commonly seen with
tritis, and diffuse neoplasia) can usually be diagnosed with
infltrative mucosal diseases (e.g., inflammatory disorders,
random biopsy of the affected organs. Lastly, the nature of
maligna nt neoplasia, and benign polyps) and may be pedun-
the suspected lesion (e.g-, superficial versus deep mucosal
culated or sessile. As previously noted, masses should be
 disease) will influence instrument selection and the biopsy
sampled deeply to avoid misdiagnosis.
technique. Nonlymphomatus neoplastic lesions are often
GI ulceration or erosion is defined as an endoscopically
best sampled deeply (i.e., repeated samples from the same
visible breach in mucosal integrity, which may or may not
site) because superficial biopsy specimens typically contain
be associated with active hemorrhage. Ulcers are typically
necrotic surface debris and superficial inflammatory cells
solitary, crateriform, well-circumscribed lesions that extend
that obscure the correct diagnosis.
deeply into the mucosa and contain central fibrinous exu-
date. Erosions are discrete, superficial mucosal defects with-
■ EXAMINATION AND DESCRIPTION
 out raised margins or necrotic centers. Ulcers and erosions
OF THE MUCOSA
are characteristic of inflammatory and neoplastic lesions.
Erosive lesions should be sampled directly. Ulcerative lesions
A thorough, systematic examination of mucosal structures
should usually be sampled by obtaining specimens from the
should precede all biopsy procedures because postbiopsy
ulcer rim, where it merges with adjacent tissue. Alternatively,
hemorrhage may obscure lesions. Excellent descriptive
where ulcers are associated with lesions such as scirrhous
CHAPTER 8   Endoscopic Biopsy Specimen Collection and Histopathologic Considerations  ·  295
Mucosal abnormalities should always be observed as the
endoscope is advanced forward to avoid misinterpretation as
BOX8-2
 a result of operator-induced trauma. Linear lesions always
 Important Features to Have on Endoscopy
suggest the posibility of an iatrogenic origin as opposed to
Forms
a pathologic lesion.
Date of procedure
 INSTRUMENTATION FOR SPECIMEN
 Patient identification
COLLECTION
Indications for procedure
 Equipment used (both endoscope and accessories such 
Selection of appropriate biopsy instruments is influenced by
as biopsy forceps and retrieval devices)
the type of endoscope (rigid versus flxible) and the range of
Complications encountered
Extent of the examination (how far was endoscope
equipment available for specimen collection. Practical endo-
(ipasueape
scopic accessories include pinch biopsy forceps, cytology
Were images recorded?
brushes, and aspiration catheters for acquiring intraluminal
 Evaluation of each organ using tick boxes to ensure that
fluids. In most clinical situations, mucosal biopsy specimens
each lesion/site is addressed 
obtained with flexible endoscopic techniques are required
 Postprocedural recommendations
for definitive diagnosis. The relative merits of endoscopic
accessories are discussed in the following sections.
Pinch Biopsy Forceps
BOX8-3
 Flexible, pinch biopsy forceps are most commonly used to
Endoscopic Criteria for Mucosal Assessment 
obtain mucosal specimens from the GI tract. These small,
flexible forceps with opposing 2- to 3-mm cups on their
Degree of erythema
distal end are passed through the operating channel of the
Tissue friability
endoscope. There are numerous configurations (i.e., cups
Mucosal granularity
may be smooth or serrated, standard or fenestrated, with or
 Mass lesions
without a central needle; forceps may be multiple use or dis-
 Erosions and ulcers
posable, and some are designed to allow multiple samples to
Stricture
be taken before withdrawing the instrument) (Figure 8-1).
Luminal distension
Fenestrated forceps are reported to cause fewer crush arti-
Visibility of submucosal vessels
facts and yield larger biopsy specimens than nonfenestrated
models. There is a lack of uniformity of opinion between
endoscopists as to the best configuration for endoscopic
 gastric carcinoma in dogs, a diagnosis may sometimes only
biopsy forceps. Biopsy forceps with central needles can help
be achieved by sampling tissue as deeply as possible within
stabilize the forceps and are useful for some endoscopists but
the ulcer itself. Mucosal specimens from tissues surround-
 in the hands of other clinicians yield inferior tissue samples.
ing an ulcer should also be procured to characterize benign
from malignant ulcerative disease. Mucosal biopsy speci-
their own hands.
mens obtained from focal lesions (e.g-, ulcer, masses) should
Recent work has shown that the diagnostic quality of the
be placed in a separate biopsy cassette to distinguish the
endoscopic sample influences the likelihood that a patholo-
histopathologic features of these lesions from the histopath-
gist will find a specific mucosal lesion. In general, six mar-
ologic changes in biopsy specimens obtained from normal-
ginal or adequate samples should be collected to detect
 appearing or less involved areas of mucosa.
abnormalities in the feline gastric and duodenal mucosa,
Miscellaneous endoscopic observations should also be
whereas six adequate or 10 to 15 marginal samples should be
noted. Inadequate distension after air insufflation may be
collected from the canine stomach and duodenum, depend-
seen with extraluminal compression, strictures, infiltrative
ing on the lesion being sought. To be considered adequate,
diseases, and severe fibrosis secondary to chronic inflamma
a biopsy sample should contain the full thickness of the
tion. Normal submucosal blood vessels may not be visual-
mucosa and be wide enough to have at least three to four
ized because of mucosal edema, the accumulation of exudate
intact and preferably contiguous villi. Specimens contain-
(e.g-, blood, mucus, or necrotic debris), and the infltration
ing submucosa are preferred, but it is not always possible to
of inflammatory or neoplastic cells. Gross pitting of the duo-
obtain tissue at this level, especially when the mucosa is rela-
denal mucosa has been associated with acute Giardia infec-
tively thick (e.g-, large versus small dog; duodenum versus
tion in the dog. Characteristic milky-white nodules (i.e.,
ileum) (Figure 8-2).
dilated lacteals) in the mucosa or a milky exudate within the
There are various techniques for sampling GI mucosa with
intestinal lumen may be seen in dogs with lymphangiectasia.
flexible endoscopic forceps. We each have our preferences,
296 ■PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Figure 8-1 Biopsy cups with pinch forceps. A, Standard forceps
with a central needle. B, Serrated-jaw forceps with a central
Hgure 8-3 Gastric mucosal biopsy technique using pinch for-
needle. C, Serrated-jaw forceps without a central needle. (Courtesy
ceps. Note the perpendicular placement ofthe biopsy forceps
of fergens AE: Gastrointestinal endoscopic biopsy techniques.In
along the angulus. Good biopsy technique is essential in assuring
August ∫R, editor: Consultations in feline internal medicine,ed 3,
a high diagnostic yield from histopathologic examination by the
Philadelphia,1997,Saunders.)
pathologist.
with a small diameter intestinal lumen (e.g, small dogs and
cats), one may first advance the forceps, open them, retract
the tip of the forceps against the tip of the endoscope, and
then maximally deflect the tip of the endoscope obliquely
into the mucosa in an attempt to achieve as perpendicular
an orientation as possible. This typically makes it impos-
sible to visualize the mucosa (i.e., a “red out"), but it may
allow one to advance the insertion tube tip into the mucosa
at a more nearly vertical angle. Larger, deeper, and more
diagnostically significant specimens are usually obtained
by application of pressure at the time of biopsy, but if so
much pressure is applied that the tip of the forceps turns and
does not approach the tissue directly, then inferior samples
may be obtained. Larger forceps (e.g-, those that can pass
Figure 8-2 Small intestinal biopsy specimen procured with pinch
through an accessory channel diameter of at least 2.8 mm)
forceps from a healthy dog. Note the excellent quality of this
usually yield better quality specimens, although areas with
specimen, as evidenced by numerous intact villi, perpendicular
relatively thin mucosa (e.g-, ileum and feline duodenum)
orientation of crypts to surface epithelium, and inclusion of
may be adequately sampled with smaller forceps (e.g., those
deeper lamina propria tissue (hematoxylin and eosin stain).
that can pass through an accessory channel diameter of
2.2 mm or less). Adequate forward pressure is evidenced
but any technique that consistently works for an individual
 by displacement of the tissue away from the endoscope and
is acceptable. The procedure may be performed solely by
gentle “bowing" of the biopsy instrument shaft (but not the 
the endoscopist; however, having an assistant to operate
tip of the forceps). The jaws of the forceps are then closed
the biopsy forceps is advantageous. It is generally desirable
frmly, the instrument is retracted to the endoscope tip,
to position the endoscope tip directly in front of and per-
and a firm steady tug is used to tear a tissue sample free.
pendicular to the area to be sampled (Figure 8-3). This may
Except for the gastric antrum near the pylorus, it is not
be difficult or impossible in smaller patients (e.g, cats) in
necessary to forcefully jerk the forceps back into the endo-
which the intestinal lumen is relatively narrow. The pinch
scope. If a forceful jerk is deemed necessary, it is important
biopsy instrument is passed through the operating channel
to straighten the tip of the endoscope to help avoid dam-
and extended beyond the tip of the endoscope, the jaws are
age to the biopsy channel. The forceps instrument is with-
 opened, and the instrument is advanced into the mucosa
drawn from the operating channel, and the tissue specimen
with the use of forward pressure. In the case of animals
is carefully removed from the open jaws of the forceps for
CH APTER 8  Endoscopic Biopsy Specimen Collection and Histopathologic Considerations  ·  297
the use of endoscopically obtained cytologic samples from
the GI tract of small animals is noteworthy. One small study
reported good correlation of cytologic and histopathologic
fndings in 55 dogs diagnosed with benign mucosal inflam-
mation and lymphoid malignancy involving the duodenum.
Unfortunately, a description of comparative data for gastric
 and colonic specimens was not reported.
In a more comprehensive investigation, brush and touch
cytologic specimens were obtained by endoscopic examina-
tion of the stomach (n = 49), small intestine (n = 47), and
colon (n = 18) in 44 dogs and 14 cats. All cytologic smears
were blindly reviewed and objectively graded for infla mma-
tory cellularity, cellular atypia, bacterial organisms, hem-
A
 orrhage, and background mucus and debris. In each case
a cytologic diagnosis was rendered and compared with the
histologic findings. Excellent correlation between cytologic
observations and histopathologic features was observed. For
detecting abnormalities, the examination of endoscopically
obtained cytologic specimens was found to have a sensitivity
and specificity of 100% and 92% for the stomach, respec-
fively, 93% and 93% for the smallintestine, respectively, and
88% and 88% for the colon, respectively. A similar diagnosis
mined to be normal or to have lymphoplasmacytic inflam-
mation, mixed inflammation, eosinophilic inflammation,
and lymphoid malignancy (Figure 8-5). Brush cytology was
Figure 8-4 A, Disposable guarded cytology brush. B, Close-up of
most useful in detecting lamina propria cellular infiltrates;
brush extended beyond its protective sheath.
touch cytology was more likely to detect acute mucosal
inflammation as evidenced by increased numbers of neutro-
processing. Specimens may also be used to make touch
 phils. These results indicate that exfoliative cytology is a use-
imprints for cytologic evaluation.
ful and reliable adjunct to endoscopic biopsy. Nevertheless,
 endoscopic cytology is probably underutilized as a clinical
Cytology Brushes and Catheters
diagnostic tool for primary GI disease.
Catheters may be used to aspirate duodenal fluid or other
uuiqo nog myan aie sausniq aono paprene aqesodsi
intraluminal fluids for diagnostic purposes. This fluid may
cell specimens. These brushes are passed through the operat-
then be examined for Giardia trophozoites or examined in
ing channel of the endoscope under direct guidance and are
patients with suspected exocrine pancreatic insufficiency,
protected from contamination byan outer sheath (Figure 8-4).
which may be documented via duodenal-enteral feed stimula-
Once the area to be sampled is identified, the brush is extended
tion. Sterile, disposable 4.5F (1.52-mm outer diameter) poly-
from its sheath, rubbed vigorously against the mucosa or sur-
ethylene tubing (Intramedic Polyethylene Tubing, Becton,
face of the lesion without causing excessive hemorrhage, and
Dickinson & Co., Parsippany, N.Y.) may be passed through
then retracted into the operating channel. The brush cytology
the operating channel of the endoscope for these purposes.
instrument is then removed from the endoscope. Superficial
cells and cellular debris are then rolled or rubbed onto micro-
Rigid Forceps
scopic slides, air dried, stained with a Romanowsky-type stain
(e.g., Diff-Quik), and examined microscopically for evidence
Rigid forceps are used with rigid proctoscopes and colo-
of inflammation, neoplasia, or infectious agents. Alternatively,
noscopes to obtain directed biopsies from the descending
touch cytology may be performed by transferring a mucosal
 colon and rectum. The forceps come in a variety of styles.
specimen from the biopsy forceps to a glasslide with a needle
It is important to use instruments that “cut" the mucosa as
and then gently touching the specimen onto the slide so that a
 opposed to those that tear off the mucosa. After that, the
cytologic imprint is obtained.
 main differences are the length of the biopsy instrument and
Studies in humans have confirmed the clinical utility of
the angulation of the biopsy head (Figure 8-6). The rigid
brush cytologic samples in the diagnosis of upper GI malig-
forceps instrument is advanced through the rigid endo-
nancies and infections. Endoscopic exfoliative cytology is
scope, and the tip of a fold of mucosa is gently grasped and
simple to perform, is less invasive than biopsy, and provides
moved back and forth. If only the mucosa moves, then one
a rapid diagnosis. The paucity of published data describing
assumes that it is safe to perform the biopsy with little risk of
298 ■PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
Figure 8-5 Gastrointestinal endoscopic exfoliative cytology preparations. A, Brush cytologic specimen obtained from the smallintestine of
a dog with moderate (grade 5 to 6) lymphocytic enteritis. Note the numerous small lymphocytes embedded within the duodenal epithelia.
B, Touch cytologic specimen obtained from the small intestine of a dog with moderate (grade 5 to 6) suppurative enteritis. Numerous neu-
cat with alimentary lymphosarcoma. Note the fairly homogeneous population of medium-sized lymphoblasts with multiple and prominent 
nucleoli. A Giemsa-type stain (Diff-Quik) was used on all specimens.
rigid instruments may only obtain tissue from the descend-
ing colon. Their routine use by inexperienced operators in
the procurement of colonic biopsy specimens is not recom-
mended; however, they are the preferred instrument for
sampling rectal masses when the attempt is being made to
distinguish benign from malignant lesions. (See Chapter
6 for further discussion of rigid colonoscopy.) When used
properly, they obtain samples far superior to those obtained
 by flexible forceps (ie., they are larger and typically include
generous portions of submucosa).
Figure 8-6 Two examples of rigid forceps used for procurement
of colonic biopsy specimens. Note the different cutting jaws on
■ TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS
these instruments and the angulation of the biopsy head.
FOR ENDOSCOPIC BIOPSY
General Comments
 procuring the tunica muscularis. If the wall of the intestine
moves, then it is likely that the endoscopist has taken too
Taking too few samples during endoscopic examination is
 deep a tissue purchase and may perforate the wall.
-dns u o n u sd ano anau
There is some risk of colonic perforation when inexpe-
ficial, focal disease generall warrants procurement of
rienced endoscopists use rigid forceps. Furthermore these
fewer samples (e.g-, three to four) versus deep focal disease
CH APTER 8 Endoscopic Biopsy Specimen Collection and Histopathologic Considerations ·  299
A
mucosal surface. B, The instrument advanced aborally to tear off a linear strip of mucosa. C, Endoscopic biopsy of the duodenum showing
a linear strip of mucosa that has been removed. Note the appearance ofthe opaque submucosa, indicative of removal of an excellent-quality
mucosal specimen. (A and B, Courtesy of McGowen GF: An improved technique of endoscopic biopsy in the upper gastrointestinal tract,
Gastrointest Endosc 32:59, 1986.)
(i.e., a mass covered with normal-appearing mucosa) where
technique are usually larger but may not be as deep as those
probably six or more samples should be obtained. If no
 obtained by an avulsion (pull-off) technique.
focal lesions are seen, then the presence of diffuse disease
is assumed, and multiple specimens (e.g-, six marginal or
tant additional consideration. Achieving optimal orienta-
adequate samples from feline stomach and duodenum; six
tion requires communication and cooperation between the
adequate or 10 to 15 marginal samples from canine stom-
pathologist or histopathology technician and the endosco-
ach and duodenum) should be obtained. This practice helps
 pist. Paraffn wax ermbedding of each biopsy specimen indi-
ensure that several adequate tissue samples will be available
vidually within a composite block increases the likelihood
for review by the pathologist and that focal, patchy lesions
that several tissues will be optimally oriented. Serial sections
will not be missed. The morphologic information obtained
placed in several rows on a single slide are then evaluated.
from such evaluation depends on the depth of the tissue,
Careful orientation, expert serial sectioning, and the avoid-
total volume of tissue obtained, and orientation of the tissue
 ance or recognition of mechanical artifacts typically yield
sample. As previously noted, specimen quality can be influ-
histopathology slides of consistently high quality that alow
enced by forceps size and biopsy pressure. When the biopsy
the pathologist to provide the most accurate evaluation
instrument cannot be oriented perpendicular to the mucosal
possible.
o e uo di  an -d e a
sal biopsy specimens. The mucosa is grasped tangential to
Biopsy Specimen Handling
the mucosal surface, and the forceps biopsy instrument (or
the endoscope with forceps held stationary in place) is then
Endoscopic biopsy specimens are small, fragile pieces of
advanced 4 to 5 cm aborally to tear off a strip of tissue from
fissue subject to artifacts from handling during the biopsy
the mucosal surface (Figure 8-7). Samples obtained with this
 procedure, mounting, and processing, including microtome
300 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Figure 8-8 Multiple biopsy specimens placed on a biopsy sponge.
Note the difference between good-quality (left) and poor-quality
(right) endoscopic specimens.
sectioning of the paraffin wax-embedded tissue. Artifactual
changes can be minimized if care is exercised in procuring
a nd handling the specimen. Tissue specimens should be gen-
tly teased from the forceps with a needle and placed on lens
paper, cucumber slice, or specially designed biopsy sponge.
Fgure 8-9 Several duodenal biopsy specimens may be placed on
Commercial cassettes with precut “sponges" can be used for
cucumber slices before tissue processing. This minimizes specimen
the submission of endoscopic biopsy specimens (Figure 8-8).
handling at the pathology laboratory.
p ods e u pend aq us suds ado adn
the sponge is then placed directly in the cassette. The closed
cassette is immersed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and
BOX8-4
submitted to the laboratory.
Cucumber slices can be substituted for plastic sponges and
Cucumber Paper Preparation
are an excellent medium for the submission of endoscopic
1.
 Slice a firmn cucurmber as thinly as possible, avoiding
biopsy specimens. Mucosal biopsy tissue samples are placed
seed areas.
on thin slices of cucumber (preserved in alcohol), which
2.F
 Place cucumber slices in 95% ethanol for 3 days:
are then deposited in formalin containers and submitted
change ethanol daily
for processing (Figure 8-9). At the laboratory the cucumber
3.
Then store the cucumber slices in 95% ethanol in a
slices are removed from the formalin. Then smaller cucum-
efriqerator
ber sections containing multiple biopsy specimens arranged
4.
 Blot excess ethanol from the surface of a cucurber slice
 in parallel rows are trimmed away and placed on their side
before placing biopsy tissue on the "cucumber paper,"
in the processing cassette (e.g-, perpendicular to the cassette
leaving the villi (or surface epithelia) pointed upward.
surface so that tissue orientation is optimized after section-
 5. Do not allow the cucumber slices to dry out completely;
ing). The tissues are then embedded in paraffin wax. The
biopsy specimens adhere less well to dry cucumber and
specimens do not have to be removed from the cucumber
may float off in formalin.
slices before embedding because the microtome can read-
ily cut through the vegetable material. This technique mini-
From Swan RW, Davis HJ: The biopsy-cucumber unit, Obstet Gyneco/ 36:803,
mizes specimen handling at the laboratory and consistently
1970.
yields well-oriented tissues of high diagnostic quality. The
cucumber technique works best for institutions with an in-
the number of specimens obtained from each site, relevant
house pathology service. The protocol for the preparation of
endoscopic observations, and salient historical and clinical
cucumber slices is presented in Box 8-4.
data on the histopathology form. An example of endoscopic
B    ss   s
report forms that may be downloaded for use can be found at
cucumber slices before formalin fixation should be avoided.
http:// www.wsava.org/StandardizationGroup.htm.
Specimens should not be allowed to sit and excessively dry on
cucumber or sponge surfaces because air drying contributes
Tissue Artifacts
to artifacts. Overly dried samples may adhere tightly to the
 sponge or cucumber and be damaged when removed by the
Various artifacts may hinder accurate interpretation of
pathology service. Samples from different sites (e.g-, stomach,
endoscopic biopsy specimens. When placed in forma-
duodenum, and colon) should be placed in separate contain-
lin, the mucosa of GI tissues has a tendency to roll over
ers and appropriately labeled. The endoscopist should record
the submucosa, which makes precise orientation before
CH APTER 8  Endoscopic Biopsy Specimen Collection and Histopathologic Considerations  ·  301
Hgure 8-11 A small intestinal biopsy specimen obtained with
Figure 8-10 Poor-quality small intestinal biopsy specimen. Note
endoscopic forceps showing significant squeeze artifact at the base
that tissues consist of villus tips only, without underlying subvillus
of the tissue specimen (circie). Artifacts of this type are sometimes
lamina propria and associated structures. This type of tissue
difficult to avoid, even with good biopsy technique (hematoxylin
artifact may be caused by poor biopsy technique or a specimen
and eosin stain).
rolling over during fixation (hematoxylin and eosin stain).
routine processing difficult. Multiple samples are embed-
 ded in the same paraffin wax block, and 3-μm to 4-μm or
often yield excellent quality specimens for diagnostic review.
thinner sections are shaved from the block until the section
obtained represents the largest specimen of each piece of
Tissue Fixation, Immunohistochemical Analysis, and
tissue. Many of the sections may have an oblique orienta-
Molecular Testing
tion, and ifthe mucosa has significant roll-over artifact, the
surface of some specimens may be the only tissue available
Fixation in 10% neutral buffered formalin is adequate for
for microscopic examination. Hence some small intestinal
routine histologic examination of tissue specimens. Glutaral-
biopsy sections may consist of villi only (Figure 8-10). In
dehyde fixation is optimal for tissues being examined by elec-
these instances it is not possible to evaluate the subvillus
tron microscopy. Immunohistochemical labeling of certain
lamina propria with its complement of crypts and proprial
cell-associated antigens is increasingly available to diagnostic
cellular populations. Other sections may be devoid of sur
histopathologists, for example, for the phenotypic classifica-
face epithelium, which creates the false impression of an
tion of alimentary lymphoma. Although standard antibody
ulcer. Where villi are cut tangentially, the impression of vil-
 panels may be applied to sections of fixed tissue taken from
lus stunting might be obtained by the untrained observer.
the same wax block used to produce the routine hematoxy-
Irregular or apparently multilayered epithelium at the
lin and eosin (H&E) section, in some cases the use of more
“tip" of such villi indicates that they have not been cut in a
specialized immunohistochemical analysis may require that
perpendicular orientation.
 additional biopsy samples are snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen
Pinch or stretch artifacts created at the margins of biopsy
or preserved in fixatives other than formalin (e.g., alcohol).
specimens (Figure 8-1l) are evidenced by the “telescoping?
A discussion with the pathologist before endoscopy is under-
of mucosal glands, the expression of mucosal glands from
taken will ensure that appropriate samples are collected. Tis-
underlying lamina propria into the area of the lumen, and
A ael VN u pased 1o Suzaa deus Aq paaasid sans
"streaming" of nuclear chromatin. To some extent these
be used for extraction of nucleic acids (e.g-, RNA or DNA)
changes are unavoidable. Good biopsy technique (espe-
 utilized in molecular testing such as polymerase chain reac-
cially avoiding rapid closure of the biopsy forceps during
tion (PCR). The fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
tissue procurement) and gentle handling of specimens after
technique may be performed on standard unstained tissue
biopsy can minimize the effects of these artifacts. Streaming
sections. At present these advanced techniques are largely
nuclear chromatin artifact can be a particular problem in tis-
applied in a research setting rather than for routine diagnos-
sues with lymphoma. If lymphoma is suspected, the endos-
tic purposes (Figure 8-12).
copist should be especially gentle with the specimen before
Standard tissue-staining methods (ie., H&E) provide
fixation, and additional biopsy samples should be obtained
excellent tissue detail for routine microscopic examina-
so that the chance of a diagnostic specimen being procured
tion. Special stains may highlight certain infectious agents,
is maximized. Additionally, exfoliative cytologic specimens
although histochemical staining is no substitute for culture
302 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
or PCR-based detection and speciation of organisms. A vari-
specific for S100, neuron-specific enolase (NSE), synapto-
ety of silver impregnation methods and Giemsa staining have
physin, and CD117 (c-kit).
 been employed to identify Helicobacter spp. organisms in gas-
A range of antisera have been applied to studies of canine
tric biopsy specimens. The fluorescent acridine orange dye can
 and feline IBD for phenotyping and enumerating infltrating
also be used for this purpose. Fungi can be identified in sec-
 populations ofT lymphocytes (CD3, CD4, and CD8, antisera
tions stained with periodic acid-Schiff reagents (PAS) or silver
specific for the canine T-cell receptors of α-β or -& chain
techniques (e.g., Gomori's methenamine silver stain). Bacteria
composition), B lymphocytes (CD79a), plasma cells (IgG,
can be assessed in gram-stained sections of tissue. Other histo-
IgM, and IgA), mast cells (IgE), and antigen-presenting cells
chemical stains may assist the pathologist in the interpretation
(MAC387, MHC class II, and CD1) (Figure 8-14).
of morphologic changes. For example, stains that highlight
collagen fibers may be useful for evaluating fibrosis, and PAS
■ CORRELATION OF ENDOSCOPIC
stain highlights colonic mucus and histiocytes in histiocytic
AND PATHOLOGIC FINDINGS
ulcerative colitis in Boxer dogs (Figure 8-13).
Immunohistochemical or immunofluorescence methods
-a e iog sanss asdoiq sidoosua on pandde uaaq aau
topathologic examination may allow a definitive diagno-
ety of purposes and are now becoming routinely available
sis, thereby facilitating selection of specific therapy for the
to the diagnostic pathologist. Such diagnostic procedures
animal. Endoscopy allows direct mucosal visualization
are at present most widely applied to the characteriza-
tion of alimentary neoplasia. Most commonly, immuno-
histochemical analysis has become a useful adjunct to the
histologic diagnosis of feline alimentary small T-cell (i.e.,
well-diferentiated) lymphoma. This disease represents one
of the greatest challenges for the pathologist because of the
well-documented transition between lymphoplasmacytic
inflammation and lymphoma in this species (and less com-
monly also in the dog). Labeling of serial sections with anti-
sera specific for CD3 (a pan-T-cell marker) and CD79a (a
pan-B-cell marker) can allow the pathologist to evaluate
clonality of an infiltrate (see also further discussion in the
subsequent section on neoplasia at the end of this chapter).
Antibodies specific for cytokeratins may be used to
highlight epithelial tumors, and intestinal carcinoid (of
neuroendocrine origin) will label with antisera specific for
synaptophysin and chromogranin. Intestinal leiomyoma/
leiomyosarcoma may be distinguished by labeling with anti-
suos e oi padde ueiuqu ms ui asuaaon l-g any
tissue section from a Boxer with histiocytic ulcerative colitis. Clusters
sera specific for vimentin, desmin, muscle-specific actin,
of invasive Escherichia coli organisms are readily visualized within the
and α-smooth muscle actin. By contrast, GI stromal tumor
deep mucosa with the use of an oligonucleotide probe specific to the
(GIST) of the interstitial cells of Cajal will label with antisera
16S rRNA bacterial sequence.
and the colonic wall is poorly distensible. B, Colonic biopsy specimen showing a diffuse infiltrate of foamy macrophages within the lamina
 propria. Within their cytoplasm the macrophages contain material that is positive (purple) for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain.
CH APTER 8  Endoscopic Biopsy Specimen Collection and Histopathologic Considerations ·  303
and the opportunity to acquire targeted biopsy specimens
from grossly abnormal tissues. The clinical significance
■ DIAGNOSTIC UTILITY OF ENDOSCOPIC
of endoscopic observations and their correlation with his-
BIOPSY
tologic findings have been investigated. One study found
that approximately two thirds of cases with endoscopically
Historical, interest in performing flexible endoscopic
 observed lesions had histologic abnormalities, including
biopsy of the GI tract has waxed and then waned as many
inflammatory infiltrates. Excess mucosal granularity and
diagnoses were found to be incorrect (e.g, incorrectly diag-
friability were associated with histologic abnormalities in
nosing IBD when the problem was lymphoma or not finding
 82% of cases. In the absence of other endoscopic findings,
disease in dogs with severe protein-losing enteropathy). We
mucosal erythema held the least predictive value for histo-
believe that a substantial part of the frustration with endo-
logic abnormality in this study. A separate report similarly
scopic biopsy is related to poor endoscopic and biopsy tech-
found that mucosal lesions (i.e., granularity, friability, ero-
niques resulting in the collection of poor-quality samples,
 sions, or ulcers) were observed during endoscopy in 52%
which, in turn, have been shown to have a negative impact
of dogs and in 42% of cats with histologic features of IBD.
on diagnosis. Although there are definitely cases in which
Mucosal erythema was frequently observed in these animals
 diagnosis requires full-thickness samples taken at surgery
but may have been influenced by physiologic mechanisms or
 or laparoscopy, we fnd this to be a relatively rare occur-
the effects of anesthesia.
rence. However, for endoscopic biopsy to have good posi-
However, endoscopic observations do not always corre-
tive and negative predictive values, the endoscopist needs to
late with histopathologic findings. In one study, 56 (96.5%)
 approach the procedure much as a softissue surgeon would
 of 58 tissues endoscopically assessed as normal were micro-
approach an exploratory laparotomy; that is, endoscopy is
scopically normal, but up to 26.8% of tissues endoscopically
an important procedure that must be performed carefully
a ssessed as abnormal were also microscopically normal. Possi-
and exacly (as opposed to a novelty or something “fun" to
ble reasons for endoscopic-microscopic discordance include
do). GI endoscopy performed by a well-trained, experienced
failure to obtain representative biopsy tissue, presence of
endoscopist is excellent for examining and/or sampling
artifactual lesions, failure to recognize histologic lesions, and
esophageal, gastric, duodenal, jejunal (depending on patient
inability to distinguish mild histologic changes from normal
size and endoscopic length), ileal, colonic, cecal, and rectal
tissue. Obvious clinical signs are frequently present in ani-
mucosa (Figure 8-15). Deep mural lesions and mid-distal
mals lacking endoscopic and histologic abnormalities. These
jejunal lesions are typically inaccessible endoscopically.
 patients may have functional defects such as motility distur-
GI endoscopy with the procurement of biopsy speci-
bances, secretory diarrheas, and/or permeability defects.
mens is particularly well-suited for diagnosing mucosal
Figure 8-14 Immunohistochemical stains of canine colonic biopsy specimens. A, Specimen from a healthy dog stained for pan-T (CD3)
antigen. The numerous positive-staining T cells within the epithelium of the colonic glands are intraepithelial lymphocytes. B, Specimen
from a dog with inflammatory bowel disease, stained for cells that contain immunoglobulin A (IgA). Note the intense eosinophilic
intracytoplasmic staining and the tendency of these IgA cells to reside as cords of cells within the colonic lamina propria.
304 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Hgure 8-16 Severe inflammatory bowel disease in the small
intestine of a dog. Lymphocytic, plasmacytic cellular infiltrates are
accompanied by marked epithelial and glandular alterations. Note 
that multiple crypts are dilated and contain proteinaceous and
Figure 8-15 “Blind" biopsy technique of the canine ileum. If
degenerate cellular debris (hematoxylin and eosin stain).
posible,ileal biopsy specimens should be procured during all
gastrointestinal endoscopic procedures because they serve to
 [xad au u auenqo suauads Asdoq uuad
architectural disruption (Figure 8-16). Recently, a histologic
(duodenal) small intestine.
 grading system for GI inflammation in the dog and cat has been
proposed by the WSAVA Gastrointestinal Standardization
Group (http:// www.wsava.org/StandardizationGroup.htm)
inflammatory lesions, determining the causes of GI ulcer-
and is gaining acceptance as the current standard for diagnos-
ation or erosion, and detecting alimentary tract neoplasia.
tic pathology. This grading system has provided pathologists
with a pictorial template and accompanying descriptive text
that defines the major architectural and inflammatory altera-
Noninfectious Inflammatory Lesions
 tions occurring in the gastric fundus and antrum, duodenum,
 Inflammatory lesions are found in many endoscopic biopsy
and colon of dogs and cats. For each architectural change and
specimens. If infectious agents, protozoa, or nematodes
for each type of inflammatory cell a definition of normal is
are documented in animals with such microscopic lesions,
provided and compared with tissue that may have mild, mod-
the inflammatory changes are attributed to the identified
erate, or marked pathologic change. It is beyond the scope of
pathogen. However, similar lesions found unassociated with
this chapter to give detais of the WSAVA monograph, but
a defined cause are often attributed to IBD. IBD is a clini-
the document also includes a series of standard “tick box"
cal syndrome of idiopathic inflammation characterized by
reporting forms that pathologists may use to ensure that all
chronic Gl signs that often resolve with antinflammatory
aspects of a biopsy are examined and recorded before a final
therapy. Canine and feline IBD probably encompass disease 
 diagnosis is achieved. It is hoped that the use of this grading
processes of diverse cause that have common GI symptoms
scheme will increase the correlation between interpretations
and inflammatory lesions.
given by individual pathologists,thereby creating a more stan-
Historically, gradation of lesions has shown poor correla-
dard approach to histologic diagnosis. This may become of
tion between microscopic lesions and the severity of clini-
 great importance for multicenter clinical trials. The WSAVA
cal signs at diagnosis. There are two major possibilities for
Gastrointestinal Standardization Group is currently evaluat-
these findings: the findings may be correct (i.e., there is no
 ing the utility of this grading scheme and hopes to identify
correlation), or the findings may be incorrect because of
those microscopic features that are most strongly associated
problems in the histologic analysis of intestinal biopsy speci-
with consistency of pathologic diagnosis between observers.
mens. In addition, more detailed qua ntitative assessment of
A refinement of the scheme may then follow in the future.
lamina proprial inflammatory cells in cases of IBD by mor-
 Endoscopy can be useful in detecting intestinal lymphan-
phometric analysis has not defined categories of microscopic
 giectasia. The most severe lesions of this disorder may pri-
lesions that can predict the clinical severity of disease or the
marily involve the jejunum and therefore can be inaccessible
likely response to therapy. IBD largely remains a diagnosis of
to endoscopic procedures. Lacteal dilation, a key microscopic
exclusion that is substa ntiated by the remission of GI signs in
lesion of lymphangiectasia, may be observed endoscopically
response to appropriate medical therapy.
in the duodenum of some affected animals (Figure 8-17).
The microscopic findings in IBD consist of minimal to
 The extent oflacteal dilation seen with this disorder is gener-
 pronounced inflammatory cel infltration of the gastric and
ally more severe than that seen with IBD unassociated with
intestinal mucosa accompanied by varying degrees of mucosal
 protein-losing enteropathy. Lipogranulomas are a hallmark
CH APTER 8  Endoscopic Biopsy Specimen Collection and Histopathologic Considerations ·  305
[euaponp reuixaid aul yoa aoueieadde sidossopug 'y Aqjedaaiua suisol-uianoid qm op e u eiseiasueqduil leusaiu Ll-g annb
mucosa. Note the miliary, raised white structures present along the duodenal mucosal surface. These structures are grossly dilated, central
lacteals filled with chylomicron-rich material. B, Duodenal biopsy specimen from an affected dog. Note the multiple dilated lymphatic
vessels within the villi (central lacteals) and subvillus lamina propria. Mild lymphocytic, plasmacytic infiltration and edema within the
lamina propria are also present (hematoxylin and eosin stain).
of intestinal lymphangiectasia but are generally not revealed
mucosal immunity, and/or qualitative changes in the enteric
 by endoscopic biopsies. Lacteal dilation is one of the criteria
bacterial flora. Histopathologic lesions in animals with floral
that may be graded with the use of the WSAVA scheme pre-
 perturbations may be accompanied by mucosal inflammation
viously described.
of varying severity, and a definitive diagnosis is only made
 after response to antibacterial therapy.
There are some situations whereby endoscopic biopsy
Infectious Inflammatory Lesions
is an essential component for diagnosis of GI disease asso-
Viral diseases often involve the digestive tract of small ani-
 ciated with bacterial infection. An example is the associa-
mals, but the diagnosis of these infections is seldom based on
tion of Helicobacter spp. infection with chronic gastritis in
 an assessment of endoscopic biopsy specimens. Canine and
some dogs and cats and emerging data linking attaching and
feline parvoviral enteritis is characterized by severe architec-
invasive E. coli to histopathologic lesions of granulomatous
tural disruption of the small intestinal mucosa with loss of
colitis in Boxers with histiocytic ulcerative colitis. Enteritis
 mucosal glands and vili and regeneration of the remaining
associated with adherent gram-positive cocci (identified in
 glands. Rarely, intranuclear viral inclusions are seen. Dogs
one case as Streptococcus durans) has been described in two
with distemper may have intracytoplasmic and intranuclear
dogs in which the organisms were found in close association
inclusions within gastric and intestinal mucosa. Distemper
with villus epithelium in endoscopic biopsy specimens.
 inclusions may be found unassociated with mucosal damage.
Intestinal cocidiosis is predominately an infection of pup-
A variety of enteropathogenic bacteria including Salmo-
pies and kittens. Cryptosporidiosis has been rarely found, except
nella spp, Campylobacter jejuni, Clostridium spp, and entero-
in immunosuppressed animals or animals that are stressed with
pathogenic Escherichia coli may cause gastroenteritis in small
concurrent disease problems. However, this infection is now
animals. The true prevalence of bacterial diarrhea is con-
being identified more often as animals with diarrhea are rou-
founded by the presence of many of these organisms existing
tinely being tested for this parasite. Some of the nematodes that
as components of the normal intestinal flora. Most of these
infect dogs and cats may be found on endoscopic examination
pathogens do not require endoscopic biopsy for diagnosis;
(Figure 8-18). Heterobilharzia may be found with some degree
however, their presence may complicate preexisting disease
of frequency in some geographic locations. Histoplasmosis
such as canine IBD. Current understanding of IBD in humans
 can typically be diagnosed with endoscopic samples (especially
and animals also suggests that such bacteria may act as trig-
 colonic ones). Pythiosis is more difficult to diagnose than his-
gers for the development of immune-mediated enteropathy.
toplasmosis because of its predilection for deeper layers of the
Much research focus is currently directed at understanding the
GI tract and the fact that there may bea paucity of hyphae pres-
qualitative composition of the alimentary microflora and how
 ent. Prototheca is rarely found in dogs with chronic GI signs.
this might be altered with chronic intestinal inflammation. In
this respect, a strong association between mucosa-associated
Gastrointestinal Ulceration or Erosion
bacteria, proinflammatory cytokine mRNA expression, and
mucosal inflammation has been described recently in cats
Gastrointestinal ulceration or erosion (GUE) may be asso-
with IBD. Moreover, antibiotic-responsive diarrhea (ARD)
ciated with a variety of primary digestive and systemic
may develop secondary to disrupted barrier function, aberrant
disorders. GI neoplasia, administration of nonsteroidal
306 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
antinflammatory drugs, IBD, hepatic disease, and extreme
 mon causes. In general, GUE is more frequent in dogs than
in cats. Erosive lesions are more common than ulcers, and
both ulcerations and erosions occur more often in the stom-
ach than in the proximal intestine (Figure 8-19).
Ulcers vary in microscopic appearance, depending on
their severity and stage of development. Acute gastric lesions
begin as erosions with superficial necrotic debris, neutro-
philic infiltrates, and loss of mucosal architecture. More
chronic ulcers are characterized by a base and sides com-
posed of granulation tissue of varying thickness and maturity
intermingled with a mixed inflammatory cellular infltrate
and overlaid by necrotic surface debris. Excellent biopsy
Figure 8-18 Multiple Physaloptera nematodes (arrows) lying
technique is required to differentiate benign from malignant
GUE. Biopsy samples should be obtained from the rim to
on the gastric mucosa in a dog. These nematodes may cause
the chronic vomiting and histologic lesions of lymphocytic,
avoid superficial inflammation and fibrinous exudate that
plasmacytic gastritis.
may cloud diagnostic interpretation. Samples should gener-
ally also be taken from the pit of the ulcer, but care must be
taken so that deep ulcers are not perforated. Brush cytology
is a useful adjunct to histopathologic examination when ali-
mentary neoplasia is suspected as the cause of GUE.
Neoplasms
GI mucosal neoplasia can usually be diagnosed by endo-
scopic biopsy. Gastric and intestinal (especially rectal) pol-
yps are common. Villous adenomatous polyps are found in
the stomach and large bowel and frequently form smooth
or pedunculated masses that project into the lumen, often
"downstream" from the point of mucosal attachment
(Figure 8-20). These lesions are characterized by mucosal
glandular hyperplasia that is frequently accompanied by
varying degrees of mucosal epithelial atypia, especially in
Figure 8-19 Multiple gastric ulcers within the pyloric antrum of a
large bowel polyps. Invasion of the submucosa is the hall-
dog. Note the crateriform appearance and deeply invasive nature
mark of malignancy in these lesions. Submucosal invasion
of these mucosal defects.
is often difficult to determine because of disorientation of
B
Figure 8-20 A, Large gastric polyp causing pyloric outflow obstruction and postprandial vomiting in a 12-year-old miniature poodle.
polyp. Surgical removal of the polyp was curative.
CH A PTER 8Endoscopic Biopsy Specimen Collection and Histopathologic Considerations·  307
the biopsy specimens caused by their irregularity. Frequently
GI adenocarcinomas often ulcerate and induce reac-
the stalk cannot be thoroughly examined microscopically to
tive fibroplasia (ie., scirrhous carcinomas), resulting in
assess the completeness of excision. However, the majority
dense, noncompliant regions of the stomach or intestine
 of GI polyps in small animals are benign.
(Figure 8-21) that resist flexible, endoscopic biopsy. In cats,
Leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas of the digestive tract are
stricture is a common sequela of distal small intestinal adeno-
diffcult to diagnose by endoscopic techniques. These tumors
carcinoma (i.e., the napkin-ring lesion). Gastric carcinoma is
arise within the wall (e.g-, tunica muscularis) of the GI tract;
often recognized by the effect of associated desmoplasia on
hence, they are typicall covered by normal mucosa. Fur-
the pliability of the stomach. The endoscopist may note a stiff,
thermore, the tumors are relatively dense, which makes them
noncompliant feel to the gastric mucosa. In contrast, gastric
difficult to sample with flexible endoscopes. However,leiomyo-
lymphoma does not usually induce this fibroblastic reaction.
sarcomas may be accompanied by overlying mucosal ulcer-
Gastric carcinoma is rare in cats compared with dogs. Conse-
ation, and deep mucosal biopsy of the mass may be informative.
quently, a large mucosal gastric mass in a cat is more likely to
be lymphoma than gastric carcinoma (see Figure 4-97).
Lymphoma is the form of GI neoplasia most commonly
diagnosed endoscopically (Figure 8-22, A), and ileal biopsy
 may be very important in finding this lesion. Low-grade,
small, lymphocytic malignant lymphoma is common in
older cats and may be difficult to distinguish from lympho-
plasmacytic enteritis. The advent of specifc immunohisto-
chemical techniques to identify populations of malignant B
a nd T lymphocytes (i.e., immunophenotyping) and molecu-
lar (PCR) testing for clonality have facilitated more accurate
diagnosis ofthese diffcultcases (Figure 8-22, B). Tissuesinfl-
trated with lymphoma tend to be fragile and prone to exten-
sive stretch artifacts. Multiple biopsy specimens should be
taken from any lesion suspected to be lymphoma so that the
chances of obtaining a specimen suffciently free of artifacts
for evaluation are maximized. In contrast to the fbroblastic
Figure 8-21 Focal gastric ulceration along the angulus in a
reaction seen in intestinal adenocarcinoma, lymphoma can
geriatric dog with scirrhous adenocarcinoma.Multiple deep
cause a mass lesion often associated with dilated, ulcerated
mucosal biopsy specimens obtained with pinch forceps from the
regions of the intestine and soft pliant lesions within the gas-
ulcer rim and center of the ulcer confirmed the diagnosis.
tric mucosa. Mesenteric lymph nodes are often infiltrated in
Figure 8-22 A, Lymphosarcoma involving the proximal duodenum in a 12-year-old domestic short hair cat with chronic vomiting and
weight loss. Note the multiple erosive lesions observed along the duodenal mucosa. B, Immunophenotyping performed on an ileal biopsy
specimen. A dense homogeneous (>90%) population of T lymphocytes (CD3+ T-cell stain) have infiltrated within the ileal mucosa. These
findings are consistent with a diagnosis of well-differentiated T cell lymphoma.
308·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
cases of primary alimentary lymphoma, as are the spleen and
enteropathies. The association of histopathology with out-
liver. The large granular form oflymphoma is a unique vari-
   s r    s
ant that occurs in cats and often involves the digestive tract.
 These studies indicated that there was not a strong associa-
In this form of lymphoma, the lesions are composed of large
tion between clinical findings and the severity of histopatho-
lymphocytes and lymphoblasts with variably sized, slightly
logic lesions in dogs with IBD. This was especially true when
 eosinophilic granules that are phenotypically cytotoxic T
one evaluated posttreatment changes in disease activity and
cells. The granules within the lymphocytes are larger and
its correlation to posttreatment histopathologic findings.
more eosinophilic than the granules commonly observed in
There is some evidence that dogs with moderate-to-severe
 granular lymphocytes of other species. A recent case series
 IBD accompanied by increased C-reactive protein concen-
 of feline alimentary large granular lymphocyte lymphoma
trations are more likely to have significant histologic lesions
has indicated that this is an aggressive disease that is poorly
than those dogs having only mild clinical signs. In contrast to
 responsive to chemotherapy.
dogs with IBD, cats with IBD showed a positive correlation
Canine and feline intestinal mast cell tumors are relatively
between morphologic changes (i.e., epithelial alterations, vil-
rare. These tumors tend to grossly resemble lymphoma.
lus fusion, and atrophy), GI signs, and upregulated expres-
The affected intestinal segments are thickened and dilated,
 sion of some proinflammatory cytokines in a recent report.
often with an ulcerated surface. Eosinophil infiltration may
The use of immunohistochemistry applied to endoscopic
 accompany canine intestinal mast cell tumors, but these cells
biopsy samples may provide important prognostic infor-
seldom occur in feline alimentary mast cell tumors. Tolu-
 Bnap rd e oi ssuosai s jud e hupaan uo
idine blue staining may reveal metachromatic granules in
trial. The cell surface expression of P-glycoprotein in muco-
the cytoplasm of neoplastic mast cells in dogs, but this histo-
 sal lymphocytes of some dogs with IBD has been associated
chemical stain is frequently negative in cats. Mast cell tumors
with resistance to steroids, whereas dysregulated expres-
are similar to lymphoma in that other organs and structures,
sion of certain apoptotic markers (e.g., bcl-2 and caspase-3)
especially regional lymph nodes, may be infiltrated by neo.
may herald therapeutic success or failure in dogs with IBD.
plastic mast cells.
The advantage of immunophenotyping for diagnosis of
We have observed three cases of an unusual, progressive
well-cdifferentiated feline lymphoma has been previously
lesion of uncertain etiology in cats. Vomiting and anorexia
discussed. This diagnosis generally carries a favorable long.
are the primary clinical signs. The intestinal wall and mesen-
term outcome because affected cats are typically treated with
teric lymph nodes of the affected animals are infiltrated or
a specifc drug regimen of prednisolone and chlorambucil.
replaced by an infiltrate of eosinophils, fewer scattered mast
A variety of new molecular tools are being applied to
cells, fibroblasts, and capillaries alternating with regions of
 endoscopic biopsy specimens. Helicobacter-associated gas-
dense collagen. The few mast cells within the lesion have
tritis in companion animals may now be diagnosed by PCR
normal morphologic features. Unfortunately, the lesions
 and FISH analysis of gastric mucosal biopsy specimens.
frequently are not amenable to resection, and clinical signs
Furthermore, these tools may be applied after therapy to
are persistent. The infltrative character of the lesions resem-
assess for successful eradication of invasive bacteria. Inves-
bles that of a neoplasm, but the heterogeneous nature of the
tigators have recently described computer imaging methods
lesion suggests a nonneoplastic process. A similar lesion has
for analyzing cellular populations in normal and pathologic
 been recently described and diagnosed as an unusual form of
 intestinal biopsy specimens. Other studies have utilized ocu-
intestinal mast cell tumor in cats.
lar morphometry and immunohistochemistry to evaluate
immunoglobulin-containing cells, T cells, and other immu-
 THE FUTURE
nologic molecules in endoscopic specimens from healthy
 dogs and from dogs and cats with IBD. Still new diagnostic
The histopathologic applications of GI endoscopy are con-
applications for endoscopic specimens include molecular
tinually expanding. Of particular potential value is the role
characterization of the gut microbiota in healthy dogs and
of histopathology as a tool for diagnostic monitoring and
cats and their use in demonstrating imbalances of intestinal
assessment of therapeutic responses in animals with chronic
microbial communities in dogs and cats with IBD.
SUGGESTED
REAdING
Allenspach K, Wieland B, Grone A, et al: Chronic enteropathies in
  s [        
dogs: evaluation of risk factors for negative outcome, J Vet Intern
histopathological diagnosis of gastrointestinal inflammation in
Med 21:700-708, 2007.
the dog and cat: a report from the World Small Animal Veterinary
Casamian-Sorrosal D, Willard MD, Murray JK, et al: Comparison of
Association Gastrointestinal Standardization Group, J Comp Pathol
histopathologic findings in biopsies from the duodenum and ileum
138(Suppl 1):S1-S43, 2008.
of dogs with enteropathy, J Vet Intern Med 24:80-83, 2010.
CH APTER 8  Endoscopic Biopsy Specimen Collection and Histopathologic Considerations ·  309
Evans SE, Bonczynski JI, Broussard JD, et al: Comparison of endoscopic
Moore PF, Woo JC, Vernau W, et al: Characterization of feline T cell
 and full-thickness biopsy specimens for diagnosis of inflammatory
receptor gamma (TCRG) variable region genes for the molecular
bowel disease and alimentary tract lymphoma in cats, J Arm Vet Med
diagnosis of feline intestinal T cell lymphoma, Vet Immunol
Assoc 229:1447- 1450, 2006.
Immunopathol 106:167-178, 2005.
Golden DL: Gastrointestinal endoscopic biopsy techniques, Vet Clin
Simpson KW, Togan B, Rishniw M, et al: Adherent and invasive
North Am Small Anim Pract 8:239-244, 1993.
Escherichia coli is associated with granulomatous colitis in Boxer
Janeczko S, Atwater D, Bogel E, et al: The relationship of mucosal
dogs, Infect Immun 74:4778-4792, 2006.
bacteria to duodenal histopathology, cytokine mRNA, and clinical
Willard MD, Lovering SL, Cohen ND, et al: Quality of tissue specimens
disease activity in cats with inflammatory bowel disease, Vet
obtained endoscopically from the duodenum of dogs and cats, JAm
Microbiol 128:178-193, 2008.
Vet Med Assoc 219:474-479, 2001.
Jergens AE, Moore FM, Haynes JS, et al: Idiopathic inflammatory
Willard MD, et al: Correlation 
between pathologists assessing
bowel disease in dogs and cats: 84 cases ( 1987-1990), JArm Vet Med
endoscopic gastric and intestinal biopsies using WSAVA guidelines:
Assoc 201:1603- 1608, 1992.
a report from the World Small Animal Veterinary Association
Jergens AE, Andreason CB, Hagemoser WA,etal: Cytologicexamination
Gastrointestinal Standardization Group, J Vet Intern Med 22:1456,
2008.
gastrointestinal tract disease in dogs and cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Willard MD, Mansell J, Fosgate GT, et al: Effect of sample quality upon
213:1755-1759, 1998.
the sensitivity of endoscopic biopsy for detecting gastric and duodenal
Jergens AE, Schreiner CA, Frank DE, et al: A scoring index for disease
lesions in dogs and cats, J Vet Intern Med 22:1084-1089, 2008.
activity in canine inflammatory bowel disease, J Vet Intern Med
Xenoulis PG, Palculict B, Allenspach K, et al: Molecular-phylogenetic
17:291-297, 2003.
characterization of microbial communities imbalances in the small
Krick EL, Little L, Patel R, et al: Description of clinical and pathological
intestine of dogs with inflammatory bowel disease, FEMS Microbiol
findings, treatment and outcome of feline large granular lymphocyte
Ecol 66:579-589, 2008.
lymphoma (1996-2004), Vet Comp Oncol 6:102-110, 2008.
Mansfield CS, James FE, Craven M, et al: Remission of hystiocytic
ulcerative colitis in Boxer dogs correlates with eradication of invasive
intramucosal Escherechia coli, J Vet Intern Med 23:964-969, 2009.
HAPTER
Endoscopic Placement of
Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy
Tubes
Jacqueline Whittemore and Joseph W. Bartges
se of endoscopically placed gastrostomy and gastro-
is indicated. Given the negative association between protein-
jejunostomy tubes has increased in conjunction with the
 calorie malnutrition and patient outcome, feeding tube place-
increased availability of endoscopy in veterinary medicine.
ment should be considered as soon as a patient is identified as
The benefits of nutritional support include improved
 meeting one or more placement criteria. When anesthetizing
patient immune function, wound healing, and survival.
patients for diagnostic procedures, clinicians should con-
Compared with parenteral feeding, enteral feeding is asso-
 sider preemptive placement of feeding tubes if one or more
ciated with improved enterocyte health and reduced bacte-
of these criteria may be anticipated. Conversely, significant
rial translocation. Appetite stimulants and force-feeding are
malnutrition, inflammation, and hypoproteinemia are asso-
often relied on for short-term enteral supplementation in
ciated with delayed wound healing and may compromise
hyporexic patients. Although potentially helpful in initially
 gastrostomy tract healing and fbrosis. In a patient with one
stimulating a patient's appetite, pharmacologic stimulants
or more of these risk factors or at high anesthetic risk, it may
provide little benefit in cases with chronic hyporexia or in
be prudent to feed the animal parenterally or via nasoesopha-
 patients with underlying disorders. Force-feeding uncom-
 geal or esophagostomy feeding tube until the patient is more
monly yields significant caloric benefit, may erode the
stable. At that juncture, a percutaneous endoscopic gastros-
human-animal bond, can generate food aversion, and may
tomy (PEG) or percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunostomy
be associated with negative sequelae, including aspiration in
(PEG-J) tube may be placed, and the relative risks of stoma
the obtunded patient. Neither may be used in patients with
site dehiscence or anesthetic arrest should be decreased.
dysphagia or motility disorders.
PEG tubes have historically been reserved for patients with
Compared with force-feeding and chemical appetite stim-
 normal gastrointestinal motility that cannot or do not meet
ulation, feeding tubes improve maintenance of the human-
their caloric requirements. Dysphagic causes for tube place-
animal bond, lessen the impact of patient appetite on dietary
ment include refractory anorexia, upper respiratory infection,
intake, and allow provision of the patient's entire caloric
head trauma, nasal or oral neoplasia, feline lymphocytic-
needs. Depending on the type of tube chosen, additional
plasmacytic gingivitis-stomatitis complex, cranial nerve
benefits include the provision of long-term nutritional, fluid,
deficits, cricopharyngeal achalasia, and esophageal disease
and pharmacologic support; gastric decompression and suc-
(e.g, esophagitis, neoplasia, tear, or stricture). Common
 tion; decreased pancreatic stimulation; and the ability to use
metabolic causes include hepatobiliary disease (e.g., hepatic
commercial canned diets or soaked commercial kibble diets
lipidosis, cholangiohepatitis, or cirrhosis) and renal disease.
Gastrointestinal causes include pancreatitis, inflammatory
cians should attempt to feed as high in the gut as possible.
bowel disease, gastrointestinal neoplasia, and gastrointestinal
foreign body. In several recent publications, PEG tubes have
■INDICATIONS
been successfully used to manage caloric needs of patients with
Placement of gastrostomy and jejunostomy tubes should
PEG-J tubes have been used less commonly in veterinary
be considered for patients with significant hyporexia or
 medicine. Common indications for the use of jejunostomy
 anorexia, anatomic or functional disorders preventing ade-
tubes include conditions predisposing animals to aspiration
quate caloric intake, disease processes requiring ongoing
(e.g, regurgitation, vomiting, and significant obtundation),
(more than 7 days) nutritional or medical support, and cases
functional or mechanical obstructions (e.g- gastric stasis or
in which bypass of upper portions of the gastrointestinal tract
 atony, pyloric obstruction, and proximal small intestinal
311
312 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
obstruction), significant gastric disease or gastrectomy, and
tubes, over-the-counter (OTC) canned diets and even
 pancreatitis. The use of gastrojejunostomy tubes in patients
soaked kibble diets may be administered with limited
with pyloric outflow tract obstruction or small intesti-
additional preparation (ie., processing with a blender,
nal obstruction is dependent on the ability to successfully
straining, or other methods). Additionally, the ability to
advance the jejunostomy tube. Endoscopic placement of
use OTC diets instead of prescription monomeric and
nasojejunostomy tubes has been described; it may be a useful
elemental diets greatly reduces food costs.
alternative for patients at high risk of stoma dehiscence that
2. Decreased client time spent administering feedings. Feed-
would otherwise benefit from jejunal feeding.
 ings can generally be administered more quickly via PEG
tube compared with nasoesophageal, esophagostomy,
 and PEG-J tubes. In addition, clients administering PEG
Megaesophagus and PEG or PEG-J Tubes
feedings generally record better patient feeding tolerance
The use of PEG tubes in patients with megaesophagus
when compared with clients administering esophagos-
remains controversial. In several recent reports, PEG tubes
tomy feedings.
were successfully utilized to manage patients with mega-
 3. Improved patient tolerance. Patients tolerate PEG tubes
esophagus that were unable to independently maintain ade-
 better than nasoesophageal and esophagostomy tubes.
 quate caloric intake. Three of four dogs with megaesophagus
This is particularly true for patients with facial and nasal
 secondary to tiger snake envenomation received PEG tube
diseases.
placement as part of their case management.l Two of these
4. Increased versatility. In addition to their usefulness for
dogs survived to discharge and continued to be fed via tube
enteral feeding, PEG tubes may be utilized for adminis-
until the megaesophagus resolved (30 and 36 days). Gastros-
tration of fluid therapy and medications and may provide
tomy tube feedings were also successfully utilized in treat-
access for gastric suction and decompression.
ment of six other dogs with megaesophagus (etiology not
 5. Improved tube life span. High patient tolerance, advances
stated), and a cat with megaesophagus after diaphragmatic
in gastrostomy tube manufacturing, and anatomic fac-
repair.23 Megaesophagus was classified as idiopathic in three
tors all contribute to greater indwelling life for PEG tubes
of four dogs receiving replacement low-profle gastrostomy
 compared with other tube types. Decreased bandaging
tubes in one study.4 None of these dogs died or was eutha-
requirements and conformational advantages of low-
nized as a result of complications from tube feeding. These
profile replacement tubes (discussed later) may further
dogs were maintained with the use of replacement low-
reduce the risk of unplanned tube removal and are asso-
profle tubes for 31, 1017, 723, and 1020 days. The first two
ciated with extended tube life spans.
dogs were still alive at the time the study was published; the
other two died from non-tube-related causes.
Disadvantages of PEG Tubes
Reports of successful long-term management of patients
with megaesophagus are exciting, although placement of an
Although highly versatile and well tolerated in the majority
endoscopic feeding tube is by no means a panacea. Because
 of cases, PEG tubes do have some limitations with regard to
animals with megaesophagus often have aberrant gastric
 placement and use. Limitations and disadvantages include
motility and associated gastroesophageal reflux, the use of
1. Specialized equipment and training is necessary. Nonendo
 gastrostomy tubes does not eliminate regurgitation or the
scopically guided gastrostomy tube placement has been
risk of subsequent aspiration pneumonia. In cases of sec-
described and may provide a less expensive alternative
ondary megaesophagus that may be reversible, placement
 in some cases. Limitations of blind percutaneous gas-
and use of PEG-J tubes may help mitigate the risks of gastro-
trostomy tube placement include the inability to visually
esophageal reflux and aspiration by introduction of food dis-
examine the gastrointestinal tract for underlying disease
tally in the gastrointestinal tract. If the megaesophagus does
 and guide optimal tube placement.
not resolve or the patient does not tolerate the jejunostomy
2. General anesthesia is required. Although most PEG tubes
tube, it may be removed, and the patient may be fed through
can be placed in less than 25 minutes, general anesthesia
the coexistent PEG tube. Alternately, for patients with idio-
is required. Patients that are poor anesthetic candidates
pathic or irreversible secondary megaesophagus, low-profle
 may be better managed with parenteral or nasoesopha-
gastrostomy tubes may provide the best balance between
geal feeding until they are more stable.
patient quality of life and risks of aspiration.
3.Stoma site disruption and premature tube dislodgement
may be life-threatening. Unplanned removal of naso-
esophageal and esophagostomy tubes is rarely associated
Advantages of PEG Tubes
with significant patient complications. In contrast, pre-
There are a number of specific advantages of PEG tubes over
mature PEG tube removal or tube migration may be
other feeding methodologies. These include but are not nec-
associated with gastric leakage into the abdomen and
essarily limited to
attendant peritonitis. Premature tube removal may be
1. Decreased client time andcostassociated with preparingfeed-
particularly deleterious in severely cachexic animals or
ings. In contrast to nasoesophageal and esophagostomy
those with marked hypoproteinemia or inflammation
CHAPTER 9  Endoscopic Placement of Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy Tubes  ·  313
because these conditions directly impede wound heal-
providing trophic stimulation of enterocytes located
ing and stoma development, which increases the risk of
aborally to the tube, which aids in maintenance of entero-
dehiscence and leakage. In cases with a high risk of poor
cyte health and minimizes the risks of bacterial transloca-
wound healing, the use of parenteral or nasoesophageal
 tion and secondary multiple organ dysfunction.
 feeding before PEG tube placement may improve patient
3. Decreased risks of reflux and aspiration. For patients with
outcomes.
upper intestinal motility disorders, PEG-J feedings allow
4. Disease-related and conformational factors may preclude
maintenance of a positive energy balance with decreased
or negatively impact PEG tube placement. In patients with
risks of gastric distension, esophageal reflux, and aspiration.
severe esophageal disease (e.g-, stricture or mass effect),
These benefits are amplified by the ability to perform gas-
tube placement may need to be aborted if the endoscope
tric suctioning through the indwelling PEG tube.
cannot be advanced past the area of esophageal occlu-
4. Decreased mechanical complications and improved patient
sion. In addition, appropriate gastric positioning may not
comfort. Compared with surgically placed jejunostomy
be achievable in deep-chested dogs or excessively obese
tubes, PEG-J tubes are better tolerated by patients. In
animals. In these cases, placement may lead to gastric
 malpositioning, outflow obstruction, excessive tension on
utilized, which decreases the prevalence of mechanical
the stoma site (leading to stoma dehiscence or unplanned
issues like kinking, coiling, and clogging. In cases in which
tube migration/removal), or splenic laceration. When
the PEG-J tube is inadvertently dislodged or removed,
appropriate positioning cannot be achieved endoscopi-
replacement or repositioning may easily be performed
cally, the procedure should be aborted and laparoscopi-
through the PEG tube and does not require creation of
cally assisted gastrostomy tube placement or laparotomy
an additional stoma. The ability to manage two tubes
should be considered.
through one stoma (thus minimizing sites for possible
5.Usefulness is limited in patients with signijficant gastroin
 dehiscence) provides an additional advantage in patients
testinal motility disorders. In cases with significant gastric
predisposed to poor wound healing due to cachexia,
atony or gastroesophageal reflux, a PEG-J tube or par-
hypoproteinemia, peritonitis, generalized inflammatory
enteral feeding may be more appropriate for feeding,
disorders, concurrent endocrine disease, or immunosup-
although PEG tubes may still provide a benefit through
pression. The decreased number of enterostomy sites,
 gastric suctioning to decrease regurgitation, vomiting,
compared with separate placement of gastrostomy and
and aspiration.
 jejunostomy tubes, has been associated with a significant
6. The feeding tube or kit itself is costly. Commercial gastros-
 decrease in life-threatening complications like peritonitis
tomy tube kits, while more convenient and often better
and premature tube dislodgement.
tolerated by patients than mushroom-tip latex tubes, are
significantly more expensive. This cost may not be justifi-
 able in cases in which the clinician anticipates the need
Disadvantages of PEG-J Tubes
for the tube will be relatively short-term.
Widespread use of jejunostomy tubes has been historically
limited by mechanical and logistic challenges. Changes in
tube placement and management practices have rendered
Advantages of PEG-J Tubes
some of these concerns moot. In addition to the limitations
Although PEG-J tubes are less commonly placed in veteri-
noted for PEG tubes, additional limitations and disadvan-
nary medicine, they offer a number of specific and compel-
tages of PEG-J tubes include
ling advantages and are probably underutilized. Advantages
1. The need for continuous rate infusion (CRI) feeding. The
include
use of a CRI feeding protocol has been recommended so
1. Increased flexibility in patient management. In comparison
that vomiting and diarrhea are minimized when patients
with surgically placed jejunostomy tubes, PEG-J tubes are
are fed through jejunostomy tubes. This drastically limits
placed in concert with a PEG tube. This means that the
home use of jejunostomy tubes and generally increases
clinician gains all the potential benefits of a gastrostomy
the level of care and treatment costs of in-hospital feed-
tube in addition to the benefits of a jejunostomy tube
ings. The need for CRI feeding to minimize vomiting and
while only creating one transserosal defect (stoma) in the
diarrhea has come into question. In one retrospective
patient.
study of 47 dogs and cats with surgically placed jejunos-
2. Decreased pancreatic stimulation. When PEG-J tubes are
tomy tubes, 6 animals received feedings via jejunostomy
 properly positioned, food enters the intestinal tract at the
tube at home, which suggests that bolus feeding was uti-
level of the proximal jejunum, causing minimal stimula-
lized in at least some of these animals without noted ill
tion of the exocrine pancreas. This may offer significant
effects.5 More recently, bolus feedings of commercial
benefits when necrotizing pancreatitis cases are being
canned foods via PEG-J tubes successfully maintained
managed. When compared with parenteral nutrition (the
body weight in 12 healthy dogs and 5 cats for 14 days
other nutritional intervention with minimal pancreatic
without medical (i.e., diarrhea or abdominal cramping)
secretion), PEG-J feedings have the added advantage of
complications.6 It is possible that the improved tolerance
314 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
of bolus feedings may partially relate to the decreased
 Gastrostomy Tubes
velocity of food entering the intestines as a result of
 increased luminal tube diameter. Ongoing investigation
Construction Materials
of bolus jejunal feedings in clinical patients is indicated.
Gastrostomy tubes may be manufactured from rubber,
2. The need for monomeric diets. Because the PEG-J tube
latex, silicone, or polyurethane. In human medicine, the
bypasses a large portion of the intestinal tract, use of
use of rubber or latex tubes has been supplanted by silicone
monomeric liquid diets has been recommended. Mono-
and polyurethane tubes. Long-term use of rubber and latex
meric diets are relatively expensive, costing approxi-
tubes is complicated by tissue reactions to the tubes, changes
mately four times as much as prescription recovery diets
induced by chronic gastric acid immersion (hardening), and
(e.g-, Hills a/d, Royal Canin Recovery RS, or Eukanuba
colonization by fungal organisms. Tube failure due to Candida
Recovery). The successful use of commercial diets in
colonization has been reported ina cat. Silicone tubes are softer
the aforementioned study without medical (diarrhea,
than other tubes and thus better tolerated by patients, but their
abdominal cramping) or mechanical (clogging of the
use in human medicine is limited by diffculties in performing
tubes) complications is particularly encouraging.
 gastric aspiration due to luminal collapse and limitations in
luminal diameter. Polyurethane tubes are generally more
Advantages and Disadvantages
 resilient and are available in larger luminal diameters.
of Nasojejunostomy Tubes
 Placement Style
To our knowledge, there have been no reports evaluating the
PEG tubes are generally designed for one of two placement
use of nasojejunostomy tubes in either a clinical or research
 techniques (pull versus push). The majority of PEG tubes are
veterinary setting. Advantages include decreased pancreatic
initially placed by the pull method. Tubes installed with the
stimulation and lack of an enterostomy site. Limitations
use ofthe pull method are pulled through the mouth into the
include increased esophageal reflux (because the feeding
stomach with a long suture and then outward through the
tube traverses the lower esophageal sphincter), poor patient
 gastric and body walls. The tube has, or is modifed to have,
tolerance, increased mechanical difficulties due to decreased
 a tapered end with an attachment mechanism or loop so it
tube diameter and increased length, and the need for CRI
can be smoothly pulled through the gastric wall (Figure 9- 1).
feeding and liquid diets. In addition to patient removal due
With the push method, the tube is pushed over a guidewire
to intolerance, the small diameter of the tubes makes them
from the mouth into the stomach and out through the body
prone to dislodgement secondary to vomiting.
wall. The proximal end of the tube is tapered to push across
the stomach and body walls and is fenestrated for passage of
the guidewire.
Contraindications
Contraindications to endoscopic feeding tube placement
Anatomy
 include high anesthetic risk; refractory coagulopathy, refrac-
Retention of the PEG tube in the stomach is dependent on
tory vomiting (nasojejunostomy and PEG tubes); significant
the tube's internal bumper or retention disk. The anatomy
obtundation (PEG tubes); significant malabsorptive intesti-
of the bumper varies by manufacturer and placement
nal disease, motility derangement, or obstruction aboral to
technique (Figures 9-2 through 9-4). Bumpers are designed
the anticipated tube location; and an inability to achieve suc-
to balance the risk of accidental dislodgement against
cessful orientation and apposition of the stomach and body
the risk of gastric necrosis and the invasiveness of tube
walls due to patient conformation, splenomegaly, peritoneal
removal or replacement. Bumpers that offer a decreased
effusion, gastric neoplasia, or gastropexy (PEG and PEG-J
risk of accidental dislodgement generally require endoscopic
tubes). An additional relative contraindication would be the
removal, whereas those that may be removed through the
 potential for the patient to benefit diagnostically or thera-
body wall by applying traction with or without the use of
 peutically from laparotomy.
 a stylet are more susceptible to premature removal. When
 selecting a PEG tube for placement, the clinician must weigh
■ EQUIPMENT
the patient's temperament and the anticipated need for tube
removal or replacement against the patient's size, anesthetic
Aside from a flexible endoscope, equipment needs vary
risk, and the client's finances.
 depending on the tube type and whether to use a commer-
cial tube placement kit. Commercially available kits are more
Sizes
expensive than homemade kits but often offer greater flexibil-
Tubes with luminal diameters of 18F to 24F are commonly
ity with regard to tube material and conformation. In addition
utilized in dogs and cats. Clinicians are encouraged to
to the feeding tubes themselves, commercial kits include most
use larger diameter tubes whenever possible, particularly
of the necessary equipment for tube placement and usage. If
if PEG-J placement or replacement with a low-profle
long-term usage ofthe tube is not anticipated or required, the
gastrostomy button is desired or anticipated. When
added cost of a commercial kit may not be indicated.
using mushroom-tip or Pezzer catheters, it is particularly
CHAPTER 9
Endoscopic Placement of Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy Tubes ·  315
B
C
introducer needle with over-the-needle catheter, a retention disk, and a feeding adaptor. B, Close-up of the feeding adaptor. C, Endoscopic
view after placement of the internal bumper of the PEG tube shown in A. Note that the inner bumper needs to be pulled closer to the gastric
mucosa for proper placement.
Figure 9-2 Internal bumper of a percutaneous endoscopic
gastrostomy (PEG) tube (Ballard Medical Products, Draper,
Hgure 9-3 Internal bumper of a percutaneous endoscopic
Utah) after placement.
gastrostomy (PEG) tube (C. R. Bard Inc., Covington, Ga.) after
placement.
316 ·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
BOX9-1
 Equipment Checklist for Percutaneous
Endoscopic Gastrostomy (PEG) Tube
Placement by the Pull Method
 Surgical scrub and drapes
 Endoscope and endoscopic snare or retrieval forceps
Scalpel blade
 Over-the-needle catheter
 Imexpensive suture material or fishing line for tube
retrieval
 Disposable pipette tip for use as dilator and sheath
Large-bore needle
 Sterile lube
 Feeding tube
 If a mushroom-tip catheter is utilized, the catheter
administration tip will need to be cut at an angle to
Figure 9-4 Internal bumper of a percutaneous endoscopic
create a beveled edge. Set aside the catheter tip por-
gastrostomy (PEG) tube (Biosearch Medical Products Inc.,
 tion for later use as an extermal flange
Somerville, N.J.) as seen endoscopically after placement in a cat.
If a commercial kit is used, many of the following
 materials may be included in the kit.
Catheter tip adaptor
 Syringe port cap
Nonabsorbable suture
Gauze squares
Orthopedic stockinette
Note: Equipment is listed in the order of use.
Figure 9-5 Components of a homemade gastrostomy kit. From leff
to right,in the front row:No.11 scalpel blade,22F BardUrologic
Catheter (C. R. Bard, Inc., Covington, Ga.). From left to right, in
the back row: Retention suture, over-the needle catheter, disposable
pipette tip, catheter tip adaptor, syringe port cap. Not displayed:
sterile lube, gauze squares, and orthopedic stockinette. (Photo taken 
by Greg Hirshoren, @ 2009 The University of Tennessee.)
important to select a large-bore tube with a rigid tip to
minimize the risk of premature dislodgement.
Sityoflenr
Hgure 9-6 Low-profle gastrostomy tubes: On the leftis a tube
Additional Materials
with a mushroom-tip internal bumper (Passport Low Profle
Gastrostomy Device, Cook Medical, Bloomington, Ind.). On the
Components of a homemade kit are displayed in Figure 9-5.
right is a tube with an inflatable balloon internal retention device
The majority of these materials are included in commercial
(MIC-KEY Low Profile Gastrostomy Feeding Tube, Kimberly-
feeding tube kits. See Box 9-1 for a checklist of materials
Clark, Roswell, Ga.). (Photo taken by Greg Hirshoren,@ 2009 The
necessary for PEG tube placement.
University of Tennessee.)
the need for external dressings and retention sutures, which
Low-Profile Gastrostomy Tubes
 improves patient tolerance, aesthetics, and ease of manage-
Low-profile gastrostomy tubes or buttons (PEG-B) offer a
ment. The presence of a one-way valve minimizes reflux of
 number of advantages over traditional tubes. The compact
food during administration, while alternate attachments
 and self-retaining designs (Figure 9-6) generally eliminate
facilitate gastric sampling and suction.
CHAPTER 9  Endoscopic Placement of Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy Tubes · 317
0200g The University of Tennessee
Figure 9-7 A, Percutaneous positioning of a one-step low-profle gastrostomy tube (EndoVive Low Profle Percutaneous Endoscopic
gastrostomy tube (EndoVive Low Profle Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy kit; Boston Scientic) using the ripcord. C, One-step
low-profle gastrostomy tube (EndoVive Low Profle Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy kit; Boston Scientific) shown with variably
sized silicon spacers.(Photos taken by Greg Hirshoren,  2009 The University of Tennessee.)
One-Step Gastrostomy Tubes
Replacement PEG-B Tubes
Although low-profle gastrostomy tubes have historically
 Replacement PEG-B tubes have either a mushroom-tip or
 been used as replacement tubes, several commercial one-
balloon internal retention bumper. Mushroom- or bulb-
step low-profle gastrostomy button (OsB) kits (Figure
 tipped PEG-B tubes are stretched with the use of an enclosed
9-7) are available for primary placement. Because of their
metal stylet and advanced through the healthy stoma; then
aesthetic benefits, large luminal diameters, and ease of use,
the stylet is withdrawn. Balloon-tipped PEG-B tubes are
 OSBs are increasingly being utilized as the tube of choice in
inflated after advancement through the stoma to prevent
human medicine. Initially, placement ofOSBs was a ssociated
 accidental dislodgement.
with a high prevalence of peri-PEG cellulitis, button
migration, and secondary peritonitis. These complications
Jejunostomy Tubes
 have been decreased with changes in tube design and may
be minimized further through careful selection of the
Jejunostomy tubes may be placed during initial gastros-
appropriate OSB shaf length and creation of an adequately
tomy tube placement, through an existing esophagostomy
large skin incision. In a recent study in children, equivalent
tube, gastrostomy tube, or nasojejunally. Commercial kits
complication rates were noted for OSBs and traditional
for simultaneous PEG-J placement have been utilized suc-
PEG tubes, but tube life and feeding tolerance were much
cessfully in both cats and dogs. Regardless of the method of
higher in the OSB group.7
 placement, care should be taken to select a large diameter
318 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
(9F to 12F) jejunostomy tube of suffcient length to ensure ade-
The tube insertion site is determined with the use of
quate advancement past the caudal duodenal flexure. Achiey-
endoscopic transillumination: monitor the stomach wall
ing these goals may be particularly challenging if nasojejunal
via endoscope while an assistant applies intermitent exter-
 placement is required. For dogs receiving PEG-J tubes, orad
nal pressure with one finger. The stomach is thus palpated
migration of properly placed jejunostomy tubes was noted
until an optimal site is determined. For accurate evalua-
with 65-cm but not 95-cm tubes. For cats, 65-cm jejunostomy
tion of the insertion site, it is important that the mucosa at
tubes appear to be of adequate length to limit orad migration
 the site of compression remain visible while pressure is being
after appropriate placerment. Jejunostomy tubes may have
applied. The goal is to place the tube (1) as dorsally as pos-
weighted or unweighted tips. The purpose of a weighted tip is
sible so that gastric leakage is minimized and traction on the
to facilitate aboral movement of the jejunostomy tube during
 gastric or body walls is limited and (2) at the juncture of the
peristalsis beyond the limits of endoscopic placement.
 gastric body and antrum so that the pyloric outflow tract is
The majority of PEG-J placement techniques require the
 not obstructed. In our experience, this generally ends up being
use of a soff-tipped, flexible guidewire (diameter, 0.035 inch
1 to 2 cm caudal to the last rib and a third of the distance from
[0.89 mm]; minimum length, 260 cm). The guidewire is
 the ventral midline dorsally. If appropriate placement cannot
included in commercial kits; if a kit is not used, it will need
be achieved without undue tension on the gastrostomy site,
to be purchased separately, unless the antegrade wire-free
termination of the procedure should be seriously considered,
 placement technique is employed.
 and placement should be achieved with an alternate procedure.
Once the insertion site is confirmed, a final surgical scrub
is applied before a small (≈l-cm) skin incision is made. The
 TECHNIQUES FOR TUBE PLACEMENT
 endoscope is withdrawn to the cardia to protect it from acci-
Preparation
dental damage, and a large (14G to 18G) over-the-needle
catheter is advanced into the gastric lumen (Figure 9-8, A).
Patients should be fasted for 8 to 10 hours before anesthetic
The catheter is secured with an endoscopic snare or retrieval
induction. It is important to note that this may not entirely
forceps before removal of the stylet. Once the stylet is
eliminate the risk of aspiration in patients with significant
retracted, a long suture or line is advanced through the cath-
derangements of gastrointestinal motility. After anesthetic
eter into the stomach. The external portion of the suture
induction, the patient should be placed in right lateral
 should be secured with a hemostat to prevent it from acci-
recumbency (right side down). Note that this is opposite to
 dentally being pulld into the stomach during the next step.
the position utilized for most endoscopic procedures. Intra-
The snare is then loosened and shifted down the catheter
venous administration of perioperative antibiotics at the
to securely grasp/engage the suture (see Figure 9-8, C). The
time of anesthetic induction is strongly encouraged. Addi-
endoscope and snare are slowly retracted until the suture
tional doses of antibiotics should be given every 2 hours until
exits the animal's mouth. At this juncture, the suture will
completion of feeding tube placement. In one double-blind,
extend from the hemostat on the outside of the animal's
 randomized controlled trial in human patients, administra-
body, through the body wall into the stomach, up the esoph-
tion of perioperative antibiotics dramatically reduced the
agus, and out the patient's mouth. The suture is released
rate of peristomal infections (7% in the cefazolin group vs.
from the snare and attached to the gastrostomy tube.
 32% in the placebo group).8
In the case of commercial kits, a long loop should be vis-
ible on the end of the retrieval suture extending from the
mouth. Thread this loop a couple of inches through the
PEG Tube Placement
 metal loop on the end of the PEG tube. The bulbous end of
Confrm that the animal is in right lateral recumbency. An
the feeding tube is then pulled through the suture loop. As
approximately 10 cm × 10 cm area caudal to the last rib
tension is applied to the tube and the retrieval suture, the
should be clipped and aseptically prepared on the left side.
two loops slide together in an interlocking conformation
 Place a mouth speculum, and pass the lubricated endoscope
(Figure 9-9). Apply lubrication generously.
into the stomach. Briefly examine the stomach to ensure that
If a commercial kit is not used, attachment of the PEG
it is grossly healthy and to rule out defects that may com-
tube is slightly more labor intensive. The retrieval suture is
promise feeding tube placement or apposition of the stomach
threaded through the pointed end of a disposable pipette tip
and body wall If biopsy samples need to be obtained from the
and set aside. Cut the proximal portion of the feeding tube
 stomach or duodenum, collect them before proceeding with
below the flared end at an angle to create a beveled edge.
tube placement. The stomach should be insufflated until it
 Next pass an 18G needle through the tube perpendicularly
bulges against the body wall and the endoscopic light is clearly
 so it spans the bevel (see Figure 9-8, D). The retrieval suture
visible through the skin. This ensures adequate displace-
is threaded through the bevel of the needle and out the other
ment of any organs (e.g-, spleen, liver, and intestine) lurking
side. The needle is then removed from the tube, leaving the
between the stomach and body wall. An assistant may need to
retrieval suture in place. Tightly tie the suture to the tube
 manually occlude the esophagus to achieve adequate gastric
with the knot centered in the bevel. Slide the pipette tip
insufflation. It is important, though, to minimize overinsuf-
 down over the end of the tube (see Figure 9-8, E), and apply
flation and secondary compromise of venous return.
lubrication generously.
CHAPTER 9  Endoscopic Placement of Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy Tubes · 319
C
shoaaenui aiaau-au-iaao aiet 'y anbiuuat lnd au suin aqnn Auuoison sidossopua shoauiniad e jo juaaseid s-h aana
is removed and suture is fed into the stomach. C, The endoscopic snare is loosened and slid down to tightly fasten on the retrieval suture.
The endoscope and snare are retracted to pullthe suture out ofthe mouth. D, The end of the retrieval suture exiting the mouth is threaded
through the pointed tip of a disposable pipette. A large-gauge hypodermic needle is advanced through the end of the gastrostomy tube, and
Continued
Insert, but do not tie, a second retrieval suture through
may leak around the shaft, and the tube's protrusion into the
fenestrations (if present) in the internal bumper of the gas-
lumen may occlude the pyloric outflow tract. In contrast, if
trostomy tube to aid orad tube retrieval in case of technical
 pressure is applied to the gastric mucosa, patient intolerance,
difficulties or tube failure during placement (see Figure 9-8,
 peristomal infection and inflammation, ischemic necrosis,
F). Gently feed the stomach tube into the mouth while an
and tube migration or premature dislodgement may occur.
assistant applies traction to the retrieval suture where it exits
Application of internal flanges to stabilize homemade tubes
the body wall (see Figure 9-8, G). The endoscope should be
 may increase the risk of pressure-associated complications.
used to follow the tube's progress once it enters the esopha-
We do not recommend their use.
gus. The assistant will continue to pull on the suture until the
After tube positioning is confirmed, an external retention
tip of the tube reaches the body wall. The assistant may need
device or flange is applied to fix the tube in place (see Figure
to apply manual pressure to the body wall while applying
9-8, J). Care is again necessary to balance fixation require-
traction to the suture to facilitate tube passage through the
ments against pressure on the stoma site. Depending on tube
stomach and body walls (see Figure 9-8, H). Once the tube
design, the external flange may be sutured in place. Before the
has been passed through the body wall, the second retrieval
animal is recovered from anesthesia, a final check with the
suture may be withdra wn.
endoscope is performed to ensure that the internal bumper's
Careful positioning of the PEG tube's internal bum-
apposition to the gastric wall was not inadvertently shifted
per against the gastric mucosa is essertial for a successful
during placement of the external retention device. Air is
outcome. Successful placement of a PEG tube hinges on
evacuated from the stomach, and the endoscope is removed.
achieving just the right balance between apposition and
Finally, the tube is cut to the desired external length, fitted
 pressure. Ideally, the internal bumper will just barely touch
with a catheter tip adaptor, and bandaged with the use of
the mucosa, thus creating a seal without applying pressure
 gauze squares and an orthopedic stockinette (Figure 9-10).
to the mucosa (Figure 9-8, I). If the bumper is inadequately
 One-step low-profle gastrostomy tubes are placed in much
apposed to the mucosa (see Figure 9-1, C), gastric contents
the same manner as traditional PEG tubes. Peristomal
320 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Figure 9-8, cont'd E, After the hypodermic needle is removed and the retrieval suture securely knotted, the pipette tip is slid over the end of
the gastrostomy tube and lubricant is applied. F, A second retrieval suture is threaded through the fenestrations of the feeding tube in case
[aan aul oi uoenl auaa suidde Aq sneudosa au umop pue yinou an oul passed Ayaes si aq aui ' aessaau st [eaaai peio
suture where it exits the stomach. H, Gentle manual pressure is applied to the body wall as the suture is retracted to pull the pipette tip and
J, The external retention device or flange is applied so it will prevent tube movement without applying pressure on the skin. (Iages reprinted
with permission from Luhn A, Bartges J, Snow P: Gastrostomy feeding tubes: Percutaneous endoscopic placement, Vet Med 99:612-617, 2004.)
 complications in human pediatric patients have been largely
placement, it may be prudent to have two tubes on hand-
eliminated by an increase in the size of the initial skin incision
 One of which may be returned afterward—-and carefully apply
from 1 cm to 1.5 cm. Pending veterinary data on this topic,
a retrieval suture to the internal bumper. Once the proximal
we recommend the use of this modification. Careful use of the
end of the tube is advanced through the body wall, the sheath
manufacturer's measuring device is crucial when a tube size is
ripcord is pulled (see Figure 9-7, A). The delivery device may
selected. When a measurement falls between shaft lengths, the
then be separated from the OSB, which releases the external
longer OSB should be selected to minimize peristomal com-
flange and sets the tube in place. If the appropriate tube size
plications. Given episodic problems with tube failure during
has been chosen, the shaft will protrude about 0.5 cm from
Figure 9-9 Loop of suture interlocking with wire loop preattached
Hgure 9-11 The twisted end of a wire placed through the tran-
the tube to be pulled through the abdominal wall.
sected end of a gastrostomy tube is pushed into the lumen of the
aaaaqa  ssas
is pushed into the stomach. This will allow easier removal with
endoscopic retrieval forceps.
Figure 9-10 A Boxer after percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
(PEG) tube placement. Note that a piece of 6-inch orthopedic
stockinette has been used as a wrap to protect the tube site.
the body wall. The slight bit of laxity will disappear once the
 animal is no longer in a recumbent position. Some kits have 
interchangeable external flanges so that shaft length can be
Figure 9-12 Gastrostomy tract immediately after tube removal.
adjusted after tube placement (see Figure 9-7, B).
Gastrostomy Tube Removal
Tube removal may be performed in awake, sedated, or
Gastrostomy Tube Removal and Replacement
anesthetized animals depending on patient temperament
Gastrostomy tubes should be left in place a minimum of
and the conformation and removal requirements of the
10 to 14 days before removal so that gastrostomy tract fibro-
indwelling PEG tube. Tubes may be removed percutaneously
sis is adequate and peritoneal leakage of gastric contents
by application of gentle traction to the tube, with or without
 does not occur. In animals with compromised wound heal-
utilization of a stylet to stretch and narrow the internal
ing, formation of a secure gastrostomy tract may take sig-
bumper. Tubes may also be severed at the level of the skin
nificantly longer. Septic complications due to incomplete
and then retrieved endoscopically or be allowed to pass in the
adhesion formation and gastric leakage after tube removal
feces. It is generally recommended that internal bumpers be
have been reported as long as 28 days after initial tube place-
retrieved in animals less than 20 kg so that small intestinal
ment. Regardless of the amount of time elapsed since PEG
 obstruction does not occur. Endoscopic bumper retrieval may
tube placement, tube removal should not be considered if
be facilitated by attachment of a metal loop to the transected
inadequate gastrostomy tract fibrosis is suspected. Should a
shaft before pushing the shaft into the stomach (Figure 9-11)
 PEG tube be dislodged before complete tract healing, surgical
 or by use of a snare to capture the bumper endoscopically
exploration may be necessary to prevent fatal complications.
before transection. Figure 9-12 presents an example of a
322 ·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
healthy gastrostomy stoma after tube removal. Gastrostomy
from the body wallif the appropriate tube size has been cho-
tracts generally close within 12 hours and seal within 24 hours
 sen. The slight bit of laxity will disappear once the animal is
 of tube removal. No bandaging or special care is required.
no longer in a recumbent position.
 The major complication of PEG tube replacement is gas-
Gastrostomy Tube Replacement
trostomy tract disruption, causing secondary peritonitis,
The biggest challenge to successful replacement of an
with or without potential migration of the new tube into the
accidentally dislodged PEG tube is the rapidity with which
 abdominal cavity. Regardless of whether replacement is per-
the stoma closes. Replacement generally must be performed
formed in the awake or anesthetized patient, it is important
within 8 to 12 hours so that a new stoma does not need to be
to ensure that the stoma has not been disrupted after place-
 created. Replacement may be performed in awake, sedated,
ment by performance of a gastrostomy ga strogram.
 or anesthetized animals depending on patient temperament
Gastrostomy Gastrogram
and tube conformation. Application of local anesthetic gel
to the stoma area may facilitate tube placement in a wake or
The total volume of radiopaque iodinated contrast medium
minimally sedated animals. In our experience, replacement
necessary for a diagnostic gastrogram is calculated. One third
with mushroom-tip PEG tubes in nonanesthetized patients
of this volume is administered through the tube, after which
is less commonly successful in cats or in dogs with very
orthogonal abdominal radiographs are obtained. ( In cases in
flexible rib cages.
which subtle tract disruption is suspected, performance of
Replacement PEG tubes that do not require endoscopic
fluoroscopy during administration may provide additional
assistance are available in traditional (PEG) and low-profle
diagnostic information.) If no leakage is identified, the
(PEG-B) styles. If long-term use is desired, placement of a
remaining volume is administered to distend the stomach,
PEG-B tube should be given serious consideration. To place
and radiographs are repeated. Both phases of the study are
a tube with an inflatable balloon retention mechanism,
 important so that gastrostomy tract disruption can be ruled
simply advance the tube through the stoma and inflate the
out. The first set of radiographs will not identify leaks that
balloon per manufacturer's instructions. Placement of bal-
occur under pressure, for example, in association with a
loon-tipped tubes is often better tolerated and more easily
distended stomach, while the second set of radiographs may
accomplished in awake patients compared with mushroom
miss leaks that only occur in low-pressure situations, for
tip tubes, although the tubes themselves seem more suscep-
example, tracts that are compressed by surrounding tissues
tible to failure. For tubes with mushroom or bulb-shaped
when the stomach is distended. Additionally, if large leaks are
tips, the enclosed stylet should be placed alongside the shaft
 present, the initial study may help better identify the source.
into a fenestration on the bumper (Figure 9- 13). It is impor-
tant to avoid passing the stylet through the lumen of the
PEG-J Tube Placement
tube to prevent compromise of the antireflux valve found in
most PEG-B tubes. Traction is applied to the tube to extend
Several techniques have been described for placement of gas-
and narrow the retention bumper so it may be introduced
trojejunostomy tubes. (The reader is encouraged to review
through the stoma. The bumper returns to its original con-
the section on feeding tube selection before proceeding.) We
formation once the stylet is retracted, securing the tube in
encourage the use of the largest luminal diameter PEG and J
place. For PEG-B tubes, the shaft will protrude about 0.5 cm
tubes to minimize mechanical complications and maximize
flexibility in usage. For all described techniques, the PEG tube
   oi ae p a p 
 body wall to allow maximal insertion of the jejunostomy tube.
Retrograde Guidewire Technique
Advance the endoscope through the mouth into the stomach.
 Under endoscopic guidance, pass an endoscopic retrieval
snare through the PEG tube into the stomach and open fully.
Advance the endoscope through the snare and toward the
 Pylorus (Figure 9-14). Reposition the animal in leff lateral
recumbency to facilitate advancement of the endoscope
through the pylorus. Continue advancement ofthe endoscope
into the small intestine as far aspossible; the minimum distance
should be at the level of the distal duodenum. Generously
flush the instrument port of the endoscope with water. Insert
Figure 9-13 A stylet is passed alongside the shaft of a low-profle
the flexible end ofa 0.035-inch (0.89-mm) 260-cm guidewire
gastrostomy tube to extend the mushroom tip for insertion
(Passport Low Profle Gastrostomy Device, Cook Medical,
through the working channel of the endoscope and extend
Bloomington, Ind.). (Photo taken by Greg Hirshoren, @ 2009 The
it to the limit of endoscopic visualization. Carefully retract
University of Tennessee.)
the endoscope to the stomach, leaving the guidewire in place.
CHAPTER 9   Endoscopic Placement of Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy Tubes  ·  323
As the endoscope is slowly withdrawn through the snare,
from the mouth. The endoscopic snare and guidewire are
advance the guidewire to create a large loop with the stomach.
carefully withdrawn through the PEG tube, straightening the
Secure the snare around the guidewire at the approximate
 guidewire loop and creating a U in the wire (see Figure 9-15,
midpoint of the loop (Figure 9-15, A). The goal is to provide
B). After the orad end of the guidewire is identified by careful
just enough redundant wire in the stomach to allow retrieval
tugs on the wires, it is pulled through the esophagus and out
through the PEG tube without dislodging the guidewire from
the PEG tube.
the distal duodenum. (Endoscopic retrieval forceps may also
Lubricate the jejunostomy tube and guidewire per manu-
be utilized to capture the guidewire if a snare is not available.)
facturer's instructions using water, saline, or water-soluble
Remove the endoscope from the gastrointestinal tract, leaving
lubricant. Thread the jejunostomy tube over the guidewire
the endoscopic snare engaged and the guidewire protruding
and through the PEG tube. After the jejunostomy tube enters
the PEG tube, traction is applied to the proximal end of the
guidewire to eliminate looping of the jejunostomy tube during
placement and maximize the depth of aboral placement. (Read-
vancement of the endoscope into the stomach may be useful
to ensure the guidewire is adequately taut before jejunostomy
tube advancement.) When the jejunostomy tube has been fully
advanced over the guidewire and the administration end has
been seated in the PEG tube opening, the guidewire is carefully
 retracted If looping of the jejunostomy tube is noted, the pro-
 cedure should be repeated to ensure the tube is appropriately
seated in the jejunum. Abdominal radiographs should be taken
before recovery to confirm that the tip of the jejunostomy tube
extends distal to the caudal duodenal flexure (Figure 9-16).
Antegrade Guidewire Technique
After PEG tube placement, reposition the endoscope and
advance endoscopic grasping forceps into the stomach.
Figure 9-14 The endoscope is passed from the mouth into
Insert the flexible end of a 0.035-inch (0.89-mm) 260-cm
the stomach. An endoscopic snare is advanced through the
guidewire through the PEG tube into the stomach and
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube, and the
 grasp with the endoscopic forceps. Advance the guidewire,
endoscope is advanced through the snare and aborally as far as 
forceps, and endoscope through the pylorus and aborally to
from fergens AE, Morrison fA, Miles KG: Percutaneous endoscopic
the limit of the endoscope; the minimum distance should be
gastrojejunostomy tube placerment in healthy dogs and cats,IVet
to the distal duodenum. If possible, continue advancement
Intern Med 21:18-24, 2007.)
 of the forceps and guidewire to the limit of endoscopic
A
B
Figure 9-15 A, Once the endoscope has been advanced as shown in the previous figure, a guidewire is advanced through the working channel
a is au u doon lus e aian oipauee ual si amaine au pue panan mos si adossua aui ueznsa jo l al oi
an yanoiu umeipum ayaren are amapina pue aes sidossopua pauaail aui 'g 'aapina at puoe painsas si areus sidossoua
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy ( PEG) tube,creating a Uin the wire as it exits the PEG tube. (Images reprinted with permission from Jergens
AE, Morrison JA, Miles KG: Percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunostory tube placerment in healthy dogs and cats, J Vet Intern Med21:18-24, 2007.)
324 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
0n eroqe aqm auoisounialansea sidossopua snoaueiniad e jo juaased ioaos 'y suensuouap suderoipei esiopouaa gl-a ano
the distal duodenal flexure and B, incorrect placement orad to the distal flexure. (Images reprinted with permission from jergens AE, Morrisor
JA, Miles KG: Percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunostomy tube placement in healthy dogs and cats, J Vet Intern Med 21:18-24, 2007.)
visualization. Alternately, a bronchoscope may be advanced
retracted and the endoscope is slowly withdra wn to prevent
through the PEG tube and into the small intestine to the
tube dislodgement.
limit of the endoscope. With this variation, the guidewire is
fed through the working channel of the bronchoscope for
Repositioning Jejunostomy Tubes
placement in the jejunum. One disadvantage of this variation
 If a jejunostomy tube is partially dislodged or if gastric reflux
is that the distal end of the guidewire is not secured against
of the infused diet is noted, the feeding tube may need to be
orad migration.
repositioned. Advancement ofthe tube without introduction
Lubricate the jejunostomy tube and guidewire per manu
of loops, kinks, or knots is best accomplished with the use
facturer's instructions using water, saline, or water-soluble
 of the antegrade wire-free technique. Alternately, blind
lubricant. Thread the jejunostomy tube over the external
 sis  ad de aq  n
portion of the guidewire while maintaining tension on the
which the indweling jejunostomy tube has a weighted
distal end with the grasping forceps. Once the jejunostomy
tip. Orthogonal radiographs with or without gas or liquid
tube enters the PEG tube, traction is applied to the proximal
 contrast should be performed to confirm proper placement.
end of the guidewire. The presence of gentle traction proxi-
Jejunostomy Tube Removal
mally with distal tension will straighten the guidewire, which
will limit looping of the jejunostomy tube during placement
Jejunostomy tubes are easily removed by application of
and maximize the depth of aboral placement. The distal tip
 steady gentle traction. It is recommended that jejunostomy
of the guidewire is released as the jejunostomy tube reaches
tubes be removed slowly to prevent patient discomfort,
the grasping forceps. After the jejunostomy tube has been
intestinal irritation, and iatrogenic intussusception.
fully advanced over the guidewire and seated in the PEG
tube, the guidewire and endoscope are carefully retracted.
Nasojejunostomy Tube Placement
If looping of the jejunostomy tube is noted, the procedure
should be repeated to ensure that the tube is appropriately
There are two basic techniques for endoscopic nasojejunos-
seated in the jejunum. Abdominal radiographs should be
tomy tube placement. Nasojejunostomy tube placement
taken before recovery to confirm that the tip of the jejunos
may also be performed in the nonanesthetized patient with
tomy tube extends distal to the caudal duodenal flexure.
the use of fluoroscopic guidance, but challenges with ade-
 quate aboral tube advancement limit the usefulness of this
Antegrade Wire-Free Technique
technique.
This technique is very similar to the antegrade guidewire
technique. Instead of a guidewire being placed, the tip of the
Antegrade Technique
jejunostomy tube is directly introduced through the PEG
The jejunostomy tube is lubricated and directly passed
tube. It is secured with grasping forceps in the stomach and
through the ventral nasal meatus, down the esophagus, and
advanced endoscopically into the jejunum until resistance is
 into the stomach just like a nasogastric tube. (This may be
 met or the tube is fully seated. After the jejunostomy tube is
more easily accomplished if a stylet is utilized to stiffen the
 in position and the tip is released, the grasping forceps are
tube.) The endoscope is then advanced into the stomach, and
CHAPTER 9 Endoscopic Placement of Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy Tubes·  325
A
B
Figure 9-17 Nasojejunostomy tube in place with the tip of the tube in the proximal jejunum. A, Lateral radiograph. B, Ventrodorsal
radiograph. A small amount of radiopaque iodinated radiographic contrast material was placed in the tube to better demonstrate its
position.
grasping forceps are used to secure the tip of the jejunostomy
tube. The tube is advanced endoscopically into the jejunum
until resistance is met or the tube is fully seated. After the
jejunostomy tube is in position and the tip is released, the
 grasping forceps are retracted and the endoscope is slowly
withdrawn to prevent tube dislodgement. Abdominal
radiographs should be taken before recovery to confrm that
the tip of the jejunostomy tube extends distal to the caudal
duodenal flexure (Figure 9- 17). If looping of the jejunostomy
tube is noted, the procedure should be repeated to ensure
that the tube is appropriately seated in the jejunum. Once
tube positioning is confirmed, the tube should be secured
with staples or stay sutures (as for a nasoesophageal feeding
tube). An Elizabethan collar should be placed immediately
to prevent premature tube dislodgement.
Hgure 9-18 Lateral radiograph demonstrating the placement of
a nasojejunostomy tube in a Rottweiler. The endoscope is in the
Retrograde Guidewire Technique
proximal duodenum. The guidewire is placed through the channel
Advance the endoscope through the stomach and distally
of the endoscope and into the intestine. The tip of the guidewire is
as far as possible into the small intestine. Generously flush
in the proximal jejunum.
the instrument port of the endoscope with water. Insert the
flexible end of a 0.035-inch (0.89-mm) guidewire through
nasopharynx Grasp the tip of the tube with forceps and pull
the working channel of the endoscope and extend to the limit
the tip rostrally out of the mouth. Thread the proximal end
of endoscopic visualization (Figure 9-18). (It is particularly
of the guidewire through the tip of the transfer tube until it
important that a long [260-cm or greater] guidewire be
 protrudes a few inches out of the other end of feeding tube.
utilized to prevent oral migration of the jejunostomy tube.)
Carefully feed the tube back into the nasopharynx to avoid
 Carefully remove the endoscope, leaving the guidewire in
disruption of the guidewire's position in the jejunum. (Fluo-
place.
roscopic guidance may be useful for preventing dislodge-
Advance a 5F to 12F feeding tube (the transfer tube)
 ment.) Retract the transfer tube from the nose, leaving the
through the ventral nasal meatus and into the caudal
guidewire in place.
326 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Lubricate the exterior of the jejunostomy tube, the
 Insert the tube into the slit of half of the squares. Rotate the
guidewire, and the lumen of the jejunostomy tube per
 remaining squares 180 degrees before applying to the tube
manufacturer's instructions. Thread the jejunostomy tube
 so that the slits rest on opposite sides of the tube. Tape the
over the guidewire and into the jejunum. Traction is applied
to the proximal end of the guidewire to minimize looping of
ioned with orthopedic stockinette is applied to stabilize the
 the jejunostomy tube during placement. When the jejunos-
 gauze (see Figure 9-10). Apply a tape tab to the end of the
tomy tube has been fully advanced, the guidewire is carefully
tube, and secure it to the sweater using a safety pin. Although
retracted. Tube positioning and stabilization are performed
external dressings are not applied to PEG-B tubes, patients
as described for the antegrade technique.
prone to “worrying" their tubes may benefit from application
 Because the retrograde technique requires “backloading"
of a sweater. Elizabethan collars should be used for animals
the guidewire through the nose and the guidewire's place-
with jejunostomy tubes to prevent premature dislodgement.
ment in the jejunum could be potentially dislodged, the
practitioner may be tempted to alter the procedure. Modi-
Feeding and Other Use
fications to this technique generally create more challenges
than they solve. Descriptions follow to protect the reader
Gastrostomy Tube Feeding
from temptation. Risks of dislodgement may be minimized
Feeding through a new PEG tube is generally notinitiated for
 by placement of the transfer tube before installment of the
10 to 12 hours. Although veterinary and human studies have
 guidewire as previously described, but the transfer tube then
shown feeding to be safe as early as 3 hours after placement
 generally interferes with endoscope movement. Preloading
of PEG and OSB tubes,12 underlying diseases, medications,
the guidewire through the nose with the transfer tube so that
and patient factors may drastically influence the rate at which
the proximal end of the wire exits the nose and the distal end
 an individual gastrostomy tract seals. We strongly encourage
exits the mouth seems viable, but then the guidewire can-
performance of a gastrostomy gastrogram as previously
not be passed through the endoscope instrument channel.
described to confirm that the stoma has sealed before
Instead, grasping forceps would have to be used to secure
initiating early feeding or in cases in which the gastrostomy
the wire and guide it down the esophagus while the endosco-
 tract is suspect. Radiographic pneumoperitoneum in the
 pist remained vigilant against iatrogenic esophageal damage
initial postoperative period is not a contraindication to
from the unguarded tip of the guidewire. For these reasons,
feeding and is present in approximately 75% of patients
if nasojejunostomy tube placement is indicated, we prefer
evaluated 3 hours after placement.
use of the antegrade technique.
Animals with prolonged anorexia (greater than 5 to
7 days) or poor body condition are at risk of refeeding syn-
 drome if their maintenance caloric needs are provided too
 TUBE MAINTENANCE AND USE
quickly. During prolonged anorexia, total body stores of
Maintenance
phosphorus, pota ssium, and magnesium are depleted. Addi-
fionally, thiamine stores are exhausted. The shift from cata-
Stoma-site dressings should be removed, and the stoma
bolic tissue breakdown to carbohydrate metabolism during
should be inspected daily for the first week and every other
refeeding results in increased insulin secretion and decreased
 day thereafter. Mild crusting around the stoma is normal.
gluconeogenesis. Circulating glucose concentrations will
The area should be gently flushed with lukewarm, diluted
initialy normalize but may then overwhelm pancreatic and
chlorhexidine (1:10) solution. If the site is inadvertently
 peripheral cell function, which would lead to severe hyper-
cleansed with soap, it should be thoroughly rinsed with
glycemia. Additionally, insulin release stimulates cellular
particular attention to areas of tube contact (e.g, under the
uptake of phosphorus, potassium, magnesium, and thia-
external flange or fixation) so that residual soap does not
 mine. This may result in severe clinical hypophosphatemia
irritate the tissues or stimulate self-tra uma. Erythema, swell-
(causing hemolytic crises, rhabdomyolysis, cardiomyopa-
ing, or discharge at the stoma site warrants more frequent
thy, or seizures), hypokalemia (causing cardiac arrhythmias,
stoma care; antibiotics and antinflammatory medications
refractory hypotension, and myopathies), hypomagnesemia
should be considered. Swelling should be aggressively man-
(causing refractory cardiac arrhythmias or neuromuscular
aged because it increases the risk of ischemic necrosis, tube
derangement), and thiamine deficiency.
 migration, and premature tube dislodgement. Tenderness
 Happily, refeeding syndrome may be avoided through the
may be the first warning sign of cellulitis but also occurs
 gradual reintroduction of food. Maintenance requirements
commonly when larger diameter tubes are placed in cats.
are calculated for the patient. On the first day of feeding, one
Empiric analgesic treatment should be useful in distinguish-
third of maintenance requirements (divided over the course
 ing between mechanical pain and early inflammation.
of the day into three to six feedings) are administered. The
After the area is cleansed and allowed to dry, approxi-
feeding amount is increased by one third each day until the
mately eight 3- × 3-inch gauze squares are applied to pro-
patient is receiving its maintenance caloric requirements
tect the stoma. Position the scissors midway along one edge
o ie suad iog ep rad sua  oi aar iao
of the gauze squares, and cut halfway across to create a slit.
 not initially tolerate feedings, reductions in initial feeding
CHAPTER 9   Endoscopic Placement of Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy Tubes  ·  327
volume with or without increases in feeding frequency may
is increasing. In the most detailed report of bolus jejunal
be necessary. For patients that develop clinical pathologic
feeding, eight healthy dogs and four healthy cats were bolus
signs of refeeding syndrome, increases in caloric intake
fed commercial diets every 8 hours for 14 days. Bolus feed-
may need to be extended over 7 to 10 days instead of the
 ings were well tolerated in all animals. Mild diarrhea or soff
described 4 days. For animals without prolonged anorexia,
stools were noted in two dogs and two cats, respectively. No
maintenance caloric intake often may be fed on the first day
vomiting or evidence of abdominal cramping was noted.
of tube use without complication.
 Clinical use of bolus jejunal feeding was reported in another
Before and after each feeding, PEG tubes should be flushed
study, but the feeding frequency, diet choice, and duration
with approximately 10 mL lukewarm water to prevent clog-
of feeding were not provided. Given the paucity of clinical
ging. Gastrostomy tubes should also be flushed between
 data, we recommend that jejunal bolus feedings initially be
the administration of one medication and the next so that
administered every 4 to 6 hours. Once the patient acclimates
clogging is prevented. If gastroparesis is suspected, residual
to jejunal feeding, the feeding volume may be increased and
gastric contents should be aspirated and quantitated before
the frequency decreased.
 administration of additional feedings so that aspiration is
Nasojejunostomy Tube Feeding
a voided. If a large residual volume is recorded, the scheduled
feeding should be skipped. If repeated large residual volumes
Nasojejunal feeding may be commenced immediately after
are noted, the use of prokinetic agents should be considered.
the patient recovers from anesthesia. The long length and
Additionally, placement of a PEG-J tube may be warranted.
narrow diameter of nasojejunostomy  tubes  necessitate
Chronic aspiration of gastric contents is not recommended
CRI feeding with a liquid diet (see PEG-J tube feeding for
because it may cause significant electrolyte derangements.
 a discussion of recommended diets for CRI feeding). The
 nasojejunostomy tube should be flushed with tepid water a
Gastrojejunostomy Tube Feeding
 minimum of every 4 to 6 hours for prevention of clogging.
Gastrojejunostomy feedings have typically been initiated
within 12 to 24 hours of tube placement, although feeding
■ COMPLICATIONS
within 6 hours of tube placement has been performed
without complication.6 Both CRI and bolus feeding
 Complications associated with endoscopic feeding tube
protocols have been described. Regardless of the feeding
placement may be divided by type (i.e., mechanical versus
 protocol, jejunostomy tubes should be generously flushed
patient-related) or severity (i.e., mild, moderate, or major).
with water 3 to 6 times daily so that clogging is avoided.
Complications are generally classified as minor ifthey pose no
 Medications should not be administered via jejunostomy
 health risk to the patient. Moderate complications interfere
tube. Gastric aspiration as described for PEG tube feeding
with the health of the patient but are non-life-threatening.
should be considered when PEG-J feedings are initiated. If
whereas major complications pose a life-threatening risk to
dietary gastroduodenal reflux is noted, the jejunostomy tube
the patient. See Table 9- 1 for a list of common complications
may be positioned too far proximally in the tract; aboral
of endoscopic feeding tube placement. Specific prevention
advancement may improve dietary tolerance. In cases of
and treatment strategies are also described.
recurrent or persistent reflux, prokinetic agents should be
considered.
PEG Tubes
Monomeric and polymeric liquid diets are most com-
monly recommended for CRI feeding protocols. Pragmati-
 Complications associated with PEG tube placement occur
cally, monomeric diets seem less prone to clog jejunostomy
in roughly 40% to 60% of patients. It was not possible to
tubes but are substantially more expensive than regular
determine overall prevalence rates for individual complica-
diets. Physiologically, monomeric diets are utilized to mini-
tions given reporting differences between studies. Minor and
mize abdominal cramping, vomiting, and diarrhea due to
 moderate complications appear to represent 11% to 33%
diet entry aboral to a large portion of the gastrointestinal
and 38% to 78% of complications, respectively.39 Preva-
tract. The use of larger diameter tubes for PEG-J placement
lence rates for major complications range dramaticall and
appears to have obviated challenges with tube obstruction.
are difficult to interpret because of the inconsistent use of the
One recent report of jejunal feeding of commercial recov
term premature tube removal. Tube removal or dislodgement
ery diets without an increased prevalence of gastrointestinal
before adequate stoma fibrosis (lessthan 10 days) is undoubt-
signs suggests that physiologic constraints may be over-
edly one ofthe most catastrophic complications of PEG tube
stated. It is important to note that this study involved PEG-J
placement. Unfortunately, premature tube removal has also
feeding of healthy dogs and cats. Surveillance for negative
been used to refer to PEG tube removal before the clinician
effects of jejunal feeding is warranted when feeding is initi-
would like but after adequate stoma healing, which is what
ated. If cramping, vomiting, or diarrhea is noted, switching
we might describe as inconvenient tube removal.
 to a monomeric liquid diet may mitigate signs.
Minor complications occurring commonly are pain at
Given the hospitalization and nursing requirements of
the stoma site and mild peristomal swelling, erythema, or
CRI feeding, investigation of jejunal bolus feeding protocols
discharge. Commonly reported moderate complications
328 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
 Table 9-1 Common Complications of Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy (PEG) and Gastrojejunostomy (PEG-J)
Tubes
 Complication
Prevention tips
Recommended treatment
Organ laceration or
 Confirm adequate gastric insufflation
Laparotomy
 perforation
 Confir endoscopic transillurmination irmmediately before
placement
Pneumoperitoneum
 Confirm adequate gastric insufflation 
None generally necessary
Limit overinsufflation after advancement of over-the-needle
catheter into the stomach
Use endoscopic snare to prevent retrograde migration of catheter
 out of the stomach
Confirm appropriate placement of PEG tube intermal bumper
against gastric mucosa
Gastric hemorrhage
Perform coagulation testing in patients at risk of coagulopathy
Identify and treat coagulopathy
Use endoscopic transillumination to avoid gastric vessels
 Monitor for self-resolution 
 Maintain controlled approach when inserting catheter
Laparotormy
 Ischemic necrosis and/or
 Be vigilant in choosing gastrostomy site, particularly in deep-
Surgical correction or closure
tube dislodgement or
sbop patsaup
 peritoneal migration 
Minimize tension on gastric mucosa by intermal bumper
 Carefully measure gastrostomy tract depth when selecting low-
profile PEG tubes
Avoid homemade intermal flanges 
 Use perioperative antibiotics
 Pyloric obstruction
 Be vigilant in choosing gastrostomy site, particularly in deep-
If excess tube is present in stomach,
shop paisaup 
carefully retract tube
 Locate gastrostomy at junction of body and fundus 
If gastrostomy is malpositioned, tube
Minimize protrusion of internal bumper into gastric lumen
removal or surgical correction may be
required
Vomiting and/or delayed
Minimize tube protrusion into gastric lumen
Decrease feeding volume
gastric emptying
Administer prokinetics 
 Increase feeding frequency
Administer prokinetics
Consider PEG-J placerment
Leakage of gastric
 Place gastrostomy site as far dorsally as possible
If leakage is intracorporeal (e.g..
contents at stoma site 
esosnu pseh aun isuiebe sisan l os iadwng ieatui uoisod
peritoneal), surgical correction
(without applying tension)
If leakage is strictly extracorporeal,
reposition tube or replace with a larger
diameter tube
 Patient intolerance or
 Confirn intermal and external bumpers are not applying
 Apply Elizabethan collar
 self-trauma
pressure to gastric mucosa and skin
 Evaluate for cellulitis and treat
 For low-profile PEG tubes, confirm appropriate shaft length 
appropriately
when placing tube
 Experiment with differing bandage
Use perioperative antibiotics to limit cellitis
techniques to minimize tension on the 
 Be aggressive with postoperative analgesia when placing large-
agn
diameter PEG tubes in cats
 Remeasure gastrostomy tract to confirm 
 Be conscientious with stoma and bandage care
shaft is appropriate length, particularly
if intolerance develops in concert with
weight gain
Peristomal cellulitis and/
 Use perioperative antibiotics
Increased frequency of stoma care
 or infection
Create adequate skin incision (1-1.5 cm depending on tube type)
Antibiotics
 before tube placement
 Antinfl armmatories
Limit dermal pressure by extermal retention device
 Perform stoma care daily until fully healed
Clogging of tube
 Place maximal diameter PEG and PEG-J tubes
 Instill carbonated soda to unclog tube
 Flush tubes with water before and after each use
Mechanically unclog using blunt-ended
 Do not administer medications through jejunostomy tubes
stylet
 Train owners on appropriate usage and maintenance of tubes
Assess jejunostommy tubes for kinking.
coiling. and knotting on abdominal
radiographs
CHAPTER 9  Endoscopic Placement of Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy Tubes  · 329
are peristomal cellulitis, ulceration, or infection; vomiting
Patient complications are generally as for PEG tubes and
in association with feeding; premature tube removal (not
include patient chewing, premature tube removal, cellulitis
requiring surgical intervention) and inconvenient tube
at the stoma site, and discharge. Although patients tolerate
removal; and tube malfunction. Because peristomal infec-
PEG-J tubes better than jejunostomy tubes, animals must be
tion remains the most commonly reported complication,
prevented from chewing or biting at the tube insertion site.
it is notable that perioperative antibiotics are not noted
The use of perioperative antibiotics may minimize develop-
 as part of the treatment protocol for any veterinary stud-
 ment of peristomal cellulitis, as may judicious use of analge-
ies in contrast to placement protocols for human patients.
sics to limit self-trauma in response to pain.
Major complications are premature tube removal (requir-
ing surgical intervention), septic peritonitis, and aspiration
Nasojejunostomy Tubes
pneumonia (generally secondary to the primary disease
process). The prevalence of major complications is prob-
To our knowledge, complication rates for nasojejunostomy
ably between 4% and 11% of cases. Mechanical compli-
tubes have not been determined. Anecdotally, the most com-
cations include diffculty with tube use, clogging, leakage
mon complications are patient intolerance, early removal,
from the tube (usually due to failure of the antireflux valve
kinking, clogging, and orad migration. One potential major
 on PEG-B tubes), patient-associated tube damage, and tube 
complication of nasojejunostomy tube feeding is aspiration
failure secondary to design (baloon seam rupture) or fun-
pneumonia. The risk of aspiration pneumonia is increased
 gal colonization.
when the patient is predisposed to tube dislodgement (e.g--
 paroxysmal vomiting) and laterally recumbent or obtunded.
PEG-JTubes
 CONCLUSION
Mechanical and stoma site complication rates of 46% and
77%, respectively, were reported in a prospective study of
 Endoscopic placement of feeding tubes is a minimally inva-
sive and reliable way to provide caloric, fluid, and pharma-
tubes.l0 These are significantly higher than overall complica-
cologic support for dogs and cats. Early identification of
tion rates for jejunostomy tubes of 17.5% and 40% in previ-
patients that may benefit from feeding tubes is increasing as
ous studies, probably reflecting their retrospective nature.,11
clients and veterinarians more fully recognize the many roles
Mechanical complications commonly noted include orad
of feeding tubes in case management and preservation of
tube migration, coiling, kinking, and obstruction. Although
the human-animal bond. Appropriate patient selection and
 a high prevalence of tube obstruction was noted in earlier
tube choice minimize the risks of major complications and
studies, clogging has not been reported in recent studies of
mechanical failure, while new research on tube construction
 gastrojejunostomy or PEG-J tubes. This suggests that the
and placement techniques, feeding protocols, and diet types
utilization of larger diameter tubes may obviate obstruc-
has decreased the overall cost and labor associated with both
tion risks. Orad tube migration, coiling, and kinking may
short- and long-term feeding tube usage. Ongoing clinical
be greatly reduced when longer jejunostomy tubes are used
studies in veterinary patients are indicated to expand our
and initial placement extends distal to the caudal duodenal
understanding of the uses and limitations of different tube,
flexure.
feeding protocol, and diet types.
REFERENCES
1. Hopper K, Beck C, Slocombe RF: Megaoesophagus in adult
5. Crowe DT, Devey JI: Clinical experience with jejunostomy
dogs secondary to Australian tiger snake envenomation, Aust
feeding tubes in47 small animal patients, JVet Emerg Crit Care
Vet J 79:672-675, 2001.
(San Antonio) 7:7-19,1999.
 2. Campbell SJ, Marks SL, Yoshimoto SK: Complications and
6. Jergens AE, Morrison JA, Miles KG: Percutaneous endoscopic
outcomes of one-step low-profile gastrostomy devices for
gastrojejunostomy tube placement in healthy dogs and cats,
long-term enteral feeding in dogs and cats, J Arm Anirm Hosp
J Vet Intern Med 21:18-24, 2007.
Assoc 42: 197-206, 2006.
7. Evans JS、 Thorne M、 Taufiq S: Should single-stage PEG
3. Salinardi BJ, Harkin HR, Bulner BJ: Comparison of
buttons become the procedure of choice for PEG placement in
complications of percutaneous endoscopic versus surgically
children? Gastrointest Endosc 64:320-324, 2006.
iuy uy f 'sies 7s pue sop zt ui saqni Aisoses pased
8. Jain NK, Larson DE, Schroeder KW: Antibiotic prophylaxis
Hosp Assoc 42:51-56, 2006.
for percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy: a prospective,
4. Yoshimoto SK, Marks SL, Struble AL: Owner experiences and
randomized, double-blind clinical trial、 Ann Intern Med
complications with home use of a replacement low profile
107:824-828, 1987.
 gastrostomy device for long-term enteral feeding in dogs, Can
Vet J 47:144-150, 2006.
330 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
9. Ireland LM, Hohenhaus AE,Broussard JD,et al: A comparison
11. Swann HM,Sweet DC,Michel K: Complications associated with
of owner management and complications in 67 cats with
use of jejunostomy tubes in dogs and cats: 40 cases (1989-1994),
esophagostomy and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
J Am Vet Med Assoc 210: 1764-1767, 1997.
feeding tubes J Am Arirm Hosp Assoc 39:241-246, 2003.
12. Yarze JC, Herlihy KJ, Fritz HP: Prospective trial evaluating early
10. Cavanaugh RP, Kovak JR, Fischetti AJ: Evaluation of surgically
initiation of feeding in patients with newly placed one-step button
'saop l! Alesu u saqn supaay Auosounlalansea paed
gastrostomy devices, Dig Dis Sci 46:854-858, 2001
J Am Vet Med Assoc 232:380-388, 2008.
10
CHAPIER
Laryngoscopy and
Tracheobronchoscopy
of the Dog and Cat
Philip A. Padrid
 Endoscopy of the Laryngeal Vault
examination. Preanesthesia laboratory tests are performed as
 indicated by the patient's age, health status, and the good
of the Dog and Cat
ad   aos iosr o 
Laryngoscopy is the visual examination of laryngeal anatomy
 as an emergency diagnostic tool before surgical correction;
and movement for the purpose of evaluating laryngeal func
however, the best results are, of course, obtained when the
tion. The most common symptom oflaryngeal disease in dogs
 procedure is performed in a stable patient.
noe (iops uq asiou amie iaddn si si pue
many symptoms may result from disorders of laryngeal
 PATIENT RESTRAINT
structure or function including exercise intolerance, respira-
AND POSITIONING
tory distress, increased inspiratory effort, prolonged inspi-
ratory time, cyanosis, voice change, loss of bark/purr, and
Laryngoscopy can be performed in a matter of minutes.
coughing after eating or drinking. Laryngoscopy should also
That being said, the patient should nevertheless be examined
 be performed before any bronchoscopic examination.
under a light plane of general anesthesia so that the proce-
dure can be performed in a thorough manner and in a stress-
free environment (for the laryngoscopist!). The patient's
■INSTRUMENTATION
 plane of anesthesia should be deep enough to allow the oral
Laryngoscopy is a technically easy procedure. Any combi-
cavity to be held open without fear that the endoscopist may
nation of instruments can be used as long as adequate illu-
be bitten, but light enough to retain some degree of normal
mination of the larynx is generated, and the epiglottis and
laryngeal function. An animal that has been properly anes-
dorsal pharyngeal wall are kept from the visual field. The vet-
thetized for laryngoscopy still displays a strong gag reflex
erinarian can generally get a good view of the larynx using an
 subsequent to pharyngeal or laryngeal stimulation and will 
 overhead examination light, a penlight, and a laryngoscope.
also demonstrate a rapid withdrawal reflex to deep pain. If
The value of an endoscope is that the light is more focused,
the patient's level of anesthesia allows simple gag-free intu-
the surrounding structures (tongue, epiglottis, and soft pal-
bation, normal laryngeal motion may be altered because of
ate) are minimally displaced, and the veterinarian can obtain
the anesthesia; this is not ideal, but laryngoscopy should still
excellent pictures or movies of the larynx for later exami-
be performed (see later discussion on the use of doxapram).
nation (e.g-, with clients and students). A standard laryngo-
Injectable anesthetics are most typically used for laryn-
scope blade or a common wooden tongue depressor is most
 goscopy. My preference is propofol used to effect. The dose
often used to depress the epiglottis and improve the view of
 of propofol needed to generate a proper plane of anesthesia
the ventral portion of the larynx The real key to successful
commonly ranges from 1 to 4 mg/kg IV. The drug should be
and safe laryngoscopy is to know (1) what normal anatomy
given slowly, over 30 seconds to 2 minutes, to effect. Hypox-
and normal anatomic variations are expected and (2) com-
emia is absolutely predictable, and every patient should receive
mon and predictable complications of the procedure.
supplemental oxygen by mask before and immediately
after the procedure. It is also appropriate to intermittently
 PATIENT PREPARATION
as needed. Atropine or glycopyrrolate should be used as a
Laryngoscopy is most easily performed when the patient
 premedication to prevent bradyarrhythmias that are some-
is lightly anesthetized. Food should be withdrawn for
times induced by laryngeal manipulation and subsequent
6 to 12 hours to minimize the risk of aspiration during the
vagal stimulation. Topical 1% lidocaine may occasionally
331
332 ■ PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
be needed to decrease reflex responses (e.g., laryngospasm,
resulting from unilateral or bilateral laryngeal paresis or
swallowing, or gagging) that may be encountered during the
 paralysis. Laryngeal webbing and granuloma formation both
procedure. This is much more commonly required in the
typically are secondary to previous surgery or trauma. Both
conditions result in stenosis of the glotic lumen, and these
 patient in a sternal recumbent position. A mouth gag should
fixed lesions often cause severe signs of airway obstruction.
be used to facilitate safe oral examination and to ensure good
Less commonly a pharymgeal or larymgeal rannula, tumor,
visualization of the larynx.
or foreign body may be found. (Laryngeal abnormalities are
depicted in Figures 10-3 through 10-17 in the “Atlas" sec-
■ PROCEDURE
tion). The physical characteristics of secretions or blood
should be noted, and the examiner should attempt to deter-
A thorough laryngoscopic evaluation includes a complete
mine the anatomic source of the abnormal fluid accumula-
anatomic examination and an assessment of normal laryngeal
tion. The examiner should recall that secretions (including
function and motion. To begin, care should be taken to gently
blood) found in the region of the larynx might have origi-
depres the epiglottis from the visual field and gently elevate
nated in the trachea, lower airways, or lung parenchyma.
the soft palate, as needed. Forceful maneuvers can inappro-
priately fix the laryngeal cartilages in place and artifactually
Evaluation of Laryngeal Motion
distort otherwise normal laryngeal motion.
As previously stated, a light plane of anesthesia is most
 appropriate to properly evaluate norrmal laryngeal function.
Evaluation of Laryngeal Structure
However, any level of anesthesia with any routine anes-
 Normal structures that should be evaluated during laryngos-
thetic protocol may artifactually distort otherwise normal
copy include the cricoid, thyroid, and arytenoid cartilages
laryngeal motion. Thus, if laryngeal motion, that is, adduc-
(also the corniculate and cuneiform processes), vestibular
fion, abduction, and symmetry of movement, is normal,
folds, vocal folds (cords), laryngeal saccules (lateral ven-
laryngeal paresis or paralysis may be ruled out. However,
tricles), epiglottis, and aryepiglottic folds (Figure 10-1).
if laryngeal motion seems abnormal, doxapram hydro-
Normal mucosa should be pink in color, and superficial
chloride (Dopram-V) 0.5-1.0 mg/kg IV should be adminis-
vessels may be visible. Secretions are minimal in the area of
tered. Within 30 seconds of administration, this medication
the normal laryngeal vault. Mucosal hyperemia and edema,
increases the rate and depth of respiration, and the increased
excessive secretions, and redundant pharyngeal mucosa are
ventilatory effort persists for a few minutes. Doxapram will
commonly encountered abnormalities. If the lumen of the
not make an abnormal larynx function in a normal manner.
 glottis is smaller than normal, the resulting airflow is tur-
Instead, doxapram will override the potentially depressant
bulent rather than laminar. Turbulent airflow is irritating
effects of anesthesia on laryngeal motion. Thus, if the larynx
to mucosa, and this commonly causes at least some of the
 appears abnormal before doxapram and functions normally
 mucosal erythema and edema that is encountered during
during doxapram administration, the endoscopist can rea-
laryngoscopy.
sonably assume that laryngeal function is, in fact, normal.
Common structural abnormalities include everted sac-
Conversely, if laryngeal function remains abnormal after
cules and laryngeal collapse. These abnormalities usu-
 doxapram administration, the endoscopist can reasonably
 ally develop as secondary phenomena as a result of more
conclude that laryngeal function is abnormal. Side effects
 chronic disease and increased negative inspiratory pressures
of doxapram are minimal and include salivation, muscular
tremors (rare), and (uncommonly) vomition.
 Laryngeal motion related to vocalization (e.g-, whining)
or swallowing should not be confused with laryngeal abduc-
tion. Normally the size of the glottic lumen is increased on
-Corniculateprocess
 inspiration by an active abduction of the arytenoid carti-
lages. Complete failure of one or both arytenoid cartilages
Cuneiform process
to abduct (increasing the size ofthe glottic lumen) is defined
Aryepiglotticfold
 as laryngeal paralysis (unilateral or bilateral). Partial failure
of movement is referred to as laryngeal paresis. Paradoxical
 motion (the opposite side is pulled across the midline dur-
ing inspiration) involving the vocal cord or entire arytenoid
cartilage on the affected side is not usually a primary disor-
Vocalfolds
der. This is a form of laryngeal collapse and is generally a
sequela of chronic laryngeal paresis or paralysis. Laryngeal
collapse is a morbid finding because the success of surgery
Epiglottis
designed to permanently abduct one of the arytenoid car-
Figure 10-1 Normal laryngeal anatomy.
tfilages ("lateralization") is decreased; the “nonlateralized"
CHAPTER 10  Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat  ·  333
cartilage and associated vocal fold will tend to move medi-
■ COMPLICATIONS
ally, and the glottic opening may not remain in even a semi-
open position.
A properly performed laryngoscopic examination is a low-
risk procedure. However, the clinician should be aware that
■ ANCILLARY TOOLS AND PROCEDURES
emergencies might occur during and immediately after
laryngoscopy. In a small number of patients, stimulation
Radiographic evaluation of the larynx does not add sig-
 of the larynx may provoke a very strong vagal response that
nificant diagnostic or prognostic information and is not
may result in profound bradyarrhythmias. Administering
routinely advocated as part of the complete evaluation of
anticholinergic medication before anesthesia is induced
laryngeal disorders. A number of investigators have demon-
largely prevents this. Laryngeal mucosal hyperemia and
strated that ultrasound of the larynx may be used to diag-
 edema are commonly encountered in a variety of laryngeal.
nose abnormal laryngeal structure or function. However,
 disorders. The manipulation that occurs during laryngos-
the practitioner will still need to directly visualize the larynx
 copy may cause additional mucosal irritation, edema, and,
to make a proper diagnosis. Tidal breathing flow-volume
 potentially, further narrowing ofthe airway (a complication
loops (TBFVLs) have been used to document the presence
that is more common in cats). This is the most important
of upper airway obstruction (Figure 10-2). However, an
reason why the laryngeal structures should be treated with
abnormal TBFVL still requires laryngoscopy to confirm the
 great respect and should be physically manipulated only as
presence and extent of structural and functional laryngeal
much as is absolutely needed to complete the examination.
disorders. A laryngeal electromyogram or biopsy procedure
dn e sss iee m sd as e u
may be used to delineate a specific cause, but these tests are
airway obstruction may have great difficulty maintaining a
patent airway during the immediate postanesthetic recovery
has been made.
phase. Patients with upper airway obstruction have adapted
Chest radiographs are usually indicated before laryngos-
a breathing strategy that minimizes discomfort. However,
 copy for a few reasons. First, laryngeal disease is commonly a
 in the immediate postanesthetic recovery phase, a semi-
disease of older patients. If surgery to correct abnormalities
aware patient may begin to breathe with increased effort,
of the larymx is being considered, radiographic evaluation
and this lowers the intraglottic pressures. Lowered intra-
 of the thorax will be valuable in the decision to operate or
 glottic pressure increases medial movement ofthe laryngeal
not. Second, patients with laryngeal disease may be force-
 cartilages (adduction) and worsens the airway obstruction.
fully inspiring against a somewhat closed glottic opening.
A vicious cycle develops in which increased airway obstruc-
 Interpretation of the lung pattern seen in these patients
 tion causes panic, increased effort to breathe, and further
will be complicated by underinflation and some degree of
worsening of airway obstruction. Therefore endotracheal
interstitial bleeding caused by negative inspiratory pressure-
and tracheostomy tubes and instruments should be avail-
induced interstitial capillary rupture. These findings will be
able (in suspected cases). If a surgically correctable disor-
valuable in determining the indications for and value and
 der of the larynx is suspected (e.g-, laryngeal paralysis), the
timing of the larymgoscopic procedure.
laryngoscopic examination should be scheduled so that
surgical correction can immediately follow the examina-
 tion, thereby avoiding a second anesthetic procedure.
 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FELINE
AND CANINE LARYNGOSCOPY
The laryngeal vault of dogs and cats are anatomically, grossly
different. Specifically, the corniculate and cuneiform pro-
cesses of the arytenoid cartilages are well developed and are
much more prominent in dogs than in cats. Furthermore,
mucosa lining the feline laryngeal vault becomes edematous
 after manipulations that cause no edema in canine patients.
This edematous response may be dramatic and can result in
serious airway obstruction (see Figure 10-5 in the “Atlas"
section). The feline larynx may respond to light touch with
A
Normal
B ]  Laryngeal paralysis
spasm, further occluding the upper airway. For these reasons
Figure 10-2 A tidal breathing flow-volume loop (TBFVL) from a
it is critical to place a few drops of 1% lidocaine on the surface
working-breed dog presented for decreased exercise ability during
of the feline laryngeal structures before laryngoscopy is per-
hunting. A, Note the loop shape in a normal dog. B, The loop
formed. It is also important for the operator to be very gentle
shape on inspiration (arrow) is flattened. (From Amis TC, et al:
Upper airway obstruction in canine laryngeal paralysis, Am J Vet
when manipulating this area.
Res 47:1008, 1986).
334·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr larynGOscOPy paGes
334-338
LARYNGEAL EDEMA
 Figure 10-8, p. 335, Saccular edema
Hgure 10-13, p. 337, Laryngeal granuloma
 Figure 10-3, p. 334, Laryngeal edema in a
 and eversion in a cat
in a dog.
Figure 10-14, p. 337, Vocal fold tear in
Hgure 10-4, p. 334, Laryngeal edema in a
adog
LARYNGEAL COLLAPSE
cat with smoke inhalation injury
Figure 10-9, p. 336, Laryngeal collapse in
Hgure 10-5, p. 335, Severe laryngeal edema 
 a dog with exercise intolerance
LARYNGEAL NEOPLASIA
 in a cat due to traumatic intubation 
Figure 10-10, p. 336, Partial laryngeal
Figure 10-15, p. 338, Undifferentiated
collapse in a dog with noisy breathing
carcinoma in a cat
LARYNGEAL FOREIGN BODIES
Figure 10-11, p. 336, Laryngeal collapse 
Figure 10-16, p. 338, Lymphoma in a cat
Hgure 10-6, p. 335, String foreign body
in a dog with exercise intolerance and
Figure 10-17, p. 338, Squamous cell
 in a dog with acute gagging
loss of bark
carcinoma in a dog
Figure 10-18, p. 338, Thyroid carcinoma
LARYNGEAL SACCULITIS
NONNEOPLASTIC GROWTHS
causing significant airway obstruction
in a dog
Hgure 10-7, p. 335, Everted laryngeal
Figure 10-12, p. 337, Vocal fold granu-
 saccules in a dog with noisy breathing
loma in a dog
ATLAS FOR LaRYNGEAL E
EDEMA
A
B
Hgure 10-3 A 12-year-old female spayed domestic short hair was evaluated for change in the
quality of the “meow." A, Profound laryngeal edema was found; however, no cause was determined.
The patient's signs improved but were not completely resolved after treatment with oral and inhaled
corticosteroids. B, Normal feline larynx for comparison.
Hgure 10-4 A 2-year-old spayed female
Siamese cat was seen 3 weeks after smoke
 inhalation. The majority of signs were
resolved; however,the cat continued to have
noisy breathing. Edema is present at the
ventral margin of the laryngeal vault (arrows).
CHAPTER 10
Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat ·  335
Figure 10-5 A, Severe laryngeal edema
and obstruction that developed within
 5 minutes of a traumatic attempt at
 intubation in a 4-year-old domestic short 
F
hair cat. B, Normal feline larynx for
comparison.
AtLAS FOR
 fOreIGn bOdIes
Figure 10-6 A4-year-old spayed female
Springer Spaniel was seen for acute signs
of gagging. A string (yellow structure) was
found circumferentially around the dorsal
 and lateral margins of the larynx. The owner
later determined that the string was from a
recent pot roast served for dinner the previous
evening.
Atlas fOr larynGeal SaCculitiS
Figure 10-7 A 6-year-old neutered male Bijon Friese was
presented for noisy breathing. The saccules are everted and
Hgure 10-8 Saccular edema and eversion in a cat.
edematous and obstruct more than 75% of the glottic lumen.
Surgical removal of the saccules was successful; however, the
laryngeal cartilages and associated vocal folds were then found
to adduct on inspiration (laryngeal collapse). This was likely the
cause of the saccular eversion.
336·PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
AtlAS fOR
 LarYNGeal COllaPSe
Figure 10-9 A 5-year-old intact male German shorthaired pointer
was presented for exercise intolerance. The arytenoid cartilages
 and vocal folds adducted bilaterally on inspiration.
Hgure 10-10 Partial laryngeal collapse in a 12-year-old Labrador
retriever with a 6-month history of noisy breathing. Only partial
 bilateral abduction of the arytenoid cartilages occurs during
maximal inspiration. The left vocal fold is visible in the lumen
of the normally clear laryngeal opening. Note also hyperemia,
Excessive secretions, and edema distributed throughout the
laryngeal vault.
B
Hgure 10-11 A 10-year-old neutered male Labrador retriever was presented for exercise
intolerance and loss of bark. A, The vocal folds adducted on inspiration and the arytenoid cartilages
were fixed in place during inspiration and expiration during tidal breathing. B, All structures
sedated and placed in oxygen and recovered uneventfully from the procedure.
CH APTER 1 0  Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat
LEE
AtlaS FOr NONNeOPLaStIC GrOwtHs
Figure 10-12 Vocal fold granuloma in a 6-year-old Boxer. The
Hgure 10-13 Laryngeal granuloma in a dog presented for noisy
dog's owners had noticed a gradual change in the quality of the
breathing 4 months after a “de-barking" surgical procedure.
animal's bark.
Hgure 10-14 Vocal fold tear in an 8-year-old Yorkshire terrier
presented for chronic intermittent coughing, gagging, and change
in quality of bark. Resection of the tear resulted in resolution of
symptoms. The cause of the tear was not determined.
338·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
Atlas fOr LaryNGeal NeOPLasIa
Hgure 10-16 A 2-year-old neutered male domestic short hair was
Figure 10-15 A 6-year-old spayed female domestic short hair
with a 2-month history of noisy breathing and raspy quality to
evaluated for gagging, choking, and weight loss. The patient was
the “meow." The mass(arrow) was growing lateral to the left
referred from a shelter. The mass completely distorts the normal
arytenoid laryngeal cartilage, forcing the cartilage medially. The
diagnosis was undifferentiated carcinoma.
The patient's results were positive for feline leukemia virus, and
the histologic diagnosis was lymphoma.
Figure 10-17 A 14-year-old spayed female mixed breed hunting
 dog was seen for severe exercise intolerance and absence of bark.
A mass was found that obstructed more than 75% of the glottic
lumen. The histologic diagnosis was squamous cell carcinoma.
Hgure 10-18 Thyroid carcinoma causing significant airway
obstruction and exercise limitation in an 8-year-old terrier.
Tracheobronchoscopy of the
Dog and Cat
B0X10-1
 In 1904 Dr. Chevalier Jackson developed the frst rigid bron-
 Indications for Tracheobronchoscopy
choscope; however, it took 64 more years (1968) before
fiberoptic bronchoscopy became part of clinical pulmonary
Acute cough for which an inhaled foreign body is the 
 medical practice in human medicine. Over the past 20 years,
suspected cause
Chronic cough that has an unknown cause or does not
respiratory endoscopy has also become an important diag-
respond to standard therapy
nostic technique in the practice of high-quality veterinary
Unexplained lung infiltrate
 medicine. Before the development of the bronchoscope, vet-
Unexplained abnormal breathing patterm
erinary patients with clinical signs referable to the respiratory
Confirmation and staging of tracheal collapse
system were evaluated with the techniques of chest ausculta-
Staging of chronic bronchitis, including the presence 
tion, thoracic radiography, and transtracheal washing. Bron-
and degree of airway collapse
choscopy advanced our ability to examine these patients;
Distinction of cardiac disease from respiratory disease as
with a bronchoscope we can better understand the nature,
a cause of cough by demonstration of left mainstem bron-
vascularity, extent, and distribution of many pathologic
chial collapse
changes in airway wall structure and function. A microbi-
Stridor not explained by laryngoscopic findings
Diagnosis and staging of primary or metastatic pulmo-
ology brush can be easily passed into areas of focal infec-
nary neoplasia
tion without contamination of “healthy” sites, which avoids
Rermoval of mucoid obstruction in atelectatic lung lobes
a common complication that can occur during unguided
transtracheal or bronchopulmonary washing through an
endotracheal tube. Exfoliated cells from primary or meta-
static neoplastic lesions can be identified with the technique
the morphology and distribution of cells that line individual
of bronchoalveolar lavage, which has made it possible to
lung segments, and the retrieved samples can be processed
stage and treat cancer more effectively. Left atrial compres-
to include total and differential counts of the cells obtained.
sion of a mainstem bronchus can be identified, which can
Bronchoscopy itself has no specific contraindications.
help confrm the presence of cardiomegaly as a cause of
However, the procedure should not be performed in patients
 coughing and can help distinguish cardiac- and respiratory-
that are not candidates for general anesthesia. Importantly,
related disorders. The general experience of most clinicians
all standard bronchoscopes are larger in diameter than sta n-
who use bronchoscopy in their practices of veterinary medi-
dard endotracheal tubes used for cats; therefore bronchos-
cine and surgery can be summarized in one line: *How did
copy in the feline patient must be done with great speed
we ever get along without it?"
 and skill to avoid predictable hypoxemia and respiratory
compromise.
■INDICATIONS
INSTRUMENTATION
The two most frequent indications for performing bronchos-
copy in veterinary patients are (1) acute or chronic cough
Both rigid and flexible bronchoscopes are available for use
that is unanticipated or unresponsive to standard medical
 in veterinary patients. The flexible scope is most commonly
therapy and (2) unexplained radiographic infltrates (Box
used; however, rigid bronchoscopy is still indicated in the
10-1). Bronchoscopy can also be invaluable in distinguishing
following situations:
cardiac from respiratory causes of a cough and for staging
1. Very small patients (e.g-, cats, toy-breed dogs) for whom
metastatic lung cancer. Tracheobronchoscopy should also
the tracheal lumen is smaller than the smallest commonly
be considered in veterinary patients with noisy breathing or
used flexible bronchoscope
stridor for which laryngoscopy fails to confrm the cause.
 2. When the area of interest is the trachea and carina (except
Bronchoscopy is particularly valuable in collecting sam-
 in large or giant breeds)
ples for microbiological, cytologic, and histologic analysis.
 3. When photographic quality needs to be enhanced
Tracheobronchial biopsy is primarily performed to obtain a
Bronchoscopes used to evaluate adult human patients
histologic diagnosis for abnormal endobronchial growths or
are 4.8 to 5.2 mm in outer diameter, have a 2.0-mm inner
 parenchymal infltrates. Microbiological sampling of infected
channel diameter, and are between 55 and 60 cm in length.
Bronchoscopes specifically designed for veterinary patients
 scopic guidance because the sampling brush can be directed
can also be found with longer lengths. These scopes can be
 into specific areas of interest. This technique offers the best
used to completely evaluate the respiratory tree in medium-
chance of retrieving diagnostic samples and minimizes the
to large-sized dogs. As previously noted, cats and small (toy)
risk of cross-contamination of less involved sites, as can
dogs are more safely evaluated with smaller diameter rigid
Occur when nonspecific washing techniques are used. Bron-
instruments. Alternatively, bronchoscopes designed for
choalveolar lavage is a technique that can be used to assess
 use in children may be used in smaller veterinary patients.
340 · PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Table 10-1 Dimensions of Flexible and Rigid Instruments for Use in Tracheobronchoscopy in Dogs and Cats
Bronchoscope
Outer diameter
Working length
Inner channel
Up deflection
Down deflection
(ww)
(cm)
(ww)
(degrees)
(degrees)
Flexible
5
55 or 85
2
180
80
Flexible
3.7
54
1.2
180
80
Flexible
2.5
100
1.2
170
90
Rigid
2.7
53
None
None
None
Rigid
1.7
34
None
None
None
Flexible pediatric instruments are generally 3.5 to 3.7 mm in
 heart disease as the cause of clinical signs. In some universi-
outer diameter, have a 1.2-mm inner channel diameter, and
ties, additional pulmonary function tests may be available
are 40 to 60 cm in length. However, the smaller channel of
 and appropriate, including measurement/analysis of total
these pediatric instruments prevents passage of commonly
lung resistance, dynamic compliance, and TBFVLs. These
 used ancillary tools, including biopsy forceps and culture
last series of tests are not required for the safe evaluation of a
and/or cytology brushes. Specific dimensions of instruments
 patient scheduled for bronchoscopy.
designed for bronchoscopy are summarized in Table 10-1.
Special precautions are required for endoscopy in patients
 Bronchoscopy is most safely performed in intubated
with upper airway obstruction from such causes as a poste-
 u ae  a s pn amie ie os s
 rior pharyngeal polyp, elongated and thickened soft palate,
 emergency. There are two general limitations to this golden
laryngeal paralysis or paresis, and tracheal mass or collapse.
rule. First, smaller patients cannot always be intubated with
These patients tend to wake up with a vague increased aware-
 endotracheal tubes that are large enough to allow passage of
ness oftheir preexisting airway obstruction and consequently
the scope through the lumen of the tube. Second, giant breed
adopt a very aggressive inspiratory breathing strategy. This
dogs have very long respiratory trees, and in these patients
leads to further upper airway collapse and a vicious cycle that
the presence of an endotracheal tube may limit the length to
may necessitate tracheostomy. These patients must be very
which an endoscope can be extended into the tracheobron-
closely and aggressively monitored until they are fully awake.
chial tract. Specifically, in these animals the standard adult
If an endotracheal tube is placed, it should not be removed
 bronchoscope is not long enough to reach past the carina
until the awakening patient is forcefully attempting to cough
if the scope is first passed through an endotracheal tube.
it out. In some cases these patients will benefit from the use
Therefore, bronchoscopy may need to be performed with-
of short-acting sedatives to minimize the immediate posta n-
out an endotracheal tube so that the bronchoscope can be
 esthetic panic that is common in this setting.
advanced farther into the airways. Alternatively, these ani-
 mals may be evaluated with the use of a pediatric gastroscope
Oxygen
with an outer diameter of 7.8 to 9 mm, an inner channel
diameter of 2 to 2.8 mm, and a length of 100 to 150 cm.
 Patients should always be given 100% oxygen for 10 to 15
minutes before tracheobronchoscopy and again for 10 to 15
 PATIENT PREPARATION
minutes after the procedure. This prevents the hypoxemia
that routinely develops in animals that are not oxygenated
 Tracheobronchoscopy requires the induction and main-
before respiratory endoscopy. Oxygen may be delivered
tenance of general anesthesia. Bronchoscopy can uncom-
through an endotracheal tube or by a tight-fitting facemask.
monly induce vagally mediated bradycardia. With this
In patients that are not intubated, there are also a few easy
exception, the risk of bronchoscopy is equivalent to the risk
ways to administer oxygen during the tracheobronchos-
 of anesthesia itself. This is not a trivial issue. Most patients
 copy procedure. The clinician may deliver 1 to 2 L/m of
for whom bronchoscopy is being contemplated are symp-
100% oxygen through the biopsy channel of the endoscope.
tomatic for a respiratory-related disorder, and anesthesia is
Alternatively, oxygen flow may be delivered through a sepa-
generally considered to be high risk in this patient group.
 po jaaat au oi adossua au apisuoe passed aqni aiei
Thus, the evaluation of patients undergoing bronchoscopy
carina. Urinary catheters ranging in size from 3F to 8F are
should include a measure of oxygen exchange in addition
 most commonly used for this purpose.
to tests that are routinely performed in patients undergo-
ing anesthesia and may include a complete physical exami-
Previously Prescribed Medications
nation, a complete blood count, serum chemistry profle,
urinalysis, thoracic radiographs, and either pulse oximetry
Many patients scheduled for tracheobronchoscopy are
or arterial blood gas evaluation. In some patients a cardiac
being treated with medications to treat the presumed dis-
ultrasound examination is also indicated to rule out primary
ease for which tracheobronchoscopy is being considered.
CHAPTER 10  Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat  ·  341
The primary factors in deciding to continue or discon-
should determine the techniques used in this and all anes-
tinue these medications are the clinical status of the patient
thetic cases. Rapidly cleared gas anesthetics are generally safe
and the suspected underlying disorder(s). For example, if
because of the quick recovery time involved.
 infection is suspected and the endoscopist anticipates tak-
 Experienced bronchoscopists may complete a thorough
ing airway secretions for culture, most references suggest
 endoscopic evaluation and sampling of the respiratory tract
that antibiotics should be discontinued for 72 hours before
in 10 minutes. In stable patients it is not always necessary
sample collection. However, if the infection is severe and/or
to intubate the patient, and a short-acting injectable anes-
the endoscopist is concerned that the patient's clinical status
thetic may be adequate. For some practitioners the advan-
may deteriorate, then medications should be continued. In
tage of using injectable anesthesia is the speed of recovery of
this instance the interpretation of samples for microbiologi-
the patient. Additionally, in nonintubated patients there is
cal analysis will need to be made in the context of concurrent
increased airflow available because an endotracheal tube is
antibiotic treatment. The golden rule is to do no harm, and
not in place and does not further decrease airway diameter.
 common sense needs to prevail in every case.
However, for the new endoscopist it is usually wise to place
an endotracheal tube before bronchoscopy. The advantage
Bronchodilators
of this approach is that the airway is protected if the health
of the patient deteriorates during the procedure. A T-piece
Bronchoscopy will predictably induce bronchospasm. This
adapter is placed between the anesthesia tubing and the
e a u  a ae s na 
endotracheal tube so that the endoscopist can simultane-
species; conversely bronchospasm can be life threatening in
ously pass the endoscope into the respiratory tract (Figure
feline patients. Cats with suspected bronchial disease should
10-19). Practitioners need to remember that a standard
be pretreated 15 minutes before tracheobronchoscopy is
bronchoscope with a 5-mm outer diameter requires at least
 performed with terbutaline 0.01 mg/kg (0.005 mg/lb) subcu-
a 7F endotracheal tube so that adequate airflow can be main-
taneously or intramuscularly or with albuterol by inhalation.
 tained within the tube and around the bronchoscope.
For the reasons previously discussed, smaller dogs and
cats should be evaluated with a pediatric (3.5-mm outer
Topical Lidocaine
diameter) bronchoscope, with or without prior endotracheal
Lidocaine (1% without epinephrine) should be applied to
intubation (4.5F or greater). If intubation is not planned,
the larynx of all cats. This may be accomplished with the use
supplemental oxygen can be administered through the biopsy
of a 1-mL syringe and a 26-gauge needle to gently spray a
channel of the endoscope or through a tube passed alongside
drop onto the larynx before an endotracheal tube or bron-
the scope into the trachea, as previously mentioned.
choscope is inserted. Lidocaine should also be applied to
the trachea of all dogs and cats undergoing tracheobron-
PATIENT RESTRAINT
choscopy. This can be accomplished by spraying lidocaine
AND POSITIONING
(≤0.5 mL in cats) through the vocal folds with the use of
endoscopic or laryngoscopic visualization. The endoscopist
Tracheobronchoscopy of dogs and cats is always performed
should then wait 5 minutes before proceeding with endos-
with the use of general anesthesia. The position of the patient
copy. Remember, the procedure of tracheobronchoscopy
is determined by the preference and previous experience of
is fundamentally the process of sticking a tube down the
windpipe, and nature has provided mammalian species with
powerful cough reflexes to minimize the invasion of a for-
eign object into the respiratory tract. Pretreatment with lido-
caine minimizes tracheal sensitivity and the cough reflex; it
also decreases the level of general anesthesia required for the
procedure.
 SPECIFIC ANESTHETIC
RECOMMENDATIONS
A number of different and sophisticated protocols have been
developed and advocated for anesthetizing patients with
respiratory compromise. It is well worth the time needed to
become proficient in their use. Interestingly, for most prac-
titioners the best method of anesthetizing a patient for respi-
ratory endoscopy is the method that is most commonly and
Hgure 10-19 T-piece adapter for endotracheal tube. This
adapter allows the flexible bronchoscope to be inserted through
safely used by the practitioner who is responsible for admin-
the endotracheal tube without disrupting the simultaneous
istering the anesthesia. Common sense and good judgment
administration of anesthetic gas and oxygen.
342 ·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
the endoscopist. In almost all cases, it is easiest and safest
okay to withdraw the scope to the level of the carina to
to perform a complete tracheobronchial evaluation of the
reestablish position in the bronchial tree. Once the tip of
the bronchoscope approaches the carina, I examine each
comfort the patient's ventral neck should be supported with
lobar bronchi in the following order: right cranial, right
 a rolled towel. The mouth is kept open by insertion of a
middle, accessory, right caudal, leff cranial subsegment,
metal speculum (Figure 10-20).
left caudal subsegment, leff caudal lobe (Figure 10-21).
There is no magic attached to this order; the key is to do it
PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION
the same way each time to maximize the opportunity for a
IS NOT A SIGNIFICANT CONCERN
thorough and complete evaluation of all reachable airway
segments every time.
The endoscopist should learn to travel the tracheobronchial
 The segmental and smaller branches of many lobar bron-
tree in the same direction, from one specific lobe to the next,
chi have a similar appearance. If the bronchoscopist is not
in the identical order in each patient. This makes it easier to
sure of the exact position of the bronchoscope tip, the scope
remember the anatomic location from moment to moment.
should again be withdrawn to the carina and positioned so
The bronchoscope should always be passed in a nontrau-
that the tracheal membrane is dorsal. The bronchoscope can
matic fashion through the rimma glottis (between the vocal
then be repositioned into the area of interest. This maneuver
folds) with complete visualization. A significant number of
should be repeated as many times as necessary to confirm
patients undergoing tracheobronchoscopy have concurrent
the position of the instrument within the respiratory tree.
laryngeal disease; for this reason a thorough laryngoscopic
Few situations in respiratory medicine are more frustrating
evaluation should precede bronchoscopy. If the endoscope
than visualizing a discrete bronchial lesion during bronchos-
is passed through an endotracheal tube, a small amount of
copy, withdrawing the bronchoscope for the placement of
lubricating jelly (K-Y or the equivalent) should be placed
ancillary tools such as biopsy forceps, and then not being
on the outside of the instrument. This makes it easy to slide
able to find the lesion again. This situation can be prevented
the instrument within the endotracheal tube and minimizes
if the bronchoscopist is always familiar with bronchoscopic
trauma to the bronchoscope.
anatomy and aware of the anatomic position of the scope
The trachea is first evaluated for color, vascularity,
within the pulmonary tree.
rigidity, size, and position and movement of the dor-
sal membrane. The bronchoscope is advanced toward
■ PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION
the carina while the tip is maintained directly within the
IS A CONCERN
lumen of the trachea. If the bronchoscopist loses sight of
the carina, the endoscope should not be advanced until the
When focal infection is a concern, there is some disagree-
carina is again located. If there is any question about the
ment among bronchoscopists regarding the order in which
specific location of the tip of the endoscope, it is always
airway segments should be evaluated. The advantage of visit-
ing the infected area first is the decreased chance of sample
contamination by colonizing bacteria from noninfected
areas. The advantage of placing the bronchoscope in the
 infected area last is the decreased chance of carrying infec-
tious material to other areas of the bronchial tree. I believe
that the preeminent rule is “frst do no harm." Thus, I prefer
to visit the infected area as the last step before removing the
bronchoscope from the patient.
 NORMAL APPEARANCE
The normal canine airway generally does not contain mucus
 or free fluids of any kind. The mucosa is pink and glistening.
A fine network of submucosal vessels is easily seen unless the
mucosa is edematous or covered with mucus. The tracheal
rings are also easilyidentified. The dorsal tracheal membrane
is tight, does not protrude into the lumen of the trachea, and
 may extend past the carina and blend into either or both of
the mainstem bronchi (see Figure 10-25 in “Atlas" section).
Figure 10-20 Proper position of endoscopist and patient for
The smaller intrathoracic airways tend to widen and nar-
bronchoscopy. Note that the dog is in a sternal recumbent
row very slightly on inspiration and expiration, respectively,
position and square to the table to prevent distortion of normal
anatomic relationships. The bronchoscopist is seated to avoid
and the timing and degree of these shape changes should
fatigue.
be noted.
CHAPTER 10
 Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat · 343
 Normal airway mucosa in cats has a yellowish tinge (see
- s m ((s ,  -oe a a
Figure 10-26 in “Atlas" section). Importantly, it is common
lapse, mucosal erosion may be seen in the areas where the
to find small amounts of mucus in otherwise healthy feline
dorsal membrane comes into contact with the ventral floor
airways. (This mucus would be considered a sign of inflam-
of the trachea.
mation in canine airways.)
More chronic inflammatory processes, including para-
sitic infection with Osleri osleri nematodes or chronic bron-
 ABNORMAL APPEARANCE
chitis, may cause the formation of nonneoplastic polyps or
nodules (see Figure 10-30 in “Atlas” section). These tissues
Mucosal inflammation from any cause tends to result in
are usually friable and therefore bleed easily if touched by the
 various degrees of hyperemia, edema, and mucous secretion.
tip of the bronchoscope or an ancillary instrument. Chronic
The presence of hyperemia alone can be due to a cough from
inflamed airways may contain large amounts of thick tena-
any cause, and the finding of increased mucosal reddening
 cious mucus, which in rare cases may result in mucous plugs.
This is seen more commonly in cats with asthma. In severe
lapse that results in coughing typically causes general hyper-
cases, scarring and mucus may lead to total obliteration of
emia. During a normal cough the tracheal lumen may narrow
an airway. Airway collapse is another common finding in
transiently by as much as 75%, and this finding should not
 chronic inflammatory airway disease in the canine species.
be interpreted as a sign of tracheal collapse. However, dur-
(Inflammatory lesions are depicted in Figures 10-31 through
ing normal expiration the tracheal lumen should be unaf-
10-35 in the “Atlas" section.)
fected. Dogs with tracheal collapse often have a weakened or
 Pulmonary fungal infections or neoplasia can cause
flaccid dorsal tracheal membrane that intrudes into the tra-
-unq paznsia aq ae s "saou d r plea
cheal lumen during passive inspiration. This flaccid mem-
choscopically as a distortion of normal anatomy (see Fig-
brane may occlude part or all of the lumen of the trachea
ure 10-36 in “Atlas" section). An enlarged left atrium from
Accessory
lobe
Right
RB4V2
LB2V2
RB4D2
Left
caudal-
LB2D2
RB4V1
LB2V1
caudal
lobe
RB4D1
LB2D1
lobe
Right
RB2C1
middle
RB
RB3
LB1V1b
RB2
LB1V1
LB1V1a
Left
RB1D1
RPB
cranial
Right
RB1V1-
RB
LB1D1
lobe
cranial<
RB1V2
LBIV2
lobe
LRB1D2
LBID2
B
Trachea
Figure 10-21 Tracheobronchial anatomy. The respiratory tree is a series of connected, branching tubes that serve to conduct air into and out
ofthe respiratory exchange units (alveoli). Because the multiple airway branches arborize into thousands of small respiratory bronchioles,
the task oflearning tracheobronchial anatomy may seem overwhelming. In practice, however,the bronchoscopist need only learn the names
and appearances ofthe seven majorlung segments. In almost all cases,disease or pathology localized to a particular lung segment with
radiography can be confirmed and explored bronchoscopicall ifthe endoscopist learns the appearance of the entrance to these seven lung
lobes.Because the trachea is long, wide,and straight,it is an easy area to navigate with an endoscope. However once the mainstem bronchi
are entered, even the experienced bronchoscopist can become confused about the particular branch or airway segment. If uncertainty exists
regarding the placement ofthe bronchoscope,the endoscopist should retract the instrument to the carina so that the tracheal membrane
an auensuoap ueouuanq ueuei  panaua juaasqns pue juaas syiads au suiou uee unaq uaun pue iesio s!
vast arborization ofthe canine respiratory tree. (The canine and feline respiratory trees are basically identical.) B, Diagram of the canine
 s  a  a u saq d e (q r) sq  ad uaaas a us aann sam
McKiernan BC:Systematic identification of endobronchialanatomy during bronchoscopy in the dog,Am J Vet Res 47:2649,1986.)
344 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
congestive heart failure may also cause a characteristic dis-
a concentration of less than 104 colony-forming units
tortion of normal airway architecture as it compresses only
(CFU)/mL is believed to represent nonpathologic coloniza-
the left mainstem or lobar bronchus without affecting other
tion, and antibiotic therapy is not recommended. Healthy
cats and dogs may harbor an aerobic bacterial population
Tracheobronchial foreign bodies are found and removed
within their mainstem bronchi at a concentration of as high
more often than they are reported in the veterinary litera-
as 103 CFU/mL. In practice, quantitative cultures can be
ture. This is especially true in warmer climates where plant
obtained with a disposable loop with a 0.01-mL volume for
material, including foxtail grass, is frequently inhaled by
collection (American Diagnostics, Pendleton, Ind.). Alterna-
hunting dogs. In the majority of cases this plant material
tively, the clinical significance of a positive culture result can
is likely quickly coughed up and expelled without apparent
 be inferred from growth obtained on a primary culture plate
complications. Occasionally, however, foxtails or blades of
(if growth is ≥104 CFU/mL, infection is indicated) or if the
other grasses become trapped within the respiratory tree and
airway material was subcultured in enrichment broth such as
cause acute, explosive coughing. Entrapped plant material
thioglycolate (≤103 CFU/mL indicates commensal growth).
should be suspected in any dog that has an acute, explosive
cough and has recently been in a field or woody environment
Cytology
d on uoe un (uonoas (sv, u se-ii aiie aa)
material, I have discovered and removed unusual objects,
Transtracheal washing was a technique developed in humans
including rocks and sewing pins, from the airways of both
to collect airway secretions for culture. The primary advan-
dogs and cats (see Figure 10-39 in “Atlas" section).
tage of this technique was the avoidance of contamination
by oropharyngeal flora. In the original description of this
technique, cytologic evaluation of the collected material was
■ ANCILLARY TOOLS AND PROCEDURES
never mentioned. When transtracheal washing was later
Culture
developed for veterinary patients, cytology was for the first
time suggested as a benefit of the collection procedure. Air-
Most dogs and cats with chronic signs of coughing, gagging, or
way secretions from normal dogs were used as a baseline to
expiratory difficulty that are otherwise systemically well do not
evaluate material collected from dogs with signs of respira-
have clinically significant respiratory bacterial infections. Nev-
tory disease. Interestingly and in contrast, healthy cats were
ertheless, bacteria may be found in material obtained from the
never used to develop normal values. This bit of history is
tracheobronchial tree of these patients. This apparent paradox
helpful in understanding the use of airway cytology in the
is easily explained by the finding that the tracheobronchial tree
evaluation of our patients with respiratory conditions.
of many species, including the dog and cat, is not routinely
 Cytology of respiratory tract fluid is most helpful for con-
sterile. As in almost all situations in clinical medicine, culture
frming the presence of suspected infectious organisms or
results should be interpreted in light of the patient's clinical
exfoliated neoplastic cells. It is much less helpful for diag-
history, physical signs, and other diagnostic test results.
nosing the cause of noninfectious inflammation of the lower
When infectious bacterial airway disease is suspected, air-
airway and, in fact, was never meant for this purpose, as pre-
way secretions should be cultured for aerobic bacteria and
viously described. There are at least three reasons for this.
Mycoplasma spp. (cats only). When a patient's radiographic
 First, alveolar macrophages are the predominant cell found
signs and travel history are consistent with a fungal infec-
 in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from healthy dogs and cats,
tion, cultures should also be obtained. The exception to this
and they do not reflect granulomatous inflammation. Addi-
suggestion is possible infection with Coccidioides immitis.
tionally, eosinophils (cells that might reflect inflammation in
In cultures, C. immitis develops mycelia, which are highly
other body fluids) are commonly found in high numbers in
infectious and therefore represent a public health hazard.
otherwise “normal" cats (Figure 10-23). Finally, total and dif-
The guarded microbiology brush (Microvasive, Natick, Mass.)
ferential cell counts are not routinely determined from airway
is an alternative to the transtracheal wash for retrieving airway
fluids. This makes interpretation of noninfectious and non-
material for culture. The brush is designed to pass through the
neoplastic cytologic findings more subjective (e.g-, relatively
biopsy port (2-mm diameter) of a previously positioned adult
 large number of neutrophils) and diffcult to interpret.
(5-mm outer diameter) bronchoscope (Figure 10-22). The
Cytology brushes designed for use in humans with respi-
inside brush is extruded, gently passed into the region of sus-
 ratory disease are made to sample endobronchial cells, or
 pected infection, and resheathed. It is then withdrawn from the
cells that line the airway wall. This is appropriate in humans,
bronchoscope and processed by cutting off the end of the brush
for whom endobronchial masses are relatively common.
 into a microbiology tube with culture swab removed.
 Because endobronchial lesions are very rare in dogs and cats,
Secretions obtained with the use of a guarded microbi-
cytology brushing is not the method of choice for retrieving
ology brush may be cultured routinely or in a quantitative
samples for cytologic analysis.
fashion. Quantitative bacterial cultures have been used to
 In general, large numbers of nonseptic neutrophils in
 distinguish colonization from infection in human patients
the absence of bacteria support the finding of bronchitis
with bacterial pneumonia. In these cases, bacterial growth at
or asthma, and overwhelming populations of eosinophils
CH A PTER 1 0 Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat ·  345
A
B
C
D
Figure 10-22 Double lumen sheathed microbiology brush. A, The brush is retracted into the sheath to ensure that sterility is maintained. B,
The tip of the brush is extended from the sheath. The 140-cm sheathed brush isfrst passed through the biopsy port of the bronchoscope. Under
bronchoscopic guidance the brush and the sheath are passed into the airway. The brush is extruded from the sheath and passed into the area
 of interest within the airway to collect samples for microbiological analysis. Under bronchoscopic visualization the brush is resheathed before
it is withdrawn into the distal end of the scope. Once the apparatus has been removed from the bronchoscope, the end ofthe brush is extruded
from the sheath so that the tip, along with the airway sample, can be clipped off into a sterile clot tube for further processing. C, Endoscopic
appearance of tubing extended from the scope. D, The brush is extended into the airways under direct visualization. After a brushing sample is
 obtained,the brush is withdrawn into the sheath before the sheath is retracted into the working channel of the scope. (Courtesy of Todd R. Tarms.)
(greater than 50%) are consistent with the diagnosis of aller-
reporting of the samples. Unlike analysis of other body flu-
gic asthma.
ids such as whole blood, urine, and spinal or joint fluid,
total and differential cell counts  from tracheobronchial
Bronchoalveolar Lavage
washings are not routinely determined. This is partially
due to the various methods used to collect and analyze
As previously mentioned, a major limitation in the cyto-
the samples and the subsequent lack of uniformity in the
logic  interpretation  of  tracheobronchial secretions is
results that are obtained. The technique of bronchoalveolar
the lack of uniformity in the collection, processing, and
lavage was developed to better standardize the collection,
346 ·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
福
A
Saline solution
Cells-
number
differential
C
Figure 10-23 Tracheal, bronchial, and pulmonary cytology. The diagnosis of neoplastic and infectious diseases of the respiratory tract
may be significantly aided by the cytologic evaluation of cells collected during bronchoscopy. Occasionally, respiratory cytologic findings
may also be helpful in the diferential diagnosis of noninfectious nonneoplastic pulmonary inflammatory disorders, including chronic
bronchitis, feline asthma, and pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia (PIE syndrome). Common methods used to collect airway and
parenchymal cells include bronchial brushings, bronchial washing, and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Various brushes are available to
collect cell from the respiratory mucosa however,these instruments have been designed for human patients with focal endobronchial
lesions. Because the majority of bronchopulmonary disorders seen in veterinary practice do not involve such lesions, these brushes are
not appropriate for the routine collection of airway specimens for cytologic analysis. Bronchial washings are advantageous compared
with transtracheal washings because the former technique is performed under bronchoscopic guidance and the fluid can be instilled into
specifc lung segments. However, the analysis of cells obtained by the method of bronchial washing is limited to a subjective appraisal of
the number and kind of cells present. BAL is a more recently developed technique in which the bronchoscope is guided into an affected
lung segment until the size ofthe scope is as large as the entered airway. At this point the instrument is said to be in a wedged position.
With this technique, large amounts of fluid may be instilled and gently aspirated without fear of flooding the lung because the majority
Paaiap aq ues suas  leot pue ieuaa uog uisod paam e u si adossoua au am aaaau aq ues p pasu go
for the cells collected by BAL, and these counts can greatly aid the endoscopist in determining the respiratory cause of clinical signs. A,
 Bronchial brushes available for use when a focal lesion is suspected or visualized by radiography or during bronchoscopy. B, Cytologic
specimen collected with a bronchial brush. The majority of cells are mucosal epithelial cells. C, Placement ofthe bronchoscope to perform
bronchoalveolar lavage. Note that the majority of aspirated fluid is withdrawn back through the bronchoscope because the instrument is
wedged into position, thus minimizing the amount of fluid that may be lost around the bronchoscope.
analysis, and reporting of bronchial and alveolar lining cells
or subsegmental branch of a lung lobe (see Figure 10-23).
and secretions.
With this technique, relatively large volumes of fluid (2 mL/
So that a maximal return of fluid is ensured, bron-
kg [0.9 mL/1b] of body weight) may be repeatedly instilled
choalveolar lavage should be performed through a flexible
and recovered. Because ofthe potential loss of large volumes
s e o am, uq s r adosso
of fluid within the lung, only clinicians experienced in this
CHAPTER 1 0 Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat ·  347
E
Suction
Adapter to
/channelopening
Specimen trap
F
a as sd a ae sau  aat a m  as s a p oi a
recovered from healthy dogs and cats. E, Large number of eosinophils in a BAL sample from a healthy cat. F, Sterile suction trap, which
 can be placed in series between the suction catheter (not shown) and the bronchoscope. The aspirated fluid can be cultured or prepared for
cytologic evaluation.
technique should perform bronchoalveolar lavage in cats.
 the appearance of the biopsy instrument tip is magnified
The administration of 100% oxygen for at least 10 min-
when viewed through the endoscope (Figure 10-24).
utes before and after bronchoalveolar lavage is necessary if
Transbronchial biopsy may be performed with the use of
hypoxemia is to be prevented.
standard flexible biopsy forceps or by introducing a Stifcor
needle (Microvasive Inc.). With the former approach, the
flexible bronchoscope is introduced into the affected lung
Biopsy
segment, and the closed biopsy forceps is delivered into the
Endobronchial biopsy is more commonly performed and
lung periphery, past the operator's feld of vision. When
 more rewarding diagnostically in human medicine because
resistance is met or the appropriate area reached (if fluoros-
of the more frequent occurrence of endobronchially located
copy is used), the forceps instrument is retracted 1 mm to 2
cancer associated with cigarette smoke. For veterinarians,
mm and its jaws are opened. At this point the lungs of the
endobronchial biopsy is occasionally helpful in diagnosing
anesthetized patient are expanded, and the biopsy instru-
neoplastic lesions and identifying nonneoplastic polyps.
ment is advanced until resistance is again met. The patient's
This technique can also increase the index of suspicion for
lungs are allowed to deflate, the jaws of the biopsy forceps 
chronic bronchial inflammation.
 are closed, and peribronchial alveolar tissue is obtained. At
The biopsy cup is typically less than 2 mm in width and
this point the bronchoscopist usually feels a characteristic
can retrieve tissue from the bronchial tree that is usually
tug of parenchyma. While the forceps is removed, the flex-
only 1 mm to 1.5 mm in size. Full-thickness samples are not
ible bronchoscope is maintained in the sampled lung seg-
retrieved with this method. Furthermore the specimen that
ment to monitor for bleeding or to confine bleeding to the
is obtained is frequently crushed, and the presence of crush
isolated bronchial segment.
artifact makes histologic interpretation of the sample dif-
This technique is sometimes associated with persistent
ficult. The bronchoscopist may also be initially fooled into
bleeding and pneumothorax, which are potential compli-
thinking that a larger piece of tissue can be obtained because
cations that should be of concern to anyone attempting the
348 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Figure 10-24 Endobronchial biopsy. A, Biopsy cup (at the tip of a biopsy instrument designed for endobronchial biopsy) within the
that occurs during bronchoscopic visualization. B, After the biopsy instrument is withdrawn from the airway, the sample is retrieved and
placed on a piece of a wooden tongue depressor. Note the actual size of the biopsy cup relative to the hands of the operator. C, Processed
tissue obtained by endobronchial biopsy of the airways of the dog in A. The epithelium is fragmented due to crush artifact. However,the
epithelium can still be appreciated to be increased in size, and the submucosa is infiltrated with neutrophils. A single enlarged submucosal
gland is seen at the 9-o'clock position.
procedure. While transbronchial biopsy is a promising tech-
that worsens with increased respiratory effort. The degree of
nique, it requires specialized equipment, sophisticated opera-
collapse is classified from grade I (slight collapse with mild
tor training, and postprocedure intensive care availability,
membrane redundancy) to grade IV (total collapse with the
as needed. Additionally, although closed-chest techniques
dorsal membrane lying on the tracheal ring). Medical man-
such as transbronchial biopsy are available for acquiring lung
agement is usually effective for patients with grade I and
od asq uo s  d
 grade II collapse. However, in some patients with grade II
vides a greater chance ofobtaining quality diagnostic samples.
and IV collapse, clinical signs may be severe, persistent, and
 interfere with quality of life.
Tracheal Stenting for Tracheal Collapse
Permanently implanted internal stents have been used
for many years in human patients with tracheal narowing
Tracheal collapse is a disorder seen primarily in small and toy
 due to malacia, neoplasia, or external pressure (e.g-, enlarged
breed dogs. This is a progressive, degenerative disease of the
lymph nodes). More recently, balloon-expandable and self-
cartilage rings in which hypocellularity and decreased gly-
expanding intraluminal stents have become available for use
 cosaminoglycan content results in dynamic tracheal collapse
 in veterinary patients with grade II and IV tracheal collapse.
CHAPTER 1 0 Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat ·  349
Clinical improvement may be seen in 75% or more ofpatients
of the collapsed segments and a three-dimensional sense
treated in this manner, although patient selection for the pro-
of the stent within the lumen of the trachea. For these rea-
cedure is a major determinant in the success of the stent.
sons, endoscopic guidance of stent placement is my pre-
Intraluminal stents may be placed with the use of fluo-
ferred approach. The specific technique of stent placement
roscopic or endoscopic guidance. The advantage of endo-
is beyond the scope of this chapter, and the reader is directed
scopic placement of a tracheal stent is direct visualization
 to multiple didactic courses designed for such training.
SUGGESTEDREADING
Amis TC, McKiernan BC: Systematic identification of endobronchial
Johnson LR, Drazenovich TL: Flexible bronchoscopy and
anatomy during bronchoscopyin the dog, Arm J Vet Res 47( 12):2649-
bronchoalveolar lavage in 68 cats (200l-2006), J Vet Intern Med
2657, 1986.
21(2):219-225, 2007.
Caccamo R, Twedt DC, Buracco P, etal: Endoscopic bronchial anatomy
Kirschvink K, Leemans J, Delvaux F, et al: Bronchodilators in
in the cat, J Feline Med Surg 9(2):140-149, 2007.
bronchoscopy-induced airflow limitation in allergen-sensitized
 Creevy KE: Airwayevaluation and flexible endoscopic procedures in dogs
cats, J Vet Intern Med 19(2):161-167, 2005.
and cats: laryngoscopy, transtracheal wash, tracheobronchoscopy,
MacPhail CM, Monnet E: Laryngeal dieases. In Bonagura JD, Twedt
and bronchoalveolar lavage, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
DC, editors: Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIV, St Louis, 2009,
39(5):869-880, 2009.
Saunders.
 De Lorenzi D, Bertoncello D, Drigo M: Bronchial abnormalities found
Radlinsky MG, Williams J, Frank PM, et al: Comparison of three
in a consecutive series of 40 brachycephalic dogs, J Am Vet Med
 clinical techniques for the diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis in dogs,
Assoc 235(7):835-840, 2009.
Vet Surg 38(4):434-438, 2009.
Hammel SP, Hottinger HA, Novo RE: Postoperative results of
Tobias KM, Jackson AM, Harvey RC: Effects of doxapram HCl
unilateral arytenoid lateralization for treatment of idiopathic
on laryngeal function of normal dogs and dogs with naturally
laryngeal paralysis in dogs: 39 cases (1996-2002), I Am Vet Med
occurring laryngeal paralysis, Vet Anaesth Analg 31(4):258-263,
Assoc 228(8):1215-1220, 2006.
2004.
Jakubiak MJ, Siedlecki CT, Zenger E, et al: Laryngeal, laryngotracheal,
Weisse CWC: Intraluminal stenting for tracheal collapse. In Bonagura
and tracheal masses in cats: 27 cases (1998-2003), J Arm Anirm Hosp
JD, Twedt DC, editors: Kirks's current veterinary therapy XIV, St
Assoc 41(5):3 10-3 16, 2005.
Louis, 2009, Saunders.
 Ａtlas For tracHe0bronch0sc0py ＰaGes З50-З９
NORMAL CANINE AND FELINE TRACHEA AND BRONCHI
Figure 10-34, p. 354,Bleeding in a segmental airway after
Figure 10-25, p. 350, Canine trachea and bronchi
 bronchoscopy in a dog
Figure 10-26, p. 351, Feline trachea and bronchi
Hgure 10-35, p. 355,Open airway ina dog with tracheal collapse
 and chronic bronchitis
PRIMARY TRACHEAL COLLAPSE
Figure 10-27, p. 351, Tracheal collapse in a Welsh Corgi
ENLARGED TRACHEOBRONCHIAL LYMPH NODES
Figure 10-28, p. 352, Segmental tracheal collapse with mucosal
Hgure 10-36, p. 355, Blastomycosis in a dog
LEFT ATRIAL COMPRESSION OF LEFT MAINSTEM
TRACHEAL NARROWING
BRONCHUS
Figure 10-29, p. 352, Tracheal narrowing causing dyspnea in a
Hgure 10-37, p. 356, Left mainstem bronchus collapse caused by
young Sheltie
 left atrial enlargement in a dog
 PARASITIC TRACHEOBRONCHITIS
TRACHEOBRONCHIALFOREIGNBODIES
Figure 10-30, p. 353, Parasitic nodules (Filaroides osleri)
Hgure 10-38, p. 357, Foxtail foreign body in bronchus of a dog
Hgure 10-39, p. 358, Cat with rock lodged in trachea
CHRONIC BRONCHITIS AND ASTHMA
Figure 10-31, p. 354, Polypoid formation in a segmental airway
TRACHEOBRONCHIALNEOPLASIA
branch
Hgure 10-40, p. 359, Pulmonary hemangiosarcoma in a dog with
 Figure 10-32, p. 354, Eosinophilic granuloma in a segmental air-
acute cough and hemoptysis
way branch
Hgure 10-41, p. 359, Bronchogenic adenocarcinoma occluding a
Figure 10-33, p. 354,Scarring and mucus formation in a dog
segmental airway in a dog
350·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
AtlaS FOR NORmaL CanINe And felINe tRaCHeA
AND BRONCHI
D
Fgure 10-25 A, Bronchoscopic appearance of the normal canine trachea with a bronchoscope
positioned at midtrachea. The dorsal tracheal membrane appears as a distinct thin strip of muscle
n ise ue se seadde ( an ne uaas) sung ieiud s ai maa yo piay sn u
extension of the trachea. The left principal bronchus forms a more acute angle with the trachea.
C, Different dog, close-up view of carina and dorsal tracheal membrane. D, Normal canine lobar
and segmental bronchi. Note the rounded structure of the individual airway segments, their pink
 color, and the absence of mucus or free fluids.
CHAPTER 10 Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat ·  351
B
Hgure 10-26 A, Lumen of a feline trachea and carina with a bronchoscope positioned at the level
of the midtrachea. Feline airway mucosa has a distinctly yellow tinge compared with canine and
human airways. B, Same airway at the level of the carina. Slight hyperemia at the entrance to both
the right and left mainstem bronchi is due to irritation from the tip ofthe bronchoscope. Compare
with the appearance of canine carina (see Figure 10-25, B and C).
Atlas fOr PrImary tracHeal COllapSe
Deviation of the dorsal tracheal membrane into the lumen of the trachea may occur as a
primary condition (primary tracheal collapse) or in association with chronic bronchitis.
The collapse point may be focal or may involve the entire length of the trachea. Coughing
greatly exacerbates the condition and can lead to complete airway obstruction, syncope,
and respiratory arrest.
A
B
Hgure 10-27 A, Generalized tracheal collapse in a Welsh Corgi with a chronic honking cough. The
tip of the bronchoscope is at the level of the midtrachea. More than 50% of the tracheal lumen is
occluded during normal breathing. B, As seen with a bronchoscope at the level of the carina, the 
tracheal membrane has occluded two thirds of the entrance to the right mainstem bronchus.
352PART ONE
Flexible Endoscopy
B
Hgure 10-28 Segmental tracheal collapse with mucosal erosion. A, Tracheal collapse causing a
cough may result in communication between the dorsal and ventral mucosa. B, This may lead to
mucosal erosion (arrow), which can cause continued coughing and a destructive cycle of cough-
mucosal damage-cough. Mucosal erosion cannot be appreciated radiographically but is easily seen
with a bronchoscope.
ATLAS FOR TRACHeAL NARROWING
A
B
Hgure 10-29 A, A 5-month-old female Sheltie with acute dyspnea. Symptoms of increased
respiratory effort had increased over the prior 24 hours. B, The midcervical trachea was focally
narrowed to a diameter of approximately 2 cm (tracheal narrowing side to side). The cause was not
determined.
CHAPTER 10 Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat ·  353
Atlas for Parasitic tracheObrOnchitis
Common tracheobronchial parasites include Filaroides (Oslerus) osleri in dogs and
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus in cats. The lungworm F. osleri produces small granulomas
in the tracheal and bronchial mucosa adjacent to the carina. Coughing is the major
clinical symptom, and wheezing and dyspnea may occur if a large number of nodules are
 present. Radiographs may reveal soff tissue densities (granulomas) in the caudal trachea.
Characteristic nodules are readily visible on bronchoscopic examination, and mature
worms may be observed within the nodules. The diagnosis is confirmed by identifying
larvae in bronchial washings or in a fresh fecal sample after larvae are coughed up and
Swallowed.
Hgure 10-30 Parasitic nodules. More chronic inflammatory processes, including parasitic infection 
with Filaroides species,may cause the formationof nonneoplastic polyps or nodules.A,Filaroides
(Oslerus) osleri nodules in the distal trachea of a Greyhound with chronic coughing, wheezing,
and weight loss. B, The same Greyhound's trachea after therapy (1 year from the time the original
endoscopic photograph was made). Tracheal hyperemia is seen, but no nodules remain. C, F. osleri
larvae from a tracheal wash sample (low-power magnification). D, F. oslerilarvae (high-power
magnification). (A and B, Courtesy of Flora E.F. Lindsay; C and D, Courtesy of Anne E. Wagner.)
354·PART ONE
FlexibleEndoscopy
AtlaS fOr ChrOnIC brOnChItIs and astHmA
Chronic noninfectious inflammatory diseases in dogs and cats are most commonly due to
chronic bronchitis (both species) or asthma (cats).
Figure 10-31 Polypoid formation in segmental branch of right
Hgure 10-32 Eosinophilic granuloma in a segmental branch of
caudal lobe of a 9-year-old Pomeranian with untreated chronic
the left caudal lobe of a 5-year-old poodle with a chronic cough.
bronchitis.
The granuloma resolved and symptoms abated after a 6-week 
 course of inhaled corticosteroids. This is an unusual finding in
a dog and has some features that are similar to Churg-Strauss
syndrome in humans.
Figure 10-33 Scarring and mucus formation causing complete
Hgure 10-34 Bleeding within segmental airway after
obliteration of the airway of a 10-year-old Welsh Corgi with a
bronchoscopy in an 8-year-old female spayed Samoyed with a
chronic cough.
chronic cough and chronic bronchitis. Friable airway mucosa can
cause minimal bleeding that appears to be increased because of the
telescopic effect of the bronchoscope.
A
B
Hgure 10-35 A, Open airway at inspiration in an 1l-year-old poodle with tracheal collapse and
chronic bronchitis. B, Airway in the same dog, now collapsed during passive inspiration.
ATLAS
FOr EnlarGed TracheObrOnchial lymPH
NOdES
Figure 10-36 A7-year-old Cocker
spaniel was evaluated for progressive
weight losslethargy,andacough
persisting for 1 to 2 months. A, Dor-
soventral thoracic radiograph revealed
complete consolidation of the right 
cranial and middle lung lobes. B, Bron-
choscopy revealed massive lymphade-
nopathy resulting in obstruction of the
entrance to the right principal and right
 cranial bronchus. Bronchoalveolar lavage
 samples revealed thick-walled yeast 
cells typical of Blastorryces dermatitidis.
 Biopsy confimmed the diagnosis of
 blastomycosis. C, Nodular appearance 
and airway narrowing caused by enlarged
tracheobronchial lymph node in a 5-year-
old male intact Springer spaniel hunting
dog. Blastomycosis was confirmed by
culture and cytologic analysis. The nodule
regressed and symptoms resolved after
antifungal treatment.
356 ·PART ONE Flexible Endoscopy
Atlas fOr left Atrial cOmPressiOn Of left
MAINStEM bRONCHUS
 Congestive heart failure can result in enlargement of the left atrium, which may push up
 into the ventral floor of the respiratory tree at the level of the left mainstem bronchus. As a
result, the ventral and dorsal mucosa come into contact with every heartbeat. This situation
 can result in chronic coughing.
Hgure 10-37 A 12-year-old retriever cross
was evaluated for a chronic cough. Chest
 radiographs demonstrated normal lung
parenchyma and left atrial enlargement.
Through the bronchoscope the left mainstem
 bronchus was seen to collapse from the ventral
floor up in time with the heartbeat. The right 
mainstem and segmental bronchi, as well as 
the left-sided bronchi past the collapse point,
were all normal. Diuretic therapy resulted in left
atrial shrinkage and resolution of the cough.
Atlas fOr tracHeObrOncHial fOreiGn bOdIes
and other medications is usually the most common presenting sign of a tracheobronchial
foreign body. Inhaled foreign bodies are often small enough to pass beyond the carina
 into the lobar bronchi. Grass awns, nails, bone fragments, and a variety of other types of
foreign material have been retrieved from the airways. Survey thoracic radiographs may be
unremarkable if the foreign material is not radiodense. In most airway foreign body cases
a mucopurulent exudate is found originating from the bronchus in which the foreign body
scope to retrieve the foreign material. In most cases, clinical signs resolve shortly after the
foreign body is removed.
CHAPTER 10  Laryngoscopy and Tracheobronchoscopy of the Dog and Cat  ·  357
C
D
Hgure 10-38 A 2-year-old Golden retriever was presented with a 2-month history of a
nonproductive cough. Radiographs showed mild interstitial and penibronchial densities that
Suggested mild chronic bronchitis. A complete blood count was unremarkable. A corticosteroid
 srp an se uoos se paan ynos an inq suis ieiu an pans sussaiddns yno e pue
were discontinued. A, Lateral thoracic radiograph showing mild interstitial densities. B, Endoscopic
view of the bronchus, with mucopurulent exudate covering what appears to be a foreign body (7- to
9-o'clock position in the field of view). C, After the mucus was cleared away, two projections from a
foxtail (Hordeum jubatum, a common weed in California) were identified. The foxtail was retrieved
where the foxtail was lodged. E, Foxtail (length, 2.5 cm) removed from the bronchus. The cough
stopped immediately after the foreign body was retrieved. (Courtesy of Todd R. Tarms.)
358·PART ONEFlexible Endoscopy
C
aui ne su uia a oi pauaad sm ie se u ap pio-iav a-ol an
University of California at Davis Veterinary Medicine Teaching Hospital because of the acute onset
of respiratory distress. On admission the cat was coughing; however, no other respiratory signs were
apparent. During physical examination the cat acutely began gasping, became cyanotic, and suffered
respiratory arrest. A, Lateral thoracic radiograph revealing a radiopaque foreign body over the
base of theheart,within theintrathoracic tracheaB,Dorsoventral thoracic radiograph suggesting
mediastinal and cardiac shift toward the left hemithorax. The large amount of air in the stomach
is a common finding in animals suffering from acute and significant respiratory impairment. C,
Rock found within the tracheal lumen. When the rock moved cranially,the cat coughed but was 
otherwise stable. When the rock rolled caudally, it obstructed a mainstem bronchi, leading to
acute respiratory distress. The bronchoscopist was not able to use normal forceps to remove the
rock. The foreign body was finally retrieved using a Foley catheter that was advanced alongside the
bronchoscope until the balloon tip was caudal to the rock. The catheter balloon was blown up and
brought out of the trachea with the bronchoscope and the rock. The cat survived the procedure 
a pamsqo ue oi panqe sem ys deuseaui au uuu umoy a paseaiai sem pue
mainstem bronchus at the time the radiograph was taken.
Atlas fOr tracHeObrOncHIal NeOPlasIA
Hgure 10-40 Bronchial bleeding in trachea. A, Pooling of frank blood in the midtrachea of a
12-year-old German shepherd with acute cough and hemoptysis. B, Blood from right caudal lobar
bronchus from same dog. The postmortem diagnosis was pulmonary hemangiosarcoma.
Figure 10-41 Bronchogenic adenocarcinoma
occluding a segmental airway in a 10-year-old
for 4 months.
11
CHAPTER
Stapling and Energy Devices for
Endoscopic Surgery
25
John C. Huhn
30
ndoscopic procedures frequently involve tssue manipu
■ ENDOSURGICAL CLIPS AND STAPLERS
lation and dissection so that the target tissue can be exposed.
Hemorrhage is not uncommon in such maneuvers. Effec-
Endosurgical clip appliers were developed in 1990 and were
tively dealing with intraoperative hemorrhage is a prerequi-
used extensively in humans to perform laparoscopic chole
 site to successful completion of the endoscopic procedure.
cystectomy, one of the first major laparoscopic treatments in
Special techniques and equipment exist that facilitate hemo-
people. Surgical clip appliers have a place in every endosco-
stasis in a limited space, such as that encountered in mini-
pist's armamentarium. A single clip application may negate
mally invasive surgery. If hemorrhage is not controlled,
the need to convert to an open procedure. Modern clip
 conversion to an open procedure may be required. The fol-
appliers can be precocked before placement, which allows
lowing sections will explore the theory, application, and lim-
the clip to be advanced proximal or distal along a tubular
itations of endomechanical and energy-based devices when
structure before closure. The distal tips of the clip are closed
used in minimally invasive surgery. In so doing, I seek to
first, which prevents tissue from being squeezed laterally
help the endoscopic surgeon make the best possible choices
beyond the clip margins before closure. Some form of clip
in utilizing these technologies.
counter is visible on the instrument and ensures sufficient
Aside from ligatures and pretied suture loops, surgical sta
clip numbers to complete the procedure (Figure 11-2).
pling devices are the fundamental means of arresting hem-
Failures attributable to clip application are usually a func-
orrhage during endoscopy. These vary in complexity from
tion of two factors: (1) inclusion of too much tissue within
single-fre clip appliers to multifire endostaplers. Disposable
the clip and (2) clip slippage. The first error can be prevented
loading units (DLUs) of several widths and staple leg lengths
by selection of the appropriate clip configuration and size.
are available to accommodate variable tissue thickness and
C-shaped clips that capture the tubular structure by closing
trocar sizes. Endoscopic gastrointestinal anastomosis (Endo
at the ends first are generally most effective. Clip size is a
GIA) devices include an integrated knife blade, which allows
function of shaff diameter, and 5- and 10-mm versions are
division between triple-staggered rows of staple lines during
available. Clip slippage can be minimized by application
the fring cycle.
without undue tension on the structure to be clipped. Tissue
The past 10 years have seen significant advances in surgi-
 diameter changes with the release of tension and can cause a
cal devices geared toward operative dissection and hemo-
 clip to migrate away from the original application site.
stasis. Advanced electrosurgical generators, ultrasonic
Multifre endostapler cartridges (DLUs) come in a vari-
scalpels, and surgical lasers are examples of such. Although
ety of lengths and configurations (Figure 1l-3). The staples
themselves are composed of titanium and are formed into a
they are best viewed simply as different means of deliver-
 B shape as they are applied against the cartridge anvil during
ing energy to tissue. Tissue effects are ultimately medi-
the fring cycle. The B shape allows microvascular perfusion
ated by thermal changes, which are predictable despite the
to the staple line, which prevents necrosis that could lead to
operative method (Figure 1l-1). No one particular system
 delayed hemorhage or leakage. Available options include
is inherently superior to the other. Each has its advantages
an integrated cutting blade as well as a roticulating hinge.
and disadvantages for a given procedure. Unfortunately, the
Roticulation is defined as the ability to simultaneously rotate
choice of an energy modality is frequently more a function
and articulate and requires the appropriate endostapler as
of surgeon familiarity and training rather than an informed
well as stapler cartridge. Note that the use of a roticulating
decision.
as opposed to a simple straight cartridge adds approximately
363
364·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
1.5 cm of length to the DLU, which can be an important con-
then additional measures need be taken to prevent hemor-
 sideration when working in a tight space, such as the chest.
rhage or leakage. These measures include suture over-sew
 Numerous staple leg and cartridge lengths allow appli-
and/or application of ligating loops, clips, and energy-based
cation of hemostatic and pneumostatic staple lines across
technologies.
parenchymal, bronchial, and vascular pedicles of varying
thicknesses. In thick parenchymal tissue applications, such
■ ELECTROSURGICAL GENERATORS
as the liver, the staple lines may be placed in tiers to effec-
tively seal the cut edges in a stepwise fashion.
The first electrosurgical generator was developed by Harvey
 It is important to be attentive to staple closure widths
Cushing and William Bovie in the 1920s. Early electrosurgi-
when stapling devices are used. If the tissue to be stapled is
cal generators that followed from their original “Bovie" were
either thinner or thicker than the closed width of the staple,
 deficient primarily in two areas: patient safety and consistent
Absorptive heating
100° C
Smoke plume
Vaporization, carbonization
90-100°C
Puckering
Drying
65-90°C
White/Gray
Protein denaturalization
60-65°C
 Blanching
Coagulation 
37-60° C
None
Warming, welding 
Visual change
Biological change
Hgure 11-1 Effect of heat on tissue is temperature-related and is a function of application time.
NOC5m
Hgure 11-2 A, Endoscopic clip applicators have long shafts that make them suitable for delivery through 5-mm ports. B and C, LED clip
 counter and clip dlosure, which commence at the tips.
CHAPTER11
 Stapling and Energy Devices for Endoscopic Surgery ·  365
tissue effect. Advances in computer and electronics technol-
biological system, resistance is referred to as impedance and
ogies in the past 20 years have not only addressed these issues
is a function of blood supply and tissue composition. Fur-
but also established electrosurgery as the preferred standard
thermore, as electricity is applied to tissue, its impedance is
in many operating theaters.
continually changing as it undergoes desiccation.
Household electricity is supplied as 110-volt, alternating
 current at 60 Hz. That is, the current is supplied as a sine
Theory
wave, which changes polarity from positive to negative at
Electricity is defined as the flow of electrons from a source
60 cycles per second. The neuromuscular system becomes
(+ electrode) to another electrode (- electrode) or ground.
refractory to electrical stimulation beyond a frequency of
The flow of electricity along a circuit is best described by
100,000 Hz. For this reason, modern electrosurgical genera-
tors utilize frequencies in the range of 350,000 to 500,000 Hz,
Ohm's Law : V =I * R
which falls within the medium radiofrequency electromag-
where V = voltage; I = current; and R = resistance to flow
 netic spectrum (Figure 1l-4). Some units may go as high
as 3 to 4 megahertz (MHz) and deserve special mention
This can be conceptually illustrated by water flowing
(Figure 11-5). These units are commonly referred to as radio-
through a garden hose. For water to flow through the hose,
surgery units, but this terminology is not only confusing but
there must be driving pressure to overcome the resistance to
 incorrect. By medical convention, the term radiosurgery
flow imposed by the hose diameter. Voltage is that driving
 applies to the use of a targeted beam of ionizing radiation
force, and resistance relates to the hose diameter. Current
used primarily for cancer ablation. The correct terminology
represents the total amount of water per unit time, which is
for high-frequency electrosurgical application as referenced
dependent on the driving pressure (voltage) and the resis-
here is radio wave radiosurgery (RWRS). This type of system
tance to flow due to the hose diameter. When applied to a
will be discussed separately in a subsequent section.
When direct current is allowed to flow through a wire
connecting the positive and negative poles of an electrical
circuit, the wire itself becomes hot. When this heated wire
loop is brought into contact with tissue, the heat of the wire
exerts a tissue effect proportional to its magnitude. This
is referred to as electrocautery. This is in contrast with the
system that is utilized in modern electrosurgical genera-
tors, whereby alternating current from an active electrode is
allowed to pass through the patient's body to a passive or
dispersive electrode, and then back to the generator box.
Figure 11-3 Endostaplers are 10 mm in diameter and can be
 Although seemingly a minor point, it is important to realize
used with a number of disposable loading units (DLU), which
allow insertion through a 10-mm port. The green cartridge, which
this distinction, as the literature is fraught with references to
houses staples with a4.8-mm leg length, needs a 15-mm port on
electrocautery when electrosurgery as applied by an electro-
account of its larger overall diameter.
surgical unit (ESU) is what is actually meant.
60 Hz
100 kHz
550-1550 kHz
54-880 MHz
+
+
+
Household
Muscle and nerve
AM Radio
Television 
appliances
stimulation
ceases
Electrosurgery
200 kHz-3.3 MHz
Figure 11-4 All electrosurgical units (ESUs) operate within radiofrequency bandwidth. Most ESUs operate in low to medium
radiofrequency bands (200 kHz to 3.3 MHz), which overlap AM broadcast signals. Some units operate in high radiofrequency bands
(3 to 30 MHz), which occur in the range between AM and FM radio broadcasting.
366·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Power is defined by the following relationship:
peak voltage than a coagulating waveform at the same
power setting. Higher peak voltages result in greater lateral
P=V*I
thermal damage to the target tissue. This is clinically appar-
where P = power; V = voltage; and I = current
ent when tissue is incised with three different waveforms
applied at the same power setting (Figure 1l-7). For this
 In the context of an EsU, the selected power setting is a
reason, it is important for the surgeon to have a fundamen-
function of voltage and current. Voltage is a primary deter-
tal understanding of the physics of electrosurgery rather
minant of tissue effect and is very much a function of the
than relying exclusively on the selected waveform to exert
waveform delivered by the generator.
its designated effect. Another clinically relevant example
lies in the application of energy to a hemostat to achieve
coagulation of a vessel. Intuitively, one would expect the
Waveforms
 Electrosurgical waveforms consist of essentially three types:
 in fact this is not recommended practice. Cutting energy
cutting, coagulating, and blended (Figure 11-6). The cut-
 should be applied to the hemostat, as lesser voltage is uti-
ting and blended waveforms are continuous and use less
lized with less thermal spread. In fact, cutting energy can
be used to effect hemostasis and is often underutilized in
this capacity. Cutting energy is capable of producing deeper
hemostasis than that achieved with coagulating energy. The
 reason for this lies in the fact that coagulating energy pro-
 duces greater thermal damage, resulting in rapid buildup
of tissue resistance from char accumulation at the tissue-
electrode interface.As tissue resistance increases, greater
power is needed to penetrate deeper tissue. With cutting
energy, tissue heats up more quickly, steam forms as cells
explode, and there is less char accumulation. Energy is able
to penetrate deeper into the target tissue without stalling at
the point of tissue damage.
 Many surgeons prefer to use blended energy for nearly all
tissue applications, considering it to be a tradeoff between
Figure 11-5 The Ellman Surgitron unit operates at a frequency
fissue damage and inadequate hemostasis. As noted in
of 4 MHz and transforms alternating current to direct current
Figure 11-6, blended energy is delivered as an interrupted 
waveforms. The need for intimate contact between the patient
and the grounding plate is minimized because delivered energy
waveform, with varying degrees of on and off time. As the
 seeks ground through the plate, which is positioned close to the
percent of on time is increased, the more rapidly tissue is
operative site.
desiccated and hemostasis is achieved.
Low voltage
High voltage
 Pure cut
 Blend 1
Blend 2
Blend 3
Coag
100% on
50% on
40% on
25% on
6% on
50% off
60% off
75% off
94% off
Typical example
Hgure 11-6 The cut waveform is continuous and is of lower voltage than the blended and coagulating waveforms. The coagulating
blended waveforms allow tailoring of tissue effect toward cutting or coagulation, as dictated by the operative situation.
CHAPTER 119
 Stapling and Energy Devices for Endoscopic Surgery ■ 367
were totally dependent on the operator with respect to ultimate
Monopolar Systems
tissue effect. Variations in time of application as well as incon-
 Monopolar electrosurgical systems consist of a generator
 sistent power delivery made for inconsistent results. With
box, an electrosurgical pencil, and a return electrode. The
the advent of computer-modulated circuiry, however, huge
 generator box allows operator selection of output wave-
advances were made to allow nearly real-time monitoring of
form as well as power. Electrical energy must flow from the
tissue impedance. Modern generators sense tissue impedance
d d rsoaa ai on xo rna pao
 at 200 times per second and alter voltage and current to deliver
through the patient to the attached dispersive electrode, and
 consistent power over a wide range of tissue impedances. The
back to the generator. The electrosurgical pencil is referred to
end result is much more consistent tissue effects (Figure 11-8)-
as the active electrode and the patient return pad as the passive
Significant advances have been made in the refinement
(or dispersive) electrode. It is important that concentrated
 of waveform delivery. In particular, various modifications
energy at the active electrode be returned to the patient over
of blended waveforms have allowed the surgeon the ability
a wide contact area so as to reduce the chance of current con-
to discreetly cut and coagulate with minimal lateral ther-
centration and patient burning. It is in this area that signif-
 mal damage. Furthermore, nearly instantaneous feedback
 cant advances have been made to ensure patient safety.
through the electrosurgical pencil allows the generator to
 Early monopolar systems utilized metal grounding plates
 adjust output as the active electrode is moved through tissue.
to collect energy passing through the patient and return it
 Electrosurgical electrodes or pencils come in a variety of
to the generator. The weakness with these systems lay in the
 geometric configurations. The spatula electrode tip is the
inconsistent contact interface between the patient and the rigid
 most widely used. Electrode geometry has a critical influence
plate, occasionally resulting in unanticipated patient burns.
 on tissue effect. Smaller electrodes allow electrosurgical cur-
The advent of malleable grounding pads alleviated much of
rent to be concentrated at the tissue-electrode interface. This
this problem, but even these could lose adhesion during a
current concentration allows tissue desiccation to occur at
procedure, which resulted in areas of increased current den-
lower power settings and with less lateral thermal damage.
sity and thermal damage. This problem was remedied when
Fine wire electrodes and wire loops are best used where ther-
contact quality monitoring (CQM) circuitry was built into the
mal damage is a major operative consideration, as in neuro-
generator. With this system, the generator was programmed
surgery and biopsy procurement. Spatula electrodes can be
to shut offif patient pad impedance fell outside of prescribed
coated in a fashion to enhance current concentration. This
limits. A further improvement to this system came in the form
 coating is applied so that the flat portion ofthe spatula blade
of return electrode monitoring (REM), wherein an interroga-
is covered with nonconductive polymers; only the edges are
tion signal is sent from the generator to a split patient return
left uncovered to facilitate current delivery. Furthermore,
pad. Again, the generator is programmed to cease operation if
this covering facilitates intraoperative cleaning and prevents
the return signal is outside programmed limits.
 eschar accumulation, which can lead to inconsistent energy
The generator box (ESU) converts standard 60-Hz, 110-
 delivery. This is in contrast to uncoated electrodes, which
volt current into an operator-selected waveform and power
allow current dispersion across a broad surface as electro-
delivered at 300 to 500 KHz. The first monopolar generators
surgical energy sparks to tissue. These electrodes require
cleaning with scratch pads, which further promotes eschar
accumulation and unpredictable energy delivery.
 Insulated electrode extensions are an invaluable tool for
the endoscopic surgeon (Figure 1l-9). They allow the use
of a standard electrosurgical pencil for application of hand-
switched monopolar energy to the operative target. Various
types ofL-shaped and J-shaped wire hooks can be used with
these extensions, allowing the surgeon to bluntly dissect
and spot coagulate vessels, as needed. Many surgeons utilize
blended waveforms for this application.
Recent advances have produced an electrosurgical pencil
whose power level can be changed with a sliding switch on
the pencil itself (Figure 11-10). The minimum-maximum
 power range can be set on the electrosurgical generator, and
the operator can vary power within this range as appropriate
Figure 11-7 Three incisions have been made with an electrosurgical
 to the operative situation.
pencil all at the same power setting but utilizing different waveform
With monopolar electrosurgery, essentially three different
settings on the electrosurgical unit. Incisions were made in a non-
tissue effects can be exerted on the target tissue: cutting, ful-
contact mode and in the same time frame. The incision on the lef
was made in the cut mode. The center incision was made using blend
guration, and desiccation. Electrosurgical cutting divides tis-
mode, and the incision on the far right was made using coagulation
sue with electric sparks that direct intense heat to tissue over
mode. Differences in elicited thermal damage are obvious.
a very limited surface area. Current density is maximized,
368·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
45
t
35
30
Fat, scar, ad hesions
25
 Mesentary omentum
20
Gall bladder
15
Bowel
10
Liver, muscle
5
 Prostate in nonconductive solution
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
 Ohms of tissue impedance
power versus tissue impedance. For both generators, the power is initially set to 40 W. With a traditional generator (red line), power drops
precipitously as the electrode tip encounters increasingly greater tissue resistance. With an adaptive response generator, increasing resistance is
sensed by the generator and more power is automatically delivered to the electrode tip to maintain power and thus consistency of tissue effect.
Hgure 11-10 Vallylab's Force Triverse pencil features a sliding
switch to change power delivery via the electrosurgical handpiece.
It also features a proprietary blend mode, activated viathe center
V button, which optimizes the balance between cutting and
coagulation. Its use with J- or L-shaped electrode extensions makes
this an optimal tool for monopolar endosurgery. The Force Triverse
is designed to be used with the Force Triad electrosurgical system.
The rate of movement of the electrode tip influences the
depth of the cutting stroke.
Fulguration is a tissue effect that is achieved with sparking
to tissue in a noncontact mode. The coagulation waveform,
which is interrupted and of higher voltage, is the usual gen-
erator setting. In this application, energy delivery is inter-
mittent, which allows cooling between spark bursts. As such,
Figure 11-9 Numerous electrode extensions with variable
tip configurations are available for use with a conventional
coagulation as opposed to vaporization is the net effect. Pro-
electrosurgical pencil. This allows hand-switched use of
teins melt and recongeal to form a coagulum. Some ESUs
monopolar energy in endosurgical applications.
 have a refined fulguration mode referred to as spray mode.
Spray mode does not penetrate as deeply as fulguration
and a large amount of heat is delivered over a short period of
mode and is thus useful when oozing capillary beds in deli-
time. Electrode manipulation has a huge impact on ultimate
cate, heat-sensitive tissues need to be sealed.
tissue effect. The electrode is positioned slightly above the
 Electrosurgical desiccation occurs when the active elec-
tissue to be transected, in what is termed a roncontact mode.
 trode is held in direct contact with the target tissue. Current
In this manner, electrical energy sparks to tissue, causing tis-
density is minimized, which leads to less overall heat pro-
sue heating greater than 100° C and vaporization of intra-
 duction. Tissue is dried out, proteins melt, and a coagulum
cellular content. The cutting waveform, which is continuous
is formed. Tissue desiccation can be carried out indirectly
 and of lower voltage, is traditionally used in this application.
via energy transfer to a hemostat. Although most surgeons
CHAPTER 119
 Stapling and Energy Devices for Endoscopic Surgery ■  369
utilize an EsU coagulation setting for this purpose, it is actu-
ally preferable to use a cut setting. In so doing, lower voltages
are used, which reduces lateral thermal damage. Further-
more, instances of unintended surgeon shocks, which occa-
sionally create holes in gloves, are greatly reduced.
Safety hazards include inadvertent surgeon burns and
 other hazards. Smoke generated by ESUs contains many car-
cinogenic compounds. A smoke evacuation system is highly
recommended. Most operating room fres are caused by the
Hgure 11-11 The tip of the Patton HotBlade is shown in close-
use of electrosurgical equipment. Therefore, this equipment
up view. For coagulation, energy passes from the active electrode,
should be inspected regularly to be certain that it is safe for
through the intervening tissue, and on to the passive electrode to
complete the circuit. When the tissue is judged to be sufficiently
 operative use. Insulation on all reusable equipment and
sealed, energy is again applied as the blade is being deployed. The
patient grounding systems should receive special focus. ESUs
blade itself then becomes part of the electrical circuit to allow
that are purchased from clearing houses or from sources of
cutting of the sealed coagulum. Note the presence of insulation
questionable origin should be inspected, calibrated, and vali-
around the proximal part of the grasping electrodes. This is to
prevent short-circuiting of the current when the blade is deployed.
dated by a biomedical engineer, if possible.
Coupling injuries consist of three electrosurgical phe-
 nomena. The first of these is direct coupling. Direct coupling
bipolar forceps activation via a user-selected time delay. Fur-
occurs when the energy from an active electrode sparks to
thermore, the user can select an end point for tissue desicca-
an electrically conductive object or tissue that is adjacent to
tion via an ESU setting, specified in terms of tissue impedance
the intended tissue target. When this happens, a burn may
between the forceps tines. The end result is a bipolar energy
occur at this secondary site, depending on the magnitude
 system that requires no hand switch or foot switch activation.
of the diverted current. Direct coupling is avoided by not
An example of the most basic endoscopic bipolar cut/coag-
 energizing the active electrode until it is touching or in close
ulation device is the HotBlade (Patton Surgical, Austin, Tex)
proximity to the target tissue.
It consists of a long shafted (20- to 30-inch) instrument with
 Indirect coupling occurs when the insulating coating ofthe
two looped wire electrodes at the tip (Figure 11-11). One elec-
 active electrode is compromised. When this ocurs, a portion
trode functions as an active electrode, and the other is a passive
of the electrical current is diverted to an adjacent conductor,
electrode. When tissue is grasped between the electrode ends,
where a burn may occur. The surgeon may initially be con-
it is stabilized via spring-tensioned jaws. On activation of the
fused by the lack of power output and may turn up the power
 energy cycle, current passes from the active electrode through
setting of the ESU. This has the potential to exacerbate the
the grasped tisue tothe passive electrode and then back to the
 burn, which may not be detected until days after the injury.
 generator to complete the circuit. The HotBlade incorporates
Capacitative coupling occurs when curent charge has
a separate thumb-activated knife blade, which is used to sever
 built up between two conductors separated by an insulating
the tissue coagulum. Energy is delivered as the cutting blade
material. When the charge becomes of sufficient magnitude
is advanced, which allows the cutting blade itself to become
to exceed the insulating capacity of the material (usually plas-
 part of the electrical circuit. This device has great utility for the
tic), the charge sparks across the insulator to conductive tis-
economy-minded surgeon, but it is subject to operator error.
sue, where a thermal injury can occur. Again, the severity of
the injury is a function of current magnitude. This type of
lum, whereas too much energy generates excessive char. Tissue
injury is best prevented by avoiding “hybrid" cannula systems.
 compression is limited by the spring tension. With suffcient
Hybrid systems are those that utilize a combination of metal
 experience, however, the instrument is nonetheless effective.
and plastic components. Metal cannulae in the body wall are
 A highly-specialized bipolar system (LigaSure, Covidien,
 less apt to cause capacitative coupling injuries because any
Mansfield, Mass.) has been developed for the specific pur-
stray current that should inadvertently energize the cannula
pose of vessel sealing (Figure 1l-12). This system utilizes a
would be dispersed over a wider contact surface area.
unique combination of tissue compression and low-voltage
 energy to melt vessel collagen and elastin to form a translu-
Bipolar Systems
cent seal. Vessels as large as 7 mm in diameter can be sealed
with this technology. The resultant seal has been shown to
 In bipolar electrosurgical systems, the active and passive elec-
withstand three times the systolic pressure. Furthermore, the
trodes are contained within the same surgical instrument. This
vessels themselves need not be isolated from tissue bundles,
allows the operator to achieve the desired tissue effect with
 and intravascular clotting is not required to effectively seal.
much less energy and less risk to the patient. Bipolar forceps
Specialized forceps have been developed for the LigaSure
resembling tissue forceps are used in this application. Most
system. Some handpieces consist of spring-tension grasping
 ESUs require the use ofa foot switch and a bipolar forceps cord
forceps, within which is contained a trigger-activated knife
for this function. However, recent advances have produced a
blade. As the tissue is grasped and the forceps locked, the
bipolar generator (see Force Triad ES Systerm) that controls
ESU senses tissue impedance and delivers the correct amount
370 ·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
of energy to arrive at a predetermined impeda nce that coin-
embedded in a temperature-sensitive polymer material
cides with the sealing cycle end point. An audio tone sounds
termed PTC (Figure 1l-13). Each particle acts as a discrete
continually until this end point is reached, at which time a
thermostatic switch that regulates the amount of heat pass-
cycle termination tone sounds. The operator then advances
ing into the tissue it contacts. Once the optimal temperature
the knife blade via a nontactile finger trigger.
for collagen denaturation is reached, each particle interrupts
 Other LigaSure handpieces resemble conventional hemo-
current flow to the specific tissue area. The process continues
 static forceps and come in various lengths and jaw configura-
until the entire segment is sealed, without sticking, charring.
tions. These forceps use the same generator and are used for
or smoke. Another innovative aspect of this system is in how
traditional, nonendoscopic surgery. These forceps are of stain-
it effects compression of tissue within its jaws. An I-beam-
less steel construction and accept congruent snap-in electrodes
type blade (I-Blade) slides along the electrode jaws to effect
designed for the specific forceps. These forceps function in a
cutting after tissue has been sealed. This design is able to
similar manner as described previously, only they do not con-
 generate high tissue pressure during the seal cycle, which not
tain an integrated knife blade and require foot switch activation.
 only prevents tissue slippage but also produces very strong
A novel bipolar sealing/cutting forceps has recently been
tissue seals-up to 7 times the systolic pressure. Vessels as
developed (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, Ohio). These
large as 7 mm in diameter can be sealed with this technology.
forceps feature grasping jaws with an integrated cutting blade
and control delivery of power and temperature at the tis-
■ FORCE TRIAD ELECTROSURGICAL
sue-electrode interface. The instrument jaws are lined with
SYSTEM
millions of nanometer-sized conductive carbon particles
The Force Triad electrosurgical system represents an amal-
 gamation of the latest advances in monopolar and bipolar
electrosurgical technologies. The unit features three touch-
screen modules, each of which has the capacity to operate
two electrosurgical modalities, although not simultaneously
(Figure 1l-14). Module 1 allows the use of hand-switched
and foot-switched monopolar energy delivery. Module 2
allows the use of hand-switched monopolar as well as bipo-
lar energy applications. Module 3 houses two LigaSure deliv-
ery systems, which feature significant improvements over
the first generation stand-alone LigaSure units. With faster
tissue impedance feedback and pulsed energy delivery, the
fissue fusion cycle is approximately twice as fast as the first
generation LigaSure unit. Soffware upgrades are available via
Figure 11-12 Valleylab LigaSure unit with handpiece accessories.
the Internet through a local area network (LAN) connection
The five instruments on the left are used to seal vascular pedicles
housed within the generator.
and require foot-switch activation. Those on the right are sealer/
dividers and are hand-switch activated. This unit is now referred
to as a first-generation unit.
30
Figure 11-13 SurgRx Enseal handpiece design is shown in close-
up view. Note the gold I-blade at the instrument hinge and the
Hgure 11-14 Valleylab Force Triad electrosurgical generator
grasping teeth at the perimeter of the internal blade surface.
features monopolar, bipolar, and LigaSure capabilities. The touch-
When the handpiece handle is squeezed, the I-blade advances
screen modules are forward compatible with advancements in
simultaneously with energy delivery. The blade functions to both
generator technology. Handpieces are automatically recognized by
close the bipolar jaws and cut the sealed tissue. Therefore, this is a
saulias roieraua anedondde pue ui pasanid uaum roierauag au
aas apii-leas aun dn spaads ieaa ym ssasaid dais-a
are selected based on recall or default.
CHAPTER 119
 Stapling and Energy Devices for Endoscopic Surgery  ·  371
 RADIO WAVE RADIOSURGERY
UEDs consist of a generator, an ultrasonic energy
transducer, and various handpiece options (Figure 1l-15).
RWRS devices are popular with dentists, dermatologists, and
Alternating current is modulated by the generator and then
plastic surgeons in open surgical applications. They can be
directed to the transducer, where it is converted to sound
used in a similar fashion as ESUs for monopolar and bipolar
energy. To effect this energy transformation, piezoelectric
endoscopic applications. RWRS devices are radiofrequency
current is directed through a series of stacked ceramic plates
 generators, like their ESU counterparts. However, unlike
 in the transducer. Vibration of these plates at approximately
ESUs, they convert alternating current to high-frequency
55,500 times per second initiates a sound wave whose fre-
 direct current and extensively modify and filter the resulting
quency is an integral multiple of the instrument's inherent
waveform. What is particularly interesting about these gen-
fundamental frequency. The resulting sound wave is termed
erators is that they produce ultraprecise incisions with a thin
a harmonic frequency and is capable of producing mechani-
wire electrode that remains cool to the touch and produces
cal energy.
minimal thermal spread. In fact, the thermal spread rivals
The utility of UEDs is largely a function of handpiece
that of CO, laser. Furthermore, intimate contact between the
design. Sound energy emitted from the transducer is propa-
 patient and a grounding pad is not required. The emitted
 gated down the shaft of the instrument and is transferred to
radio waves are collected via a wire antenna that is part ofthe
the instrument tip. The resulting energy is manifest as axial
ground plate. The radio waves are dispersed on the ground
displacement of the instrument tip itself (hook or ball probe)
plate and returned to the generator. Nonetheless, these radio
or an attached blade (shears) (Figure 1l-16). As power is
waves can be disruptive to operating room monitoring
increased on the generator, the length of axial displacement
equipment, which can be a major disadvantage when it is
 per cycle is increased. Clinically, this increases the cutting
used as a dedicated operating room generator. The reduced
rate, especially when shears and hook probes are used. How-
need for patient-grounding plate contact and the ability to
ever, there is a coincident decrease in coagulating ability
make precise, low-power incisions with minimal char make
when cuts are made at faster speed. Therefore, the use of this
this device ideally suited for work on avian and small exotic
system requires generator settings that optimize the trade-
species.
off between speed and hemostasis.
 Electrosurgery is a safe and effective endosurgical tech-
UEDs are very well suited to tissue dissection. There is
nology when used by trained individuals. Some important
minimal heat generation at the instrument tip, resulting in
recommendations for use are presented in Box 11-1.
very little lateral thermal damage (<1.5 mm) to adjacent tis-
sue. Vibratory energy produces tissue friction, producing a
 ULTRASONIC (HARMONIC) SCALPEL
 steam envelope as cells explode and vaporize. This phenom-
 enon is referred to as cavitation. This advancing cavitational
There are times when it is inadvisable to utilize electrical
steam envelope dissipates heat and facilitates dissection, thus
energy to effect cutting or coagulation in an operative set-
ting. This is particularly true with monopolar energy, where
current must pass through the patient's body en route back
to the ESU. Spark gaping can result in direct or indirect cou-
 pling injuries during laparoscopy. Furthermore, unintended
neural stimulation can induce cardiac or respiratory arrest
during thoracoscopy. It is during such procedures that ultra-
sonic energy devices (UEDs) may be particularly useful.
B0X11-1
General Recommendations for Endosurgical
 Use of Electrosurgery
Inspect instrurment insulation carefully
Use the lowest possible power setting.
 Use the low-voltage (cut) waveforrm.
Use brief, intermittent versus prolonged activation of
active electrode.
Do not open-circuit activate the active electrode.
Use bipolar electrosurgery when possible
Hgure 11-15 Ultrasonic energy system (Autosonix, Covidien,
 Do not use hybrid (metal/plastic) cannula systems
Norwalk, Conn.) consists of a generator box, a transducer, and
various handpieces. The transducer lies between the generator and
the handpiece, often screwing into the handpiece itself.
372 ■ PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
reducing tissue char buildup at the instrument tip. Vessels
as large as 3 mm in diameter may be coagulated with this
system.
A recent article' compared the efficacy of four 5-mm-
diameter laparoscopic vessel ligation devices on 5-mm
中USS
bovine arteries. Two bipolar sealing devices (LigaSure V [LS]
and Gyrus PK [GP]), one ultrasonic device (Harmonic Scal-
 pel ACE [HS]), and one novel device using nanotechnology
(Enseal PTC [ES]) were evaluated. Lateral thermal spreading,
USS
seal times, seal burst pressure, smoke production, operative
visibility, and subjective seal quality were compared among
devices. Lateral thermal spreading was reflected by mean tis-
sue temperature 2 mm away from the respective instrument.
中USS
The authors concluded that the LS had the best overall
performance of the devices tested. It produced the highest
burst pressure, fastest sealing time, low thermal spreading,
Figure 11-16 Ultrasonic energy handpiece tips options. The
and low smoke production. The HS created the least ther-
upper tip is part of an instrument that functions primarily as a
mal spreading and smoke production but was slow and pro-
shears (Ultra Shears), ideally suited for dissection and coagulation
duced the weakest vessel seal. The GP had fast sealing times
of vessels up to 3 mm in diameter. The middle tip (Ball Probe) is
best utilized for hemorrhage control over a broad, diffuse surface,
but produced the most smoke and gave rise to variable and
such as a cut liver edge. The bottom tip (Hook Probe) is used to
 sometimes very low burst pressures. The ES had slow sealing
cut/coagulate the back side of tissue/vascular pedicles.
times and variable burst pressures.
SUGGESTED
READING
Absten GT: Practical electrosurgery for clinicians, Marathon Shores,
Fla., 2002, Professional Medical Education Association, (booklet
and current and future uses, JAm Coll Surg 202:520-530, 2006.
online): http://www.lasertraining.org/Administrative/Library/Prac
Rumbaugh ML, Burba DJ, Natalini C, et al: Evaluation of a vessel-
tical%20Electrosurgery%%20Manual.pdf. Accessed July 29, 2010.
sealing device for small intestinal resection and anastomosis in
Advincula AP, Wang K: The evolutionary state of electrosurgery: where
normal horses, Vet Surg 32:574-579, 2003.
are we now? Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 20:353-358, 2008.
 Sherman JA: Oral radiosurgery: an ilustrated clinical guide, London,
DeForge DH, Sherman JA: Journal of radiowave radiosurgery (website):
2005, Informa Healthcare.
http://vetradiowaveradiosurgery.com. Accessed July 29, 2010.
Silverman EB, Read RW, Boyle CR, et al: Histologic comparison of
canine skin biopsies collected using monopolar electrosurgery,
ethiconendosurgery.com/products/category/3. Accessed July 29,
CO Jaser, radiowave radiosurgery, skin biopsy punch, and scapel,
2010.
Vet Surg 36:50-56, 2007.
Fischer AT: Electrosurgery in laparoscopy. In Fischer AT, editor: Equine
Thompson SE, Potter L: Electrosurgery, lasers, and ultrasonic energy. In
diagnostic  surgical laparoscopy, Philadelphia, 2002, Saunders.
Freeman LJ, editor: Veterinary endosurgery, St Louis, 1999, Moshy.
Landman J, Kerbel K, Rehman I: Evaluation of a vessel sealing system,
Tobias KM: Surgical stapling devices in veterinary medicine: a review,
Vet Surg 36:341-349, 2007.
gastrointestinal anastomosis vascular staples and sutures for arterial
Valleylab, Principles of electrosurgery ondine (booklet online): http:!
and venous ligation in a porcine model, J Urology, 169:2:697-700,
www.valleylab.com/education/poes/index.html. Accessed July 29,
2003.
2010.
REFERENCE
1. Lamberton GR, Hsi RS, Jin DH, et al: Prospective comparison
of four laparoscopic vessel ligation devices, J Endourol 22:
2307-2312,2008.
12
CHAPIER
Application of Laser Energy with
Endoscopic Visualization
Peter H. Eeg
eterinary medicine has seen a significant increase in the
Most laser wavelengths in the visible and infrared light
use of laser energy in the past 15 years. Literature such as
spectrum can be transmitted with endoscopic devices
The Veterinary Clinics of North America (edited by Kenneth
(Figure 12-1). Diode lasers producing wavelengths in the
E. Bartels, DVM, MS, May 2002) and Veterinary Laser Sur-
810- to 980-nm range and neodymium:yttrium alumi-
gery: A Practical Guide (by P. Eeg DVM, CVLF, and N. Berger
num garnet (Nd:YAG) lasers producing wavelengths in
DVM, DABLS, 2006) have helped to extend our knowledge
the 1064-nm range are primarily used with fiberoptic, rigid
and use of various laser wavelengths for veterinary surgical
endoscopic, and laparoscopicall directed laser energy trans-
and medical therapeutic treatments.
mission to target tissues.
As we have pushed the knowledge envelope with respect to
Used to a lesser extent, CO lasers produce wavelengths
laser energy's use, a natural extension has been the coupling of
in the 10,600-nm range; this wavelength can also be trans-
 endoscopic visualization devices (either Hopkins-style rigid
 mitted to target tissues with endoscopic devices. Probable
scopes, flexible fberscopes, or flexible video endoscopes)
applications would be found in thoracoscopy, laparoscopy,
with laser energy application. Physicians have extended the
cystoscopy, video rhinoscopy, and otoscopy. CO laser
 application of laser energy, which has allowed the use of less
transmission requires a hollow wave or articulated arm for
invasive techniques through endoscopes, catheters, laparo-
transmission, whereas the diode and Nd:YAG lasers use a
scopes, and even hypodermic needles. Although laser energy
quartz crystal transmission fiber.
is not solely responsible for two decades of small incision sur-
Laser energy is electromagnetic radiation derived from the
 gery in human medicine,lasers have largely eliminated bleed
production of photons via stimulation of specific materials
ing in reduced-access locations through superior hemostasis,
transection, bisection, and ablation of target tissues.
Thus the extension of laser usage by example and indi-
vidual investigation of laser energy effect on hard-to-access
 Electromagnetic Spectrum
tissue locations for the veterinary surgeon via endoscopic
(nanometers)
guidance is an exciting treatment advance for general and
CO2
Er:YAG
specialty veterinary practices. As this aspect of laser energy
KTP
Nd:YAG
utilization expands, both general surgeons and specialty sur-
Excimer
Dye
 Diode
geons will benefit in terms ofimproved technique and patient
 quality of care for these minimally invasive procedures.
X-rays,
068
icrowaves,
cosmic
TV and
 LASER-TISSUE INTERACTION
rays
radio
waves
 Using laser energy with endoscopic equipment requires an
understanding of the physical aspects of laser-tissue interac-
V
Visible
Infrared
tion. Regardless of whether surgeons or clinicians are using
a topical or endoscopically transmitted laser energy applica-
400
700
tion for tissue removal or manipulation, they must under-
Hgure 12-1 Diode laser wavelengths in the electromagnetic
stand the effect differing laser wavelengths may produce on
spectrum. (Modijfied from an illustration provided by Lumenis,
the target tissue and surrounding tissues.
Santa Clara, Calif.)
374 ·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
that are capable of high-intensity photon emission. Visible
devices are passed through operating channels of scopes
light photons are limited to the part of the electromagnetic
such as cystoscopes, which are used during fluid infusion
 spectrum between 400 nm and 700 nm. Infrared light pho-
in aqueous or semiaqueous areas. These laser wavelengths
tons (not visible to the human eye, a key safety factor) repre-
work well in environments such as the abdominal cavity,
sent the electromagnetic regions from 700 nm to 12,000 nm.
urogenital region, and intraarticular and intrathecal regions
Laser energy specifically transmits as an intense, coherent,
of the body. Diode wavelength laser energy is carried via
monochromatic, collimated, photon beam.
 a quartz crystal fiber. This fiber is very flexible and easy to
It is critical for the surgeon or clinician using a laser to rec-
manipulate in the working channel of an endoscopic device
ognize that differing wavelengths of laser energy are affected
(Figure 12-3). CO, laser wavelength energy has an exceed-
to differing degrees by the substances they interact with as
ingly high water coefficient. This renders the COz laser
they pass along their course. Critical changes to the beam
much less advantageous in aqueous areas of the patient's
come in four primary photon-tissue interactions. These
body. The fluid environment would have to be suctioned
effects to the photons are in the form of reflection, scatter,
for lasing to be accomplished. CO laser wavelength energy
absorption, and transmission. Anyor all may occur during the
can be considered for endoscopic otoscopy, rhinoscopy, and
laser-tissue interaction. These effects vary depending on
 some abdominal procedures in which limited fluid content
 the wavelength being utilized and must be understood before
is observed. CO laser wavelength energy is advantageous
 the laser-tissue interaction is implemented. The uneducated
because a very limited peripheral tissue effect, usually less
user may cause peripheral tissue damage or direct tissue
than 0.1 mm, occurs. Thus, in areas in which specific tissue
effects that may in turn produce unintended complications.
is to be vaporized without any peripheral tissue damage, the
The Suggested Reading section at the end of this chapter
 CO laser wavelength energy is preferred.
offers a broad range of literature resources for a more com-
plete understanding of these critical tissue effects.
■ DIODE WAVELENGTH ENERGY
Specifically germane to this discussion is a primary
understanding of the specific wavelength absorption coeffi-
Used in scope applications, diode laser wavelength energy
cient of diode, Nd:YAG, and CO, laser wavelengths related
can be applied to the target tissue in one of two modes. These
to water, melanin, hemoglobin, and oxyhemoglobin. A full
modes are described as noncontact or contact. Diode laser
understanding of these absorption interactions is critical for
wavelength energy being applied in a noncontact mode (true
producing the desired tissue effect with the selected laser
laser photon transmission into the target tissue) provides a
wavelength. In most cases clinicians are attempting vapor-
tissue interaction effect that optimizes the absorption of the
ization, ablation, dissection, resection, or hemostasis at the
photons within hemoglobin, oxyhemoglobin, melanin, and,
 particular tisue location. Figure 12-2 gives a basic overview
to a variable degree, water. In noncontact mode (also known
of varying absorption events with respect to the laser wave-
as free-beam mode) tissues that are not highly vascular or
lengths discussed.
-sun aean iso si ua ias apo pe as
ted through water because its coefficient to water is exceed-
ingly low. This is very advantageous when laser delivery
Light Absorption Coefficient of Tissue
Reactive Components
00.000
10.00
CO2
iode
0.0
0.00
0.000
0.2
1.0
3.0
10
20
wa
ngtr(mlc
Figure 12-2 Laser light absorption coeffcient for diode and CO2
Hgure 12-3 A standard setup for diode laser energy transmission
wavelengths. (Modified from an illustration provided by Lumenis,
through a working channel of a fiberoptic device. (Photograph @
Santa Clara,Calif.)
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 12
Application of Laser Energy with Endoscopic Visualization  ·  375
pigmented (e.g-, fascia, tendons, ligaments, adipose, and
 Because of the high heat potential of the diode laser
cartilage) will allow transmission of the diode photons into
tip, the laser should never be activated while the crystal
deeper, more vascular tissue. This can produce unexpected
fber is inside the endoscopic equipment working channel.
and unwanted distant tissue site effects. Therefore it is criti-
This could lead to damage of the optical fibers. The opera-
cal that the surgeon match the diode wavelength with the
tor should be sure that the laser is in standby mode during
tissue to be treated. The surgeon also needs to be aware of
introduction of the quartz crystal into the endoscopic work-
what structures or organs are lying deep to the targeted area.
 ing channel. The crystal fber is available in diameters rang-
Diode laser wavelengths in the range of 795 nm to 810 nm
ing from 200 microns up to 1000 microns. These fibers can
have a low water coeffcient. Diode laser wavelengths in the
come with a variety of tip configurations. Most clinicians use
range of 980 nm to 1064 nm have a twofold increase in the
bare end tips that can be cleaved (cut at a 90-degree right
water coefficient and interact with the water molecules to a
angle) repeatedly so that the fber surface is pristine before
limited degree, especially intracellular water.
sterilization and packaging.
 Diode lasers in fberoptic, endoscopic, and laparoscopic
procedures are most commonly applied in the contact mode
 RIGID ENDOSCOPE (CYSTOSCOPY,
of energy transmission to the tissue through a rigid endo-
scopic viewing device (Figure 12-4). Contact mode provides
ARTHROSCOPY, OTOSCOPY,
a high heat event at the fiber tip-tissue interface. The sur-
RHINOSCOPY)
 geon accomplishes this by exposing the diode fiber tip to a
piece of wood and firing the laser. This creates a carbonized
 Diode laser energy and fibers are especially useful with
layer (char) at the cleaved fiber tip surface. This char causes
 endoscopic visualization devices (see Figure 12-3). Human
the diode photons traveling down the quartz crystal fber to
medicine has utilized this technology to advance mini-
impact the carbon molecules and release their energy into
mally invasive endoscopically guided procedures, especially
the carbon in the form of heat. The more photons that strike
in arthroscopy, rhinoscopy, cystoscopy, and endoscopy.
the carbonized surface per unit time ( watts), the greater the
A diode laser is specifically useful in these areas because
heat effect at the tip. This creates a direct tissue contact abla-
the fluid environment that exists or that can be provided
tion and cauterization effect. It allows for maximal tissue
through the device avoids excessive thermal events. The
resection and cauterization of the target tissue vasculature
diode laser can be used to ablate most types of tissue in
with minimal or no transfer of diode wavelength photons to
the contact mode. Rapid cauterization and minimal visual
distant tissue sites.
field obstruction are possible with the use of the diode laser.
The heat generated by application of a contact diode laser
The size of fiber to be used is dependent on the amount of
is a function of the power setting ( watts or joules) controlled
tissue to be ablated or resected and the available diameter
at the machine face plate, the tissue exposure time (seconds),
of the working channel of the device. Most hemostasis in
the modality being used (noncontact vs. contact), and the
fluid environments can be accomplished at between 3 and 6
absorption coeffcient ofthe target tissue. Heating ofthe diode
watts for 0.25 to 1.0 second. Diode laser excision, ablation,
crystal fiber tip is not an issue in noncontact mode. The heat
resection, transection, or bisection of tissue can be accom-
generated at the fiber tip in contact mode can be modulated
plished at between 5 and 15 watts on a continuous output
if the power setting is limited, the total exposure time is less
over a variable time domain. It is preferable to use a slightly
than 2 seconds, and the tip is actively cooled in a continually
 a o,  r a n s od i
replenished liquid environment. When the diode fber tip is
operation). This will more effectively minimize any exces-
immersed in a water-dominated fluid environment, the tip
sive thermal release into the surrounding tissue. It is critical
does not transfer heat to the surrounding area until the fluid
to realize that any gas bubble formation from the tip of the
temperature begins to rise. There can still be a direct tissue
diode crystal fber during its contact with the tissue is a spe-
heating, but this heat is also dissipated by the fluid.
cific indication of excessive heating at the target tissue site
that is not being adequately removed by the fluid present.
This can create peripheral thermal damage to adjacent tis-
sue that may not immediately be visible. I recommend a
 continuous flow of sterile lactated Ringer's solution (LRS)
at a rate of 1 mL/sec during active lasing. If gas bubbles are
noted, then a decrease in watts or an increase in the speed of
contact over the tissue is also indicated. Remember also that
 as the fluid compartment increases in size, the flow rate of
cooling fluid over the laser contact site decreases and must
be adjusted accordingly so that excessive heating is avoided.
Figure 12-4 A 980-nm diode quartz crystal fiber emerging from a
Adequate evacuation of the fluid is also needed through either
working channel of a cystoscope.(Photograph @ 2010 University of
a passive outflow port or active suction so that irrigation is
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
facilitated and overdistension in a closed area is avoided.
376 ·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Any particulate debris can also be removed via this route.
potentially damaging the endoscope. For these reasons the
Once the part of the tissue being resected is free from the
 surgeon should flex and manipulate the fiber within the flex-
surrounding tissue, it can be removed via grasping forceps.
ible scope in all directions. The surgeon should then remove
Small benign masses can be ablated and the blood supply
the diode quartz fiber and evaluate its integrity in a darkened
can be disrupted if the surgeon contacts the diode laser fiber
room. Diode wavelength energy is not visible to the naked
tip onto or into the mass and activates the laser for 2 to 5
eye, but the guide beam, which is usually a red visible light
seconds at 5 to 15 watts. The tissue can then be allowed to
wavelength, can be seen. Cracks in the quartz fiber are seen
 slough naturally or can be removed with grasping forceps.
 as distinct red or green lines ( depending on the aiming beam
A variety of tissue resection and ablation techniques can be
color) within the plastic coated sleeve.
accomplished with one of these devices when diode laser
 It is equally important to always retract the diode quartz
energy is utilized appropriately.
fber tip back into the flexible or rigid endoscope before
In situations in which an endoscope does not have a
advancing the device into a new location. This protects the
working channel, a 3F to 11F catheter can be advanced with
quartz fiber and the surrounding tissue from accidentally
the endoscope, and the diode laser quartz crystal fiber can
being torn by the exposed fiber or having the tip break off
then be advanced through the catheter. This technique can
into surrounding tissue. The fiber should be allowed to cool
also be utilized when the working channel of an endoscopic
for at least 10 seconds before retracting it into the endoscope.
 device needs to be used for other functions. This is especially
This will eliminate the potential for thermal damage to the
important when the tissue being ablated needs to be held in
endoscope. Ifthe diode quartz fiber becomes excessively hot,
 position while lasing is taking place.
the plastic coating can melt. This can make retraction of the
Nonresectable malignant tumors can be palliatively
 diode quartz fber difficult or impossible. If this occurs, the
reduced in size for provision of homeostasis to the area and
endoscope must be removed, the quartz fber recleaved, and
 potential improvement in the patient's quality of life. This is
the fiber tip carbonized again.
especially true in cases in which the mass is a location that
Intraluminal masses or ulcerations can be managed with
will not allow complete resection or complete resection is
the diode quartz fiber passed through a working endoscope
not financially viable for the client. Laser resection as a one-
channel. Quartz fibers of 600 microns to 1000 microns are
stage treatment or during repeated treatments may be more
usually preferable in that they are thicker and can tolerate
 cost-effective and less stressful for the patient than radiation
being dragged or pulled across the tissue better without
treatment. I have found this to be especially true for diffuse
breaking. Pedunculated masses can be resected at the base
nasal, oral, otic, and intraluminal bladder malignancies.
if the surgeon applies 5 to 12 watts, continuous power and
drags the exposed fiber over the base until the mass is freed.
■ FLEXIBLE AND RIGID ABDOMINAL
When bleeding ulcers in the gastrointestinal tract are
LAPAROSCOPIC ENDOSCOPY
 managed, diode laser energy can be utilized to coagulate and
cauterize actively hemorrhaging tissue. It is important to
Whether the masses to be managed are intraluminal, extralu-
have an idea of the depth of the tissue. Ifthe ulceration is full
minal, or extraorgan in nature, diode laser energy directed
thickness to the serosa, then the use of a diode may not be
through endoscopic equipment can enhance minimal inci-
indicated. If the mucosa is the primary area ulcerated, then
sional effects, limit additional tissue injury, and speed recov-
the diode laser will be a highly effective device. The diode
ery time. Correct positioning of the quartz crystal fiber with
energy should be applied at 3 to 4 watts for 0.5 to 1.0 second.
respect to the endoscope will maximize the speed and effec-
 Reapplication of energy can be applied if the hemorrhag-
tive use of the laser.
 ing is not completely controlled. It is always better to seal a
The diode quartz fiber should be in the ventral position
bleeding vessel with two separate, short applications of diode
with respect to the endoscopic lens. This is especially true
energy rather than a single application of diode laser energy
for any endoscopic devices that have angled views. This gives
of long duration. This provides better long-term hemostasis
 the best visualization in my opinion. The smallest diameter
 and reduces peripheral tissue heating.
flexible or rigid scope available is always preferred. It allows
When the surgeon works in the intestinal tract, the envi-
for the best access and the greatest flexibility in small spaces.
ronment of the lumen should be distended with sterile work-
The quartz crystal fiber is very flexible, but the surgeon
ing fluid and be relatively debris free. This will eliminate the
should experiment with endoscope devices that allow four-
potential for gas combustion from the hot diode quartz fiber
way flexing at the tip while the quartz crystal fiber is properly
tip. In some cases suction may be needed to evacuate the area
situated before attempting any intraluminal or extraluminal
to be lased of any combustible gases before sterile fluid is
resection. Quartz fibers have a plastic coating that protects
infused. This can further eliminate the danger of unexpected
the fber from harm. If the quartz fber is flexed too much,
combustion. Diode laser energy can be applied through an
it may crack within the plastic coating. Should this happen,
 endoscope to excise tissue, palliatively ablate nonresectable
the diode quartz fiber could loose some or all of its photon
neoplastic tissues, collect samples of suspect tissues, or pro-
transmission capabilities. This break could also allow leak-
vide hemostasis after punch or Tru-Cut biopsy. Here again
age of diode laser photons out along the working channel,
fibers that are generally in the range of 600 to 1000 microns
in diameter work best in my experience. It is important to
This will produce a generalized contracture, denaturization,
use an endoscopic device that has at least two working chan-
 and cauterization of the blood vessels in the exposed tissue.
nels. In the abdominal cavity there is a significant amount
Some necrosis of neoplastic tissue is also achieved. This tis-
of free gas, usually in the form of CO2, that has been used
sue will then selectively slough over a 3- to 10-day period
for insufflation of the abdomen to facilitate visualization of
after treatment. Some peripheral vascular leakage may be
tissues and organs. A significant amount of plume can be
 noted because the diode beam edges can create some lateral
produced when ablation or vaporization is initiated. This
thermal damage. This is usually limited. It is important to
plume can obscure visualization of the target tissue site and
know whether any larger vessels are deep or lateral to the
requires evacuation by suction. Plume evacuation is best
tissue area to be treated. These vessels may be injured and
could possibly rupture several days after the therapy because
aroscope port not being used on the endoscope. The area
of a peripheral tissue effect.
treated with laser energy should also be flushed to remove
An alternate way to devitalize a specific area of neoplastic
any char and evaluated for evidence of continued bleed-
tissue with the use of diode laser energy is to advance a diode
ing. Remember that adequate fluid must be passed over the
quartz fiber into the approximate center of the neoplastic
diode laser quartz fiber when it is in the active lasing mode
 mass and apply 10 to 25 watts of power in a continuous con-
so that fiber overheating and thermal damage of peripheral
tact mode. Exposure time will vary depending on the size of
tissue are avoided. Again, my preference is sterile LRS at a
the mass. I use a 2-second exposure per centimeter of tissue
rate of 1 mL/sec during active lasing.
to be ablated. This also minimizes peripheral tisue heating.
When diode laser energy is being utilized for minimally
 invasive ovariectomy, retained testicle resection, or other
 CONCLUSION
 organ resection, care must be taken to adequately isolate
vessels that need to be cauterized. It is prudent to have some
The use of diode laser energy through endoscopic devices
form of hemoclips available in case a vessel cannot be ade-
is an exciting and often rewarding experience. Great
quately sealed with diode laser energy. Vessels that are larger
advances in minimally invasive surgical techniques can be
than 2 mm in diameter are usually too large to effectively
accomplished. Patient quality of life can be maintained or
cauterize with diode laser energy. Vessels that are larger than
enhanced. However, it is critical that any veterinary clinician
0.6 mm in diameter are too large to cauterize with CO, laser
using diode laser energy through endoscopic devices clearly
energy.
understand the laser-tissue interactions. It is also paramount
Minimally invasive treatment to reduce or retard the
that complete working knowledge be obtained not only from
 growth of nonresectable hepatic neoplasia can be achieved
reading but also from hands-on experience. The golden rule
with the use of diode laser energy in noncontact mode. In a
for laser surgery is to start smalland build on positive experi-
continuous output noncontact mode, 10 to 25 watts of diode
ences. More tissue can always be removed, but once tissue is
laser energy is applied to the target area for 5 to 10 seconds.
ablated or vaporized, it is gone for good.
SUGGESTED
READING
Arndt KA, Olbricht S: Lasers in cutaneous and aesthetic surgery,
Janda P, Sroka R, Mundweil B, et al: Comparison of thermal tissue
 Philadelphia, 1997, Lippincott Raven.
effects induced by contact application of fiber guided laser systems,
Lasers Surg Med 33:93-101, 2003.
interactions. In Jensen DM, Brunetaud JM, editors: Medical laser
 Moll JR: Diode lasers in small animal veterinary medicine. In Berger N,
endoscopy: deveiopments in gastroenterology, Boston, Mass., 1990,
Eeg P, editors: Veterinary laser surgery: a practical guide, Ames, Iowa,
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
2006, Blackwell Publishing.
Bartels KE, editor: Lasers in veterinary medicine—where have we
Moll JR, Eeg P, Berger N: Laser ear surgery. In Gotthelf LN, editor:
been, and where are we going? Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Small anirmal ear diseases, ed 2, St Louis, 2005, Elsevier.
32(3):495-515, 2002.
Nikfarjam M, Christophi C: Interstitial laser thermotherapy for liver
Bartels ID, et al: Use of diode laser energy (805 nm) for selective
tumors, Br J Surg 90(9):1033-1047, 2003.
thermolysis of contaminated wounds, Lasers Surg Med Suppl
235(9):52, 1997.
Berger N, Eeg P: Veterinary laser surgery: a practical guide, Ames, Iowa,
2006, Blackwell Publishing.
13
CHAPIER
Endoscopic Knot Tying
and Suturing
Lynetta Freeman, Clarence A. Rawlings,
and David R. Stoloff
ndoscopic suturing is not difficult and expands the capa-
to maneuver in small spaces. Intracorporeal suturing and
bilities of the laparoscopic surgeon, enabling more difficult
knot tying offer benefits of flexibility, decreased invasive-
 ness as compared with laparoscopic-assisted techniques,
or laparoscopically assisted surgery. This chapter will focus
and more secure knot holding in some procedures. Having
 on the indications for endoscopic knot tying and suturing
 skills and the confidence to perform laparoscopic knot tying
and 10 practice tips for surgeons to successfully accomplish
 and suturing will enable the endoscopic surgeon to attempt
endoscopic suturing. An in-depth discussion of endoscopic
endoscopic correction of problems without converting to
suturing and knot tying can be found in another text.l Step-
 traditional open surgery.
by-step instructions for specific techniques are included on
the companion website.
 PRACTICE TIP 1: COMMIT
TO LEARNING
INDICATIONS
scopic suturing and thus requires diligence to master. The
operating environment presents unique challenges that must
Suturing and knot tying are required for closing tissues and
be overcome. The field of view is smaller than with open sur-
controlling hemorrhage. Intracorporeal suturing and knot
gery, there is loss of three-dimensional viewing, points for
tying can be done for an intestinal resection and anastomo-
instrument insertion are fixed, and the surgeon is working
sis during foreign body removal, but foreign body retrieval
with less familiar equipment. These challenges can be over-
is more efficiently done as a laparoscopically assisted intes-
 come by employing the techniques presented in this chapter
tinal resection and anastomosis. Consequently, the first cri-
and developing experience with your surgical team in per-
terion is that suturing and knot tying be practical for the
forming minimally invasive procedures. Properly positioning
procedure. The current clinical indications are somewhat
the instrument ports, taking advantage of the technology to
limited as veterinarians begin minimally invasive surgery
magnify the surgical field, and utilizing a good light source
using laparoscopic-assisted techniques. As veterinarians
will address some of the challenges associated with mini-
 desire to perform more challenging procedures, the applica-
mally invasive surgery. After basic skills are learned, the only
tions of intracorporeal knot tying and suturing will expand.
requirement to gain mastery of intracorporeal suturing is
Procedures using intracorporeal suturing have included
 practice. Several endoscopic training systems are available for
laparoscopic gastropexy, thoracoscopic closure of the dia-
practice, but a simple cardboard or plastic box can also suffce.
phragmatic hernias, laparoscopic closure of the urinary
Set the trainer at table height, connect the light source to the
bladder, and laparoscopic correction of abdominal her-
laparoscope, insert a few trocars, and practice (Figure 13-1).
nias including incisional hernias. Examples of procedures
 PRACTICE TIP 2: INVEST IN
LAPAROSCOPIC NEEDLE HOLDERS
cally assisted nephrectomy, and partial amputation of a
portion of lung, spleen, and liver. Although staplers, clip
Reusable 5-mm needle holders are available from several
appliers, and energy-sealing devices can be used to appose
equipment manufacturers. They may be obtained with
tissue and ligate vessels, they can be expensive and difficult
straight or curved jaws (Figure 13-2, A-B). Curved jaws
379
380 ·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 13-1 A, Endo-Pelvi-Trainer setup contains items for laparoscopic skills development. B, The laparoscope, trainer, and video
monitor are in axial alignment.
C
D
Hgure 13-2 A, Szabo-Berci Needle Holder “Parrot Jaw" and B,Szabo-Berci Assistant Needle Holder Flamingo Jaw (Karl Storz-
Endoskope, Tuttlingen, Germany). C, Internal jaw configuration comparing the “self-righting" laparoscopic needle holder (left) to
lo aaau aun suuao ui sisisse usuau laui aul se aui ou papei si aiaau au uaum ' ( iapiou aiaau leuoen
 proper suturing.
BOX 13-1
 Instrument List for Laparoscopic Suturing and
Knot Tying
General Equipment
Needle holder, 5 mm
Grasping forceps, 5 mm 
Endoscopic scissors, 5 mm 
Special Instrumentation
Figure 13-3 Baseball diamond analogy for port placement in
laparoscopic suturing. The camera is at home plate, instrument
 Self-righting needle holder, 5 mm
ports are at first and third bases,the target is at second base, and
Knot pusher, 5 mm
the monitor is in the outfeld.
Endoscopic Babcock forceps
 Pretied loop ligatures
 Introducer sleeve 
Keep the instrument tips close to the wound surface to mini-
 mize depth perception issues.
 PRACTICE TIP 4: SELECT AN
provide the advantages of assisting with loop formation,
helping to keep the suture from slipping off the jaws, and
APPROPRIATE SUTURE MATERIAL
providing better visibility of the suture site. A “self-right-
AND SUTURE LENGTH
 ing" needle holder has a feature that will assist the needle in
assuming the correct orientation for suturing (Figure 13-2,
 Monofilament absorbable materials like polydioxanone,
C-D). Laparoscopic needle holders have a handle that is
 polyglyconate, and poliglecaprone 25 have less tissue drag
in axial alignment with the shaft of the device. Axial align-
 and are generally preferred; however, most monoflament
ment provides flexibility with respect to port location and
materials have memory, the ends are stiff, and these mate-
makes it possible to rotate the shaft 360 degrees. Finally,
rials can be somewhat difficult to tie. For these reasons,
laparoscopic needle holders need a ratchet mechanism that
 some surgeons prefer a coated multiflament material such
is adjustable so that secure fixation of the needle in the jaws
as braided silk, polyglactin 910, polyglycolic acid, polyes-
of the instrument is ensured; however, the mechanism must
ter, or nylon. For a single intracorporeal suture, cut the
be easily locked and released during the procedure. Experi-
suture length to approximately 10 cm. Ifthe strand is much
enced laparoscopic surgeons prefer a pair of needle holders
longer, it will lay outside the visual field. Longer lengths of
so thateither device can be used for suturing. Recommended
suture are more difficult to manage and can become tan-
instrumentation is listed in Box 13- 1.
gled during the procedure. More effort is required to pull
the suture through tissue, and friable tissue can become
 PRACTICE TIP 3: PLAN THE OPERATIVE
damaged during this maneuver. Use the needle holder
APPROACH
to apply counterpressure to the tissue while the strand
is being pulled by the grasping forceps. For continuous
The ideal setup for laparoscopic suturing is similar to that
suture patterns, the suture strand should be approximately
for other laparoscopic procedures. Using the baseball dia
20 cm to 25 cm so that three or four continuous sutures
mond analogy, think of the camera port being positioned at
 can be placed and tied back to a double loop.
home plate, the wound positioned at second base, and the
working ports for insertion of the needle holder and grasp-
 PRACTICE TIP 5: PROTECT TROCAR
ing forceps at frst and third bases. The video monitor repre-
GASKEIS AND FLAPPER VALVES
sents the outfield (Figure 13-3). Whenever possible, position
the wound to be sutured in the 12-o'clock to 6-o'clock ori-
If the outer gasket on the trocar is damaged, it results in loss
entation. The surgeon will be using the needle holder and
 of insufflation and loss of the visual field, and the procedure
 grasping forceps inserted through the working ports, and
is delayed while these issues are addressed. The gaskets on
the camera holder typically reaches under the surgeon's arm
disposable trocars are easily damaged when the needle is
u a ro  a  os   
being inserted or retrieved. Curved needles, up to a CT-2,
holder shaft to ensure that it will reach the wound site, and
can be inserted through a 10-mm trocar (Figure 13-4). When
whenever possible, separate the working ports by 15 to 20
inserting or retrieving a needle, grasp the suture behind the
cm, placing each of them about 10 cm from the camera port.
swage to allow the needle to trail behind the suture. If a
382 ■ PART TWO RigidEndoscopy
Figure 13-4 A, Curved needles can be introduced and withdrawn
through a 10-mm to 12-mm trocar. Note how the needle trails
behind the suture as the needle is withdrawn. B, Care should 
be taken to prevent the suture or needle from being caught by
the internal flapper valve mechanism inside the trocar. For this
reason, the transparent trocars are preferred for endoscopic
suturing.
reducer cap is being used, insert the needle holder through
the reducer cap, grasp the suture, depressthe flapper valve,
and advance the needle holder and suture. Once the needle
clears the flapper valve, the reducer cap is attached to the tro-
car to prevent loss of pneumoperitoneum. As an alternative
in animals with a relatively thin body wall, the needles can be
inserted and retrieved percutaneously.
Hgure 13-5 The pirouette technique for loading the needle
holder. , The suture is lifted so that the needle tip remains
in contact with tissue. B, The body of the needle is rotated to
 PRACTICE TIP 6: TAKE TIME TO LOAD
allow proper loading of the needle holder. C, The needle is
THE NEEDLE HOLDER PROPERLY
perpendicular to the needle holder.
Before beginning to suture, the surgeon should ensure that
the needle is perpendicular to the needle holder and the tip
needle holder to cause the needle to rotate into the correct
is oriented in the proper direction for suturing. Curved or
position for grasping. For traditional needle holders, the pir-
 half-curved “ski” needles are most commonly used. Grasp a
 ouette technique is performed by holding the suture approx-
curved needle approximately half to two thirds of the length
imately 2.5 cm from the needle with a grasping forceps. As a
from the needle point to the swage, and grasp a ski needle just
ballerina with arms extended overhead rotates about a single
behind the curved portion. With self-righting needle holders,
point, lift the suture so only the point of the needle is in con-
lay the needle on the serosal surface of an organ, position the
tact with the tissue serosa (Figure 13-5). Then use the suture
needle holder loosely over the midbody of the needle, and
to rotate the body of the needle until it is correctly positioned
 press down on the surface of the tissue with the needle and
for grasping. After loading the needle in the needle holder,
being used. Figure 13-7 illustrates the classic microsurgical
technique for tying a square knot.2
 PRACTICE TIP 9: LEARN HOW TO TIE
AN EXTRACORPOREAL SUTURE
Extracorporeal suturing is when the knot is formed outside
the body, advanced into the body, and finally secured. Extra-
 corporeal knots can be used for ligation in place of a clip, for
tissue approximation, and for wound closure. The modified
Roeder knot is illustrated in Figures 13-8 and 13-9. When
used as ligatures, extracorporeally tied knots have advan-
tages over pretied loops because the sutures can be passed
around an intact vessel or duct and tied before transection
Figure 13-6 The needle is positioned perpendicular to the wound
 of the vessels. Care must be taken to prevent excess upward
edge, and the grasping forceps are used to grasp the tip of the
tension on the tissue during knot tying.
needle as it emerges from tissue.
The easiest means is to advance single or double half
hitches with a knot pusher or Babcock forceps (Figure
bring the needle close to the laparoscope to confirm that the
13-10). Introduce the suture or suture-needle combination
 needle is perpendicular to the needle holder jaws.
through the trocar, keeping one limb of the suture exter-
nal to the cannula. Pass the suture through the tissue to be
apposed or around the tissue to be ligated, and exteriorize
 PRACTICE TIP 7: ENSURE PRECISE
the suture. Create a double half hitch, which means the end
SUTURE PLACEMENT AND GENTLE
of the suture is passed through the loop twice instead of
TISSUE HANDLING
once. Use the knot pusher or Babcock forceps to advance the
 double half hitch to the tissue while applying slight tension
 Positioning the wound edges close to each other using
to both limbs of the suture. Convert the double half hitch
stay sutures can assist in proper wound closure. To ensure
to an overhand knot (the first throw of a surgeon's knot) by
precise needle passage, hold one edge of the wound with
exerting corrective tension on the suture. Withdraw the knot
 grasping forceps to stabilize the tissue during needle pen-
pusher, and make a single half hitch. Use the knot pusher
etration. Drive the needle perpendicular to the wound
to advance what will become the second half of a surgeon's
edge (Figure 13-6). As the needle is driven through the
knot. Additional throws are placed in a similar fashion, as
tissue, look for any change in direction of the needle's
needed. Cut both tails approximately 2 cm from the knot.
path. Observe for an area of tissue tenting. If needed, apply
counterpressure with the open jaws of the grasping for-
 PRACTICE TIP 10: CONSIDER
ceps adjacent to the point of needle tenting. When the tip
ALTERNATIVES
of the needle penetrates the tissue, grasp the needle with
the grasping forceps, apply counterpressure with the nee-
Pretied loop ligatures are useful for ligation of free vascular
dle holder to the adjacent tissue, and pull the needle the
 pedicles and closure of small tissue defects. They consist of
remainder of the way through the tissue. Sometimes it is
a pretied suture loop with a sliding knot (Figure 13-11).
easier and less traumatic to regrasp the needle with the
A disposable cannula is available that protects the loop
 needle holder and use the needle holder to pull the needle
 during insertion through the trocar. The loop ligature is
through remaining tissue.
advanced until the entire loop is visible within the body cav-
ity. A grasping forceps is inserted through another port, and
 PRACTICE TIP 8: TIE SQUARE KNOTS
ad anss au dsei oi doot a uanoi passed aie smei s
to be ligated (see Figure 13-11, C). While the structure is
As with open suturing, knots that utilize monoflament
elevated slightly with grasping forceps, the loop is guided
inoy jo nuu e u Aq anoas  aie siean
over the grasper around the tissue pedicle. To close the loop,
throws, with each resulting in a square knot. Magnification
the surgeon snaps the plastic cannula at its scored end and
 and excellent lighting ensure more precise tension applica-
 positions the tip of the cannula and pretied slip knot at the
tion and square knot placement. If there is excessive tension
exact site of ligation (see Figure 13-1l, D-E). The surgeon
on the suture, a surgeon's throw can be used to increase fric-
then pulls back on the short portion of the cannula while
tion and ensure that the loop will not loosen while the next
 advancing the longer portion. The ligature is tightened by
throw is made. At least three techniques are described for
 application of additional tension. The suture is then cut, and
intracorporeal suturing. Each technique has advantages and
the long end of the suture and cannula are removed from the
disadvantages depending on the needle type and approach
trocar (see Figure 13-11, F-H).
384■PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
D
Figure 13-7 Classic microsurgical technique for intracorporeal knot tying. A, The suture is laid ina C configuration and then wrapped
around the grasping forceps with the needle holder.For a surgeon's throw, wrap the suture around the grasping forceps twice. B, The tail of
the suture is grasped and pulled through the loop, and the needle holder and grasping forceps are pulled in opposite directions to create the
and pulls it through the loop. E, For the third throw,the needle holder wraps the suture around the grasping forceps. F, The tail of the
suture is grasped and pulled through the loop. The process should be repeated again for a total of four throws.
If needle handling is an issue, the Endo Stitch is a dispos-
company (Figure 13-13). After loading the needle-suture
able 10-mm suturing device that utilizes a double-pointed
combination into the device and cutting the suture to an
needle with suture swaged to the middle of the needle (Fig-
 appropriate length, pass the instrument through a 10-mm
ure 13-12). A clever design securely holds and toggles the
trocar. Open the jaws, ensure that the needle is positioned for
needle back and forth between the two jaws of the needle
 passage, and position the jaws across the tissue to be sutured.
holder. The device can be used to place simple interrupted
Depress the toggle lever to pass the needle through tissue
or continuous suture patterns. Before using this device, it is
to the other jaw of the device, and pull the suture through
helpful to practice suturing in the trainer provided by the
tissue leaving a 3-cm tail ("post") (Figure 13-14, A-C).
CHAPTER 13  Endoscopic Knot Tying and Suturing ·  385
C
D
Figure 13-8 Modifed Roeder knot. A, Produce a surgeon's throw. B, Wrap the free end three times around both limbs ofthe loop. C, Throw
 asnd iou e yim ou au suusnd pue pua aum au uo sund aq uaui' 'qu ahm aul pume pua aay adind auno sdeim jiey oml
Note that this knot is demonstrated using a classical two-handed knot tie. Care must be taken to ensure the final two half wraps are on the limb
that the knot will slide down as the Roeder knot is tightened.
Grasp the tail with the grasping forceps, and pull it verti-
tight. Repeat the steps to complete a square knot (see
 cally, creating a post. The suture loop should form a big C.
Figure 13-14, F-1).
 Insert the needle through the middle of the C behind the
 For additional information and step-by-step instructions
post (see Figure 13-14, D). Close the jaws, and toggle the
 on specific techniques, refer to the companion website.
needle to the other jaw (repeat twice for a surgeon's knot)
(see Figure 13-14, E). Close the jaws to pull the suture
386PARTTWORigidEndoscopy
C
Figure 13-9 Modified Roeder knot. A, Create a double half hitch and hold the free end of the suture between the middle fingers of the left
hand. B, Hold the half hitch between the thumb and index finger of the left hand and the free end of the suture in the right hand. C, Pass 
aul oi dool aul iapun pua aalj aul ssed ot siaguy aippiu aul asn'a pueu yalaul jo suaauy aippiu aul oi dool aul iaao amns aul jo pua aul
right hand again.
E
H
limbs of the loop from back to front and through the newly created loop to complete the first wrap. G, Pass the free end from back to front
and through the loop to complete the second half wrap. H, Alternately apply tension to the ends ofthe suture to compress the loosely
constructed knot. The initial half hitch and the final last half wrap are slid closer together. To tighten and lock the knot, apply tension on the 
standing part of the suture while pushing on the knot with the knot pusher. The free end of the suture is cut to 1 to 2 cm. The knot pusher
then advances theRoeder knot to the tissue.
388·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Figure 13-10 Using the Babcock forceps for extracorporeal suturing. A, The suture is passed through tissue inside the body cavity; both ends
ofthe suture are external to the trocar. A single or double half hitch is tied. B, One end ofthe suture is threaded through each ofthe jaws of
the endoscopic Babcock forceps. Apply tension to both free ends ofthe suture while advancing the forceps. C, While keeping tension on both
au "rouy auljo uoiod isny au ieas oi alis pumom aui ieau pauado pue iesoil aul yanoiu paoueape pasoo aie sdanoy aui spua aimins
process is repeated for additional throws.
CHA PTER 13 Endoscopic Knot Tying and Suturing ·  389
Figure 13-11 Using an EndoLoop device. A, Pretied loop ligature consists of a loop with sliding knot and a plastic cannula that is conical 
at one end, serving as a knot pusher, and scored at the opposite end near the red tape to create a tab. The cannula has a channel through the 
center for the suture; when the tab is separated from the cannula, the suture loop is made smaller by advancing the cannula while holding
the tab. B, The loop is introduced through a reducer cap on a 10/12-mm trocar. C, A grasping forceps is brought through the loop to grasp
a free pedicle. D, The scored tab is snapped from the end of the cannula.
Continued
390 ■ PART TWO RigidEndoscopy
H
Figure 13-11, cont'd E, The cannula is advanced to secure the knot. The tip of the cannula is held against tissue as the knot is tightened.
F, Externally,the suture is cut between the cannula and tab, and the cannula is removed. G, Endoscopic scissors are introduced beside the
suture. H, The suture guides the scissors to the wound site.
autosuIture
Figure 13-12 The Endo Stitch suturing device is available with
Hgure 13-13 Suturing trainer for learning to use the Endo Stitch
nylon, polyester, and absorbable suture materials. A switch on the
suturing system.
handle toggles the needle back and forth between the two jaws of
the suturing device.
through tissue. B, The instrument is closed on tissue, and the toggle switch is activated to passthe needle to the other jaw. C, To form a
knot, the free end of the suture is grasped and pulled vertically to create a “post." A C is then formed with the suture attached to the needle.
 D, The needle is then passed behind the post to the opposite jaw of the needle holder. E, Close the jaws of the needle holder to pull the
suture tight.
Continued
392 ■PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
G
H
Figure 13-14, cont'd F, Repeat the steps to complete a square knot. Form a C with the suture attached to the needle. G, Pass the open jaw
 of the device through the Cloop and the jaw containing the needle behind the post. H, The instrument is closed, and the toggle switch
 activated to pass the needle to the opposite jaw. I, The jaws are then closed to pull the suture tight and form a square knot.
REFERENCES
1. Stoloff DR: Laparoscopic suturing and knot tying techniques.
2. Szabo Z: Analysis of surgical movements during suturing in
In Freeman LJ, editor: Veterinary endosurgery, St Louis, 1999,
laparoscopy, Endosc Surg Allied Technol 2(1):55-61, 1994.
Mosby.
14
CHAPIER
Psychomotor Training
and Virtual Reality
Lynetta Freeman and Clarence A. Rawlings
urgical education* is essential for ensuring the safe
In human medicine, to meet these challenges for not only
and judicious use of new technology. Training in surgery
surgical residents but also for experienced surgeons who
involves cognitive knowledge, making accurate intraopera-
wish to learn new techniques, a number of surgeons and
tive decisions, and the acquisition of technical skills. This
educators worked at developing skills training programs for
chapter will focus on skills development. Fitts and Posner
minimally invasive surgery. Recognizing that “cut, sew, and
defined a three-stage model for motor skill acquisition':
fie remain the staples of surgical craft"6 and that the laparo-
cognitive, meaning the surgeon understands the task; integra-
scopic environment offered significant barriers to perform-
tive, meaning the surgeon can perform the mechanics of the
ing procedures? (Table 14-1), the early pioneers first defined
task; and automated, meaning that the surgeon performs the
the skills that are needed in laparoscopic surgery. These
task with speed, effciency, and precision. Achieving a high
needs were met by modeling exercises that can be carried
level of expertise is a goal of every good surgeon because this
 out in a relatively low-cost box-type trainer. Several groups
will result in delivering the best postoperative result for the
then developed systems for training, and among them, the
patient.2
McGill Inanimate System for Training and Evaluation of
 In human medicine, there has been an evolution in sur-
Laparoscopic Skills (MISTELS)8 and the Rosser Top-Gun
gical training from the Halsteadean-apprenticeship model
training programs were two of the prominent programs.9
of “see one, do one, teach one" to a proficiency-basedt cur-
Skill development exercises focused on two-hand coordina-
riculum.3 A number of factors have been responsible for this
tion, laparoscopic suturing, and gentle tissue handling in a
movement, and many of them apply to the field of veterinary
three-dimensional (3D) environment visualized on a two-
 medicine.4,5 With introduction of new technology, residents
dimensional (2D) monitor.
and students need to learn not only how to perform the tra-
 Surgeon educators not only wanted to offer an envi-
ditional approaches but also how to perform them using the
ronment for training but also desired to evaluate students'
new technology. Recently, the American College of Veteri-
performance in a more objective manner. An assessment
nary Surgeons introduced a requirement for resident cre-
methodology called Objective Structured Assessment of
dentialing that involves performing a number of minimally
Technical Skills (OSATS), developed by Dr. Reznick at the
invasive techniques. With somewhat limited exposure
to
 University of Toronto and Dr. Fried at McGill University in
minimally invasive surgery cases, the high costs of labora-
Montreal, was introduced to improve an instructors' evalu-
tory or operating room-based training, and ethical concerns
 ation of operative performance of surgical residents in open
regarding the use of animals or practice on client-owned ani-
d sidosde  pde rai u sm l oia
 mals, there is a definite need for computer-based educational
dures. In this assessment, instructors developed checklists of
programs and simulation technology to make psychomotor
surgical tasks for each procedure and observed and graded
skills training more efficient and effective.
students based on completion of the checklist. In addition, a
global rating scale of operative performance based on tissue
handing, knowledge and handling of instruments, time and
*Surgical education refers tothe communication or acquisition of knowledge
motion analysis, flow of operation and use of assistants, and
or information, whereas training refers to the acquisition of skills (cognitive
specific procedural knowledge was used to rate operative per-
or psychomotor).
formance.ll Recently, a model for objective skills assessment
+Proficient is “advanced in the acquirement of some kind of skill: skilled,
adept, expert,” whereas competence is defined as“sufficiency of qualifcation,
has been proposed for cardiovascular surgeons that identifies
capacity to deal aclequately with a subject."
a progression of skills in performing vascular anastomoses. 12
394·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
 Educators then developed metrics to quantify individual
(ADEPT) use tracking software to track the motion of the
performance. The metrics were based on time for comple-
surgeons' hands so that path length for the surgical instru-
tion of each task, number of errors, and measures of sur-
ment and the instrument movements can be recorded.13 In
 gical dexterity. To automate data recording and remove
 some cases, surgeons evaluate a final product with a mea-
 observer bias for evaluation of surgical dexterity, the Impe-
 sured end point such as the leakage pressure ofa ligated ves-
rial College Surgical Assessment Device (ICSAD) and
sel or intestinal anastomosis or the tensile strength of tied
the Advanced Dundee Endoscopic Psychomotor Trainer
knots. 14,15
The new assessment tools were then evaluated for valid-
ity and reliability.16 Construct validity was shown, and the
Table 14-1 Psychomotor Challenges in Minimally
training and assessment methods were demonstrated capa-
Invasive Surgery
ble of differentiating novice, intermediate, and expert sur-
geons. External validity was proven, and the scoring system
Unique challenge
Implications for surgeon
could be utilized by various test sites with similar results.
Predictive and concurrent validity demonstrated a relation-
 Loss of 3D vision and fewer
 2D interpretation of 3D structures;
ship between scores in the test system and technical skills
depth perception clues
rust rely on shadows, light,
tissue deformation, instrument
measured in the operating room. The reliability (i.e., the
 consistency) of the tests was shown by demonstrating inter-
angulation to determine depth 
Diminished tactile feedback
Impaired judgment of forces
rater and test-retest reliability. Ultimately, systems need to
applied or tissue consistency
demonstrate an ability to separate competent from incom-
Movements constrained
Depend on trocar position for
petent performance from a technical skills perspective; how-
 triangulation at the surgical site
ever, the concept faces a number of challenges.13
 Ergonomic considerations:
 Select table height and port
Today, the most commonly used system in training
operator discomfort and
placement to keep shoulder
human laparoscopic surgeons is the SAGES Fundamentals
fatigue, long instruments
and elbows in alignment; select
of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS).17 The program begins with
with unfarniliar handles
 proper instrument length
web-based introduction and instruction, followed by prac-
Fulcrum effect
 Understand pivotal effect of
tice in a box trainer to establish proficiency in five tasks:
 Paradoxic movements
body wall creating inverted
transferring pegs, cutting a pattern, placing an Endoloop,
movements (the hand moves
and performing extracorporeal and intracorporeal suturing.
right, the instrument tip moves 
There are established proficiency levels for each task based
left only when the camera is
on time, accuracy of cutting, dropping of pegs outside the
pointing toward the monitor)
field of view, accuracy of suture placement, and ability to
Enhanced tremor: hand
Requires more intense focus on
 movements are magnified
fine dexterity tasks
perform the tasks consecutively (Table 14-2).
on monitor
Recently, several virtual reality (VR) systems have been
Reduced field of view, new
Requires cooperation of surgical
 anatomic viewpoint
team to operate the camera
(Table 14-3), and there is no doubt, considering the
to avoid iatrogenic injury and
advances made in the gaming industry, that technology
facilitate a smooth operation
will improve and become less expensive in the next few
years (Figure 14-1). Computer-generated surgical simula-
2D, Two-dimensional; 3D, three-dimensional.
tion allows learners to progress independently at their own
Modified from Pellen MGCP, Horgan LF, Barton JR, et al: Construct validity of
the ProMls laparoscopic simulator, 5urg Enoosc 23:130-139, 2009.
pace and repeat tasks as many times as necessary with no
 Table 14-2 Proficiency Levels and Training Protocol for the Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery Curriculum
Task
Task name
Proficiency level*
Seconds
 Allowable errors
Repetitions**
1
 Peg transfer 
 Meain
48
 No drops outside field of view
2 consecutive +
10 nonconsecutive
2
Pattern cut
Mean + 2 s.d.
98
All cuts within 5-mnm lines
2 consecutive
3
Mean + 2 5.d.
53
Up to 1-mm accuracy error allowed
2 consecutive
4
Extracorporeal suture
Mean + 2 s.d.
136
Up to 1-mm accuracy error allowed
2 consecutive
5
 Intracorporeal suture
Mean + 2 s.d.
112
Up to 1-mm accuracy error allowed
2 consecutive +
10 nonconsecutive
Data from http://www.flsprogramm.org.
*Based on expert-derived performance.
**Maximum number of repetitions required is 80.
CHAPTER 14  Psychomotor Training and Virtual Reality ·  395
risk to the patient and better prepare students for the stress
residents were quicker and made fewer errors in performing
of the operating room. The MIST-VR system (Mentice,
laparoscopic procedures than those not trained.20,21 Other
http://www.mentice.com) is a computer-based system in
reported potential applications for VR include screening or
which the screen displays the VR movements of the instru-
recruiting prospective students for abilities that predict a
ments in real-time 3D graphics. The Lap Mentor (Simbionix,
successful career in surgery, the opportunity to practice pro-
http://www.simbionix.com) is a VR training device that
 cedures before an operation, and as a venue for postgradu-
uses haptic or force feedback combined with laparoscopic
ate training or certification.22 Although there are significant
simulation with realistic visualization of the abdominal cav-
cost constraints in veterinary medicine, in the future, it is
ity (Figure 14-2). The transfer of skills learned on VR sim-
likely that surgical training will not only involve the surgeon
ulators has been demonstrated by the fact that VR-trained
but also extend beyond the surgeon to encompass the entire
 Table 14-3 Virtual Reality Simulators for Minimally Invasive Surgery
Simulator
Company
Description
MIST-VR
Mentice
 Computer-based systerm that provides a graded series of training
http://www.rmentice.com
 exercises to teach surgical procedures
LAP Mentor
Simbionix
http://www.sirnbionix.com
 enables training on basic skill(see Figure 14-2)
ProMIS
Haptica
New module enables SAGES/ACS FLS tasks to be measured in
Surgical Simulator
http://www.haptica.com/index.htm
 ProMIS
LapSim 
Surgical Science
 Interactive simulation software that runs on a personal computer
http://www.surgical-science.com
for basic and advanced procedures
SurgicalSIM
METI
Computerized simulator that enables basic and advanced skills
http://www.meti.com
training (see Figure 14-1)
SEP Basic &
 SimSurgery
Computerized simulators for laparoscopic skills and robotic surgery
SEP Robot
http://www.simsurgery.com
training
MATT Trainer
Limbs & Things
 Plastic models that enable skills to be practiced using traditional
http://www.golimbs.corm/index.php
 instruments
 FLS
SAGES Fundarmentals of Laparoscopic
Web-based program to teach fundamental laparoscopic skills
Surgery
http://flsprogram.org
Figure 14-1 Virtual reality simulation system for laparoscopic
Hgure 14-2 Virtual reality simulation system combines haptic
skills development.(Courtesy of Medical Education Technologies,
feedback and visualization for laparoscopic skills development.
Inc., Sarasota, Fla.)
(Courtesy of Simbionix USA, Cleveland, Ohio.)
396·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
surgical team so that patients receive the best care. Likely,
veterinary populations.24 This study found that skill training
these will be in VR-type environments.
increased objective scores for the three MISTEL skills that
 Ralph Clayman recently wrote, “We are entering a brave
did not involve tying and that individuals with laparoscopic
new age of education in which technical, as well as cognitive,
 experience scored higher than novices, both before and after
competence will be tested in a quantifiable manner... Per-
additional training. Going forward, we need to define the
haps this is the first step in changing the ‘practice’ of surgery
skills that need to be learned for those wishing to practice
into the perfection' of surgery, as we perform it and as our
minimally invasive surgery, evaluate the use of the tools and
patients should experience it."23 In veterinary medicine, we
metrics that have already been developed, and demonstrate
have lagged behind our colleagues in human surgery, both
that these tools and metrics accomplish the goals of develop-
in adoption of new technology and in applying the disci-
ing psychomotor skils that directly transfer to the operating
pline of objective assessment of surgical skills. Only a recent
room. These tasks will require collaboration of veterinary
 study has addressed objective measures, MISTELS, using
educators with the serious intent to improve patient care.
REFERENCES
1. Fitts PM, Posner MI: Hurman performance, Belmont, Calif.
14. Darzi A, Datta V, MacKay S: The challenge of objective
1967, Brooks/Cole.
assessment of surgical skill, Am / Surg 181:484-486, 2001.
2. Reznick RK, MacRae H: Teaching surgical skills—changes in
15. VanSickle KR, Smith B, McClusky DA, et al: Evaluation of
the wind, N Engl / Med 355:2664-2669, 2006.
a tensiometer to provide objective feedback in knot-tying
3. Gorman PJ, Heier AH, Krummel TM: Simulation and virtual
performance, Am Surg 71:1018-1023, 2005.
reality in surgical education. Real or unreal? Arch Surg
16. Aggarwal R, Grantcharov T, Moorthy K, et al: An evaluation
132:1203-1208, 1999.
of the feasibility, validity, and reliability of laparoscopic skills
4. Johnson AL, Farmer JA: Teaching veterinary surgery in the
assessment in the operating room, Arn Surg 245(6):992-999,
operating room, J Vet Med Educ 17(1):10-12, 1990.
2007.
 5. Scalese RJ, Issenberg SB: Effective use of simulations for the
17. Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons:
teaching and acquisition of veterinary professional and clinical
What is FLS?—Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (website):
skills, J Vet Med Educ 32(4):461-467, 2005.
http://www.flsprogram.org/. Accessed January 24, 2009.
6. Haluck RS, Krummel TM: Computers and virtual reality for
18. Haluck RS, Satava RM, Fried G, et al: Establishing a simulation
surgical education in the 21st century, Arch Surg 135:786-792,
center for surgical skills: what to do and how to do it, Surg
2000.
Endosc 21:1223-1232, 2007.
7. Pellen MGCP, Horgan LF, Barton JR, et al: Construct validity
19. Gallagher AG, Ritter EM, Champion H, et al: Virtual reality
of the ProMIS laparoscopic simulator, Surg Endosc 23:130-139,
simulation for the operating room. Proficiency-based training
2009.
as a paradigm shift in surgical skills training, Ann Surg
8. Fried GM, Feldman LS, Vassiliou MC, et al: Proving the value
241(2):364-372, 2005.
of simulation in laparoscopic surgery, Ann Surg 240:518-528,
20. Seymour NE, Gallagher AG, Roman SA, et al: Virtual reality
2004.
training improves operating room performance. Results of a
9. Rosser JC, Rosser LE、 Savalgi RS: Skill acquisition and
randomized, double-blinded study, Anr Surg 236(4):458-464,
assessment for laparoscopic surgery, Arch Surg 32:200-204,
2002.
1997.
21. VanSickle KR, Ritter EM、Baghai M,et al: Prospective,
10. Martin JA, Regehr G, Reznick R, et al: Objective Structured
randomized, double-blind trial of curriculum-based training
Assessment of Technical Skill (OSATS) for surgical residents,
for intracorporeal suturing and knot tying、∫ Am Coll Surg
Br J Surg 84:273-278, 1997.
207:560-568, 2008.
11. Reznic R, Regehr G, MacRae H, et al: Testing technical skill
22. Aggarwal R, Darzi A: From scalpel to simulator: a surgical
via an innovative “bench station" examination, Am J Surg
journey, Surgery 145(1):1-4, 2009.
172:226-230, 1996.
23. Clayman RV: A “tipping point" in surgical education:
12. Al-Ruzzeh A, Karthik S, O'Regan D: Objective surgical skill
simulation at the gates,J Urol 175:415-416,2006.
assessment: the diagonal operating matrix, Interact Cardiovasc
24. Fransson BA Ragle CA: Assessment of laproscopic skills before
Thorac Surg 6:188-191, 2007.
and after simulation training with a cannine abdominal model,
13. Moorthy K, Munz Y, Sarker SK, et al: Objective assessment of
JAm Vet Med Assoc 236:1079-1084, 2010.
technical skills in surgery, BMf 327:1032-1037, 2003.
15
CHAPIER
Laparoscopy
Laparoscopic Surgery Introduction:
Using endoscopy to treat disease has markedly increased
Indications, Instrumentation,
the indications and client enthusiasm for endoscopy. In
people, two treatment approaches, laparoscopic cholecystec-
Techniques, and Complications
tomy and arthroscopy, led the transition from traditional to
Clarence A. Rawlings
minimally invasive (endoscopic) surgery. More than 500,000
cholecystectomies are performed annually in the United
Laparoscopy is the minimally invasive surgical technique
oodde sidossoiede e padoiaap pano al un ses 
that accomplishes many of the same maneuvers as the tra-
to gallbladder removal.3 Multiple laparoscopic modifica-
 ditional surgical procedure of laparotomy. Laparoscopy is
tions were soon developed, and within 2 years, the majority
performed using the optical space produced by carbon diox-
of cholecystectomies done in the United States were per-
ide insufflation. Initial insufflation is done with the use of a
formed laparoscopically.4 The advantages of the minimally
Veress needle or a catheter placed through a minilaparotomy
invasive cholecystectomy include smaller incisions, shorter
incision or by placement of a trocar-cannula with the use of
hospitalization, and a more rapid return to work. There
a Hasson technique. Once the peritoneal cavity is distended,
appears to have been resistance to this new laparoscopic
the laparoscope is placed through the cannula and used to
approach from some traditional surgeons in the United
view the placement of additional trocar-cannulae. With the
States, especially those in academia. The widespread demand
use of these additional cannulae, biopsy and surgical instru-
for laparoscopic cholecystectomy appears to have been more
ments are passed into the abdomen. In contrast to thoracos-
in response to patient request than any study document.
ing less pain, shorter hospitalizations, and other positive
cannula sites to prevent loss of carbon dioxide and optical
 outcomes. Patients wanted small incisions and perceived
space. Please visit the companion website for a model for
 reduced trauma. When audiences at veterinary endoscopy
patient discharge instructions.
courses are asked ifthey would prefer a traditional surgery at
 a cheaper cost as compared with a more expensive minimally
invasive surgery, people routinely respond that they do not
The history of laparoscopy in small animals is similar to
want the traditional and would insist on the endoscopic pro-
that in human surgery, except that widespread veterinary
cedure. Many pet owners agree that their four-legged fam-
Isny sem AdossoiedeT "sieaA 0z ot si passel seq uondope
ily members should have the same advantages of minimally
 performed in a dog in 1902, before clinical laparoscopy in 
invasive surgery as they would want for themselves.
people. Although laparoscopy was used routinely by a few
This section introduces the concept and techniques for
basic laparoscopy. Later portions will cover specific diagnos-
probably related to the need for better and more cost-
tic and treatment techniques.
effective endoscopes, improved light sources, and camera
 and imaging processing capabilities. The frst reported liver
 INDICATIONS FOR LAPAROSCOPY
biopsy was done in 1972.2 This liver biopsy technique con-
tinues to be the most commonly indicated and performed
 Nearly all of the organ biopsy specimens taken by traditional
laparoscopic technique in dogs and cats. In people and smal
laparotomy can be obtained by laparoscopy (Box 15-1).5-7
animals, the other historical delay was that indications for
 Specific indications and techniques for biopsies of the liver,
laparoscopy were restricted to diagnosis of organ disease.
spleen, kidneys, pancreas, prostate, gastrointestinal tube,
397
398·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
BOX 15-1
BOX15-2
 Diagnostic Indications for Laparoscopy
 Treatments Performed by Laparoscopy
 or Laparoscopic Assistance
 Hepatic examination and biopsies
Cholecystocentesis
Laparoscopic incisional gastropexy (preventive or
Renal examination and biopsies
therapeutic)
 Prostatic examination and biopsies
Laparoscopic enterostomy tube pacement
 Pancreatic examination and biopsies
 Laparoscopic cryptorchid castration 
 Lymph node examination and biopsies
Laparoscopic ovariectomy/ovariohysterectomy
Splenic examination and biopsies
Laparoscopic cystopexy
Reproductive tract examination
For retroflexed bladder in perineal hernia
Examination and biopsy of masses
As suspension procedure for spay-associated
Cancer staging by examination and biopsies
incontinence
 Intestinal exploration and full-thickness biopsy (laparo-
Laparoscopic cystoscopic calculi and polyp removal
 scopic assistance)
Laparoscopic colopexy for recurrent rectal prolapse
Laparoscopic gastrostomy and enterotomy for foreign 
body rermoval
Laparoscopic attenuation of portosystemic shunts
Laparoscopic-assisted resection of intestinal tumors
lymph nodes, and masses are included in the section by
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy
David Twedt. Organs are better viewed laparoscopically than
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy
during traditional surgery. Images and movies can also be
Laparoscopic insulinoma resection
recorded. These can be used to monitor disease severity and
to communicate with the client and veterinary colleagues.
The primary missing examination tool is digital palpation.
The ability to palpate organs, such as in the liver and spleen,
gastropexy, cystoscopic-assisted calculi removal, and spay
       
 procedures are well accepted and have been taught to hun-
 organ palpation for lesion localization can be obtained with
dreds of veterinarians during “hands-on” endoscopy courses.
the use of palpation probes and ultrasonographic transduc-
Specific procedures are presented in the treatment sections.
ers during laparoscopy. The diagnostic value of laparoscopy
This treatment list is being expanded almost daily as more
for histologic definition and staging of cancer is high and is
 surgeons and practitioners become comfortable with endos-
 a laparoscopic application that is underappreciated. Samples
 copy and are presented with the challenges of managing dis-
taken for histologic, microbiologic, and toxicologic exami-
 pades aisioand aou pue ioie yon aie uo
should be one that is doable by traditional technique and has
those obtained with ultrasonography. When compared with
a reasonable chance of being accomplished in a similar, min-
obtaining these samples by traditional laparotomy, laparos-
imally invasive fashion. The laparoscopic procedure should
copy markedly reduces the surgical time and trauma. Many
not be contraindicated for that patient, such as repair of a
clients will positively respond to the clinician's recommen-
diaphragmatic hernia. Another contraindication is the lack of
dation for a liver biopsy if it can be done through two small
surgical proficiency, for example, in performing endoscopic
incisions, whereas they frequently reject biopsy recommen-
knot tying. The client must be informed and be prepared to
a ne udo ue si do uo a um suo
accept that the procedure might not be accomplished endo-
efficient surgeons will find that their initial laparoscopic
scopically but may require conversion to the traditional lap-
liver biopsies seem longer than laparotomies that they have
arotomy technique. An advantage of attempting a minimally
performed hundreds of times. Motivated endoscopic surgi-
invasive surgery in a client-owned patient is that conversion
 cal novices can quickly become proficient with equipment
can be done with the only disadvantage being the cost of
setup and will find their operative times reduced below that
instrumentation and increased surgery and anesthesia time.
of their laparotomy times. The time savings is that required
 The consent for endoscopic surgery should always include
to open and close a midline laparotomy incision.
a phrase such as, “Dr.
is given permission to convert
 Laparoscopic treatments, which have developed during
to a traditional or open procedure if Dr.
deemscon-
 the past decade, markedly expand the types and numbers of
small animal procedures; in addition, the number of indica-
techniques requires the use of research subjects. An example
tions that can be treated with laparoscopy has expanded Box
15-2). Most procedures on this list have been documented
 ing strength were needed to confirm an effective adhesion
in publications, and some, such as laparoscopic-assisted
between the abdominal wall and antrum. Procedures such
 as cystoscopic calculi removal and resection of intestinal
removal, have been performed in hundreds of patients. The
tumors were first performed in client-owned patients. If the
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy
66■
endoscopic surgery had failed, permission to convert to the
traditional procedure was obtained from the client before
surgery. These clients were most appreciative, and their pets
BOX 15-3
benefited from the minimally invasive procedure. When
List of Laparoscopic Equipment for Simple
considering conversion, the surgeon must periodically be
Diagnostic Studies and Laparoscopic-Assisted
introspective about the progress of the endoscopic surgery
Treatments
 and be willing to accept that an alternative approach might
be best. Input may also be provided by another surgeon, the
Xenon light source and light cable
anesthetist, or a colleague. Some endoscopic surgeons set an
Carbon dioxide insufflators and tubing
arbitrary time limit for minimally invasive surgery before
Endoscopic video camera
 conversion to traditional surgery.
Digital capture device for images and movies
Hopkins telescope, 5 mm x 29 cm, one 0-degree
aparoscope
■ CONTRAINDICATIONS
Trocar-cannula for 10-mm instruments with one sharp-
tipped trocar
There are few contraindications for laparoscopy if a tradi-
Three trocar-cannulae for 5-mm instruments: two with
tional laparotomy can also be justified. There may be a prefer-
sharp-tipped trocars and one with blunt-tipped trocar
 ence for a traditional laparotomy if the addition of endoscopy
Two EndoTip cannulae (screw-in) for 5-mm instruments
significantly complicates the procedure. Some combined
 One cannula reducer, from 11 to 5.5 mm
surgeries, such as cystic calculi removal and liver biopsy, are
Veress pneumoperitoneum needle (optional)
better done laparoscopically. Major mass resections usually
One 5-mm palpation probe
lo Aroudoie aqisun noede udo ue aba
One 5-mm Babcock forceps
One 10-mm Duval forceps
renal systems can be contraindications for the same reason
One 5-mm oval biopsy forceps
that they would be in traditional laparotomy. The same con-
One 5-mm punch biopsy forceps
sd ou  so o ae 
One 5-mm curved Kelly dissecting and grasping forceps
Coagulopathies should be diagnosed and, when possible,
One 5-mm curved Metzenbaum scissors
managed before surgery. For dogs with unmanaged coagu-
Plastic container for sterilizing telescopes, with perfo-
lopathy and a need for a liver biopsy, a laparoscopic approach
rated and transparent lid 
is usually safer than a traditional laparotomy. The only poten-
Monopolar electrocautery cable to attach scissors and 
tial sites for hemorrhage are the trocar and liver biopsy sites.
forceps to electrocautery generator
 In contrast, a laparotomy for liver biopsy requires a much
Trays for sterilizing and secure storage of above instru-
longer incision and has increased bleeding potential.
mentation, with perforated and transparent lid
The major contraindication for laparoscopy is a lack of
either equipment or experience on the part of the operator
to perform the procedure. Training is required, and experi-
 ence with multiple procedures reduces complications during
laparoscope should be the next scope purchased, as it is pre-
laparoscopy.
ferred for examination of cranial and caudal regions of the
 abdomen, the adrenal glands, the sides of organs, and thora-
■ BASIC LAPAROSCOPIC
coscopy. The 30-degree imaging provides the option of see-
INSTRUMENTATION
ing “around corners" and is especially useful for examining
all sides of liver lobes. It can be very useful when working
Laparoscopy packs should include trocar-cannula units,
in confined area. These areas may be so confining that can-
scopes, and endoscopic surgical tools (Box 15-3). Endo-
nulae must be placed closely together, which makes it dif-
scopic instruments tend to be the same as used for tradi-
ficult to use the O-degree scope for surgical manipulations.
tional surgery except that they are long and have a narrow
A 2.7-mm diameter, 15-cm long, 30-degree scope can be
shaft suitable for passing through the cannulae. These instru-
useful for laparoscopy in cats, small dogs, and small exotic
ments include forceps, scissors, retractors, needle holders,
animals. When the 2.7-mm scope is used, a 3-mm trocar-
electrocautery and other energy devices, and suction/lavage
cannula reduces the size of the initial incision. The 2.7-
instruments. The trocar-cannula units and endoscopic tools
 mm scope should be restricted to smaller patients because
may be disposable or reusable. Most of the reusable tools are
its smaller size reduces the viewing feld and its fewer light
stainless steel, and many veterinarians prefer them for their
fbers reduce illumination. Ten-millimeter scopes provide
 cost-effectiveness. Reusable instruments can be properly
11el pue Aymq aie Aaul eu ioiel e pue uall aiou
cleaned and sterilized in a steam autoclave. This section will
than ideal for most dogs but should be considered for larger
include specific instruments for a starter system. The reader
 patients. Their bulk also increases durability, as they are less
is referred to Chapter l on instrumentation for more details.
prone to being bent. Bent scopes produce a halo in their
 The essential laparoscope is a 5-mm, 0-degree endoscope,
image, which should be avoided to decrease scope injury.
which can be used in most cats and dogs. A 5-mm, 30-degree
I have tried to use an operating laparoscope, in which an
400■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Figure 15-1 Operating ends of 5-mm endoscopic instruments 
typicaly recommended for a beginning pack. Left to right are
Hgure 15-3 As the endoscopic surgeon develops his or her skills,
palpating probe,dissecting scissors,biopsy cup forceps,punch
asuture scissors (right) will be needed in addition to dissecting
biopsy forceps, dissecting forceps, Babcock forceps, and a 10-mm
scissors (left). Suture scissors are used to cut sutures after
Duval forceps. (Photograph by Chris Herron @ 2010 University of
placement of pre-tied endoscopic loops or when endoscopic knot
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
tying is performed (see Chapter 13). (Photograph by Chris Herron
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation,Inc.)
but the slightly more aggressive Duval tips secure the antrum
better and the double action produces a wider grasp. There
 are considerable differences between various Babcock and
Duval forceps tips, even within the same endoscopic equip-
ment companies' product lines. The tips should grasp firmly
but should not penetrate viscus walls. Five-millimeter
instruments for the starter pack should include biopsy
forceps (cup and punch), scissors (dissecting), forceps
(Babcock, dissecting), and a palpation probe. Handles are
 interchangeable, but the locking type are used for grasping
devices and needle drivers, whereas the nonlocking handles
are used for scissors and biopsy devices (see Figure 15-2).
The scissors and dissecting forceps can have an aftachment
electrode for monopolar electrocautery. A variety of lengths
Figure 15-2 Handles for endoscopic instruments can be either
are available, but the shaft and sheath must be the same
nonlocking (center) or locking. Two styles of locking handles are
length. For simplicity, lengths for the initial pack should be
demonstrated: a swing-line is below and box-locks are above.
the same to reduce confusion for beginning operators. As
Nonlocking handles must be used for scissors and biopsy devices.
the endoscopic surgeon becomes more confident, additional
le a ii saio aaau e su ds
mechanism. Both styles may have a connection for monopolar
5-mm instruments include another dissecting forceps with a
electrocautery. (Photograph by Chris Herron @ 2010 University of
right-angle tip, suction/lavage probe, knot-tying forceps (see
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Chapter 13), suture scissors (Figure 15-3), and fan retrac-
tor (Figure 15-4 and Box 15-4). Ancillary equipment is also
endoscopic instrument is passed through a channel of the
needed and should be accumulated as necessary and as the
large-diameter operating laparoscope; however, I prefer not
 practice expands (Box 15-5). Although bipolar instruments
to use it because the disadvantage is the loss of depth percep-
are available from endoscopy companies, widely used bipo-
tion in the absence of triangulation. Some surgeons like the
lar instruments are also available from companies selling
 power generators. Some seal large vessels and others strictly
tomy or ovariohysterectomy (see the “Laparoscopic Ovario-
 coagulate. Some have the capability to dissect and cut tissue.
hysterectomy” section of this chapter).
Cannulae must be appropriate for passage of 5-mm
Recommended endoscopic instruments for dogs and cats
instruments; usually the outer cannula diameter is 5.5 to 6
are 5 mm, except for a 10-mm Duval forceps (see Box 15-3,
 mm. The initial pack should include at least three such can-
 Figures 15-1 and 15-2). The 10-mm forceps is used to grasp
nulae: two should have sharp trocars and the third should be
larger and thick walled organs, such as the gastric antrum for
blunt (Figure 15-5, A). A cannula for a 10-mm Duval for-
 gastropexy. Initially the Babcock forceps was recommended,
ceps is needed for laparoscopic gastropexy (Figure 15-5, B).
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy
■401
BOX15-5
Ancillary Equipment for Endoscopic Surgery
Tilting operating table
Large back table
Electrocautery cable for monopolar to endoscopy
instruments
Energy with delivery devices and cables
 Sterile biopsy cassettes
Camera sleeves
 Stapling equipment 
Vascular clips
sdooloe
Figure 15-4 Retraction and indirect palpation can be done with
fan retractors (left)and palpation probes (right). The fan retractor is
open on the left and closed for insertion through a trocar (middle).
The palpation probe can be used to manipulate organs and measure
lesions with the metric scale on the probe. (Photograph by Chris
11-mm trocar can be performed before a gastropexy in which
Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
the same cannula is used for a 10-mm Duval forceps. Reus-
able trocar-cannulae may have replaceable parts, such as the
rubber grommet. Reusable cannulae can have either an auto-
B0X 15-4
matic or manual flap-valve. Disposable trocar-cannulae tend
 List of Additional Laparoscopic Equipment
to have sharper tips, are lighter, and are more self-retaining.
These advantages make them the preference of most physi-
for Advanced Endoscopic Treatments
cians, but their typical silastic valves make them very diffi-
One 5-mm right-angle dissecting forceps
cult to clean and sterilize. Reuse will also produce tears in the
One 5-mm hook suture scissors
silastic valves. Insuflation tubing can be purchased from the
Two 5-mm needle driver and assistant (name of
endoscopic manufacturer. Tubing can be resterilized but can
instruments)
have connectors and filters that are deformed during steam
 One 5-mm suction/lavage system
sterilization. Filters are typically discarded by veterinarians 
One 5-rmm fan retractor
after their initial use. Other acceptable insufflation tubing is
Tru-Cut or biopsy gun power 14G needle biopsy device
 silastic tubing with a Luer-Lok connector that is purchased
20G, 1.5-inch needles for cholecystocentesis
from an endoscopy manufacturer. Suction line tubing has
Cystoscopic scopes and equipment
 also been used for insufflation tubing.
Surgical equipment complementary to endoscopic instru-
ments are similar to either a spay or general surgery pack
(Figures 15-7 and 15-8). Typical instruments include tissue
The type of cannula is a personal preference. The most com-
forceps (DeBakey and closure tissue forceps), approximately
mon have a smooth external sheath, which has a tendency
8 mosquito hemostats, approximately 6 Kelly hemostats,
to slide in or out of the abdominal trocar site. Some smooth
scissors (Metzenbaum, Mayo, and suture), 2 high-quality
trocars have a method for securing the trocar to the inci-
needle holders, 12 towel clamps, 2 nonperforating Lorna
sion. An excellent but more expensive option is disposable
adossoiedel nog buei udep saie pue sd jamo
trocar-cannulae (Figure 15-5, C). An Olive occluding device
 and thoracoscopy should provide a large opening in a large
can be used to aid in sealing leaks about the trocar site and
aseptic feld and cover the entire patient and operating table.
 in securing the trocar to the trocar site. A popular alterna-
Because light and camera cables are attached to critical and
tive to smooth-surface trocar-cannulae is screw-in cannu-
expensive cameras and laparoscopes, these cables and the
lae, which are retained well in the incision (Figure 15-6).
insufflation tubing must be secured to prevent damage and
Their disadvantage is that they can be more traumatic to
contamination. There should be stable, draped areas to place
place. Some clinicians prefer to have both, using the smooth
these instruments during the procedure. A large, draped
for quick procedures, such as liver biopsies and grasping of
back table works best to securely hold all equipment.
organs to be delivered to the surface forlaparoscopic-assisted
 Principles of aseptic surgery are essential, even though
procedures, and the screw-in cannula for spays. A smooth
the incisions are small. Surgical instruments are either steam
trocar for the 10-mm Duval forceps should be included for
autoclaved or gas sterilized. Reusable endoscopic instru-
 its use in the gastropexy. A reducer valve should be available
ments can usually be steam autoclaved. It is critical to dis-
to reduce the opening for a 10-mm instrument to one for a
semble the take-apart instruments (Clickline) and to clean
5-mm instrument. In this way biopsy of an organ through an
them in an enzymatic bath according to the manufacturer's
402■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Figure 15-5 A, The most common trocar-cannulae used for 5-mm endoscopic instruments have a smooth outside surface. The top cannula
has a palpation probe as used by some for the Hasson placement technique and the rmiddle trocar has a trocar with a round tip, which
works best for the Hasson technique. The lower trocar is sharp and is used for penetration of the abdominal wall when distended with
pneumoperitoneum. Reusable trocar-cannula must be disassembled for proper cleaning and processing between each use. B, A reducer
) axadonse e u asn sdary ean uu-oi e se yns uusu uu-il e ioy pauisap ens e uisn yo uodo au sapiaaid
for human surgery and work very well for animals. Most can be used with either a blunt trocar tip or be charged so that a very sharp cutting
trocar is used to thrust through the abdominal wall. They are light and frequently have an external surface that retains the cannula within
the abdominal wall. An assembled cannula (above), and the cannula has the trocar withdrawn (below). (Photographs by Chris Herron @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
pss s s d  d a s
camera and light cable (Figure 15-10). Although many lapa-
and have the surgical team aseptically reassemble them dur-
roscopes are rated for steam autoclave, care must be taken to
ing the surgery. The camera, scopes, and light cables are
strictly follow the manufacturer's guidelines. An option that
usually gas sterilized with the use of either Sterad or eth-
avoids reusing steam-autoclaved laparoscopes or glutaralde-
ylene oxide. Disinfection with glutaraldehyde (Cidex) or
 hyde disinfection is rotating a 5-mm, 0-degree with a 5-mm,
the use of a camera sleeve can also be used for the camera
 30-degree laparoscope and a 2.7-mm endoscope.
and light cable. If glutaraldehyde is used, the instruments
Recording images and movies digitall is considered
must be thoroughly flushed with sterile fluids. Consider-
essential by many clinicians. These are useful for docu-
ing the expense of endoscopic equipment and the potential
menting and monitoring disease. Clients, veterinary col-
for injury, I strongly recommend that endoscopic boxes be
leagues, hospital staff members, and referring veterinarians
used for pack preparation, sterilization, and storage (Figure
appreciate being able to view diseases and treatments that
15-9). If several endoscopic surgery cases are scheduled for
have been performed. It is very useful to compare endo-
the same day, planning is required to rotate and sterilize
scopic images with other imaging findings, for example,
instruments. The trocar-cannulae and endoscopic instru-
those seen on radiographs, ultrasonograms, and comput-
ments can be steam autoclaved. Some clinicians have extra
erized tomography scans. Many clinicians and hospitals
light cables, trocar-cannulae, and energy equipment and use
use images and movies as a critical part oftheir endoscopic
a camera sleeve instead of glutaraldehyde disinfection for the
marketing.
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy
■403
Figure 15-6 Screw-in reusable trocar-cannulae (lower) are
uba sanad i dsasuns asqpaaad
Hgure 15-8 Retractors commonly used for laparoscopy.
more prolonged endoscopic surgery and for thoracic surgery.
(Photograph by Chris Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
(Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Foundation,Inc.)
Fgure 15-9 Instrument trays are important for organizing,
processing, sterilizing, and protecting endoscopic instruments.
Reusable instruments should be disassembled for sterilization or
disinfection, then these Clickline instruments are reassembled at
instruments include scissors (Metzenbaum, Mayo, and suture),
the surgery table. (Photograph by Chris Herron @ 2010 University of
forceps (curved mosquito and Kelly),tissue forceps (DeBakey and
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Brown-Adson), 10-12 towel clamps, saline bowl, 2 diamond-insert
needle holders, and sufficient draping to cover the entire patient 
and table. (Photograph @ 2010 University ofGeorgia Research
vessels, such as renal vessels, as another means of hemor-
Foundation,Inc.)
rhage control. Gastrointestinal resections and anastomoses
 can be performed with the use of stapling equipment during
laparoscopy.
■ ACCESSORY ENDOSCOPIC
INSTRUMENTS
 PATIENT EVALUATION
AND PREPARATION
Several energy and stapling instruments are useful, even
 essential, when more advanced laparoscopic procedures are
e a pd aa pd s 
 performed. These are covered in Chapter 11. Electrocautery,
in sud v adossoede aoq aup aq ose pons
vessel-sealing devices, and other power equipment reduce
have complete historical and physical examinations. Evalu-
hemorrhaging while tissue is cut. These techniques are criti-
ations should include a complete blood count, platelet
cal when the clinician performs an ovariectomy, ovariohys-
count, serum chemistry profle, and urinalysis. Some prac-
terectomy, adrenalectomy, and other vascular dissections.
fices may opt for more modest laboratory studies for young.
Clips and endoscopic knot tying can be applied to larger
healthy dogs and cats undergoing elective procedures such as
404■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Figure 15-10 Stenile sleeves for maintaining sterility of the camera can allow the performance of several endoscopic surgeries in succession.
The camera must be sleeved aseptically before it is connected to the sterile laparoscope. A, An assistant lowers the nonsterilized camera
uo sqei aui uo sind jueisise aui am aqes eras aun uoe aaaals aui shadod uoaains aui 'g 'uoans aais aul aa Piay aaaais ai oiui
the end to be connected to the camera processor. C, The tip of the camera end of the sleeve is torn along a perforated line, and the camera
end ofthe sterile laparoscope is placed through this window. D, The laparoscope is connected to the camera, and sterility is maintained
by wrapping the sleeve about the laparoscope with the attached adhesive strip. This is an effcient way of reusing the camera but prevents
aseptically switching scopes during the procedure. It is frequently useful to switch between O- and 30-degree laparoscopes or from a
laparoscope to a cystoscope during laparoscopy, but this is prevented when a sleeve is used. ( Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia
Research Foundation,Inc.)
cryptorchidectomy, ovariectomy, ovariohysterectomy, and
■ ANESTHESIA AND MONITORING
gastropexy. Patients requiring biopsies of the kidney, liver,
or masses should also have coagulation studies. Depending
General anesthesia with positive pressure ventilation should
on the disease condition, clinical judgment can indicate the
be given for nearly all laparoscopies.8-10 Some clinicians
need for more complete organ function and imaging studies
prefer sedation plus local anesthesia for quick liver biop-
(e.g, ultrasonography, radiography, computed tomography,
sies. Considering the safety of general anesthetic drugs, the
and contrast studies).
monitoring capability in veterinary practices, and the sta-
 Patients are typically fasted for at least 12 hours. Longer
bility gained by general anesthesia, I strongly prefer general
a i sd paso ro su aq  sa
anesthesia.
prone to stress-induced ileus. I typically have food withheld
for 12 hours when the patient is admitted on the morning
thesiologists for its ability to reduce postoperative pain and
of surgery. Water may be continued up to 2 hours before
respiratory problems.8 Several pain studies have identified
- adod pou opie d re u iadsa s
less pain after minimally invasive surgery as compared with
centrate their urine. The bladder should be emptied, espe-
traditional or maximal surgery. Despite these pain studies,
cially for caudal abdominal surgery such as ovariectomy,
I ensure pain reduction by continued practice of analgesia
ovariohysterectomy, and calculi removal.
during and after surgery.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy ·405
Figure 15-11 Carbon dioxide insufflation ofthe
peritoneal cavity produces a pneumoperitoneum that
B
forces the diaphragm cranially. As compared to the
normal lung (insert A), pneumoperitoneum decreases
lung volumes and compliance (insert B). The higher
the abdominal pressure,the greater the depression of
breathing function. Patients should be provided with
artificial ventilation during insufflation. (Art by Kip Carter
DUGA2009
@2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
With one major exception, the anesthetic approach taken
Table 15-1 Physiologic Effects of Elevated
for a patient undergoing laparoscopy is the same as that used
Intraabdominal Pressure on
for a patient undergoing laparotomy. The exception is the need
Pulmonary Function
for positive pressure ventilation. With respect to anesthetic
regimens, drug selection should be based on the procedure and
the patient's age, physical condition, and disease status, regard-
Distension
 Parameter
Effect
media
Species
less of whether the surgery is minimally invasive or traditional.
Patients that are unstable, such as those with cardiopulmo-
Peak inspiratory
Increased
Air
Canine
nary disease, diabetes, hypothyroidism, decreased or increased
pressure
adrenal gland function, and decreased liver function or renal
htrathoracic
Increased
Tyrode's
Canine
 disease, should be managed medically as well as possible and
pressure
solution
have anesthetic drugs that produce minimal alterations to the
PaCO2
Increased
CO2. N2O
Canine, porcine
 diseased organ's function. In addition to analgesia throughout
PaO2
Decreased
CO2, N2O, air
Canine, porcine
and after the procedure, some cases are supplemented by local
Pulmonary
Decreased
CO2
 Human 
injections of lidocaine and/or bupivacaine in the trocar sites.
compliance
Carbon dioxide distension ofthe abdominal cavity dramat-
Tidal volume 
Decreased
NO
Canine
icall aects ventilation and venous return (Figure 15-11).8-10
Minute
Decreased
N2O
Canine
 Pressure pushing cranially on the diaphragm decreases extra-
ventilation
pulmonary compliance, tidal volume, and minute volume.
Insufflated
o p sisd nodsu yead nssad si
abdomen
vascular pressures and resistances are increased (Tables 15-1
and 15-2). Unless corrected, the arterial carbon dioxide ten-
sion increases and the arterial oxygen tension decreases. These
changes are exacerbated when the patient's head is down
(Trendelenburg position) (Table 15-3). Higher abdominal
 pressures and greater degrees of table tilt increase the pulmo-
 nary compromise. Some clinicians use the “Rule of i5's" as
safety guidelines for intraabdominal pressure and degree of
 Trendelenburg tilt. The high positive pressure pneumoperi-
Balley JE, Pablo LS: Anesthetic and physiologic considerations for veterinary
tings are typically 12 ventilations per minute; one third of the
endosurgery. Freeman L, editor: Veterinary enoosurgery, St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
time is for inspiration, and the remaining time permitted is
for expiration. Peak inspiratory pressure is typically 12 mm
reduction of the anesthetic concentration, and administra-
Hg. It is best if ventilation is adjusted according to the arte-
tion of cardiovascular drugs.
rial or end-tidal carbon dioxide tensions. Ventilation can be
 provided by a mechanical ventilator or by hand. The critical
factor is monitoring of cardiopulmonary measures.
 LAPAROSCOPIC TECHNIQUES
Venous return is decreased by intraabdominal insuffla-
Trocar-Cannula Placement
tions (see Table 15-2). Arterial pressure can also be decreased
by positive pressure ventilation. Consequently, arterial pres-
Laparoscopy produces excellent two-dimensional view-
sure should be monitored. Decreased arterial blood pres-
ing. This better image is produced by better lighting, mag-
sure treatments may include increased intravenous fluids,
nification, and scope/camera optics. Depth perception is
406■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Table 15-2 Physiologic Effects of Elevated Intraabdominal Pressure on Cardiovascular Function
 Parameter
Effect
Distension media
Species
Heart rate
Increased
CO2. N2O, N2
 Canine, porcine
Mean arterial blood pressure
Increased
CO2, NzO, saline
Canine, porcine
Pulmonary arterial pressure
Increased
CO2, heliumn
Canine, porcine
 Pulrmnonary vascular resistance
Increased
CO2. helium
 Canine, porcine
Systemic vascular resistance
Increased
CO2. helium, NO, saline
Canine, porcine
Venous return
Decreased
CO2, N2O, N2
Canine
Cardiac output
Decreased
Air, air bag, argon, CO2, heliumn, NzO, N2, saline,
Canine, porcine, human
Tyrode's solution
Hepatic arterial and portal venous
Decreased
 CO2, hydroxyethyl starch colloid, lactated Ringer's
Canine, porcine
solution
Abdominal visceral blood flow
Decreased
Air bag, CO2, helium, Tyrode's solution
 Canine, porcine
Renal arterial blood flow and
Decreased
 Air bag, Tyrode's solution
Canine
glomerular filtration
Balley JE, Pablo LS: Anesthetic and physiologic considerations for veterinary endosurgery. Freeman L, editor: Veterinary endosurgery, St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
poor, similar to viewing with a single eye, and can be con-
 Endoscopic surgery, like all surgeries, must be accomplished
trasted with the depth perception achieved with two eyes
used during traditional surgery. When instruments seen
 tion. When two surgeons are operating from opposite sides
through a laparoscope are used, triangulation of the scope
of the patient, the baseball field concept and comfort for
with the instrument(s) provides depth perception. Thus,
both surgeons can be best maintained by both if a second
 trocar-cannula placement must be such that triangulation is
monitor is provided for the assistant surgeon (Figure 15- 16).
produced.ll,12For simple biopsies, such as liver biopsies, only
The image for the second monitor is taken from the first. It
two trocar-cannulae are needed. One is for the laparoscope,
is frequently helpful to move the scope from one trocar to
 and the other is for the biopsy device. A similar approach is
 another to improve imaging and performance of the surgery.
used for laparoscopic-assisted procedures in which the sec-
Triangulation of an endoscopic instrument in relation-
 ond trocar is for a grasping instrument to extract an organ
ship to the laparoscope provides some depth perception.
to the trocar incision. When the trocar-cannula incision is
Depth perception is lost if the instrument and scope are
lengthened, the organ can be extracted sufficiently for such
- sos pasn si adossoiede sunado ue no jaeid
procedures as a gastropexy, intestinal biopsy, intestinal
cians consider this arrangement as “dueling swords"
resection and anastomosis for tumors and foreign bodies, or
because the scope and instrument are coming from the
removal of cystic calculi with a cystoscope. Most true lapa-
same direction and are headed toward the same target. In
roscopic operative procedures require at least three trocars:
addition to depth perception, there is a limited range of
one for the scope and the other two for instruments to dis-
instrument motion in relation to each other. When using
sect, cut, suture, tie knots, apply clips, and apply energy for
 an instrument running parallel to the scope or when using
hemorhage control.
 The classic arrangement for these three trocars is a base-
the instrument and target organ by advancing the endo-
 ball infeld (Figures 15-12 and 15-13). The catcher position
scopic instrument gently toward the target organ. Depth is
is the laparoscope trocar and the operative instrument tro-
 determined when the instrument touches the organ. Trian-
cars are going along the first and third base paths toward
gulation during proper baseball feld positioning can also
second base. The laparoscopic image has triangulation and
be assisted by the use of a 30-degree laparoscope. The view-
 depth perception of both instruments as they manipulate
ing should be such that the 30-degree viewing is directed
sn yoeodde aeqaseq, s (ase puosas) ais piei a
toward the operative site taking full advantage of the side
be considered with each surgery. Consideration given to
view. The baseball concept also applies in the sagittal plane.
instrumentation orientation also includes the sagittal and
 Poor trocar-cannula positioning can produce challenges
aoid os op oi aine (ti-i ana) sued ssaasue
for less experienced endoscopic surgeons attempting lap-
instrument motions seen on the monitor that are moving in
aroscopic-assisted cystostomy to remove calculi when the
the opposite direction as those same instruments are moving
calculi are cranial to the cystoscopic site. Other deep struc-
within the abdomen (Figure 15-15). Violating the baseball
tures have also been a problem in this vertical plane when
-u j isidosoa paouaadxa ue Aq suop aq ueo pdaso
the trocar-cannula sites are placed too close to the monitor
 essary, but it is tedious, fatiguing, and headache-producing.
with respect to the organ.
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy
■407
Table 15-3 Summary of the Physiologic Effects
of Elevated Intraabdominal Pressures
and Head-Down Tilt
Parameter
Effect
mpedance of lung and chest wall
Increased
 Peak inspiratory pressure
Increased
 Deadspace ventilation
Increased
PaCO2
Increased
PaO2
Decreased
 Pulmonary compliance
Decreased
 Functional residual capacity
Decreased
Vital capacity
Decreased
 Mean arterial blood pressure
Increased
UGA200
Left ventricular pressure, dp/dt and end-systolic
Increased
wall stress
Monitor
 Systemic vascular resistance
Increased
 htracranial pressure
Increased
Cardiac output
Decreased
Insufflated
abdomen
Head-down
Trendelenburg 30°
insufflated
Balley JE, Pablo LS: Anesthetic and physiologic considerations for veterinary 
endosurgery. Freeman L, editor: Veterinary enocsurgery. St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
B
UGA2009
Hgure 15-12 A, The baseball feld concept should be used when
 The first trocar for insufflation and initial laparoscope
planning trocar sites for endoscopic surgery. Trocars must be
placement can be inserted with at least three different tech-
piemoi pue uoains au tuoiy aeme suiod Aaui ieui os paed
 niques. The two classic methods use a Veress needle or a
the monitor. The primary surgeon is in the catcher's position
and is looking at the monitor in the outfield while operating on
Hasson technique. The Veress needle consists of a sharp
second base inside the body cavity. B, Instruments are placed
 outer trocar and a blunt inner stylet within the trocar (Fig-
along the frst to second and the second to third base paths so
ure 15-17). A skin incision is made and the needle advanced
that triangulation produces depth perception with the same
through the abdominal wall. Once the sharp needle pene-
movement, being seen on the monitor as occurring within the
trates the peritoneal cavity, a spring advances the blunt stylet
patient. It is preferable that the laparoscope be central and held
by an assistant surgeon. When appropriate, it may be better to 
forward within the needle to protect abdominal structures
move the laparoscope to another trocar. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010
from being cut. Some clinicians describe a “pop" as the
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
 peritoneum is penetrated (Figure 15-18, A). Once inside
the abdominal wall, the needle is gently rotated to attempt
 to validate that the complete abdominal wall has been pen-
that it can be done on the side or midline, in contrast to
etrated. A small amount of fluid should easily flow through
the Hasson technique, which is routinely done on the ven-
the Veress needle. The clinician should attempt aspiration to
tral midline. A common veterinary practice is to place the
check for bowel contents and blood. A drop of saline placed
Veress needle on the right side with the patient in leff lat-
on the needle hub should flow gently into the abdominal
 eral recumbency. This position can be used for liver biop-
cavity when the wall is lifted. Insufflation is then started
 sies, pancreatic biopsies, and enterostomy tube placement.
(Figure 15-18, B). An advantage of the Veress technique is
The disadvantages are the potential damage of abdominal
408■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Monito
UGA2009
OUGA2009
Hgure 15-13 Close-up of baseball field concept with patient 
and instruments. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia
ResearchFoundation,Inc.)
organs, insufflation of the space between the abdominal
musculature and the peritoneum (Figure 15-19), fatal air
embolism, 13 and insufflation of omental or falciform fat.
The Hasson technique is done using a 5-mm cannula
with a blunt-tipped trocar (see Figure 15-5, A); however,
direct observation is first provided by performance of a
minilaparotomy (Figure 15-20). If a blunt-tipped trocar
is not available, a palpation probe can be placed into the
@UGA2009
peritoneal cavity and the cannula can be advanced over it.
中
Placement should be on the midline, and the same ana-
Hgure 15-14 The baseball feld concept should also be applied
tomic precision is required as when a midline spay incision
when instrument orientation is considered in the transverse (A)
is made. The animal should be in strict dorsal recumbency.
and sagittal planes (B). (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University of
 The skin and subcutaneous fat are incised, approximately
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
 3 cm caudal to the umbilicus, 2.5 to 3 times as long as the
trocar is wide. This length increases with the thickness of
direction to avoid the spleen and umbilical fat. The trocar is
the subcutaneous fat. The fat is dissected from the external
rotated axially as it is advanced and directed just inside the
 sheath approximately 1 cm laterally. Traction sutures are
 abdominal wall once the peritoneum is penetrated. The tro-
placed 5 mm to 1 cm lateral on each side of the intended
car is also rotated to reconfrm an intraperitoneal location.
minilaparotomy. These sutures are used to lift the abdom-
Care is taken to avoid abdominal organ injury throughout
inal midline for the midline incision and can be used for
 trocar placement. Insufflation is then started. The advantage
securing the trocar and providing a seal if the abdominal
 is that intraabdominal trauma may be reduced as compared
incision is too large. The incision through the midline into
with the use of a Veress needle and the surgeon can be con-
the abdomen is made with a No. 15 blade. The incision
fident that insufflation is being delivered intraperitoneally.
through the midline should be short to ensure a snug fit
 The disadvantages are that placement is on the ventral mid-
of the abdominal wall around the trocar. The intraperito-
line and the initial skin incision is larger than with the Ver-
neal position is confrmed by placing a blunt curved forceps
ess needle. Ifthe minilaparotomy is larger than the cannula,
(mosquito or small Kelly) into the peritoneal cavity and
carbon dioxide will leak (Figure 15-21). If this occurs, the
rotating the forceps (Figure 15-20, B). The hemostat should
abdominal pressure will be below the preset pressure. When
spin freely. The trocar is then forced through the mini-
this occurs, an encircling mattress suture can be placed or a
laparotomy incision. The initial thrust is in a right cranial
dilating “Olive" can be added to the trocar (Figure 15-22).
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy
■409
Hgure 15-17 A Veress needle used to produce pneumoperi-
toneum. The needle is assembled (above) with the central, blunt.
tipped trocar being removed from the outer, sharp needle in the
center. On the left the central, blunt trocar is lower leff and the 
sharp outer needle is lower right. The inner stylet has a blunt tip
and is maintained forward by a spring. After the skin is incised,
the Veress needle is advanced through the body wall. The blunt
stylet retracts while the sharp outer needle proceeds through the
Hgure 15-15 Improper surgeon position for endoscopy in that
wall and then springs forward when the peritoneum is penetrated.
the scope is pointed away from the monitor. The target site should
Abdominal organs are lesslikelytobe injured because the blunt
be between the surgeon and monitor, not the surgeon between
stylet protects them from the sharp needle when the peritoneum
the monitor and target. (Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia
has been penetrated. ( Photograph by Chris Herron @ 2010
Research Foundation, Inc.)
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
round-tipped urinary catheter is passed into the intraperi-
toneal space and insuflation is started. After the peritoneal
cavity is distended, the trocar is inserted. This technique
works well with a screw-in trocar.
The site for the initial trocar with the Hasson or modi-
fed technique is on the midline and is usually at least 2 cm
caudal to the umbilicus. The cranial to caudal site is selected
on the basis of the procedure and area of interest. When the
laparoscope is placed through this midline site, the surgeon
can pass the scope around the umbilical fat when going from
side to side by slightly withdrawing the scope into a vertical
position. Once around the umbilical fat, the trocar is directed
toward the site of interest. Some initial midline trocars are
placed cranial to the umbilicus. Care must be taken when
these cranial trocars are placed in fat animals, especially cats
and subhuman primates. These species can accumulate fat 
Hgure 15-16 The use of a second monitor for the assistant
between the abdominal wall and the peritoneum between the
surgeon can provide the same baseballconcept for viewing as
 diaphragm and umbilicus, which makes it possible to insuf-
the primary surgeon. The second monitor is very important
when laparoscopic spays are performed because they require that
flate this space and not the peritoneum. The other trocars
the surgeon work on the opposite side of the patient to do the
are placed based on the baseball and triangulation consider-
opposite ovary. (Photograph @ 2010 University ofGeorgia Research
ations, but midline trocar locations are preferred when the
Foundation, Inc.)
baseball concept can be maintained. The midline position
decreases trauma to muscles, vessels, and nerves. Placement
Temporary occlusion of leakage can be accomplished with
 of trocars after insufflation and placement of the laparoscope
moist gauze held tightly around the trocar. Another alterna-
should be performed during marked abdominal wall disten-
tive is also performed on the ventral midline (Figure 15-23).
sion. This distension produces a stiff abdominal wall that
The skin incision can be smaller than with the Hasson but
depresses less as the trocar is forced through the wall. Site
must be long enough to define the midline. Sutures are used
selection is done by palpation of the intended site. Trans-
as in the Hasson technique. After the initial incision, a 12F
illumination of abdominal wall vessels provides the ability
410·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
CUGA2009
UGA2009
Hgure 15-19 A common complication of Veress needle
insufflation is placement of the needle between the abdominal
musculature and the peritoneum or between muscle layers.
Watching the pressure and flow on the insufflator quickly
indicates the high pressure (left digital dial) and low flow when
there is resistance to gas flow. If detected early, this problem can
be corrected by redirection of the needle intraperitoneally. The
same pressure and flow measurements can be produced by other
obstructions to flow, such as insufflation tubing obstruction or an
incorrectly turned one-valve. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University
of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
all trocars, the abdominal pressure should be reduced to just
what is adequate for the surgery because a lower pressure
reduces ventilator compromise.
Figure 15-18 A, The Veress needle frequently produces a
perceptible “pop" on entering the peritoneum, when the blunt
■ INSUFFLATION AND OPTICAL SPACE
trocar is forced into the cavity. B, Fluid should be easily infused into
the abdominal cavity, and a drop of fluid placed on the connector
Insuflation is initially achieved by infusing carbon dioxide
should easily flow into the peritoneal cavity when the body wall is
through a Veress needle, the minilaparotomy-placed cath-
elevated. Insuflation is then started. (A, Art by Kip Carter @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.; B, Photograph @
eter, or a Hasson-placed trocar. Insufflators either may be
2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation,Inc.)
analog with mechanical flow meters or have digital display
 gauges. I prefer the electronic (digital) insufflators because
 desired pressures and flow are programmable, digital pres-
to avoid vessels and nerves, which frequently parallel vessels
sures and flow are displayed, and many are capable ofavoid-
(Figure 15-24).14 The skin incision for these additional tro-
ing excessive pressures. The carbon dioxide canister must
cars should be only slightly more than that needed for trocar
be secured to the endoscopy cart, and back-up tanks should
placement. The exception on skin length is for laparoscopic-
be available. Electronic insufflators should be initially set to
assisted procedures when the length will need to accommo-
deliver up to 15 mm Hg pressure. The flow rate should be
date the procedure, such as a gastropexy, intestinal biopsy,
set high, more than 5 L/min, unless a cat's or small dog's
or cystoscopic-assisted calculi removal. The trocar is pushed
abdomen is being insufflated. As the abdomen is being insuf-
through the abdominal wall while the surgeon watches the
flated, flow and pressure should be continually monitored.
trocar tip entry using the laparoscope (Figure 15-25). Once 
This pressure and flow information is essential for solving
the tip has penetrated the peritoneum, the trocar should be
 directed in a horizontal position to avoid a sudden thrust
 ,  si s  n 
into abdominal organs. The trocar is advanced just suffi-
scopic Problems" section).
ciently for the cannulae to be totally inside the abdominal
After all trocars have been placed, the setting for abdomi-
wall before withdrawal of the cutting tip. After placement of
nal pressure should be reduced to just adequate, usually 6 to
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy· 411
Hgure 15-20 Placement of the initial insufflating trocar by the Hasson technique is done on the midline through a midline incision. A, The
skin and subcutaneous incision is 1.5 to 2 cm long. The midline is identified, and the subcutaneous incision is dissected for 1.5 cm lateral to
the midline. A traction suture is placed on each side to lift the abdominal wall. A minilaparotomy incision is made with a No. 15 blade. B, A
curved mosquito hemostat is placed gently through the incision and rotated to ensure an intraperitoneal location. C, The trocar for a 5-mm
laparoscope is passed through the incision, which should be a snug fit. Trocar-cannula insertion should be in the right cranial direction
to reduce the likelihood of entering either the umbilical fat or spleen. The trocar is also rotated to ensure proper position. The trocar is
removed from the cannula, and insufflation begun, usually with fows greater than 6 L/min. ( Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia.
ResearchFoundation,Inc.)
8 mm Hg, to provide the necessary optical space. There are
peritoneal pressure can be done by adjustment of one-way
times when pressures should be adjusted to simplify the pro-
valves to either stop flow into the abdomen or permit gas
 cedure. When the antrum is extracted during gastropexy,
flow from the peritoneal cavity. After the ovary is suspended
the bladder during a cystoscopic-assisted bladder surgery,
from the abdominal wall, abdominal pressure is returned to
or an ovary with or without the uterus during a laparo-
operatinglevels.
scopic-assisted spay, insufflation should be discontinued.
This reduced pressure decreases the need for traction as the
 TECHNIQUES FOR PATIENT
abdominal wall is moved closer to the organ rather than the
POSITIONING
d pas e sse as p e  q 
toneal cavity. The exit of carbon dioxide through the trocar
Laparoscopic and thoracoscopic surgeries are greatly
hole while the viscus is lifted through the extended trocar
enhanced when the patient can be repositioned to present
site may be beneficial. Passage of a transabdominal needle
the surgical site at the highest level. Organ exposure using
through the ovary for a laparoscopic-assisted spay is facili-
 patient positioning is similar but superior to that provided
tated by decreasing the pressure enough to make the abdom-
by the use of self-retaining retractors, laparotomy pads, and
 inal wall pliable. Effciently reducing and then increasing
an assistant's hands or handheld retractors. These traditional
412·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 15-21 Leakage around a Hasson-placed trocar
can occur if the initial minilaparotomy incision is too
01
97.5
large. This is reflected by a low pressure (left digital scale)
OUGA2009
despite a high flow (right digital scale). Other leakage
causes include an open insufflation port on a cannula,
a leaky cannula valve, and a poor connection. The leak
must be stopped if an optical space is to be achieved.
(Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
Foundation, Inc.)
UGA2009
A
Figure 15-22 Leakage around the
trocar can be obstructed by placement
of a purse-string suture (A), or use of
an Olive (B). Temporary obstruction
OUGA2009
can also be obtained by placement of
moist gauze over the opening. (Art
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
B
 surgical devices and techniques produce trauma, are labor
 surgical contamination. The better option is to secure the
intensive, and block viewing of some of the surgical field.
 patient to the table, prepare it for surgery, drape the patient 
 Techniques for patient repositioning can be as fundamental
for aseptic surgery, and then reposition the table with the
 as manually rolling the patient while it is draped for asep-
secured and aseptically draped patient. Surgery tables should
tic surgery. Although commonly done, patient rolling risks
be able to tilt so that the patient's head goes up, the rear end
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy ·413
Hgure 15-25 Trocar-cannula placement after a pneumo-
peritoneum has been established. As the tip enters the abdomen,
Figure 15-23 The feeding tube modifcation of the Hasson
the tip is observed with the laparoscope. Once the peritoneum is
technique substitutes the initial entry of the trocar-cannula
penetrated, the trocar should be directed horizontally and away
with a 12F feeding tube. Insufflation proceeds rapidly through
from abdominal organs. Once the entire tip ofthe shaft of the 
the tube. Once pneumoperitoneum is established at 15 mm Hg
cannula has entered the peritoneal cavity, the trocar is removed
pressure, either a screw-in cannula or a blunt-tip trocar-cannula
from the cannula. (Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia
is positioned in place ofthe feeding tube. (Photograph @ 2010
Research Foundation, Inc.)
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
when placing the patient in the head down position (Tren-
 delenburg). Greater tilting may be required but only if
the patient's anesthetic and cardiopulmonary statuses are
 stable. For rotation to lateral recumbency, the patient may
be rotated nearly 90 degrees. The primary restriction to lat-
 eral rotation is to retain all trocars within the optical space.
Failure to do so can produce injury when instruments are
removed or replaced through the trocars.
Most operating tables sold to veterinarians tilt in only one
direction. If this is the only option in the practice, care must
be taken to position the patient on the table in the direction
desired for surgery (Figure 15-26). A better option is to pur
chase a table that tilts in both directions. A positioner can be
added to the table top for rotation into lateral recumbency.
Another option is to purchase a table that tilts and rotates in
 all four directions (Figure 15-27).
Hgure 15-24 Trocar site selection, not on the midline, should
■ LAPAROSCOPIC EXPLORATION
include transillumination of the abdominal wall with the use 
oflight from the laparoscope. This aids in identifying pertinent
Surgical exploration of the abdomen during laparoscopy
muscles and vessels, so that the likelihood of hemorrhage and
shares many of the anatomic principles used during lapa-
merve damage is reduced. In addition, the abdominal wall is
palpated externally to identify a site appropriate for triangulation
rotomy. The exploratory, sometimes termed the 360-degree
to approach the target structure. (Photograph @ 2010 University of
or around the world examination, should be initiated with
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
the patient in dorsal recumbency. Before intestinal explo-
ration, the greater omentum frequently obscures abdomi-
 goes up, or the left or right side goes up. Raising the head
 nal viscus during both traditional and minimally invasive
(reverse Trendelenburg) simplifies cranial abdominal sur-
exploration. Moving the greater omentum toward its origin
idossoiedel io Asdoq iaal e hup suop ieq se qons A1
from the greater curvature of the stomach is done with both
cholecystectomy. Raising the rear of the patient (Trendelen-
techniques, although it is easier during a traditional laparot-
burg) simplifes surgery in the pelvic region. Rotation of the
omy with the use of a long midline incision. For a thorough
patient into lateral recumbency provides better exposure
exploration, the patient is rotated into left and right lateral
for ovarian and adrenal surgery. The rule of “don't tilt the
recumbent positions while the laparoscope is maintained in
patient more than 15 degrees" is a good guideline, especially
a midline cannula. Exploration of some patients is benefited
414·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Figure 15-26 Rotation of the body using the Tankersly table. A,
This table is secured to a standard operating table. The direction
of the table tilt should be appropriate if head-down or head-up 
position is also desired. B, Once the patient is secured to the tilt
table, rotation of the patient is easily done while maintaining
an aseptic field. This is particularly useful for laparoscopic
spays, adrenalectomies, pancreatic biopsies, and exploratory
examinations. (Photographs @ 2010 University ofGeorgia Research
Foundation,Inc.)
by placing the patient in either Trendelenburg or reverse
Trendelenburg position. Viewing of structures such as the
liver, adrenal glands, and kidneys is much superior to that
in traditional laparotomy. Examination of these structures
is facilitated by patient repositioning and the ability to move
the laparoscope close to the organ. In addition, the 30-degree
laparoscope provides a side viewing of the organ. A palpa-
tion probe, fan retractor, or endoscopic forceps can be used
to reflect and reposition organs. Laparoscopic examination
of the spleen, bladder, and ureters is similar to a laparotomy,
Hgure 15-27 The DRE tilt table can be adjusted in height, head-
but each technique has some advantages. Exploration of the
down or head-up position, or right or left recumbency with the
 prostate and the sublumbar lymph nodes requires dissection
use of the two joystick controls. The view of the table from the
patient's head (A) and side (B) is presented. C, Once the patient is
of their fat. As the laparoscope is spun around the abdomen,
secured to the table, the surgeon-requested position is obtained by
the orientation is improved when monitors are on opposite
adjusting the joysticks. (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia
sides of the patient. The primary surgeon may need to move
Research Foundation, Inc.)
to the opposite side of the patient for best viewing.
Exploratory “running" of the gastrointestinal tube is more
challenging during laparoscopy than laparotomy. These
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy· 415
laparoscopic techniques can be used to find a gastrointes-
abdominal cavity with the scope, the surgeon should avoid
tinal tumor or foreign body and to locate diverse sites for
also entering the falciform ligament, which introduces fat
full-thickness biopsies as done with laparoscopic assistance.
 to the lens. Hemorrhage produced by the scope's cannula
 As with laparotomy, laparoscopic examination can begin at
will cause blood to drip down the cannula and onto the
the stomach or the colon. Two techniques are used to move
scope. To avoid cannula-induced hemorrhage, the sur-
through the small intestine. Both employ two Babcock for-
 geon should take care to avoid vascular injury by keeping
ceps, either 5 or 10 mm, depending on the patient size. Intes-
to the midline and controlling bleeding vessels. If the poor
tinal trauma is reduced if the tips are relatively atraumatic
image persists, problem solving is directed toward finding
and the forceps ratchets are not engaged. The intestine can
the source. The scope is removed to examine and clean
be passed from one forceps to the next in a “rope climbing"
the lens at both ends, and the same is done for the cam-
fashion. This requires a nearly ambidextrous technique,
Pxa si pd az e um sisisid id a i ei
which is a technique already practiced by many experienced
on the operative field, the scope should be looked through
surgeons. The other technique is easier for some surgeons in
directly. The camera image should be examined without
that one forceps is left in the same abdominal area while the
the attached scope. Usually repeated cleaning resolves the
dominant hand powers the other forceps to grasp an intes-
problem. Rarely, moisture can penetrate into some camera
tine and move it to the more stationary forceps. This more
heads during glutaraldehyde disinfection. One image prob-
stationary forceps drops the prior segment and then grasps
 lem may be the failure to fully insert the camera plug into
the intestine near to the forceps in the dominant hand. The
the image processor. Also rarely, the poor image may be
 most awkward intestinal region to explore is the colonic loop
related to the electronics beyond the camera. In my experi-
 of the duodenum, which is usually dorsal and relatively inac-
ence this image problem has usually developed in used and
cessible. When the small intestine is followed to the colonic
reconditioned cameras and image processors. I recommend
flexure, an alternative approach is useful. The stomach to
that a practice purchase the highest quality of new camera
colonic flexure ofthe duodenum can be first examined, then
and image processor that it can afford. These should have a
the cecum can be used as the starting point to explore the
warranty and after-purchase service contract to ensure that
small intestine in an oral direction. Both sides of the intes-
the system always works properly.
tine should be examined in a fashion similar to that used
An inadequate optical space is the second most common
 during a laparotomy. The mesenteric lymph nodes should
 problem encountered during laparoscopy. Inadequate dis-
be examined.
tension of the peritoneal cavity with carbon dioxide is either
failure of gas inflow or a leak producing excessive loss of
 COMMON LAPAROSCOPIC PROBLEMS
carbon dioxide. First, the gas tank and insufflators must be
turned on. Numbers for flow and pressure displayed on the
Problems will occur during laparoscopy, and a problem-
insufflator provide the key to problem definition and solv-
d  sa a  e s
ing. If the pressure is high and the flow is low, gas flow is
should rarely require a decision to stop laparoscopy or con-
obstructed. Reasons include an obstruction of the insuffla-
vert to traditional surgery. For the experienced surgeon,
tor tubing, a closed one-way valve on the insufflating can-
this problem solving is no different than that already prac-
nula, and an inappropriate placement of the trocar-cannula
ticed for problems encountered during traditional surgery.
tip or Veress needle. A common error is to place the trocar-
Most problems can be avoided by such rigorous attention
 cannula or Veress needle between abdominal musculature
to technical details that most developing problems can be
 and the peritoneum. This should be identified and corrected
 either prevented or corected. Common problems are a poor
 quickly. Distension will be limited, but carbon dioxide in the
image and optical space.
tissues can increase abdominal wall thickness and compli-
cate proper trocar-cannula/needle placement. The Veress
should be examined and cleaned with sterile gauze. The
needle can also be inserted into abdominal organs, which
camera lens should also be checked and cleaned before
results in decreased flow. If the pressure is low and the flow
 connection to the scope. The laparoscope and camera
is high, a leak is present. The insufflation line may be discon-
should have already been cleaned before sterilization, but
nected, a leak may be present around one of the cannula, or
these surfaces should be reexamined during assembly at the
a one-valve on a noninsufflating cannula may be open to the
 operating table. When initially placed into a hot, humid
room. If the leak is around a cannula, an Olive (dilating and
abdomen, the cold lens of the scope becomes cloudy with
tapered about the cannula) or a purse-string suture can close
humidity. This problem is reduced if the scope is pre-
the leak. Purse-string sutures must be done on the muscula-
warmed with warm lavage solution. The scope's humidity
ture and not the skin. Closing the skin can produce accumu-
can also be wiped off by a quick touching of the abdomi-
lation of air between muscles and in the subcutaneous. With
nal wal, not the abdominal organs. Prolonged touching of
a digital insufflator, the technical staff frequently diagnoses
 abdominal tissue should be avoided because the light-gen-
the problem before the surgeon(s).
erated heat of the scope can burn tissue. The scope image
Inadequate exposure of a target organ may occur even
can also be blurred by fat or blood. On entering into the
when the images and optical space are good. Exposure may
416■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
High abdominal pressure may reduce venous return. This
may require additional intravenous fluid administration.
The effect of abdominal pressures on venous return may be
 negated slightly when the patient is in the head-down posi-
tion (Trendelenburg).
 Hemorrhage can be a problem with any surgery. The first
 avoidance technique is to maintain good exposure and dis-
sect anatomically. The use of endoscopy increases the ability
to see vessels and reduces blood loss markedly as compared
with traditional surgery. If hemorrhage develops during lap-
 aroscopy, control measures are similar to those used in tradi-
tional surgery. The area must be cleared, the damaged vessels
identifed, and the injury repaired. Hemorrhage developing
during laparoscopy may cause the laparoscope lens to be
obscured by blood. If so, the scope must be removed and
the lens cleared. It is important to remove the blood from
the abdomen before it clots as liquid is easier to remove
than clots. An endoscopic suction tip can be placed into the
blood pool, and the blood can be aspirated by a traditional
suction system. The suction tip must be depressed into the
blood so that aspiration of carbon dioxide from the opti-
cal spaces is avoided. The suction device usually includes a
channel for lavage solutions. A multiple valve on the suction
device allows the bloody area to be repeatedly aspirated and
lavaged. Once the area is clear, the best approach to closing
the leaky vessels can be established. Leaks may be stopped by
 application of hemostatic clips to the vessel, by ligation of
the vessel, or by application of either a vessel-sealing device
or electrocautery.
B
 DECIDING TO CONVERT
Figure 15-28 A, Quality of image ofthe ovary during a traditional
TO TRADITIONAL SURGERY
spay as compared with a laparoscopic spay. B, During laparoscopy.
the ovary, suspensory ligament, and uterus are obvious, and the
Making the decision to convert is simplified if the client has
kidney is in the lower left corner. ( Photographs @ 2010 University of
already provided consent to convert if complications arise.
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
A standard portion of the endoscopic surgery informed
consent form should include, “Dr.
has permission
improve when the patient is repositioned so that the organ is
more superior or when a manipulating instrument is used.
 A palpation probe or fan retractor placed through an addi-
ful, although I continue to try to contact the client during
tional cannula can be used to deflect tissue from the target
the procedure before converting. Obtaining permission to
 organ or to reposition the organ. The image quality of the
convert during preoperative communication reinforces to
the client that endoscopic surgery is less invasive and stress-
with a traditional spay (Figure 15-28).
ful. Typical reasons for conversion are that the procedure
A potential problem is the cardiopulmonary effects of
is more extensive than anticipated or that complications
pneumoperitoneum. When the abdominal cavity is insuf-
have developed. Complicating examples include unresolved
flated with carbon dioxide, pressure on the diaphragm
hemorrhage, damage to abdominal organs, and an inability
impedes spontaneous breathing. The external restrictive
to accomplish the surgery. These complications during lap-
pulmonary disease can be reduced if care is taken in the use
 aroscopy and laparoscopic-assisted surgery have been rare.
of pneumoperitoneum. After trocar-cannula placement,
When laparoscopy is used to determine whether a mass can
abdominal pressure should be reduced to a pressure just
be resected, conversion often occurs so that the abdominal
adequate to accomplish the surgical goals. This lower pres-
mass can be removed. In general, I prefer to err on the side
sure is usually 6 to 8 mm Hg. Pulmonary compromise should 
of converting so that mass removal can be attempted rather
-a ad ad  i d e a 
tion is being performed. It is best if the end-tidal carbon
resectable mass. Regardless, these decisions are influenced
dioxide concentration and blood pressure are monitored.
by the client's preferences and the patient's condition.
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy
■417
One important postoperative consideration is to remove
 CARE AND POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
the carbon dioxide from the body. When the carbon diox-
AFTER ENDOSCOPIC SURGERY
ide is restricted to the peritoneal cavity, elimination simply
involves opening the stop cocks and removing the valves
Postoperative care for endoscopic surgery patients is simi-
from cannulae. If good laparoscopic technique has been
lar to that for patients undergoing the same procedures
used, no carbon dioxide should have entered the omen-
 done traditionally. Because endoscopy is minimally inva-
tum or between muscle and facial plains of the abdominal
sive, complications and pain associated with the traditional
wall. If some carbon dioxide did enter these areas, it should
incision should be minimal. Overall, the complication
 be absorbed quickly into the blood. Some human patients
rate after surgery is low in patients. Postoperative care is
develop pain in their armpit regions after laparoscopic
directed toward analgesic drugs, fluids, and possibly antibi-
cholecystectomy, presumably because carbon dioxide has
otics. Patients being treated for medical diseases and those
migrated superiorly when the patient is rotated to the left
that have had new diseases discovered during preoperative
while in a reverse Trendelenburg position. I am unaware of
evaluation should have these conditions evaluated. Anal-
a similar problem developing in dogs and cats. It should be
gesia during the night after minimally invasive surgery
noted that the thinner abdominal walls and fewer instances
typically involves narcotics, such as hydromorphone and
of obesity in dogs and cats reduce the likelihood of carbon
buprenorphine. Some patients are administered drugs such
dioxide being infused inappropriately.
as fentanyl or ketamine by continuous rate infusion. Non-
Discharge instructions include typical postoperative mon-
steroidal drugs are commonly used. Some patients require
itoring and restriction of activity. Most patients are returned
sedatives, especially when narcotic dysphoria is judged to
 to their normal diet and daily activities on the day subsequent
have developed. An advantage of minimally invasive sur-
  a n o d  s 
 gery is the ability to inject lidocaine or bupivacaine into
activity is the same as for traditional surgery. If strong adhe.
the cannula sites. Local anesthesia is probably more impor-
sions are the goal for the surgery, such as gastropexy, vigorous
tant for cannula sites near to nerves, such as those that are
 and stressful activity should be avoided for at least 3 weeks.
paramedian in contrast to midline. Nonsteroidal analgesic
With respect to feeding patients who have undergone intes-
drugs, tramadol, or both are commonly dispensed for a few
tinal resection and anastomoses are managed in a fashion
days after surgery.
similar to patients that have undergone a laparotomy.
REFERENCES
1. Semm K: Cholecystectomy: the history of endoscopy. In
9. Duke T、 Steinacher SL, Remedios AM: Cardiopulmonary
Vitale GC,Sanflippo JS, Perissat JN,editors: Laparoscopicsurgery,
effects of using carbon dioxide for laparoscopic surgery, Vet
an atlas for general surgeons, Philadelphia, 1995, JB Lippincott.
Surg 1:77、1996.
2. Lettow E: Laparoscopic examinations in liver diseases in dogs.
10. Gross ME, Dodam JR, Faunt KK: Anesthetic considerations
Vet Med Rev 2:159, 1972.
for endoscopy. In McCarthy TC, editor: Veterinary endoscopy,
3. Cuschieri A, Dubois F, Meuiel J, et al: The European experience
St Louis, 2005, Saunders.
with laparoscopic cholecystectomy, Am / Surg 161:385, 1991.
11. Kolata RJ, Freeman LJ: Access, port placement, and basic endo-
4. Cheadle WG, Larson GM: Cholecystectomy: the American
surgical skill. In Freeman LJ, editor: Veterinary endosurgery.
technique. In Vitale GC, Sanfilippo JS, Perissat JN, editors:
St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
Laparoscopicsurgery, an atlas for general surgeons,Philadelphia,
12. Freeman L: Operating room setup, equipment, and instru-
1995, JB Lippincott.
mentation. In Freeman LJ, editor: Veterinary endosurgery.
5. Magne ML, Tams TR: Laparoscopy: instrumentation and
St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
technique. In Tams TR, editor: Small animal endoscopy, ed 2,
13. Gilroy BA, Anson LW: Fatal air embolism during anesthesia for
St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
laparoscopy in a dog. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 190:552-554, 1987.
6. Richter KP: Laparoscopy in dogs and cats, Vet Clirn North Arm
14. Quint EH, Wang RL, Hurd WW: Laparoscopic transillumi-
Small Amim Pract 314:707-727, 2001.
nation for the location of anterior abdominal wall blood vessels,
 7. Twedt DC, Monnet E: Laparoscopy: technique and clinical
fLaparoendosc Surg 6:167, 1996.
experience. In McCarthy TC, editor: Veterinary endoscopy.
15. Freeman LJ: Complications. In Freeman LJ, editor: Veterinary
St Louis, 2005, Saunders.
endosurgery, St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
8. Bailey JE, Pablo LS: Anesthetic and physiologic considerations
for veterinary endosurgery. In Freeman LJ, editor: Veterinary
endosurgery, St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
418·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
AtlAS PAGEs 418-419
The following cases are presented more completely on the companion website. Only
 representative laparoscopic images are presented here for case introduction. Please review
the complete case with videos on the website (Figures 15-29 through 15-35).
www.tamssmallanimalendoscopy.com
during a laparoscopic spay
Figure 15-30, p. 418, Laparoscopic-assisted colonic resection of a carcinoma
Figure 15-31, p. 418, Laparoscopic diagnosis of a hepatic adenoma, amendable to resection
Figure 15-32, p. 418, Laparoscopic diagnosis and staging of liver cancer
Figure 15-33, p. 419, Laparoscopic diagnosis of copper storage disease in a Doberman
Figure 15-34, p. 419, Laparoscopic diagnosis of a mesothelioma
Figure 15-35, p. 419, Laparoscopic diagnosis and resection of a cystic ovary
Atlas for laParoscopic surGery
Hgure 15-29 Improper placement of LigaSure forceps during
laparoscopic spay. ( Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia
Research Foundation,Inc.)
Hgure 15-30 Identification of a colonic carcinoma during
laparoscopic-assisted resection/anastomosis. Metastasis was present
in the regional lymph node biopsy specimen, but further spreading
was not detected in other abdominal organs.( Photograph @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Hgure 15-31 Examination of hepatic adenoma before conversion
FHgure 15-32 Biopsy and staging for a liver mass diagnosed as
to laparotomy for liver lobectomy. ( Photograph @ 2010 University
hepatic hemangiosarcoma during laparoscopy. ( Photograph @
of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy
■419
Atlas fOr laParOsscOPIc surGery
Hgure 15-34 Peritoneal mesothelioma as viewed laparoscopically
Figure 15-33 Laparoscopic view of a distended gallbladder
with ascitic fluid inthe optical space. The cause of ascites
in an 8-year-old Labrador presenting with a diagnosis of ascites.
was hepatocellular necrosis, biliary hyperplasia, and
(Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
purulolymphocytic hepatitis associated with copper storage
disease in a Doberman Pinscher. (Photograph @ 2010 University of
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Figure 15-35 Cystic ovary seen before laparoscopic dissection
and removal. (Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
Foundation, Inc.)
LIVER BIOPSY
 Diagnostic Laparoscopy
Indications and Patient Selection
David C. Twedt
Indications for a liver biopsy include unexplained laboratory
Laparoscopy has become a popular means of obtaining
 or abnormal imaging findings. Because the diagnosis of most
biopsy specimens of various abdominal organs. This is
liver disease requires histopathologic examination, the liver
 spand e aa au si dosede 
biopsy becomes critical in the evaluation of a patient with
excellent size and quality of samples. Most abdominal struc-
hepatic disease. A liver biopsyis performed to obtain a diag-
tures can be adequately evaluated with the use of laparos-
nosis, to formulate a plan of therapy, or to provide an accu-
 copy, and the operator can select the ideal location of sample
rate prognosis for the owner. Liver biopsies are also used to
collection. Although uncommon, bleeding from a biopsy
 monitor the results of a specific therapy. A liver biopsy rep-
can easily be detected and measures can be taken to correct
resents a small percentage of the liver, and it may not reflect
it. Laparoscopy can also be used to stage disease or to evalu-
the true underlying pathologic condition; thus the number
ate for metastasis. This section will discuss the indications,
of biopsies and the area sampled should be carefully planned.
 techniques, and important considerations in laparoscopic
 The results of the histologic findings are then combined with
 organ biopsy of the liver, pancreas, kidney, lymph node, and
the clinical case information, laboratory data, and imaging
spleen.
 procedures so that a final diagnosis can be formulated.
420 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
center and malignant characteristics are most commonly
present in the periphery.
Circulatory diseases, such as portal vein hypoplasia (micro-
vascular dysplasia), can only be diagnosed with the combina-
tion of histopathologic and imaging techniques to exclude the
presence of either a macroscopic intrahepatic or extrahepatic
shunt. The diagnosis is confirmed by the presence of character-
istic histologic changes. The lesions associated with portal vein
hypoplasia are often patchy and may only involve certain liver
lobes; thus it is recommended that multiple lobes be sampled.
Figure 15-36 Dog with cirrhosis ofthe liver showing a nodular
Instrumentation
liver lobe, gallbladder, and ascites.
For most liver biopsies the 5- X 10-mm oval cup biopsy for-
ceps are used.23 Some oval cup forceps are available with two
 A liver biopsy is required to diagnose parenchymal liver
small sharp spikes in the tip for grasping the tissue, but these
 diseases, such as the different forms of hepatitis that occur
are not necessary. In small dogs (<10 kg) and cats pediatric
in dogs, or inflammatory biliary tract diseases that are com-
laparoscopic equipment is preferred. The pediatric oval cup
mon to cats. These conditions tend to be diffuse throughout
biopsy forceps are 3 X 6 mm in diameter and generally provide
the liver, and a liver biopsy, when obtained laparoscopically,
enough tissue for analysis. When the larger 5-mm forceps are
will, in most cases, contain a sufficient number of portal and
used in very small animals, only halfa cup size sample should
 central areas for an accurate diagnosis. Many pathologists
be taken to avoid sampling too deep and damaging the larger
believe that six individual portal areas are necessary to make
hepatic arteries and causing excessive bleeding. If ultrasono-
an adequate diagnosis of inflammatory liver disease; thus
 graphic examination detects a lesion deep in a liver lobe, a
 small-gauge needle biopsy samples may not contain enough
needle biopsy may be required to collect representative tis-
tissue for an accurate dia gnosis.l Liver biopsies are also indi-
sue. In this situation the biopsy needle is directed through
cated for hepatic copper quantitation in suspected cases of
the abdominal wall to the liver lesion similar to the technique
 copper-associated liver disease. Dogs with macronodular cir-
 described below for a renal biopsy. The 18G needle biopsy
rhosis may have large hyperplastic regenerative nodules, and
samples are generally too small, fragment easily, and do not
 a biopsy of the nodules could have relatively benign changes
contain enough portal areas to be diagnostic. The needle
while the tissue adjacent to the nodules often demonstrates
 biopsy diameter for liver evaluation is 14G for dogs and 16G
the typical inflammatory and fbrotic changes (Figure 15-36).
for smaller dogs and cats.2 Further discussion on the type of
Laparoscopy is also indicated for the evaluation of an
biopsy needles is undertaken in the renal biopsy instrumen-
extrahepatic biliary system. The large lobular hepatic ducts,
cystic duct, gallbladder, and common bile duct can be evalu-
ated as they course from the liver to the duodenum. A com-
needle biopsies found a poor histologic correlation between
 mon bile duct obstruction should be suspected when the
the two methods. Only 48% of the needle biopsies had the
 duct is dilated and the gallbladder is turgid on palpation.
Pancreatitis is a common cause of obstruction, and the pan-
Aspiration of bile for culture and cytologic analysis is usu-
creas should be carefully examined. Cholangitis and chole-
ally safe and easy to perform. I find that 18G to 20G needles
cystitis are common in the cat, and when they are suspected,
with an inner stylet used for cerebrospinal fluid collection are
a cholecystocentesis is indicated so that bile can be obtained
ideal for cholecystocentesis. The needle entry site through the
 for both culture and cytologic analysis
abdominal wall should be caudal to the diaphragm and the
Focal hepatic lesions require careful sampling, and the
needle long enough (3 to 6 inches) to reach the gallbladder
veterinarian should take advantage of laparoscopic guidance
(Figure 15-37). If the needle transects the diaphragm, there
for sample collection. Large focal lesions can be sampled and
is a potential chance for a pneumothorax. When a ventral
surrounding tissue examined for metastasis and suitability
 approach is used, it is possible to advance the needle directly
for surgical resection. Laparoscopy may also identify small
through the quadrate lobe of the liver into the gallbladder
(0.5 cm or less) metastatic lesions, peritoneal metastases,
(Figures 15-38 and 15-39).2 If there is bile leakage when this
or other organ involvement not easily observed by other
 method is used, it drains back into the liver lobe.
techniques. Detection of a single, large resectable mass on
laparoscopic evaluation would make conversion of the pro-
Patient Preparation
odde poa ss  d rs e i a
ate. Large liver masses are often quite vascular, and bleeding
Bleeding is the most frequent complication of a liver biopsy
should be a concern. Large masses should be sampled at their
because the liver produces all clotting factors except factor
periphery because a neoplastic mass may have a necrotic
VII1. The following should be evaluated: the intrinsic pathway
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy· 421
Hgure 15-39 The appearance ofthe quadrate lobe after
cholecystocentesis done in Figure 15-38. (Photograph @ 2010
Figure 15-37 A right lateral view of an 18G spinal needle directed
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
into the gallbladder for aspiration of bile.
of the coagulation times).5 It may be beneficial to adminis-
ter vitamin K, (1 to 5 mg/kg subcutaneously daily for several
days) and then reevaluate the clotting times before biopsy. If
there are abnormalities in PT, APTT, or BMBT, fresh frozen
 plasma should be administered 2 hours before the procedure
and the patient should be monitored closely after the biopsy.
The patient should be fasted for 12 hours and also be
encouraged to eliminate before a liver biopsy. A distended
stomach, colon, or urinary bladder can make laparoscopy
more diffcult to perform.
Restraint
Laparoscopic liver biopsies are generally performed with the
Figure 15-38 A 1/-inch needle placed through the abdominal wall
use of general inhalation anesthesia as described in the gen-
and quadrate lobe to enter the gallbladder for cholecystocentesis.
The patient is initially lying on its back and may be rotated slightly
toward left lateral recumbency to improve access to the quadrate
 can be performed with a combination of sedation, IV propo-
lobe. Ifthe gallbladder is to be reached with this shorter needle,
fol, and local bupivacaine anesthesia; however general anes
insufflation pressure should be decreased such that the abdominal
thesia is recommended.
wall is near to the liver. (Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia
Research Foundation, Inc.)
Procedure
(activated partial thromboplastin time [APTT]), the extrin-
 Before the liver biopsy one should determine the best entry
sic pathway (prothrombin time [PT]), and platelet count. A
site for the individual case. The two most common tele-
buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT) is also recommended,
scope entry portals are the ventral midline and the right-
 especially for breeds associated with von Willebrand's disease.
 side midabdominal approach. A leff-side midabdominal
When coagulation tests are normal, bleeding becomes less of
entry site is rarely used because the gallbladder is not ade-
a concern.5 The reserve capacity of the liver for producing
quately visualized and the entry portals lie over the location
clotting factors is great, and deficiency of clotting factor pro-
of the spleen, which makes the procedure more diffcult. A
duction is uncommon. Slight abnormalities in coagulation
 second cannula port is required for placement of the palpa-
tests may not always preclude one from performing a liver
tion probe and biopsy forceps. The location of the second
biopsy but will increase the likelihood that excessive bleed-
cannula biopsy is determined once the liver is evaluated and
ing could occur. Bleeding from a liver biopsy does not always
the sites to be sampled are selected with use of the principles
correlate with the patient's clotting times; however animals
 of triangulation.
with normal coagulation times rarely have abnormal bleed-
My preferred method for evaluation of both the liver and
ing.6 A liver biopsy should be avoided if there is clinical evi-
pancreas is to use the right lateral approach (Figure 15-40).
dence of bleeding or marked abnormalities in the coagulation
This is preferred because the falciform ligament is not in the
tests (i.e., thrombocytopenia, < 80,000 platelets; prolongation
way, the right limb of the pancreas is easily seen, and the
422■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
closed (see Figure 15-43, C-D). The sample size will vary
with the operator's technique and depth of penetration. The
biopsy sample is then retrieved in a similar manner.
The site should be examined for bleeding, which usually
quickly subsides. It is important to note that because of the
magnification with the telescope, 1 to 2 mL of blood may
 appear to look excessive.8 Sometimes it may be necessary to
wipe away the stream of blood ventral to the biopsy site to
confirm that coagulation has occurred.
Occasionally animals may also have ascites; this alone is
not necessarily a contraindication for a laparoscopic liver
biopsy. Abdominal distension from ascites does not require
GA-20
a pneumoperitoneum; rather the frst cannula is placed
directly into the ascitic fluid. If the ascites are clear, one can
easily view through the fluid. Once the second biopsy can-
si uoeidde eae ue ro aua adosaa aui ot-i any
 ssd a  j  e d s i
determined by drawing an imaginary line from the most proximal
cranial to the liver, which is an area generally free of the
point of the iliac crest to the caudal aspect of the xyphoid process.
omentum that often clogs the suction tube. Only enough
Equidistance between those points is the usual placement for
the telescope. Selection of the site for the second cannula is
ascitic fluid is removed and CO, replaced to examine and
determined after inspection of the abdominal cavity and palpation
sample the liver. Removing too much protein-rich fluid can
of the abdominal wall to select an adequate location. For the right-
contribute to hypoalbuminemia. When closing the portal
handed operator the location for the second cannula is usually 5 to
sites in patients having ascites, the surgeon should close the
10 cm to the right and somewhat cranial to the telescope. (Art by
 peritoneum and abdominal wall tightly. Portals placed off
Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
midline frequently have extravasation of the ascitic fluid into
the subcutaneous tissues. This fluid accumulation generally
extrahepatic biliary system can easily be followed to its entry
resolves in 24 hours.
into the duodenum. With this approach the Hasson tech-
nique cannot be used and the left lateral liver lobe is more
Sample Procurement
difficult to completely examine. In very small animals or
those with a large liver the entry site may be moved caudally
 It is important to sample both the areas that appear nor-
to provide a larger intraabdominal working space; ifthe liver
mal and those that are abnormal. Examples of liver disease
is quite small or the patient very large, the cannula portal
diagnosed laparoscopically are presented (Figures 15-44
may be moved more cranially (Figure 15-41). If the second
through 15-50). Some suggest that biopsies taken at the
biopsy cannula is placed too close to the telescope, triangula-
edge of the liver often do not reflect deeper lesions and that
tion is lost and manipulation of the biopsy forceps becomes
the histopathologic features of the subcapsular tissue show
difficult.
 more fbrous tissue with nonspecifc inflammatory changes
The liver can be examined with the use of the palpation
that could misleadingly be interpreted as representing the
probe (Figure 15-42). The probe is used to move omentum
entire liver.9 In my experience the biopsy samples taken
away from the liver, palpate the gallbladder, and lif and
with the 5-mm oval biopsy cups are large enough to provide
 move the liver lobes around for complete examination. One
representative tissue.27 Samples may also be procured for
should only lift or move liver lobes using the flat portion of
culture and hepatic copper quantitation. The 5- X 10-mm
the rod; the tip should not be used because pithing the liver
is a concern. Once the location of the liver biopsy is deter-
mg of liver tissue. Ideally 20 to 40 mg of liver (wet weight)
mined the biopsy forceps are directed to the site of biopsy.
is required for copper quantitation. I also usuall divide a
Either an edge of the liver or the surface of the liver can be
biopsy sample by taking one third for culture and two thirds
sampled. When the edge of the liver is sampled, the forceps
de  d  a r a a doe 
are placed under the liver to raise the lobe; this technique
transport broth or media that preserves both aerobic and
 ensures that no other tissue or omentum are in the biopsy
anaerobic bacteria.
cups. The forceps are opened and slowly withdrawn so that
 Intrahepatic lesions observed by ultrasound may be more
the liver lobe drops into the cups (Figure 15-43, A-B).7 The
difficult to identify and sample. Lesions deep to the liver
biopsy cups are closed and held closed for approximately
capsule are best obtained under laparoscopic direction of
30 seconds or longer to promote coagulation; then gentle
a biopsy needle as described in the kidney biopsy section. I
tugging on the forceps allows the biopsy specimen to be
prefer a 16G or larger semiautomatic Tru-Cut biopsy needle.
retrieved. When the surface of the liver is sampled, the cups
Care should be taken that when the needle is activated its
D aleue aalap-oe Aaeuxoidde ue ie paoanp pauado aie
throw remains within the liver lobe and does not penetrate
the surface, and pushed into the liver 5 to 10 mm and then
surrounding structures.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy ■423
Hgure 15-42 Palpation probe shown lifting the right medial lobe
of the liver. Viewing is further improved by appropriate use of a
30-degree laparoscope.
forceps and directed to the bleeding site. It is also possible to
apply compression over the bleeding area with the palpation
 probe. Monopolar electrocautery to cauterize bleeding ves-
UGA2009
sels or application of hemostatic clips can be used.7 If postbi-
Hgure 15-41 The telescope entry site for a ventral midline
opsy bleeding is a concern, the patient's hematocrit value and
approach is generally 1 to 2 cm caudal to the umbilicus. This
blood pressure should be evaluated, and abdominocentesis,
dorsal recumbency position provides a view of the entire ventral
surface ofthe liver, and the Hasson technique can be used. With
ultrasonography, or both should be performed. Life-threaten-
this approach the biopsy cannula port is placed either to the right
ing bleeding after biopsy is treated with fresh frozen plasma,
or to the left of the telescope 5 to 10 cm off the midline. If the
fresh whole blood, or, rarely as a last resort, surgery to iden-
person is right-handed,the forceps entry is generally to the right
tify and stop the source of bleeding. Evidence of bleeding as
of the telescope. It is also always possible to switch the telescope
 indicated by a decreasing hematocrit value is usual apparent
and accessory cannula ports for better visualization, manipulation,
or both. Exposure to all lobes can be improved if the patient is
within the first 5 hours after the biopsy.?
rotated slightly toward right and left lateral recumbencies. (Art by
Postoperative care involves placement of bupivacaine in
Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
the abdominal wall at the cannula sites and tramadol in dogs
or buprenorphine in cats for 48 to 72 hours after the proce-
dure. The patient is kept quiet and monitored closely for the
first 5 hours of the postoperative period.
Postoperative Care and Potential Complications
The complication rate of laparoscopic liver biopsy is low.
In an unpublished review of 250 cases, I found the com-
 PANCREATIC BIOPSY
plication rate to be less than 2%, and serious complica-
Indications and Patient Selection
tions such as anesthetic or cardiovascular-related death
or fatal bleeding were very rare. Minor complications
The diagnosis of acute and chronic pancreatic disease is usu-
were more common and included hemorrhage that was
ally made based on clinical signs, laboratory fndings, and
subsequently controlled or procedure-related problems
ultrasound changes, and a pancreatic biopsy is often not
associated with inexperience or failure to understand the
necessary. Occasionally acute pancreatitis may be difficult to
technique and its limitations. Procedure-related com-
differentiate from acute liver disease, and visualization and
plications include organ trauma (most often the spleen)
biopsy of both organs may be required. Laparoscopy can also
from the Veress needle, trocar, or instruments.
be used for the explicit purpose of placing an intestinal feed-
Excessive bleeding is the greatest concern with any biopsy.
ing tube in patients with severe pancreatitis; at that time a
The average amount of blood loss from a liver biopsy is
 pancreatic biopsy specimen should be collected.
reported to be around 2 mL in healthy dogs.8 With abnor-
The most common indications for a pancreatic biopsy are
 mal hemorrhage, several measures can be taken. Often simply
in suspected cases of either chronic pancreatitis or pancre-
placing absorbable gelatin coagulation material* in the biopsy
atic neoplasia.l0 Chronic pancreatitis is very common in cats
site is adequate to promote coagulation. A piece of coagulation
 and often associated with concurrent cholangitis, and biopsy
 material, approximately 10 mm long, is placed in the grasping
of both organs is often performed.
Pancreatic cysts and abscesses may also be indica-
*Gelfoam, Pharmacia & Upjohn, Kalamazoo, Mich.
tions for laparoscopic evaluation. Cysts can be drained
424 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
A
B
D
where sample was taken from the edge of a liver lobe. C, 5-mm biopsy forceps taking a liver biopsy over the surface of a normal liver lobe.
D, Postliver biopsy view where a sample was taken from the surface of a liver lobe.
Hgure 15-45 A view ofthe liver of a dog with chronic hepatitis
and early cirrhosis showing the nodular surface.
Hgure 15-44 A view of a hepatocellular adenoma in the right
 medial liver lobe being sampled with biopsy forceps in a dog.
Instrumentation
laparoscopically. I have also evaluated several dogs with
Pancreatic biopsies are usually taken with either 5-mm oval
unexplained  intermittent  anterior  abdominal pain;  no
identifiable ultrasound changes were seen in the pan-
fer the punch biopsy forceps for most pancreatic biopsies
creas, but a pancreatic biopsy showed low-grade chronic
because they tend to cut the pancreatic tissue, whereas the
 pancreatitis.
 Oval cup forceps often tend to tear the tissue.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy ■425
Hgure 15-49 A view of a nodular liver of a dog with hepatocuta-
neous syndrome.
Figure 15-46 A view of the gallbladder and liver of a cat with chronic
cholangitis. Note the tortuosity of the cystic and hepatic ducts.
Hgure 15-47 A view ofthe liver of a dog having a congenital
Hgure 15-50 A view ofthe liver and pancreas of a cat with chronic
extrahepatic portosystemic shunt. The pale areas represent areas of
cholangitis and pancreatitis. The palpation probe is retracting the 
 duodenum to show the nodular surface ofthe pancreas.
vacuolization of hepatocytes.
and cardiopulmonary dysfunction and must be stabilized
before the procedure. Coagulopathies are also a potential 
complication, and coagulation should be evaluated before
laparoscopy. When there is evidence of septic peritonitis, a
surgical exploratory laparotomy is indicated.
Restraint
Laparoscopic pancreatic biopsies are generally performed
with the use of routine inhalation anesthesia.
Procedure
 It is difficult to examine the entire pancreas laparoscopically.
Hgure 15-48 A view ofthe liver of a dog with acute liver failure
 The right limb is easily seen, but the left limb lays in the greater 
The red areas represent areas of massive necrosis.
 omentum caudal to the greater curvature of the stomach.
The right limb of the pancreas is visualized either through
 a ventral abdominal approach or the right lateral approach.
Patient Preparation
I prefer a right lateral approach to view the right limb of the
Animals having acute pancreatitis should be carefully evalu-
 pancreas, the extrahepatic biliary system, and the liver. The
right lateral approach is also ideal for placement of a feeding
cal and have systemic manifestations such as hepatic, renal,
tube in patients having acute pancreatitis. Viewing the left
426 ■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
limb requires considerable expertise, and a midabdominal
less than 1 mL of blood is lost in the sampling process, and
ventral approach is required. It also requires tilting the table
 generally two representative pancreatic biopsy specimens
to the right by 45 degrees and moving the greater omentum
are obtained.
away from the pancreas; even then, often only the surface of
the distal tip of the lef limb of the pancreas can be seen.
Postoperative Care and Potential Complications
The pancreas is best examined with the use of the palpa-
tion probe. Finding the descending duodenum as it lies adja-
One would think the potential complication of a pancreatic
cent to the tips of the liver lobes on a right lateral approach
biopsy would be pancreatitis; however, this is rare, and sev-
defines the location of the right limb of the pancreas. The
eral studies evaluating laparoscopic pancreatic biopsies in
palpation rod can be placed under the duodenum, and
normal dogs found no evidence of secondary pancreatitis.1l
once the duodenum is elevated, the right limb of the pan-
Excessive bleeding from a pancreatic biopsy is also uncom-
 creas becomes easily identifiable. The palpation probe may
mon, and techniques described for control of bleeding from
 also be required to move omentum or the colon away for an
a liver biopsy can be used.
adequate view of the pancreas. The gallbladder should also
 Postoperative care involves placement of bupivacaine at
be examined, as well as the common bile duct as it courses
the cannula sites, and tramadol in dogs or buprenorphine
beside the pancreas before entering the duodenum.
in cats for 48 to 72 hours after the procedure. The patient
Animals having active acute pancreatitis may be difficult
is generally kept quiet and monitored closely for the first 5
to examine because of surounding peritonitis and adhesions
hours of the immediate postoperative period.
of omentum to the pancreas. In this situation the adhesions
 must be broken down to visualize and sample the pancreas.
Often a third cannula must be placed so that adhesions can
be manipulated and broken down.
Sample Procurement
 Once the pancreas is examined biopsies are performed
(Figures 15-51 and 15-52). Always select an area away from
where the pancreatic ducts enter the duodenum. Ideally the
edge of the distal aspect of the right wing is sampled, which
avoids the center of the pancreas where the main pancreatic
duct lies. The punch or oval cup biopsy tip is placed under
the edge of the pancreas, opened, and slowly withdrawn
until the pancreas falls into the instrument. The forceps
are closed and held in that position for approximately 30
seconds and then gently tugged (Figure 15-53). Because the
Hgure 15-52 A view of the pancreas of a dog having exocrine
 pancreas is movable, it is not unusual for the entire pan-
pancreatic atrophy showing loss of normal pancreas tissue.
creas to be retracted by the biopsy forceps to the cannula.
However, when the forceps are withdrawn into the can-
nula, the pancreas falls back into the abdomen. Generally
Hgure 15-51 View of a normal pancreas in a right lateral approach
Hgure 15-53 Biopsy forceps (5-mm) shown sampling the edge of
showing the right limb ofthe pancreas next to the duodenum.
the distal right wing of a normal pancreas.
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy· 427
Patient Preparation
■ KIDNEY BIOPSY
Before a kidney biopsy the patient's renal function should
Indications and Patient Selection
be stabilized and the patient must be well hydrated. Osmotic
The advantage of a laparoscopic-assisted kidney biopsy is
diuretics such as mannitol or dopamine to improve renal
that the biopsy needle can be directed for optimal sampling
blood flow should be discontinued 2 to 4 hours before the
and can be used to prevent and monitor for postbiopsy
 biopsy because both can accentuate renal bleeding. A coagu-
hemorrhage.2 The general indications for a renal biopsy are
lation profle including platelet count, APTT, PT, and BMBT
to obtain a specific diagnosis, define the extent of disease,
should be obtained, and abnormalities should be corrected
or to determine the potential reversibility of the renal dis-
before the kidney biopsy.
ease. With advanced renal diagnostics including ultrasound
evaluation, quantitation of proteinuria, and various renal
Restraint
clearance studies, the need for a kidney biopsy is less com-
 mon. Kidney biopsies may be required for determining the
 Laparoscopic kidney biopsies should be performed with the
cause of renal proteinuria, such as differentiating renal amy-
use of routine general inhalation anesthesia.
loidosis from other glomerulopathies.12 Renal biopsies are
also helpful for confirming acute renal disease from ethylene
Procedure
- uai anoe u ssodnd ssouod io n Arxi joi
ure so that the potential for renal tubular regeneration can
Laparoscopic-assisted kidney biopsy is generally a two-per-
be determined. Other indications for renal biopsy would be
son process: one person operates the telescope and palpation
for confrming a congenital renal disease or for confrming
probe and the other operates the biopsy needle. Only one
suspected renal neoplasia. The indications for a renal biopsy
kidney should be sampled, and the decision of which one
 in patients suspected of having chronic renal failure are few
is based on imaging findings, clearance studies, or both. If
because imaging studies and laboratory testing generally
there is no specifc indication for a particular kidney, then
 provide suffcient information.
the right kidney is preferred because it is less mobile and thus
easier to sample.
The right kidney can be sampled using either a ventral
Instrumentation
or right midabdominal approach. The right midabdominal
Laparoscopic-assisted kidney biopsies are obtained with
approach is my preference, and this approach is similar to
the use of a biopsy needle directed into the abdomen under
that described for a liver biopsy. A second 5-mm cannula
visual control. The Tru-Cut biopsy needle is generally used
port should be placed for the palpation probe, and the site
for a renal biopsy.2.13 These needles have an outer cannula
should be determined after inspection of the abdominal
and inner notched shaft in which a tissue specimen is first
cavity, the kidney, and surrounding structures. The palpa-
trapped, cut, and then withdrawn. The notched portion
-ound apaau aul iaao ainssaid Aidde oi pasn si aqod uon
often has a 2-cm long indentation that is first advanced into
ture site to stop biopsy needle hemorrhage (Figures 15-54
the kidney so that the tissue can fall into the indentation.
through 15-56).7
Thereafter the outer cutting cannula is slid over the inner
The usual location for the Tru-Cut biopsy needle is high
notched shaft so that the tissue is sliced off. There are three
on the right midabdominal wall near the kidney. The location
basic types of Tru-Cut needles: manual, semiautomatic, and
is such that the angle of the needle entry can be directed to
those used in a biopsy gun. Manual devices are very cheap
collect renal cortex and not penetrate adjacent structures. The
 but are the most diffcult to handle and not recommended. 14
needle should also enter the abdomin caudal to the reflection
Semiautomatic needles are disposable, very easy to use, and
of the diaphragm. If the needle traverses the diaphragm, there
 provide excellent tissue retrieval. The biopsy gun requires a
is a risk of a pneumothorax developing. The abdominal wall
significant time investment at first, but the Tru-Cut needles
is palpated over the area for needle placement, and the site is
for them are inexpensive and easy to handle. The advan-
viewed internally with the telescope. Once the ideal location
tage of a Tru-Cut gun is that it operates so quickly that frm
is determined, a small 2-mm skin incision is made and the
fibrotic tissue often hard to sample with conventional nee-
needle is then placed through the abdominal wall and directed
 dles is readily obtained. In most cases Tru-Cut needles pro-
to the kidney. The angle of entry of the biopsy needle is critical
duce ideal, unfragmented pieces of tissue. It is important to
 and should be tangential to the kidney, the goal is to sample
note the amount of tissue in front of the needle tip so that no
 predominately renal cortex.2 Biopsies directed deep into the
 other structures are penetrated with the needle. The biopsy
center of the kidney collect less glomeruli and have a high
needles used for renal biopsies should be 16G or 14G. When
chance of hitting the large arcuate renal arteries, which would
 a 14G needle was used in normal kidneys, an average of 32
result in more severe hemorrhage. The needle tip is then seated.
glomeruli were identified on histopathologic evaluation.2
 in the renal capsule, fred, and quickly removed. Immediately
Renal biopsy specimens obtained with an 18G needle are to0
thereafter the tip of the palpation probe is placed over the
small to be very diagnostic and are not recommended.
biopsy site and pressure is applied for 1 or more minutes to
428■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Hgure 15-56 A view of the right kidney showing a palpation
probe applying pressure over the biopsy site to prevent bleeding
after a renal biopsy.
Figure 15-54 A view of the right kidney from a right lateral
approach. The vena cava is below the kidney.
Sample Procurement
Generally one or two renal biopsy specimens are obtained.
Tissue can be placed in formalin for routine histopathologic
analysis or in glutaraldehyde for electron microscopic exam-
ination. Tissue may also be frozen for specialized immuno-
fluorescence studies.
Postoperative Care and Potential Complications
The major complication of a renal biopsy is hemorrhage.
The patient is also expected to have some postbiopsy hema-
turia for 12 to 24 hours. It is recommended that fluid ther-
 apy is administered or adjusted to promote a mild diuresis
after the biopsy to prevent renal, ureteral, or bladder blood
 clot formation. Although uncommon, a clot formation in
the ureter or renal pelvis can result in a serious obstructive
uropathy. Dopamine or mannitol should be avoided in the
immediate postoperative period as it could initiate renal
bleeding. Routine narcotic postoperative pain management
Hgure 15-55 A view of the right kidney from a right lateral
is used, but nonsteroidal antinflammatory agents are to be
approach with a 16G automatic biopsy needle in the renal
parenchyma for a renal biopsy.
avoided.
stop the bleeding. It is important to remember the length of
 SPLEEN BIOPSY
the throw of the biopsy notch so as not to damage surround-
Indications and Patient Selection
ing structures with the needle tip.
The kidneys can also be sampled with the use of a stan-
The indications for a splenic biopsy are uncommon, and
 dard ventral approach. The telescope cannula is placed 1
the procedure is generally performed when neoplasia is sus-
to 2 cm caudal to the umbilicus on the midline. Gener-
pected. Hematologic and imaging abnormalities are the pri-
ally the animal is rotated approximately 45 degrees to the
mary reason for evaluating the spleen. Diffuse splenomegaly
left or toward the operator to reflect the right kidney. The
is the major indication for a biopsy, whereas splenic masses
second cannula is then placed through the abdominal wall
 generally are managed by surgical removal. Occasionally
for the palpation probe, and the remainder of the tech-
during a laparoscopic evaluation abnormalities of the spleen
nique is similar as described for the right midabdominal
are observed and would be a reason for performing a splenic
approach.
biopsy.
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy
429
Figure 15-57 A view of the tip of a normal spleen seen from a left
Hgure 15-58 A view of a normal right adrenal gland in a dog
lateral approach.
with the phrenicoabdominal vein traversing over the surface of the
adrenal gland.
Instrumentation
The 5-mm oval cup biopsy forceps are generally used for
biopsy of the spleen; however the Tru-Cut biopsy needles
(16G or 14G) can also be used.15
Patient Preparation
Before splenic biopsy a coagulation profle should be
obtained, and if splenic neoplasia is suspected, it would be
wise to take three-view thoracic radiographs to evaluate for
pulmonary metastases.
Restraint
 Laparoscopic biopsies of the spleen should be performed
with the use of routine general inhalation anesthesia.
Hgure 15-59 View of a right adrenal carcinoma in a dog.
Procedure
 Evaluation of the spleen requires either a ventral abdominal
approach or a lef lateral midabdominal approach (Figure
15-57). Caution should be exercised when a ventral midline or
left midabdominal approach is taken because a large spleen is
usually located directly under the entry points for the cannulae
and Veress needle and the spleen can be traumatized A large
spleen is also diffcult to manipulate with the use of the palpa-
tion probe, and it may be necessary to tilt the table in various
 directions so that gravity can be used to visualize the spleen.
Sample Procurement
The method of the splenic biopsy is similar to that described
for a liver biopsy using the oval cup biopsy forceps or needle
biopsy technique. I routinely place absorbable gelatin coagu-
lation material in the biopsy site to promote coagulation.
Figure 15-60 View of enlarged abdominal lymph node.
430 ■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Postoperative Care and Potential Complications
Restraint
The major complication of a splenic biopsy is bleeding,
General anesthesia as described for a liver biopsy is required.
 and the same postoperative precautions should be taken as
described for a liver biopsy.
Procedure
Lymph node biopsies are performed with the oval cup
■ LYMPH NODE BIOPSY
biopsy forceps as described for the liver. Because most lymph
 nodes are difficult to isolate and sample, a third cannula port
Indications and Patient Selection
is often required to retract tissue for adequate lymph node
 Detection of an unexplained enlarged lymph node during
 exposure. Bleeding is uncommon, but if excessive, manual.
laparoscopy or by ultrasound examination is an indication for
compression or gelatin foam coagulation material should be
biopsy (Figure 15-60). Other indications for biopsy include
 applied into the area.
cases in which cytologic analysis of the needle aspirate of the
lymph node is nondiagnostic or metastasis from a primary neo-
Sample Procurement
plastic lesion needs to be evaluated.16 The sublumbar, mesen-
teric, and hepatic lymph nodes are the ones most often sampled.
Samples are placed in formalin. Samples may also be col-
lected for PCR analysis or flow cytometric analysis if lym-
phoma is suspected.
Instrumentation
Either the pediatric 3-mm or the routine 5-mm oval cup
Postoperative Care and Potential Complications
biopsy forceps is used to biopsy lymph nodes.
Complications from lymph node biopsy are uncommon.
 Patient Preparation
The patient should be monitored carefully in the immediate
 postoperative period for evidence of bleeding as described in
The patient preparation is similar to that for the liver biopsy.
the liver biopsy section.
REFERENCES
1. Crawford AR, Xi-Zhang L, Crawford JM: The normal adult
9. Patrelli M,Scheuer PA: Variation in subcapsular liver structure
human liver biopsy: a quantitative reference standard,
and its significance in the interpretation of wedge biopsies, J
Hepatology 28(2):323, 1998.
Clin Pathol 20:743, 1967.
2. Rawlings CA, Howerth EW: Obtaining quality biopsies of the
10. Webb CB、 Trott C: Laparoscopic diagnosis of pancreatic
liver and kidney, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40:352, 2004.
disease in dogs and cats, J Vet Intern Med 22(6):1263, 2008.
3. Twedt DC: Laparoscopy of the liver and pancreas. In Tams TR,
11. Harmoinen J、Saari S,Rinkinen M, et al: Evaluation of
editor: Small animal endoscopy,ed 2,St Louis, 1999,Mosby.
pancreatic forceps biopsy by laparoscopy in healthy beagles,
4. Cole TL, Center SA, Flood SN, et al: Diagnostic comparison
Vet Ther 3:31, 2002.
of needle and wedge biopsy specimens of the liver in dogs and
12. Vaden SL, Levine JF, Lees GE,et al: Renal biopsy: a retrospective
cats, J A Vet Med Assoc 220:1483, 2002.
study of methods and complications in 283 dogs and 65 cats, J
5. Bigge LA, Brown DJ、 Penninck DG: Correlation between
Vet Intern Med 19(6):794, 2005.
coagulation profle findings and bleeding complications after
13. Grauer GF, Twedt DC, Mero KN: Evaluation of laparoscopy
ultrasound-guided biopsies, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 37:228,
for obtaining renal biopsy specimens from dogs and cats, J Am
2001.
Vet Med Assoc 183(6):677, 1983.
6. Monnet E, Twedt DC: Laparoscopy, Vet Clin North Amm Small
14. Hoppe FE, Hager DA, Poulos PW, et al: A comparison of
Anim Pract 33:1147,2003.
manual and automatic ultrasound-guided biopsy techniques,
7. Twedt DC, Monnet E: Laparoscopy: technique and clinical
Vet Radiol 27:99, 1986.
experience. In McCarthy TC, editor: Veterinary endoscopy, St
15. Richter KP: Laparoscopy in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am
Louis, 2005, Saunders.
Small Anim Pract 31(4):707, 2001.
8. Vasanjee SC, Bubenik LJ, Hosgood G, et al: Evaluation of
16. Johnson GF, Twedt DC: Endoscopy and laparoscopy in the
hemorrhage, sample size, and collateral damage for five hepatic
diagnosis and management of neoplasia in small animals, Vet
biopsy methods in dogs, Vet Surg 35(1):86, 2006.
Clir North Am 7:77-92, 1977.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy · 431
Laparoscopic-Assisted Gastropexy
to GDV can be so strong that owners prefer to avoid this
experience with their next pet.
Clarence A. Rawlings
■ INSTRUMENTATION
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV) can be fatal: mortality
rates of 15%, 16%,2 and 27%? have been reported, even
Basic laparoscopic instruments used are a 0- or 30-degree
when the condition has been appropriately managed and
scope placed through a 5-mm trocar, 5- and 10-mm trocars,
treated with an emergency operation. Most GDV-effected
 and either a 10-mm laparoscopic Duval or Babcock forceps.
dogs die if not treated as an emergency. In contrast, 1% or
 The longer working action and more robust grasping abil-
less die when only the stomach is dilated (GD). Of dogs that
ity of the 10-mm forceps is much better than using a 5-mm
have been successfully treated medically for bloating, more
Babcock forceps.
than 80% of those without a gastropexy had a recurrence
 PATIENT EVALUATION AND
tropexy may still have bloating, but rarely does the stomach
PREPARATION
undergo voluvlus.5 I am unaware ofa dog treated with a pre-
o hup (l) Axadosee paisisse-oidossoredel aaua
 Evaluation primarily ensures that the patient is in good gen-
GDV, but some have had GD develop. These bloated dogs
eral health, suitable for general anesthesia. The dog should
 have been successfully managed medically. This section will
be fasted for at least 12 hours.
 present LAG as an elective preventive procedure for GDV.6,.7
Anesthesia
■ PATIENT INDICATIONS AND
CONTRAINDICATIONS
 General anesthesia with positive pressure ventilation during
insufflation is required.
The most likely candidates for gastropexy have predic-
tors making them likely to develop GDV. Any dog that has
undergone successful medical bloat treatment is at risk for
GDV and should have a gastropexy. In a series of nearly
6,000 dogs, of which approximately one third bloated, other
GDV risk factors included increasing age, increasing weight,
a greater chest height/width ratio, and being a purebred.8
The lifetime risk for GDV has been reported as 37% for Great
Danes, 25% for Irish Setters, 25% for Standard poodles, and
19% for Weimaraners; several other large breeds have risk
factors in the double digits.9 The relative risk of GDV nearly
 doubles the lifetime risk for the breed when a parent or sib-
ling has bloated.l0 In the case of a breed like Great Danes,
this equates to the lifetime risk factor for bloating exceeding
that of not bloating. Because the median age for bloating in
most breeds is middle age, dogs older than 7 years are at least
twice as likely to bloat as 2- to 4-year-old dogs.8
Other dogs of susceptible breeds should be considered
candidates for reasons beyond the medical justification. The
justification for an elective, preventive gastropexy is stron-
 ger for some valuable working dogs, such as security and
military working dogs, assstive dogs, drug-sniffing dogs,
and other performance dogs exposed to competitive situa-
tions. A critical prospective study of 927 military working
dogs found that 9.1% developed GDV and were removed
UGA200
from the working force during the study.ll In these work-
Hgure 15-61 The dog is placed on its back with the surgeon
ing breeds, the fact that the approach is minimally invasive
standing on the patient's right side and the monitor being toward
increases the attractiveness of LAG. The only disadvantage
the patient's head on the opposite side.After the midline trocar
for a gastropexy is the restriction on strenuous training and
is placed, insufflation is performed so that a laparoscope can be
 performance for approximately 3 weeks while the gastropexy
placed. The second trocar (for 10-mm grasping forceps) is placed
on the right side, just lateral to the rectus abdominis and 5 cm
becomes strong. Another justification for a LAG in GDV-
caudal to the last rib. (From Rawlings CA, Foutz FL, Mahaffey MB,
susceptible dogs is an owner who has lost dog(s) of the same
Et al: A rapid and strong laparoscopic-assisted gastropexy in dogs.
 breed to GDV. The negative experience of losing a loved dog
Am J Vet Res 62:871-875, 2001.)
432 ■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
A
C
Hgure 15-62 A, 10-mm laparoscopic Duval or Babcock forceps is passed through the right trocar, and the antrum is grasped at the site
0h paad pue jo pa si se uensu au sdaiay aui aq ais ieail aui o pal si uue au sy g xadose papuaui au go
 suy o  pu y) 'aes au oi pa si uue au pue 'us g o papuaixa si ais ieail aul paaoau si resoin a' adessa
Foutz FL, Mahaffey MB,et al: A rapid and strong laparoscopic-assisted gastropexy in dogs, Am J Vet Res 62:871-875, 2001.B, Photograph @
2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
for grasping with the forceps and for the incisional gas-
Procedure
tropexy is midway between the mesenteric and antimes-
 Dogs are placed in dorsal recumbency.6.7 A trocar-cannula
enteric sides, approximately 5 to 7 cm orally from the
for the viewing telescope is placed on the ventral midline
pylorus (Figure 15-62, A).
2 to 3 cm caudal to the umbilicus (Figure 15-61). After the
The Duval (or Babcock) forceps and antrum are lifted
peritoneal cavity is distended with carbon dioxide, a 0- or
to the incision surface by removal of the right-side can-
30-degree, 5-mm laparoscope is placed through the can-
nula and extension of the cannula's incision to 6 cm in a
nula. The laparoscope is connected to a video camera and
direction parallel to the last rib (see Figure 15-62, B). The
a xenon light source. The second trocar-cannula is placed
 antral exteriorization should be viewed via the laparoscope
lateral to the right margin of the rectus abdominis and
so that twisting of the antrum is avoided (see Figure 15-62,
5 cm caudal to the last rib. The abdominal wall is trans-
C). Traction sutures with a size 0 synthetic monoflament
illuminated to identify vessels, which should be avoided
suture are placed in a cruciate fashion, orally and at least
when the incision is made. A 10-mm laparoscopic Duval
5 cm aborally, at the commissures of the intended gastro-
 or Babcock forceps is passed through the right parame-
pexy (Figure 15-63). An incision, at least 4 cm long, is made
 dian port to manipulate the cranial abdominal organs and
through the serosa and muscular layer of the antrum (Figure
then to grasp the antrum of the stomach. The antral site
15-64, A). The sides of the incision should be dissected from
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy ■ 433
RA
R
Hgure 15-63 Two traction sutures are placed in a cruciate
pattern: one is at the oral and the other the aboral end of the
intended incisional gastropexy site of the antrum. R, Right rib;
RA, rectus abdominus; S, stomach. (Frorm Rawlings CA, Foutz FL,
Mahaffey MB,et al: A rapid and strong laparoscopic-assisted
gastropexy in dogs, Am J Vet Res 62:871-875, 2001.)
the mucosa to ensure that the sutures are not placed through
the mucosa and that adequate muscle tissue is included in
the LAG. A simple, continuous pattern of size 2-0 or 0 syn-
thetic absorbable monofilament sutures is placed to appose
the seromuscular layer of the antrum to the transversus
 abdominis muscle. Separate continuous sutures are placed
on the cranial and caudal sides of the incisions (see Figure
15-64, B). The oblique abdominal muscles are closed with
interrupted synthetic sutures, and the remainder of the inci-
sion is closed according to the surgeon's preference. After the
LAG is viewed for position and orientation (Figure 15-65),
the midline cannulae are removed and the incision closed.
 The gastropexy should be photographed, and even recorded
as a movie, for the medical record and for sharing with the
B
owner.
Hgure 15-64 A, The incision for the gastropexy is in the
 POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
seromuscular layer (SM) at least 4 cm long, between the greater
and lesser curvatures of the stomach and 5 to 7 cm oral to the 
COMPLICATIONS
pylorus. B, The seromuscular layer is sutured to the transversus
 Because this LAG procedure is relatively simple and quick
abdominis muscle (TA) in a simple, continuous fashion, with
a knot is at each end of the closure. The oblique muscles are
for the surgeon trained in basic endoscopy courses, intra-
dlosed over the gastropexy before closing the subcutaneous and
 operative complications are rare. The most likely compli-
skin. GM, Gastric mucosa and submucosa. (Frorm Rawlings CA,
cation is penetration of the antral lumen during incision
Foutz FL,Mahaffey MB,et al: A rapid and strong laparoscopic-
through the seromuscular layer or during suturing. If the
assisted gastropexy in dogs, Am J Vet Res 62:871-875, 2001.)
mucosa is incised, it should be closed in a simple continu-
ous fashion with an absorbable 3-0 or 4-0 monofilament
 placement of the index finger through the extended tro-
suture. Avoiding needle placement through the mucosa
car site to palpate the gastrohepatic ligament. A less criti-
requires careful needle placement through the submu-
cal challenge during surgery is the antrum being hidden by
cosa, which has been dissected from the mucosa. Improper
omentum, small intestine, or large intestine. These struc-
gastropexy location on the antrum can be avoided by
tures are moved caudally and to the left with the 10-mm
434 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Hgure 15-65 The completed gastropexy is examined and
photographed after completion and reinsuffation.The orientation
can also be examined and recorded with a movie. (Photograph @
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
forceps. Slight rotation to a mild left lateral recumbency
may help. Hemorrhage, which reduces the attractiveness of
the gastropexy image, can be prevented by avoidance ofthe
vessels and by use of pin-point electrocautery of small ves
sels during extension of the trocar site.
 POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Pain is the primary management concern after LAG. Nar-
cotics are administered to provide analgesia for the first 6 to
10 hours, followed by oral drugs after discharge. Some dogs
 also need mild sedation to supplement narcotics. Patients
 are provided water when alert and standing and are fed the
morning after surgery.
Hgure 15-66 A, An ultrasound examination at 6 to 12 months
after surgery can confirm that a gastropexy is present. B, The
■ FOLLOW-UP MONITORING
laparoscopic-assisted gastropexy (LAG) will usually be within 3 to
4 cm of the skin incision.Vertical arrows point to the gastropexy,
Methods typically recommended to reduce the likelihood of
and the horizontal arrows point to serosal surfaces just caudal
 bloating should be followed; that is, large amounts of dry
to the LAG. (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
pue Aep rad jea aus e u pasaun aq pou pous poog
Foundation, Inc.)
water intake and vigorous exercise after eating should be
limited.
emergency situation ifthe dog bloats. If a gastropexy is pres-
A local abdominal ultrasound should be performed 6
ent, the bloating is most likely due to GD and should not
to 12 months after a gastropexy (Figure 15-66). The site of
require emergency surgery. Administration of intravenous
the gastropexy is typically within 3 cm of the incision scar.
fluids, gastric intubation for decompression, and gastric
Knowledge of a permanent gastropexy can be useful in the
therapies are usually the only treatments needed.
REFERENCES
1. Brockman JD,Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ: Canine gastric
3. Buber T, Saragusty J, Ranen E, et al: Evaluation of lidocaine
dilatation-volvulus syndrome in a veterinary critical care unit:
treatment and risk factors for death associated with gastric
295 cases (1986-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:460, 2001.
dilatation-volvulus in dogs: 112 cases (1997-2005), ∫ Am Vet
2. Beck JJ, Staatz AJ, Pelsure DH, et al: Rick factors associated
Med Assoc 230: 1334, 2007.
with short-term outcome and development of perioperative
4. Eggertsdottir AV, Moe L: A retrospective study of conservative
treatment of gastric dilatation-volvulus in the dog, Acta Vet
dilatation-volvulus: 166 cases (1991-2003)、 J Am Vet Med
Scand 36:175, 1995.
Assoc 229:1934, 2006.
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy· 435
 5. Glickman LT, Lantz GC, Schellenberg、 et al: A prospective 
9. Ward MP, Patronek GJ, Glickman LT: Benefits of prophylactic
study of survival and recurrence following the acute gastric
gastropexy for dogs at risk of gastric dilatation-volvulus, Prev
dilatation-volvulus syndrome in 136 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp
Vet Med 60:319, 2003.
Assoc 34:253, 1998.
10. Glickman LT, Glickman NW,Schellenberg DB,et al: Non-
6. Rawlings CA, Foutz TL, Mahaffey MB,et al: A rapid and strong
dietary risk factors for gastric dilatation-volvulus in large and
12879 s 1a f uy shop ui Axados paisisse-idossoredel
giant breed dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 217:1492, 2000.
2001.
11. Moore GE, Burkman KD, Carer MN, et al: Causes of death
7. Rawlings CA, Mahaffey MB、 Bement S, et al: Prospective
or reasons for euthanasia in military working dogs: 927 cases
evaluation oflaparoscopic-assisted gastropexy in dogs susceptible
(1993-1996), J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:209, 2001.
to gastric dilatation, J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1576, 2002.
8. Glickman LT, Glickman NW, Perez CM, et al: Analysis of risk
factors for gastric dilatation and dilatation-volvulus in dogs,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 204:1465, 1994.
Laparoscopic-Assisted Placement
preferred feeding tube for most patients is an esophagos-
of Enterostomy Feeding Tubes
tomy tube, which requires simple instrumentation, simple
surgery, and brief general anesthesia. Patients in whom
Clarence A. Rawlings
anesthesia is contraindicated may be better candidates for
a nasoesophageal catheter or parenteral nutrition. Pancre-
Early use of feeding tubes for nutrition in critical and sur
atitis is a hypermetabolic disease in which early feeding
gical patients should follow the same preemptive approach
 improves nutritional and immune status and reduces com-
taken for administration of analgesic drugs in stressed and
 plications in people.4-7 Food entering the stomach increases
potentially painful patients. The preference is to feed the
pancreatic exocrine release of gastrointestinal hormones,
 patient normally. The next preferred feeding methods use
whereas it is thought that slow infusion of food into the
feeding tubes; however, parenteral nutrition is the less pre-
upper small intestine does not provide such an increase.
ferred type of nutritional support. Enteral nutrition is pre.
Indications include gastric and gastric outflow disease,
ferred to parenteral nutrition because food in the intestinal
which frequently produces vomiting.
tract maintains intestinal function and structure, decreases
The advantages oflaparoscopic-assisted enterostomy tube
 permeability to bacteria and endotoxins, and preserves
placement over laparotomy are that it is minimally invasive,
secretory immunoglobulin production.l Feeding tubes are
quick, and avoids the presence of a longer abdominal inci-
usually nasoesophageal and esophagostomy tubes; gastros-
 sion.3 Many patients needing an enterostomy tube are can-
tomy and enterostomy tubes are less frequently indicated.
didates for pancreatic, liver, or intestinal biopsies. These are
Esophagostomy and gastrostomy tubes permit feeding with
readily obtained with only two or three small openings dur-
pet foods that have been processed in a blender, which pro-
ing laparoscopy.
vides better nutritional selection.2 Patients fed by a tube oral
Contraindications include factors that make patients
to the pylorus must tolerate these feedings without vomit-
poor candidates for general anesthesia and abdominal insuf-
ing.2 This section will present the indications for and use of
flation. Other conditions that are contraindications include
a feding tube placed distal to the pylorus, a laparoscopic-
a moribund state, congestive heart failure, and severe pul-
assisted enterostomy tube.3
monary disease.
■ PATIENT INDICATIONS AND
■INSTRUMENTATION
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Basic laparoscopic instruments used are a 0- or 30-degree
An enterostomy tube is indicated in critical patients that
scope placed through a 5-mm trocar, two or three 5-mm
need nutrition but have either pancreatitis or a condition in
trocars, and either one or two 5-mm laparoscopic Bab-
which food cannot pass through the pylorus into the small
cock forceps. If the only procedure is placement of an
intestine (Figure 15-67). Nutritional support should be
enterostomy tube, two trocars and one Babcock forceps
considered if the patient has weight loss below ideal weight
are needed. If the goal is to explore the intestine or obtain
exceeding 10% for chronic loss and 5% for acute loss or if
a pancreatic biopsy specimen, the third trocar, an extra
oral intake has been or will be interrupted for more than
laparoscopic 5-mm Babcock forceps, and a biopsy cup for-
5 days. The need for nutritional support is more critical for
ceps are needed. If the only biopsy needed is one of the
patients with burns, pancreatitis, sepsis, massive wounds,
liver, the biopsy cup forceps can be used through the sec-
severe respiratory distress, and severe diarrhea.l.2 My
ond trocar.
436■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
 aeed yos paeua u eudsap Areidsu o Aris ii-g oi -e e pey ueuenad pakeds aieua Pio-ea-i s  a-il an
been previously amputated, and bilateral paralysis was treated by a laryngeal lateralization. During recovery from the laryngeal surgery,the
dog vomited and aspirated, requiring placement of a tracheostomy tube. B, Thoracic radiographs demonstrating a dilated esophagus and
aspiration pneumonia. This dog was a candidate for and received laparoscopic-assisted placement of an enterostomy tube. ( Photographs @
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
■PATIENT EVALUATION AND
the 5-mm Babcock is used to grasp and lift the middle ofthe
PREPARATION
descending duodenum to the lengthened trocar incision (see
Figure 15-68, B). Insufflation can be temporarily discontin-
Evaluation of the patient should confirm the need for an
ued. The duodenum is lifted enough to be able to place four
enterostomy tube and that the patient can tolerate general
traction sutures between the duodenum and the abdominal
anesthesia and laparoscopy. The minimal laboratory work
musculature but not enough for the duodenum to be exte.
includes a complete blood count, serum chemistry pro-
riorized. Two sutures are placed on the antimesenteric bor-
fle, coagulogram, urinalysis, and pancreatic tests. The dog
der: one oral and the other aboral from the intended tube
should be fasted for at least 12 hours.
site. The other two sutures are placed medially and later-
ally. A purse-string suture of 3-0 or 4-0 synthetic absorbable
monoflament is placed (Figure 15-69, A). An 8F catheter
Anesthesia
has its tip cut transversely as a single end-hole and is inserted
General anesthesia with positive pressure ventilation is
into a No. 15 blade for penetration of the duodenum in
required. Systemic antibiotics are administered perioperatively.
the center of the purse-string suture. Insufflation and the
laparoscope help in watching as the tube passes aborally.
The tip is usually passed well distal to the duodenal-colic
Procedure
flexure before the purse string is tightened and the tube is
 Patients are placed on their back.6,7 A trocar-cannula for
secured with sutures to the outside ofthe patient (see Figure
the viewing telescope is placed on the ventral midline 2 to
15-69, B). The deep and superficial wound layers are closed
3 cm caudal to the umbilicus (Figure 15-68, A). After the
with simple, interrupted 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable sutures. It is
 peritoneal cavity is distended with carbon dioxide, a 0- or
critical that any drainage of inflammatory cells and bacteria
30-degree, 5-mm laparoscope is placed through the cannula.
be along the tube to the outside of the patient and not into
The laparoscope is connected to a video camera and a xenon
the peritoneal cavity.
light source. At this time, patient rotation 45 degrees toward
left lateral recumbency can aid in identifying and grasping
■ POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
the descending duodenum. The second trocar-cannula is
COMPLICATIONS
placed lateral to the right margin of the rectus abdominis
and in the middle of the flank. The incision is parallel to the
Complications are unusual for this simple laparoscopic-
rectus abdominis. The abdominal wall is transilluminated so
assisted procedure. One technical error is to advance the
that vessels can be identified and avoided when the incision
tube incorrectly toward the stomach. This can be avoided
is being made. If indicated, biopsies and bowel exploration
by watching the tube advance. The tube could kink, but this
should precede placement of the enterostomy tube. When a
is unusual. Distension of the abdomen with suspension of
third trocar is needed, it is placed on the left side, opposite
the duodenum from the enterostomy tube site appears to
 to the right-sided trocar. For placement of the feeding tube,
 straighten the duodenal-colic flexure to ease tube passage.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy
437
A
Hgure 15-69 A, The trocar site is lengthened enough so that four
sutures can be placed to secure the duodenum to the abdominal wall
 Four sutures are placed between the duodenum and the abdominal
Hgure 15-68 A, The laparoscope trocar is placed on the
musculature. A purse-string suture is placed, and the antimesenteric
border is perforated with a No. 15 blade. B, An 8F feeding tube is 
midline caudal to the umbilicus, and the second trocar is placed
passed while being monitored with the laparoscope. (Frorn Rawlings
on the right side lateral to the rectus abdominis. B, A 5-mm
Babcock forceps is used to grasp the midpoint of the descending
CA, Howerth EW, Bement S, et al: Laparoscopic-assisted entrostomy
tube placement and full-thickness biopsy of the jejunum with serosal
duodenum. Rotation toward left lateral recumbency aids by
placing the duodenum more superior. This illustration shows
patching in dogs, Am J Vet Res 63:1313-1319, 2002)
a second Babcock forceps used to explore the intestines. (From 
Rawlings CA, Howerth EW, Bement S,et al: Laparoscopic-assisted
entrostomy tube placement and full-thickness biopsy of the jejunum
with serosal patching in dogs, Am J Vet Res 63:1313-1319, 2002)
Gastrointestinal ileus is common, and its management is
- n  n si  s  r
 nous fluids and electrolytes, metoclopramide, and anal-
 POSTOPERATIVE CARE
gesic drugs. Water or electrolyte solutions can be infused
through the enterostomy tube, frequently within a few
 s   i  
hours of tube placement. Feeding is begun gradually with
 Narcotics are administered to provide analgesia for at
infusion of commercial liquid diets by pumpl (Figure
least the frst 6 to 10 hours. These patients are considered
15-70). The small-diameter enterostomy tube precludes
critical, and their care should be focused more toward the
foods that have been processed in a blender, which are
disease of the individual patient than the tube placement.
tend to cause obstructions. Too rapid administration,
438 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
clinical studies complications of enterostomy tube place-
ment, especially those leading to deaths, were found to be
related to the disease and not the feeding tube.8 It is criti-
 cal to monitor the patient closely in an effort to detect sep-
tic peritonitis. Although complications from enterostomy
tubes have been rare in clinical studies,& peritonitis devel-
 opment is life-threatening. Peritonitis prevention primarily
involves sealing the duodenum to the abdominal wall and
ensuring that any drainage is external.
The care and management of the feeding tube are critical.
The tube and enterostomy site should be cleaned in a man-
ner similar to aseptic preparation for surgery at least once a
 day. Antibacterial ointment is applied to the tube osteotomy
site, and the tube should be protected with clean bandages.
Figure 15-70 Slow infusion of food into an enterostomy tube
Tubes are flushed with warm water before and after every
should show distribution in the proximal portion of the jejunum
feeding. The tube is typically left for at least 10 days and then
similar to contrast media administered into the tube. The tube
simply withdrawn.
can be seen entering the duodenum (top arrow) and ending in the
jejunum (bottom arrow). Too rapid administration or ileus can
result in food refluxing into the stomach. Gastric distension can
■ FOLLOW-UP MONITORING
produce vomiting and defeats the justification for an enterostomy
tube during pancreatitis treatment. (Frorm Rawlings CA,
Follow-up monitoring is only required for a few days after
Howerth EW,Bement S,etal: Laparoscopic-assisted entrostomy
 enterostomy tube withdrawal. The duodenum will be per-
tube placement and full-thickness biopsy of the jejunum with serosal
patching in dogs, Am J Vet Res 63:1313-1319, 2002.)
manently attached to the abdominal wall, but adhesion
should produce no long-term problems.
 especially in a patient with ileus, can produce reflux into
the stomach. Excessive distension seen in gastric ileus can
produce vomiting and even aspiration pneumonia in the
depressed patient. Other iatrogenic problems can include
 diarrhea related to hyperosmotic commercial diets.2 In
REFERENCES
1. Marks SL: The principles and implementation of enteral
5. Freeman LM、 et al: Nutritional support in pancreatitis: a
nmutrition. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman ED, editors: Textbook of
retrospective study, J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)5:32, 1995.
veterinary internal medicine: diseases of the dog and cat,ed 6,St
6. Marulenda S, Kirby DF: Nutritional support in pancreatitis,
Louis, 2005, Saunders.
Nutr Clin Pract 10:45、1995.
2. Eirmann L, Michel KE: Enteral nutrition. In Silverstein DC,
 7. Simpson WG, Marsino L, Gates L: Enteral nutritional support in
Hopper K, editors: Small animal critical care medicine, St Louis,
acute alcoholic pancreatitis, J Am Coll Nutr 14:662, 1995.
2009, Saunders.
 8. Swann HM, Sweet DC, Michel K: Complications associated with
3. Rawlings CA, Howerth EW, Bement S, et al: Laparoscopic-
use ofjejunostomy tubes in dogs and cats: 40 cases (1989-1994),
assisted enterostomy feeding tube placement and full-thickness
J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1764, 1997.
biopsies with serosal patch in dogs, Am J Vet Res 63:1313, 2002.
 9. Novo RE, Churchill J, Faudskar L, et al: Limited approach to the
4. Brodoky G, Harsanyi L, Pap A, et al: Effect of enteral nutrition
right flank for placement of a duodenostomy tube, ∫ Am Anim
on exocrine pancreatic function, Am / Surg 161: 144, 1991.
Hosp Assoc 37:193, 2001.
The use of very small laparotomy incisions and a Snook
 Laparoscopic Cryptorchid Castration
spay hook to retrieve the retained testicle have previously
Nathan A. Miller
been recommended for the castration of cryptorchid ani-
mals. Because of poor visualization, complications have been
Cryptorchidism is a common congenital defect in dogs.
associated with this technique and include inadvertent pros-
Because the trait is heritable and retained testicles have an
 tatectomy, urethral avulsions, and ureteral damage. Because
increased incidence of neoplasia and torsion, castration is
of these potential significant complications, the use of caudal
the treatment of choice. Laparoscopic removal of retained
testicles offers decreased morbidity rates and improved visu-
minimally invasive testicular removal without the risks asso-
alization and safety.
 ciated with poor visualization.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy · 439
Fat and the inguinal lymph nodes may be mistaken dur-
ing palpation for an inguinally retained testicle. In a previ-
ous study in the cat, palpation to locate the retained testicle
was performed successfully only 48% ofthe time. Inaccurate
localization of the testicle can lead to an increased chance
 of morbidity in the patient due to unnecessary exploration
of the abdomen and inguinal region. Laparoscopy allows a
 precise approach to localization of the undescended testicle.
■ PATIENT INDICATIONS
Laparoscopic cryptorchid castration is indicated in patients
who have a nondescended abdominal testicle that cannot be
clearly palpated in the inguinal region (Box 15-6).
UGA2009
BOX15-6
Instrumentation for Laparoscopic Cryptorchid
Hgure 15-71 Placement of trocars for removal of a right
Castration
intraabdominal testicle. This patient has been rotated into left
lateral recumbency. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University of
One 0- or 30-degree 5-mm laparoscope
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Two 5-mm portals 
One 5-mmn aggressive grasping instrurent (Babcock
forceps will also work)
Procedure from Access to Closure
A table capable of tilting from side to side and front to
A 5-mm trocar is inserted just caudal to the umbilicus with
back
the use of the Hasson technique or blindly after Veress
needle insufflations (Figure 15-71). The head of the patient
is tilted downward to move the intestines cranially and
improve visualization of the caudal abdomen. Examination
 PATIENT EVALUATION
 of the area between the kidney and the inguinal rings can
be performed if the patient is rolled into right and then leff
 The diagnosis of cryptorchidism is typically made by simple
lateral recumbency. This usually does not require the place-
scrotal palpation. The inguinal regions should also be palpated
ment of any additional portals. Attention should be paid to
carefully while the patient is awake and then also while under
the inguinal rings. If the testicular vasculature and vas defer-
anesthesia immediately before surgery. If the undescended
ens are seen exiting the inguinal ring (Figure 15-72), the tes-
testicle(s) can be clearly palpated in the inguinal region, a
ticle is extraabdominal and exploration of the inguinal area
laparoscopic procedure is unnecessary. If there is uncertainty
through a separate incision should be pursued.
about the presence of the testicle in the inguinal region, lapa-
Intraabdominal testicles are usually easily identifiable
roscopic visualization of the inguinal rings provides a mini-
(Figure 15-73). The surgeon can confrm identification
mally invasive method of determining whether the testicle is
by following the vas deferens from the region just dorsal
intraabdominal. Ultrasound can also be used to determine the
to the neck of the bladder to the testicle. Once the testicle
location of the testicle but is generally not necessary.
has been identified, a second portal is established in the
 body wall above the testicle. An aggressive 5-mm grasper
 PATIENT PREPARATION
or 5-mm Babcock forceps is used to grasp the testicle (Fig-
ure 15-74). The epididymus is an area where a secure hold
Routine preoperative fasting is recommended. The urinary
can often be obtained (Figure 15-75). Once the testicle has
bladder should be emptied entirely before surgery to allow
been grasped, insufflation is stopped and the trocar site
the best visualization possible. This can be done via expres-
enlarged enough to exteriorize the testicle (Figure 15-76).
sion or catheterization.
The vasculature and vas deferens are then ligated routinely
(Figure 15-77).
The enlarged trocar site is then closed with sutures in the
 Anesthesia and Monitoring
external fascia, subcutaneous tissue, and skin. Insufflation of
Routine anesthetic protocols and monitoring are rec-
the abdomen is reestablished, and the ligatures are inspected.
ommended unless the condition of the patient dictates
The telescope and portal are removed, and the site is closed
otherwise.
routinely.
440■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Hgure 15-72 Anatomy seen at the inguinal ring when the testicle
Hgure 15-75 Grasping the testicle with a 5-mm laparoscopic
is extraabdominal. (Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia
Babcock forceps. (Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia
Research Foundation, Inc.)
Research Foundation, Inc.)
Hgure 15-73 Intraabdominal testicle. (Photograph @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Hgure 15-76 Testicle exteriorized through the enlarged portal site
with vas deferens and testicular vessels intact. (Photograph @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation,Inc.)
Hemoclips or a LigaSure device can also be used to ligate
or seal the testicular vasculature intraabdominally (Figure
15-78); however, this does require an additional portal and
is generally unnecessary. The connecting structures of the
testicle have enough laxity to allow it to be exteriorized
easily, and even if the vasculature is ligated internally, the
trocar site will need to be enlarged to allow removal of the
testicle itself.
In cases where both testicles are intraabdominal, the
second testicle can usually be removed through the same
 enlarged portal from which the frst testicle was removed.
Suffcient insuflation allows visualization, and the surgeon
can grasp the other testicle by holding a moist gauze sponge
over the site while placing the grasper through the incision.
Hgure 15-74 Trocar placement and grasping of a right
Usually there is enough laxity of the vas deferens and tes-
retained testicle. (From Miller N, van Lue S, Rawlings CA: Use of
laparoscopic-assisted cryptorchid castration in dogs and cats, I Am
ticular blood supply to allow the testicle to be exteriorized
Vet Med Assoc 224:875-878, 2004.)
through an incision on the opposite side of the abdomen.
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy
■441
Figure 15-78 Use of the LigaSure to provide hemostasis.
removal and submission for histopathologic analysis are
recommended. Testosterone levels and human chorionic
gonadotropin (HCG) stimulation testing can also be used
 postoperatively to confrm the lack of any remaining tes-
ticular tissue.
Hgure 15-77 Ligation ofthe testicle externally. (Frorm Miller N,
vanLueS,Rawlings CA:Use of laparoscopic-assted cryptorchid
 CARE AND POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
astration in dogs and cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 224:875-878, 2004.)
AFTER THE PROCEDURE
■ POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
 No special precautions are necessary. Routine monitoring
COMPLICATIONS
for signs of hemorrhage or incision problems should be per-
formed as in an open procedure. Suture removal at portal
 In very rare circumstances the patient may be monorchid
sites should be performed 2 weeks postoperatively. Other-
rather than cryptorchid. In these cases, following the vas
wise, no long-term follow-up is required.
 deferens will help to confrm the absence of a testicle. If
there is any unusual tissue at the end of the vas deferens,
SUGGESTED
READING
Bellah JR, Spencer CP, Salmeri KR: Hemiprostatic urethral avulsion
Miller NA, Van Lue SJ, Rawlings CA: Use of laparoscopic-assisted
during cryptorchid orchiectomy in a dog, JArm Anim Hosp Assoc
cryptorchidectomy in dogs and cats, JAm Vet Med Assoc 224:875-
25:553-556, 1989.
878,2004.
Boothe HW: Testes and epididymides. In Slatter D, Stone EA, editors:
Millis DL, Hauptman JG, Johnson CA: Cryptorchidism and
Textbook of small animal surgery, Philadelphia, 1993, Saunders.
monorchidisrm in cats: 25 cases (1980- 1989), J Arm Vet Med Assoc
Burke TJ, Reynolds HA: The testes. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Disease
200:1128- 1130, 1992.
mechanisms in small animal surgery, Philadelphia, 1993, Lea &
Pena FJ, Anel L, Dominguez JC, et al: Laparoscopic surgery in a clinical
Febiger.
case of serminoma in a cryptorchid dog, Vet Rec 142:671-672, 1998.
Crane SW: Orchiectomy of retained and descended testes in the dog
Reif JS, Maguire TJ, Kenney RM, et al: A cohort study of canine
and cat. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in small anirmal
testicular neoplasia, JAm Vet Med Assoc 175:719-723, 1979.
surgery, Philadelphia, 1990, Lea & Febiger.
 Richardson EF, Mullen H: Cryptorchidism in cats, Commpend Contin
Dunn ML: Cryptorchidism in dogs: a clinical study, J Am Anirm Hosp
Educ Vet 15:1342, 1993.
Assoc 4:180, 1968.
Schultz KS, Waldron DR, Smith MM, et al: Inadvertent prostatectomy
Gallagher LA, Freeman LJ, Trenka-Benthin S, et al: Laparoscopic
as a complication of cryptorchidectomy in four dogs, J Am Anim 
castration for canine cryptorchidism, Vet Surg 21:411-412, 1992.
Hosp Assoc 32:211-214,1996.
Hayes HM, Pendergrass TW: Canine testicular tumors: epidemiologic
Wallace LJ, Cox VS: Canine cryptorchidism. In Kirk RW, editor:
features of 410 dogs, Int J Cancer 18:482-487, 1976.
Current veterinary therapy VIl. small animal practice, Philadelphia,
Kirby FD: Castrating the cryptorchid dog or cat, Vet Med 75:632, 1980.
1980, Saunders.
442■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
 The only contraindications for LAC are systemic instability
 Laparoscopic-Assisted Cystopexy
and an active urinary tract infection. Many patients with spay-
Clarence A. Rawlings
associated incontinence and perineal hernia have histories of
urinary incontinence, and these conditions probably increase
Cranial traction ofthe urinary bladder has been used in com
the infection potential. When present, the infection should be
appropriately managed before consideration of LAC.
cated perineal hernia and in female dogs with spay-associated
urinary incontinence. The standard repair of a perineal her-
■ INSTRUMENTATION
nia is to transpose the internal obturator muscle to primar-
ily close the perineal hernia. In addition, the male patient
Basic laparoscopic instruments used are a 0- or 30-degree
5-mm laparoscope, a 5-mm Babcock forceps, and two trocars.
to develop in more than 20% of all spayed female dogs and
exceeds 30% of spayed female dogs weighing more than
 PATIENT EVALUATION
20 kg. Studies have found the rate to approximate 10% of
AND PREPARATION
spayed dogs. Incontinence signs may increase in spayed dogs
that have urinary tract infections, polyuria development, or
Evaluation primarily ensures that the patient is in good gen-
 obesity. Variations in the reported rate of incontinence may
eral health, suitable for general anesthesia. Perioperative
relate to how closely the owner observes and spends time with
 antibiotics should be used.
the spayed female dog. Leaking is more likely to be detected
Anesthesia
ing on tile floors, wood floors, or bed sheets. Nearly 100% of
 incontinent dogs are described by their owners as dribbling
 General anesthesia with positive pressure ventilation during
during sleep or when recumbent. Onset of spay incontinence
insufflation is required.
develops in 75% of incontinent dogs within 3 years of ovar-
Procedure
incontinence is also associated with sphincter incompetence,
but the mechanism has been described as multifactorial and
 Dogs are placed on their back in a mild Trendelenburg
may include bladder and urethral position within the pelvis.
 position (head down). Trocar-cannula placement sites are
selected to provide good viewing via the camera and appro-
 PATIENT INDICATIONS
priate grasping of the bladder via a trocar site. The viewing
AND CONTRAINDICATIONS
trocar-cannula is placed on the midline, 2 to 3 cm caudal to
the umbilicus with use of the open (Hasson) technique. The
The main indication for laparoscopic-assisted cystopexy
(LAC) is recurrent perineal hernia after primary repair and
level and just lateral to the rectus abdominis muscle (Figure
castration in male patients. This may be associated with a
15-79). The cystopexy site on the transversus abdominis mus-
retroflexed urinary bladder. The proper technique for pri-
cle is selected just medial to the caudal superficial epigastric
 mary repair and the long-term use of stool softeners should
vessels, and a 3- to 4-cm long incision is made longitudinally
 be sufficient and will avoid consideration of cystopexy as a
through the abdominal muscle. The bladder is gently pulled
component of perineal hernia management. Colopexy has
cranially with the laparoscopic Babcock forceps such that the
also been combined with cystopexy for refractory perineal
 midportion of the bladder can be attached to the transversus
hernia; I have used colopexy for recurrent rectal prolapse.
abdominis muscle (Figure 15-80, A). Two traction sutures of
Treatment of spay-associated urinary incontinence is first
2-0 polydioxanone are placed into the bladder in a cruciate
attempted with phenylpropanolamine or estrogens. Approx-
fashion 3 cm apart (Figure 15-80, B). A 2.5- to 3-cm inci-
 imately two thirds of spay-incontinent dogs respond favor-
sion is made cranially to caudally through the serosa and the
ably. Treatment also involves monitoring for and treating
superficial layers of bladder wall muscle (Figure 15-81, A). A
urinary tract infections. Additional treatment is required for
simple continuous suture of 2-0 or 3-0 polydioxanone is used
dogs not responding to medical treatment, and some owners
to appose the medial side of the seromuscular incision in the
desire a more permanent fix. Options include injection aug-
bladder to the medial side of the internal sheath incision, and a
parallel continuous suture is placed to appose the lateral sides
cystopexy. Although all three have been reported to improve
(Figure 15-81, B). The external sheath ofthe rectus abdominis
urinary control, this improvement typicall requires con-
muscle is then apposed with a continuous 2-0 or 0 polydioxa-
tinuation of phenylpropanolamine and management of
 none suture (Figure 15-81, C). Two subcutaneous continu-
urinary tract infections. Of these three treatments, injection
ous suture pafterns and an interrupted skin suture pattern are
augmentation is the least invasive and LAC is less invasive
 placed. After the incisional cystopexies, the bladder is exam-
than traditional colposuspension. The thin wall of the female
ined laparoscopically (Figure 15-82) and cystoscopically. Posi-
urethra can result in migration of the injection material and
tive contrast cystourethrograms show an example of the use of
 a tra nsient benefit after injection augmentation.
a LAC for a dog with recurrent perineal hernia (Figure 15-83).
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy ■443
Hgure 15-79 A, Aerial view of the patient with surgeons and laparoscopic 
equipment for a laparoscopic-assisted incisional cystopexy. The primary
Surgeon is located on the patient's right side. Although less convenient for
monitor viewing,this position is comfortable for incision and suturing of
the right side cystopexy site. Trocar-cannulae are placed for the laparoscope
(caudal to umbilicus) and Babcock tissue forceps on either side of the
 midabdomen for grasping and cranial traction on the urinary bladder. ( From
RawlingsCA,HowerthEW,MahaffeyMB,et al:Laparoscopic-assistedcystopexy
in the dog, Am J Vet Res 63:1226-1231, 2002.)
A
AlisonUGA 2001
B
AllisonUGA2001
Figure 15-80 A, A third trocar can be used at the cystopexy site for a second Babcock forceps, or the abdominal muscular incision can
be made to insert a tissue forceps to grasp the ventral side of the bladder. Cranial traction is applied to the bladder to position the ventral
say yoe puas e uudeua iiad si u pad si iape paxaaai e uam as axados au suee iapeq auigo ud
 and cystic decompression by urethral catheter are frequently required. B, Cruciate traction sutures are placed at each end of the planned
cystic seromuscular incision, which is 2.5 to 3 cm long. (From Rawlings CA, Howerth EW, Mahaffey MB, et al: Laparoscopic-assisted cystopexy
in the dog, Am J Vet Res 63:1226-1231, 2002.)
444·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
AlisonUGA2001
Allison@UGA2001
Figure 15-81 A, The serosa and external
layers of the cystic muscle are incised between
the traction sutures with care taken to avoid
entering the lumen. B, A simple continuous 
suture of 2-0 or 3-0 polydioxanone is placed
to appose the internal sheath and deep layers 
 of the rectus abdominis muscle to the serosa
 and incised muscle of the bladder wall.
Medial and lateral suture lines are placed
parallel to each other. Care is taken to avoid 
placing sutures within the bladder lumen,
and the initial cruciate sutures are removed.
C, After the cystopexy has been performed,
the medial and lateral sides of the combined
aponeurosis of the external and internal
abdominal oblique muscles and the superficial
layers of the rectus abdominis muscle are
closed in a simple, continuous fashion. (From
Rawlings CA,Howerth EW,Mahaffey MB,
AlisonUGA2001
etal:Laparoscopic-assisted cystopexy in the dog,
Am J Vet Res 63:1226-1231, 2002.)
Hgure 15-82 Cranial
traction of the bladder
without evidence of
twisting. The bladder can
 be examined cystoscopically
to ensure that the lumen 
is not penetrated with 
sutures. The cystopexy can
be placed more toward the 
urethra or more cranially if
desired. (From Rawlings CA,
Howerth EW, Mahaffey MB,
et al:Laparoscopic-assisted
cystopexy in the dog, Am J Vet
Res 63:1226-1231,2002.)
AllisonUGA 2001
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy■ 445
B
Figure 15-83 A, Lateral view of a positive-contrast cystourethrogram from a 9-year-old Yorkshire terrier with a history of acute urinary
obstruction and repeated attempts to urinate. The dog had a recurrent perineal hernia, in which the first primary repair had failed. The
bladder is in a pelvic position, providing the impression that the urethra may be kinked and obstructed. B, Pressure was applied laterally
to the caudal abdomen, over the area of the bladder. The urethra is kinked sufficiently at the vesicourethral junction to obstruct flow. This
likely produced straining that challenged the initial perineal hernia repair. C, Another cystourethrogram performed 10 months after an
incisional cystopexy was performed with laparoscopic assistance. D, Application of stress with a paddle does not produce caudal movement
of the bladder or urethral kinking. (From Rawlings CA, Howerth EW, Mahaffey MB, et al: Laparoscopic-assisted cystopexy in the dog, Am J Vet
Res 63:1226-1231, 2002.)
■ POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS
 after discharge. Some dogs also need mild sedation to sup-
plement narcotics. Patients are provided water when alert
The  most severe complication is a continual urine leak
 and standing and are fed the morning after surgery. Urina-
into the abdomen from a needle placed inadvertently into
 tion should be monitored closely. Straining may develop,
the bladder lumen. This has occurred when larger needles
 and its severity may be reduced by the pain medication.
were used to place polypropylene but has not occurred in
The residual volume should be monitored if retention is
the incisional cystopexy in which polydioxanone was placed
suspected.
with care to avoid the bladder lumen. The other potential
complications are urinary tract infections and a partially ret-
 FOLLOW-UP MONITORING
 roflexed bladder. Both are unlikely.
Female dogs treated for urinary incontinence by LAC will
 POSTOPERATIVE CARE
continue to be susceptible to incontinence. Because urinary
tract infections worsen incontinent signs, centesis-obtained
Pain and urinary voiding are the primary management
urinalysis and even cultures should be done on a regular
 concerns after LAC. Narcotics are administered to provide
 basis. I recommend continuation of phenylpropanolamine
analgesia for the first 6 to 10 hours, followed by oral drugs
(1.5 mg/kg PO, q8h).
446 ■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
SUGGESTED
READING
ds u s an e ia ' aqnh d Po s Po
Rawlings CA, Barsanti JA, Mahaffey MB, et al: Prospective evaluation
bitches: prevalence and breed predisposition, Schweiz Arch
of colposuspension for treatment of incontinence in spayed female
Tierheilkd 13l:259-263, 1989.
dogs. JArm Vet Med Assoc 219:770-775, 2001.
Holt PE: Pathophysiology and treatment of urethral sphincter
Rawlings CA, Howerth EW, Mahaffey MB, et al: Laparoscopic-assisted
mechanism incompetence in the incontinent bitch, Vet Int 3:15-25,
cystopexy in the dog. Arn J Vet Res 63:1226-1231, 2002.
1992.
ds d   a  ao  a
Huber DJ, Seim HB, Goring RL: Cystopexy and colopexy for the
mechanism incompetence in the bitch. J Small Anim Pract 42:481-
management of large or recurrent perineal hernia in the dog: 9 cases
486, 2001.
(1994 to 1996), Proceedings of the Sixth Meeting of the European
College of Veterinary Surgeons, 1997, Versailles, France, p 156.
Laparoscopic Extrahepatic Portosystemic
Diagnostics for cases of suspected portosystemic shunts
typically include a complete blood count, blood chemistry
Shunt Attenuation
panel, fasting and postprandial bile acid levels, ultrasound,
Nathan A. Miller
and nuclear scintigraphy. Transcolonic nuclear scintigra-
phy is the most definitive test in determining whether por-
Single extrahepatic portosystemic shunts are a congenital
tal blood is being shunted past the liver, but ultrasound can
abnormality affecting small breed dogs primarily but not
often be very useful in determining the location of the shunt
exclusively. The condition decreases liver function to vary-
and is generally more readily available.
ing degrees and results in clinical signs including hepatic
encephalopathy, seizures, coma, urate stone formation, and
■ PATIENT PREPARATION
lethargy Medical management can reduce signs, but surgical
attenuation of the shunt is preferable when possible. This has
 Signs of hepatic encephalopathy should be controlled medi-
cally as well as possible before surgery. Diets should have
Complete ligation is not possible when portal pressures rise
moderate protein restriction and high levels of branched-
excessively in response to ligation. Procedures to gradually
chain amino acids. Antibiotics are given to reduce bacte-
attenuate the shunt have gained popularity. These include
ria in the gastrointestinal tract that produce ammonia and
ameroid constrictor placement around the shunt or cello-
other toxins thought to be partially responsible for hepatic
phane banding of the shunt. These procedures result in fewer
encephalopathy. Antibiotics typically chosen include neo-
problems with portal hypertension and seem to decrease the
mycin, metronidazole, and ampicillin. In addition lactu-
incidence of postoperative seizures. Laparoscopic explora-
lose is given orally to reduce intestinal transit time and trap
tion and attenuation of the shunt with a cellophane band
ammonia within the colon by acidifying colonic contents.
allows minimally invasive treatment of these patients.
Lactulose or betadine enemas are sometimes given in severe
cases of hepatic encephalopathy.
■ PATIENT INDICATIONS
Fasting of patients is required before anesthesia to ensure
AND CONTRAINDICATIONS
an empty stomach, minimize the risk of gastric reflux/
regurgitation, and improve laparoscopic visualization in
 Laparoscopic cellophane band placement is indicated in
 patients diagnosed with a single extrahepatic portosystemic
shunt. Because the length of the procedure is typically lon-
ger (especially in early cases), patients who are at high risk
B0X 15-7
of anesthetic complications should not be considered can-
Instrumentation for Laparoscopic Extrahepatic
didates. The procedure is not indicated in a patient with a
 Portosystemic Shunt Attenuation
suspected intrahepatic shunt (Box 15-7).
One 5-mm, 30-degree telescope
 PATIENT EVALUATION
Four 5-mm trocars
Two 5-rmm Kelly dissectors
 Extrahepatic shunts are most common in miniature and
 One 5-mm Metzenbaum scissors
toy breed dogs and cats, and intrahepatic shunts are more
Cellophane prepared with silk sutures on either end
commonly diagnosed in large breed dogs. Typical histori-
Either 5- or 10-mm endoclips
Large radius needle and suture for traction sutures
cal findings include weight loss, anorexia, failure to grow, a
A table capable of tilting the patient from left lateral to
slow recovery from sedation or anesthesia, a wide variety of
dorsal to right lateral recumbency
 neurologic signs including seizure and lethargy, and urate
urolithiasis.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy · 447
the cranial abdomen. However, many patients are young
ventral stomach wall is grasped in the area of the pyloric
toy breeds, and the possibility of hypoglycemia is a concern.
antrum and pulled to the right ventral body wall just caudal
Fasting in these animals should be for 4 to 6 hours rather
to the ribs. A suture with a large-diameter needle is passed
than the standard 12 hours.
through the body wall and the stomach wall. The two ends
are clamped externally and kept long. When traction on the
stomach is needed, the ends are pulled tight and clamped
Anesthesia and Monitoring
 externally with a hemostat. A similar suture is placed on the
Because of the decreased liver function in these patients, care
left side. When both sutures are tight, the stomach will be
must be taken during anesthesia. Dosages of drugs metabo-
suspended from the ventral body wall (Figure 15-85). A win-
lized by the liver such as narcotics and barbiturates should
dow can be opened in the omentum to allow good access and
be decreased. Often patients are hypoproteinemic and hypo-
visualization of the omental bursa.
tensive, which should be treated as necessary with plasma,
Exploration of the abdomen for identification of the
 colloids, or inotropic support.
shunt is then performed. With the patient in left lateral
recumbency the descending duodenum can be grasped and
retracted ventrally and toward the midline. This will allow
Procedure from Access to Closure
 good visualization of the cava and portal vein (Figure 15-86).
A wide abdominal clip is used to allow the maximum area for
Careful attention should be paid to the area of the epiploic
portal placement. The patient should be positioned in dorsal
foramen. Shunts originating from the portal vein, splenic
recumbency with the ability to tilt the head up if necessary
vein, and left gastric vein will often be seen entering the cava
for the purpose of visualization. As the patient will be rotated
 in this area. The area should also be inspected for evidence
from left to right lateral recumbency during the procedure,
 of multiple congenital or acquired shunts. These appear as
a tilt table is recommended. The first portal should be estab-
multiple tortuous vessels present in the mesenteric tissues.
lished just caudal to the umbilicus with the use of either a
 Exploration of the left abdominal gutter is performed
Hasson technique or Veress needle insertion. Keeping the
with the patient in right lateral recumbency. Traction on
 portal caudal to the umbilicus minimizes the interference
the previously placed gastric sutures can assist with visual-
with visualization from the falciform fat. Two additional
ization in this area. The tortuous vessels of multiple porto-
 portals are placed in the left and right abdomen a few centi-
systemic shunts will often be seen in this area. In addition,
meters caudal to the telescope portal so that good triangula-
 abnormal vessels leading through the diaphragm to the azy-
tion on the cranial abdomen is allowed (Figure 15-84).
gos vein can be seen from this perspective. Gentle manipu-
To aid in exploration for this procedure two traction
lation ofthe left medial and left lateral lobes ofthe liver with
sutures should be placed in the ventral gastric wall. The
a palpation probe or fan retractor will aid in visualization of
the diaphragm.
 Finall, exploration of the omental bursa with the patient
Monito
in dorsal recumbency is performed. Vessels originating from
the splenic vein and the gastroepiploic vein are visualized
here. This is often useful for confirming that a vessel seen
from the right side entering the cava is truly originating from
the portal vasculature (Figure 15-87).
Once the abnormal vessel is identified, it is dissected
free from surrounding tissues for a length of approxi-
mately 5 to 10 mm (Figure 15-88). Two Kelly dissectors
are used for this purpose; occasionally some sharp dissec-
tion is necessary with Metzenbaum scissors. For vessels
entering the cava this is usually best accomplished with
the patient in lef lateral recumbency. The scope can be
shifted to the portal in the right abdomen. Instruments
can be placed in the midline portal, and an additional
portal can be established in the right side of the abdomen
(Figure 15-89). For vessels passing through the left side
of the diaphragm, dissection is generally easiest with the
patient in right lateral recumbency, the scope shifted to
the left abdominal portal, instruments in the midline por-
tal, and an additional portal established in the lefft side of
OUGA2009
the abdomen (Figure 15-90).
Figure 15-84 Portal placement for exploration of the abdomen. (Art
Once dissection of the shunt is complete, a strip of cel-
by Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
lophane with silk suture tied to each end is placed within the
448·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Pancreas seen through
 window in omentum
Stomach
(retracted)
 Right renal v.
 Portal splenic shunt
Spleen
Duodenum
Splenic v.
Portal v.
Caudal vena cava
Superior mesenteric a.
UGA2009
Figure 15-85 Use of suspending sutures to pullstomach toward ventral abdominal wall willexpose fossa caudal to stomach. (Art by Kip
Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Figure 15-86 A splenocaval shunt seen from the left side with the
Hgure 15-87 The same shunt visualized from within the omental
patient in left lateral recumbency. The cava is seen at the top of the
bursa. The stomach is suspended with sutures from the body wall 
 picture. The hepatic artery is seen coursing over the shunt.
to allow this view. The shunt is seen coursing underneath the left
limb of the pancreas, and the hepatic artery is over the top of it.
The cava is being pushed into view by the instrument. From this 
abdominal cavity. The silk is fed around the vessel and used
 perspective the shunt could be followed to the splenic vein.
to pull the cellophane strip into place around the shunt (Fig-
ures 15-91 and 15-92). The two strands of silk on either side
 of the cellophane are grasped and retracted to allow place-
recommended to achieve eventual complete attenuation of
ment of hemoclips on the two sides of the cellophane. The
the shunt.l However, one prospective study of clinical cases
 ends of the cellophane are then clipped to allow removal of
concluded no intraoperative attenuation with the cellophane
the silk strands (Figure 15-93).
 band was required and no attenuation may improve the out-
Intraoperative attenuation of the shunt to a diam-
 come.2 If intraoperative attenuation is performed, intraop-
eter of 3.0 mm or less with the cellophane band has been
erative visual monitoring of the bowel for clinical signs of
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy
■449
Monitor
Figure 15-88 The shunt after dissection.
CUGA2009
FHgure 15-90 Additional portal placement for dissection and
 banding of shunt in the left side of the abdomen. (Art by Kip
Carter 2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation,Inc.)
OUGA2009
Figure 15-89 Additional portal placement for dissection and
 banding of shunt in the right side of the abdomen. (Art by Kip
Carter @ 2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Hgure 15-91 Passage of a strand of silk tied to the cellophane.
portal hypertension should also be performed because no
 direct portal pressure monitoring can be done during the
laparoscopic procedure. The abdomen is deflated and por-
tals closed routinely.
 POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS DURING
AND AFTER SURGERY
-d do  n us n u d a
 cedure would be failure to identify the shunt definitively.
Although good visualization of the right portal/caval area,
the epiploic foramen, and the diaphragmatic region can be
achieved, access to shunts in other areas may be difficult,
 especially for the surgeon new to the procedure. If a sus-
pected shunt cannot be found, either a contrast portogram
Hgure 15-92 Passage ofthe celophane strip. The silk handling
can be performed by exteriorization of a loop of jejunum
 sutures can be seen at either end.
450 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
complication. Careful dissection of the shunt is important
as the vessel walls are typically fragile. Bipolar cautery or
other methods of intraabdominal coagulation will assist the
 surgeon in minimizing hemorrhage from small surround-
ing vessels, which will obscure visualization. Methodical
dissection and control of hemorrhage will improve the
chances of success.
Postoperative complications specific to this procedure
include portal hypertension and seizures. These are expected
to occur with the same frequency as with open cellophane
banding of portosystemic shunts and should be managed in
the same manner.
Figure 15-93 Final placement of the cellophane band with
multiple hemoclips securing both ends.
■ FOLlOW-UP MONITORING OF
PROCEDURE EFFECT
 or conversion to an open procedure can be elected. If the
surgeon cannot clearly determine whether a vessel is a
Medical management of the portosystemic shunt should
portosystemic shunt, conversion to an open procedure is
be continued for 1 to 2 months postoperatively. Evalua-
prudent rather than incorrectly attenuating a normal ves-
tion of the effectiveness of the procedure can be performed
sel. As always, caution is advised, especially when one is
 2 months postoperatively via monitoring of clinical signs,
 new to a procedure. Hemorrhage is an additional potential
serum bile acid levels, and colonic scintigraphy.
REFERENCES
1. Hunt GB: Effect of breed on anatomy of portosystemic shunts
 2. Frankel D, Seim H, MacPhail C, et al: Evaluation of cellophane
resulting from congenital diseases in dogs and cats: a review of
banding with and without intraoperative attenuation for
242 cases, Aust Vet / 82(12):746-749, 2004.
treatmentofcongenitalextrahepaticportosystemicshuntsindogs,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 228(9):1355-1360, 2006.
SUGGESTED READING
d'Anjou MA, Penninck D, et al: Ultrasonographic diagnosis of
 Sereda CW, Adin CA: Methods of gradual vascular oclusion and their
portosystemic shunting in dogs and cats, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
applications in treatment of congenital portosystemic shunts in
45(5):424-437, 2004.
dogs: a review, Vet Surg 34( 1):83-91, 2005.
Fossum TW: Portosystemic vascular anomalies. In Fossum TW, editor:
Tobias KM, Rohrbach BW: Association of breed with the diagnosis of
Small animal surgery, St Louis, 1997, Moshy.
congenital portosystemic shunts in dogs: 2,400 cases (1980-2002),
Hunt GB, Kummeling A, et al: Outcomes of cellophane banding for
JAmr Vet Med Assoc 223(11):1636- 1639, 2003.
congenital portosystemic shunts in 106 dogs and 5 cats, Vet Surg
Watson PJ, Herrtage ME: Medical management of congenital
33{1):25-31, 2004.
portosystemic shunts in 27 dogs—a retrospective study, J Srmall
Landon BP, Abraham LA, Charles JA: Use of transcolonic portal
Anim Pract 39(2):62-68, 1998.
scintigraphy to evaluate efficacy of cellophane banding of congenital
Whiting PG, Peterson SL: Portosystemic shunts. In Slatter D, editor:
extrahepatic portosystemic shunts in 16 dogs, Aust Vet J 86(5): 169-
Textbook of small animal surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993,
179,2008.
Saunders.
Lipscomb VJ, Jones HJ, Brockman DJ: Complications and long-term
Winkler IT, Bohling MW, Tillson DM, et al: Portosystemic shunts:
outcomes of the ligation of congenital portosystemic shunts in 49
diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of 64 cases (1993-2001), J Am
cats, Vet Rec 160( 14):465-470, 2007.
Anim Hosp Assoc 39(2):169- 185, 2003.
Martin RA: Congenital portosystemic shunts in the dog and cat, Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 23(3):609-623, 1993.
Laparoscopic-Assisted Gastric Foreign
develop serious life-threatening complications. When mate.
Body Removal
rial is present within the stomach, several options for
treatment are available, including observation and serial
Michael G.Dearmin
radiographs, induction of emesis, transesophageal retrieval
with the use of flexible endoscopy, open surgery with gas-
Dogs in particular tend to consume either whole or in part
trotomy, and laparoscopic hand-assisted gastrotomy.
almost anything they encounter in their environment. These
 Flexible endoscopy is preferred for removing gastric for-
objects frequently pass without incident, but some animals
eign bodies when possible (see Chapter 7). When flexible
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy · 451
 -oidel saisau Aeuu e ‘uondo ue jou si Adossoua
■ INSTRUMENTATION
scopic procedure may be performed. Laparoscopic-assisted
 gastrostomy reduces surgical trauma and offers the advan-
 The laparoscopic-assisted gastrotomy procedure requires
tage of improved control of abdominal contamination
only basic laparoscopic instrumentation. In brief, a lapa-
because the body wall forms a gasket-type seal around the
roscopic operating telescope and light source, CO2 insuf-
section of stomach wall retracted through the abdominal
flation source, and laparoscopic Babcock grasping forceps
incision. This procedure requires only basic laparoscopic
are required. Typical instruments may include a 5-mm
30-degree fore-oblique laparoscope and cannula and a
the beginning endoscopist.
10-mm laparoscopic, locking Babcock and cannula. Smaller
patients may require a 5-mm rather than a 10-mm Babcock.
■ INDICATIONS AND
However, the thick, mobile gastric wall can be surprisingly
CONTRAINDICATIONS
difficult to grasp and hold effectively with smaller forceps,
even in relatively small patients.
Less invasive means of gastric foreign body retrieval should be
considered before surgical removal. In some instances, induc-
 PATIENT EVALUATION
tion of emesis or observation and serial radiographs may be
AND PREPARATION
 appropriate. Emesis should be avoided if caustic material is
present or if passage of the foreign body poses a risk of trauma
The preoperative workup for each patient will be individual-
to the esophagus. In other cases, objects may appear small
ized by the initial history and physical examination findings.
enough to pass through the gastrointestinal tract. Removal
Abdominal radiographs are indicated to define the gastric
a au u se ansoxa uxon pioae oi paeiu a s Ae
foreign body and observe for foreign material or signs of
of batteries and some coins. Consideration should be given
obstruction in other parts of the gastrointestinal tract. Tho-
to flexible endoscopy, and many objects may be retrieved this
racic radiographs are also often indicated, particularly if a
way. The decision to remove an object by flexible endoscopy
history of repeated vomiting is present to observe for signs
will depend on the skill and experience of the endoscopist.
of aspiration. In addition, the esophagus is examined for
 In general, materials that may be damaging to the esophagus
radiographic signs of esophageal foreign material. Young,
 should not be retrieved with this technique, unless they can be
 otherwise healthy patients may need only a packed cell vol-
adequately controlled during removal. These include materials
ume, total protein, sodium, chloride, and potassium analy-
with sharp edges that could lacerate the esophagus or materi-
sis to identify any dehydration and electrolyte disturbances.
als that may include caustic substances. Some materials cannot
Patients with additional comorbidities such as cardiac, kid-
be adequately grasped by endoscopic equipment. These may
ney, or endocrine diseases may require additional workup
include ball-type objects with round firm surfaces and large 
as needed. Patients should be carefully screened for signs of
cloth materials that may separate when grasped or expose the
 acute abdominal complications, including evidence of gas-
 esophagus to a large amount of gastric fluid during retrieval.
 trointestinal perforation or sepsis. Careful abdominal palpa-
 Specialized equipment and retrieval bags are available and can
 tion and a complete blood count in addition to radiographic
broaden the type of material retrieved through the esophagus.
fndings may suggest more severe abdominal complica-
 Relative indications for a laparoscopic procedure include lack
 tions. An abdominal ultrasound with fluid aspiration, four-
of access to flexible equipment or failure to retrieve the mate-
quadrant abdominocentesis, or diagnostic peritoneal lavage
rial with a flexible approach.
may be indicated. Patients with evidence of abdominal sepsis
When other approaches fail or are deemed inappropriate,
 or gastrointestinal tract leakage should be stabilized imme-
 the decision to perform a laparoscopic procedure will depend
Aoinb se Auoioedet leuope Aq uo paierado pue Aiane
on several factors. In general, patients with poor cardiopul-
as possible.
 monary reserve may not be appropriate candidates for the
Patients with dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities
 procedure as they may be intolerant to abdominal insuffla-
will benefit from appropriate fluid therapy before anesthe-
tion. More specifcally, concern for gastrointestinal perfora-
 sia and surgery. Patients that are actively vomiting may be
tion, septic peritonitis, or both will usually warrant an open
 treated with antiemetics, but prokinetic agents such as meto-
clopramide should be avoided. Additional testing may also
must also match his or her own personal level of experience
be indicated if there is suspicion that the foreign material
with the patient and procedure. For instance, a patient that is
 ingested may have a toxic component.
metabolically compromised or has other comorbidities that
increase anesthesia risk may be a poor surgical candidate for
the beginning endoscopist. In this case, the patient will be bet-
Anesthesia
ter served with an open approach that the surgeon is familiar
Once adequatelyevaluated and stabilized for surgery, patients
with and can perform efficiently. In contrast, a young, other-
 are premedicated and anesthetized. Premedication proto-
wise stable patient may be an excellent candidate for the begin-
cols should avoid the use of morphine and other opioids
ning laparoscopic surgeon to develop skill and experience.
 prone to inducing emesis if it is contraindicated. A variety
452■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
of induction agents are appropriate. The primary consid-
induction. Cefazolin at 22 mg/kg IV every 2 hours through
eration is rapid induction and quickly securing an airway.
the conclusion of the surgical procedure is a typical protocol.
Patients that have been vomiting may have a relatively empty
stomach with the exception of the foreign material. Others,
Surgical Procedure
particularly if large amounts of cloth material are present,
 may have a large amount of gastric fluid despite evidence of
The abdomen should be prepared and draped as for an open
vomiting. Care should be taken to quickly secure the airway
abdominal procedure in the event the procedure needs to
of these patients to prevent aspiration if regurgitation does
be converted. The clipped and prepared area should extend
occur. Maintenance is with gas anesthesia, typically isoflu.
at least 8 cm cranial to the xiphoid in the average dog. Por-
rane or sevoflurane. Antibiotic prophylaxis is initiated after
tals for the procedure are on the midline (Figure 15-94).
However, if the procedure is to be combined with any other
laparoscopic procedures such as general exploration or lapa-
 roscopic-assisted gastropexy, the clipped area should extend
well up the lateral aspect of the flank regions for placement
of flank portals (Figure 15-95).
A modified Hasson technique is used to create the ini-
tial 5-mm cannula portal approximately 5 to 6 cm caudal
to the xiphoid in the average size dog (this has been covered
in the introduction of laparoscopy). Insufflation is initiated
and the camera introduced. The stomach should be visible
below (dorsal) and slightly cranial to the portal. A second
portal is then made several centimeters cranial to the first.
An approximately 1-cm stab incision is made into the skin,
and a 10-mm cannula with diamond tip obturator is used to
 penetrate the body wall along the linea. The cannula is also
inserted in a lateral direction and under direct visualization
in the field of view of the laparoscope. Because the portals
are close to one another, the cannulae may be crossed dur-
 ing placement. The frst cannula and scope must be only just
within the peritoneum to allow visualization of the second
cannula. This may be accomplished with a 0-degree scope,
Figure 15-94 Initial portal placement. Patient's head is to the left.
but the 30-degree fore-oblique scope aids with visualization.
B
Figure 15-95 A, A combined laparoscopic procedure was used to retrieve both a gastric foreign body and cystic calculi (B) in this patient.
Note the alternate portal placement for the combined procedure with the laparoscopic trocar placed caudal to the umbilicus, the gastrotomy
over the stomach and the cystotomy over the cranial part ofthe urinary bladder. Please refer to Chapter 15 on the companion website for
additional information on this case.
(Photographs @ 2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation,Inc.)
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy ·453
With the second portal in place, the Babcock is intro-
Introduction of the laparoscope into the stomach is
duced and directed toward the body of the stomach. The
an optional step. Many larger foreign objects will be eas-
stomach is grasped in the midbody, and the Babcock handle
ily grasped blindly through the gastrotomy incision. How-
is locked (Figure 15-96). The laparoscope and 5-mm can-
ever, the lack of tactile feedback from the tip of the forceps
nula may then be withdrawn, and insufflation is released.
 and the presence of rugal folds can make blindly grasping
The 10-mm cannula should then be elevated along the
even moderate sized objects quite frustrating. Care must
handle of the Babcock, and the initial incisions are joined
be taken to ensure rugal folds are not grasped in conjunc-
to create a 5- to 8-cm incision. The final size of the incision
tion with the object, which could damage or even perfo-
will be dictated by the object to be removed. With the inci-
rate the stomach wall. Insertion of the scope is quick and
sions extended and insufflation released, the stomach wall is
 easy and hastens identification and retrieval of the for-
lifted gently to the incision line. At this point it is important
 poas aq oi pa aq a ados a a u
not to attempt to withdraw the stomach wall through the
stomach for additional foreign material before closure of
 incision. Stay sutures are placed where the stomach wall is
the gastrotomy incision. The gastrotomy incision is closed
brought close to the cranial and caudal aspect of the inci-
routinely while the stomach wall is maintained exterior to
sion. Traction is then placed on the stay sutures and forceps
the abdominal wall (Figure 15-99). A judicious local saline
 to withdraw a small portion of the stomach wall through the
lavage is performed to remove any superficial contamina-
incision. At this point, two additional stay sutures are placed
tion; the moistened gauze 4 × 4 pads are also removed. The
in the stomach wall in the middle of the incision to apply lat-
 stay sutures are released, and the stomach wall is allowed to
eral traction. Moistened 4 × 4 gauze pads are placed around
the incision opening, and the four stay sutures are draped
over the top. When properly positioned, the stomach wall
forms a seal with the abdominal wall, preventing introduc-
tion of material into the abdomen. (The 4 × 4 pads serve to
control local contamination). A stab incision is made into
the stomach wall, and the laparoscope and cannula are intro-
 duced into the opening (Figure 15-97). The stomach wallis
held gently between the thumb and forefinger, to provide a
seal, while a small amount of insuflation is applied. Insuf-
flation should not be excessive but just enough to slightly
distend the rugal folds to allow visualization of the foreign
object. The Babcock or other grasping forceps are then
introduced into the stomach to grasp the foreign object and
gently manipulate it through the body wall and gastrotomy
incision (Figure 15-98).
autn
Hgure 15-97 A, Appearance of open gastrotomy incision.
@ UGARF
Traction sutures are providing tension on the stomach to avoid
Figure 15-96 Grasping stomach wall with laparoscopic Duval
peritoneal contamination. B, Gastrotomy incision with camera
forceps. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
and grasping instrument insertion into the stomach. (B, Art by
Foundation,Inc.)
Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
454 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Hgure 15-99 Appearance of gastrotomy closure before
replacement of stomach wall into abdominal cavity.
first 4 to 5 days after returning home. Exercise is restricted
to leash walking only until sutures are removed 10 to 14 days
after surgery. More clinically affected patients may require
longer periods of hospitalization with fluid, medical, and
nutritional support.
Postoperative complications can include gastrotomy inci-
sion leakage, peritonitis, abdominal incisional dehiscence,
esophagitis, and aspiration pneumonia. Gastrotomy leak-
age and abdominal incisional complications are uncommon
when the procedure is performed properly. However, such
complications can occur as a sequela to the onset of sep-
tic peritonitis. In most cases, abdominal complications are
Figure 15-98 Section of plastic ball (A) and sock foreign body (B)
uncommon. Esophagitis and aspiration pneumonia are seen
retrieved with laparoscopic assistance.
much more frequently. Both can be caused by bouts of vom-
iting before treatment and from regurgitation during or after
surgery. Regurgitation during surgery can be quite severe in
drop back into the abdomen. The body wall incision is then
some cases. Monitoring should include frequent observa-
closed routinely.
tion for this complication, and an effort should be made to
evacuate any material as soon as regurgitation is observed.
 POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Patients that have regurgitated may be extubated gently with
the endotracheal tube cuff partially inflated during recov.
Similar to preoperative needs, postoperative care will be
ery. The patient should be monitored frequently for signs
dictated by the individual patient's clinical status. For most
of increased respiratory rate or effort, mucous membrane
uncomplicated cases, I prefer to continue fluid therapy over-
color, and lung field auscultation. Postoperative radiographs
night with nothing by mouth with the exception of sucral-
may be indicated, but the presence of pneumonia should not
fate. I also administer an H, blocker such as famotidine or
be excluded based on early radiographs as changes often lag
ranitidine. I do not routinely use prokinetic agents, but some
 behind the clinical appearance of the patient.
cases may benefit from their use. I recommend early feeding
Esophagitis may be a cause for anorexia after surgery.
the morning after surgery with a bland enteral diet. Feed-
Adequate pain control aids in controlling these signs. In
ing is initiated with a few small bites, and a small amount
addition, I routinely administer a sucralfate slurry to patients
of water is offered. If feeding is tolerated without vomiting.
 to soothe the esophagus and stomach. This is continued in
daily requirements are divided into four to five feedings
conjunction with an H, blocker for 5 to 7 days after the sur-
through the day. Uncomplicated cases may be discharged
gical procedure. Finally, esophageal stricture can be seen
as soon as tolerance to oral feeding is confirmed. However,
as a later complication after vomiting, regurgitation, and
I recommend that owners continue feeding several small
 severe esophagitis. This complication should be suspected in
meals each day until sutures are removed. The diet may
 patients developing dysphagia or regurgitation problems in
 gradually be converted to the dog's standard diet over the
 the weeks and months after surgery.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy · 455
SUGGESTED
READING
Lew M, Jaynski M, Brzeski W: Laparoscopic removal of gastric foreign
 Silverstein FE, Dennis MB: Removal of gastric foreign body from a
bodies in dogs comparison of manual suturing and stapling
dog, using a fiberoptic endoscope, JAr Vet Med Assoc 168:433-434,
viscerosynthesis, Pol J Vet Sci 8:147-153, 2005.
1976.
Monnet E, Twedt DC: Laparoscopy, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
 Zimmer JF: Rermoval of gastric foreign bodies using flexible fiberoptic
Pract 33:1147-1163, 2003.
endoscopy, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 76:1611-1619, 1981.
Other conditions that may be good indications for LC
 Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy
include dogs and cats with symptomatic cholelithiasis without
Philipp D. Mayhew
common bile duct stones or associated EHBO. This occurs
less frequently, and in these cases care must be taken not to
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) is the most frequently
overlook stones that are residing in or moving in and out of
performed minimally invasive surgery in humans, indicated
the ductal system. Well-circumscribed gallbladder neoplasia
principally for the treatment of gallstone disease and chole-
may be another reasonable indication for LC but is extremely
cystitis. It was first performed in the early 1980s, and cur-
rare in dogs and cats.
rently more than 75% of all cholecystectomies are performed
laparoscopically. Operative safety for LC is considered very
 PATIENT CONTRAINDICATIONS
high, and conversion to open surgery occurs in only 5% to
-s a a e  a  ei s J 
Several patient-specific factors that should be considered
 trum of extrahepatic biliary tract pathology is seen, so only
contraindications to this technique exist. The presence of an
limited parallels can be drawn to human medicine.
uncontrolled coagulopathy should be considered a contra-
indication. Providing adequate hemostasis laparoscopically
■ PATIENT INDICATIONS
can be more diffcult compared with open surgery in which
packing of the gallbladder fossa can easily be performed.
Conditions that are treated by cholecystectomy in small ani-
 Factors that might cause a patient to be poorly tolerant of
mals include necrotizing cholecystitis,4 gallbladder trauma
 pneumoperitoneum such as uncontrolled congestive heart
or neoplasia, symptomatic cholelithiasis56 and gallbladder
failure, severe chronic respiratory disease, and diaphrag-
mucocele (GBM).7-10 In one study the most common indica-
matic herniation should be considered contraindications.
tion for cholecystectomy in dogs was necrotizing cholecysti-
Disease-specific contraindications to LC include the
tis, although because of nomenclature changes over the past
 presence of bile peritonitis. The site or sites of bile leakage
few years, some cases previously categorized as necrotizing
must be accurately identified and sealed. In some cases the
cholecystitis might now be termed gallbladder mucocele.1l
location of the perforation might be readily apparent, but
GBMs appear to be getting more common in dogs and are
 in other cases, perforation might be located at the base of
characterized by the gradual accumulation oflarge amounts of
the cystic or common bile ducts, which can be very difficult
thick gelatinous bile within the gallbladder lumen. Gelatinous
to examine laparoscopically. In humans the risk of missing
 bile is caused by cystic mucinous hyperplasia of the gallblad-
a site of bile leakage or the presence of a common bile duct
der mucosa.12 Several recent publications have highlighted
cholelith is reduced by the use of endoscopic retrograde
the potential morbidity associated with GBM. Rupture of the
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), intraoperative chol-
 gallbladder is found in 23% to61% ofcases at presentation7-10
angiography (IOC), or laparoscopic bile duct exploration
and extrahepatic bile duct obstruction (EHBO) is found in
(LBDE).15 ERCP has been reported in dogs but not for this
up to 30% of cases at presentation.8 Clinical signs can also
indication.16,17 Neither IOC or LBDE has been reported in
be associated with nonperforated, nonobstructive GBMs, and
small animals and may be challenging due to the small size
 most commonly are vomiting, lethargy, and inappetence.10,13
and tortuous nature of the cystic duct. In the future these
Cholecystectomy in dogs with nonperforated, nonob-
adjunctive therapies may allow for successful LC in small
structive GBM may be justifiable to eliminate the clinical
 animals with biliary leakage.
signs previously mentioned that can be attributable to GBM
Another relative contraindication to LC in veterinary
and to avoid the significant morbidity and mortality—-which
patients is the concurrent presence of EHBO. Various
has been reported to be as high as 22% to 40%—that can
authors place different importance on common bile duct
arise from surgical management of bile peritonitis or EHBO
flushing in GBM, but in my view it is vital for ensuring com-
resulting from GBM.8-10 The surgeon should always con-
sider whether the dog is a good candidate for anesthesia and
results of diagnostic testing are suggestive of obstruction.7-9
pneumoperitoneum. It is known that many dogs with GBM
I would also recommend that common bile duct flushing
have a very prolonged clinical course, and some dogs may
be performed in cases with choleliths to ensure that none is
 respond to medical management. 4
left in the common bile duct postoperatively. Again, in the
456■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
future it may be possible to combine LC with ERCP to allow
A telescope portal is established with a cannula suitable for
a minimally invasive approach to mucoceles or cholelithia-
passage of 10-mm instruments in the subumbilical location.
  a      
The other three instrument ports can be 5.5- or 6-mm ports
obstruction.
suitable for 5-mm instrumentation. A laparoscopic retractor is
 Inadequate training of the surgeon or inadequate instru-
important for retracting the gallbladder cranially during cystic
mentation are contraindications for LC. This is one of the
duct dissection. Various types and sizes of laparoscopic retrac-
more challenging laparoscopic techniques and should only
tors are available. The use ofa 5-mm fan retractor (Karl Storz
be attempted by surgeons who have considerable experience
Veterinary Endoscopy) has been reported and works well for
with both basic laparoscopic techniques and performing
 a sda eu osde esodd s
cholecystectomy in traditional open fashion.
important for creating a plane of dissection around the cystic
Many dogs suffering from GBM are small breeds, with
duct and should be available in both 5- and 10-mm sizes.
a recent study demonstrating a predisposition in the Shet-
A knot pusher is necessary for pushing extracorporeally
land sheepdog.10 The technique has been performed in dogs
 tied slipknots into position on the cystic duct. If hemostatic
as small as 4 kg although instrument manipulation in these
clips are used for cystic duct ligation, it is recommended
very small dogs is challenging and these authors suggested
that a 10-mm hemostatic clip applier be used that applies
that with standard 5 mm instrumentation this might repre-
medium to large hemostatic clips. Ideally a multiclip applier
 sent a reasonable lower end of the size scale for LCin dogs.13
is used that will minimize instrument exchanges as several
clips are usually applied to the cystic duct before sectioning.
INSTRUMENTATION FOR THE
 A vessel-sealing device or other form of bipolar cautery
PROCEDURE
is very useful for dissecting out the gallbladder from the
hepatic fossa once cystic duct ligation is complete. The use of
Apart from the basic components of the laparoscopic tower
the device or bipolar cautery helps to minimize hemorrhage
described in Chapter 1 certain specific instruments are
from the hepatic attachments to the gallbladder and also aids
indispensable for laparoscopic cholecystectomy (Box 15-8).
in maintaining visualization during dissection. Monopolar
cautery can be used but is less safe than bipolar energy as
insulation failure, sparking, and direct coupling can all cause
damage to adjacent tissues without the surgeon noticing. Two
BOX 15-8
commonly used bipolar vessel-sealing devices (LigaSure V,
Valleylab Inc., Boulder, Colo.; and Enseal Trio, Ethicon
Special Instruments Required for Laparoscopic
Endosurgery Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio) have fine-tipped hand-
Cholecystectomy
pieces that allow their use as a blunt dissection tool as well as
a vessel-sealing device when required to seal vessels and small 
 One 10-mm trocar-cannula assembly (at least one
bile ducts during dissection. Another device that uses ultra-
10-mm cannula is used to insert a 10-mm night-angle
sonic energy (Harmonic Scalpel, Ethicon Endosurgery Inc.,
forceps, 10-mm clip applier, and 10-mm specimen
retrieval bag applicator)
Cincinnati, Ohio) to seal vessels also has a fine-tipped hand-
Three 5-mm threaded cannulae
piece and has been shown to be useful for this indication.13
 One 5-mm fan retractor (several laparoscopic types of
It should be noted that these devices should not be used to
retractors are available, but the fan retractor works well 
seal and section the cystic duct as they have been shown in
for this application)
 experimental models to be ineffective for this application.18
 One 5-mm night-angle dissecting forceps
 Once the gallbladder is withdrawn, it should be placed in
One 10-mm night-angle dssecting forceps (a 10-mm
 a specimen retrieval bag. Most are loaded into 10-mm appli-
night-angle dissection forceps might be necessary if the
cator devices that allow easy manipulation of the gallbladder
cystic duct is too thick to allow the 5-mm device from 
into the bag once placed into the peritoneal cavity.
passing all the way around the duct)
A suction-irrigation device is required for LC to suction
 Knot pusher (for placement of extracorporeally tied 
 small accumulations of hemorrhage during cystic duct liga-
bparoscopic slipknots)
Suction-irrigation device (for aspiration of hemor-
tion. They are also very helpful for aspiration of bile from
hage, bile from within the gallbladder at the termination
the gallbladder once it has been placed into the specimen
 of the procedure, and any remaining lavage fluid after
retrieval bag and for suction and lavage of the hepatic fossa
completion)
once the gallbladder has been removed. When suction is
Vessel-sealing device/bipolar cautery (principally for dis-
applied during laparoscopy, CO2 will rapidly be aspirated
section of the gallbladder from its hepatic fossa)
(with resultant loss of the pneumoperitoneum) as well as
Laparoscopic hemoclips (for cystic duct ligation in
the fluid or blood that the surgeon intended to remove. It is
smaller dogs)
therefore helpful to apply very short bursts of suction, pref-
Specimen retrieval bag (for retrieval of the gallbladder
 erably with accurate placement of the suction tip into the
at the termination of the procedure)
pool of fluid to be aspirated. This is greatly facilitated by the
use of a disposable suction-irrigation device, most of which
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy· 457
 have buttons that allow suction or irrigation to be applied
into the abdomen, and a full exploration of the peritoneal
for very short periods.
cavity is performed. Insertion of three instrument ports for
5-mm instrumentation is the next step: one port is placed 5
 PATIENT PREPARATION
to 8 cm lateral and 3 to 5 cm cranial to the umbilicus in the
left cranial quadrant and two are located 3 to 5 and 5 to 8 cm
A standard preoperative diagnostic workup should include
lateral to the umbilicus on the right side in a triangulated pat-
a complete blood count, serum biochemical panel, and uri-
tern around the anticipated location of the gallbladder. Port
nalysis. A coagulation panel should be performed as well
relationships will have to be modified as appropriate depend-
as a thorough ultrasonographic examination of the entire
ing on the size of the animal. Port positions for LC can be
abdominal cavity.
seen in Figure 15-100.
 Patients should be liberally clipped from 1 to 2 inches cra-
The first part of the procedure is to dissect circumferen-
nial to the xiphoid process to the pubis; laterally a high clip to
tially around the cystic duct (Figure 15-101, A)(see Video
the dorsal third of the abdominal wall should be performed
 15-1 on the companion website). Retraction of the gallblad-
because port placement, especially on the left side, will be at the
der with a 5-mm fan retractor through the left-sided instru-
midabdomen level. Patients are placed in dorsal recumbency
ment port is used to elevate the gallbladder into a position
with the front legs tied cranially and the hindlegs caudally.
where the cystic duct is visible. Care must be taken not to
If V-trays are used for extra stability, they should not extend
inflict iatrogenic damage to the adjacent liver parenchyma
caudal to the costal arch as they can interfere with instrument
during this part of the procedure. It is helpful at this point
manipulation during the procedure. Aseptic surgical scrubbing
to place the telescope into the right paramedian port that
should be performed as for an open surgical procedure, and
is closest to midline (the middle of the triangle) so that the
care should be taken to include the more dorsal areas. The use
two instrument ports that will be used for dissection are not
of a tilt table can be useful intraoperatively to help with gravity
too close together. Right-angle laparoscopic forceps are now
assisted retraction of organs during certain parts of the pro-
placed into one instrument port, and another dissection
cedure. Perioperative antibiotics should be used and selected
instrument is placed into the other. Either the 5- or 10-mm
based on culture and sensitivity testing of previously recovered
right-angle dissector is used, depending on the diameter of
microbial cultures of the hepatobiliary system, or an empiri-
the cystic duct. The second dissection instrument can be
cal choice should be made based on knowledge of commonly
 Kelley forceps, the suction-irrigation tip, or a second pair
encountered hepatobiliary flora. Suitable empirical choices are
 of right-angle forceps, depending on surgeon preference. At
cefazolin (22 mg/kg IV q2h), cefoxitin (22 mg/kg IV q2h), or
this point a clear view of the cystic duct should be visible.
metronidazole (10 mg/kg IV q2h).
Anesthesia and Monitoring
Anesthetic challenges during LC are similar to those for most
laparoscopic interventions. Ventilatory variables should be
closely observed during anesthesia either with end-tidal CO2
monitoring or blood-gas analysis. Care should be taken not
to exceed intraabdominal pressures of 10 to 12 mm Hg. Ade-
quate visualization of important anatomic features is often
 achieved at pressures of 8 to 10 mm Hg.
Procedure from Access to Closure
Abdominal access can be obtained with either the Hasson
technique or placement of a Veress needle, depending on the
surgeon's preference. A four-port technique is generally used
for LC in dogs. In humans a two-port technique and even a
single-port technique have been described; thus in the future,
further refinement of the technique may allow port numbers
to decrease.19,20 A trocar-cannula assembly that will allow
 passage of 10-mm instrumentation is placed at a subumbili-
cal location 1 cm caudal to the umbilicus. Once the telescope
port has been placed, a pneumoperitoneum is established
UGA2009
with carbon dioxide (maximal pressure, 10 to 12 mm Hg)
Hgure 15-100 Position of trocars and instrumentation for
with use of a pressure-regulating mechanical insufflator.
alaparoscopic cholecystectomy. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010
A 5-mm or 10-mm, 0- or 30-degree laparoscope is inserted
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
458■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
A
Figure 15-101 A, A fan retractor is used to retract the gallbladder cranially. This allows access to the cystic duct and artery. Either 5- or
10-mm laparoscopic right-angle dissecting forceps are used to dissect around the cystic duct and artery in preparation for ligation of these
structures using extracorporeal or intracorporeal suturing techniques. B, Ideally three ligatures are placed on the cystic duct and artery.
The duct and artery are then sectioned between the two most distal of the three ligatures. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia.
Research Foundation, Inc.)
If that is not the case, further manipulation or retraction of
likely indicates iatrogenic penetration of the cystic duct, and
adjacent organs should be performed to ensure good visu-
conversion to an open approach should be considered. Vari-
alization. In some cases it will help to tilt the table into a
ous options exist for ligation of the cystic duct. The use of
 head-down position (Trendelenburg position). This makes
hemostatic clips is possible in some dogs in which the cystic
it easier to retract the liver lobes, which have a tendency to
duct is small and not distended. Medium to large hemostatic
fall caudally into the operative field. However, this can also
clips should be applied. If clips are to be used, at least four
allow the small intestine to move cranially and obstruct the
clips should be applied to the duct before sectioning the duct
operative field. Because of the varying anatomy of each dog.
 in the middle so that at least two clips remain on each end. In
the surgeon must be prepared to attempt several different
 dogs with GBMs and some other hepatobiliary conditions,
combinations of active retraction and patient positioning to
significant thickening of the cystic duct wall and some dis-
create adequate visualization in each case.
tension may be present. In these cases, I strongly recommend
thatextracorporealltiedsuturesare placed around thecystic
duct to ensure safe ligation of the duct because the clips may
Once adequate visualization is obtained, the right-angled
be inadequate to ligate the thickened abnormal tissue pres-
forceps are used to dissect circumferentially around the cys-
entl3 (Figure 15-101, B). For suture ligation modifed Roeder
tic duct (see Video 15-1 on the companion website). The
knots of 0 or 2-0 polydioxanone are prepared extracorpore-
surgeon must try to ensure that they are proximal to the
ally and pushed into position with the use ofa knot pusher.21
 entrance of the first hepatic duct so that iatrogenic damage
Ideally three ligatures are placed, and sharp sectioning of the
to that structure can be avoided. Some hemorrhage is likely
to occur as this dissection proceeds but is typically minor.
the two most proximal sutures, leaving 1-2 ligatures in place
 Intermittent suction should be used to aspirate any hem-
 around the cystic duct and one in place on the gallbladder. It
orrhage so that optimal visualization during the dissection
is helpful to leave the end on the gallbladder suture long to
is maintained. The dissection is complete when the tips of
aid in manipulation after the cystic duct is cut.
the right-angled forceps are visible coming around the cys-
Once the cystic duct is sectioned, dissection of the gall-
tic duct and enough length of cystic duct has been dissected
bladder out of the hepatic fossa is begun. Upward traction
free to allow the placement of multiple clips or sutures. If
 must be placed on the galbladder to dissect it out, and this
any leakage of bile is detected during this dissection, it most
can be performed by gentle traction on the suture end that
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy· 459
Figure 15-102 The gallbladder has been placed in a specimen
retrieval bag before intraperitoneal bile suctioning.
Hgure 15-103 After withdrawal of the cannula still containing the
specimen retrieval bag application device at the subumbilical port
remains on the gallbladder or by manipulation with a blunt
site,the bag is partially withdrawn from the peritoneal cavity. The
probe. Care should be taken when pressure is applied to
retrievalbagwillbepulleduptothebody walland partillyopened
the gallbladder wall because it may be very friable and thin
toallowa smallincisiontobemade intothe galbladder while it isstill
within the peritoneal cavity. The bile will then be suctioned out before
walled, and penetration of the gallbladder can occur if too
the now-collapsed gallbladder is withdrawm through the port incision.
much pressure is applied. It is very helpful to use a vessel
sealing device or bipolar cautery to aid in dissection of the
 gallbladder from the fossa. The fine-tipped versions of the
examination; in addition, bacterial culture and sensitivity
vessel-sealing devices can be used both as blunt dissection
testing of the bile and gallbladder wall should be performed.
instruments and vessel sealers to minimize hemorrhage dur-
Before closure of the instrument ports and before cannula
ing the procedure and to seal the small bile ducts. Traditional
removal, CO, should be purged from the peritoneal cavity.
bipolar cautery tips can also be used for this purpose, as can
Port closure is achieved by placing single, simple, interrupted
the hemostatic clips previously mentioned.
monofilament absorbable sutures of appropriate size into the
 Once dissected free, the gallbladder is placed into a speci-
muscle fascia ofthe body wall followed by single, simple, inter-
men retrieval bag that is inserted through the subumbilical
rupted sutures of 3-0 poliglecaprone 25 in the subcutaneous
port (Figure 15-102). The entire cannula is withdrawn from
or intradermal tissue. Placement of skin sutures is optional.
the port site along with the first part of the retrieval bag (Fig-
ure 15-103). Tension is placed on the retrieval bag until a
■ POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
small area ofthe gallbladder can be visualized and punctured
COMPLICATIONS
with a No. 11 blade; care should be taken not to penetrate
the retrieval bag during the process (see Video 15-2 on the
The risk of conversion from a laparoscopic approach is a possi-
companion website). The tip of the suction device is then
bility about which owners should always be warned. In humans
placed into the gallbladder (that is still located within the
the risk of conversion for uncomplicated elective cholecystec-
abdomen), and bile is suctioned from within the bag. Once
tomy in patients without cholecystitis is as low as 2.7%. In
the bile has been suctioned completely, the now empty gall-
dogs too few of these procedures have been performed to pro-
 bladder can be pulled through the telescope port incision
duce viable conversion rates. In one study of six dogs in whom
within the specimen retrieval bag. If the bile is extremely
laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed for uncompli-
gelatinous, it may be diffcult to aspirate it all. In these cases
cated biliary mucocele, no cases were converted to an open
it may be necessary to enlarge the port incision to remove the
approach when there was an intact gallbladder and no bile
bag; however, in most cases this is not necessary.13
peritonitis.13 It is important to remember that a liberal policy
of converting to an open approach when complications occur
 or anatomic abnormalities are discovered represents good sur-
The subumbilical port incision is then sutured closed in
 gical judgment rather than a complication of the procedure.
three layers. Thorough lavage of the gallbladder fossa is per-
formed, followed by aspiration of fluid with the use of the
■ CARE AND POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
suction-irrigation device. Careful inspection of the hepatic
AFTER THE PROCEDURE
sis has been achieved. A laparoscopic liver biopsy specimen
 Patients should be carefully monitored for postoperative
should now be harvested. Both the gallbladder and liver
 complications after LC. Analgesic management remains a
biopsy specimens should be submited for histopathologic
 very important component of postoperative care even though
460·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
a minimally invasive approach has been taken. Injectable
recommended in any case in which the cystic duct is thick-
opioid medication should be used with care in these patients
ened or distended or in dogs in which hemostatic clips may
as it causes constriction of the sphincter of Oddi, which can
not be wide enough to effectively seal the duct. Postoperative
significantly increase pressure within the extrahepatic biliary
EHBO developing as a result of inadequate flushing of resid-
tract and worsen cholestasis. Nonsteroidal antinflamma-
ual bile sludge from the common bile duct could also occur.
tory drugs (NSAIDs) can be used unless a contraindication is
Avoidance of this complication can be achieved by careful
 present. Many dogs with GBM also have Cushing's disease,
case selection and the decision not to perform LC in dogs that
so care should be taken with administration of NSAIDs ifthis
have preoperative biochemical or imaging evidence of EHBO.
condition has been diagnosed or is suspected.8
For surgeons early in the learning curve, LC is likely to take
Although few postoperative complications were reported
 considerably longer than open cholecystectomy. This should
in a small number of dogs undergoing the procedure, the
be taken into account when patients are considered for sur-
clinician should monitor for several important problems
 gery. If a patient is judged not to be an ideal candidate for
that may occur.13 Laboratory variables such as cholestatic
prolonged anesthesia, it may be preferable in some cases to
(alkaline phosphatase and gamma glutamyl transferase) and
 pursue open cholecystectomy. Similarly, if a patient under-
hepatocellular (alanine aminotransferase) liver enzyme lev-
going LC is physiologically decompensating, consideration
els as well as the serum bilirubin level should be monitored
should be given to conversion to an open technique, which
for several days postoperatively. It is not uncommon to see
may be more rapid. With experience, however, this proce-
 transient elevations in these enzyme levels postoperatively,
 dure can be completed in a very reasonable amount of time.13
which may be secondary to parenchymal manipulation
and dissection during the procedure, secondary anesthetic
■ FOLLOW-UP MONITORING OF
effects, or the effect of pneumoperitoneum.13 It should be
PROCEDURE EFFECT
noted that because of underlying concurrent hepatobiliary
pathologic conditions, it is not uncommon for the results of
Long-term monitoring of patients undergoing LC involves
laboratory liver variables to remain abnormal, which is why
follow-up management of associated chronic inflamma-
 collection of a liver biopsy specimen to evaluate concurrent
 tory hepatobiliary disease, if present. Follow-up serum bio-
 hepatobiliary pathology at the time of LC is recommended.13
chemical monitoring should be performed as dictated by
 Potential complications that could occur with LC include
the results of the histopathologic examination and culture
spillage of bile from inadequate ligation of the cystic duct and
results obtained at the time of surgery. In patients with clini-
postoperative bile peritonitis if ligation of the duct was to fail
cal signs attributable to GBM these clinical signs should be
 postoperatively. This can occur after open cholecystectomy,
monitored for improvement. In animals with cholelithiasis
and the same problem could occur after LC if care is not taken
it is very unlikely that it will recur once cholecystectomy
to securely ligate the duct. Double ligation of the cystic duct
has been completed because most choleliths originate in the
with monoflament absorbable or nonabsorbable sutures is
gallbladder.
REFERENCES
1. Livingston EH,Rege RV:A nationwide studyofconversion from
9. Worley DR, Hottinger HA, Lawrence HJ: Surgical management
laparoscopic to open cholecystectomy, Am / Surg 188:205-211,
of gallbladder mucoceles in dogs: 22 cases (1999-2003), J Ar
2004.
Vet Med Assoc 225:1418-1422, 2004.
 2. Rosen M, Brody F, Ponsky J: Predictive factors for conversion
10. Aguirre AL, Center SA, Randolph JF,et al: Gallbladder disease
of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, Am / Surg 184:254-258, 2002.
in Shetland Sheepdogs: 38 cases (1995-2005), J Arm Vet Med
3. Shamiyeh A, Danis J, Wayand W, et al: A 14-year analysis of
Assoc 231:79-88, 2007.
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Conversion—when and why?
11. Mehler SJ, Mayhew PD, Drobatz KJ, et al: Variables associated
Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech 17:271-276, 2007.
with outcome in dogs undergoing extrahepatic biliary surgery:
4. Kirpensteijn J, Fingland RB, Urich T, et al: Cholelithiasis in
60 cases (1988-2002), Vet Surg 33:644-649, 2004.
dogs: 29 cases (1980-1990), J Arm Vet Med Assoc 202:1137-
12. Kovath RM, Hildebrandt PK, Marcus LC: Cystic mucinous
1142, 1993.
hypertrophy ofthe mucosa ofthe galbladder in the dog,Pathol
5. Eich CS, Ludwig LL: The surgical treatment of cholelithiasis in
Vet 2:574-584, 1965.
cats: a study of nine cases, / Amm Anim Hosp Assoc 38:290-296, 2002.
13. Mayhew PD, Mehler SJ、 Radhakrishnan A: Laparoscopic
6. Church EM, Matthiesen DT: Surgical treatment of 23 dogs
cholecystectomy of uncomplicated gallbladder mucocele in six
with necrotizing cholecystitis, J Am Anir Hosp Assoc 24:305-
dogs, Vet Surg 37:555, 2008.
310, 1988.
14. Walter R, Dunn ME, d'Anjou MA,et al: Nonsurgical resolution
7. Besso JG, Wrigley RH, Gliatto JM, et al: Ultrasonographic
of gallbladder mucocele in two dogs、 J Arm Vet Med Assoc
iappeqes ym ssop vl ui suuy lesu pue auereadde
232:1688-1693, 2008.
mucocele, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41:261-271, 2000.
15. Brasesco OE, Rosin D, Rosenthal RJ: Laparoscopic surgery of
8. Pike FS, Berg I, King NW,et al: Gallbladder mucocele in dogs:
the liver and biliary tract, J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech 12:91-
30 cases (2000-2002), / Am Vet Med Assoc 224:1615-1622, 2004.
100,2002.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy · 461
16. Spillmann T, Happonen I, Kahkonen T, et al: Endoscopic
19. Poon CM, Chan KW, Lee DWH, et al: Two-port versus four-
retrograde cholangiopancreatography in healthy Beagles, Vet
port laparoscopic cholecystectomy, Surg Endosc 17:1624-1627,
Radiol Ultrasound 46:97-104, 2005.
2003.
17. Spillmann T, Schnell-Kretschmer H, Dick M, et al: Endoscopic
20. Romanelli JR: Single port laparoscopic cholecystectomy with
retrograde cholangiopancreatography in dogs with chronic
the Triport system, Surg Innov 15:223-228, 2008.
gastrointestinal problems, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:293-299, 2005.
 21. Stoloff DR: Laparoscopic suturing and knot tying techniques.
18. Matthews BD, Pratt BL, Backus CL, et al: Efectiveness of the
In Freeman LJ, editor: Veterinary endosurgery, ed 1, St Louis,
ultrasonic coagulating shears, LigaSure vessel sealer and surgical
1999, Mosby.
clip application in biliary surgery: a comparative analysis, Am
Surg 67:901-906, 2001.
and treatment by surgical excision is chosen in cases with
 Laparoscopic Adrenalectomy
functional adrenocortical tumors, pheochromocytomas,
Philipp D. Mayhew
and tumors greater than 6 cm in diameter.12 In small ani-
mals such guidelines have not been firmly established, and
In dogs and cats either the ventral midline approach or the
the tumor type is not always known. LA may provide a less
[enains uado iog pasn Aeuonpen s! yoeoidde iequieied
invasive modality for treatment of patients with incidental
access to the right or left adrenal gland. Laparoscopic adre-
 masses of the adrenal glands; however, every patient must
nalectomy (LA) has now been described in peoplel-3 and
be evaluated on the basis of its own clinical signs, consid-
veterinary patients.45 Significant benefits exist for people
eration of comorbidities, and suitability for surgery because
undergoing laparoscopic versus open surgery, including
 morbidity and mortality rates are significant with both open
decreased surgical time, fewer transfusions, shorter hospi-
 adrenalectomy and LA.5,8
tal stays, and lower incidences of postoperative pneumonia,
Laparoscopic pheochromocytoma resection is controversial
 sepsis, renal insuffciency, and wound infections.1 It is likely
in humans. Some authors have suggested an increased chance of
that some of these benefits would be seen in small animal
morbidity relating to hemodynamic instability,13 whereas others
patients, although such comparative studies are not yet
have refuted this.14,15 No reports of LA for pheochromocytoma
 available in veterinary medicine.
exist in the veterinary literature.
■ PATIENT INDICATIONS
 PATIENT CONTRAINDICATIONS
The laparoscopic approach to the adrenal gland in small ani-
Contraindications for  LA include systemic instability,
mals provides excellent visualization of the gland for dissection.
uncontrolled metabolic or acid-base disturbances, uncon-
 Because of the anatomic location of the glands close to large
trolled coagulopathies, untreated severe arrhythmias, and
vascular structures and the propensity for tumors to invade
hypertension. Animals that are poor candidates for anes-
these and other structures, case selection for this procedure is
thesia with pneumoperitoneum such as those with severe
critical. The dissection of the right adrenal gland is especially
cardiorespiratory disease or those with diaphragmatic her-
challenging because the gland capsule can be continuous with
 niation are poor candidates for the procedure.
the tunica externa of the caudal vena cava in dogs, although
Vascular invasion of the mass into surrounding vessels
successful right adrenalectomy in dogs has been reported.5
should be considered a contraindication. If the mass is too
 In general it is suggested that animals with functional
large (>6 cm), the use of an open approach should be con-
tumors of the adrenal glands or those with tumors larger than
sidered, although good guidelines are not available in small
3 to 4 cm that do not exhibit vascular invasion be considered
animals as to what size of tumor can be removed without
candidates for LA. The most common tumors in dogs are
increasing morbidity or mortality rates.
adrenocortical adenomas and adenocarcinomas and pheo-
 Inadequate training or lack of the correct instrumenta-
chromocytomas.6-8 In cats functional adrenocortical tumors
tion should also be considered an absolute contraindication
occur but are much less common than in dogs.? Aldoste-
for this procedure because LA is a challenging laparoscopic
rone-secreting tumors also occur rarely in cats.i0,1l In some
intervention that should only be attempted by surgeons with
countries bilateral adrenalectomy for the management of
hyperadrenocorticism is performed, but this is controversial.
 ence in performing the surgery in traditional open fashion.
A clinical syndrome often encountered in both man and
small animals is the adrenal “incidentaloma" in which an
 PATIENT PREPARATION
adrenal mass is discovered when a diagnostic workup of
another problem is being performed and is not associated
Diagnostic imaging of the gland is a very important part of
with obvious clinical signs. In humans, a thorough evalu-
the preoperative diagnostic workup for adrenal masses. It is
 ation of hormonal functionality of the mass is performed,
vital to know the dimensions of the mass and its relationship
462■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Small animals undergoing LA should receive routine
perioperative antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity
 testing for any known infections, or an empirical choice such
as cefazolin (22 mg/kg q2h IV) should be used.
In preparation for surgery liberal clipping of the hair
should be performed from 2 inches cranial to the xiphoid
process to l inch caudal to the pubis and laterally to the
most dorsal third of the body wall. The patient should
undergo a routine aseptic surgical scrub of the entire area;
the scrub should include the far dorsal area because port
placement may be very dorsal on the affected side. In addi-
tion to this the surgeon should always be prepared for rapid
     n n
occur intraoperatively; therefore, the need to perform a
Figure 15-104 This computed tomographic image shows a
ventral midline celiotomy or a paralumbar approach to
partially mineralized left adrenal mass located adjacent to the
the adrenal gland should always be anticipated. It may
aorta and vena cava but does not show evidence of vascular
be helpful to express the bladder and pass a stomach
invasion into either structure.
tube before surgery to prevent these organs, if full, from
either directly or indirectly obscuring visualization of the
to surounding organs and especially vascular structures. In
surgical field.
approximately 25% of adrenal neoplasms vascular invasion
into the vena cava or renal vasculature is present.8 Eleven
Anesthesia and Monitoring
percent of adrenocortical tumors and 55% of pheochro-
mocytomas were found to have vascular invasion in one
Appropriate anesthetic management of patients for adre-
study.8 If detected preoperatively, vascular invasion should
nalectomy is vital for success. Depending on the nature of
dde udo ue unsd no uou ue paipiun a
the mass different hormonal abnormalities may be present.
 because these tumors will likely require specialized vascular
Patients with functional adrenocortical tumors may have
techniques to remove tumor thrombi. These techniques are
metabolic disturbances and are often hypertensive and
not currently performed laparoscopically in small animals.
hypercoagulable. Pretreatment with corticosteroids is nec-
Various choices are available for preoperative imaging, and
essary (see section on Patient Preparation) to avoid sudden
ultrasonography and computed tomography (Figure 15-104)
hypoadrenocortical crises postoperatively. Animals with
are reported most frequently. Ultrasonography has been
pheochromocytomas may be hypertensive and may exhibit
shown to have a sensitivity and specificity of 80% and 90%,
arrhythmias. These conditions should be treated before
respectively, for detection of tumor thrombus.8 Sensitivity
surgery, but intraoperative management is often required
and specifcity rates of computed tomography or magnetic
during periods of catecholamine release stimulated by
resonance imaging for detection of vascular invasion are cur
surgical manipulation of the tumor. Intraoperative treat-
rently unknown.
ment with β-blocking agents, such as esmolol, can be used
 Before surgery the same preoperative management of
to decrease heart rate but only if an active α-blockade is
adrenal neoplasia as would be performed for open adre-
 in effect before its use. Intraoperative hypertension is usu-
nalectomy should be pursued prior to LA. In the case of
ally treated with phentolamine, a short-acting intravenous
functional adrenocortical tumors, supplementing with cor-
α-blocker. Arrhythmias can be treated with intravenous
ticosteroids before initiation of surgery to avoid a hypoad-
lidocaine.
renocortical episode in the recovery period is important.
Cats with aldosterone-secreting tumors are often hyperten-
 Suitable choices may include dexamethasone (0.1-0.2 mg/
 sive on presentation and have a metabolic disturbance such as
kg IV), prednisolone sodium succinate (1-2 mg/kg IV),
hypokalemia, hypernatremia, and metabolic alkalosis. These
or hydrocortisone (2 mg/kg IV). In animals in which
disturbances should be treated before surgical treatment of
pheochromocytoma is suspected, pretreatment with
an
this condition. Readers are referred to anesthesia texts for fur-
Q-adrenergic blocker, such as phenoxybenzamine, should
ther details on anesthetic management of these often complex
be considered for several weeks preoperatively until the ani-
cases.
mal is normotensive. In cats with functional adrenocortical
tumors it has been suggested that treatment with trilostane
 INSTRUMENTATION FOR THE
should be initiated until the skin abnormalities that com-
PROCEDURE
 monly accompany the condition in this species resolve.1ll
Cats with aldosterone-secreting tumors should have their
Several important instruments beyond the basic laparo-
metabolic and electrolyte disturbances corrected before
 scopic tower and instruments described in Chapter 1 are
surgery.
required to complete an LA (Box 15-9) successfully.
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy
■463
■ PROCEDURE
B0X 15-9
A three- or four-port technique can be used for LA in dogs
 Special Instruments Required for Laparoscopic
depending on how much active retraction is necessary. Once
Adrenalectomy
abdominal access has been achieved, exploration of the peri-
toneal cavity is performed to look for intercurrent pathologic
One 10-mm trocar-cannula assembly (at least one can-
 conditions or signs of metastasis. The liver is closely inspected,
 nula should accommodate 10-mm instrumentation for
 and biopsy specimens of suspicious lesions are taken. Once
passage of a 10-mm clip applier and specimen retrieval
exploration of the peritoneal cavity is complete, the dog or
bag)
cat is rotated away from the side of the lesion into almost
Three 5-mm threaded cannulae
One 5-rmm fan retractor (a fan retractor may not always
lateral recumbency. Placement of a small foam wedge under
be necessary but is useful to have available in cases in
the spine with the animal in lateral recumbency has also been
which the surgical field is repeatedly comprorised by
advocated.5 Instrument port placement is then pursued in a
 surrounding structures)
 triangulating pattern around the location of the adrenal gland
 One 5-mm right-angle dissecting forceps (this is used
(Figures 15-105 and 15-106). Instruments should not be
for dissection around the phrenicoabdorminal vascula-
placed too close together or interference during the dissection
ture in larger dogs)
 may occur. For a leff-sided lesion a trocar-cannula assembly
Suction-irrigation device (for aspiration of small accu-
 suitable for passage of 5-mm instrumentation is placed 5 to
mulations of hemorrhage and fat during dissection 
10 cm cranial to and 5 to 8 cm lateral to the subumbilical port
as well as lavage of the site after terrmination of the
on the leff side in a location just caudal to the costal arch. It
procedure)
is important when this port is placed to remain caudal to the
Vessel-sealing device/bipolar cautery (used for dissection 
and ligation of vasculature)
last rib to avoid inadvertent penetration of the thoracic cav-
Laparoscopic hemoclips (used for ligation of the phren-
ity. A second instrument port is then placed 5 to 10 cm caudal
icoabdorminal vessels in larger dogs or when a vessel-
and 5 to 8 cm lateral to the subumbilical port in the lower
sealing device is unavailable)
leff quadrant. One of these three pors is usually established
Specimen retrieval bag (should always be used to
with a cannula suitable for passage of 10-mm instrumenta-
retrieve any adrenal mass from the abdomen so that port
tion so that a 10-mm clip applier can be used and subsequent
site metastases are avoided)
withdrawal of the mass in the specimen retrieval bag can be
achieved. If a right-sided lesion is present, the ports are placed
 at the same locations but on the opposite side.
 In some cases good visualization is achieved with this
 For dissection of the gland it is very helpful to use a vessel-
 apadn ssad s ass p sod
sealing device because the rich vascular supply to the gland
other cases on the left side, the spleen or stomach will
ensures that hemorrhage will be profuse even from small vessels
obscure visualization of the cranial aspects of the adrenal
supplying the gland. Two bipolar vessel-sealing devices (Liga-
gland and the kidney will sometimes obscure visualization
Sure V, Valleylab Inc., Boulder, Colo.; and Enseal Trio, Ethicon
of the caudal margin of the gland. On the right side the right
Endosurgery Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio) and one that uses ultra-
lateral lobe of the liver must be retracted cranially and the
sonic energy (Harmonic Scalpel, Ethicon Endosurgery Inc.,
kidney can require retraction dorsally and caudally. Intes-
Cincinnati, Ohio) can be used for this indication. These devices
tines can also intermittently obscure visualization of right or
all have a fine-tipped handpiece that allows for blunt dissection
left glands but will usually fall ventrally once the animal is in
and vessel sealing in the tissue planes around the adrenal gland.
lateral recumbency. For improved visualization the surgical
 A suction-irrigation device is also very helpful for apply-
table can be manipulated into a head-up or -down position
  ne on us jo s s 
to aid in retraction of organs; alternatively, a third (or more)
 as well as some of the fat around the capsule of the gland.
instrument port(s) can be placed more dorsally over the kid-
Laparoscopic clip appliers are used for ligation of larger ves-
 ney so that an additional retractor can retract either cranial
sels such as the phrenicoabdominal vein and artery in larger
or caudal structures during dissection.
dogs. In smaller animals these can be sealed and cut with
The initial step in the dissection is penetration of the ret-
the use of the vessel-sealing device, if one is available. A
roperitoneal lining over the affected gland (Figure 15-107).
 5-mm right-angled forceps is helpful for dissecting around
In dogs, at least part of the adrenal gland is usually visible,
the phrenicoabdominal vessels. A fan retractor is helpful for
which allows the surgeon to initiate dissection in that loca-
retracting the kidney, stomach, liver, spleen, or intestines
tion. In obese animals and especially in cats the gland can be
 away from the surgical site. Finally, a specimen retrieval bag
obscured by fat, in which case dissection through the fat to
must be used to remove the mass from the peritoneal cavity.
localize the gland will be necessary. Once a small window has
 Commercially available bags can be purchased and used for
been made in the retroperitoneum, a vessel-sealing device
this purpose, or one can be fashioned from the thumb or
is used to cut and coagulate through the tissues around the
body of a sterile surgical glove.16,17
464·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
OUGA2009
A
Figure 15-105 A, Position of trocars and instrumentation for laproscopic adrenalectomy of the left adrenal gland. The patient is in right
lateral recumbency. If the right adrenal gland is being approched, the patient is in left lateral recumbency, and the trocars are placed at the 
same locations on the right side. B, Port placement for a left-sided adrenalectomy is demonstrated. At the termination of the procedure the
adrenal has been placed in a specimen retrieval bag and is being removed through the caudal 10-mm port incision. (A, Art by Kip Carter @
2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Figure 15-106 With the kidney retracted in a caudal direction 
with the use of the blunt probe, a good view of the adrenal mass 
 can be seen before initiation ofthe dissection.
Hgure 15-107 The capsule of the adrenal mass is being grasped
to elevate it. Care is taken not to penetrate the capsule during
gland. A blunt probe or Babcock forceps can be used to aid
 manipulation of the mass.
in manipulation of tissues around the gland as the dissec-
 tion progresses. Intermittent suctioning of small amounts of
hemorrhage as well as fat around the gland helps with visu-
directly visualize, but the result is that as the dissection pro-
alization, and the suction-irrigation tip can be used as an
ceeds hemorrhage can be expected from almost all planes of
 aid to dissection while the surgeon employs the vessel-seal-
 dissection. The vessel-sealing device becomes very useful as
ing device in the other instrument port (see Video 15-3 on
coagulation and cutting of tissues are performed simulta-
the companion website). The adrenal gland receives arterial
neously. The phrenicoabdominal vein and artery are larger
supply from numerous small arteries and is drained prin-
and more visible and must be identified and ligated. The
cipally by the adrenal vein, which on the right side enters
bipolar vessel-sealing devices should be able to reliably seal
directly into the caudal vena cava and on the left enters the
the phrenicoabdominal vessels of small to medium dogs.
renal vein. Clinically, these smaller vessels are difficult to
However, in larger dogs I prefer to place hemoclips on these
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy · 465
vessels to ensure secure ligation of the vessels (see Video 15-3
be performed. The most common problem is “nuisance"
on the companion website).
hemorrhage that is not hemodynamically significant but pre.
vents good visualization of the surgical field and wil prolong
www.tamssmallanimalendoscopy.com
surgical time and may predispose to complications.
As dissection of the gland progresses, Babcock forceps can
Not infrequently iatrogenic damage to lymphatic vessels
 sometimes be placed on the tissues surrounding the gland to
located dorsal to the adrenal gland can occur intraoperatively
aid in retraction although care should be taken to avoid pen-
and can lead to leakage of lymphatic fluid. This can, in some
etration of the capsule (Figure 15-107). As much as possible
cases, be profuse and obscure visualization. It can require
the gland should be handled with blunt instruments to min-
suctioning but is usually not a significant long-term concern.
imize the chance of penetrating the capsule. If this occurs
there is an increased chance of tumor seeding of the perito-
 CARE AND POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
 neal cavity, although one report documents good outcomes
AFTER THE PROCEDURE
even in dogs in which the tumor capsule was penetrated and
the inner contents of the gland were aspirated.5
Ongoing hemorrhage should be monitored in the many ves-
Once the gland is fully dissected, port site metastases can
sels that are dissected during the procedure. Thromboembo-
 be avoided if the mass is placed into a specimen retrieval
lism is one of the most serious complications and has been
bag before removal from the peritoneal cavity through the
 seen after both open8 and laparoscopic5 adrenalectomy in
10-mm port or an enlargement of this port, if necessary (see
dogs and can be fatal. Careful monitoring for signs of respira-
Video 15-3 on the companion website). The surgical site
tory distress is necessary. Preoperative treatment with heparin
should be thoroughly lavaged with sterile saline, and close
may help reduce the incidence of this problem. In dogs with
inspection for any evidence of ongoing hemorrhage should
functional adrenocortical tumors monitoring for postop-
be performed. If any persistent hemorrhage is encountered,
erative hypoadrenocorticism should be performed. Ongoing
religation of the offending vessel can be performed or the
therapy with corticosteroids should be continued for 2 to 3
placement of a hemostatic agent such as gelatin foam (Gel-
weeks postoperatively until the results of adrenocorticotropic
foam, Pfzer Inc.) or oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgi-
hormone (ACTH) stimulation tests can confirm normal cor-
cel, Johnson & Johnson Inc.) can be considered.
ticosteroid production from the contralateral adrenal gland.
Supplementation with a mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone
■ POSSIBLE INTRAOPERATIVE
acetate) is necessary if bilateral adrenalectomy is performed
COMPLICATIONS
but is not usually necessary after unilateral adrenalectomy.
 Delayed wound healing is a concern in hyperadrenocorti-
coid animals, and incisions should be closely monitored even
 during LA. They are mostly the same as those seen with open
though the small incisions associated with LA are likely to be
adrenalectomy; however, the ability to deal with these com-
of less concern compared with large open incisions.
plications may be compromised because of the lack of manual
access to the surgical field. Dissection close to major vascular
■ FOLLOW-UP MONITORING OF
structures makes profuse hemorrhage a possibility. If vascular
PROCEDURE EFFECT
invasion goes undetected preoperatively, hemorrhage is more
likely to occur and highlights the importance of preoperative
Most animals with functional adrenocortical tumors will
diagnostic imaging. When right-sided lesions are dissected,
special care should be taken because the capsule of the right
this does not occur, the presence of metastases or intercur-
adrenal gland is often continuous with the tunica externa of
rent disease should be considered. Confirmation of normal
the caudal vena cava, which makes this a particularly chal-
adrenal function in previously hyperadrenocortical animals
lenging dissection that is especially prone to hemorrhage.5 If
should be performed several weeks after surgery with the use
 hemorrhage occurs and is very significant, immediate con-
 of the ACTH stimulation test. Recurrence of clinical signs
version to an open approach should be performed. If it is pos-
after surgery may indicate regrowth of the tumor or develop-
sible to suction out enough hemorrhage to obtain adequate
ment of metastatic disease. Further adrenocortical function
clamping or clip application to the bleeding vessel, it should
testing can be repeated to evaluate possible recurrence.
REFERENCES
1. Lee J, El-Tamer M, Schifftner T, et al: Open and laparoscopic
3. Gil-Cardenas A, Cordon C, Gamino R, et al: Laparoscopic
adrenalectomy: analysis of the National Surgical Quality
adrenalectomy: lessons learned from an initial series of 100
Improvement Program, / Am Coll Surg 206:954, 2008.
patients, Surg Endosc 22:991, 2008.
2. David G, Yoav M, Gross D,et al: Laparoscopic adrenalectomy:
4. Freeman LJ: Minimally invasive adrenalectomy. In Freeman
ascending the learning curve, Surg Endosc 18:771, 2004.
LJ, editor: Veterinary endosurgery,St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
466■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
5. Pelaez MJ, Bouvy BM, Dupre GP: Laparoscopic adrenalectomy
12. Grumbach MM,Biller BMK,Braunstein GD,et al: Management
 for treatment of unilateral adrenocortical carcinomas: techniques.
of the clinically inapparent adrenal mass (“incidentaloma"),
complications and results in seven dogs, Vet Surg 37:444, 2008.
Ann Intern Med 138:424, 2003.
6. Barthez PY, Marks SL, Woo J, et al: Pheochromocytoma in
13. Tiberio GA,Baiocchi GL,Arru L,et al: Prospective randomized
dogs: 61 cases (1984-1995), J Vet Intern Med 11:272, 1997.
comparison of laparoscopic versus open adrenalectomy for
 7. Anderson CR, Birchard SJ, Powers BE, et al: Surgical treatment
sporadic pheochromocytoma, Surg Endosc 22:1435, 2008.
of adrenocortical tumors: 21 cases (1990-1996), J Am Anim
14. Ippolito G, Palazzo FF, Sebag F, et al: Safety of laparoscopic
Hosp Assoc 37:93, 2001.
adrenalectomy in patients with large pheochromocytomas: a
 8. Kyles AE,Feldman EC,De Cock HEV,et al: Surgical management
single institution review, World J Surg 32:840, 2008.
of adrenal gland tumors with and without associated tumor
15. Humphrey R, Gray D, Paulter S,et al: Laparoscopic compared 
thrombi in dogs: 40 cases, J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:654, 2003.
9. Duesberg CA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al: Adrenalectomy
a review of 47 cases, Can J Surg 51:276, 2008.
for treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in cats: 10 cases (1988-
16. Yao CC, Wong HH, Yang CC,et al: Liberal use of a bag made
1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1066, 1995.
 uainads ioy Aragins sidossoiedel aunp aao esins e uoy
10. Ash RA, Harvey AM, Tasker S: Primary hyperaldosteronism in
retrieval, Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech 10:261, 2000.
the cat: a series of 13 cases, J Feline Med Surg 7:173, 2005.
17. Holme J, Mortenson FV: A powder-free surgical glove bag for
11. Chiaramonte D, Greco DS: Feline adrenal disorders, Clin Tech
retractionofthe gallbladder duringlaparoscopic cholecystectomy,
Small Anim Pract 22:26, 2007.
Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech 15:209,2005.
Laparoscopic Spay of the Female Canine
The two variations of the laparoscopic spay that are cur-
and Feline
rently performed are the laparoscopic ovariohysterectomy
(Lap OHE) and the laparoscopic ovariectomy (Lap OVE).
Randy Hutchison
The Lap OHE has a similar result as the traditional ovario-
hysterectomy. The ovaries and the majority of the uterus are
Laparoscopic procedures used to sterilize female canines and
removed. The Lap OVE differs from traditional thinking,
felines are becoming more readily available for pet owners.
especially within the United States, because the main focus
 Previously, only traditional laparotomies were performed
of the surgery is ovary removal only. This surgery contradicts
to do an ovariohysterectomy. Larger incisions, reduced
what many American-trained veterinarians were taught, but
visibility, and slow recovery times were all a result of the
 ovariectomy has been widely performed in Europe even with
traditional approach. With the advancement of veterinary
a traditional laparotomy.
laparoscopy, many of the same benefits that humans experi-
Regardless of which of the aforementioned procedures is
ence with minimall invasive surgery can now be provided
performed, both provide the patient with the benefits of lapa-
for veterinary patients. Throughout this section, the differ-
roscopic surgery. Smaller incisions (Figure 15-108), reduced
 ent techniques and the benefits of the laparoscopic spay will
tissue trauma, diminished pain, and surgical feld magnifica-
be discussed.
tion are all advantages of minimally invasive surgery. This
Hgure 15-108 A, View of a short incisional closure of a traditional spay in a dog. B, View of closure of two trocar incisions after a
laparoscopic ovariectomy.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy · 467
technology now allows veterinarians to provide the benefits
hernias, especially larger ones, can be associated with a con-
of laparoscopic surgery to domestic cats and dogs for one of
current diaphragmatic hernia.
 the most common and important surgical procedures that is
The second and third reasons involve the reproductive
currently performed. The laparoscopic spay provides a better
tract itself. The veterinarian should always question the
surgical experience for the patient and pet owner while achiev-
 owner as to the reproductive cycle history of the patient. Has
ing the ultimate goal of sterilization.
the patient shown signs of being in season? When was the
last estrous cycle of the patient? These are important ques-
■ PATIENT INDICATION
tions, even though a spay is being performed. Many owners
will call to schedule the spay just as the patient is beginning
Females dogs and cats of all ages, sizes, and breeds are pre-
to show evidence of being in season. The symptoms offen
sented for spays to veterinary clinics around the world.
noted by the owner are vulvar swelling or vaginal bleeding.
Almost all of these patients can and should be considered as
The most important factor in determining whether to per-
 candidates for the laparoscopic spay. Once a veterinary prac-
form the laparoscopic spay is not necessarily that the patient
tice is equipped for laparoscopic spays, it should be offered
is in heat but whether the patient may have ovulated. If
to any owner who has a patient that he or she desires to be
the patient is less than 5 days into its estrus cycle, it is very
 spayed. In my practice, I have performed a laparoscopic spay
unlikely that the animal would have ovulated. The surgeon
on patients ranging in size from 1.7 1bs (0.8 kg) up to 220 1bs
 should be aware of the increasing blood flow into the ovary
(100 kg). The size of the patient should not be considered
 and uterus, but the surgery can still be done safely. In fact,
 as a contraindication for performing laparoscopic spays. In
when a lap OVE is performed, most of the broad ligament
regard to the larger patients, the significantly improved visu-
blood supply in proximity to the uterus is avoided. The
alization actually provides more confidence that adequate
importance of the ovulation is the hormonal change within
hemostasis has been achieved.
the patient when this occurs. The bitch has a very unusual
Another common misconception is that the laparoscopic
hormonal cycle as compared with many other mammals.
spay may not be ideal for aged patients. This could not be
After ovulation, the progesterone level rises and contin-
further from the truth and should be considered the ideal
ues to stay elevated for approximately 63 days regardless
means by which to spay an older patient. Even dogs and
 of whether she has become pregnant. This 63-day duration
cats just l year of age or older have significantly more fat
 mimics the normal gestation period of the dog. If a spay is
around the ovarian pedicle and the broad ligament than a
performed after ovulation, the sudden drop in progesterone
6-month-old juvenile. During a traditional ovariohysterec-
may lead to some unwanted behavioral changes seen with a
tomy, the friability of the tissue tends to increase because of
false pregnancy. The now-spayed female may display signs
this fat. This becomes troublesome when the surgeon is try-
 of nesting, apparent lactation, and the carrying of inani-
 ing to elevate the ovary through the spay incision. This part
 mate objects. Although spaying this particular female may
of the surgery often leads to tearing of the ovarian pedicle.
not necessarily be physically harmful, it may produce some
 It is also more diffcult to isolate the vasculature and ligate
behaviors with which the owner is uncomfortable. Any spay
it with absolute confidence because of the fat. Finally, the
technique that creates this change in hormones can cause
amount of fat on the surgeon's glove can lead to frustration
the same effect.
because the slippery surface makes it more difficult to handle
The other reason for being acutely aware of the patient's
the surgical instruments. The laparoscopic approach reduces
reproductive cycle, especially in an aged female, is the pos-
the amount of tissue elevation required to properly transect
sibility that the surgical patient may have a pyometra.
the pedicle and remove the ovary and uterus (if desired). It
A pyometra is a hormonal disease that affects the uterus and
 also improves the ability to verify that no hemorrhaging is
 is typically seen in the affected patient approximately 4 to
occurring after the pedicle has been transected.
8 weeks after estrus. During the preoperative examination
 of the patient, the surgeon should be looking for any sign
 PATIENT CONTRAINDICATIONS
 or symptom that would indicate that an evaluation for a
pyometra should be performed. Preoperative findings may
There are very few circumstances in which a laparoscopic
include fever, leukocytosis, vaginal discharge, or abdominal
spay would be contraindicated in a patient. However, there
distension. Any of these findings should prompt the veteri-
are three specific instances in which an open technique or
narian to order radiography or preferably an ultrasound to
 a postponement of the surgery may be indicated. The first
exclude a pyometra. Remember, just because the owner has
is the presence or suspected presence of a congenital or
not noticed a problem does not mean that the patient cannot
traumatic diaphragmatic hernia. This situation is widely
have a pyometra.
regarded as a contraindication to most laparoscopic pro-
The problems that a pyometra creates for the surgeon
cedures. The concern is the insufflation of carbon dioxide
 are threefold. First, the possibility of rupturing the uterus
into the thoracic cavity. This increase in pressure may inhibit
with the trocar or Veress needle is certainly a risk. Puncture
proper ventilation. Particular attention should be paid to
of the uterus will inevitably lead to peritonitis. Second, the
those patients who have umbilical hernias. Some of these
risk of a uterine tear while handling the reproductive tract
468■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
with the laparoscopic instruments is possible. Finally, the
 PATIENT PREPARATION
potential effects of bacterial endotoxins originating from
the pyometra may alter the patient's anesthetic stability. I
Each patient is fasted at least 8 hours before surgery. An IV
have encountered two patients who displayed absolutely no
catheter and fluids are administered to each patient regard-
evidence of the disease preoperatively and were found to
less of size, age, or breed. The patient should be walked
have a pyometra at the time of surgery.
outside before the start of surgery. It important to have the
-doid ros sidossde ae aroq ae jd
 PREOPERATIVE PATIENT EVALUATION
tive pain medications are then administered before the start
 of surgery. Typically I use a combination of an NSAID and
Patients presented for laparoscopic spay should have a com
plete physical examination before surgery. All findings that
tions. The surgeon also may elect to use a local anesthetic
would preclude the patient from any other anesthetic or sur
agent such as bupivacaine at the surgical sites. All drug
gical procedures would apply to the laparoscopic spay. Care-
selections should be made based on the results of the physi-
ful attention should be paid to any presence of an umbilical
cal examination and blood work results. All contraindica-
hernia, as mentioned previously. A careful evaluation of the
tions should be taken into account before use of any ofthese
vulva should also be performed for any evidence of swelling
'ssn.p
or discharge that may be indicative of an unknown estrus or
reproductive tract disease. Preoperative blood work should
 SURGICAL ROOM SETUP
 d o a m se pd aq o
surgery.
All laparoscopic procedures require good preoperative plan-
It is also not unusual for a patient to present, especially
ning. The amount of instrumentation, video equipment, and
one that was adopted or rescued, and the new owner is
cord can be overwhelming to a new minimally invasive sur-
unsure if the pet has been previously spayed. Veterinarians
geon. When a surgical suite is prepared for the laparoscopic
have often used the presence or absence ofa scar as a possible
 spay, there are a few important things to remember that will
indication that the animal has been spayed. This technique
make the spay much easier. Most surgeons will use a Mayo
can certainly be unreliable because of the variation in scar-
stand for their standard surgical pack. It is recommended
ring among patients, the possibility that a different type of
that a second larger table also be prepared in a sterile man-
surgery has been performed, or the uncertainty if there is any
 ner so that the laparoscopic equipment can be placed on it.
ovarian tissue remaining in the body. All practices should
Trying to use a Mayo stand for all of the equipment often
 be equipped with in-house canine luteinizing hormone (LH)
leads to damaged or broken equipment, whether it is from
 test kits. These kits are extremely useful and important inthat
falling or mishandling.
 they can provide a more definitive answer to the clinician
The next item that needs to be remembered is that dur-
about whether the patient has been spayed. It is important
ing the laparoscopic spay, the surgeon will need to switch
to know that LH is species specific. Canine LH tests should
sides of the operating table. Each ovary and uterine horn
be performed with a canine LH kit. Fortunately, feline LH is
is approached from the opposite side of the surgical table
similar enough to canine LH that it can be run on the same
during the laparoscopic spay. Because of this change in
kit. However, these samples should never be submitted to a
sides, the surgical suite must be prepared in such a way
human laboratory.
that there is a clear path available for the surgeon to move
LH originates from the pituitary gland. Its primary func-
that does not put at risk the equipment or the sterility of
tion is to signal the formation of the corpus luteum, which
the procedure. The surgical monitors, camera, xenon light
produces progesterone and supports the impending preg-
 source, and carbon dioxide insufflation unit should all be
nancy. The ovary will provide negative feedback to the pitu-
placed toward the cranial aspect of the patient. This will
itary gland, preventing release of LH, until it is time for that
allow the surgeon to change sides of the operating table on
process to occur. This is vital information when interpreting
the caudal aspect of the patient, away from the equipment
the results of an LH test. A positive result indicates that LH
and cords.
is being produced, and there is no negative feedback from
The final item that should be available in the surgical suite
an ovary. This animal has been spayed. A negative result
for the laparoscopic spay patient is some form of a tilting
indicates that there is no LH being produced because it is
table (see Laparoscopy introduction). For the laparoscopic
being inhibited by an ovary. This animal has ovarian tissue
 spay, it is most important to have a table that tilts in a right
remaining. The only exception to this rule is when an animal
 and left lateral orientation. This lateralization of the patient
is tested at the time it is ovulating and a corpus luteum is
 intraoperatively will allow for the best visualization of the
being created. A complete physical examination is impera-
reproductive tract. There are many varieties of these tables
tive because there should be other evidence of estrus if this
 available. Motorized surgical tables or manual table top
is occurring. Also, this release of LH in the ovulating animal
units are most commonly available. The surgeon should
 occurs within an extremely narrow window of time, usually
 make a selection on the basis of the overall budget and any
less than 24 hours.
other procedures that may be performed.
CHAPTER 15Laparoscopy· 469
an ovariectomy hook is a half-circle, reverse-cutting, heavy-
Instrumentation
 gauge needle. These can be easily driven through the body
Before the laparoscopic spay, the endoscopic technician
wall, but the tip of the needle must be driven back through
should have all of the equipment necessary for the procedure
the skin. Once the tip isthrough the skin (after already going
available for use. If the technician is in the routine of having
around the ovary), an additional needle holder or hemostat
 all potentially needed instrumentation available, each proce-
must be used to grasp the tip to prevent it from slipping back
dure will be expedited and therefore the anesthetic time for
into the abdominal cavity.
the patient will be reduced. As previously mentioned, it is
preferred to have the surgical video monitor, carbon dioxide
■ CHOOSING BETWEEN
insufflator, camera, and xenon light source on one tower.
The instruments then should be laid out for use.
AN OVARIECTOMY AND
The laparoscopic spay typically requires the following
OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
equipment. Depending on if the surgeon is performing a
Lap OHE or a Lap OVE, two or three trocar-cannulae will
 Ultimately, the decision to perform a Lap OHE or a Lap
be needed. A Lap OVE requires one to two cannulae while a
OVE is based on the surgeon's preference. Factors such as
 Lap OHE requires two to three cannulae. One cannula will
ease of surgery and number of incisions should be consid-
be used for the telescope port, and the others will be used
ered. The surgeon must also be prepared to do either tech-
for operating ports. The telescope port will be either 5 mm
e ul auop aq ll eqi isanbai Aeu iaumo ue asnesaq anbu
or 10 mm based on the size of telescope that is being used.
certain fashion. The veterinarian can educate the client, but
The selection of the operating cannula size is important and
he or she also must remember that the client will decide
should be chosen ahead of time. As female dogs and cats get
which procedure he or she is most comfortable with. There
older, there is additional fat that will develop around the
is no right or wrong when it comes to choosing between the
ovaries and uterus. Typically dogs older than 1 year of age
two. What is most important is that the surgeon be able to
 and more than 20 1bs require a 10-mm operating cannula so
 adapt intraoperatively from one technique to the other if
that it becomes easier to remove the tissues from the body.
there is a surgical finding that would suggest that a change
Although the ovary itself may be small, the surrounding tis-
 in technique should be made. If a Lap OVE is the surgery
sue can be more cumbersome to remove. Simply increasing
of choice, then the veterinarian must be comfortable with
the size of the cannula can dramatically reduce the difficulty
why this procedure is equally effective and accomplishes
of removing this tissue.
the same goals as a traditional ovariohysterectomy. Espe-
The surgical instrumentation will be prepared next.
cially in the United States, veterinary students are not typi-
 Regardless of the type of laparoscopic spay that is selected,
cally taught an ovariectomy technique, and it is therefore
the surgeon will need a surgical pack with scalpel, surgical
 something that they are not always comfortable discussing
scissors, towel clamps, and needle holders. The laparoscopic
 or performing. Remember, a client is not comfortable if the
 instrumentation should include grasping forceps, a bipolar
surgeon is not comfortable with or confident in the surgery
electrocautery instrument with a transecting blade, and an
he or she is about to perform.
 ovariectomy hook. In most cases, a 5-mm grasping forceps
 and electrocautery instrument are satisfactory. A 10-mm for-
formed, an ovariectomy is done 99% of the time. The main
ceps should be considered in many of the aged, large breed
reason for this drastic difference in percentage is threefold.
 dogs. The larger jaws of the 10-mm grasping forceps allow
First of all, it is easier. Performing an ovariectomy reduces
for a deeper tissue purchase. When a 5-mm forceps is used
the amount of tissue that needs to be electrocauterized and
pue padseia aq oi aqe s ieui e uao siiey eao 1iel e uo
transected. The ovariectomy avoids most of the vascula
tearing of the tissue is possible.
ture within the broad ligament. This is especially important
There are different options available for the ovariectomy
when one is operating on an aged female patient. Second,
hook. The ovariectomy hook is used to suspend the ovary
the ovariectomy will usually reduce the number of incisions
against the body wall in the Lap OVE. The most important
required by at least one. The technique will be described later
characteristic of any ovariectomy hook is that is has a cut-
in this section, but a complete ovariohysterectomy requires
ting tip so that it can be driven easily through the skin of
a caudal incision near the pubis. Often this incision creates
the patient. The only exception to this rule may be in an
 postoperative problems because it is easy for the patient to
 extremely small patient in which a taper cut needle can be
self-traumatize by licking. Finally, an ovariohysterectomy is
used; the reasoning is that a cutting-type needle can actu-
just unnecessary in most cases.
ally cut through the ligamentous attachments of the ovary,
Gaining the confidence to perform an ovariectomy is
which could result in the ovary falling from its surgical posi-
 something that many veterinarians have trouble achieving.
tion. The frst type of ovariectomy hook is a single unit that
 Most veterinary students in the United States are taught
has a surgical needle that is attached to a weighted handle.
to perform an ovariohysterectomy. This is done more as a
The weighted handle keeps the ovary suspended on its own
tradition than as a necessity. European veterinary surgeons
and does not require additional clamps. The other option for
      s   
470■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
laparotomy. Therefore, there is some longer term informa-
for every surgical patient, but during the laparoscopic spay,
tion on the outcome of patients after this procedure. The
the oxygen saturation, carbon dioxide level, and respiratory
positive support for an ovariectomy, however, comes from
 rate must be carefull monitored. During the procedure, the
understanding how traditional spays are truly done and the
patient's abdominal cavity will be insufflated with carbon
knowledge of the reproductive cycle.
dioxide. It is typically thought that by keeping the insuffla-
 In the majority of ovariohysterectomies, the entire uterus
tion pressure below 15 mm Hg, most patients should be able
is not removed. When the uterus is exposed from the body,
 to respire at an acceptable rate and volume for short periods.
the uterus is ligated somewhere along the uterine body. This
However, there is also variability between patients. Making
is done so that the cervix is not traumatized and the surgical
sure that the patient is ventilating and oxygenating properly
site is more easily exposed. Therefore, there is uterus that
is critical, especially after insufflation has occurred. Positive
remains in the body. If the surgery is performed correctly
 pressure ventilation may be required in some instances to
and all ovarian tissue is removed, this remaining uterus will
maintain appropriate gas levels within the patient.
rarely cause any problem for the patient. If, however, there
Surgeons performing minimally invasive procedures
 is ovarian tissue remaining, the patient may suffer problems
must also be prepared for the stimulation of the patient that
ranging from recurrent estrous cycles to stump pyometra.
sometimes occurs when the abdomen is insufflated and the
When reasons are given for spaying dogs and cats, there
 peritoneum is distended. Occasionally a patient will begin to
are many that are given. The goal of spaying the patient is
breathe more heavily or have abdominal spasms as a result
 t0 prevent unwanted pregnancy, heat cycles, mammary tis-
of this stimulation. The anesthetist must be prepared for
sue swelling, mammary cancer, pyometra, endometritis, and
this, but the surgeon must be patient and not proceed with
any unwanted associated behaviors such as false pregnancy.
additional trocar placement until this has discontinued. Try-
When this list is reviewed, it should be realized that these
ing to place additional trocars during this reactive phase will
diseases or body changes are a result of hormonal influence,
only increase the likelihood of iatrogenic abdominal trauma.
not the presence of uterine tissue. The most common ques
Each endoscopy technician must be fully aware of the
tions about postovariectomy complications relate to the
procedure the surgeon is about to perform. The surgical
concern about development of a pyometra and the possibil-
sites will vary between a Lap OVE and a Lap OHE. When
ity of development of primary uterine cancer. In regard to a
the Lap OVE is performed, the surgical field needs to extend
 pyometra, all veterinarians must remember that a pyome-
 more laterally than it would in a traditional midline prepara-
tra forms because of the effects of the estrogen:progesterone
tion. The hair should be clipped from the xiphoid process to
ratio on the uterus. Pyometra typically does not occur solely
the pubis in the cranial to caudal direction. In regard to the
because a uterus is present. The resulting infection that
lateral aspect of the surgical site, the hair should be clipped
occurs is made possible because of the hormonal effects on
approximately 50% of the distance between the ventral and
the uterine lining. Many also question the potential need for
dorsal midline on each side of the patient (Figure 15-109).
estrogen supplementation for treatment of a female with uri-
This will give the surgeon adequate space to insert his or her
nary incontinence. Again, without concurrent progesterone
ovariectomy hook. The Lap OHE is performed along the
supplementation, this will not cause pyometra.
midline ofthe patient and simply requires a more traditional
 Neoplasia of the uterus appears to be relatively uncom-
 mon. In my experience, neoplasia of the canine and feline
reproductive tract more commonly affects the ovaries.
Again, given how many spayed dogs there are with uterine
stumps, it is rare that uterine cancer is diagnosed in those
patients. It would seem that if uterine cancer was common
in otherwise spayed dogs and cats, it would not matter how
much of the uterus remained within the abdominal cavity.
 This is certainly my own observation, but one that I believe
is worth noting.
 ANESTHESIA AND SURGICAL
PREPARATION
 As with any laparoscopic surgical procedure, general anes-
thesia is required. During the procedure, each patient should
have an IV catheter and fluids and be monitored with appro-
Hgure 15-109 The clip for a laparoscopic spay must go high on
priate equipment. In my practice, I monitor each laparoscopic
a p a d m nd a
each side as most techniques use a transabdominal wall suspension
of the ovary. The large abdominal surgical preparation must go
and measure blood pressure, carbon dioxide levels, and
at least as far laterally and dorsally as midway between the ventral
 respiratory rate. It is critical for each variable to be monitored
and dorsal abdominal midline.
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy ■471
 spay preparation extending from xiphoid proces to pubis.
of these tissues will vary. This will often increase the amount
The above areas should then be prepared with surgical
of force the surgeon places on the trocar and can lead to a
scrubbing as with any other surgery.
rapid and deep insertion into the abdominal cavity. Loss of
control of the trocar will increase the likelihood of splenic
or visceral trauma. Elimination of some of these layers will
 SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
improve the accuracy and safety of this first trocar place-
ment. The surgeon should make a small skin incision that
Laparoscopic Ovariectomy: Two-Port Technique
is about the same width as the trocar that is being used. For
During the procedure the patient is placed in dorsal recum-
example, if a 5-mm trocar-cannula is being used, the sur-
bency on the surgical table. Before a Veress needle or a tro-
 geon should make a 4- to 5-mm incision in the skin. After
car is placed in the abdominal cavity, the first step in any
the skin is incised, the subcutaneous fat should be dissected
laparoscopic procedure is to carefully palpate the abdomi-
from the incision. This accomplishes two important objec-
nal cavity. The primary organs that should be located are
tives. It allows the surgeon to accurately identify the mid-
the spleen and the bladder, but one should always be aware
line and to establish direct contact between the trocar and
of any mass effect that may be present. Once the spleen is
the abdominal muscle. Finally, a stay suture can be placed
located, it should be carefully moved to the left side of the
 at the cranial aspect of the incision so that the abdominal
 body so that it is not directly below the puncture site. If the
wall can be elevated away from the viscera while the trocar
 bladder is found to be enlarged, urine should be manually
is being placed. ll of these steps willimprove trocar place-
expressed until it is virtually empty. This is important for any
ment accuracy and trocar control for a safer entrance into
THO de ei roo aeioadsa s nq aad oidoode
the abdominal cavity.
needs to be performed. After the abdominal palpation, the
Once the abdomen is properly insufflated to approxi-
 abdomen should be insufflated with either a Veress needle
mately 10 to 15 mm Hg and the cannula has been positioned,
or a Hasson technique. The initial placement of the Veress
the laparoscope is inserted through the cannula and into the
needle or trocar-cannula should be done approximately 3
 abdomen. Before proceeding with the laparoscopic spay, the
cm caudal to the umbilicus.
surgeon should use this opportunity to perform an evalua-
This initial part of the procedure is often the most frus-
tion of the abdomen for any anatomic defects or iatrogenic
 trating. One mistake that many practitioners make is trying
 trauma that could influence the remainder of the surgery.
to puncture the abdomen through all of the layers of the
The diaphragm is evaluated frst to verify that no diaphrag-
abdominal wall. When the attempt is made to place the tro-
matic hernias are present. The liver and spleen should then
car through skin, subcutaneous fat, fascia, muscle, and then
 be viewed for any underlying disease process or trauma that
peritoneum, many different tissue types are encountered.
may have occurred. Once these structures have been evalu-
Each of these tissues has varying strengths and elasticity. The
ated and no contraindications or complications are noted,
amount of pressure required to drive a trocar through each
the site for the operating port is chosen (Figure 15- 110). This
Hgure 15-110 A two-trocar ovariectomy can be performed with the
frst trocar being placed on the midline, caudal to the umbilicus. Trocar
placement and peritoneal insuffation may be with a Veress needle or a
insufflation, the second trocar is placed on the midline, 3 cm cranial to
the umbilicus. The umbilical fat should be avoided. This instrumentation
and a quick exploratory examination are done with the patient lying
on her back; she is then rotated to the right and then left to remove
the contralateral ovary. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia
5UGA2009
Research Foundation, Inc.)
472■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
port is also placed on midline. Typically, 3 cm cranial to the
remaining closed. The instrument can then be used to gen-
umbilicus is sufficient to provide enough space between the
tly retract the spleen and duodenum away from the surgical
 e  o d     
 area. The ovaries lie directly caudal to each kidney. The kid-
angulation may occur. The laparoscope should be used to
 ney's size in relation to the ovary will provide a larger land-
visualize the midline intraabdominally. The surgeon now
 mark. Once the kidney and surrounding area are exposed,
 must make a decision as to what size the operating cannula
the suspensory ligament and the fat of the mesovarium can
should be. The ovaries will be removed from the patient
be used to locate the ovary (Figures 15-112 through 15-114).
through this site, and the size of the ovary must be consid-
The fat around each ovary can be a very reliable structure
ered. The ovaries of cats, dogs younger than 6 months, and
used to locate the ovary. It is rounder and more prominent
dogs less than 20 lbs can typically be removed through a
than the mesenteric and omental fat.
 5-mm incision. Most dogs more than 20 lbs and older than
Once the ovary is exposed, it then needs to be grasped
6 months should have at least a 10-mm cannula placed to
and elevated so that the ovarian hook can be placed (Figure
make removal of the ovary easier. The skin and fat should
15-115). The ovarian bursa is an excellent place to insert
again be incised as previously described, but a stay suture is
the lower jaw of the grasping forceps. Many practitioners
usually not required because the abdomen is already insuf-
try to grasp and elevate by the surrounding fat, but this
flated. As the trocar is being placed, it is done under the visu-
often leads to tearing and dropping of the ovary. After the
grasping forceps jaws are locked, the ovary is elevated to
trocar is placed safely away from the organs and alongside
the ventral body wall of the patient. Be sure that there is
the falciform ligament, not through it. If a cannula is placed
no omentum or other tissue caught within the jaws of the
within the falciform fat, it will interfere with the use of the
forceps before inserting the ovarian hook. The ovary should
laparoscopic instruments and greatly increase the difficultly
be elevated until the ovarian pedicle is taut and the ovary is
of removing the ovary.
in contact with the body wall. Having the tissue under slight
Now that both cannulae are in place and the abdomen
tension will make it easier to cauterize later in the proce-
 has been examined for trauma or defects, the laparoscopic
dure. Gentle forward pressure should be applied on the
 ovariectomy can begin. Both the technician and the surgeon
St an aiedied u uoss a in os sdaso hudsen
should be on the same side of the table, opposite the ovary
from the exterior of the patient. This provides the landmark
 that is about to be removed. This positioning allows accurate
by which the ovary hook is placed. The ovariectomy hook
triangulation to occur. It is always easier for the surgeon to
work with the targeted structure in front of him or her. The
surgical table should now be tilted approximately 45 degrees
 toward the surgeon. The viscera will then begin to move away
from the targeted ovary on the opposite side of the abdomen.
Remember, one of the best retractors in the world is gravity.
 Each ovary typically has one structure impeding the view of
the surgeon: the spleen is often obstructing the left ovary and
the duodenum is often obstructing the right ovary. Remem-
bering key landmarks and changing patient positionare very
important in successful identification of each ovary.
 If the ovary is not easily seen, the following steps can be
 performed (Figure 15-111). First, the laparoscopic grasping
Hgure 15-112 Two landmarks to identify the ovary (left
forceps can be introduced into the abdomen with the jaws
side photographed) are the kidney (K) and the suspensory
ligaments (SL).
Figure 15-111 The initial exploration for the right ovary may
be obscured by the descending duodenum or other abdominal
Hgure 15-113 The right ovary (O) can be seen in this dog caudal
structures. For the right ovary to be exposed, the patient should
and lateral to the kidney. Other landmarks include the kidney (K),
be rotated to lie with her left side down.
suspensory ligament (SL), and ovarian fat (OF).
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy
473
should be inserted through the skin just below the grasp-
procedure and the surgeon must be aware of its location at all
ing forceps. The placement of the hook should be visual-
times (Figure 15-116). If it is kept within the curve of the
ized with the laparoscope. It is imperative that the ovary
hook, one can be confident that it will not be transected
remain within the curve ofthe hook so that it is not hanging
and an ovarian remnant will not remain in the abdomen.
near the area to be transected. The ovary is the key to the
 It should be noted that some bleeding may occur when the
ovariectomy hook is passed through the surrounding tissue
of the ovary. The bleeding usually stops quickly, and addi-
tional hemostasis is rarely required.
With the ovary now suspended from the body wall, the
grasping forceps should be released from the ovary and
removed from the abdomen. Through the same cannula that
the forceps were removed, the bipolar electrocautery instru-
ment should be introduced. Before transecting the ovarian
pedicle, the surgeon should take a moment to visualize the
structure and select the best area for the electrocautery to
be applied (Figure 15-117). It is wise to avoid areas that are
especially fatty as well as those that are near the kidney and
possible ureter location. The bipolar electrocautery instru-
ment will then be used to cauterize and cut tissue in a line
 from the suspensory ligament to the proximal uterus; the
surgeon should make sure that the ovary remains away
Figure 15-114 The left ovary is seen in this cat.
from the electrocautery instrument the entire time (Figure
15- 118) (see Chapter 11 for the cautery and sealing options).
The surgeon continues to cut through the tissue until the
ovary is completely free of all attachments. During this part
of the surgery, there are typically three problem areas that
the surgeon will encounter. The first is the ovarian artery.
SL
Careful and complete cauterization of this vessel must occur
to prevent hemorrhage. In the juvenile patient, the ovar-
ian artery can usually be seen, but as the patients become
older, fat deposition will often obscure the artery from view.
The surgeon must feel comfortable about the general loca-
tion of this artery, even though it may not be clearly seen.
The second area of concern is the uterine artery. The uterine
artery lies in close proximity to the uterine horn and often
will bleed if not carefully cauterized. Finally, the uterine
Figure 15-115 The left ovary (O)is being elevated toward the left
 horn itself often needs to be transected at its proximal aspect.
abdominal side with the use of laparoscopic Babcock forceps. The
Ideally the transection is made between the ovary and the
right kidney (K) can be seen. The three sites for transection can be
seen and include the ovarian vessels (O vesseis), the uterus (U),
uterus. However, there is often not enough space to be con-
and the suspensory ligament (SL).
fident that the entire ovary can be removed. I have found no
Hgure 15-116 The left ovary is being lifted against the 
abdominal wall so that an ovarian hook or a needle with
swaged-on sutures can be placed through the ovary. The
ovary should be palpated while the hook or needle is
passed. This can be facilitated by temporary reduction
@UGA2009
of the distending abdominal pressure. (Art by Kip Carter
@2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
474 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Hgure 15-119 The ovariectomy has been completed, and the
Figure 15-117 Abipolar electrocautery is being applied to the
ovary is suspended from the abdominal wall. If a spay hook was
proximal portion ofthe left uterine horn. Care is taken to ensure
the suspension technique,the ovary is removed through the
cautery and hemostasis of the uterine vessels that are hidden
operating trocar or trocar site, depending on the relative size of the
from view in this image. A variety of energy devices have made
ovary versus the trocar. If the suture is maintaining suspension,
laparoscopic spays practical, and the options are included in
the ovary can be left attached while the patient is rotated for
Chapter 1l. The more advanced devices can successively seal and
removal of the contralateral ovary. Both ovaries can then be
divide vascular structures.
removed with the patient in dorsal recumbency.
Figure 15-118 The left uterus is being transected. The vascular
structures are progressively sealed and divided in steps. The
Hgure 15-120 The ovarian excision site is cleanly seen. This is the
selection of which area is operated first depends on which is best
typical example of complete hemostasis and absence of collateral
exposed and the clinician's preference.
injury.
problem in incising through the uterus. When this occurs,
cannula. Unless the ovary is very small and will fit into the
the exposed end of the uterus is also cauterized.
cannula, it is often easier to remove the cannula and extract
 The ovariectomy is now complete; all that remains is the
the ovary through the incision. Before the ovary is removed,
removal of the ovary from the abdomen (Figure 15-119).
the carbon dioxide should be released from the abdominal
Remove the electrocautery from the abdomen and reinsert
cavity to reduce tension on the abdominal wall and incision.
the grasping forceps through the operating port. The ovary
Do not be afraid to extend the incision slightly so that the
should be gripped as tightly as possible, and the jaws of the
ovary can be removed; performing minimally invasive sur-
forceps should be locked. It is important that the ovary and
 gery does not mean that the ovary and surrounding fat sud-
 connective tissue is grasped and not fat. Grasping fat often
denly get smaller when they near the incision. With a slight
lea ds to the ovary being dropped into the abdomen because of
rocking motion, the ovary can be removed from the abdo-
tearing when it is being pulled through the incision. After the
men and then examined to ensure complete excision ( Figure
 Ovary is grasped, the ovariectomy hook is removed. Evalu-
15- 121). At this point, the operating cannula is replaced, the
ate the surgical site for any hemorrhage with the laparoscope
abdomen is reinsufflated, and the surgeon and technician
(Figure 15-120). The tilt table can now be placed into its
switch sides to remove the opposite ovary.
 original position so that the patient is again in dorsal recum-
Once both ovaries are removed, the incisions should be
 bency. The freed ovary is then pulled gently to the operating
closed. A simple interrupted suture is usually suffcient to
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy· 475
B
Figure 15-121 The excised ovaries should be examined before completion ofthe procedure. A, The fossa is opened to expose the ovary.
B, Both ovaries are present: one is exposed and the other is still hidden.
close the abdominal wall. A subcuticular suture will oppose
 Extreme caution must be used to prevent a penetration
the skin, and surgical glue is used to close the skin.
that is too deep. Because of the muscular attachments of
the abdominal muscle to the pelvis, the viscera are in closer
proximity to the abdominal wall than they are cranially. A
One-Port Ovariectomy
traumatic puncture is more likely here if caution is not used
The one-port ovariectomy is performed in a similar fash-
 and the placement not visualized with the laparoscope.
ion to the two-port technique. All one-port ovariectomies
Once all cannulae are in place, a grasping forceps is intro-
require the use of an operating scope. The operating scope for
duced through the caudal port and is visualized with the lapa-
this procedure is often 10 mm in width. There is an operat-
roscope as it moves cranially toward the ovary. Use the same
ing channel contained within the telescope that will typically
landmarks as the Lap OVE to identify and grasp the ovary. The
accommodate 5-mm instruments. The primary difference
bipolar electrocautery instrument is introduced into the cra-
for surgeons, especially if they were trained with a two-port
nial port and advanced toward the suspensory ligament of the
technique, is that there will not be the triangulation with the
 grasped ovary. While gentle, caudal traction is placed on the
instruments. The instruments will be directly in front of the
Ovary, the electrocautery unit begins by transecting the suspen-
telescope. Although the field of view may be different, the
sory ligament and continues through the ovarian pedicle. It is
learning curve can be just as fast as any other technique. This
important to continue to pull gently, always keeping tension in
technique is equally as effective as the two-port technique in
the broad ligament. One tendency of many new laparoscopic
performing a successful laparoscopic ovariectomy.
surgeons isto proceed to dorsal within the broad ligament of the
uterus. As the surgeon advances the electrocautery instrument
along the broad ligament, he or she should remain as close to
Laparoscopic Ovariohysterectomy
the uterine body as possible. This accomplishes two goals: one
It is becoming more of a rarity to perform a complete Lap
is that it allows the surgeon to avoid much of the vasculature in
OHE, but is important to know. The surgeon must be pre-
the broad ligament, and the other is that it protects the intes-
pared to perform this technique in the event that the owner
tine and ureter from damage. The cauterization and transection
requests it or pathology is identifed in the uterus and the
should continue until the area near the uterine body is reached.
decision is made to remove it. The primary difference is that
After the first side of the ovary and uterus has been freed,
the technique requires the placement of a third port near the
the ovary should be released and allowed to temporarily lie
 pelvis, where the uterus and ovaries will be removed. The
freely in the abdomen. Again, the surgeon and technician
surgery begins in an identical fashion to the Lap OVE in
should change sides of the surgical table. The procedure is
that a port is placed on each side of the umbilicus (Figure
 repeated for the second ovary and uterine horn. The second
15-122). The third port is placed on midline approximately
ovary then remains in the grasping forceps and is pulled.
3 cm cranial to the pubis. The laparoscope can be used to
through the caudal incision. Again, depending on the age of
visualize the bladder to be sure that the location or size of
the animal, this incision may need to be elongated to ensure
it will not interfere with the placement of the third trocar.
that the ovary and uterus can be removed with ease. The
Digital palpation externally can be used to identify the pro-
 ovary and uterus continue to be pulled through the inci-
posed location of the caudal trocar. A skin incision is made at
sion until the uterine body is exposed. At this point, the
the selected site, and the trocar is placed into the abdomen.
uterine body should be ligated or cauterized and transected
476 ■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Figure 15-122 Atwo-port technique is the most common
adossede au amasod uaaseo dosiede
trocar is placed as for ovariectomy, but the operating trocar 
is placed approximately 3 cm cranial to the pubis or over the
approximate bifurcation of the uterus. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
UGA2009
 proximal to this point. Once appropriate hemostasis is veri-
under the magnification of the laparoscope, but usually it is
fied, the uterine stump is replaced back into the abdomen.
negligible. The biggest problems that occur secondary to the
The remainder of the uterus and opposite ovary should now
bleeding are the reduced visualization of the ovary and the
 be free and able to be pulled through the incision. After the
absorption of light. The blood often obscures the ovary as it
laparoscope is used to confirm that there is no intraabdomi-
flows into the most gravity-dependent areas of the surgical
nal bleeding, the incisions are closed as previously described.
field. At this point, it is important to utilize the endoscopic
tilt table or an irrigation-suction unit to remove the blood
■ COMPLICATIONS
from the area surrounding the ovary so that the surgery can
continue. Other sources of bleeding can occur from the
As with any procedure, there are always complications that
 Ovarian and uterine arteries as described previously.
can occur with the laparoscopic spay. I would preface this sec-
Another complication of the laparoscopic spay is the
tion by saying that when a complication occurs, many practi-
dropping of the ovary as the surgeon attempts to remove it
 tioners hastily abandon the laparoscopic procedure in favor
through the incision. It cannot be stressed enough that the
of a laparotomy. In my opinion, this is usually unnecessary
size of the ovary does not change just because a laparoscopic
and often makes the problem more difficult to correct and the
 surgery is performed. Great care must be taken to enlarge the
 procedure more difficult to finish. It is human nature to resort
incision enough so the ovary can be removed through it. If an
to that with which we are most comfortable. One of the most
 Ovary is dropped the first thing that should be done is noth-
dlifficult things for new endoscopists is trusting that the visual-
ing. The surgical team often rushes to straighten the tilt table
ization and magnification of the laparoscope can be extremely
and starts to move intestine and omentum. Remember that
 beneficial in correcting or evaluating a potential complication.
the ovary had been removed from the blood supply and is not 
With that being said, there are some potential complica-
hemorrhaging itself. The ovary will fall with gravity and will
tions that each surgeon must make efforts to avoid and know
be directly below the incision. Moving the patient and the
how to respond. One of the most common complications
intestinal contents will make the ovary difficult to find.
of any laparoscopic procedures is trauma to the spleen. All
precautions should be taken to avoid this, but the reality is
that it happens sometimes. Splenic trauma with the trocar or
Other Complications That Can Occur
Veress needle will always result in bleeding into the abdomi-
 Burning of the peritoneum with the bipolar electrocau-
nal cavity. The intraabdominal pressure that is created by
tery unit
the carbon dioxide does help control the bleeding. The area
 Hematoma formation at the site of placement of the
 of trauma should be monitored with the laparoscope until a
ovariectomy hook
clot has formed and the surgeon is confident that no more
 Leaking of carbon dioxide from the operation cannula
hemorrhage is occurring. All bleeding appears significant
incision after the first ovary has been removed
CHAPTER 15 Laparoscopy · 477
These complications should be avoided but are not criti-
converted to a traditional approach so that careful handling
cal. Peritoneal injury may lead to increased pain for the
of the fragile uterus can occur. The discovery of a diaphrag-
 patient. Be sure to monitor for discomfort and treat accord-
matic hernia will also suggest conversion to a laparotomy so
ingly. Hematomas generally form in small patients with very
that the thoracic cavity can be spared the effects of the car-
little body fat. The prevalence of hematoma formation can
bon dioxide pressure and so the hernia itself can be repaired.
be reduced with the use of a taper-cut needle as the ovari-
As described earlier in this book, other problems with insuf-
ectomy hook. Another method of reducing hematoma for-
flation may also lead to a laparotomy.
mation is to use the intraabdominal light from the scope
Before laparoscopic surgery, the surgeon should edu-
to “shadow” subcutaneous vessels and avoid striking them
cate the client about the potential for a laparotomy. Owners
with the needle. If carbon dioxide is leaking from the inci-
need to understand that complications can occur and that
sion, do not hesitate to place a purse-string suture around
not every case is routine, whether it is due to surgical error,
the cannula to cease the flow of gas. Taking a few seconds to
unexpected anatomic changes, or a suspected pathologic
place this suture will greatly reduce the mounting frustration
condition. A conversion to a laparotomy is rare, but all sur-
that occurs with decreased visualization from an improperly
gery rooms should be equipped and prepared for the pos-
insufflated abdominal cavity.
sibility. It is unlikely to occur but, if necessary, may have to
 Occur quickly. Preparedness is a basic theme of laparoscopy.
■ CONVERSION TO LAPAROTOMY
Each procedure should be prepared as the one before. This
repetition will dramatically improve one's ability to respond
There are relatively few instances in which a conversion will
to complications.
be needed, especially after the surgeon becomes comfortable
with the procedure and all of the instrumentation. The most
 POSTOPERATIVE CARE
common cause for conversion is uncontrolled hemorrhage,
from either the spleen or the ovarian pedicle. Careful tech-
One of the greatest benefits of minimally invasive surgery for
nique and quality electrocautery instrumentation are the
owners is the rapid recovery of their pet and quick return to
best ways to avoid this. Another potential reason for con-
a normal interaction with the family. In my practice, most 
version is the unlikely event that a pyometra is discovered
 a  s      sn
while the procedure is being performed. If the integrity of
day of restricted activity. Most are sent home with 2 to 4 days
the uterine wall is at all in question, the surgery should be
of a pain medication such as tramadol or an NSAID.
SUGGESTED READING
Devitt CM, Cox RE, Hailey JI: Duration, complications, stress, and
Van Goethem B, Schaefers-Okkens A, Kirpensteijn I: Making a
pain of open ovariohysterectormy versus a simple method of
rational choice between ovariectomy and ovariohysterectomy in
Japaroscopic-assisted ovariohysterectomy in dogs, J Arm Vet Med
the dog: a discussion of the benefits of either technique, Vet Surg
Assoc 227:921, 2005.
35:136, 2006.
Hancock RB, Lanz OI, Waldron DR, et al: Comparison of postoperative
pain after ovariohysterectomy by harmonic scalpel-assisted
Vet Surg 34:273, 2005.
16
CHAPIER
Thoracoscopy
 Please visit the companion website for a model for patient 
Thoracoscopy Introduction:
discharge instructions.
Indications, Instrumentation,
ww.tamssmallanimalendoscopy.com
Techniques, Biopsy Procedures,
and Complications
■ INDICATIONS
MaryAnn G. Radlinsky
Thoracoscopic exploration is indicated for obtaining a diagno-
Thoracoscopy provides the opportunity for exploratory and
sis or treating intrathoracic conditions that may include pleural
interventional procedures within the chest, all performed
effusion, pericardial effusion, pulmonary disease, mediastinal
through multiple 5-mm or 10-mm incisions, vastly extend.
lesions, lymphadenopathy, chylothorax, PRAA, pulmonary
ing the range of diagnostic and therapeutic techniques
 mass lesions, PDA, and spontaneous pneumothorax.
beyond the ability of ultrasound and advanced imaging. Sig-
 One of the benefits of thoracoscopy over thoracotomy is
nificant spreading of the ribs and sternum is avoided, which
that all areas accessible by the approach normally taken for
significantly decreases the perioperative morbidity associated
the disease process can be evaluated with enhanced visual-
with traditional thoracotomy procedures. The use of a rigid
ization and decreased morbidity. Not only can all areas of
endoscope allows for magnification and access to all organs
the thorax be seen, but magnification and lighting are also
and spaces normally approached by intercostal thoracotomy
greatly enhanced, increasing the probability of identifying
or median sternotomy. Complete evaluation of the parietal
small lesions (Figure 16-1). Multiple samples of abnormali-
pleura, mediastinum, lungs, lymph nodes, diaphragm, and
ties may be obtained for histopathologic examination; small
pericardium can be followed by sample collection for histo-
 Or early lesions may be easily identified by thoracoscopy.
pathologic examination and aerobic, anaerobic, and fungal
culture.
INSTRUMENTATION
 The use of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS)
was initially limited to diagnostic exploration of the struc-
The equipment required for thoracoscopy differs litle from
tures. However, with more advanced instrumentation,
that required for laparoscopy except there is no need for an
experimentation, and experience, many more surgical pro-
insufflator (see Figure 15-1). The chest is a rigid wall, the
cedures have become feasible. Interventional procedures
lungs collapse when ports are placed, and further collapse
may be done for the treatment of pericardial effusion,
is possible with selective bronchial intubation or bronchial
restrictive pericarditis, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), and
blockade, which may make insufflation unnecessary.
chylothorax as well as spontaneous pneumothorax, lung
Any rigid endoscope may be used for thoracoscopy; how-
lobe neoplasia, megaesophagus associated with persistent
ever, most surgeons prefer to use a 30-degree endoscope and
right aortic arch (PRAA), and pyothorax. Specific proce-
have a O-degree endoscope available. The 0-degree endoscope
dures include partial or subtotal pericardectomy, ligation
is best suited for the surgeon early in training and for ini-
and division of a PDA, thoracic duct ligation (TDL), partial
tial experience with thoracoscopy, as the view is easiest to
 or complete pneumolobectomy, division of the ligamentum
understand, straight on, and simple to process However, the
arteriosum, and mediastinal debridement. This chapter wil
 0-degree endoscope requires the surgeon to lever against the
describe the indications for and techniques used in VATS.
ribs to view the entire thoracic cavity. This problem can be
479
480■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Figure 16-1 A small pleural lesion (arrow) is seen overlying a
rib in a dog with chronic pleural effusion. (Photograph @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
A
alleviated by use of the 30-degree endoscope, which has a field
of view that is angled from the long axis of the endoscope. The
offset angle allows complete examination of the thoracic cav-
ity without levering against adjacent ribs (Figure 16-2). The
surgeon can “look around corners" with the angled endo-
scope, place less torque on the ribs adjacent to the port site,
and decrease the risk of damage to the endoscope. By rotating
the 30-degree endoscope, the surgeon views a wider area than
with the 0-degree endoscope. Rotation of a O-degree endo-
scope causes no change in the field of view.
The size of the endoscope used is determined by the size
of the patient. A 5-mm, 30-cm endoscope offers the wid-
est range of use and can be used in most cats and dogs. The
length of the endoscope is also appropriate for nearly all
sizes of dogs but may be longer than needed for small dogs
and cats. Light transmission is also adequate for the thoracic
structures of most sizes of small animal patients. Very small
dogs and cats may be better evaluated with a 2.7-mm endo-
B
@UGA2009
scope, which is the same type used for rhinoscopy and cys-
Hgure 16-2 A, The 30-degree endoscopic viewing angle allows
 toscopy, even though it transmits less light. The decreased
for easy exploration of the thorax without levering against the ribs
illumination and diminished field of view are less of a prob-
and structures adjacent to the endoscopic port. B, The 0-degree
lem in smaller patients, and the ability to maneuver a smaller
endoscopic viewing angle levers against the ribs when attempting
to view the extremes of the thoracic cavity, putting pressure on the
endoscope between narrowly spaced ribs is also beneficial.
intercostal nerves and vessels. (Art by Kip Carter  2010 University
The 2.7-mm endoscope is shorter (18 cm), which also makes
of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
it appropriate for use in smaller patients. A 10-mm endo-
scope is more robust and can be helpful in large and giant
 breeds but is rarely necessary.
thoracic wall. Some procedures have been done in an assisted
 Ports are used to introduce the endoscope and operat-
fashion; in those cases ports are removed, a port opening is
ing instruments into the thoracic cavity. They are inserted
extended to a minithoracotomy, and instruments used in
into the pleural space with the use of a trocar or obturator.
open surgery complete the procedure. If insufflation of the
Sharp trocars are not usually necessary for thoracoscopy and
thorax is desired for further atelectasis, valved ports may be
can damage the fragile pulmonary parenchyma adjacent to
used; however, pulmonary changes in patient status often
the thoracic wall. It is safer to use a blunt obturator through
offset the benefits of insufflation. Ports that are soft and flex-
minithoracotomy in an open fashion, which also allows
ible (Figure 16-3) decrease the pressure applied to adjacent
establishment of a pneumothorax before port insertion and
 soft tissue and ribs and may decrease the perioperative pain
further decreases the risk of pulmonary trauma.
a ssociated with nerve compression by rigid ports against ribs.
 Ports used for thoracoscopic surgery are usuall open
 They are useful at intercostal sites and can be sutured in place
rather than valved, as insufflation is rarely used or recom-
to decrease dislodgement when instruments are changed.
mended for thoracoscopy. Open ports allow for rapid
Flexible ports (Flexipath, Ethicon, Inc., Somervill, N.J)
exchange of instruments and decrease trauma to the adjacent
    nd a   s   a o 
CHAPTER 16 Thoracoscopy · 481
 manipulation, and measurement of organs and lesions; cup
and punch biopsy forceps to sample the liver, lymph nodes,
lesions, and the pancreas; straight and curved grasping for-
FLEXIPATH
 ceps for manipulation and minor dissection required for
15mm
sampling; and scissors for dissection and sample excision (see
 Figure 15-1). Samples of pleura, mediastinum, pericardium,
and lymph nodes may be obtained with these instruments.
Addition of a preformed ligature loop allows sampling of lung
margins. An aspiration-irrigation port can be used to evacu-
 ate large volumes of pleural or pericardial fluid and to irri-
 gate a field of dissection. Alternatively, a small Poole suction
tip or a feeding tube can be inserted through a port to obtain
fluid samples and drain large volumes of fluid. Spinal needles
can be inserted through the thoracic wall to obtain pericardial
Figure 16-3 Flexible endoscopic port that can be transected at a
fluid samples under direct, endoscopic visualization. Sam-
length that matches the depth ofthe thoracic wall. ( Photograph @
pling for cytologic evaluation, bacterial culture and suscepti-
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
bility testing, fungal culture, and histopathologic examination
 should be considered during every thoracoscopic exploration.
resterilized for repeated use in similarly sized patients.
Friction may cause problems that inhibit instrument or
THERAPEUTIC PROCEDURES
 endoscope movement within the flexible port. Water-soluble
lubricant will decrease friction, but the endoscope end must
More instrumentation will be required to perform different
be avoided to minimize problems with visualization.
therapeutic interventions. Straight and curved dissectors are
Laparoscopic ports may be used for thoracoscopy but
needed to dissect structures within the thorax. Lymph node
may be longer than desired. Smooth laparoscopic ports can
removal, mass removal, ligation of the ligamentum arterio-
dislodge easily when placed between ribs. Traditional laparo-
sum, ligation of the thoracic duct, and pericardectomy are
scopic ports are also often supplied with valves that are not
performed with several types of dissecting forceps and scis-
necessary for thoracoscopy and sharp trocars. There is a great
-dsa  sd a aba sad nss ss
risk of organ trauma when sharp trocar-port assembly inser-
 ing and retraction. Fine tissues do not require large, toothed
tion is used for thoracoscopy, and it is more likely to damage
forceps, but more aggressive grasping forceps are needed to
pulmonary parenchyma. Open placement, establishment of a
 grasp and manipulate tougher tissue, such as the pericardium
pneumothorax, and placement under direct visualization may
and other connective tissues within the mediastinum. A fan
not be enough to decrease the risk of trauma. Replacement of
retractor is required to retract lung away from the site of dis-
the sharp trocar with a blunt trocar is recommended if lapa
section for many procedures and is vital for dissection of the
roscopic ports are used for thoracoscopy. Threaded ports are
pulmonary hilus, ligamentum arteriosum, and PDA to avoid
helpful, as they remain in place during instrument changes for
pulmonary trauma and postoperative pneumothorax (see
thoracoscopic evaluation. The paraxiphoid approach requires
Figure 15-4). Lung biopsy is greatly facilitated by the applica-
a longer port; using a long, threaded port for slow, controlled
tion of pretied suture loops. Clip appliers are very useful for
placement with a 0-degree endoscope allows the surgeon to
hemostasis and ligation of the thoracic duct and are required
visualize each structure penetrated, and exact placement in
for PDA ligation. Even more advanced procedures, such as
the pleural space is then made possible. Excessively deep port
assisted or endoscopic partial or complete pneumolobec-
placement can be avoided as can tissue trauma. Threaded
tomy, require endoscopic gastrointestinal anastomosis (GIA)
 ports may also be used intercostally and are more secure than
or thoracoabdominal (TA) stapling devices. Removal of spec-
smooth laparoscopic ports (see Figure 15-6).
imens larger than those collected with biopsy forceps is best
 achieved with specimen retrieval bags so that port site metas-
■ DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
tasis or infection is avoided (see Figures 15-102 and 15-103).
Bags can be purchased or made from those available in stores.
Operative instruments for diagnostic thoracoscopy and
The majority of the instruments used in diagnostic or
laparoscopy are interchangeable. As with the endoscope
therapeutic procedures (e.g-, grasping forceps, scissors, and
and ports, the operative instruments used depend on the
dissectors) can be connected to electrocautery or radiosur-
size of the patient: 5-mm instruments are the most versatile;
gical devices. The insulated shaft allows for monopolar use.
 however, smaller patients may benefit from 2.7-mm, shorter
Specially designed bipolar forceps and cutting devices are also
instruments. Large patients will tolerate more robust 10-mm
available. More specialized devices for incision and/or sealing
instruments. As thoracoscopic techniques and training
of vascular structures include harmonic scissors and vessel-
become more advanced, more instruments will be desired.
d a   s  s 
The instruments used for the majority of diagnostic thora-
dectomy, and advanced dissection such as that required for
coscopy include a palpation probe, which is used for palpation,
mediastinal debridement in cases of pyothorax far simpler; in
482■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
addition, they maintain visualization while minimizing col-
Thoracoscopy performed on a dorsally recumbent
lateral tissue damage. The more advanced the procedure, the
 patient approximates the exploration via a median ster-
more advanced the instrumentation usually used.
 notomy. Both sides of the chest can be explored, but dor-
sal access may be somewhat limited. Use this approach for
 PATIENT PREPARATION
 general exploration in cases of unknown diagnoses, such
AND POSITIONING
as chronic pleural effusion of unknown origin. Clip the
 patient, and aseptically prepare at least 5 cm caudal to the
Surgeon training and ability, patient preparation and drap-
 xiphoid process, up to the thoracic inlet, and dorsally for
ing, and equipment that may be required for immediate con-
placement of thoracostomy tube(s). Preparation and drap-
version to an open thoracotomy should be in the operating
 ing should allow port placement in the ventral two thirds of
suite at the beginning of any thoracoscopic procedure. The
the chest bilaterally. Draping is wider than that used for a
 patient should not require redraping, and equipment must
median sternotomy so that an intercostal port and a thora-
be immediately available. Altering patient positioning will
costomy tube can be placed.
 allow the use of the best retractor during the procedure: grav-
ity. The lungs will gravitate downward, toward the hilus, or
PREOPERATIVE DIAGNOSTIC
both as they become atelectatic, and the heart will rotate in
EVALUATION
the dependent position. The surgeon should be aware, how-
ever, that fluid within the pleural space will elevate the lungs,
Most patients undergoing thoracoscopic evaluation will
depending on the positioning of the patient. Therefore, the
undergo noninvasive diagnostic testing such as a complete
surgeon should remove as much fluid as possible to minimize
blood count, biochemical profle, urinalysis, thoracic and
frustration and maximize visualization during thoracoscopy.
abdominal radiography, abdominal ultrasonography, and
Securely fasten the positioned patient to the opera-
echocardiography, depending on their primary problem.
tive table, and be certain the position is appropriate for the
Fine-needle aspiration of any lesions and analysis of pleural
intended or most complicated procedure. The patient may
fluid, if present, should be done before thoracoscopy. Fluid
be positioned in dorsal, lateral, or sternal recumbency, as
analysis should include protein levels, nucleated cell counts,
required for the procedure. Consider whether the patient's
a cytologic examination, and aerobic and anaerobic cultures.
 position will require alteration intraoperatively. Changing
 Fluid triglyceride and cholesterol levels should be compared
the position may allow gravity to provide improved expo-
with serum levels if chylothorax is suspected. Systemic alter-
sure of the desired site. Different equipment can be used,
ations in the patient and the patient's cardiopulmonary sta-
such as tilting tables or tabletop additions that allow for the
tus should be considered before thoracoscopy, just as they
 position to be angled or changed. Please review Chapter 15
would before open thoracotomy.
 for the baseball concept for surgeon and trocar positioning
■ANESTHESIA
15-12), as well as the use of tilt tables (see Figures 15-26 and
15-27). Take care to secure the patient well ifa table or table-
Diagnostic thoracoscopy under heavy sedation and oxygen
top devices are used so that dramatic positional changes with
supplementation has been reported in people but is not prac-
contamination during surgery are avoided. Rapid conversion
tical in veterinary medicine. The technique requires valved
to an open approach should be considered when the patient is
ports and controlled pneumothorax, with rapid examina-
being secured to the operating table. Be certain that assistants
tion and biopsy of structures in cooperative patients.
can release limb ties as rapidly as possible if the position of
General anesthesia and mechanical ventilation are stan-
the patient must change for conversion to open thoracotomy.
 dard for thoracoscopy in veterinary medicine. Physical status,
Specific patient preparation depends on the approach
 systemic compromise, and ventilatory ability of the patient
used. Thoracoscopy may be performed via an intercostal
should be considered, and the anesthetic technique should
approach, mimicking lateral thoracotomy. One hemithorax
be tailored to the patient's needs. Pneumothorax is required
e ai e jo a  m a ad aq 
during thoracoscopy, and when both lungs are mechani-
 Examine all dorsal, middle, and ventral structures including
cally ventilated, a decreased partial pressure of oxygen
the diaphragm, lungs, mediastinal structures (e.g-, vessels,
(PaO2) and increased partial pressure of carbon dioxide
nerves, lymphatics, and lymph nodes), pulmonary hilus,
(PaCO2) occurs. These changes are attributed to ventilation-
hilar lymph nodes, great vessels, pericardium, and the tho-
perfusion mismatching but are not severe enough to result
racic inlet. The patient should be prepared for a standard
 in clinical compromise in healthy dogs. A decrease in total
lateral thoracotomy. Clip the entire hemithorax, and asepti-
 peripheral vascular resistance occurs secondary to hypercap-
cally prepare and drape not only for a lateral incision but also
for port and thoracostomy tube placement. Draping of the
healthy experimental dogs. Clinical cases may not show nor-
 chest should be wide enough to allow palpation of intercostal
mal ventilation or perfusion, and changes in tidal volume,
spaces and placement of multiple ports; thus it is often wider
inspiratory pressure, and ventilatory rate should be based
than that normally required for an open thoracotomy.
on changes in monitoring variables. Therefore, adequate
CHAPTER 16 Thoracoscopy · 483
 monitoring equipment must be used to detect changes and
resection of a large mass any time that thoracoscopy is per-
to adjust the ventilation as required by the patient.
formed. The approach should be appropriate for the site to be
Mechanical ventilation and frequent adjustments are usu-
evaluated, intended surgical intervention, and possible need
 ally required during thoracoscopy to maintain ventilation
for open surgery. Have all instrumentation for open thoracot-
and adequate pulmonary atelectasis for visualization within
omy available in the operating suite before starting thoracos-
the pleural space. These changes may result in further ven-
copy. Minithoracotomies used for port placement may need
tilatory alterations within the patient. If space within the
to be extended, depending on the size of the lesion excised.
thorax is not adequate for visualization or dissection with
For collection of biopsy samples, small lesions, or compress-
the openings made and pneumothorax resulting affer open
ible tisue such as the pericardium, 5-mm or 10-mm portals
 port placement, selective, one-lung ventilation (OLV) may
permit extraction of the tissue. Larger lesions may be dis-
be used. Single-lung ventilation increases the working space
sected thoracoscopically and the port site enlarged for extrac-
within the chest and is required for some advanced proce-
tion of the tissue. Very large lesions, especially those close to
dures, such as partial or complete pneumolobectomy, and
the hilus, require a large thoracotomy for extraction and may
be better approached by standard, open thoracotomy. These
the ligamentum arteriosum for PRAA. Minimal, clinically
 decisions can be made with the use of thoracoscopy as a diag-
controllable alterations after OLV in healthy, experimental
nostic tool before open surgery. In every case, the chest should
first be completely explored and all abnormalities evaluated.
erally ventilated dogs. Hypoxemic vasoconstriction theoreti-
 If no abnormal fndings are identified, consider biopsy of
cally shunted pulmonary blood flow to ventilated areas of the
the pleura, lung, lymph nodes (e.g-, sternal and hilar), medi-
lung, minimizing intrapulmonary shunting, or ventilation-
astinum, and pericardium. Primary, diffuse pulmonary dis-
 perfusion mismatching. The use of OLV in patients with
 sd ad a q s   
abnormalities may be more demanding and difficult if venti-
lesions of the lung pleura, mediastinum, or lymph nodes
lation or perfusion is not normal before or during anesthesia.
can be sampled or removed depending on the equipment
Monitoring should include pulse oximetry, end-tidal carbon
available and surgeon training. Pericardectomy can be done
dioxide levels, blood pressure, electrocardiography (ECG),
for cases of pericardial effusion, and the right atrium can be
and blood gas levels in patients undergoing thoracoscopy.
examined on opening of the pericardial sac. The right atrium
The addition of 5 cm HzO or less of positive end-expiratory
may be evaluated after pericardial incision, but the use of an
 pressure (PEEP) was recommended in patients undergoing
angled endoscope and careful manipulation of the pericar-
thoracoscopy with OLV to decrease the negative effects of
dium are required for this advanced maneuver.
OLV. Using PEEP recruited more alveoli in ventilated lungs,
 Cases of spontaneous pneumothorax or those requiring
minimized ventilation-perfusion mismatching, and did not
examination of the right atrium are more challenging. All 
 affect cardiac output or delivery of oxygen to the tissues.
lung lobes must be evaluated under direct visualization, and
OLV is achieved by selective bronchial intubation or
saline infusion into the thorax may diagnose the site of leak-
blocking the bronchus on the operated side of the chest.
Establish OLV in the operating suite immediately before
thoracoscopy so that the tube or blocker is not dislodged
ectatic lung. Thoracoscopy in those cases allows for surgical
during patient transport and positioning. Flexible endos-
planning should an open thoracotomy become necessary.
 copy is required and is associated with a minimal learning
Localizing the pulmonary lesion via thoracoscopy will allow
curve, especially when bronchial blockade is performed.
a single thoracotomy to be performed if necessary to remove
 The blocker must be properly located, and inflation of the 
 abnormal pulmonary parenchyma, which can also be done
balloon must block the flow of gas without displacing the
thoracoscopically. Pneumolobectomy is more difficult via a
 balloon into the carina or distal trachea. The use of an oval
median sternotomy, and thoracoscopy at least allows identi-
rather than round bronchial blocker helps decrease the risk
fication of the side of the lesion and allows a lateral approach
of dislodgement. Endotracheal tube alteration and extension
to the affected lung, which eliminates the use of an explor-
have been described, but specialized tubes can be purchased
 atory median sternotomy. A median sternotomy is less desir-
for bronchial intubation or blockade. Selective intubation
able for pneumolobectomy because the pulmonary hilus is
 p  oi adosq aix e sa os
 displaced dorsally, away from the surgeon.
frm the appropriateness of the tube or blocker. The endo-
 scope is used to enter the correct bronchus and serves as a
 THERAPEUTIC PROCEDURES
stylet over which the endotracheal tube is fed.
The use of a video camera and video monitor is vital in
■ EXPLORATORY THORACOSCOPY
therapeutic procedures. An assistant directs the endoscope
while the surgeon performs the procedure. Without a video
 The surgeon must be adequately trained and prepared for
camera and monitor, this would be impossible. Concurrent
conversion to open thoracotomy (either intercostals or
viewing by all members of the operating and anesthetic team
 median sternotomy) due to unexpected complications or for
allows correlation of the patient's progress with the progress
484■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
of the procedure, linking the entire team together, maximiz-
 Place other ports affer exploration of the chest. Their
ing the quality of patient care.
placement depends on the expected procedures to be done.
Triangulation is required for accurate and easy operation
 ESTABLISHING A PNEUMOTHORAX
and should be planned. Subsequent portal placement should
be done under thoracoscopic visualization. Identify the
A pneumothorax may be established with the use ofa Veress
port site by placing pressure on the intercostal space with
needle or via a minithoracotomy. A Veress needle inserted
concurrent  endoscopic  visualization.  Minithoracotomies
through a stab incision through the skin with the stopcock
and placement of ports with blunt obturators have been
opened to allow air to enter the pleural space is possible but
 described. Each port can be used for examination or passage
is associated with greater risk of pulmonary trauma. Dissec-
of operating instruments. Portals placed for lateral thoracic
tion of the thoracic wall via a minithoracotomy with place-
 procedures may be placed anywhere from dorsal to ventral,
ment of a blunt trocar and port is safer and allows air to enter
as long as the site is visualized with the endoscope. Consider
the thoracic cavity more rapidly.
the movement of the pulmonary parenchyma, and place
ouaed areond a pioae on qanoua aeua sod
 PORT PLACEMENT
during instrument entry and manipulation. Care should be
taken to avoid the internal thoracic arteries, which should
Choose an initial port site that will allow examination of the
be easy to visualize. Operating portals should be spaced
 entire pleural space and triangulation of subsequent ports
  s q   os pe 
for biopsy or therapeutic intervention (see Figure 15-12). In
endoscope is avoided. Use a 30-degree endoscope to obtain
a lateral approach, make a skin incision slightly larger than
the diameter of the port. Bluntly dissect the musculature of
the thoracic wall until the parietal pleura is penetrated. The
size of the thoracotomy should be large enough to allow easy
placement of a blunt trocar and port. Examine the entire
hemithorax before placement of subsequent ports, which
should be done under direct visualization with the endo-
scope (see Figure 16-20).
sd u is pad uo si d prid 
undergoing thoracoscopy in a dorsal position (see Figure
16-19). Place the port with concurrent visualization through a
 0-degree endoscope within the lumen of the port. A threaded
port is ideal for such placement. Make an incision through the
skin to one side of the base of the xiphoid process between
it and the costal arch. Port placement is easiest if it is intro-
duced into the ipsilateral hemithorax. It is important to make
Hgure 16-4 The right internal thoracic vessels (arrows) can be seen
the incision larger than the diameter of the threaded port to
in the cranial mediastinum of a dog in dorsal recumbency. The
structures on the left side ofthe thorax (right of the arrowheads)
avoid gathering of the skin and subcutis on port advancement.
 Place the port and slowly advance it, using a clockwise motion,
are covered by an intact cranial mediastinum before fenestration.
(Photograph @ 2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
toward the ipsilateral thoracic wall and somewhat dorsally, to
ensure entry into the pleural space. Introduce a 0-degree endo-
scope as soon as the port engages the musculature. Advance
the port under endoscopic guidance until it penetrates the dia-
phragm and diaphragmatic pleura. Advance slightly beyond
the pleura to allow uninhibited insertion and removal of the
endoscope and other instruments through the port. The initial
evaluation of the chest through the paraxiphoid port is lim-
ited to the hemithorax entered (Figure 16-4). Fenestrate the
costal space to allow bilateral exploration (Figure 16-5). The
mediastinum will often adhere to the contralateral lungs until
bilateral pneumothorax has been established. Fenestrate the
mediastinum using two pairs of grasping forceps placed in a
poorly vascular section; a fatty mediastinum may require sta-
bilization with grasping forceps and an incision with scissors.
Hgure 16-5 The mediastinum (arrows) has been fenestrated on
the right side of the chest, which allows visualization of the left
 Use electrocautery, radiosurgery, or vascular sealers to avoid
hemithorax in a dorsally recumbent dog. ( Photograph @ 2010
any hemorrhaging that would obscure further visualization.
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 16 Thoracoscopy · 485
the widest variety of fields of view and the least risk of instru-
Mediastinal Biopsy
ment interference.
Cup biopsy forceps can also be used to sample the medias-
final pleura. Alternatively, use dissecting forceps, scissors,
■ BIOPSY TECHNIQUES
or sealing devices in cases in which the mediastinum is fatty
 Pleural Biopsy
or well vascularized. Evaluate lesions for vascularity before
sampling to avoid large vessels. Insert hemostatic foam into
Pleural biopsy can be done during any thoracoscopic explor-
the biopsy site left by cup forceps if necessary. Dissect lesions
atory surgery. Avoid the intercostal vessels (Figure 16-6) and
with curved forceps and graspers, followed by Metzenbaum
nerves located at the caudal aspects of the ribs to minimize the
scissors. Achieve hemostasis with electrocautery, radiosur-
risk oflife-threatening hemorrhaging Insert cup biopsy forceps
 gery, or vessel-sealing devices.
under thoracoscopic visualization, and use them to palpate the
Sternal lymph nodes may also be sampled. Partial dissec
ribs cranial and caudal to the intended site of pleural biopsy to
tion of the lymph node allows sampling with cup biopsy for-
avoid the neurovascular structures. This method should avoid
 ceps, or completely dissect the area for lymph node excision.
the nerves and vessels even in cases in which the thickened
Complete mass or lymph node excision requires hemosta-
parietal pleura obscures their view. Open the forceps, and take
 sis with any of the listed devices. Hilar lymph nodes require
samples from the parietal pleura; significant force is not rou-
superficial dissection for biopsy and careful dissection for
tinely required (Figure 16-7). Should significant hemorrhaging
complete excision.
 Occur, electrocautery, radiosurgery, vascular clip application,
or open thoracotomy may be required. Take multiple samples
Lung
 of the parietal pleura, including multiple abnormal and appar-
ently normal sites in an aftempt to differentiate reactive meso-
Pulmonary biopsy can be achieved with the use of three
 thelium from mesothelioma or metastatic neoplasia.
methods: spring-fired Tru-Cut biopsy, pretied loop ligature,
Or endoscopic stapling. Tru-Cut biopsy needles may be used
to sample lung masses of a large enough size so as to avoid
trauma to the normal surrounding pulmonary parenchyma.
Direct the needle, and fire it into the mass under thoraco-
scopic guidance.
 Use pretied loop ligatures to sample the distal 2 cm of lung
lobes. Introduce the pretied loop ligature and grasping forceps
into the thoracic cavity. Grasp the edge of the lung through the
loop ligature, and elevate it while tightening the ligature dur-
ing exhalation. Tightening the loop with the lung fully inflated
increases the risk of pleural and parenchymal damage. Stabi-
lize the lung and ligature, and excise the area to be sampled
with Metzenbaum scissors; last, transect the excess suture with
 hook scissors and remove it from the thorax (Figure 16-8).
Figure 16-6 The right intercostal vessels and ribs are easily
identified caudal to the ribs in this dorsally recumbent, healthy dog.
(Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Figure 16-7 Cup biopsy forceps used for pleural biopsy in a
dog with pleural thickening due to chronic pleural effusion.
Hgure 16-8 A pulmonary biopsy sample taken with a loop ligature.
(Photograph @ 2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
(Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
486 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Hgure 16-10 Thoracoscopic visualization of the tip of a
thoracostomy tube during placement. (Photograph @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Figure 16-9 A pulmonary biopsy sample taken with an
endoscopic gastrointestinal anastomotic stapler. (Photograph @
subcutaneous tunnel is appropriate. Secure the tube with a
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
purse-string and Roman sandal-type of suture pattern, and
wrap the thorax to avoid tube dislodgement. Ensure that the
Endoscopic stapling devices can be used to obtain larger
thoracic bandage does not inhibit ventilation.
lung biopsy specimens and may be fred twice to perform
Hypoxemia may occur after thoracoscopy just as it may
wedge excisions of lung (see Chapter 1l; Figure 11-3)
after thoracotomy. Use nasal oxygen to decrease the risk in
(Figure 16-9).
the immediate postoperative period; it can be discontinued
within 12 hours in most patients without pulmonary com-
 promise. Pain management will also ensure more normal
Ending the Procedure
thoracic wall excursions and ventilation. Local nerve blocks
 Close each port site to achieve an airtight seal. The thoracic
and systemic opioid analgesics are commonly used after tho-
wall may be closed in two layers, one in the muscle and fas-
racoscopy. Inject bupivacaine around the port sites or the
cia, the second in the skin; however, ideally close the subcutis
 adjacent nerves before removing the surgical drapes to allow
as a third layer. Evacuate the pleural space via a thoracos-
 sufficient time for onset of action of the local anesthetic.
tomy tube immediately after port closure to assist patient
Recovery after thoracoscopy should be the same as that for
ventilation. Intermittent pleural drainage via the tube after
 thoracotomy but with less pain and ventilatory compromise.
surgery allows for early identification of hemorrhaging or air
Remember that patients with pleural disease of unknown
accumulation in the pleural space.
origin or idiopathic pericardial effusion may still accumulate
fluid within the pleural space; thoracoscopy is therapeutic
but not curative. Postoperative attention to fluid balance if
Postoperative Care
fluid is being removed from the pleural space is important.
Any patient undergoing thoracoscopy should be treated
Accumulation of significant quantities of blood within the
as if undergoing thoracotomy. All surgical sites should be
pleural space is a clear indication for reexploration. Air accu-
assessed for hemorrhaging and should be treated appro-
mulation after thoracoscopy may resolve with intermittent
priately, including the port sites on port removal. Inability
or continuous suction of the pleural space; failure to resolve
to control hemorrhaging is an indication for conversion to
may require reexploration.
open thoracotomy. Specific lung biopsy, partial lobectomy,
s  d  os ss   s
Complications
and observed for leakage; partial pneumolobectomy or clo-
sure of the site(s) should be performed, if needed. Air leak-
Hemorrhaging or pneumothorax after thoracoscopy is simi-
o e go ude aq aiedode pie aa pos aie
lar to that after open thoracotomy and may require treat-
ligature if that technique was initially used or by placement
ment. Tumor seeding of port sites affer thoracoscopy has
 of more staples after GIA resection of the lung.
been reported in human patients and in dogs. Care should
Place a thoracostomy tube in all cases except those in
be taken to avoid this complication, but a diagnosis is not
which solid tissue biopsy was achieved with minimal hem-
always known before thoracoscopy, widespread neoplasia,
 orrhaging. Place the tube in a normal fashion under endo-
such as mesothelioma, can affect port sites despite proper
scopic visualization (Figure 16-10); grasping forceps can
 handling of tissues. Use endoscopic retrieval bags for remoy.
be used to adjust tube location within the pleural space.
 ing samples after biopsy or mass excision; however, port site
Do not utilize one of the port sites, and be certain that the 
 metastasis can still occur, despite this practice.
CHAPTER 16 Thoracoscopy · 487
Figure 16-11 The phrenic nerve (arrow) is easily visible at the
Hgure 16-12 The normal parietal pleural structures of the cranial
base of the heart below the pulmonary parenchyma. ( Photograph
mediastinum are obscured by pleural thickening in a dorsally
@ 2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
recumbent dog with pyothorax. (Photograph @ 2010 University of
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Normal Findings
effusion. Thickening may be generalized with or without
Many structures within the normal thorax are easily identi-
concurrent plaque or nodular-appearing lesions. Sample
fied. The thoracic wall is easily viewed through the pleura,
thick pleura and nodules to increase the probability of
which is quite thin in healthy patients. Ribs, costochondral
obtaining a definitive diagnosis. The sternebrae and inter-
junctions, intercostals vessels, and nerves should be easy to
nal thoracic vasculature may also be difficult to identify in a
identify (see Figures 16-4 and 16-6). Depending on the posi-
severe case of pleural and mediastinal thickening. The pleura
tioning of the patient, many other structures should be seen.
can be significantly thickened and may be accompanied
If the patient is in dorsal recumbency, all of the following
by adhesions between the visceral pleura and surrounding
should be evaluated: sternebrae, internal thoracic vessels,
 structures in cases of pyothorax. Severe pleural and medi-
pericardium, sternal lymph nodes, lungs, and diaphragm.
astinal thickening may make division of the ventral medi-
The normal ventral mediastinum is thin and interlaced with
astinum more diffcult, and hemostasis with electrocautery
fat and may be readily visible in the central portion of the
and radiosurgery or sealing devices are often required. The
ventral thorax on initial examination; however, it may be
surgeon should also utilize adequate dorsal direction when
adhering to the visceral surface of the contralateral lung lobes
placing a paraxiphoid port, as severe pleural disease may
(see Figure 16-4). On fenestrating or opening the mediasti-
hinder port placement. It is important to consider thoraco-
num, the surgeon should examine the lungs on both sides of
 centesis or passing a Poole suction tip into the chest to drain
the chest; they should be pink and easily retracted. The peri-
as much pleural fluid as possible in cases of pleural effusion.
cardium can easily be seen, and the phrenic nerves should be
Thoracic fluid elevates the lungs ventrally, interfering with
visible at the base of the heart surrounded by pericardial fat
visualization of other structures and appropriate ventilation
(Figure 16-11). Rotate the patient or grasp the pericardium
of the patient.
to examine the phrenic nerves bilaterally. The heart should
 Cases of spontaneous pneumothorax may be associated
 be visible through the translucent pericardium. View the
with an obvious pulmonary lesion, such as subpleural blebs,
pulmonary vasculature by retracting the lung away from the
bullae, or atelectatic or emphysematous lungs, which should
heart with atraumatic instruments such as a palpation probe
be visibly different from normal lungs (Figure 16-13). Par-
or fan retractor. Thymic tissue is readily apparent in the
tially fill the chest with saline under direct visualization to
 mediastinum of young patients. Hilar and dorsal structures
identify a source of air leakage. Similar evaluation may be
may be more readily viewed via a lateral approach. Dorsal
done for cases of pulmonary trauma in which persistent air
structures such as the sympathetic trunk, thoracic duct(s),
leakage has occurred.
azygos vein, mainstem bronchi, and hilar lymph nodes may
Chronic pericardial effusion, constrictive pericarditis,
be identifed with significant retraction or changes in patient
cardiac or heart-based tumors, or pyothorax can result in
positioning.
 pericardial thickening or fibrosis. Grasping the pericardium
is difficult if fluid is present and is similar to attempting to
 grasp an inflated balloon. Pericardiocentesis under thora-
Pathologic Findings
 coscopic visualization should allow grasping, sampling, and
 Pleural thickening can obscure ribs, intercostal vessels and
removal of the pericardium. Examine the heart for tumors
nerves, or contralateral pulmonary parenchyma (Figure
with the pericardium at least partiall intact, which facili-
16-12). Small thickened areas on the pleura are also abnor-
tates manipulation and changing cardiac positioning for
 mal. These changes along with mediastinal thickening may
 complete inspection. Neoplasms may be readily visible on
be associated with conditions resulting in chronic pleural
the right atrial appendage or heart base.
488 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
 Examine the pulmonary hilus and hilar lymph nodes and sam-
ple or remove them for histopathologic examination in any
case of pulmonary neoplasia. Lung lobe torsion appears as a
dark, consolidated lung lobe with a twisted hilus. The condi-
tion is usually associated with a hemorrhagic pleural effusion.
Tumors of the cranial mediastinum, including thymoma
and lymphoma, should be readily visible or palpable (Figure
16-16). Care should be taken to evaluate adjacent anatomy
(e.g-, phrenic nerves, internal thoracic vessels, and the cra-
nial vena cava) associated with the cranial mediastinum
before attempting removal. Last, a diaphragmatic hernia
should be as easily identified as abdominal orga ns within the
thorax Take extreme caution during laparoscopy because
insufflation of carbon dioxide into the abdomen will enter
the thorax, which leads to immediate tension pneumothorax
and decreased cardiac output secondary to decreased venous
return. Failure to recognize a diaphragmatic hernia during
laparoscopy can be a rapidly fatal event.
Pericardiocentesis
 Pericardiocentesis can easily be done under thoracoscopic
guidance. Introduce a needle or a catheter-over-the-needle
Figure 16-13 A, Atelectatic lung in a dog with spontaneous pneu-
through the thoracic wall and direct it into the pericardium
mothorax B,Normal lung ina dog with spontaneous pneumothorax.
under endoscopic visualization (Figure 16-17). Aspirate the
(Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
fluid as soon as the pericardial sac is entered. Maintain the
needle ventral to the heart.
Pericardiocentesis is necessary before pericardectomy or
pericardial window formation if the fluid distends the peri-
cardium and does not allow grasping forceps to maintain
hold of the pericardium for incision. An intact, distended
pericardium is as difficult to grasp as a balloon flled with
air. After pericardiocentesis, the relaxed pericardium is more
easily grasped and stabilized for manipulation and incision.
Mediastinal Debridement
Explore and debride the thoracic cavity in cases of pyotho-
rax. Position the patient in dorsal recumbency for complete
exploration and debridement of both hemithoraces. Use
Figure 16-14 Thoracoscopic view ofadhesions in a 14-year-old
the initial evaluation to assess whether the procedure can
male Labrador retriever with chronic hemorrhagic pleural effusion.
be done via endoscopy alone. Multiple strong fibrous adhe-
The histologic diagnosis was mesothelial dysplasia. ( Photograph @
sions usually require conversion to a median sternotomy
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
because fluid loculation and frm adhesions will require
significant time and increase the risk of parenchymal dam-
Abnormalities of the pleura and lung include adhesions
 age and hemorrhaging. The ultimate goal of the procedure
(Figure 16-14) and fibrosing pleuritis, a condition in which
is complete debridement of the mediastinum, which may
the visceral pleura thickens and limits expansion of the pul-
include the pericardium. Grasping forceps and Metzenbaum
monary parenchyma. Severe fibrosing pleuritis results in
scissors should be used to remove all abnormal tissue from
small, rounded lungs adjacent to the hilus. Lungs may also
the thoracic cavity. The use of electrocautery, radiosurgery,
feel thick and not deflate normall. Lung tumors should be
or vessel-sealing devices is strongly encouraged for the entire
visible if they are superficially located and will become more
 procedure, as bleeding will diminish visualization.
visible when atelectasis occurs (Figure 16-15). Use a palpation
Thoracoscopy improves visualization of the thoracic
probe to compress normal lung tissue and search for deeper
inlet and diaphragm for debridement. Tilting the patient
lung tumors: take care to avoid parenchymal trauma. Multiple
to the right and left may assist in visualization of the dorsal
masses may represent secondary neoplasia (metastatic nod-
structures. Samples should be submitted for histopathologic
ules), and can be diagnosed with multiple biopsy specimens.
examination and aerobic, anaerobic, and fungal culture.
CHAPTER 16Thoracoscopy
■489
B
C
D
Figure 16-15 A, This 14-year-old spayed female cat was not eating and had severe weight loss, weighing 2.1 kg at the time of examination.
B,An enlarged submandibular mass was frmly attached, and interstitial disease typical of metastatic cancer was seen on thoracic radiographs.
D, Histologic diagnosis was a disseminated thyroid adenocarcinoma. On the basis ofthe thoracoscopy,the cat was euthanized because ofthe
poor prognosis. (Courtesy of Theodore Animal Hospital, Theodore,Ala.)
Hgure 16-17 A white catheter used for pericardiocentesis under
Figure 16-16 A mediastinal mass visible in the thorax of a dog.
thoracoscopic visualization. ( Photograph @ 2010 University of
(Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
490■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
 Pericardectomy
 PATIENT EVALUATION
MaryAnn G. Radlinsky
Each patient should have a complete diagnostic evaluation,
and most undergo a complete blood count, biochemical
Pericardectomy was the first interventional technique devel
profle, urinalysis, thoracic and abdominal radiography,
oped for thoracoscopic treatment in dogs and demonstrated
 and ultrasound examination, as well as cardiac ultrasonog-
a decrease in patient pain and stress compared with the same
raphy and ECG. Cardiomegaly on radiographs is confrmed.
 procedure performed through a lateral thoracotomy. Tho-
as effusion with echocardiography, which also provides the
racoscopic resection of pericardium is now the standard of
diagnosis of tamponade. Abdominal imaging may reveal
care for pericardectomy.
hepatomegaly and hepatic venous congestion, and ECG may
show electrical alternans. Pleural fluid should be evaluated
■ INDICATIONS
for cell count and types, and samples should be considered
for culture and susceptibility testing.
Pericardectomy is indicated for cases of chronic, recurrent
pericardial effusion related to idiopathic, benign pericar-
 PREPARATION
dial effusion, pericardial effusion due to neoplasia, and
cases of chronic chylothorax (e.g-, hemangiosarcoma,
Position the patient in either lateral or dorsal recumbency. If
 heart base tumors, and mesothelioma). The procedure is
subtotal pericardectomy to the ventral aspects of the phrenic
also indicated for cases of restrictive, or fibrosing, pericar-
nerves bilaterally is done, dorsal recumbency provides the
ditis and infectious pericarditis. The pericardial effusion
 best access to the pericardium.
may lead to cardiac tamponade and right-sided heart fail-
ure depending on the volume and rate of accumulation of
■ PROCEDURE
pericardial fluid.
If the patient is in dorsal recumbency, place the first port in
■INSTRUMENTATION
the paraxiphoid position. Place additional intercostal ports at
the sixth intercostal spaces bilaterally or at the sixth and tenth
Threaded cannulae, flexible cannulae, fine grasping forceps,
intercostal spaces on the right (Figure 16-19). Alternatively,
aggressive grasping forceps, Metzenbaum scissors, an energy
place ports at the paraxiphoid and ninth intercostal spaces on
device (preferably bipolar cautery or a vascular sealing
each side of the chest (Figure 16-18). Place additional ports
 device), and fan retractors all are useful for the actual pro-
as needed during the procedure, taking care to place all ports
cedure. OLV has been described but is not always necessary,
ventral to avoid pulmonary trauma. OLV is not required dur-
especially if the patient is positioned in dorsal recumbency.
ing pericardectomy in patients placed in dorsal recumbency,
Monitor
UGA2009
Figure 16-18 A threaded cannula is in the right
 paraxiphoid position with flexible ports at the sixth
intercostal space. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University
of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 16 Thoracoscopy · 491
which makes the administration of anesthesia simpler. The
radiosurgical equipment; however, electrocautery or vessel-
right and left lateral approaches have been described; the lefft
sealing instruments with a built-in cutting device are avail-
approach offers visualization of the right atrial appendage and
 able and decrease the need to exchange instruments during
aortic root for tumor evaluation. Place ports in the third, fifth
the procedure, thereby minimizing surgery time. Perform
and ninth; third, fourth, and ffth; fourth, sixth, and eighth;
 pericardiocentesis under thoracoscopic visualization to cause
 or fourth, sixth, and tenth intercostal spaces (Figure 16-20).
relaxation of the pericardium and allow stabilization with
Perform the procedure with aggressive grasping for-
 grasping forceps if the pericardial sac is distended with fluid.
ceps and scissors. Connect scissors to electrocautery or
Creation of a pericardial window allows fluid to drain con-
tinuously from the pericardial sac into the pleural space, pre-
venting cardiac tamponade in cases of idiopathic pericardial
Monitor 
effusion or neoplasia. First, explore the thoracic cavity and
sample abnormalities, which may represent neoplasia. Next,
identify the phrenic nerves, and protect them throughout the
 procedure (Figure 16-21). Identify the cranial aspect of the
 pericardium, and grasp the pericardium and incise it with scis-
sors. Make a pericardial window that is approximately 3 to 5
 cm long and ventral to the mediastinal fat. Once an opening
is made in the pericardium, it may be easier to manipulate the
pericardium by grasping one edge with one side of the forceps
 placed inside the pericardial sac and the other on the mediasti-
nal surface. Place the sample in an extraction bag for removal,
which should be easily accomplished through one of the oper-
ating portals; if necessary, enlarge a port site for extraction of
the tissue. Submit the pericardium for histopathologic exami-
 nation and bacterial culture and susceptibility testing.
Subtotal pericardectomy for constrictive pericarditis, infec-
tious pericarditis, or neoplasia is best done with the patient in
dorsal recumbency. Portals may be required on both sides of
OUGA2009
the chest for adequate pericardial excision. Open the mediasti-
num with two grasping forceps or forceps and scissors. Electro-
cautery, radiosurgery, or vessel-sealing devices may be needed
in large dogs or if a large amount of fat is present in the ventral
Figure 16-19 Alternatively,the right sixth intercostal port and an
mediastinum to decrease hemorrhaging and contamination
ipsilateral tenth intercostal port may be used. (Art by Kip Carter @
of the endoscope with blood. Explore the thorax, and sample
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
lesions present as dictated by the findings. Identification of
Figure 16-20 Portal placement for
pericardectomy from a right lateral
CUGA2009
approach. (Art by Kip Carter @
2010 University of Georgia Research
Foundation,Inc.)
492· PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
accumulations of pleural air may also require surgical inter-
vention if continuous suction fails to result in pleural seal-
ing. Analgesia should be maintained. Local anesthetic at each
port site may be supplemented in the postoperative period
with intrapleural local anesthetic application and parenteral
opioid analgesia, as needed. It is important to note that fluid
d  p  s nou  
may be discharged to return for pleurocentesis, if required.
 Occlusion of a Patent Ductus Arteriosus
MaryAnn G. Radlinsky
Figure 16-21 The sympathetic trunk (black arrows), intercostal
Partially open and thoracoscopic approaches for clip appli-
arteries (arrowheads), and aorta (white arrows) are visualized in the
cation to occlude a PDA have been described in dogs.l The
right caudal thorax of a dog with chronic chylothorax. (Photograph
2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation,Inc.)
 obvious indication for the procedure is the definitive diag-
nosis of a left-to-right PDA in a patient.
the phrenic nerves is imperative, and they must be protected
■ INSTRUMENTATION
throughout the procedure. Perform the initial portion of
the subtotal pericardectomy as for a pericardial window but
 Flexible or threaded cannulae,a fan retractor, a thoracoscopic
extend the excision more dorsally, cranially and caudally,
or traditional clip applier, appropriately sized hemostatic
excising the tissue but preserving a cuff around the phrenic
clips, a palpation probe, grasping forceps, curved dissecting
nerves. Few surgeons elevate the phrenic nerves from the peri-
forceps, and a suction-irrigation system should all be consid-
cardium for a more complete pericardectomy. Electrocautery,
ered for clip application to PDA in veterinary patients.
radiosurgery, or vessel-sealing devices are highly desirable for
decreasing hemorrhaging, which can be life-threatening and
■ PATIENT EVALUATION
may interfere with visualization of dorsal structures.
Most patients are diagnosed with PDA via physical examina-
■ POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
tion findings, thoracic radiography, and echocardiography.
COMPLICATIONS
A continuous, machinery murmur is auscultated high in the
axillary region, a palpable thrill is often present, peripheral
Evaluate the surgery site for hemorrhaging, and establish
pulses are hyperkinetic, and there is a lack of obvious jugular
 hemostasis before thoracic wall closure. The pericardium is
pulses. Thoracic radiographs may demonstrate left atrial and
often highly vascularized in pathologic conditions, and hem
ventricular enlargement, pulmonary overcirculation, dila-
orrhaging may be significant; thus bipolar cautery or, prefer-
tion of the descending aorta, and main pulmonary arterial
ably, vessel-sealing devices are recommended. Avoid damage
dilation. Echocardiography provides the diagnosis of PDA.
to the phrenic nerves along the dorsal aspect of the pericar-
dium. The port sites should be evaluated before closure and
 PATIENT PREPARATION
during port removal to ensure no hemorrhaging from the
sites or intercostal vessels occurs. Lung, pericardium, and
The entire left hemithorax from dorsal to ventral should be
epicardium should be evaluated, and all hemorrhages or
aseptically prepared and draped for the procedure. Be sure to
leakage of air repaired.
include a wide area for the proposed port sites and thoracos-
tomy tube placements.
 POSTOPERATIVE CARE
■ PROCEDURE
The patient should be placed in the intensive care unit with
oxygen supplementation until fully recovered and the venti-
pue ay oz oi s uoy pauei jodai pausqnd e ui saop au
latory status returns to normal. Thoracostomy tube manage-
4 to 6 months of age. The partially open approach used a
ment is the same as for an open thoracostomy. Thoracostomy
 minithoracotomy of2 to 3 cm at the fourth intercostal space
tubes should be wrapped to minimize tube dislodgement,
for instrument passage. An endoscope was placed in a port in
to secure the subcutaneous tunnel around the tube, and to
the middle of the fifth intercostal space, and a lung retractor
minimize patient molestation of the tube. The tube should be
was placed through a port in the ventral aspect of the fourth
 sealed properly, and the seal must be maintained whenever
or fth intercostal space. Thoracoscopic clip application was
the tube is not in use. The tube is used to evaluate for air leak-
 done with two ports: one dorsal and one ventral in the fifth
age and hemorrhaging, either of which may be indications
 intercostal space; one port was placed dorsally for the endo-
 sr dor  s s 
 scope in the third intercostal space.
CHAPTER 16 Thoracoscopy · 493
The ductus was palpated and dissected from lateral to
■ PATIENT EVALUATION
medial, cranially and caudally. Medial wall dissection was
 avoided, which is one benefit of the thoracoscopic approach.
Physical examination findings are related to chronic pleural
One of the dogs in the report had residual flow, which was
effusion and the loss of chyle into the pleural space. A restric-
considered clinically insignificant.  Importantly, 10-mm
tive breathing pattern, weight loss, pallor, and decreased
clips, the largest size available, were used, which limits the
heart sounds are common. A complete blood count, bio-
size of a PDA that can be occluded using this method. The
chemical profle including triglyceride levels, and urinaly-
dogs were also of a size amenable to the 10-mm and 5-mm
sis are required. Heartworm, feline leukemia virus (FeLV),
 portals and instruments used.
and feline immunodeficiency (FIV) testing should be done.
Thoracic and abdominal radiography and ultrasound, as
■ POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
well as cardiac ultrasound, are indicated to rule out numer-
COMPLICATIONS
ous primary conditions. Pleural effusion should be evalu-
 ated for cell counts and types and protein, triglyceride, and
The main intraoperative complication particular to PDA sur-
cholesterol levels. Triglyceride and cholesterol levels should
gery is life-threatening hemorrhaging. Immediate conversion
be compared with those of the serum, and the fluid should
to an open approach may be required, and application of
undergo culture and susceptibility testing.
 pressure, careful dissection, and use of the Jackson technique
may all be necessary. This surgery should not be attempted if
 PATIENT PREPARATION
the surgeon is not practiced at open PDA ligation. The other
complications of air leakage and hemorrhage are similar to
The entire hemithorax should be prepared, including the
those described in the general section and for pericardectomy.
cranial abdomen and space for thoracostomy tube place-
 ment. Draping is wide, and consideration of all port and
 POSTOPERATIVE CARE
s  d   d a s si sn 
nal recumbency, tilted slightly away from the side operated;
The patient is recovered in the intensive care unit and man-
rapid repositioning into lateral recumbency is usually not a
aged as described for pericardectomy. Oxygen supplemen-
problem following sternally recumbent surgery. A paracostal
tation, thoracostomy tube management, and provision of
 approach to the abdomen may be made for mesenteric lymph
Aans sio e u essu ae esee eddde
node injection or catheterization for lymphangiography.
patients.
■ PROCEDURE
Thoracic Duct Occlusion
 Identifythe thoracic duct via a right lateral approach in dogs;
MaryAnn G. Radlinsky
cats require a leff lateral approach for surgical treatment of
chylothorax. The light and magnification provided by thora-
Chylothorax is a complex, often unrewarding condition in
 coscopy enhance the visualization ofthe thoracic duct ( Figure
dogs and cats. Many differential diagnoses must be ruled out
16-22); however, chronic pleural thickening due to chyle in
before considering therapy. Surgery for the effusion alone
the chest can impede visualization. The thoracic duct may
may result in failure if a primary cause is left unidentified.
not be visible, and en bloc ligation of all structures dorsal to
The diagnosis of idiopathic chylothorax can only be made on
the aorta and ventral to the sympathetic trunk may be neces-
exclusion of the numerous causes of chylothorax.
sary. The ligation should be performed in the caudal thorax,
 caudal to the entrance of the azygos vein into the chest. This
■ INDICATIONS
location may have the fewer number of ducts, but beware of
the large cisterna chyli; it may be too large for clip occlusion.
Ligation of the thoracic duct is useful in any case of idio-
Place the patient in sternal recumbency to avoid pulmonary
pathic chylothorax that fails to respond to medical manage-
 trauma, as the lungs will become atelectatic; perform the pro-
ment. Most cases are first treated medically, but care should
 cedure dorsal to them. OLV may be used if necessary.
be taken to avoid prolonged medical management, as infec-
 Place ports in the chest with two at the dorsal third and
tion may complicate repeated thoracocentesis and chronic
 one for the endoscope in the middle of the chest. Pass instru-
chylous effusion can result in fbrosing pleuritis, or restric-
ments through the cranial and caudal ports, which should
tive pleuritis.
be located in the dorsal one third of the thorax, usually in
the eighth and tenth intercostal spaces. Pass the endoscope
■ INSTRUMENTATION
through a port in the ninth intercostal space (see Figure
16-22, A). Perform the initial dissection with Metzenbaum
The following equipment is needed: flexible or threaded can-
scissors: open the mediastinal pleura longitudinally at the
nulae, grasping forceps, curved dissecting forceps, Metzen-
ventral aspect of the aorta in the site intended for ligation.
baum scissors, cautery, a knot pusher, a fan retractor, and an
Take care to avoid the costal arteries branching from the
endoscopic clip applier.
aorta and coursing dorsally (see Figure 16-22, B). Use curved
494 ■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
A
@UGA2009
Figure 16-22 A, The endoscope and instrument port sites for thoracic
duct ligation in the dog. B, Close-up view ofthoracic duct ligation.
The dissection is between the intercostal arteries. The aorta is retracted
ventrally, and clips have been applied to all tissue within the dissected
mediastinal segment. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 Uriversity of Georgia
Research Foundation, Inc.)
dissecting forceps to continue the dissection along the side of
Pericardectomy should be a subtotal expanded procedure; two
the aorta and then move dorsally, ventral to the thoracic duct.
or three longitudinal fenestrations should be made from the
Concurrent gentle, ventral traction on the aorta will assist in
apex to just ventral to the phrenic nerves (Figure 16-23).
continuing the dissection through the mediastinum into the
contralateral hemithorax. Perform a dissection dorsal to the
 POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
thoracic duct and ventral to the sympathetic trunk until the
COMPLICATIONS
 contralateral hemithorax is entered. It is important that the
dissection include all tissue lateral to the aorta and that the
The dissection of the thoracic duct can result in trauma to
contralateral hemithorax is entered to encompass all thoracic
the adjacent intercostal arteries, which arise dorsolaterally
duct branches. Introduce a 10-mm endoscopic clip applier
along the aorta. Immediate hemostasis is required, as the
into the caudal port, and apply clips to all visible branches of
hemorrhaging will be brisk and will rapidly obscure the field
the thoracic duct during ventral retraction of the aorta.
of view. Conversion to an open approach may be required.
Lymphangiography can be used to assess the completeness
Pleural thickening may make entry into the thorax diffi-
 of the ligation via a right paracostal laparotomy or by injection
cult, but the use of minithoracotomies for port placement
of contrast medium into a mesenteric lymph node. Coloration
should decrease the risk of entry into the abdominal cav-
of the thoracic duct may be done before the initial dissection
ity and pulmonary trauma. Port site hemorrhaging, pul-
monary trauma and air leakage, and hemorrhaging of the
until all lymphatic flow through the duct(s) has ceased. Con-
surgical sites must be controlled. Avoid damage to the sym-
current pericardectomy is recommended and can be accom-
pathetic trunks dorsally and the phrenic nerves along the
plished by placing the patient in lateral or dorsal recumbency.
dorsal pericardium.
CHAPTER 16 Thoracoscopy
495
that fluid accumulation may not cease immediately, and
the patient may be discharged to return for pleurocentesis
if required. Hypoxemia may occur affer thoracoscopy, as
with thoracotomy. Use nasal oxygen to decrease the risk in
the immediate postoperative period; it can be discontinued
within 12 hours in most patients without pulmonary com-
 promise. Pain management will also ensure more normal
thoracic wall excursions and ventilation. Local nerve blocks
and systemic opioid analgesics are commonly used after tho-
racoscopy. Inject bupivacaine around the port sites or the
adjacent nerves before removing the surgical drapes so that
suffcient time is allowed for the onset of action of the local
Figure 16-23 Appearance of the pericardium at necropsy done
 anesthetic.
years after a pericardial window and longitudinal fenestration
Recoveryafter thoracoscopy should be the same as that for
were done in a dog. (Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia
thoracotomy but with less pain and ventilatory compromise.
Research Foundation, Inc.)
Remember that patients with pleural disease of unknown
 origin or idiopathic pericardial effusion may still accumulate
 POSTOPERATIVE CARE
fluid within the pleural space; thoracoscopy is therapeutic
but not curative. Postoperative attention to fluid balance if
The care for TDL and pericardectomy is the same as that
fluid is being removed from the pleural space is important.
required for the care of any patient undergoing thora-
Accumulation of significant quantities of blood within the
coscopy (see the “Pericardectomy” section). Attention to
pleural space is a clear indication for reexploration. Air accu-
thoracostomy tube maintenance, patient ventilation and
mulation after thoracoscopy may resolve with intermittent
 Oxygenation, and analgesia are imperative as is monitor-
 or continuous suction of the pleural space; failure to resolve
ing for air leakage or hemorrhage. It is important to note
may require reexploration.
REFERENCE
1. Borenstein N,Behr L, Chetboul V,et al: Minimally invasive patent
ductus arteriosus occlusion in 5 dogs, Vet Surg 33:309, 2004.
SUGGesteD
READING
Brisson BA, Geggiti F, Bienzle D: Portal site metastasis of invasive
Kudnig ST, Monnet E, Riqueime M, et al: Cardiopulmonary effects
 mesthelioma after diagnostic thoracoscopy in a dog, IAm Vet Med
of thoracoscopy in anesthetized normal dogs, Vet Anaesth Analg
Assoc 229:980, 2006.
31(2):121-128, 2004.
Brisson HN, Dupre GP, Bouvy BM, et al: Thoracoscopic treatment of
Kudnig ST, Monnet E, Riquelme M, et al: Effect of positive end-
bullous emphysema in 3 dogs, Vet Surg 32:524, 2003.
expiratory pressure on oxygen delivery during l-lung ventilation
Cantwell SL, Duke T, Walsh PI, et al: One-lung versus two-lung
for thoracoscopy in normal dogs, Vet Surg 35:534, 2006.
ventilation in the closed-chest anesthetized dog: a comparison of
Lansdown JL, Monnet E, Twedt DC, et al: Thoracoscopic lunglobectomy
cardiopulmonary parameters, Vet Surg 29:365, 2000.
for treatment of lung tumors in dogs, Vet Surg 34:530, 2005.
Dupre GP, Corlouer JP, Bouvy B: Thoracoscopic pericardectomy
MacPhail DM, Monnet E, Twedt DC: Thoracoscopic correction of
performed without pulmonary exclusion in 9 dogs, Vet Surg 30:21,
persistent right aortic arch in a dog, JArm Anirm Hosp Assoc 37:577, 2001.
2001.
McCarthy TC: Thoracoscopy, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Faunt KK, Cohn LA, Jones BD, et al: Cardiopulmonary effects of
20:1341, 1990.
bilateral hemithorax ventilation and diagnostic thoracoscopy in
McCarthy TC: Diagnostic thoracoscopy, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
dogs, Ar# I Vet Res 59:1494, 1998.
14:213, 1999.
Faunt KK, Jones BD, Turk IR, et al: Evaluation of biopsy specimens
McCarthy TC, Monnet E: Diagnostic and operative thoracoscopy. In
McCarthy TC, editor: Veterinary endoscopy for the small animal
Am I Vet Res 59: 149, 1998.
practitioner, St Louis, 2005, Elsevier Saunders.
Isakow K, Fowler D: Walsh: Video-assisted thoracoscopic division of
Potter L, Hendrickson DA: Therapeutic video-assisted thoracic surgery.
the ligamentum arteriosum in two dogs with persistent right aortic
In Freeman LJ, editor: Veterinary endosurgery, St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
arch, JAm Vet Med Assoc 217:1333, 2000.
 Radlinsky MG, Mason DE, Biller DS, et al: Thoracoscopic visualization
Jackson J, Richter KP, Launer DP: Thoracoscopic partial pericardectomy
and ligation of the thoracic duct in dogs, Vet Surg 3l:138, 2002.
in 13 dogs, I Vet Intern Med 13:529, 1999.
Walsh PJ, Remedios AM, Ferguson JF, et al: Thoracoscopic versus open
 Kovak IR, Ludwig LL, Bergman PJ, et al: Use of thoracoscopy to
determine the etiology of pleural effusion in dogs and cats: 18 cases 
and morbidity, Vet Surg 28:472, 1999.
(1998-2001), J Amm Vet Med Assoc 221:990, 2002.
Walton RS: Video-assted thoracoscopy, Vet Clin North Arm Small
Anim Pract 31:729, 2001.
496 ■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Thoracoscopic and Thoracoscopically
 alveoli. The cause of pulmonary blebs and bullae in animals
Assisted Lung Lobectomy
is not known, although evidence suggests that bullae may
 be a latent complication of trauma. Secondary spontane-
Eric Monnet
 ous pneumothorax can result from several pulmonary dis-
eases including bacterial pneumonia, a pulmonary abscess,
The minimal invasiveness of the procedure, rapid patient
chronic obstructive lung disease, reactive airway disease,
recovery, and diagnostic accuracy make thoracoscopy an
 tuberculosis, and pulmonary carcinoma. It is recommended
ideal technique over other more invasive procedures for the
resection of small lung masses or the treatment of spontane-
cally treated, the source of the leak is first localized, the lung
 ous pneumothorax.
involved in the leak removed, and the other lung lobe evalu-
Complete or partial lung lobectomy can be completed
 ated for bullae and blebs that are potential causes of pneu-
under thoracoscopy or with a thoracoscopicall assisted
mothorax.2-4 Spontaneous pneumothorax due to ruptured
procedure.
lung bullae can be explored and treated with thoracoscopy.5
 However, the evaluation of the entire lung parenchyma is
 PATIENT INDICATIONS
not always possible with either a transdiaphragmatic or an 
 intercostal approach.
Lung masses can be sampled or resected under thoracos-
 copy.l Thoracoscopic or thoracoscopically assisted resection
 PATIENT CONTRAINDICATIONS
small lung lesions at the periphery of the lung lobes (Figure
Dogs with a large mass in the lung parenchyma or a mass
 16-24). It is probably not appropriate to attempt resection of
 close to the hilus are not good candidates for thoracoscopic
 aie e asq iaia u  s u ioie ss e
surgery. A large mass is diffcult to manipulate in the tho-
cotomy will be required for its extraction.
racic cavity so that the hilus of the lung can be visualized
Spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in dogs without evi-
for placement of staples. In addition, if the mass is close to
dence of trauma. Spontaneous pneumothorax is primary
the hilus, safe placement of staples is difficult. A clean mar-
when the patient shows no evidence of associated pulmo-
gin might be diffcult to obtain. A thoracoscopically assisted
nary disease and secondary when an obvious pulmonary
 procedure can be performed for larger masses if the thora-
cotomy is enlarged enough to extract the lung lobe.
thorax results from rupture of pulmonary blebs or bullae.
Exploration of the entire lung parenchyma can be very
Pulmonary blebs are localized collections of air within the
 challenging in dogs, even with OLV. Therefore, thoracos-
visceral pleura, whereas pulmonary bullae are confluent
copy may not even be indicated in dogs with a spontane-
 ous pneumothorax and obvious evidence of where the leak
is originating. Computed tomographic (CT) scans have been
used to help localize bullae and blebs.6,7 However, the rup-
tured bullae or blebs may be visible because they are in atel-
ectatic tissue.
LL
 PATIENT EVALUATION
AND PREPARATION
If the localization of the tumor is not clear on thoracic radio-
 graphs, a CT scan is required to help localize the tumor. It
is possible that a tumor may be too small to be visualized or
palpated under thoracoscopy. For tumors in the cranial lung
lobe, it can be difficult to determine whether the mass is in
the left or right cranial lung lobe; therefore, the CT scan can
help further define the location of the mass and help the sur-
geon decide the side for the intercostal thoracoscopy.
Spontaneous pneumothorax usually is severe and requires
placement of a thoracostomy tube for effective treatment
before surgery. Continuous pleural suction often is neces-
sary to keep the pleural space evacuated, especially in the
early treatment period. After evacuation of the pleural space,
thoracic radiographs, including both lateral views, or a CT
Figure 16-24 Radiograph of a dog with a solitary lung mass in the
left caudal lung lobe. The mass is small and in the periphery of the
scan should be examined for primary or secondary causes of
lunglobe.
 pneumothorax. Pulmonary bullae may be visible on thoracic
CHAPTER 16 Thoracoscopy · 497
radiographs. Pulmonary blebs usually are not visible. Appro-
preferred position. The telescope and operative portals are
priate blood and fecal parasitic examinations should also be
inserted with the use of appropriate triangulation to access
performed.
the involved pathologic condition.
With a lateral approach a thoracoscopically assisted tech-
■ ANESTHESIA
nique can be used for the resection of peripheral lesions in a
cranial or middle lung lobe. Caudal lung lobes do not tend
General considerations about anesthesia and thoracoscopy
to be amenable to a thoracoscopically assisted approach
are presented in the chapter on anesthesia (see the “Anes-
because they are attached dorsally in the thoracic cavity by
thesia" section on pg. 482). OLV is important in performing a
a dorsal ligament.
lung lobectomy and is induced under bronchoscopy with an
endobronchial blocker. OLV is recommended for increasing
■ THORACOSCOPIC PARTIAL LUNG
the amount of space available in the thoracic cavity so that
LOBECTOMY
the instruments and the lung mass can be manipulated (Fig-
ure 16-25). OLV is induced after the patient has been posi-
For peripheral lesions less than 2 cm in diameter, a loop liga-
tioned on the operating table so that the bronchial obturator
ture technique can be used. The tip of the lobe to be removed
is not dislodged. OLV induces oxygen desaturation of arte-
is positioned through a pretied loop ligature (EndoLoop,
rial blood; however, the application of PEEP interferes with
Ethicon, Somerville, N.J.), which is then tightened. Loop lig-
 cardiac output and helps maintain oxygen saturation.8,9 The
ature made of monoflament suture material should be used
 patient is in an oblique position to improve the exposure of
because it is more rigid and easier to control in the thoracic
the dorsal part of the hilus of the lung.
cavity. Loop ligature can be made at the surgery table with
monoflament suture and a Roeder knot. The ligated portion
■ PARTIAL LUNG LOBECTOMY
of the lung is transected and removed. This technique is only
possible if the suture can be placed no more than 3 cm from
Lung biopsy for chronic lung disease, excision of lung
the edge of the lung. Larger or more central lesions require
masses, lung abscesses, emphysematous bullae, or any other
an endoscopic stapling device for occlusion and transection
localized disease process in the peripheral portions of the
of the portion of the lobe to be removed.
lung lobes can be performed effectively with a minimally
When partial lung lobectomy is performed with an endo-
invasive technique.
scopic stapler (EndoGIA, US Surgical, Norwalk, Conn.), the
EndoGIA is placed through an additional portal to provide
optimal alignment for application of the stapler (see Figure
Approach
11-3). After transection of the lung lobe, the excised por-
 Portal placement for partial lung lobectomy is dictated by
tion is removed from the chest by enlargement of one of the
ae s   q    o  
portals to allow passage of the tissue. An endoscopic tissue
and 16-28). Dorsal recumbency and the paraxiphoid tele-
pouch (Endo Catch, US Surgical, Norwalk, Conn.) can be
scope portal allow examination of both sides of the chest for
used to facilitate tissue removal. The transected lung margin
cases in which the side of the pathologic condition is unde-
is observed for air leakage or bleeding before the telescope
termined, such as with spontaneous pneumothorax.
 exits the chest. A chest drain is placed at a site away from all
If the side of involvement can be determined preopera-
portals, operative and telescope cannulae are removed, and
tively with radiographs or other diagnostic techniques, lat-
the portals are closed.
eral recumbency provides greater unilateral access and is the
■ THORACOSCOPICALLY ASSISTED
PARTIAL LUNG LOBECTOMY
A partial lung lobectomy can be performed with a thora-
coscopically assisted technique. Two portals are placed in
an intercostal space so that the lesion to be resected is pre-
cisely localized. On the basis of the preoperative thoracic
radiograph, the two portals are placed at least three or four
intercostal spaces away from the lesion. After identification
of the lesion a minithoracotomy is performed to exterior-
ize the tip of the lung to be resected with the lesion (Figure
16-26). The partial lung lobectomy is completed as during
 a thoracotomy. After the resection is completed the lung
lobe is returned to the thoracic cavity and the minithora-
Figure 16-25 Intraoperative view of the mass in Figure 16-24.
The lung parenchyma is not inflated around the mass because of
cotomy is closed routinely. A chest tube is placed in the
one-lung ventilation.
thoracic cavity.
498■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
 COMPlEte LuNG LObECtOMy
 THORACOSCOPIC LUNG LOBECTOMY
Approach
Individual structures of the hilus are not isolated for mini-
 Lateral recumbency with intercostal portal placement is the
mally invasive lung lobectomy. For caudal lung lobes and the
preferred technique for complete lung lobectomy.
accessory lung lobe, the pulmonary ligament is divided to
A telescope portal and two operative portals are placed
free the lung lobe for manipulation. The dorsal ligament is
with triangulation around the hilus of the lung lobe to be
dissected with either Metzenbaum scissors or electrocautery
removed. Portals are better placed in the ventral third of
(Figure 16-29).
the intercostal space. If a cranial lung lobe is to be resected,
After the hilus of the lung to be resected is localized, the
the portals are placed in the eighth or ninth intercostal
portal for the staples is placed. It has to be placed as far as
space (Figure 16-27). If a caudal lung lobe or the right
 possible from the hilus to allow complete opening of the
middle lung are resected, the portals are placed in the
staple cartridge in the thoracic cavity before it reaches the
third or fourth intercostal space (Figure 16-28). A fourth
hilus of the lung. In addition, the portal has to be situated
 portal might be required for the placement of the stapling
such that the placement of the staples perpendicular to the
equipment.
long axis of the hilus is allowed. By placement of the car-
tridge perpendicular to the hilus, the length of the staples is
maximized. A 45-mm- or 60-mm-long EndoGIA stapling
cartridge with 3.5-mm staples is commonly used across
the hilus of the lobe (Figures 16-30 and 16-31). Before the
staples are released, it is important to make sure that only
the hilus of the lung—and not other structures such as the
phrenic nerve (Figure 16-32)—is in the stapler. An angle
telescope makes this step easier. The stapling cartridge must
be long enough to include the entire hilus to be stapled.
A 60-mm-long cartridge is most commonly used for this
purpose.
After the staples are released, the resected lung lobe is
 placed in a retrieving bag to prevent seeding of the tho-
racic wall with tumor cells (Figure 16-33). A cannula hole
is enlarged to retrieve the lung lobe in the retrieving bag.
Enlarged hilar lymph nodes can be sampled or removed
(Figure 16-34). Ifa lymph node is sampled, a combination
of sharp and blunt dissection is used to isolate the lymph
node. Electrosurgical assistance and clip application for
hemostasis can be used. Before removal of the telescope,
Figure 16-26 Bullae in a left cranial lung lobe removed with a
thoracoscopically assisted technique.
the hilus is observed for air leakage or bleeding. A chest
Hgure 16-27 Portal placement in the eighth and ninth
intercostal spaces for a cranial lung lobectomy. Port No.
4 is optional for a retractor. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation,Inc.)
@UGA 2009
CHAPTER 16Thoracoscopy· 499
 drain is placed at a site away from all portals, the operative
 unusual to have production of a small amount of air for the
and telescope cannulae are removed, and the portals are
first 4 to 6 hours after surgery. The thoracotomy tube can be
closed.
-eaidnq pue auesoplT Xiaans iaue snou Zl oi 8 paaoual
caine can be placed in the pleural space to help control pain
■ THORACOSCOPICALLY ASSISTED LUNG
 after surgery. Opioids are required at a low rate after surgery
LOBECTOMY
to control pain.
Similar to a partial lung lobectomy, a lung lobectomy can be
■ POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
performed with a thoracoscopically assisted technique. The
COMPLICATIONS
telescope is introduced through a portal placed away from
the hilus of the lung. A minithoracotomy is then performed
Loss of OLV is a complication that requires repositioning
at the level of the hilus of the lung being removed. A regular
the blocker in the appropriate bronchi or conversion to a
TA stapling device (TA Stapling Device, US Surgical, Nor-
thoracotomy. The endobronchial blocker can dislodge and
walk, Conn.) is introduced into the thoracic cavity through
completely occlude the trachea. A capnograph is very impor-
the minithoracotomy. The telescope is used to visualize the
tant during OLV so that this complication can be rapidly
appropriate placement of the stapling device at the hilus of
detected. Some patients do not tolerate OLV and experience
the lung. After firing of the staples, a scalpel blade is used to
desaturations less than 85%, even with PEEP. Thoracotomy
 detach the lung lobe under visualization with the telescope.
 is then indicated at this point in the surgery.
Then the lung lobe is resected through the minithoracot-
 Pneumothorax can develop after surgery because of iatro-
 omy. This technique requires a larger thoracotomy for the
genic trauma to the lung parenchyma. It is important to have
placement and manipulation of the stapling device than does
open cannulae to prevent a tension pneumothorax during
a normal thoracoscopic procedure. The minithoracotomy is
the surgery. One or two chest tubes are indicated at the end
closed in a routine fashion.
of the procedure. Continuous suction might be required
After thoracoscopic lung lobectomy the patient is moni-
for a few hours after surgery. Usually the lesions seal within
tored for the development of a pneumothorax. It is not
24 hours of surgery.
UGA2009
Figure 16-28 Portal placement in the third and fourth
intercostal spaces for a caudal and right middle lung
lobectomy. Port No. 4 is optional for a retractor. (Art by
Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
Foundation,Inc.)
500·PARTTWO
Rigid Endoscopy
Hgure 16-30 EndoGIA being placed at the hilus of a right cranial
Figure 16-29 Dorsal ligament of a caudal lung lobe (white
lung lobe.
arrows).
Figure 16-31 EndoGIA applied to the hilus of a caudal lung lobe.
Hgure 16-32 Visualization of the phrenic nerve near the hilus of
a right cranial lung lobe.
Hgure 16-34 Biopsy of a hilar lymph node.
Figure 16-33 Lung lobe removed from the thoracic cavity in a
retrieving bag.
CHAPTER 16 Thoracoscopy · 501
REFERENCES
1. Lansdowne JL, Monnet E, Twedt DC、 et al: Thoracoscopic
6. Au JI, Weisman DL, Stefanacci JD, et al: Use of computed
lung lobectomy for treatment of lung tumors in dogs, Vet Surg
tomography for evaluation of lung lesions associated with
34:530-535,2005.
spontaneous pneumothorax in dogs: 12 cases (1999-2002), JAm
2. Valentine A, Smeak D, Allen D,et al: Spontaneous pneumothorax
VetMedAssoc228:733-737,2006
in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Vet 18:53-62, 1996.
7. Lipscomb V, Brockman D, Gregory S,et al: CT scanning of dogs
3. Holtsinger RH, Beale BS, King RR: Spontaneous pneumothorax
with spontaneous pneumothorax, Vet Rec 154:344, 2004.
in the dog: a retrospective analysis of 21 cases, J Am Anim Hosp
8. Kudnig ST, Monnet E,Riquelme M,et al: Effect ofpositive end-
Assoc 29:195-210, 1993.
expiratory pressure on oxygen delivery during 1-lung ventilation
4. Lipscomb VJ、 Hardie RJ、 Dubielzig RR: Spontaneous
for thoracoscopy in normal dogs, Vet Surg 35:534-542, 2006.
pneumothorax caused by pulmonary blebs and bullae in 12
9. Kudnig ST, Monnet E, Riquelme M, et al: Cardiopulmonary
dogs, / Am Arnirm Hosp Assoc 39:435-445, 2003.
effects ofthoracoscopy in anesthetized normal dogs, Vet Anaesth
5. Brissot HN, Dupre GP, Bouvy BM、 et al: Thoracoscopic
Analg 31:121-128, 2004.
treatment ofbullous emphysema in 3 dogs, Vet Surg 32:524-529,
2003.
Thoracoscopic Correction of Persistent
to the vascular ring anomaly suggest that vagal nerve injury
has occurred and also dictate a more guarded prognosis.
Right Aortic Arch
The timing of surgical intervention may be an important
Eric Monnet
prognostic consideration. Generally, the sooner surgical
intervention is undertaken, the less the degree of perma-
 There are seven types of vascular anomalies described in the
nent esophageal injury. Aspiration pneumonia and severe
literature that can compromise the lumen of the esophagus
nutritional debilitation also must be considered in the tim-
in dogs and cats. PRAA with left ligamentum arteriosum
 ing of surgery. Surgery may have to be delayed in favor of
accounts for more than 90% of vascular ring anomalies in
nutritional supportive care with liquid diets or tube gas-
dogs. German shepherds, Irish setters, and Boston terriers
trostomy in some cases. Recently, a long-term study after
are thought to be at increased risk of development of vas-
 s se s     p
cular ring anomaly. Correction of vascular ring anomalies
a good outcome. Of dogs operated on, 92% did not have
under thoracoscopy can be performed in dogs. Because this
 regurgitation after eating.
they are transitioned from a liquid food to a solid food,
■ PATIENT CONTRAINDICATIONS
this surgery has to be performed in animals of a small size.
It might require pediatric instruments and a telescope to
Ligamentum arteriosum with blood flow could represent a
reduce the size of the instrumentation in the thoracic cavity.
challenge under thoracoscopy. PDA have been treated under
thoracoscopy.2 Those dogs had a normal anatomy. In dogs
■ PATIENT INDICATIONS
with a PRAA dissection of their ligamentum arteriosum with
 blood flow may represent an anatomic challenge. If blood flow
All the vascular ring anomalies except the double aortic
is present in the ligamentum arteriosum, a continuous murmur
arch should be treatable under thoracoscopy. Only the cor-
should be present. An aberrant subclavian artery in a patient
rection of esophageal compression by a ligamentum arte-
might represent a contraindication for surgery under thoracos-
riosum associated with a PRAA has been reported in the
 copy because it can be diffcult to localize; in addition, its dis-
literature.
section and ligation are difficult because the artery is perfused.
Surgery to relieve esophageal obstruction associated
with vascular ring anomaly should be considered pallia-
 PATIENT EVALUATION
tive and not curative in most cases. The esophageal diam-
AND PREPARATION
eter and motility rarely become completely normal after
surgery. Continued medical management with semiliq-
 Clinical findings associated with vascular ring anomaly are
uid diets and upright feeding may be necessary for a long
related to esophageal obstruction. Postprandial regurgita-
period or indefinitely after surgical correction. Clear prog-
tion usually manifests sometime after weaning when animals
nostic indicators for vascular ring anomaly in small animals
start to receive solid food. Affected animals are often small
have not been identified, but severe dilation of the cranial
compared with litermates, despite a ravenous appetite.
 esophagus is considered to be indicative of a guarded prog-
 Bulging of the cervical esophagus can be seen on gentle com-
 nosis. Dilation and hypomotility of the esophagus caudal
 pression of the thorax or abdomen, especially after a meal.
502 ·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Aspiration pneumonia may cause significant respiratory
A 30-degree-angled telescope is recommended because it
distress if present. Concurrent tracheal entrapment may
allows a better visualization of the ligamentum arteriosum
cause signs of fixed airway obstruction ifa rare double aortic
when the telescope is introduced from the left eighth or
arch is present. Signs related to cardiac abnormalities usually
ninth intercostal space. Four portals are required to intro-
are not identified. Esophageal dilation cranial to the base of
duce a retractor to retract the cranial lung lobe caudally dur
the heart on plain thoracic radiographs or barium esopha-
ing the procedure. The fourth portal for the retractor should
gram suggests the presence of a vascular ring anomaly.
be placed in the sixth or seventh intercostal space, at the level
Identification of the aorta on the right side of the esophagus
of the costochondral junction. With this position the retrac-
sometimes is posible on a ventrodorsal radiograph and sug-
tor does not interfere with the manipulation of the other
gests that a PRAA is present. Identification of the aortic pulse
instruments.
against the right wall of the esophagus on endoscopic exami-
 nation also suggests that PRAA is present. Definitive confr.
 Surgical Technique
mation of the presence and type of vascular ring anomaly
 often requires surgery.
A pediatric set of instruments (2.7 mm) is recommended
for this surgery. The first step of the procedure is to localize
■ ANESTHESIA
the ligamentum arteriosum. The left cranial lung lobe must
be moved away to be able to expose the entire the cranial
Anesthesia performed for the exploration of a PRAA follows
part of the thoracic cavity. Usually the ligamentum arteri-
the general recommendations described in the chapter on
osum can be visualized within the mediastinum cranial to
anesthesia (see the “Anesthesia" section on p. 482) OLV is
the heart base. A palpation probe can be used to palpate the
not required for the correction of ligamentum arteriosum
area of interest and identify the ligamentum arteriosum. If
with a PRAA.
the ligamentum cannot be identified, then a stomach tube
is advanced in the esophagus. The stomach tube outlines the
esophagus and cannot be advanced beyond the level of the
 SURGICAL PROCEDURE
ligamentum.
 A grasping forceps and a right-angle forceps are used to
Approach
dissect around the ligamentum arteriosum (Figures 16-36
After confrmation of the diagnosis of a PRAA under flexible
and 16-37). A combination of sharp and blunt dissec-
endoscopy, the patient is placed in right lateral recumbency
tion is recommended for isolating the ligamentum from
in a slightly oblique position to help visualize the dorsal part
the mediastinum and the esophagus. Before the dissec-
 of the thoracic cavity. OLV is not required to improve expo-
tion, the vagus and the phrenic nerves must be identified.
sure of the ligamentum arteriosum during the procedure.
 It is not unusual to visualize lymphatic vessels coursing
The telescope and the operative portals are placed in the
over the ligamentum arteriosum. They must be differen-
lefft eighth or ninth intercostal space (Figure 16-35). They
tiated from the vagus nerve. Electrocautery can be used
have to be placed as caudal as possible to increase the space
during the dissection of the ligamentum arteriosum to
in the thoracic cavity. The portals are placed in the dorsal
minimize bleeding. It is important to recognize the wall
third of the intercostal space. Therefore the instruments will
of the esophagus during the dissection. Identification of
be perpendicular to the ligamentum arteriosum, which will
the esophagus during dissection is facilitated by passing
make the dissection easier.
a stomach tube or an endoscope. The light of a flexible
Figure 16-35 Position of the four portals required for
the treatment of persistent right aortic arch. Portals No.
1 and No. 3 are used for instruments, portal No. 2 is used
for the telescope, and portal No. 4 is for the retractor.
OUGA2009
(Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University ofGeorgia Research
Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 16Thoracoscopy
503
endoscope helps visualize the ligamentum arteriosum by
the long lobe has not been twisted on its hilus. A chest tube
transillumination.
is placed, and the portals are closed.
Because some of the ligamentum arteriosum is still per-
Because the thoracic cavity has not been opened dur-
fused at the time of surgery, either place endoscopic vascular
ing the surgery, the patients are not hypothermic, which is
clips or use a vessel-sealing device to close the ligamentum
very beneficial in young patients. Furthermore, dogs have
arteriosum (Figure 16-38). Vessel-sealing devices or endo-
less pain after thoracoscopy than after thoracotomy, which
scopic vascular clips do not exist in a size smaller than 5 mm.
helps their respiratory function recover better. Postoperative
Therefore, one portal must be enlarged for their introduc-
 dietary management is the same as for open surgical PRAA
tion. The ligamentum is then transected between the clips
correction.
or the seals.
 Taking advantage of the illumination and the magnifi-
■ POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
 cation from the telescope, the surgeon should dissect and
COMPLICATIONS
 divide any remaining fibers from the esophagus that may
limit its expansion. A balloon dilation catheter is then used
The major challenge of the procedure is the small size of the
to further expand the esophagus under thoracoscopic visu-
thoracic cavity. The smallest size of instrument is recom-
alization. If the esophagus is not totally free, more fbers will
 mended for facilitation of the surgery.
have to be dissected (Figure 16-39).
Hemorrhage can happen during the procedure, especially
At the end of the procedure, the retractor that was keep-
if the ligamentum arteriosum is perfused. The ligamentum
 ing the left cranial lung lobe deflated and out of the field of
arteriosum should be ligated with clips or with a vascular
view is removed. The lung lobe is visualized to make sure it
sealing device. If hemorrhage occurs, an intercostal thora-
is reexpanding normally. If not, it is important to make sure
cotomy is indicated.
Figure 16-36 Dissection of the mediastinum with scissors.
Hgure 16-38 Vascular clips have been placed on the ligamentum
arteriosum before it is transected.
Figure 16-37 Dissection of the ligamentum arteriosum from the
Hgure 16-39 Aballoon has been expanded in the esophagus to
esophagus.
ensure that all fibers have been dissected.
504·PART TWO RigidEndoscopy
REFERENCES
2. Borenstein N, Behr L, Chetboul V, et al: Minimally invasive
1. MacPhail CM, Monnet E, Twedt DC: Thoracoscopic correction
patent ductus arteriosus occlusion in 5 dogs, Vet Surg 33:309-
of persistent right aortic arch in a dog, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
313,2004.
37:577-581, 2001.
Thoracoscopic Evaluation and Treatment
then thoracoscopy can be used to debride the mediastinum.
 If the lesions are beyond the mediastinum, the thoracoscopy
of Pyothorax
will be converted to a thoracotomy to debride all the tissue
Eric Monnet
involved in the disease process.
Pyothorax represents a treatment challenge to the internist
 PATIENT CONTRAINDICATIONS
and the surgeon. Dogs are commonly seen for the treatment
of a chronic pyothorax. Blood work, auscultation, and basic
Patients with a pyothorax and a mass on thoracic radiographs
and advanced imaging technology are not able to differen-
have been shown to require thoracic surgery, these patients
tiate chronic versus acute pyothorax and do not produce
are not candidates for thoracoscopy even if the mass is in the
reliable enough information for the clinician to decide the
lung parenchyma. Lung masses can be removed under thora-
optimal treatment for each patient. Pyothorax in dogs can be
coscopy, but they have to be small and dista nt from the hilus.
due to the propagation of an infection from the lung paren-
A lung mass related to pyothorax is either a lung abscess due
chyma (e.g-, lung abscess or pneumonia), migration of a for-
to chronic pneumonia or a migrating foreign body. There-
eign body (hunting dog), or trauma of the chest wall with
fore, these masses are large and diffuse. Extensive adhesions
 penetration in the pleural space.
present with chronic pyothorax could make the lung lobec-
 Treatment of a pyothorax is mostly a challenge in dogs
tomy diffcult during thoracoscopy. An intercostal approach
because it is diffcult to decide which cases would respond to
is also required when a lung lobectomy is performed under
medical treatment versus surgical treatment. Dogs are rou-
thoracoscopy. During thoracoscopy, a transdiaphragmatic
tinely given medical treatment for 2 to 3 days. If an improve-
subxiphoid approach is used for the evaluation of a pyotho-
ment is not obvious after 3 days, surgery is recommended.l-3
rax. Therefore, two different approaches will be required to
 Dogs seem to respond beter to surgical treatment if they
completely evaluate and treat the patient, which is a poor
have a mass in the lungs or the mediastinum or have an
 option for the patient.
infection with actinomyces on cytologic analysis.4 Therefore,
when surgical treatment is delayed for 2 to 3 days for most
 PATIENT EVALUATION
dogs, the client's expenses are increased.
AND PREPARATION
Thoracoscopy has been recommended in human sur-
gery to assist in the treatment of pyothorax. It has been
Patients are evaluated as for a thoracotomy with blood work,
used to explore the pleural space and to collect culture and
radiographs, and cytologic analysis. If the patient has diff-
biopsy specimens; after analysis ofthe specimens, it can be
culty breathing, a thoracocentesis will be required to drain as
decided if medical treatment only is sufficient or if surgi-
much exudate as possible. If the thoracocentesis is not suf-
cal treatment is required because of the advanced nature
ficient, a thoracostomy tube should be placed.
of the condition. Thoracoscopy is then used to debride
Oxygen delivery needs to be optimized before anesthe-
the mediastinum and all tissue involved in the infectious
sia: volume loading of the patient with the use of crystal-
process.5-7
loids or colloids increases cardiac output, and blood product
increases the oxygen capacity.
 PATIENT INDICATIONS
■ ANESTHESIA
Patients with pyothorax are evaluated with thoracic radio-
graphs, ultrasonography, blood work, cytologic analysis, and
Anesthesia performed for the exploration of a pyothorax fol-
cultures. Thoracoscopy is indicated in any case in which a
lows the general recommendations described in the chapter
diagnosis of pyothorax is made but a mass is not present on
on anesthesia (see the “Anesthesia" section on p. 482). OLV
thoracic radiographs. For patients with acute pyothorax, tho-
is not required for the exploration of the pleural space. A
racoscopy is indicated for exploration of the pleural space,
chest tube might be placed at the time of induction because
collection of biopsy and culture specimens, and debride-
 some patients can experience decompensation due to the
ment of the mediastinum. For patients with chronic pyotho-
amount of fluid present in the pleural space. Therefore,
rax, thoracoscopy is indicated for evaluation of the extent
draining of the pleural space after induction can improve
 of the lesions. If the lesions are limited to the mediastinum,
ventilation and oxygen saturation.
CHAPTER 16Thoracoscopy
505
Hgure 16-41 Utilization of electrocautery to dissect the
 mediastinum to gain access to both sides of the pleural space.
QUGARF
Figure 16-40 Cannula placement for the evaluation of pyothorax:
portal No. 1 is used for the telescope while portals No. 2 and No. 3
are used for the instruments. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University
of Georgia Research Foundation,Inc.)
Hgure 16-42 Acute pyothorax with severe inflammation
of the pleural surface. An exudate is present, and no adhesions 
■ SURGICAL PROCEDURE
are visualized.
Approach
A transdiaphragmatic subxiphoid approach with the patient
in dorsal recumbency is used to gain access to both sides of
the thoracic cavity. Instrument portals are placed on either
side of the thoracic cavity in the seventh or eighth intercostal
space close to the sternum (Figure 16-40).
Surgical Technique
After placement of the trocars, the entire mediastinum
is dissected from its attachment on the sternum (Figure
 16-41). Electrocautery or a vessel-sealing device is used for
this dissection because blood vessels in the mediastinum
Hgure 16-43 Chronic pyothorax with severe adhesions between
are large and can bleed profusely. With acute pyothorax the
the pleural surface, the mediastinum, and the pericardium.
pleural surfaces are red and inflamed and limited adhesions
are present (Figure 16-42). With chronic pyothorax many
adhesions might be present between the pleura, the medi-
explored. A palpation probe and a blunt forceps are used to
astinum, the pericardium, and the lung surfaces (Figure
manipulate each lung lobe.
 16-43). Extensive adhesions are an indication for conversion
The patient can be tilted on its left and right side to
to a thoracotomy.
improve visualization of the dorsal part of the right and
The entire pleural space is then explored, and the tho-
left hemithoraces. The pericardium is also evaluated for its
racic inlet is the starting point. A 30-degree-angled telescope
involvement in the disease process. It is important to per-
is recommended because it allows better visualization of the
form echocardiography before the thoracoscopy for evalu-
cranial mediastinum and both sides of each lung lobe. The
ation of the status of the pericardium. If the pericardium
telescope is moved caudally so that each lung lobe can be
 has increased thickness and pericardial effusion is present,
506·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Left
Right
Figure 16-44 The mediastinum has been dissected away from the
Hgure 16-45 Dissection of mediastinum from the pericardium
sternum as cranially as possible without damaging the internal
with electrocautery.
thoracic artery (the white arrow indicates the limit of dissection in
the cranial mediastinum with internal thoracic arteries).
 POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
COMPLICATIONS
a traditional thoracotomy with a subtotal pericardectomy is
 probably more appropriate.
 Hemorrhage control during surgery is critical. Many large
After a complete exploration, the surgeon can decide
 blood vessels are present in the mediastinum, requiring the
to either perform a thoracoscopy or convert to a median
use of electrocautery or a vessel-sealing device. If the bleed-
sternotomy. If the condition is chronic with multiple adhe-
ing cannot be controlled, a thoracotomy is required.
 sions and severe involvement of the pericardium or if lung
Dissection of adhesions between lung parenchyma and
lobes are involved in the disease process, a sternotomy is
the pleural surfaces or the mediastinum may damage the
performed (see Figure 16-43). If the condition seems acute
lung parenchyma. Therefore, pneumothorax can develop.
and minimal adhesions are present, then biopsy and culture
 It is important to have open cannulae to prevent a tension
 specimens are taken. The mediastinum is resected exten-
pneumothorax during the surgery. Two chest tubes might be
sively during thoracoscopy. The dissection is extended crani-
indicated at the end of the procedure. Usually those lesions
ally to the level of the internal thoracic artery (Figure 16-44).
 seal within 24 hours of surgery.
Then the mediastinum is dissected away from the pericar-
Severe inflammation and fibrosis ofthe mediastinum can
dium (Figure 16-45). A pleural lavage is performed under
preclude a good evaluation of the pleural surface, the lung
 thoracoscopy, and two thoracostomy tubes are placed under 
 parenchyma, and the pericardium. A thoracotomy will then
thoracoscopic guidance.
be required.
REFERENCES
1. Scott JA: Canine pyothorax: clinical presentation, diagnosis, and
 5. Martinez-Ferro M, Duarte S, Laje P: Single-port thoracoscopy
treatment, Compend Contin Educ Vet 25:180:194, 2003.
for the treatment of pleural empyema in children, / Pediatr Surg
2. Piek CJ, Robben JH: Pyothorax in nine dogs, Vet Q 22:107-111,
39:1194-1196, 2004.
2000.
6. Roberts JR: Minimally invasive surgery in the treatment of
 3. MacPhail CM: Medical and surgical management of pyothorax,
empyema: intraoperative decision making, Arn Thorac Surg
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 37:975-988, 2007.
76:225-230, discussion 229-230; 2003.
4. Rooney MB, Monnet E: Medical and surgical treatment of
 7. Grewal H, Jackson RJ, Wagner CW, et al: Early video-assisted
pyothorax in dogs: 26 cases、 J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:86-92,
thoracic surgery in the management of empyema, Pediatrics
2002.
103:e63, 1999.
Cystoscopy
Cystoscopy Introduction: Indications.
Most traditional cystotomies and nearly all urethroto-
Instrumentation, Technigues, and
mies can be avoided by performance of either transurethral
Complications
cystostomy as a diagnostic tool, for calculi removal, and for
Clarence A. Rawlings
repair of ectopic ureters is rarely performed in my practice.
Compared with a traditional cystotomy, the magnified cys-
Cystoscopy is a minimally invasive diagnostic and treat-
toscopic images are much more revealing because cystos-
ment tool for the urogenital system (Boxes 17-1 and 17-2).
copy distends the urogenital system with fluid infusion and
Cystoscopy was initially used for research in the dog in
 does not require a hemorrhage-producing incision. The pri-
1930.1 Diagnostic cystoscopy in female dogs was not
mary applications for which I use traditional cystotomy are
described for another 50 years.24 Transurethral cystoscopy
to repair ruptured bladders and remove calculi in animals
in male dogs soon followed,3-4 and clinical use in cats was
with other indications for a laparotomy. For animals requir-
 not reported until 1986.5 Unfortunately, cystoscopy was
ing calculi removal and procedures such as a liver biopsy,
slowly accepted and practiced in veterinary urology. The
laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy is preferred over traditional
past decade has seen much wider application. The benefits
laparotomy and cystotomy.
and effciency of cystoscopy make it a practical tool for
This section introduces the concepts, general techniques,
general practice and a required tool for specialty practices.
and indications for transurethral cystoscopy and laparo-
Please visit the companion website for a model for patient
scopic-assisted cystoscopy. Later sections will cover specific
discharge instructions.
 treatment techniques.
ww.tamssmallanmalendosopy.com
■ INDICATIONS FOR CYSTOSCOPY
Cystoscopy has become the treatment tool for calculi
removal, ectopic ureters,7* polyps, lithotripsy,l and transi-
Indications for cystoscopy include chronic or recurrent uri-
fional cell carcinoma. After the diagnostic procedures of sur-
nary tract infections, hematuria, dysuria, stranguria, pollaki
vey radiographyand ultrasonography, diagnostic cystoscopy
uria, trauma, calculi, incontinence, abnormal morphologic
is more efficient, increases diagnostic accuracy, provides the
findings in the urine sediment, and abnormal imaging fnd-
ability to selectively obtain biopsy specimens, and is easier
ings on abdominal radiographs and ultrasounds (see Box
to apply in clinical practice than contrast procedures and
17-1).11,12Transurethral cystoscopy with a rigid cystoscope is
computed tomography (CT). Survey radiographs and ultra-
the preferred approach for female dogs and cats ( Figures 17-1
sonograms are useful in detecting calculi and enlargement,
through 17-6). The urethra and bladder of male dogs can be
rupture, and displacement of the urinary system. Cystoscopy
studied with a flexible urethroscope passed through the ure-
does require general anesthesia but otherwise is essential and
thra (see Figure 17-4). A small diameter semirigid scope can
efficient when managing urinary problems. Images are in
be used in male cats, unless they have had an urethrostomy
color, and both images and movies can be recorded. Images
(Figure 17-7). Routine practice after perineal urethrostomy
are particularly useful for monitoring disease progression
in the cat is to examine the urinary system with a 1.9-mm
and regression. As compared with cystoscopy, contrast pro-
rigid cystoscope. Most small animal patients can also be
cedures require more time, are messy, are two-dimensional,
examined with a laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy.6 Laparot-
and are restricted to black and white images.
omy for removal of calculi from the renal pelvis and ureter
507
508·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
BOX 17-1
 Indications for Cystoscopy
Recurrent and chronic urinary tract infections
 Persistent hematuria
 Dysuria/strangunia/tenesmmus
 Increased urinary frequency (pollakiuria)
Trauma
Calculi
Incontinence
 Abnormal imaging findings 
Neoplastic cells in urine sediment
Hgure 17-1 Rigid endoscopes used for cystoscope sheaths for
Abnormal vulvar appearance, including recessed vulva
cystoscopy in female dogs and cats, as well as laparoscopic-
with redundant perivulvar skin
assisted cystoscopy. Each has 30-degree viewing and utilies the
same camera and light cable. They are 1.9, 2.7,and 3.5 or4 mm
in diameter. The 1.9-mm size may also be integrated into the
cystoscopy sheath, which makes it more durable because it is
slender and prone to bending. (Photograph by Chris Herron @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
BOX 17-2
Treatments in Which Cystoscopy Is Used
 Removal of calculi from urethra, bladder, and ureters
Lithotripsy
Correction of intrarmural ectopic ureters
Resection of masses inflarmmatory polyps and transi-
tional cell carcinoma)
Removal of foreign bodies
Injection augmentation for sphincter dysfunction
 Cauterization of sites of focal bleeding
is facilitated by the use of small arthroscopes or cystoscopes
(Figure 17-8). When the aftempt is made to diagnose uri-
 nary problems, cystoscopy should be considered essential.
Hgure 17-2 Standard sheaths for cystoscopy for use with
endoscopes (see Figure 17-1). Each has an inflow and outflow
For the previously mentioned problems, other diagnostic
port, as well as an operating port for instruments. The sheath for
procedures include a history, physical examination, com-
the 1.9-mm scope is a 10F size with a 3.5F operating channel,
plete blood count, serum chemistry profile, and urinalysis. If
which will accommodate a 400-μum diode laser fiber; the sheath
the problem is assumed to be diffcult to either diagnose or
for the 2.7-mm scope is a 14.5F size with a 5F operating channel,
resolve, cystoscopy is a quick and direct approach for diag-
which will accommodate a 8o0-μm fiber, and sheaths for the
nosis.ll In addition, when cystoscopy is used for diagnosis,
3.5- to 4-mm scopes range from 17F to 24F. (Photograph by Chris
the operating channel provides an option for passing grasp-
Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
ers, basket catheters, injection needles, scissors, and energy
devices for treatments (see Box 17-2 and Figure 17-6). The
are urinary tract infections. Obstructive dysuria is most
only significant concern is the need for general anesthesia.
commonly produced by calculi (discussed later in this chap-
 Because the procedure is typically quick and minimally inva-
ter) or tumors of the urethra or bladder outflow tract (Fig-
sive, anesthesia is usually easily justified.
ure 17-9). Other causes of obstructive dysuria are prostatic
abscesses or cysts, granulomatous masses, strictures (Fig-
ure 17-10), trauma, fibrotic bands of tissue (Figure 17-11),
Dysuria and Stranguria
and urethral contraction due to bladder-urethral sphincter
Dysuria and stranguria are difficult urination or straining to
reflex dyssynergia. Masses obstructing the bladder outflow
urinate. Despite repeated attempts to void, the patient pro-
 area can also include inflammatory polyps and blood clots.
duces a typically small volume of urine. Dysuria is caused
Straining can be produced by vaginal and vestibular
by obstructions, inflammation, or irritation. The most com-
masses (Figure 17-12), but these masses seldom produce
 mon cause of inflammation and a frequent cause of straining
complete urinary obstruction.
CHAPTER 17
Cystoscopy
509
Hgure 17-5 It is very helpful to be slightly ambidextrous, being able
 Supuadap pueq iaula ul adossoishs aui anendueu pue poq c
on the needs for the procedure. Most cystoscopy is performed with
the dominant hand; here the right hand is being demonstrated.
Injectionaugmentation,lasertreatment,transcervical insemination,
and biopsies are done with the right hand on the accessory
instrument while the cystoscope is in the leff. (Photograph by Chris
Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Figure 17-3 Specialized sheaths for cystoscopy can be used with
the 3.5- to 4-mm telescopes. These include a deflecting bridge
for selective ureteral catheterization. Injection augmentation
(A) and transcervical insemination (B) (see Chapter 18). During
the cystoscope is held in the left hand and a syringe attached to the
needle is slowly injected with the right hand. (Photograph by Chris
Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
Figure 17-4 The flexible 2.5- to 2.8-mm fiberoptic urethroscope is
used to examine the urethra of male dogs, the urethra is approached
B
from either the tip ofthe penis or the bladder during laparoscopic-
assisted cystoscopy. This is available in 70- and 100-cm lengths. The
Hgure 17-6 A, The 2.7-mm cystoscope and sheath are being used
focus on the urethroscope should be adjusted before connecting 
to pass a 5F biopsy forceps. Although cystoscopic biopsy can be
to the camera, and then the only focusing is with the camera. The
 done by one person, it is better to have a second person to open and
flexible tip can bend 90 degrees in one direction (inset). A full
close the alligator handle and then to remove and replace the forceps
 360-degree examination can be done by manually rotating the
in the operating channel. The operator is responsible for positioning
scope from outside the patient. The operating channel accepts
the cystoscope and biopsy device. B, A basket catheter for calculi
3F instrumentation, which should only be advanced through the
removal shown here with and without calculi. (A, Photograph by
scope while it is straight or only slightly bent. (Frorm Rawlings CA:
Chris Herron  2010 University of Georgia ResearchFoundation,
Endoscopic removal of urinary calculi Compend Cont Ed Pract Vet
Inc.B, From Rawlings CA: Endoscopic removal of urinary calculi,
31(10): 476-484, 2009.)
Compend Cont Ed Pract Vet 31( 10):476-484, 2009.)
510·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
The initial evaluation of dysuria should determine whether
the patient is urermic and whether urine is being retained.
-  n   si a r
sonography after the patient is permitted to void. Patients
with high residual volume usually have obstructive dysuria
 or neurologic deficits. Straining patients with a low residual
volume are typically those with inflammation, most likely
 caused by infection. Questions about the patient's history
should include:
1. “What are the urinary signs?"
2. *Has the patient had prior urinary disease?"
3. “How frequently does the patient attempt to void?
4.
"How much urine is produced?*
5.
“Does the patient strain to void?"
Figure 17-7 A 1-mm semirigid telescope with 0-degree viewing.
6.
"Is defecation normal or changed?"
(Fror McCarthy TC, Veterinary endoscopy for the small animal
7.
“Is there blood or discoloration of the urine?"
practitioner, ed 1, St Louis, 2004, Saunders.)
8. “"When does blood appear to be within the urine stream?"
atin
UGARF
A
@UGARF
 sadoss asaui ooedee su ies aaoan on Adossndau rg pasn si adosse lus o adosiso u-oi'I v -il an
be used to exarmine lumen of dilated renal pelvis and ureters during laparotomy. This approach is similar to arthroscopy and can be used
for calculi removal using grasping forceps and calculi basket devices. A, Grasping forceps to remove calculi using a second small opening
through the renal parenchyma or going parallel to the scope. B, Basket catheter passed through the cystoscope's operating channel to
remove calculi. (From Rawlings CA: Endoscopic reroval of urinary calculi, Compend Cont Ed Pract Vet 31(10):476-484, 2009.)
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 511
9. “Has there been any history of trauma?"
calculi or cancer, specifically transitional cell carcinoma (see
10. “Has the patient had any generalized disease signs, such
Figure 17-9), as the cause of obstructive dysuria.13,14 Other
as vomiting, weight loss, or anorexia?
causes include strictures (see Figure 17-10), other anatomic
The physical examination should include all systems,
abnormalities, and extraluminal masses. Patients with uri-
and the emphasis should be on the urogenital tract. First,
nary tract inflammation will not have obstructions but will
is the bladder distended? If the bladder is distended because
have signs of inflammation. Calculi can be diagnosed in
of either obstruction or neurologic deficits, care should be
female cats by rigid cystoscopy and in male dogs by flexible
taken to avoid rupture ofthe bladder. The urethra is palpated,
urethroscopy. Transurethral cystoscopy is the preferred cal-
and the external orifice is examined. Examination should
culi removal treatment in female dogs when the calculi are
also include rectum palpation. These examinations can also
 only two to three times the diameter of the largest cystoscope
include urethral catheterization and a neurologic examina-
appropriate for the patient. A three- or four-wire basket
tion. Care should be taken during catheterization and must
catheter is passed through the cystoscope's operating chan-
 be stopped if resistance is encountered. Radiographs should
 nel. Urethral calculi in male dogs can sometimes be removed
 be taken, and in male dogs either urethroscopy or positive
with the use of a basket catheter and flexible urethroscope.
contrast urethrography should be considered. After a com-
 Calculi in male cats may be removed by transurethral cystos-
plete history and physical examination, the mechanism of
copy when a perineal urethrostomy has also been performed
the dysuria can usually be characterized as an obstruction
as a part of the case management. Cystic calculi and most
with a full bladder or an urgency with an empty bladder.
urethral calculi can be removed by a laparoscopic-assisted
Urinalysis is best obtained by centesis, and a portion ofthe
 cystoscopy in both male and female dogs and cats.
urine should be submitted for culture and sensitivity testing.
 Endoscopic surgical treatment can also be done for stric-
Cystocentesis is a relatively safe procedure, especially when
tures, intraluminal masses, intraluminal foreign bodies, and
ultrasound is used. The standard blood tests should also
transitional cell carcinoma. Foreign bodies may be removed
 be done. Patients with obstructive signs require emergency
by wire baskets and grasping forceps passed through the
measurement of blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine,
 operating channel. Strictures may be resected and transi-
and electrolyte concentrations. The standard of practice for
tional cell carcinoma debulked with a diode laser (Figure
straining dogs includes survey radiographs. Ultrasonog-
17-13), or both may be treated by stenting. See the “Mini-
raphy is also noninvasive and is an excellent technique for
 mally Invasive Options for Urinary Obstructions, Including
examining the urinary tract from the kidneys to the external
Calculi” section. Although both techniques are new, pre-
orifice of the urethra. Before and usually in lieu of proceed.
liminary clinical experience with urethral stents and laser
ing to contrast procedures, CT, or magnetic resonance imag-
resection of transitional cell carcinoma has demonstrated
ing (MRI), the next diagnostic procedure is cystoscopy.
 prolongation of quality of life. Some masses can be resected
Cystoscopy can diagnose the cause of urinary obstructive
by traditional surgery.
disease and has the potential to provide treatment in many
patients. In female dogs, cystoscopy can be used to diagnose
Hgure 17-10 Five-year-old intact male English bulldog who
started dribbling urine 48 hours before referral examination.
There were repeated attempts to void without a good urine
Figure 17-9 Ten-year-old female spayed Wirehaired Dachshund
stream. No signs of azotemia were present,but small calculi were
with hematuria, frequent attempts to void, and occasional
present in the bladder and urethra. Urethral calculi were removed
inappropriate urination. Small cystic calculi and a urinary tract
from the os penis area with a basket catheter, and bladder calculi
infection were present. Cystoscopy was used to find proliferative
were removed by laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy. A urethroscope
masses in the urethra and small calculi, which were removed. The
was used to find a mild stricture and urethral injury just caudal
histologic diagnosis was transitional cel carcinoma. (Photograph @
to the os penis. ( Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation,Inc.)
Foundation, Inc.)
512·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
urinary tract inflammation by the presence of inflamma-
tory lymphocytic or plasmacytic foci (Figure 17-14). Dogs
with recessed or “hooded" vulvas frequently have local pyo-
derma and ascending infection. Inflammatory foci are com-
monly found in the vestibule, and these foci can spread up
the urethra and into the bladder. Cystoscopy is frequently
combined with episioplasty to remove the excessive peri-
vulvar skinfold.
There are multiple anatomic reasons for recurrent
the following causes: calculi, foreign bodies, inflammatory
polyps, tumors, incontinence, and other anatomic abnor-
malities. Primary treatment should be attempted. If no
apparent anatomic cause is found, a biopsy of the blad-
der mucosa can be obtained for tissue culture. In many
patients, management must focus on aggressive monitor-
ing and appropriate antibiotic treatment. These patients
should have regular cystocentesis for urinalysis and cul-
 ture. If appropriate urinary tract infection management
has been done and infection recurs, cystoscopy can be
repeated.
Urinary Incontinence
 Urinary incontinence in spayed female dogs develops in as
B
many as one in five.15-is Many clients have accepted some
 degree of incontinence in older spayed female dogs and may
not comment on this dribbling unless specifically asked. For-
satisfactorily to either phenylpropanolamine (PPA) (1.5 mg/
kg given three times a day) or estrogen.l6 (The diethylstil-
bestrol [DES] dosage is approximately 0.5 mg for a small dog
and 1 mg for a dog more than 25 kg.) Ifthe dog gains urinary
control during administration of DES, the dog is monitored
until incontinence recurs, at which time the 4-day treatment
is repeated. The dosage is usually adjusted according to the
response to treatment. Many incontinent dogs also have
urinary tract infections. Inflammation may be the cause
or result of the incontinence, and it is essential to identify
C
 and treat infections as a part of incontinence management.
Figure 17-11 Six-year-old female spayed Dachshund with dysuria
Cystoscopy is done to eliminate anatomic causes of incon-
and frequent yelping when placed into left lateral recumbency.
tinence. Surgical treatments of sphincter dysfunction in
Hematuria was present on urinalysis, but no abnormalities were
spayed female dogs include colposuspension, the placement
seen on radiography or ultrasonography. A, The cranial area of
of an artificial urethral sphincter (hydraulic occluder), and
the urethra had a stricture. B, The fbrous stricture was resected
with the use of a diode laser. C, No stricture was present when
sydu aeea I paad semdosisi
     n   n
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
is maintained.
 The most typical cause of persistent incontinence
,    a s   o 
Recurrent Urinary Tract Infection and Inflammation
scopic Diagnosis and Treatment of Ectopic Ureter Patient
Recurrent infections may produce a range of signs from mild
 Indications/Contraindications" section). PPA and estrogen
straining to frequent urination. Many dogs attempt to void
seldom reduce incontinence signs in these cases. Cystos-
repeatedly, frequently delivering small amounts of urine.
copy is the critical and accurate technique for ectopic ureter
These repeated attempts to void should be contrasted with
 diagnosis and can also be used for treatment. Laparotomy
the traditional male marking activity. After the diagnostic
 is rarely necessary and is usually restricted to nephrectomy
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 513
Hgure 17-13 Two-year-old spayed female Doberman Pinscher
with incontinence, characterized by frequent bed soaking and
dribbling four to five drops after voiding. A, Cystoscopy was used
to find along tag oftissue originating in the cranial region of
the urethra; the other end was just inside the urethra. A loop of
the tissue exited the urethral meatus. B, The origin and insertion
were resected with the use of a diode laser aided by traction with
a mosquito hemostat. Histologic diagnosis was lymphocytic,
Figure 17-12 Twelve-year-old female Shih Tzu, who had had
plasmacytic inflammation of an apparently congenital lesion.
three litters, now has a mass periodically protruding from the
Incontinence resolved. ( Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia
vulva. A, Cystoscopy found the mass attached to the cranial region
Research Foundation, Inc.)
ofthe vagina. B, Ovariohysterectomy, which included this region
ofthe vagina removed the mass, a vaginal fbroma. ( Photographs 
2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation,Inc.)
Hematuria and Other Abnormal Discharges
Hematuria and purulent discharges can be produced in the
of end-stage hydronephrosis. The initial workup should
 urogenital system at any point from the kidney to the exter-
include urinary tract evaluation, urinalysis, urine culture,
nal genitalia. The anatomic site can sometimes be localized
survey radiography, and ultrasonography. If incontinence
depending on the timing of hemorrhage with respect to
persists, especially if a urinary tract infection appears to have
urination. Blood dripping frequently or at the start of uri-
been appropriately treated, the patient should be referred for
nation is usually more external, from the prostate to the tip
 cystoscopy. Contrast studies are rarely required for dia gnosis
of the urethra, prepuce, or vestibule. Blood seen through-
of ectopic ureters. When cystoscopy is used in the diagno-
out urination is usually from the bladder or kidneys, cra-
sis of an ectopic ureter, a diode laser is used to resect the
 nial to the urethral sphincters. The source of blood may
membrane between the urethra and ectopic ureter. Patients
be from trauma, neoplasia, or polyps or may be idiopathic
treated cystoscopically have better urinary control than
(Figure 17-15).19 Survey radiography and ultrasonography
those treated traditionally. Despite anatomic corection of
should be done, but the most diagnostic technique is usually
ectopic ureters, additional incontinence treatment may be
cystoscopy. Masses can be identified, and diagnostic samples
needed to reduce leakage. Dogs treated cystoscopically have
can be obtained for histologic evaluation. Traumatic inju-
also avoided a laparotomy. A separate section is devoted to
ries are usually just verified, but catheterization until the
ectopic ureter diagnosis and treatment. (See the “Cysto-
injury heals or surgery is occasionally appropriate. Some
scopic Diagnosis and Treatment of Ectopic Ureter Patient
dogs develop renal origin hematuria, and the location can be
Indications/Contraindications" section.)
easily identified with cystoscopy (Figure 17-15).19
514·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
B
Hgure 17-14 Seven-year-old female spayed Golden retriever who
had had bilateral neoureterostomy performed intravesicularly at
8 months of age as treatment for bilateral ectopic ureter. Incontinence
and infection were frequent after surgery. A, The vulva was small
and recessed. B, Cystoscopy found extensive areas of lymphocytic,
plasmacytic inflammatory foci in addition to a fenestrated ureter
and a broad mesonephric septal remnant at the vestibulovaginal
junction. C, After a diode laser resected these areas, and urethral
injection augmentation was done,incontinence resolved for 3 weeks
and then slowly returned. A colposuspension and episioplasty were
recommended. (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
Foundation, Inc.)
Trauma and Pelvic Fractures
urethra to be entered. Strictures and tumors can increase
Cystoscopy can be used to access intrapelvic injuries asso-
ciated with trauma, especially when pelvic bones are frac-
a diagnosis in those cases. An appropriate range of cysto-
ei siop u adossoisao pioae oi iduae I ieisua un paini
scopes are needed for a wide range of patient and urethral
already have a diagnosis of a ruptured urinary tract. Infusion
sizes. Without a flxible urethroscope, the entire length of
 of fluids during cystoscopy could contaminate the abdomi-
the male dog's urethra cannot be examined.
nal cavity.
 INSTRUMENTATION
■ CONTRAINDICATIONS
Transurethral cystoscopy in the female dog and cat is per-
The primary contraindications are patient size, lack ofinstru.
mentation, and lack of expertise. I have rarely encountered
angle, which provides side viewing as well as enough for-
a patient in which general anesthesia precluded cystoscopy.
ward viewing to direct the scope into the urogenital system.
Cystoscopy of the female is probably the quickest and easi-
The side viewing increases the examination capabilities
est endoscopic technique to learn. After inanimate model
because the scope can be rotated 360 degrees. Cystoscopes
training during training laboratories, cystoscopy is the first
consist of a scope that is inserted into a sheath. Cystoscope
procedure taught when the student progresses to patients.
sheaths have two fluid ports: one is for fluid infusion and the
Some individual dogs and cats may be more challenging, but
other is for outflow. Infusion of saline or a balanced electro-
 patience and gentle, subtle movements frequently allow the
lyte solution permits flushing and distension of an optical
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 515
This scope can be passed up the urethra of a male dog over
10 kg and sometimes in dogs as small as 6.5 kg. It can also be
passed from the bladder to the region of the os penis during
laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy in smallr dogs. The advan-
tage of the fiberoptic scope is the ability to use the standard
camera and light cable connected to either the cystoscope
 or the laparoscope during a laparoscopic-assisted cystos-
 copy. This reduces the instrumentation for examination of
the bladder and urethra during this procedure as compared
with use of the flexible scope, which requires a separate
video endoscopy system. Male cats can be examined with a
1.2-mm-diameter flexible cystourethroscope or a semirigid
1-mm scope.12
■ PATIENT EVALUATION AND
PREPARATION
All dogs and cats undergoing cystoscopy should have a com-
plete history, physical examination, a complete blood count,
urinalysis, and serum chemistry tests. The chemistry tests
and imaging tests vary depending on the animal's prob-
lem, as already discussed. Urinary tract infections should be
appropriately managed, but this may be diffcult depend-
ing on the cause of the infection. Some conditions, such
as neoplasia and massive hemorrhage, are indications for a
platelet count, coagulogram, and, possibly, mucosal bleed-
ing times. Patients should be fasted from solid foods for 12
 hours, unless medical status requires more frequent feeding.
Figure 17-15 Four-year-old spayed female Shepherd cross dog
Water is also withheld, but shorter times are preferred for
had been treated for persistent urinary tract infection.There were
frequent attempts to void, and hematuria could be seen during
patients with renal disease, which reduces the urine concen-
urination. There was no evidence of urinary tract infection when
tration. Antibiotic administration is routinely used during
examined as a referral. Cystoscopy was used to identify bloody
cystoscopy.
urine exiting the right ureter (A) but not the left (B) resulting in
a diagnosis of essential unilateral hematuria. ( Photographs @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
■ANESTHESIA AND MONITORING
General anesthesia is required. No special anesthetic pro-
space It is important to avoid overdistension of the bladder,
tocol is universally preferred. Drug selection and types of
which is drained via the outflow port. The most frequently
monitoring should be based on the animal's condition and
used scope is a 2.7-mm, 18-cm-long cystoscope with a 14.5F
the expertise of the practice. The patient should be permit-
sheath (see Figure 17-1). It can be used in female dogs as
ted to urinate before cystoscopy, and the bladder should be
small as 5 kg. In dogs more than 15 to 20 kg, this 2.7-mm
emptied at the end of cystoscopy.
cystoscope can usually be used to examine the urethral and
bladder outflow but is too short to do a thorough bladder
 CYSTOSCOPIC TECHNIQUES
examination. In these larger female dogs, a 3.5- or 4-mm,
30-cm-long cystoscope is preferred. In female dogs smaller
Rigid transurethral cystoscopy is selected for female dogs
than 5 kg and in female cats, a 1.9-mm, 18-cm-long cysto-
and cats and for male cats after perineal urethrostomy. The
scope is required. Even this scope becomes difficult to use
ability to provide high flows quickly provides a clear optical
in females less than 2 kg. Because the 1.9-mm scope can be
media. The 30-degree viewing with a rigid scope provides
broken, it is also provided in an integrated fashion with the
excellent images of the entire urogenital system. Because of
  s a  e    s
the long and circuitous urethra, male dogs require the use of
useful, especially for injection augmentation and selective
flexible endoscopy. This provides lower infusion rates and
catheterization of ureters.21
limited ability to examine the entire bladder. Another alter-
Transurethral cystoscopy of male dogs is done with a
native for male dogs and cats is laparoscopic-assisted cys
flexible urethroscope. My preference is a 2.5-mm by 70- or
toscopy. This technique is even used for removal of calculi
100-cm-long fiberoptic scope (see Figure 17-4). This scope
from the urethra or for diagnosis of bladder and proximal
tapers from 2.5 mm at the tip to 2.8 mm near its eyepiece.
urethral masses.
516·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
 TRANSURETHRAL CYSTOSCOPY
IN FEMALE DOGS AND CATS
Multiple techniques have been used for transurethral cys-
toscopy, but I have developed preferences after experimen-
tation with alternatives. The patient is placed on her back
with the vulva positioned at the end of the table; the operator
is behind the dog, and the monitor is at the patient's head,
opposite the cystoscopy site from the operator (see Figure
17-16, A). A modest amount of clipping is done about the
vulva. This area is scrubbed in an effort to reduce contami-
nation. A sterile drape is fenestrated for the vulva and placed
 Over the patient to leave the vulva exposed. Sterile gloves are
used (see Figure 17-16, B). Cystoscopic equipment is either
sterilized or disinfected with glutaraldehyde (Cidex). These
 practices are done to limit contamination.
The cystoscope is advanced through the vestibule and
into either the urethra or vagina with direct visualization
and fluid infusion (Figures 17-17 and 17-18). Although a
blunt obturator is routinely included as part of the cysto-
scopic package, it is not used for dogs and cats. The cysto-
scope is held in the dominant hand, and the light cable is in
the up position. The operator should be looking down or
 paoed aop a u adoss aaaap-oe a unor aesiop
dorsal recumbency. To examine areas on either side or ven-
trally, the operator should rotate the light cable and scope
while maintaining the camera in the same orientation. The
vulva lips are closed and an optical space is produced within
the vestibule by infusion of fluid through the infusion port;
this allows the urethra to be seen and entered. Fluid infu-
sion is by gravity flow with either saline, Ringer's solution,
lactated Ringer's solution, or some sterile isotonic electrolyte
fluid (see Figure 17-17). Before either the urethra or vagina
is entered, the vestibule should be examined. The urethra is
entered after holding the tip ofthe cystoscope at the urethral
orifice so that the urethra can be dilated with fluid infusion.
As the cystoscope is advanced, care should be taken not to
advance it forward against resistance. The dorsal wall of the
urethra can be viewed, but to view the entire urethral lumen
would cause the point of the cystoscope sheath to be pushed
against the ventral urethral wall when a 30-degree cystoscope
Figure 17-16 A, The patient for cystoscopy is placed on her
is advanced. The entire urethra wall can be easily examined
back with the vulva at the end of the table. The monitor should
by ventral displacement of the cystoscope's tip during with-
be opposite the patient from the operator, and a large, draped
drawal of the cystoscope from the bladder. When the blad-
instrument table should be placed between the endoscopy tower
der is entered, residual urine is permitted to flow through
and the patient. B, The patient's vulvar area is modestly clipped
the outflow port. When the outflow port is open, the inflow
and surgically prepared before draping. It is essential that the
Si pim iei os uoiasui adosisi iaye Aiamoas paso aqeaa
port should be closed. Once the bladder is collapsed, the
prevented from escaping the optical space. For more information
outflow port is closed and inflow is turned on. The flush-
on the cystoscopy technique, visit the companion website.
ing procedure is repeated until a clear optical space permits
www.tamssmallanimalendoscopy.com
examination of the lining of the urinary system. Care must
be taken to avoid overdistension of the bladder. Overdisten-
(Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
tion can produce mucosal tears in the bladder and can cause
difficulties in examining the ureters and cranial portion of
the bladder. Dogs more than 20 kg are frequently examined
with the 2.7-mm cystoscope because the most critical areas
are from the bladder outflow to the exterior, and much of
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy
■517
UGARF
Figure 17-17 Intravenous types of fluids are used for infusion at
gravity flow. It is essential that an optical space is maintained by
prevention ofloss of fluid. Two ports are on the cystoscope: one
B
for inflow and the other for outflow. Flow should be permitted
Hgure 17-18 A, During infusion, the cystoscope is advanced
to flow either in or out without both ports being open at the
dorsally sufficiently to avoid the sub-clitoral fossa. B, The
same time. Once the cystoscope is inside the bladder,bladder
cystoscope is then directed more horizontally during advancement
fluid is permitted to flow out and new fluids infused so that the
into both the vagina and urethra. The vestibule, vagina, urethra,
bladder can be cleared. Care is taken to avoid overdistention of the
bladder, and trigone with both ureteral openings must be
bladder. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
thoroughly examined. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010 University of
Foundation, Inc.)
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
the bladder can be examined if the bladder is only mildly
channel. These samples are small, requiring as many as 8 or
distended. Before or after examination of the urinary system,
10 samples for accuracy. Recurrent urinary tract infections
the vagina is entered and the cystoscope advanced as far cra-
can be an indication for a bladder mucosal biopsy for culture
nially as possible. Because this procedure is normally done
and sensitivity testing. My preference is to place these small
quickly, it is common to repeat passage of the cystoscope
biopsy specimens on a single foam insert within a biopsy
into the bladder so that a thorough examination is ensured.
cassette. Larger samples from vestibular and caudal urethral
The bladder is emptied on the final examination.
masses can frequently be obtained with the use of a 3-mm
 All surfaces of the urogenital tract are examined, usually
oval biopsy forceps passed beside the cystoscope. Having
starting just cranial to the clitoral fossa. Typical abnormali-
sterilized biopsy cassettes on the sterile back table improves
ties include calculi, tumors, mucosal tears, focal inflamma-
aseptic technique.
tory lesions, laceration through the urogenital tract wall, and
The operating channel can also be used to pass other
congenital abnormalities. The most common congenital
instruments for retrieval of calculi and foreign bodies and for
lesions are ectopic ureters, a condition in which the ureters
laser treatment of ectopic ureters and masses; an injection
do not enter the bladder outflow tract normally but rather
needle can also be passed through the channel for submu-
enter distally into the urethra, vagina, or vestibule. Many
cosal augmentation with bulking solution. These treatments
 dogs have a persistent mesonephric septal remnant going
 are covered in subsequent sections.
from dorsal to ventral at the vestibulovaginal orifice. This
 remnant may continue cranially in the vagina to appear as a
 TRANSURETHRAL CYSTOSCOPY
medial septum. Digital images and movies of abnormalities
IN MALE DOGS
are recorded. In some patients with no apparent lesions, it is
helpful to record the normalcy for hospital records and com-
The distal portion of the urethra can be examined with the
munication with the client.
use of a short, rigid scope with a sheath, such as a 1.9-mm
Biopsy specimens are obtained from tumors and masses.
cystoscope and various arthroscopes. For a complete ure-
These biopsies are usually done with the largest flexible
thral examination, a long (70- to 100-cm) urethral flexible
biopsy cup device that can be passed through the operating
scope is used. It is preferable to be able to deflect the tip in at
518·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
least one direction, for example, neutral to left to right. Rota-
Control of preexisting urinary infections should be
tion of the flexible scope provides the ability to turn the tip in
attempted before surgery. If infection persists, a culture of
each of four directions. The approach to passing either short,
the urine or bladder mucosa should be considered. Regard-
rigid or longer flexible scopes is similar to passing a urethral
less of urinary control, the potential contamination dictates
catheter. Adequate urethral distension frequently requires
the use of antibiotics during cystoscopy.
injection by syringe in addition to the standard gravity infu-
Two laparoscopic trocars are used for laparoscopic-
sion. As the urethroscope is being passed, avoid forcing the
 assisted cystoscopy. The monitor is placed caudal to the
tip against the wall, which produces a “pink-out." Manipu-
patient (see Figure 17-19). Laparoscopic techniques are
lation of the urethra and bladder can be helpful while the
described in the “Laparoscopic Surgery Introduction” por-
urethroscope is advanced. This manipulation can be directly
 tion of Chapter 15. The trocar for a 5-mm laparoscope is
on the urethra and penis, rectal palpation of the prostatic
 placed on the midline, approximately 3 cm caudal to the
urethra, or abdominal manipulation of the bladder. The
umbilicus. The abdomen is insufflated, and the site for the
best examination, images, and movies are obtained as the
second trocar is selected. This trocar is for a 5-mm laparo-
urethroscope is being withdrawn. Good viewing requires a
Jo uoaai peeio a  pue dseia oi sdaioy yoqeg oidos
slow, steady withdrawal with redirection of the tip to retain a
the bladder to the abdominal wall. This site is on the midline
luminal view. Within the bladder, a clear optical space must
for female dogs and for some male dogs, depending on the
be obtained, which can be difficult to accomplish with the
 position of the prepuce in relation to the cranial portion of
low flows through the 2.5- to 2.8-mm flexible scope. It is
the bladder. It is critical that the cranial portion of the blad-
helpful to empty and flush the bladder with a urethral cathe-
der is lifted to the trocar site. The site is enlarged suffciently
ter before urethroscopy. Examination of the bladder is easier
 to expose enough of the bladder so that the bladder can be
ifit is only modestly distended. A thorough examination can
secured to the exterior. If there is bladder lumen cranial to
be done by moving the tip back and forth and rotating the
the trocar site, it is difficult to inspect and remove calculi
scope 90 degrees.
from the cranial pouch of the bladder. A variety of secur-
Biopsy specimens can be taken with a long, flxible 1-mm 
 ing techniques are used to keep the bladder frmly attached
(3F) biopsy instrument. Care must be taken when the biopsy
to the abdominal wall and prevent urine contamination of
instrument is advanced through a bent scope; any resis-
the peritoneal cavity. Four quadrate attachments with inter-
 tance is a reason to withdraw the entire scope, reinsert the
 rupted cruciate-placed sutures are used, which permits their
long tags to be secured to drapes. Some surgeons prefer to
the scope. The handle of these smaller biopsy instruments
place a temporary continuous suture between the bladder
should never be squeezed when taking the biopsy “bite."
and skin. Once the bladder trocar has a secure seal with the
Closure must be gentle, and the spring must do most of the
 abdominal wall, a small cystotomy is performed. A 2.7-mm
 cystoscope is placed into the bladder via the minicystotomy.
operating channel can also be used for graspers and basket
For cats and small dogs, a 1.9-mm cystoscope is used. The
ssd  ose u  pas rar l i y sia
 bladder is lavaged in similar fashion to transurethral cystos-
beside the urethroscope. The basket is opened and closed
 copy. Some clinicians prefer to have a urethral catheter as an
while being directly viewed with the urethroscope. Calculi
additional infusion source. The bladder and entire urethra of
and foreign bodies can be removed with this technique.
female dogs and the prostatic urethra of males are examined
with the rigid cystoscope. Calculi are removed with a variety
■ LAPAROSCOPIC-ASSISTED
of instruments, depending on the size and number of the cal-
culi. Various alligator forceps, 5-mm Babcock forceps, and
CYSTOSCOPY
arthroscopic grasping forceps are passed parallel to the cys-
Calculi too large for transurethral cystoscopic removal
toscope to grasp and retrieve calculi (Figure 17-20). Another
in female dogs and cats and calculi in male dogs and cats
calculi removal technique is to use a wire basket catheter
can be removed with the use of cystoscopy done as a lapa-
(see Figure 17-6, B). The entire assembly of cystoscope and
roscopic-assisted procedure (Figure 17-19).6 The rare con-
forceps or basket catheter are removed with the calculi, and
traindications for calculi removal by either transurethral
then the cystoscope and forceps are replaced into the blad-
der for the next retrieval. Once the final larger calculi are
   o  ad  r  a a
removed, some smaller ones can be flushed from the blad-
dog. These calculi may be better removed by traditional cys-
der with a urethral catheter flush and even surgical suction.
totomy. Other calculi that would be removed by traditional
Once the calculi are removed, the cystoscope is advanced
laparotomy are in patients needing other major abdominal
through the urethra in females and a flexible urethroscope is
 surgeries. Examples include removal of nephroliths along
advanced in the urethra in males. The 2.5- to 2.8-mm flexible
with a nephrectomy. Patients requiring a simple liver biopsy
urethroscope can be passed from the bladder to the os penis
and calculi removal are usually better treated by laparos-
 iaiet saop uo siuad so an qanoiu pue shop iso u
D pasn uaaq osie s adossoiss paisisse-idossoiedet don
6.5 to 10 kg. It is common to see irregularly shaped calculi
resect masses and to examine the bladder outflow tract.
such that it is possible to easily pass a urethral calculi around
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 519
Figure 17-19 Laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy is used to examine the bladder, ureteral openings, and urethra, as well as to remove calculi
that are too large for removal by transurethral cystoscopy. A, Laparoscopy is done to identify and lift the cranial portion of the bladder
to the abdominal wall. B, The caudal trocar site is enlarged enough to permit securing the bladder to the abdominal wall and to perform
a minicystotomy for placing the cystoscope into the bladder lumen. C, Calculi are removed with the use of either wire basket catheters 
through the operating channel or a variety of grasping devices passed parallel to the cystoscope. After the calculi are removed, small calculi
can be flushed and aspirated from the bladder. The urethra should be examined with the use of either a rigid cystoscope in a female dog or
a flexible fiberoptic scope inthe male dog.(Frorn Rawlings CA,BarsantifA,Mahaffey MB,et al: Use oflaparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy for
removal of calculi in dogs, J Am Vet Met Assoc 222:759-761, 2003.)
while not feeling resistance to the passage. Urethral strictures
 Resection of tumors, such as inflammatory polyps, can be
 just proximal to the os penis from prior calculi obstruction
 accomplished with laparoscopic assistance. The primary mod-
and trauma are common. Knowledge of such strictures can
ification is to extend the trocar site enough to exteriorize the
justify a scrotal urethrostomy (see Figure 17-10). After cal-
d q aoe e  o dos  
 culi removal and flushing, the cystotomy is closed in a sin-
into the bladder lumen to accurately define the margins of and
gle-layer, appositional suture pattern avoiding the mucosa.
resect an inflammatory polyp. Laparoscopy can also be used
The greater omentum is sutured to the bladder closure.
 for a lymph node biopsy to stage transitional cel carcinoma.
520·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
intraluminal calculi and mural calcification. I have also used
 an arthroscope to examine dilated ureters when removing
 ureteral calculi, performing a neocystostomy, or ureteroto-
 mies. The ability to see calculi and strictures with a scope
is vastly superior to other examination techniques used on
the ureters. Other approaches for renal and ureteral calculi
 can be found in the *Minimally Invasive Options for Urinary
Obstructions, Including Calculi” section.
 Cystoscopes and ureteroscopes have also been useful for
 examination of the bladder and urethra during traditional
laparotomy. The cystoscope can be passed through a mini-
cystotomy before doing a cystotomy. An example is a small
opening that will allow determination of the precise area to
Figure 17-20 Calculi can be removed from the bladder and
begin resection of an inflammatory polyp. An excellent use
urethra by either a wire basket catheter passed through the rigid
of a flexible urethroscope is for examination of the urethra
cystoscope (see Figure 17-6, B) or a grasping forceps advancing
parallel to the scope.Thelatter canbe initially challengingbut
after removal of cystic calculi during cystotomy. Urethral
calculi are removed by either flushing or a basket catheter.
practice, especially with models, quickly increases competency.
Note that the relative lengths of the scope and retrieval device
Diagnostic accuracy and calculi removal are dramatically
should be continually monitored to ensure proper orientation. To
 improved when a scope is used. In addition to clearly seeing
view the technique and cases demonstrating calculi removal, visit
 urethral calculi, the surgeon can use the scope to see lesions,
the companion website.
especially strictures just caudal to the os penis.
A rigid scope can also be placed into cysts, such as pros-
tatic or paraprostatic cysts. I have used this to identify an
(From Rawlings CA: Endoscopic removal of urinary calculi,
opening from the urinary system into a recurring cyst. Endo-
Compend Cont Ed Pract Vet 31(10):476-484, 2009.)
 scopic identifcation and closure of the opening prevented
cyst recurrence.
■ INTRAOPERATIVE NEPHROSCOPY
AND CYSTOSCOPY
 POTENTIAL CYSTOSCOPIC PROBLEMS
 Rigid endoscopy during open (or traditional) surgery can be
 Problems during transurethral cystoscopy are rare and usually
very useful for improving visualization and surgical results.
reflect poor technique. For example, penetration of the ure-
A 2.7- or 1.9-mm cystoscope or a small arthroscope can
thra or other urogenital regions is due to excessive force used
be placed into intestinal, biliary, or urogenital systems (see
when the scope is advanced. The urethra in female dogs can
Figure 17-8). As compared with traditional surgery that is
be positioned in a tortuous fashion or can be rotated as much
even supplemented with magnifying surgical loops and
as 45 degrees. The vulva and vestibule change size and charac-
diode head lights, scopes provide better lighting, magnifica-
ter during the reproductive cycles. The urethral meatus may
tion, photographic capability, and minimal surgical insults.
be positioned such that the cystoscope encounters resistance
The optical space is obtained as for cystoscopy with the use
when the caudal surface of the pubis provides extraluminal
of saline or Ringer's solution. If hemorrhage is profuse, air or
obstruction to the cystoscope's entry into the urethra. Gentle
carbon dioxide can be used.
 and small movements, redirection or rotation of the scope,
The most frequent intraoperative endoscopy is for exam-
and infusion of fluids should permit urethral entry. The cysto-
ination of the renal pelvis and recesses when renoliths are
scope should never be advanced against significant resistance.
removed. The approach is similar to arthroscopy, a scope is
Hemorrhage most likely develops during examination
 placed through a puncture in the greater curvature of the
 and biopsies of transitional cell carcinoma. This hemorrhage
kidney. Penetration of the pelvis is easy because the pelvis is
has not, in my experience, been severe enough to produce
dilated. Calculi removal has been accomplished by placing
 significant blood loss but may be a reason to stop the proce-
an alligator forceps beside the 30-degree scope, an alligator
dure. If massive flushing does not work, some clinicians use
forceps through a separate penetration so that triangulation
carbon dioxide or small amounts of air to provide a transient
 can be achieved, or a basket catheter through the operating
optical space.
channel of the cystoscope. This use of scope and retrieval
Laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy rarely causes problems;
instrument within the kidney is so minimally invasive that
 however, one problem is peritoneal contamination with urine
the renal vessels do not require occlusion. The scope can also
if the bladder is not secured snugly against the abdominal
be passed through the proximal part of the ureter. When
wall. I have only seen this once, and it should not occur after
calculi are removed with a scope, the renal recesses must
 an initial experience. I have had one case requiring conver-
be thoroughly examined so that complete calculi removal is
 sion after penetration of the bladder wall when using a 5-mm
 ensured. The scope can also be used to differentiate between
laparoscopic biopsy cup forceps. Closure of the bladder wall
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 521
 defect was simple and probably could have been performed
dogs can be discharged the same day. Dogs undergoing laser
laparoscopically. I do not use the 5-mm biopsy forceps when
surgery or injection augmentation should be monitored
obtaining a sample from the bladder wall. The most frequent
 to determine if urethral obstruction has been produced by
complication, although stil unusual, has been subcutaneous
swelling or hemorrhage. Patients with tissue resection and
infections at the trocar site used to access the bladder.
those with renal disease are candidates for fluid therapy at
rates that are at least at maintenance levels.
■ DECIDING TO CONVERT OR
Urinary tract infections should be treated with antibiotics
DISCONTINUE CYSTOSCOPY
on the basis of urine or bladder mucosal culture sensitivity
testing. After a course of antibiotics has been completed, a
 I have not experienced a complication requiring conver-
 centesis-obtained urinalysis and culture should be repeated
sion to traditional surgery when performing transurethral
 at approximately 5 days after the last treatment.
cystoscopy. Discontinuation of transurethral cystoscopy
 Incontinent patients are candidates for PPA (1.5 mg/kg
has been based on penetration of the urethra and hemor-
given three times a day) or estrogen treatment. Persistence of
rhage that makes examination difficult. The urethra has been
incontinence despite appropriate urinary tract infection con-
penetrated when a cystoscope was inappropriately forced
trol and drug treatment is a reason for surgical treatment with
through the wall and when a diode laser was used for resec-
the use of either a colposuspension or injection augmentation.
tion of urethral cancer and correction of ectopic ureters.
 Pain after laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy is managed in
Although urethral penetration during a diode laser resection
a fashion similar to any other laparoscopic procedure. Other
of transitional cell carcinoma is possible for any clinician,
 patient care is dependent on the animal's disease.
other penetrations are usually produced by improper tech-
nique and limited clinical experience. Urethral perforation
■ FOLLOW-UP MONITORING OF
 has been successfully managed with a urethral catheter leff
PROCEDURAL EFFECTS
in for 1 or 2 days.
Urinary tract disease is frequently progressive, persistent, or
 PATIENT CARE AFTER CYSTOSCOPY
recurrent. Reasons include infection, calculi formation, incon-
tinence, and progressive renal failure. Patients with urinary
Mild analgesic narcotic drugs are routinely provided dur-
conditions must be monitored for the remainder of their lives.
ing the first few hours after transurethral cystoscopy. If
Recurrent infection requires that these patients be examined
additional surgery such as resection of urethral cancer or
as frequently as every 4 months. A centesis-obtained urine
an episioplasty is done, then longer acting and more potent
sample should be cultured each time. Patients with recurrent
 narcotics are used for analgesia. Nonsteroidal drugs or tra-
calculi formation should have their stones chemically ana-
madol can be dispensed with the patient. Most patients are
lyzed, and appropriate medical therapy should be instituted.
discharged the day after cystoscopy, which permits in-
 In addition, imaging by survey radiography and ultrasonogra-
hospital observation of urination for the first 24 hours. Some
phy should be done as frequently as every 4 months.
REFERENCES
1. Vermooten V: Cystoscopy in male and female dogs, J Lab Clin
9. Rawlings CA: Resection of inflammatory polyps in dogs using
Med 15:650-657, 1930.
laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy, / Arm Anir Hosp Assoc 43:1-5,
2. Cooper JE,Milroy EJ, Turton JA,et al: Cystoscopic examination
2007.
of male and female dogs, Vet Rec 115:571-574, 1984.
10. Senior DF:E
Electrohydraulic shock-wave lithotripsy for
3. Bearley MJ, Cooper JE: The diagnosis of bladder disease in
experimental canine struvite bladder stone disease, Vet Surg
dogs by cystoscopy, J Small Anim Pract 28:75-85, 1985.
22:213-219, 1988.
4. Biewenga WJ, van Oosterom RAA: Cystourethroscopy in the
11. Senior DF: Cystoscopy. In Tams TR, editor: Small animal
dog, Vet Q 7:229-231, 1985.
endoscopy, ed 2, St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
5. McCarthy TC, McDermaid SL: Prepubic percutaneous
12. McCarthy TC: Cystoscopy. In McCarthy TC,editor: Veterinary
cystoscopy in the dog and cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:213-
endoscopy for the small animal practitioner, St Louis, 2005,
219,1986.
Saunders.
6. Rawlings CA, Barsanti JA, Mahaffey MB, et al: Use of
13. Valli VE, Norris A, Jacobs RM, et al: Pathology of canine
laparoscopic-assted cystoscopy for removal of calculi in dogs,
bladder and urethral cancer and correlation with tumor
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 222:759-761, 2003.
progression and survival, J Comp Pathol 113:113-130, 1995.
7. McCarthy TC: Transurethral cystoscopy for correction of
14. Phillips BS: Bladder tumors in dogs and cats, Commpend Contin
ectopic ureter, Vet Med 102:558-560, 2006.
Educ Vet 21:540-564, 1999.
8. Berent AC, Mayhew PD,Porat-Mosenco Y: Use of cystoscopic-
15. Holt PE: Urinary incontinence in the bitch due to sphincter
guided laser ablation for treatment of intramural ureteral
ectopia in male dogs: four cases (2006-2007), J Arm Vet Med
retrospective analysis of sixty cases, / Srmall Anirm Pract 26: 181-
Assoc 232: 1026-1034, 2008.
190,1985.
522·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
16. Arnold S, Arnold P, Hubler M, et al: Urinary incontinence in
19. Kaufman AC, Barsanti JA, Selcer BA: Benign essential
spayed bitches: prevalence and breed predisposition, Schweiz
hematuria in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Vet 16:1317,
Arch Tierheilkd 131:259-263, 1989.
1994.
17. Holt PE: Long-term evaluation of colposuspensions in the
 20. Cannizzo KL, McLoughlin MA, Chew DJ,et al: Uroendoscopy,
treatment of urinary incontinence due to incompetence of the
evaluation of the lower urinary tract, Vet Clin North Am Small
urethral sphincter mechanism in the bitch, Vet Rec 127:537-542,
Anim Pract 31:789-807, 2001.
1990.
 21. Senior DF, Newman RC: Retrograde ureteral catheterization in
18. Rawlings CA, Barsanti JA, Mahaffey MB, et al: Evaluation
female dogs, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 22:831-834, 1986.
of colposuspension for treatment of incontinence in spayed
female dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 219:770-775, 2001.
Minimally Invasive Options for Urinary
have been shown to pass spontaneously in 98% of people with
 no intervention other than medical management alone (i.e.,
Obstructions, Including Calculi
alpha blockade).1-,1l,12 For stones that do not pass, ESWL
Allyson C. Berent
has been effective for stone elimination in 50% to 81% of
cases of ureteral stones, and most outcomes of success range
from 50% to 67%.13-18 Ureteroscopy, on the other hand,
■ INTERVENTIONAL RADIOLOGY
has a near 100% success rate when the holmium:yttrium-
AND INTERVENTIONAL ENDOSCOPY
aluminum-garnet (YAG) laser lithotrite is used.io,13-15,19
OF THE URINARY TRACT
This makes ureteroscopy, combined with intracorporeal
lithotripsy, the frst-line therapy for large ureteral calculi in
Interventional endoscopy (IE) involves the use of endo-
humans.5,10,13-15,1920 In pediatric patients, similar outcomes
scopic equipment with other contemporary imaging, such
have been seen with ESWL and ureteroscopic lithotripsy,
as fluoroscopy, ultrasound, or both, to perform diagnostic
overall stone-free rates have been 100% with the use of
and therapeutic procedures. Interventional radiology (IR)
 holmium:YAG laser lithotripsy guided by ureteroscopy and
uses fluoroscopy, with or without ultrasound, to access ves-
sels and various lumens to deliver specific materials for diag-
 bladder and urethral stones are less of a problem than upper
nostic and therapeutic purposes (e.g-, stents, chemotherapy,
tract stones, contrary to that which is seen in veterinary
embolization particles, and coils). These modalitiesare being
 patients. When stones are found in the bladder or urethra
used in combination for endourologic procedures.
of humans, transurethral laser lithotripsy is the treatment of
Currently, a growing investigation of the use of many
choice for stone extraction. PCCL is often the treatment of
novel techniques in veterinary medicine has been under-
choice for large cystic stone burdens, where repetitive ure-
taken, and this section will discuss mainly the use of IE/IR in
's'suasuo aie eun ssnbsqns pue aessd e
the management of urinary obstructions and stone disease
The most common etiology of upper and lower tract urinary
in the upper and lower urinary tract of veterinary patients.
obstructions in veterinary patients is stone disease, but second
 The relatively common incidence of upper and lower uri-
 to that is obstructive neoplasia and benign strictures. Manage-
nary tract obstructions, combined with the invasiveness and
ment of urinary obstructions due to tumors and strictures is
morbidity associated with traditional surgical techniques,
similar to that used for stone disease, which mainly involves
makes the use of minimally invasive procedures like IE and
the placement of urinary stents (urethral and ureteral).
 IR appealing. Such endourologic procedures are the stan-
 Because of the small size of veterinary patients and the
dard of care in human medicine, and these procedures are
common occurrence of urinary diseases, the use of these
currently being applied in veterinary medicine. Access and
techniques is being investigated and commonly performed by
training to proper equipment and techniques are essential
the author. Publications of the use of these modalities in small
before many of the following procedures can be performed.
 animal patients are scarce, and more are under way.23-38 This
 In humans, extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
section will discuss some additional equipmentthat is used for
(ESWL), laser lithotripsy, ureteroscopy, ureteral stenting,
these interventional modalities that has not been previously
 and percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL)/ureterolithot-
discussed, and each area of the urinary tract will be addressed.
omy (PCNUL)/cystolithotomy (PCCL) have almost eradi-
The sections will separately expand on the current veterinary
cated the need for open surgery in the management of stone
literature and procedural descriptions (Table 17-1).
 disease.l-7 Nephrolithiasis is a common problem in human
 patients, and treatment usually involves the use of ESWL
(with or without concurrent ureteral stenting) or PCNL.8-10
Equipment
The decision on the modality chosen is typically based on
Various flexible and rigid endoscopes are used for tradi-
stone size and clinician preference. Ureterolithiasis is also
tional interventional endosurgical procedures and range in
dealt with in a similar manner. Ureteroliths less than 5 mm
diameters from 1.9 mm to 7.5 mm, depending on the size of
CHAPTER 17
Cystoscopy
523
Table 17-1 Procedures and Equipment for Interventional Urinary Calculi Management
Name
Procedure
Indications
Key instrumentation
Extracorporeal shockwave
Implosion of calculi in the renal pelvis
Renal caiculi: Less than 15 mm
ESV/L generator (dry or wet
lithotripsy (ESVVL)
or ureter to permit resulting debris
alone, or greater than 15 mm
unit); cystoscopes and
to passively pass and void
with ureteral stent
fluoroscopy if concurrent
Ureteral calculi: Any size in dogs.
ureteral stenting
and less than 3 mm in cats
Percutaneous
Percutaneous renal pelvis access via
Renal calculi greater than 25
Renal access sheath,
nephrolithotomy
fluoroscopy +/- ultrasound to
mm to 30 mm, or impacted 
fluoroscopy, nephroscopes,
(PCNL); percutaneous
 pass a scope into the renal pelvis
proximal ureteral stones 
 intracorporeal
 nephroureterolithotomy
for stone retrieval by basketing or
lithotripsy (Hol: YAG
(PCNUL)
intracoporeal ithotipsy and ba5-
or electrohydraulic/
keting. This can be done for proximal
pneumatic); nephroureteral
ureteral stones as well (PCNUL)
stent/nephrostomy tube
Retrograde ureteral
 Ureteral access via cystoscopy and
Severe pyelonephritis due to
Cystoscope, open-ended
catheterization
ureteral catheterization
ureteral obstruction
ureteral catheter,
hydrophilic guidewire.
contrast, fluoroscopy
Ureteral stenting
Dogs (stones): Retrograde ureteral
Ureteral obstruction secondary
 Fluoroscopy, hydrophilic
access via cystoscopy and
to stone disease, stricture,
guidewire, ureteral 
fluoroscopy
blood clot or neoplasia.
catheters, contrast
 Reserved in cats for
 material, a double pigtail
Cats (stones/stricture): Retrograde
commplicated ureteral
ureteral stent
or antegrade ureteral access via
 obstructions (many stones,
cystoscopy +/- cystotomy +/-
concurrent nephroliths, and 
pyelography
difficult surgery).
Tumor: Antegrade access via
ultrasound/fluoroscopy for
pyelography
Ureteroscopy
Cystoscopy is performed to identify
Typically reserved for ureteral/
Rigid cystoscope, guidewire.
the ureteral orifice, and a
pelvis evaluation for idiopathic
fluoroscopy, ureteral
guidewire is advanced up the
 renal hermaturia or obscure
dilators, flexible
ureter in a retrograde manner.
ureteral dilation that is not
ureteroscope
The flexible ureteroscope is then
determined based on routine
advanced over the guidewire up
imaging
the entire ureter to the renal pelvis
Percutaneous
Using ultrasound guidance, the renal 
 Acute or severe ureteral
Utrasound, fluoroscopy.
 nephrostomy tube
pelvis is punctured using a renal
 obstruction where stabilization 
renal access needle (dog.
access needle, and a guidewire is
is required prior to definitive
18 gauge; cat, 22 gauge).
curled inside the dilated renal pelvis.
fixation 
 hydrophilic guidewire,
A locking-loop pigtail catheter is
locking-loop pigtail
advanced over the guidewire and 
catheter (dog, 6F; cat, 5F).
curled and locked inside the renal
pelvis for extermal drainage.
Laser lithotripsy
Cystoscopy is used to isolate and 
Femare cdogs: Stone less than
Cystoscope, Hol:YAG laser,
identify stones in the urinary
1 cm and less than 5 stones
 stone retrieval baskets 
bladder, urethra, or kidney. A
requiring fragmentation
laser is used through the working
Male dogs: Urethral stones (any
channel of the scope to fragment
the stones into srmall pieces for
size); bladder stones less than
5 mm and less than 3 stones;
removal.
 male dogs must be bigger
than 7 kg
Femare cats: Stone less than 6 mm
 and less than 2 stones requiring
fragmentation
Male cats: Not possible with
current technology
Continued
524·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
Table 17-1 Procedures and Equipment for Interventional Urinary Calculi Management--cont'd
Name
Procedure
Indications
Key instrumentation
Stone basketing
 Transurethral calculi rernoval using 
Stones with a diarmeter of
Cystoscope; 3- and 4-wire
 cystoscopy and a stone retrieval
 approximately 5 mm to 7 rmm
stone retrieval basket
basket
in fermale dogs; 3 mm to 4
mm in male dogs: 2 mm to 5
mm female cats
Percutaneous
2 cm abdominal incision over bladder 
Any size dog or cat with any
Cystoscope, screw trocar,
cystolithotormy (PCCL)
apex; isolation of bladder to
number or size of stones
 stone retrieval basket
incision with stay sutures; stab
 incision into bladder for screw
trocar (6 mrm), cystoscope and
stone retrieval basket used to
removal all cystic and urethral 
calculi
Urethral stenting
Huoroscopic guided self-expanding
Typically performed for
Fluoroscopy, guidewire,
metallic stent placement for
 malignant urethral
catheters, urethral access
urethral obstructions using
 obstructions, benign
sheath, marker catheter,
retrograde transurethral access
urethral strictures, and reflex
contrast and stent
dyssynergia
 Antegrade urethral
Cystocentesis performed using an
 Urethral tears, srmall fermale dogs
Fluoroscopy, contrast,
catheterization (AUC)
18 gauge over-the-needle catheter.
 and cats that cannot be easily
catheter, guidewire, open-
Contrast infused into bladder
catheterized
ended urethral catheter
under fluoroscopic guidance.
Guidewire advanced thiough
catheter toward urethral opening
at trigone and manipulated down
the urethral antegrade until 
through-and-through access is
obtained. An open-ended urethral
catheter is then advanced over the
guidewire for catheterization
 and secured in place
the patient. Flexible ureteroscopes are used for bladder and
urinary collection system. Catheters are defined as flexible or
urethral acces in male dogs (2.7 to 3.4 mm) and for ureteral.
rigid hollow tubes used to drain fluids from body cavities.
sa ys idae on rno aie see  u ss
Most *catheters" in the urinary system are used for tempo-
(typically greater than 20 kg). Rigid and flexible nephroscopes
rary drainage of the renal pelvis (nephrostomy tubes), ureter
can be used (2.8- to 7.3-mm diameter) for percutaneous
(double pigtail ureteral catheters), or urinary bladder (cys-
nephroureterolithotomies performed in an antegrade fashion.
tostomy tubes). Urinary catheters are classically soff, com-
 Different types of intracorporeal machines and lasers are
fortable, polyurethane-type tubes that have an open lumen 
available for these procedures, including ultrasonic, pneu
with multiple fenestrations, permitting temporary drainage.
matic, electrohydraulic, and holmium:YAG laser lithotrites.
Locking-loop pigtail catheters (Figure 17-22) are the clas-
ESWL also has application for small to moderate size neph-
sic catheter recommended for nephrostomy or cystostomy
roliths, ureteroliths, and cystoliths. For many of the more
tubes. Stents are defined as small tubes, often expandable,
commonly performed IR procedures, a traditional fluoros-
 inserted across a blocked lumen to restore patency. Urinary
copy unit is sufficient. A C-arm fluoroscopy unit has the
"stents" are typicall used for permanent or long-term diver-
advantage of mobility, permitting various tangential views
sion in the kidney, ureter, or urethra. Stents are most often
without moving the patient and is ideal for most urinary pro-
completely indwelling tubes that can be placed for various
cedures. Ultrasonography is useful for percutaneous needle
purposes, most commonly to bypass a malignant obstruc-
access into the renal pelvis or bladder when antegrade access
tion, stricture, or embedded stone(s) (e.g-, ureteroliths).
is desired. Guidewires of various sizes, shapes, and stiffness,
Stents come in different materials (e.g-, metal, polyurethane,
as well as catheters and stents, are needed for each procedure
 silicone, plastic, and rubber), shapes, and sizes (Figure 17-23).
(Figure 17-21). Urinary catheters and stents can be used
 Typically urethral stents are metallic, and upper tract ure-
for various purposes to divert urine throughout the entire
teral stents are soft polyurethane-silicone material. Urethral
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 525
A
Figure 17-22 Locking-loop pigtail catheter used for cystostomy
or nephrostomy tubes. A, Distal catheter tip with multiple
fenestrations straightened out on a guidewire. B, Once the
guidewire is withdrawn, the loop starts to form and the string is
seen from the distal to the most proximal loop. C, Once the string
is pulled at the proximal end of the catheter,the loop is secured
and locked into place to prevent inadvertent removal.
 stents are compressed metallic tubes that are typically of
two types: Self-Expanding Metallic Stents (SEMS),* made
of laser cut nitinol metal, and Balloon-Expandable Metallic
Stents (BEMS),f made of either stainless steel or nitinol
metal. The ureteral stents are polyurethane, C-Flex mate-
rial, or silicone mixtures and are typically in a double-pigtail
(or double J) shape. The proximal loop is coiled inside the
renal pelvis, and the distal loop is inside the urinary bladder
while the shaft sits inside the entire ureteral lumen, allowing
for urinary diversion from the renal pelvis directly into the
bladder. Finally, various sizes and shapes of stone baskets are
often available to aide in stone extraction (Figure 17-24).
Patient Evaluation
Figure 17-21 Various guidewires used for gaining access to the
When patients are evaluated for stone disease, it is important
urinary system. A, The “Weasel wire" is a hydrophilic angle-
 to order an appropriate biochemical evaluation (complete
tipped guidewire that is the most commonly used wire for urinary
blood count, complete chemistry panel), urinalysis, and
procedures. B, Magnified image of the angled tip. C, A Teflon
guidewire, which provides more stiffness during the placement
urine culture. If stone disease is found or suspected, abdomi-
of the stent or balloons. D, Magnification of the floppy tip to the
nal radiographs including the entire urinary tract should be
Teflon guidewire.
*Vet Stent-Urethra (Infiniti Medical, Malibu, Calif.)
+Balloon Expandable Metallic Stent (Infiniti Medical, Malibu, Calif.)
526· PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
Hgure 17-24 Stone baskets.
A
stone on ultrasound that is not seen on radiographs, then
a radiolucent (i.e., urate, uric acid, cystine, dried solidifed-
blood stone, or silica) or smallstone(s) too small to be visible
on a radiograph is likely. Other causes of ureteral obstruction
include tumors, blood clots, or strictures and can be seen on
ultrasound but not on radiographs. Typically, tumors of the
urinary tract occur at the trigone of the bladder, resulting in
unilateral or bilateral distal ureteral obstruction at the ure-
terovesicular junction (UVJ), and diffuse ureteral dilation
and hydronephrosis would be seen on ultrasound. Strictures
are often seen at sites of previous ureteral surgery or in the
proximal right ureter. In my experience they are often seen
in association with a circumcaval ureter, and this is typically
found on the right side.
Once documentation of obstruction is obtained from
ultrasonographic and radiographic imaging, with or without
B
ureteropyelography, then the appropriate course of action
can be taken. Indications for cystoscopy with diagnostic and
Figure 17-23 Different urinary stents. A, Self-expanding
metallic stent (SEMS) classically used for urethral obstructions.
treatment maneuvers are presented in Table 17-2.
B, Double-pigtail ureteral stent. The proximal loop curls in
the renal pelvis, the shaft sits inside the ureteral lumen, and
the distal loop curls inside the urinary bladder. This stent is
Anesthesia
multifenestrate d.
patients with urinary obstructions. If an upper tract obstruc-
obtained (kidney to the distal urethra). The majority of the
tion is present and the patient is concurrently azotemic, it is
stones seen in practice are radiopaque (calcium oxalate or
very important to monitor fluid loading during anesthesia
struvite), although many stones are not, and the lack of visible
(ideally with central venous pressures), as fluid overloading is
stones on flat radiographs does not rule out their presence. If
a common complication until the obstruction is relieved. Once
there is concern of upper tract stones disease (i.e., abdominal.
the urinary tract is patent, then more aggressive fluid manage-
 pain, azotemia, or radiographic evidence of ureteroliths or
ment is indicated, as long as there is no concurrent heart dis-
 nephroliths), an abdominal ultrasound is indicated. It is very
ease. If lithotripsy is being performed for lower urinary tract
important to measure the renal pelvis diameter if pyelecta-
stones, I recommend avoiding pure opioid drugs, as this may
sia or hydronephrosis is visible and the exact location and
cause urine retention and increase urethral tone, making void-
size of the associated nephrolith(s) or ureterolith(s) with the
 ing urohydropropulsion (VUH) more difficult. I also encour-
associated location and size of ureteral dilation, if present.
 age epidural anesthesia when dealing with ureteral procedures.
Ideally this would be correlated with the abdominal radio-
graphic findings, as stone size and number are much more
Postoperative Care
accurate on radiographs than on ultrasound, but the degree
of ureteral obstruction and hydronephrosis or hydroureter
 Postoperatively, patients are monitored very carefully for
is more accurate with ultrasound. I use both in combination
urine output, urine flow, and stranguria. For animals with
rather than either modality alone. If there is evidence of a
 preoperative azotemia or concurrent suspected renal failure,
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 527
Table 17-2 Indications and Procedures for Cystoscopy
of stone disease, appropriate stent placement, and the urine
culture is negative at 2 weeks, then a urinary tract ultrasound
Indications
is obtained at 4 weeks to monitor the renal pelvic size and
Procedures
residual stone location. For animals with recurrent cystoli-
Hematuria
Locate bleeding site; cauterize
thiasis I recommend radiographs every 2 to 3 months for the
Recurrent urinary tract
Identify and eliminate predisposing 
first year and, ifthe stones do not recur, then every 6 months
 infection
causes (e.g.. polyps)
thereafter. A urine culture should be obtained every
 Lower urinary tract
 Fragment and remove uroliths; resect
6 months. For animals with recurrent calcium oxalate uroli-
inflammation 
polyps and tumors
thiasis a wet diet is recommended, and the goal for the urine
 Urolithiasis
Perforrm lithotripsy: determine
specific gravity should be less than 1.020. It is often neces-
composition from fragments
sary to add 1 cup of water to each can of food. Ideally the
Urinary incontinence 
Ectopic ureters; locate and catheterize
patient should eat a neutralizing diet (e.g-, Royal Canin s/o
Urethral incompetence; inject Teflon
pHormula or Hill's C/D multicare), supplementation with
 or collagen
 potassium citrate is recommended at 50 to 100 mg/kg PO
Bladder tumors
Biopsy: resect
bid, the goal for the urine pH should be 6.8 to 7.2, and there
 Urethral obstruction
 Determine the causes; remove
 should be no evidence of hyperkalemia.
 uroliths; resect polyps and tumors
 Suspected trauma
 Localize and define injuries
Renal disease
Catherize the ureters
■ INTERVENTIONAL APPROACH
 Obtain differential glomerular
TO NEPHROLITHIASIS
filtration rate
Sample ureteral urine for urinalysis
Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy
and culture
for Nephrolithiasis
 Perform retrograde pyelography
ESWL is a minimally invasive alternative for the removal of
upper tract calculi in the renal pelvis or ureters. It can also
be used for bladder stones, but this is less common. ESWL
aggressive fluid therapy is indicated, as are monitoring and
uses external shock waves that pass through a water medium
matching fluid intake and output. From 1 to 14 days ani-
(either a wet or dry unit) and the soft tissue ofa patient. The
mals can have a significant postobstructive diuresis requir-
shock waves are directed under fluoroscopic guidance. The
ing excessively high rates of fluid therapy while the renal
stone is shocked anywhere from 1000 to 3500 times at differ-
medullary concentration gradient is reestablished; failure to
 ent energy levels for implosion and powdering of the stone.
provide the high rate of fluid therapy needed can result in
The debris is then permitted to traverse the ureter into the
worsening azotemia and dehydration. This seems to be more
urinary bladder over a 2- to 12-week period. ESWL is believed
significant in cats than in dogs after ureteral obstruction
to be very safe for the kidney, although subclinical intrarenal
relief. I nearly always place an esophagostomy tube after a
hemorrhage does occur.30-32 The severity of the damage is
ureteral intervention in cats to maintain postoperative fluid
dose dependent. In dogs and pigs it was shown that minimal
 needs and since implementing this practice the risk of fluid
decreases in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and renal
overloading has declined dramatically. Postoperative anal-
 blood flow within 24 hours of treatment can occur and that
gesia is variable, depending on the procedure. For ESWL,
this will return to baseline within 1 week.l6,17 For stones of
 percutaneous nephrostomy tube placement, and endoscopic
larger sizes (greater than 1.5 to 2 cm), PCNL is often recom-
or percutaneous ureteral stenting, 1 to 2 days of tramadol
mended in humans.19,39
is typically all that is indicated. For laser lithotripsy, PCCL,
Patient Selection
ureteroscopy, or PCNL, tramadol and nonsteroidal antin-
flammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for 3 to 5 days are suggested.
This procedure can be performed safely for nephroliths
(less than 15 mm) and ureteroliths (of any size) in canine
(fentanyl by continuous rate infusion [CRI], intravenous
patients (Figure 17-25). In animals with stones larger than
 methadone, or intravenous buprenorphine) are indicated
15 to 30 mm ESWL should be performed with the safety of a
for 2 to 3 days.
concurrent indwelling double-pigtail ureteral stent or PCNL
should be considered. A stent is typically placed before
 ESWL to aid in stone debris passage so that a nonobstructive
Follow-up and Monitoring
nephrolith is not exchanged for an obstructive ureterolith.
 For all patients with stone disease I recommend a urine cul-
For stones larger than 3 cm PCNL should be considered.
ture and abdominal radiograph at 2 weeks after any proce-
ESWL is not often used for upper tract stones in feline patients
dure. Two weeks of antibiotics is typically recommended
because of the impacted nature of the stones, the resistance
(fluoroquinolone or potentiated penicillin) after placement
to fracture,30 and the risk of subsequent ureteral obstruction
 of a ureteral stent. If the radiograph shows no progression
during passage.30,32 The diameter of the feline ureter is less
528·PARTTWO
Rigid Endoscopy
than 0.4 mm,40 and the chance of breaking a large nephrolith
Potential Complications
to fragments all smaller than this is very unlikely. ESWL is
offered at a few veterinary facilities in the United States. In
The risk of hemorrhage, shock-induced arrhythmias, and
one report of 32 dogs with nephroliths or ureteroliths, ESWL
ureteral obstructions induced by fragment passage are the
was effective in stone fragmentation in 90% of patients, but
major concerns. A coagulation profle is routinely obtained
less than 70-80% after a single treatment. Approximately
before ESWL for nephrolithiasis, and arrhythmias are less of
30% of dogs required two treatments for the fragments to
 a concern with the newer generation lithotrites because of
 pass down the entire ureter successful.32,23 These rates are
the ability to vary the shocks with the patient's electrocardio-
similar to my experience and those reported in humans.16-18
graphic (ECG) tracing. It is important that the urine culture is
This procedure has been effective in only a small number of
 negative before ESWL; if a concurrent infection is suspected,
feline cases and is ideal for very distal ureteroliths or small
then 48 to 72 hours of appropriate intravenous antibiotic
 stones less than 3 mm in diameter. Because I started placing
therapy is recommended before ESWL. In humans long-
ureteral stents before ESWL for many obstructive ureteroliths
term risk of shock wave-induced diabetes mellitus has been
 or large nephroliths, the success rate has improved to more
 documented, particularly for right-sided nephroliths, but 
than 85% in dogs in a single treatment.
this has not been clearly proven in humans or appreciated in
Figure 17-25 Patient with bilateral large nephroliths. A, Ventrodorsal radiograph before extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) and
concurrent ureteral stenting. B, Post-ESWL with an indwelling double-pigtail ureteral stent in place. C, Patient during an ESWL treatment
with a dry ESWL unit.
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 529
veterinary medicine. Most patients are discharged the same
needle into the renal pelvis and guided toward the ureteral
day or the morning after their procedure.
catheter in an antegrade manner. The goal is to pass the wire
down the entire ureter, into the urinary bladder, and out the
■ PERCUTANEOUS NEPHROLITHOTOMY
 urethra and obtain through-and-through access (see Figure
17-26). Next a balloon-dilating catheter is advanced over the
Nephrolithiasis or proximal ureterolithiasis can cause an
wire to dilate the tract from the skin into the renal pelvis,
increase in intrarenal hydrostatic pressure, resulting in pro-
through the greater curvature of the kidney. This needs to
 gressive renal insufficiency. Stones can also cause intractable
be large enough to place a sheath that accommodates the
 pyelonephritis, recurent ureterolithiasis or cystolithiasis,
nephroscope. This is guided with fluoroscopy (see Figure
and ureteral colic. If the stone is small enough, it may pass
17-26). This access allows for minimal renal damage as the
or be subclinical; however, others require intervention to
tissue is spread apart via balloon dilation over a guidewire,
relieve an obstruction, avoid permanent nephron damage,
rather than incised as with a nephrotomy. A nephroscope is
 or prevent recurrent infections. Nephrotomies, pyelotomies,
then placed through the access sheath, and the nephrolith
or ureterotomies can be prolonged, invasive, and compli-
 or proximal ureterolith is identifed and fragmented (with
 cated surgeries, potentially resulting in significant morbidity
the use of ultrasonic, electrohydraulic, or laser lithotripsy) or
and mortality and a declining GFR.40-43 In people, PCNL is
simply removed with a stone retrieval basket. The fragments
considered the standard of care for nephroliths or proximal
are removed via suction, grasping forceps, or urologic stone
ureteroliths too large to be treated with ESWL or combined
retrieval baskets, which can be directed through the working
retrograde ureteroscopy and laser lithotripsyl-5,7,9,44 and
channel of the endoscope. After urolith removal a percuta-
 has been performed successfully in a small number of clini-
neous nephrostomy tube is placed to allow for closure of the
cal veterinary cases28,29 and research dogs.37 This minimally
access tract for 14 to 28 days. There is some evidence that
 invasive endoscopic procedure aims to minimize morbidity
a tube does not need to be left in place after percutaneous
and preserve as much renal function as possible. The success
access is obtained.37 If there is a concern about small frag-
rate of PCNL has been documented at 90% to 100% in both
ments remaining, ureteral trauma, or ureteral inflammation,
the adult and the pediatric human population.1-5,44
a percutaneous nephroureteral stent or indwelling double-
pigtail ureteral stent can be placed, which maintains the
 patency of the entire upper urinary collection system until
Patient Selection
the inflammation resolves.
Dogs and cats with nephroliths or proximal ureteroliths that
 are creating a clinical problem and are too large to pass with
Complications
ESWL (greater than 2.5 to 3.0 cm) are candidates.
The most serious risk is excessive bleeding during tract for-
Procedure
mation in the renal parenchyma, so coagulation status and
blood type are routinely evaluated. Maintaining ureteral
With the use of cystoscopy and fluoroscopy, retrograde ure-
access throughout the procedure is a priority, as proximal
teropyelography is performed. This is accomplished by pas-
ureteral trauma is a major concern; temporarily placing
sage of a small hydrophilic guidewire up the ureteral orifice
an indwelling stent is done routinely. Because the access is
with cystoscopic and fluoroscopic guidance. Once access is
obtained percutaneously, a nephropexy is not performed, so
obtained, an open-ended ureteral catheter is advanced over
 I recommend leaving a nephrostomy tube or nephroureteral
the guidewire and the wire is removed. Contrast is then
stent across the access site for at least 2 to 4 weeks. The tube
injected into the catheter for a retrograde ureteropyelogram,
needs to be monitored carefully, wrapped up, and covered
aiding in enhancement of the ureter and renal pelvis and
to prevent infection or accidental dislodgement but does
allowing for fluoroscopic-guided access into the renal pel-
not need to have gravity drainage because it is multifenes-
vis percutaneously. The catheter and wire are then advanced
trated and urine will drain directly into the urinary bladder
together up the ureter to the distal end of the stone. Ureteral
through the ureter.
catheter access is maintained so that the ureter is protected
while the nephrolith is fragmented, so that small stone frag-
■ RETROGRADE URETERAL
ments are prevented from escaping down the ureter, and
 So that repeated ureteropyelography and postprocedural
CATHETERIZATION FOR SEVERE
stent placement are allowed, if necessary. This retrograde
PYELONEPHRITIS
approach may not be possible in male cats or small male
 dogs, in which case antegrade access is obtained via percu-
Urinary obstruction associated with infection (secondary
taneous access with the use of fluoroscopy and ultrasound.
to ureteral calculi, inspissated purulent material, or concre
Using either fluoroscopy or ultrasound, a renal access
tions) constitutes an emergency, often mandating prompt
needle is used to obtain percutaneous renal access. Using flu-
decompression of the upper tract collection system. This is
oroscopic guidance, the guidewire is advanced through the
 one of the most serious complications of urolithiasis, and
530·PARTTWO
Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 17-26 Percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) in a female dog. A, Percutaneous access was achieved, and a nephroscope is being
used through a sheath to perform nephroscopy. B,A fluoroscopic image of the nephroscope ( white arrow) and the stone fragments after
sheath sitting inside the renal pelvis. D, Endoscopic image of the large nephrolith during lithotripsy as the large stone is fragmented.
infections associated with ureteral stones are common. In
antibiotic therapy. Percutaneous nephrostomy tube place-
humans percutaneous nephrostomy tube drainage and ret-
ment is a potential option in veterinary patients (see the
rograde ureteral catheterization has been well established
"Percutaneous Nephroureterolithotomy" section), but
for successful and immediate drainage.45 There are contro-
the risks of excessive hemorrhage (with concurrent severe
versies in human medicine regarding whether internal or
thrombocytopenia), intraabdominal leakage of purulent
external drainage is more appropriate, as both are similarly
material and bacteria resulting in septic (retro)peritoni-
effective.45 In veterinary patients the avoidance of external
 tis, accidental tube dislodgement, and the requirement for
drainage tubes is always advantageous, particularly if dis-
either a second surgery for obstruction relief (ureterotomy)
lodgement can be life-threatening (i.e., percutaneous neph-
or nephropexy are all drawbacks when compared with retro-
rostomy tubes). In veterinary practice severe pyelonephritis
 grade decompression.
with associated obstruction can result in sepsis, and ure-
teronephrectomy has often been the traditional treatment
Patient Selection
modality. Because this obstruction is often due to a stone,
I strongly encourage salvaging the kidney: chronic stone dis-
This would be an ideal procedure to consider in any female
ease can lead to chronic renal failure or a similar condition
dog with severe hydronephrosis and associated pyelonephri-
on the contralateral side in the future. With some ofthe new
tis, in which concurrent ureteral obstruction is preventing
options, immediate and effective drainage with preservation
urinary drainage of purulent material. This can also be per-
of the kidney is accomplished. One study in veterinary medi-
formed in male dogs, although the ease of endoscopic tube
cine showed that 77% of dogs with ureteral obstructions had
placement is more difficult given the anatomy of the male
concurrent infections and 44% had evidence of thrombocy-
urethra. The placement of a ureteral stent is not contraindi-
topenia, which is often severe (lessthan 30,000/μLplatelets).46
 cated with concurrent infection as long as the patient is put
The ideal treatment would be to establish immediate drain-
 on appropriate antibiotic therapy and is treated for at least
age of the renal pelvis, in conjunction with appropriate
6 to 8 weeks.
CHAPTER 17Cystoscopy
531
B
D
Figure 17-27 Retrograde ureteral stent placement in a dog with urolithiasis. Patient is in dorsal recumbency. A, Guidewire access up the
night ureteral orifice during cystoscopy. Notice the numerous small bladder stones on the dependent surface of the bladder. B, Ureteral
renal pelvis before placement). C, Fluoroscopic image of retrograde ureteropyelography with the use of distal ureteral catheter access to
document ureteral and renal pelvic lesions. D, Guidewire being advanced up the ureter into the renal pelvis with fluoroscopic guidance.
E, Fluoroscopic image of the ureteral stent being placed over the guidewire and up the ureter. F, The double-pigtail ureteral stent is in place
with one loop in the renal pelvis and one loop in the urinary bladder.
Procedure
for immediate removal of purulent material. This material
Retrograde ureteropelvic decompression is accomplished
is cultured. Once the guidewire is curled inside the renal
with endoscopic and fluoroscopic guidance. Access is
pelvis, the open-ended ureteral catheter is removed and a
accomplished in female dogs transurethrally via cystos-
5F or 6F multifenestrated, locking-loop pigtail catheter (see
-s e aan ki (y  u ) siop a s do
Figure 17-22 and Figure 17-28) is advanced over the guide-
totomy or keyhole/laparoscopic cystoscopy for ureteral
wire. This larger diameter catheter has multiple larger holes
access. Once the ureter is visualized, a hydrophilic guide-
and allows for fast and effective drainage of thick material.
wire is advanced into the orifice in a retrograde manner
Once the renal pelvis is drained and carefully flushed of
up the ureter and into the renal pelvis, bypassing the ure-
 gross purulent material, the locking-loop catheter is left in
teral obstruction (i.e., stone or purulent material) (Figure
 place, extending from the renal pelvis (loop), down the ure-
17-27). This is guided with fluoroscopy. Over the guidewire
ter, in the bladder, and exiting the urethra. This is secured
an open-ended ureteral catheter is advanced up the ureter
 in place with a Chinese finger trap to the vulva or prepuce,
and into the renal pelvis, and the guidewire is removed. This
 and a closed urinary collection system is attached to the
 catheter allows for drainage and flushing of the renal pelvis
 catheter to allow for continuous renal pelvic drainage. The
532·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
 Before
 Purulent
material in
renal pelvis
and ureter
Ureteral
catheter for
drainage
After 
B
C
D
Figure 17-28 Dog with ureterolithiasis and obstructive pyelonephritis. A, Notice the flling defect in the renal pelvis, which is purulent
material. B, The locking-loop pigtail catheter was used to maintain drainage of the renal pelvis and remained indwelling from the renal
pelvis, down the ureter, and out the urethra. C and D, This was then exchanged for an indwelling ureteral stent 3 days later, once the
purulent material was no longer visualized.
primary cause for the ureteral obstruction can be addressed
and effectively with the combination of drainage and appro-
 once the patient is stable and the infection is under con-
 priate antibiotic therapy is the goal.
trol. Because there is already ureteral access, an indwelling
double-pigtail ureteral stent can be placed with a simple
■ INTERVENTIONAL APPROACH TO
exchange to allow for shock wave lithotripsy or spontane-
 Ous stone passage, while permitting urinary drainage and
URETEROLITHIASIS AND URETERAL
avoiding a persistent ureteral obstruction. This procedure
OBSTRUCTIONS
has also been done where the locking-loop catheter is not
left indwelling, and after drainage is performed at the time
Ureteral disease can create a significant dilemma in veteri-
of the initial procedure, the indweling double-pigtail ure-
nary patients and is far more common and emergent than
teral stent is placed. The latter is reserved for more stable
 diseases of the renal pelvis. The relatively common incidence
patients.
of ureteral disease, combined with the excessive morbidity
associated with traditional surgical techniques, makes some
 of the following options appealing.
Complications
 Feline ureterolithiasis is the most common upper uri-
The most serious risk of this procedure is iatrogenic ureteral
 nary tract frustration, often requiring immediate interven-
trauma during guidewire and catheter passage. With proper
tion. Other causes for ureteral obstruction include ureteral
technique this is unlikely. Addressing the infection quickly
strictures or stenosis, ureteral neoplasia, and blood clots or
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy
blood stones. More than 98% of feline ureteroliths were doc-
50% of cats and 25% of dogs).41,42,46 Nevertheless, given all
umented to be composed of calcium oxalate, which is a trend
the surgical concerns, the survival rates were dramatically
from decades prior.40-42This meansthatthese stones will not
 higher for cats that had surgery performed when compared
dissolve medically and either need to pass spontaneously,
with those treated with medical management alone. Medi-
be bypassed, or be removed. Once medical management
cal management has been shown to be effective in a minor-
fails ( which is traditionally intravenous fluid therapy, man-
ity of cases (8% to 17%)4l but should be considered for 24
nitol CRI, and alpha-adrenergic blockade with or without
to 48 hours before any intervention. Finding a less invasive
amitriptyline),41,47 partial obstructions are often neglected
and more effective alternative would be ideal. In humans
because of the risk:benefit ratio of attempted surgical
minimally invasive options have replaced open ureteral
removal. If there is a complete ureteral obstruction, decom-
surgery.* The placement of a double-pigtail ureteral stent,
either minimally invasively (IR technique) or surgically via
function to the ipsilateral kidney is preserved. After a ure-
cystotomy, could potentially circumvent the complications
teral obstruction, studies in normal dogs have shown that
of surgery alone (e.g., leakage, stricture, and reobstruction),
the ureteral pressures increase immediately.48 After a tran-
while quickly and effciently stabilizing the patient, decreas-
sient increase in pressure, the renal blood flow diminishes
ing renal pelvic pressure, and stopping the cycle of pressure-
to 40% of normal over the first 24 hours and decreases to
 induced nephron death.
20% by 2 weeks.4950 This increase in pressure is transmitted
to the entire nephron, and a decrease in GFR occurs.49 The
URETERAL STENTING
longer the ureter remains obstructed, the more permanent
the damage to the kidney. It was found that after 7 days of
Ureteral stenting has been performed for a variety of dis-
obstruction, the GFR was permanently diminished by 35%,
orders in both dogs and cats.28,29,33 One study in healthy
and when the obstruction lasted for 14 days, the GFR was
research dogs54 showed the effects of double-pigtail ure-
diminished by 54%.4953 The acute damage was more dra-
teral stents and percutaneous nephrostomy tubes on ure-
matic, and it took weeks/months before stabilization of renal
teric motility with artificial stone transit. The ureters were
function occurred. These studies were performed in nor-
found to be dilated around the ureteral stent, as antici-
mal dogs without preexisting azotemia, chronic interstitial
pated from the goal of passive ureteral dilation seen in
 nephritis, or chronic obstruction, so extrapolation of a worse
people. This may aid in subsequent stone passage, future
 outcome might be expected in clinical patients who have
ureteroscopy, or both, as shown in children.2l,s8 The goals
exhausted their hypertrophic compensatory mechanisms.
of ureteral stenting are fourfold: (1) to divert urine from
With this information, aggressive and timely intervention is
the renal pelvis into the urinary bladder while bypassing
suggested.
the ureteral obstruction (e.g-, ureterolithiasis, obstruc-
Traditional therapy has been accomplished surgically
tive neoplasia, and ureteral stricture or stenosis), (2) to
via ureterotomy, neoureterocystostomy, ureteronephrec-
 encourage passive ureteral dilation (for ureteral stenosis or
tomy, and renal transplantation. One group reported two
strictures, placement of larger stents, or future stone pas-
retrospective studies in more than 150 cats.41,42 There were
sage), (3) to decrease surgical tension on the ureter during
high procedure-associated complications (more than 30%)
and after surgery (i.e., resection and anastomosis or proxi-
and mortality rates (18% to 39%, depending on the type
mal ureteral reimplantation) and prevent postoperative
of management elected). This study was from two insti-
leakage and edema, and (4) to aid in extracorporeal shock
tutions that have a lot of experience with ureteral surgery
wave lithotripsy for large obstructive ureteroliths or neph-
and microsurgery. The morbidity and mortality rates may
roliths that could results in serial ureteral obstructions if
be even higher in environments in which operating micro-
the stones do not completely pass down the ureter, which
scopes and microsurgical experience are not as readily avail-
is termed Steinstrasse. 19,39,57,58
able. Many of the associated complications with surgery
At my institution, more than 150 dog or cat ureters have
were due to site edema, recurrence of stones that pass from
been successfully stented for various clinical purposes.28,29
the renal pelvis to the surgery site, stricture formation, and
The main type of ureteral stent is the double-pigtail stent,
ureterotomy-associated or nephrostomy tube-associated
which is completely intracorporeal and can remain in place
urine leakage.40-42 Of the large number of cats in that study,
for numerous months, if necessary (the recommendation
a relatively small number had long-term imaging follow-up,
is for less than 6 months, but more than 3.5 years of stent
and 40% of those that did had evidence of ureteral stone
patency has been seen in cats and more than 2 years in dogs)
recurrence, of which 85% had evidence of nephrolithiasis at
(see Figure 17-23). Each loop of the pigtail is curled (one
the time of the first ureteral surgery.41 The number of ani-
in the bladder and one in the renal pelvis), allowing for
mals that did not have stone recurrence with prior nephro-
direct urinary passage from the kidney to the urinary blad-
 lithiasis was not evident in that study. Chronic renal failure
der, around the stones, or through the stricture (see Figures
is common at the time of diagnosis (greater than 75% of
17-23 and 17-27).
cats and 50% of dogs), and persistent azotemia is a wide-
spread problem after a successful intervention (more than
*See references 7, 9, 10, 13-15, 19-21, 39, 54-58.
534·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 17-29 Feline patient during endoscopic stent placement. Patient is in dorsal recumbency. A, Guidewire (white arrows)
being advanced up the ureter in a retrograde manner. B, Ureteral catheter (black arrows) midway up the ureter during a retrograde
ureteropyelogram documenting the tortuosity and obstructed ureter. C, Ureteral stent (black arrows) being advanced over the guidewire
[a aul aisun aimai au uim pay si neu doo au an sauis ieanain xad au yo e pasedq aysans am an a
pelvis (white asterisks). D, Once the ureteral stent is in place, there is one loop inside the renal pelvis (black arrow) and one inside the urinary
bladder (white arrow).
the guidewire is removed. Retrograde contrast ureteropy-
Patient Selection
elography is performed to help identify any lesions, stones,
 In female dogs and cats ureteral stents are most often
or filling defects in the ureter or renal pelvis. The wire is
attempted cystoscopically in a retrograde manner through
readvanced through the catheter into the renal pelvis around
the ureteral orifice at the UVJ (see Figure 17-27). They can
the stones or through the stenosis, and the catheter is with-
also be placed antegrade (in male or female cats or with
drawn. An indwelling double-pigtail ureteral stentt is placed
trigonal tumor-induced obstructions) through the renal
over the guidewire under fluoroscopic guidance with one
 a  (ns  aod) si
curl remaining in the renal pelvis in front of the obstruction
a cystotomy or ureterotomy (common in male dogs and
and the other is pushed into the urinary bladder through the
cats). The success rate of endoscopic placement in dogs
  si s (ei  i s a) aos
 nears 98% but is only 25% in cats. The success rate surgi-
2.5F to 3F × 12- to 16-cm double-pigtail multifenestrated
cally in cats nears 95%, particularly since the development
stent+ in cats and a 3.7F, 4.7F, or 6F × 14- to 22-cm double-
of stents made for the feline ureter (2.5F) (see Figures 17-27,
 pigtail multifenestrated stentt in dogs.
17-29, and 17-30).
The antegrade technique is the preferred technique for
male cats or animals with tumors obstructing the UVJ.
 This requires percutaneous renal access with a renal access
Procedure
needle (18G or 21G) or over-the-needle catheter (18G or
Performed under general anesthesia, the retrograde technique
22G). Access is acquired with the aid of either ultrasound
uses cystoscopy and concurrent fluoroscopy. An angle-
or fluoroscopy. The guidewire is passed from the renal pel-
tipped hydrophilic guidewire* is advanced into the distal
vis, down the ureter, into the urinary bladder, and out the
 ureter from the UVJ. The wire is advanced up the length of
urethra, obtaining through-and-through access (see Figure
the ureter and curled into the renal pelvis. Care is taken to
17-30). The stent can then be placed in a retrograde fash-
bypass the obstruction without perforating the ureter (see
ion over the wire, as previously described to keep the hole in
Figure 17-29). An open-ended ureteral catheterf is then
the kidney as small as possible. These procedures can also be
advanced over the wire under fluoroscopic guidance, and
 done intraoperatively when surgical ureterotomy success is
 in question, leakage or stricture is a concern, stone removal
 is not possible, or obstructive neoplasia is found. On the
*Infiniti 6. Fr. Locking loop drainage catheter (Infiniti Medical LLC, Malibu,
Calif.)
tWeasel Wire (0.035-, 0.025-, 0.018-inch) hydrophilic angle-tipped
tVet Stent, double-pigtail ureteral stent (Infiniti Medical LLC, Malibu, Calif.)
guidlewire (Infiniti Medical LLC, Malibu, Calif.)
§Renal access needed 18 gauge (Cook Medical, Bloomington, Ind.)
CHAPTER 17Cystoscopy
535
B
 Bladder
 Bladder
Bladder
Bladder
Bladder
G
H
Figure 17-30 Fluoroscopic and endoscopic images of a male dog with a distal ureteral obstruction secondary to trigonal neoplasia during ureteral
stent placement. The patient is in left lateral recumbency. A, Ultrasound-guided antegrade pyelography. Asterisk is the renal pelvis, white arrows
are the tortuous ureter filled with contrast, and the white arrowhead is the needle used for puncture. B, Guidewire (black arrowheads) passed down
the ureter through the renal access needle. C, Ureterogram and cystogram showing the tumor causing the distal ureteral obstruction. The black
bladder at the ureterovesicular junction (UVJ). E, Guidewire passed dowm the urethra and out the penis (black arrows) for through-and-through
access. F, Dilator being passed retrograde over the wire from the penis through the UV] to open the lumen for stent placement.black arrows is the
marker catheter in the colon. The white arrow points to the dilater, and the biack arrow points to the guidewire. G, Double pigtails of each end of
the ureteral stent (white arrows) sitting inside the renal pelvis and urinary bladder, respectively. The black arrows point to the second safety wire.
H, Stent placement after the through-and-through wire is removed during a cystogram. Endoscopic image of the distal end of the ureteral stent
during a cystoscopy as it travels through a proliferative tumor at the UV]. The whife arrowspoint to the ureteral stent traveling from the renal
 peivis through the entire ureter and into the urinary bladder.
basis of my experience, indwelling drainage is an ideal, long-
allows for ureteral protection from future obstruction and
term, and safe option for dogs and cats. Stent removal is rela-
ureteral dilation for small fragment passa ge into the bladder.
tively simple and typically done with a grasping instrument,
None of the 50 or more cats with ureteral stents had reob-
retrieval basket, or snare by either endoscopic or fluoro-
struction with another stone after stent placement, and none
scopic guidance (Figure 17-31). Feline patients are typically
 succumbed to recurrence of a ureteral obstruction, leakage,
left with the stents indwelling unless the stent becomes an
or stricture formation.
issue (rare); over the past 3 years I have not found this to be
For cases in which minimally invasive stent placement
much of a long-term issue. On a long-term basis this stent
is very difficult, I have had great success in a majority of
536·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 17-31 Cystoscopic image of a double-pigtail ureteral stent in the right ureter of a female dog and its subsequent cystoscopic retrieval
with an endoscopic grasping instrument. This dog is in dorsal recumbency. A, Pigtail of the ureteral stent sitting inside the urinary bladder
as it exits the UVJ. B, A grasping instrument entrapping the ureteral stent during cystoscopic stent removal.
Procedure
cases with surgical placement via cystotomy, keyhole cys-
toscopy, or ureterotomy. Once the stent is in place, the
A renal access needle is advanced into the renal pelvis through
concern about multiple ureteroliths, nephroliths, post-
 the renal parenchyma under ultrasound or fluoroscopic guid-
operative leakage, future ureterolithiasis, or stricture is
 ance for a pyelocentesis and pyeloureterogram, as previously
eliminated because the stent will dilate the ureter, bypass 
described. A guidewire is advanced through the needle, down
the stones, prevent nephrolith travel, and avert any leakage
the ureter, into the urinary bladder, and out the urethra (see
from occurring.
Figure 17-26). A sheath is advanced over the wire to accom-
modate the endoscope. Once the stone is identified, a stone
Complications
basket can be used to remove the stone through the access
sheath, or the stone can be fragmented with the laser lithotrite
The most serious risk with ureteral stent placement is iat-
(see Figures 17-26 and 17-32). Ifthe stone is easily identified on
rogenic ureteral tears or trauma. If a stent is able to be
fluoroscopy, a stone basket can be guided through the sheath,
placed, this is rarely an issue, but if the procedure cannot
without use of the endoscope for entrapment and removal
ultimately be completed, the trauma induced by the attempt
(Figure 17-33). This procedure is not commonly performed
(particularly in cats) can result in ureteral edema, temporary
to date.
obstruction, or leakage. It is very important that this proce.
dure only be attempted with proper understanding of the
 EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCK WAVE
 equipment and training in the technique, and the know-how
LITHOTRIPSY FOR URETEROLITHIASIS
to place a nephrostomy tube in the event the stent ca nnot be
successfully placed.
As previously discussed, this procedure can be performed.
safely for ureteroliths in dogs with any size stone and small
■ PERCUTANEOUS
ureteroliths (3 to 4 mm) in cats.26,27,32
NEPHROURETEROLITHOTOMY
Ureteroscopy
manner via renal access for proximal ureteroliths. This has
Retrograde ureteroscopy is a very common modality used in
 already been described in greater detail in the “Percutaneous 
human medicine for both diagnostic and therapeutic man-
Nephrolithotomy" section.
agement of ureteral disease.5,13
Patient Selection
Patient Selection
This technique is more commonly performed in dogs
 siiq pd aaa nq so  issod si s
but can be done in cats if the ureter and pelvis are
significantly dilated (more than 8 to 10 mm) and can
20 kg or have ectopic ureters, which make the ureteral orifice
accommodate the flexible ureteroscope (2.7 mm) or rigid
large and easily accessible. Retrograde ureteroscopy is dif-
cystoscope (4 mm).
ficult to perform in dogs through a normal ureteral orifice,
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 537
A
B
C
D
Figure 17-32 Female dog with multiple renal calculi. A, Cystoscopic image of a 0.035-inch guidewire obtaining right ureteral access.
B, After percutaneous renal access with a balloon dilation set, a stone basket is used to remove the intact nephroliths. C, A stone basket
removing a proximal ureteral stone from this percutaneous approach. D, Nephroscopic image of the proximal ureter after stone removal
with two safety guidewires in the ureter to aid in postprocedural stent placement.
as the ureter in a normal dog is less than 2 to 3 mm and the
been effective, or for evaluation of ureteral obstruction and
smallest ureteroscope is approximately 2.7 mm. It is easier
hydroureter when other imaging modalities are not diag-
in female dogs because of the ease of ureteral access, as dis-
nostic (e-g-, ureteral stricture/stenosis or neoplasia) (see
cussed, although it has been performed in larger male dogs.
Figure 17-34).
There is some documentation in pediatrics that pretreat-
ment with a ureteral stent will allow for passive ureteral dila-
Complications
tion over a few days to a few weeks and will ease the insertion
 of the ureteroscope.s8
The most serious risk with retrograde ureteroscopy is scope-
induced or dilator-induced ureteral trauma. If the ureter is
Procedure
not tremendously dilated, easily accepting the scope (as in
cases of ectopic ureter with concurrent hydroureter), then
Ureteral access is obtained via cystoscopy, as already
an indwelling double-pigtail ureteral stent is placed tem-
described, and a guidewire is advanced into the renal
 porarily at the end of the procedure to prevent temporary
pelvis. The ureteral orifice is then dilated with a ureteral
obstruction or postoperative strictures.
dilator to 8F to 10F, which allows a retrograde ureteropy-
elogram before ureteroscopy, as well as the placement of
PERCUTANEOUS NEPHROSTOMY
a second safety wire that can remain in place next to the
TUBE PLACEMENT
ureteroscope. The flexible ureteroscope is then advanced
over the guidewire into the ureter under fluoroscopic and
Ureteral obstructions can result in severe hydronephrosis
endoscopic guidance (Figure 17-34). This procedure is ide-
and life-threatening azotemia when presenting bilater-
ally performed for evaluation of the ureteral and renal pel-
ally or in animals with concurrent renal insufficiency or
vic mucosa in the case of idiopathic renal hematuria, for
renal failure. Some patients can be managed medically
ureteral stone disease and laser lithotripsy if ESWL has not
with supportive care until a ureterolith passes, but others
538·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
05.05
Figure 17-33 Fluoroscopic image of ureteral stone retrieval by stone basketing. A, Male cat with proximal ureterolithiasis (circle) and
bilateral locking-loop nephrostomy tubes (white arrowhead). B, Guidewire (black arrows) down the ureter via antegrade puncture bypassing
the proximal ureterolith (circle). C, Stone basket (white arrow) inside the ureteral lumen, next to the guidewire (black arrow) prior to stone
retrieval. D, Stone entrapped in stone basket (circle) for fluoroscopic retrieval.
may require either surgery so that permanent damage is
for nephrostomy drainage; in a recent evaluation of 17
avoided or hemodialysis for stabilization before prolonged
patients (12 cats and 5 dogs), no complications occurred
anesthesia. Ureteral surgery can be relatively prolonged
during tube placement and all tubes accomplished their
and complicated in these debilitated patients with an
goal of short- or long-term (n = 3) drainage successfully.
unclear outcome of residual renal function, as previously
One tube was accidentally dislodged 2 weeks after percuta-
 discussed. One possibility is to place a temporary nephros-
neous placement when the dog was at home, but this did
tomy tube, either percutaneously or surgically, to quickly
not result in any ill effects.59
relieve the obstruction and determine whether adequate
renal function remains before prolonged anesthesia and
Patient Selection
expense before definitive surgery or stent placement is
done. A locking-loop pigtail catheter is recommended (5F
The placement of these tubes is indicated in patients that
 or 6F)* (see Figure 17-22) to decrease the risk of inadver-
 have hydronephrosis measuring more than 7 mm to 10 mm
tent tube removal or urine leakage. Historically, nephros-
in diameter and immediate decompression is desired before
tomy tubes have been met with much resistance because
definitive fixation for stabilization.
of the high risk of postplacement complications (more
than 50%),404l even though there is very little published
Procedure
on their use in veterinary medicine. In my experience the
appropriate use of these catheters results in very few com-
This procedure is done under ultrasound guidance, and a
plications in both dogs and cats. The complications are
renal access needle is used for pyelocentesis and ureteropy-
usually due to premature removal or dislodgement, urine
elography, as already described. Thena hydrophilic guidewire
leakage, or poor drainage. With the advent of sturdy, mul-
is passed through the needle under fluoroscopic guidance
tifenestrated tubes that form a loop that will lock the cath-
and coiled into the dilated renal pelvis (Figure 17-35). The
eter in the renal pelvis, these complications seem to have
pelvis should be larger than 7 mm to 10 mm to allow the pig-
declined dramatically (see Figure 17-22). In my practice,
tail to curl easily inside the collection system. The locking-
locking-loop pigtail catheters have been used routinely
loop pigtail catheter is then advanced over the guidewire
into the renal pelvis, and the curl is formed. Once the curl is
*Dawson-Mueller drainage catheter, 5F, (Cook Medical, Bloomington, Ind.)
made in the renal pelvis, the pigtail is locked and the catheter
Locking-loop pigtail catheter. 6F ( Infiniti Medical, Malibu Calif.)
is secured to the body wall. The catheter is securely sutured
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 539
'yal aui ot lien sua aui oi pean Adossoiaiain suioiapun sop aleuay e jo aeui sidossoiong euuopqe lenuaaosio te-il aanb
A, A rigid cystoscope (white arrow) is used to place a cone-tipped catheter in the most distal aspect of the ureter so that retrograde contrast
and up the ureter and into the renal pelvis. The J-hooked distal ureter is apparent (white arrowhead). C, The cystoscope is removed over the
wire, and a ureteral dilator (white arrows) is advanced over the wire under fluoroscopic guidance. D, The ureteral dilator is removed, and
arrowheads) is replaced through the working channel. F, A single pigtailed locking-loop ureteral stent is placed over the guidewire (black
arrowheads). The loop is locked in place in the renal pelvis, with the distal end exiting the urethra to provide temporary patency.
to the skin by a purse-string and Chinese finger-trap suture
 ureteral patency. The catheter is scrubbed, and the purse-
pattern. This should remain in place for approximately 4
string and finger-trap sutures are removed. A guidewire is
weeks for tract formation if it is placed percutaneously, or
then advanced through the catheter until it exits the distal
the hole can be closed surgically once the obstruction is
end of the catheter, which is inside the renal pelvis. This
relieved. If it is placed surgically, then a nephropexy should
will result in the nephrostomy catheter loop straightening
be performed around the catheter. In cats, these tubes are
(see Figure 17-35). Once the catheter is straight, it can be
typically placed surgically because the feline kidney is very
removed with gentle traction over the guidewire. It is very
mobile and prevention of leakage is ideal. These catheters
important to be sure that the catheter is straight before
can also be placed via direct puncture. The catheter comes
removal and, if there is a ureteral stent concurrently present,
with a sharp trocar that can be placed in the lumen of the
that the proximal pigtail of the stent is not entrapped with
catheter. Under ultrasound guidance the greater curvature
the locking-loop catheter during removal.
of the kidney can be directly punctured until the catheter is
inside the renal pelvis, at which point the stylet can be slowly
Complications
withdrawn as the catheter is simultaneously advanced and
locked, forming a loop inside the renal pelvis. Once the cath-
The most serious complications are bleeding, dislodge-
eter is in place, a closed collection system is attached to allow
ment, leakage, and infection. All tubes should be carefully
for gravity drainage until the obstruction is relieved.
monitored after placement and removed as soon as possible
 Removal of the locking-loop nephrostomy tube requires
 once patency is established. All catheters should be sutured
fluoroscopic guidance. First, some contrast is injected
 carefully to the skin with multiple tacking points to prevent 
through the catheter into the renal pelvis to document
inadvertent dislodgement or removal.
540·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
G
H
Figure 17-35 Percutaneous nephrostomy tube placement and removal in a feline patient with a ureteral obstruction and an indwelling
ureteral stent. A, Ultrasound-guided renal pelvis access (white arrow) with pyelography under fluoroscopy. B, Guidewire (black arrows)
being advanced and coiled inside the renal pelvis through the puncture needle. C, Locking-loop nephrostomy catheter (white arrows) being
exiting the skin as it is drained of urine. F, Nephrostomy tube removal after stent placement for permanent decompression. A guidewire
(black arrows) is being advanced through the nephrostomy tube (white arrows) into the renal pelvis. G, Guidewire coiled inside the renal
pelvis (black arrows) as the nephrostomy tube is being removed off the wire. Care should be taken not to manipulate the ureteral stent
(white arrow) that will remain. H, Nephrostomy tube is removed, and ureteral stent remains.
 DISEASES OF THE LOWER URINARY
holmium laser lithotripsy was in 1995 in human medicine.7
The holmium:YAG laser is a solid-state pulsed laser that emits
COLLECTION SYSTEM: URINARY
light at an infrared wavelength of 2100 nm.14,20 The energy is
BLADDER AND URETHRA
absorbed in less than 0.5 mm of fluid, which makes it safe
Transurethral Laser Lithotripsy
to fragment uroliths in tight locations, as within the urethra,
ureter, renal pelvis, or urinary bladder, with limited urothelial
Laser lithotripsy involves intracorporeal fragmentation of
 damage.20 It combines both tissue cutting and coagulation
uroliths, which is accomplished with the use of flexible or rigid
 properties, as well as the ability to fragment stones on con-
tact.20 This technology has been performed in dogs, rabbits,
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 541
is advanced less than 0.5 mm from the target (calculus),
the vapor bubble comes in contact with and impacts the
stone. The closer the fiber tip is to the target, the larger
the effect.14
Patient Selection
Size limitations are the major setback for this technique.
A male dog needs to accept an 8F urinary catheter with ease,
as this is similar to the size of the flexible cystoscope. There
are no size limitations in female dogs and most female cats.
ssi siop sae u sdo is pusa pou op I
than 7 kg, with more than five bladder stones, or with any
stone bigger than 1 cm. Other operators may have different
m op ae io uodo jna e si asdil iset e
urethral stones that can accept the cystoscope. For most
small male dogs with numerous bladder or urethral stones
I currenty perform the keyhole transvesicular cystoscopic
stone retrieval technique (PCCL) or laparoscopy (see the
"Percutanenous Cystolithotomy" section).
Procedure
Via cystoscopic guidance the laser fiber is advanced
through the working channel and touches the stone. The
stone is subsequently fragmented until the pieces are small
enough to be removed normograde through the urethral
B
orifice, either via voiding urohydropropulsion or with the
assistance of a stone retrieval basket (see Figure 17-36).
Figure 17-36 Laser lithotripsy of a struvite stone in a female
 This process is useful for cystic and urethral calculi in dogs
dog. A, The laser fiber is passed through the working channel of
the scope (glass probe with blue cladding) and directed onto the
and cats, as well as for renal and ureteral calculi in dogs.
urolith. B, The stone is contacted with the laser, and the energy
All stone types can be fragmented with the effective use of
fragments the stone until the pieces are small enough for voiding
laser lithotripsy. Success rates in stone retrieval in female
or basket retrieval.
 dogs with laser lithotripsy is superior to that of male dogs
(100% and 87%, respectively, in the largest veterinary study
published to date).23
monkeys, pigs, humans, horses, goats, and steers.23,24,31,36,60-62
To date the procedure has become widespread in both dogs
Complications
and cats.23,24,31 There are also some reports on the use of elec-
Temporary urethral swelling from multiple passes of
trohydraulic lithotripsy in veterinary medicine.25,26
the endoscope transurethrally is the most common
Small diameter fibers (200, 365, 550 μm) are guided
complication, requiring 24 hours of catheterization. Other
through the working channel of small diameter flexible
 potential complications include urethral tears, bladder
or rigid cystoscopes or ureteroscopes. Although commer-
rupture during VUH, urethral strictures, and excessive
cial models of lithotrites vary slightly, the pulse duration
bleeding. There are many instances where the stone is too
of the holmium laser ranges from 250 to 750 microsec-
aq on qnoua Ts inq uoismdondoiq uioa og s1
onds, the pulse energy ranges from 0.2 to 4.0 J/pulse, the
removed with cystoscopic-guided traction, in which case a
frequency ranges from 5 to 45 Hz, and the power ranges
stone retrieval basket is used to entrap and remove the stone
from 3.0 to 100 W. The power is based on the application.
transurethrally.
 Laser energy is focused on the urolith surface, directed via
Other urologic applications for laser technology in the
endoscopy (Figure 17-36). Pulsed laser energy is absorbed
urinary tract (particularly a 980-nm diode laser) include
by water inside the urolith, which results in a photother-
incision of urethral and ureteral strictures, ablation of super-
mal effect and causes urolith fragmentation. The holmium
ficial transitional cell carcinoma within the urethral and
laser effect on the calculus is by a vapor bubble. The vapor
 bladder lumen, laser ablation of urinary polyps (discussed
 bubble is created when the pulse of laser energy traveling
previously), and laser ablation of persistent parameso-
through water from the tip of the fiber is trapped within
nephric septal remnants (Figure 17-37). Intramural ectopic
a bubble (Moses effect). If the fiber tip is 0.5 mm or more
 ureters are routinely treated in my practice with the use of
away from tissue, the vapor bubble collapses, the water
cystoscopic-guided laser ablation (CLA) with good success
absorbs the energy, and no impact is made. As the fiber tip
(discussed previously).
542·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
B
C
一
E
A, Vertical membrane across the vaginal opening, termed persistent paramesonephric remnant. In this dog it extends approximately 3
cm cranially into the vagina (vaginal septum). B, Diode laser probe (black asterisk) through the working channel of the cystoscopy and a
guidewire (white arrow) in the right orifice to the vagina. C, At the start of the laser procedure as the tissue is coagulated and cut. D, Inside
the vagina as the last part of the septum is transected with the laser. E, At the completion of the laser procedure. F, Fluid is infused into the
vagina provides an optical space to confirm that the entire septum has been cut and the vagina is open.
■ STONE BASKETING
■ PERCUTANEOUS CYSTOLITHOTOMY!
Basket retrieval of bladder and urethral stones is routinely
KEYHOLE TRANSVESICULAR
performed in both male and female dogs and female cats.
CYSTOURETHROSCOPY
This is accomplished by transurethral cystourethroscopy.
Stones of less than 5 mm in female dogs and less than 3 mm
The most common procedure to date for the retrieval of cystic
in female cats can be routinely retrieved; in male dogs stones
or urethral calculi in small animal patients is a traditional cys-
typically need to be less than 3 mm to be retrieved. After
totomy or, if retropulsion is not possible, urethrotomy. More
the procedure topical bupivacaine is usually infused into the
recently minimally invasive procedures have shown success
urethra for temporary local analgesia.
 in stone removal including laparoscopic-assisted cystotomy34
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 543
uue adosss ieisasei g dossss enisasu u xade iapeau s e daa ot pasn iesanmars l an
jo uoiod juapuadap aul u sunns aie sauois aldinu pue 'eiuiain au ul sl naiaqes raqqnu pau y xade aui moy yau nappeiq aul piemol
the bladder. C, Stone retrieval basket used through the working channel of the cystoscope for stone removal. D, Stone entrapped in stone 
retrieval basket during removal.
and lithotripsy,23-25 as discussed previously in detail. As pre-
bladder to accuratelypalpate the location ofthe apex. A small
viously discussed, the use of lithotripsy is limited by patient
ventral midline skin incision approximately 1.5 to 2.0 cm in
size, sex, species, stone size, and stone number. Laparoscopic-
length is made over the bladder apex. This incision is typi-
 cally just cranial to the prepuce or slightly paraprepucial in
toneum, and additional equipment. This new minimally
dogs and just caudal to the umbilicus in cats. A 1- to 1.5-
invasive technique, termed PCCL, combines cystic and ure-
cm incision is made into the abdominal cavity through the
thral stone retrieval for any size, sex, or species and is very easy
linea alba to accept one finger for digital palpation ofthe full
to perform in both cats and dogs. This technique has been
bladder. A Gelpy forcep is placed in the abdominal incision.
 described in more than 30 patients in abstract form.63 With
 Once the bladder is identified, the urinary bladder is emp-
this technique the need for urethrotomy for stone disease is
tied through the urethral catheter so that the vesicle location
nearly obsolete. This is currently the procedure of choice in
can be confirmed during digital palpation. The bladder apex
any dog or cat with more than two bladder stones, allowing
is grasped atraumatically with Babcock forceps or one finger
 for excellent visualization of the bladder and urethra.
and brought to the incision. Three stay sutures using 3-0 or
In children, the treatment of choice for bladder stone
4-0 polydioxanone (one apical and two lateral) are placed.
retrieval is transurethral lithotripsy; however, in certain cir-
The bladder is secured to the abdominal incision with the
cumstances when the urethral lumen is too small the stone
stay sutures and packed to reduce urine contamination. A
burden is too large, or state-of-the art equipment like litho-
stab incision is made into the bladder lumen between the
tripsy is not available (some developing countries), PCCL is
stay sutures. A 6-mm metallic Endotip screw trocar, with a
performed.8,22
diaphragm, is advanced from the stab incision into the blad-
der lumen angled toward the urethra. A rigid (1.9-mm or
2.7-mm integrated, 30-degree lens) cystoscope is advanced
Procedure
through the trocar into the urinary bladder aiming caudally
 Animals are placed under general anesthesia and positioned
toward the trigone (Figure 17-38). The entire mucosal sur-
in dorsal recumbency. The patient's abdomen is asceptically
face of the bladder and proximal urethra is visualized, and
prepared, as for routine surgery. A urethral catheter (3.5F
the location and number of uroliths are identifed. Slow
to 8F) is placed, and sterile saline is infused into the urinary
saline irrigation is used to maintain bladder distension and
544·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
visibility while tension is maintained on the apex to keep
 potentially associated with an undesirable outcome because
the stone fragments and debris at the trigone for removal.
 of manual urine drainage, extensive hospital stays, urethral
The urethral catheter is used to flush smallstones rigorously
trauma, persistent frequent urination, tumor regrowth,
retrograde while a suction tip is placed through the trocar
and an extremely high rate of tube-associated infections
for small stone retrieval. Then the scope is replaced into the
(more than 85% in dogs).67-72 Placement of SEMS under
 bladder, and the remaining larger stones are retrieved with
fluoroscopic guidance via a transurethral approach can be
a stone retrieval basket guided through the working channel
a fast, reliable, and safe alternative for establishing urethral
of the cystoscope. Finally, after the bladder is free of stone
 patency.35 This technique has been performed in more than
material the flexible cystoscope is advanced distally down
100 canine patients. Urethral stenting may also be useful
the urethra to ensure that no stone fragments remain in
 in patients with benign urethral strictures when traditional
the urethra while the urethra is simultaneously flushed in
therapies have failed or when surgery is not recommended
a retrograde manner distally through the urinary catheter.
or contraindicated. Benign urethral strictures may resolve
In male dogs the entire urethra can typically be visualized in
with urethral balloon dilatation alone, and this has been per-
an antegrade manner, and ifless than 4 kg, usuallythe scope
formed in dogs and cats. In my experience, it is common
 can visualize to the mid/proximal os penis. During this pro-
for urethral strictures to reform after balloon dilatation, and
cedure the bladder can be explored carefully for polyps or
they often require a covered self-expanding urethral stent.
 masses, which can be removed with the laser or sampled,
if necessary. Once the scope and trocar are removed, the
Patient Selection
incision is closed with the use of 3-0 or 4-0 poliglecaprone
(Monocryl) sutures in a simple interrupted pattern. The
Urethral stenting is indicated in patients with urethral
abdominal incision is closed routinely in three layers with-
 obstructions secondary to tumors, strictures, or reflex dys-
out skin sutures.
synergia. There are no size limitations for this procedure and
In addition to stone retrieval, this technique can be
they can be used in both canine and feline patients for stric-
utilized for evaluation of bladder polyps and tumors, ure-
 tures, tumors, and reflex dyssynergia.
teral or renal bleeding, or ureteral access for ureteral stent
placement.
Procedure
A marker catheter is placed inside the colon to allow for
Complications
maximal urethral measurement and determination of stent
There are few risks with this technique other than those that
size. The bladder is maximally distended with contrast, and a
 are associated with routine cystotomy. It is very important to
pull-out urethrogram is performed to allow for maximal dis-
be confident of the bladder location on initial digital palpa-
tension of the urethra with a urethral access sheath in place,
tion because of limited visualization. This procedure should
which prevents urinary leakage from the urethral papilla and
never be done in the face of an active urinary tract infec-
orifice. Measurements of the normal urethral diameter and
tion, as the abdomen is not able to be flushed before closure.
the length of obstruction are obtained, and an appropriately
I require a urine culture to be negative before performing
sized SEMS,* BEMS,f or balloon dilation catheter is chosen
this procedure. Urine leakage is kept to a minimum with the
(stents chosen are approximately 10% to 15% greater than
 use of the Endotip trocar with diaphragm. If an infection is
the normal urethral diameter and 3 to 5 mm longer than
identified before this procedure, appropriate antibiotic ther-
the obstruction on both the cranial and caudal ends; bal-
apy for 3 to 5 days is recommended.
loon catheters are typically sized based on the exact urethral
 diameter). The stent is deployed under fluoroscopic guid-
ance, and contrast cystourethrography is performed again to
■ URETHRAL BALLOON DILATION
document restored urethral patency (Figure 17-39). In cats
OR METALLIC STENTING FOR BENIGN
and dogs with very short strictures a BEMS is more likely to
be used because of the small diameter of the delivery system,
AND MALIGNANT OBSTRUCTIONS
the small diameter of the urethra, and in the case of stric-
Malignant obstructions of the urethra can cause severe dis-
tures, the typical short stricture length. SEMS are typically
comfort, dysuria, and life-threatening azotemia. Transitional
wider and longer, which are appropriate for tumors or larger
cell carcinoma is the most common tumor of the trigone and
strictures. Because of the compressive nature of the BEMS
urethra in dogs and cats.64-66 Chemotherapy and NSAID
(versus the self-expanding nature of the SEMS), my pref-
therapy has been successful in slowing tumor growth, but
erence has been to use SEMS, if possible, in strictures. Any
 a complete cure and resolution of obstruction are uncom-
compression of the stent (even during a rectal examination
mon.65,66 When signs of obstruction occur, more aggressive
or rectal temperature assessment) can bend and compress
therapy is indicated. Placement of cystostomy tubes,67-69
transurethral resections,70 and surgical diversionary proce-
*Vet Stent-Urethra (Infiniti Medical, Malibu, Calif).
dures 71,72 have been described in dogs but are invasive and
+BEMS, (Infiniti Medical, Malibu, Calif).
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 545
10
mm
E
Figure 17-39 Urethral stent placement in a dog with obstructive prostatic carcinoma. A, Guidewire (white arrow) advanced through the
urethra into urinary bladder. Marker catheter (upper white arrow) in colon. B, Catheter (white arrow) advanced over the guidewire and
and prostatic contrast extravasation (white asterisk). Measurements are taken to choose stent size using the marker catheter to adjust
for magnification. D, Urethral stent (white arrowhead) compressed on the delivery system advanced over the guidewire before stent
deployment. E, Urethral stent during deployment (white arrowhead). F, Urethrogram after urethral stent (white arrowheads) deployment
documenting a patent urethra. Black asterisk shows the distal end of the tumor in the urethra.
the stent permanently, which will require additional balloon
Complications
dilation to resolve.
 For strictures, I typically apply a topical solution of 5 mL
The major risk involved in urethral stent placement is typi-
of 0.1% mitomycin C (MMC) to the site after it is bro-
cally due to inappropriate sizing. It is important that the stent
ken with a balloon. Approximately 5 mL of solution is leff
be slightly oversized to ensure that it will not migrate after
to dwell on the stricture site after dilatation for 5 minutes
placement (particularly for benign or extraluminal diseases).
and then flushed with saline. MMC is an antibiotic that is
During placement, it is imperative that the bladder be flled so
produced by Streptomyces caespitosus. Besides being an anti-
that there is clear definition between the trigone and proximal
biotic, it is antineoplastic (like an alkylating agent) and anti-
urethra. If the bladder is empty, then the trigone of the blad-
 proliferative, causing single-band breakage and cross-linking
der can be misinterpreted as the proximal urethra; if the stent
 of DNA and inhibiting RNA and protein synthesis.73-75 As
 is placed in this area, it will be undersized, and if not seated
 an antiproliferative agent, MMC inhibits fbroblast prolif-
well in the urethra distally, the stent can migrate into the blad-
eration and decreases scar tissue formation. Its antiprolifera-
der. It is also important to be sure to place the stent beyond
tive properties on fibroblasts have been shown in vivo and
the obstructed region both cranially and caudally. I recom-
in vitro. MMC has been shown in rats, dogs, and humans to
mend the length of the stent extending 5 to 10 mm cranial
be effective in reducing stricture recurrence in the urinary,
and 5 to 10 mm caudal to the stenosis or tumor so that none
 respiratory, and gastrointestinal tracts.73-75
of the obstructive region remains unstented. It is very rare for
546·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
the patient to have an obstruction again and require a second
lumen, it can be removed and the blunt hollow stylet can
stent. This occurred in less than 5% of patients and was typi-
remain in place while the catheter is gently advanced about 1
 cally due to tumor growth beyond the ends of the stent rather
 to 2 cm into the bladder. Then the hollow stylet is withdrawn
than through the interstices of the stent. After stent placement
while the catheter is advanced into the bladder as described,
m    s  si go m
and the loop is locked to form the curl inside the bladder.
owners of this before placement is very important. Typically
This tube will need to remain in place for at least 4 weeks
the urinary incontinence is minimal and occurs when the
before removal because it is not surgically secured. Other tubes,
bladder is full, just before urination, but expectations should
like latex mushroom-tipped catheters, Foley catheters, or low
be communicated to the client.
 profle tubes can be placed with either an open or laparoscopic-
assisted surgical technique.67,68 This allows for a cystopexy to
 PERCUTANEOUS CYSTOSTOMY TUBE
be performed at the same time. Surgically inserted tubes should
PLACEMENT
remain in the patient for at least 2 weeks after placement.
 Cystostomy tubes are often placed to bypass a urethral obstruc-
Complications
tion or *buy time" while a urethral or trigonal lesion is healing.
Cystostomy tubes are commonly associated with secondary
Patient Selection
infections (at least 86% in one study) because of the external
nature of the tube; complications with the tubes have been
 These tubes can be used for malignant neoplasia (trigonal or
reported in as many as 49% of patients and include inad-
urethral), severe extraluminal compression due to sublum-
vertent tube removal, eating of the tube by the patients, fis-
 bar lymphadenopathy, proliferative or granulomatous ure-
tulous tract formation, and mushroom-tip breakage during
thritis, urethral strictures, urethral tears, or urethral stones
removal.69 Infections are not ideal in circumstances in which
that are difficult to remove surgically. With the advent of
chemotherapy (for malignant obstructions) or immunosup-
urethral stents (discussed previously), the use of cystostomy
pressive therapy (for immune-mediated disease-proliferative
tubes has declined tremendously. Cystostomy tubes can be
urethritis) is being used.
placed either percutaneously or surgically. With the locking-
loop pigtail catheter (see Figures 17-22, 17-35, 17-40) percu-
■ ANTEGRADE URETHRAL
CATHETERIZATION
 fast and easy technique when necessary.
 Urethral catheterization is typically a fairly simple and rou-
tinely performed procedure in veterinary patients and is pri-
Procedure
marily used to establish urinary drainage for patients with
 Under fluoroscopic guidance (as described previously for
urethral obstructions, monitor urine output, or provide
 nephrostomy tubes), an 18G over-the-needle catheter is
urethral patency after urethral or urinary bladder surgery.
advanced into the urinary bladder, as in a cystocentesis
Occasionally, standard retrograde catheterization can be dif-
(paramedian), until urine is draining. Urine is withdrawn
ficult in very small (female) patients, female patients with
and contrast is infused to highlight the urinary bladder
obstructive tumors, or feline patients with urethral tears
under fluoroscopy. The stylet is removed, and the hydro-
after trauma or attempted serial retrograde catheterization.
philic guidewire is advanced through the catheter and into
Antegrade urethral catheterization performed under direct
the urinary bladder. The wire is curled around the blad-
fluoroscopic visualization can be performed rapidly, easily,
der two to three times. Then the locking-loop catheter is
and safely. Urethral tears are most commonly seen in male
advanced over the wire with the hollow stylet still in place
cats during diffcult catheterizations for urethral blockage.
(and the inner sharp trocar removed). Once the proximal
They can also be seen after vehicular trauma. This is an ideal
2 cm of catheter is inside the bladder lumen, the stiff hol-
technique for iatrogenic tears because the tear is typically
low stylet is removed while the string is pulled to start form-
longitudinal and made in a retrograde manner. Longitudinal.
ing the loop at the distal end of the catheter. Once a loop is
urethral tears will usually heal within 5 to 10 days without
seen to form inside the bladder, the string is pulled tight and
surgical intervention, and the catheter should be maintained
for that length of time to help prevent stricture formation.76
be easily drained, and the catheter is secured to the body wall
This procedure can be done without fluoroscopy when nec-
Procedure
essary if the locking-loop catheter is used with the sharp tro-
Under general anesthesia a cystocentesis is performed with
car placed through the hollow stylet. The catheter itself can
the use of an 18G over-the-needle catheter aimed toward the
then be used to directly puncture the bladder. It is best to do
urethra as already described for cystostomy tube placement.
this with ultrasound guidance if fluoroscopy is not available.
Contrast is injected to define the urinary bladder, trigone,
Once the sharp portion of the trocar is inside the bladder
 and proximal urethra (see Figure 17-40). Under fluoroscopic
CHAPTER 17Cystoscopy
547
E
Figure 17-40 Antegrade catheterization and cystostomy tube placement in a cat with a urethral tear. A, Retrograde urethrogram showing
extravasation of contrast through the urethral tear. B, Cystocentesis (white arrow) performed under fluoroscopic guidance for cystogram
and guidewire access. C, Guidewire access through the puncture needle (black arrow) aimed out the urethra in an antegrade direction.
D, Retrograde catheter placement (black arrows) over the guidewire once through-and-through access is obtained. E, Guidewire (black
arrows) coiled inside the bladder for cystostomy tube placement. F, The cystostomy tube (circle) is locked as already described. The urethral
catheter is in place (black arrows).
guidance, a 0.035-inch angled-tip hydrophilic guidewire is
Complications
 advanced antegrade into the bladder toward the trigone, down
the urethra, and out the penis or vulva, which then allows
This procedure should be performed with caution in ani-
through-and-through access. A urinary catheter (open-ended
mals with known urinary tract infections. If access cannot be
obtained at the urethra because of severe stone impaction,
retrograde fashion into the urinary bladder, and the guidewire
stricture, or other obstructions, then a locking-loop catheter
is removed. It is important to remember to cut off the tip of
can be used to divert urine though the hole made in the blad-
a closed-ended catheter (i.e., red rubber) to allow for it to be
 der as already described to prevent leakage of urine through
advanced over the guidewire. The urinary catheter is secured in
the hole into the abdomen.
place in a routine manner. If a 5F catheter may be placed over
the guidewire, then a 0.035-inch guidewire is recommended,
■ CONCLUSION
as compared with a 3.5F catheter that would require a 0.018-
inch guidewire. A 0.018-inch guidewire can be placed through
With the proper equipment and training a vast number of
a 22G over-the-needle catheter, and a 0.035-inch guidewire
 applications using IE and IR in the urinary tract of veterinary
can be placed through an 18G catheter, as previously described.
 patients are possible. It is important to know all the benefits
548·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
and risks of each procedure and provide that information to
medicine, requiring more clinical investigations and con-
clients before performing new interventional modalities. It is
trolled studies to compare their use with that of traditional
also important to remember that, even though most of these
therapy. To date there are only a few facilities providing
techniques are considered standard of care in human medi-
much of the above technology, but the availability is grow-
cine, many are still considered investigational in veterinary
ing tremendously.
REFERENCES
1. Muslumanoglu AY, Karadag MA, Tefekli AH, et al: When is
19. Al-Awadi KA: Steinstrasse: a comparison of incidence with and
 open ureterolithotomy indicated for the treatment of ureteral
without J stenting and the effect of J stenting on subsequent 
stones? Int f Urol 13:1385, 2006.
management, BfU Int 84:618,1999.
 2. Segura JW, Preminger GM,Assimos DE,et al: Ureteral Stones
20. Wollin T, Denstedt J: The holmium laser in urology、 J Clin
 Clinical Guidelines Panel: summary report on the management 
Laser Med Surg 16(1):13, 1998.
of ureteral calculi, J Urol 158: 1997.
21. Denstedt JD, Razvi HA, Sales JL, et al: Preliminary experience
3. Anagnostou T、 Tolley D: Review, management of ureteric
with holmium:YAG laser lithotripsy, J Endourol 9:255, 1995.
stones, Eur Urol 45:714, 2004.
 22. Sofer M, Kaver I, Greenstein A, et al: Refinements in treatment
4. Troy A, Tolley D, Jones G, et al: Treatment of lower ureteric
oflarge bladder calculi: simultaneous percutaneous suprapubic
stones using the Dornier Compact Lithotriptor, Eur Urol
and transurethral cystolithotripsy, Urology 64:651, 2004.
1(suppl):36 (abstract), 2002.
23. Adams LG, Berent AC, Moore GE, et al: Use of laser lithotripsy
 5. Grasso M III: Ureteroscopic lithotripsy, Curr Opin Urol 9:329,
for fragmentation of uroliths in dogs: 73 cases (2005-2006),
1999.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 323(11):1680, 2008.
6.Kumar V, Ahlawat R, Banjeree GK, et al: Percutaneous
 24. Grant DC, Were SR, Gevedon ML: Holmium:YAG lithotripsy
ureterolitholapaxy: the best bet to clear large bulk impacted
for urolithiasis in dogs, J Vet Intern Med 22(3):534, 2008.
upper ureteral calculi, Arch Esp Urol 49:86, 1996.
25. Defarges A, Dunn M: Use of electrohydraulic lithotripsy in
 7. Uthappa MC, Cowan NC: Retrograde or antegrade double-
28 dogs with bladder and urethral calculi, J Vet Intern Med
 pigtail stent placement of malignant ureteric obstruction? Clin
22(6):1267, 2008.
Radiol 60:608, 2005.
 26. Adams LG, Senior DF: Electrohydraulic and extracorporeal
8. Salah MA, Holman E、 Khan AM, et al: Percutaneous
shock-wave lithotripsy, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
cystolithotomy for pediatric endemic bladder stone: experience 
29:293,1999.
with 155 cases from 2 developing countries, J Pediatr Surg
 27. Block G, Adams LG, Widmer WR,et al: Use of extracorporeal.
40:1628,2005.
shock wave lithotripsy for treatment of nephrolithiasis and
9. Al-Shammari
AM、 Al-Otaibi K, Leonard MP、et al:
ureterolithiasis in five dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 208(4):531,
Percutaneous nephrolithotomy in the pediatric population,
1996.
JUrol 162:1721, 1999.
28. Berent A, Weisse C、 Bagley D, Casale P: Ureteral stenting
10. Coe FL, Evan A, Worcester E: Kidney stone disease, J Clin
 for benign and malignant disease in dogs and cats. Abstract
Invest 115(10):2598, 2005.
presented at American College of Veterinary Surgery, 17-21
11. Miller OF, Kane CJ: Time to stone passage for observed ureteral
October, 2007, Chicago, Ill.
calculi: a guide for patient education, J Urol 162:688, 1999.
29. Berent A: Ureteral stenting in cats: a minimally invasive
12. Autorino R, De Sio M, Damiano R,et al: The use of tamsulosin
alternative. Proceedings presented at American College of
in the medical treatment of ureteral calculi: where do we stand?
Veterinary Surgery, 22-25 October, 2008, San Diego, Calif.
Urol Res 22:460, 2005.
30. Adams LG, William JC, McAteer JA, et al: In vitro evaluation
13. Bagley DH: Expanding role ofureteroscopy and laser lithotripsy
of canine and feline calcium oxalate urolith fragility via shock
for treatment of proximal ureteral and intrarenal calculi, Curr
wave lithotripsy, Am / Vet Res 66(9): 1651, 2005.
Opin Urol 12:277, 2002.
 31. Lulich JP, Adams LG, Grant D, et al: Changing paradigms in
14. Bagley DH, Das A: Endourologic use of the holrmiurm laser,
the treatment of uroliths by lithotripsy, Vet Clin North Am
Jackson, Wy., 2001, Tenton NewMedia.
Small Anim Pract 39(1):143, 2009.
15. Matsuoka K, Iida S, Nakanami M, et al: Holmium: yttrium-
32. Lane IF: Lithotripsy: an update on urologic applications in small
(po isdoul odossa iy ias iau-uue
animals, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34(4):1011, 2004.
45(6):947,1995
 33. Weisse C, Berent A: Interventional radiology and endosurgery
16. De Hill, McDougal WS, Stephens H, et al: Physiologic and
of the urinary system. In Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, editors:
pathologic alterations associated with ultrasonically generated
Current veterinary therapy, ed 14, St Louis, 2009, Saunders.
shock waves, J Urol 144:1531, 1990.
34. Rawlings CA, Mahaffey MB、Barsanti JA, et al: Use of
17. Lingeman JE, Smith LH, Woods JR,et al: Bioeffects and long-
laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy for removal of urinary calculi
term results of ESWL. In Lingeman JE, Newman DM, editors:
in dogs J Am Vet Med Assoc 22(6):759, 2003.
Urinary calculi: ESWL, endourology, and medical therapy.
35. Weisse C, Berent A, Solomon J, et al: Evaluation of palliative
Philadelphia, 1989, Lea & Febiger.
stenting for management of malignant urethral obstructions
18. Mueller CS,Wilbert D, Thueroff JW,et al: Extracorporeal
in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 229(2):226, 2006.
shock wave lithotripsy of ureteral stones: clinical experience
 36. Davidson EB, Ritchey JW, Higbee RD,et al: Laser lithotripsy
and experimental findings, / Urol 135:831, 1986.
for treatment of canine uroliths, Vet Surg 33:56, 2004.
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy · 549
37. Donner GS, Ellison GW, et al: Percutaneous nephrolithotomy
59. Berent A, Weisse C, Bagley D: The use of locking-loop pigtail
in the dog: an experimental study, Vet Surg 16(6):411, 1987.
nephrostomy catheters for ureteral obstruction in dogs and
38. Berent A, Weisse C, Bagley D,et al: Ureteral stenting for feline
cats. Abstract presented at American College of Veterinary
ureterolithiasis (abstract). American College of Veterinary
Surgery, 8-12 October, 2009, Washington, DC.
 Internal Medicine, 3-6 June 2009, Montreal, Canada.
 60. Howard RD, Pleasant RS, May KA: Pulsed dye laser lithotripsy
39. Mustafa M: The role of stenting in relieving loin pain following
for treatment of urolithiasis in two geldings, ∫ Arm Vet Med
ureteroscopic stone therapy for persisting renal colic with
Assoc 212:1600, 1998.
hydronephrosis, Int Urol Nephrol 39(1):91, 2007.
61. Streeter RN, Washburn KE, Higbee RG, et al: Laser lithotripsy
40. Hardie EM, Kyles AE: Management of ureteral obstruction,
of a urethral calculus via ischial urethrotomy in a steer, ∫ Am 
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34(4):989, 2004.
Vet Med Assoc 219(5):640, 2001.
41. Kyles A, Hardie E, Wooden E,et al: Management and outcome
62. Halland SK, House JK, George LW: Urethroscopy and laser
of cats with ureteral calculi: 153 cases (1984-2002), JAm Vet
lithotripsy for the diagnosis and treatment of obstructive
Med Assoc 226(6):937, 2005.
urolithiasis in goats and pot-bellied pigs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
42. Kyles A, Hardie EM, Wooden BG,et al: Clinical, clinicopathologic.
220:1831, 2002.
 radiographic, and ultrasonographic abnormalities in cats with
63. Runge J、 Berent A, Mayhew P, et al: Transvesicular keyhole
ureteral calculi: 163 cases (1984-2002)、 J Arm Vet Med Assoc
s     n a  
226(6):932, 2005.
 Abstract presented at American Collge of Veterinary Surgery.
43. Gookin JL、 Stone EA, Spaulding KA, et al: Unilateral
 22-25 October, 2008, San Diego, Calif.
*(1661-5861) sa1 0 :aseas1 [ua1 y sop un Aoandau
64. Wilson HM, Chun R, Larson VS,et al: Clinical signs,treatments,
JAm Vet Med Assoc 208(12):2020, 1996.
and outcome in cats with transitional cell carcinoma of the
44. Raza A, Turna B, Smith G, et al: Pediatric urolithiasis: 15 years
urinary bladder: 20 cases, J Am Vet Med Assoc 231(1):101,
of local experience with minimally invasive endourological
2007.
management of pediatric calculi,f Urol 174:682, 2005.
65. Knapp DW, Glickman NW, Widmer WR, et al: Cisplatin
45. Pearle MS, Pierce HL, Miller GL, et al: Optimal method of
versus cisplatin with piroxicam in a canine model of human
urgent decompression of the collecting system for obstruction
invasive urinary bladder cancer, Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
and infection due to ureteral calculi, J Urol 160:1260, 1998.
46(3):221, 2000.
46. Snyder DM, Steffery MA, Mehler SJ, et al: Diagnosis and
66. Norris AM, Laing EJ, Valli VEO, et al: Canine bladder and
surgical management of ureteral calculi in dogs: 16 cases, N Z
urethral tumors: a retrospective study of 115 cases (1980-
Vet J 53(1):19-25, 2004.
1985), J Vet Intern Med 16:145, 1992.
47. Achar E, Achar RA, Paiva TB, et al: Amitriptyline eliminates
67. Smith JD: Placement of a permanent cystostomy catheter to
calculi through urinary tract smooth muscle relaxation, Kidney
relieve urine outflow obstruction in dogs with transitional cell
Int 64(4):1356, 2003.
carcinoma, / Am Vet Med Assoc 206:496, 1995.
48. Wen JG, Frokiaer J Jorgensen TM、et al: Obstructive
68. Stiffler KS, McCrackin Stevenson MA, et al: Clinical use of
nephropathy: an update ofthe experimental research, Urol Res 27:
low-profle cystostomy tubes in four dogs and a cat, ∫ Am Vet
29-39, 1999.
Med Assoc 223(3):325, 2003.
49. Coroneos E、Assouad M、 Krishnan B、et al: Urinary
69. Beck AL, Grierson JM, Ogden DM, et al: Outcome of and
obstruction causes irreversible renal failure by inducing
complications associated with tube cystostomy in dogs and
chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis, Clin Nephrol 48:125,
cats: 76 cases (1995-2006)、 J Arm Vet Med Assoc 230:1184,
1997.
2007.
50. Wilson DR: Renal function during and following obstruction,
70. Liptak JM, Brutscher SP, Monnet E、 et al: Transurethral
Annu Rev Med 28:329, 1977.
resection in the management of urethral and prostatic
51. Fink RW, Caradis DT, Chmiel R, et al: Renal impairment and
neoplasia in 6 dogs, Vet Surg 33:505, 2004.
its reversibility following variable periods of complete ureteric
71. Fries CL, Binnington AG, Valli VE, et al: Enterocystoplasty
obstruction, Aust N ZJ Surg 50:77, 1980.
with cystectomy and subtotal intracapsular prostatectomy in
52. Kerr WS: Effect of complete ureteral obstruction for one week
the male dog, Vet Surg 20(2):104, 1991.
on kidney function, J Appl Physiol 6:762, 1954.
72. Stone EA, Withrow SJ, Page RL, et al: Ureterocolonic anasto-
 53. Vaughan DE, Sweet RE, Gillenwater JY: Unilateral ureteral
mosis in ten dogs with transitional cell carcinoma, Vet Surg 17:
occlusion: pattern of nephron repair and compensatory
147, 1988.
response, J Urol 109:979, 1973.
73. Ayyildiz A、Nuhoglu B、Gulerkaya B、et al: Effect of
 54. Zimskind PD: Clinical use of long-term indwelling silicone rubber
s u sisaq pe uay uo -uau ea
ureteral splints inserted cystoscopically, J Urol 97:840, 1967.
with experimentally induced urethral stricture、 Int ∫ Urol
 55. Yossepowitch O: Predicting the success of retrograde stenting
11(12):1122,2004.
for managing ureteral obstruction, J Urol 166:1746, 2001.
74. Mazdak H, Meshki I, Ghassami F: Efect of mitomycin
56. Goldin AR: Percutaneous ureteral splinting, Urology 10(2): 165,
C on anterior urethral stricture recurrence after internal
1977.
urethrotomy, Eur Urol 51(4):1089, 2006.
57. Lennon GM: Double pigtail ureteric stent versus percutaneous
75. Daher P, Riachy E, Goerges B, et al: Topical application of
nephrostomy: effects on stone transit and ureteric motility, Eur
 mitomycin Cin the treatment ofesophageal and tracheobronchial
Urol 31(1):24, 1997.
stricture: a report of2 cases,J Pediatr Surg 42(9):E9, 2007.
58. Hubert KC: Passive dilation by ureteral stenting before
76. Meige F, Sarrau S, Autefage A: Management of traumatic
ureteroscopy: eliminating the need for active dilation, J Urol
urethral rupture in 1l cats using primary alignment with a
174(3):1079, 2005.
urethral catheter, Vet Cop Orthop Traumatol 21:76, 2008.
550·PARTTWO
Rigid Endoscopy
Cystoscopic Diagnosis and Treatment
of Ectopic Ureter
Normal ureter
Clarence A. Rawlings
 Ectopic ureters are the most common cause of urinary incon-
tinence in young female dogs. Incontinence starts at birth
Ectopic ureter
and is usually detected soon after the puppy is separated from
her littermates. The incontinence does not respond to PPA.
The most accurate diagnostic technique for detecting ectopic
Oam piad a ose si doss dosiso s saa
correct the ectopic ureter by diversion of ureteral urine flow
Corrected ureter
 directly into the urinary bladder.2 This cystoscopic technique
avoids surgery. Although owners are usually pleased by the
results, most dogs continue to require medical treatment to
best manage their incontinence and urinary tract infections.
An ectopic ureter does not enter the bladder trigone in
Hgure 17-41 Sagittal illustrations of a ureter entering the cystic
normal fashion but rather enters the urinary system distally
serosa just cranial to the trigone. The normal ureter travels
(Figure 17-41). Most are bilateral, but the unilateral type is
within the wall briefly before entering the cystic lumen within the
 also common. 1,3-5 Most ectopic ureters enter the serosa of the 
trigone (upper). Intramural ectopic ureters travel in the wall from
the entrance into the cystic serosa to an entrance into the lower
bladder but continue within the wall of the urethra as an intra-
wrogenital tract (middle). This entrance may be into the cranial
mural ectopic ureter to enter distally into the urethra, vesti-
region of the urethra or at any point in the urethra, vagina, or
bule, or vagina. A variation of the ectopic ureter is a trough,
vestibule. Cystoscopic correction of an ectopic ureter involves
which continues as a depression into the urethra from the
transection of the tissue between the urethra and intramural
ectopic ureter (lower). This membrane is thin. Extreme caution
normal entry into the trigone.3 Some intramural ectopic ure-
should be taken ifthe site for transection is not obvious. (Art @ 2010
ters are fenestrated such that urine has an option of flowing
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
directly into the bladder or through the distal ectopic portion
to enter the distal urogenital tract.l3 An extramural ectopic
ureter bypasses the normal ureteral entry site to directly enter
More recent techniques approach the ectopic ureter via a
 the lower urogenital tract, but these are considered extremely
ventral cystotomy. With or without a catheter in the ectopic
rare. The consistent sign is incontinence, and most patients
ureter, a 5-mm incision is made through the cystic mucosa
have continual or very frequent dribbling. This type of incon-
and into the ectopic ureter within the trigone. A neoure-
tinence is not that typically associated with dribbling primar-
terostomy is done at this incision site, and then the distal
ily during recumbency caused by spay-associated sphincter
ureter is either ligated several times4,8,9 or resected, followed
deficiency. Most dogs have a moist perineum, and some
by closure of the submucosal defect.9,10 Regardless of the
develop perivulvar dermatitis. Some patients, especially cats,
surgeon's preferred technique for rerouting, nonfunctional,
groom themselves sufficiently to reduce the client's percep-
hydronephrotic kidneys or those with severe pyelonephritis
tion of incontinence. In addition to an anatomic misdirection
are candidates for removal (ureteronephrectomy) when the
of urine flow as an incontinence mechanism, urethral sphinc-
contralateral kidney has normal function.4,7,10 In a recent 
ter tone is decreased as reflected by decreased maximal ure-
report, 15 of 21 dogs (71%) with resection of the distal seg-
thral pressure on a urethral pressure profle.6 Some dogs also
ment and 7 of 14 (50%) of those with ligation remained
appear to have a short urethra and a pelvic bladder.4 Ectopic
incontinent.? When medical treatment was combined with
ureters are usually reported in female dogs, but cats and male
surgery, incontinence declined to 43% in both groups.9 This
dogs have been diagnosed34 and treated with cystoscopy.7
is similar to my recollection of at least a 50% rate of some
The goal of all ectopic ureter treatments is to relocate
 incontinence in dogs treated with reimplantation of the ure-
the termination of the ureter back into the bladder (Figure
ter into the cranial part of the bladder. My results with cys-
17-42).8,9 Simply redirecting urine flow does not guarantee
toscopic laser treatment of ectopic ureter in female dogs and
 normal urinary control because many of these patients have
cats has found that 11 of 17 were dry with either cystoscopy
 congenital incompetence of the urethral sphincter mecha-
alone (6) or cystoscopy and PPA (5). The outcomes of the
nism.6,9,10 The traditional treatments have included laparot-
remaining 6 were improved, and 5 were greatly improved.
omy and cystotomy. The frst technique ligated the ectopic
ureter at its entrance into the cystic serosa, and the ureter was
PATIENT INDICATIONS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS
reimplanted into a cranial region of the bladder.34,8-10 Reim-
plantation techniques used at that time, particularly tunnel-
Incontinent young dogs should have cystoscopy as part of
ing of the urethra within the wall, resulted in some patients
their diagnostic evaluation. Ectopic ureter has been initially
having strictures and hydroureter or hydronephrosis.4,8
diagnosed in dogs as old as 10 years, but these dogs had had
CHAPTER 17 Cystoscopy
·551
Figure 17-42 A, The diode laser generator is 980 nm, and energy is delivered through a glass fber passed through the operating channel of
fber (below). The tip of the center of the glass fiber is blacked with carbon by fring the laser while touching a wood depressor. (Photographs
by Chris Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
incontinence for most of their recorded lives. In some young
 Imaging before cystoscopy varies between clinicians, but I
dogs with recurrent urinary tract infections, ectopic ureter
 prefer survey radiography of the abdomen and ultrasonog-
should also be suspected as a potential cause. Urinary infec-
raphy of the urinary system. Radiographs may detect calculi
tion is common in dogs with ectopic ureter and may be dif-
secondary to infections, and ultrasonography may identify
ficult to manage without correction of the ectopic ureter.
Cystoscopy should also be used in cats and male dogs sus-
teral obstruction and infection, as well as pyelonephritis.
 pected of having ectopic ureter.
Some clinicians prefer excretory urography or retrograde
■ INSTRUMENTATION
additional expense and hassle because an ectopic ureter can
 be quickly and more accurately located with cystoscopy in
The most commonly used rigid cystoscopes are the 1.9-mm
female dogs and cats. Accuracy of contrast procedures is lim-
and 2.7-mm cystoscopes. In male dogs, a flexible 2.5- or 2.8-
ited.l There is a very low likelihood that an ectopic ureter
mm urethroscope is required. I have successfully treated one
is extramural. Contrast CT scans are also being used on an
female cat using a 1.9-mm cystoscope and diode laser. My
experimental basis. My primary indication for urethrogra-
 colleague, Allyson Berent, has used the flexible urethroscope
 phy is incontinence in the young male dog.
and diode laser to correct ectopic ureters in male dogs.'
The primary preoperative patient care provided is man-
 Catheters or cardiovascular guides may be passed through
agement of the urinary tract infection. A sterile urine cul-
the cystoscope's operating channel and into the ectopic ure-
ture may be difcult to obtain, and cystoscopy may need to
ter to confrm and maintain lumen identifcation during
 proceed as the definitive treatment to aid in management of
laser treatment. The most commonly used laser for cutting
infection.
and coagulating under water is the diode laser, which has a
wavelength of 980 nm. I have used radiofrequency to per-
form the same treatment in one dog, and others have used
Anesthesia
the holmium:YAG laser (200- or 400-μm fiber with a 2100
 General anesthesia is required. Antibiotics, preferably based
nm wavelength). The diameter of the diode laser glass fiber
 on culture sensitivity testing, are administered during
is up to 600 μm for the operating channel of a 1.9-mm cysto-
cystoscopy.
 scope and 800 μm for a 2.7-mm cystoscope.
Procedure
■ PATIENT EVALUATION AND
PREPARATION
 Dogs and cats are placed on their back for cystoscopy. The
vulva and vestibule should be examined for signs of local
The owner should be thoroughly questioned about the
infection and a recessed vulva. Most dogs have focal areas of
 presence, characteristics, and severity of urinary inconti
lymphocytic or plasmacytic inflammation. An episioplasty
nence. All patients must have a urinalysis and urine culture.
should be considered when an ascending urinary tract infec-
 The standard preoperative laboratory workup of complete
tion appears related to a recessed vulva. A complete cystos-
 blood count and a modest chemistry profle should be done.
 copy includes examination of the vestibule, vagina, urethra,
552·PARTTWO
RigidEndoscopy
D
Figure 17-43 Two-year-old spayed female Siberian husky with incontinence after being obtained as a puppy. A, Bilateral intramural ectopic
ureters were present: the right was dilated and entered the urethra just inside the vestibulourethral junction, and the left entered just caudal 
to the cystourethral junction. The right ectopic ureter is dorsal (lower lumen as the dog is lying on her back). B, The membrane between the
urethra and ectopic ureter is being incised using the diode laser its energy is being delivered through the glass fiber. Because ofthe size ofthe
hydroureter, no guide is needed. C, The completed treatment of the ectopic ureter with new ureteral stoma being inside the bladder. D, The 
completed transection ofthe band at the vestibulovaginal junction. ( Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
bladder, and trigone in an effort to identify ureteral open-
into the urinary system for further examination and laser
ings. This may require several entries and exits ofthe urethra
treatment. The use of a guide also aids in maintaining iden-
and bladder; the most revealing observations are frequently
tification of the lumen during laser resection. Some clini-
during cystoscope withdrawal. Normal ureters enter the tri-
cians like to inject contrast media into the ureter to delineate
gone with varying shapes depending on bladder distension.
the ectopic ureter's position under fluoroscopic guidance.
Pulsatile urine ejection from the ureters is normal. Most
The membrane between the urethra and the ectopic ureter
 dogs with an ectopic ureter also have a vertical band of tissue
is transected starting at the caudal opening of the ectopic
 or mesonephric septal remnant at the vestibulovaginal junc-
ureter (see Figures 17-41, 17-43, B, 17-44, C, and 17-45,
tion (Figures 17-43 through 17-46).1 Most are bifenestrated
B). This transection is continued cranially to the bladder
with separate openings on each side of the remnant, con-
trigone (see Figure 17-43, C). The tip is “blackened" in an
necting the vestibule to the vagina (see Figures 17-44, B, and
effort to focus energy at the tip for contact cutting and to
17-46). Band width and length vary. Some continue cranially
reduce radiating laser beams. Care is taken to cut only the
as a medial septum, even for most of the vaginal length
tissue between the ureter and urethra, which will avoid
 If the ureter is dilated, laser treatment is started (see
or at least reduce collateral injury. Care must be taken to
Figures 17-43, B, and 17-44, C). If the ureter is small or
avoid cutting the catheter or prolonging exposure of the
there are reservations about the diagnosis, a flexible cardio-
laser on a metal guide. The transection is continued well
vascular guide or catheter is passed through the operating
into the trigone. When a persisting vestibulovaginal vertical
channel into the ectopic ureter (see Figure 17-45, B). The
membrane is present, it is transected. I am not aware of any
guide or catheter should be long enough that it can be left
documentation that this membrane is involved in inconti-
in the ureter while the cystoscope is withdrawn. With the
nence, but its presence appears to provide dorsal traction
catheter and guide in the ureter, the cystoscope is replaced
on the urethral meatus.
CHAPTER 17Cystoscopy
553
A
C
Figure 17-44 Nine-month-old female Australian shepherd with incontinence since purchase as a puppy. A, Bilateral intramural ectopic
ureters were present:the left was dilated and entered the urethrajust inside the vestibulourethral junction,and the right entered 2 cm
caudal to the cystourethral junction. This view is ofthe right ureter. B, The persisting vertical membrane at the vestibulovaginal junction is
very broad, and the left ectopic ureter can be seen just inside the urethra. C, The membrane between the urethra and right ectopic ureter is
being incised using the diode laser; its energy is being delivered through the glass fiber. D, No guide is used because the ureter is dilated and
the lumen is easily maintained.(From SmithAL,Radlinsky MG,RawlingsCA:Cystoscopic diagnosis and treatment ofectopic uretersin female
dogs: 16 cases (2005-2008), I Am Vet Med Assoc 237:191-195, 2010.)
A
B
squ e p aepenbu addn u uuado iapeq a ou ean aj aeua au uun jeammsan auj u g
stricture, which the frst endoscopist could not traverse with a 2.7-mm cystoscope. This stricture was dilated and then opened more
 completely with the use of the diode laser. B, A metal cardiovascular guide was used to define the lumen of the ectopic ureter as cutting with
the diode laser was performed. This was done because the anatomy was atypical for ectopic ureters, and the ureters were small. (Frorm Smith 
Assoc237:191-195,2010.)
554·PART TWO
Rigid Endoscopy
cases were with small ureters and could have been avoided
by use of a guide in the ureter(s). Another problem is the
potential for a stricture at the new ureteral stoma into the
bladder. I am aware of this occurring in only one patient,
which required a nephrectomy.
 If an obstruction develops, diagnosis should be possible
with ultrasonography during the first month after cystos-
copy. If the obstruction is detected early, surgical redirec-
tion of the ureter, or the placement of a ureteral stent, into
the bladder should resolve this problem before kidney injury
becomes irreversible.
Figure 17-46 Five-month-old female mixed breed dog, which
 POSTOPERATIVE CARE
had dribbled since obtained at 10 weeks of age. This view from the
vestibule could be initially confusing because openings lateral to
Pain management and fluid administration are the primary
the vestibulovaginal vertical band could initially be considered as
concerns after laser treatment. Pain after cystoscopic correc
 ou suuado ads e ue a saia sdoa eaie
tion should be minimal, but either a mild narcotic or non-
vagina. The small bilateral ectopic ureters can be seen just caudal
steroidal analgesics are indicated. Maintenance intravenous
to the vesiculourethral junction. (Photograph @ 2010 University of
fluids are continued in the early period after cystoscopy in an
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
effort to ensure urine production and flow. Urination must
be observed. Urinary obstructions have not been reported,
■ POTENTIAL INTRAOPERATIVE
but swelling due to extensive trauma might occur. Some
COMPLICATIONS
dogs develop urgency after cystoscopy, and this is detected by
observation of repeated attempts to void. When only urgency
On introspection, because there is a learning curve with
develops, the dog should still be able to empty the bladder.
the frst 10 procedures, this technique is better performed.
in the presence of an experienced cystoscopist, preferably
■ FOLLOWW-UP MONITORING
one who has done several laser treatments. I have not had
a perforation while using a laser on an ectopic ureter, but
An ultrasound performed within a month is ideal. Managing
the urinary system's wall has been perforated by inexperi-
an ectopic ureter patient requires a long-term commitment to
 enced operators. When urethral perforations have occurred
monitoring for urinary incontinence and infection. Most dogs
during cystoscopy, the usual succesful treatment involves
have marked improvement of their urinary control after cor-
maintaining a urethral catheter for at least 2 days. My less
rective cystoscopy. Most also require PPA (1.5 mg/kg, three
severe complication has been losing identification of the
times a day) for maximal control. Although ovarian removal
lumen. One resulted in transection of the contralateral ecto-
may produce the mechanism for spay-associated urinary con-
pic ureter while incising a dilated ureter in the area of a small
tinence, I still recommend spaying. In addition to the usual
and shorter ectopic ureter. In both cases, it was possible to
benefits provided by a spay, sterilization avoids transmission
repeat the cystoscopic treatment at a later date. Both of these
 of any potential genetic predisposition for ectopic ureter.
REFERENCES
1. Cannizzo KL, McLoughlin MA, Mattoon JS, et al: Evaluation
7. Berent AC, Mayhew PD, Porat-Mosenco Y: Use of cystoscopic-
of transurethral cystoscopy and excretory urography for
guided laser ablation for treatment of intramural ureteral
6h) sas  so aey un saa oa jo sis
ectopia in male dogs: four cases (2006-2007), J Am Vet Med
2000), JAm Vet Med Assoc 223:475-481, 2003.
Assoc 232:1026-1034, 2008.
 2. McCarthy TC: Transurethral cystoscopy for correction of
8. Rawlings CA: Correction of congenital defects of the urogen-
ectopic ureter, Vet Med 102:558-560, 2006.
ital system, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 14:49-60,
 3. Stone EA, Mason LK: Surgery of ectopic ureters: types, method
1984.
of correction, and postoperative results, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
9. Mayhew PD, Lee KC, Gregory SP,et al: Comparison of two
26:81-88, 1990.
surgical techniques for management of intramural ureteral
4. Holt PE, Moore AH: Canine ureteral ectopia: an analysis of 175
ectopia in dogs: 36 cases (1994-2004), J Am Vet Med Assoc
cases and comparison of surgical treatments, Vet Rec 136:345-
229:389-393, 2006.
349, 1995.
10. McLoughlin MA, Chew DJ: Diagnosis and surgical manage-
 5. Lamb CR, Gregory SP: Ultrasonographic findings in 14 dogs
ment of ectopic ureters, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 15:17-24,
with ectopic ureter, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:218-333, 1998.
2000.
6. Lane IF, Lappin MR, Siem HB IIl: Evaluation of results of
11. Smith AL, Radlinsky MG, Rawlings CA: Cystoscopic diagnosis
preoperative urodynamic measurements in nine dogs with
and treatment of ectopic ureter in female dogs: 16 cases (2005-
ectopic ureters, J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1348-1357, 1995.
2008), JA VMA, 237:191-195, 2010.
18
CHAPIER
Vaginoscopy and Transcervical
Catheterization in the Bitch
Autumn P. Davidson
Cryopreservation and subsequent thawing diminish semen
by the normal anatomy of the canine vagina and is now
quality, necessitating special insemination technology. Fro-
greatly facilitated by the development of rigid cystoure-
zen thawed semen needs to be placed close to the site of
throscopes with excellent optics and accessories permitting
fertilization (the fallopian tube) for acceptable conception
insufflation and tissue sampling for cytologic, histopatho-
rates; intrauterine insemination is highly recommended.4
logic, and culture analysis.l Plain radiography provides lim-
The process and resultant quality of canine cryopreservation
ited information about the female reproductive tract, and
have improved with time; however, insemination techniques
contrast radiography requires anesthesia and evaluates only
 remained challenging until transcervical endoscopic intra-
the lumen. Ultrasonography provides good information
uterine access was developed. Data supporting the benefit of
about the reproductive tract but has limited penetration into
intrauterine deposition of frozen thawed semen exist (40%
the vagina within the pelvic canal. Sampling of the female
to 90% conception rates); it can then be extrapolated that
aisau si aoioide no Adooede ea loen anoidai
better conception rates will occur with intrauterine insemi-
 pelvic canal anatomy again limits access.
nation of chilled, extended, or otherwise compromised 
The normal anatomy of the vagina and cervix in the bitch
semen.5,6 Ovulation timing (e.g-, vaginal cytology and serial
has also hampered transcervical access to the canine uterus
progesterone and luteinizing hormone [LH] evaluation)
until rigid cystourethroscopes were developed.12 Histori-
best dictates the optimal day(s) for insemination, typically
cally, intrauterine insemination required an invasive proce-
3 to 6 days affer the LH surge. The initial rise in the proges-
dure (laparotomy or laparoscopy) in the bitch. In addition
terone level (first day that the progesterone level is between 2
to its invasiveness, laparotomy requires general anesthesia,
 and 3 ng/mL) estimates the LH surge.
which many clinicians and clients find objectionable for an
elective procedure such as artifcial insemination. The lapa-
■ INSTRUMENTATION
roscopic approach to the canine uterus has been used infre-
quently, especially in the practice setting, similarly because
Endoscopically guided transcervical catheterization requires
of its relative invasiveness (i.e., multiple incisions and insuf-
the use of a rigid cystourethroscope, the standard com-
flation) and because it requires special equipment, expertise,
ponents of which are a forward oblique telescope with a
and again, anesthesia. In some countries, elective surgeries
30-degree viewing angle; a protective sheath with Luer-Lok
such as these are not permitted.
adapters and an obturator; a telescope bridge with an instru-
ment channel; and a cold light source. The 30-degree angle
■ PATIENT INDICATIONS
is optimal for visualization of the dorsally oriented cervix.
Several models and sizes of rigid cystourethroscopes are
Vaginoscopy (often coupled with cystoscopy) is an impor-
now available. The original cystourethroscope has a 3.5-mm
tant component in the diagnostic approach to vulvar and
forward oblique telescope with a 30-degree viewing angle;
vestibulovaginal disorders associated with abnormal vul-
a 22F protective sheath with two Luer-Lok adapters and an
vovaginal discharge, excessive vulvar licking/excoriation,
obturator; and a telescope bridge with one 10F instrument
perivulvar dermatitis, dysuria, urinary incontinence, or dif-
channel. The working length of this scope is 29 cm (Hopkins
-e oe pn sns q 
Telescope, cystoscopy/reproductive sheath with obturator,
ties (Figures 18-1 and 18-2).3
bridge with instrument channel; Karl Storz, Goleta, Calif.;
555
556 ·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 18-1 Vaginal endoscopic view of a grass awn embedded in
the cranial vagina.
A
Hgure 18-4 A, The 18-cm cystourethroscope: (from top)
telescope, sheath, obturator. B, Assembled.
10F catheter) can be used for giant breeds (Davidson mul-
tipurpose rigid telescope, standard operating sheath, sin-
Figure 18-2 Vaginal endoscopic view of a vestibulovaginal
gle-channel bridge; Endoscopy Support Services, Brewster,
developmental anomaly (dorsoventral septate band) preventing
N.Y.; Figures 18-4 and 18-5). Recently, a new ureteroreno-
natural breeding.
scope has been promoted for vaginoscopy and transcervical
catheterization with a 6-degree viewing angle telescope and
instrument sheath combined into one 8.0-13.5F unit, two
Luer-Lok adaptors, a one-way instrument port with angled
eyepiece, and a working length of either 34 or 43 cm. The
instrument channel of the ureterorenoscope accommodates
up to a 5.5F catheter or instrument (Ureterorenoscope; Karl
Storz, Goleta, Calif.; Figure 18-6).
 A video camera can be attached to the endoscopes, per-
mitting enlarged imaging of the procedure. Video endos-
 copy is preferred because it also allows both the operator
 and audience (e.g-, the client) to comfortably watch the
entire insemination procedure. Unlike with gastrointestinal
endoscopy, electronic air pumps for insufflation and suction
 are not generally necessary and may be hazardous to friable
urogenital tissues, creating excessive distension of the vagina
Figure 18-3 The 29-cm cystourethroscope. From left, clockwise:
 or bladder. Adequate air insuffation or suction can be
the bridge, sheath, telescope, and light source/cable.
achieved, if needed, by connecting intravenous tubing and
a syringe with a three-way stopcock to one of the working
Figure 18-3). A smaller version (2.7-mm Multi-Purpose
channels; this arrangement is sometimes useful for insuffla-
Rigid endoscope, 18-cm length; Karl Storz, Goleta, Calif.)
tion for routine vaginoscopy in a nonestrual bitch and occa-
 accommodating a 5.5F catheter (such as is used for rhinos-
sionally for suctioning of copious estrual fluid to improve
copy) can be used for very small breeds (less than 4.5 kg),
visualization of the vaginal lumen in estrual bitches. Air dis-
 and a larger one (33-cm working length accommodating a
tension with an insufflation bulb also works well. Irrigation
CHAPTER 18  Vaginoscopy and Transcervical Catheterization in the Bitch ·  557
 Table 18-1 Equipment for Endoscopic Vaginoscopy
Equipment
Necessary
Optional
Rigid vaginoscope
V (D.T)
Light source and cable
V (D.T)
Video carmera, screen
/ (D.T)
Catheters (5.5-10.0F)
/ (D.T)
Biopsy instrument
V(D)
Sterile guarded culturette
/ (D)
Air insufflation bulb
/ (D.T)
Hydraulic table
V (D.T)
Hydraulic chair
V (D,T)
D, Diagnostic vaginoscopy; T, transcervical insemination.
and 8F diameters. Routine endoscopic biopsy forceps and
(guarded) culture instruments can be used for intrauterine
sample acquisition, and endoscopic retrieval forceps can be
used for vaginoscopic foreign body removal.
Lubrication of the endoscope is seldom necessary in
estrual bitches. If a lubricant is used, it should be absolutely
nonspermicidal and water soluble (Priority Care nonsper-
micidal sterile lubricating jelly, First Priority Inc., Elgin, Il1.)
B
and should be applied only to the midportion of the sheath.
Care must be taken to avoid contact with the lens, which
Figure 18-5 A, The 33-cm cystourethroscope: (from top)
would obscure visibility (Table 18-1).
obturator, sheath, bridge, and telescope. B, Assembled.
 PATIENT PREPARATION
With proper saline irrigation or air insufflation distending
vaginal folds, no special preparation of nonestrual bitches is
necessary before vaginoscopy.
Beyond ovulation timing necessary to identify the fertile
window of time appropriate for breeding, no specific patient
preparation is necessary for transcervical insemination. The
external lips of the vulva can be swabbed gently with isopro-
 Pyl alcohol to remove any substantial debris accumulated as
 a consequence of estrual discharge.
■ RESTRAINT
Figure 18-6 The ureterorenoscope.
Diagnostic vaginoscopy is most commonly performed in
with normal saline best improves visualization of the vaginal
 ovariohysterectomized bitches or in intact bitches in anes-
vault by distending the vaginal folds in nonestrual bitches.
trus or diestrus. Without the protective effect of estrogen on
An 8F urinary catheter is an appropriate size for most
the vaginal mucosa (causing marked thickening, infolding.
bitches for cervical catheterization, although a 5.5F catheter
and keratinization of the wall), vaginal endoscopy can be
is sometimes required for small or maiden bitches (Sover-
uncomfortable and potentially traumatic without adequate
eign, Tyko Healthcare Group, Mansfield, Mass.). The largest
 patient immobilization and analgesia. An appropriate gen-
catheter accommodated offers the best rigidity for manipu-
eral anesthetic is indicated. The patient is then positioned in
lation through the cervix and minimizes reflux of the insem-
padded dorsal or lateral recumbency to facilitate entry into
inant. A stylet can be placed inside the catheter if increased
the vaginal vault with a rigid endoscope. Ventral recum-
rigidity is required. Polypropylene urinary catheters are used
bency requires hindquarter elevation with foam wedges or
commonly, recently, commercial catheters including a stylet
sandbagging and is less desirable.
have become available (Canine TCI [Transcervical Insemi-
 Estrual bitches tolerate vaginoscopy without sedation or
nation Catheter]TM, Minitube USA, Verona, Wis.) in 5.5
 anesthesia well because of the hormone-induced changes
558·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
in the vaginal mucosa. Transcervical catheterization is best
paracervix, necessitating the use of smaller diameter, rigid
accomplished with the bitch standing on a nonskid surface
equipment to access the cervical area.
under light restraint and with gentle support of the abdo-
The DMF forms a distinct caudal tubercle where it ends in
men to inhibit sitting. The operator should work from a sit-
the midvagina. The cervix is approximately 2.5 cm cranial to
ting position, with the arms raised to the level of the vulva
the caudal tubercle of the DMF. The canine cervix is difficult
to minimize muscle fatigue. An adjustable examination
to access blindly. It lies diagonally across the uterovaginal
table and chair can facilitate operator comfort. With proper
junction, and the canal of the cervix is directed craniodor-
restraint and table setup, the procedure can be accom-
sally from the vagina to the uterus. The vaginal portion of
 plished by one operator. However, the participation of the
the cervix appears as alarge tubercle when viewed endoscop-
breeder or client for restraint and observation generally is
ically (Figure 18-9). The internal (uterine) os of the cervi-
rewarding.?
cal canal faces almost directly dorsally, whereas the external
(vaginal) os is directed toward the ventral vaginal floor. The
vaginal os is often located ventrally or laterally in the cervical
■ PROCEDURE
tubercle, in the center of a rosette of distinct mucosal fur-
Anatomy
rows. The cervical canal varies in diameter with the stage of
the estrous cycle and parity, nonestrual and maiden bitches
The vagina of the bitch is relatively long compared with
are expected to have a narrower cervical lumen. The actual
other domestic animals; the total length from the cervix to
appearance and general orientation of the vaginal cervix can
the vulva (including the vestibule) has been reported to be
vary from day to day during the estrous cycle.
10 to 14 cm in an 11-kg bitch. The canine cervix is not acces-
The midvaginal region is characterized by a somewhat
-enia aq li us iou ruu iad uondid ieni Aq ais
narrowed, crescentlike lumen. When viewed endoscopically,
ized with an ordinary vaginal speculum or otoscope, which
are both too short. Consequently, equipment for visualizing
and approaching the canine cervix must be long (e.g, up to
29 cm for large breeds and 33 cm for giants) (Figure 18-7).
In addition, the presence of vaginal mucosal folds and the
position of the cervix in the bitch require the use of rigid
equipment to access the cervix.
The paracervix, the most cranial portion of the vagina,
surrounds the cervix and is dominated dorsally by a well-
 defined mucosal ridge,the dorsal median fold (DMF) (Figure
18-8). Cranially, the paracervical region ends in the fornix,
a dead-end space cranioventral to the vaginal portion of the
cervix that appears as a blind pocket when viewed endo-
scopically. The DMF extends from just distal to the vaginal
portion of the cervix to the midvaginal region. It narrows the
Hgure 18-8 The dorsal median fold (DMF) provides a landmark
for cranial passage of the vaginal endoscope.
Figure 18-7 Vaginal endoscope length necessary for a Newfoundland
bitch; the position of the cervix is approximately at the levelofthe
Hgure 18-9 Roset appearance ofthe cervix as viewed from the
cranial thigh.
vaginal vault.
CHAPTER 18  Vaginoscopy and Transcervical Catheterization in the Bitch ·  559
the caudal tubercle and narrowed middle vaginal lumen
better visualization of the os. If a large amount of estrual
give the misleading appearance of tissue with an opening;
fluid impedes visualization of the cranial vagina, removal of
this is the false cervix. When rigid insemination pipettes
the scope and having the bitch sit for a few moments can
are introduced blindly into this area, often some resistance
be helpful (Figure 18-11). Aspirating the fluid through the
is felt, followed by advancement; this may lead some clini-
catheter and gentle air insufflation can also improve vis-
cians to believe that they have accomplished an intrauterine
ibility. The tip of the polypropylene catheter or endoscopic
insemination.7
instrument is advanced into the cervical os by simultaneous
manipulation of the cervix using the endoscope and cath-
eter. The rigidity of the endoscope permits manipulation of
Technique
the cervical tubercle to access the os and start insertion of the
The endoscope is introduced through the vulva along the
catheter (Figure 18-12).
dorsal commissure, through the vestibule, over the brim of
After insertion of the tip of the catheter, the viewing end
the pelvis, and into the vagina in a dorsal direction. To avoid
of the scope must be dropped significantly to align the cath-
the clitoral fossa and urethral orifice, the clinician must direct
 eter parallel to the direction of the cervical canal. Once the
the end of the endoscope dorsally (Figure 18-10). It is surpris-
scope position is parallel to the cervical canal, the catheter
ingly easy to enter the urethra, which can be differentiated
 can usually be steadily advanced through the cervix with a
from the vagina by the characteristic smoother, more vascu-
twirling motion (Figure 18-13). For intrauterine insemina-
lar appearance of the urethral mucosa. If urethral entrance
tion, the catheter is passed in as far as possible without meet-
is achieved, urine often wicks rapidly into the operator's lap.
ing resistance. The uterine lumen of the average-sized bitch
 The operator then advances the scope between the vagi-
nal folds by observing and following the direction of the vag-
inal lumen. During estrus, the vaginal lumen is cavernous
in appearance until the false cervix is approached. Here the
caudal tubercle of the DMF is commonly seen as a promi-
nent landmark. Following the DMF facilitates passage into
the cranial vagina. The vaginal portion of the cervix appears
 as a distinct tubercle with a cobblestone appearance due to
a rosette of mucosal furrows converging at the os. The false
cervix, by comparison, is smooth and has a single horizontal
fissure. The actual cervical os sometimes can be identified by
serosa nguineous to hemorrhagic fluid of uterine origin flow-
ing from the cervical canal.
The vaginal cervical os can be difficult to visualize because
it tends to be located ventrally or laterally on the cervical
tubercle. The scope and catheter can be used to manipulate
Hgure 18-11 Pooling of estrual fluid in the paracervical region
the somewhat moveable cervix into a position that permits
obscures visualization of the cervical os.
Figure 18-10 Directing the scope dorsally when entering the 
Hgure 18-12 Manipulation of the cervix to improve access to
vestibule avoids entry into the urethra facilitating passage into the
the vaginal os can be accomplished with manipulation of the rigid
vaginal lumen.
vaginal endoscope and the catheter.
560 ■ PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 18-13 Catheterized cervix. The catheter is twirled cranially
 gently until resistance is met.
Hgure 18-15 The minimal amount of air (usually 1 to 2 mL)
necessary to evacuate all semen from the catheter is injected after
the infusion.
instrumentation used successfully. Rarely, access to the cer-
vical canal cannot be achieved. A repeated attempt should
be made in 24 hours because the morphology of the cervix
changes under hormonal influence. For this reason, frozen
semen should not be thawed until successful catheterization
 of the cervix has been accomplished. The practitioner and
client should agree on a plan for vaginal or alternate intra-
uterine insemination beforehand, in the rare event that cath-
eterization cannot be accomplished by the end of the bitch's
fertile window. Repeat inseminations may provide better
sperm cell availability during the fertile period of the estrous
cycle and may improve conception and litter size. The mini-
Figure 18-14 Infusion of semen (amber fluid) is shown, without
mal inseminant dose in the dog has not been established; 100
reflux.
 million viable motile and morphologically normal sperm
 cells are advised.8-10
in estrus can accommodate approximately 2 mL of semen,
and semen has been shown to distribute throughout both
 SAMPLE PROCUREMENT
horns even when inseminated into only one. Minimal back-
flow of semen occurs with proper catheter placement (side
 Sampling of the vaginal luminal content, mucosal cytology,
ports are well within the uterine lumen) (Figure 18-14). In
 or biopsy is performed under direct visualization, with the
the event of visible semen backflow, the insemination should
use of standard endoscopic instrumentation. Sampling of
be stopped and the catheter repositioned cranially or cau-
 intrauterine contents for culture or endometrial cytology or
dally. Minimizing the amount of air introduced into the
biopsy is accomplished blindly, again with the use of stan-
uterine lumen before insemination also reduces backflow. A
 dard endoscopic instrumentation.3,11,12
small amount of air (1 to 2 mL) is used to flush all the semen
from the catheter into the uterus (Figure 18-15). Catheters
 POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS AFTER
(8F) with beveled, open-ended construction rather than
THE PROCEDURE
side ports are ideal but not readily available. For intrauter-
ine diagnostics, culture and biopsy instruments are similarly
Concerns about the introduction of vaginal flora into the
advanced until contact is made with the uterine mucosa.
uterine lumen through transcervical catheterization have
Saline can be infused in and out ofthe uterine lumen through
not been realized. Normal vaginal flora can be found tran-
siently in the uterus during proestrus and estrus, and vaginal
The ease of transcervical catheterization should be
flora is known to be introduced into the uterine lumen dur
recorded in the medical record for each bitch (1, easy [less
than 5 minutes]; 2, modest difficulty; 3, moderately dif-
of the hindquarters of bitches is not necessary or beneficial
ficult; 4, very difficult; 5, not achievable), as well as the
after insemination.
Vaginal endoscopes used for insemination should be
taken to clean the lens surface to remove any accumulated
cleaned after use but do not need sterilization; in fact, con-
 debris; this is best accomplished with a cotton tip appli-
cerns about residual spermicidal action make sterilization
cator and isopropyl alcohol. The scope should be com-
undesirable even though semen is only in contact with the
pletely dry before use. Catheters should be used once and
catheter with proper technique. Vaginal endoscopes used
 are sterile when removed from their packaging. Cytology
for diagnostics similarly do not need to be sterilized as the
and biopsy instruments should be disinfected before use.
vaginal vault is not sterile. The manufacturer's directions
Culturettes are single use and sterile as packaged. Because
for cleaning, usually with an enzymatic product and disin-
normal vaginal flora can translocate into the uterus dur-
fectant, should be adhered to, followed by thorough rinsing
ing estrus, intrauterine cultures must be interpreted with
with water and, fnally, isopropyl alcohol. Care should be
caution.l2
REFERENCES
1. Lindsay FEF: The normal endoscopic appearance of the caudal
7. Wilson MS: Some aspects of artificial insemination in the bitch,
reproductive tract of the cyclic and non-cyclic bitch: post
using frozen semen. MVSc Thesis, Massey University, New
uterine endoscopy, J Small Anim Pract 24:1, 1983.
Zealand, 1992.
2. Roszel JF: Anatomy of the canine uterine cervix, Compend
 8. Wilson M: Nonsurgical intrauterine artificial insemination in
Contin Educ Vet 14:751, 1992.
bitches using frozen semen, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 47:307-311;
 3. Watts JR, Wright PJ, Whithear KC: Uterine, cervical and vaginal
1993.
microflora of the normal bitch throughout the reproductive
9. Davidson AP, Eilts BE: Advanced small animal reproductive
cycle, J Small Anim Pract 37:54, 1996.
techniques. JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 42:1-8; 2006.
4. Fontbonne A, Badinand F: Canine artifcial insemination with 
10. Wilson MS: Transcervical insemination techniques in the
frozen semen: comparison of intravaginal and intrauterine
bitch, Vet Clin North Am Smmall Anim Pract 31:291-304; 2001.
deposition of semen, J Reprod Fertil Suppl47:325, 1993.
11. Watts JR, Wright PJ: Investigating uterine disease in the
5. Linde-Forsberg C, Forsberg M: Fertility in dogs in relation to
bitch: uterine cannulation for cytology, microbiology and
say um uoeasu jo ais pue al a pue aenb uaas
hysteroscopy, J Small Anim Pract 36:201-206; 1995.
and frozen semen, / Reprod Fertil Suppl 39:299, 1989.
12. Watts JR, Wright PJ, Lee CS: Endometrial cytology of the
 6. Linde-Forsberg C, Holst BS, Govette G: Comparison of fertility
normal bitch throughout the reproductive cycle, J Small Anim
 data from vaginal vs intrauterine insemination of frozen-thawed
Pract 39:2, 1998.
dog semen: a retrospective study、 Theriogenology 52:11-23;
1999.
19
CHAPIER
Rhinoscopy
David K. Saylor and Jarod E. Williams
Rhinoscopic Diagnosis and Treatment of
potential diseases but rarely provides specific information
Nasal Diseases, Transnares Curettage for
about the origin or cure of allergic rhinitis.
Palliation of Malignant Nasal Obstruction
■ CONTRAINDICATIONS
Rhinoscopy is an invaluable component of the nasal
 Rhinoscopy is contraindicated in animals with primary or
workup. Rhinoscopy is used in conjunction with diagnostics
secondary hemostatic defects. Prolonged or excessive epi-
such as blood work, thoracic radiographs, skull radiographs,
 staxis can be seen in the hypertensive patient. Rhinoscopy
and skull computed tomographic (CT) scans or magnetic
should be pursued with extreme caution when a disease pro-
resonance imaging (MRI). It provides visualization of the
cess has infiltrated the cribriform plate or there is evidence of
 nasal cavity, choanae, nasopharynx, and in some patients,
increased intracranial pressure.
the frontal sinuses. Chronic, unrelenting nasal disease is a
frustrating problem in dogs and cats, and the primary dis-
■ EQUIPMENT
ease can often be diffcult to diagnose.l,2 Rhinoscopy is use-
ful for both diagnostic and therapeutic case management
There are many equipment options available for direct
and reduces or eliminates the need for rhinotomy in most
visualization of the nasal cavity. The most effective tools
instances. Rhinoscopy is the final component of the nasal
are rigid telescopes with operating sheaths capable of irriga
workup. A sequential diagnostic approach is imperative,
 tion and instrument passage within all nasal cavity regions.
and history taking, signalment, and a physical examina-
 Otoscopes are only useful in nasal disease evaluation within
tion are the building blocks. Nasal disease causes a variety
the most rostral nasal compartment. Although preferred
of symptoms.
by some clinicians, flexible endoscopes are rarely needed
 and provide no additional diagnostic or therapeutic benefit
■INDICATIONS
to the clinician. Rigid endoscopes are the main tools used
in rhinoscopy. Two rigid endoscope sizes are commonly
 Rhinoscopy indications include chronic intermittent
used in small animal rhinoscopy. The 1.9- and 2.7-mm
to paroxysmal sneezing, nasal congestion, epistaxis and
30-degree visual field endoscopes can be used to adequately
stertor, or nasal airflow obstruction. As numerous nasal
evaluate most cats and dogs the clinician will encounter
 diseases will share a common constellation of symptoms,
in clinical practice. In cats and small dogs less than 10 kg.
rhinoscopy serves as an effective tool for diagnosis provi-
the 1.9-mm 30-degree integrated endoscope is preferred
sion and symptom relief from nasal tumors, nasal foreign
(Figure 19-1). In patients more than 10 kg, a 2.7-mm diam-
bodies, fungal rhinitis, and both acquired and congenital
eter multipurpose endoscope with a triport cystoscopy
 nasal anatomic abnormalities such as nasal and nasopha-
 operating sheath is preferred (Figure 19-2). Some clini-
ryngeal stenoses. Rhinoscopy tends to be less effective
cians prefer using the arthroscopy sheath with the 2.7-mm
therapeutically in the management of allergic or lym-
scope as it has a slightly smaller working diameter but a
phoplasmacytic rhinitis, unless debridement of necrotic
greater flow rate when high irrigation is needed (Figure
infected tissue is necessary for symptom relief. In the case
19-3). The integrated scopes and operating sheaths gen-
of allergic rhinitis, rhinoscopy serves to rule out other
erally have a parallel biopsy channel and two additional
563
564·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Figure 19-1 Karl Storz model No. 27030BA 1.9-mm 30-degree
visual feld integrated rigid endoscope. (Photo courtesy of Karl
Hgure 19-3 Karl Storz model No. 64018B5A, 67065C,6412BAR,
Storz GmbH é Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
2.7-mm 30-degree visual field rigid endoscope with cystoscopy
and arthroscopy sheaths. ( Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH é Co.
KG,Tuttlingen,Germany.)
Hgure 19-4 Karl Storz model No. 63005BA, 27026C,27025G,
and instrument diverter. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co.
Figure 19-2 A 30-degree visual field rigid endoscope with camera,
KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
light cable,irrigationline, and biopsy instrument inserted. (Photo
courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH e Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
■ EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT
90-degree channels with stopcocks for irrigation and suc-
WITH NASAL DISEASE
tion. The arthroscopy sheath has only a single 90-degree
History and Signalment
channel for irrigation and is more than adequate in most
instances because the biopsy and suction ports are seldom
A good historical evaluation of the problem along with the
needed for their stated uses. The working length of these
two scopes enables adequate visualization of the choanae
before the physical examination and help guide diagnostics.
and the nasopharynx in all but the largest of dogs. In giant
 Most nasal diseases can have both acute and chronic stages.
breeds, a 4.0-mm diameter 30-degree visual field endo-
 Intermittent and paroxysmal sneezing tends to be seen with
nasal cavity disease, whereas reverse sneezing and hacking
ommended for complete rhinoscopic examination (Figure
(postnasal drip) can indicate problems in the nasopharynx
19-4). Angled visual field endoscopes require some clinician
or middle ear via the eustachian tube. Stertor without sneez-
adaptation but when used properly allow for a much greater
ing often suggests nasopharyngeal disease.
rotated hemispheric view with reduced traumatic leverage
Nasal discharge characteristics are often nonspecific
compared with 0-degree visual field scopes (Figure 19-5).
because serous, mucopurulent, and overt epistaxis can be
This is a clinician preference, and either scope can be used
seen with any type of nasal disease depending on the stage
on a daily basis to perform complete rhinoscopy safely. The
and duration of the problem. Primary epistaxis should sug-
chief advantages of rigid endoscopes are in their ability to
gest potential hypertension, tick-borne vasculitis, or coagu-
provide reliable spatial orientation, high-flow irrigation,
lopathy. These should be investigated bythe clinician before
and the physical leverage used in different rhinoscopic tech-
rhinoscopy. Bilateral signs occur most often with inflam-
niques and to facilitate diagnostic biopsy.
 matory conditions. Anatomic defects such as cleft palates
CHAPTER 19Rhinoscopy
565
BOX19-1
Causes of Nasal Discharge in Dogs and Cats
s6o0
Lymphoplasmacytic hinitis
 Eosinophilic hinitis
 Fungal hinitis (Aspergillus)
Neoplasia
 Foreign bodies
Dental disease
Parasitic rhinitis (Pneumonyssoides)
Ehrlichia canis (Rocky Mountain spotted fever)
30
Nasopharyngeal stenosis
Ciliary dyskinesia
Cleft palate
Otitis media
Distemper virus
Cats
 Lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis
45°
Eosinophilic rhinitis
 Upper respiratory virus (calici, thinotracheitis)
Hgure 19-5 Visual feld options with angled telescopes.
Fungal thinitis (Cryptococcus)
Neoplasia
can cause recurring rhinitis but should be easily identifi-
 Nasopharyngeal polyps
able without specialized diagnostics. Although rare, cili-
 Foreign bodies
 ary dyskinesia should be considered in the very young dog
Dental disease
with recurrent bilateral mucopurulent rhinitis. Unilateral
Otitis media
 Nasopharyngeal stenosis
signs are often associated with foreign bodies, fungal infec-
Parasitic rhinitis (Capillana, Cuterebra)
tions, and tumors. Prior responses to an antibiotic, antiin-
Cleft palate
flammatory, or antihistamine are nonspecific observations
because most significant nasal cavity disease is complicated
by a secondary bacterial infection, local inflammation, and
reflexive mucus production. Inflammatory rhinitis, naso-
 pharyngeal polyps, foreign bodies, and fungal infections
External evaluation of the nose and nasopharymx begins
tend to occur more in younger to middle-aged patients.
with examination of the nostrils and face. The external
Tumors tend to be more prevalent in the middle-aged to
nares should be checked for the character of discharge and
 geriatric populations. Seasonal or geography-associated
ulceration of the epithelium. There is a distinct appearance
 symptoms tend to predict allergic or inflammatory condi-
of the nostril in animals with fungal rhinitis that includes
tions (Box 19-1).
ulceration and hypopigmentation. Hold the mouth closed
with one hand, and close off one nostril with the other. Uni-
lateral or bilateral obstruction can be determined with this
Physical Examination
maneuver. Animals with obstruction become frantic until
The nasal cavity is surrounded by bone, which severely lim-
they can open their mouths and breathe. If air movement is
its physical examination. However, with experience and
attention to detail, the clinician can often localize the site of
disorder causing nasal symptoms. Epistaxis with normal
 disease and narrow or prioritize the list of possible causes
movement of air through both nostrils should raise a red
with a regimented physical examination. Physical examina-
flag. Epistaxis can be unilateral or bilateral and can occur
tion findings are variable and can include the presence or
without primary nasal disease. In animals without obvious
absence of stertor, sneezing or reverse sneezing, symmetry or
obstructive nasal disease, a coagulopathy, tick-borne vascu-
asymmetry of nasal airflow, nasal discharge, external nares
litis, or hypertension must be ruled out before general anes-
 structure, facial symmetry, and ocular retropulsion abnor-
thesia and rhinoscopy are pursued. Fundic examinations
malities, along with localizable pain (especially over the
are recommended in all patients with epistaxis. Palpate the
 maxilla, sinuses, and periocular regions).
face to check for asymmetry or bony defects in the skull.
566·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
 Destruction of bone indicates a neoplastic process. Pain can
be seen with erosive neoplasms but is also seen with fungal
rhinitis and peracute sinusitis. Ifthe patient allows, examine
the oral cavity, teeth, gums, and hard and soft palates both
visually and through palpation. Erosion ofthe hard palate or
ventral deflection of the soft palate by a lesion is sometimes
visible or palpable during oral examination. Severe dental
disease can cause rhinitis or overt oronasal fistulae typically
in geriatric small to miniature dog breeds. Significant gingi-
val recession, overt cavities, and loose teeth should prompt
consideration of nasal disease of dental origin. Retropulsion
of both eyes should be similar. A decrease in caudal move-
 ment of one eye indicates a periorbital, orbital, or retrobul-
bar swelling. Evaluate the movement of air through both
nostrils.
■ PRERHINOSCOPIC CLINICAL
PATHOLOGY
A complete blood count, serum chemistry panel, urinaly-
sis, prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin
time (PTT), and chest radiographs are recommended
 before rhinoscopy in all patients. In at-risk breeds, either 
a Von Willebrand's factor analysis or buccal muco-
sal bleeding time is recommended. If epistaxis without
Hgure 19-6 Canine open-mouth ventrodorsal view with right-
obstruction is present, tick serologic analysis and a blood
 sided destructive soft tissue mass; nasal osteosarcoma.
 pressure measurement is indicated. Fungal serologic anal-
ysis is indicated in specific cases that are determined by
 geographic location and clinical suspicion. Negative fungal
serologic results do not always rule out a particular fungal
infection. Specific fungal serologic and polymerase chain
reaction tests will have variable specificity and sensitivity
with respect to the detection of specific fungal infections
and should be assessed at the interpretation of results.34
Further steps in the diagnostic workup require general
anesthesia.
■ RADIOGRAPHY
Radiographic imaging or CT is always performed before rhi-
noscopy. Rhinoscopic iatrogenic hemorrhaging and irriga-
tion fluid used during the procedure will distort tissue and
create fluid densities that can influence the findings in any
radiographic study. Nasal radiographs can be performed in
most hospitals and, with practice, can be very useful in the
localization and characterization of nasal and nasopharyn-
geal disease.5 Nasal radiographs require general anesthesia
and special patient positioning. Most commonly performed.
are 30-degree beam-angled open-mouth ventrodorsal and
Hgure 19-7 Canine tangential sinus view with right-sided frontal
straight lateral views. The open-mouth view provides a
sinus soft tissue opacity; nasal osteosarcoma.
complete, symmetrical image of the nasal cavity without
superimposition of the mandible. Tumors typically show
the frontal sinuses is achieved with a rostrocaudal tangential
asymmetrical opacities and turbinate destruction (Figure
view (Figure 19-8). This allows comparison of the left and
19-6). Turbinate destruction is also seen with fungal rhini-
right frontal sinuses as the cavities are superimposed on the
tis. The straight lateral view allows evaluation of the naso-
lateral view. Dental films of the maxillary arcade are some
pharynx and frontal sinuses (Figure 19-7). Further study of
times needed to rule out tooth root abscesses and oronasal
CHAPTER 19 Rhinoscopy · 567
Figure 19-8 Feline lateral skull radiograph with nasopharyngeal
mass present.
Hgure 19-10 Canine computed tomographic scan; sagittal section
through the caudal nasal cavity showing left-sided infltrative soft
tissue mass with septal and nasal bone osteolysis.
 Figure 19-9 Feline skull computed tomography image with
nasopharyngeal mass.
fistulae. MRI and CT scans are becoming more commonly
available and provide better detail of the nasal, nasopha-
ryngeal, and sinus cavities and cranial vault anatomy com-
 pared with standard radiography.67 Advanced imaging via
MRI and CT, although considered state of the art, assist in
 description and localization of diseased tissue but have not
 yet produced results specific enough to eliminate the need
for rhinoscopy8,9 (Figures 19-9 through 19-11) (Table 19-1).
Hgure 19-11 Canine three-dimensional computed tomographic
reconstruction; lytic left caudal nasal and frontal sinus chondro-
sarcoma.
■ ANESTHESIA FOR RHINOSCOPY
Although rhinoscopy is less invasive compared with rhi-
 procedure likely to induce significant epistaxis. Anesthetic
notomy, adequate preoperative neuroleptanalgesia, intraop-
induction and intubation should be performed promptly
erative and postoperative analgesia, and antinflammatory
because patients with nasal obstruction cannot breathe when
treatments are recommended based on the patient's preop-
their mouths are closed following heavy sedation. Immedi-
erative evaluation. Preanesthetic nonsteroidal antinflam-
ate airway protection via appropriate endotracheal intuba-
matory drugs (NSAIDs) should be used with caution and
tion will also help to prevent aspiration of infected postnasal
forethought because of potential inhibitory effects of some
secretions. Anesthesia maintenance is often provided via gas
agents on platelet aggregation, as well as other adverse pri-
inhalation because all patients are intubated. During rhi-
 mary and drug interactive secondary reactions.10 Alpha-2
noscopy abrupt and forceful sneezing and nasopharyngeal
agonists can cause significant hypertensionll and should
 reflexive movements can be observed even in the adequately
be considered potentially disadvantageous when used in a
 anesthetized patient. These forceful movements can greatly
568·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Table 19-1 Recommended Prerhinoscopic Evaluation
Chronic bilateral
 Unilateral
Unilateral or
congestion, ±
congestion,
Epistaxis,
Epistaxis,
bilateral nasal
Facial
Diagnostics
stertor
± stertor
obstructed
nonobstructed
obstruction
asymetry
CBC/Chem/UA
V
V
PT/PTT
√
√
Buccal mucosal
 Breed indicated
Breed indicated
Breed indicated
Breed indicated
Breed indicated 
Breed
 bleeding time
 indicated
Blood pressure and 
V
fundic examination
Ehrlichia serology
Fungal titers 
V?
Otoscopy
Thoracic radiographs
2-view
3-view
 3-view
 3-view
3-view
3-view
Skull radiographs
V. bullae views?
V. if no CT/MRI,
V, if no CT/MRI
V. if no CT/MRI
V. if no CT/
Dental obliques?
MRI,
Bullae views?
 Dental
obliques?
CT/MRI
eedaw uqwoypod idid bunewi aeuosan oauewydenwot pandwoo r siseuunaud swauo wnasuno pooq analdwo /wa
throm boplastin time.
affect procedural ease, as well as induce patient trauma and
cause equipment damage. Bilateral nerve blockade at the
level of the infraorbital foramen can greatlyreduce the sneeze
reflex, and a combination of lidocaine and bupivacaine is
 recommended in dogs and at reduced doses in cats. Intraop-
erative and perioperative, culture-guided antibiotic therapy
is recommended because of the high incidence of secondary
 bacterial rhinitis in the patient with nasal disease. Endotra-
cheal tube cuff evaluation should be rechecked before any
flushing because of the potential for iatrogenic flushing or
aspiration of infected nasal secretions into the lungs.
■ TECHNIQUE: RIGID ANTEGRADE
RHINOSCOPY
 Patients are placed in a sternal recumbent position. The
Figure 19-12 Patient positioning for rhinoscopic examination.
cuffed endotracheal tube is secured to the mandible. A
rolled towel is placed beneath the animal's neck to point
the muzzle in a ventral direction, and an oral speculum is
through the nares. In some instances this can result in signif-
placed to hold the mouth open (Figure 19-12). Fluid and
icant hemorrhage that will impair rhinoscopic visualization.
tissue will then tend to run out of the nostrils and mouth
We recommend tissue submission from biopsy samples col-
rather than collect around the larynx. No gauze is stuffed
lected after the rhinoscopic examination has been completed.
in the oropharnx. This impedes the movement of fluid
The scope is inserted at a slightly dorsal angle through the
from the nasopharynx into the mouth. The animal's front
dorsal medial aspect of the nostril. Some prefer entering the
legs are pulled laterally or covered with plastic to prevent
ventral medial aspect of the nostril. Once past the nostril and
soiling. Again, endotracheal tube cuff evaluation should be
the alar cartilage, the scope is straightened and advanced in a
rechecked before any flushing because of the potential for
caudal direction. The nasal septum provides a source of ana-
iatrogenic flushing or aspiration of infected nasal secretions
tomic reference. The three primary meatus should be exam-
into the lungs.
ined. Mucosal changes, turbinate structure, and the nature
Some clinicians prefer to collect samples for culture
of discharge are evaluated. Advance the scope slowly and
before rhinoscopy begins via blind insertion of the culturette
 passively to diminish bleeding. Allow the scope to follow the
CHAPTER 19 Rhinoscopy · 569
Figure 19-13 Normal canine rostral nasal cavity the septum is
medial (left).
Hgure 19-15 Normal canine nasal turbinate mucosa.
Figure 19-14 Normal canine meatus division.
Figure 19-16 Normal canine ethmoid turbinate.
meatus with gentle pressure. When resistance is met or the
can then palpate the scope through the soft palate when it
moves into the nasopharynx. Some force is needed to com-
is restored. The goal is to examine as much of the nasal cavity
plete this procedure and may result in increased bleeding.
 as possible. Ease of examination is influenced by the size of the
 Flexible fberoptic endoscopes are preferred and utilized
animal, breed, skull conformation, and the underlying disease.
effectively by some clinicians, but we do not routinely use
Normal turbinates have a smooth, pink-to-white surface
them for primary evaluations. Retrograde placement of
and a spatial alignment thatprovides channels for the passage
these scopes behind the soft palate allows visualization of
 of air. The color varies and appears tan in the caudal nasal
the nasopharymx, choanae, and caudal segments of the nasal
cavity. Turbinates come in different shapes and sizes, but the
 passages. Flexible endoscopes can also be used in an ante-
surface should be smooth. Ethmoid turbinates in the caudal
 grade fashion through the nostrils in some patients but are
 nasal cavity will have a characteristic stippled or corrugated
limited by the scope and patient size. Irrigation is limited
appearance (Figures 19-13 through 19-16). Ulcerations or
with small fiberoptic scopes; biopsy instruments are diminu-
various proliferations of the mucosa are indicative of dis-
tive at best, and the reliability of representative tissue collec-
ease. These changes are typically diffuse and accompanied
tion should be questioned when this technique is used. The
 by a lot of mucus. Mucus can be thin to purulent. Copious
2.5-mm fiberscope has a single channel used for both irriga-
amounts can be flushed out of the nasal cavity to allow better
 tion and instrument passage. When an instrument is passed,
the irrigation flow is markedly reduced, drastically affecting
full examination of the nasal cavity, run the scope along the
visualization during biopsy collection. The spatial orienta-
floor of the nasal sinus to the level of the choanae. Keep-
tion estimation and direct visualization provided by flexible
 ing the scope pointed in a ventral medial direction prevents
 endoscopes is inferior when compared with rigid telescopes.
inadvertent trauma or penetration of the cribriform plate.
In most cases, rigid telescopes can be passed through
The index finger of the free hand can be used to follow the
the nasal cavity, choanae, and into the nasopharynx, elimi-
 scope as it moves caudally over the hard palate; the surgeon
 nating the need for flexible retrograde rhinoscopy.
570·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
administration of antifungal medications. After sample
collection or TNC the nasal cavity is copiously flushed to
remove loose tissue fragments, blood clots, nasal secretions,
and debris. The oropharynx is carefully suctioned. Extuba-
tion is performed as late as the patient will tolerate to allow
for maximal recovery of gag responses and oral respira-
2
tory compensation with persistent nasal obstruction. Some
 patients require makeshift temporary oral speculum place-
ment to maintain oral airflow. Alternatively, a hanging
3
maxilla technique can be used to provide the same effect.
Of note, some clinicians prefer the use of an air interface
when performing rhinoscopy. Saline irrigation will reduce
visible hyperemia immediately via reflexive mucosal vaso-
 constriction. We have found an air interface to be less advan-
tageous over a saline interface because most patients with
significant nasal disease require lavage of the nasal mucosa
Figure 19-17 Cup forceps comparison left to right, 2.5-mm
for full visualization of nasal anatomy. Preexisting mucus,
fiberoptic and 1.9-mm integrated cup, 2.7-mm cystoscopy
sheath cup, 4.0-mm cystoscopy sheath cup, free cup.
hemorrhages, and debris will greatly reduce the productiv-
ity of the rhinoscopic examination unless properly managed.
After the visual examination is completed, tissue samples
 RHINOSCOPY COMPLICATIONS
are collected for culture and biopsy evaluation. Specialized
endoscopic instruments are available for collecting samples
through the biopsy channel of all scopes. Depending on
1 to 7 days and up to 2 weeks affer aggressive TNC. The
the scope size and instrument channel, tissue samples may
 client should be made aware of this in advance to make any
be very small, and the reliability of such minuscule samples
 appropriate arrangements at home to accommodate for this
should be questioned by the clinician (Figure 19-17). If
temporary side effect.
endoscopic instruments are utilized, multiple (>12) samples
Significant rhinoscopic complications are rare with
should be collected to increase the accuracy of diagnosis. We
appropriate patient selection, preparation, and technique.
 recommend an alternate technique in which tissue samples
Significant complications include severe epistaxis with infl-
 are collected for biopsy evaluation by passing larger instru-
trative malignancy presence, encephalitis with cribriform
ments parallel to the scope or retrieving samples without
plate defects, and pneumonia or pneumonitis after aspira-
direct visualization based on lesion spatial approximation.
tion of contaminated irrigation fluids or preexisting infected
With practice, the clinician should be able to spatially localize
mucus. Aspiration is often seen with improper endotracheal
the diseased tissue (on the basis of the depth of penetration of
intubation, suboptimal cuff insufflation, or in the immediate
the rigid scope, the angle of insertion, and sometimes visible
anesthetic recovery period after extubation while the patient
transnasal illumination) and insert an instrument to the site
 is heavily sedated and coughing is suppressed from opioid
large enough to attain grossly substantial tissues. The sample
 analgesic administration.
site is then reexamined with the scope after biopsy, and the
process is repeated to the clinicians satisfaction. Even foreign
bodies can be removed in this fashion. Focal, discrete lesions
 SPECIFIC RHINOSCOPIC DIAGNOSES
are uncommon in the patient with grossly symptomatic nasal
Nasopharyngeal Diseases
disease. Direct visualization is recommended when these sites
are sampled. Pass an alligator forceps or a cup biopsy for-
The hallmark symptom of nasopharymgeal disease is ster-
 ceps outside the scope until the instrument can be seen. This
tor. Discharge, sneezing, reverse sneezing, and hacking may
affords visualization ofthebiopsy site.It can be a tedious pro-
be present variably. If the main complaint is noisy breath-
cess, but the samples are adequate. Blind biopsy techniques
ing and not productive sneezing with nasal discharge, the
 do not diminish the value of rhinoscopy, and adequate tis-
 nasopharynx may be the site of primary disease. The most
sue submisson should be the ultimate diagnostic goal. Tis-
common primary problems in the nasopharynx in cats
sue samples are submitted for histopathologic analysis and
aerobic bacterial culture in most cases. Mild-to-moderate,
are generally young and have a history of noisy breathing.
spontaneously resolving hemorrhaging is expected after the
Sneezing and mucopurulent nasal discharge may be pres-
collection of samples for culture and biopsy evaluation.
ent, but the chief complaint is stertor and increased respira-
 Transnares curettage (TNC) is performed as described
tory effort. This is a problem that often requires otoscopic as
later in Chapter 19 for obstructive neoplastic and hyper-
well as rhinoscopic intervention. With the patient placed in
plastic states and to debride fungal plaques before local
dorsal recumbency, the soft palate is reflected rostrally with
CHAPTER 19 Rhinoscopy · 571
Hgure 19-20 Feline nasopharyngeal adenocarcinoma.
Figure 19-18 Feline nasopharyngeal polyp visualization via soft
palate retraction.
Hgure 19-21 Canine computed tomographic image of reflux-
associated nasopharyngeal stenosis.
(see Chapter 20). In older cats with similar symptoms, a neo-
 plasm in the nasopharynx is more likely, and rhinoscopy is
often much more rewarding (Figure 19-20). Foreign bodies
can become lodged in this area after vomiting or pharymgeal
nasopharyngeal spasms induced by attempted swallowing of
the foreign object. Nasal and nasopharyngeal stenosis after
trauma, nasogastric reflux,14 and chronic rhinitis can occur
in dogs and cats (Figures 19-21 through 19-23). Reflux can
occur during general anesthesia and can be a helpful clue if
postoperative symptoms arise and persist. Congenital cho-
 anal atresia and nasopharyngeal dysgenesis have also been
reported in dogs.15,16 Nonspecific chronic inflammation of
Hgure 19-19 Feline benign nasopharyngeal polyp extraction.
the nasopharynx causes a cobblestone appearance of the
 mucosa due to the formation of hyperplastic lymphoid fol-
the use ofa spay hook, and the polyp is removed via traction
licles (Figures 19-24 and 19-25). Chronic inflammation may
and avulsion (Figures 19-18 and 19-19). The eustachian tube
be the result of a lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis complex or
orifices can generally be directly visualized and any remain-
sometimes may be secondary to otitis media and middle ear
ing tissue removed, if present. Both ears should be care-
drainage of infected secretions via the eustachian tube. Otos-
fully examined, and transtympanic bulla curettage should
 copy is recommended in any patient with nasopharyngitis
of unknown origin. CT studies performed in a population
572·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Figure 19-22 Canine rhinoscopic image of reflux-associated
nasopharyngeal stenosis.
Hgure 19-25 Canine chronic nasopharyngitis; eustachian tube
orifices visible.
Figure 19-23 Feline chronic lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis and
nasopharyngitis with nasopharyngeal stenosis.
Hgure 19-26 Canine nasal foreign body with unilateral
oculonasal discharge.
■ NEOPLASIA
Foreign Bodies
Nasal foreign bodies can present with extreme variability
 depending on the foreign material, amount, and skull con-
formation of the patient. Unilateral to bilateral mucopuru-
lent to mucohemorrhagic discharges can be present. Most
patients' histories will include a response to medication and
symptom recurrence on treatment cessation. Foreign bodies
can be either radiodense or radiolucent. Because of exten-
 Figure 19-24 Canine chronic lymphoplasmacytic nasopharyngitis
sive regional soft tissue changes, nasal foreign bodies can be
 and rhinitis.
 mistaken for tumors, even with advanced imaging.18 Foreign
 bodies generally require rhinoscopy for both definitive diag-
of 45 cats with chronic sinonasal discharge revealed effu-
nosis and removal (Figures 19-26 through 19-28).
sive bulla disease in 28% of symptomatic cats.17 Unfortu-
nately, we are unable to differentiate primary and secondary
Parasitic Rhinitis
pathology based on the concurrence of nasal and middle ear
disease. Regardless of the knowledge of the primary cause,
Pneumonyssoides caninum infection has been well character-
 both inflammatory foci should be treated to achieve symp-
 ized in dogs.19 Diagnosis requires direct examination and
tom relief.
observation of the mite within the nares and rostral nasal
CHAPTER 19Rhinoscopy
573
Hgure 19-29 Canine nasal aspergillosis with nasal planum
Figure 19-27 Canine nasal foreign body with extensive local soft
depigmentation and ulceration.
tissue hyperplasia.
Figure 19-28 Nasal foreign material retrieved via rhinoscopy and
nasal flushing.
Hgure 19-30 Feline nasal Cryptococcus with ulceration and
granuloma formation.
compartment. Infection most often causes reverse sneezing
and has been considered to be an etiologic factor of gastric
 dilatation volvulus complex in breed-predisposed canines.20
Successful treatment has been reported using ivermectin,19
 milbemycin oxime,2l and selamectin.2
Fungal Rhinitis
The hallmark presentation for the patient with fungal rhinitis
varies somewhat with the fungus in question and domestic
species affected4,2325 (Figures 19-29 and 19-30). No response
 or a transient improvement can be seen with antibiotic ther-
apy because secondary bacterial infections can be present.
Aspergillus fumigatus is the most common canine fungal
 rhinitis.26 Chronic, unilateral mucopurulent to mucohemor-
rhagic nasal discharge is often reported. Serologic,3 CT, and
Hgure 19-31 Canine nasal aspergillosis with mucus, hyperplasia,
MRI27 findings lack sensitivity and specificity, respectively,
and ulceration.
for reliable diagnosis of sinonasal aspergillosis. Rhinoscopic
visualization and histopathologic evaluation are necessary for
examined in patients with suspected fungal rhinitis because
diagnosis confirmation. The classic fungal rhinitis lesion is a
treatment of all fungal mats is necessary for disease resolution.
 green-gray, whitish, necrotic plaque in the midcaudal nasal
Sinusoscopy, sinusotomy, or both are often recommended 
cavity. Regional turbinate reactive hyperplasia can be present,
to access and debride frontal sinus fungal mats and for anti-
making the visual examination findings heterogeneous at best
fungal instillation.28 Several treatment protocols have been
(Figures 19-31 through 19-33). The frontal sinuses should be
 described employing either single-agent sinonasal lavages or
574 ■ PART TWO RigidEndoscopy
Allergic rhinitis is a broad term often interchanged with
chronic rhinitis, chronic hyperplastic rhinitis, lymphoplas-
macytic rhinitis (LPR), and eosinophilic rhinitis (ER). LPR
and ER are classified based on the predominant cell type on
 histopathologic examination. Many chronic nasal conditions
show a mix of inflammatory cell types and varying degrees
 of proliferative changes in the nasal mucosa. Eosinophils
are rarely the predominant cell type, and ER is uncommon.
Lymphocytes and plasma cells are common cell types seen on
 histopathologic examination, and varying numbers of neu-
trophils and eosinophils are present.30,3 LPR is the most com-
mon form of chronic noninfectious inflammatory rhinitis in
dogs and cats. A number of studies have been performed to
 attempt specific cytokine profling without uniform results.
Figure 19-32 Canine nasal aspergillosis with ulceration as the
source of epistaxis.
whereas T-helper I profles may predominate in cats.34 This
information has yet to have proven helpful in the specific
treatment and elimination of symptoms. Multiple infec-
tive agents have been identified in association with chronic
canine and feline rhinosinusitis, but none has been signif-
 cantly reproducible enough to be deemed causative.35-37
Medical management employing various forms of corti-
costeroids, antibiotics, and nebulization therapies is generally
temporarily successful, but symptoms return with complete
treatment cessation. Secondary bacterial infections commonly
compound symptoms. We have had significant success using
fluocinolone acetonide with dimethyl-sulfoxide (Synotic)
mixed with various culture-guided parenteral antibiotics as a
direct nose drop. This technique has the benefit of achieving
high local steroid, antioxidant, and antibiotic concentration
with minimal systemic absorption. The dimethylsulfoxide
Figure 19-33 Canine nasal aspergillosis fungal mats in the caudal
component may theoretically help medication penetration
 nasal cavity.
into significantly hyperplastic nasal tissues. Lastly, a liquid
nose drop helps to moisturize productive nasal secretions that
systemic antifungal therapy, depending on the fungus. We
 add to symptomatic obstruction common in these patients.
 believe rhinoscopic debridement and flushing to remove fun-
There are many nonspecific changes seen with rhino-
gal plaques improves the response to local treatment.
scopic evaluation that vary from mild to severe (Figures
Cryptococcus neoformans is the most common feline
19-34 through 19-41). Mucosal hyperplasia, hyperemia, and
fungal rhinitis.26 This fungus often infects the rostral nasal
accumulations of mucoid to mucopurulent secretions are
 compartment, causing planum deformation, ulceration, and
typical findings. Turbinate mucosa can have a classic clubbed
a mass effect. It has been reported to proliferate in the naso-
and hyperplastic appearance. Progression can result in gen-
 pharynx of cats and dogs.29 This fungus can also be part of a
eralized or polypoid mucosal proliferation or hyperplasia.
localized facial dermatitis or more systemic infection. Sero-
In severe, chronic cases, infected and necrotic turbinate can
logic analysis is sensitive and specific enough to provide a
be seen. The combination of mucosal hyperplasia and abun-
presumptive diagnosis.
dant accumulation of mucus compromises the air passage-
 Other fungal infections reported to cause rhinitis in the
ways and can limit the movement of the scope, especially in
dog and cat include Rhinosporidium, Exophiala, Alternaria,
cats and small dogs. Inflamed tissue bleeds easily and can
Trichosporon, Blastomyces, and Histoplasma and the algae
further decrease visibility. Site selection for biopsy is offen
Prototheca.26
 nonspecific because most of the nasal mucosa is involved.
 Bacterial cultures collected at the time of examination may
reveal a current secondary bacterial infection, unlikely the
" Allergic" or Inflammatory Rhinitis
primary cause but nonetheless creating pathologic symp-
The hallmark presentation of the patient with an “allergic"
toms. Mycoplasma may be of concern in cats with recurring
rhinitis is chronic, bilateral, serous to mucopurulent or
rhinitis.3s Biopsy and appropriate culture submission are
mucohemorrhagic discharge. Occasionally discharge will be
critical for developing a specific medical plan to manage the
unilateral, but changes in the nasal cavity are bilateral.
patients' current symptoms.
CHAPTER 19
Rhinoscopy
575
Figure 19-34 Canine lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis with hyperplasia
Hgure 19-35 Canine lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis with mucosal
with turbinate clubbing.
hyperplasia and turbinate clubbing.
Figure 19-36 Canine severe and chronic lymphoplasmacytic
Hgure 19-37 Canine severe and chronic lymphoplasmacytic
rhinitis with polypoid mucosal hyperplasia.
rhinitis with inflammatory bnidging of turbinates.
Figure 19-38 Canine severe chronic lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis
Hgure 19-39 Feline lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis with polypoid
with polypoid masses.
hyperplasia.
576 ■ PART TWO RigidEndoscopy
2
34567
Figure 19-40 Feline lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis with caseated
Hgure 19-41 Feline lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis; caseated obs-
obstructive mucus.
tructive mucus recovered during rhinoscopy with curettage and
traumatic flushing.
REFERENCES
1. Meler E, Dunn M, Lecuyer M: A retrospective study of canine
14. Berent AC, Kinns J, Weisse C: Balloon dilatation of naso-
persistent nasal disease: 80 cases (1998-2003), Can Vet J
pharyngeal stenosis in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 229(3):
49(1):71-76, 2008.
385,2006.
2. Demko JL, Cohn LA: Chronic nasal discharge in cats: 75 cases
15. Coolman BR, Marretta SM, McKiernan BC, et al: Choanal
(1993-2004), J Am Vet Med Assoc 230(7):1032-1037, 2007.
atresia and secondary nasopharyngeal stenosis in a dog, J Am
3. Pomrantz JS, Johnson LR, Nelson RW, et al: Comparison of
Anim Hosp Assoc 34(6):497-501, 1998.
serologic evaluation via agar gel immunodiffusion and fungal
16. Kirberger RM, Steenkamp G, Spotswood TC, et al: Stenotic
culture of tissue for diagnosis of nasal aspergillosis in dogs.
 nasopharyngeal dysgenesis in the Dachshund: seven cases
JA Vet Med Assoc 230(9):1319-1323, 2007.
(2002-2004), J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 42(4):290-297, 2006.
4. Kerl ME: Update on canine and feline fungal diseases, Vet Clin
17. Detweiler DA, Johnson LR, Kass PH、et al: Computed
North Am Small Anim Pract 33(4):721-747, 2003.
tomographic evidence of bulla effusion in cats with sinonasal
5. Pownder S, Rose M, Crawford J: Radiographic techniques
disease: 2001-2004,J Vet Intern Med 20(5):1080-1084, 2006.
of the nasal cavity and sinuses, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
18. Jones JC、 Ober CP: Computed tomographic diagnosis of
21(2):46-54, 2006.
6. Petite AFB、Dennis R: Comparison of radiography and
Assoc 43(2):99-111, 2007.
magnetic resonance imaging for evaluating the extent of nasal
19. Gunnarsson L, Zakrisson G, Lilliehook I, et al: Experimental
neoplasia in dogs, J Small Anim Pract 47(9):529-536, 2006.
infection of dogs with the nasal mite Pneumonyssoides caninum,
7. Johnson EG, Wisner ER: Advances in respiratory imaging、 Vet
Vet Parasitol 77(2-3):179-186, 1998.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 37(5):879-900, 2007.
20. Bredal WP: Preumoryssoides caninum infection—a risk factor
8. Miles MS, Dhaliwal RS, Moore MP, et al: Association of
for gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs、 Vet Res Cormmun
 magnetic resonance imaging fndings and histologic diagnosis
22(4):225-231, 1998.
in dogs with nasal disease: 78 cases (2001-2004),J Am Vet Med
21. Gunnarsson LK, Moller LC, Einarsson AM, et al: Clinical
Assoc 232(12):1844-1849, 2008.
efficacy of milbemycin oxime in the treatment of nasal
 9. Lefebvre J, Kuehn NF, Wortinger A: Computed tomography as
mite infection in dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:81-84,
an aid in the diagnosis of chronic nasal disease in dogs,JSmall
1999.
Anim Pract 46(6):280-285, 2005.
22. Gunnarsson L, Zakrisson G, Christensson D,et al: Effcacy of
10. Curry SL, Cogar SM, Cook JL: Nonsteroidal antinflammatory
selamectin in the treatment of nasal mite (Preurmoryssoides
drugs: a review, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41:298-309, 2005.
caninum) infection in dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40(5):400-
11. Sinclair MD: A review of the physiological effects of alphaz-
404,2004.
agonists related to the clinical use of medetomidine in small
23. Wehner A, Crochik S, Howerth EW, et al: Diagnosis and
animal practice, Can Vet J 44:885-897, 2003.
 treatment ofblastomycosis affecting the nose and nasopharynx
12. HS Allen, Broussard J, Noone K: Nasopharyngeal diseases in
of a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 233(7):1112-1126, 2008.
cats: a retrospective study of 53 cases (1991-1998), J Am Anim
24. Malik R, Dill-Macky E, Martin P,et al: Cryptococcosis in dogs:
Hosp Assoc 35(6):457-461, 1999.
a retrospective study of 20 consecutive cases, J Med Vet Mycol
13. Hunt G, Perkins C, Foster S: Nasopharyngeal disorders of dogs
33(5):291-297, 1995.
and cats: a review and retrospective study, Compend Contin
25. Benitah N: Canine nasal aspergillosis, Clin Tech Small Anim
Educ Vet 24(3):184-200,2002.
Pract 21(2):82-88, 2006.
CHAPTER 19Rhinoscopy· 577
26. Wolf AM: Fungal diseases ofthe nasal cavity ofthe dog and cat,
33. Peeters D, Peters IR, Helps CR,et al: Distinct tissue cytokine
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 22(5):1119-1132, 1992.
and chemokine mRNA expression in canine sinonasal
27. Saunders JH, Clercx C, Snaps FR,et al: Radiographic, magnetic
aspergillosis and idiopathic lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis, Vet
resonance imaging, computed tomographic, and rhinoscopic
Immunol Immunopathol 117(1-2):95-105, 2007.
features of nasal aspergillosis in dogs、 J Am Vet Med Assoc
34. Veir JK, Lappin MR, Dow SW: Evaluation of a novel
225(11):1703-1712, 2004.
immunotherapy for treatment of chronic rhinitis in cats,
28. Peeters D, Clercx C: Update on canine sinonasal aspergillosis,
J Feline Med Surg 8(6):400-411, 2006.
Vet Clin North Am Srmall Anim Pract 37(5):901-916, 2007.
35. Johnson LR, Foley JE、 De Cock HE, et al: Assessment of
29. Malik R、 Martin P, Wigney DI, et al: Nasopharyngeal
infectious organisms associated with chronic rhinosinusitis in
cryptococcosis, Aust Vet J 75(7):483-488, 1997.
cats, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 227(4):579-585, 2005.
30. Windsor RC, Johnson LR: Canine chronic inflammatory
36. Windsor RC、 Johnson LR、 Sykes JE、et al: Molecular
rhinitis, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 21(2):76-81, 2006.
detection of microbes in nasal tissue of dogs with idiopathic
31. Michiels L, Day MJ, Snaps F, et al: A retrospective study of
lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis, J Vet Intern Med 20(2):250-256,
non-specific rhinitis in 2 cats and the value of nasal cytology
2006.
and histopathology, J Feline Med Surg 5(5):279-285, 2003.
37. Hawkins EC, Johnson LR, Guptill L,et al: Failure to identify an
 32. Kurata K, Maeda S, Yasunaga S,et al: Immunological findings 
associationbetweenserologicormolecularevidenceofBartonella
in 3 dogs clinically diagnosed with allergic rhinitis, J Vet Med
infection and idiopathic rhinitis in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Sci 66(1):25-29, 2004.
233(4):597-599, 2008.
 Palliative Treatment of Nasal Tumors
a relatively high complication rate. Rhinotomy alone has
Using Rhinoscopic-Assisted Transnares
been shown to marginally increase survival times in dogs
Curettage
with sinonasal tumors when compared with untreated
tumors.ll,12 Rhinotomy with full turbinate exenteration and
 RT has been shown to significantly prolong survival but car-
Tumors of the nasal cavity and nasopharynx account
ries a high risk of procedural complications.13 RT in vari-
for approximately 1% to 2% of all canine and feline neo-
 ous applications has been shown to be an effective treatment
plasms.1 Benign masses are uncommon. The majority of
in numerous studies. RT with or without cytoreduction has
nasal tumors are malignant, and a variety of germinal ori-
been shown to provide a longer disease-free interval and is
gins are reported23 (Figures 19-42 through 19-49). Most
the treatment of choice.6,13-17 RT without surgical cytoreduc-
nasal tumors are primary,2 but metastatic nasal tumors have
tion does not relieve nasal obstruction immediately. There
been reported.34 Local infiltration is common. Rostral cere-
are numerous documented short- and long-term side effects
bral metastasis has been reported with a variety of sinona-
associated with this treatment.13-17 Stereotactic radiosurgery
sal tumors.5 Distant metastases of primary nasal tumors are
is considered to be at the forefront of RT.18 These machines
uncommon but have been reported and generally observed
 are able to deliver a very high dose of radiation to a specific
later in the disease process.6 Numerous causes have been
site with minimal collateral tissue damage.l8 Unfortunately,
 proposed. Etiologic factors shown to be associated with sino-
the limited availability and expense of such technology
nasal tumor development include exposure to household
removes it from common practice, even in most major
tobacco smoke,′ coal and kerosene heater exhausts,8 mesati-
metropolitan areas. Rhinoscopic debridement of sinonasal
cephaly, and dolichocephaly.9 Generally, complete primary
tumors with the use of an arthroscopic power shaver has
removal of a symptomatic tumor is not possible due to space
been described.l0 Rhinoscopic diode laser ablation of nasal
limitations, sensitivity of local anatomy, and local infltra-
tumors is limited by availability and technical expertise and
tion by the tumor.9 The prognosis associated with malignant
is a lengthy procedure.19,20 The beneficial effect of systemic
nasal tumors is often poor due to the tumor behavior, inac-
chemotherapy has been reported with variable results.21-23
cessibility of the site to primary trea tment, and the significant
There may be a significant difference in predicted chemo-
impact of nasal airflow obstruction on patient quality of life.
therapy response among the nasal tumor germinal origins.22
Because of the characteristics of nasal tumors, treat-
No single chemotherapeutic regimen has currently been
 ment options are often limited by equipment specialization, 
 proven to be reliably effective with all nasal tumors. Pal-
cost, and technical skill. Current treatment options include
liative treatment with NSAIDs has been advocated after
rhinotomy, radiation therapy (RT), rhinoscopic shaver
the identification of cyclooxygenase enzyme expression by
debridement, rhinoscopic laser ablation, and chemotherapy.
some nasal tumors.23-25 There are currently no controlled
Rhinotomy has been described by both ventral and dorsal
studies identifying a benefit in survival of patients with nasal
nasal cavity approaches,10 is considered traumatic, and has
tumors treated with long-term NSAIDs only. NSAIDs in
578 ■ PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
 Figure 19-42 Canine nasal respiratory epithelial adenocarcinoma.
Figure 19-45 Canine nasal neuroendocrine carcinoma.
Figure 19-43 Feline nasal adenocarcinoma.
Figure 19-46 Canine nasal chondrosarcoma.
Figure 19-44 Canine solid and acinar nasal adenocarcinoma.
Figure 19-47 Canine nasal osteosarcoma.
combination with chemotherapy have been shown to have
 Transnares curettage (TNC) helps provide relief of nasal
a beneficial effect on survival in dogs.22 Because of factors 
obstruction and tumor-associated epistaxis and provides
such as treatment availability, cost, efficacy, invasiveness,
 generous tissue samples for histopathologic confirmation
and incident treatment complications, many clients desire
in undiagnosed cases. With the use of a variable combina-
an option other than RT, rhinotomy, or rhinoscopic-assisted
tion of radiographic, rhinoscopic, and nasal flushing local-
laser ablation.
 ization techniques, tumor tissue is identified and removed
CHAPTER 19Rhinoscopy
579
Hgure 19-48 Canine undifferentiated nasal spindle cell tumor.
Hgure 19-50 Transnares curettage small pack for patients less
than 20 kg.
nasopharyngeal reflexive movements can be observed even
in the adequately anesthetized patient. These forceful move-
ments can greatly affect procedural ease, as well as induce
patient trauma and cause equipment damage. Bilateral nerve
blockade at the level of the infraorbital foramen can greatly
reduce the sneeze reflex, and a combination of lidocaine and
bupivacaine is recommended in dogs and at reduced doses
in cats. Intraoperative and perioperative, culture-guided
antibiotic therapy is recommended because of the high inci-
Figure 19-49 Feline high-grade nasal lymphoma.
dence of secondary bacterial rhinitis in the patient with a
nasal tumor. Endotracheal tube cuff evaluation should be
through the nostrils with a combination of common surgical
rechecked before any flushing because of the potential for
instruments. Abnormal tissue is removed via traction avul-
iatrogenic flushing or aspiration of infected nasal secretions
sion directly through the nostrils or traumatically loosened
into the lungs.
a nd flushed through the nasopharynx out of the mouth. The
Rigid, integrated endoscopes are recommended for rhi-
procedure was adapted from two articles written by With-
noscopy. A 1.9-mm rigid endoscope is used in cats and
row et al in the 1970s and 1980s and has been used by one
small dogs, and a 2.7-mm rigid endoscope is used in dogs
of the authors for 20 years.26-28 The introduction of rhinos-
that weigh more than 15 kg. The length should be at least
 copy to the procedure has improved visualization of abnor-
17 cm for large dogs. A 4.0-mm rigid endoscope may be
mal tissues and has enabled more thorough tumor removal.
 needed in some dogs more than 45 kg. The integrated scopes
 Removal of the abnormal tissue restores nasal breathing,
provide a port for constant fluid infusion. This is necessary
decompresses sinus congestion, and eliminates signifi-
for flushing secretions and blood away from the tip of the
 cant ongoing paraneoplastic epistaxis. The quality of life is
 scope and nasal lumen so that adequate anatomic visualiza-
improved, and the invasiveness is minimal.
tion is provided.
Preoperative evaluation of the patient with a nasal tumor
Instruments used for TNC vary depending on the size
consists of a complete blood count, serum biochemistry pro-
 of the animal and conformation of the nasal cavity (Figures
fle, urinalysis, PT and PTT, three-view thoracic radiographs,
19-50 and 19-51). Kelly, mosquito, and Carmalt hemostatic
and nasal imaging of choice (e.g-, rhinoscopy, radiographs,
forceps and various sized rongeurs work well for grasping
CT, or MRI). Von Willebrand's factor analysis or buccal
and retrieving tissue. Curettes and a Freer periosteal elevator
mucosal bleeding times should be performed in predisposed
are used to loosen tissues aftached to bone. Straight Doyen
breeds. TNC is contraindicated in the coagulopathic or
tissue forceps (dogs) and Noyes alligator forceps (small dogs
thrombocytopenic or thrombocytopathic patient.
 and cats) are used to clear the choanae. Frazier suction tips
Although TNC is less invasive compared with rhinot-
are used for curettage as well as for suction. The largest diam-
omy, adequate preoperative neuroleptanalgesia, intraop-
eter suction tip catheter the nasal cavity will accommodate
 erative and postoperative analgesia, and antinflammatory
should be used to limit clogging of the catheter with tissue
 treatments are recommended based on the patient's pre-
 and debris. Flushing is accomplished in larger animals with
operative evaluation. Abrupt and forceful sneezing and
the use of a bulb syringe or a 60-mL catheter-tipped syringe.
580 ·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 19-51 Transnares curettage large pack for patients greater
than 20 to 30 kg.
Hgure 19-53 Patient positioning for transnares curettage.
Figure 19-52 Transnares curettage flush pack.
Hgure 19-54 Flushing to determine obstruction and remove
debrided tissues.
In cats and small dogs, a 12-mL syringe with a Christmas tree
adapter works well (Figure 19-52).
Patients are placed in a sternal recumbent position. The
seal. Normally, fluid should move easily through the nasal
cuffed endotracheal tube is secured to the mandible. A rolled
cavity into the nasopharynx and roll out the mouth. Resis-
towel is placed beneath the animal's neck to point the muzzle
tance varies with the degree of obstruction. The nasal cavity
in a ventral direction, and an oral speculum is placed to hold
is then evaluated with the endoscope. Nasal tumors typically
the mouth open (Figure 19-53). Fluid and tissue will then
are unilateral, but both passages should be carefully exam-
tend to run out of the nostrils and mouth rather than collect
ined to find any tumor extending across the midline. Always
around the larynx. No gauze is stuffed in the oropharynx.
evaluate the patency of the choanae, and pass the scope into
This impedes the movement of fluid from the nasopharynx
the nasopharynx The presence of neoplastic tissue may pre-
into the mouth. The animal's front legs are pulled laterally or
vent visualization of the choanae on one or both sides.
covered with plastic to prevent soiling. Again, endotracheal
Curettage is performed after complete rhinoscopic evalu-
tube cuff evaluation should be rechecked before any flushing
ation. Combining rhinoscopic findings with the results of
because of the potential for iatrogenic flushing or aspiration
the radiographs, CT, or MRI gives the surgeon good local-
 of infected nasal secretions into the lungs.
ization of the mass. Curettage is a blind procedure done by
The first step is to flush each nostril (Figure 19-54). This
feel and spatial approximation estimates supported by imag-
gives a good indication of the degree of obstruction. A bulb
 ing results. Knowledge of nasal anatomy is essential. A blunt
syringe or syringe with adapter is seated in the nostril, and the
instrument is passed through the nostril on the affected side
nasal planum is squeezed on each side to provide an effective
(Figure 19-55). Slide the instrument along the hard palate
CHAPTER 19 Rhinoscopy · 581
Figure 19-55 Transnares instrument insertion based on lesion
localization.
Hgure 19-57 Tumor debridement is performed via traction-
avulsion.
Figure 19-56 Instruments can be palpated within the nasopharynx
through the soft palate.
Hgure 19-58 Periodic flushing and suctioning are performed to
near the midline until it can be palpated sitting above the
clear the nasal passage and determine the end of debridement.
soff palate (Figure 19-56). A Doyen forcep in dogs or a
Noyes alligator forcep in cats is used for this step. Moving
the instrument along the floor of the nasal cavity prevents
rhinoscopic inspection until the bulk of abnormal tissue has
inadvertent puncturing of the cribriform plate. Vigorously
been removed. Rhinoscopic assistance is optimal, but this
move the probe vertically, horizontally, and circularly at
procedure can be performed with only the benefit of serial
the level of the choanae. This maneuver loosens obstructive
flushing to mark reestablishment of nasal patency (Figures
tissue. Once the probe moves easily into the nasopharynx,
19-58 and 19-59). Flushing resistance should be minimal
flushing is performed to expel dislodged tissues. Loose frag-
after adequate curettage has been completed. This predicts
 ments of tissue will be flushed around the soft palate and out
restoration of nasal breathing in the postoperative period.
of the mouth and can often provide adequate histopatho-
Remove any tissue associated with the cribriform plate with
logic specimens in cases with open diagnoses. Once the
extreme caution. Use a curette or angled Frazier suction tip
choanae are clear, curettage continues in the nasal passage.
to debride the maxillary recess. Visualization of the frontal
 Tissue is grasped with hemostats or rongeurs and is pulled
sinus is difficult. Direct trephination of the frontal sinus may
out through the nostril (Figure 19-57). Abnormal tissue is
be necessary to remove abnormal tissue that extends into
removed with minimal force; traction on healthy tissue is
this space. The need for this intervention may be determined
met with significant resistance and should signal the surgeon
 in advance based on the results of radiographic imaging.
to proceed further with caution in that location. Continue
Large amounts of tumor tissue can be debrided by this pro-
flushing as tissue is being retrieved. This also provides excel-
 cess and will immediately restore nasal airflow patency and
lent biopsy samples. Check the progress of tissue debride-
 dramatically cytoreduce the tumor burden before follow-up
ment with rhinoscopy. Continue curettage, flushing, and
therapies (Figures 19-60 through 19-62).
582·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 19-59 Reevaluation of the nasal lumen after transnares
curettage.
Fgure 19-61 Sizable tumor fragments can be removed through
the nares.
Figure 19-60 Transnares curettage debridement of canine nasal
tumor.
 Rhinoscopic sequence imaging of TNC debridement of a
feline caudal nasal and nasopharyngeal adenocarcinoma is
depicted in Figures 19-63 through 19-69.
Hgure 19-62 Large amounts of tumor can be safely removed,
Small fragments of visually abnormal tissue may persist
which reestablishes nasal airflow and dramatically improves
despite repeated efforts to remove them. Running a separate
quality of life.
instrument along the side of the scope or passing a diode
laser down the biopsy port of the scope allows visualization
massive and life-threatening. Retrospectively, maxilla infl-
and removal of this tissue. Vigorous curettage and flushing
tration with compromise of the maxillary artery and rostral
may dislodge these fragments. Considering the failure ofrhi-
branches was suspected. In the event acute severe hemor-
notomy and complete extirpation of the tumor to increase
rhaging is observed, stabilization maneuvers such as unilat-
the disease-free interval, removal of every fragment of tumor
eral carotid compression, unilateral carotid ligation, Foley
is a moot point. This is a palliative procedure. Removing the
catheter or small endotracheal tube intranasal insertion, and
majority of the tumor eliminates bleeding, and clearance of
bulb expansion can be implemented. Most tumor-associ-
the choanae and nasopharynx restores nasal breathing.
ated epistaxis will resolve spontaneously with appropriate
Epistaxis will appear significant throughout this proce-
 debridement of the neoplastic tissue. Postoperative epistaxis
dure. This is expected and is rarely enough to result in ane-
is expected for 5 to 7 days. We have found no need for or
mia requiring transfusion. It is extremely rare to encounter
benefit of nasal instillation of vasoconstrictors. Most patients
life-threatening hemorrhaging. We have observed three
are discharged with a presumptive antibiotic (pending cul-
cases in a 10-year period in which hemorrhaging was acutely
ture results, if applicable), opioid analgesic, and steroid or
CHAPTER 191
Rhinoscopy
583
Figure 19-63 Transnares curettage sequence: feline nasal adeno-
Hgure 19-64 Right caudal nasal cavity adenocarcinoma at the
carcinoma of the right caudal nasal cavity and nasopharynx,
level of the choana.
evaluation of the tumor extent, tumor debridement, and
reevaluation of lumen patency after the procedure.
Figure 19-65 Full mass obstruction is present,flling the
FHgure 19-66 Transnares curettage debridement of obstructive
nasopharynx and preventing air flow bilaterally.
tumor.
Figure 19-67 Nasopharyngeal lumen is now visible midway
Hgure 19-68 Continued debridement causing self-limiting 
hemorrhage.
through the procedure.
584 ■ PART TWO RigidEndoscopy
NSAID (depending on their preoperative assessment and
drug safety profles) within 24 to 48 hours of the procedure.
We have observed surgical remission times of single-digit
months (1 to 9 months) for 80% of patients receiving TNC
only (unpublished data). The procedure can be repeated as
needed based on the patient disease progression. The disease
 of patients with bone infltration tends to be less responsive
than does the disease in patients with primarily intraluminal
recurrence. We have observed multiple dogs and cats with
low-grade adenocarcinoma and low-grade chondrosarcoma
 experience survival times of 2 to 4 years treated with inter-
mittent TNC and palliative medications alone (generally
NSAIDs and antibiotics, as clinically indicated). We have
combined and routinely recommend folow-up RT in all
Figure 19-69 The nasal passage and nasopharynx is clear; resto-
 patients that are able to pursue additional treatment. Survival
ration of patient nasal breathing has been accomplished with
times are in tabulation after a 5-year retrospective of both
minimal trauma.
dogs and cats having TNC, with and without follow-up RT.
REFERENCES
1. Madewell BR, Priester WA, Gillette EL, et al: Neoplasms of the
13. Adams WM, Bjorling DE, McAnulty JE, et al: Outcome of
 nasal passages and paranasal sinuses in domestic animals as
accelerated radiotherapy alone or accelerated radiotherapy
reported by 13 veterinary colleges, Am f Vet Res 137:851-856,
followed by exenteration of the nasal cavity in dogs with
1976.
intranasal neoplasia: 53 cases (1990-2002), JArm Vet Med Assoc
2. Cotchin E: Spontaneous neoplasms of the upper respiratory
227(6):936-941, 2005.
tract in animals. In Muir CS, Shanmugaratnam K: Cancer of
14. LaDue TA, Dodge R, Page RL、 et al: Factors influencing
the nasopharynx, Flushing, N.Y., 1967, Medical Examination
survival afer radiotherapy of nasal tumors in 130 dogs, Vet
Publishing.
Radiol Ultrasound 40(3):312-317, 1999.
3. Patniak AK: Canine sinonasal neoplasms: clinicopathological
15. Mellanby RJ, Stevenson RK, Herrtage ME, et al: Long-term
study of 285 cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:103-114, 1989.
outcome of 56 dogs with nasal tumours treated with four doses
4. Affolter VK, Moore PF: Localized and disseminated histiocytic
of radiation at intervals of seven days, Vet Rec 151(9):253-257,
sarcoma of dendritic cell origin in dogs, Vet Pathol 39(1):74-83,
2002.
2002.
16. Gieger T, Rassnick K,Siegel S, et al: Palliation of clinical signs
 5. Snyder JM, Lipitz L, Skorupski KA,et al: Secondary intracranial
in 48 dogs with nasal carcinomas treated with coarse-fraction
neoplasia in the dog: 177 cases (1986-2003), f Vet Intern Med
radiation therapy, JAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 44(3):116-123, 2008.
22(1):172-177, 2008.
17. Northrup NC, Etue SM, Ruslander DM, et al: Retrospective
6. McEntee MC, Page RL, Heidner GL, et al: A retrospective
study of orthovoltage radiation therapy for nasal tumors in 42
dogs, J Vet Intern Med 15(3):183-189, 2001.
radiation, Vet Radiol 32(3):135-139, 1991.
18. Gordon IK, Kent MS: Veterinary radiation oncology:
7. Reif JS, Bruns C, Lower KS: Cancer of the nasal cavity
technology, imaging、 intervention and future applications,
and paranasal sinuses and exposure to environmental
Cancer Ther 6(1):167-176, 2008.
tobacco smoke in pet dogs, Am J Epidemiol 147(5):488-492,
19. Berger N, Eeg PH: Veterinary laser surgery, Malden, Mass..
1998.
 2006, Blackwell Publishing.
8. Bukowski JA, Wartenberg D, Goldschmidt M: Environmental
20. McCarthy Timothy: Veterinary endoscopy for the snall animal
causes for sinonasal cancers in pet dogs, and their usefulness
practitioner, St Louis, 2004, Saunders.
as sentinels of indoor cancer risk, f Toxicol Environ Health A
21. Henry CJ, Brewer WG Jr, Tyler JW, et al: Survival in dogs with
54(7):579-591, 1998.
nasal adenocarcinoma: 64 cases (1981-1995), J Vet Intern Med
9. Morgan JP, Suter PF, O'Brien TR, et al: Tumors in the nasal
12(6):436-439, 1998.
cavity ofthe dog: a radiographic study, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
22. Langova V, Mutsaers AJ, Phillips B,et al: Treatment of eight
13(1):18-26, 1972.
dogs with nasal tumours with alternating doses of doxorubicin
10. Degner DA: Surgical considerations of nasal discharge, Clin
and carboplatin in conjunction with oral piroxicam, Aust Vet f
Tech Srmall Anim Pract 21(2):64-68, 2006.
82(11):676-680, 2004.
11. Laing EJ, Binnington AG: Surgical therapy of canine nasal
 23. Hahn KA, Knapp DW, Richardson RC, et al: Clinical response
tumors: a retrospective study (1982-1986), Can Vet J 29(10):
of nasal adenocarcinoma to cisplatin chemotherapy in 11 dogs,
809-813, 1988.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 200:355-357, 1992.
12. Henry CJ, Brewer WG Jr, Tyler JW, et al: Survival in dogs with
24. Borzacchiello G, Paciello O, Papparella S: Expression of
nasal adenocarcinoma: 64 cases (1981-1995), J Vet Intern Med
cyclooxygenase-1 and -2 in canine nasal carcinomas, J Comp
12(6):436-439, 1998.
Pathol 131(1):70-76, 2004.
CHAPTER 19 Rhinoscopy · 585
25. Kleiter M, Malarkey DE, Ruslander DE, et al: Expression of
27. Withrow SJ, Susaneck SJ, Macy DW, et al: Aspiration and
cyclooxygenase-2 in canine epithelial nasal tumors, Vet Radiol
punch biopsy techniques for nasal tumors, ∫ Am Anirm Hosp
Ultrasound 45(3):255-260, 2004.
Assoc 21:551-554, 1985.
26. MacEwen G, Withrow S, Patnaik AK: Nasal tumors in the dog:
28. Withrow SJ: Diagnostic and therapeutic nasal flush in small
retrospective evaluation of diagnosis, prognosis and treatment,
animals, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:704-707, 1977.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 170( 1):45-48, 1977.
20
CHAPTER
Otoscopy
Video Otoscopy
The video otoscope is one of the few pieces of equip-
ment that can be used in the examination room and that
Lynette K. Cole
can allow the client to visualize the ear canal and tympanic
membrane along with the veterinarian. Direct visualization
Ear diseases are one of the most commonly encountered
 of the ear and any abnormalities present will improve the cli-
conditions for which clients seek veterinary care from
ent's compliance with prescribed therapies and on reexami-
the veterinary practitioner and veterinary dermatologist.
nation offers positive reinforcement for the treatments that
These diseases frequently pose diagnostic and therapeu-
were performed. It is an invaluable piece of equipment to use
tic challenges to the veterinarian and can be very frustrat-
when the ear canal and tympanic membrane are evaluated
ing conditions for the clients to treat. Video otoscopy has
in a patient with otitis. The most common complaints that
revolutionized the practice of veterinary otology. It allows
clients may have when their pets have ear disease are head
for better visualization of the ear, which aids in the diagnosis
shaking, ear scratching, otic discharge, foul odor from the
and management of the ear disease, makes possible digital
 ear, and pain when the ear is manipulated. In some instances,
 documentation of the ear disease, and is instrumental in
neurologic signs, such as facial nerve paralysis, Horner's syn-
educating clients about ear disease.
drome, vestibular disturbances, or deafness, may be present
and may indicate the need to evaluate the patient for middle
■INDICATIONS
or inner ear disease.
The initial diagnostic plan for a patient with acute otitis
In the past decade, video otoscopy has become more widely
externa should include cytologic analysis of otic exudates in
utilized for the evaluation and treatment of diseases of the
addition to the otic examination so that it can be determined
external ear canal and middle ear. Indications for the use
whether an infective agent is present in the ear canal and,
of the handheld otoscope still exist; however, the video
if so, what initial treatments should be recommended. In
otoscope has the advantages of superior magnification and
patients with chronic, recurrent otitis externa, in addition to
lighting, complete visualization of the ear canal and tym-
cytologic analysis of otic exudates and an otic examination,
panic membrane when instruments (e.g-, biopsy forceps,
 diagnostics are needed to determine the cause of the recur-
grasping forceps, curettes, and catheters) are used through
rent otitis and to evaluate the patient for concurrent otitis
the instrument channel, and digital capture capability to
media. These may include, but are not limited to, bacterial
document the ear disease.
culture and sensitivity testing (C/S), a food trial, allergy test-
Most video otoscopes are much more durable than the
ing, blood work, biopsies, radiographic imaging of the bulla,
traditional rigid endoscopes; therefore, they can be used in
 deep ear flushing, and myringotomy.
the awake animal in the examination room, as well as in the
Additionally, in patients with chronic otitis externa, the
sedated or anesthetized animal, so they are very versatile.
predisposing factors, primary causes, and perpetuating fac-
 Examination of the external ear canal and tympanic mem-
tors must be identifed to control the ear disease. Primary
brane should be part of the general examination, regardless
causes of otitis externa are those that result in ear disease
of whether clients complain of any ear disease in their pets.
in the absence of other factors. Primary causes include
It is important for veterinarians to become familiar with the
parasitic diseases, hypersensitivity disorders, foreign bod-
normal structures in the ear so that they are then able to
ies, disorders of keratinization, autoimmune disease, and
determine whether an abnormality exists.
neoplasia.
587
588·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
Predisposing factors are conditions affecting the patient
that increase the risk of developing ear disease but that do
not trigger the ear disease. Predisposing factors include con-
formational abnormalities (e.g- pendulous pinnae, stenotic
ear canals, and excessive hair) and ear canal epithelial com-
promise (e.g-, swimming, inappropriate treatments such
as hair plucking, trauma from cotton swabs, and irritating
topical otic products).
 If these primary causes and predisposing factors are
not diagnosed and controlled, perpetuating factors such as
bacterial and yeast infections, otitis media, and progressive
pathologic changes (e.g-, stenosis, hyperplasia, fibrosis, and
the resolution of the otitis externa even if the primary cause
is identified and controlled. The most commonly isolated
Hgure 20-1 Mild erythema and glandular hyperplasia associated
infectious organisms from the horizontal ear canal in dogs
with otitis externa are some of the first changes noted inthe ear
with otitis externa are Malassezia pachydermatis, Staphylo-
canal. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio State University,
Coccus intermedius, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Columbus, Ohio.)
Indications for the Use of Video Otoscopy
the client. After examination of one ear, the otoendoscope
in the Examination Room
should be disinfected before it is inserted into the second
 For the beginner, the use of the video otoscope in the awake
ear. At minimum, I will wipe the otoendoscope with iso-
animal can be frustrating because it requires hand-eye coor-
 propyl alcohol before examining the second ear. If there is
dination. However, the best way to become familiar with
a considerable amount of exudate on the otoendoscope, I
using the equipment is to perform video otoscopic examina-
will soak the otoendoscope in glutaraldehyde for 20 minutes
tions on every patient. In the awake patient, proper techni-
and rinse it thoroughly with tap water, wipe it dry, before
cal restraint is a must. A technician experienced in handling
placing it in the second ear. Depending on the severity of the
awake animals for otic examinations will help to expedite the
ear disease, a complete otoscopic examination may not be
procedure, which results in less discomfort for the patient.
 possible. However, even if only the vertical ear canal can be
Examinations are best performed on an examination table
viewed with the otoendoscope, the client can be shown the
with the animal in sternal recumbency or standing. In the
pathology of the ear, which will help them to understand the
dog, it is best to have the technician stand on the opposite side
necessity of additional treatments and diagnostics. A plan for
of the ear to be examined and gently grasp the muzzle with
future management of the ear can then be formulated.
one hand while keeping the other hand on the dorsum of the
The normal vertical and horizontal ear canal should be
neck. In the cat, less restraint is usually best: the technician
pink, and in most animals, the cartilage is flexible; thus the
should place a hand on the dorsum of the neck or, if neces-
otoendoscope should advance easily down the canal. There
sary, scruff the cat while the other hand controls the back end.
can be small amounts of wax in the ear canal. In animals
 For evaluation of the ear, the tip of the video otoscope
with otitis externa, the changes detected in the ear canal are
should be placed at the intertragic incisure (incisura inter-
related to the severity of the ear disease. The first changes
tragica). Then, the external ear canal needs to be gently
noted in the ear canals in cases of acute otitis externa include
extended into a straight line by grasping the ear pinna and
erythema and glandular hyperplasia (Figure 20-1). The
pulling it up and outward while inserting the otoendoscope.
amount of exudate in the ear canal is variable and should
Advance the otoendoscope into the horizontal ear canal as
be documented, as should its color and consistency. A swab
the canal is straightened while looking at the monitor. The
sample from each ear should be obtained for cytologic eval-
focal distance of the video otoscope is such that it is not nec
uation. If numerous rod bacteria are noted cytologically or
essary to penetrate deeply into the horizontal ear canal to
the infection has worsened since the last visit, then a bacte-
visualize the entire canal and tympanic membrane. In the
rial C/S is indicated. In more severe cases of otitis externa,
awake cat, it is difficult to visualize the entire rostral and dor-
 glandular hyperplasia progresses, resulting in stenosis of the
sal portion of the tympanic membrane.
canal, sometimes to the point where the otoendoscope can
Both ears should be examined, and if there is a com-
 no longer be advanced into the vertical ear canal. The degree
plaint of unilateral otitis, I will begin with the least affected
of stenosis and hyperplasia should also be documented.
or unaffected ear first. The least affected or unaffected ear
Ulcerations may also be noted, especially in ears second-
should be used to show the client a normal ear as compared
arily infected with P. aeruginosa. Parasites such as Otodec-
with the clinically affected ear. If both ears are abnormal,
 un inoqe suo Aidei pazensia aq Ae soun sah
then it is helpful to have pictures of a normal ear to show
ear canal with the video otoscope and are usually found in
CHAPTER 20 Otoscopy · 589
conjunction with dark brown ceruminous (“coffee ground")
3. If the patient has neurologic signs indicative of otitis
exudate. On occasion, masses or foreign bodies may be seen
media or otitis interna.
in the ear canal during the video otoscopic examination.
4. If I suspect the patient to have a foreign body or mass in
In cases of chronic otitis externa, the tympanic mem-
the ear canal or middle ear.
brane may not be visualized due to excessive exudate, steno-
5. If a patient has had recurrent or continual ear infections
sis, hyperplasia, or a combination of these. If the tympanic
 for 6 months or longer.
membrane is visible, the color and gross appearance of the
pars flaccida and pars tensa should be noted. Documentation
■ INSTRUMENTATION
of the findings on the video otoscopic examination of the
vertical and horizontal ear canal as well the tympanic mem-
 The standard otoendoscope is a straightforward 0-degree
brane is important for comparison during future reevalua-
telescope with a length of 7 to 8.5 cm, a tip diameter of
tions; this documentation should consist of digital images as
4.75 to 5 mm, and a 2-mm working channel, which is
well as other findings recorded in the patient record.
fully immersible and able to be sterilized in ethylene oxide
 I find that most patients that allow an otoscopic examina-
(gas) and autoclaved. The camera is a digital single-chip or
tion with a handheld otoscope will allow one performed with
three-chip camera of high resolution, with automatic white
a video otoscope. However, it is important to note that some
balance. The standard light source is halogen; however,
 dogs and cats will not allow a video otoscopic examination
I prefer the xenon light source, which gives off a “whiter"
to be performed, despite proper restraint or the experience
and brighter light. In addition, if the camera is to be used
of the video otoscope user. In addition, some animals' ears
for other types of endoscopy, the xenon light is the preferred
may be too painful to allow any otic examination.
light source. The working channel allows the passage of5F or
Fogging of the lens during the video otoscopic exami-
smaller catheters, endoscopic forceps, and video otoscopic-
nation in the awake patient can be a source of frustration.
compatible curettes. Some may choose to use a rigid cysto-
Fogging occurs when the cool lens comes into contact with
scope or arthoscope to examine the ear canal and tympanic
the warm ear canal. There are a few procedures that can be
 membrane. Because of the delicate nature of these scopes,
used to control lens fogging. I use a combination of isopro-
they should only be used in the anesthetized animal.
 pyl alcohol wipes and a commercially available lens defogger
A dual-port adapter is available with some video oto-
(UltraStop). Before inserting the otoendoscope into the ear,
 scopes and can be attached to an external suction device and
I wipe the tip with an alcohol-soaked gauze sponge and then
a fluid bag to provide simultaneous passive suctioning and
 spray the defogger on the tip. This procedure will need to
flushing. External suction and flushing devices are also avail-
be repeated if the tip comes into contact with the ear canal
able and can be used by attachment of a catheter to the unit
epithelium (and subsequently accumulates some wax on
for directed suction and flushing. A medical-grade moni-
the tip) or comes into contact with exudate in the ear canal.
tor is preferred for viewing because the image projected is
Another technique that has been used to defog the lens is to
 superior to nonmedical grade monitors. The digital capture
warm the tip of the otoendoscope in a bowl of warm water.
system functions like a computer and is invaluable for image
documentation. Most have the capability of capturing still
Indications for the Use of Video Otoscopy for Deep
images and video clips. Biopsy and grasping forceps and
 curettes are available for obtaining samples, removing for-
Ear Flushing, Myringotomy, Biopsy, and Foreign
eign bodies, and dislodging cerumen, respectively. Brushes
Body Retrieval
are available for removing loose hairs and debris.
If the animal has chronic otitis externa, it may have concur-
rent otitis media. The most common clinical sign of otitis
 INSTRUMENT DISINFECTION
media is recurrent otitis externa. Rarely do my patients with
otitis media have concurrent neurologic signs, but some will.
 After the video otoscope and any associated equipment (e.g-)
 Neurologic signs that are suggestive of middle and inner ear
curette, forceps, or dual-port adapter) is used, it is impor-
disease include facial nerve paralysis, Horner's syndrome,
 tant to clean and disinfect the equipment. The clinician can
vestibular disturbances, and hearing loss. Not every animal
remove exudate in the port of the otoendoscope by passing
with chronic recurrent otitis externa requires anesthesia and
the manufacturer's cleaning brush in and out of the port.
a deep ear flush, so I have some guidelines I use to help make
 The otoendoscope along with any equipment used during
that decision. The following are cases in which I will consider
the procedure is first cleaned with an enzymatic cleaner. The
performing anesthesia and a deep ear flush and examination:
soaking time will be indicated by the manufacturer of the
1. If the client has been treating the infection using topical
 cleaner, but soaking times should never exceed those recom-
cleaning and drying agents, along with topical antimicro-
 mended by the manufacturer of the otoendoscope to prevent
bial agents, and I am still not able to visualize the tym-
damage. The otoendoscope and equipment are scrubbed
panic membra ne.
with brushes and towels and then transferred to a distilled
 2. If the patient has numerous rod bacteria detected cytolog-
water bath to rinse off the enzymatic cleaner. After the oto-
ically from the ear, and the culture reveals P. aeruginosa.
endoscope and equipment are cleaned, they are disinfected
590·PART TWO RigidEndoscopy
by soaking in glutaraldehyde for the length of time indicated
by the manufacturer of the otoendoscope. Alternatively, the
curette and forceps may be gas sterilized. Some otoendo-
pioe no pis se q ose  sdos s
 PATIENT PREPARATION
Once the decision has been made to perform a deep ear
flush, the patient's ear needs to be prepared for the proce-
dure. To do an appropriate flush, one needs the vertical and
 ie os aqissod se uado se aq o sieu iea reozio
tympanic membrane can be visualized. To do this, the animal
should be started on topical and systemic glucocorticoids
2 to 3 weeks before the deep ear flushing. The only excep-
tions to this would be in an animal with neurologic disease
Hgure 20-2 Normal anatomy of the canine tympanic membrane
where glucocorticoids may be contraindicated or in an ani-
of the right ear. I, Pars flaccida; 2, pars tensa; 3, stria mallearis;
mal that has a medical reason for not being able to be treated
C, caudal; D, dorsal; R, rostral; V, ventral. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette
with glucocorticoids. In older patients I will usually run a
Cole, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
complete blood count and biochemical profile before the
administration of glucocorticoids to ensure that no meta-
tube. A separate cartilaginous band, the annular cartilage, fits
bolic problems are present that would preclude their use. If,
within the base of this tube. The annular cartilage overlaps
when the animal returns for the deep ear flush, the ear canal
with the osseous external acoustic meatus and articulates via
has not opened up and the vertical and horizontal ear canals
ligamentous tissue, giving the external ear canal flexibility.
are still stenotic and hyperplastic, then the prognosis for
 In most breeds, hairs are present in the external ear canal,
medical management of this case is poor and treatment of
decreasing in number from distal to proximal. A very few fine
the otitis will require surgical management. If the ear canals
hairs are found at the entrance of the cartilaginous external
 have opened up with the treatment, then the animal should
acoustic meatus. I find that these hairs are a useful landmark
be anesthetized for the deep ear flush.
for locating the tympanic membrane when flushing an ear.
The middle ear consists of an air-filled tympanic cavity,
■ OTIC ANATOMY
three auditory ossicles, and the tympanic membrane. The
tympanic membrane is located at a 45-degree angle in rela-
It is important to understand the anatomy of the external
tion to the central axis of the horizontal part of the exter-
and middle ear when evaluating a patient with ear disease.
 nal ear canal. The tympanic membrane is a semitransparent 
 First, in order to diagnose otic disease, one must be familiar
 membrane that separates the external ear canal from the
with the appearance of the normal structures of the ear. Sec-
middle ear, is thin in the center and thicker at the periphery,
ondly, when one is performing a deep ear flush, it is impera-
 and is divided into two sections, the small upper pars flac-
tive that one is aware of the delicate structures of the ear to
cida and the larger lower pars tensa (Figure 20-2). The pars
avoid damaging them and causing neurologic complications.
flaccida is the pink, small, loosely attached region forming
The opening of the external ear canal is bounded by the
the upper quadrant of the tympanic membrane that con-
helix (the free, slightly folded margin of cartilage at the base
tains small blood vessels. The pars flaccida is usually flat;
 of the pinna) rostrally, the tragus laterally, and the antitra-
however, even in the healthy ear one may identify a bulg-
gus caudally. The antitragus is a thin, elongated piece of
ing pars flaccida (Figure 20-3). The exception is the Cavalier
cartilage caudal to the tragus and separated from it by the
King Charles Spaniel, in which a bulging pars flaccida may
intertragic incisure (incisura intertragica). This anatomic
 be indicative of a disease known as primary secretory otitis
region is the area in which I will insert the otoscopic cone
media (PSOM) (Figure 20-4).
or otoendoscope for the otoscopic examination. The verti-
The pars tensa, the thin, tough, gray structure with radiat-
cal ear canal runs for about 1 inch, extending ventrally and
 ing strands, occupies the remainder of the membrane. The
slightly rostrally before taking a medial turn and forming
 pars tensa is attached to the osseous ring ofthe external acous-
the horizontal ear canal. There is a prominent cartilaginous
tic meatus. The manubrium of the malleus attaches to the
ridge that separates the vertical and horizontal ear canals
 medial surface of the tympanic membrane. The outline of the
and, when the ear is in its normal position, makes otic
manubrium of the malleus, the stria mallearis, may be visual-
examination ofthe horizontal ear canal difficult without the
ized when the tympanic membrane is viewed externally. The
 clinician elevating this ridge by grasping the ear pinna and
pars tensa has a concave shape when viewed externally
lifting the ear.
because of the tension applied to the internal surface of the
The horizontal ear canal is composed of auricular and
membrane, where the manubrium of the malleus is aftached.
 annular cartilage. The auricular cartilage rolls as it forms a
The point of greatest depression is called the umbo.
CHAPTER 20 Otoscopy · 591
Figure 20-3 Bulging pars flaccida ina dog without any external or
Hgure 20-5 Left ear of a canine skeleton (tympanic membrane
middle ear disease. I, Pars flaccida; C, caudal; D, dorsal; R, rostral;
rououond 'g :aimionis iea aIppiu suesnl (paaoua
V, ventral. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio State University.
6, bulla septum; 7, vestibular (oval) window; 8, cochlear (round)
Columbus, Ohio.)
window; C, caudal; D, dorsal; R, rostral; V, ventral. (Courtesy of
Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
avoid damaging the promontory or the cochlear window and
to avoid damaging the inner ear, causing vestibular distur-
bances or deafness.
The middle ear cavity of the cat is different from the
 dog's and is divided by a septum into two distinct regions,
the tympanic cavity and the bullar cavity. These two cavi-
fies are connected through a narrow foramen between the
septum and the petrous bone. In the small dorsolateral com-
 partment lie the auditory ossicles, the osteum of the auditory
tube, and the tympanic membrane. The larger ventromedial
 compartment is an air-flled tympanic bulla. The bony sep-
tum should be perforated surgically when middle ear disease
is present in both cavities for proper drainage of the middle
Figure 20-4 Bulging pars flaccida in a Cavalier King Charles
ear cavity. Rough handling of the bony septum may result
Spaniel with primary secretory otitis media (PSOM). 1, Pars 
in damage to the postganglionic sympathetic nerves. The
flaccida. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio State University,
Columbus,Ohio.)
nerves, which are visible submucosally as fine strands over
the cochlear promontory, should be avoided during surgical
removal of the septum in the cat.
The tympanic cavity consists of a small epitympanic recess,
The three auditory ossicles, the malleus, incus, and sta-
a large ventral bulla, and the tympanic bulla proper. In the
 pes, are the bones that transmit and amplify air vibrations
dog, there is an incomplete bony septum, the bulla septum,
from the tympanic membrane to the inner ear. The malleus
which allows communication between the tympanic bulla
is attached to the tympanic membrane, the petrous tempo-
proper and the ventral tympanic bulla. On the medial wall of
ral bone, and the incus. The incus is suspended between the
the tympanic cavity, there is a bony eminence, the promon-
 malleus and the stapes. The footplate (base) of the stapes is
tory, which houses the cochlea, and lies opposite the tympanic
attached to the vestibular window, which is in direct contact
membrane medial to the epitympanic recess. At the caudola-
with the perilymph fluid. The vestibular window is approxi-
teral portion of the promontory, a foramen called the cochlear
 mately 18 to 20 times smaller in area than the tympanic
(round) window is located. The cochlear window is covered
membrane.
by a thin membrane that oscilates to dissipate the vibratory
energy of the perilymph in the scala tympani. The vestibular
Procedure for Deep Ear Flush with the Video
(oval) window lies on the dorsolateral surface of the promon-
Otoscope
tory immediately adjacent to the pars flaccida (Figure 20-5).
It is covered by a thin diaphragm. The footplate of the sta-
The video otoscope is an invaluable tool for evaluating and
 pes is attached to the diaphragm over the vestibular window.
flushing the middle ear of an anesthetized patient with oti-
When flushing the middle ear, one must be very careful to
tis media. I would encourage standardizing the orientation
592·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
of the video otoscope relative to the animal when utilizing
is ruptured or torn, as previously stated, it is important to
the video otoscope in the anesthetized patient. That way, the
flush copious amounts of sterile saline into the ear canal to
surgeon avoids becoming disoriented when the anatomy of
remove the ceruminolytic agent. In addition, once a rup-
the ear is abnormal. Next, make sure that the monitor is eas-
tured or torn tympanic membrane has been identifed,
ily visible while examining the ear, which means that it is
do not infuse the ceruminolytic agent into the bulla. Once
directly in front or to the left or right. It is very awkward
the exudate has been removed from the external ear canal,
for the surgeon to try to view the monitor over his or her
I attach the dual-port adapter to the port on the otoendo-
shoulder.
The animal should be anesthetized and have an endotra-
tioning and flushing of the external ear canal, which expands
cheal tube in place for the deep ear flush. The endotracheal
the ear canals, further magnifies the ear, prevents lens fog-
tube will prevent aspiration of any fluid that passes from the
ging, and continues to clean the ear. A warmed bag of sterile
middle ear into the auditory tube to the nasopharynx and
 saline is attached to a Venoset on one port of the dual-port
then to the oropharynx and respiratory tract if a myringot-
adapter, and a suction hose is attached to the other port.
omy and middle ear flush are performed. Before the deep
 A tear or rupture can be identifed by bubbles coming from
ear flush, the first procedure I perform is radiographic imag-
the tympanic membrane. Once the patency of the tympanic
 ing to evaluate the middle ear. I prefer to perform computed
membrane has been determined, I will remove the saline from
tomography (CT) on my patients, but in general practice,
 the ear canal and evaluate the tympanic membrane with the
this is often not available, and bulla radiographs suffice.
otoendoscope because saline in the ear canal can sometimes
 Radiographic imaging not only allows evaluation of the
cause the tympanic membrane to look opaque ( which would
middle ear for changes consistent with otitis media (i.e., soff
be considered abnormal) when it is not. If the tympanic mem-
tissue density in the bulla) but it also allows identification of
brane is ruptured, then the patient has otitis media. A myrin-
significant changes in the bulla, such as sclerosis or lysis, that
 gotomy does not need to be performed, and samples from the
may indicate osteomyelitis or a tumor, respectively, which
middle ear for cytologic and culture analysis can be obtained
will aid in determining the prognosis for medical treatment
through the tear in the tympanic membrane. I find it helpful
of the ear disease.
to have technical assistance in obtaining these samples. I will
Just before cleaning the ear, one should obtain swab sam-
turn the otoendoscope to where the port is ventral, without
ples from the external ear canal for bacterial C/S and cyto-
 moving the camera. This allows easy access to the port and
logic examination. Video otoscopic images are taken of the 
keeps the instruments aimed ventrally so that the auditory
external ear canal for documentation. With the patient in
ossicles and promontory are avoided. I will have a techni-
lateral recumbency, preferably on a tub table and a heating
cian stand behind the patient's head and hold the ear in one 
pad (those specifically designed for veterinary surgical pro-
hand and the video otoscope in the other. This allows me to
cedures), the external ear canal is soaked with an ear cleaner
have my hands free to flush the middle ear (Figure 20-6). An
or ceruminolytic agent for 10 minutes. I prefer to use a
open-end 31F Tomcat catheter attached to a 12-mL syringe
 ceruminolytic agent because these products are the best for
is placed through the port of the otoendoscope. Saline is
 removing exudate from the ear canal. However, the majority
flushed into the middle ear cavity and aspirated back for cul-
of these products are ototoxic if they enter into the middle
ture, and a second sample is flushed into the middle ear and
ear cavity. Once the ear has been cleaned, if the tympanic
aspirated back for cytologic analysis. After sample retrieval,
membrane is ruptured or torn, I will repeatedly flush sterile
the middle ear is flushed with warm sterile saline through the
saline into the external ear canal to remove the cerumino-
 open-ended Tomcat catheter. I wil flush and aspirate back 1
lytic agent. There is, however, one commercially available
mL of sterile saline at a time and will finish when the saline
ceruminolytic agent, Cerumene, that has been shown to be
flushed from the middle ear cavity is clear.
nonototoxic.
 If the tympanic membrane is intact, then one must eval-
After the external ear canal has been soaked with a cerumi-
uate the tympanic membrane to determine whether it is
 nolytic agent or ear cleaner, the external ear canal is flushed
abnormal or normal and couple that with the results from
with warm sterile isotonic saline with the use of a bulb syringe
the radiographic imaging. A tympanic membrane, specif-
to remove large debris and exudate. This is followed by flush-
cally the pars tensa, that is opaque, gray, peeling, bulging,
ing with warm sterile isotonic saline with the use of a hand-
or hemorrhagic would be considered abnormal. At times, it
held otoscope with an 8F polypropylene urinary catheter
may be diffcult to determine whether the “structure" that
attached to a 12-mL syringe passed through an otoscopic
 one is visualizing is indeed the tympanic membrane, exudate
cone. An 8F red rubber feeding tube may be cut to size and
in front of the membrane, or, in the case of a ruptured tym-
used to flush the external ear canal. External flushing devices,
panic membrane, middle ear structures. In those situations,
such as the Vet Pump 2, available from the manufacturer
 I will pass an open-ended 31F Tomcat catheter through the
of the video otoscope, may be used in place of the manual
 port on the otoendoscope and gently touch the structure in
flushing described above. Once the ear is clean, the tympanic
question.
 membrane is evaluated with the video otoscope and images
Once it has been determined that the tympanic mem-
 are taken for documentation. If the tympanic membrane
brane is intact and is abnormal or if there is radiographic
CHAPTER 20Otoscopy · 593
Figure 20-6 A, The normal position of the otoendoscope (port is dorsal) and camera in the ear canal of a dog. B, Rotation of the
otoendoscope allowing the port to be ventral. A Tomcat catheter is placed through the port. C, Placement of the otoendoscope in the ear
canal with the port ventral. The clinician is flushing the middle ar with the catheter and the technician is holding the otoendoscope and
camera. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
evidence of otitis media, then a myringotomy incision
Unfortunately, if this occurs, it is best to abort the ear flush
would need to be made to be able to obtain samples from
and reschedule; in my experience, once the ear canal epithe-
the middle ear and flush the middle ear cavity. This can be
lium begins to peel, it will continue to peel and make it very
accomplished by passing a myringotomy needle (specially
difficult, if not impossible, to visualize the tympanic mem-
 designed for use with the otoendoscope), open-ended 312F
brane. Fortunately, this does not occur very frequently.
Tomcat catheter, or 5F polypropylene urinary catheter (cut
 Once the ear canal has been cleaned, masses and foreign
down in length) through the port on the otoendoscope
bodies may now be identified that were unable to be seen
into the caudoventral quadrant of the pars tensa. The myr-
(if present) before the flush because of the exudate inhib-
ingotomy needle, Tomcat catheter, or 5F polypropylene
iting visualization. The video otoscope, along with specific
urinary catheter is used to make the myringotomy incision
forceps, can be used to remove or sample masses in the ear
(Figure 20-7). To obtain samples from the middle ear cavity
canal or remove foreign bodies. For biopsies, the biopsy for-
for bacterial culture and cytologic analysis, an open-ended
ceps are inserted into the port on the otoendoscope. It is best
3/2F Tomcat catheter or 5F polypropylene urinary catheter
to keep the tip of the otoendoscope in the vertical ear canal,
is attached a 12-mL syringe placed through the port of the
pass the biopsy forceps into the port, and extend it out into
otoendoscope. One milliliter of saline is flushed into the
the lumen of the ear canal. Then have the technician slowly
middle ear cavity and aspirated back for culture, and a sec-
move the video otoscope closer to the mass to be removed
ond sample is flushed into the middle ear and aspirated back
or sampled. If the tip of the otoendoscope is too close to
for cytologic analysis. Then the middle ear cavity is flushed
the mass, once the biopsy forceps are advanced through the
in the same fashion as discussed previously when the tym-
port, they may extend past the structure in question and
panic membrane was ruptured. The normal tympanum has
potentially rupture the tympanic membrane. The mass or
been shown experimentally to heal in 21 to 35 days. There-
biopsy sample from the mass should be submitted for histo-
fore, if the ear is kept free from infection after the myrin-
pathologic evaluation. It is advisable to perform the biopsy
gotomy procedure, the tympanic membrane should heal in
procedure as the final procedure because there will be some
3 to 4 weeks.
bleeding from the biopsy site, which makes visualization of
Rarely, while the external ear canal is being flushed, the
a aq u srq a  ss d
ear canal epithelium will begin to peel. This is from soak-
with grasping forceps under direct visualization of the video
ing the ear with saline and ear cleaners or ceruminolytic
otoscope. The procedure is the same as previously described
 agents, which results in maceration of the stratum corneum.
for the use of the biopsy forceps.
594 ■ PART TWO RigidEndoscopy
 COMPLICATIONS OF DEEP EAR
FLUSHING AND MYRINGOTOMY
I rarely see any complications after deep ear flushing in
the dog; however, I go over the neurologic side effects (i.e.)
facial nerve paralysis, Horner's syndrome, vestibular distur-
bances, and hearing loss) that may occur subsequent to a
 deep ear flush and myringotomy with the client and have
the client sign a consent form before the procedure. In cats,
complications after ear flushing are common. Part may
be due to the location of the postganglionic nerves, which
run through the middle ear cavity submucosally below the
septum of the tympanic bulla over the cochlear promon-
tory. Damage to these nerves results in Horner's syndrome.
Fortunately, most complications will resolve within 3 to 6
weeks. It is important to perform a neurologic examination
on any animal that has otitis as well as question the client on
his or her perception of the animal's hearing ability before
the ear flushing.
In some cases of chronic, recurrent otitis externa, sur-
 gical intervention, consisting of a total ear canal ablation 
and bulla osteotomy, may be warranted. Surgery is indi-
cated when there is inadequate response of the external ear
infection to medical management due to poor client com-
pliance or the presence of a resistant organism; otitis media
fails to respond to myringotomy, ear canal flushing, and
 medical management; or progressive pathologic changes of
the ear (i.e., calcifcation, proliferation, and stenosis) have
resulted in permanent occlusion of the ear canal. Fortu-
Figure 20-7 A, Use of a Tomcat catheter to make a myringotomy
 nately, this is rarely necessary if aggressive medical therapy
incision into the caudoventral quadrant of the pars tensa of a
has been used.
cadaver dog's right ear. C, Caudal; D, dorsal; R, rostral; V, ventral.
B, Myringotomy incision. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
SUGGEStEd
READING
Angus JC, Campbell KL: Uses and indications for video-otoscopy in
Evans HE: The ear. In Evans HE, editor: Miller's anaromy of the dog,
small animal practice, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 3 1:809-
ed 3, Philadelphia, 1993, Saunders.
828, 2001.
Mansfield PD, Steiss JE, Boosinger TR,et al: The effects of four,
Cole LK: Otoscopic evaluation of the ear canal, Vet Clin North Am
commercial ceruminolytic agents on the middle ear, J Am Anim
Small Anim Pract 34:397-410, 2004.
Hosp Assoc 33:479-486, 1997.
CHAPTER 20
Otoscopy
595
Atlas PAGes 595- 597
ATLASFORVIDEOOTOSCOPY
Figure 20-12, p. 596, Scaly pars tensa in
Figure 20-16, p. 596, Ceruminal gland
Figure 20-8, p. 595, Normal canine tym-
 a dog with otitis media
adenoma in the external ear canal of
panic membrane ofthe left ear
Figure 20-13, p. 596, Normal feline
a dog
Figure 20-9, p.595,Bulging pars flac-
 tympanic membrane of the right ear
Figure 20-17, p. 596, Ceruminolith in
cida in a dog without otitis media
Figure 20-14, p. 596, Bulging, opaque
the ear canal of a cat
Figure 20-10, p. 595, Bulging pars flac-
pars tensa in a cat with otitis media
Figure 20-18, p. 597, Nasopharyngeal
cida in a dog with primary secretory
Figure 20-15, p. 596, Feline tympanic
polyp in the ear canal of a cat
otitis media
 membrane with two tears in the pars
Figure 20-11, p. 595, Bulging pars tensa
tensa
 in a dog with otitis media
1
V
Hgure 20-8 Normal canine tympanic
Hgure 20-9 Bulging pars flaccida in a
membrane of the left ear. I, Pars flaccida; 2,
dog without otitis media. I, Pars flaccida:
pars tensa; 3, stria mallearis; 4, bulla septum;
C, caudal; D, dorsal; R, rostral; V, ventral.
C, caudal; D, dorsal; R, rostral; V, ventral.
(Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio State
(Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio.)
University, Columbus, Ohio.)
Hgure 20-10 Bulging pars flaccida ina
Hgure 20-11 Bulging pars tensa in a dog with 
Cavalier King Charles spaniel dog with
otitis media. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The
primary secretory otitis media. I, Pars flaccida.
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
(Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio.)
596 ■ PART TWO RigidEndoscopy
Hgure 20-12 Scaly pars tensa in a dog with
Hgure 20-13 Normal feline tympanic
otitis media. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The
membrane. 1, Pars flaccida; 2, pars tensa; 3,
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
stria mallearis; C, caudal; D, dorsal; R, rostral;
V, ventral. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The
Ohio State University,Columbus,Ohio.)
Hgure 20-14 Bulging,opaque pars tensa in a
Hgure 20-15 Feline tympanic membrane
cat with otitis media. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette
with two tears in the pars tensa. (Courtesy of
Cole, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio State University,
Ohio.)
Columbus, Ohio.)
Hgure 20-16 Ceruminal gland adenoma with
Hgure 20-17 Ceruminolith in the horizontal
blood noted in the external ear canal of a dog.
ear canal of a cat. (Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole,
(Courtesy of Dr. Lynette Cole, The Ohio State
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
University, Columbus, Ohio.)
CHAPTER 20 Otoscopy · 597
Hgure 20-18 Nasopharyngeal polyp in the horizontal ear canal of
a cat. (Courtesy of Andrew Hillier, D. V.M.)
Conservative Management of Chronic
eliminate pain. Significant hearing loss is generally present
Otitis Media in Dogs
before TBC. Restoration of hearing is uncommon and not
considered a procedural goal. The main limiting factor with
David K. Saylor and Jarod E. Williams
conservative management is the patency of the lumen of the
canal. Successful TBC is unlikely when the canal lumen has
Chronic canine otitis media (OM) is a frustrating problem
been severely compromised by fibrosis, stenosis, or glan-
in small animal practice. OM is most commonly the result
dular hyperplasia. Progression of OM to otitis interna with
of bacterial otitis externa extension through a ruptured
 neurologic complications is a potential outcome without
tympanum. Less commonly, OM can result from bacterial
TEA/LBO.12 The majority of cases of OM can be managed
nasopharyngitis with eustachian tube retrograde transloca-
without TEA/LBO with successful TBC and culture-guided
tion of bacteria to the tympanic bulla. General symptoms
local antimicrobial-corticosteroid therapy.
include scratching, rubbing, head shaking, exudation, odor,
periaural pain and pain on temporomandibular joint exten-
■ INSTRUMENTATION
sion, head tilt, Horner's syndrome, facial neuropathies,
and ataxia.l Examination of the canal is often unsuccessful
 Otoscopic evaluation with a rigid endoscope is superior to
without sedation or general anesthesia. Most patients have
that achieved with a handheld otoscope. Visualization of
been treated with multiple antimicrobials over a period of
the tympanic cavity and its contents is an essential part of
 months to years. The majority of cases are unilateral, but
the examination. The rigid scope can be visually directed
bilateral OM does occur often in conjunction with atopic
into the bulla. The magnification and superior lighting
dermatitis.23 A polymicrobial gram-positive or gram-nega-
provided with the rigid endoscope are invaluable. The
tive aerobic recovery from middle and external ear segments
1.9-mm, 30-degree visual angled integrated endoscope
has been reported in multiple studies.4-7 Given the spectrum
(Karl Storz model No. 27030BA) with ports for irrigation,
of potential pathogens and often significant antimicro-
suction, and biopsy can be used in any sized dog. Irrigation
 bial resistance, specific culture-guided therapy is required.
 is necessary to keep the end ofthe scope clear. The operating
Enteral and parenteral antibiotic delivery has often been
 ports and specialized endoscopic cup forceps of the 1.9-mm
shown to be inferior to topical delivery methods in humans.8
endoscope are offen too small to be effective at meaning-
The same observations should be assumed in dogs in light
ful TBC. Our personal preference is to use this scope for
of the relatively extensive canal and bulla volume compara-
examination and a handheld otoscope for introduction of
tively. Definitive treatment is often unsuccessful without
instruments into the canal and bula. Instruments used in
surgical intervention. Total ear canal ablation with lateral
TBC include Noyes alligator forceps, various curettes, and
bulla ostectomy (TEA/LBO) and lateral ear canal resection
Mcllwraith peapod arthroscopic rongeurs (Figure 20-19).
techniques have been well characterized9,10 but are invasive
 These rongeurs are the most effective tool. They can be pur-
and traumatic. A number of seemingly “end-stage ears" can
chased with cup sizes of 2, 4, 5, and 6 mm. Tomcat catheters
be salvaged noninvasively.ll Careful transtympanic bulla
are used for flushing, and various diameter Frazier suction
curettage (TBC) and lavage of the bulla followed by medi-
tips are used for suction. A 1.9-mm rigid endoscope with an
cal management with otic topical medications has a high
arthroscopy sheath for irrigation is a suitable substitute for
rate of success. The goal of TBC is to resolve infection and
the integrated scope.
598·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 20-19 Instruments for debridement of the tympanic bulla
(left to right): two sizes of bone curettes, peapod arthroscopic
 rongeurs, and Noyes alligator forceps.
Hgure 20-20 Irrigation with an open-end Tomcat catheter.
 PATIENT EVALUATION
AND ANESTHESIA
 Preoperative diagnostic testing includes a complete blood
count (CBC), chemistry panel, and urinalysis. Otoscopy and
any procedure involving the middle ear are conducted under
 general anesthesia. An intravenous catheter is placed, and
intravenous fluids are recommended. A balanced neurolept-
analgesic preanesthetic combination is recommended for
most patients because the affected ear is often very painful.
Anesthetic induction agents are chosen based on the patient
assessment. Inhalant anesthesia is provided for maintenance
during the procedure. Postoperative analgesia is highly rec-
ommended for 2 to 3 days postprocedure.
External Ear Canal Evaluation
Samples are collected from the ear canal for aerobic bacterial
culture. External ear canal exudate sampling has been shown to
be sufficient for prediction of aural tissue infection in patients
with chronic otitis externa and media.5 The canal is lavaged
Figure 20-21 Using a Frazier suction tip.
and suctioned to remove gross obstructive debris (Figures
20-20 and 20-21). The 1.9-mm endoscope is introduced into
described previously in this chapter. If the tympanum is not
the canal, and the lining is visualized. Ulcerations in the lining
 present and the bulla is empty (Figure 20-24), copious lavage
are common findings. They can be focal or involve large sec-
with warm saline can be performed through the endoscope
tions of the epithelium (Figure 20-22). The degree of hyper-
 irrigation port. This is often suffcient for cases without
plasia of the lining varies. Occasionally, obstructive fibrosis
marked bulla soft tissue proliferation. More often, mucus,
and stenosis secondary to severe infection are found in some
debris, and proliferative tissues are present, filling the bulla
canals. These ears are more effectively treated with TEA/LBO.
(Figures 20-26 and 20-28). The endoscope is removed, and
curettage is performed through a standard otoscope. One
should be familiar with the position of the round window,
Middle Ear Evaluation
the oval window, and the opening to the eustachian tube
The middle ear starts at the tympanic membrane. In most
and consider the spatial relationship of a straight ear canal
truly chronic cases it is rare to find an intact tympanum
and the medial wall of the bulla. Manipulate the pinna to
(Figure 20-23). However, intact tympani can be present
straighten the canal and introduce instruments in a ros-
with OM.ll In this case, nasopharyngitis or secretory OM
tral, ventral direction. It is diffcult to damage any of these 
should be considered as potential origins. If the eardrum is
structures with proper placement of instruments. Over-
intact, follow recommendations for medical management
zealous flushing is more of a concern. In dogs a bony ridge
CHAPTER 20
Otoscopy■599
Figure 20-22 Hyperplasia and ulceration in the canal lining of an
 8-year-old German shepherd with a l-year history of otitis externa.
Hgure 20-25 Canine tympanic bulla with mild endothelial
proliferation along the medial ridge.
Hgure 20-26 Mucopurulent discharge and debris flling the
Figure 20-23 Proliferative tissue and mucopurulent discharge
tympanic bulla of an 11-year-old Golden retriever with a chronic
frame a large defect in the tympanic membrane of the dog in 
history of otitis and recent development of a head tilt.
Figure 20-22.
separates the tympanic cavity from the tympanic bulla and,
in a few individuals, may cause diffculty in placing the
 scope or instruments into the tympanic bulla (see Figures
20-24 and 20-25). When alligator forceps, curettes, or a pea-
pod arthroscopic rongeur is used, proliferative tissues and
attached debris can be removed. Progress is visualized with
intermittent rigid endoscopic visualization. The TBC pro-
cedural goal is to debride proliferative tissue and flush out
all debris, which results in visualization of bulla periosteum
(see Figures 20-24 and 20-25). The medial wall of the bulla
should be visible at the end of the procedure (Figure 20-27).
■ POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS
AND CARE AFTER TREATMENT
 Most patients are discharged the day of the procedure on an
opioid analgesic and eardrops on the basis of case medical
Figure 20-24 Appearance of the tympanic bulla of the dog in
history and in-house cytologic results. Various combina-
Figures 20-22 and 20-23 after debridement and irrigation. Note
tions of dimethylsulfoxide, corticosteroids, and parenteral
the inflamed appearance of the medial wall of the bulla and the
 sclerosis of the dorsal bony ridge when compared to the same
antibiotics have been previously reported13 and have been
structures in a different dog in Figure 20-25.
effectively used. Otic application of parenteral formulas has
600·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
been reported in the treatment of resistant P. aeruginosa
otitis externa in dogs.l4 Mixed solution shelf lives and solu-
tion precipitates bring into question the usefulness of such
approaches. That said, we have been able to successfully clear
numerous complex infections including multidrug-resistant
 gram-negative bacilli and methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus with careful periodic reevaluation using local
therapies alone (Table 20-1). Not all antibiotics are created
equal. Some drugs within classes, because of their molecular
structures or mechanism of action, are reported to be more
 or less susceptible to resistance development over time.15,16
We choose compounds reported to have lower resistance
 potential because most cases require prolonged treatment of
Figure 20-27 Appearance of the medial wall of the tympanic bulla
weeks to months. With this approach, we do not find resis-
'uh snoidos pue aeeais iae g-oz ainaig ui aop auijo
tant bacterial selection an issue over the course of treatment,
and successful management of even chronic, stubborn, and
resistant OM can be achieved without the systemic adminis-
tration of antimicrobials. While the OM infection is treated,
it is imperative to determine the cause of the chronic otitis
externa so that an appropriate maintenance program can
be started when the OM has resolved. It is also extremely
important that clients understand that a maintenance pro-
gram is essential in preventing future ear infections.
Possible complications of TBC include Horner's syn-
drome, facial nerve paralysis, deafness, vestibular abnor-
malities, and, rarely, meningitis or encephalitis. Always use
caution when placing instruments in the tympanic cavity
and flush with care. The use of amikacin in an ear with a
ruptured eardrum is controversial because of the ototoxicity
of aminoglycosides instilled in the middle ear. Candidates
for this procedure are more often than not hearing impaired
mm
in the affected ear. The goal of this procedure is to resolve
the infection, eliminate pain, and salvage the ear canal. The
2
3
4
5
6
7
purpose is not to restore hearing. Antimicrobial agents are
Figure 20-28 Debris and proliferative tissue removed from the
chosen more for their effectiveness than any concern about
tympanic bulla of the dog in Figures 20-26 and 20-27.
ototoxicity. If iatrogenic hearing loss is of significant con-
 cern, a nonototoxic agent should be employed.
Table 20-1 Otic Mixtures for Resistant Otitis Media
Otic combination
Mixture
Application
Storage/concerns
Observed efficacy
Amikacin-Synotic
50 mg/8 mL
0.25 mL/20 Ib bid ×14 d.
 Room temperature, light
More than 4-6
pb uau
protected, shake before use,
weeks
minor precipitates may form 
but do not appear to limit 
efficacy, ototoxicity
Levofloxacin-Synotic
100 mg/8 mL
0.25 ml/20 Ib bid x 14 d,
 Room temperature, protect 
2-4 week5
pb uau
from light, no precipitates
Meropenem-Synotic
1 g/16 ml, dilute dry powder
0.25 mL/20 Ib bid
Refrigerate, protect from light,
2-3 weeks
directly with 8 mL Synotic;
brown discoloration
withdraw and mix in with 
observed after 2-3 weeks
8 mL Synotic; shake before
 in suspension
use as the mixture appears
to be a suspension
CHAPTER 20 Otoscopy · 601
REFERENCES
1. Gotthelf L: Diagnosis and treatment of otitis media in dogs and
9. Mason KL, Harvey CE, Orsher RJ: Total ear canal ablation with
cats, Vet Clin North Amm Srmall Anim Pract 34(2):469-487, 2004.
lateral bulla ostectomy for end-stage otitis in dogs, Vet Surg
2. Rosser Jr E: Causes of otitis externa, Vet Clin North Am Small
17(5):263-268, 1988.
Anim Pract 34(2):459-468, 2004.
10. Lanz O, Wood B: Surgery of the ear and pinna, Vet Clin North 
 3. Saridomichelakis MN, Farmaki R, Leontides LS,et al: Aetiology
Am Small Anim Pract 34(2):567-599, 2004.
of canine otitis externa: a retrospective study of 100 cases, Vet
11. Palmeiro BS, Morris DO, Wiemelt SP, et al: Evaluation of
Dermatol 18(5):341-347, 2007.
otitis media after lavage of the tympanic bulla and long-term
4. Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Kowalski JI, et al: Microbial flora and
antimicrobial drug treatment in dogs: 44 cases (1998-2002), /
antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of isolated pathogens
Am Vet Med Assoc 225:548-553, 2004.
from the horizontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs with otitis
12. Spangler EA, Dewey CW: Meningoencephalitis secondary to
media, J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:534-538, 1998.
bacterial otitis media/interna in a dog, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
5. Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Hillier A,et al: Comparison of bacterial
36:239-243, 2000.
organisms and their susceptibility patterns from otic exudate
13. Boothe DM: Small animal clinical pharmacology and
 and ear tissue from the vertical ear canal of dogs undergoing
therapeutics, Philadelphia, 2000, Saunders.
total ear canal ablation, Vet Ther 6(3):252-260, 2005.
14. Nutall TI: Use of ticarcillin in the management of canine otitis 
6. Hariharan H, Coles M, Poole D, et al: Update on antimicrobial
externa complicated by Pseudormonas aeruginosa, J Small Anim
susceptibilities of bacterial isolates from canine and feline otitis
Pract 39:165-168, 1998.
externa, Can Vet J47:253-255,2006.
15. Cunha BA: Antibiotic
resistance、 Med Clin North Am
7. Colombini S, Merchant SR, Hosgood G: Microbial flora and
84(6):1407-1429, 2000.
antimicrobial susceptibility patterns from dogs with otitis
16. Kotra LP、 Haddad J、 Mobashery S: Aminoglycosides:
media,Vet Dermatol 11:235-239,2000.
perspectives on mechanisms of action and resistance and
8. Esposito S, D'Errico G, Montanaro C: Topical and oral
strategies to counter resistance, Antimicrob Agents Chemother
treatment of chronic otitis media with ciprofloxacin, Arch
44:3249-3256, 2000.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 116:557-559, 1990.
Conservative Management of Feline
(DLC) of the bulla and ventromedial compartment (VMC)
Inflammatory Polyps
septotomy to allow drainage of the ventromedial compart-
ment is less invasive compared with VBO. Most cats are
David K. Saylor and Jarod E. Williams
treated on an outpatient basis, which reduces hospitalization
time and costs. Recurrence of polyps with this technique
Feline inflammatory polyps are benign growths that most
is approximately 10% (unpublished data) with postopera-
commonly are found in young cats.l Infectious causes have
tive local installation of an otic steroid-antibiotic combina-
been theorized. However, polymerase chain reaction stud-
tion. If polyps recur, procedural repetition or VBO can be
ies have failed to reliably identify etiologic viral organisms.2
performed.
Most arise in the tympanic bulla (TB) or eustachian tube
(ET). The polyps can then extend either through the tym-
INSTRUMENTATION
 panic membrane into the horizontal ear canal or down the
ET into the nasopharynx (NP). Polyps can be single or mul-
Video otoscopy performed with a video otoscope or a rigid
tiple, involve one or both ears, and can be found in the NP.3
endoscope improves visualization of the ear canal, tympanic
Symptoms depend on the location of the polyp(s). Polyps
membrane, and middle ear because of the superior magnifi-
in the NP typically cause chronic stertorous respiration and
cation and lighting. This advantage is importa nt in evaluating
have been associated with chronic rhinitis. Polyps in the ear
the ear canal and TB after removal of the polyp. A handheld
canal cause recurrent otitis externa and media and can lead
otoscope is used to allow passage of larger instruments for
to head tilt, nystagmus, and ataxia. The recommended treat-
removal of smaller polyps and proliferative tissues within
ment is traction avulsion of the polyp followed by ventral
the canal and DLC (Figure 20-29). A peapod arthroscopic
bulla osteotomy (VBO).1,3-5 Simple removal of the polyp
 rongeur is preferred for removal of soft tissue. Curettes of
with traction avulsion is often followed by regrowth and
varying sizes are used to remove granulation tissue from the
relapse of symptoms. Polyrecurrence has been reported to be
surface of the TB septum. A Frazier suction tip is used to
 greater in cats with aural components, and recurrence may
remove discharge and irrigation fluids. Open-ended Tomcat
be decreased by corticosteroid therapy.6
catheters are used for flushing the canal and middle ear. We
Traction avulsion ofthe polyp followed by transtympanic
prefer using the 1.9-mm integrated scope (Karl Storz model
bulla curettage (TBC) of the dorsolateral compartment
No. 27030BA) for visualization of the canal. The scope has
602■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
a 30-degree viewing angle and three ports for biopsy, irriga-
compartment. It is believed that most polyps originate in
tion, and suction. Irrigation is essential for visualization of
this area. As polyps grow they either extend down the ET to
 the canal and bulla anatomy.
lie in the NP or more commonly extend laterally through the
eardrum to sit in the ear canal.
■ FELINE MIDDLE EAR ANATOMY
 The two compartments communicate through a narrow
fissure where the septum is incomplete dorsally.7 The caudal
The feline TB is divided into the VMC and DLC by a bony
 aspect of this fissure enlarges to form a foramen that houses
septum. The larger VMC is palpable caudal to the angle
the round window of the cochlea. The promontory lies medial
of the jaw and surrounds the ventral, medial, and caudal
to the foramen along the dorsal wall of the bulla primarily in
aspects of the DLC. This compartment is entered when VBO
the VMC but does communicate with the DLC along the fis-
is performed. It is frequently flld with mucopurulent dis-
sure above the septum. The tympanic plexus lies on the surface
charge but rarely contains polyps. The eardrum forms the
of the promontory. Damage to this structure causes Horner's
 major portion of the lateral wall of the smaller DLC, and
syndrome.8,9 A transient Horner's syndrome is a common
the septum forms the medial wall. The auditory os of the
sequela of polyp removal even if a bulla osteotomy is not per-
ET occupies the dorsomedial and rostral extremity of this
formed. The round (cochlear) window, oval (vestibular) win-
dow, and auditory ossicles are all found in the dorsal aspect of
the bulla. Avoiding curettage in this area minimizes iatrogenic
trauma that produces loss of hearing and vestibular deficits.
■ PROCEDURE
 The procedure is performed under general anesthesia. The
fle, and feline leukemia virus and feline immunodeficiency
serologic testing. A balanced neuroleptanalgesic preanes-
thetic combination is recommended to reduce the amount of
induction and maintenance agents required. Although some
clinicians prefer radiographs or CT scans to evaluate the TB,
we find the added cost of imaging unnecessary, specifically in
cats less than 3 years of age. In middle-aged to geriatric cats,
Figure 20-29 Instruments for polyp removal and debridement
imaging of the middle ear is highly recommended because of
oftympanic bulla (left to right): spay hook for retraction of soft
the higher incidence of malignant tumor presence.l0 Palpate
pue sdiod eus udsea iay masuou sidossoue podead aiered
the soft palate to check for a mass in the NP. The soff pal-
proliferative tissue,small bone curette for curettage and puncture
ofthe septum, alligator forceps for removal oftissue, and mosquito
ate is then retroflexed with a spay hook for direct visualiza-
hemostat for traction and avulsion of polyps.
tion (Figure 20-30, A). Evaluation ofthe NP is much easier if
Figure 20-30 Inflammatory polyps in the nasopharynx and right horizontal ear canal of a 10-month-old, female, spayed domestic short hair.
CHAPTER 20 Otoscopy · 603
surgical loops and a headlamp are used. Polyps in the NP are
flushing and suction. Once the canal is clean, a 1.9-mm rigid
 grasped with a hemostat or right-angle forceps and removed
endoscope is used to evaluate the canal. Polyps appear as
via traction avulsion (Figure 20-30, B). On removal of the
smooth pink masses that tend to fll the lumen of the hori-
 polyp, suction is used to clear the NP, and the contralateral
zontal canal (see Figure 20-30, B, and Figure 20-32). Larger
ET orifice is examined.
 polyps can extend into the vertical canal and in extreme
 Once the NP has been cleared, otic examination is per-
cases may be visible in the opening of the vertical canal. The
formed with the handheld otoscope. Affected canals are gen-
 polyp is grasped with a hemostat and removed via traction
erally filled with mucopurulent discharge and waxy debris
avulsion. Always seat the hemostat as deep into the canal as
that can hide the polyp. The discharge is cleared with gentle
possible to enable complete removal of the polyp. Typically
there is a stalk associated with one end of the polyp indica-
tive of a narrow base of attachment (Figure 20-31). After
removal of the polyp reevaluate the canal, tympanum, and
bulla using the rigid endoscope (Figure 20-33). Findings
vary in the horizontal canal. It can be empty, or smaller pol-
 yps and inflammatory tissue can be found extending into the
tympanic cavity. Intact tympani are rarely present.
 Proliferative tissue, satellite polyps, and fbrinous debris 
that extend into the TB are commonly present. The TB is
often lined with inflammatory tissue. At this point the goal
is to remove proliferative tissue until the bony septum is vis-
ible. With a handheld otoscope and a peapod arthroscopic
rongeur, grasp and remove soff tissue. Alternately, a small 
curette can be used to carefully loosen tissue from the sep-
  sd   in s  s
cm1
2
operative channels of the rigid scope or video otoscope are
3
 generally too small to be effective. The curette is then used to
Figure 20-31 Large nasopharyngeal polyp and smaller polyps
puncture the septum by placing progressive force in a cau-
from the right ear canal of the cat (see Figure 20-30).
doventral direction. A pop is felt as the VMC septotomy is
Figure 20-32 Multiple polyps in the right
ear canal of a 2-year-old, male, neutered
domestic short hair with a history of
chronic otitis.
604■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
successfully performed. Remove the curette and insert the
dorsal aspect of the bulla. Damage to the oval window can
rigid endoscope. A stream of mucus flowing into the DLC is
lead to head tilt, nystagmus, and ataxia. Always try to avoid
a typical finding (Figure 20-34). This mucus can be collcted
this segment while removing proliferative tisue. Damage to
for bacterial culture. The hole in the septum can be enlarged,
the round window and/or auditory ossicles can cause deaf-
 or a second puncture can be created to allow easier access
 ness in the affected ear. Pharymgeal swelling from removal of
into the VMC (Figure 20-35). A Tomcat catheter is used to
a nasopharyngeal polyp or discharge from the ET can lead to
 gently lavage the VMC. Even tenacious or caseated mucus
 obstruction and respiratory distress on extubation. We com-
can be removed with this method (Figure 20-36). The VMC
monly administer a single dose of intra-operative cortico-
is lavaged but not curetted. The TB is liberally lavaged with
steroids to lessen postoperative nasopharyngeal swelling and
a saline flush until the returning fluid is clear. Carefully suc-
edema. Otic medications are instilled immediately after final
tion all fluid and debris from the pharynx at the conclusion
 canal cleansing. Cats must be watched closely in the immedi-
of the procedure.
ate postoperative period until awake and moving.
Cats are discharged with an otic steroid-antibiotic com-
■ POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS
bination and an opioid analgesic (buprenorphine 0.015
AND CARE AFTER TREATMENT
 mg/kg per os up to every 6 hours, as needed). Pending the
results of bacterial cultures, we commonly use a mixture of
Horner's syndrome is the most common complication of
fluocinolone acetonide with dimethyl-sulfoxide (Synotic)
this procedure, but it tends to resolve in most cases. If Horn-
and levofloxacin 6.25 mg/mL, given at 0.2 mL twice a day in
er's syndrome persists, functional impairment is uncom-
the affected ear(s) for 2 to 4 weeks on the basis of the sub-
jective severity of the pathologic condition. Oral adminis-
tration of postoperative antibiotics and corticosteroids is
rarely needed with this approach. Reexamination is recom-
 mended near the end of medication duration. If mucopu-
rulent discharge is observed in the bottom of the ear canal,
exudate is cultured and the ear canal and TB are reevalu-
ated under anesthesia. The canal is flushed and cleaned,
and proliferative tissue is removed, if present. Consider
VBO in refractory cases.
Polypectomy and TBC as described are minimally inva-
sive and appear to be highly effective in the resolution of
feline aural and nasopharyngeal inflammatory polyps. In
our practice, recurrence rates are approximately 10 percent.
Most cases of recurrence can be definitively managed by
 procedural repetition with appropriate culture-guided infec-
tion and inflammation control. In refractory cases, VBO is
Figure 20-33 Appearance of the septum after debridement of
an effective treatment with excellent long-term results for
the polyps of the cat (see Figure 20-32).
patients that fail to respond to polypectomy and TBC.
Figure 20-34 Mucus flowing from the puncture site of the septum (see Figure 20-32, C).
CHAPTER 20
Otoscopy■605
Figure 20-35 Punctured septum after debridement and flushing
Hgure 20-36 Polyps and proliferative tissue removed from the
of the tympanic bulla.
right ear canal and tympanic bulla of the cat (see Figures 20-32
through 20-35).
REFERENCES
1. Donnelly KE, Tillson MD: Feline inflammatory polyps and
6. Anderson DM, Robinson RK, White RAS: Management of
ventral bulla osteotomy, Compend Contin Educ Vet 26(6):446-
inflammatory polyps in 37 cats, Vet Rec 146:684-687, 2000.
453,2004.
7. Little CJL, Lane JG: The surgical anatomy of the feline bulla
 2. Veir JK, Lappin MR,Foley JE,et al: Feline inflammatory polyps;
tympanica, / Small Anim Pract 27:371-378, 1986.
historical, clinical and PCR fndings for feline calicivirus and
 8. Pope ER, Constantinescu GM: Feline respiratory tract polyps.
feline herpes virus-1 in 28 cases, J Feline Med Surg 4:195-199,
In Bonagura J, editor: Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIlI,
2002.
 Philadelphia, 2000, Saunders.
 3. MacPhail CM, Kudnig ST, Lappin MR: Atypical manifestations 
9. LeCouter R: Feline vestibular diseases—new developments,
of feline inflammatory polyps in three cats, ∫ Feline Med Surg
J Feline Med Surg 5(2):101-108, 2003.
9:219-225, 2007.
10. Allen HS, Broussard JB, Noone K: Nasopharyngeal disease in
4. Faulkner JE, Budsberg SC: Results of ventral bulla osteotomy
cats: a retrospective study of 53 cases (1991-1998), J Am Anirm
for treatment of middle ear polyps in cats, ∫ Arm Anirm Hosp
Hosp Assoc 35:457-461, 1999.
Assoc 26:496-499, 1990.
 5. Kapatkin AS, Matthiesen DT: Results of surgery and long term 
follow up in 31 cats with nasopharyngeal polyps, J Am Arim 
Hosp Assoc 26:387-392, 1990.
21
CHAPTER
Arthroscopy
John T. Payne
rthroscopic surgery is a relatively new discipline in vet-
■ PATIENT INDICATIONS
erinary surgery. The frst report of arthroscopic surgery in
the dog was in 1978 by Dr. G. B. Siemering who discussed
 Indications for arthroscopic surgery vary between joints.
arthroscopic anatomy in the canine stifle joint and estab-
 In the elbow joint, most common indications include frag-
lished that the accurate diagnosis of canine cranial cruci-
mented medial coronoid process (FCP), osteochondri-
ate ligament (CCL) disease was possible arthroscopically.
tis dissecans (OCD) of the elbow, and ununited anconeal
 Arthroscopy advanced slowly from that initial report, and
process. Less common indications may include biopsies of
the frst course in veterinary arthroscopy was not taught
the joint capsule in cases of immune-mediated arthritis or
until 1996 at the American College of Veterinary Surgeons
capsular neoplasia, evaluation of fractures of the condyle, or
meeting. Instructors were Drs. Robert Taylor, Wayne Whit-
reduction of elbow fractures and debridement of the joint 
ney, Andrew Sams, Tim McCarthy, and John Payne. Since
in cases of septic arthritis. In the shoulder the most com-
that initial basic course in canine arthroscopy, there have
 mon indications include OCD of the humeral head, biceps
been many articles discussing various uses of this exciting
tendon tenosynovitis, and evaluation of medial shoulder
technology in small animal surgery. Arthroscopy is the most
instability. Less common indications may include capsular
important and exciting advance in small animal orthopedics
biopsy, evaluation of glenoid fractures, or debridement in
since the introduction of plate-and-screw fracture fixation.
cases of septic arthritis. In the stifle, the most common indi-
Arthroscopic procedures are now the state of the art for
cations include stifle OCD, meniscectomy, or debridement
many common diseases in canine joints and have replaced
of the CCL stumps in dogs with CCL rupture. Less common
 open procedures in many cases.
indications include evaluation of fractures of the condyle or
Arthroscopy has gained wide acceptance due to a number
 patella or debridement of septic joints. The tarsus, carpus,
of important factors. First and foremost is the rapid advance
and hip joints are much less commonly scoped. The hip may
of all minimally invasive surgical procedures in human sur-
be evaluated arthroscopically to assess cartilage condition
gery. In humans and animals, minimally invasive procedures
and integrity before triple pelvic osteotomy. The tarsus can
have gained acceptance because they are associated with less
be evaluated for OCD lesions, and these may be removed
postoperative pain, less morbidity and fewer postoperative
with the use of an arthroscopic approach. The carpus (radio-
complications, a more rapid recovery, and, in humans, a
carpal joint) is rarely scoped but can be debrided or evalu-
more rapid return to work. Additionally, arthroscopic exam
ated in cases of undiagnosed lameness involving this joint.
ination allows a more thorough examination of the joint
being operated on and allows some treatments that previ-
PATIENT CONTRAINDICATIONS
ously were not possible. Arthroscopy has also allowed vet-
erinary surgeons to identify new diseases (medial shoulder
There are few contraindications specifically for arthroscopic
instability in dogs) and caused veterinarians to reevaluate
 surgery. Perhaps the most common contraindication would
other diseases about which they previously had an incom-
be animals or joints that are simply too small to allow exami-
plete understanding (elbow dysplasia). Because arthroscopy
nation. When a 1.9-mm arthroscope is used, dogs as small as
is a new discipline, there is a lot to be learned, and veterinar
12- to 13-kg body weight may be scoped, but instrumenta-
ians are stillin the infancy of what this technology willallow
tion of joints in very small dogs and cats may be difficult or
them to achieve in the future.
impossible. Dogs with severe arthritis and poor joint range
607
608·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
of motion may present a challenge to the arthroscopist, but
these severely degenerative joints are not a contraindication.
Besides small size of the animal, the only other contraindica-
ons iains Aue o Aidde eqi sauo eiau aq pnom suo
as animals being poor anesthetic candidates or having severe
systemic diseases rendering their joint problems irrelevant.
 EQUIPMENT FOR SMALL ANIMAL
ARTHROSCOPY
Arthroscopy in the dog requires high-quality equipment
that can be obtained from several manufacturers. It is ill
advised to purchase outdated, used equipment because the
technology has changed so much in recent years. The follow-
ing discussion will give the budding arthroscopist advice on
what equipment is needed to perform quality arthroscopic
Figure 21-1 Commonly used arthroscopes for small animal
procedures. High-quality equipment is not a substitute for
surgery include the 2.7-、2.4-,and 1.9-mm arthroscopes. (Photo
practice and attention to detail when learning arthroscopic
courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH  Co.KG,Tuttlingen, Germany.)
skills, but poor quality equipment will frustrate and hamper
progression of one's skills.
 Soaking in glutaraldehyde is messy and can be irritating to
Arthroscopes
 mucous membranes for most people. Certain scopes can be
autoclaved, but this process will decrease the life ofthe scope.
The initial instrument that is considered is the arthroscope
itself. Arthroscopes are surgical telescopes that allow visual-
Video Camera and Control Unit, Light Sources,
ization of the joint. These scopes are rigid tubes with lenses
and Monitor
on the ends and fiberoptic bundles in the tube that allow
transmission of the image and light. Arthroscopes are avail-
All veterinary arthroscopy is performed with the use of a
able in several diameters including 4.0, 2.7, 2.4, and 1.9 mm
video camera. These cameras attach to the arthroscope by
(Figure 21-1). The most commonly used endoscope in
several mechanisms that vary by manufacturer. Video cam-
small animal orthopedics is the 2.7-mm arthroscope. The
 eras may be single chip or three chip, and all give an excellent
2.4-mm scope is very similar, and the 1.9-mm scope is useful
 picture with good resolution. The three-chip camera is pre-
in smaller joints such as the carpus or tarsus. The 4.0-mm
ferred by most arthroscopists because it allows higher quality
scope is too large for most dogs and is rarely used in compan-
pictures and video to be recorded. In addition, most camera
 ion animals. In addition to varying diameters, several lengths
heads have two to three buttons that can be programmed to
and viewing angles are available for arthroscopes. Most vet-
perform a number of functions, including taking still pic-
erinary arthroscopists use a shorter scope (12 cm or less in
tures or video, controlling the light intensity, or turning on
length), although scopes are available up to 18 cm. Viewing
and off digital enhancement software. The camera head is
angles of 0, 30, and 70 degrees have been used in the past,
sterilized by ETO, soaking in glutaraldehyde solution, or by
but the 30-degree arthroscope is almost exclusively used by
plasma sterilization.
veterinary arthroscopists. Even though arthroscopes have an
 Light sources are an important part of the arthroscopy
eyepiece for direct viewing, all modern arthroscopy is per-
tower. Both halogen and xenon light sources have been used,
formed with the use of a video arthroscope. The final feature
but xenon is almost exclusively used in arthroscopy. The
of all arthroscopes is a post for attaching the light cable.
light cable is sterilized by ETO, by soaking in glutaraldehyde,
 Because arthroscopes are rigid stainless steel tubes con-
or by plasma sterilization.
taining fiberoptics, a few words regarding care of the instru-
The monitor is the screen that is used to visualize the
ment are in order. Arthroscopes are fragile and do not tolerate
joint. Most modern monitors are high-definition flat screen
bending or being dropped. An arthroscope should always be
monitors that give excellent picture quality. Monitor size
kept in its protective sheath or in its cannula. Arthroscopy
varies considerably, but the rule of thumb is to purchase the
should never be performed without a scope cannula. Visual-
largest monitor that fits your arthroscopy cart and your bud-
ization of the joint is made possible by carefully locating por-
get. A 2l-inch or larger monitor is ideal beca use it allows the
tals, not by forcing the scope into an inaccessible area. Using
arthroscopy cart to be backed away from the surgical table as
 an arthroscope as a crowbar to force a view into the joint can
much as possible. The operating table area gets very crowded
break the scope, resulting in an unwarranted expense. Ster-
with all of the equipment necessary to perform the proce-
ilization of the arthroscope is by ethylene oxide (ETO), by
 dure, and the farther the arthroscopy cart is from the table,
the more room is lef for the surgeon and assistant to work.
CHAPTER 21 Arthroscopy · 609
Video Capture Equipment
When arthroscopic surgery is performed, it is not necessary
to have equipment to take photographs or video images of
the procedure, but it is nevertheless useful. One use of this
 h sod  r s p i si p
 also helpful to record images for the medical record so that
LOIS
arthroscopic lesions can be correlated with surgical out-
comes. One of the most important reasons to record images
of the procedures is for marketing. Most clients and referring
veterinarians enjoy having pictures of the procedures, and it
 makes explaining the procedure to the client much easier.
■ FLOID MANAGEMENT
 During arthroscopic surgery, fluid continually flows through
Figure 21-2 Typical arthroscopic fluid pump. (Photo courtesy of
the joint to provide a clear field of view, free of blood and
Karl Storz GmbH  Co. KG,Tuttlingen, Germany.)
debris. For fluid to flow, an ingress and egress portal must be
established in all joints. The route of ingress and egress varies
from procedure to procedure and will be discussed later in
with a modest pressure. Typically, pressures within the joint
this chapter. It is important to control both the flow and the
are set at 25 to 40 mm Hg. If bleeding from the joint cap-
 pressure within the joint so that the joint is kept distended.
sule is a problem or the joint is not distending well, higher
and fluid extravasation outside the joint is minimized. If the
 pressures can be used but rarely exceed 60 mm Hg. When
pressure within the joint is too low, the joint collapses and
choosing an arthroscopy pump to purchase, one should
the surgeon is unable to see structures within the joint. If the
investigate the cost of the pump along with the cost of the
pressure is too high, the fluid flows out of the joint into the
tubing to determine whether the tubing can be used on more
subcutaneous area, leading to joint collapse and poor visu-
than one case or can be resterilized. Single-use tubing that
alization. Fluid management is very important during the
 cannot be reused may be prohibitively expensive.
procedure, and there are three main ways that fluid flow and
pressure are managed during surgery.
 SHAVERS
The simplest way to manage fluid within the joint is sim-
ply through gravity. The fluid irrigation bags are suspended
A power shaver is an important part ofanyarthroscopy setup
from the operating room ceiling, and fluid is delivered
(Figure 21-3). The power shaver is a motorized power tool
imprecisely to the surgical site with the use of a standard
that allows the rapid and precise removal of bone, cartilage,
intravenous infusion set. Pressure and flow are controlled
and soft tissue. The essential components of most power
by raising and lowering the bags. Many surgeons use this
shaver units are the electronic control box, a handpiece and
technique because it is inexpensive and effective; however,
 bit, and the foot pedal. The power shaver may be controlled
control of flow and pressure is limited, and optimal joint dis-
with the use of a hand control or a foot control, but most
tension may not be achieved.
surgeons prefer a foot control. The control box contains the
 A variation of this technique is to use the inflatable fluid
electrical apparatus and controls for revolutions per minute
 delivery devices designed to deliver fluid under pressure
of the handpiece. The handpiece is the motor and couples to
intravenously to trauma patients. The fluid bag is inserted
interchangeable bits for different jobs, and the foot pedal is
into the inflatable device, and a hand pump is used to pres-
a variable speed controller that also allows the bit to rotate
surize the system, delivering fluids at a varying pressure.
forward or backward or to oscillate. The speed of the hand-
These devices work well for arthroscopy, but one needs to
piece is generally set to 1500 to 2500 rpm for most small
be very careful not to overinflate the bag because too high
 animal procedures. Bits are cannulated so that debris that is
a pressure leads to serious fluid extravasation and joint
cut is immediately removed from the joint by surgical suc-
collapse.
tion that is coupled to the handpiece. Bits are a tube within
The ideal way to deliver fluid to the joint is to use a
a tube in which the inner tube rotates. The outer tube is a
mechanical arthroscopy pump (Figure 21-2). Several manu-
tissue guard that serves to protect the soft tissue. There is a
facturers market these pumps, and most use either an impel-
 defect on the side or end of the outer tube that exposes the
ler or a roller pump to control fluid flow rate. A transducer
 blade or burr that does the cutting. Many types of bits are
built into the fluid line is used to precisely control pressure
 available, but the most useful for small animal arthroscopy
within the joint. The pumps work well, and fluid extravasa-
 are aggressive cutting blades that are 2.5 to 4.0 mm in diam-
tion is minimized through optimal fluid management. For
eter. Burr bits are also helpful and can be obtained in the
most arthroscopic procedures, a high flow setting is used
same size range.
610·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
E000U
Figure 21-3 Arthroscopic power shaver and handpiece. (Photo
courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
 CANNULAS, TROCARS,
Hgure 21-4 Arthroscopic hand instruments include probes and
AND OBTURATORS
graspers of various types and sizes. (Photo courtesy of Karl Storz
GmbH Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany.)
Cannulas are hollow stainless steel tubes that are used to intro-
duce both the arthroscope and some instruments into the
joint. There are several types of cannulas, and their purpose
manipulate pieces of bone and cartilage, retract soft tissue, and
is to maintain the portal (incision into the joint); protect the
check the integrity of articular tissues. A small probe is best, and
scope, instruments, and soft tissue; and serve as a way to intro-
 perhaps the most useful is a temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
duce or remove irrigation fluid from the joint. Scope cannulas
probe designed for use in the TMJ of humans. It is a nice size
 are matched to the size of the arthroscope and are generally
probe and easily fits through a 2.9-mm cannula. Some probes
about 2 mm larger in diameter than the scope. Instrument
have alternating color bands so that the surgeon can get an idea
cannulas are optional for use and come in many diameters.
of dimension when exploring joints or measuring lesions.
Some instruments do not fit through a cannula well, and
Perhaps the single most important hand instrument is
sometimes instrument cannulas actually interfere with move-
 a grasper. This is an alligator-style instrument that is used
ment of the instrument within the joint. Irrigation cannulas
to grasp and remove cartilage and bone from the joint.
are similar to the scope cannula in diameter and have ports
A grasper needs to be small but sturdy so that pieces of the
 on the sides as well as an open end. Irrigation cannulas can be
instrument do not break off within the joint as one works.
 used for fluid ingress or egress, depending on the situation.
 pue iaa un  s' on 0'7 aie siadsena isq a
Trocars and obturators fit into the cannulas and are used
backward curving teeth to get a good grasp on tissues to be
to introduce the cannula into the joint. Trocars are very
 removed. Delicate graspers are discouraged because there is
sharp and can cause significant cartilage damage; therefore,
a risk of the top jaw breaking off within the joint. Alliga-
they should be used with caution. Obturators may be conical
tor graspers should never be forced open within the joint
or blunt and do not have as much potential for damaging
because they are not very strong in this mode and are eas-
cartilage. The trocar or obturator is removed as soon as the
ily damaged. In some instances, a sturdy pair of mosquito
joint capsule is penetrated and is not used again unless the
hemostats can be used as arthroscopic graspers.
cannula is removed from the joint and requires reinsertion.
A small pair of arthroscopic rongeurs is also useful. They
are similar to the graspers but have cupped jaws with sharp
 HAND INSTRUMENTS
edges and are used for taking small bites of tissue in the joint.
Rongeurs that are 2.5 to 3.0 mm in diameter are the ideal
There are literally hundreds of arthroscopic hand instru-
size. Arthroscopic rongeurs should also not be forced open
ments available, and many of them are very expensive. The
as they are weak in this mode.
veterinary surgeon should select wisely from this wide vari-
The next type of instrument needed is a set of several
ety of hand instruments and only purchase those that will
small curettes. Both open and closed curettes that are 2 to
 be used commonly. There are only a few hand instruments
3 mm in diameter are helpful. Curettes are used to trim and
that are needed to perform arthroscopic surgery in dogs, and
 debride both bone and cartilage during procedures.
these will be described individually.
 Arthroscopic scissors are required for some procedures,
 The first hand instrument necessary is a probe (Figure 21-4).
such as trimming meniscal tears in dogs. They come in
This is a straight stainless steel rod with a 90-degree bend at the
a variety of sizes, but the most useful have relatively short
end so that it forms a small hook. This instrument is used to
blades and are 2.0 to 3.0 mm in diameter.
CHAPTER 21 Arthroscopy · 611
The last commonly used instrument is a small 2- to 3-mm
should be performed to assess the patient's overall health
osteotome. This instrument is used to elevate bone frag-
 and suitability for general anesthesia. Most surgeons prefer
ments and to split bone fragments that are too large to be
preoperative blood work to include a complete blood count
removed through a portal. Any style of osteotome in this size
 and a general biochemical profle of renal and liver function
range will work well for this purpose.
tests and blood glucose and electrolyte levels. Chest films and
 There are many other arthroscopic instruments that may
other more extensive testing are only performed if the physi
be recommended for specifc purposes, but those just men-
cal examination and laboratory values suggest a need.
tioned will allow the veterinary arthroscopist to perform
nearly any procedure. It is recommended that beginning
Patient Preparation
 arthroscopists obtain the aforementioned instruments ini-
tially and add to their collection as they get more experience.
Preparation of the patient for an arthroscopic procedure is
similar to preparation for an arthrotomy. The hair from the
■ RADIOFREQUENCY
affected limb is clipped widely so that proper draping and
AND ELECTROCAUTERY
manipulating of the limb are posible. During the procedure,
the limb will be manipulated to allow access to different
There are several manufacturers marketing radiofrequency
 parts of the joint, and this may include extension and flexion
units for use in a fluid environment during arthroscopic
of the joint or the application of a varus or a valgus stress
procedures. As in open surgical procedures, these devices are
to the joint. It is also common to place rotational stress on
used to cauterize bleeding vessels or to ablate tissues in a cut-
 joints. It is also not unusual when learning arthroscopy to
ting or cauterizing mode. Coagulation and cutting functions
make a limited arthrotomy if one is unable to complete the
of these instruments operate by the generation of heat caused
procedure arthroscopically. It is a mistake to inadequately
by the electrical resistance of the tissues. Additionally, these
clip the limb because it will lead to compromise of the sur-
units can be used to coagulate collagen in tissues, which will
 gery in some cases. Some clients have the misconception that
 cause them to shrink. These units are available as monopolar
 arthroscopy means less clipping of hair on the dog, and it
 or bipolar devices and are useful during arthroscopic sur-
 must be explained to the client that this is not the case.
 gery. Arthroscopic radiofrequency units consist of a control
Once the limb is clipped, the patient is moved into the
box that houses the electronics and allows for control of the
 operating room and placed in the proper position on the
amount of power being generated. The second component is
operating table. This means dorsal recumbency for elbow,
a handpiece that couples to the control box with the use of a
stifle, and tarsal arthroscopy and lateral recumbency for
 cord. The final component is a tip that inserts into the joint 
arthroscopy ofthe shoulder, hip, or carpus. Sandbags placed
and performs the work.
laterally to the dog for elbow arthroscopy are used as ful-
crums to enable a valgus stress to be placed on the joint.
Positioning aids are available or can be custom-made for
Towers
shoulder or stifle arthroscopy, and these are placed into posi-
Arthroscopic equipment manufacturers all sell towers or carts
tion before aseptic preparation of the limb. Once the dog is
that are designed to hold all the electronic components of a
properly positioned, the surgical field is prepared aseptically
modern arthroscopy system. These carts are heavy duty and
with the use of standard procedure and either povidone-
 have numerous shelves on which to place components and
iodine or chlorhexidine solution.
even have multioutlet power strips to allow power to all of the
Once the surgical team is scrubbed, gowned, and gloved,
components. These towers allow easy storage of the system and
draping can take place. Drapes are placed on the patient
 enable the systems to be portable between operating rooms.
with the use of the same landmarks that would be used if
 one was draping for an arthrotomy. Drapes are held in posi-
tion with towel clamps, and a field drape covers the entire
Patient Evaluation
 patient as well as the instrument table. The instruments are
Arthroscopic patients are generally young to middle-aged
 arranged on the table, and if the arthroscopic equipment has
dogs that are in otherwise good health aside from their lame-
been soaked in glutaraldehyde solution, it is carefully rinsed
ness. Evaluation of these patients preoperatively begins with
in saline solution to prevent introduction of glutaraldehyde
a complete and thorough history and physical examination.
residue into the joint. Adherent drapes or stockinettes are
The affected joint(s) are evaluated by palpation, and abnor-
not used for arthroscopic surgery.
malities such as pain on range of motion, effusion, and crepi-
tus are noted and recorded in the medical record. In nearly all
Anesthesia and Monitoring
casesradiographs are taken ofthe affected joint to confirm the
clinical diagnosis. In some cases, computed tomography or
General anesthesia is required for nearly all arthroscopic
ultrasound evaluation of the affected joint may be indicated
procedures. Unlike other minimally invasive procedures,
or desired before surgery. Once the need for arthroscopic sur-
there are few special anesthetic considerations that are
 gery has been determined, baseline blood work and urinalysis
 needed before arthroscopy.
612 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
An intravenous catheter is placed in a limb that is not
 stab incisions for both the scope portal and the instrument 
to be operated on, and the patient is premedicated with a
 portal(s) before distension of the joint is important because
tranquilizer such as acepromazine and a narcotic such as
even small amounts of fluid extravasation may cause the
morphine or hydromorphone. Once the patient is sedated,
bony landmarks to become difficult to palpate. If this occurs,
 general anesthesia is induced with a combination of either
rad adid a u p aq iu  sd a
diazepam/ketamine or propofol at the surgeon's discretion.
Once the stab incisions are placed, the joint is predis-
Once the animal is unconscious, an endotracheal tube is
tended. This is performed with the use of a 1/2-inch 22G
placed and the cuff is inflated. Anesthesia is maintained with
hypodermic needle. The needle is introduced into the joint
isoflurane or sevoflurane gas. An injectable nonsteroidal
 at the site of the scope portal. Placement of the needle at this
antinflammatory drug (NSAID) may be given at this time
 site allows the surgeon to ensure that the location of the joint
to help with postoperative pain. If the procedure involves the
space is properlyidentified, and it allows one to fine tune the
 rear legs, epidural analgesia with morphine may reduce the
location of the portal. With the needle in place, the joint is
need for postoperative pain medication and is commonly
inflated with 6 to 15 mL of saline or lactated Ringer's solu-
performed.
tion (depending on the size of the animal and the size of the
During anesthesia, standard anesthetic monitoring is
joint). The surgeon determines the proper amount of solu-
conducted. Generally this will include monitoring the heart
tion by releasing the syringe plunger and watching the pres-
rate and rhythm with an electrocardiograph and monitor-
sure push the plunger back out. This solution will distend
ing hemoglobin saturation (SpO2) and end-tidal CO, with
the joint capsule, which will make it easier to introduce the
 a capnograph. It is also wise to monitor blood pressure and
scope cannula.
 body temperature during anesthesia.
With the joint predistended and under pressure, the sur-
Once the procedure is completed, the patient is given an
 geon removes the needl but must remember the angle and
additional intravenous dose of either morphine or hydro
direction that allowed the joint space to be easily accessed.
morphone at extubation and additional doses at 4- to 6-hour
The scope cannula is then carefully plunged into the joint;
 intervals. For most arthroscopic procedures, one to two
the cannula should be as close to perpendicular to the skin
additional doses are all that is needed. Most straightforward
 as possible. If the cannula is not perpendicular to the skin,
arthroscopy patients can be discharged on the same day as
more soft tissue must be tunneled through and it may be
their surgery. For most dogs, postoperative antibiotics are
more difficult to manipulate the arthroscope within the
unnecessary, but an oral NSAID is prescribed to be given for
 joint. Either the conical obturator or the sharp trocar can
7 to 10 days postoperatively. Tramadol may also be helpful
be used to introduce the scope cannula, but if the trocar is
for the frst 5 to 7 postoperative days to ensure a comfortable
used, it is very important not to damage the cartilage within
recovery. Most patients do not require more potent pain
the joint. A tightly distended joint capsule will help to cush-
medications during the postoperative recovery period.
ion the entry of the trocar into the joint, but it is easy to
 gouge the cartilage if one is not acutely aware of the local
■ GENERAL ARTHROSCOPIC TECHNIQUE
anatomy.
Once the cannula is introduced into the joint, the obtura-
Arthroscopy is commonly performed in the elbow, shoul-
tor or trocar is removed as the cannula is pushed into the
der, and stifles of the dog and less commonly in the tarsus,
joint. It is possible that only the tip of the trocar or obturator
carpus, and hip joints. There are some principles that apply
went through the joint capsule because they extend beyond
to all joints, and those concepts will be discussed in this
the tip of the cannula, and if one is not pushing the cannula
section.
into the joint with the same motion with which the obturator
Once the animal is draped and the instrumentation is
or trocar is being removed, then the cannula may dislodge
arranged and ready, the surgical procedure begins. The first
from the joint into the periarticular tissues. Once the obtura-
thing the surgeon does is to properly position the limb for
tor or trocar is removed, the arthroscope is introduced into
the procedure. The landmarks for the procedure are pal-
 the joint and locked into place. The fluid irrigation line is
pated, and stab incisions are made at the portal sites with
then attached to the fluid port located on the scope cannula,
the use of a No. 15 surgical blade. It is important not to pull
and the fluids are allowed to flow, which redistends the joint.
the skin out of position when doing this; otherwise, the por-
Do not move the scope or attempt to explore the joint until
tal sites will not be in an anatomically correct position. It
the fluids are running and the joint has had an opportunity
 cannot be stressed enough that portal location is the single
to redistend. Once the joint is redistended, the joint can be
most important element of the procedure. Proper portal
explored. If the fluid is cloudy with either debris or blood, an
positioning determines whether the proper structures can be
egress needle can be placed into the joint to allow fluid flow;
visualized in the joint, whether the instruments are intro-
this will cause the fluid to become clear.
duced into the best location within the joint, and, indeed,
Once within the joint, the arthroscopist's first priority
whether the surgical procedure can be completed. A portal
s  e  a o s a   
that is 3 to 4 mm out of position may greatly complicate
within the joint. The camera is generally oriented with the
the entire operation or cause it to be aborted. Placing of the
buttons up, except during a few specific maneuvers. This
CHAPTER 21Arthroscopy ■613
 allows for rational movement of the arthroscope such that
septic elbow joints, or biopsy of bone or soft tissue neo-
left is left and right is right. If the camera is not held with the
plasms involving the joint.
buttons up, the movements of the arthroscope are paradoxi-
The elbow jointis the simplest joint to explore arthroscop-
cal and can be confusing to the arthroscopist. With the scope
ically and is generally the first joint to be mastered by the
and camera oriented correctly, a known landmark is located.
novice arthroscopist. This is because there are minimal soff
This should be a landmark that cannot be confused with any-
tissues surrounding the joint and the bony landmarks are
thing else. In the elbow, the anconeal process is an excellent
readily palpated. Equipment needs for elbow arthroscopy
landmark, as are the medial coronoid and the radial head. In
are relatively simple and include a 2.7-, 2.4-, or 1.9-mm
the shoulder, the most reliable landmark is the biceps ten-
arthroscope, an instrument cannula or cannulas, a right-
don. In the stifle, one generally begins with the scope in the
angle probe, an alligator style grasper, and a power shaver
medial or lateral pouch of the joint, and the intercondylar
with appropriate bits. A set of small surgical curettes and a
notch can be located from there. Once the arthroscopist is
small osteotome are also helpful. A fluid pump is very help-
oriented within the joint and a known structure has been
ful for elbow arthroscopy, and a pressure of 30 to 40 mm Hg
identified, a thorough systemic exploration of the joint is
is adequate with a moderately high flow rate.
 performed. Pathologic lesions within the joint are identified,
Once patients are prepared for surgery, they are placed in
and the surgeon can perform the appropriate procedure.
 dorsal recumbency on the operating table. The arthroscopy
Once the procedure is completed, the joint is irrigated and
tower is placed directly in front of the table with anesthesia
evacuated with the use of the shaver tip or a cannula and
equipment placed to either side. The affected leg or legs are
the joint is reexplored to ensure that no loose particles of
hung in the usual fashion for orthopedic surgery, and sterile
cartilage or bone are left within the joint. When this final
 skin preparation is performed from the mid-metacarpus to
 exploration is completed, the arthroscope and instruments
the mid-humerus. Sandbags that act as fulcrums are placed
are removed from the joint and the incisions are closed with
lateral to each elbow so that when the leg is draped and
appropriate suture material.
 brought down the sandbag allows the assistant to place a val-
After surgery, most arthroscopic patients are treated with
 gus stress on the elbow. After draping in the usual fashion,
 narcotic analgesics for the frst few hours, and many can go
the procedure begins.
home the same day as the procedure. For most arthroscopic
The initial maneuver is to have the assistant provide a
patients, postoperative antibiotics are not indicated, but an
valgus stress to the elbow and to provide pronation using
NSAID is administered for 5 to 10 days, as dictated by the
the sandbags previously placed. This opens the medial
procedure. Few patients require a bandage postoperatively.
joint space maximally, and this position is held through-
 out most of the procedure. The procedure begins by loca-
ARTHROSCOPY OF THE ELBOW
sed a uosod on s auo i su l jo u
(Figure 21-5). These landmarks are the medial humeral
 Indications for arthroscopy of the elbow include FCP, OCD
epicondyle and the intermuscular septa between the prona-
 of the elbow, and ununited anconeal process. Less common
tor teres, flexor carpi radialis, and superficial digital flexor
indications for elbow arthroscopy may include evaluation
muscles. The arthroscope portal is located directly distal
or reduction during repair of elbow fractures, exploration
to the medial humeral epicondyle along a line that would
 of the elbow for undiagnosed elbow pain, debridement of
bisect the humeral shaft in the intermuscular septum of the
Figure 21-5 Portal locations for elbow exploration and removal of fragmented medial coronoid processes and elbow osteochondritis
dissecans lesions.
614·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
flexor carpi radialis and superficial digital flexor muscles.
view the cranial aspect of the joint. For visualization of an
Once this landmark is located, a 3-mm skin incision is made
OCD lesion, the arthroscopist rotates the scope to view the
at this location. The instrument portal is located distal and
medial aspect of the humeral condyle.
cranial to the epicondyle along a line that would bisect the
Once the lesion is identified, an instrument portal is
radial shaft and is in the intermuscular septum of the prona-
established. This portal should come into the joint through
tor teres and the flexor carpi radialis muscles. A slight stair
the previously described landmarks and will be seen entering
step can usually be palpated at this location at the transition
the joint just caudal to the visible medial collateral ligament
from the medial humeral condyle to the radial head. A 3-mm
of the elbow. For identification of the proper portal, a 22G
incision is made at this location. It is important to make the
needle is inserted into the joint; the arthroscope can visual-
stab incision before distending the joint capsule with fluid
ize the needle's entry into the joint, and the arthroscopist
because it is often more difficult to palpate the landmarks
can assess whether the portal is in an acceptable location. If
once the joint is distended.
the location is not acceptable, small adjustments are made
After the landmarks and portal sites are located, the joint is
 to the needle until the portal is in the correct location. Do
distended with the use of a 22G, 1/2-inch hypodermic needle.
d m s asa reod psed iod e idae nou
This needle is inserted into the joint at the site of the arthro-
 performance of the procedure. When the needle enters the
scope portal and allows the surgeon to precisely locate the
joint at the correct location, that location and angle of inser-
joint space. Care must be taken not to damage the cartilage
tion are noted and the arthroscopist replaces the needle with
with this needle, and with practice it is easy to feel the needle
an instrument cannula. This cannula establishes the location
slip through the joint capsule. The joint is distended with 6
 and access for instruments needed to perform the procedure.
 to 12 mL of sterile saline or lactated Ringer's solution until
it is turgid. There should be enough pressure in the joint to
Fragmented Medial Coronoid Process
push the plunger up on the syringe when the plunger is not
being depressed. This degree of pressure makes insertion of
 FCP may be identifed as a loose fragment, a cleavage line at
the arthroscope easier and helps to prevent damage to the joint
the base ofthe medial coronoid, or simply as malacic cartilage
cartilage. With the joint under pressure, the needle is quickly
covering the coronoid process (Figure 21-6). Treatment con-
removed and the arthroscope cannula with conical obturator
sists of a subtotal coronoidectomy, which involves removing
is inserted into the joint at the same location. A slight pop will
the fractured or malacic tissue and then shaving the coronoid
be felt when the obturator penetrates the joint capsule. The
down to its base with either a power shaver or a curette. If a
obturator is then removed from the cannula, and the arthro-
large fragment is present, it is easier to remove the fragment
scope is inserted into the cannula and locked into place. Before
in one or several pieces with alligator graspers than to take
performing any maneuvers, the irrigation fluids are attached to
out the entire fragment with the shaver. Ifthe fragment is too
the inflow port of the scope cannula and the fluids are allowed
large for the graspers, a small 3-mm osteotome can be used
to flow. This causes the joint to reexpand and reduces the risk
to split the fragment into manageable pieces for removal.
of accidental dislodgement of the scope from the joint. If the
 Once the bulk of the fragment is removed, the remaining
fluid is cloudy or bloody and visualization is poor, the scope
coronoid process is shaved down until it is smooth. The
can be pulled out of the cannula and fluid can be allowed to
medial humeral condyle must be examined after removal of
flow until it is clear. There must be an ingress and egress port
the fragment. Many dogs have large full-thickness cartilage
for fluid to flow so that a clear visual field can be achieved.
defects opposite the fragment on the medial portion of the
Once a clear field of view is established, one is able to
begin exploration of the joint. Exploration generally begins
 in the caudal aspect ofthe joint, the anconeal process is iden-
tified, and the arthroscope is aligned for proper relationships
HC
 as previously described. If one is in the joint and is unable to
move to the caudal aspect of the joint, the scope can be care-
fully pulled back a short distance to allow freer movement
of the scope. Sometimes the arthroscope is inserted into the
FCP
joint too deeply, which prevents moving the scope into the
caudal pouch.
The anconeal process and the caudal aspect of the joint
are examined for any cartilage defects or loose fragments of
 bone or cartilage; then the arthroscope is swept cranially to
examine the cranial aspect of the joint. In the cranial aspect
of the joint, the medial coronoid process, radial head, and
Hgure 21-6 A typical fragmented medial coronoid process (FCP)
humeral condyle are examined. FCP and OCD are identified
of the elbow. HC, Humeral condyle. (Photograph by Dr. Steven
in this compartment of the elbow. For visualization of the
Budsberg and Chris Herron @ 2010 University ofGeorgia Research
FCP, the arthroscope is rotated to allow the arthroscopist to
Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 21 Arthroscopy · 615
humeral condyle. If there is a full-thickness defect, micro-
 The prognosis for soundness with elbow OCD is guarded
fracture can be performed to enhance healing with fibrocar-
because many of these dogs later develop significant osteo-
tilage. A 70-degree microfracture pick is used to create small
arthritis of the elbow joint. Postoperative care is identical to
holes that perforate the sclerotic subchondral bone. These
that of FCP patients, and many dogs will require some form of
holes should be 3 to 4 mm apart. Bleeding will not always
therapy for osteoarthritis permanently. Elbow OCD patients
be seen from the holes because there is fluid under pressure
may be candidates for some of the newer cartilage resurfacing
within the joint. The joint is then thoroughly inspected to
 procedures, such as the osteochondral allograftransfer system
ensure that no debris is left behind and irrigated with saline
(OATS) procedure that has been performed on a few dogs.
or lactated Ringer's until the fluid is clear and all debris is
 removed. The instrumentation and the scope are removed
Other Conditions of the Elbow
from the joint, and the skin incisions are closed routinely.
After surgery, no bandages are needed, and most patients
Dogs with ununited anconeal processes can be examined
 are released from the hospital with an NSAID on the same
 arthroscopically for several reasons. The first reason is that
day. Antibiotics are unnecessary after coronoid surgery. The
a significant number of these dogs also have FCPs that can
prognosis after surgery is still somewhat controversial and
be identified and treated. The second reason is to assess
highly variable. Younger dogs (<1/2 years) appear to have
the condition of the joint and the anconeal process. It is
the best prognosis, whereas dogs older than 3 years may
not reasonable to repair an anconeal process with either a
not improve much. Many dogs do not return to normal,
lag screw or an ulnar osteotomy procedure if the anconeal
but approximately 70% of young dogs appear to have some
 process is devoid of cartilage or there is severe deformity of
improvement after surgery. If the dogs have severe full-
the anconeal. Arthroscopy allows one to assess the condi-
thickness cartilage defects or severe elbow incongruity, the
fion of the anconeal process and make a rational decision
 prognosis is poorer. It is diffcult to find good control study
evidence regarding prognosis because of the variables pre-
sented bythe disease (i.e., the degree of cartilage damage, age
of the dog, the presence or absence ofelbow incongruity, and
the presence or absence of effusion). After surgery, the dogs
are restricted from exercise for the first 6 weeks and typically
should be rechecked at 2 and 6 weeks postoperatively. Dogs
that are still lame or have severe effusion may need to con-
tinue having NSAIDs or glucosamine-chondroitin supple-
 ments for extended periods of time.
OCD
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Elbow
OCD of the elbow is less common than FCP and occurs
most often in retrievers and other large breeds of dog
(Figure 21-7). OCD of the elbow occurs as a loose cartilage
A
flap most often on the medial portion of the humeral con-
dyle. It may be identified preoperatively as a small defect
on the medial humeral condyle on the craniocaudal radio-
 graphic projection or on a pronated craniocaudal radio-
graphic projection. Arthroscopic treatment of OCD of the
elbow consists of removal of the cartilage flap, debridement
 of the bed, and microfracture of the full-thickness cartilage
defect. Arthroscope and instrument portals are the same as
 in arthroscopy for an FCP, except that the arthroscope can be
 inserted slightly more proximal to allow better visualization
of the cartilage flap. Once the scope enters the joint and one
is viewing the coronoid process, the scope can be rotated 180
 degrees to view the medial humeral condyle and to visualize
the entire lesion. Once identifed, the flap is removed with
graspers, and the bed of the lesion and any remaining loose
cartilage is removed with a curette or the shaver. Microfrac-
Hgure 21-7 A, Typical appearance of an elbow osteochondritis
ture is performed in the bed of the lesion as in arthroscopy
dissecans (OCD) lesion involving the medial portion of the humeral
condyle (OCD flap). B, Same condylar lesion following removal of
for an FCP. The joint is then irrigated, and the skin incisions
the OCD flap. C, Condyle. (Photographs by Dr. Steven Budsberg and
are closed.
Chris Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
616·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
about whether to help the process heal back to the ulna or
 The patient preparation for shoulder arthroscopy is simi-
to simply remove the fragment. Removal of the fragment
lar to that for a shoulder arthrotomy. The leg is held in a
requires a small caudolateral incision because the fragment
nonstressed position parallel to the floor by an assistant.
is too large to be removed by shaving in a reasonable period
Once draping is completed, the landmarks are palpated and
of time.
the portals are located. The acromion process is the only
Tumors of the joint capsule (synovial sarcomas) and
consistent landmark, and three portals are commonly used.
immune-mediated arthropathies occasionally need to be
The scope portal is located immediately cranial and distal to
sampled, and the biopsy can be performed arthroscopically.
the acromion process (Figure 21-8). There is a palpable divot
The abnormal tissue is simply visualized, and a sample is
just off the cranial aspect of the acromion process that is bor-
taken with cupped biopsy forceps.
dered caudally by the acromial head of the deltoid tendon.
 One should evaluate a lateral radiograph before surgery to
■ ARTHROSCOPY OF THE SHOULDER
determine the relationship of the joint space to the tip of the
acromion. In some dogs the tip of the acromion is proximal
Indications for arthroscopy of the shoulder include OCD
to the joint space, and in some it is distal to the joint space.
of the shoulder, partial tears of the biceps tendon (bicipi-
A 3-mm incision is made at this location. The instrument
tal tenosynovitis), medial shoulder compartment disease,
 portal for an OCD lesion is located in the following man-
exploration of the shoulder, assisting in the repair of glenoid
ner. A lateral radiograph is examined to determine the dis-
fractures, and biopsy of masses involving the shoulder joint
tance from the acromion to the ca udal aspect of the humeral
 capsule. Contraindications would be limited to diseases that
head. An imaginary line from the tip of the acromion to
would limit the safety of anesthesia and extraarticular condi-
the approximate location of the humeral head is made that 
tions involving the shoulder region.
would be parallel to the floor if the dog were standing. A
The shoulder is more difficult to explore arthroscopically
second line of the same length is drawn from this location
because more soft tissue surrounds the joint and the rela-
90 degrees to this line in a distal direction. This locates the
tionship of the acromion process to the joint space is more
instrument portal site for an OCD lesion. Generally, the cau-
variable. Generally most dogs will accommodate a 2.7-
dal aspect ofthe spinous head of the deltoid muscle is palpa-
a 2.4-mm arthroscope. Other necessary equipment includes
ble in the same location. If the operation is for a partial tear
an alligator-style grasper, a probe, an instrument cannula,
of the biceps tendon, the instrument portal is located medi-
ally or laterally to the biceps tendon cranially and medial to
dures, a radiofrequency device is helpful. A fluid manage-
the greater tubercle; this will be discussed later.
 ment pump is helpful because it is more likely to extravasate
When the scope portal site has been located and an inci-
irrigation fluid subcutaneously in the shoulder than it is in
sion made, a 22G 1%2-inch needle is inserted into the joint
the elbow. When a fluid pump is used, a pressure of 35 to 45
immediately cranial and distal to the acromion process. The
mm Hg with a high flow rate is desirable.
needle must be inserted perpendicular to the skin or the
shoulder, biceps tendonopathy, and medial shoulder lesions.
CHAPTER 21 Arthroscopy · 617
needle will deflect off the edge of the glenoid and will not
tear the cartilage loose at that margin. It is preferable to leave
enter the joint. With the needle in the joint, sterile saline or
a small attachment site for the cartilage to hold it immobile
lactated Ringer's solution is injected into the joint to pre-
because this makes it easier to grasp with alligator-style for-
distend it. This usually requires 8 to 15 mL of fluid depend-
ceps. The probe is removed from the joint, the grasping forceps
ing on the size of the dog. A pressure that will push the
are inserted into the joint, and a large bite of the flap is taken,
 plunger back on a 12-mL syringe is achieved, and the needle
torn completely loose from the underlying humeral head, and
is removed from the joint. The scope cannula with conical
removed from the joint. If the flap is in a young dog and is
obturator is then inserted into the joint space perpendicular
pliable, the flap is pulled to the opening in the joint capsule
to the skin surface. The conical obturator is removed from
and a twisting motion is used to remove the entire flap from
the cannula, and the scope is inserted into the joint. The irri-
the joint in a single piece. If the dog is older and the cartilage
gation fluids are hooked up to the fluid ingress attachment
flap is thickened, it is typical to remove the flap in several
on the scope cannula, and the joint is allowed to redistend.
pieces. Either technique is acceptable as long as the entire flap
The biceps tendon is located, the scope and camera are prop-
is removed from the joint. Once the flap is removed, the edges 
erly oriented in the joint for rational relationships, and the
of the lesion are carefully inspected to ensure that no loose car-
joint is explored. Structures that are evaluated include the
tilage remains in the joint; these edges are then trimmed with
 biceps tendon, the glenoid and humeral head articular carti-
a shaver or a curette. It is unnecessary and inadvisable to use
lage, the medial glenohumeral ligament, and the subscapu-
a curette to make a deep lesion in the humeral head; simply
laris tendon. Once the joint is explored and the lesions are
removing the loose cartilage is enough. Once debridement is
 evaluated, the corrective procedures are begun.
complete, the joint is irrigated and the skin incisions are closed.
After the surgery, the patient is restricted from exercise
for 4 to 6 weeks and then gradually returned to normal activ-
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Shoulder
ity. The prognosis is excellent for full recovery, and there are
OCD of the shoulder is the most common reason for
few reported complications.
arthroscopic surgery on the shoulder joint. OCD surgery
involves removal of the cartilage flap from the joint, debride-
Biceps Tenosynovitis
ment of the bed of the lesion, and irrigation of the joint.
Once the joint is entered as already described, the lesion is
 Biceps tenosynovitis is a common condition causing mild-
located on the caudal aspect of the humeral head. In most
to-moderate shoulder pain in the dog. This condition could
cases, the flap is obvious and is still attached to the humeral
be more properly called a partial tear of the biceps tendon
head (Figure 21-9). On some occasions, the cartilage flap is
because the inflammation is probably secondary to the par-
loose within the joint and may be found in the caudal pouch
tial tendon tear (Figure 21-10). The only way to defnitively
of the shoulder joint, the medial compartment, or the cranial
confirm this diagnosis is through arthroscopic evaluation of
 pouch beneath the biceps tendon.
the joint and tendon.
If the flap is still attached to the humeral head, the instru-
The operation begins in a manner identical to that for an
ment portal is established, and a probe is used to elevate the
OCD lesion with insertion of the scope into the joint in the
flap over most of its attachment site. The probe is pushed
usual manner. The lesion can be identified as fraying and
to the margins of the loose cartilage and lifted straight up to
partial tearing of the proximal portion of the biceps tendon
BT
Figure 21-9 An osteochondritis dissecans lesion is viewed on
Hgure 21-10 A partial tear of the biceps tendon (BT) as viewed
the caudal aspect of the humeral head. (Photograph by Dr. Stever
through the arthroscope.(Photograph by Dr.Steven Budsberg and
Budsberg and Chris Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
Chris Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation,
Foundation,Inc.)
Inc.)
618·PART TWO RigidEndoscopy
immediately distal to its origin on the supraglenoid tuber-
be taken arthroscopically if there is an intraarticular com-
osity. Once the lesion is identified, the instrument portal is
 ponent. Biopsies of the shoulder joint capsule may be taken
located either to the medial or lateral side of the proximal
with the use of a pair of arthroscopic biopsy forceps.
biceps tendon. The easiest way to locate this portal is to push
Fractures of the glenoid are not common; however, when
externally on the skin in the area of the portal. This can be
they occur, they are generally repaired with lag screws. With
viewed within the joint as an indentation of the joint capsule.
arthroscopic visualization of the joint surface, a lag screw can
Once the portal location is identifed, the portal is further
be placed with the use of either a minimal surgical approach
confirmed by insertion ofa 22G 1/2-inch needle into the joint.
or fluoroscopic visualization.
The needle should enter the joint at the proximal aspect of the
biceps tendon lateral or medial to the tendon. The surgical
■ ARTHROSCOPIC SURGERY
 procedure consists of transecting the tendon at its attachment
OF THE STIFLE
to the supraglenoid tuberosity. This can be accomplished by
introducing a No. 15 Bard-Parker blade adjacent to the nee-
Indications for arthroscopy ofthe stifle joint include debride-
dle. The blade is inserted into the joint parallel to the tendon,
ment of the CCL stumps before stabilization procedures,
 and under visualization, the blade is turned 90 degrees and
examination and removal of torn portions of the menisci,
the tendon is cut by pressing the blade against the tendon.
 debridement of stifle OCD lesions, biopsy of intraarticular
A sawing motion is not used because it increases the chance
tumors or the synovial membrane, and evaluation of the sti-
 of pulling the blade from the joint. One must be careful not
fle joint for abnormalities in cases of undiagnosed stifle pain.
to put stress on the blade or it can break off within the joint.
The stifle joint is the most difficult of the major joints to
Alternatively, an instrument cannula is inserted into the joint,
examine arthroscopically because of the infrapatellar fat pad
 and a radiofrequency device can be used to transect the ten-
and the limited space present between the femoral condyles
don. Once the tendon is transected, the joint is irrigated and
and the tibial plateau. In most cases a 2.7-mm arthroscope
the skin incisions are closed routinely.
is used, and a motorized shaver, electrofrequency unit, or
After surgery, the patient is restricted from exercise for 4
both are necessary to remove portions of the fat pad so that
weeks and then gradually returned to normal activity. Most
the CCL stumps or menisci can be visualized. A fluid pump
 patients become sound 7 to 10 days after the surgery, and
the procedure has an excellent prognosis and few reported
to 75 mm Hg) are sometimes used to help control fat pad
complications.
hemorrhage and improve visualization.
 Before arthroscopy, the patient is anesthetized and the
hair is clipped from the skin from the midmetatarsus to the
Other Conditions of the Shoulder
hip joint. The patient is placed on the operating table in dor-
Other conditions of the shoulder that may be addressed
 sal recumbency, and some surgeons prefer the cranial end of
arthroscopically include medial compartment syndrome,
the operating table to be elevated slightly.
neoplasms of the joint capsule, or glenoid fractures.
Once the dog is sterilely prepared for surgery and prop-
Medial shoulder compartment syndrome is a poorly
erly draped, the portals are established (Figure 21-11). The
understood condition that occurs mainly in active large
initial portals are immediately lateral and medial to the patel.
 breed dogs. It is seen as a chronic mild-to-moderate forelimb
lar ligament about halfway between the patella and the tibial
lameness and is easily confused with biceps tenosynovitis. It
tuberosity. Some surgeons prefer to make their portals more
is identified through arthroscopic exploration of the joint.
proximally, just distal to the patella, but portals in this loca-
Typical lesions include synovial proliferation of the joint and
tion can make manipulation of the menisci more diffcult.
fraying and tearing of the medial glenohumeral ligament,
 Unlike the shoulder and the elbow, there is no reason to pre-
 subscapular tendon, or both. Treatment options include ther-
 distend the joint before the portals are made. The surgeon
mal capsular shrinkage, capsular imbrications, and medical
makes the lateral portal by using a No. 15 scalpel blade and
therapy. Thermal capsular shrinkage has been reported but is
incising all the way into the joint. The medial portal is made
no more effective than medical therapy and may have serious
in the same fashion. If the surgeon prefers, with the stifle
 consequences such as shoulder luxation if the joint is overly
in extension, a conical obturator can be introduced into the
heated and the patient is not bandaged in an Ehmer sling for
lateral compartment, passed proximally and medially, and
a 6-week period. Capsular imbrication has been sporadically
forced through the skin in the craniomedial compartment
attempted, and the benefits over medical management are
 of the stifle. A fluid egress cannula can be placed over the
unclear. Medical management includes the use of NSAIDs
obturator and into the medial joint compartment to allow
and physical therapy aimed at maintaining joint range of
fluid egress. Once this medial egress cannula is placed, the
motion and maintaining or improving shoulder muscular
 scope cannula is inserted into the lateral portal and forced
strength. Medical management helps these patients and is the
 under the patellar ligament and into the proximal aspect of
 most accepted treatment for this condition at this time.
the medial compartment of the stifle. The fluid ingress is
Tumors of the soft tissues surrounding the shoulder joint
 established with the use of the arthroscopy pump; the joint is
 are not common, but when they occur, biopsy samples may
then allowed to distend, and the fluid is allowed to clear. At
CHAPTER 21 Arthroscopy · 619
Figure 21-11 Typical portal locations for arthroscopic exploration of the stifle. The scope and instruments can be placed in either portal
depending on the lesion.
this time the proximal lateral and medial compartments of
the stifle are examined, and in most dogs significant synovial
 hyperplasia will be seen. Once the proximal compartments
CAC
are assessed, the stifle is flexed to 90 degrees, and the scope
is positioned at the proximal end of the intercondylar notch.
In dogs with chronic stifle disease, the synovium and fat
pad will prevent visualization of the cruciate ligaments and
the menisci. A cannula is introduced into the medial com-
partment and advanced to the proximal aspect of the inter-
CRC
condylar notch until it can be seen in the visual field of the
 arthroscope. The cannula is removed and replaced by a 3.5-
 or 4.0-mm aggressive cutting blade, and a viewing window is
established in the fat pad and hyperplastic synovium to allow
visualization of the cruciate ligaments and the deeper aspects
of the intercondylar notch. Generally, use of the oscillating
function on the shaver with suction applied is most effective
CAC
at removing the soft tissues. The fat pad is resected down
to the tougher tissue distally that identifies the intermeniscal
TCRC
ligament. Bleeding of the fat pad is controlled with a combi-
nation of fluid pressure and flow, and in cases of significant
hemorrhage, the radiofrequency probe can be used to cau-
terize vessels.
CRC
At this point, the cranial and caudal cruciate ligaments
can be inspected and debrided if a partial or complete tear
is identifed (Figure 21-12). For visualization of the medial
B
meniscus, the assistant puts a valgus stress on the limb,
and the light post is rotated to view medially from the area
Hgure 21-12 A, Intact cranial and caudal cruciate ligaments
adjacent to the caudal cruciate ligament. Probes and other
as viewed arthroscopically. B, Partial tear in cranial cruciate
ligament. CAC, Caudal cruciate ligament; CRC, cranial cruciate
instruments can be introduced into the medial portal, and
ligament; TCRC, torn cranial cruciate lilgament. ( Photographs by
the meniscus can be examined and probed. If the medial
Dr. Steven Budsberg and Chris Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia
 meniscus is torn, the torn edge is grasped with a locking
Research Foundation, Inc.)
620 ■ PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Hgure 21-14 Osteochondritis dissecans of the lateral femoral
condyle inthe dog. (Photograph by Dr. Steven Budsberg and Chris
Herron @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
in the lateral portal. Once the lesion is identified, the carti-
lage flap is removed and the bed of the lesion is cleaned up
with the shaver.
■ ARTHROSCOPIC EVALUATION
OF THE OTHER JOINTS
TCRC
Arthroscopy of the hip is occasionally performed to evalu-
ate cartilage integrity and condition before triple pelvic
TM
osteotomy. The leg is clipped as for any surgery, and the
limb is prepared as usual for surgery of the hip joint. The
hip is subluxated ventrally, and the arthroscope is intro-
B
duced into the dorsal aspect of the joint. The entire artic
Figure 21-13 A, Normal appearance medial meniscus of the stifle.
ular surface of both acetabulum and femoral head can be
B, Frayed edge of lateral meniscus with reminant of torn cranial
evaluated. Additionally, the round ligament can be visual-
cruciate ligament. TCRC, Torn cranial cruciate ligament; TM, torn
ized and assessed.
The tarsal joint can be evaluated by introduction of the
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
arthroscope caudolaterally or caudomedially. This is some-
times difficult because of the small size of the joint, but OCD
 grasper and pulled cranially (Figure 21-13). The edges of
lesions of the talus can then be visualized and debrided with
the tear can be cut with a radiofrequency probe or a pair of
a small shaver.
arthroscopic scissors through the same portal as the grasper.
The radiocarpal joint is rarely scoped but can be visu-
The portal can be slightly enlarged for this purpose. It is
alized by introduction of the arthroscope either lateral or
essential to reprobe the medial meniscus because double and
medial to the extensor carpi radialis tendon on the cranial
even triple bucket-handle tears are common.
aspect of the joint.
The lateral meniscus is examined by having the assis-
tant place the leg in a varus stress position, and the scope
 POTENTIALINTRAOPERATIVE
is rotated in the intercondylar notch for a lateral view. The
COMPLICATIONS
entire lateral meniscus should be examined because damage
to the cranial or caudal horn may be noted. Once the cruciate
Complications of arthroscopy are rare due to the smallsize of
ligaments and menisci are examined and treated, the proce
the incisions used for these procedures. The most common
dure is done, the joint is irrigated, and the scope is removed.
complication intraoperatively is subcutaneous extravasation
of fluid. This causes the joint to collapse and makes visualiza-
tion of structures difficult or impossible. This complication
Osteochondritis of the Stifle
is avoided by carefully controlling the fluid pressure used
OCD of the stifle is relatively uncommon and is generally
for joint distension. It is also helpful to provide an egress
located on the lateral femoral condyle (Figure 21-14). The
portal early on in the procedure, even if the egress portal is
procedure for treatment is generally the same as for CCL
the same as the instrument portal. Life-threatening hemor-
injuries, as previously described, except that the scope is best
rhage during the procedure is very rarely or never seen, but
placed in the medial portal to allow instruments to be placed
intrarticular hemorrhage may be severe enough to cause
CHAPTER 21 Arthroscopy · 621
difficulty viewing structures during surgery. Intraarticular
needed. Postoperative infection is very rare and is treated
hemorrhage is best controlled by increasing either fluid flow
with joint irrigation or debridement and appropriate anti-
 or pressure temporarily or by cauterizing the offending ves-
biotics when it occurs. Neuropraxias are similarly very rare
sel with radiofrequency, when it can be identified. Either of
 and are generally temporary and self-limiting. Other com-
these complications can be severe enough to prevent com-
plications are rare.
pletion of the procedure, and the novice arthroscopist may
 need to convert to arthrotomy while on the steeper portion
■ FOLLOW-UP MONITORING OF
of the learning curve.
PROCEDURAL EFFECTS
Other complications during arthroscopy such as diff-
culty accessing some parts of the joint are usually due to poor
Arthroscopy patients are generally seen again at 10 to 12
technique or poor portal placement. These complications
days postoperatively to remove the sutures or staples. A final
are rectified with careful location of portals and experience.
evaluation to assess return to function is also completed 6 to
 8 weeks postoperatively. Most dogs will show improvement to
 CARE AND POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
 atleast preoperative status at the time the sutures are removed.
AFTER THE PROCEDURE
Dogs having other procedures at the same time, such as tibial
plateau leveling osteotomy or triple pelvic osteotomy, should
After uncomplicated arthroscopic surgery, most patients are
recover in the same time frame or more rapidly than dogs
confined to a limited area for 6 to 8 weeks to allow healing of
having a similar open procedure. Many patients with severe
the soft tissues and cartilage. An oral NSAID is administered
arthritis at the time of the arthroscopic surgery continue to
for 7 to 10 days postoperatively, oral antibiotics are rarely
require treatment of their preexisting condition.
SUGGESTED
READING
Bardet I: Arthroscopy ofthe shoulder ofdogs and cats: a six year study
Payne I: Arthroscopic surgery in the dog, Proceedings of the Western
of 221 cases, Proceedings of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society,
Veterinary Conference, Las Vegas, Nev., 2008.
Val d'Isere, France, 2000.
Van Rhyssen B, Van Bree H: Arthroscopic findings in 100 dogs with
Beale B, Hulse D, Shulz K, et al: Small animal arthroscopy, Philadelphia,
elbow Jameness, Vet Rec 140:360, 1997.
2003, Saunders.
Whitney WO: Basic arthroscopy of the canine stifle, Arthroscopy
Fitzpatrick N, Smith TJ, Evans RB, et al: Radiographic and arthroscopic
 Proceedings of the Ninth Annual ACVS Symposium, San Francisco,
findings in the elbow joints of 263 dogs with medial coronoid
1999.
disease, Vet Surg 38:213, 2009.
22
CHAPTER
Exotic Pets*
Stephen J. Divers
 several advantages, including single-entry procedures, ports
General Introduction and Reguired
for insufflation or saline infusion, and an operating channel
Equipment
for the introduction of 1.7-mm instruments (Figure 22-1). In
addition, the 1.9-mm telescope with integrated sheath and the
 Endoscopy has proven to be a most useful diagnostic tool in
1-mm semirigid miniscope are extremely useful for smaller
veterinary medicine. In the feld of zoological medicine, the
species (Figure 22-2). For multiple-entry endoscopy, the
application of diagnostic endoscopy has shown great promise
recent application of human pediatric 2- and 3-mm instru-
in a variety of species but has probably been most exploited by
 ments to exotic species has enabled coelioscopy, laparoscopy,
a vian veterinarians.l,2 Great strides have been made over the
and thoracoscopy to become a reality (Figures 22-3 and 22-4).
 past decade in many areas of zoological endoscopy, however,
Some form of insufflation is required for most procedures
because of space limitations in this chapter, only a handful of
(except avian coelioscopy). CO, delivered by a dedicated
select procedures have been described for those species likely
 endoflator is preferred, but for smaller animals air delivered
to be encountered in companion animal practice, namely,
by syringe or a small aquarium air pump can be used, as long
 exotic mammals (rabbits, ferrets, and rodents), companion
as the risks associated with air emboli are never ignored. In
and working birds (psittacines and raptors), companion rep-
some situations, the use of saline infusion can be especially
tiles (lizards, snakes, turtles, and tortoises), and ornamental
helpful, particularly when dealing with a hollow viscus (e.g
fish. Most of the modern developments and advances have
 gastrointestinal tract, bladder, cloaca, or ear), and is also the
not been included, and readers are directed to the references
method of choice for aquatic species because of the negative
at the end of each section for more complete details.
buoyancy effects of residual gas.
The fact that most exotic pets weigh less than 2 kg
 INSTRUMENTATION
requires careful control of the endoscope; the eyepiece and
camera should be supported with the superior hand, and the
Given the variation in size and the nature of the species and
 terminal shaft should be held by the thumb and forefinger of
procedures that may be performed, a variety of different
the inferior hand (Figure 22-5, A). Handling the endoscope
scopes and instruments are often required (Table 22-1)3-5
in this fashion provides fne control without tremor. Biopsy
 For most practices the 2.7-mm telescope and 4.8-mm oper-
specimens can be easily harvested from most structures.
 ating sheath offers the greatest versatility, which can be built
However, when an instrument is inserted and manipulated,
on as individual practice caseload dictates. This system offers
it is necessary to change from a two-handed hold to a one-
 handed technique. The usual thumb and forefinger support
of the endoscope shaft by the inferior hand is now adjusted
*Reprinted with permission from the following:
so that the left hand can take the entire weight of the sheath-
soxa u asn ioy uoeuaumnsu pue juaudnba Adossopug is siai
scope-camera system. The thumb is slid up the shaft of the
animal medicine, Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 13(2):171-185, 2010.
Divers SJ: Avian liagnostic endoscopy, Vt Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract
sheath, and the fingers are curled over the top to encircle
13(2):187-202, 2010.
the sheath. Now that the sheath is grasped in a fist with the
Divers SJ: Avian endosurgery, Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 13(2):203-
sheath further supported by the thumb to prevent rotation,
216,2010.
the right hand can be removed to pick up and insert an
Divers SJ: Reptile diagnostic endoscopy and endosurgery, Vet Clin North
instrument down the operating channel (see Figure 22-5, B).
Am Exot Anim Pract 13(2):217-242, 2010.
Divers SJ: Exotic mammal diagnostic endoscopy and endosurgery, Vet Clin
This can only be performed using a correctly sheathed tele-
North Am Exot Anim Pract 13(2):255-272, 2010.
 scope; otherwise, damage will occur.
623
624 ·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
 Table 22-1 Endoscopic Instrumentation for Companion Exotic Mammals, Reptiles, Birds, and Fish
Equipment description
 Primary indications
Visualization and documentation
Endoscopic video camera and monitor
Required for all endoscopy procedures
Xenon light source and light guide cable
Digital capture device (e.g.. AIDA-Vet)
Endoscopes
1 mm x 20 cm semirigid miniscope, 0 degree
Stomatoscopy. otoscopy, rhinoscopy. tracheoscopy in animals less than 1 kg
1.9 mm x 18.5 cm telescope, 30-degree oblique,
Stomatoscopy, otoscopy, rhinoscopy, tracheoscopy, gastroscopy.
with integrated 3.3-mm operating sheath
colonoscopy, vaginoscopy. cloacoscopy, laparoscopy/coelioscopy.
and thoracoscopy in animals between 500 g and 3 kg
2.7 mm x 18 cm telescope, 30-degree oblique
Stomatoscopy. otoscopy, rhinoscopy, tracheoscopy. gastroscopy.
 4.8-mm operating sheath
colonoscopy, vaginoscopy, cloacoscopy, laparoscopy/coelioscopy.
and thoracoscopy in animals between 1 kg and 8 kg
5 mm x 8.5 cm otoendoscope, 0 degree,
Stomatoscopy and otoscopy in animals between 3 kg and 50 kg
with integrated operating sheath
Flexible instruments for use with operating sheaths
 1-mm biopsy forceps
For use with 1.9-mm telescope and integrated sheath
1-mn grasping forceps
1.7 rmm × 34 cm biopsy forceps
For use with 2.7-mm telescope, 4.8-mm operating sheath, and 5-mm
1.7 mm × 34 cm single-action scissors
otoendoscope
1.7-mm remote injection needle with Teflon guide
1.7 mm × 34 crm grasping/retrieval forceps
1.7 mm x 60 cm wire retrieval basket
1.7-mm radiosurgery needle
1.7 rmm × 32 c polypectomy snare
Insufflation
CO2 insufflator with silicone tubing
 Used for insufflation during laparoscopy
 Sterile saline suspended above endoscopy table with
Used for sterile saline infusion for otoscopy. rhinoscopy. cystoscopy.
intravenous dnip line to a port on the operating sheath
vaginoscopy. colonoscopy, cloacoscopy, and coelioscopy
Rigid instruments and cannulae for multiple-entry laparoscopy and thoracoscopy
 2.5-mm graphite and plastic cannula 
Used with the 1.9-mm telescope for laparoscopy, thoracoscopy. and
 2-mm Reddick-Olsen dissecting forceps, plastic handle
coelioscopy in animals less than 500 g
without racket
 2-mm Metzenbaum scissors, plastic handle without racket
2-mm Babcock forceps, plastic handle with racket
3.9-mm graphite and plastic cannula (accommodates
Used with the 2.7-mm telescope for laparoscopy, thoracoscopy. and
2.7-mm telescope and 3.5-mm protection sheath)
coelioscopy in animals less than 8 kg to 10 kg
 3.5-mm graphite and plastic cannula (accommodates
3-mm instruments)
3-mm fenestrated grasping forceps
3-mm Reddick-Olsen dissecting and grasping forceps
 3-mm short, curved Kelly dissecting and grasping forceps
3-mm atraumatic dissecting and grasping forceps
3-mm Babcock forceps
3-mm Blakesley dissecting and biopsy forceps
3-mm scissors with serrated, curved, double-action jaws
3-mm microhook scissors, single-action jaws
3-mm Mahnes bipolar coagulation forceps
 3-mm imigation and suction cannula
 3-mm palpation probe with centimeter markings
 3-mm distensible palpation probe
 3-mm ultramicroneedle holder
 3-mm knot tier for extracorporeal suturing
2 plastic handles without rackets
1 plastic handle with Mahnes-style racket
1 plastic handle with hemostat-style racket
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets· 625
Table 22-1 Endoscopic Instrumentation for Companion Exotic Mammals, Reptiles, Birds, and Fish—cont'd
Equipment description
Primary indications
 Radiosurgery equipment
3.8- or 4.0-MHz dual radiofrequency unit (for example,
 Enables endoscopic instruments to be used as monopolar devices and
Surgitron, Ellman Intemational Inc.) with foot pedal
facilitates bipolar coagulation
 Monopolar lead to connect to plastic instrument handles
 Bipolar lead to connect to 3-mm Mahnes bipolar coagulation
forceps
Figure 22-1 The 2.7-mm telescope system. A 2.7-mm telescope
housed within a 4.8-mm operating sheath, connected to a light
cable and an endoscopic video camera. Top inset: A 1.7-mm biopsy
Hgure 22-3 Multiple-entry 3-mm endoscopy system. Plastic,
forceps inserted down the instrument channel and emanating
nonracket handle (H) attached to a radiosurgical (R) and a 3-mm
directly in front ofthe telescope. Botto inset: A variety of 1.7-mm
instrument (I), which is inserted through a 3.5-mm cannula (C).
instruments can be used through the operating channel, including
uq a ssand aq aqeaa ae ( sas as
retrieval forceps (1),biopsy forceps (2), remote injection or
(arrow), and the radiosurgery connector (R) on the handle enables
aspiration needle (3), and single-action scissors (4). (Photograph @
the instrument to be used as a monopolar device. ( Photograph @
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
postsampling leakage. The remote injection needle can be
used for remote aspiration, irrigation, and drug administra-
tion. The 1.0- and 1.7-mm flexible biopsy forceps are used
to harvest tissue samples for histopathologic and microbio-
logic analysis in patients as small as 30 g. The small sample
size usually permits the collection of several biopsy samples
for multiple laboratory tests and the use of serial sampling to
monitor disease progression over time. To take a tissue sam-
ple, the biopsy forceps are inserted down the operating chan-
nel and into the field of view. It is much easier to advance and
 manipulate the sheath-scope-instrument as a single device
than to try to keep the sheath-scope still and independently
move the biopsy forceps back and forth. With the biopsy for-
ceps held open, the sheath-scope-instrument is advanced to
Figure 22-2 A, The 1.9-mm telescope with integrated operating 
the tissue of interest and when tissue enters the biopsy cup,
sheath. B, A 1-mm semirigid miniscope with a 2-mm endotracheal
the handle is released. These instruments are delicate, and the
tube placed over the endoscope in preparation for exotic mammal
intubation. ( Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
 biopsy handle is only required to open the biopsy jaws. The
Foundation, Inc.)
handle's spring mechanism is usually suffcient to take a soff
tissue biopsy without additional manual pressure, as long
The 1.0- and 1.7-mm grasping forceps are useful for
as the instrument is sharp. Clamping down on the handle
manipulation of tissues, debridement, and retrieval of for-
will damage the forceps and increase biopsy crush artifact.
eign objects, including parasites. The fine aspiration/injec-
Some organs may be protected by a more fibrous membrane.
tion needle can be used for the aspiration of fluid from cystic
The fixed blade of the scissors is inserted at a shallow angle
structures where biopsy may be contraindicated because of
through the membrane, and the sheath-scope-scissors are
626 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 22-4 Multiple-entry 3-mm endoscopy system. A, Trocar (1) and 3.5-mm plastic and graphite cannula (2) with side insufflation port
(3). B,Forceps: long Babcock forceps (1), atraumatic dissecting and grasping forceps with single-action jaws (2), Reddick-Olsen dissecting
forceps (3) fenestrated grasping forceps (4), long, curved Kelly dissecting and grasping forceps (5), short, curved Kelly dissecting and
grasping forceps (6). C,Scissors and biopsy instruments: microhook scissors with single-action jaws (1),lakesley dissecting and biopsy
forceps (2), scissors with long, sharp, curved double-action jaws (3), scissors with serrated, curved double-action jaws (4). D, Probes:
distensible palpation probe (1), palpation probe with centimeter markings (2), irrigation and suction cannula (3). (Photographs @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
advanced as a single unit, cutting the membrane as they pro-
immediate processing. Alternatively, if they will be mailed
ceed. The scissors can then be replaced by the biopsy forceps
to a microbiology laboratory, they should be submitted in
 to take a sample through the capsular incision.
 transport media. For the submission of samples for toxico-
 ei axde e ap ae sds ado
logic or parasitologic analysis, it is wise to consult with the
in size. Handling and other histologic artifacts are reduced
laboratory before sample collection.
by gently shaking the tissue into a small volume of sterile
A definitive diagnosis is essential for maximizing treat-
 saline before decanting into a biopsy cassette and submitting
ment success, and many exotic animal cases are unsuccess-
 in 10% neutral buffered formalin. Picking the biopsy speci-
fully managed simply because of a failure to identify the
 men out with the use of a needle willcause severe damage,
 problem. Definitive diagnosis relies on the demonstration
and even the use of a moistened cotton-tipped applicator has 
 of a host pathologic response (as determined by paired ris-
been shown to cause tissue alteration. Biopsy specimens for
 ing antibody titers, histopathologic or, less reliably, cyto-
microbiologic analysis are best submitted in sterile saline for
 logic analysis) and the causative agent (as determined by
CHAPTER 22 Exotic Pets · 627
A
@ UGARF
UGARR
Figure 22-5 Correct handling of the 2.7-mm telescope and 4.8-mm operating sheath. A, The two-handed technique for general evaluation
involves supporting the sheathed telescope and camera with the superior hand while the thumb and forefinger of the inferior hand
provide fine motor control without tremor. B, The one-handed technique facilitates instrument use by a single surgeon and involves the
inferior hand taking the weight ofthe sheathed telescope and camera by gripping the entire shaft, with the thumb slid up the sheath to
prevent rotation. The inferior hand is now free to pick up and insert an instrument down the operating channel. (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
 microbiologic, parasitologic, or toxicologic analysis). There
of necropsy, endoscopy offers the least invasive method to
are few reliable serologic tests available for most exotic spe-
collect such material. Consequently, clinicians will discover
cies, and those that are available require a minimum of
that diagnostic endoscopy offers an unparalleled ability to
2 to 3 weeks between samples. It is therefore clear that tissue
diagnose disease and maximize treatment success in these
samples are required to make a speedy diagnosis, and short
demanding patients.
REFERENCES
1. Brearley MJ, Cooper JE,Sullivan M: Endoscopy in exotic species,
4. Hernandez-Divers SJ: Diagnostic and surgical endoscopy. In
In Color atlas of small animal endoscopy, St Louis, 1991, Mosby-
Raiti P, Girling S,editors: Manual of reptiles,ed 2, Cheltenham,
Year Book.
England, 2004, British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
 2. Burrows CF, Heard DJ: Endoscopy in nondomestic species. In Tams
5. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Hernandez-Divers SM: Avian diagnostic
TR, editor: Sall arimal endoscopy, ed 2, St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
endoscopy, Cormpend Cont Educ Vet 26:839-852, 2004.
 3. Hernandez-Divers SJ: Small mammal endoscopy. In Quesenberry
6. Hernandez-Divers SJ: Minimally-invasive endoscopic surgery of
KE, Carpenter JW, editors: Ferrets, rabbits and rodents: clinical
birds, J Avian Med Surg19:107-120, 2005.
medicine and surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, Saunders (in press).
Selected Endoscopy Procedures
small size, they are ideal candidates for minimally invasive
for Exotic Mammals (Ferrets, Rabbits,
diagnostic and surgical endoscopy. Indeed, in some situ-
ations the development of endoscopy has enabled many
and Rodents)
procedures to be performed for the first time or with sig-
nificantly reduced morbidity and mortality rates compared
with traditional surgery (e.g, rhinoscopy versus rhinotomy).
ulus), ferrets (Mustela putorius furo), and rodents (order
Considerable advances in exotic animal endoscopy have
 Rodentia) in the United States, these exotic mammals repre-
been made over the past 5 years, and further development
sent the third largest group of companion mammals ( behind
and refinement seem assured.2 However, because of space
dogs and cats).1 The majority of rabbits, ferrets, and rodents
restrictions, only stomatoscopy, rhinoscopy, and laparos-
 presented to practitioners are less than 2 kg, and given their
copy can be briefly covered here. For otoscopy, vaginoscopy,
628■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
tracheobronchoscopy, cystoscopy, gastrointestinal endos-
 angled toward the maxillary arcades, and with the light guide
copy, and thoracoscopy, readers are directed to a complete
cable up, the mandibular teeth are seen preferentially. The
review on the subject.3
lingual, buccal, and occlusal aspects of every tooth should
be evaluated with the use of appropriately sized and curved
INSTRUMENTATION
dental probes. Tooth laxity, exudates, and gingival changes
should be noted. In the vast majority of the small herbivores,
Given the variation in size and the nature of the proce-
the most commonly encountered malocclusions involve
dures that may be performed, a variety of different scopes
 Overgrowth to the lingual aspect ofthe lower arcades and buc-
and instruments are available (see Figure 22-1). For most
 cal aspect of the upper arcades (Figure 22-6). Once identified
practices the 2.7-mm system offers the greatest versatility
the malocclusion should be trimmed with either ronguers or,
and can be built on as individual practice caseload dictates.
 preferably, a motorized dental handpiece that is less likely to
 This system offers several advantages, including single-entry
result in dental fracture. During dental trimming it is vital
procedures, ports for air or saline infusion, and an operat-
 that the telescope is either protected with a guard or tempo-
ing channel for the introduction of 1.7-mm instruments
rarily removed and then reinserted to evaluate the teeth after
(see Figure 22-1). In addition, the 1.9-mm telescope with
reduction of the malocclusion. The telescope can also be used
 integrated sheath and the l-mm semirigid miniscope are
-d jo ssd ado   n ad
extremely useful for smaller mammals (see Figure 22-2). For
molar or molar extractions or to examine the cavity left after
 multiple-entry endoscopy, the recent application of human 
 extraction. Indeed, the telescope has also been used to target 
 pediatric 2- and 3-mm instruments to exotic animal endos-
flushing and antimicrobials into dental cavities via the oral
copy has enabled laparoscopy and thoracoscopy to become a
cavity. These techniques have been used to successfully treat
reality (see Figures 22-3 and 22-4).4
retrobulbar abscesses in rabbits via the oral cavity, thereby
avoiding enucleation.? Although rare, soft tissue masses may
■ PROCEDURES
 be sampled with the use of the 1.7-mm biopsy forceps, and
foreign bodies may be removed with retrieval forceps.
 In general, the approach to exotic mammal endoscopy is
similar to that used in domesticated dogs and cats, and much
Rhinoscopy
can be learned and applied from the domestic animal and
human literature.56 However, in addition to the anatomic
With the animal intubated and in sternal recumbency in
peculiarities, the exotic mammal endoscopist must be more
a 10- to 20-degree head-down position, the oropharynx is
 precise, given the confines within these smaller species. It is
 packed with moistened gauze. The nasal cavities are flushed
therefore particularly important to use the finger and the
with warm sterile saline to remove any debris and excess
thumb of the inferior hand to support the tip of the telescope
mucus. The use of towels under the animal's head helps
 to ensure accurate control at all times.
prevent flooding of the table and floor. For animals more
than 2 kg the 2.7-mm telescope is used; however, for smaller
 animals the 1.9-mm sheathed telescope is preferred. Using
Stomatoscopy
a sheath enables intraoperative flushing to maintain visual-
 Dental disease is undoubtedly one of the most common pre-
ization; however, in small animals the naked telescope can
 sentations for rabbits and rodents, and stomatoscopy under
 be used with care along with intermittent syringe flushing
 general anesthesia ensures a far more detailed examination
through the nostrils. The ventral and middle nasal meatus
than can be achieved in the conscious animal in the exami-
can be exploited to examine the ventral and middle con-
 nation room.27,8 The limited access to the oral cavity may
chae. In larger animals, the endoturbinates and opening to
preclude the use of endotracheal tubes; however, anesthetic
the nasopharynx can also be seen. Care is required so that
Aq no uoanun ieseu eia pnddns aq ues uaaxo pue see
the delicate nasal turbinates that are prone to hemorrhage
placing a small face mask over the nostrils. It is important
are not damaged (Figure 22-7, A). The telescope should be
to give consideration to the use of active scavenging from
kept as medial as possible and always kept within the meatus.
the area to avoid anesthetic gas exposure to staff Alterna-
 Even so, hemorrhage can rarely be completely avoided. Exu-
tively, injectable anesthetic agents may be used, and although
 dates, abscesses, masses, and foreign bodies can be appreci-
this does not negate the need for supplying oxygen via a
 ated and sampled or removed (Figure 22-7, B-F).
nasal line or mask, it does reduce staff exposure to inhalant
The recent advent of 2- and 3-mm rigid instruments also
agents. The animal is positioned in sternal recumbency with
 permits biopsy and debridement within the nasal or parana-
the head supported and mouth held open using a “rodent/
 sal sinuses via limited surgical access.4 There are occasions
rabbit table retractor restrainer" (Sontec Instruments Inc.,
when dental disease requires an extraoral approach, either
Centennial, Colo.), and “cheek spreaders" (Sontec Instru-
alone or in conjunction with intraoral surgery, and the tele-
ments Inc.). The 1.9- and 2.7-mm telescopes are preferred
scope can serve as a useful surgical aid. The extension of hyp-
because the 30-degree angle provides a better view of the
 sodont roots into the nasal cavity may warrant rhinoscopy
occlusal surfaces: with the light guide cable down, the view is
via the nostrils, as already detailed, or surgical rhinotomy.
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets· 629
P3
M1
M3
C
￥2
M3
E
Figure 22-6 Endoscopic dental pathology in rabbits. A, Abnormally long right maxillary premolars I and 2 due to inadequate dietary
forage. B, Close-up of more severe elongation of the right maxillary premolars I and 2. In this case the teeth have caused severe ulceration
() e ieo () 7 pue (i) I seou pue (d) e ieouad eixeu iuu yo uoeuoa P  (moun) esonu eonq ayi u!
appears normal. Note that molar also has a small sharp spur associated with its buccal border (arrow). This spur would be buried in the
buccal mucosa and would be impossible to visualize without endoscopy and lateral retraction of the mucosa. D, Gross elongation of left 
'1iua aul yo jaaal aui on(id) I ielouaid jo ieam anaas io aimpe pue (moun ands [engul paeiosse uim (d) 7 relouand ienqiue
E,Caseous exudate emanatingfrom around left maxillary molar 2(M2）after the applicationof pressure with a dental probe.F,End-stage
dental disease. In this view of the left maxillary arcade only premolar 1 (P1) and molar 3 (M3) are clearly visible, premolar 2 and molar 2
'ssqe euap apun ue aeiu lam a i aiu ualms u suraa uaas aq us (mou) I ieou jo jed pue ussu ae
(Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
630·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
B
D
E
Figure 22-7 Rabbit rhinoscopy. A, Normal nasal turbinates viewed from within the ventral nasal meatus. B, Abscess in the caudal aspect
of the ventral nasal meatus in a rabbit unsuccessfully treated for chronic rhinitis. C, Same abscess after endoscopic debridement, which,
with postoperative antimicrobials based on biopsy culture and sensitivity, were curative. D, Granulomatous rhinitis with nasal septum
destruction due to Mycobacteriurm sp. E, Hay foreign body (arrow) within the cranial aspect of the ventral nasal meatus, just caudal to the
Dental abscesses affecting the maxilla may enter the para-
Laparoscopy
 nasal sinuses, and the telescope can provide evaluation via
a small (4- to 5-mm) osteotomy. Even when extensive sur-
For a detailed discussion of methodology the reader is
gical osteotomy or rhinotomy is performed, surgical access
referred to the dedicated laparoscopy literature as only small 
 is often very limited in small herbivores, but the telescope
 enables detailed evaluation farther cranial and caudal to the
has been shown to offer significant advantages over tradi-
surgical site.
tional surgical options, both in human and in veterinary
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets· 631
medicine. In particular, laparoscopy is, with practice, faster,
less traumatic, and results in less postoperative pain and a
faster return to normal function. Until the advent of 2- and
 3-mm human pediatric equipment, laparoscopy was lim-
ited to a single-entry system with the use of the sheathed
telescope. However, multiple-entry techniques are now
possible and practical for animals more than 500 to 1000 g.
Indeed, laparoscopic oophorectomy is now my sterilization
method of choice for female rodents and rabbits because it
 involves less tissue manipulation and results in less postop-
 erative discomfort and a faster return to normal feeding and
behavior.
Single-entry laparoscopy has been used most exten-
sively for the collection of visceral biopsy specimens from
rodents, rabbits, and ferrets. In general, a 3- to 4-mm surgi-
adossalat aui 'lauay e un adossoredel aua-adm g-z ang
(1) has been inserted through the umbilicus, cranial to the Veress
cal approach is made through the umbilicus or at some other
needle (2) and CO, insufflation line. A 3-mm instrument (3) has
convenient point along the linea alba. After insertion of the
been inserted through one of two 3.5-mm cannulae (4). (Photograph
sheathed telescope, a mattress suture can be tied to create an
2010 University ofGeorgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
air-tight seal; however, this is seldom necessary if the inci-
 sion through the linea alba is small. For larger mammals CO2
insufflation is required; however, for small rodents it is often
possible to simply attach a syringe containing air to one of
the sheath ports and manually inject air into the abdomen.
Risks associated with air embolism have not been observed
in rodents but should be considered.
 Single-entry techniques are simple and easy to perform,
 but the variety of instruments is limited; thus, tissue manip-
ulation and endosurgery are rudimental. Nevertheless,
visceral evaluation and biopsy are practical even in small
rodents. For larger animals multiple-entry techniques using
nd ae su sad uq e p -z
 and provide greater opportunities for endosurgery.4 There
is a wider equipment selection for 3-mm instruments, and
these are used with Clickline interchangeable handles con-
nected to a radiosurgery unit for hemostasis. Access to the
Figure 22-9 A tilting endoscopy table specially built for small
abdomen is achieved with the use oflightweight 3.5-mm (for
mammals, based on the original design by Dr. Ty Tankersley.
(Photograph @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
instruments) and 3.9-mm (for sheathed telescope) threaded
 graphite cannulae. Cannula placement is determined by the
organ of interest, preference of the surgeon, and anatomic
nature of the animal in question (Figure 22-8). CO, insuf-
the instruments can be directed to either lateral position.
flation with the use of a dedicated endoflator is essential for
When required to examine the other lateral, the surgeon
multiple-entry techniques. Some prefer the use of a Veress
simply moves around the table. It is often helpful to have a
 needle, while others, concerned about the risk of damage
second slave monitor located on the other side of the operat-
to internal viscera (especially the voluminous gastrointesti-
ing table rather than move the entire endoscopy tower.
nal tract of small herbivores), prefer to surgically place the
 For access to the liver, gastrointestinal tract, spleen, pan-
initial cannula or telescope. An ability to rotate the animal
creas, and bladder, the telescope is again passed through the
from dorsal to either lateral position can greatly assist with
linea alba or umbilicus, but the instruments are inserted
the location of ovaries, kidneys, and other dorsolateral struc-
transversely across the abdomen rather than longitudi-
tures. Although tilting endoscopy tables are commercially
nally. In this manner, the telescope and instruments can
available for domesticated animals, a specifically designed
be advanced into the cranial abdomen for access to the
 and constructed small mammal tilting table is in use at the
liver, stomach, intestinal tract, spleen, and pancreas or
University of Georgia (Figure 22-9).
advanced caudad toward the large intestine and bladder
 For procedures involving dorsolateral structures (e.g--
(Figure 22-10). It is important to aspirate all abdominal gas
 oophorectomy), the telescope is inserted through the umbi-
 after surgery because the presence of residual CO is a source
licus with two additional cannulae placed 2 to 8 cm cranial
of postoperative discomfort. Cannula holes are closed with
 and caudal to the telescope, along the linea alba. In this way
a single suture.
632·PART TW0Rigid Endoscopy
E
aa go saqol leipa al pue reiaiel yal au uaamiaq auexa oi aqoid uonedied e uisn y adossoiede ianay Aua-aldm ol-z aan
liver (L). B, Identification of an abnormally thickened galbladder (G) between the quadrate and right medial liver lobes (L). C, Endoscopic
sunene -g jo asn aul anon 'eounsu ue jo auasand aui payuos jeqi sdaay Asdoiq u-g usn (d) seaoued aul jo Asdoi
tissue forceps (arrow) to retract the mesentery. D, View of the spleen (S) demonstrating a nodular abnormality (black arrow) and the
say sdoq ug usn (s) uaads a go asdog  (mn am) uendse aaau auy pain-punosen pandane yo ans sniad
(arrow). F, Postbiopsy view of the spleen (S); note the absence of severe hemorrhage. (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
Foundation,Inc.)
CHAPTER 22 Exotic Pets · 633
REFERENCES
1.AVMA: U.S. pet ownership and demographics sourcebook,
5. McCarthy TC: Veterinary endoscopy for the small animal
Schaumburg、 Ill., 2007、 American Veterinary Medical Asso-
practitioner, St Louis, Saunders, 2005.
ciation.
6. Tams TR: Small animal endoscopy,ed 2, St Louis, Mosby, 1999.
2. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Murray M: Small mammal endoscopy.
7. Taylor M: Endoscopy as an aid to the examination and
In Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW, editors: Ferrets, rabbits, and
treatment of the oropharyngeal disease of small herbivorous
rodents: clinical medicine and surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 2004,
mammals, Semin Avian Exot Pet Med 8:139-141, 1999.
Saunders.
 8. Hernandez-Divers SJ: Clinical techniques: dental endoscopy of
3. Hernandez-Divers SJ: Small mammal endoscopy. In Quesenberry
rabbits and rodents, J Exot Pet Med 17:87-92, 2008.
KE, Carpenter JW,editors: Ferrets, rabbits and rodents: clinical
9. Martinez-Jimenez D, Hernandez-Divers SJ, Dietrich U, et al:
medicine and surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, Saunders (in press).
Endosurgical treatment of a retrobulbar abscess in a rabbit,
4. Hernandez-Divers SJ: Minimally-invasive endoscopic surgery of
f Am Vet Med Assoc 230:869-872, 2007.
birds, J Avian Med Surg 19:107-120, 2005.
10. Monnet E, Twedt DC: Laparoscopy, Vet Clin North Am Srmall
Anim Pract 33:1147-1163,2003.
Selected Endoscopy Procedures for Birds
■ PROCEDURES
(Psittacines, Passerines, and Raptors)
The general techniques used in avian endoscopy are similar
to those used for domesticated animals. However, the fact
There are around 10,000 species of birds that vary tremen-
that most companion birds weigh less than 1000 g requires
dously in their anatomic, physiologic, and ecologic adapta-
careful control: the base of the endoscope, eyepiece, and
tions. It would be impossible to coverall species, so this chapter
camera should be supported with the superior hand, and the
has been purposefully restricted to those likely to be encoun-
terminal end should be held by the thumb and the forefinger
tered in companion animal practice, namely, the psittacines
of the inferior hand (see Figure 22-5). Handling the endo-
(parrots), passerines (songbirds), and raptors (birds of prey).
scope in this fashion provides fine control without tremor.
 This summary has been written with the general practitioner
in mind, and because of space constraints only tracheoscopy,
Tracheoscopy
cloacoscopy, and coelioscopy are described For a complete
review including ingluvioscopy, gastroscopy, and endoscopic
The lower respiratory tract can be evaluated with the use of
surgery, the reader should consult the references.12
the left and right approaches to the air sacs and lungs (see 
Avian endoscopy dates back several decades, and the
coelioscopy). However, for the respiratory examination to be
first description in a United States journal that I am aware of
completed an oral approach to the choana, trachea, and syr-
appeared in 1978 and involved the evaluation of gonads in con-
inx and an external approach to the nares are required. Par-
scious birds.3 Since that time, continued progress and refine-
rots that are dyspneic or that suddenly lose their voice and
 ment have been made with a dedicated avian endoscopy system
present in acute respiratory distress must first be stabilized.
fashioned from human pediatric cystoscopy equipment.
Oxygen and, where necessary, an air sac tube to provide an
alternative airway should be considered. Gas anesthesia can be
■ INSTRUMENTATION
delivered by an air sac tube, which leaves the mouth and tra-
chea clear for endoscopy, biopsy, and debridement. In larger
Given the variation in the size of birds and the nature of the
birds the 3.5-mm protection sheath should be used and will
procedures that may be performed, the selection of tele-
 generallyenable tracheoscopyofbirds more than 400 to 500 g
scope and instruments should be carefully considered (see
(e.g-, Amazons, African grays, macaws, and cockatoos). In
Table 22-1). For most practices the 2.7-mm telescope and
smaller birds, a 1.0-mm semirigid endoscope or 1.9-mm
4.8-mm operating sheath offers the greatest versatility and
telescope is required. The 1.9-mm and 2.7-mm telescopes
can be built on as individual practice caseload dictates. This
 can be used without any sheath; however, the advantages of
system offers several advantages, including simple single-
reduced diameter should be weighed against increased risks
entry access, ports for air or saline infusion, and an oper-
of damaging the telescope. With the bird in dorsal recum-
ating channel for the introduction of 1.7-mm instruments
bency and the head and neck extended, the telescope can be
(see Figure 22-1). In addition, the 1.9-mm telescope with
inserted through the glottis and into the trachea. A surgi-
integrated sheath (with 1-mm instruments) and the l-mm
 cal plane of anesthesia is required to prevent coughing, but 
semirigid miniscope are useful for smaller birds (see Fig-
irritation and mucosal damage can be reduced by raising the
ure 22-2). For multiple-entry endoscopy, the use of 2- and
leading edge of the 30-degree telescope above the mucosal
3-mm human pediatric instruments has enabled coelomic
surface while it is advanced down the trachea. The complete
sq e o una u aeai e aoaq o Aaanua
tracheal rings, syrinx, and sometimes even the proximal pri-
(see Figures 22-3 and 22-4).4,5
mary bronchi can be examined (Figure 22-11, A-C). Even
634■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
where tracheal diameter prevents the use of a sheathed tele-
proventriculus (ventral), and ribs and intercostal muscles
scope, retrieval and biopsy forceps can be inserted alongside
(dorsal) (Figure 22-14, A). Exploration of adjacent air sacs is
the telescope for retrieval of foreign bodies, debridement,
accomplished by pressing the tip of the telescope against the
and sample collection (see Figure 22-11, D-F).
 air sac membrane and advancing the telescope in a sweeping
motion until the air sac membranes are breached. Normal
Cloacoscopy
membranes are transparent, and tissues in the adjacent air
sac can be visualized and avoided. Great care is required
Cloacoscopy using warm saline irrigation is very reward-
when breaking through thickened opaque air sacs because
ing and is preferred for the evaluation of cloacal papillo-
vision is impaired and trauma can occur if the telescope is
mas, coprodeum, urodeum (including the openings to the
blindly advanced. Lung, liver, heart, and associated great
ureters and, in females, the shell gland), bursa of Fabricius,
vessels can be examined from the cranial thoracic air sac
and proctodeum (Figure 22-12, A-E). Excessive cloacal fluid
(Figures 22-14 and 22-15), whereas urogenital, intestinal,
administration can result in oral regurgitation; thus, intu-
splenic, adrenal, and associated vasculature can be visualized
a a  ss  d s 
from the abdominal air sac (Figure 22-16). There is no need
ily sampled, but care is required not to penetrate the cloacal
to repair the small holes punctured in the air sac membranes
membranes. Cloacal neoplasms can be ablated with the use
because they generally heal within 10 days. However, large
of radiosurgical or diode laser probes introduced via the
air sac rents will not heal. Postoperative subcutaneous
instrument channel of the sheath (see Figure 22- 12, F).
emphysema may be seen in some birds when only skin
closure is performed. Therefore, either a single absorbable
Coelioscopy
(poliglecaprone 25) suture that incorporates both muscle
and skin or a two-layer closure is recommended.
There are four basic approaches to the coelom: leff, right,
Right Approach
ventral, and interclavicular. Physical examination, diagnostic
imaging (including radiography and ultrasonography), and
The right approach is essentially the same as previously
clinical pathology should be conducted to identify the most
described. Of particular note is the asymmetrical location of
appropriate approach. For example, the spleen is best visual-
the psittacine pancreas, which can be most easily accessed
ized via a leff approach, the psittacine pancreas from the right,
from the right abdominal air sac in most species if the
and both liver lobes can only be seen from a ventral approach.
duodenum (most caudal loop of intestine) is followed
Most approaches to the avian coelom involve entry into and
caudoventrad.
examination from within the air sacs. Therefore, it is impor-
tant to keep ports closed to avoid anesthetic compromise. In
Ventral Approach
addition, left and right approaches should be avoided in birds
The ventral approach provides excellent access to both
with ascites because fluid leakage into the air sac system is
left and right liver lobes. In cases of ascites, the ventral
almost unavoidable; however, in such cases, a ventral midline
approach is preferred because the telescope can enter the
approach into the hepatoperitoneal cavity is practical.
hepatoperitoneal cavity without entering the air sac system.
The bird is positioned in dorsal recumbency, and after
Left Approach
 aseptic preparation, entry is made in the ventral midline,
The most commonly used procedure involves a left approach
just caudal to the keel. The hepatoperitoneal cavity is divided
into the air sac system because male and female reproductive
into left and right sides, and the midline membrane can be
 organs can always be seen (only a few species have bilateral
perforated using the telescope as previously described.
 ovaries). The bird is positioned in right lateral recumbency
Clavicular Approach
with wings secured dorsad over the bird's back with the use
of self-adhesive tape. The left pelvic limb is pulled craniad
To identify and preserve the crop, the surgeon needs to use a
 and secured to the neck, again with the use of a self-adhesive
larger surgical approach (1 cm) in the midventral coelomic
bandage, to expose the left flank (Figure 22-13, A). The entry
 inlet. On entering the clavicular air sac, the telescope must
site is located immediately behind the last rib and just ventral
be carefully advanced because of the close proximity of leff
to the flexor cruris medialis muscle as it courses from caudal
and right brachiocephalic branches and other major vessels
stifle to ischium (see Figure 22-13, B). Very few feathers, if
in this region. The clavicular approach is less commonly
any, need to be plucked before aseptic preparation of the
utilized but does provide access to the syringeal region, heart,
area. After a 2- to 4-mm skin incision, straight hemostats,
and great vessels and has been useful for the identification,
directed in a slight craniodorsal direction, are used to
 sampling, and treatment of cranial coelomic masses.
bluntly dissect between the thin subcutaneous tissues
and enter the caudal thoracic air sac. The hemostats are
Biopsy Technique
replaced by the sheathed telescope, and the correct position
within the caudal thoracic air sac is confirmed by the
One of the greatest benefits of endoscopy is that when an
identification of lung (straight ahead), cranial thoracic air
 abnormal structure or pathologic lesion is observed, biopsy
sac (leff), abdominal air sac (right), caudal edge of liver and
specimens can be taken under direct visual control. Biopsy
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets· 635
B
D
E
Figure 22-11 Tracheoscopy. A, Appearance of the normal psittacine syrinx and distal trachea. B, Acquired tracheal membrane or stricture (m)
in an African grey parrot due to prior traumatic intubation. C, Syringeal granuloma (g) in a moluccan cockatoo. Biopsy forceps (b) are being 
advanced in preparation for sampling and debridement, while the anesthesia is maintained via an air sac tube. D, Endoscopic debridement of the 
debridement, antimicrobial medication is delivered directly to the syrinx using a 1.7-mm catheter (c).F,Appearance of the same syrinx 2 days
after surgery revealing patency and the resolving nature of the infection. ( Photographs @ 20i0 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
specimens can be harvested from the kidneys, gonads,
 sites are generally diagnostic. Ultrasound-guided and blind
liver, spleen, pancreas, lung, fat, air sac, coelomic muscula-
 percutaneous biopsy techniques may be equally effective in
ture, and, in general, any abnormal soft tissue structure. It
diagnosing diffuse disease. However, poorer visualization of
is important to examine as much of the target structure as
closely associated structures makes iatrogenic trauma more
possible to determine whether pathology is focal, multifocal,
likely. Most diagnostic failures occur because of poor tissue
 or diffuse. In cases of diffuse renal or hepatic disease (e.g-)
selection for biopsy, and this is especially true when dealing
tubulonephrosis, nephrocalcinosis, hepatic lipidosis, and
with focal (e.g-, abscesses, neoplasia, or cysts) and multifo-
hepatitis), biopsy specimens taken from the most convenient
cal diseases (e.g-, pyogranulomata and mycobacteriosis). In
636 · PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
A
C
E
Figure 22-12 Cloacoscopy using a 2.7-mm telescope, 4.8-mm operating sheath, and saline infusion. A, Appearance of the normal
of the coprodeum. B, Ureteral openings (arrows) and dorsal urodeal fold (u) in a pigeon. C, Oviductal opening (o) close to the dorsolateral
urodeal fold (u) in an immature red-tailed hawk. D, Caudal to the ureteral openings (arrows) and dorsal to the urodeal fold (u)lies the
bursa of Fabricius (b), which is far more obvious in younger birds and involutes in adults. E, Papillomas (p) in a blue and gold macaw
obscuring one side ofthe urodeal fold (u).Feces (arrows) canbe seen entering the coprodeum.F,Diode laser ablation of alarge solitary
(c) and the reflection from an air bubble (a). ( Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
these cases, direct endoscopic visualization offers the best
should be taken in the same biopsy sample for both micro-
 chance of sampling the most appropriate area(s). In cases of
biologic and histologic analysis. Alternatively, and techni-
focal or multifocal disease, single or multiple discrete lesions
cally easier, small biopsy specimens can be collected from
are visible and biopsy specimens should ideally be harvested
the abnormal and normal areas and submitted together for
from the edge of the lesion; normal and abnormal tissue
 comparison. Focal disease deep within an organ showing no
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets· 637
rather than risk leakage into the air sacs or coelom. When
 attempting to take a liver or lung biopsy sample,the surgeon
should first incise the air sac and serosal membranes using
endoscopic scissors. This provides better access to the tissue
parenchyma and yields biopsy samples of superior histologic
quality with minimal artifacts. Biopsies of the spleen, kid-
 ney, testis, adrenal glands, and most pathologic lesions can
usually be taken without the use of scissors. Postsampling
hemorrhage tends to be minor and inconsequential thanks
to the avian extrinsic coagulation pathway and, in particular,
tissue-associated thromboplastin.6-8
Liver Biopsy
In cases of diffuse liver pathology, the most accessible
sampling site from a lateral approach is the caudolateral edge
of the liver, located on the ventral floor of the caudal thoracic
air sac. For access to the liver it is necessary to incise the air sac
and hepatoperitoneal membranes with scissors. The scissors
atin
are opened, and the fixed blade is gently inserted through
the membranes parallel with the edge of the liver. While the
@ UGARF
blades are kept open, the scissors-sheath-telescope unit is
elevated and advanced to extend the incision (see Figure
22-15, C). Once the incision is large enough to permit the
introduction of biopsy forceps, the blades are closed and the
scissors retracted. Biopsy forceps are then inserted through
the incision, and a clean liver sample can be collected (see
 Figure 22-15, D). Multiple biopsy specimens can be taken
from the same site.
Kidney Biopsy
Renal biopsies can be collected from the cranial, middle, or
caudal divisions ofthe kidney from within the abdominal air
sacs. In general, there is no need to use scissors as the renal
 parenchyma protrudes and is easily accessed (see Figure
22-16, F).
wng Biopsy
Lung tissue is most accessible from within the left or right
caudal thoracic air sacs. The air sac and pleural membranes
must first be incised with scissors. It is generally easier to
B
@ UGARF
rotate the scissors within the operating channel, such that
Figure 22-13 A, Positioning of a parrot for left lateral
the fixed blade is dorsal. The scissors-sheath-telescope unit 
coelioscopy. The left pelvic limb is pulled craniad and taped to the
is advanced, and the point of the fixed blade is inserted
neck of the macaw to expose the left flank. B, The telescope white
arrow) entry point is just behind the last rib (black arrow), at the
through the membranes covering the lung. The scissors-
ventral border of the flexor cruris medialis muscle (m). (Art by Kip
sheath-telescope unit is then gently moved ventrad creating
Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
a dorsoventral incision through which biopsy forceps can be
inserted to collect lung tissue.
Splenic Biopsy
surface lesions, although rare, may be missed on endoscopic
examination. It is important to correlate histopathologic
The spleen is best visualized from within the left abdominal air
and microbiologic biopsy results with clinicopathologic data
sac, and although greater hemorrhaging is usually associated
when organ disease is present. It is often surprising how
with biopsy, the clinical consequences appear minimal.6
biopsy results provide a definitive diagnosis even in the face
Pancreatic Biopsy
of unremarkable clinicopathologic data.
 sd si sse  st io ad e i
Pancreatic biopsy specimens are most easily collected from
is safer to first attempt drainage with fine-needlle aspiration
within the right abdominal air sac of psittacines.
638 ·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Figure 22-14 Coelioscopy using a 2.7-mm telescope. A, View from within the caudal thoracic air sac in a pigeon. The ventrolateral aspect
ou [eiu aui 'aaoqe () sas eisoaiu pue () sq au im aue ia a (mo) miso Ard a pue (i) ui auijo
(c) and abdominal (a) air sacs lie to the left and right, respectively. B, View of the lung (l) from within the caudal thoracic air sac of an
Amazon parrot with intrapulmonary hemorrhage (white arrow). The opening to the primary ostium (black arrow) is also obvious. C, View
inside the primary ostium of the caudal thoracic air sac demonstrating the normal appearance of parabronchi and lung tissue. D, View
inside the primary ostium of the cranial thoracic air sac of a macaw with severe dyspnea. Note the fungal mycelia (arrow), which on biopsy
proved to be Aspergilus fumigatus. E, Normal appearance of the heart (h), liver (li), and esophagus (e) from within the cranial thoracic
air sac of an Amazon parrot. F, View of the heart with grossly thickened and opaque pericardium (h) in an Amazon parrot that presented 
 and pericardial biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of constrictive fibrosing pericarditis. (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets· 639
Figure 22-15 Liver examination and biopsy from within the left caudal thoracic air sac. A, View of the normal liver (li), proventriculus
(p), lung (Il), and cranial thoracic air sac (c) inapigeon. B, View of the swollen and discolored liver (li) and distended proventriculus
(p) in ablack palm cockatoo with chlamydophilosis. C, In preparation forbiopsy,the ventral floor of the caudal thoracic air sac and the
hepatoperitoneal membranes have been incised using 1.7-mm scissors to expose the liver parenchyma (li). D, 1.7-mm biopsy forceps are
used to collect a sample of liver. (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
640PARTTWORigidEndoscopy
B
C
E
3
Figure 22-16 Renal examination and biopsy from within the abdominal air sac. A, External iliac vein (e) running between the cranial (ka)
(40) inpiao pue (mouun) suauesi Aosuadsns (o) Aieao aul jo uoeisose asol aul aon AaupIy yal aul jo suoisiai (qy) aIPpIu pue
B, Ischiatic vein (i) and spinal nerves (black arrow) running between the middle (kb) and caudal (kc) divisions of the left kidney, with the 
ureter and immature oviduct (white arrow) coursing ventromediad. C, Abnormally small cranial (ka) and middle (kb) divisions of the right
kidney in a macaw. The external iliac vein (e) and ureter (arrow) are also shown. Such anomalies can be congenital or the result of chronic
disease and renal fbrosis. D, Swollen cranial division of the left kidney (ka) due to bacterial glomerulonephritis in an Amazon parrot,
causing caudal displacement of the external iliac vein (e). The middle division of the kidney (kb), adrenal (a), and testis (t) are also visible.
E, Renomegaly of the caudal division of the right kidney (kc) and dilation of the ureter (arrow) associated with lead intoxication and renal
tubular necrosis in a macaw. F, Caudal division of the kidney after biopsy using 1.7-mm biopsy forceps. Note the minor hemorrhage that 
usually stops quickly because of avian tissue-bound thromboplastin. ( Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 22 Exotic Pets · 641
REFERENCES
1. Taylor M: Endoscopic examination and biopsy techniques. In
 6. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Wilson GH, Lester VK, et al: Evaluation of
Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR, editors: Avian medicine:
coelioscopic splenic biopsy and cloacoscopic bursa of Fabricius
principles and application, Fort Worth, Fla., 1994, Harrison Bird
biopsy techniques in pigeons (Colurba livia), J Avian Med Surg
Diets International.
20:234-241,2006.
2. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Hernandez-Divers SM: Avian diagnostic
 7. Sturkie PD, Griminger P: Blood: physical characteristics,formed
endoscopy, Copend Contin Educ Vet 26:839-852, 2004.
elements, hemoglobin and coagulation. In Sturkie PD, editor:
 3. Harrison GJ: Endoscopic examination of avian gonadal tissues,
Avian physiology,ed 3, New York, 1976, Springer-Verlag.
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 73:479-484, 1978.
8. Hanley CS, Wilson GH, Latimer KS, et al: Interclavicular
4. Hernandez-Divers SJ: Minimally-invasive endoscopic surgery of
hermangiosarcoma in a Double Yellow Headed Amazon
birds, J Avian Med Surg 19:107-120, 2005.
(Amazona ochrocephala oratrix). J Avian Med Surg 19:130-137,
5. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Stahl SJ, Wilson GH, et al: Endoscopic
2005.
orchidectomy and salpingohysterectomy of pigeons (Colurmba
livia): an avian model for minimally invasive endosurgery,
JAvian Med Surg 21:22-37, 2007.
 Selected Endoscopy Procedures for Fish
■ PROCEDURES
The general approach to fish endoscopy is similar to that
As of 2007, there were more than 9 million households
used for domesticated animals. However, the fact that most
in the United States that kept around 75 million fish.
fish are relatively small and have a very compact coelom
Ornamental fish may include freshwater or marine spe-
 necessitates careful control: the base of the endoscope, eye-
cies in cold water or tropical systems; however, cold water
piece, and camera should be supported with the superior
koi carp and goldfsh, tropical guppies, tetras, and angel
hand while the terminal end is held by the thumb and the
fish and marine or reef saltwater aquaria are most com-
forefinger of the inferior hand. Handling the endoscope in
 monplace. Although veterinary care of pet fish has largely
this fashion provides fine control without tremor.
been restricted to a limited number of enthusiastic prac-
titioners, dedicated texts on the subject are available and
Gill Endoscopy
should be consulted before undertaking their veterinary
care.23 Even free-ranging species have benefited from
 Gill disease is common and yet only endoscopy provides a
endoscopy, which has been used for the purposes of gen-
magnified evaluation of the gills while functioning within
der evaluation and endosurgical gonadectomy.4 Because
water flow. With the fish in dorsal recumbency the telescope
of space restrictions, only gill endoscopy and coelioscopy
is positioned within the water stream flowing over the gills
have been briefly discussed here. For complete descrip-
(Figure 22-17, A). Each gill arch can be examined, includ-
tions and reviews of all procedures, the references should
ing the gill rakes and primary and secondary lamellae (see
be consulted.
Figure 22-17, B-C). Indeed, when the full magnifying capa-
bilities of the telescope are used, it is possible to visualize the
■ INSTRUMENTATION
erythrocytes coursing through the countercurrent capillaries
of the secondary lamellae. Parasites can be readily identified,
Given the variation in size and the nature of the proce-
 and biopsy specimens can be collected for histopathologic
dures that may be performed, consideration should be
analysis.
given to the correct selection of telescope and instruments
(see Table 22-1). For most practices the 2.7-mm telescope
Coelioscopy
and 4.8-mm operating sheath offers the greatest versa-
tility and can be built on as individual practice caseload
Piscine coelioscopy can be difficult because of the tightly
dictates. This system offers several advantages, includ-
packed and poorly distensible nature of the body cavity,
ing simple single-entry access, ports for saline infusion,
combined with the variable presence and size of the swim
and an operating channel for the introduction of 1.7-mm
bladder. These difficulties can be overcome with the use of
instruments (see Figure 22-1). In addition, the 1.9-mm
 sterile saline instead of CO, for insufflation. Saline, being a
telescope with integrated sheath (with 1-mm instruments)
fluid, is approximately 800 times denser than gases like air
and the l-mm semirigid miniscope are useful for smaller
and COz and can create greater coelomic distension with
fish (see Figure 22-2). For multiple-entry endoscopy, the
improved observation of the viscera. Although care must
use of 2-, 3-, and 5-mm instruments has enabled coelomic
be exercised, short-term use of saline appears to be safe and
endosurgery to become a reality in fish (see Figures 22-3
effective. Endoscope-guided aspiration and collapse of the
and 22-4).5,6
swim bladder are also feasible and can greatly improve the
642■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
B
Figure 22-17 Gillendoscopy. A, Koi carp positioned in dorsal recumbency with the telescope positioned within the stream of water flowing
through the mouth and out of the opercula. B, View of the normal gills. In the anesthetized fish rhythmic movements of the gill arches and the
(ou ya) ea ard e jo maia payiu' uenandde leuuy e aaid aem u alae aeuas pue ard auljo aueeade
demonstrating the ultrastructure of the secondary lamellae (white arrow). (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
working space within the coelom. Reinflation of the swim
cranial and caudal kidney, swim bladder, and inactive
bladder can be rapid in those fish that possess a direct con-
gonads (see Figure 22-18).
nection between the swim bladder and the intestinal tract:
A scalpel blade incision through the skin and subcutis is
they simply gulp air at the water surface. Those fish that rely
followed by careful penetration into the coelom with the use
on vascular delivery of gas to the swim bladder should be
 of hemostats. On insertion of the sheathed telescope, sterile
kept in a shallow tank until normal swimming returns.
saline insufflation precedes the examination. This is most eas-
 In most cases, sterile saline is preferred for single-entry
ily accomplished by suspension of a 1-L bag of sterile saline
diagnostic techniques, whereas CO, is often preferential for
10 to 50 cm above the fish; it is connected to one of the sheath
 multiple-entry endosurgery (Figures 22-18 and 22-19). The
 ports by means of an intravenous delivery set (see Figure
precise entry point for the telescope and, if required, addi-
22-20). The saline should be at the same temperature as the
tional instrument ports are determined by the anatomic
tank water. With the fish in lateral recumbency it is impor-
nature of the fish, the diagnostic or surgical priorities of the
tant to ensure a tight sheath-skin interface or use a mattress
procedure, and the preferences of the endoscopist. I have
suture to prevent excess fluid loss. Despite operation within a
commonly used two major approaches:
fluid environment, postbiopsy hemorrhage is minimal and is
1. With the fish in dorsal recumbency, a ventral midline (or
rarely, ifever, of concern (see Figure 22-20, B-D).
just off midline) entry is made, caudal to the pectoral fins
After the procedure, excess saline can be aspirated
and cranial to the vent. This provides detailed examina-
 or allowed to drain from the insertion site (any residual
tion of the liver, spleen, pancreatic tissue, gastrointestinal 
saline will have no noticeable effect on buoyancy), and a
tract, and active gonads (Figure 22-20).
 single absorbable monoflament suture (poliglecaprone 25,
2. With the fish in lateral recumbency, a ventral midline
polydioxanone, or polyglyconate) closes the body wall in a
to paramedian entry often provides better access to the
single layer.
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets·643
B
Figure 22-18 Oscar fish that presented with abnormal buoyancy and was unable to feed. A, Coelioscopy under anesthesia using a 2.7-mm
telescope and 3.5-mm protection sheath with saline infusion. B, View of a distended intestinal viscus seen from within the coelom. C, View
of the same site after endoscope-guided fine-needle aspiration. On recovery the fish returned to normal buoyancy and feeding. (Photographs
@ 2010 University of GeorgiaResearch Foundation, Inc.)
644·PARTTWORigid Endoscopy
一
Figure 22-19 Coelioscopy of koi carp and goldfish. A, View within the cranioventral coelom of a koi carp illustrating normal
gastrointestinal tract (g), liver (l), and cords of pancreatic tissue associated with portal blood vessels (arrow). B, Abscess (α) embedded
within the surface ofthe liver in a goldfish that presented with anorexia and abnormal swimming. C, Retroperitoneal caudal kidney (k) of a
koi carp. D, Normal swim bladder (s) of a koi carp. E, Normal active ovary (o) in a koi carp preparing to spawn. F, Ovarian adenocarcinoma 
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 22 Exotic Pets ■ 645
C
D
Figure 22-20 Coelioscopy and liver biopsy in a catfish (Ilctalurus punctatus). A, Coelioscopy in a catfish using a 2.7-mm telescope and
4.8-mm operating sheath, with saline infusion. B, View of the cranioventral coelom and the liver. C, Advancement of the biopsy forceps
onto the liver. D, Postbiopsy view of the liver, note the absence of hermorrhage. (Reprinted with permission from Boone SS, Hernandez-Divers
Sf, Radlinsky M, et al: Comparison between coelioscopy and coeliotomy for liver biopsy in channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus), I Am Vet Med
Assoc 233:960-967, 2008.)
REFERENCES
1.AVMA: U.S. pet ownership and demographics sourcebook,
 5. Hernandez-Divers SJ: Minimally-invasive endoscopic surgery of
Schaumburg, Il., 2007, American Veterinary Medical Asso-
birds, J Avian Med Surg 19:107-120, 2005.
ciation.
6. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Stahl SJ, Wilson GH, et al: Endoscopic
2. Harms CA, Lewbart GA: Surgery in fish, Vet Clin North Am Exot
 orchidectomy and salpingohysterectomy of pigeons (Colurmba
Anim Pract 3:759-774, 2000.
Aansoua aiseaun Aeuuu oy lapou uenae ue :(
3.Wildgoose WH: BSAVA Manual of ornamental fish, ed 2,
J Avian Med Surg 21:22-37, 2007.
Quedgeley、 United Kingdom, 2001、British Small Animal
Veterinary Association.
4. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Bakal RS, Hickson BH, et al: Endoscopic
sex determination and gonadal manipulation in Gulf of Mexico
sturgeon (Acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi),J Zoo Wildl Med 35:459-
470,2004.
646 ·PART TWO Rigid Endoscopy
Selected Endoscopy Procedures for
significant advantages over traditional surgical options, both
Reptiles (Lizards, Snakes, Turtles, and
in human and veterinary medicine. In particular, laparos-
copy is, with practice, faster and less traumatic and results
Tortoises)
in less postoperative pain and a faster return to normal
function. Until the advent of 2- and 3-mm human pediatric
The class Reptilia consists of more than 7000 species, includ-
equipment, laparoscopy was limited to a single-entry system
ing about 250 species of turtles, tortoises, and terrapins
using the sheathed telescope. However, multiple-entry tech-
belonging to order Chelonia, 2500 species of snakes in the
niques are now possible and practical for animals weighing
suborder Serpentes, and 4500 species of lizards in the subor-
more than 500 g.
der Sauria (snakes and lizards are combined to form the order
Precise positioning for coelioscopy depends on the
Squamata). Only the commonly maintained companion ani-
body shape and confrmation of the particular species, the
mal species will be discussed here, and crocodilians have been
structure(s) of interest, and the preferences of the endosco-
purposefully excluded. In addition because of space restric-
pist.ll The entry site is aseptically prepared and draped, and
tions, only diagnostic coelioscopy can be described here. For
 adhesive clear plastic drapes are preferred because they per-
 complete descriptions and additional procedures including
mit better visualization of the patient.
tracheobronchoscopy, stomatoscopy, gastroscopy, cloacos-
Lizards
 in pulmonoscopy and minimally invasive endosurgery, the
 Dorsoventrally compressed lizards (e.g-, bearded dragons and
 reader is directed to more complete reviews.1-6
savannah monitors) are positioned in dorsal recumbency,
whereas laterally compressed lizards (e.g-, chameleons) can
■ INSTRUMENTATION
be placed in either lateral position. Round-bodied lizards
(e.g, green iguanas) can be endoscoped in either lateral or
Given the variation in size and the nature of the proce-
dorsal recumbency, but lateral is generally preferred and
 dures that may be performed a variety of different scopes
allows access to more organs.
and instruments are available (see Table 22-1). For most
Given the relatively smallsize of most pet lizards, a single
practices the 2.7-mm telescope and 4.8-mm operating
midcoelomic entry point, either in a paramedian or paralum-
sheath offer the greatest versatility and can be built on as
bar area, will usually permit examination of most, if not all,
individual practice caseload dictates. This system offers sev-
of the coelomic structures (Figure 22-21). While anatomic
eral advantages, including single-entry procedures, ports
for air or saline infusion, and an operating channel for the
introduction of 1.7-mm instruments (see Figure 22-1). In
addition, the 1.9-mm telescope with integrated sheath and
the 1-mm semirigid miniscope are useful for smaller reptiles
(see Figure 22-2). For multiple-entry endoscopy, the use
of 2- and 3-mm human pediatric instruments has enabled
coelomic endosurgery to become a reality (see Figures 22-3
and 22-4).7
■ PROCEDURES
The general techniques used in reptile endoscopy are similar
to those used for domesticated animals. However, the fact
that most pet reptiles weigh less than 2 kg requires careful
control: the base of the endoscope, eyepiece, and camera
should be supported with the superior hand while the termi-
nal end is held by the thumb and the forefinger of the infe-
rior hand (see Figure 22-5). Handling the endoscope in this
fashion provides fine control without tremor.
Hgure 22-21 Telescope entry sites for coelioscopy in lizards. A, For
lateral entry into the coelom,the entry point (x)is bordered craniad
Coelioscopy
by the last rib (r), dorsad by the lateral processes ofthe lumbar
vertebrae (v), caudad by the musculature ofthe hindlimb (h), and
Because reptiles lack a true abdomen, the term coelioscopy is
ventrad by the ventral abdominal (av) and pelvic veins (pv). B, For
aventral approach to the coelom,insertion points (x)maybe either
more accurate than laparoscopy. For a detailed discussion of
laparoscopy methodology the reader is referred to the dedi-
(1) in the midline, behind the anastomoses of the lateral pelvic
veins, or (2) lateral to the ventral abdominal vein (av), caudal to the
cated literature on the subject, as only reptile specifics will be
last rib (r) and cranial tothe pelvic veins (pv). (Photographs @ 2010
highlighted here.8-10 Laparoscopy has been shown to offer
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets· 647
A
B
C
E
一
Figure 22-22 Lizard coelioscopy. A, Left liver lobe (l) of an iguana (left lateral approach). B, Heart (h) and lung (lu) of a green iguana; note
the absence of a diaphragm (left lateral approach). C, Left liver lobe (l) behind the posthepatic membrane (m) of a monitor lizard (ventral
(sus  e ea ya saadssui auqnisdeoauasqe aiaou unuejon e
spleen (sp), and testis (t) of a green iguana (left lateral approach). F, Oviduct (ov), ovary (o), and fat body (f) in a green iguana (left lateral
approach). (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
differences exist between families, the green iguana serves as
right lateral approach to the gallbladder are preferred. Right-
a useful model for describing saurian coelioscopy.12 In the 
handed surgeons will find that a left paralumbar approach
iguana, there is no significant difference in visualization of
is preferable, unless physical examination and diagnostic
lung, liver, pancreas, small intestine, large intestine, ovary,
imaging indicate a right-sided problem. The lizard is posi-
oviduct, testis, epididymis, vas deferens, bladder, fat body,
tioned in right lateral recumbency, with the left pelvic limb
 or kidney from either left or right approaches. However, a
taped caudad against the tail base. The entry area is bordered
left lateral approach to the heart, stomach, and spleen and a
craniad by the ribs, dorsad by the spine, and caudad by the
648■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
pelvic limb. Aseptically, a small skin incision is made in the
monitors, Varanus spp.) have thin posthepatic and/or post-
center of the defined area. The skin and underlying muscle
pulmonary membranes that may be pigmented and that may
 are grasped and elevated away from the coelomic viscera, and
obscure the gonads. The surgeon can breach the membrane
small hemostats are gently forced through the abdominal
m luean pue ludsna Aq uozinsia ianaq moe o
muscle and into the coelomic cavity. It is wise to temporarily
retrieval forceps or incising using the scissors. Care must be
cease artificial ventilation until the telescope has been intro-
taken not to damage the follicles because leakage will cause
duced into the coelom, thereby reducing the possibility of
sterile coelomitis.
damage to an inflated lung. The hemostats are removed and
Dorsal to the gonads are the adrenal glands lying adja-
replaced by the sheath and obturator (with insufflation line
cent to the renal veins (Figure 22-23, A). The vas deferens
attached to one of the ports). When a small skin and muscle
of males and oviducts of females are also visible and can be
hole is made, the sheath will be tight fitting and insufflation
followed caudad to the pelvic inlet. The kidneys of most liz-
 gas leakage will be minimal. Once in place the obturator is
ards are situated in the caudodorsal coelom; however, those
removed and replaced with the telescope. Once the telescope
of the iguana are intrapelvic but can still be visualized (see
 has been inserted and the pneumocoelom created, it may be
Figure 22-23, B). Ventrad from the pelvic inlet, the bladder
necessary to gently touch the tip of the telescope against a
and fat body are seen (see Figure 22-23, C). A left paralumbar
coelomic membrane to clean the terminal lens of conden-
 approach will reveal the small intestine and terminal colon;
sation or tissue fluid. If there is fat or blood on the lens, it
however, a right paralumbar approach will provide access to
is often necessary to remove the telescope from the sheath,
the gallbladder and cecum (see Figure 22-23, D). The pan-
clean it with sterile damp gauze, and replace it.
creas may be easier to locate via a right approach, residing
On left paralumbar entry into the lizard, the frst organ
close to the midventral region, caudal to the liver and gall-
to note is the large brown liver lying in the midventral coe-
bladder, closely associated with the duodenum (see Figure
lom (Figure 22-22, A). Advancing the telescope craniad will
22-23, E). On the right side, the heart is partially obscured by
reveal the heart at the cranioventral aspect of the coelom,
the ascending vena cava (see Figure 22-23, F).
close to the coelomic inlet in iguanas (see Figure 22-22, B).
There are no diaphragmatic, postpulmonary, or longitudi-
Snakes
nal membranes in the iguana. These membranes do exist to
 Snakes are less commonly subjected to coelomic endoscopy
a greater or lesser extent in tegus and monitors (see Figure
because they have more diffuse coelomic fat, it is impossible
22-22, C). Minor perforation of these membranes by the
to examine all the major organs via a single entry, insufflation
telescope will not cause any harm, but care is required to
is generally more difficult, and surgical coeliotomy can be
avoid perforating the lung or intestinal tract.
readily performed along the entire length of the coelom.
Dorsal to the heart and extending from coelomic inlet to
 Nevertheless, if a targeted endoscopic approach to a single
 midcoelom are the paired lungs (see Figure 22-22, D). Lung
 coelomic region is required, lateral entry between the ribs in
ventilation will be substantially reduced during insufflation,
larger snakes and ventrolateral entry just medial to the ribs for
 and careful communication with the anesthetist is required
smaller snakes are practical approaches (Figure 22-24, A)1l
to balance inspiration and insufflation pressures. Caudal to
A recently developed technique for liver biopsy entails access
the lungs, in the midcoelom, is the stomach with the spleen,
via the pulmonoscopy approach to the air sac. From within
which is an elongated dark red organ in iguanas, situated
the air sac it is possible to visualize and sample the liver (see
 close behind (see Figure 22-22, E). Careful examination deep
Figure 22-24, B-D).
to the stomach and spleen will reveal the splenic limb of the
Chelonians
pancreas. The gonads are located just caudal to the spleen
 on either side of the dorsal midline. Rigid endoscopy can be
With the chelonian supported in lateral recumbency, the most
utilized to determine the gender of reptiles, even at a very
useful coelioscopic approach is via the left or right prefemoral
early age. This is extremely useful in monomorphic species
fossa (Figure 22-25).1l Right-handed surgeons will generally
of lizards (e.g-, blue tongue skinks, Tiliqua spp.; prehensile-
find it easier to enter the left prefemoral fossa, and left-handed
tailed skinks, Corucia zebrata, monitor lizards, Varanus spp.;
 surgeons the right. In general, unless diagnostic imaging
gila monsters and beaded lizards, Heloderma spp.) and when
dictates a unilateral problem, the surgeon's preference
involved in an endangered breeding program that requires
can prevail. A large bladder can hinder coelioscopy, and
gender determination of neonatal or juvenile chelonians.
chelonians should be encouraged to urinate before surgery.
Endoscopy also provides feedback on reproductive activ-
This can be achieved by bathing the animal or by gentle digital
ity and disease. The testis is usually ovoid and smooth, and
 manipulation of the cloaca before anesthetic induction.
'7-7  s) uss m A Aa A a
The hindlimb is retracted and taped caudad so that the
E). The immature or inactive ovary appears as a cluster of
prefemoral fossa is exposed. In chelonians with a well-
small,fluid-flled follicles (see Figure 22-22, F). As the ovary
developed plastron hinge (e.g-., box turtles) it is wise to place a
 matures and becomes active some ofthe follicles will enlarge
wedge between the caudal plastron and carapace to maintain
and appear yellow to orange in color as they fill with yolk.
exposure. After aseptic preparation, a small (2- to 4-mm)
Some species of lizards (e.g, tegus, Tupinambis spp., and
craniocaudal skin incision is made in the center of the
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets· 649
B
C
D
E
Figure 22-23 Lizard coelioscopy. A, Epididymis (e) and adrenal (arrow) lying dorsal to the testis (t) in a male iguana (left lateral approach).
B, Normal vas deferens (arrow) and kidney (k) emerging from the pelvic inlet in a green iguana (left lateral approach). C, Bladder (b) and
terminal colon (c) of a green iguana (left lateral approach). D, Loops of small bowel in a green iguana (left lateral approach). E, Gallbladder
(g), pancreas (p), duodenum (d), and ventral abdominal vein (arrow) of a green iguana (right lateral approach). F, Cranial lung (lu) and
caudal vena cava (v), partially obscuring the heart (h) of a green iguana (right lateral approach). (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia
Research Foundation,Inc.)
prefemoral fossa. The subcutaneous fat and connective tis-
muscle that lies between the femur and ventral surface of the
sues are bluntly dissected with the use of hemostats down
ilium. The coelomic aponeurosis is penetrated by advancing
to the coelomic aponeurosis (formed by the broad ten-
hemostats or the operating sheath and obturator toward the
dinous portions of the transverse and oblique abdominal
head. Some force is required to breach the coelomic mem-
muscles). Care should be taken to remain cranial to the sar-
brane and gain access to the coelomic cavity and viscera
torius muscle of the pelvic limb and ventral to the iliacus
(Figure 2-26). With the telescope tip positioned within the
650·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
P
D
pe  poq e (y) au yaao aod ee aiueaai puaa-aious s ye eia yat dssa aus t an
saqa iesoas pue ses ie a  ui aui ajo ses iie ai u oy paaia (i) iaai uod leg g roiisuos eoq e ul (sou sq
have been incised to expose the liver parenchyma (1). D, View of the liver (I) after biopsy. (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
Foundation, Inc.)
Figure22-25Operatingroomlayout
and chelonian positioning for a left lateral
approach to thecoelomiccavity.(Art byKip
Carter @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
@UGA2008
Foundation,Inc.)
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets· 651
Pancreas
Liver
Stomach
Lung
Epididymis
Kidney
Pericardium
covering heart
Cloaca
Testis
Hgure 22-26 Position and orientation of coelomic
UGA
viscera inside a male chelonian; note the entry position
of the telescope through the prefemoral fossa and the
Gallbladder
asymmetry of certain organs. Inset: View through the skin
incision (s), showing the coelomic membrane (m) and
Spleen
Urinary
Intestine
penetration into the coelom (c). (Art by Kip Carter @ 2010
Colon
bladder
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
coelom, insufflation aids visualization. For large animals,
as 10 g (see Figures 22-26 and 22-28, E-F). The kidneys are
CO insufflation is preferred, but air has also been success-
retrocoelomic, residing behind an often transparent coelomic
fully used, delivered by either syringe or aquarium air pump.
membrane (see Figures 22-26 and 22-29, A). If a pigmented
When dealing with giant chelonians, air may passively enter
 coelomic membrane is present, the close association with the
once the coelom has been breached. For small or aquatic
testis (or immature ovary) can indicate their location (see
species, saline infusion provides superior visualization, is
Figure 22-29, B). However, in adult females where the ovary
 -ou u suouxa paad se pue uonq aenau
 and suspensory ligament have enlarged and fallen away from
 nate chelonians as small as 10 g.13
the pigmented coelomic membrane, it can be challenging to
The dark red-brown liver is the most obvious organ to
locate the kidneys unless enlarged (see Figure 22-29, C).1 An
use for orientation (see Figure 22-26 and Figure 22-27, A).
extracoelomic approach to the chelonian kidney is possible in
 The heart is cranial to the liver and partially obscured by a
those species with more flattened shells and does not require
( -  g- sa as) d s
entry into the coelomic cavity. Instead, the sheathed telescope
 The stomach is most prominent on the leff (see Figures 22-26
is gently advanced in a caudodorsal direction between the
and 22-27, C), and while potentially seen from either lateral,
coelomic aponeurosis and the broad iliacus muscle. A com-
the pancreas and closely associated duodenum are easier to
 bination of gentle lateral movements of the endoscope tip
access from the right (see Figures 22-26 and 22-27, D). The
and intermittent insufflation is used to further separate the
gallbladder is easily found associated with the caudal edge
 coelomic aponeurosis from the musculature and reveal the
of the right liver lobe (see Figures 22-26 and 22-27, E), but
retrocoelomic kidneys (see Figure 22-29, D).
the spleen is often hard to find because it is located under
the right liver lobe, close to the duodenum and pancreas (see
Pathology and Endoscopic Biopsy
Figures 22-26 and 22-27, F). The ventral aspects of the lungs
are located dorsad and are most obvious in those species that
In reptiles, a variety of pathologic conditions may be appre-
 lack prominent postpulmonary membranes or septum hori-
ciated, often with surprisingly few clinicopathologic or dis-
zontale (see Figure 22-26 and Figure 22-28, A). The colon,
cernible radiographic or ultrasonographic changes. Tissue
 gonads, oviducts (in females), bladder, and kidneys can be
samples can be easily harvested from most organs and, in
viewed from either side. The bladder is situated in the most
 general, any abnormal soff tissue structure. Liver disease
dependent area, and the ovaries and oviducts of reproduc-
may be focal or diffuse, and although the caudal edge is
tively active females can occupy much of the coelom (see
easiest to sample, biopsy specimens can also be taken from
Figures 22-26 and 22-28, B-C). The male testes, which are
the surface if the serosal covering is first incised. A vari-
cream, yellow, or brown in color, are situated in the cau-
 ety of renal diseases have also been described.l.14 In lizards
dodorsal coelom, closely associated with the vasa deferentia,
 and snakes the lobulated kidney is easy to approach and
epididymides, adrenal glands, and kidneys (see Figures 22-26
sample directly. However, in chelonians its flattened ret-
and 22-28, D). Recently, endoscopy has been shown to be
rocoelomic position first requires incision of the coelomic
 accurate for identifying gender in neonate chelonians as small
membrane.
652·PARTTWORigid Endoscopy
C
D
E
F
Hgure 22-27 Chelonian coelioscopy. A, Normal liver (l) in a radiated tortoise (left prefemoral approach). B, Heart (h) and pericardial fat (f)
C,Stomach (s), liver (I),and oviduct (o) in a red-foot tortoise (left prefemoral approach). D, Liver (I) and pancreas (p) are closely associated
with the duodenum (d) and stomach (s) in a red-eared slider (left prefemoral approach). E, Pancreas (p), duodenum (d),and gallbladder
right liver lobe (l) in a yellow-bellied slider (night prefemoral approach). ( Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
CHAPTER 22Exotic Pets· 653
B
C
D
E
Figure 22-28 Chelonian coelioscopy. A, Ventral (serosal) view ofthe dorsal shell (s), left lung (lu), and liver (l) in a red-eared slider (left
prefemoral approach). B, Urinary bladder (b), oviduct (ov), and ovary (o) in an African spurred tortoise (left prefemoral approach). C, Mature
ovary (o) extending to the caudal edge of the left liver lobe (l) in a Hermann's tortoise (left prefemoral approach). D, Testis (t), epididymis (e),
and vas deferens (arrow) in the caudodorsal coelom of a red-eared slider. Note the closely associated retrocoelomic kidney (k) and the distal 
colon (c) (left prefemoral approach). E, Immature testis (t) closely associated with the kidney (k) in a neonate male Chinese box turtle (left
prefemoral approach with saline infusion). F, Immature ovary (o) and oviduct (ov) closely associated with the kidney (k) and distal colon (c)
in a neonate female Chinese box turtle (left prefemoral approach with saline infusion). (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research
Foundation,Inc.)
654·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
C
D
Hgure 22-29 Chelonian renal examination. A, View ofthe retrocoelomic kidney (k), renal vasculature (v), and closely associated testis (t)
and epididymis (e) in a male red-eared slider turtle. Note that renal visualization is possible because of the transparent nature ofthe coelomic
membrane (left prefemoral approach). B, View ofthe same caudodorsal region in an adult male Greek tortoise. The retrocoelomic kidney (k)
is obscured by the pigmented coelomic membrane; however,its position can be determined by the obvious testis (t) and vas deferens (arrow)
(left prefemoral approach). C, View of the same caudodorsal region in an adult female Greek tortoise with the retrocoelomic kidney (k)
obscured by a pigmented coelomic membrane. With no closely associated gonad to indicate the kidney's location, the endoscopist must rely
 On accurate anatomic knowledge alone (left prefemoral approach). D, Direct, extracoelomic view of the kidney (k) and ventral aspect ofthe
caudodorsal shell (s) in a red-eared slider (left prefemoral approach). (Photographs @ 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
REFERENCES
1. Hernandez-Divers SJ: Endoscopic renal evaluation and biopsy
8. Tams TR: Srmall aniral endoscopy,ed 2, St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
of Chelonia, Vet Rec 154:73-80, 2004.
9.McCarthy TC: Veterinary endoscopy for the small animal
2. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Stahl S、 Hernandez-Divers SM,et al:
practitioner, St Louis, 2005, Saunders.
(uunst vuonsr) euena1 uaaia aui jo Adossopua sjuo[ao
10. Monnet E, Twedt DC: Laparoscopy, Vet Clin North Am Small
J Herpetol Med Surg 14:10-18, 2004.
Anim Pract 33:1147-1163, 2003.
 3. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Stahl SJ, McBride M, et al: Evaluation of
11. Hernandez-Divers SJ、 Hernandez-Divers SM, Wilson GH,
an endoscopic liver biopsy technique in green iguanas, J Am
et al: A review of reptile diagnostic coelioscopy,J Herpetol Med
Vet Med Assoc 230:1849-1853, 2007.
Surg 15:16-31, 2005.
4. Stahl SJ, Hernandez-Divers SJ, Cooper TL, et al: Evaluation
12. Divers SJ: Lizard endoscopic techniques with particular regard
 of transcutaneous pulmonoscopy for examination and biopsy
to the green iguana (Iguana iguana). Semin Avian Ex Pet Med
of the lungs of ball pythons and determination of preferred
8:122-129, 1999.
biopsy specimen handling and fixation procedures, J Am Vet
13. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Stahl SJ, Farrell R: An endoscopic
Med Assoc 233:440-445, 2008.
method for identifying sex of hatchling Chinese box turtles and
 5. Hernandez-Divers S): Diagnostic and surgical endoscopy. In
comparison of general versus local anesthesia for coelioscopy.
Raiti P, Girling S,editors: Manual of reptiles,ed 2, Cheltenham,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 234(6):800-804, 2009.
England, 2004, British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
14. Hernandez-Divers SJ、 Innis C: Renal disease in reptiles:
6. Taylor WM: Endoscopy. In Mader DR,editor: Reptile medicine
diagnosis and clinical management. In Mader DR, editor:
and surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2006, Saunders.
Reptile medicine and surgery, ed 2, St Louis, 2006, Saunders.
 7. Hernandez-Divers SJ: Minimally-invasive endoscopic surgery
ofbirds. J Avian Med Surg 19:107-120, 2005.
23
CHAPTER
Marketing Endoscopic Services
in the Clinic
Randy Hutchison
eterinary medicine has provided a wonderful opportu-
 endoscopy can succeed in that environment, it can be just as
nity for veterinarians to perform a variety of diagnostic and
 successful in a general primary care facility.
therapeutic procedures depending on their primary area of
I would suggest that each practice owner look at his or
interest. We are not confined by an organ system or a specific
 her practice's appointment book. I would expect that there
skill set. There are many technologies that have been made
 may be at least one case every day that could be a candidate
available to veterinarians in recent years. These technolo-
for endoscopy. Every clinic, no matter how large or small,
gies, after being sold to human medicine, have become more
evaluates patients with chronic gastrointestinal symptoms,
affordable for veterinarians. Practice owners then need to
recurrent nasal disease, urinary tract disease, and persistent
make the determination whether that equipment will benefit
 blood work abnormalities. These are only a few examples
their practice and their patients.
of the many problems that may require endoscopy to diag-
There is often litle question as to the benefit of these
nose or treat the underlying pathologic condition. Certainly,
technologies. The concern is whether they be used with the
each case must be evaluated as an individual, but many of
frequency required to make them profitable within the prac-
these scenarios could ultimately indicate endoscopy as the
tice. The types of cases that walk into a practice on a daily
next appropriate test. Over the course of this chapter ways to
basis will ultimately be the determining factor as to which
promote and market endoscopy will be discussed, as wil the
sn a e m sd si ia 
financial and reputation-enhancing benefits it will have for
model, veterinarians can only be successful if they are pre-
a veterinary facility.
sented with an opportunity and offer people a reason to give
 PHILOSOPHY OF PRACTICE
provide both of these for a clinic.
Minimally invasive procedures have been commonplace
It is my belief that a successful endoscopy practice is directly
in human medicine for years. Veterinary medicine is now
related to the overall medical philosophy of the clinic.
advancing, in part, because ofallthe benefits endoscopypro-
As pet owners become more aware of advances in veteri-
vides. One of the great advantages that veterinarians have in
nary medicine, they expect more from veterinarians. More
than ever, pets are now an integral part of a family's over-
ple have been exposed to it in some way. Whether they have
- s o cre, e f  ran sr 
had it done to themselves or to a friend or family member,
narians have been trying to judge from owners how much
many people are familiar with a colonoscopy, a laparoscopic
testing they actually want and how much money they really
appendectomy, a laparoscopic cholecystectomy, or some
want to spend. Veterinarians need to overcome that theory
other procedure involving endoscopic technology. Clients
 and offer these patients appropriate but complete veterinary
 may not understand the intricate details of the procedure,
care. Owners are now sitting across the examination room
but their familiarity with it will make it easier for veterinari-
looking at veterinarians and wondering why a more com-
 ans to market it to them. The other tremendous advantage of
plete and thorough evaluation is not being offered. Diag-
endoscopy is that the cases in which endoscopy is indicated
nostic testing and therapeutic intervention may not always
 are the ones that enter into a clinic each and every day. For
provide an answer that carries with it a favorable prognosis,
endoscopy to be successful, a veterinarian does not necessar-
but there is a certain degree of closure that goes along with
ily need to work in a specialized or referral setting. Although
knowing the answer as opposed to an educated guess. Clients
655
656■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
want to know to the very best of a veterinarian's ability if
endoscopy is weighed against the perceived ability to pay
they made the correct decision: good or bad.
for the equipment. Intentions typically are good after these
I once heard a veterinarian say that because he was get-
meetings, but so often the enthusiasm wanes. This enthusi-
ting older, he felt he needed to reduce his workload. He
asm is often affected because the owners and the associates
figured that the best way to do this was to maximize the
do not make the effort to sell the procedures to the clients.
quality of each procedure. He incorporated a policy in which
Also, new endoscopists are often intimidated by the equip-
all patients would receive intravenous catheters and fluids,
ment or find it easier and faster to revert back to comfort-
preoperative blood work, excellent anesthesia, and a pain
able, traditional techniques. One guarantee that can be made
 management protocol. All of these improvements would,
is that endoscopy equipment cannot benefit a practice or be a
of course, involve a price increase to cover the cost of this
profit center when it is collecting dust in a drawer or closet.
new plan. The response to his plan was tremendous. He
 It would seem unlikely that any practice would make a
estimated that his workload almost doubled. Clients do not
multithousand-dolar investment and then not put it to
want to pay extraordinary costs for average or below-average
use. Unfortunately, this is not an uncommon situation. I
care. The most important thing that a majority of clients
 get many referrals in my practice where clients come from
want is excellent care for their pets. The cost of this care has
a clinic that has endoscopy equipment but have not used it
value to them.
in so long that they would rather send that client to a new
A veterinary practice must establish a reasonable price
 practice. I have also had technicians who have come from
for services depending on the demographics of their region.
 practices that will not consider advanced techniques such as
Demographics, however, should not dictate the quality of
endoscopy because they do not want to pursue the appropri-
medicine that veterinarians choose to practice. All veterinar-
 ate education to be able to use the instrumentation. The very
ians must graduate from an accredited veterinary program.
frst action that should be performed is the enrollment of
 During this training, veterinarians are exposed to quality
 staff into an endoscopy course that covers procedures that
medicine that is performed in a particular way. Patients
the practice is interested in implementing.
receive an appropriate physical examination, a thorough
There are many endoscopy courses offered throughout
diagnostic workup, and therapy based on the results of these
the world at a variety of universities and continuing educa-
tests. The job of veterinarians must be to carry these funda-
 tion meetings. Many of these courses will offer the opportu-
 mentals into practice and offer this basic philosophy at the
nity to try equipment that a practice has purchased or that
primary care level. The other realization to which all veteri-
is considering purchasing. These programs will also provide
narians must come is that there is a certain population of
that first hands-on experience in a controlled setting with
pet owners who will not want or cannot afford the type or
 instructors. This first, positive experience will lay the foun-
quality of medicine that the clinic will offer. However, there
dation for confidence with the patients. The next source of
will always be that group, no matter what level of medicine a
 instruction should come from having an experienced endos-
veterinarian chooses to practice. A clientele who selects vet-
 copist come to your practice. This accomplishes two very
erinarians for their services will be a much more dependable
 CTrucial objectives. It allows the ownership to see the capa-
 group than those who veterinarians continue to chase. There
bilities within the walls of their practice, and it also gives the
are more than enough pet owners who seek out, value, and
staff the very first exposure to endoscopy. The enthusiasm
appreciate excellent pet health care.
and excitement that this can generate among the staff are
This philosophy is ultimately what makes endoscopy suc-
irreplaceable. The instruction that these courses will provide
cessful within a practice. People are aware that endoscopy
 will lay the groundwork for the confidence and competency
exists within medicine and perceive it as an advance in tech-
required to have a successful minimally invasive practice.
   iad  sas rq i 
rating endoscopy into your practice philosophy is a logical
 THE KEY TO ENDOSCOPY SUCCESS
 step in upgrading medical care and the overall personality of
the practice. The reputation and respect that can be gener-
As with any business, a solid business plan must be estab-
  and e  sna osa pe aq pe
lished. A veterinary clinic will invest a large sum of money
 a springboard to overall practice success.
into its endoscopy equipment. There is not a more important 
 decision to be made when starting an endoscopy practice
 MAKING A COMMITMENT
within the clinic than who will be in charge of the equip-
TO ENDOSCOPY
ment. The number one key to success is choosing a dedicated
technicianwhowillberesponsibleforthecare oftheequipment
 Once a clinic has decided to add endoscopy to their practice,
ns d a puninsins afo dns  pu
that clinic must make a commitment to using endoscopy.
assistant during all endoscopic procedures. Having a trained
If you choose to do, then choose to use. Often the decision to
 person to handle all of the instrumentation will greatly
begin a minimally invasive practice involves a number of
improve the care of the equipment and the longevity of it.
meetings between associates and practice owners. Through-
Ultimately, the ability to profit from endoscopy comes from
out the course of these discussions, the start-up cost of
being able to reuse the same equipment multiple times. This
CHAPTER 23   Marketing Endoscopic Services in the Clinic ·  657
can absolutely be done with a technician who is comfortable
technician will quickly become proficient at operating the
 and confident in his or her job. I have learned from my own
camera. The ability to achieve a clear, concise, and consis-
experience that having too many people directly involved
tent image will improve visualization during the procedure.
will lead to a decreased amount of care because of an overall
Improved visualization will then lead to faster, safer, and
lack of accountability.
more accurate surgery. My experience has been that most
The proper maintenance of the endoscopy equipment
poor images on the monitor require a minor adjustment
should be the frst step in the learning process once endos-
to the equipment or a short stoppage in the procedure so
that adequate measures can be taken to correct the prob-
ment is being made with better quality all of the time, it still
lem. Experienced technicians will be able to recognize these
consists of telescopes, fiber optics, and small surgical instru-
 problems and correct them on their own in a timely manner
mentation. This equipment is constantly being exposed to
 so that the procedure can continue. Avoiding frustration is
bodily fluids, surgical cleaners, and a variety of sterilization
a huge help in shortening the learning curve and making
 processes. The technician in charge of the endoscopy equip-
 endoscopy successful in the veterinary practice.
ment needs to realize the importance of appropriate clean-
ers, duration of exposure, and packaging of the equipment.
■ MARKETING
 Once a fnancial commitment has been made to endoscopy,
 the realization is that much of this equipment can be made
Marketing a new service such as endoscopy is as important
to last for years with proper care. The longer this equipment
as any other part of the practice. The ultimate goal is making
lasts, the more the average cost per procedure will go down
 current and potential clients aware that endoscopy is now
and the more the proft per procedure will go up. The suc-
being offered as a part of routine veterinary care. The ques-
cess of endoscopy from a business standpoint is based on
tion inevitably becomes to whom and where should the new
not only the number of procedures performed but also the
service be marketed. There are many outlets that can be used
length of time the equipment lasts. I recommend to each
to advertise your clinic and the services that are provided.
clinic with which I consult that they have their primary tech-
Advertising in print media, on the Internet, and on televi-
nician go through a lecture or course so that the technician is
 sion is an option, but the first and most important advertis-
 prepared for the very first minimally invasive procedure that
ing decision that should be made is to thoroughly educate
the clinic performs.
the staff about the minimall invasive procedures that the
 Every animal hospital has a different surgical room.
hospital will perform.
These surgical suites can vary in both size and shape. The
There is not an advertising source that can better reach
chosen technician will have an important role in setting up
clientele than those who are in contact with them everyday:
the room before each procedure. One of the keys to being
the staff Before a clinic begins endoscopy, I believe that
 a good endoscopist and maximizing efficiency is a consis-
there should be a staff meeting. This meeting should cover
 tent placement of equipment and a systematic approach to
the procedures that will be performed and the benefits that
each surgical placement. One guarantee that can be made is
that there will be a tremendous increase in both the num-
formed. One important realization is that although most
ber of wires and the amount of equipment in the surgery
of the staff does not have the training and education that
room. Issues such as surgical sterility, safety, and equipment
the veterinarian possesses, many of them are pet owners
protection all must be taken into account. The endoscopy
 and pet lovers. The technicalities of the procedure may not
technician will play an integral role in keeping the surgery
be completely understood, but the benefit and advantages
room in a neat and orderly fashion. This should not be taken
to the animals are well understood. The staff will become
for granted. Many procedures involve a potential change in
extremely proud to be associated with a facility that offers
table side for the surgeon, so the ability to move in a safe
minimally invasive procedures. They are adamant that the
 and sterile manner is important. The technician must also
best care be given to their pets as well as the client's pets. If
be familiar with each procedure so that factors like moni-
they are educated about the procedures and have these pro-
tor placement and table position can be taken into account.
cedures done on their animals, then their enthusiasm will
Endoscopy becomes much more diffcult when the surgeon
 spill over to the clients walking in through the front door.
must look backward over his or her shoulder or does not
It is inevitably the responsibility of the surgeon to provide
have the ability to tilt the patient into the proper orientation.
the exact details ofthe procedure to the owners, as well as the
The other decision that I made when I began doing mini-
risks and the benefits of each procedure. Fortunately, many
mally invasive surgery was that I was going to have my tech-
owners have already made the decision to have a minimally
 nician assist and scrub for each surgery. I think it is obvious
invasive procedure done because of the interactions with the
that having the same assistant for each and every procedure
front desk staff and the technicians. The staff members have
can only be helpful, but the degree to which it benefits the
told stories of their pets having an endoscopic procedure and
patient cannot be understated. Having a natural flow to
the fulfillment experienced by other clients who have had the
each procedure improves surgical times and safety for the
same done for their pets. Even though the veterinarian is the
 pet. After numerous repetitions of the same procedure, the
person performing the surgery, many clients feel it is more
658■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
important to receive reassurance and confidence in their
in an excellent image capturing system at the onset of the
choice from someone who has had to make that decision and
endoscopic practice will be invaluable as it relates to overall
 gone through the procedure already.
 client happiness and satisfaction.
The other most important way to promote endoscopy
in the veterinary practice is to get out in the animal com-
■ PRICING AND PROFITABILITY
munity. Endoscopy is quickly catching on, but veterinarians
who are not performing endoscopy are not as likely to dis-
No matter how convinced veterinaria ns are about the poten-
cuss it and almost certainly will not promote the fact that
tial success of endoscopy within their practice, the bottom
another practice is performing it. I have found that the driv.
line is being able to convince the practice owners or partners
ing force in increasing endoscopy popularity is the clients
that any purchase of this magnitude can be profitable for the
who are curious about it and want a better surgery for their
clinic. Once the decision has been made to perform mini-
pets. These are the people with whom to communicate. Each
 pd q s d e sd as 
year my practice rents a booth at the local dog show, and we
 spend anywhere from $25,000 to $70,000 or more depend-
 display an entire presentation on endoscopy. The response
 ing on the types of setup and procedures with which a clinic
is overwhelming, and we frequently receive many new cli-
wishes to begin. When presenting a business plan for endos-
ents who often drive a hundred miles or more just to have a
 copy to the owners, the veterinarian should be confident that
minimally invasive procedure done for their pets. The word
-uaod e ose inq aqed aoaq auo jou Tm adossoua
of mouth that also occurs is extremely beneficial. I often
tial cornerstone of the practice.
talk to multiple prospective clients after the show whom I
Throughout the country, each geographic region tends
have never met before but who have heard of our services
to differ on average prices for veterinary care. This is cer-
through friends.
tainly no different when it comes to endoscopy. There are
I also believe that donating an hour of time to the local
some basic rules that, in my opinion, each practice should
dog clubs is extremely rewarding to your practice. In each
take into consideration when setting their price list for endo-
community there are a number of breed groups, training
scopic procedures. The first thing to consider is the pure
organizations, and humane organizations that are often try-
i oi i   ad i a a jo iso
ing to find speakers for their monthly meetings. It still amazes
in regard to covering the price of the equipment. A general
sid go mos aps e o posan m snoe a moq a
rule that is very achievable is for each practice to pay off the
and procedures that are currently being done endoscopi-
equipment in 1 to 2 years. Many practices will implement an
cally. These groups have members of all different levels of
automatic fee for the endoscopic operating room of $200 to
 animal experience, but all tend to be thoroughly impressed
$250 in addition to any other procedural costs. Remember,
 after learning that many procedures once thought to be only
there is no reason that a practice should not be performing
 available to humans are now available to their pets.
at least three to five endoscopic procedures per week, even
 at the start of their endoscopy practice. This number alone
■ UTILIZING YOUR IMAGE CAPTURING
will generate $600 to $1000 weekly even if only the operating
SYSTEM
room fee is considered.
The second factor in determining the pricing is not sell-
The old saying that a picture is worth a thousand words could
 ing yourself short when pricing the procedures. The clinic or
not apply more to endoscopy. There is no doubt in my mind
 hospital has invested significant dollars in both the equip-
that the ability to show pictures of a patient's procedure will
 ment and the training of the doctors who are performing
help in the owner's understanding of the procedure, relieve
the procedures. The clinic has now provided a service that
 concerns about any procedure done, and also justify the cost
increases the demand because the “supply" of practices
of the procedure. I believe that just because owners pay their
 performing each of these procedures is minimal. The clinic
bills and take their pets home does not always mean that they
may be one of the few if not the only practice in the area
were happy or had a complete understanding of what was
that is performing minimally invasive procedures. There is
done. Having the ability to meet with clients in the examina-
 definite value in this. Unfortunately, there are still too many
tion room and go over the pictures that were taken during
practices that equip themselves for endoscopy but find it to
the surgery will go a long way in satisfying the owners' curi-
be unsuccessful financially because they are underpricing
osity and make them feel that the surgery not only needed
themselves. Remember, motivated, advanced practices will
to be done but was also done in the best possible way. Five
attract motivated clients who appreciate and search for this
minutes in the examination room before the discharge of the
type of quality medicine. These are the people who will sup-
patient can be the difference between having a client for life
port the endoscopic practice and make it the success it can
and having a client for just one procedure. The investment
and should be.
24
CHAPTER
New Technologies on the Horizon
Lynetta Freeman
dvances in diagnostic imaging and testing have enabled
 resolution of cells below the tissue surface and investigation
earlier and more specific detection of diseases in animals.
 of tissue properties such as blood flow or oxygen concentra-
These changes, along with the revolution in minimally inva-
tion. These new technologies can now identify abnormal or
sive surgery in humans, have encouraged the use of less inva-
dysplastic cells that have the potential for future malignant
sive procedures in animals. Widespread adoption of these
transformation. This field is an entirely new area of medicine
techniques in veterinary medicine has lagged behind human
beyond the scope of this chapter, and interested readers are
medicine and surgery. The potential future of endoscopy in
 encouraged to pursue current reviews of literature on these
veterinary medicine is discussed with exploration of new tech-
topics.1
nologies and the study of adoption patterns from human med-
icine. These new technologies are current as of this textbook
■ TRANSITION TO THERAPEUTIC
preparation, but newer technologies will be introduced and
PROCEDURES
should be considered for adoption into veterinary medicine.
Several factors in human medicine have enabled a transi-
■ IMPROVED DIAGNOSIS
tion from diagnostic to therapeutic endoscopy. Screen-
ing colonoscopy is the most frequently performed clinical
Two practice pattern trends from the past decade in human
gastroenterology and surgery emerge: (1) an improvement in
risk individuals and all people older than age 50 years to
diagnosis and (2) a transition from diagnostic to therapeu-
aid in early detection of colonic carcinoma. Identification
tic procedures. Early diagnosis of gastrointestinal disease is
 and treatment of early stage lesions have reduced the risk of
evolving as technology is improving. Today, high-definition
death from colon cancer. Benign polyps are removed with
video endoscopes provide significantly better image qual-
an electrocautery snare. In selected cases, endoscopic sub-
ity and contain working channels for introduction of novel
mucosal resection of suspected malignant lesions is now
devices that permit biopsy, retrieval of foreign bodies, and
-e jo r san u aq pd 
other advanced procedures. Recently, the PillCam (Given
ologists. Using a flexible endoscope in submucosal dissec-
Imaging, Yogneam, Israel) was introduced as a capsule con-
tion, gastroenterologists perform an en bloc resection of
taining a camera and light source that captures images as the
mucosal lesions suggestive of cancer, sparing patients the
pill moves through the intestinal tract. The patient requires
morbidity of an invasive surgical procedure.2 The procedure
no sedation, swallows the pill, and, over the next few hours,
was frst performed on upper gastrointestinal tract lesions
 images are wirelessly downloaded to a receiver and then to a
by gastroenterologists in Japan, where gastric cancer is quite
computer program that makes the images available for inter-
prevalent. A number of new tools and techniques have
 pretation by a gastroenterologist. The technology is now in
been developed to enable these procedures to be performed
its second iteration, having a camera and light source at each
 safely with less risk of perforation. Therapeutic endoscopes
end of the pill so that numerous images are captured as the
contain dual working channels for simultaneous introduc-
pill tumbles through the intestinal tract.
tion of two devices, such as a snare and a grasping forceps.
New imaging modalities such as tissue spectroscopy and
A recent development by Olympus is the R-scope3 (Olympus
confocal microscopy are being applied to cellular surfaces
America, Center Valley, Pa.).
with endoscopic techniques and provide innovative diagnos-
Evaluation of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is
tic information to enable three-dimensional, high-quality
the most common reason that Americans undergo upper
659
660■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
gastrointestinal endoscopy. The condition is manifested
clinically by heartburn and is usually treated with antacids,
lifestyle modifcation, and proton pump inhibitor drugs to
 reduce acid production. Prevention of acid reflux is impor-
tant because the chronic reflux can lead to dysplastic changes
in the distal esophagus, known as Barrett's esophagus, a pre-
malignant condition that can progress to esophageal adeno-
carcinoma. Only patients with refractory GERD or those
with a severe hiatal hernia are referred to undergo a surgi-
cal procedure. The most commonly performed procedure,
laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication, creates a gastric wrap
around the distal esophagus to prevent reflux. Several new
devices have been developed and introduced into clinical tri-
als, aimed at addressing the incompetent gastroesophageal
Hgure 24-1 Tri-Clip endoscopic clipping device. A three-pronged
sphincter mechanism. The Stretta procedure, developed by
device is useful for clipping small bleeding vessels, including
 Curon Medical (Fremont, Calif), used radiofrequency (RF)
energy delivered on the outside of a basket-like device on
the end of a flexible endoscope. The RF energy was intended
to cause controlled scarring of the tissue around the gastro-
64 patients. A second generation device is in development.
 esophageal (GE) junction but was abandoned because of an
Surgeons used endoscopic suturing devices to narrow the
gastrojejunostomy site in gastric bypass patients that gained
ing the procedure. Endoscopic injection of bulking agents,
weight after bypass surgery.6 A sleeve stapling device devel-
such as hydrogels or inactive polymers, in and around the
oped by Satiety, Inc. (Palo Alto, Calif.)7 and the Stoma-
GE junction has also been investigated and abandoned.
phyX device by EndoGastric Solutions (Seattle, Wash.) that
A number of companies have introduced systems for plicat-
 applies polypropylene fasteners in the stomach are currently
ing the tissue around the GE junction with sutures or fas-
being evaluated in clinical trials.8 These endoscopic device
 tening devices. One of these, the Bard EndoCinch Suturing
 innovations have enabled surgeons and gastroenterologists
 System (CR Bard, Murray Hill, N.Y.) is currently still being
 to expand their delivery of therapeutic endoscopy.
sold. The company is involved in a clinical trial with a new
 The most significant move toward therapeutic endoscopy
suturing system, the RESTORe Suturing System, which is
occurred with the introduction of natural orifice translu-
targeted at creating a sutured gastropexy for weight reduc-
menal endoscopic surgery (NOTES). The feld has rapidly
tion in obese patients.4 All of these device developments
expanded with more than 200 citations in PubMed during
were targeted as therapeutic procedures.
the past 4 years. These procedures use a natural orifice (e.g--
 Human gastroenterologists frequently must address gas-
 stomach, vagina, bladder, bowel, or esophagus) to introduce
trointestinal bleeding. The two primary sources are esopha-
 a flexible endoscope into a body cavity and perform proce-
geal varices and gastrointestinal ulcers. Esophageal varices are
dures under endoscopic visualization. The first laparoscopic
dilated submucosal blood vessels that form as a result of por-
procedure was technically a natural orifice procedure. First
tal hypertension, usually as a result of hepatic cirrhosis. When
 described in 1901, George Kelling of Dresden, Germany,
the vessels erode, significant bleeding occurs. Esophageal
introduced a cystoscope through the bladder into the abdom-
varices are treated by injection of materials to cause scarring
 inal cavity of a dog and advocated insufflation as a theoreti-
(sclerotherapy) or by placement of ligating bands around the
cal means of controlling bleeding.° In 2004, Anthony Kalloo
dilated or bleeding vessels. Bleeding from gastrointestinal
 and his collaborators in the Apollo group introduced a tech-
ulcers is usually addressed by application of electrocautery or
nique for creating access to the abdominal cavity through the
endoscopic clips to stop acute active bleeding and administra-
 stomach in pigs.i0 The technique rapidly expanded to other
tion of proton pump inhibitors for long-term management.
investigators and procedures. Exploration of the abdomi-
 Several companies have introduced endoscopic clip appli-
nal cavity, liver biopsy, fallopian tube ligation, lymph node
ers. The Tri-Clip endoscopic clipping device (Cook Medical,
biopsy, cholecystectomy, and splenectomy were developed in
 Bloomington, Ind.) is currently available (Figure 24-1).
animal models.l-17 Urologists are exploring the application
Just after expansion of therapeutic procedures, creative
of NOTES for performing nephrectomy procedures through
 gastroenterologists and surgeons began to explore the fea-
a transvaginal approach.i8 An esophageal approach is being
sibility of intralumenal treatment of obesity. The Garren-
investigated as an access means for NOTES procedures in the
Edwards gastric bubble was introduced in the late 1980s and
thoracic cavity. 19 We have recently demonstrated the feasibil-
subsequently withdrawn from the market because of com-
ity of performing transgastric ovariectomy in dogs.20
 plications of deflation and small bowel obstruction. Fogel
Anticipating that the NOTES techniques might spread
et al5 used the Bard EndoCinch to create a sutured endoscopic
in an uncontrolled manner, two human societies, the Soci-
 gastroplasty procedure, which was evaluated and reported in
 ety of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons
CHAPTER 24New Technologies on the Horizon· 661
(SAGES) and American Society for Gastrointestinal Endos-
copy (ASGE), representing the surgeons and the gastroen-
BOX 24-1
terologists, convened a meeting in 2005 to discuss the topic
and propose guidelines for technology evaluation. The col-
Endoscopic Supplies for NOTES Procedures
laborative group, known as Natural Orifice Surgery Consor-
tium for Advancement and Research (NOSCAR), provides
Flexible therapeutic gastrointestinal videoscope (Olyrm-
oversight for conducting research and evaluating these pro-
pus GIF 2T-160; Olympus America Inc., Center Valley.
Pa.)
cedures through meetings and discussion of issues, publica-
Video system center and monitor (Olympus CV-160;
tion of white papers, and funding of research in this area.21,22
Olympus America Inc., Center Valley. Pa.)
Because NOTES procedures are anticipated to be the next
Endostat Il electrosurgical generator (Boston Scientific
revolution in endoscopic surgery, a general description of
Corporation, Natick, Mass.)
the procedure follows. In addition, several recent review
Overtube (US Endoscopy. Mentor, Ohio)
articles are available.23,24
16G intravenous catheter
0.035-inch/450-cm guidewire (Hydra Jagwire; Boston
Scientific Corporation, Natick, Mass.)
■ NOTES PROCEDURE DESCRIPTION
Hexagonal snare (AcuSnare; Cook Medical Inc, Bloom-
ington, Ind.)
 Preoperative Preparation
Needle knife (Huibregtse Triple Lumen Needle Knife:
Cook Medical Inc, Bloomington, Ind.)
Before NOTES approaches can be considered, the necessary
 Endoscopic balloon dilator (CRE Esophageal/Colonic
equipment and supplies must be assembled (Box 24-1). A
Wire-Guided Balloon; Boston Scientific Corporation,
smoothly functioning team consisting of a surgeon, a gas-
Natick, Mass.)
troenterologist, and technical support personnel, includ-
Endoscopic scissors (Olympus Endoscopy. Center Valley.
ing an anesthetist and a circulating nurse, is required. The
Pa.)
gastroenterologist performs the endoscopic procedure, and
 Endoscopic grasping forceps (Polygrab Tripod; Olympus
the surgeon manipulates devices inside the abdominal cav-
 Endoscopy. Center Valley. Pa.)
ity. Equipment used in NOTES procedures should be sterile
Prototype T-fastener device (Cook Medical Inc, Bloom-
(Figure 24-2). An overtube (US Endoscopy, Mentor, Ohio)
ington, lnd.)
is used to reduce the risk of oral contamination and facili-
tates repeated esophageal intubation. Perioperative antibi-
 NOTEs, Natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery.
otics are administered preoperatively and repeated every 2
hours during anesthesia (cefazolin, 22 mg/kg IV). The abdo-
men is aseptically prepared, and a laparotomy pack is avail-
able if the procedure must be converted to a laparotomy.
Equipment Setup
After anesthesia and positioning of the animal in dorsal
recumbency on a tilting table, the monitor is positioned so
that the gastroenterologist and the surgeon stand on the ani-
mal's leff side and can easily view the monitor. A vacuum
source is established, and an electrocautery unit is placed
on the bottom of the endoscopy tower. A therapeutic (dual-
channel) flxible endoscope, Olympus GIF 2T-160 video
 outside diameter of the scope is 12.8 mm, and the working
Hgure 24-2 Photograph of natural orifice translumenal
channels allow simultaneous insertion of 2.8- and 3.5-mm
endoscopic surgery (NOTES) ovariectomy procedure being
devices. A digital recorder is used to capture videos, which
performed in an anesthetized dog. The gastroenterologist wears
 can be downloaded to a computer for video editing.
Examination gloves and manipulates the endoscope. The surgeon
Air insufflation through the video endoscope is controlled
wears sterile attire in an attempt to minimize contamination of the
 by the endoscopist. Abdominal distension is monitored so
abdominal cavity during the procedure.
that hemodynamic compromise does not occur because of
overdistension. Alternatively, traditional pressure-regulated
Gastric Preparation and Abdominal Access
laparoscopic automatic insufflators can be used to instill
 CO through an 16G percutaneously placed catheter. Pres-
After the animal has undergone a 12- to 24-hour fast and
sures are kept below 14 mm Hg, similar to that for animals
general anesthesia, upper endoscopy is performed to
undergoing laparoscopy.
examine the stomach and ensure that there is no gastric
662■PART TWORigid Endoscopy
pathologic condition and no residual food particles. If so,
Gastric Closure
the stomach is lavaged with sterile water until clear, then
cefazolin (1 g in 200 mL normal saline) is instilled and left in
Visceral closure is one of the most critical steps in ensuring
the stomach for 10 to 20 minutes. The antimicrobial solu-
that there is no continuing leakage from the stomach after
tion is aspirated, and after gastric inflation, a site for the gas-
the procedure. The InScope Tissue Apposition System (Ethi-
trotomy is chosen on the left side of the stomach, close to
con Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, Ohio) and the Cook Medi-
the greater curvature.
 cal prototype system both utilize T-fastener systems ( Figure
Like percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube
24-5). A size 2-0 nylon suture is swaged to the center of a
placement, a large hexagonal snare (AcuSnare; Cook Medi-
1-cm hollow needle, and the needle is loaded into a delivery
cal Inc. Bloomington, Ind.) is passed through the working
device for passage down the working channel of the endo-
channel of the endoscope. After gastric indentation, an 16G
scope. The needle is advanced into tissue, and the T-fastener
catheter is inserted percutaneously into the stomach, and a
is deployed in tissue. Pairs of T-fasteners are deployed, and
guidewire (0.035-inch/450-cm Hydra Jagwire, Boston Sci-
the sutures are secured with special clips to close the gastric
entific Corporation, Natick, Mass.) is introduced through
incision (Figure 24-6).
the catheter into the stomach and grasped with the snare
(Figure 24-3). An endoscopic balloon dilator (CRE Esopha-
■ BENEFITS AND RISKS
geal/Colonic Wire-Guided Balloon, Boston Scientific Cor-
poration, Natick, Mass.) is then passed over the guidewire
Potential benefits of “scarless surgery" are that NOTES
down the working channel of the endoscope to traverse the
 approaches may be associated with less pain and less impact
stomach wall. The balloon is inflated to 6 atmospheres pres-
on the immune system. The initial human studies seem
sure and dilates the gastrotomy to 20 mm. As the balloon is
to indicate that patients required relatively litle postop-
 deflated, the endoscope and balloon are passed through the 
erative analgesia.25 Several investigators have performed
gastrotomy into the peritoneal cavity. Insufflation creates an
 optical space for viewing the abdominal structures.
Orientation, Tissue Manipulation, and Extraction
Each instrument introduced into its respective working
channel functions only in coaxial alignment with the end
of the endoscope as the endoscope is rotated and the tip
flexed to obtain visualization of internal structures. Tissue
 handling is achieved with three-pronged grasping forceps
(Figure 24-4). As with laparoscopy, changes in position
enable gravity forces to provide effective retraction. During
tissue specimen retrieval, it is essential to have a firm grasp
on the structure being removed because if dropped, it can be
nearly impossible to locate.
Figure 24-4 Endoscopic grasping forceps with three prongs.
Skin
 Adipose tissue
Muscle
 Peritoneum
Stomach
Figure 24-3 Illustration of the percutaneous endoscopic
gastrostomy (PEG) technique for percutaneous introduction
Hgure 24-5 T-fasteners consist of an element with a suture
of a guidewire into the gastric lumen.
swaged to the center.
CHAPTER 24New Technologies on the Horizon· 663
comparative studies of pain and postoperative stress with
Final Caveats
NOTES, open, and laparoscopic procedures in animals26-28
Early evidence is conflicting; however, it appears that both
NOTES is still considered an experimental procedure. Just
NOTES and laparoscopic procedures result in less pain than
as there were challenges with early implementation of lapa-
 open approaches. If the procedures do prove to be less pain-
roscopy, there are a number of issues related to performance
ful, physicians speculate that NOTES may eliminate the need
of surgery with the use of the NOTES approach (Table
for general anesthesia and could potentially change the site
24-1). There is a potential for infection when a contami-
of care from operating rooms to intensive care units or bat-
nated natural orifice is penetrated; however, with the use
tlefield situations.29
 of protocols developed to date, infection does not appear
Figure 24-6 A, The sutures from a pair of T-fasteners are secured with a special clip. B, The suture is held between an outer collar and an
inner plug.
Table 24-1 Comparison of Laparoscopic and NoTES Approaches for Surgery
Technique
Laparoscopy
NOTES
adoosopua
Rigid laparoscope (5 mm and 10 mm)
Fexible endoscope (12.8-mm outer diameter)
Secondary access
Additional 5-rmm ports
 2.7- and 3.2-mm working channels 
Working platform
Stable platform using the body wall 
 Unstable platform using the flexible endoscope 
Approach to operative site
Triangulation
Instruments
Wide selection of rigid 5-mm and 10-mm
Limited selection of flexible endoscopic instruments
 instruments
Energy modalities
Wide selection of monopolar and bipolar
 Monopolar and bipolar snares and probes; cutting
electrocoagulation end-effectors; ultrasonic
 and sealing devices in development
energy
Insufflation
 Pressure-regulated CO2 insufflation through
Air through the endoscope is not pressure regulated
 stopcock on trocars
Visual field
Wide
Limited 
Light
Bright
 Dark unless close to object
Orientation
 Landscape easily changed by adjusting camera
Landscape cannot be dhanged, except by rotating
entire scope
Alignment
Laparoscope aligned with rnonitor for direct
 Flexible endoscope is easily retroflexed, giving images
image
that are upside down and backward
Sterilization
Skin sites are prepared
Hollow viscus is decontarminated
Manipulation 
Independent movement of laparoscope and 
Coaxial movement of instruments only, tied to
working ports
endoscope
Tissue closure
Wide variety of endoscopic stapling and
Limited availability of suturing devices
suturing equipment; ability for manual
Stapling devices not available
aparoscopic suturing
 NOTES, Natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery.
664·PART TWORigid Endoscopy
to be a significant clinical concern. The biggest challenge is
of users must also be demonstrated. In the current set-
the use of existing instrumentation. Pressure-regulated CO2
ting, implementation of NOTES procedures requires a
insufflation through the endoscope is not available. Viewed
cross-functional team of surgeons, gastroenterologists,
images may be upside down and backward, depending on
 and veterinarians to develop the animal models and per-
the scope orientation, which makes navigation more dif-
form the studies in a way that the results can be trans-
fcult. Coaxial instrument alignment prohibits triangula-
lated to human clinical trials. Although many patients are
tion, and none of the current endoscopic instruments are as
 attracted to the idea of surgery without scars, considerable
robust as laparoscopic equipment.
evidence must be obtained to show that these techniques
doisod u seeiueape anil e io osie inq aes Auo jou ane
■ CONCLUSION
erative recovery.
NOTES feasibility has been demonstrated in animal and
preliminary human clinical studies, but the safety and effi-
REFERENCES
1. Anandasabapathy S: Endoscopic imaging: emerging optical
12. Kantsevoy SV, Jagannath SB, Niiyama H, et al: Endoscopic
 techniques for the detection of colorectal neoplasia, Curr Opin
gastrojejunostomy with survival in a porcine model,
Gastroenterol 24(1):64-69, 2008.
Gastrointest Endosc 62:287-292, 2005.
2. Tanaka S、 Oka S、 Chayama K: Colorectal endoscopic
13. Fritscher-Ravens A, Mosse CA, Ikeda K, et al: Endoscopic
 submucosal dissection: present status and future perspective.
transgastric lymphadenectomy by using EUS for selection and
including its  differentiation
from endoscopic mucosal
guidance, Gastrointest Endosc 63:307-312, 2006.
resection, / Gastroenterol 43(9):641-651, 2008.
14. Pai RD, Fong DG, Bundga ME, et al: Transcolonic endoscopic
3. Sumiyama K, Gostout CJ、 Rajan E、 et al: Transgastric
cholecystectomy: a NOTES survival study in a porcine model 
cholecystectomy: transgastric accessibility to the gallbladder
[with video], Gastrointest Endosc 64:428-434, 2006.
 improved with the SEMF method and a novel multibending
15. Rolanda C、 Lima E,Pego JM、 et al: Third-generation
therapeutic endoscope、 Gastrointest Endosc 65:1028-1034,
cholecystectomy by natural orifices: transgastric and
2007.
transvesical combined approach [with video]、 Gastrointest
4. Bard CR: Transoral gastric volume reduction as an intervention
Endosc 65:111-117, 2007.
for weight management (TRIM), ClinicalTrial.gov. Available
16. Kantsevoy SV,Hu B、 Jagannath SB、et al: Transgastric
online: http://www.clinicaltrial.gov/ct2/show/NCT006798. Ac-
endoscopic splenectomy: is it possible? Surg Endosc 20:
cessed February 8, 2009.
522-525,2006.
5. Fogel R, De Fogel J, Bonilla Y,et al: Clinical experience of
17. Rattner D, Kalloo A: ASGE/SAGES Working Group on natural
transoral suturing for an endoluminal vertical gastroplasty:
orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery, Surg Endosc 20:
1-year follow-up in 64 patients, Gastrointest Endosc 68(1):
329-333,2006.
51-58,2008.
18. Raman JD, Bergs RA, Fernandez R et al: Complete transvaginal 
6. Thompson CC,Slattery J, Bundga ME,et al: Peroral endoscopic
NOTES nephrectomy using magnetically anchored instru-
reduction of dilated gastrojejunal anastomosis after roux-en-Y
mentation, J Endourol 23:367-371, 2009.
iam m suad i u mau assd e ssq s
19. Woodward T, McCluskey D 3rd, Wallace MB,et al: Pilot study of
regain, Surg Endosc 20(11):1744-1748, 2006.
transesophageal endoscopic surgery: NOTES esophagomyotomy,
7. Deviere J, Ojeda Valdes G, Cuevas Herrera L, et al: Safety.
vagotomy, lymphadenectomy. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A
feasibility and weight loss after transoral gastroplasty: first
18(5):743-745, 2008.
human multicenter study, Surg Endosc 22:589-598, 2008.
 20. Freeman LJ, Rahmani EY, Sherman S, et al: Oophorectomy
8. Overcash WT: Natural orifice surgery (NOS) using StomaphyX
via natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES):
for repair of gastric leaks after bariatric revisions, Obes Surg
feasibility study in dogs. Gastrointest Endosc 69:1321-1322, 2009.
18(7):882-885, 2008.
21. Rattner DW、 Hawes R: What is NOSCAR? Surg Endosc
9. Gandsas A: The history of laparoscopy, Laparoscopy.com:
21:1045-1046, 2007.
 Available online: http://www.laparoscopy.com/shows/lapstry4
22. Hawes RH: Transition from laboratory to clinical practice
.htm. Accessed February 8, 2009.
in NOTES: role of NOSCAR, Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am
10. Kalloo AN, Singh VK, Jagannath SB,et al: Flexible transgastric
18(2):333-341, 2008.
adeiaut pue sisouseip ol yoeoidde aaou e :dorsoauoiuad
23. Willingham F, Bruge WR, Taking NOTES: translumenal
interventions in the peritoneal cavity, Gastrointest Endosc
flexible endoscopy and endoscopic surgery, Curr Opin
60:114-117,2004.
Gastroenterol 23(5):550-555, 2007.
11. Jagannath SB、 Kantesevoy SV, Vaughn CA, et al: Peroral
24. Flora ED, Wilson TG, Martin IJ,et al: A review of natural orifice
transgastric endoscopic 
ligation of fallopian tubes with
translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) for intra-abdominal
long-term survival in a porcine model, Gastrointest Endosc
surgery: experimental models, techniques, and applicability to
61(3):449-453, 2005.
the clinical setting, Ann Surg 247(4):583-602, 2008.
CHAPTER 24 New Technologies on the Horizon · 665
25. Zorron R, Maggioni LC, Pombo L, et al: NOTES transvaginal
28. Freeman LJ, Rahmani EY, Al-Haddad M, et al: Comparison
cholecystectomy: preliminary clinical application, Surg Endosc
of pain and postoperative stress in dogs undergoing natural
22(2):542-547, 2008.
 orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery, laparoscopic、 or
26. McGee MF,Schomisch SJ, Marks JM, et al: Late phase TNF-
open bilateral oophorectomy, Gastrointest Endosc 72:373-380,
alpha depression in natural orifice translumenal endoscopic
2010.
surgery (NOTES) peritoneoscopy, Surgery 143:318-328, 2008.
 29. Pearl JP, Ponsky JL: Natural orifice translumenal endoscopic
27. Bingener J, Krishnegowda NK, Michalek JE: Immunologic
surgery: a critical review, / Gastrointest Surg 12(7):1293-1300,
e un Adosodel ym paeduos saion unp siaaueed
2008.
randomized blinded porcine trial, Surg Endosc 23(1):178-181,
2009.
l-mm semirigid telescope, 0-degree
Adenomatous polyps
Anus, sessle plasmacytoma, 243f
 Australian shepherd, lumenal walls
viewing,510f
atlas, 238
Anzemet, usage, 253
(exudate),201f
1.7-mm biopsy forceps, 625f
presence, 306-307
Aorta, visualization, 492f
Automated, term (usage),393
1.9-mm telescope, 625f
retroflexed image, 238f
Aortic arch,development,56f
Automatic exposure control, 16
2.7-mm telescope system,625f, 636f
Adrenal incidentaloma,461
Around the world exploration,413-414
Avian endoscopy, 633
handling, 627f
Adrenal mass capsule,grasping, 464f
Arterial pressure (decrease), positive
4.8-mm operating sheath, handling, 627f,
Advanced Dundee Endoscopic
pressure ventilation (impact),405
B
636t
Psychomotor Trainer (ADEPT), 394
Arthropump, flow rate/pressure
Babcock forceps, usage, 388f, 432-433
5F biopsy forceps, usage, 509f
Advanced endoscopic treatments,
regulation,20f
Ballndilatinrocedre sequential
 5F feeding tube, advancement, 325
laparoscopicequipment list,401b
Arthroscopes,1l1,608
endoscopic view, 75f
5-mm cannula, Hasson technique,
Advanced Television Systems Committee
nigidity,608
 Balloon dilators
408409
(ATSC),HDTV format adoption,18
usage, 608f
basis, 73-74
 5-mm endoscopic instruments
Aerostrogylusbstrusus,resence,353
video camera/control unit,608
sizes, 72f
operating ends,400f
Air insuflation
video capture equipment, 609
Ballon-Expandable Metallic Stents
trocar-cannulae,usage,402f
control, video endoscope (usage), 661
Arthroscopic fluid pump, 609f
(BEMS), 524-525
 5-mm laparoscopic Babcock forceps,
impact, 101
Arthroscopic power shaver/handpiece,
Balloon-tipped PEG-B tubes, infation,
usage, 440f
usage, 101
610f
317
5-mm oval biopsy forceps,usage, 424f
Airway appearance, 342-343
Arthroscopic rongeurs, usefulness, 610
BAL technique, usage,346f-347f
8F catheter, usage, 560
abnormality, 343-344
Arthroscopic surgery,607
Barium bolus,transport (stoppage),
10-mm Duval forceps, 400
Airway obliteration, scarring/mucus
fuid flow,609
87f-88f
12F feeding tube, advancement, 325
brmation, 354f
fluid management, 609
Barium contrast radiogram, usage, 57f
18G spinal needle, right lateral view, 419F
Alimentary tract, object passage, 246
patient contraindications, 607-608
Barium contrast radiography,
18-mm cystourethroscope,556f
Allergic rhinitis (inflammatory rhinitis),
patient indications, 607
completion, 43
29-cm cystourethroscope, 556f
574
performing, 609
Barium residue, atlas, 19l-192
33-mm cystourethroscope, 557f
chronic rhinitis, term
Arthroscopic technique,612-613
Bartels, Kenneth E., 373
360-degree examination, 413-414
(interchangeability), 574
Arthroscopy
Basal lamina propria, biopsy (depth),205f
980-nm diode quartz crystal hber, 375f
medical management, 574
care/problems, 621
Baseball held concept, application,
Alliance Infator II, 72f
complications, rarity, 620-621
407f408f
A
Alligator-jaw grasping forceps, 50f
follow-up monitoring,621
Baseline tests, usage, 29-30
Abdomen
All-in-one units, 17
intraoperative complications,
Basket-type grasping forceps, 51f
exploration
Analog video signals (transmission),
620621
 Basset hound, coloniclumen (annular
portal placement,447f
cables (usage), 17f
laser energy, 375-376
 adenocarcinoma), 240f
shunt identifcation, 447
Ancillary equipment, 32
performing, 612
Beagle,mucosal hemorrhages
insuflation,471-472
components,importance,34
Arytenoid cartilages
(scattering),234f
preparation/draping, 452
Anconeal process, 614
bilateral adduction, 336f
Bending section, 6
surgical exploration,413-414
Anesthesia-induced esophageal stricture,
evaluation, 332
Benign lymphocytic enteritis,
survey radiographs, 247
 balloon dilation, 76f
hxation, 336f
differentiation, 211
Abdominal access 661-662
Anesthesia-related esophagitis, 62
partial bilateral abduction, 336f
Benign obstructions, urethral ballon
Abdominal air sac, renal examination/
Angled telescopes, visual held options,
Arytenoid laryngeal cartilage, mass
dilation/metallic stenting, 544-546
biopsy, 640f
565F
(growth),338F
complications, 545-546
Abdominal cavity, carbon dioxide
Angulus
Ascarid infection, 210f
patient selection, 544
distension, 405
en face view, 102-103
Ascending colon
procedure, 544-545
Abdominal midline (lifting), sutures
focal gastric ulceration, 307f
air insufflation, 181
Benign stricture,esophageal obstruction,
(usage), 418f
tunnels, appearance, 105
leocolic sphincter, entry, 226-227
69
 Abdominal pressure, reduction, 410-41l,
visualization, 102
mucosal friability,increase, f
Biceps tendon, partial tear, 617f
416
Annular adenocarcinoma, 240f
multifocal ganglioneuroma,43f
Biceps tenosynovitis, 617-618
 Abdominal wall
Anorectal junction, retroflexed view, 229f
whipworms
Bichon Frise
needle placement, 421f
Anorexia, prolongation, 326
observation, 238
descending colon, diffuse nodular
stiffness, 418f
Antegrade guidewire technique, 323-324
presence,227f
lymphoma, 241f
transillumination,413f
Antegrade technique, 534-535
Ascending duodenum, 179
rectum, diffuse nodular lymphoma,
Abscesses laparoscopic evaluation,
Antegrade urethral catheterization,
curve, sequential views, 193f
241F
423424
546-547
junction, 193f
Bijon Friese, saccules (eversion/edema/
Accessory channels (drying), high-
complications, 547
open views, 188f
obstruction), 335f
pressure air gun (usage), 23f
procedure, 546-547
Ascites, presence, 422
Bilateral large nephroliths, 528f
Accessory endoscopic instruments, 403
Antegrade wire-free technique, 324
Aseptic surgery, principles (importance),
Bile aspiration,420
Accessry pancreatic duct, opening, 180
Antibiotic-responsive diarrhea (ARD),
401-402
Bile-stained froth,accumulation, 191f
Acid-induced esophagitis, 62
development, 305
Aspect ratio,18f
Biopsies
regurgitation/vomiting, observation,
Antral canal, endoscope (advancement),
Aspergilsfurmigtus,canine fungal
bleeding excess,concern,423
41
t01
hinitis, 573-574
collection, 223-224
Acquired adult-onset megaesophagus, 50
Antral peristaltic waves, observation, 105
Aspiration pneumonia, impact, 502
cups, 347
Activated partial thromboplastin
Antral-pyloric canal, examination, 97
Aspiration risk, decrease, 313
pinch forceps, inclusion, 296f
time (APTT), evaluation
Antral-pyloricjunction, retroversion,
Assembled trocar/cannula, 22f
imprints, collection, 301
(recommendation),420-421
107F
Assistant surgeon,monitor(usage),409f
instrument
Acute pancreatic disease, diagnosis 423
Antrum, 105
Atelectatic lung, spontaneous
guidewire usage, 107
Acute pyothorax, 505F
grasping, 432F
pmeumothorax (presence),488f
retraction, 107
Adaptive response generators,
object removal,282f-283f
Atypical hypoadrenocorticism, 97-98
performing, 105
conventional generators (contrast), 368f
Tupperware fragments, 278f
Australian shepherd, bilateral intramural
procedure, performing, 108
Adenocarcinoma, atlas, 239
view, 107108
ectopic ureters (presence),553f
Page numbers followed by findicate hgures; t, tables; b, boxes.
667
668■Index
Biopsies (Continued)
Bowel cleansing, low-volume hypertonic
Canine ileocecocolic junction, atlas, 197
Cardiomyopathy, 326
delicacy, 626
phosphate solutions (effectiveness),
Canine ileum
Cardiopulmonary status,monitoring
handling, 299-300
220
atlas, 197
(care), 108
placement, 300f
 Bowel wall,endoscope tip (direction), 183f
bind biopsy technique, 304f
Cardiovascular function, elevated
techniques, 485-488
Boxer
Canine inflammatory bowel disease
intraabdominal pressure (physiologic
usage, 347-348
colonic tissue,fluorescence in situ
antisera, application, 302
effects), 406t
video otoscopy, usage, 589
hybridization application, 302f
atlas, 200-201, 234
Caseated obstructive mucous, 576f
Biopsy-associated colonic perforation,
descending colon
Canine intestinal mast cell tumors,
Cathsh,coelioscopy/liverbiopsy, 645f
risk, 229
intraluminal hemorrhage, 236f
rarity, 308
Catheterized cervix, 560f
Biopsy forceps, 12f
multifocal ulcers, 236f
Canine intraepithelial lymphocytes,
Catheters, 297
advancement,110
superhcial ulcers, 236f
differences, 185
dehnition, 524-525
availability, 34
duodenum, diffuse lymphosarcoma,
Canine lobar bronchi, 350f
usage, 297
blind passage, 227f
212F
Canine lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis
Cats
cups, 34f
hematochezia, 302f
hyperplasia, 575f
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus,presence,
opening, 182f
histiocytic ulcerative colitis, 236, 302f
mucosal hyperplasia, 575f
353
effectiveness,44
PEG tube placement, 321f
polypoid mucosal hyperplasia, 575f
aldosterone-secreting tumors,
extension, 108-110
vocal fold granuloma, 337f
Canine meatus division, 569f
hypertensivity,462
hinge, 34f
Broad-based major duodenal papilla, 196f
Cainmixhagsmast
antegrade catheterization, 547f
Biopsy sample
Bronchial cytology,346f-347f
tumor), 91f
ascending colon
collection, 228-229
Bronchoalveolar lavage, 345-347
Canine nasal aspergillosis, 573f
appearance, 226f
fexible forceps, usage, 229f
Bronchodilators, usage, 341
fungal mats,574f
shortness, 199
digestion, 185
Bronchogenic adenocarcinoma, 359f
nasal planum depigmentation/
 blind ileum biopsy, 199f
handling/preparation, 112
Bronchoscopy
ulceration, 573f
chronic cholangitis
quality,importance, 185
contraindications,339
ulceration, 574f
gallbladder,view,425f
removal, 112f
endoscopist/patient position, 342f
Canine nasal chondrosarcoma,578f
liver view, 425f
wrapping, 112f
indications, 339
Canine nasal foreign body
pancreas, view,425f
Bipolar cautery,usefulness, 456
safety, 340
lcalsfissa
chronic diarrhea, mucosa
Bipolarelectrosurgical systems369370
 topical lidocaine,administration, 341
unilateral oculonasal discharge, 572f
(appearance), 204f
 specialization, 369
value, 339
Canine nasal neuroendocrine carcinoma,
colitis, 237
Bipolar sealing/cutting forceps,
Bronchospasm (induction),
578f
colon (biopsy sample collection),
development, 370
bronchoscopy (impact), 341
Canine nasal osteosarcoma, 578f
flexibleforceps（usage),229f
Birds, endoscopy procedures, 633
Brush cytology
Canine nasal respiratory epithelial
colonic lumen, intraluminal
biopsy technique, 634-637
helpfulness,229-230
adenocarcinoma, 578f
lymphoma, 241f
cystic lesion/abscess, presence, 637
specimens, collection, 297, 298f
Canine nasal tumor, transnares curettage
cystostomy tube placement,547f
instrumentation, 633
 Buccal mucosa bleeding time (BMBT),
debridement, 582f
duodenal lumen, tubular hairball
procedures, 633-637
evaluation (recommendation),
Canine nasal turbinate mucosa, 569f
(presence), 195f
Bitch, vaginoscopy/transcervical
420421
Canine open-mouth ventrodorsal view,
duodenal mucosa, problem, 204f
catheterization, 555
Buckle foreignbodies, presence,
566f
duodenal papilla, position, 195f
complications, 560-561
278f279f
Canine rhinoscopic image,572f
nuaponp
instrumentation, 555-557
Bull terrier (duodenum), irregular
Canine rostral nasal cavity, 569f
hair, presence, 195f
patient indications, 555
boreign object (string attachment),
Canine segmental bronchi, 350f
tissue, lifting, 183f
patient preparation, 557
292F
Canine severe chronic lympho-
endoscopic instruments,
procedure, 558-560
plasmacytic rhinitis, polypoid
recommendation, 400
restraint, 557558
C
masses, 575f
eosinophilic esophagitis, 64f
sample procurement, 560
Cables, usage (examples), 17f
Canine skeleton, left ear, 591f
esophageal strictures, 66
technique,559-560
Cairn terrier
Canine solid/acinar nasal
eversion, 335f
Bladder
 descending colon, multinodular
 adenocarcinoma, 578f
focalerosions,mcosaliregularityf
 calculi, removal, 520f
leiomyosarcoma, 242f
Canine three-dimensional computed
focal gastric erosion,biopsy, lllf
cranial traction, 444f
gastroesophageal junction,
tomographic reconstruction, 567f
functional adrenocortical tumors,461
examination, LAC (usage), 519f
leiomyoma,92F
Canine trachea
gallbladder, view,425F
outflow tract, examination, 518
Calculi removal
atlas, 350
gastricbody/antrum,facilitation,105
trigone, etopic ureter entry, 550
cystoscope/arthroscope, usage, 510f
bronchoscopic appearance, 350f
gastroscopy, endoscope position/
Bladderapex,screw trocar
cystoscopy, usage, 507
Canine tympanicbulla,endothelial
conhguration,109F
(usage), 543F
Camera control unit (CCU)
proliferation, 599f
hemorrhage
Blended electrosurgical waveforms, 366
capability, 15f
Canine tympanic membrane, 595f
biopsy samples, 205F
Blended energy, surgical preference, 366
connection, 15
anatomy, 590f
endoscope-induced mucosal
Blind biopsy technique, 183f, 304f, 570
electronics, 16
 Canine undifferentiated nasal spindle cell
trauma, 208f
 Blind ileum biopsy, 199f
Camera head
tumor, 579f
hiatal disorder,barium contrast
 Bluetick coonhound, whipworms
adapter, 15f
Canine upper small intestine, atlas, 187
esophagram, 87f88f
(presence),238f
CCD,impact, 16
Cannula (cannulae), 10-1l, 610 
hyperthyroidism, irregularity/hssures,
 BNC analog video format, 16
Camera sterility, 404f
advancement, 389f390f
205f
Body
Camera types, 16
appropriateness,400-401
lecolicjunction,elevation,199f
carbon dioxide removal,417
Campylobaterjejuni,305
assembly, 22f
ileocolic orihce, size, 174
motation, Tankersly table (usage),414f
Candidbica,impact,64
pint introduction, 612
ileum, biopsy forceps (blind passage),
Bones
Canine airway, appearance, 342-343
placement, puncture method, 12
227f
chips, 288f289f
abnormality,343-344
Cannula-induced hemorrhaging,
inflammatory bowel disease, 211
dislodging, 255
Canine bronchi, atlas,350
avoidance, 415
0-zos sameay siganos
approach,256
Canine chronic lymphoplasmacytic
Capsule,penetration (avoidance),465
intestinal lymphoma, lateral
difhculty, 255-256
nasopharyngitis/rhinitis, 572f
Carbon dioxide
abdominal radiograph, 248f
impingement site,256
Caninechronicasopharyngitis57f
distension, 405
intraluminal lymphoma, 241f
foreign body, presence, 264f-265f
Canine colonic biopsy specimens,
flow rate/pressure regulation,
laryngeal vault,endoscopy,331
impaction, 256
immunohistochemical stains, 303f
insuator( usage), 19f
movement, absence, 256
Canine computed tomographic image,
infusion, 410
lateral abdominal radiographs, 182f
removal, lodgment site, 268f-269f
571f
insufflation, 405f
lesions, etiology (uncertainty), 308
retrieval, 264f265f
Canine computed tomographic scan,
insuflator, recommendation, 19
liver, view,425F
Borzoi,congenital megaesophagus,53f
567f
laser
lymphocytic, plasmacytic enteritis
Canine cryptorchidism, 442
thermal spread, 371
(irregularity/hssures),205f
Bougienage,79-80
Canine ethmoid turbinate, 569f
lymphoplasmacytic enteritis,208f
sessions, median,7980
Canine/feline laryngoscopy, differences,
wavelength production, 373
mucosa, cobblestone appearance, 205f
Bougies, 79f
333
removal, 417
mucosal irregularity/friability, 206f
piling, 256
Canine fungal rhinitis, 573-574
wavelengths, laser light absorption
nasal discharge, causes, 565b
usage, 79
Canine gastroesophageal sphincter, 49f
coefhcient, 374f
otic steroid-antibiotic combination,
Bovie, William, 364-365
dosed position, 47f
Cardia, 50f
604
Index■669
Cats (Continued)
Cervix
Cleaning procedures, training, 20-22
Colonoscopy (Continued)
pancreas, view,425f
anatomy,555
Clickline,401-402
low-volume hypertonic phosphate
pediatric endoscope,advancement, 179
catheterization, 560f
Cloacoscopy,634
solutions, effectiveness, 220
polyp debridement, septum
manipulation, 559f
visualization,636f
patient preparation, 219-221
appearance, 604f
rosette appearance,558f
Closed cranial esophageal sphincter, 46f
performing,659
retroversion maneuver,103
Cheetah, gastroesophageal
Closed pylorus,negotiation, 106
01zaaad
nght ear canal, nasopharyngeal polyp,
intussusception, 88f
Qostridium perfringensenterotoxicosis,
restraint, 220-221
603F
chronic intermittent vomiting.
possibility,217
sedation,requirement, 220-221
rubber ball (removal),proximal
 accompaniment, 89f
Qostridium spp., 305
usage,consideration, 173174
jejunum (enterotomy), 291f
Chelonians, 648-651
Closure tissue forceps, 401
Companion animals, arthroscopic
saccular edema/eversion, 335f
coelioscopy,652f-653f
Clotting factors, liver production,
surgery, 607
sewing needle foreign body,274f
coelomic viscera, position/orientation,
420-421
Complete endoscopy systems, 10
smallintestinal mucosa, appearance,192
651f
Coagulating electrosurgical waveforms,
Complete lung lobectomy, 498
spaying reasons, 470
operating room layout/positioning,
366
Composite video, combination, 16
splenic flexure,225f
650f
Coagulating waveform,characteristic,
Concurrent mucositis, 63
stomach
renal examination, 654f
366F
Concurrent smallintestinal lymphoma,
pine needles,accumulation,288f
Chemical appetite stimulation,
Coagulopathies, diagnosis, 399
93f
ngid leather patch, presence,
comparison, 311
Cocker Spaniel
Concurrent ureteral stenting,528f
280f-281f
Chemically-induced erosive esophagitis,
ascending colon,mucosal friability
Congenital extrahepatic portosystemic
tracheobronchoscopy, 33l, 339
pseudomembrane formation, 63f
(increase), 231f
shunt,417
flexible/rigid instruments,
Chest radiographs,recommendation, 566
pylorus, radiograph,59f
Congenital hiatal hernia2
dimensions, 340t 
Chicken rib bone,esophageal presence
night cranial/middle lung lobes,
Congenital idiopathic megaesophagus, 50
transverse colon, characteristics, 25-226
(endoscopic view), 270f
dorsoventral thoracic radiograph,
Congenital megaesophagus, 51f
upper smallintestine, mucosal trauma,
Chinese Shar-Pei
355f
observation, 53f
209f
gastroestophagea intussusception,
Coelioscopy,634,641-642
Congestive heart failure, result, 356
ureteral stenting, 533
86f
2.7-mm telescope, usage, 638f
Constrictive pericarditis
vascular ring anomaly, 55
hiatal hernia, 84f
davicular approach, 634
impact, 487
ventrodorsal abdominal radiographs,
lateral thoracic radiograph, 86f
left approach, 634
subtotal pericardectomy, usage,
182f
periesophageal mass 94f
reptiles, 646-651
491492
ventrodorsal radiograph, barium
pigmented caudal esophagus,49f
right approach,634
Contact diode laser, heat generation, 375
enema (usage), 219f
stomach/spleen/duodenum,
ventral approach, 634
Contact quality monitoring (CQM)
Caudal cruciateligaments
displacement, 85f
Coelomic viscera,position/rientation,
circuity, usage, 367
arthroscopic viewing, 619f
triple esophageal stricture, 68f
651f
Continuousrate infusion (CRI) feeding
inspection/debridement,619-620
Cholecystocentesis421f
Cognitive, term (usage), 393
hospitalization/nursing requirements,
Caudal esophageal infammation, 60
Chrominance, 16
Coherent bundles, 8
327
Caudal esophagus
Chromogranin, 302
Coherent hber bundles, 8f
necessity, 313-314
erythematous mucosal streaks, 85f
Chronic asthma, atlas, 354
Coin foreign body, presence, 276f
Contrast-enhanced radiographs, usage,
fluid, pooling, 82
Chronic bronchitis
Cold light endoscopy, 13
53
Caudal esophagus, pigmented
atlas, 354
Colitides, atlas, 237
Contrast radiography,endoscopy
mucosa, 49f
impact, 343
Colon
replacement, 175
 Caudal lung lobe
Chronic cholangitis, 425f
appearance, 230
 Controlled radial expansion balloon 
dorsal ligament, usage, 500f
Chronic cough, treatment (nonresponse),
biopsy sample collectin,exible
dilators, usage,72
hilus, EndoGIA application, 500f
356
forceps (usage), 229f
Conventional generators, adaptive
Caudal mediastinal uid density,presence
 Chronic esophageal hstula, views, 81f
complete evaluation, 227
response generators（contrast）,68f
(lateral thoracic radiograph), 84f
Chronic esophageal strictures, 69f
endoscopic examination,indications,
Coupling injuries, 369
Caudal nasal cavity,canine nasal
Chronicinflammatory processes,impact,
217
Cranial cruciate ligaments
aspergillosis fungal mats, 574f
343
fecal material, adherence, 222f
arthroscopic viewing,619f
Caudal/right middle lung lobectomy,
Chronic intermittent vomiting, presence,
leoscopy, 180
inspection/debridement, 619-620
third/fourthintercostal spaces(portal
89f
mucosal granularity,ncrease,f
Cranial esophageal sphincter (CES),
placement), 499f
Chronic large bowel diarrhea
mucosal surface (evaluation), flexible
observation, 43
Caudal thoracic esophagus, 48f
causes, 219b
colonoscopy (usage),218-219
Cranial esophagus, pseudomembrane
inflammatory lesions, 66
colonoscopy,importance,217
tunnel view, 224f
formation, 63f
observation,49F
Chronic lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis
ulceration, 237f
Cranial lung lobectomy, eighth/ninth
undifferentiated sarcoma, 92f
turbinates, inflammatory bridging,
white hair, remains, 230f
 intercostal spaces (portal placement),
Caudal tubercle, formation, 558
575f
Colonicbiopsyspemenscoleton）
Chroniclymphoplasmacytic rhinitis,
Caudal vena cava, tunica externa
nigid forceps(usage),298f
Cranial mediastinum
(relationship), 465
polypoid mucosal hyperplasia, 575f
Colonic carcinoma, identihcation, 418f
hstulous tract, extension, 8lf
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, pars
Chronic otitis externa, tympanic
Colonic lumen
 parietal pleural structures, obscuration,
flaccida
membrane (visualization difhculty),
annular adenocarcinoma, 240f
487f
bulge, 591f
589
intraluminal lymphoma, 241f
tumors, visibility/palpability, 488
primary secretory otitis media,
Chronic otitis media
Colonic lymphoma, 241
Cranial thoracic esophagus
presence, 595f
anesthesia, 598-599
Colonic mucosa
diverticulum, 54f
disease indication, 590
complications/care, 599-600
appearance, 230
obstruction, 90f
CCD chip, usage, 15
conservative management, 597
gross/microscopic evaluation, 217
proximal dilation, 59f
Cecal inversion, 231f
instrumentation, 597
Colonic spasm, 244f
Cranial vagina, endoscopic view, 556f
Cecal orifce,location, 198f
patient evaluation, 598-599
Colonictissue,uresencein su
Crescent grasping snares, 251f
Cecocolic sphincter,opening,26f
Chronic pancreatic disease, diagnosis,
hybridization application, 302f
Cricoid cartilages, evaluation, 332
Cecum
423
Colonic vascular dysplasia, 243f
Crush artifact, presence, 347
ileocolic junction, relationship, 180f
Chronic pericardial effusion, impact, 487
Colonoscopy, 27, 217
Cryptorchidism
lymphoid follicles, 230f
Chronic persistent diarrhea, mucosal
appearance, 230
commonness, 438
opening, dilation, 198f
granularity,202F
biopsies, collection, 223-224
diagnosis, 439
whipworms, observation, 238
Chronic pyothorax, 505f
colonic preparation, 221f-222f
Crypts (deep mucosa), low-power/high-
Cellophane band, placement, 450f
Chronic small bowel diarrhea,
complications, 230-232
power photomicrographs, 184f
Cellophane strip, passage, 449f
occurrence, 175
diagnostic importance, 218
Cucumber
Centesis, usage,511
direct postoperative observation,
paper preparation, 300b
Central lumen,visualization,224
(usage), 98
ability, 217-218
slices, substitution, 300
Cerenia, usage, 253
Chylothorax, 479
gastrointestinal lavage solution,
Culture, usage, 344
Ceruminal gland adenoma, 596f 
Cidex, 23-24
administration (care), 219-220
Cup forceps, comparison, 570f
Cervical esophagus
Claw grasping forceps,53f
general anesthesia,requirement,
Curettage, performing,580581
collapse, 43
Clayman, Ralph, 396
220-221
Curvature wall, endoscope (forward 
fbrous web, 70f71f
Cleaning brush
importance, 217
force), 103f
imperforate stricture, 70f-71f
exit, 21f
indications, 217-218
Cushing, Harvey, 364-365
observation, 46f
insertion, 21f
instrumentation, 218-219
Cutting electrosurgical waveforms, 366
670Index
Cutting energy, capability, 366
Descending colon (Continued)
Distended gallbladder, laparoscopic
Dogs(Continued)
Cut waveform,characteristic,66
nodules, presence, 237f
view, 419F
pheochromocytomas, 461
Cystic calculi, retrieval, 542543
superhcial ulcers,236f
Distended midthoracic esophagus, 47f
placement, 431f
laparoscopic procedure,452f
tnicconcentricrings,223f
Diverticula (diverticulum)
pleural biopsy, cup biopsy forceps
Cystic duct,sectioning, 458-459
ulcerated sessle adenocarcinoma, 240f
atlas, 53
(usage), 485f
Cystic muscle,serosa/external layers
Descending colon-transverse colon
diagnosis, 53
pyloricantrum,gastriculers,
(incision), 444f
junction, 225f
lateral thoracic radiograph,54f
retrograde ureteral stent placement,
Cystic ovary,bservation,419f
Descending duodenal canal
survey thoracic radiographs, 53
531f
Cystopexy site,trocar(usage), 443f
endoscope, positioning, 178f
Doberman pinscher
right adrenal carcinoma, view, 429F
Cystoscope
Descending duodenal lumen, endoscope
copper storage disease,419f
small intestine
980-nm diode quartz crystal hber, 375f
tip (advancement), 177-178
cystoscopy, usage, 513f
endoscope position, radiographs,
advancement, 517f
Descending duodenum
duodenum, mucosal irregularity, 200f
189f
sheaths,rigidendoscopesusage),08f
air distension,192F
gastric/intestinal foreign bodies,panty
infammatory bowel disease, 304f
Cystoscopic-assted calculiremoval,
biopsy instrument,advancement, 181f
hose (presence),290f
lymphangiectasia, 175
409-410
curve, sequential views, 193f
lymphangiectasia,207F
spay,shrtincisinlsure466
Cystoscopic-guided laser ablation (CLA),
entry, view, 192f
Dogs
spaying reasons, 470
usage, 541
examination, 178-179
adenocarcinomas, 461
splenic flexure,225f
Cystoscopy, 507
junction, 193f
adrenocortical adenomas, 461
thoracicesophagus,fshhook
anesthesia/monitoring, 515
mucosal change,granularity
anorectal junction, retroflexed view,
(radiograph),271f
contraindications, 514
proliferation (increase), 200F
229f
thorax, mediastinal mass, 489f
conversion/discontinuation, decision,
pediatric veterinary endoscopes, usage,
ascending colon
tracheobronchoscopy, 331, 339
521
173
appearance, 226f
flexible/rigid instruments,
follow-up monitoring/procedural 
rpundworm, presence,210f
length, 199
dimensions, 340t
effects, 521
Desmin, 302
sphincters, open,227f
transverse colon, characteristics,
holding/manipulation, 509f
Diagnostic esophagoscopy, 44
whipworms, observation, 238
225226
indications, 507-514, 508b,527t
Diagnostic laparoscopy,419
atelectaticlung, spontaneous
ureteral stenting, 533
instrumentation, 514-515
Diagnostic studies, laparoscopic
pneumothorax (presence),488f
ureterolithiasis,532f
intraoperative nephroscopy;
equipment list,399b
broad-based major duodenal papilla,
urethral stent placement, 545f
relationship, 520
Diamond-insert needle holders, 403f
196f
introduction, 507
Diaphragm, cranial force,405f
cecum, whipworms (observation),238
ventrodorsal abdominal radiograph,
laser energy, 375-376
Diarrhea, IBD (impact),200-201
cholecystectomy, justihcation, 455
226F
patient care, 521
Dietary indiscretion, 246
chronic hepatitis/early cirrhosis, liver
ventrodorsal radiograph, barium
patient evaluation/preparation, 515
Diethylsilbestrol (DES) dosage,
(view),424f
enema (usage), 218f
patient placement, 516f
approximation, 512
chronic otitis media, conservative
Domestic long hair cat
physical examination, 511
Diff-Quik, 297
management, 597
erosive lymphoplasmacellular/
problems, 520521
Diffuse eosinophilic esophagitis, 64
colitis, 237
eosinophilic colitis, 235f
procedures, 527t
Difuse erosive suppurative colitis, 235f
colon
foreignbody,resenef
sheaths, usage, 508f
Diffuse gastritis, 294
fecal material, adherence, 222f
respiratrydistresacutenset
secializdsheathsage09f
Difuselymphosarcoma,212f
ulceration/mucosal granularity/fri-
Domestic short hair cat
techniques, 515
Diffuse mucosal lymphoma, 241f
ability, 237f
descendingulcerated sessle
treatment, 507, 508b
Diffuse neoplasia, 302f
congenitalextrahepaticportosystemic
adenocarcinoma, 240f
Cystostomy,locking-loop pigtail catheter
Digestive tract
shunt, 425f
laryngeal edema, presence, 334f
(usage), 525f
leiomyomas/leiomyosarcomas, 307
descending colon, iatrogenic mucosal
lymphoplasmacellular/suppurative
Cytokeratins, antibodies (relationship),
viral diseases, 305
hemorrhage, 222f
colitis, 235f
302
Digital image capture/archiving systems,
duodenal lymphosarcoma, 212f
proximal duodenum,lymphosarcoma
Cytology, 112
19F
duodenum,histologic examination,
(involvement),307f
specimen collection,BAL technique
Digital video signals (transmisson),
211f
right ear canal,polyps,603f
(usage),346f-347f
cables (usage), 17f
endoscopic instruments, 
ulcerative lymphoplasmacellular
usage, 344-345
Digital zoom, 15-16
recommendation, 400
colitis, 235f
Cytology brushes, 297
Dilated lymphatic channels, 208f
esophageal foreign bodies,255
vascular ring anomaly, persistent right
availability, 34
Diode laser energy
esophageal perforation,270f
aortic arch, 58f
dose-up, 297f
endoscopic visualization, 375-376
esophageal srictures, 66
Dorsal median fold (DMF), 558, 558f
transmission, 374
exocrine pancreatic atrophy,426f
caudal tubercle, formation, 558
D
setup, 374f
ilaroides osleri,presence,353
 Dorsal tracheal membrane, deviation, 351
Dachshund
utilization, 376-377
gastric foreignbody,presence,19f
Dorsocaudal thorax, caudal
peach pit foreign body, presence, 275f
Diode laser generator, 5lf
gastric mucosa, Physaloptera
mediastinal mass(lateral thoracic
stomach,plastic/cord wrappings
Diodelaser probe, usage, 542f
nematodes (presence), 306f
radiograph), 92F
(removal), 288f289f
Diode lasers, application, 375
leocolic orihce, 198f
Dorsolateral compartment (DLC),
DeBakey forceps,401
Diodelaser wavelengths, 373f
inflammatory bowel disease, histologic
transtympanic bulla curettage, 601
De-barking surgical procedure,337f
energy,application, 374375
features, 302-303
Double-balloon enteroscopy, 185-186
Debrided tissues, removal, 580f
water coefhcient, 375
intestinal lymphangiectasia, 305f
Double lumen sheathed microbiology
Debridement, continuation (impact),
Diode quartz hber, ventral position, 376
jejunum, blind biopsy technique, 183f
brush,345f
583f
Diode wavelength
laryngeal granuloma, 337f
Double-pigtail ureteral stent, 526f
Deep ear flushing
energy,374-375
laryngeal vault, endoscopy, 331
cystoscopic image, 536f
complications, 594
laser light absorption coefhcient, 374f
laryngoscopy, 331
Doudenal froth, atlas, 191
procedure, 590-593
Disease entities,morphologic
left caudal lung lobe mass
DRE tilt table, adjustments, 414f
video otoscopy, usage, 589
descriptions, 293
intraoperative view, 497f
Dry swallow, 6263
Defecation, colonoscopy(importance),
Disorders, atlas, 243
radiograph, 496f
Duct of Santorini, opening, 180
218
Disposable guarded cytology brush, 297f
liver, view, 425f
Duodenal adenocarcinoma, 213f
Deflected tip,instruments (force,
Disposable loading units (DLUs), 363
lymphangiectasia,208f
Duodenal biopsy specimens, placement,
avoidance), 8f
variation, 363-364
majordudenal papilla,presence, 196f
300f
Depth ofheld, determination, 8
Disseminated thyroid adenocarcinoma,
major papilla, visualization, 196f
Duodenal blind biopsy technique, 185f
 Descending colon
histologic diagnosis, 489f
midjejunum,nectarine pit foreign
Duodenal bulb, 177-178
adenomatous polyps, 239f
Distal descending colon, benign masses,
body removal,291f
circumferential examination, 32
carcinoid, 242f
238
minorpapilla,visualization,196f
Duodenal contractions
diffuse nodular lymphoma, 241f
Distal descending duodenum
nasal discharge, causes, 565b
atlas, 190
hyperemia,234f
lower wall, mucosal granularity
obstructive prostatic carcinoma, 545f
J061 auanbas
iatrogenic mucosal hemorrhage,222f
(increase), 204f
cbstructive pyelonephritis, 532f
Duodenal fluid (aspiration), catheters
intraluminal hemorrhage, 236f
Distal descending duodenum, fold
papillary adenocarcinoma,214f
(usage), 297
lumen,hemangiosarcoma,242f
observation, 188f
papillary ileal rice,protrusin,99f
Duodenal foreign bodies, 26l-262
mucosal granularity,increase, 234f
Distal esophagus, dilation,86f
pars flaccida, bulge, 591f
atlas, 290
multifocal ulcers,236f
Distal gastric body, sewing needle
otitis media, absence, 595f
endoscopic retrieval, 290
multinodular leiomyosarcoma, 242f
removal, 274f
pediatric endoscope, advancement, 179
removal,difhculty, 261-262
Index■671
Duodenal lumen, tubular hairball
Electrosurgical electrodes,geometric
Endoscopes (Continued)
Endoscopic scissors, usage, 389f-390f
(presence),195f
conhgurations, 367
procedures
Endoscopic services
Duodenal lymphosarcoma, 212f 
Electrosurgical generators, 364-370
care/handling/preparation, 33-35
image capturing system, utilization,
Duodenal mucosa, 188f
theory,365-366
textbook description, 28-29
658
appearance, 196f, 211f
waveforms, 366
purchase
marketing, 655, 657-658
irregularity,201F
Electrosurgical pencils
caution, 30
practice,philosophy,655-656
problems, 204f
electrode extensions, 368f
decision, 27-28
price, establishment, 656
Duodenal papillae
geometric conhgurations,367
completion, 28
pricing/proftability,658
atlas, 195
incisions, example, 367f
readvancement, 104
Endoscopic stent placement,534f
position, 195f
insulated electrode extensions, 367
retroflexion,228f
Endoscopic surgery
Duodenogastric reflux disorder, 101
Electrosurgical unit (ESU), 365
ngid biopsy forceps, insertion, 220f
ancillary equipment,401b
Duodenoscopy, performing, 105 
bipolar systems, 369-370
shaft,removal, 178
care/problems, 417
Duodenum
coupling injuries,369
skills training, 28
endosurgical clips/staplers, 363-364
advancement, 187f, 192f
generatorbox,usage,367
support, left thumb (usage), 37
performance,allowance, 404f
colonic loop,exploration, 414-415
indirect coupling, occurrence, 369
tip,deflection,102f
stapling/energy devices,363
difuselymphosarcoma, 212f
monopolar systems, 367-369
6p directional changes, 104
trocar sitelanningbaseballd
hair
operation,radiofrequency bandwidth,
torque (advancement/application),
o(aesn))dasuo
atlas, 194 
365f
right hand (incorrect position), 39f
Endoscopic surgical treatment, usage, 51l
presence, 195f
safety hazards, 369
training, 28-29
Endoscopic suturing, 379
irregularfreinbjectstring
Electrosurgical waveforms,types, 366
toubleshooting guide, 25t
challenges, 379
(attachment), 292f
Elevated intraabdominal pressure,
versatility, 32
indications, 379
mucosal irregularity,200f
physiologic effects, 405t-407t
video camera, attachment, 556-557
needle handling, issue, 384-385
air insufflation, 202f
Elizabethan collar, placement, 324-325
wear/damage, excess (absence), 3233
needle holder
tissue,linear section (lifting), 183f
Elman Surgitronunit66f
wide-angleillumination, 180
loading time, 382-383
Duval atraumatic laparoscopic grasping
Endobronchial biopsy, 348f
working channel, absence, 376
pirouette technique, 382f
forceps, 253f
performing,347
Endoscope system, 3
needle position,383F
Duval forceps, 252
Endocrinopathies,signs, 174175
Endoscopically guided mechanical
Endoscopic tip deflection
recommendation, 400
EndoGIA
dilation, usage, 69-71
descriptive terms, 38-39
usage, 432-433
application, 500f
Endoscopicballon dilation, 80
terminology,38-40
Dysphagia,42
placement, 500f
Endoscopic biopsy
Endoscopic vaginoscopy, equipment,
Dysphagis
usage, 497
22 sapisa
557t
acute onset, 61f
EndoLoop device, usage, 389f390f, 497
Endoscopic visualization,laser energy
Dysuria, 508-511
Endo-Pelvi-Trainer setup, laparoscopic
performing, 294
application, 373
initial evaluation, 510
skills development, 380f
specimen
Endoscopy
Endoscope-body position
collection, 293
advantages, 29-30
E
advantages, 38
tissue, 299300
assistant, 3536
Ear canal, cleaning,593
relationship,38
technical considerations, 298-302
responsibility, 36
Early diagnosis, value, 30
tracheoscopy,633-634
tissues, immunohistochemical/
role, 36b
Ectopic ureters
Endoscope-induced mucosal trauma
immunofluorescence methods
cart,fexible endoscope(storage),23f
anesthesia, 551
atlas, 208
(application), 302
commitment, making, 656
cystoscopic diagnosis/treatment,
hemorrhage, 208f
 Endoscopic clip applicators, 364f
courses, offering, 656
548-551
Endoscopic equipment
diagnosis, improvement, 659
follow-up monitoring, 554
accessory instruments, 40f
importance, 27
equipment
instrumentation, 551
advancement,100f,323f
laser energy,usage,373
maintenance, 657
intraoperative complications,554
luminal view,loss, 224f
Endoscopic foreignbodyremoval
repair work, 33
patient evaluation/preparation, 551-552
right hand position, 39f
advantages, 249
usage, reasons, 29
patient indications/contraindications,
cabinet storage, 40f
complications, 262
exploratory surgery,relationship,176
550-551
care, 3335
Endoscopic gastrointestinal anastomosis
forms, features, 295b
postoperative care,554
checking,33
(Endo GIA),363
imaging chain, 4f
procedure, 551-552
cleaning,40
Endoscopic GIA/TA stapling devices,
services, implementation/marketing,
Ectopic ureters,cystoscopy (usage), 507
deaning brush,exit,2
requirement, 481
29-30
Egyptian Mau(colon),white hair
deaning/disinfection/sterilization,
Endoscopic grasping forceps,662f
success, key, 656-657
(remains),230F
Endoscopic ilumination, achievement, 13
surgeon position, problem,409f
Elbow
control section, holding (two-fnger
Endoscopic images
technologies, future, 659
arthroscopy, 613-616
method), 37f
digital capture,possbilities,18
usefulness, 55, 173
indications, 613
damage, user-related causes, 24b
llumination/brightness factors, 13
Endostaplers, characteristics, 365f
initial maneuver, 613-614
equipment storage,40
Endoscopic imaging systems, 15-17
Endo Stitch
conditions, 615-616
external surface,drying
Endoscopic instruments
device, usage, 385f
exploration, portal locations,613f
fexibility/stiffess, egree,3
handles, variation, 400f
suturing device, availability, 390f
fragmented medial coronoid process,
flexible instruments, usage, 5f
recommendation, 400
suturing system,suturing
614f
forward force, effect, 103f
selection, 30-32
trainer,390f
joint, pressure, 614
curvature,104f
usage, 384-385
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD), 615
handling, 36-38
triangulation, 406
Endosurgical lips, 363364
appearance, 615f
high-level disinfection/sterilization, 23
Endoscopic knot tying, 379
failures,attributin,63
prognosis,615
holding
instrument list, 381b
Endosurgical staplers, 363-364
Electricity,dehnition,365
three-hnger grip, alternative
Endoscopic light sources
Endosurgical staples
Electrocardiographic (ECG) tracing,
method, 37
categorization, 13
closure widths, attention, 364
528-529
three-hnger method,usage, 38f
power, 13
leg/cartridge lengths, usage, 364
Electrocautery, 365,61l-612
immersion, enzymatic detergent
Endoscopic observations
Endotherapy injection needle,
anesthesia/monitoring, 61l-612
(usage),22f
histopathologic hndings, correlation
positioning/extruding,78f
patient evaluation, 611
initial view, 101f
(absence), 303
EndoTIP cannula, 12
 patient preparation, 611
introduction, ports (usage), 480
notation, 295
Endotracheal tube, T-piece adapter
Electrode extensions, 368f
left handedness, 36-37
Endoscopic/pathologic hndings,
(usage),341F
insulated types, 367
lens systems, location, 8
correlation, 302303
Enemas
Electromagnetic spectrum, diodelaser
lubrication, 557
Endoscopic photo/video documentation,
administration, impact, 221f-222f
wavelengths, 373f
operating ends, 400f
1819
Gopnq usua
tube insertion, trauma, 222f
 Electronic image information,
optical quality, determination, 10
Endoscopic procedures
transmission, 16
overtube
tissue manipulation/dissection,
bilateral ectopic ureters, presence, 553f
Electrosurgery,365
pasage, 252
involvement, 363
calculi, presence, 511f
endosurgical use,recommendations,
position,254f
VETPUMP2, usage, 20f
esophageal candidiasis, 65F
371b
passage, 323f
Endoscopic retrograde
histiocytic ulcerative colitis, 236f
 Electrosurgical desiccation, occurrence,
position/conhguration, 109f
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP),
English setter, duodenum (mucosal
368369
power/type, 13-14
usage, 455
irregularity), 200f
672■Index
English Springer (stomach),bottle cap
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, 90f
Esophagus(Continued)
Feline high-grade nasal lymphoma, 579f
foreign body (presence), 286f
Esophageal strictures
irritant medications/chemicals, 62-63
Feline ileocolicjunction, atlas, 199
Enlarged tracheobronchial lymph nodes,
atlas, 66
mast cell tumor, 91f
Feline inflammatory bowel disease
atlas, 355-356
dinical signs, 66-67
wishbone, presence, 264f-265f
antisera, application, 302
Enseal PTC, 372
diagnosis, 67
Estrogen treatment, 521
atlas, 204, 234
Enteropathogenic bacteria, impact, 305
dilation,TTS balloon dilator (usage),
Estrual bitches, vaginoscopy (tolerance),
Feline inflammatory polyps
Enteroscopy, 173
73F
557558
complications/care, 604 
indications, 174-176
endoscopic appearance, 67-69
Estrual fluid, pooling,559f
conservative management, 601-602
usage, consideration, 173174
endoscopic treatment, 69-80
Ethylene oxide (ETO)
instrumentation, 601-602
Enterostomy feeding tubes, laparoscopic-
esophageal foreign body, impact,
gas sterilization, 67
procedure, 602-604
assisted placement, 435-438
272f273f
sterilization,608
traction avulsion, 601
anesthesia, 436
esophagoscopy, usage, 67-69
usage, 401402
Feline intestinal mast cell tumors,
follow-up monitoring, 438
etiology, 66
Eustachian tube orihces, visibility, 572f
rarity, 308
instrumentation, 435
formation, 70f-71f
Exfoliated cellsidentincation,339
Feline lateral skull radiograph, 567f
intraoperative complications, 436
lateral barium contrast esophagram,
Exotic mammals
Felinelymphoplasmacytic rhinitis
patient evaluation/preparation, 436
67f
dorsolateral structures, involvement,
caseated obstructive mucous, 576f
patientindications/contraindications,
partial stricture, 69f
631
polypoid hyperplasia,575f
435
perforation, 77f
endoscopy procedures, 627-628
Feline middle ear anatomy,602
postoperative care,437-438
radiography, 67
instrumentation, 628
Feline nasal adenocarcinoma, 578f
procedure, 436
stenting,80
laparoscopy,630-631
Feline nasal Cryptocorcus, ulceration/
Enzol, 20, 35
triamcinolone (intralesional injection),
procedures, 628-631
granuloma formation, 573f
Eosinophilic colitis,235f
endotherapy injection needle
rhinoscopy,628-630
Feline nasopharyngeal adenocarcinoma,
commonness, 234
(positioning/extruding),78f
stomatoscopy, 628
571f
Eosinophilic esophagitis, 64
Esophageal surgery, complication, 80
Exotic pets,623
Feline nasopharyngeal polyp
appearance, 64f
Esophageal wall
dehnitive diagnosis, 626-627
visualization, 571f
Eosinophilic rhinitis (ER), 574
damage, bone impaction, 256
endoscopic instrumentation,
Feline skull computed tomography
Eosphageal foreign body, 272f-273f
radial stretch forces, 71-72
624t-625t
image, 567f
Eosphageal mucosa, observation, 48
Esophagitis
instrumentation, 623-627
Feline small intestine, atlas, 192
Eosphageal perforation, rarity, 44
adjunctive therapy,78
insuflation,requirement,623
Feline trachea
Epistaxis, appearance,824
atlas, 60
weights, 623
atlas, 350
Epithelial tumors,302
causes, 60
Exploratory thoracoscopy, 483
lumen, 351f
Equipment positioning,35f
dinical signs, 64-65
External ear canal
 Feline tympanic membrane, 596f
Erosions, characteristics, 294-295
determination, 29
evaluation, 598
flushing, 593
pars tensa, tears, 596f
Erosivelsions,biopsy samples,110
development, 272f-273f
Female Australian shepherd, bilateral
Erosive lymphoplasmacellular colitis,
diagnosis, 65-66
06s <uuada
intramural ectopic ureters (presence),
235F
endoscopic hndings, 65-66
553f
Erythema
esophageal foreign bodies,impact,
(ESW/L), 522, 527529, 536537
Female Cairn terrier, esophagitis, 60f
denotation, 294
60-62
coagulation profle,usage,528-529
Female canine/feline,laparoscopic spay,
presence, 201f
etiology, 60-64
ventrodorardigrap
466467
term, usage, 200-201
foreign body impaction, association,
Extracorporea suture,tying,383
anesthesia/surgical preparation,
Erythematous mucosal streaks/erosions,
256-257
Extracorporeal suturing,Babcock forceps
470-471
62F
severity, 60F
(usage), 388f
complications, 476-477
Esophageal biopsy,requirement,44
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)
Extrahepatic bile duct obstruction
instrumentation, 469
Esophageal bone foreignbodies, 255-257
ancillary equipment, 32
(EHBO), 455
 patient contraindications, 467-468
presence, 266f267f
 procedure oral speculum (placement),
preoperative biochemical/imaging
patient indication, 467
Esophageal candidiasis65f
34F
evidence, 460
patient preparation,468
Esophageal disease, clinical signs, 42
upperGIendeuiabil3
Extrahepatic biliary system (evaluation),
postoperative care, 477
Esophageal diverticula, 53
usefulness, 98
laparoscopy (indication), 420
preoperative patient evaluation,468
observation, 55f
Esophagoscopy, 41
Extrahepatic portosystemic shunts,
reproductive cycle, awareness, 467
Esophageal dysfunction, esophagitis
accessory instruments, requirement, 42
congenital abnormality, 446
surgical room setup, 468469
(sign),65
generalanesthesia,requirement,42
Extrahepatic shunts, commonness, 446
surgical techniques, 471-476
Esophageal hshhook foreign bodies,
indications, 4142
Extraluminal compression,55
Female cats
257-258
instrumentation, 42
Extrinsic mass, 105-106
rigid transurethral cystoscopy, 515
Esophageal hstula, atlas, 81
patient preparation/restraint, 4243
EZ-Zyme,20,35
transurethral cystoscopy, 514-517
Esophageal foreign bodies, 60-62
performing,173
Female Dachshund, hematuria
atlas, 264290
postoperative care/complications, 44
F
(presence), 512f
complication, 80
procedure, 43
Facial nerve paralysis, 600
Female Doberman pinscher,cystoscopy
endoscopic removal, 253-258
procurement,44
Fan retractors
(usage), 513f
extraction, safety, 253
ngid endoscopes, availability, 42
examples,401f
Female dogs
removal
term, reference, 41
usage, 458f
0s dossoss ssouee
emergency procedure, considera-
usage, 67-69
Fasting, impact, 98
dorsoventral abdominal fluoroscopic
tion, 248
Esophagus
Fat nodes,palpation mistake,439
image, 539f
ngid grasping forceps, usage, 252
anatomic narrowing, 246
Fecal examination results, 217
megaesophagus, 52f
ngid instrument, usage, 254f
appearance, atlas, 4649
Feedings, 326-327
PCNL, achievement, 530f
Esophageal infections, 64
balloon, expansion, 503f
administration, 312
renal calculi, 537f
Esophageal lumen,size,6769
bone foreign body,presence,
Feeding tubes
rigid transurethral cystoscopy, 515
Esophageal mucosa, endoscopic
264f265f
 modihcation, Hasson technique, 413f
transurethral cystoscopy, 514-517
examination,66
bones, dislodging,266f-267f
usage, 311
urinary incontinence, 512
Esophageal neoplasia
chicken rib bone,endoscopic view,
Feline airway mucosa, yellow tinge, 351f
Female domestic short hair cat,
atlas, 90
270f
Feline benign nasopharyngeal polyp
arytenoid laryngeal cartilage (mass
diagnosis, endoscopy/biopsy (usage),
constriction, 59f
extraction, 571f
growth),338f
90
corrosive injury, 62-63
Feline bronchi, atlas, 350
Female English bulldog, bilateral ectopic
impact, 90
cranial aspect, hshhook location,
Feline/canine laryngoscopy, differences, 333
ureters (presence), 553f
Esophageal neoplasms, rarity, 90
257258
Feline caudal thoracic esophagus, 50f
Female German Shepherd
Esophageal obstruction, 66
diseases, clinical signs, 42
Feline cecum, presence, 199f
(regurgitation), persistent right aortic
relief, surgery (usage), 501
endoscopes, initial view, 101f
Feline chroniclymphoplasmacytic
arch (vascular ring anomaly), 59f
Esophageal perforation
z auadde sidssopua
hinitis, 572F
Female Labrador retriever
atlas, 8081
endoscopy, usage (limitation),174
Feline duodenum, approach, 193f
 chronic esophageal hstula, views, 8lf
bone foreign body,impact, 270f
external compression, 94
Feline esophagus
erosive esophagitis, 63f
clinical signs, 80
food/fuid dilation, survey thoracic
composition,48
juu juasisiad) kemoue suu sensea 
suspicion, 43
radiographs, 55
thoracic inlet, 48f
aortic arch), 58f
Esophageal pork bone foreign body,
reignbody management,245
Felinegastroscopy,considerations,
 Female mixed breed dog, bilateral ectopic
presence, 268f269f
inflation, 48f
107-108
ureters, 554f
Index■673
Femalemixedbreedhunting dog,glottic
Focal gastric erosion,biopsy, lllf
Gallbladder mucocele (GBM), 455
Gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopic
lumen obstruction, 338f
Focal gastric ulceration, 307f
canine suffering, 456
exfoliative cytology preparations, 298f
Female Samoyed, bronchoscopy
Focal hepaticlesions, sampling (care),
Gas-lled soft tissue mass
Gastrintestinal (GI) endoscopy,27
(segmental airway bleeding),354f
420
(demonstration), survey thoracic
histopathologic applications, 308
Female Sheltie acute dyspnea f
Focal-length zoom adapter, purchase,
radiographs (usage), 82
performing, indications, 29
Female Siamese cat, edema (presence), 334f
15-16
Gastric biopsy
 procedures, textbook description,
Female Siberian husky, bilateral
Food
samples,collection
28-29
intramural ectopic ureters, 552f
gastroesophageal reflux, 85f
endoscopic forceps, usage, 112f
skills training,28
Female Springer Spaniel,arynx string
impaction (pulsion diverticula), 53
errors, 110t 
suction capability,importance,3334
presence), 335f
putrefaction, 55
techniques, 108-112
training, 28-29
Female ureterolithiasis, 532-533
Force-feeding, comparison, 31l
example, 110f
Gastrointestinal (GI) flexible endoscopy,
Female Wirehaired Dachshund, cystic
Forceps
video endoscopic image, 4f
clinical signs, 29b
calculi/urinary tract infection, 511f
cups, opening, 182f
Gastric body, 99-102
Gastrointestinal (GI) foreign bodies
Ferrets
examples, 403f
antrum, object removal,282f-283f
anatomic considerations, 245-246
endoscopy procedures, 627-628
Force Triad ES generator (Valleylab), 370f
Gastric closure, 662
dient education, 249
multiple-entry ferret laparoscopy,632f
Force Triad ES System, 369-370
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV)
diagnostic evaluation, 247-248
multiple-entry laparoscopy, 631f
monopolar/bipolar electrosurgical
fatality, 431
endoscopic removal, 245
Fiability, description, 294
technologies, amalgamation, 370
risk, 431
patient prohles, 246-247
Fiberoptic endoscopes, preferences, 569
Force Triverse pencil (Valleylab), 368f
Gastric dilation, 178-179
instrumentation, usage, 249-253
Fiberoptic light-transmitting cable, 14f
Foreign bodies
Gastric distension, 178-179
removal, success, 249
Fiberscopes, 3
atlas, 335
degree, 100-101
symptoms, clinical signs, 247
features, 4t
blurred view, 280f-281f
Gastric foreign bodies, 258-261
Gastrointestinal (GI) inflammation,
image-transmitting components, 8
characterization, 246
 abdominal radiograph, usage, 258
histopathologic changes (WSAVA
inexpensiveness, 3—4
endoscopic retrieval, complications
association, 247
guidelines), 293
light-transmitting components, 8
(rarity), 262
atlas, 274290
Gastrointestinal (GI) lavage
manufacturing, 30-31
entry,246
panty hose, presence, 290f
administration, care, 219-220
optics, 8
extraction, visualization
rmoval,258
solution
viewing held,black dots (presence),
(requirement), 255
rigid instrument, usage, 254f
administration,impact, 221f-222f
33F
forceps,availability, 250
retrieval,laparoscopic procedure,45f
fatal aspiration, 230-232
Fibrinous debris, 603-604
grasping, 259
Gastric mucosa, Physaloptera nematodes
Gastrointestinal (GI) motility
Fibrinous mucoid exudate, presence, 201f
impaction, esophagitis (association),
(presence), 306f
derangements, 318
Fibrotic esophageal stricture, 67f
256257
 Gastric mucosal biopsy technique, pinch
disorders, PEG usefulness (limitation),
Filaroidesoslerinodules53f
impingement, close-up view,
orceps(usage), 296f
313
FireWire, 16-17
264f265f
Gastric perforation, endoscope (impact),
Gastrointestinal (GI) neoplasia, 185-186
Fish, endoscopy procedures, 641
neoplasia, 572
113
lymphoma,relationship,307308
coelioscopy, 641-642
nonretrieval, 256
Gastric polyp, impact, 306f
Gastrointestinal (GI) signs(treatment),
instrumentation, 641
patient profles, 246-247
Gastric preparation, 661-662
diet (implication), 174-175
procedures, 641-642
removal, 288f289f
Gastric rugal folds, hlling, 86f
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST),
FISH analysis, 308
endoscopic guidance, 288f-289f
Gastric ulcers, 306f
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract,bleeding
302
Fishhooks
polypectomy snares, usage, 250-251
impact, 9798
location, 257-258
retention, diagnosis, 247
Gastric wall, stretching, 104
ulcers (management), 376
radiograph, 258f
retraction, difhculty, 259
Gastroenteritis,enteropathogenic
Gastrointestinal (GI) tube,exploratory
visualization,difhculty,57
 solo removal technique, 262f
bacteria (impact), 305
running (challenge), 414-415
Fistulous communication, abnormality,
types, 246
Gastresophageal (GE) intussusception
Gastrointestinal ulceration/erosion
81
Foreign body retrieval
atlas, 43
(GUE), 294295, 305306
Flamingo Jaw, 380f
grasping instruments,usage,250
diagnosis,radiography/esophagoscopy
Gastrojejunostomy tube feeding, 327
Flapper valves, protection, 38l-382
procedures, 249
8(asn)
Gastropexy, 409-410
Flaroides (Oslerus) osleri,presence, 353
success, 261
protrusion, 89f
biopsy,performing, 400-401
Flexible abdominal laparoscopic
video otoscopy, usage, 589
regurgitation/vomiting, observation, 41
examination/photography,434f
endoscopy, 376-377
Forward-viewing endoscope,usage,32
Gastroesophageal (GE) junction, 659-660
incision, seromuscular layer, 433f
Flexible colonoscopy, 218-219
Four-pronged grasping instruments,
cardia, 50f
presence (conhrmation), ultrasound
performing, left lateral recumbency,
usage, 250
circumscribed mass, 93f
examination (usage),434f
224
Four-quadrant intralesional submucosal
dose-up view, 103f
Gastroscopes, 4
procedure, 224-230
injection, administration, 75
gastroscopy, usage, 99
outer diameter, 4
Flexible endoscopes, 3-9
Four-way angulation, 6
leiomyoma, 92f
Gastroscopy, 97
accessory channel
Four-way tip defection, 7f
Gastroesophageal reflux
anesthesia, usage, 98-99
deaning brush, insertion, 21f
Fragmented medial coronoid process,
presence, 83f
baseline screening tests, 97-98
damage,prevention, 9
614-615
reference, 62
cardiac complications, 113
automatic air insufflation, 224
example,614f
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
clinical signs, 97
availability, 4
Frazier suction tip,usage, 598f
evaluation, 659-660
complications, 113
deaning supplies, 22b
Friability, term (usage),200-201
possibility, 29
rarity, 113
construction/handling, 5-7
Fulguration, 368
Gastroesophageal sphincter (GES)
211
description, 176t
Full HD, 18
abnormalities, 66
diagnostic plan, 97-98
glutaraldehyde solution soaking, 24f
Full-thickness perforation, 80-81
disorder, suspicion, 51-52
endoscope
two-lane deflection capability, 4
Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery
displacement, 82
position/confguration, 109f
types, 3
(FLS), 394
endoscopic examination,48-49
tip,positioning,99-100
wmbilical cord, pressure tester
curriculum, profciency levels/training
gastroesophageal intussusception,
inadvertent retroversion,103-105
(attachment),8f
protocol,394t
protrusion,89f
indications, 97-98
Flexible endoscopy,19
Fundus, close-up view, 103f
high-pressure zone, 43
instrumentation, 98
applications, 28b
Fungal rhinitis, 573-574
cbservation, 49f50f
paradoxic motion, 103-105
endoscopic instrumentation/
reduction, 88f
 patient preparation, 98
documentation, 3
G
relaxation, 62
performing, 98, 173
 Flexible instruments, 9
Gagging,acute onset, 61f
tumor, view, 93f
avoidance, 98
classifcation, 9
Gallbladder
visualization, 4849
positioning, 98-99
Flexible video endoscopes, cleaning
bile aspiration, 421f
 Gastrointestinal (GI) adenocarcinomas, 307
procedure, 99
(reference guide), 21b
cholecystocentesis, needle placement,
Gastrointestinal anastomosis (GIA)
pulmonary complications, 113
Flow cytometry,usage, 185
421f
stapling devices,requirement,481
retroversion(J maneuver), 102-103
removal, laparoscopic approach, 397
Gastrointestinal (GI) diseases
Gastrostomy gastrogram, 322
Fluid management,609
retraction, fan retractor (usage), 458f
description/interpretation, WSAVA
Gastrostomy tract disruption, 322
Fluorescence in situ hybridization,
specimen retrieval bag placement,
Gastrointestinal Standardization
Gastrostomy tubes, 314-316
application, 302F
459, 459f
Group guidelines, 185
Fluoroscopy unit, sufhciency, 524-525
view, 425f
histopathologiclesions,relationship,
complications, 327-329
Focal erosions, mucosal irregularity, 206f
withdrawal, 456
294b
construction materials, 314
674■Index
Gastrostomy tubes (Continued)
Guidewires
Histiocytic ulcerative colitis
Inflammatory rhinitis, 574
endoscopic placement, 31l
access, 531f
atlas, 236
Infatableballoon catheters, impact,
equipment, 314-318
backloading, 326
presence, 236f
71-72
feeding, 326-327
requirement, 524-525
Hopkins rod lens system, 9f
Inflated esophagus, 48f
placement style, 314
Gyrus PK, 372
Horizontal ear canal
Ingested chemical iritants,impact,63
removal, 321-322
ceruminolith,596f
Ingested foreign bodies
replacement, 321-322
H
composition, 590
treatment,248-249
sizes, 314316
Hairballs (trichobezoars), removal, 260
nasopharyngeal polyp,597f
types,247-248
transected end, wire placer
nent, 321f
endoscopic appearance, 272f-273f
Horner’s syndrome, 600
Inguinal lymph nodes, palpation mistake,
tube removal, 321f
Halogen lamps, intensity/color, 14
commonness, 604
439
Gastrotomy closure, appearance, 454f
Hand instruments, 610-611
Household electricity, supply, 365
 Inguinal ring, anatomy,440f
Gastrotomy feeding tubes, usage, 257
Handpiece,components, 6
Humeral head, Map attachment, 617
Initial balloon diameter,selection, 73-74
Generalized tracheal collapse5f
Hands-on endoscopy courses, 398
Hyperemia
Inner control knob, counterclockwise
Generator box, usage, 367
Haptic feedback/visualization,
 endoscopic hnding, 230
turns, 39
Geriatric dog, angulus(focal gastric
combination, 395f
presence, 234f
Insertion tube
ulceration), 307f
Harmonic frequency, 371
Hypergastrinemia,63F
advancement, right hand (usage), 37
German Shepherd
Harmonic scalpel, 371-372
Hyperplasia,599f
damage,prevention, 6
esophageal stricture, 54f
Harmonic Scalpel ACE, 372
Hypoadrenocorticism,impact, 174
diameter, 31
midtrachea, frank blood (pooling), 359f
 Hasson-placed trocar
Hypocalcemia, 207f
distal tip, close-up inspection, 6
mucosa, scalloping efect (mucosal
carbon dioxide infusion, 410
Hypokalemia, 326
limitation, 31
irregularity/granularity),201f
leakage, occurrence, 412f
Hypomotility (megaesophagus), 53
Instrumentation, autoclavable
rectum-descending colon,diffuse
 Hasson technique, 408-409
Hypoproteinemic patients, colloid
characteristic, 24
nodular adenocarcinoma, 240f
feeding tube modincation,413f
administration, 9899
Instrument trays,importance,403f
night caudal lobarbronchus,blood
trocar placement, 411f
Hypoxemia, occurrence, 486
Insufflating trocar, placement (Hasson
(presence), 359f
trocar site, location, 409-410
technique),411F
stomach
Head-down tilt,physiologic
Insufflation
glassfragments,277F
effects, 407t
Iatrogenic mucosal hemorrhage,222f
achievement, 410
plasticforeignbody,presence,
Heartworm antibody test,97-98
Iatrogenic tearing, 43
degree, necessty, 178179
284f285f
Helicobacter-associated gastritis, 308
Idiopathic megaesophagus, 52f
optical space,relationship,410411
German shorthaired pointer, arytenoid
Hematemesis, 41
cranial thoracic esophagus,
Insufflator
cartilages/vocal folds (bilateral
impact, 97
diverticulum, 54f
flow rate/pressure regulation, 19f
adduction), 336f
Hematochezia, 302f
Ileal orihce 
usage, 19
Giardiantigentest,9798,174
Hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) production,
conhguration, 199f
Integrated telescope, 13f
assay, 210
301
protrusion, 180
Integrative,term（usage),393
Giardia trophozoite, 210, 297
Hematuria
presence, 197f
Intercostal arteries, visualization, 492f
image, 174
abnormal discharges, 513
Ileocolic junction 
Interlacing artifacts, 18
Gill endoscopy, 641
observation, 515f
cecum, relationship, 180f
Internal stent,usage4349
visualization, 642f
presence, 512f
elevation, 199f
Interstitial cells ofCajal, GIST, 302
Glomerular hltration rate (GFR),
Hemoclips, usage,440
presence,198f
Interventional modalities, equipment,
decrease, 527, 532-533
Hemorrhage
Ileocolic orifce, 198f
527t
Glottic lumen, obstruction, 338f
amount,expectation, lllf
Ileocolic valve, opening/traversal, 180
Intestinal biopsy, 409-410
Glutaraldehyde (Cidex), usage, 401-402
development, 520
Ileoscopy, 31
Intestinal biopsy specimens
Glutaraldehyde solution (2%), 23-24
presence, 179-180
Ileum
collection, 173
soaking, 24f
Hemorrhagic luid
atlas, 197
 endoscopic forceps, usage, 301f
Golden retriever
gastroesophageal reflux, presence, 85f
biopsy forceps,blind passae, 27f
procurement, pinch forceps (usage),
bronchogenic adenocarcinoma, 359F
pooling, 88f
bind biopsy technique, 304f
296f
bronchus, mucopurulent exudate, 357f
Hemorrhaging
endoscope tip, air insufflation, 181
quality,problem, 301f
cecum, lymphoid follicles, 230f
problems,416
entry,force(avoidance),181
Intestinal carcinoid, 302
colonic vascular dysplasia, 243f
severity, 76f
 llumination lenses, 8
Intestinal curves, endoscope
esophageal lymphoma,93f
Hemostasis (provision), LigaSure
advancement, 193f
interstitial densities, lateral thoracic
(usage), 41F
Imagecaturin systmtilizatin8
Intestinal foreign bodies, panty hose
radiograph, 357f
Hepaticadenoma,examination,418f
Image guide (IG), 8
(presence), 290f
peribronchial densities, 357f
Hepatic encephalopathy, control, 446
bundle, 8
Intestinal involvement, diffusion, 175
rectum-descending colon junction,
Hepatic hemangiosarcoma, diagnosis,
Imaging chain,beginning, 17
Intestinal leiomyoma, 302
sessile adenocarcinoma, 231f
418f
Immune-mediated enteropathy,
Intestinal lymphangiectasia, 207f
segmental airway, occlusion, 359f
Hepatocellular adenoma, view, 424f
development, 305
atlas, 206
Goldhsh, coelioscopy,644f
Hepatocutaneous syndrome,425f
Immunohistochemical analysis, 301-302
 Intestinal lymphoma, lateral abdominal 
GoLYTELY
Hiatal disorder, barium contrast
use, 185
radiograph, 248f
lavage solution, administration, 219
esophagram, 87f-88f
Imperial College Surgical Assessment
Intestinal mucosa (abnormalities),
oral administration, 174
Hiatal hernia
Device (ICSAD), 394
enteroscopy (usage), 173
Granularity
atlas, 82
Inadvertent retroversion, 103-105
Intestinal parasites, atlas, 210
increase, 294
dinical signs, 82
gastric wall,stretching, 104
Intestinal tract
term, usage, 200-201
conhrmation, endoscopy (usage),82
overcoming,tips(maneuver), 104b
diseases, clinical signs, 42
Grasping forceps, 12f
presence, 84f
Indirect coupling,ccurrence,369
surgeon, impact, 376-377
Grass awn,vaginal endoscopic view,556f
regurgitation/vomiting, observation, 41
Indirect palpation, palpation probes
Intestine passage,frcepsropelbing
Gravity fow infusion,intravenous fluids
views,85f
(usage), 401F
fashion),414-415
(usage), 517f
Hiatus, diseases(diagnosis), 82
Indirect video endoscopy,3
 Intraabdominal insufflation, impact, 405
Great Dane
High-dehnition (HD) endoscopic
Indwelling double-pigtail uretera stent,
Intraabdominal testicles, 440f
congenital megaesophagus, 51f
imaging, advantages, 18
placement, 534
identihcation, ease, 439
duodenal blind biopsy technique, 185f
High-dehnition (HD) endoscopy,
Infectious inflammatory lesions, 305
 Intraabdominal trauma, reduction,
rectum, adenomatous polyp
benehts, 18
Infectious pericarditis, subtotal
408-409
(retroflexed image), 238f
High-dehnition (HD) image,aspect
 pericardectomy, 491-492
Intracorporeal knottying
stomach, plastic foreign body
ratio, 18f
 Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
Endo Stitch device, usage, 385f
(presence), 284f-285f
High-dehnition television (HDTV), 17-18
commonness, 176
microsurgical technique, 384f
Great vessels, congenital malformations,
ATSC adoption, 18
diagnosis, 173
Intraluminal pressureinrease3
55
High-dehnition video,17-18
endoscopic examinations, 203f
Intraluminlal fluids (aspiration),
Greyhound
High-level disinfection2022
impact, 200-201
catheters (usage),297
cecum (appearance),226f
High-pressure air gun, usage, 23f
lamina proprial inflammatory cells,
Intraoperative cholangiography (IOC),
distal trachea, Filroides osleri
Hilarlymph nodes
quantitative assessment, 304
usage, 455
(presence), 353f
J005Asdon
microscopic hndings, 304
Intraoperativenephroscopy,cystoscopy
Grocott's methenamine silver stain,
enlargement, pulmonary fungal
Inflammatory lesions, observation, 304
(relationship), 520
usage, 64
infections/neoplasia (impact),
Infammatory leukogram, 202f
Intrathoracic stents, difhculty, 80
Guarded microbiologybrush,usage,344
343-344
Inflammatory polyps, resection, 519
Iohexol (Omnipaque), usage, 80
Index■675
Ipsilateral tenth intercostal port, usage,
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy (LA), 461
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy
Laparoscopic techniques, 405-410
491f
anesthesia/monitoring,462
(Continued)
Laparoscopic treatments, development, 398
Irregular foreign object,string
cannula, withdrawal, 459f
instrumentation, 456-457
Laparoscopy, 397
(attachment), 292f
care/problems, 465
position, 457f
anesthesia, 404405
fllow-up monitoring, 465
requirement, 456b
contraindications, 399
four-port technique, usage,463
intraoperative complications, 459
diagnostic indications, 398b
Jackson, Chevalier, 339
instrumentation, 462-463
patient contraindications, 455-456
exotic mammals, 630-631
Jejunostomy tubes, 317-318
requirement, 463b
patient indications,455
history, 397
complications, 327-329
intraoperative complications,465
patient preparation,457-459
images/movies,recording
endoscopic placement, 31l
patient contraindications, 461
procedure, 457-459
(importance), 402
equipment, 314-318
patient indications, 461
suction-irrigation device, requirement,
indication, 397-399,420
exterior, lubrication, 326
patient preparation, 461-462
456457
instruments, 12f
lubrication, 323-325
procedure,463-465
trocars, position, 457f
monitoring,404-405
placement, 317-318
respiratory distress, signs
visualization, 458
 patient evaluation/preparation,
removal, 324
(monitoring),465
Laparoscopic cryptorchid castration,
403-404
repositioning, 324
retroperitoneal lining, penetration,
438439
 patient positioning, techniques,
Jejunum,179
463-465
anesthesia/monitoring, 439
411-413
blind biopsy technique, 183f
suction-irrigation device, helpfulness,
care/problems, 441
popularity,419
open views, 188f
463
instrumentation, 439b
postoperative consideration,417
J maneuver(retroversion), 102-103
three-port technique, usage, 463
intraoperative complications, 441
 problems, 415-416
importance, 102
vascular invasion, 461
patient evaluation, 439
retractors,xamples,403f
reversal, 103
Laparoscopic assistance,
patient indications,439
right lateral approach, 421-422
Joints
treatments, 398b
patient preparation,439-440
surgery, approach, 663t
arthroscopic evaluation, 620
Laparoscopic-assisted cystopexy (LAC),
procedure, 439-440
surgical instruments, examples, 403f
predistension, 612
464f, 518519
Laparoscopic equipment list, 399b, 401b
techniques, 405-410
anesthesia, 442
Laparoscopic exploration, 413-415
treatments,398b
complications, 445
Laparoscopic extrahepatic portosystemic
two-dimensional viewing, excellence,
Keeshond, duodenal adenocarcinoma,
fllow-up monitoring,445
shunt attenuation, 446
405-406
213f
instrumentation, 442
anesthesia/monitoring, 447
Laparotomy, conversion,477
Kelly hemostats,401
laparoscopictrocars, usage,518-519
complications, 449-450
Lap Mentor, 394-396
Ketamine, diazepam (combination),
patient evaluation/preparation, 442
fllow-up monitoring,450
Laryngeal anatomy, 332f
66-86
patient indications/contraindications,
instrumentation, 446b
Laryngeal architecture (distortion), mass
Keyhole transvesicular cystourethroscopy,
442
patient evaluation, 446
(impact), 338f
542-544
postoperative care, 445
patient indications/contraindications,
Laryngeal collapse
complications, 544
procedure, 442
446
atlas, 336
procedure, 543-544
Laparoscopic-assisted gastric foreign
patient preparation, 446-449
example, 336f
Kidney biopsy, 427-428, 637
body removal, 464f
procedure, 447-449
Laryngeal edema
complications, 428
anesthesia,451-452
Laparoscopic instrumentation, 399-402
atlas, 334
hemorrhaging, complication,428
indications/contraindications, 451
Laparoscopic liver biopsy, complication 
development, 335f
indications, 427
instrumentation, 451
rate, 423
Laryngeal function/motion, assessment,
instrumentation, 427
 patient evaluation/preparation,
Laparoscopiceedle holders,
332
patient preparation, 427
451-454
investment, 379-381
Laryngeal granuloma, 337f
patient selection, 427
portal placement,452f
Laparoscopic ovariectomy (Lap OVE),
Laryngeal motion
postoperative care,428
postoperative care, 454
466
evaluation,332333
procedure, 427-428
postoperative complications, 454
performing, decision,469
vocalization, relationship, 332-333
restraint, 427
preoperative workup, 451
surgical site,470-471
Laryngeal neplasia,atlas38
sample procurement, 428
surgical procedure, 452-454
two-port technique, 471-475
Laryngeal obstruction,development,35f
Kidney retraction, blunt probe
Laparoscopic-assisted gastropexy (LAG),
Laparoscopic ovariohysterectomy
Laryngeal saculitis,atla5
(usage),464f
431435
(Lap OHE),466, 475-476
Laryngeal structure
Kidney sampling, ventral
anesthesia, 431
performing, decision,469
abnormalities, 332
approach, 428
conhrmation, ultrasound examination
surgical site, 470-471
evaluation, 332
Knot pusher
(usage),434f
Laparoscopic palpation probe, 12f
Laryngeal vault, endoscopy, 331
requirement, 456
dogs,placement,431f
Laparoscopic problems, 415-416 
Laryngoscopy, 331
usage, 458
examination/photography,434f
Laparoscopic skills development
ancillary tools/procedures, 333
Knottying
follow-up monitoring, 434
virtual reality simulation system, 395f
chest radiographs,indication,333
equipment list, 381b
incision, seromuscular layer, 433f
virtualreality simulationsystem,
complications, 333
requirement, 379
instrumentation, 431
haptic feedback/visualization
differences, 333
Koi carp
intraoperative complications, 433-434
(combination), 395f
injectable anesthetis, usage, 331-332
coelioscopy,644f
 patient evaluation/preparation,
Laparoscopic spay, 466-467
instrumentation, 331
dorsal recumbency positioning, 642f
431433
 anesthesia/surgical preparation,
patient preparation,331
 patient indications/contraindications,
470-471
patient restraint/positioning,331-332
431
dip, location, 470f
performing, 331
Labrador retriever
postoperative care, 434
complications, 476-477
procedure, 332-333
adhesions, thoracoscopic
procedure, 432433
equipment, requirement, 469
risk, 333
view, 488f
simplicity/speed, 433-434
instrumentation, 469
Larynx,radiographic evaluation, 333
antrum, Tupperware fragments,278f
Laparoscopic-assted incision cystopexy,
LigaSure forceps, placement problem,
Laser energy
anus, sessile plasmacytoma, 243f
443F
418f
application, 373
diffuseerosivesuppurativecolitis35f
Laparoscopic-assted kidney biopsy
misconception, 467
electromagnetic radiation derivation,
laryngeal collapse, 336f
advantage,427
ovariectomy, selection ( frequency),
373374
rectum,leiomyosarcoma,242f
collection, 427
469
wavelengths, impact, 374
vascular ring anomaly, persistent right
two-person process, 427
 physical examination, 468
Laser light absorption coefhcient, 374f
aortic arch, 59f
Laparoscopic-assisted resection/
postoperative care, 477
Laser lithotripsy, 526-527
Lacteal dilation, degree, 175
anastomosis, 418f
surgical room setup, 468469
intracorporeal fragmentation,
Laparoscopes
Laparoscopic-assisted treatments,
surgical techniques, 471-476
involvement, 540-541
cannula, usage, 11f
laparoscopic equipment list, 399b
Laparoscopic surgery, 397
Laser-tissue interaction, 373-374
humidity, reduction, 415
Laparoscopic bile duct exploration
atlas, 418
Laser treatment, complication, 80
image,blurring,415
(LBDE), usage, 455
enhancement,41l1-413
Laser wavelengths,transmission, 373
light cable/camera head, attachment,
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC), 455
Laparoscopic suturing
Lateral barium contrast esophagram,
14F
anesthesia/monitoring, 457
instrument list,381b
67F
trocar, placement,437f
care/problems,459-460
operative approach, plan,381
Lateral deflection knob (operation),right
usage, lens surface (examination/
complications, 460
port placement,baseball diamond
hand (usage), 37-38
deaning), 415
disease-specihc contraindications, 455
analogy, 381f
Lateral femoral condyle, OCD, 620f
variations, 399-400
following-up monitoring, 460
setup, 381
Lateral thoracic radiographs, usage, 54f
676■Index
Lateral videofuoroscopy sequence,
Lizards, 646-648
Lymphosarcoma, proximal duodenum
Mesenteric lymph nodes, infltration,
guidewire balloon (usage),74f
coelioscopy, 647f, 649f
(involvement),307f
307308
Lavage solution, oral administration,
telescope entry sites,646f
Lympoplasmacytic enteritis, 208f
Metallic stenting, 544-546
1
endoscopy procedures,642-646
Lymposarcoma, differentiation,21l
Metastatic neoplastic lesions, exfoliated
 Left abdominal gutter, exploration,
left paralumbar entry, 648
cells(identincation), 339
b
membranes, minor perforations, 648
MetriCide, 23-24
 Left adrenal mass, computed
Lobar bronchi, branches (appearance),
Maine Coon cat, esophageal stricture,
MetriZyme, 20, 35
tomographic image,462F
342
272f273f
Midcervical trachea, narrowing, 352f
Left caudal lobe,segmental branch
Locking-loop pigtail catheters, usage,
Major duodenal papila
165 ^AAe Iea a1pP!
(eosinophilic granuloma), 354f
524525, 532f
appearance, 195f
Middle ear evaluation, 598-599
Left caudal thoracic air sac, liver
Longer scope, 106-107
presence, 196f
Midgastric body, endoscope tip
examination/biopsy, 639f
insertion, 106
view,188f
(position), 109f
Left cranial lung lobe,bullae removal,
Loop conhguration, allowance, 38
Major papilla, visualization, 196f
Midjejunum,nectarine pit foreignbody
498f
Lower esophageal sphincter,
Malasseziα pachyderrmatis, 588
removal, 291f
 Left ear, canine tympanic membrane,
breign body retraction (difhculty),
Male bulldog.
Midthoracic esophagus, 48f
595f
259
hiatal hernia, views, 85f
distension, 47f
Left mainstem bronchus
Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy
reflux esophagitis, 62f
Miniature poodle, gastric polyp
collapse, 356f
general anesthesia,usage,35
views, 85f
(presence), 306f
left atrial compression, atlas, 356
protocol standard, 173-174
Male dogs
Miniature schnauzer,descending colon
Left ovary
Lower respiratory tract, evaluation,
fluoroscopic/endoscopic images, 535F
(carcinoid), 242f
elevation, 473F
633-634
transurethral cystoscopy, 515, 517-518
 Minilaparotomy-placed catheter, carbon
lifting, 473f
Lower urinary collctin system, diseases,
wethra,examination, 509f
dioxide infusion, 410
observation,473f
15-0
Male domestic long hair cut, sophageal
Minimally invasive surgery
Left-sided adrenalectomy,port
Low-prohle gastrostomy tubes (PEG-B),
diverticulum, 55f
anesthesiologists, preference, 404
placement,464f
316317
Male domestic short hair cat, laryngeal
commonness, 655
Left uterine horn (proximal portion),
example, 316f
architecture (distortion), 338f
psychomotorchallenges 394t
bipolarelectrocautery (application),
replacement, 317
Male English bulldog, calculi (presence),
technique, 397
474f
stylet,passage22F
 51lf
virtual reality simulators, 395t
Left uterus, transection, 474f
Luer-Lok adaptors, 555-556
 Male German shorthaired pointer,
Minor duodenal papilla, position, 196f
Leiomyosarcoma, 302
Lumen
arytenoid cartilages/vocal folds
Minor papilla, visualization, 196f
Leptospirosis, 97-98
diameter, narrowing, 190f
(bilateral adduction),336f
MIST-VR system, 394-396
Lesions, gradation, 304
endoscope tip, positioning, 183f
Male Labrador retriever
Mixed-breed dog
Ligamentum arteriosum
hemangiosarcoma, 242f
persistent right aortic arch,59f
colonic spasm, 244f
dissection, 503f
ileal orihce, protrusion, 180
reflux esophagitis, 63f
descending colon
vascular clip placement, 503f
appearance,197f
vocal folds/arytenoid cartilages,
adenomatouspolyps, 239f
LigaSure (Valleylab), 370f
location, 223f
hxation, 336f
erosions, 237f
device, usage, 440
Lumenal air, suctioning, 104
Male neutered Collie, partial stricture, 69f
granularity/friability, increase, 237f
forceps, placement (problem),418f
Luminal view, loss, 224f
Male neutered Golden retriever, chronic
hyperemia, 234f
handpieces, 370
Luminance, 16
esophageal strictures, 69f
mucosal granularity,increase,234f
usage, 441f
Lungs
Male Siamese cat,gastroesophageal
nodules, presence, 237f
LigaSure systems, specialized forceps
abnormalities, 488
reflux, 83f
wnuaponp
0-69s (guamdaaaap)
biopsy, 637
 Malignant nasal obstruction, palliation
mucosal appearance, 211f
LigaSure V,372, 456,463
 specimens,endoscopic stapling
(transnares curettage),563
mucosal irregularity, 202f
Light guide(LG), 8
devices(usage),486
Malignant obstructions, urethral balloon
esophageal pork bone foreign body,
bundles, usage, 8
hilus, localization, 498
dilation/metallic stenting, 544-546
presence, 268f269f
light emission, 15
lobes
complications, 545-546
lateral radiographs,260f
Light sources, 13-15
removal,500f
patient selection, 544-545
mucosal granularity, 202f
color/brightness, acceptability, 14
 sampling, pretied loop ligatures
procedure, 544-545
rectum
selection, factors, 14
(usage), 485
Malignant tumors, impact,242
 adenomatous polyps, 239f
Light-transmitting cables, 1415
masses, observation, 489f
Marker catheter, placement, 544-545
pedunculated adenocarcinoma,
availability, 14
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Masses, sampling, 110112
231f
construction, 15
evaluation,555
Mass esions, observation, 294
thoracic esophagus, hshhook
Lipogranulomas (obstructing
origination, 468
Mast cell neoplasia, 215f
(presence), 271f
granulomatouslesions),208f
test kits, 468
 MeGill Inanimate System for Training 
ulcerative lymphoplasmacellular
Lithotripsy,cystoscopy (usage),507
Lymphangiectasia,206
and Evaluation ofLaparoscopic Skills
colitis, 235f
Liver
Lymphangiography, usage, 494
(MISTELS), 393
ventrodorsal radiographs, 260f
cirrhosis, 420f
Lymphaticchannels,dilation
Medial egresscannula, placement,
Mixed-breed hunting dog, glottic lumen
evaluation, right lateral approach,
Lymph node biopsy, 430
619-819
obstruction, 338f
421422
complications, 430
Medial meniscus, bucket-handle tear, 620f
Mobile endoscopy services, usage, 35
examination
indications, 430
Medial shoulder compartment syndrome,
Modihed Hasson technique, usage, 452
left caudal thoracic air sac, 639f
instrumentation, 430
618
Modihed Roeder knot, 385f
palpation probe, usage, 422
 patient preparation, 430
Mediastinal biopsy, 485
double halfhitch, creation, 386f387f
mass,biopsy/staging, 418f
patient selection, 430
Mediastinal debridement, 488
Molecular testing, 301-302
nght medial lobe (lifting), palpation
postoperative care, 430
Mediastinal pleura (sampling),cup
Monoflament absorbable materials
probe(usage),423F
procedure, 430
biopsy forceps (usage), 485
preference, 381
view, 424f425f
restraint,430
Mediastinum
securing,383
Liverbiopsy, 397,419-423, 637
sample procurement, 430 
dissection, 506f
Monomeric liquid diets, 327
bleeding, correlation, 420-421
specimen, metastasis (presence),
electrocautery, usage, 505f
Monopolarelectrosurgery,tissue effects,
cathsh, 645f
418F
scissors, usage, 503f
367368
complications, 423
Lymphocytic enteritis
evaluation, 479
smajss peieinsonaa jeiodouol
entry site, determination,421
impact, 204f
fenestration, 484f
367369
indications, 419-420
vomiting,173
Megaesophagus
Mosquito hemostat, placement, 411f
instrumentation, 420
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic inflammatory
atlas, 5052
Motility disturbance, 42
left caudal thoracic air sac, 639f
bowel disease, 185
diagnosis conhrmation, survey
Mucosa
 patient preparation, 420-421
Lymphoma
radiography (usage), 51
appearance, 111f
patient selection, 419-420
atlas, 241
endoscopic examination,
biopsy instrument, seating, 184f
postoperative care,423
diagnosis, endoscopy (usefulness),
nonrequirement, 51
procedure, 421422
173
hypomotility,53
examination/description, 294-295
requirement,420
gastrointestinal neoplasia,307-308
long-term management, 312
forceps,perpendicular position,
restraint, 421
Lymphoplasmacellular colitis, 235f
cbservation, 5lf-52f
228-229
sample procurement,422
Lymphoplasmacytic enteritis,209f
PRAA,association, 479
forceps cups,burial, 183f
specimen collection,5-mm oval biopsy
Lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis (LPR),
term, reference, 50
scalloping effect, mucosal irregularity/
forceps (usage), 424f
574
tubes, 312
granularity,201F
Index
677
Mucosal assessment, endoscopic criteria
Nasopharyngeal polyp, 597f, 603f
Obstructive tumor, transnares curettage
Overtube (Continued)
(usage), 295b
Nasopharynx (NP)
debridement,583f
position,254f
juawainsoid <suaads (sdong pesosn 
dlarity, 584f
Obturators, 610
usage, 259
(push-off technique), 299f
clearance, 603
Olive, usage, 412f, 415
usefulness,example,255f
Mucosal erosion, 352f
external evaluation, 565566
Olympus GIF Type 10 side-viewing
Overtube, usefulness, 252
Mucosal erythema, observation, 101
full mass obstruction, 583f
endoscope, distal end, 31
Mucosal folds
inflammatory polyps, 602f
 Olympus GIF Type XK10 oblique
P
endoscopic appearance, 223f
instrument palpation, 581f
viewing panendoscope, distal
Pac man approach, 175
erythematous mucosal streaks/
nonspecinc chronic inflammation,
end, 31
Palpation probes
erosions, 62f
570-572
Olympus GIF XQ10 lexible endoscope,
example, 401f
Mucosal friability, 206f
tumors, 577
220f
pressure, application, 428f
increase, 231f
Natural orifce translumenal endoscopic
Olympus Injector Needle, 75
usage, 422
Mucosal granularity, increase, 204f
surgery (NOTES),660
Olympus XP-20, usage, 31
example, 423F
Mucosal hemorrhages, scattering, 234f
approaches, consideration,661
Omental bursa
Pancreas
Mucosal irregularity, 200f, 206f
benefits/risks, 662-664
exploration, 447
distal right wing (sampling), biopsy
air insufflation, 202f
caveats, 663-664
splenocaval shunt, observation, 448f
forceps (usage),426f
Mucosal pitting effects,f
equipment setup, 661
Omnipaque, usage, 80
evaluation, right lateral approach,
Mucosal redness,increase (hyperemia), 230
photograph, 661f
One-lung ventilation (OLV)
421422
presence, 234f
preoperative preparation, 661
achievement, 483
examination, 426
Mucosal slide-by technique, 225f
procedures
importance, 497
biopsies, performing,426
Mucosal tearing, 76f
description,661-662
usage, 483
right lateral approach, 426f
Multihre endostapler cartridges,
endoscopic supplies, 661b
One-port ovariectomy, 475
right limb, visualization,425-426
variation, 363-364
surgery, approach, 663t
One-step gastrostomy tubes, 317
view, 425f-426f
Multinodular adenocarcinoma,
usage, anticipation, 660-661
One-step low-profle gastrostomy tubes
Pancreatic biopsy, 423-426, 637
retroflexed view, 240f
Necrotizing pyogranulomatous
(OSB), 317
complications, 426
Multiple-entry 3-mm endoscopy, 625F
esophagitis,Pythiumnsidism
percutaneous positioning, 317f
indications, 423-424
system,626f
(impact), 64
placement, 319-321
instrumentation, 424
Multiple-entry ferret laparoscopy, 63f
Nectarine pit foreign body,removal, 291f
safety, 326
patient preparation,425
Multipurpose flexible video endoscope,
Needle holder 
One-way angulation, 6
patient selection, 423424
4F
loading time, 382-383
Open-end Tomcat catheter, irrigation,
postoperative care, 426
Multi-Purpose Rigid endoscope
pirouette technique, 382f
598F
procedure, 425-426
5Fflexibleiopsyforcepsinsertin,
Neoplasia, 572-574
 Open gastrostomy incision, appearance,
restraint, 425
1lF
atlas, 242
453f
sample procurement, 426
locking, 11f 
impact, 97, 343-344
Open pylric orince,endoscopetip
Pancreatic cysts,laparoscopic evaluation,
operating sheaths, 11f
subtotal pericardectomy, usage,
(position),192f
423-424
protectionheath,usage,
491-492
Open ring gastric foreignbodies,260-261
Pancreatic insufhciency,trypsin-like
Multipurpose video endoscope,four-way
suspicion,brush cytology
Operating laparoscopes, 13f
immunoreactivity assay, 201f
tip deflection, 7f
(helpfulness), 229-230
Operating scopes, convenience, 12
Pancreatitis, 425f
Muscle-specic actin,302
Neoplasms, 306-308
Operating sheath, 1l
diagnosis, endoscopy (usage), 186
Myringotomy
Neoplastic lesion, tissue sample
Optical space
Panhypoproteinemia, 207f
complications,594
collection, 211
ascitic fluid, presence, 419f
Papillay adenocarcinoma, 214f
incision,Tomcat catheter (usage), 594f
Nephrolithiasis
insuflation, relationship, 410-411
Papillary ileal orihce, protrusion, 199f
video otoscopy, usage, 589
complications, 528-529
Optical zoom, 15-16
Paradoxic motion, 103-105
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy,
Oral speculum,placement,34f
Paraesophageal hiatal hernia, 85f
N
527-529
Oscar hsh,presentation, 643f
Parasitic nodules, 353f
Napkin-ring lesion, 307
interventional approach, 527-529
Osleri osleri nematodes, impact, 343
Parasitic rhinitis, 572-573
 Nasal breathing, restoration, 580-581
patient selection, 527-528
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD)
Parasitic tracheobronchitis, atlas, 353
Nasal cavity,tumors, 577
 Nephroscopy, cystoscope/arthroscope
elbow,615 
Parasoci motion, 103-105
Nasal discharge
(usage),510f
lesions, view, 617f
Parenchymal liver disease (diagnosis),
causes, 565b
Nephrostomy tubes,locking-loop pigtail
shoulder, 617
liver biopsy (requirement),420
characteristics, 564-565
catheter (usage), 525f
Otic anatomy, 590-593
Parietal pleura, evaluation, 479
Nasal disease
Neuron-specinc enolase (NSE),302
Otitis externa, erythema/glandular
Parts,laral cls
Parrot Jaw, 380f
patient evaluation, 564-566
Neutered male domestic long hair cat
hyperplasia,588F
physical examination, 565-566
esophageal stricture, perforation, 77f
Otitis media (OM)
(positioning),637f
radiography, 566-567
trichobezoar-induced esophageal
absence, 595f
Pars flaccida, 590
thinoscopic diagnosis/treatment, 563
stricture, 68f
problem,597
bulge, 591f
Nasal foreign material, retrieval 573f
 Neutered male domestic short hair cat
resistance, otic mixtures (usage), 600t
Pars tensa
 Nasal lumen,reevaluation, 582f
esophageal squamous cellcarcinoma, 90f
Otoendoscope,position,93f
bulge, 595f
Nasal passage
fbrous web, 70f71f
Otoscopic evaluation,rigid endoscope
otitis media,presence,596f
clarity,584f
imperforate stricture, 70f71f
(usage),597
otitis media, presence, 596f
periodic lushing/suctioning, 581f
trichobezoar-induced esophagitis,61f
Otoscopy, 587
tears, 596f
Nasal tumors
Neutered maleminiature poodle,erosive
laser energy, 375-376
 Partial collars, open ring leash
characteristics, 577-578
esophagitis,63f
recommendation, 570-572
attachments, 260-261
palliative treatment, 577-584
Newfoundland bitch, vaginal endoscope,
Oval grasping snares, 251f
Partial lung lobectomy, 497
preoperative evaluation, 579
558f
Ovarian excision site, observation, 474f
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide
Nasojejunostomy tubes
 Nodular adenocarcinoma, biopsy, 240f
Ovariectomy
(PaCO2), increase, 482-483
advantages/disadvantages, 314
Nodular liver,view, 425f
completion,474, 474f
Partial pressure ofoxygen (PaO)
antegrade technique, 324-325
Noninfectious inflammatory lesions, 
hook, options, 469
decrease, 482-483
complications, 329
304-305
ovariohysterectomy, choice, 469-470
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT),
feeding, 327
Nonneoplastic growths, atlas, 337
Ovary
566
placement,324-326
Nonneoplastic polyps/nodules
excision/examination,474f
Passerines, endoscopy procedures, 633
demonstration, lateral radiograph,
(formation), chronic inflammatory
exposure, 472-473
 Patent ductus arteriousus (PDA), 479
325f
process(impact), 343
image quality, 416f
ligation,481
proximal jejunum placement, 325f
Nonresectable malignant tumors,
landmarks, 472f
Patent ductus arteriousus (PDA)
retrograde guidewire technique,
reduction, 376
Over-the-counter (OTC) canned diets,
occlusion, 492
325326
Nose,external evaluation, 565-566
312
instrumentation, 492
 Nasopharyngeal diseases, 570-572
Nutritional support, benefts, 31l
Over-the-wire (OTW) balloon, deflation,
intraoperative complications, 493
symptom,570-572
7273
patient evaluation, 492
Nasphayeallenvibilt
0
Over-the-wire (OTW) endoscopic
patient preparation,492
 Nasopharyngeal mass
Objective Structured Assessment of
channel,72
postoperative care, 493
felinelateral skullradiograph, 567f
Technical Skills (OSATS), 393
Overtube, 42
procedure, 492-493
feline skull computed tomography
Obstructing granulomatouslesions
disadvantages, 253
Patient fasting, 404
image, 567f
(lipogranulomas), 208f
passage, 252
Patient hydration, 427
678■Index
 Patient/instruments, baseball held
Pericardectomy,490
Pneumoperitoneum
Proximal jejunum
concept (close-up), 407f, 408f
indications, 490
cardiopulmonary effects, 416
appearance, 194f
Patient positioning, 35f
instrumentation, 490
establishment, trocar-cannula
endoscopetip,positioning,182f
Patton HotBlade,tip, 369f
intraoperative complications,492
placement, 413f
nasojejunostomytube placement,35f
Peach pit gastric foreign body,presence,
patient evaluation, 490
production, 405f
Proximal stomach, 99-102
275f
portal placement,rightlateral
Veressneedle, usage, 409F
circumferential examination, 102-103
Pediatric endosope,purchase(sacrince),
approach,491f
Pneumothorax
endoscopes, advancement, 10l-102
31
postoperative care, 492
establishment, 484
Pseudomembrane formation,63f
Pelvic fractures, 514
preparation, 490
thoracic radiography, 43
Pseudomnas aeruginoa, 588
Percutaneous cystolithotomy (PCCL),
procedure, 490-492
Polydioxanone (PDS), usage, 80
Psittacines,endoscopy procedures,633
522, 542544
Pericardial window, creation,491
Polyethylene tubing, usage, 297
Psychomotor training, virtual reality, 393
complications, 544
Pericardiocentesis
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 301
Puli, inflammatory bowel disease
procedure, 543-544
accomplishment,488
analysis,308
(endoscopic examinations),203f
Percutaneous cystostomy tube
white catheter, usage, 489f
identifcation, 64
 Pulmonary biopsy, 485-486
placement, 546
Pericardium,necropsy (appearance),
utility, 185
sample
complications, 546
495f
Polymeric liquid diets, 327
endoscopic gastrointestinal anasto-
patient selection, 546
Periesophageal masses
Polypectomy
motic stapler, usage, 486f
procedure, 546
atlas, 94
description, 604
loop ligature, usage, 485f
 Percutaneous endoscopic
dinical signs, 94
snares, usage, 250-251
Pulmonary compromise, 416
gastrojejunostomy (PEG-I), 311
cbstruction (evaluation), endoscopy
 Polypoid adenocarcinoma, 240f
Pulmonary cytology,346f-347f
antegrade guidewire technique,
(usage),94
Polypoid mucosal hyperplasia, 575f 
323-324
Pulmonary function, elevated
presence,94f
Polyps
intraabdominal pressure (physiologic
antegrade wire-free technique, 324
Periesophageal mediastinal density,
0s aesndosos
effects), 405t
placement techniques, requirement,
increase, 43
removal, 602f
Pulmonary fungal infections, impact,
318
Peritoneal cavity, carbon dioxide
Pomeranian
343344
retrograde guidewire technique,
insufflation, 405f
descending colon, nodules (presence),
Pulmonary lesion, spontaneous
322323
 Peritoneal mesothelioma, laparoscopic
237F
pneumothorax (association),487
 Percutaneous endoscopic
view, 419f
esophagus
 Pulmonary nodules (presence), thoracic
gastrojejunostomy (PEG-J) tubes, 312
Persistent right aortic arch (PRAA),
bone foreign body/wishbone,pres-
radiography (usage), 91f
advantages, 313
56f, 58f
ence, 264f265f
Pulsion diverticula (food impaction), 53
complications, 328t, 329
megaesophagus, association, 479
dilation, thoracic radiographs, 436f
Pumps, usage, 19
disadvantages, 313-314
treatment, portal position, 502f
inspiratory dyspnea, 436f
Purse-string suture
mechanical complications, decrease,
vascular ring anomaly, 57f, 59f
intestinal lymphangiectasia,207f
S1t^uoymsaxa
313
Persistent right aortic arch (PRAA),
rectum,nodules (presence),37f
placement,412F
usage, 311-312
thoracoscopic correction, 501
nght caudal lobe, segmental branch
Pyelonephritis, retrograde ureteral
ventrodorsal radiographs, 324f
anesthesia, 502
(polypoid formation), 354f
catheterization, 529-532
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
intraoperative complications,503
Pyloric canal, opening (identincation
(PEG), 311
patient contraindications, 501
chronic bronchitis, 355f
difhculty), 106
kit, 315f
 patient evaluation/preparation,
descending colon, lumen
Pyloric mucosal hypertrophy, 105-106
technique, illustration, 662f
501-502
(hemangiosarcoma),242F
Pyloric orince,appearance, 177
Percutaneousendoscopic gastrostomy
 patient indications, 501
inspiration, open airway, 355f
Pyloric outlow obstruction,gastric
(PEG) tubes, 312, 327-329
surgical procedure,502503
left caudal lobe, segmental branch
polyp,306f
advantage, 312
surgical technique, 502503
(eosinophilic granuloma), 354f
Pylorus, 105-107
complications,328t
Peyer's patches
stomach
advancement, 187f, 192f
design,314
appearance, 188f
coin foreign body, presence, 276f
closure, 105106
disadvantage,312-313
visualization,202f
reignbodies,presence,282f83f
maneuvers, facilitation, 177-178
feeding, usage, 78
P-glycoprotein, cell surface expression,
tracheal collapse, 355f
deformity,32
flushing, 327
308
Positive end-expiratory pressure ( PEEP),
duodenum,junction, 192f
insertion site
 Phenylpropanolamine (PPA), canine
amount (recommendation), 483
endoscope, advancement, 105,
conhrmation, 318
response, 512
Postprandial vomiting gastric polp,
177178
determination, 318
Phrenic nerve
306f
diffhculty, 106-107
internal bumper, 315f-316f
observation, 487f
Power, dehnition, 366
example,107f
positioning, 319
visualization, 500f
Power shaver, importance, 609
inability, 182-184
maintenance, 326-327
Physaloptera nematodes, presence,
Premature tube removal, 327
identincation, 105
placement, 318-321
306F
Prerhinoscopic clinical pathology, 566
longer scope, usage, 106-107
complications, 327
Physiologic variables, assessment/
Prerhinoscopic evaluation,
pediatric endoscope, advancement
disease-related/conformational
maintenance,99
recommendation, 568t
(problem), 177-178
factors, 313
PIE syndrome, 346f-347f
Pressure tester, attachment, 8f
relaxation, 106
pull technique, usage, 319f-320f
Pigmented caudal esophagus, 49f
Pretied loop ligatures
short scope,usage,106
snare, passage, 662
Pinch artifacts, creation, 301
components, 389f-390f
traversal, difhculty/frustration, 107
 placement, pull method (equipment 
Pinch biopsy forceps, 295-297
usefulness, 383
Pyometra, problems, 467-468
checklist),316b
usage, 295
 Primary colors (RGB), 16
Pyothorax, evaluation (cannula
replacement, complication, 322
Pinch forceps,usage, 296f
Primary neoplastic lesions, exfoliated
placement), 505f
retention, 314
Pine needles, accumulation, 288f
cells (identincation), 339
Pyothorax,thoracoscopic evaluation/
usage, reservation, 311
Pink-out, production,517-518
 Primary secretory otitis media ( PSOM),
treatment, 504
Piscine coelioscopy, difhculty,
590
anesthesia, 504
Percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL),
641-642
Primary tracheal collapse, atlas, 351
intraoperative complications, 506
522, 529, 536
Pixels, 16 
Proinflammatory cytokine mRNA
patient contraindications, 504
bleeding, excess,529
Plastic ball (retrieval), laparascopic
expression, 305
patient evaluation/preparation, 504
complications, 529
assistance, 454f
Protein-losing enteropathy, 304-305, 305f
patient indications, 504
patient selection,29,6
Plastic foreign body, presence,
Prothrombin time (PT), 566
surgical procedure,505-506
procedure, 529, 536
284f285f
evaluation, recommendation,420-421
surgical technique,505-506
recommendation, 527
Platelet count,evaluation
 Proton pump inhibitor, 78
Pythium insidiosum, impact, 64
Percutaneous nephrolithotomy
(recommendation),420-421
Proximal antrum, visualization, 102
weterolithotomy (PCNUL), 522
Pleura,abnormalities,488
Proximal descending duodenum
Q
 Percutaneous nephrostomy tube
Pleural biopsy, 485
air insufflation, impact, 188f
Quadrate lobe
placement, 537539
cup biopsy forceps, usage,485f
endoscope tip,lateral/ventrodorsal
appearance, 421f
complications, 539
Pleural effusion, 43
projections, 189f
example, 540f
presence,thoracic radiography
major duodenal papilla, view, 188f
R
patient selection,538
(usage), 91f
wnuaponp jewixod
Rabbits
procedure, 538-539
Pleural lesion, observation, 480f
endoscope,advancement, 177-178
endoscopic dental pathology,629f
Perianal tissues,grip (tightening),
 Pleural surface, inflammation, 505f
involvement, 307f
endoscopy procedures, 627-628
223F
Pneumomediastinum, 43
ulceration, visualization, 174
rhinoscopy, 630f
Index■679
Radiofrequency, 6ll-612
Retrograde guidewire technique,
Right ovary
Screw-in trocar, 408-409
anesthesia/monitoring,61l-612
322323, 325326
exploration,472F
Second Babcock forceps, trocar (usage),
patient evaluation, 611
backloading, requirement,326
cbservation, 472f
443F
patient preparation, 61l
Retrograde technique,534
Right retained testicle(grasping),trocar
Secretions(collection),guarded
Radiosurgery,term (application), 365
Retrograde ureteral catheterization,
placement, 440f
microbiology brush (usage),344
Radio wave radiosurgery (RWRS), 365,
529-532
Right-sided destructive soft tissue mass,
Segmental airway,bleeding,354f
371
complications,532
canine open-mouth ventrodorsal
Segmental tracheal collapse, mucosal
popularity, 371
patient selection,530
view, 566f
erosion(accompaniment),352f
Raptors, endoscopy procedures, 633
procedure, 531532
Right sixthintercostal port,usage,491f
Self-Expanding Metallic Stents (SEMS),
Rectal foreign body, 262
Retrograde ureteropyelography
Right trocar, 10-mm laparoscopic Duval/
524-525, 526f
suspicion, 262
fuoroscopic image, 531f
Babcock forceps (passage), 432f
Sel-limiting hemorrhage,debridement
Rectractors,examples,403f
performing, 529
Rigid abdominal laparoscopic endoscopy,
(impact), 583f
Rectum
Retroperitoneal lining, penetration,
376-377
Semen
adenomatous polyp, 239f
463465
Rigid antegrade rhinoscopy, 568-570
evacuation,air(usage), 560f
retroflexed image,238f
Retroversion (J maneuver),102-103
Rigidbiopsy frcps,insertin,
infusion, 560f
benign masses, 238
importance, 102
Rigid bronchoscope,development, 339
Semirigid endoscopes,9-13
diffuse nodular lymphoma, 241f
reversal, 103
Rigid colonoscopy,218
example, 13f
endoscopes advancement,224-225
 schematic diagram, 102f
performing, 221
 outer diameters, 10
leiomyosarcoma, 242f
 Reusable endoscopic instruments, steam
preparation, 219
Septum, puncture site (mucus flow), 604f
mucosal folds,endoscopic appearance,
20t-10t4ueg
procedure, 221-224
 Serial digital interface (SDI) standard,
223F
Reverse Trendelenburg,4ll-413
Rigid endoscopes, 9-13
usage, 16
nodular adenocarcinoma, biopsy, 240f
Rhabdomyolysis,326
30-degree visual held, 564f
Sessile adenocarcinoma,23lf, 239f
nodules, presence, 237f
Rhinoscopic-assisted transnares
characteristics, 221-223
ulceration, 240f
pedunculated adenocarcinoma, 231f
urettage, usage, 577584
design/usage, simplicity, 12
Sessile plasmacytoma, 243f
sessile adenocarcinoma, 239f
Rhinoscopy, 563
example,9t
Severe pyelonephritis, retrograde ureteral
stricture, 244f
anesthesia, 567-568
Karl Storz model, 564f
catheterization, 529-532
Rectum-descending colon
complications, 570
laser energy, 375-376
Sewing needle foreign body, 274f
diffusenodular adenocarcinoma, 240f
contraindications, 563
ight direction, 9-10
Sharp(rat-tooth)grasping forceps,251f
junction, sessle adenocarcinoma, 231f
diagnoses, 570-572
outer diameters, 10
Shavers, 609
Rectus abdominis muscle suture
equipment, 563-564
sterilization/storage trays,23f
Sheath,locking, 10-11
placement,444f
options, 563-564
usage, 10-11
Sheathed cytology brush
Recurrent urinary tract infection/
examination, patient positioning,
Rigid endoscopy, 19-20
example, 34f
inflammation,512
568f
endoscopic instrumentation/
requirement,34
 Red Blue Green (RGB), 16
exotic mammals, 628-630
documentation, 3-26
Sheltie, acute dyspnea, 52f
primary colors, 16
history/signalment,564-565
Shepherd cross dog,hematuria
standard, 16
indications, 563
examples, 298f
(observation), 515f
Reducer,usage,402f
laser energy,375-376
usage, 297-298
Sheland sheepdog, polypoid
Refeeding syndrome,avoidance,3637
patient evaluation, 564566
Rigidleather patch, presence,808f
adenocarcinoma, 240f
Reflux-associated nasopharyngeal
physical examination, 565-566
Rigid proctosigmoidoscopes, usage, 218
Shih Tzu
stenosis
rabbits, 630f
Rigid telescopes, CCU connection, 15f
 ascending colon, multifocal
canine computer tomographic image,
radiography,566-567
Roast, plastic/cord wrappings (removal),
igidantegraderhinoscopy,
ganglioneuroma,243f
571F
288f289f
vaginal mass, cranial region, 513f
canine rhinoscopic image, 572f
568-570
Rodents, endoscopy procedures, 627-628
 Short scope
Reflux esophagitis,62
nigid integrated endoscopes,
Rod lens otoendoscope,5F channel, 13f
insertion, 106
indication, 85f
recommendation,579
Rod lens telescopes, inavailability, 13
usage, 106
 visual examination, 570
Romanovsky-type stain, usage, 297
Shoulder
Reflux risk, decrease, 313
Right adrenal carcinoma,view,429f
Roth Net retriever, 252f
conditions,618
Regional enteritis, rarity, 175
Right caudal cavity adenocarcinoma, 583f
Rottweiler
joint, soft tissues (tumors), 618
Regurgitation, 41
Right caudal lobar bronchus, blood
nasojejunostomy tube placement,
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD), 617
chronic history, 41-42
(presence), 359f
demonstration (lateral radiograph),
Shoulder, arthroscopy, 616-618
vomiting, contrast, 41
Right caudal lobe, segmental branch
325f
exploration
Renal biopsy,hemorrhaging
(polypoid formation), 354f
Rottweiler, difuse mucosal lymphoma, 241f
difhculty,616
(complication), 428
Right cranial lung lobe
Roundworm, presence, 210f
portal locations, 616f
Renal function, stabilization, 427
dorsoventral thoracic radiograph, 355f
Rubber ball(removal),proximal jejunum
indications, 616
Renal pelvis (examination),
hilus, EndoGIA placement, 500f
(enterotomy),291f
patient preparation,616
intraoperative endoscopy
Right ear, canine tympanic membrane
Rugal folds
Siamese cat
(usage), 520
anatomy,590f
absence, 105
 anesthesia-induced esophageal
Replacement PEG-B tubes, 317
Right ear canal
invagination,88f
stricture, balloon dilation, 76f
 Replacement PEG tubes, endoscopic
polyps, 603F
movement, ll0f
edema, presence, 334f
assistance, 322
removal, 605f
samples, collection, 109f
rectal stricture, 244f
Reptiles
proliferative tissue, removal, 605f
sampling, endoscopic forceps (usage),
159-9t9 <dasoja0
Right horizontal ear canal, infammatory
11lf
Siberian husky
15g <ksdo!q s!dassopua
polyps, 602f
Rule of 15's, 405
bilateral intramural ectopic ureters, 552f
endoscopy procedures, 642646
Rightintercstal vessels/ibs,
descending duodenum, mucosal
instrumentation, 646
identihcation, 485f
5
change (granularity/proliferation
pathology,651
Right internal thoracic vessels,
increase), 200f
procedures, 646-651
observation, 484f
335F
Side-viewing endoscope, 32
Resident credentialing,American College
Right intraabdominal testicle (removal),
Signal synchronization, 16
ofVeterinary Surgeons requirement,
trocars (placement), 439f
Surgery (FLS), 394
Single-chip cameras, 16
393
Right kidney
Sagittal plane (instrument orientation),
Single-entry laparoscopy, 631
Resistant otitis media, otic mixtures
palpation probe,pressure application,
baseball eld concept (application),
Single-entry techniques,simplicity/
(usage),600t
428f
ease, 631
Respiratory compromise, 178-179
night lateral approach, 428f
Salivation, acute onset, 61f
Single-use trocar-cannulae, usage, 402f
Respiratory distress,signs (monitoring),
view, 428f
Samoyed, bronchoscopy (segmental
Six-wire body basket, 252f
465
Right kidney,sampling (ventral/right
airway bleeding), 354f
Skin incision
Respiratory tract
midabdominal approach), 427
Savary-Gilliard dilators, 79f
making,407-408
endoscopic evaluation/sampling, 341
Right lateral approach, 421-422
Schnauzer stickforeign body (gastric
size, reduction, 408-409
fuid,cytology (helpfulness),344
pancreas, 426f
perforation),287f
Small animals
Respiratory tree,343f
telescope entry, 422f
Scissors,examples,403f
arthroscopy,equipment, 608-609
Restrictive pericarditis, 479
Right medial liver lobe, hepatocellular
Scottish terrier (rectum), nodular
bronchofberscope, 6f
Retraction, fan retractors (usage), 401f
adenoma (view),401f
 adenocarcinoma (biopsy), 240f
digestive tract,viral diseases,305
Retriever cross, left mainstem bronchus
Right middle lung lobes, dorsoventral
Screw-in reusable trocar-cannulae,
endoscope, purchase (sacrince), 31
collapse, 356f
thoracic radiograph, 355f
preference, 403f
laparoscopy, history, 397
680·Index
Small bowel
Stick foreign body,gastric perforation,
Suction
Thoracoabdominal (TA) stapling devices,
biopsy, value, 173
287f
capability,importance,33-34
requirement, 481-482
mucosa, barium series completion,
Stifle
usage, 101
191f
arthroscopic examination, difhculty,
Suppurative colitis, 234f-235f
lobectomy,499
Small intestine
618
Thoracoscopicallyasisted partiallung
Surgery
biopsy samples, procurement, 182
arthroscopic exploration, portal
conversion, 416
lobectomy,497
biopsy techniques, 181-184
locations, 619f
laparascopic approach,663t
Thoracoscopic evaluation, noninvasive
cntraction sequence,194f
arthroscopic surgery,618-620
NOTES approaches, 663t
diagnostic testing, 482
endoscope positions,radiographs,
joint, arthroscopy (indications), 618
SurgRx Enseal handpiece design, 370f
Thoracoscopic lung lobectomy, 498-499
189f
osteochondritis, 620
Survey thoracic radiographs, usage, 53
Thoracoscopic partial lung lobectomy, 497
endoscope tip, advancement, 179
Stomach
Suture ligation, modinhed Roeder knots
Thoracoscopic surgery
endoscopic examination, 173
antral region, ventrodorsal radiograph,
(preparation), 458
enhancement, 4i1-413
inflammatory bowel disease,304f
261F
Suture materia/length, selection,381
ports, usage,480
lower portion, biopsy samples
ball removal, snare technique (usage),
Suture scissors, requirement, 400f
Thoracoscopic/thoracoscopically assisted
(collection), 174
251f
Suturing,379
lung lobectomy, 496
mucosal surface, Giardia trophozoite,
bottle cap foreignbody,presence,86f
indications,379
anesthesia, 497
21lf
buckle foreignbodies,presenc,
requirement, 379
patient contraindications, 496
neoplasia, 211
278f279f
S-video format, brightness/color
 patient evaluation/preparation,
atlas, 211
cardia, papillary carcinoma, 91f
information separation, 16
496497
samples, biopsy techniques (usage),
coin foreign body, presence, 276f
Sympathetic trunk, visualization, 492f
 patient indications, 496
181182
diseases,clinical signs,42
Synaptophysin,302
Thoracoscopy, 479
ulceration, occurrence, 175-176
displacement,85f
Szabo-Berci Asstant Needle Holder
anesthesia,482-483
 Small intestine endoscopy, 185-186
distension, air insuflation (impact),
biopsy techniques, 485-488
indications, 174-176
101
Szabo-Berci Needle Holder (Parrot Jaw),
complications,486
instrumentation,176-177
emptiness, 101
380F
diagnostic procedures, 481
patient preparation, 177
endoscope advancement, 325
instrument usage,electrocautery/
procedure, 177
endoscopy, usage (limitation),174
T
radiosurgical devices
Small mammals,tilting endoscopy, 631f
foreign bodies
Take-apart instruments, disassembly
(connection), 481-482
Snakes, 648
entry, 246
(importance), 401-402
endoscopes, size (determination), 480
coelioscopy,650f
presence,282f-283f
Tankersly table,usage,414f
hndings,487
coelomic endoscopy, 648
glass fragments, 277f
TELE PACK portable imaging system, 17f
fexibleports,usage,480481
endoscopy procedures, 642-646
inadvertent retroversion,overcoming,
Telescope entry, 422f
hypoxemia, occurrence,486
Snook spay hook,usage,438
104b
site, 423f
indications, 479
Sock foreign body (retrieval),
insuflation, appearance, 100f
instruments/instrumentation, 12f,
laparascopic assistance, 454f
invagination, 87
applications, 10t
479481
Spastic pylorus, negotiation, 106
laparoscope, introduction (option),
optical system, 9f
introduction, 479
Spay-associated urinary incontinence,
453-454
0  
laparoscopic ports, usage, 481
treatment,442
loop creation,guidewire (usage), 323f
example, l1f
 mechanical ventilation/adjustments,
 Specimen collection, instrumentation,
overdistension, avoidance, 101
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) probe,
requirement,483
295298
overinflation, avoidance, 108
610
one-lung ventilation, usage, 483
Spleen biopsy, 428-430
PEG tube, retention, 314
Tenesmus, colonoscopy (importance), 217
paraxiphoid port,placement, 484
bleeding, complication, 430
pine needles accumulation, 288f
Terminal ascending colon (lumen), ileal
pathologic hndings, 487-488
complications, 429
plastic foreign body, presence,
orihce (protrusion), 197f
patient preparation/positioning, 482
indications, 428
284f-285f
Terminal esophagus, papillary
performing, 482
instrumentation, 429
protrusion,82
carcinoma, 91f
port placement, 484-485
patient preparation, 429
regions,99f
Terminal ileum, examination, 180-181
postoperative care, 486
patient selection,428
residual barium, presence, 284f-285f
preoperative diagnostic
postoperative care, 430
ngid leather patch, presence, 280f-281f
airway obstruction/exercise limitation,
evaluation, 482
procedure, 429
samples,collection,109f
thyroid carcinoma (impact),338f
procedure, cessation,486
restraint, 429
suspending sutures, usage,448f
somach, antral region (ventrodorsal
recovery, 486, 495
sample procurement,429
wall (grasping), laparoscopic Duval
radiograph), 261f
rigid endoscope, usage, 479-480
Spleen view, right lateral approach,429f
forceps (usage), 453f
Testicles
therapeutic procedures, 483-484
Splenic biopsy,637
StomaphyX device,660
exteriorization,440f
instrument usage, electrocautery/
Splenic flexure,225F
Stoma sitedisruption,312313
external ligation, 441f
radiosurgical devices (connec-
Splenocaval shunt
Stomatoscopy,exotic mammals, 628
grasping,laparoscopic Babcock forceps
tion), 481-482
banding,portal placement,449f
Stone basketing, 542
(usage),440f
therapeutic procedures, 481-482
dissection, 449f
usage, 538f
T-fasteners,62F
tube, placement, 486
 portal placement, 449f
Stone baskets, 526f
securing,663f
Thoracostomy tube, thoracoscopic
observation, 448f
Storz, Karl, 13
Therapeutic procedures,transition,
visualization, 486f
Spontaneous pneumothorax, 483
Storz veterinary small animal video
199-659
appearance, 488f
endoscope, 30f
Thoracic duct identihcation, 493
exploration, 30-degree endoscopic
pulmonary lesion,association, 487
Stranguria, 508-511
Thoracic duct ligation (TDL), 479
viewing angle (usage), 480f
severity, 496497
Streptococcus durans, 305
endoscope/port sites,494f
mediastinal mass, visibility, 489f
Springer Spaniel
Stretch artifacts, creation, 301
Thoracic duct occlusion,493
survey radiographs, 247
idiopathic megaesophagus, 52f
Stretta procedure, 659-660
indications,493
Threaded cannula, right paraxiphoid
larynx,string (presence), 335f
Strictures
instrumentation, 493
position,490f
Square knots, tying, 383
balloon dilation, mucosal tearing/
intraoperative complications, 494
Three-chip cameras, 16
Standard poodle,mast cell neoplasia,
hemorrhaging, 76f
lymphangiography,usage,494
prism, usage, 16
215f
dilation
patient evaluation, 493
Three-pronged grasping instruments,
Staphylococcus intermdius, 588
ancillary procedures, usage, 75
patient preparation,493
usage,250
Stationary forceps, usage, 414-415
lateral videofluoroscopy sequence,
postoperative care, 495
Through-the-scope (TTS) balloon
Steirstrasse, 533
74F
procedure, 493-494
dilator, usage,73f
Stents
endoscopic dilation, 71
 Thoracic esophagus
adossopua (sLI) ados-ayj-qenou
dehnition, 524-525
endoscopic treatment, 69-80
dilation, barium contrast esophagram
channel, 72
08 ^a8esn
recurrence, 78
(usage),57F
Thyroid cartilages, evaluation, 332
Sterad, usage,401-402
site, visualization, 75
hshhook
Tick box reporting forms, 304
Sterile fluids, flow rate/pressure
suspicion, 43
presence, 271f
Tidal breathing flow-volume loop
(Arthropump regulation), 20f
Struvite stone,laserlithotripsy,541
radiograph, 271f
(TBFVL),333F
Subcapsular tissue,histopathologic
lumen irregular proliferativemass
Titing endoscopy,631f
features, 422
(endoscopic view), 90f
Tip angulation, manufacturer
Sterilized miniature laparoscopy,
Sub-clitoral fossa, avoidance, 517f
Thoracic radiography, 43
specihcations (determination), 33
readiness, 24f
Submandibular mass, attachment,
Thoracic wall, flexible endoscopic port
Tip bending, maximum, 40F
 Sternal lymph nodes, sampling, 485
489f
(transection), 481f
Tip deflection, descriptive terms, 38-39
Index■681
Tissue
Transcervical catheterization (Continued)
Tumor thrombus, detection, 461l-462
Ureteral stone retrieval, fluoroscopic
artifacts, 300-301
procedure, 558-560
Tupperware fragments, 278f
image, 538f
bowing, 306f
restraint, 557-558
Turbinates
Ureterolithiasis
compression,limitation,369
 sample procurement, 560
characteristic, 569
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy,
dissection, UED suitability, 371-372
technique, 559-560
inflammatory bridging, 575f
536537
fxation, 301-302
Transient reflux events, 62
Turlesndsd
complications, 537
forceps,examples, 403f
Transitional cell carcinoma, cystoscopy
patient selection, 536-537
fulguration, 368
(usage), 507
Dvariohisterectomy,476f
procedure, 537
heat, effect, 364f
Transnares curettage (TNC), 578-579
Two-pronged grasping forceps,250f
interventional approach, 532-533
manipulation/dissection, enc
opic
debridement, 582f
Ureterorenoscope, 557f
procedures, 363
rhinoscopic sequenceimaging, 582
usage, 250
Ureteroscopy, 536
monopolar electrosurgical effects,
flush pack, 580f
Two-trocar ovariectomy, performing, 471f
Ureterovesicular junction (UVJ),
367368
instruments, usage, 579-580
Two-way angulation, 6
525-526, 534
spectroscopy,maging mdalities,659
large pack, 580f
Tylosin therapy,initiation, 201f
Urethra
staining methods,30i-302
patient positioning,580f
Tympanic bulla (TB)
diseases, 540-541
T lymphocytes,populations(inhltration),
performing, 570
appearance, 599f
distal portion, examination, 517-518
302
sequence, 583f
debridement, 602f
examination, LAC (usage), 519f
Tomcat catheter, usage, 594f
 small pack, 579f
instruments,598f
Urethral balloon dilation, 544-546
Tonic concentric rings (descending
Transnares instrument insertion, 581f
septum puncture, 605f
Urethral calculi,retrieval, 542-543
colon), 223f
Transtracheal washing, 344
debris/proliferative tissue, removal,
Urethral catheterization, 546
Torque,importance,38
Transtympanic bulla curettage (TBC),
600f
Urinalysis, centesis (usage), 511
Torrent, Vicente,250251
597
flushing, septum puncture, 605f
Urinary bladder
Tortoises, endoscopy procedures,
complications, 600
medial wall, appearance, 600f
cranial traction,442
642-646
description, 604
mucopurulent discharge/debris, 599f
diseases, 540-541
 Total ear canal ablation with lateral bulla
Transurethral cystoscopy, 514-517
polyps/proliferative tissue, removal,
tumors, guidewire passage, 535f
ostectomy (TEA/LBO), 597
problems, rarity, 520
605F
Urinary catheters, characteristi,
Touch cytology, specimens (collection),
usage, 516
Tympanic membrane, proliferative
524-525
297
Transurethral laser lithotripsy, 540-541
tissue/mucopurulent discharge,599f
Urinary incontinence, 512-513
Towel clamps, examples, 403f
complications, 541
Urinary obstructions
Towers, 6ll
patient selection,541
infection, association, 529-530
Trachea
procedure, 541
Ulcerative lesions,biopsy samples, 110
minimallyinvasiveptions,5252
bronchial bleeding, 359f
Transverse colon, characteristics,
Ulcerative lymphoplasmacellular colitis,
Urinary stents, types, 526f
evaluation, 342
225226
235F
Urinary tract, interventional radiology/
Tracheal collapse
Transverse plane (instrument
Ulcers
endoscopy, 522-527
presence, 348
 orientation), baseball held concept
characteristics, 294-295
anesthesia,526
tracheal stenting,usage,348-349
(application),408f
microscopic appearance, variation, 306
equipment, 522-525
Tracheal cytology, 346f-347f
Trauma, 514
Ultrasonic cleaners, usage, 23
follow-up/monitoring,527
Tracheal lumen, narrowing,343
Trendelenburg position, 411-413
Ultrasonic energy devices(UEDs),371
interventional modalities, equipment,
Tracheal narrowing,atlas,2-353
Triamcinolone (intralesional injection),
components,371
527t
Tracheobronchial anatomy, 343f
endotherapy injection needle
suitability, 371372
patient evaluation, 525-526
Tracheobronchial foreign bodies
(positioning/extruding), 78f
utility, 371
postoperative care, 526-527
atlas, 356
Trichobezoar-induced esophageal
Ultrasonic energy handpiece tips,
Urinary tract infection
presence/removal, 344
stricture, 68f
options, 372f
recurrence, 512
Tracheobronchial lymph nodes,
Trichobezoar-induced esophagitis 61f
Ultrasonic energy system,example, 371f
treatment, 521
enlargement (atlas), 355-356
Trichobezoars (hairballs),removal, 260
Ultrasonic scalpel (harmonic scalpel),
Urinary tract infammation,recurrence,
Tracheobronchial neoplasia, atlas, 359
endoscopic appearance,272f-273f
371372
512
Tracheobronchial parasites, 353
Tri-Clip endoscopic clipping device,
Umbilical cord, components, 6-7
Urogenital system,hematuria/purulent
Tracheobronchial secretions, cytologic
660, 660f
Upper airway, foreign body management,
discharges,513
interpretation (limitation), 345-346
Triple esophagea stricture, 68f
245
Urogenital tract, surfaces (examination),
Tracheobronchial tree, travel, 342
Upper airway obstruction, endoscopy
517
Tracheobronchoscopy,331,339
placement,405-410,413f
(precautions), 340
Used equipment, purchase, 32-33
ancillary tools/procedures, 344-349
impact, 416
Upper duodenum,bile-stained froth, 191f
Uterus, neoplasia (rarity), 470
 anesthetic recommendations, 341
tip, placement(inappropriateness), 415
Upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy
biopsy, usage, 347-348
usage, 402f
acepromazine/butorphanol, usage,
V
culture, usage, 344
Trocars, 610
66-86
Vagal tone, increase, 177-178
cytology,usage, 344-345
arrangement,406
general anesthesia, usage, 35
Vagina,anatomy, 555
endoscopic evaluation/sampling,341
assembly, 22f
performing, 31f32f
Vaginal cervical os, visualization
fexible/rigid instruments,dimensions,
curved needles, introduction/
protocol standard, 173-174
(diffhculty),559
340t
withdrawal, 382f
Upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract,
Vaginal endoscope, direction, 559f
focal infection, concern, 342
gasketsprotection,82
endoscopic procedure, 177
Vaginoscopy, 555
general anesthesia, induction/
leakage (obstruction), purse-string
Upper small intestine
complications, 560561
maintenance (requirement), 340
suture/Olive(placement/usage)
appearance, 179-180
importance, 555
indications, 339, 339b
412F
endoscopy usage
instrumentation, 555-557
instrumentation, 339-340
placement,439f
advantage, 175
patient indications, 555
medications, impact, 340-341
Trocar site
limitation, 174
patient preparation, 557
oxygen, usage, 340
lengthening,437F
examination,patient preparation, 177
procedure, 558-560
patient preparation,340-341
location, 409-410
mucosal trauma, linear streaks, 209f
restraint, 557-558
patient restraint/positioning, 341-342
preparation,baseball held concept 
Ureter
sample procurement, 560
procedure,infection (impact), 342
(usage), 407f
cystic serosa entry, sagittal illustrations,
technique, 559-560
Tracheoscopy,633-634
selection, 413f
550f
Vascular anomalies, 501
visualization, 635f
Tru-Cut biopsy needle, location, 427-428
guidewire advancement, 534f
Vascular malformation, dorsoventral
Traction sutures, placement, 433f
Tru-Cut needles, types,427
Ureteral access, 537
view, 56f
Traditional surgery, conversion
True video endoscope, 3
Ureteral disease, dilemma, 532
Vascular ring anomalies
(decision), 416
camera head/adapter, nonnecessity, 15
Ureteral obstructions, interventional
atlas, 55
Transabdominal needle, passage,410-411l
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI)
approach,532-533
dinical hndings, 501
Transbronchial biopsy, performing, 347
assay, usage, 201f
Ureteral openings (examination), LAC
great vessels,congenital
Transcervical catheterization, 555"
Tumors
(usage),519f
malformations,55
anatomy, 558559
biopsy specimens, collection, 517
Ureteral stent, advancement, 534f
observation, 57f, 59f
complications, 560-561
debridement, 581f
Ureteral stenting, 533-536
persistent right aortic arch,
ease, 560
fragments,removal,8f
antegrade technique, 534535
observation, 58f-59f
instrumentation, 555-557
obstruction,cystourethrogram,545F
complications, 536
Venous return (reduction),
patient indications, 555
removal, 582f
patient selection, 534
intraabdominal insufflation (impact),
patient preparation, 557
resection, 519
procedure, 534536
405
682■Index
Yentral bulla osteotomy (VBO), 601
Video imaging,advantages, 3
Vomiting, 97
Wishbone, presence, 264f-265f
refractory cases, 604
Video monitor,usage, 16
endoscopy,usage (limitation), 174
Work area, 35
Ventral midline, telescope entry site,423f
Video otoscopy, 587-589
IBD, impact, 200-201
Working-breed god, TBFVL, 333F
Ventromedial compartment (VMC), 601
diagnostic plan,587
regurgitation,contrast,41
World Small Animal Veterinary
Veress needle
indications, 587588
Association (WSAVA)
carbon dioxide infusion, 410
instrumentation, 589
gastrointestinal disease
fluid flow, 407-408
disinfection, 589-590
Walker hound, rectal stricture, 244f
description/interpretation
 placement, inappropriateness, 415
lens, fogging, 589
Water-soluble nonionic iodinated
guideline, 185
spring-loaded stylet, retraction, 20f
otoscopes, durability,587
contrast agents, usage, 80
Gastrointestinal Standardization
usage, 19
performing,601-602
Wavelength absorption coefhcient,
Group,36, 185, 294
impact, 409f
predisposing factors, 588
understanding, 374
evaluations, 304
pop (sound), production,410f
usage, indications, 589
Weasel wire,hydrophilic angle-tipped
GI inflammation guidelines, 293
Vessel sealing, bipolar system (usage), 369
Villous adenomatous polyps, presence,
guidewire,525f
Wound edges
Vessel-sealing device,usefulness,456
306-307
Weight loss, occurrence, 175
needle position, 383f
Vestibular abnormalities, 600
Vimentin, 302
Weimaraner, cecal inversion,231f
positioning,383
Yestibulovaginal developmental
Virtual reality (VR), 393
Welch Allyn rigid proctosigmoidoscopy
anomaly, vaginal endoscopic view,
simulation system, 395f
equipment,219F
X
556f
haptic fedback/visualization,
Welsh Corgi
Xenon light source, 14f
Vestibulovaginoscopy, persistent
combination, 395f
airway obliteration, scarring/mucus
colorreproduction ability, 13-14
 paramesonephric remnant/vaginal
simulators, 395t 
formation, 354f
septum, 542f
systems,usage,394-396
generalized tracheal collapse, 351f
Y
VETPUMP2
Visible laser energy, transmission,
suppurativecolitis34f
Y/C video format, brightness/color
insufflation/irrigation/suction, 20f
374
West Highland terrier,esophageal bone
information separation, 16
usefulness, 19-20
Vocal folds
foreign body,266f-267f
Yorkshire terrier
Video-assted thoracoscopicsurgery
bilateral adduction, 336f
Whipworms
mucosal granularity, 207f
(VATS), usage, 479
hxation,336f
atlas, 238
positive-contrast cystourethrogram,
Video chain completion, 16
granuloma,337f
presence, 227f, 238f
lateral view, 445f
Video endoscopes, 3
tear, 337f
evaluation, 225-226
vocal fold tear, 337f
features, 4t
Yocalization, laryngeal motion
White balancing, 16
Yttrium-aluminum-garnet (YAG) laser
optics, 9
(relationship),332-333
Wire-guided Savary-Gilliard dilators,
lithotrite, usage, 522
Video endoscopic image,4f
(HnA) uosndaudopkyoun uplo
usage, 79
Video endoscopy,colorreproduction
complications, 541
Wirehaired Dachshund, cystic
ability, 13-14 
difhculty,526
calculi/urinary tract (presence), 511f