SmallAnimal
Dentistry
Amanualof techniques
CEDRICTUTT
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Small Animal
Dentistry
A manual of technigues
Cedric Tutt
www.vet-dentist.com
Blackwell
Publishing
@ 2006 by Cedric Tutt
Blackwell Publishing editorial offices:
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel: +44 (0)1865 776868
Blackwell Publishing Professional, 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
Tel: +1 515 292 0140
 Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd, S50 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
The right of the Author to be identified as the Author of this Work has been asserted in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
 photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
First published 2006 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
ISBN-13: 978-1-4051-2372-3
ISBN-10: 1-4051-2372-9
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Tutt, Cedric.
Small animal dentistry / Cedric Tutt.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4051-2372-3 (hardback : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-4051-2372-9 (hardback : alk paper)
1. Veterinary dentistry. 2. Dogs-Diseases-Treatment. 3. Cats -Diseases-
Treatment. I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Dentistry-veterinary. SF 867 T967s 2006]
SF867.T88 2006
636.089'76-dc22
2006012268
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library
Set in 10.5/13 pt Sabon
by Gra phicraft Limited, Hong Kong
 Printed and bound in Odder, Denmark
by Narayana Press
The publisher's policy is to use permanent paper from mills that operate a sustainable
forestry policy, and which has been manufactured from pulp processed using acid-free
and elementary chlorine-free practices. Furthermore, the publisher ensures that the text
paper and cover board used have met acceptable environmental accreditation standards.
For further information, visit our subject website: www.BlackwellVet.com
This book is dedicated to my parents Leslie and Rona Tutt who did not
spare anything in allowing us to develop into the people we are today,
and to my wife Kim whose love I cherish.
In reviewing dental embryology and development I have once again
come to realise the intricate way in which our bodies have been
constructed and reaffirm that there is a God who commands our belief
in Him.
Contents
Acknowledgements
vi
Chapter 1 Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
1
Chapter 2
Clinical Examination
33
Chapter 3
 Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
59
Chapter 4   Radiography
83
Chapter 5   Exodontics
131
Chapter 6  Jaw Fracture Repair
173
Chapter 7  Oral Surgery
185
Chapter 8  Suture Material
197
Chapter 9   Restoration
203
Chapter 10 Endodontic Therapy
213
Chapter 11 Pain Management
229
Chapter 12 Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
239
Chapter 13 Cases to Refer to Your Local Veterinary Dentist
269
Index
275
Acknowledgements
q suapnis aenpinaun ue se Asap ruaa on panpou sim I
Dr Frank Verstraete and was subsequently able to pursue this interest during
a seven year sojourn in the United Kingdom. During this time Drs Cecilia
Gorrel and Judith Deeprose were instrumental in broadening my ^dentistry
horizons' and they were a pleasure to work with. Veterinary dentistry is not a
procedure that can be performed in isolation by the veterinary surgeon and
I have had the privilege of working with a number of competent veterinary
nurses. Kelly Young and Sue Vranch were extremely helpful to me especially
during the early years when some procedures took longer than they do now!
Numerous members of the British Veterinary Dental Association and the
European Veterinary Dental Society and College have encouraged me through
the years and their help has been appreciated. My rough sketches and descrip-
tions have been converted into concise illustrations by Dr David Crossley,
whose help is acknowledged.
I would like to thank Antonia Seymour for initiating this project and for her
 patience with its often delayed progress.
 Kim, my wife, has helped me tirelessly. Her attention to detail kept me from
being verbose and thanks to her your navigation through this book using the
index will be a pleasure.
 To the editorial and commissioning staff at Blackwell Publishing and their
 copy editor, my sincere thanks for your help, encouragement and keeping the
project on track!
Vi
Tooth Development (odontogenesis)
Small Animal Dentistry
Sap o d   an no sis o y si p so
dentition, and the secondary or permanent dentition. The primary dentition
develops during the embryonic and foetal stages, while the permanent
dentition develops during the foetal and neonatal stages of development.
Tooth development progresses through a number of stages.
Stages of tooth development
Initiation stage
 Induction (an interaction between embryological tissues) is necessary for ini-
tiation to begin. The influence of mesenchymal tissues on ectodermal tissues
is known as induction.
The primitive oral cavity is lined by ectoderm, the outer portion of which
gives rise to the oral epithelium and is separated from the underlying
mesenchyme (influenced by neural crest cells) by the basement membrane.
The oral epithelium grows down into the mesenchyme giving rise to the
dental lamina.
Bud stage
 sq  s  o sn   
which the teeth will develop. The mesenchyme also proliferates, still separated
from the dental lamina by the basement membrane. All teeth develop from
ectoderm and mesoderm which is influenced by neural crest cells
Cap stage
Proliferation continues with differential growth of parts of the tooth bud
leading to a cap shape. The predominant process during this stage is morpho-
genesis which determines the eventual shape of the tooth. Deep within the
tooth bud the enamel organ develops, the inner layer of which will determine
the crown shape. The enamel organ, which is of ectodermal origin, will produce
enamel to cover the surface of the tooth crown. Within the confines of the cap
the mesenchymal tissue forms the dental papilla from which the dentine and
pulp will develop. The dental papilla remains separated from the enamel
 Organ by the basement membrane. The dentino-enamel junction (DEJ) will
develop in place of the basement membrane when it disintegrates. The mes-
enchyme surrounding the enamel organ forms the dental sac from which the
 periodontium will develop. The periodontium is thus of mesenchymal origin.
The three structures present at the end of the cap stage, namely the enamel
organ, dental papilla and the dental sac, are collectively known as the tooth
germ.
Bell stage
Proliferation, morphogenesis and differentiation continue. The cells of the
enamel organ differentiate into four distinct layers:
(1)  inner enamel (dental) epithelium which will differentiate into ameloblasts
and produce enamel;
Oral epithelium
100000
858582
Dental lamina
Primary Tooth Germ
Epthellal components:
Secondary tooth bud
Outer dental epithelium
Stellate reticulum
Stralum intermedium
Inner dental epithelium
Ameloblasts
Odontoblasts
Mesenchymal components:
Dental sac
Pre-ameloblasts
Dental paplla (future pulp)
Pre-odontoblasts
Figure 1.1 The tooth germ consists of the enamel organ, dental papilla and dental sac.
(2)  stratum intermedium supporting enamel production;
(3)  stellate reticulum supporting enamel production;
(4)
 outer enamel (dental) epithelium which protects the enamel organ during
amelogenesis. (Figure 1.1)
The enamel organ is still separated from the dental papilla by the basement
membrane.
Concurrently the dental papilla differentiates into two layers: the outermost
layer will differentiate into odontoblasts and produce dentine while the inner
layer will develop into the tooth pulp. The dental sac will differentiate into its
 separate tissues (gingiva, alveolus, periodontal ligament and cementum) at a
later stage.
Apposition and maturation
During apposition, the matrices of enamel, dentine and cementum are laid
down which will be mineralised into the final structures during maturation.
The developmental process
During the bell stage the inner enamel epithelium differentiates into pre-
ameloblasts which induce the outer cells of the dental papilla to differentiate
into odontoblasts which in turn secrete pre-dentine on their side of the base
ment membrane. At this stage the basement membrane separating the pre-
ameloblasts and odontoblasts disintegrates. Contact with pre-dentine induces
the pre-ameloblasts to develop into ameloblasts which begin amelogenesis,
secreting enamel matrix, via Tome's process, onto the disintegrating base
ment membrane. The DEJ is formed by mineralisation of the disintegrated
Small Animal Dentistry
basement membrane. Secretion of both dental matrices continues as the
cells (odontoblasts and ameloblasts) retreat from the DEJ. The ameloblasts
lose contact with the DEJ, but the odontoblasts retain contact via the odonto.
blastic process within the dentinal tubule. Odontoblasts remain vital within
the pulp but ameloblasts are lost after tooth eruption.
 Primary dentine is produced until apexogenesis (development of the tooth
root apex) is complete. Secondary dentine is laid down from completion of
apexogenesis throughout the life of the tooth. Under certain circumstances
when the tooth is damaged, the pulp will be stimulated to produce tertiary or
reparative dentine in an attempt to protect the pulp from exposure. Tertiary
 dentine is less structured than secondary dentine and becomes stained leading
to black or brown spots usually in the centre of worn teeth surfaces. These dis-
coloured spots must be differentiated from exposed, impacted pulp chambers
and caries lesions.
The dentinal tubules are usually patent from the pulp to the dentino-enamel
junction (DEJ) and dentino-cemental junctions and house the odontoblastic
processes and sensory nerves. Exposed dentine can therefore cause severe pain
and must be treated.
Root development
Once the crown is fully formed and begins to erupt into the mouth root develop-
ment begins. The root is formed by the cervical loop which is the most apical
portion of the original enamel organ and is comprised of the trwo epithelial
layers (inner and outer enamel epithelium). The cervical loop grows down
into the dental sac enclosing more of the dental papilla forming Hertwig's
root sheath. Hertwig's root sheath determines the shape of the root/s and
induces production of root dentine. Root and crown dentine are continuous,
not separate, structures
 The inner enamel epithelial cell layer of Hertwig's root sheath induces
the outer cells of the dental papilla to become odontoblasts which produce
pre-dentine in a similar manner to that formed in the crown. After formation
of root dentine, the basement membrane which has until now separated
Hertwig's root sheath from the dental papilla, disintegrates along with
Hertwig's root sheath. The remnants of Hertwig's root sheath are called the
epithelial rests of Malassez which are located in the mature periodontal liga-
 ss o dp    s  (e  
require treatment. The root continues to develop until the apex is formed. The
apical delta has numerous ramifications through which the pulp communic-
ates with the periodontal ligament. Trauma to the immature tooth may cause
pulpitis followed by pulp necrosis which will interfere with apexogenesis and
may result in tooth death, requiring extraction. Damage to the developing
root may cause an angulation of the root known as dilaceration.
Cementum
 Undifferentiated cells of the dental sac are exposed to the root dentine when
Hertwig's root sheath and the basement membrane disintegrate, inducing
them to become cementoblasts. Cementoblasts secrete cementoid which con-
tains cementocytes (cementoblasts which become trapped in the cementoid).
Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
Rests of Serres
Odontoblasts
Reduced enamel
epithelium
Pulp
Forming periodontal
ligament
Rests of Malassez
(resldual dental
epithelium)
Hertwig'sroot sheath
(dental epithelium)
Figure 1.2  The root begins to develop
when the tooth eru pts into the mouth.
Cementoid undergoes mineralisation into cementum. Apposition of cementum
on root dentine forms the dentino-cemental junction.
 In man the cemento-enamel junction presents in one of three arrangements:
(1)  in 60% of teeth cementum overlaps enamel
(2)  in 30% cementum and enamel abut
(3)  in 10% there is a gap between cementum and enamel.
This can occur in some animals as well. Where dentine is exposed it should be
sealed with an unflled resin, varnish or sealant.
Hypercementosis is the production of excessive cementum on the apical
 third of the root. This can occur as a result of chronic inflammation and may
complicate extractions in cats (Figure 1.3).
Periodontalligament
The periodontal ligament withstands rotational and other forces applied to
the tooth keeping it within the alveolus.
During crown and root development, mesenchyme from the surrounding
dental sac begins to form the periodontal ligament and the tooth alveolus
Collagen fibres are formed which span the space between the cementum and
the alveolar bone supporting the tooth within the alveolus. The periodontal
ligament is made up of a number of fbre groups:
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.3  Dog mandibu lar right
premolars affected by hyperce mentosis.
Note the lack of periodontal liga ment
space.
(1) the alveolar crest group, which span the alveolar margin and the coronal
part of the root, and which resist tilting, intrusion, extrusion and rota-
tional forces;
(2)  the horizontal group of fbres which span the coronal part of the root
and the alveolus, which keep the tooth in a vertical position resisting tilt-
ing and rotational forces;
(3)1
 the oblique group of fbres oriented margino-apically from the alveolus
to the root surface preventing intrusion of the root and resisting rota-
tional forces;
(4)  the apical group which span apico-marginally from the alveolus on to
the root, preventing extrusion of the root and resisting rotational forces.
 In multi-rooted teeth inter-radicular (trans-furcation) fbres resist extru-
sion, intrusion, tilting and rotational forces (Figure 1.4).
What happens when things go wrong during tooth
development?
Initiation stage
 Anodontia (absence of teeth) or partial anodontia (hypodontia) results from
failure of initiation. Supernumerary teeth are formed during initiation and
may cause crowding (Figure 1.5). When crowding causes compromise of the
normal teeth the supernumerary teeth should be extracted (Figure 1.6). Some
breeds have developmental anomalies which result in abnormalities with the
dentition. Most Chinese crested dogs have numerous missing teeth. This is an
inherited condition rather than an idiopathic lack of initiation (Figure 1.7)
6
Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
Trans-lurcalion fibres
Dento-gingival fibres
Alveolar crest fibres
Horizontal fibres
Oblique fibres
Figure 1.4  The periodontal ligament
Apical fibres
fibres keep the tooth in the alveolus and
withstand: intrusive, extrusive, tipping
and rotational forces.
Figure 1.5
Supernumerary
mandibu lar right premolar 1 (405)
in a dog. The tooth can be kept in
this case as surrou nding teeth are
not compromised.
Bud stage
Macrodontia (abnormally large teeth) or microdontia (peg teeth) may occur.
Cap stage
Dens in dente. The enamel organ invaginates into itself, causing a tooth-like
structure to develop within the tooth. This is rare in animals. This condition
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.6
Supernu merary mandibular
left 4th premolar in a cat. The
supernu merary tooth has exacerbated
 periodontal disease affecting
surrou nding teeth, necessitating
extraction.
Figure 1.7 Hypodontia (partial
 anodontia) in a Chinese crested dog.
 may be under diagnosed in animals due to infrequent use of radiography in
veterinary dentistry.
Gemination is the complete or partial split of a single tooth bud resulting
in a mirror-image crown, i.e. two crowns which are mirror images of each
 other (Figure 1.8). This gives the impression of an extra tooth in the affected
Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
Figure 1.8 Gemination of mandibu lar
right 4th premolar in a cat. The tooth
 bud has attempted to split to form
two teeth.
Figure 1.9  Gemination of maxillary
right incisor 2. There are four incisor
crowns visible in the maxillary right
quadrant.
quadrant and is most commonly seen in dog incisors (Figure 1.9). The root
may also be partially or completely split (Figure 1.10).
Fusion is the union of two adjacent tooth buds resulting in one large tooth.
The affected quadrant will have one less tooth (Figure 1.11).
Additional cusps (tubercles) are sometimes seen in man and in Spaniels.
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.10  Radiograph of case in
Figure 1.9 showing almost com plete
 separation of the roots in this divided
tooth.
Figure 1.11  Fused maxillary left
incisors 1 and 2 resulting in a large
tooth and one less incisor in the
maxillary left arcade.
Apposition and maturation
Enamel dysplasia. Enamel hypoplasia is a reduction in the quantity of enamel
produced leading to pitting and grooves on the teeth, while enamel hypo-
mineralisation results in reduced quality of enamel leading to discoloured teeth.
10
Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
Figure 1.12   Malformed teeth in
a dog suffering from Distemper Virus
infection. Enamel hypoplasia is also
present.
Figure 1.13   Enamel hypoplasia in a
dog suffering from Distemper Virus
infection. Note that the mandibu lar
right deciduous canine and permanent
 premolar 1 are not affected. This is
because these teeth were formed
prior to the infection.
Dentine dysplasia may also occur. These conditions are often seen in
dogs which have suffered from Distemper Virus infection and those which
have suffered bouts of pyrexia during amelogenesis and dentinogenesis
(Figures 1.12-1.15). The Distemper Virus can damage ameloblasts and
11
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.14  Enamel hypoplasia and
dysplasia in a dog suffering from
Distemper Virus infection. Note the
severity of periodontal disease affecting
some incisors. This is as a resu lt of
 plaque accu mu lation on these teeth.
Figure 1.15 Enamel hypoplasia and
dysplasia in a dog suffering from
 Distemper Virus infection. Note the
unaffected persistent mandibu lar left
deciduous canine.
odontoblasts and often results in abnormally shaped roots which undergo
premature completion of apexogenesis (Figures 1.16-1.17).
nd    s  q a  an  a 
as discolouration or enamel defects in the permanent dentition if care is
12
Tooth Development (odontogenesis)
Figure 1.16  Radiograph of maxillary
left canine (204) root in a dog suffering
from Diste mper Virus infection. Note
the conical shape of the short roots.
 Prematu re completion of apexogenesis
has occurred.
Figure 1.17   Radiograph of the rostral
mandibles of a dog suffering from
Distemper Virus infection. Note that
the permanent canines are retained
(uneru pted) due to premature
completion of apexogenesis. These
teeth may need to be extracted. Note
also the persistent mandibu lar right
deciduous canine.
not exercised during the extraction of deciduous teeth (Figure 1.18)
Fractured deciduous canines with exposed pulps leading to periapical patho-
logy can also cause enamel defects on the developing permanent teeth
(Figure 1.19).
13
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.18  Extreme care must be
exercised when extracting persistent 
deciduous canine teeth, especially
when this is performed for interceptive
orthodontic pu rposes. Note the enamel
defects on this tooth (404) due to
iatrogenic damage during extraction of
the mandibu lar right deciduous canine
when this dog was ten weeks old. (Note
the brachygnathic mandibles.)
Figure 1.19Fractured deciduous teeth
must be treated or periapical pathology
may resu lt in damage to the adjacent
developing permanent teeth.
Tooth type and shape
Dogs and cats have three incisors and one canine in each quadrant. The
incisors are named: central, middle and lateral or numbered frst, second
and third.
14
Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
Figure 1.20  The maxillary right
deciduous canine is nu mbered 504 and
the mandibu lar right deciduous canine
804 using the modified Triadan system.
Using the modified Triadan system the quadrants are numbered from 1-4,
beginning with the right maxilla and ending with the right mandible in a
clockwise direction as viewed from the front of the animal. Using this system,
the maxillary right incisors are numbered 101, 102 and 103. Canines are
suffixed by 4 (104, 204, 304 and 404) and frst molars by 9 (109, 209,
309 and 409). The primary dentition is numbered in the same way, with the
quadrant prefixes being 5, 6, 7 and 8 (e.g. maxillary right deciduous canine is
 504 and mandibular right deciduous canine is 804 (Figure 1.20)). Figures 1.21
and 1.22 are radiographs showing mixed dentition in young dogs. Note the
thin dentine walls and ^absence' of roots in the permanent dentitions.
 In dogs with a full complement of permanent teeth the dental formula is:
giving a total of 42 adult teeth.
I3 C PM4 M3
Dog deciduous dentition formula is:
ld3 Cd PMd3
2 x
giving a total of 28 adu lt teeth.
ld3 Cd PMd3
Figure 1.23 shows the mandibular right deciduous incisors 2 and 3, canine
and premolars 2-4 in a young dog. Figure 1.24 shows the permanent
mandibular right incisors 1 and 2 and the deciduous lateral incisor, canine and
premolars 2 and 3 in a young dog. The dentition here is termed ^mixed denti-
tion' as deciduous and permanent teeth are present.
In cats with a full complement of permanent teeth the dental formula is:
giving a total of 30 adult teeth.
I3 C PM2 M1
15
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.21  Radiograph of rostral
mandibles of a you ng dog with
developing permanent teeth.
Figure 1.22   Radiograph of rostral
mandibles of a you ng dog that has
linguo-verted mandibu lar deciduous
canines. Note how crowded the
permanent incisors are and how
close the permanent canines are
to each other.
16
Tooth Development (odontogenesis)
Figure 1.23   Deciduous dentition in the
right mandible of a you ng dog. Middle
and lateral incisors, canine and 
pre molars 2-4 are visible.
Figure 1.24  Mixed dentition in a you ng
dog. The permanent first and second
incisors have eru pted. The lateral
deciduous incisor, canine and
premolars 2 and 3 are still to be shed.
7
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.25  Deciduous dentition in a
kitten.
Figure 1.26
 Permanent dentition in an
ad u It cat.
Cat deciduous formula is:
Id3 Cd PMd3
2x
giving a total of 26 adult teeth.
ld3 Cd PMd2
Figure 1.25 shows the mandibular right deciduous teeth in a kitten. The
incisors and canine are out of focus and premolars 3 and 4 clearly visible.
 Figure 1.26 shows the mandibular right permanent lateral incisor and canine
and premolars 3 and 4 and molar 1 in an adult cat.
 Cats are usually without the maxillary first premolar and second molar, the
mandibular premolars 1 and 2, and molars 2 and 3.
 In dogs, the incisors, canines, frst premolars and mandibular third molars
have one root each while the remaining mandibular premolars and molars
18
Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
Figure 1.27  Mandibu lar right canine
from a dog. Note the root comprises
more than 50% of the tooth and that the
 greatest diameter is about halfway
down the root.
Figure 1.28   Top: maxillary molars 1
and 2 have three roots each (one palatal
and two buccal). Bottom: mandibu lar
right canine and molar 1. Note the
vestigial su pernu merary root in the
furcation of molar 1.
have two roots. Maxillary premolars 2 and 3 have two roots, whilst maxillary
 premolar 4 and the molars have three roots each (Figures 1.27 and 1.28).
Root configurations are similar in the cat except that the maxillary molar
buccal roots may be fused.
Some two-rooted teeth may have a third root which can cause post-
extraction abscessation if left behind - hence the need for pre-operative
19
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.29   The maxillary left third
premolar has an additional cusp on the
palatal aspect. Teeth that are sha ped 
like this one often have a
supernu merary root.
Figure 1.30  Radiograph of tooth in
Figure 1.29. Note the su pernu merary
root. (Radiographic positioning to best
visualise this root has resu lted in
su perim position of the distal and mesial
roots on those of adjacent teeth.)
radiographs (Figures 1.29 and 1.30). In the cat, the maxillary second premolar
(clinically the most rostral premolar) may have two roots in some animals. In
 some dogs, the two roots of the premolars or mandibular molar 2 may be fused.
This is another reason for pre-operative radiographs, since sectioning these
crowns may result in fracture and retention of a root fragment (Figure 1.31).
20
Tooth Development (odontogenesis)
Figure 1.31  Fused roots in a dog
 mandibu lar premolar. Pre-operative
radiography is necessary to prevent
atte mpts at sectioning such teeth prior
to extraction. These teeth can often be
extracted using the simple extraction
technique.
Figure 1.32 Supernumerary root
fused to the distal root of maxillary
left pre molar 3 (207) in a cat.
Figure 1.32 shows a supernumerary distal root fused with the distal root of
maxillary left premolar 3 in a cat. Figure 1.33 shows the tooth in Figure 1.32
after sectioning and extraction.
In the dog, the maxillary molars 1 and 2 and the mandibular molar 1 have a
cutting and a grinding surface, while mandibular molars 2 and 3 have a single
21
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.33   The extracted tooth from
the cat in Figure 1.32. Note that a wedge
of crown was removed to improve access
to the periodontal ligament space.
 grinding surface, the latter teeth being bunodont (cheek teeth with a grinding
surface). Except for the maxillary frst molar, the cat does not have grinding
surfaces on any of its cheek teeth. Teeth without grinding surfaces are termed
secodont.
In the dog the premolar 1 and molar teeth do not have predecessors. In
 Other words they are not true succedaneous teeth.
 Permanent incisors erupt palatal / lingual to the deciduous incisors while
the maxillary permanent canines erupt mesial (labial) to the deciduous
canines and the mandibular permanent canines lingual to the deciduous
canines. Permanent premolars erupt palatal / lingual to their predecessors.
 Persistent maxillary deciduous canines (Figure 1.34) and persistent mandibu-
lar deciduous canines (Figure 1.35) are commonly seen in dogs but appear to
be rare in cats. (Figures 1.36 and 1.37).
Permanent teeth erupt as shown in Table 1.1.
Teeth (permanent dentition)
Approximate age at eruption
Dogs
Cats
Incisors
3-4 months
3-4 months
Canines
4-6 months
4-5 months
 Premolars
4-6 months
4-6 months
Table 1.1  Age at which permanent
Molars
5-7 months
4-5 months
tooth eru ption occurs in dogs and cats.
22
Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
Figure 1.34 Maxillary right persistent
deciduous caninetooth(504)resuIting
in periodontitis caused by plaque and
food trapping.
Figure 1.35  Mandibular right
persistent deciduous canine
tooth (804) in a dog.
Tooth anatomy and directional terms
The crown of the tooth is the part of the tooth visible in the mouth and
covered by enamel. The crown joins the root at the tooth neck. The cemento-
enamel junction (CEJ) separates the crown from the root which is covered by
23
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.36   Maxillary left persistent
deciduous canine (604) and premolar 4
(608) in a you ng cat.
Figure 1.37 Maxillary right persistent
deciduous canine (504) and premolar 4
(508) in a you ng cat (sa me cat as in
Figure 1.36).
cementum (Figures 1.38 and 1.39). The crown is divided into occlusal, middle
and gingival thirds, and buccal / labial and lingual / palatal aspects. The part
of the tooth crown facing the dental arch midline is known as the mesial
aspect of the tooth, while the part facing away from the midline is known as
24
Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
Pulphon
Enamel
CEJ
Pulp chamber
Dentine
Periodontal
Cementum
ligament
Root canal
Lateral canal
Alveolar bone
Apical delta
Figure 1.38 Schematic anatomy of a dog mandibu lar left permanent molar 1 tooth.
Gingival sulcus
Free gingival margin
Sulcular epithelium
Junctional epithelium
Cemento-enamel junction
Attached gingiva
Mucogingival line
Figure 1.39  Schematic representation
of relationship between tooth, soft
tissues and alveolar bone.
25
Proximal
JAW
Distal
Caudal
BODY
Rostral
Distal
DENTITION
Mesial
Labial
Coronal
DENTITION
Apical
Figure 1.40
Directional anatomic terms for the mandible and its dentition (lateral view).
Lateral
Buccal
Distal
BODY
DENTITION
Medial
Palatal
Distal
Mesial
DENTITION
Medial
Lingual
Distal
BODY
DENTITION
Distal
Lateral
Buccal
Figure 1.41   Directional anatomic terms for the mandible and maxilla and their dentition (occlusal view).
the distal aspect. Towards the tip of the root is termed apical and towards the
tip of the crown is termed coronal / incisal. (Figures 1.40 and 1.41).
The ^front' of the mouth is termed rostral and the *back' is caudal.
The tongue is made up of the root, body and tip and is attached to the floor
of the mouth by the lingual frenulum.
The lower lip is attached to the attached gingiva, between the mandibular
canine and second premolar, by the labial frenulum - a fbrous structure
against which the palatal aspect of the maxillary canines occlude (Figures 1.42
and 1.43).
26
Tooth Development (odontogenesis)
Figure 1.42 Right labial frenulu m in a
young pu ppy.
Figure 1.43  Right labial frenu lum 
 in an adult dog. Note that the palatal
aspect on the maxillary right canine will
come torest against the frenulum when
the mouth is closed.
The incisive papilla is situated just caudal / palatal to the maxillary central
incisors and marks the opening of the incisivo-palatine ducts (Figure 1.44)
The puncta of the mandibular and monostomatic sublingual salivary glands
are situated ventrally on either side of the lingual frenulum (Figure 1.45). The
27
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.44   The incisive papilla is
situated palatal to the maxillary central
incisors and shou ld not be mista ken for
atumour.
Figure 1.45  The pu ncta of the
mandibu lar and su b-lingual salivary
glands are situated lateral to the lingual
frenulum. In some animals these ducts
join and secrete via one pu nctu m.
puncta of the parotid and zygomatic salivary glands open almost adjacent to
the maxillary carnassial (PM4) and molar 1 teeth in the buccal mucosa respect-
ively (Figure 1.46). The buccal salivary gland puncta are visible in the buccal
mucosa (Figure 1.47).
28
Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
Figure 1.46
  The parotid salivary duct
pu nctu m is partially pigmented in this
dog and the zygomatic salivary duct
pu nctu m is visible near the first molar.
Care must be exercised when creating
 su rgical flaps in this area.
Figure 1.47 The pu ncta of the buccal
salivary glands are visible in the buccal
mucosa.
The thin groove dividing the upper lip is known as the philtrum
(Figure 1.48).
The lower jaw comprises two mandibles that articulate at the fbrous
symphysis rostrally.
29
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.48  The shallow groove
separating the top lips is known as
the philtrum.
Figure 1.49 The space between two
teeth is known as a diastema. Here the
diaste mata between maxillary right
lateral incisor and canine and canine
and first premolar are visible.
The normal space between trwo teeth, for example between the maxillary
lateral incisor and canine is known as a diastema (Figures 1.49 and 1.50).
 The line separating the alveolar mucosa and attached gingiva is known as
the mucogingival line (Figure 1.51). When a finger is placed on the attached
30
Tooth Development (Odontogenesis)
Figure 1.50  Diastema between
mandibu lar left canine and first
premolar.
Figure 1.51 The muco-gingival line
demarcates the attached gingiva from
the alveolar mucosa. It is usually
furthest from the gingival margin,
over the canine and carnassial teeth.
 gingiva and moved from side to side it will glide over the gingival surface,
whereas, when a finger placed on the alveolar mucosa is moved from side to
side the alveolar mucosa moves with the finger. The attached gingiva is fixed
tightly to the underlying periosteum (mucoperiosteum) whereas the alveolar
31
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 1.52  The fauces house the
tonsils and are the areas medial to the
glosso-palatine folds. The tonsils lie
within their crypts and are often
enclosed by a mucosal fold.
 mucosa is not. In some animals a shallow line is seen to divide the free gingiva
from the attached gingiva.
 The palatine tonsils are housed in their crypts in the fauces and are usually
partially covered by a mucosal fold (Figure 1.52).
Further reading
Bath-Balogh, M. and Fehrenbach, M.J. (1997) Illustrated Dental Embryology,
Histology and Anatomy. W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
32
Clinical Examination
Small Animal Dentistry
An accurate history should be obtained from the client. It bears mentioning
that the client may not be the owner of the patient and some of the inform-
ation supplied may be misleading. Leading and rhetorical questions should be
avoided. If answers to particular questions do not fit the clinical picture they
should be rephrased and repeated.
A routine clinical examination should be performed on all patients presented
for dental procedures. This examination should include visual inspection and
palpation of the animal and auscultation of the thorax to monitor heart and
respiratory sounds. The colour of mucous membranes and the capillary refill
time help provide an indication of peripheral circulation. Under certain cir-
cumstances body temperature should be taken and routine pre-anaesthetic
blood test panels may be required. Depending upon the clinical and labor-
atory findings, the dental procedure may be postponed to allow further
investigation of more serious signs than the presenting dental disease. Animals
suffering with vomition and diarrhoea may have electrolyte imbalances which
will affect decisions on general anaesthesia. Animals suffering from chronic
conditions like cardiac insuffciency or systemic disease, such as diabetes, will
require special attention.
It may only be possible to carry out a cursory examination of the mouth
while the patient is conscious. This will depend on the demeanour of the
patient. For reasons of health and safety, fractious animals should be sedated,
tranquillised or anaesthetized to facilitate oral and dental examination. Most
animals will tolerate having their lips raised to reveal their teeth, providing
a glimpse of the occlusion and number of teeth present (Figure 2.1). Some
animals will not allow open-mouth examination while conscious.
The head must be palpated to determine symmetry especially in dogs and
cats which have a long hair coat. Pain may sometimes be elicited on palpation
Figure 2.1  The lips can be raised to
obtain a cursory view of the teeth in
most patients.
34
Clinical Examination
Figure 2.2 The oral cavity can be
exa mined prior to ET tu be placement.
of the head, face or eyes. Signs of heat and discharge (transudate or exudate)
should be noted. Pain on manipulation of the jaws may be due to retro-bulbar
pain caused by movement of the coronoid process.
 The caudal oral cavity can be examined on placement of an endotracheal
tube at induction of general anaesthesia. Having a light source shining over the
examiner's shoulder will provide adequate illumination of the oro-pharynx,
base of the tongue and fauces (area medial to glosso-palatine folds where
the tonsils are situated) (Figure 2.2). By gently lifting the tongue out of the
mouth it is sometimes possible to move the tonsils rostrally so that they can
be seen more easily (Figure 2.3). The normal tonsil should be small, flattened
laterally and positioned within its cleft. Periodically, foreign objects can be
found projecting from the tonsillar cleft and may be associated with exudate.
At this stage the jaws can be manipulated to elicit any crepitus or abnormal
motion of the temporomandibular joints. Lateral excursion of the jaws should
also be evaluated (Figure 2.4 and Figure 2.5) to eliminate excessive lateral
movement as a cause of inability to close the mouth (open-mouth locking).
The patient can then be intubated with an appropriately sized endo-
tracheal (ET) tube which has been measured and shortened to reduce dead-
space (if necessary) (Figure 2.6) and the cuff inflated adequately. The cuff
should be inflated whilst pressure is exerted on the rebreathing bag. It is
sufficiently inflated when there is no airflow past it. Over inflation of the cuff
is severely detrimental to the patient and may cause tracheal rupture. In some
cases the ET tube may fit so snugly that cuffinflation is unnecessary.
Light lubrication of the tube using a sterile lubricant will prevent adhesion
of the tube to the respiratory epithelium lining the trachea. A pharyngeal
pack should then be placed around the ET tube in the pharynx (Figure 2.7).
Numerous materials can be used as a pharyngeal pack including cellulose
35
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 2.3  The tonsils are visible
left and right just caudal to the glosso-
 palatine folds. The left tonsil in this dog
is enlarged and can be seen bulging
from its crypt. A biopsy su bmitted for
histopathology confirmed tonsillar
squamous cell carcinoma.
Figure 2.4  Excessive right lateral
excursion of the mandibles.
kitchen wipes (Figure 2.8), gauze swabs and commercially available pharyn-
d  o  n   P   s rs
opening. Note that the function of these packs is to prevent calculus, debris,
toothpaste and blood from accumulating around the ET tube in the pharynx
and trachea, thus preventing aspiration of these materials during extubation
36
Clinical Examination
Figure 2.5  Left lateral excursion
of the mandibles. Canines are still in
occlusion.
Figure 2.6   Trimming the ET tu be to the
correct length will red uce deadspace.
The tip of the ET tu be shou ld be placed
at the thoracic inlet and must not
 protrude beyond the incisors.
and recovery. The pack will not prevent fluid from accumulating around
the tube.
When the patient has been stabilised under anaesthesia the oral examina-
tion can be undertaken.
37
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 2.7  A pharyngeal pack should
be placed arou nd the ET tu be in the
pharynx to prevent debris and blood 
clots from accu mu lating arou nd the
tu be. Remember that the pharyngeal
pack will not prevent passage of water.
Figure 2.8  The pharyngeal packs in
this photograph are cut from cellu lose
kitchen sponges.
The clinician should beware of ideolepsis and should develop a systematic
 approach to oral examination. An oral findings recording chart serves as an
essential clinical record, aids in treatment planning a recording, and can be
used for future reference for ongoing conditions (Figure 2.9a and b). A dental
recording chart is essential for recording clinical findings, treatment planning
and treatment recordings. They also provide a comparison from examination
to examination.
38
 Diagnosis, treatment information and comments
Jaw relationship
Skull type
(0 - 3)
(0 - 3)
(0 - 3)
EE)
EE)
(0 - 3)
(0 - 3)
(0)
( - 1） +++ o + Auaas =
= Cavity (caries/endo access)
PDnnn = Persistent deciduous tooth
ORL = Odontoclastic resorption
Snnn = Supemumerary tooth
: Fracture (jaw or tooth)
Key to abbreviations
= Furcation involved
 = Calculus deposits
ONF = Oro-nasal fistula
RCT = Root canal therapy
QuadrantDisease
= Gingivitis score
= Recession depth
=Probing depth
=Mobility score
= Negligible 
ST = Sinus tract
WF = Wear facet
=Abscess
=
Scoring
5
CGRPFM
(by) uDeN
Left
W人
2
20
1.8
 Adult Canine Dental Record 
Figure 2.9a  An example of a canine recording chart.
&Q&
第
eouejeje1/5se1p
/
101
12
159
1
1
10
0
CGRPFM
Right
39
复鱼園
Diagnosis, treatment information and comments
Jawrelationship
type
(0 - 3)
(E-0)
(0 - 3)
EE)
EE)
(0 -3)
(0 - 3)
(0)
(- 1） +++ ] + AeAS =
Ca = Cavity (caries/endo access)
ORL = Odontoclastic esorption
PDnnn = Persistent deciduous tooth
= Furc ation involved
Snnn= Supemumerarytooth
Key to abbrev iations
 = Calculus deposits
RCT = Root canal therapy
(→= Length elationship
Quadrant Disease S
= Recession depth
ONF = Oro-nasal fistula
)= Tooth not present
s  =
= Probing depth
=Mobility score
= Negligible
= Sinus tract
F =Wear facet
= Extracted
= Abscess
 = 
6
民
5
X(
CGRPFM
Dy]uDeV
Left
 Adult Feline Dental Record
Q区
Figure 2.9b  An example of a feline recording chart.
+0
F 42 /900
101
高
110
18
19
110
00
CGRPFM
Right
40
Clinical Examination
Figure 2.10 Probing disto-buccally.
Each tooth should be examined individually along with its supportive
structures. A periodontal probe (the dimensions of which are known - :
See
Chapter 3) is used to probe the tooth sulcus circumferentially. The tip of
the probe is introduced into the sulcus and slowly circumscribed around
the tooth, measuring the depth of the sulcus (Figures 2.10-2.15). Most dental
recording charts will make provision for recording of four to six periodontal
 s          
angles, mid facial / buccal and mid lingual / palatal aspects. Sulcus depths
measuring less than 3 mm in dogs and less than 1 mm in cats are considered
normal (Figure 2.16). Once these depths are exceeded they are pathological
pockets. Pseudopockets are formed by hyperplastic gingiva (commonly seen
in Boxer dogs) (Figure 2.17). Gingival recession can also be measured using
the periodontal probe (Figure 2.18). The handle of the probe can be used to
determine tooth mobility by gently applying pressure to the tooth in a few
places to determine movement.
41
Figure 2.11  Probing buccally.
Figure 2.12  Probing mesio-buccally.
Figure 2.13  Probing mesio-palatally.
Figure 2.14  Probing palatally.
42
Figure 2.15  Probing disto-palatally.
Figure 2.16  The periodontal probe is used to measure su lcus
and pocket depths.
Figure 2.17  Pseudopockets formed by hyperplastic gingiva
Figure 2.18 Gingival recession being measured using a
are measu red using the periodontal probe.
periodontal probe.
43
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 2.19  Presence of su b-gingival
 plaque can be determined by probing
the sulcus / pocket using a periodontal
probe.
Figure 2.20  This mandibu lar left molar
has been scaled but not polished.
 The periodontal probe can also be used to determine the thickness of plaque
on the tooth surface and its presence in the gingival sulcus / periodontal
pocket (Figure 2.19). Scant plaque is not visible to the naked eye, plaque-
disclosing solution is required to reveal its presence (Figures 2.20-2.22).
44
Clinical Examination
Figure 2.21   Plaque-disclosing
solution has been applied to the
tooth in Figure 2.20.
Figure 2.22  The tooth in Figure 2.21
after polishing. The polishing procedure
not only aims to recreate a smooth tooth
surface but also removes plaque. Su b-
gingival polishing is essential to remove
Sub-gingival plaque.
The gingivitis index is scored from O-3, with 0 being healthy gingiva,
1 being slightly inflamed gingiva, characterised by swelling and marginal red-
ness, 2 being moderate gingivitis characterised by bleeding on probing of the
gingiva, and 3 being severe gingivitis characterised by spontaneous bleeding
on being touched (Figures 2.23-2.26).
45
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 2.23  Healthy gingiva; no visible
plaque or calculus.
Figure 2.24  Slight gingivitis (G1).
Gingival margin is reddened. This dog
has a su pernu merary 205 (PM1).
Any enamel defects should be further examined using the dental explorer.
 This fine instrument improves tactile examination and will become snagged in
enamel defects and create a tug effect when removed from a caries lesion
which is explored.
46
Clinical Examination
Figure 2.25  Moderate gingivitis (G2).
Bleeding on probing.
Figure 2.26  Severe gingivitis (G3).
Bleeding when lightly stimu lated.
Calculus index is scored as slight where there is a small amount of calculus
at the gingival margin, moderate where there is sub- and supra-gingival cal-
culus and heavy where the majority of the tooth surface is covered by calculus
(Figures 2.27-2.31). Although calculus itself does not cause gingivitis it has a
47
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 2.27  Healthy teeth and gu ms
with no calculus on teeth.
Figure 2.28  Slight calculus and G1.
rough plaque retentive surface which exacerbates periodontal disease. See
 Table 2.1 for abbreviations used in recording clinical findings.
Once the clinical examination is completed the oral cavity should be rinsed
with 0.12% chlorhexidine gluconate oral antiseptic (or similar product
48
Clinical Examination
Figure 2.29
Moderate calculus and G2
in a cat.
Figure 2.30 Heavy calculus in a dog.
Majority of the tooth su rface is covered
by calcu lus.
known to be effective against plaque organisms) prior to the commencement
of treatment (Figure 2.32).
 If the animal is suffering from severe periodontal disease and the clinician,
after probing the mandibular teeth, suspects that there is extensive bone loss it
49
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 2.31 Heavy calculus in a cat.
Figure 2.32  Oral antise ptic being
applied in the mouth prior to
commencement of the oral treatment.
This significantly reduces aerosolized
bacteria.
is advisable to take radiographs of the severely affected areas to determine
whether the mandible is still intact or whether it has undergone a pathological
fracture. These radiographs should be taken prior to the scale and polish
procedure.
50
Clinical Examination
Description
Abbreviation or score
Calculus heavy
CH
 Calculus moderate
CM
Calculus slight 
CS
 Gingival score - healthy
G0
 Gingival score - marginal redness
G1
Gingival score - bleeds on probing
G2
Gingival score - spontaneous bleeding
G3
Mobility - slight
M1
Mobility - moderate
M2
Mobility - marked
M3
Furcation - indentation at furcation
F1
 Furcation - probe passes into furcation but not through
F2
 Furcation - probe passes from buccal to lingual / palatal
F3
Fracture
Fx or #
 Pulp exposure
PE
 Enamel defect
ED
Wear facet
WF
Oro-nasal fistula
ONF
Gingival recession
GR
 Gingival hyperplasia / overgrowth
GH
Abrasion
AB
Attrition
AT
Seco ndary dentine
2D
Tertiary dentine
30
 Periodontal pocket depth
xmm
Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions
FORL
Caries
Ca
Table 2.1  Commonly used
abbreviations in dental charting.
Routine prophylaxis (scale and polish)
Moderate to heavy calculus can be removed using calculus-cracking forceps
and / or electromechanical scalers (Figure 2.33). The use of calculus-cracking
forceps is time saving but they must be used appropriately and carefully or
severe damage can be caused to the tooth and gingiva. The forceps are applied
to the calculus in such a way that shearing forces are created on the calculus in
relation to the tooth surface (Figures 2.34-2.38). Under no circumstances
should the tooth be pinched between the jaws of the forceps. In cats suffering
from odontoclastic resorptive lesions the crown of an affected tooth may
the compromised crown. If resorptive lesions are noted on other teeth it is
advisable to use other means of removing the calculus. Once the gross calculus
has been removed using forceps, the remainder can be removed using manual
(Figure 2.39), electromechanical (Figure 2.40) or pneumatic scalers.
51
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 2.33  Calculus-cracking forceps
are available in nu merous patterns.
Figure 2.34
Illustration of shearing
force applied between tooth surface and
calculus using calculus-cracking forceps.
Figure 2.35  Applying calculus-cracking
forceps to the tooth and calcu lus.
52
Clinical Examination
Figure 2.36  Shearing forces dislodge
the calculus from the crown of the
tooth.
Figure 2.37  Tenacious calculus may
require mu ltiple attempts to remove it.
Electromechanical scalers must be used with care. First, the tips of these
scalers must never be applied perpendicular to the tooth surface as they will
damage the enamel. Second, they must be properly adjusted with sufficient
water flow both to keep the scaler tip and tooth from becoming heated and to
53
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 2.38
 Removing tenacious
calculus from the maxillary left
carnassial in a cat. when the gingiva is
severely inflamed bleeding often occurs
during calcu lus removal using forceps or
electromechanical scalers.
Figure 2.39  Hand curettes are efficient
re movers of su pra- and su b-gingival
calculus and diseased cementu m
during open-root debridement. (Root 
debridement is considered harmful by
some as excessive cementu m is often
removed, denuding the dentine.)
flush calculus debris away. The scaler tip should not be kept within a deep
pocket for protracted periods as this will lead to damage of the gingiva and
possibly the pulp. (Numerous tips for sub-gingival scaling have been designed
which deliver irrigant to the tip keeping it cool and flushing debris from within
54
Clinical Examination
Figure 2.40   Piezoelectrical scaler
applied to the calcu lus. Do not spend
more than about eight seconds on a
 tooth at one time or pu Ipitis may resu lt.
Figure 2.41 A gentle, constant puff of
air along the tooth crown will inflate the
su lcus / pocket facilitating su b-gingival
visualisation. (Forceful bursts of air are
contra-indicated as they may cause
emphysema and air emboli.)
the pocket. A gentle constant puff of air directed apically along the tooth
crown using the three-way syringe will inflate the sulcus / pocket enabling sub-
gingival visualisation (Figure 2.41). Gentle sub-gingival exploration using the
dental explorer will also reveal residual calculus which must be differentiated
55
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 2.42Plaq ue-disclosing solution
shou ld be applied after scaling and 
prior to polishing to improve polishing
efficiency.
ous calculus, move on to adjacent teeth and return to uncompleted teeth
rather than spending long periods on a tooth at one time which would damage
the tooth pulp.
Once the calculus has been removed a plaque-disclosing solution can be
applied to the tooth surface to reveal the plaque, enabling the tooth to be
polished more effciently (Figure 2.42). When plaque-disclosing solution is
not used, the extent of the plaque cannot be seen nor is it possible to see where
the tooth has not been polished. Suffcient polishing paste must be used as this
acts as a lubricant and gentle abrasive. The prophy cup or brush should be
directed sub-gingivally to remove sub-gingival plaque (Figure 2.43). Once
again, do not spend too much time on each tooth or frictional heat produced
by the polishing device will cause thermal-induced pulpitis. Teeth are some-
times stained either intrinsically or extrinsically, tempting more aggressive
scaling or polishing. Often stain will not come away and tooth damage must
be prevented by limiting attempts to remove it (Figure 2.44).
When all teeth have been scaled and polished the debris and polishing paste
should be flushed from the mouth using the three-way air-water syringe
(Figure 2.45). Chlorhexidine gluconate oral rinse can be applied to the
 gingivae again prior to recovery especially if they are inflamed.
 If further treatment is needed which requires the taking of radiographs.
 a an a s sn ne  aq Pos a 
covered in calculus will result in artefacts and should only be performed
when pathological jaw fractures are suspected.
56
Clinical Examination
Figure 2.43   The rubber prophy cup
shou ld have sufficient pressure applied
 to it to cause it to deform and polish
Su b-gingivally.
Figure 2.44 Some teeth are stained s0
severely that thorough cleaning will not
remove the staining. Repeated attempts
at stain removal should be avoided to
prevent tooth damage.
57
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 2.45
 The three-way syringe is
useful in flushing polishing paste and
other debris from the mouth.
Further reading
Crossley, D.A. and Penman, S. (Eds) (1995) Manual of Small Animal Dentistry.
 BSAVA Publications, Cheltenham, UK.
Holstrom, S.E., Frost, P., and Eisner, E.R. (1998) Veterinary Dental Techniques for
the Small Animal Practitioner (2nd edn). W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
Wiggs, R.B. and Lobprise, H.B. (1997) Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
58
3 Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
Small Animal Dentistry
The 'Dental Room
The veterinary dental operatory, commonly known in practice as the dental
room, should not share air space with the preparatory area for aseptic proced-
ures. Ideally, the room should be separate from the rest of the clinic, although
this separation may be a single door (Figure 3.1). The dental area should have
an air extraction system which will cause a negative pressure within the room.
This ensures that aerosolised micro-organisms are discharged to the outside of
the building in such a manner that they do not compromise public safety
(Figure 3.2). It should not be possible for expelled air to re-enter the building
the air extraction system (Figure 3.3).
The electromechanical dental scaling procedure causes aerosolisation of
micro-organisms which will settle on work surfaces and walls, These surfaces
Figure 3.1  The dental operatory
should comprise: a comfortable chair
for the veterinarian and his assistant,
a table on which to place the patient,
an anaesthetic machine, dental
radiography unit and chair-side
developer, a light source, dental unit
and an air extraction unit which will
exhaust air to the outside.
Figure 3.2  An effective air extraction
System should exhaust dental room air
to the outside without compromising
pu blic safety.
60
Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
Figure 3.3 Expired anaesthetic gases
shou ld also be scavenged from the
anaesthetic system and expelled from
the room. In this syste m anaesthetic
gases are scavenged using the room air
extraction system.
should therefore be impervious and easily cleaned. The tiling of walls could be
a practical option.
 Since radiography will be performed in the dental room as well, its location
should take radiation safety precautions into consideration.
Health and safety considerations
The health of the veterinary surgeon, veterinary nurse and the patient are of
 utmost importance and necessary precautions should be taken to minimise
-ooid ream Pnous ssnu pue uosains Areuaiaa au spiezeq oi ainsodxa
ive spectacles to minimise ocular exposure to aerosolised micro-organisms
and splatter, as well as debris generated by scalers and high-speed dental
 uo sid, s e ae a sq aads-i sa
serious injury. Glass spectacles are not considered to provide ocular safety as
they may shatter when impacted by a projectile. *Half’ spectacle lenses are
Pnrs s eans add nid rno r ad os
also be worn to protect against inhalation of plaque micro-organisms.
Theatre caps may be considered optional as the aerosolised plaque and splat-
ter will settle on the operator's hair as well. Suitable protective attire should
always be worn (Figures 3.4 and 3.5).
Once anaesthetised, the patient's eyes should be protected by an ocular
lubricant and, depending upon the length of the procedure, this may need to
be repeated. Covering the patient's face with a drape or small towel will also
reduce the amount of aerosolised material settling on the patient's head.
A towel placed under the patient's head will help drain fluid away
Placement of an inflated, cuffed endotracheal (ET) tube is essential to
protect the lower airways from debris, blood clots and toothpaste. The ET
61
Small Animal Dentistry
Figures 3.4 and 3.5  Appropriate masks
and eye wear must be worn during
dental procedures. Theatre head 
covering is optional but advised.
62
tube also keeps anaesthetic gases contained, reducing contamination of the
Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
work area and eliminates inhalation of aerosolised micro-organisms by the
 patient. A disposable pharyngeal pack will prevent blood and debris from
accumulating in the pharynx.
Hand instruments
The periodontal probe is used to examine and evaluate gingival sulci (< 3 mm
deep in dogs and < 1 mm in cats is normal) and periodontal pockets. The
periodontal probe is a blunt-ended instrument which should have a rounded
tip to prevent damage to the gingiva and graduations of known dimension
(Figure 3.6). This enables the examiner to report the findings to the recorder
accurately. A Williams 14 periodontal probe is commonly used in veterinary
dentistry and can be read easily (Figure 3.7).
Dental explorers are sharp-tipped instruments of various shape used both to
explore the visible tooth surface and to explore sub-gingivally to examine for
calculus, after scaling is completed. The explorer will reveal sub-gingival odonto-
clastic resorptive lesions which should be differentiated from sub-gingival
Olmm
110
210
Figure 3.6  The graduations on
the probe should be of known
dimension for accurate recording
of measu rements.
Figure 3.7  A williams 14 periodontal
probe and dental explorer combination.
63
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 3.8Three-way air-and-water
syringe -a useful tool in veterinary
dentistry.
calculus. Caries lesions tend to ^snag' the tip of the instrument, while it will
slide over tertiary dentine protected lesions. The three-way syringe (Figure 3.8)
is useful to flush the mouth, dry tooth surfaces and a gentle puff of air will
sulcus or pocket (Figure 3.9).
 The dental mirror aids in visualisation of distal surfaces of caudal teeth and
can be used to visualise lingual and palatal sub-gingival tooth surfaces. The
Figure 3.9 A gentle, constant puff of
air can inflate the su lcus enabling sub-
gingival visualisation.
64
Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
Figure 3.10 Periodontal exa mination
and treatment kit comprising
(from bottom): periodontal probe and
explorer, dental mirror, dental scaler
and curette.
dental mirror not only aids in visualisation of the distal aspects of teeth but
cheek retractor. The mirror can also be used for visualisation of the naso.
pharynx. Moistening the surface of the mirror using the three-way syringe or
wiping the surface against the inside of the patient's cheek will prevent it from
frosting (Figure 3.10).
There are many different patterns of hand instrument available for use in
small animal dentistry (most having been designed for use in man). Hand
scalers are used to remove calculus from the supra-gingival surface and
curettes are used to remove sub-gingival calculus. Scalers should not be used
sub-gingivally as they will traumatize the gingiva. A universal Hygienist scaler
is adequate for veterinary dentistry. Curettes are used supra-gingivally and
sub-gingivally (Figure 3.11). Universal or Gracey curettes are adequate for
veterinary dentistry. Scalers and curettes must be used with care, to ensure
that the tooth surface is cleaned but not damaged. Calculus within develop-
mental grooves must also be removed with care. In some cases (e.g. the longi-
tudinal developmental grooves on the canines of cats) the calculus may be left
in place as to remove it will not only potentially damage the tooth but it is also
impossible to polish these grooves with routinely used rubber prophy cups
and they are thus left rough and plaque retentive.
Once all the calculus has been removed the tooth surfaces (supra- and
sub-gingival) should be polished. Polishing not only attempts to recreate
the smooth surface of the enamel but also removes plaque which is mostly not
visible to the unaided eye. Plaque-disclosing solution may be applied to the
teeth after scaling and before polishing to increase polishing efficiency. Prophy
cups or brushes can be driven by electric or air motors. When the number
of cases seen per week does not justify the purchase of a dental unit, an
65
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 3.11 A curette being used to
perform sub-gingival cu rettage.
electric-motor driven unit can be used effectively (micro-motor hobby drills)
with a latch-key prophy cup used to polish teeth). Hand polishing using a
tooth brush (manual or electric) is not beneficial but is suitable for dental
homecare to be performed by the pet owner.
Power scalers
Uitrasonic
Electromechanical scalers are divided into two categories: magnetostrictive
and piezoelectrical. In the former group, an electric current applied around a
ferrite rod or a ^metal stack' causes the attached tip to oscillate, whereas in the
latter group an electric current applied to a crystal results in deformation of
the crystal and oscillation of the scaler tip in the hand piece. Some magneto-
strictive scalers have a smaller amplitude of oscillation which allows more
effcient coverage of the tooth surface. Magnetostrictive scalers have a flat
orbital oscillation pattern, while piezoelectric scalers have a linear oscillation
pattern. Magnetostrictive scalers create cavitation circumferentially around
the scaler tip, piezoelectric scalers only create cavitation at each end of the
linear oscillation. Cavitation is the formation of small air bubbles within the
coolant which implode on the tooth surface, assisting in removal of calculus
It has also been shown to damage the cell membrane of spirochaetes com
monly found in plaque. Some magnetostrictive and piezoelectric scalers have
tips which can be used sub-gingivally as coolant is delivered to the apex of the
scaler, preventing thermal damage to the tooth or gingiva. The frequency of
these scalers is typically in the range of 16 000-32 000 Hz (Figures 3.12
and 3.13).
66
Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
Figure 3.12   The water fow must be
correctly adjusted to aid in cooling this
instru ment and also flush away debris.
Figure 3.13  Ultrasonic scalers.
From bottom: Magnetostrictive metal
stack and ferrite rod and piezoelectric
handpieces.
Sonic
 aq ps s  r n so  e d a ss is
driven through an eccentric hole in a rod within the hand piece. These scalers
also have tips which can be used sub-gingivally (Figure 3.14).
Polishers
Electric (Figure 3.15) or pneumatic motors (Figure 3.16) may be used to drive
prophy cups or brushes. Care should be exercised when selecting prophy
67
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 3.14  Sonic (upper) and
piezoelectric (lower) scalers.
This sonic scaler is air driven.
Figure 3.15  An electric motor-driven
polisher. These instru ments have higher
torque than air-driven motors. Speed
and direction control buttons are
situated on the control box.
Figure 3.16  An air-driven motor.
Direction of rotation can be reversed by
turning the speed and direction collar at
the base of the hand piece.
brushes (Figure 3.17). Nylon-bristled brushes can remove cementum from
exposed root surfaces and should therefore not be used sub-gingivally.
Natural bristle should be used in preference.
When using prophy cups suffcient pressure should be applied to the cup to
cause it to deform and slide sub-gingivally (Figure 3.18). Sub-gingival polish
ing is essential to remove plaque. Rotating prophy polishers must be set at less
 than 3500 revolutions per minute. If the prophy head persists in unscrewing
from the hand piece rotate the direction and speed adjustment ring at the base
of the hand piece to the other side. This will change the direction of rotation
and keep the prophy head in place (Figure 3.19). Some prophy heads oscillate
rather than rotate.
68
Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
Figure 3.17  Numerous polishing
devices are available. Natural bristle
brushes are preferable to nylon bristles
as the latter can strip cementu m from
the root surface.
Figure 3.18   The polishing cu p shou ld
be applied to the tooth su rface with
sufficient pressure to deform it and
allow su b-gingival polishing.
69
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 3.19  The ring at the base of the
air motor adjusts drive direction as well
as speed. Incorrect position will resu It
in 'screw-on' prophy cups repeatedly
unscrewing.
Figure 3.20   Prophy paste is available
in mu Iti-dose or individual patient tu bs.
Use of the latter eliminates the
 possibility of cross-contamination.
Polishing paste
 Dental prophylaxis paste is available in numerous flavours, consistencies and
textures. A medium abrasive texture is usually used in animals. High abrasive
paste will damage the enamel surface making it more plaque retentive and
should therefore not be used. Although dental prophy paste is available in
multi-dose tubs, single patient pots are preferable in order to prevent cross-
contamination (Figure 3.20). Single aliquots can be decanted from a multi-
dose pot and placed in an appropriate receptacle. Under no circumstances
should the paste be scooped from a multi-dose pot using the prophy cup
during the polishing procedure!
Three-way syringe
 The three-way syringe is a very useful piece of equipment when performing
routine dental prophylaxis. The air-and-water syringe is used to flush calculus
and other debris, as well as tooth paste, from the patient's mouth. A gentle
puff of air directed toward the free gingiva along the crown of the tooth will
70
inflate the gingival sulcus (or pocket), facilitating direct visualisation of the
Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
sub-gingival surface, ensuring that all calculus is removed. A gentle puff of air
over the crown of the tooth will dry the surface and expose residual calculus
that will resemble a chalk-like substance on the crown which may not be visible
when the tooth surface is wet.
Slow-speed air motor
The slow-speed air motor drives the prophy attachment (snap-on, screw-in or
latch key contra-angles or right-angle disposable prophy head), latch-key burs
and straight burs for trimming rabbit and other small herbivore teeth. Slow-
 speed motors fitted with speed-increasing hand pieces with a built-in water
supply can be used for teeth sectioning. Contra-angled hand pieces may be
fitted with latch key or push button bur chucks (clutches). The speed and
direction of rotation is adjusted by rotating a collar at the base of the air
 motor (see Figure 3.19 above). The speed should be adjusted to not more than
about 3500 rpm for polishing purposes. Too high a polishing speed willresult
in thermal injury to the tooth.
High-speed (turbine) hand piece
Most high-speed hand pieces make use of a push-button friction grip or
screw-trype chuck for securing burs.
In veterinary dentistry the high-speed hand piece is mainly used for section-
ing teeth, alveolotomy prior to extraction and alveoloplasty in anticipation of
flap closure. However, it is preferable to perform alveolotomy and alveolo-
plasty using a slow, surgical hand piece to prevent air embolisation and
emphysema. The turbine rotates at 300 000-450 000 rpm and is a high
speed, low torque instrument. Most efficient function is attained when the bur
is rotating at full speed (pedal fully depressed) and a light brush stroke is used.
As soon as too heavy a load is applied the cutting efficiency drops off (accom-
panied by an audible drop in pitch of the sound generated by the turbine) and
the turbine may stall. Heavy loading will also shorten the life of the bur which
willsoon become blunt and may damage the bearings within the turbine head.
Adequate coolant (water, polyionic fluid or in some cases, depending upon
manufacturer's recommendations, antiseptic) is essential to keep the bur and
tooth cool and flush debris from the operating site, keeping the bur from
 becoming clogged. Antiseptic solutions should not be used as flushing agents
when performing alveolotomy and alveoloplasty as they are detrimental to
cells and may delay wound healing. The high-speed hand piece is held using
the modified pen grip with the fourth fnger used as a rest on adjacent struc.
tures (Figure 3.21).
Dental burs
Dental bur types are almost innumerable. In general veterinary dental practice,
round, pear-shaped and fissure (flat (cylindrical) or tapered) burs will be
required. A couple of sizes in each of these shapes will suffice and can be
ordered from your local dental supplier. Ideally, a bur should be used on one
patient only and then discarded. When numerous teeth are to be sectioned,
more than one bur may be required to complete the task. Dental burs are
made of tungsten carbide or stainless steel and may be covered in diamond
71
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 3.21 The high-speed hand piece
is held using the modified pen grip, with
the fourth finger used as a rest on
ad jacent structures.
fragments. A small brass-wire brush should be used to remove debris from the
burs which may be sterilised in an autoclave or using a disinfectant (cold ster-
ilisation). A nylon nail brush can be used to clear tooth and bone debris from
diamond burs, which are usually reused. It is important to ensure that the
coolant flow is adjusted appropriately to ensure that the tooth and bone are
not damaged by frictional heat. Dental burs should be stored in a bur stand
(Figure 3.22).
Figure 3.22 Dental burs should be
stored in a bur stand.
72
Dentaf fuxation and efevation
 Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
Luxator@ (Figure 3.23) is a range of fine dental instruments used to sever the
periodontal ligament and create space for the more robust dental elevators
(Figure 3.24). The instrument is held in the palm grip with the forefinger
extended along the shank to aid stability and prevent injury should the
Figure 3.23  Dental luxators are fine,
sharp instru ments used to sever the
periodontal ligament and compress
alveolar bone, creating space for
insertion of dental elevators.
Figure 3.24   Dental elevators are more
robust than luxators and are used to
 apply rotational leverage forces to the
tooth root, further compress alveolar
bone and deliver the tooth.
73
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figures 3.25 and 3.26 Dental luxators
and elevators are held in the palm grip,
with the index finger extended along
the shaft of the instru ment, minimising
injury shou ld they slip off alveolar bone
or tooth su bsta nce.
Luxatorslip off the tooth or bone (Figures 3.25 and 3.26). The instrument is
advanced between the tooth and the alveolar bone in an apical direction and
rotated clockwise and anti-clockwise alternately. When reaching the end of
each rotation, gentle rotational pressure is to be applied and held for ten to
thirty seconds. Once suffcient space has been created between the tooth and
alveolar bone an elevator may be used to further loosen the tooth. Elevators
are more robust than luxation instruments and are used to elevate the tooth
from the alveolar socket/s. Under no circumstances should the luxation or
elevation instruments be used in a manner resembling the opening of a paint
pot using a screw driver! (Figure 3.27).
74
Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
Figure 3.27   Neither luxators nor
elevators shou ld be used in the manner
in which a paint can is opened using a
screw driver. This type of manoeuvre
will break these instru ments.
Dental prophylaxis
 Routine dental prophylaxis includes removal of plaque and calculus followed
by polishing of the supra- and sub-gingival teeth surfaces. Once the animal's
mouth has been examined and charted, the teeth and oral cavity should be
flushed using an oral antiseptic solution. The teeth are then scaled and pol-
ished prior to other treatments being performed except in patients with severe
periodontal disease where the taking of radiographs is indicated before the
scale and polish procedure to prevent iatrogenic jaw fractures. Gross calculus
can be removed from the tooth surface using calculus-removing (cracking)
forceps (Figure 3.28). Care should be exercised when using these instruments
 not to damage the tooth or gingiva. One jaw of the forceps is positioned on the
incisal edge of the tooth while the other is placed on the gingival extent of the
calculus. The resulting shearing force applied to the calculus and tooth when
the forceps are closed dislodges the calculus from the tooth (Figure 3.29). The
tooth should never be ^pinched’ between the jaws of the forceps as this can
result in tooth fracture. Once the majority of the calculus has been removed
the remainder can be removed using hand or electromechanical / pneumatic
scalers. When the calculus is tenacious the operator should move the scaler on
to adjacent teeth to prevent damage to the tooth surface or pulp caused by
prolonged scaling. Correct setting of the water (antiseptic) coolant will aid in
rinsing of calculus and other debris and will keep the tooth cool. Cavitational
energy created by the scaler tip also helps to dislodge the calculus and damage
plaque bacteria. Should the scaler be dropped accidentally it should be
returned to the manufacturer for evaluation, as bent scaler tips do not scale
efficiently. When the operator is satisfied that all calculus has been removed,
plaque-disclosing solution can be applied to the teeth to reveal plaque. This
will help make polishing more thorough.
The prophy cup or brush should have liberal amounts of polishing paste
applied to it as it not only acts as a mild abrasive but also as a lubricant to pre
a pnous ysnq / dno Aydoid aui (dind) qoon aui oi Anlun jaun juaa
75
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 3.28 Calculus-cracking forceps
make use of shearing forces to dislodge
calculus from the tooth / root surface.
Do not pinch the crown between the
beaks of the forceps or the crown may
be severely damaged.
Figure 3.29  Calculus dislodged by
 correct application of calculus-cracking
forceps.
sufficient pressure applied to it to cause flaring or splaying enabling the tip to
polish sub-gingivally. Polishing this part of the tooth is essential as it is here
that the plaque accumulates initially to become mineralised into calculus.
Polishing all the teeth should not take more than a couple of minutes,
following which, the prophy paste and other debris should be gently flushed
76
from the mouth. The thre-way syringe should therefore be used with care,
Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
as forceful flushing may cause debris and bacteria to be forced into the oral
tissues.
 In patients with severe periodontitis evidenced by increased probing depth,
 it may be beneficial to flush the pockets using an oral antiseptic (See Chapter 7
- Periodontal Surgery.)
Routine maintenance of prophy equipment
Sharpening of hand scalers and curettes
Scalers have two cutting surfaces which must be sharpened on a regular basis.
Depending upon use this may be daily or between patients. Place the sharpen-
ing stone on a rigid surface (table or work top) and apply the scaler tip to
the stone. Using a pull action, with your fourth finger keeping the instrument
at the correct angle, draw the instrument across the stone (Figure 3.30).
Curettes on the other hand are sharpened by being held frmly in the hand
rested on a rigid surface (edge of table or work top). The sharpening stone is
then drawn in an arc across the surface of the cutting edge to be sharpened.
Natural sharpening stones should be lubricated using oil while synthetic
stones must be lubricated with water. Diamond coated sharpeners can also be
used (Figure 3.31).
Monitoring scaler tip lengths
Some manufacturers of scaler tips provide a guide to normal scaler tip length.
Since it is the apex of the tip which is most efficient at calculus removal it soon
Figure 3.30  Sharpening a dental
scaler. Draw the instru ment across
the stone to prevent bur formation.
77
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 3.31  Sharpening a dental
curette. Draw the stone in an arc across
the surface of the curette. A diamond
sharpener is being used here.
KTGLEC EFPICIENCYTIPCARD
F00246
F00247
F00253
Figure 3.32  Ultrasonic scaler tips wear
due to the friction of calcu lus and must
be replaced when worn. The tip in this
figure is near replacement. Short tips
are ineffective (tips which have become
bent after being dropped are also likely
to be ineffective).
becomes worn and the tip must be replaced at the manufacturer's recom-
mendation (Figure 3.32). If the scaler is dropped and the tip becomes bent as
a result it should be returned to the supplier for evaluation as many tips will
become ineffective when bent. Dropping the hand piece can also cause severe
damage to the magnetostrictive and piezoelectrical components.
78
Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
Figure 3.33  The direction collar at the
base of the air polisher must be set to
run in the correct direction. Hair and
other foreign material can be
'unwound' from the prophy hand by
changing the direction of rotation.
Maintenance of pofishers
The E-type fitting of the air motor as well as the contra-angle polishing attach-
ment must be oiled on a regular basis for optimum function. The small flange
at the base of the snap-on button may accumulate material, including hair.
This material is easily removed by unscrewing the prophy button. Sometimes
by reversing the direction of rotation of the head the material can be unwound
(Figure 3.33).
Maintenance of high-speed turbine
The high-speed turbine must be oiled regularly according to the manufac-
turer's instructions since over or under oiling can be detrimental to this refined
 piece of equipment. Some turbines may be subjected to autoclave sterilisation
while others may be sterilised using disinfectants (cold sterilisation) depend-
ing upon manufacturer's instructions. The turbine must never be run without
a bur or blank in the chuck as this will cause severe damage to the turbine
head. Oil is placed in the narrower of the two large holes at the back of the
hand piece (Figure 3.34).
Sharpening fuxators and elevators
Luxation instruments are sharpened to a fne point, with the concave part of
the instrument applied to the sharpening stone (Figure 3.35). It is essential
that the curvature of the sharpening stone is the same as that of the luxation
instrument or it will be damaged irreversibly. If the curvature of the sharpen-
ing stone exceeds that of the luxation instrument it will become flattened and
lose its shape.
 Elevators are sharpened on the convex side at a less acute angle. The convex
side of the elevator must be placed on the sharpening stone at the correct
79
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 3.34 Rotary dental equipment
must be lu bricated according to
manufacturer'sinstructions using an
approved lubricant. Over lubrication
can be detrimental.
Figure 3.35
 Luxators shou ld be
sharpened on their concave su rfaces
using a sharpening stone or file of
equivalent cu rvatu re. The instru ments
 are sharpened by pushing them along
the sharpening rod. Using a sharpening
device of inappropriate size will shorten
the life of the instru ment.
inclination and using a back-and-forth wrist action, gently ^wiped’ across the
stone (Figure 3.36).
Sharp elevators and luxation instruments are less likely to inflict damage as
they engage the ligament and rarely slide off the alveolar bone which would
traumatise adjacent soft tissue (Figure 3.37).
80
Equipping a Veterinary Dental Operatory
Figure 3.36  Elevators should be
sharpened on their convex su rface at
the correct angle to maintain the tip
shape. Using a wrist action the tip is
wiped back and forth.
Figure 3.37
Luxators and elevators
must be held in such a manner that 
the index finger is extended along the
shaft of the instru ment, to prevent 
inadvertent injury should the
instru ment slide off the alveolar bone /
tooth su rface. Intra-cranial and intra /
retro-bu lbar injuries are serious
consequences of such accidents.
81
Small Animal Dentistry
Further reading
Crossley, D.A. and Penman, S. (Eds) (1995) Manual of Small Animal Dentistry.
BSAVA Publications, Cheltenham, UK.
Holstrom, S.E., Frost, P. and Eisner, E.R. (1998) Veterinary Dental Techniques for the
Small Animal Practitioner (2nd edn). W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
Wiggs, R.B. and Lobprise, H.B. (1997) Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
82
4 Radiography
Small Animal Dentistry
Indications for dental radiography
It is not possible to practice veterinary dentistry to an acceptable standard
without using radiography as an aid to diagnostics, for treatment planning
and monitoring.
Discoloured, fractured, clinically missing, abnormally shaped or placed,
worn and loose teeth should all be radiographed. Prior to the extraction of
teeth, for whatever reason, a radiograph should be obtained. Depending on
the results, the initial treatment plan may need to be modifed. For example,
the tooth may have a supernumerary root or fused roots or it may have a
sub-gingival fracture requiring a different extraction plan of action. Swelling
in the mouth (from hyperplastic gingival lesions to more aggressive lesions)
should be radiographed to determine what bony changes have occurred.
Radiography also gives an indication of the presence or absence of the peri
odontal ligament space and whether the tooth is likely to be ankylosed to the
bone or not. In some cats affected by odontoclastic resorption and replace-
ment, the entire root of a tooth may have been resorbed and replaced by bone
with only the crown remaining. Extraction of such teeth is markedly different
from routine extractions (Figures 4.1-4.1 8).
Figure 4.1  Teeth associated
with inflamed gingiva shou ld be
radiographed. In this case stage 3
Feline Odontoclastic Resorption was
diagnosed in this cat mandibu lar right
third premolar.
84
Radiography
Figure 4.2  The gingiva attached to the
occlusal su rface of this dog mandibu lar
right first molar prompted radiography
that lead to the diagnosis of
odontoclastic resorption in this tooth.
Figure 4.3  This chronic oro-nasal
fistu la resu lted from chronic
periodontitis affecting the maxillary
left canine and premolars. Radiographs
were taken to eliminate the presence of
root remnants and evaluate the bony
palate. There was no bone su pporting
206.
85
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.4   This fistu la is a remnant 
of extraction of a periodontally
compromised maxillary right canine
tooth. Radiography confirmed that 
there were no root remnants present
 before the surgical repair was
underta ken.
Figure 4.5  This draining sinus tract
was fou nd to be leading from a
periapical abscess involving the
 mandibu lar left canine in this cat.
86
Radiography
Figure 4.6
This sinus tract was
associated with periapical pathology
following a complicated crown fracture
of the maxillary right deciduous canine
in this you ng pu ppy.
Figure 4.7
 Although this sinus tract is
at the level of the maxillary right second
premolar, it led to the root of the
maxillary right canine tooth which had a
complicated crown fracture. There are
two sinus tracts dorsal to the carnassial
tooth associated with the buccal roots of
this tooth which also had a com plicated
crown fracture.
87
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.8  Severe periodontal lesions
shou ld be radiographed.
Figure 4.9  There is horizontal
bone loss affecting the teeth in this
mandibu lar left quadrant. Taking
radiographs will reveal the extent of
these lesions.
88
Radiography
Figure 4.10   Taking radiographs of
teeth similar to this will show if the
teeth are periodontally sou nd.
Figure 4.11  Although the mandibu lar
right canine and premolar 3 have
obvious chronic complicated crown
fractures, taking radiographs will 
eliminate unpleasant surprises during
extraction.
89
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.12
The maxillary second
incisor had an acute complicated crown
fracture.A pre-operative radiograph
was taken to eliminate fu rther su b-
gingival fractures prior to root
 canal therapy on this tooth. The
supernu merary maxillary left incisor 2
was an incidental finding.
Figure 4.13 Discoloured teeth should
be explored and radiographed to
eliminate caries and pulp exposures.
This is a case of arrested caries in 109.
90
Radiography
Figure 4.14   The maxillary right lateral
incisor in this six-year-old Doberman
became acutely discolou red. Periapical
pathology as a resu lt of pulpitis / pulp
necrosis must be ruled out.
Figure 4.15 Teeth with extra
cusps similar to that seen on the
maxillary right premolar 3 are often
associated with a su pernu merary root.
Radiography will confirm / rule this out.
91
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.16
The maxillary right second
incisor has undergone gemination. This
can be confirmed on radiography and
the extent of separation of the roots can
be evaluated as well.
Figure 4.17 Epuli should be
radiographed to determine the extent
of bony involvement.
92
Radiography
Figure 4.18  Oral soft tissue tu mours
often invade underlying bone which can
be confirmed radiographically.
Figure 4.19  A medical X-ray machine
can be used to take diagnostic dental
radiographs.
Equipment
Veterinary dental radiography can be performed using the medical X-ray
machines (Figure 4.19) found in most private veterinary practices but dental
X-ray machines (Figure 4.20) are more practical.
93
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.20  Dental X-ray machines are
easily positioned arou nd the patient
and can be installed in the dental
theatre.
The disadvantages of using a medical X-ray machine:
the machine is usually situated in a separate room, away from the dental
room
 the anaesthetised patient needs to be moved between the dental and X-ray
rooms to be positioned under the X-ray machine
 some machines are fixed to the wall and cannot be lowered to the required
film focal distance (FFD)
 some machines are not able to swivel to be positioned for correct bisecting
angle techniques
 collimation and positioning the X-ray head is often cumbersome
settings are arrived at by trial and error.
Advantages of using a dental X-ray machine:
●the FFD is fixed by the tube collimator
 collimation is accurate and safe
usually kV and mA are fixed, requiring only time to be set
 machine is positioned around patient
 machine may be mobile or mounted on the wall or ceiling of the dental
room.
When using a medical X-ray machine it should be set at about 70 kV and
15-25 mA depending upon the size of the patient and the structures to be
94
Radiography
Figure 4.21 Hand-developing tanks
can be used to develop dental X-ray
film. The film must be well secured
during processing as retrieving it
from the bottom of these tanks is
challenging!
AGFA
CURIX60
Figure 4.22  Processing chemicals
can be decanted from the automatic
 processor into receptacles and used
in the darkroom.
radiographed. The FFD should be about 40 cm and can be attained either by
lowering the X-ray machine head or placing an object (low table or other suit-
able object) on the X-ray table onto which the patient is placed. Intra-oral film
can be used and can either be developed in the developing tanks (Figure 4.21),
small receptacles in the dark room (Figure 4.22), or in a chair-side darkroom
(Figures 4.23-4.24).
95
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.23 Chair-side 'darkrooms' are
convenient processing cha mbers.
Figure4.24  The red 'window' provides
'safe' light within the processor allowing
visualisation of the process.
Dental X-ray machines usually have a fixed kV of between 50 and 70 and
 ns aq  p ae si a sx g r  ro 
or electronically. Some collimators are conical while others are lead-lined
cylinders (the former are considered undesirable because of increased danger
of scatter radiation). Some newer dental X-ray machines make use of a rect-
angular collimator with a cross-sectional area not much larger than the
intra-oral film. This reduces scatter radiation.
96
Health and safety considerations
Radiography
Although the health and safety specifications of some dental X-ray machines
state that it is safe to be within 600 mm of the back of the tube head and 1.8 m
in front of the tube head, it is advisable to vacate the room while dental
radiographic exposures are made. This requires installation of an extended
or remote release button. Under no circumstances should the operator or
assistant find themselves within the primary X-ray beam. The advice of your
local ionizing radiation safety oficial must be sought when planning the
installation of a dental X-ray unit. Ideally, the dental operatory should have
walls of brick and mortar and the door should be lead lined to increase the
level of ionizing radiation safety. A ‘do not enter' sign should be illuminated
when X-ray exposures are being made in the dental operatory.
Intra-oral dental film
Intra-oral dental film is non-screen film available in four sizes of which the
adult periapical (3.1 × 4.1 cm), paediatric periapical (2.4 × 4.0 cm) and
occlusal (5.7 x 7.6 cm) flms are most commonly used (Figure 4.25). These
flms are usually packed in impervious ^envelopes' which are clearly marked
to show which side is the back. Each envelope contains a lead backing sheet
and a black protective paper surrounding the flm (Figure 4.26). (Some film
packages, for example the ECO 301M, do not contain a lead backing sheet.)
Most films have a raised nodule near one corner of the front of the flm which
aids in orientation of the flm during viewing (Figure 4.27). Ideally, this nodule
should not coincide with an area of importance to be radiographed or it may
lead to artefact interference with interpretation of the radiograph. There are
two speeds of flm commonly available viz. EktaTM or E-speed and UltraIM
or D-speed. E-speed film must be developed under an orange safe light or it
will become overexposed. E-speed film requires a lower exposure setting but
Figure 4.25  The most commonly
used sizes of intra-oral dental film
are from left: paed iatric periapical,
adu lt periapical and occlusal film.
A dedicated processing clip is visible
above the film.
97
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.26   The film is protected by
black paper. A lead backing sheet
eliminates scatter radiation and the film
is sealed in a plastic envelope.
Figure 4.27  The film has a small
nod ule on the right u pper corner used
to orientate it after processing. The film
 on the left is exposed but not
developed.
gives an image of lesser quality. D-speed film can be developed under red safe
lighting.
Mammography film in normal mammography cassettes can be used to
 take radiographs of teeth and other oral structures but care must be exercised
 during positioning to prevent superimposition of structures. These cassettes
are used extra-orally. Plastic envelope cassettes can be used for intra-oral
radiography.
98
Radiography
Figure 4.28  The X-ray film / radiograph
shou ld be held along its edges to
prevent fingerprint artefacts
Film processing
Chair-side ^darkrooms’ are ideal for developing intra-oral dental film as they
can be positioned close to the patient and the processed radiograph can be
  ,    n s n  
three or four containers within them. The four-container system contains:
developer, rinse water, fixer and rinse water. The three-container system con-
tains: developer, rinse water and fixer. The film is rinsed in the same water
after developing and fixing. Small purpose-made clips should be used to hold
the flms during procesing. If these are not available small haemostat forceps
can be used instead. Automated processors are also available. Where process-
ing tanks are used in a practice the dental flm can be developed in the
darkroom, but this requires the nurse or veterinary surgeon to be away from
the patient periodically. If the practice uses an automated processor (for their
routine radiographs), developer and fixer chemicals can be decanted from
the processor and used as a three-container system within the darkroom.
Processing chemicals differ and the duration of developing and fixing varies
according to the chemicals used. When using rapid-acting chemicals, develop-
ing and fxing routinely take about 30-40 seconds per process. These chem-
icals are used at room temperature, however when the ambient temperature
is low the process will take slightly longer. Other chemicals require up to
 2.5 minutes for developing and the same length of time for fixing.
The dental film should be handled along its edges to prevent finger prints
causing artefacts (Figures 4.28 and 4.29).
Film positioning
To take a full-mouth set of radiographs in the cat will require a minimum of
ten films: one for upper incisors and canines (rostro-caudal view), two for
upper canines (latero-medial view), two for upper premolars and molars, one
for lower incisors and canines (rostro-caudal view), two for lower canines
(latero-medial view) and two for lower premolars and molars. However for
99
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.29 Holding the X-ray film /
radiograph in this manner will lead to
fingerprint artefacts.
Size 2
Size2
Figure 4.30  Illustration of positioning of intra-oral radiographic film for a su rvey series of dental radiographs in a cat.
screening purposes six views can be taken and, depending on the outcome,
further views can be taken (Figure 4.30).
To take a full-mouth set in medium to large dogs will require a further four
to six flms depending upon the size of the dog (Figures 4.31 and 4.32).
In some dogs where the incisors are arranged in an arc (rather than being in
a fairly straight row), it may be necessary to take radiographs of the left and
100
Radiography
Figure 4.31(eft)  Illustration of
positioning of intra-oral radiogra phic
film for a su rvey series of dental
radiographs of the dog mandibles.
Figure 4.32(right) Illustration of
positioning of intra-oral radiographic
film for a su rvey series of dental
eDC2005
radiographs of the dog maxillae.
Figure 4.33
By positioning the X-ray
head to one side, su perimposition of
the maxillary incisors can be prevented.
right incisors separately to prevent superimposition of the roots (Figures 4.33
and 4.34).
 Two film positioning techniques are used, namely the parallel and bisecting
line techniques.
101
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.34 The view obtained by the
positioning chosen in Figure 4.33.
X-RAY BEAM
X-RAY
BEAM
Film
position
Long axis of tooth
parallel and close to
the X-ray film
Tongue
Figure 4.35 Illustration of the parallel radiography technique. The film is placed close and parallel to the teeth and
the incident beam is directed perpendicu lar to the teeth and film.
Parallel technique
The parallel technique is used to take intra-oral radiographs of mandibular
teeth caudal to the second premolar in dogs. In some patients the second pre-
molar can be included on the first film. In cats the mandibular third and fourth
premolar and first molar teeth are imaged using the parallel technique. The
dental film is placed between the teeth and the tongue, with the film projecting
below the ventral margin of the mandible. The incident X-ray beam is then
directed perpendicular to the teeth and the film giving a realistic image of the
  n   tt s a   
102
Radiography
Figure 4.36  Parallel technique.
The film must protrude beyond the
ventral margin of the mandible to
include this on the radiograph.
Figure 4.37 Parallel technique. Paper
towel can be used to keep the film close
to the teeth.
be used to radiograph the maxillary carnassial tooth with the film placed in
an extra-oral position. The mouth must be propped open to prevent super-
imposition of other structures on the tooth being radiographed (Figure 4.39). If
this technique is used, the radiograph should be annotated accordingly as this
103
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.38  The film must be placed
close and parallel to the teeth.
Figure4.39  Radiographing the
maxillary carnassial tooth using the 
parallel technique requires extra-oral
placement of the film. A dog skull is
used for illustration.
104
radiograph will resemble that taken of the contra-lateral maxillary carnassial
Radiography
using the intra-oral placement technique.
Bisecting line technique
The bisecting line technique is used to image the remaining teeth in the mouth,
where the flm cannot be placed parallel to the teeth. The angle created by the
film axis and the tooth axis is bisected and the incident X-ray beam is directed
 perpendicular to the bisecting line (Figures 4.40-4.44). If the incident beam is
X-RAY BEAM
Long axisof tooth
Bisectingline
Figure 4.40  Bisecting line technique.
The angle formed by the tooth and film
axes is bisected. The incident beam is
directed perpendicular to the bisecting
Filmplane
line.
Figure 4.41  Bisecting line technique.
Film placement for maxillary premolars
and molars.
105
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.42 Bisecting line technique.
Film placement for maxillary incisors
and canine teeth.
Figure 4.43 Bisecting line technique.
Film and X-ray head placement for
radiography of the maxillary incisors.
 perpendicular to the tooth surface, the image will be lengthened (elongation)
(usually with the apex off the edge of the film); if the incident beam is perpen-
dicular to the film, the image will be shortened (foreshortening). If a tooth is
longer than the film available, two radiographs should be taken to evaluate
the whole tooth.
106
Radiography
Figure 4.44Radiograph obtained from
the positioning in Figure 4.43.
Figure 4.45Su perimposition of
structu res can complicate diagnosis.
Here the mesial root is su perimposed
on the palatal root.
Superimposition of structures
By changing the angle of the incident beam, superimposed structures (Fig-
ure 4.45) can be separated. The SLOB (same lingual opposite buccal) rule
is applied to superimposed structures and defines the direction in which the
107
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.46 By moving the incident
beam to a more rostral position, the
palatal structure 'moves' to a more
mesial position.
Figure 4.47 By moving the incident
beam caudally, the mesio-buccal root
'moves'to a more mesial position.
different structures move in relation to the movement of the incident beam.
A structure which moves in the same direction as the incident beam is posi-
tioned on the lingual / palatal side. For example, considering the maxillary
carnassial tooth. If the incident beam is directed from a more rostral position
the palatal root will be the most mesial of that tooth's structures on the new
radiograph (Figure 4.46). Conversely, if the beam is directed from a caudal
position the structure which moves in the opposite direction to become the
most mesial structure of the tooth on the new radiograph will be the mesio-
buccal root (Figure 4.47).
108
Radiography
Figure 4.48 Crown and root
elongation occurs when the incident
beam is tending to be perpendicular
to the tooth axes.
Correcting elongation and foreshortening
An elongated tooth (Figure 4.48) results from an incident beam tending towards
being perpendicular to the tooth surface (Figure 4.49). To correct this, the
beam should be angled at an obtuse angle to the tooth surface (Figure 4.50).
A foreshortened tooth (Figure 4.51) results from an incident beam tending
towards being perpendicular to the flm axis (Figure 4.52). To correct this,
the beam should be incident at an acute angle to the film axis (Figure 4.53).
Knowledge of root anatomy will aid in positioning of the dental flm and
direction of the incident beam to produce an accurate diagnostic image of the
tooth under examination.
Digital imaging
 There are a number of veterinary practices making use of digital dental imag
ing systems. There are two systems: direct - where the image is captured by a
sensor and sent to the computer screen - and indirect - where the image is cap-
tured on a phosphorescent plate that must be read by a laser reader and then
digitised. The direct system projects the image on a computer screen (Figure
4.54) after it has been captured by a sensor (Figure 4.55). This takes the place
of the intra-oral dental film.
109
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.49   The X-ray head is
positioned perpendicu lar to the incisor
teeth axes resulting in elongation.
Figure 4.50 Correct position for
radiographing maxillary incisors.
110
Radiography
Figure 4.51  Foreshortening occurs
when the incident beam is tending to
be perpendicu lar to the film axis.
Figure 4.52  X-ray head placement
which will lead to foreshortening of
the maxillary incisors.
111
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.53 Correct position for
radiographing maxillary incisors.
There are a number of advantages to this system including:
 speed of use (image on screen within seconds)
 minor adjustments can be made to the position of the sensor if image is not
correct on screen, without having to reposition the X-ray machine
 images can be enhanced and digital storage of patient records is facilitated.
Disadvantages include:
 price of the equipment and the size of the sensor
The use of this technology in cats is complicated by positioning of the
sensor as it is not flexible and is thicker than the intra-oral X-ray film
envelope. 'Burnout' is sometimes seen even at low exposure settings, and
by increasing the X-ray generator sensor focal distance this can sometimes
be alleviated.
Radiology
Dental radiographs are usually mounted using the lingual or buccal view. By
convention, veterinary dental radiographs are mounted using the buccal view.
This means that the radiographs are mounted with the incisal edges of teeth in
opposing arcades facing each other as viewed from the front of the animal.
This means that the patient's right arcades will be to the left of the set and the
left arcades will be to the right of the set (Figure 4.56).
112
Radiography
Figure 4.54   Digital X-ray images are
transferred to the computer screen
within seconds of exposure.
Figure 4.55 A size 2 digital dental-
imaging sensor.
Dental radiographs should be examined in a dark room, preferably with
light causes viewer pupillary constriction which adversely affects evaluation
of the radiograph and the structures radiographed (Figure 4.57). Magnifica-
tion of the image is an essential aid to accurate interpretation (Figure 4.58).
Systematic examination of the crown, root/s, pulp chamber/canals, peri-
 odontal ligament space and periapical region is imperative. Discontinuity of
113
Figure 4.56 An incomplete set of radiographs of a you ng pu ppy mou nted using the buccal-view mounting configu ration.
Figure 4.57Dental radiographs should
be viewed with light passing through the
film only, as peripheral light will affect
evaluation. This light box is not ideal.
Radiography
Figure 4.58  Magnified viewing of
dental radiographs is mandatory.
Su bstantially more detail is visible
using magnification.
Figure 4.59
The teeth must be
exa mined systematically evaluating
the crown, root/s, periodontal ligament
space, lamina dura, the pulp cavity and
root canal. Periapical tissues must be 
examined as well.
the lamina dura and widening of the periodontal ligament space are indicative
of disease and should alert the examiner to investigate further. It may be neces-
sary to take a second or third view of a structure to gain further information
(Figure 4.59).
115
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.60  A slightly oblique view
of the caudal mental foramen close to
the distal root apex of mandibu lar left
premolar 3 in a cat.
Figure 4.61 The caudal mental
 foramen can resemble pathology at
the distal root of the mandibu lar
third premolar in the cat.
There are numerous artefacts to consider when viewing radiographs. The
 mental foramina are positioned at the mandibular third and second premolars
and between the first and second incisor teeth in the dog. The middle mental
foramen is often mistaken for a periapical radiolucency at the mesial root of
the second premolar (Figures 4.60 and 4.61).
116
Radiography
Figure 4.62  The infra-orbital canal
and maxillary recess can resemble
periapical lesions when su perim posed
on maxillary premolar roots. There are
three root fragments remaining in this
dog's maxillus after incomplete
extraction of 108.
The infra-orbital foramen may create artefacts at the maxillary third or
fourth premolars. (Figure 4.62). The maxillary recess may also appear as a
radiolucency. There is no maxillary sinus in the dog or cat.
Norma! radiographic anatomy
In young animals the pulp chamber and canal are wide and the root apex
is unformed (Figures 4.63 and 4.64). The dentine formed at this point
is known as primary dentine. As the tooth matures, the apex forms and an
apical delta develops through which the pulp receives its neurovascular supply
(Figure 4.65). The dentine formed after this time is known as secondary den-
tine. Primary and secondary dentine are indistinguishable radiographically.
Radiographs should be taken of the jaws of young animals where there is
suspicion that some teeth may be missing. Amelogenesis is completed at
about three to four months of age and the permanent tooth buds will be
visible radiographically. It is important to remember that the molars and first
premolars do not have deciduous predecessors.
Immature teeth have a wide pulp chamber / canal, relatively narrow (thin)
 dentine covered by a thin layer of enamel. Mature teeth have pulp chambers /
canals of variable width and dentinal walls of variable thickness (depending
upon the animal's age) and an apical delta. The periodontal ligament space is
visible and defined by the lamina dura on one side and the cementum covering
117
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.63  Immature teeth have
'open'roots.
Figure 4.64   The pulp chamber of
immatu re teeth is wide and the dentine
walls thin. Note the persistent 604 in
this image.
118
Radiography
Figure 4.65 Once the apex has formed
the tooth is considered to be mature.
Normal dentine laid down beyond this
stage is classed as secondary dentine.
the root on the other. The lamina dura is the cribriform plate of the alveolus
and appears denser than the surrounding bone because it is seen en face (end
on) (Figures 4.66 and 4.67). The periodontal space houses the periodontal
ligament which spans from the cementum to the lamina dura ensuring that the
Figure 4.66 The lamina dura of teeth is
 seen as a radiodense line following the
outline of the root.
119
Small Animal Dentistry
Tera
(ab+cd)<ef
Figure 4.67The lamina dura appears
more radiodense than the surrou nding
alveolar bone as a result of it being
seen en face. This is illustrated by the
blue lines.
tooth is ^suspended’ in the alveolus. The lamina dura is continuous around the
root. The apical periodontal space is slightly enlarged at canine apices and the
apices of mesial roots of mandibular first molars. It is important to remember
that the radiographic image is a two-dimensional representation of a three-
dimensional structure.
 Under normal circumstances the periodontal ligament and cementum pre
         
space becomes obliterated in cases undergoing root replacement following
alveolar bone and the tooth is then ankylosed to the bone. Localised inflam-
mation of the periodontal ligament can also lead to ankylosis of the tooth to
the alveolus when normal bone turnover crosses the periodontal ligament
space.
The mesial root of the mandibular carnassial and the distal root of the
maxillary carnassial teeth often have a parallel line visible radiographically at
their distal and mesial aspects respectively, due to the developmental groove in
the surfaces of these roots (Figures 4.68 and 4.69).
Common abnormafities encountered
Periapical pathology is often characterised by circular radiolucencies sur-
rounding the apex of an affected tooth (usually around all apices of multi-
rooted teeth (Figures 4.70 and 4.71). This is due to bone loss associated with
pulpitis. Although the most common cause of periapical pathology is tooth
fractures, radiolucencies are periodically seen affecting teeth which are intact
and otherwise appear healthy. Pulpitis and pulp necrosis as a result of trauma
or haematogenous infection (anachoresis) will also cause periapical bone loss
to occur. Widening of the periodontal space and discontinuity of the lamina
dura are indications of periodontal pathology. In some animals with severe
periodontitis, pockets may become so extensive that the pulp becomes
affected (either via lateral or accessory canals or via the apical delta). These
lesions are termed periodontic-endodontic (perio-endo) lesions. These lesions
are associated with deep, wide periodontal pockets. Conversely endodontic-
120
Radiography
Figure 4.68   Developmental grooves in
the mesial part of the distal and distal 
 part of the mesial roots of mandibu lar
 carnassial teeth are often seen as
parallel lines in these areas.
Figure 4.69  The developmental groove
in the distal aspect of this mesial root of
the mandibu lar left carnassial tooth 
which adds to the anti-rotational
stability of the tooth. Note the 
dilacerated root tip.
 periodontic (endo-perio) lesions are as a result of pulp necrosis causing periap-
the marginal periodontium. These lesions are usually associated with deep,
narrow periodontal pockets.
121
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.70   Mu lti-rooted teeth usually
have periapical pathology affecting the
apices of all roots as a resu lt of pulp
necrosis. The more lucent area at the
apex of the mesial root of this carnassial
coincides with a bony defect in the
mandible through which a sinus tract
commu nicated with the buccal cavity.
Figure 4.71  Both molars 1 and 2 had
complicated crown fractures which were
treated using the 'wait and see what
ha ppens' method. The patient had
 stopped eating on this side and showed
 marked improve ment in habitus 
following extraction of these teeth.
Supernumerary roots are most commonly seen on the maxillary third pre-
molars of dogs (Figures 4.72 and 4.73) and the maxillary second and third
premolars in cats.
Fused roots (resembling a peg) may be seen on the mandibular second
molar of dogs (Figure 4.74) and mandibular premolars 2 and 3.
122
Radiography
Figure 4.72 This maxillary left
premolar 3 had a supernu merary
root which had a small palatal cusp
suggesting its presence. The root is
invisible on this radiogra ph.
Figure 4.73   The extracted tooth in
Figure 4.72. For photographic purposes
this tooth was not sectioned and
patience was required to luxate it
undamaged.
Dilacerated (abruptly bent) roots are sometimes seen on radiographs and
the extraction of these teeth can be challenging (Figures 4.75 and 4.76).
Unerupted teeth or teeth affected by impaction (physical obstruction to
eruption) are often seen on radiographs taken of clinically edentulous (tooth-
less) parts of the jaw (Figures 4.77 and 4.78).
123
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.74  The mandibu lar left
molar 2 has fused roots making simple
extraction the technique of choice if the
tooth were to be extracted. Sectioning
mu lti-rooted teeth blindly can lead to
fracture and retention of root remnants
if the roots happen to be fused.
Figure 4.75 Dilacerated roots (roots
 with angu lar deformities) can ma ke 
extraction challenging.
124
Radiography
Figure 4.76   The tooth in Figure 4.75
showing the angu lar deformities
affecting both apices.
Figure 4.77   The immature maxillary
left pre molar 3 is impacted against the
neck of the carnassial tooth preventing
its eru ption into the mouth.
125
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.78  The mandibu lar right
premolar 1 has developed parallel to
the alveolar margin and will not eru pt.
The tooth and its left mandibu lar
cou nterpart were extracted to prevent
cystic changes often associated with
these teeth when they do not eru pt
into the mouth.
Some 0rtefacts seen on radiographs (Figures 4.79-4.83)
 scratches prior to and during processing
finger prints
film damage due to placement of hanging clips
 grid pattern on radiograph exposed from the back (through lead backing
sheet)
foggy radiograph due to light exposure during processing
patchy radiograph due to package paper which may have been attached to
film during processing
 crystalline material on radiograph due to insuffcient rinsing following
processing
 grey / blue area on newly processed flm due to underfixing.
Radiograph storage
Radiographs must be stored in such a way that they can be retrieved easily
for future evaluation and comparison. This should be in a cool and dark,
dry place and the radiographs should be rinsed and dried thoroughly only
 Once. The radiographs make up part of the patient record and must therefore
be labelled accordingly. Label the mounting card or storage envelope as there
is insuffcient space on the radiographs to enter patient and client details.
When using medical X-ray film it is essential to mark left and right arcades
using radiopaque markers. Intra-oral flm has a raised dot near one corner
enabling orientation.
126
Radiography
Figure 4.79   This radiograph is
discolou red brown as a resu lt of
insufficient rinsing following
processing.
Figure 4.80   This radiograph has
elongated incisors and canines
superimposed on premolars making
it of little diagnostic value.
127
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 4.81  There are scratches on
this radiograph which interfere with
interpretation.
Figure 4.82 The incisors are ^coned off"
and the canines su perimposed on the
 premolars leading to a radiograph of 
no diagnostic value.
128
Radiography
Figure 4.83 Processing chemical
residues have discoloured this
rad iograph.
Processing chemicals
 Processing chemicals may pose a health hazard and must be handled using
 appropriate protective wear. The chemicals must be disposed of according to
health and safety regulations and must under no circumstances be poured
down the drain.
Further reading
Crossley, D.A. and Penman, S. (Eds) (1995) Manual of Small Animal Dentistry.
 BSAVA Publications, Cheltenham, UK.
Holstrom, S.E., Frost, P. and Eisner, E.R. (1998) Veterinary Dental Techniques for the
Small Animal Practitioner (2nd edn). W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
Mulligan, T.W., Aller, M.S. and Williams, C.A. (1998) Atlas of Canine and Feline
Dental Radiography. Veterinary Learning Systems, New Jersey.
Wiggs, R.B. and Lobprise, H.B. (1997) Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
129
Exodontics
5
Small Animal Dentistry
Tooth extraction is final. In selected cases teeth can be replaced using implants
however for most pet owners this procedure is cost prohibitive.
Adequate analgesia must be given to patients about to undergo tooth
extraction (see Chapter 11 - Pain Management.)
Indications for tooth extraction
 fractured teeth which cannot be restored
 teeth affected by caries (lesions so severe that restoration is not possible)
 persistent deciduous teeth
 supernumerary teeth causing crowding
· maloccluding teeth
 teeth in a jaw fracture line (which are not providing fixation stability)
 periodontally compromised teeth
severe chronic gingivo-stomatitis
 malformed teeth causing gingivitis and periodontal disease
luxated or subluxated teeth (including intruded teeth) not amenable to
treatment
retained (unerupted) teeth
1
 teeth affected by odontoclastic resorption
Figures 5.1-5.22 are a series of indications for extraction.
Figure 5.1  This patient was kicked
in the mouth by a horse and suffered
mu Itiple fractures of its teeth.
132
Exodontics
Figure 5.2 The lateral incisor was
damaged and the middle incisor is
missing in this patient. There was no
history of trau ma but these inju ries
must have occurred before the animal
was three months of age judging by
the ena mel defects on the canine.
Figure 5.3  The mandibu lar right
canine and third premolar are
fractured with chronic pulp exposure.
Restoration and root canal therapy is
contraindicated in these teeth, where
the fractu res extend su b-gingivally.
133
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.4   This mandibu lar carnassial
tooth had a slab fracture extending
 su b-gingivally. The periodontal probe
indicates a probing depth in excess of
about 12 mm (this probe is graduated to
15 mm).
Figure 5.5 Persistent deciduous canine
teeth should be extracted before they
compromise the permanent dentition as
they have in this case.
134
Exodontics
Figure 5.6  These incisors are crowded
and there is a persistent mandibu lar left
deciduous lateral incisor. Radiography
shou ld be performed prior to extraction
to determine the proximity of the
deciduous tooth root to the permanent
dentition and to confirm that the root is
still present.
Figure 5.7  These persistent deciduous
canines shou ld be extracted to create
space into which the permanent canines
can move. Failing to do this will resu lt
in the permanent canines becoming
remaining linguo-verted.
135
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.8  The pulp cavities of the
maxillary left and right lateral incisors
are exposed as a resu lt of chronic
abrasian.
Figure 5.9  The maxillary right lateral 
incisor has undergone abrasion
mesially and attrition distally and the
 mandibu lar right canine has u ndergone
attrition mesially. Abrasion is due to
wear against a foreign object while
attrition is wear from tooth-on-tooth
contact.
136
Exodontics
Figure 5.10  Su pernu merary teeth
shou ld be extracted if they cause
crowding or compromisation of
the adu lt dentition.
Figure 5.11  The 'peg tooth' in
Figure 5.10. Note the severely
dilacerated root.
137
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.12 Periodontally
compromised teeth shou ld be extracted.
Figure 5.13  This mandibu lar left 
molar 1 has no bony su pport arou nd the
distal root. An alternative to complete
 extraction is hemisection and extraction 
of the distal crown-root fragment, and 
root canal therapy on the mesial crown-
root fragment.
138
Exodontics
Figure 5.14  Teeth with Grade 3
furcation lesions shou ld be extracted
unless the client can keep the area
clean using inter-dental brushes.
Figure 5.15  A draining sinus on the
cheek or face is often an indication of
periapical pathology.
139
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.16
Purulent exudate was
fou nd at the apex of this canine tooth
(patient in Figure 5.15) even though
the crown was intact. Haematogenous
infection (anachoresis) of the root
and pulp is the most likely cause.
Figure 5.17 0dontoclastic resorption
is treated by extraction of the affected
tooth. Note the gingiva attached to the
linguo-occlusal surface of the distal cusp
of this mandibu lar right carnassial in
Bope
140
Exodontics
Figure 5.18  Teeth affected by Stage 5b
feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions
(FORL) (mandibular right canine) are
treated by raising an envelope gingival
flap, crown amputation and fap
closure.
Figure 5.19  The mandibu lar right
 premolar 3 has a Stage 3 FORL. Although
part of the root has been resorbed and 
replaced by bone, there is still some
root su bstance remaining and this 
should be extracted.
141
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.20
A supernu merary
 mandibu lar left premolar 4 has lead to
crowding and com promisation of these
teeth. The affected teeth shou ld be
extracted.
Figure 5.21
 Deep pockets between
teeth are an indication of severe bone
loss. Open curettage and fap closure or
attempts at guided tissue regeneration
 may be undertaken but these teeth are
usually extracted. Note the mucosal
lesion (just below the gloved finger) as a
result of plaque at the periodontal
lesion.
142
Exodontics
Figure 5.22 Teeth associated with oral
tu mours are most commonly extracted.
Equipment required
Scalpel blade (15 or 15C) and handle, periosteal elevator, high-or slow-speed
handpiece and burs for sectioning teeth and alveoloplasty, dental luxation
instruments and elevators, fne rat-toothed forceps, material and surgical
 scissors, needle holder and monofilament absorbable suture material (Fig-
ure 5.23).
Planning
Once the diagnosis of dental disease requiring tooth extraction has been
made, the procedure must be well planned to prevent subsequent problems.
For example, the alveolar buccal bulge of the maxillary canine keeps the
upper lip out of the path of the mandibular canine when the mouth is being
closed. Occasionally when maxillary canines are extracted and the alveolar
buccal bulge is removed the mandibular canine will trap the upper lip result-
ing in formation of an eosinophilic granuloma or ulcer in cats. This condition
is treated by rounding of the mandibular canine tip, crown shortening and
 sometimes root canal therapy or extraction of the offending tooth. Maintaining
the maxillary canine buccal alveolar bulge will prevent this.
Pre-operative radiographs of the affected teeth are essential, enabling
visualisation of the shape, length and presence of roots. If the roots have
been completely resorbed and replaced by bone there is no need to create a large
flap and remove buccal alveolar bone in order to extract non-existent roots. In
these cases the treatment of choice is an envelope flap (Figure 5.24) raised to
expose the neck of the tooth, followed by crown amputation and reduction of
143
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.23  A surgical extraction kit
should comprise: periosteal elevator,
Adson's tissue forceps, No. 3 scalpel
handle, Metzenbau m surgical scissors,
material scissors and a needle holder.
Figure 5.24 An envelope fap raised to
perform crown amputation extraction
technique on a tooth affected by FORL
(feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions),
the roots of which have undergone
replacement resorption.
144
Exodontics
Figure 5.25 Adentigerous cyst
associated with an uneru pted
mandibu lar left premolar 1 in
a Boxer dog.
replacement bone to 1 mm below the alveolar margin, and tension-free
closure of the flap. Note: if there are root remnants present, this procedure is
not indicated and the root remnants must be extracted.
Some teeth have supernumerary roots and unless this was revealed on a pre-
operative radiograph the extra root will not be extracted. This can result in
development of a root abscess. Radiographs should also be taken of edentu-
lous (toothless) regions to rule out the presence of root remnants and retained
(unerupted) teeth. This is especially important in Boxer dogs which appear to
be missing premolar 1 in any quadrant. These teeth are often associated with
dentigerous cysts which require surgical excision and extraction of the tooth
(Figure 5.25). Failure to excise the cyst and extract the tooth may result in
fracture of the affected mandible. The tooth and associated tissues must be
submitted for histopathological examination to rule out neoplasia.
Important structures and areas susceptible to injury must be considered
when planning extractions and surgical flaps (Figure 5.26).
Teeth may be extracted by one of two procedures, viz. simple (closed)
extraction technique or surgical (open) extraction technique
Generally speaking single-rooted teeth and those multi-rooted teeth which
 are severely periodontally compromised may be extracted using the simple
extraction technique.
The simple (closed) extraction technique
In this technique the tooth is extracted without a surgical flap being raised.
A scalpel blade (15 or 15C) is used to sever the gingival attachment by placing
145
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.26 Important structu res to
consider when planning extractions:
A = thin alveolar bone labial to incisor
teeth; B =a branch of the major
palatine artery passes through between
the canine and lateral incisor and
bleeds profusely when severed (digital
pressure effects haemostasis); C = the
mental neu rovascu lar bu ndle exits the
mandibu lar canal at the middle mental
foramen; D= the infra-orbital
neu rovascu lar structures exit the infra-
orbital canal here; E = there is very little
alveolar bone distal to the caudal
maxillary molar (periodontal disease
can destroy all of this bone); F (inset) =
the orbit is unprotected caudal to the
maxillary second molar; * =the globe!
it in the gingival sulcus / pocket and incising the attachment down to the
alveolar bone circumferentially around the neck of the tooth. A sharp luxation
instrument can also be used to sever the epithelial attachment (Figures 5.27
and 5.28)
Dental luxation instruments and elevators must be held in such a way that
they will not cause damage to soft tissues and adjacent vital organs (eye,
neurovascular bundles and the brain) should they slip. The instrument is held
in the palm of the hand (Figure 5.29) with the index finger extended along the
shaft of the instrument (Figure 5.30 and Figure 5.31). Once the epithelial
attachment has been severed, a dental Luxator? is inserted into the sulcus and
gently worked apically into the periodontal ligament space (Figures 5.32 and
5.33). The fine tip of the Luxator@ will sever the ligament and compress the
alveolar bone, creating space for the more robust elevator to be inserted.
 Begin by working on the lingual aspect of teeth and then progress buccally
(Figures 5.34-5.37). Gentle rotational (wrist) movements about the shaft of
the Luxator? will aid in destruction of the periodontal ligament in an apical
direction. It is often possible to deliver the tooth from its alveolus using a
-d   ps aq s  a  ( a r
odontal space enlarged, an elevator can be used to further loosen the tooth
and deliver it from the alveolus.
Luxation instruments and elevators should never be used as levers in a man
ner resembling the opening of a paint can using a screwdriver! (Figure 5.39).
All leverage actions applied to elevators are rotational about the shaft of the
instrument (Figure 5.40).
When suffciently loosened, the tooth can either be delivered using the
elevator or gently lifted out using dental extraction forceps. A word of advice
-- do not use dental extraction forceps until you have received training in their
146
Exodontics
Figure 5.27  Severing the periodontal
ligament mesially using a Luxator?@.
Figure 5.28  Severing the periodontal
ligament distally using a Luxator?.
use. Inappropriate use of dental extraction forceps will lead to tooth fracture
and increased levels of frustration, as well as prolonging the procedure by
having to retrieve root remnants! There are numerous patterns of dental
extraction forceps designed for extraction of the differently shaped teeth found
147
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.29  Luxation and elevation
instru ments must be held using the
palm grip.
Figure 5.30   The index finger must be
extended along the shaft of the Luxator@
 to protect tissues shou ld it slip offthe
bone or tooth.
Figure 5.31  An elevator correctly held.
148
nnn
Figure 5.32   The luxation instru ment is used to sever the periodontal ligament circu mferentially arou nd the tooth.
Figure 5.33   The Luxator creates
space for the elevator to fit into by
compressing the alveolar bone.
149
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.34   0Once the ligament is
severed circu mferentially begin
luxating lingually / palatally
Figure 5.35  Luxating distally.
150
Exodontics
Figure 5.36  Luxating labially.
Figure 5.37   Luxating mesially. Note
the rotational force applied to the
Luxator? moving the tooth away from
the alveolar wall.
151
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.38
Using a Luxator@ to deliver
the tooth.
Figure 5.39 Do not use Luxators? and
elevators in the manner in which one
would use a screwdriver to lever the lid
from a paint can!
in man and most of these are inappropriate for use in domestic animals. When
delivering the tooth from the alveolus using forceps, place the beaks of the
forceps as far apically as possible ensuring that the extraction forceps beaks fit
snugly around the tooth neck or root. Ill-fitting forceps will shatter the tooth.
152
Exodontics
Figure 5.40  Rotational forces shou ld
be used to dislodge the tooth.
Figure 5.41  Canines and maxillary
lateral incisors have large, strangely
shaped roots which can com plicate the
simple extraction technique and shou ld
therefore be extracted surgically.
Following simple extraction the alveolus may be allowed to heal by second
 intention or an apposing suture may be placed in the gingiva to hold the clot in
place, preventing impaction of food and other debris and promoting first
intention healing. Suturing is desirable unless the alveolus is infected
The surgical (open) extraction technique
The surgical extraction technique is used for the extraction of multi-rooted
teeth as well as for single-rooted teeth which have unusually shaped or very
large roots. The latter include the maxillary lateral incisors and the maxillary
and mandibular canines (Figure 5.41).
Extracting single-rooted teeth
When single-rooted teeth are fractured with sub-gingival extension of the
 fracture line, a surgical approach will provide better visualisation and speed
up the extraction process. A mucoperiosteal flap is raised, to facilitate extrac
tion of these teeth (Figure 5.42). If there is tension in the flap (insufficient flap
153
Figure 5.42 Stages in raising and closing a mucoperiosteal flap.
A: A gingival incision is made with releasing incisions mesially and distally. The junction of the gingival and releasing incisions is
cu rved so as not to compromise the 'corner'. The releasing incisions are made perpendicu lar to the gingival incision to preserve
blood supply to the gingiva.
 B: A periosteal elevator is used to raise the mucoperiosteal fap from the alveolar bone. This is facilitated by inserting the
periosteal elevator under the periosteu m apical to the mucogingival line.
C: The flap is raised to expose the juga (bony alveolar bu lge covering the root) of the tooth to be extracted.
D: An alveolotomy is performed removing bone to expose the periodontal ligament.
E: A luxation instru ment is used to sever the periodontal ligament and dislodge the tooth from its alveolus.
F: The flap is sutu red back in place using synthetic monofilament absorbable sutu re material.
G (from left to right): Luxation and elevation instru ments are used to dislodge the tooth from its alveolus. The alveolar bone is
used as a fulcru m against which rotational forces are applied. Alveoloplasty is performed prior to fap closure to ensure the flap
is not trau matised by sharp alveolar edges.
to close the defect) a releasing incision is made in the periosteum at the base of
the flap allowing it to advance and close the defect (Figure 5.43).
Extracting two-rooted teeth
It is often beneficial to amputate the crown of the tooth to be extracted as this
facilitates access to the periodontal ligament. This will also prevent fractures
154
Figure 5.43 If there is tension in the fap, a releasing incision is made in the periosteum at the base of the flap allowing
advancement of the fap.
A: The gingiva is incised down to the alveolar margin.
B: The mucoperiosteal fap is raised and the tooth extracted.
C: The periosteum is incised at the base of the flap (apical to the mucogingival line).
D: The fap is advanced.
E: The fap is sutured closed without tension using monofilament absorbable suture material
Figure 5.44 A wedge of crown is
removed to create better access to
the periodontal ligament space.
due to inadvertent leverage against the crown while accessing the periodontal
 an   e aa i i n r  
Beginning at the furcation, the crown is sectioned mesio- and disto-occlusally
and the wedge of crown removed (Figure 5.44) to prevent leverage against a
tall crown fragment (Figure 5.45) increasing leverage forces which can result
in crown and or root fracture. Where teeth are very close together the ^tooth
155
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.45 The Luxator@ and elevator
can be used between the two crown
segments without the danger of crown
or root fracture as a result of leverage
forces on the crown.
bulge' of the tooth to be extracted can be removed using a high-speed bur to
create space and improve access to the periodontal ligament.
A surgical flap is raised to expose alveolar bone and allow alveolotomy to
expose the roots of the tooth to be extracted (Figure 5.46). An envelope flap or
larger flap can be raised, with one or two releasing incisions. In the experience
of the author a flap is easily raised by introducing a periosteal elevator under
the periosteum of the alveolar mucosa. Once the alveolar periosteum has
been raised, the periosteal elevator should be advanced under the attached
gingiva and through the previously severed gingival epithelial attachment.
If approached from the attached gingiva side, the periosteal elevator may
be inadvertently advanced through the mucogingival junction destroying
the flap.
Flaps must have wide bases, take important structures into account
(neurovascular, salivary glands and ducts etc.), be protected from the bur
and closed in such a manner that they are not under any tension. It is better
for flaps not to begin over the furcation of a tooth or on the inter-dental
papilla (Figures 5.47 and 5.48). Ideally, flaps should begin at the line angle
(Figure 5.49) of the adjacent tooth and run perpendicular to the alveolar
margin into the surrounding alveolar mucosa making a curved junction with
the gingival incision. Having a curved ^point' aids in suturing of the flap and
maintains blood supply to the edge of the flap. (Line angles are the junction of
two perpendicular surfaces of a tooth and are defined as follows: mesio-
lingual / palatal, mesio-buccal, disto-buccal and disto-lingual / palatal, disto-
occlusal, linguo / palato-occlusal, mesio-occlusal and bucco-occlusal. )
The epithelial attachment is severed as described for simple extraction
technique (p. 145) and the incision extended rostrally and caudally providing
sufficient access to the affected tooth alveoli / alveolus. The perpendicular
156
Exodontics
Figure 5.46  Mucoperiosteal flap access for extraction of mu lti-rooted teeth.
A: The gingiva is incised by placing the scalpel blade into the gingival sulcus / pocket and incising down to the alveolar margin.
The releasing incisions are made perpendicu lar to the gingival margin and at the line angles of the tooth / teeth to be extracted
or the ad jacent teeth.
B: A small envelope flap is raised to expose the furcation of the tooth to be extracted.
C: The crown of the tooth to be extracted is sectioned from the furcation through the crown and a wedge of crown may be
removed.
D: The mucoperiosteal flap is raised by inserting the periosteal elevator under the periosteu m apical to the mucogingival line
and working it in a coronal direction before progressing rostrally and caudally.
E: The flap is raised and reflected to reveal the juga (bony alveolar bu lge) over the roots.
F: Alveolotomy is performed to expose the periodontal ligament for a distance of about three quarters of the length of the roots.
G: Luxation and elevation of the crown / root segments is performed.
periosteal releasing incision shou ld be made as described in Figure 5.43.
I: (Top to bottom): The tooth is luxated and then elevated using alveolar bone as a leverage fulcru m. Alveoloplasty is performed
releasing incisions should be extended through the mucosa to an appropriate
level (usually about three quarters of the length of the juga (bony alveolar
bulge over root). Buccal (and lingual / palatal if need be) alveolar bone should
            s
157
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.47 The furcation is that part
of a mu Iti-rooted tooth where the roots
diverge from the neck. Incising the
gingiva over the furcation area will
compromise the tooth.
Figure 5.48  The gingival papilla is
that part of the gingiva which extends
coronally between two adjacent teeth.
 sectioned through the crown. Buccal alveolar bone should be removed from
over the root for about three quarters of the length of each root. Furcation
bone should be removed to create access to the periodontal ligament. Initially,
a Luxator? should be used to sever the ligament followed by leverage activity
158
Exodontics
LO
M-C
B-0
P
M-L
Figure 5.49   Line angles are the
intersection of perpendicu lar su rfaces:
M-B = mesio-buccal; M-L= mesio-
lingual; D-B = disto-buccal; D-L= disto-
lingual; M-0= mesio-occlusal; B-0 =
1-8
M-B
bucco-occlusal; D-0 = disto-occlusal;
L-O = linguo-occlusal.
Figure 5.50  A shallow slot can be
burred into the neck of a tooth to
give added pu rchase for elevation.
using an elevator. If the tooth does not loosen suffciently more buccal alveolar
bone can be removed to facilitate access to the more apical part of the root
rather than risk fracture of the root. A shallow slot can be burred into the neck
 of the tooth to create a ledge against which the elevator can engage using the
alveolar margin as a fulcrum (Figures 5.50-5.52). Once sufficiently loosened,
the root can be delivered using the elevator or gentle use of extraction forceps.
When both roots have been extracted alveoloplasty should be performed to
remove any sharp alveolar edges and loose alveolar bone using a large, round
159
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.51  Slot bu rred into the neck
of the tooth.
Figure 5.52  The side of the elevator
is engaged into the slot and rotational
force is applied to deliver the tooth
from its alveolus.
diamond bur (Figure 5.53). The flap should be closed without tension. If for
some reason the flap is under tension, a releasing incision should be made
through the periosteum at the base of the flap (apical to the mucogingival
junction) (see Figure 5.43). This will allow the flap to advance significantly
and enable tension-free closure. The palatal (lingual) gingiva should also be
raised from the bone to facilitate alveoloplasty and flap closure.
160
Exodontics
Figure 5.53  Alveoloplasty is performed
prior to flap closure to prevent damage
to the flap from sharp alveolar edges.
Extracting three-rooted teeth
The maxillary carnassial and molar teeth usually have three roots in dogs. In
the cat the maxillary carnassial has three roots and although the maxillary
molar may have two or three roots the buccal roots are usually fused. Care
must be exercised when extracting this tooth using the simple extraction
technique.
A surgical flap should be raised as described in the section on extraction of
two-rooted teeth above. The palatal crown-root segment should be sectioned
 from the tooth neck prior to sectioning of the buccal crown-root segments
(Figures 5.54 and 5.55). This is especially important in molar teeth to ensure
the palatal cusp is not inadvertently sectioned which would lead to root frac-
ss  a sis nn-n     
followed by removal of furcation bone creating access to the periodontal
ligament (Figures 5.56-5.59). Once the buccal roots have been extracted, fur-
cation bone buccal to the palatal root should be removed to facilitate access to
this root (Figure 5.60). It is important to remember to incise the epithelial
attachment circumferentially around the palatal cusp as well because this
attachment can be particularly strong around these crowns. A releasing inci
sion is usually required in the periosteum of the buccal flaps to permit closure
of the wide resultant defect.
It is preferable to perform alveoloplasty using a large, round diamond bur,
as it not only rounds off the alveolar bone effciently but is also less likely to
cause trauma to the soft tissues. Adequate irrigation is essential to prevent
alveolar bone necrosis from frictional heat.
As much alveolar bone as possible should be maintained to prevent jaw
weakening especially in those jaws compromised by severe periodontal disease.
161
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.54 The palatal cusp of
the maxillary left molar 1 is being
sectioned.
Figure 5.55 The palatal cusp of
maxillary right carnassial is being
sectioned. The bur should be directed
at about 45° between the palatal and
buccal cusps.
When ^important' teeth (canines and carnassials) have been extracted, occlu-
sion of the remaining teeth must be evaluated to ensure that they do not cause
trauma to the opposing tissues. The mandibular carnassial tooth (molar 1)
may bite into the palate after the maxillary carnassial tooth (premolar 4) and
molar 1 have been extracted. This tooth may require odontoplasty to shorten
the crown to prevent palatal trauma.
162
Exodontics
Figure 5.56  The buccal cusps of
the maxillary right molar 1 are being
sectioned.
Figure 5.57   The buccal cusps of
the maxillary right carnassial tooth
are being sectioned.
163
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.58  The three crown segments
of maxillary right molar 1.
Figure 5.59 The three crown segments
of maxillary right carnassial tooth.
Extracting persistent deciduous teeth
Deciduous teeth are considered persistent when they are present in the mouth
together with their succedaneous counterpart. In other words if two teeth
 occupy the same location the deciduous tooth must be extracted. Persistent
deciduous teeth may be found to be unassociated with a succedaneous
tooth in the dentition of old animals and in these cases this tooth is kept
in the mouth as to extract it would reduce the number of functional teeth
(Figure 5.61). Pre-operative radiographs of persistent deciduous teeth are
164
Exodontics
Figure 5.60 Once the buccal crown /
root segments of the maxillary
carnassial tooth have been extracted,
fu rcation bone buccal to the palatal
root must be removed to facilitate
extraction of this crown / root segment.
Figure 5.61   Persistent deciduous
teeth unassociated with succedaneous
permanent teeth (confirmed
radiographically) may be kept in the
mouth as they are often functional.
This mandibu lar persistent deciduous
premolar 2 is a functional tooth in this
mixed dentition. Permanent premolar 2
is missing.
essential (Figure 5.62) as some may be undergoing root resorption and their
extraction is accomplished by simply severing the gingival attachment, either
 using a scalpel blade or a sharp Luxator@. When the roots are visible radio-
graphically, surgical extraction is indicated (Figure 5.63).
165
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.62  Persistent deciduou5
teeth must be radiographed prior to
the mucoperiosteal fap being raised for
their extraction. In some cases, as in this
 mandibu lar right persistent deciduous
canine (804), the root has already
undergone resorption and extraction is
performed by severing the gingival
attachment using a scalpel blade.
Figure 5.63   Persistent deciduou5
canine teeth which have been shown
to have their roots intact shou ld be
extracted su rgically.
The surgical flap is raised as described earlier but must be extended to
expose the full extent of the deciduous tooth root (Figure 5.64). The decidu-
ous canine crown comprises approximately 25-30% of the tooth with the
root making up the remaining 70-75% (Figure 5.65). Once the flap is raised
166
Exodontics
Figure 5.64   A large mucoperiosteal
flap is raised as described previously,
exposing the full extent of the persistent
deciduous canine juga.
Figure 5.65   The deciduous canine
tooth comprises about 25-30% crown
and 70-75% root!
and the alveolar juga exposed, an alveolotomy is performed around the whole
root beginning mesially at the neck of the tooth and ending distally at the neck
 of the tooth (Figure 5.66). Suffcient bone is removed to expose the periodon-
tal ligament which is then incised using a scalpel blade (Figure 5.67). Once the
gingival attachment has been incised on the palatal / lingual aspect of the
tooth, it can often be lifted from the alveolus using the forefinger and thumb.
Gentle luxation is required in some cases but care must be exercised not
to place the luxation instrument between the crowns of the deciduous and
167
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 5.66  Alveolotomy is performed
arou nd the whole juga, exposing the
 periodontal liga ment.
Figure 5.67   The periodontal ligament
is incised using a scalpel blade and once
the palatal / lingual-attached gingiva is
incised, the tooth can often be delivered 
from the alveolus using the thu mb and 
forefinger.
permanent teeth (Figure 5.68). This may create undue pressure on the
unerupted part of the permanent tooth and can result in enamel hypominer-
alisation due to damage inflicted on the cells that aid in enamel mineralisation
and maturation. The alveolar edges should be gently smoothed and the
tension-free flap closed.
168
Exodontics
Figure 5.68  Do not place a Luxator@
between the crowns of the deciduous
and permanent teeth as it may cause
damage to the enamel organ or
mineralising enamel and present as
enamel defects or discolou ration
when the permanent tooth eru pts.
Figure 5.69   The carnassial teeth have
longitudinal developmental grooves
(distally on the mesial root and mesially
on the distal root) which improve
anti-rotational stability. These can
complicate extraction of these teeth.
Possible complications associated with extractions
The mandibular molar 1 and maxillary carnassial tooth roots can have a
developmental groove running from the furcation to the apex of the root
(Figure 5.69). These grooves provide additional anti-rotational support to
these teeth and can result in their extraction taking longer than expected.
169
Small Animal Dentistry
On pre-operative radiographs the developmental groove in a mandibular
molar 1 appears as parallel lines at the distal aspect of the mesial root.
 Removing additional furcation bone will facilitate extraction of these roots.
      d  n  
young animals and the alveolar bone more dense. This can complicate extrac-
tion as access to the periodontal ligament space is limited and the alveolar
bone is not easily compressed during luxation and elevation. It is therefore
necessary to perform a wider and deeper alveolotomy to create space for the
Luxator@ and elevator. Greater patience is also required to prevent iatrogenic
root / crown fractures. It is also advisable to remove more buccal alveolar
x i nod noi jo  i e asdxa  se s ui a
n n sn q  sn r  s n  
alveolus although this may not be readily visible radiographically (because of
the two-dimensional view).
latrogenic oro-nasal communication often occurs when periodontally
compromised maxillary teeth are extracted as a result of bone loss affecting
the palatal alveolar wall. Sometimes the only separation between the tooth and
the nasal passage is inflamed soft tissue which tears loose during extraction.
Bleeding is usually noticed from the ipsilateral nostril. Primary closure of these
acute communications is the treatment of choice (Figures 5.70 and 5.71). In
some cases it is necessary to debride inflamed epithelialised tissue (pocket
wall) from the alveolus before the defect is closed using an advancement
flap. See Chapter 7 - Oral Surgery, for details.
Figure 5.70 A mucoperiosteal fap was
raised to extract the maxillary left
canine and premolars and an oro-nasal
communication resu lted at the canine
alveolus. The nasal passage was visible
through the alveolus.
170
Exodontics
Figure 5.71The acute oro-nasal
communication was re paired by
tension-free closure of the
mucoperiosteal flap and healed
uneventfu lly.
Further reading
Crossley, D.A. and Penman, S. (Eds) (1995) Manual of Small Animal Dentistry.
BSAVA Publications, Cheltenham, UK.
Holstrom, S.E., Frost P. and Eisner, E.R. (1998) Veterinary Dental Techniques for the
Small Animal Practitioner (2nd ed). W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
Robinson, P.D. (2000) Tooth Extraction - A Practical Guide. Elsevier Science Ltd,
Edinburgh.
Wiggs, R.B. and Lobprise, H.B. (1997) Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice.
 Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
171
6 Jaw Fracture Repair
Small Animal Dentistry
Mandibles do not have a medullary cavity. The mandibles house a number of
important structures, namely the teeth and inferior alveolar neurovascular
 structures (coursing through the mandibular canal) which complicate repair
of mandibular fractures. In young animals with deciduous dentition there
is even less space in the mandibles for fracture fixation devices because the
developing permanent dentition occupies most of the mandible. The muscles
of mastication insert on the mandibles.
Jaw fractures are common
following motor vehicle accidents and dog
fights. Jaw fractures are usually
condary to trauma although pathological
eriatric animals with severe periodontal
disease which has compromis
jaws. The majority of fractures occur in
the body of the mandible and often involve teeth (Figure 6.1 A-D).
The masseter and temporal muscles and those that open the jaw (and grav-
ity) apply opposing forces to the jaw and these will either aid in compression
of the fracture fragments or their distraction (Figure 6.2 top). The dorsal
aspect of the mandible is the tension side and the ventral margin is the com-
pression side (Figure 6.2 bottom). Jaw fractures are usually described as stable
(favourable) or unstable (unfavourable) depending upon the orientation of
the fracture. A stable fracture is one that has a caudo-dorsal to rostro-ventral
orientation. An unstable fracture has a caudo-ventral to rostro-dorsal orienta-
tion (Figure 6.3). A left mandibular fracture will result in the lower jaw shift-
ing to that side (also seen when the right temporomandibular joint becomes
luxated) and vice versa.
When teeth are involved in the fracture line their exact involvement is
crucial in deciding whether they are to be retained to aid in fracture repair
stability, or whether they should be extracted. If the fracture line follows the
 root surface but does not expose the apex, the tooth should be retained in the
mouth and re-evaluated radiographically within three months (Figure 6.1 E,
F G). If the apex of the tooth is exposed the tooth should either be extracted or
 the exposed root resected and root canal therapy performed on the remaining
 root if it will aid in fracture repair stability. This case may need to be referred
Figure 6.1.
 Common sites for jaw
fractures:
A: coronoid process;
 B: junction of ramus and mandibu lar
A
body;
C: condylar process;
D: body of the mandible.
Tooth involvement in fractu res:
E: fractures may involve fracture of the
tooth roots as well;
F: fractu res may expose the apical delta
often severing the pu lp commu nication
with the periodontal ligament. These
teeth require root canal therapy if they
are to be maintained in the mouth.
G: fractures may expose part of a root
but if the apex is not exposed then these
teeth can be maintained in the mouth.
Follow-u p radiography is advisable to
monitor teeth affected in this way.
174
Masseter
Temporal
Jaw Fracture Repair
Digastricus
Digastricus+Geniohyoideus
Gravity
Figure 6.2  The mandibles are su bject
to opposing forces. The masseter and
temporal muscles close the mouth
Tension
while the digastric and geniohyoid
muscles and gravity open the mouth.
The dorsal margin of the mandible is
the tension side while the ventral
mandibu lar margin is under
Compression
compression.
Masseter
Temporal
Digastricus
Geniohyoideus
Gravity
Figure 6.3  The forces acting on
the mandible cause fractures to be
classified as favou rable or unfavou ra ble
de pending u pon their orientation.
A fracture with a rostro-dorsal to caudo-
ventral orientation is an unfavou rable
fracture as the forces acting on the jaw
distract the fragments. A rostro-ventral
to caudo-dorsal fracture is a favou rable
orientation as it leads to compression 
of the fragments at stabilisation.
175
Small Animal Dentistry
           
tion of the tooth.
Fracture repair techniques
Tape or fabric muzzle
The tape muzzle is used to keep the jaws stabilised and the teeth in occlusion.
The initial layers of tape (zinc oxide tape is best as it does not shrink signi-
 an    s n  d  a  s
skin (it is undesirable for the tape to adhere to the patient's skin or facial hair).
The loop around the muzzle must be small enough to prevent the canine teeth
from coming out of occlusion but large enough to allow the animal to lap
food and water (and pant when warm). The loop extending from the muzzle
around the back of the ears must keep the muzzle loop from sliding down the
nose. The second layer of tapes is placed with the sticky side adhered to the
sticky layer of the initial layers of tape (Figure 6.4).
 Fabric muzzles are available which support the mandible while keeping the
canines in occlusion (Figure 6.5)
 The management of tape and fabric muzzles is of paramount importance.
After each meal the muzzle must be removed, cleaned and replaced once the
animal's face has been cleaned and dried. Wet muzzles lead to facial skin
maceration and dermatitis. Alternatively, two or three muzzles can be used
and rotated (with the used muzzle washed and allowed to dry for use again).
Tape and fabric muzzles are not only ineffective in brachycephalic breeds due
to their head and face shape, but are also contra-indicated as these breeds
often rely on open-mouthed breathing for effcient respiration.
Inter-fragmentary wiring
Inter-fragmentary wiring may be performed as long as it is possible to place
the wires without compromising tooth roots. The wire can be placed using
either a two-, three- or four-hole configuration. In the two-hole configuration
Figure 6.4 Atape muzzle in place.
These must be removed after the animal
has eaten and once the face has been
cleaned, a clean, dry muzzle must be
fitted. The animal shou ld not be left
unattended between muzzle changes.
176
Jaw Fracture Repair
Figure 6.5 Fabric muzzles are very
useful in mandibu lar sta bilisation. This
muzzle has been worn for four weeks.
The fraying is due to the patient ru bbing
it in an attempt to get it off! The owner
diligently replaced the muzzle with a
clean one after each meal, thus
preventing muzzle associated
dermatitis.
the wire is placed perpendicular to the fracture line while in the three-hole
configuration, one hole is placed in the caudal fragment and two holes are
placed in the rostral fragment lending greater stability to the repair. The dorsal
wire is placed close and parallel to the dorsal alveolar margin and the ventral
wire is placed perpendicular to the fracture line. In the four-hole technique,
two wires are placed parallel to each other and perpendicular to the fracture
line (Figure 6.6).
Inter-dental wiring
 Inter-dental wires may be used to stabilise adjacent teeth or numerous teeth in
a quadrant.
 Place a loop of wire between the teeth on either side of the fracture line and
then pass the free ends around the mesial and distal aspects of these teeth.
Take the free end which has come around the distal aspect of the caudal tooth
and pass it through the loop (passing between the rwo teeth) and tie it to the
free end at the mesial aspect of the rostral tooth. Once the free ends have been
twisted together the inter-dental loop should be twisted to complete the
fixation. This pattern can be extended to include all teeth in a quadrant and
under some circumstances extend to the contra-lateral side to improve stabil-
ity (Figures 6.7 and 6.8). Inter-dental wiring may also be performed by placing
a wire mesially around the rostral tooth and distally around the caudal tooth
to be stabilised and the loose ends twisted together (Figure 6.9).
Inter-dental acrylic
An inter-dental acrylic splint can be applied to the teeth on either side of a
 fracture to provide rigid inter-fragmentary fixation as long as there are teeth
177
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 6.6 Inter-fragmentary wiring.
A: Although this three-hole
 arrangement is correctly placed
according to tooth roots, it does not
B
provide as much stability as the
arrangement in B.
B: This arrangement of the three-hole
wire placement makes use of the
biomechanical forces on the jaw to
improve stability. The dorsal wire is
 parallel to the tension side and the
ventral wire is perpendicu lar to the
fracture line.
C: The two-hole wire placement for
favou rable fractu re stabilisation. The
wire is perpendicu lar to the fractu re
line and anchored rostrally close to
the tension side.
D: The four-hole wire placement
configuration. Both wires are arranged
perpendicu lar to the fracture line.
Care shou ld be taken not to place a wire
through a tooth root or the mandibu lar
canal.
D
 on either side of the fracture. The bulk of the acrylic should be applied to the
buccal surface of maxillary teeth (maxillary stabilisation) and the lingual sur-
face of mandibular teeth (mandibular stabilisation) to prevent interference
with occlusion. When using material which undergoes an exothermic reaction
it is important not to place too thick a layer against the tooth at one time,
Or thermal induced pulpitis may result. When using exothermic material,
incremental layers should be applied until the desired thickness is attained
(Figure 6.10). Circumferential orthopaedic wire can be placed around the
mandible and incorporated into the acrylic to provide stabilisation in
edentulous areas.
 Inter-arcade acrylic bonding between mandibular and maxillary canines
is sometimes indicated. This technique may require a combination of inter-
fragmentary wiring and inter-dental acrylic in order to be effective. The
canines are bonded together using dental acrylic or dental restorative material
178
Jaw Fracture Repair
Figure 6.7  The inter-dental loop wiring
technique. Orthopaedic wire is passed
distally arou nd the last molar and
cou rses rostrally on the buccal aspect 
of the teeth. The lingual wire is passed
between molars 1 and 2 and over the
buccal wire and back between these
teeth. This pattern is continued as far as
stabilisation is required. This may cross
the mandibu lar symphysis if required.
Figure 6.8  The two loose ends of the
wire are twisted together and then each
loop protruding buccally arou nd the
buccal wire is twisted in tu rn u ntil
desired stability is attained. The loops
can then be bent ventrally so that they
do not irritate or trau matise the cheek
mucosa.
with the jaws held apart sufficiently to allow lapping of food but not so
far apart as to prevent swallowing. Prior to bonding the teeth together, the
endotracheal (ET) tube must be untied and the tie loosened from the tube to
prevent obstruction once the tube is removed during recovery from anaes-
thesia. It is also important to ensure that the cuff inflation tube is positioned
179
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 6.9  Asingle loop of wire can be
placed mesially arou nd the rostral tooth
and distally arou nd the caudal tooth on
either side of a fracture line and the
loose ends tightened appropriately.
Figure 6.10  Interdental acrylic can be
used to form a 'rigid' fixation device.
The bu lk of acrylic shou ld be placed
lingually for mandibu lar stabilisation
and buccally for maxillary sta bilisation
in order to prevent interference with
occlusion.
alongside the ET tube between the canines or else it will become trapped at
extubation. Placement of an oesophageal feeding tube is important to main-
tain caloric intake until the patient learns to prehend and swallow food. When
patients have severe swelling in the caudal oral cavity (often associated with
 concurrent temporomandibular joint pathology) inter-arcade bonding should
be delayed until the swelling has subsided or the patient may suffer respiratory
compromise.
Orthopaedic wires and pins should not be placed within the mandibular
canal under any circumstances (as one may perform pinning of another
bone) as they will cause severe damage to the inferior alveolar blood vessels
and nerves which course through the mandibular canal. When applying
orthopaedic principles to mandibular fracture repair the fact that the dorsal
margin of the mandible is the tension side would suggest that fixation devices
must be placed closer to the dorsal margin. However, the teeth roots are
180
Jaw Fracture Repair
Figure 6.11 Holes must not be drilled
blindly through the mandibles. Three
holes have been drilled through this
mandible: one through the mesial root
of the mandibular left premolar 4, one
through the mesial root of the adjacent
molar (beneath the wire) and the third
through the fu rcation of the molar. All
of these place ments have com promised
the teeth.
housed within the dorsal half of the mandible and this precludes the use of
bone plates and screws. External fixators may be used and the pins placed
between roots according to root positions confrmed radiographically. Pins
should not be placed through tooth roots. If an external fixation pin is to
be placed through the mandibular canal then the diameter of the chosen pin
must be less than half the width of the canal in order to prevent damage to the
 inferior alveolar neurovascular bundle. Pins should be driven using a Jacobs
chuck to prevent damage to these structures and must be placed either at the
 dorsal (preferably) or ventral margin of the canal. Inter-fragmentary wires
may be placed through one cortex of the canal. The neurovascular contents
must be protected from the drill by using a retractor. Holes must not be
blindly drilled through the mandible as this inevitably results in damage to
vital structures (Figures 6.11 and 6.13).
Soft-tissue injuries must also be addressed when treating jaw fractures.
Commonly seen soft tissue injuries include stripping of the gingiva, alveolar
mucosa and periosteum from the body of the mandible. Careful debride-
ment of compromised tissue should be performed prior to suturing the soft
tissues. The tongue and sub-lingual mucosa and associated tissues can also
be damaged and should be thoroughly cleaned and treated appropriately
(Figure 6.14).
Caloric intake of these animals is very important and the placement and
maintenance of an oesophagostomy tube should be considered in all cases
until prehension and swallowing have been observed.
Mandibular symphysis separation can be repaired using nylon or poly-
dioxanone to enable recreation of the fibrous joint. Thin orthopaedic wire can
also be used for this purpose. Thick orthopaedic wire should not be used as it
inevitably leads to bony symphyseal union which is undesirable. Traumatic
cleft of the hard palate can be stabilised by a circumferential wire placed sub-
cutaneously over the bridge of the nose and across the palate just caudal to the
canines. The wires may be twisted together dorsal to the canine in the buccal
vestibule to prevent trauma to the tongue (Figure 6.15).
181
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 6.12  The teeth extracted from
the patient in Figure 6.11. Both teeth
were loose in the mandible.
Figure 6.13  The patient in Figure 6.11.
The tongue trau ma could have been
 caused by the initial trau ma or by the
bur used to drill the hole through the
jaw. It is important to protect soft
tissues when using power-driven
eq uipment.
182
Jaw Fracture Repair
Figure 6.14   This dog was kicked in the
mouth by a horse. The mandibular right 
canine was luxated (partially dislodged
from its alveolus) and the tongue had
been ripped from the su blingual
tissues by the force. The tissues were
thoroughly cleaned and sutured back in 
place. An uneventful recovery followed.
Figure 6.15
This patient was
presented with a trau matic cleft
palate which was about 10 mm wide.
A'circum-nasal’ cerclage wire was
placed su bcutaneously, dorsally over
the nose and orally across the palate
caudal to the canines. The wire was
twisted dorsal to the canine in the
buccal vestibu le on each side.
183
Small Animal Dentistry
Further reading
Crossley, D.A. and Penman, S. (Eds) (1995) Manual of Small Animal Dentistry.
BSAVA Publications, Cheltenham, UK.
Holstrom, S.E., Frost, P. and Eisner, E.R. (1998) Veterinary Dental Techniques for the
Small Animal Practitioner (2nd edn). W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
Wiggs, R.B. and Lobprise, H.B. (1997) Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
184
 Oral Surgery
Small Animal Dentistry
Gingival overgrowth (hyperplasia) is more commonly seen in dogs than cats
and some dog breeds are more predisposed to gingival hyperplasia than others
and excised tissue should be submitted for histopathological examination to
rule out neoplasia.
Hyperplastic gingiva should be recorded on the dental chart by drawing
around and over the affected tooth. The extent is noted with dimensions
measured using the periodontal probe. A pedunculated epulis is easier to
excise, though some have a good blood supply requiring ligation (Figure 7.1).
In some cases the gingival tissue is sessile and excision thereof can cause
severe haemorrhage (Figure 7.2).
The depth of pseudopockets is measured (Figure 7.3), extrapolated against
the buccal / lingual surface of the epulis (Figure 7.4) and marked by punctur-
ing the gingiva using a dental explorer. The contour of the apical extent of the
 pseudopocket is depicted by bleeding spots. The hyperplastic tissue is excised
by placing a scalpel blade against the gingiva just apical to the bleeding spots
and making an incision which meets the tooth surface just coronal to the floor
of the pseudopocket. This bevelled incision attempts to restore the gingival
margin and contour, and obliterate the pseudopocket (Figure 7.5). It will
be necessary to replace the scalpel blade often as it is soon blunted by the
fbrous tissue. Bleeding may be profuse but can usually be controlled by
digital pressure using a gloved finger or moistened gauze swabs. The use of
dry swabs inevitably removes the newly formed blood clot, resulting in
further bleeding.
 Excised tissue must be submitted for histopathological examination to rule
out neoplasia.
Figure 7.1A large pedunculated
epu lis. These usually have a good blood
su pply which may require ligation at
excision.
186
Oral Surgery
Figure 7.2  Sessile epulides can
bleed profusely at excision but digital
pressure is often sufficient to achieve
haemostasis.
Figure 7.3 The pseudopocket formed
by this epu lis is measu red using a
periodontal probe.
The use of laser surgery has been described but there is insufficient scientific
evidence to advocate the use of this treatment modality. Electrosurgical equip-
ment should in the opinion of the author not be used in oral surgery as there is
a danger of thermal-induced alveolar osteitis and pulpitis.
187
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 7.4  The depth of the
pseudopocket is extrapolated buccally
to determine the excision line. The
apical extent of the pseudopocket is
marked using a dental explorer to
create a bleeding point.
Figure 7.5  An incision is made apical
to the bleeding spots, eliminating the
pseudopocket.
Oro-nasal communication - acute and chronic
Acute oro-nasal communications caused during extraction of a periodontally
compromised tooth (Figure 7.6) or the iatrogenic penetration of the nasal
cavity during tooth luxation or elevation are repaired by primary closure
188
Oral Surgery
Figure 7.6  Acute oro-nasal
commu nication can result during
extraction of periodontally
compromised teeth.
Figure 7.7
The oro-nasal
communication in Figure 7.6 was
closed by raising a mucoperiosteal 
flap. Theselesions usually heal without
complications. The client shou ld be
warned about the possibility of epistaxis
following the surgery.
(Figure 7.7). If the site had a deep probing depth the walls of the pocket will
have been epithelialised and this material must be debrided prior to closure.
The margin of the pocket must also be debrided to remove compromised
  o si        s
189
Figure 7.8 Single flap closure of an oro-nasal commu nication.
A: The edges of the defect are excised.
B: An alveolar mucoperiosteal flap is raised extending beyond the mucogingival line.
C: An incision is made through the periosteu m at the base of the fap and it is extended as a split thickness flap. It is sometimes
 D: The flap is advanced and sutu red to the palatal side of the defect. Sutu ring is facilitated by raising the palatal mucosa from
the bony palate using a periosteal elevator.
gingiva, a full thickness mucoperiosteal flap should be raised, extended as a
split thickness mucosal flap and advanced to close the defect without tension.
The leading edge of the flap may be rounded to fit the defect and will also
ensure blood supply to the flap edge (square corners are sometimes compro
mised) (Figure 7.8). The flap must be sutured using synthetic, monoflament,
absorbable suture material.
Cleft palate
The hard palate and its oral mucosa may be cleft following high-rise syndrome
and other traumatic injuries. As long as the maxillae are stable and do not
require surgical repair the palatal mucosa can be sutured using a simple, inter-
rupted suture pattern to enable frst intention healing (Figure 7.9).
Congenital cleft palate is seen in neonates from time to time and these
patients should be referred to colleagues with experience in this treatment, as
the first surgery undertaken usually has the best prognosis for complete repair.
190
Oral Surgery
Figure 7.9 The palatal mucosa was
trau matically cleft in this cat. The oral
cavity was flushed with chlorhexidine
gluconate prior to surgery. Scale and
polish (normally undertaken prior to
oral surgery) was not done in this
patient to prevent calculus from
entering the nasal cavity. (This
photograph kindly provided by
Dr David Crossley.)
Chronic oro-nasal fstulae can be closed using a single advancement flap or
double flaps. When using the double-flap technique the epithelial lining of the
fistula should be debrided as above, except in the area where the first flap to be
s a si d  a  l io pd   ie
from the palate and hinged at the palatal margin of the defect. The flap is
sutured into the defect with the oral mucosa now recreating the floor / wall of
the nasal passage. A second flap is raised, beginning at the buccal margin of
the defect, extending into the buccal mucosa so that it can be advanced to
close the defect and the bed from where the first flap was harvested. This flap
is sutured in such a way that it completely covers the frst flap harvest site
without tension (Figure 7.10).
It is important to remember when raising these faps that the tissues are
elastic and although they may fit the defect immediately after harvesting they
will shrink slightly and cause extrinsic suture tension which may lead to dehis-
cence. When planning the flap, ensure that there is suffcient tissue to cover the
defect with about half as much to spare. In other words, if the defect is 6 mm
across, a flap will be needed which provides 9 mm of tissue to cover the defect
  Pr s ro r a   r
 cause tension and dehiscence.
Periodontal surgery
 In patients with deep periodontal pockets, pocket depth reduction techniques
are used to maintain the affected teeth.
 In some cases partial gingivectomy may achieve the desired effect with sub-
gingival curettage and effective dental home care practised, to curb further
191
Figure 7.10  Dou ble flap closure of oro-nasal defects.
A: An incision is made at the buccal margin of the defect to create the anchor point for the first fap. A second incision is made
through the palatal mucosa at a distance from the palatal margin of the defect which will permit a fap to be raised which will
reach the buccal anchor point.
B: Both faps are raised as indicated.
C: The first fap (raised from the palate) is sutu red without tension, using synthetic, monofila ment absorba ble suture material, to
the buccal anchor point. The buccal fap is extended as described in Figure 7.8.
D: The buccal flap is sutured to the palatal mucosa covering the site where the first fap was harvested from.
deterioration. At least 2 mm of attached gingiva must be retained when
performing this procedure.
In some patients it may be necessary to excise the inflamed gingival margin
and raise a mucogingival flap, permitting open curettage of the tooth roots
 prior to the flap being sutured back in place (Figure 7.11).
Some patients are in the habit of chewing their sublingual tissues (tongue-
biter syndrome) (Figures 7.12 and 7.13) and when severe, the lesions should
be surgically excised. Care must be taken when planning excision of large
lesions as they may be in close proximity to salivary structures (glands,
ducts and puncta). Some patients bite their cheek mucosae, also leading to
proliferative lesions (cheek-biter syndrome) (Figures 7.14 and 7.15). In severe
 cases surgery is needed to eliminate pain and bleeding due to trauma.
Mucoperiosteal flaps for surgical extraction techniques are described in
Chapter 5 -- Exodontics.
192
Figure 7.11  Periodontal surgery.
A: The inflamed gingiva is incised to the alveolar bone.
B: The attached gingiva is reflected from the alveolar bone using a periosteal elevator to create an envelope fap.
C: Su bgingival 'open' curettage is performed.
D: The flap is sutu red back in place using inter-dental sutu res.
For deep pockets:
F: The flap is reflected to expose the apical extent of the pocket.
G: Open cu rettage is performed, including root debridement of necrotic cementu m. Root debridement shou ld be undertaken
carefully to prevent denudation of the dentine.
H: The flap is sutured closed, in a slightly apical position, in an attempt to eliminate the pockets. Note that some cementu m is
exposed coronal to the gingiva.
Figure 7.12  Some animals chew their
su blingual tissues (tongue-biters). This
is a moderate form of the condition
and does not require surgery. The
infa mmation is as a resu lt of plaque on
the adjacent teeth.
193
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 7.13   This is a very severe
form of tongue-biter syndrome. The
su blingual tissues have undergone
severe proliferation. The lesion was
bilateral in this dog and both lesions
were excised. Histopathology revealed
hy perplasia due to chronic mechanical
trauma.
Figure 7.14 Some animals chew their
cheek mucosa. This is a mild form of
the condition.
194
Oral Surgery
Figure 7.15 This is a severe form of
 cheek-biter syndrome requiring surgical
excision. These patients often bleed
from the mouth after meals as a resu lt
of trau ma to these lesions during eating.
Further reading
Cohen, S. and Burns, R.C. (Eds) (2002) Pathways of the Pulp (8th edn). Mosby,
St Louis, Missouri.
Crossley, D.A. and Penman, S. (Eds) (1995) Manual of Small Animal Dentistry.
BSAVA Publications, Cheltenham, UK.
Holstrom, S.E., Frost, P. and Eisner, E.R. (1998) Veterinary Dental Techniques for the
Small Animal Practitioner (2nd edn). W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
Newman, M.G., Takei, H.H. and Caranza, F.A. (Eds) (2002) Clinical Periodontology
(9th edn). W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
Wiggs, R.B. and Lobprise, H.B. (1997) Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
195
Suture Material
8
Small Animal Dentistry
The most common cause of oral wound dehiscence is tension on the tissues.
This tension may be intrinsic, caused by tying sutures too tightly, compromis-
ing the tissue within the suture or, extrinsic tension where there is tension on
the wound edges because of insuffcient tissue to close the defect (Figure 8.1).
 keep tissues apposed long enough to allow healing
 not cause inflammation
 not irritate the patient
 not require removal
be strong enough to permit the finest material to be used.
The suture size chosen should be such that the strength of the suture
material equals that of the tissue being sutured. These characteristics are not
 present in any one suture material so choice of material is based on the wound
site, local conditions and surgeon's preference (Table 8.1).
CTeR
B
Figure 8.1  Suture tension.
A: Sutures shou ld be tied so that
the tissues are apposed but there
is no extrinsic or intrinsic tension.
B: Extrinsic tension resu Its from
insufficient fap tissue to close the
defect. This causes tension in the flap.
C: Intrinsic suture tension is caused by
sutu res which are tied too tight, thereby
strangling the tissue within the suture.
198
Suture
Material
Material type
Filament
Absorbable
 Means of
Suitability for
Loss of
origin
 absorption
use in mouth 
strength by (days)
Catgut
Natural
Collagen
Multifilament
Yes
 Phagocytosis
Poor
21
Vicryle
Synthetic
 Polyglactin 910
Multifilament
Yes
Hydrolysis
Average to poor
42
Vicryl Rapide?
 Synthetic
 Polyglactin 910
Multifilament 
Yes
Hydrolysis
Average to poor
14
PDS
Synthetic
 Polydioxanone
Monofilament
Yes
Hydrolysis
Poor
>60
Monocryl
Synthetic
 Poliglecaprone
Monofilament 
tYes
Hydrolysis
poog
21
Caprosyn
Synthetic
 Polyglytone 6211
Monofilament 
Yes
Hydrolysis
pooy
21
Nylon
Synthetic
 Polyamide
Monofilament 
No
10N
Very poor
>2 years
Table 8.1
Suitability of available suture materials for use in oral su rgery.
Multiflament suture material is inclined to wicking which allows bacteria
to migrate into deeper tissues.
 The use of multiflament suture material in
the oral cavity is therefore undesirable because of the vast number of bacteria
present in the mouth. The use
 of non-absorbable suture material in the mouth
not only requires sedatior
esthesia for removal but it can lead to severe
trauma of the oral soft tis
cially the sublingual mucosa.
Non-swaged-on sutur
 used in the mouth as they
increase tissue drag and :
of the
 often compromised tissue to
cutting
 most preferable. Avoid
dles
pass through the periosteum or
gingiva with ease. Wher
eth
ugh the oral tissues, care must
be exercised not to
the
s this will severely blunt the
needle making subsequent
difficult
>/1
With
waged-on reverse cutting 3/8
circle needle is ideal for most
however under some circumstances
this material is difficult 
to
the
of
 magnification is desirable.
Magnifying loupes are available
111
of formats; some with, and
others without, accompanying
illumination.
Also,
surgical or operating
microscopes are becoming more affordable for use in general practice.
A reinforced surgeon's knot is required in oral surgery to ensure that the
suture knot does not untie (Figure 8.2). 
Additional throws do not add to knot
security but create a ^multifilament'
' bulky knot which may cause inflamma
tion and provide a nidus of infection. By cutting the suture material too short
knot integrity is compromised, however, ends which are too long will irritate
the patient and may cause the patient to lick the knot loose prematurely.
Figure 8.2  The reinforced surgeon's
knot is tied by throwing a double throw
followed by a single throw and secured
by a final single throw. The reinforced
surgeon's knot should be used in oral
su rgery to prevent knots being licked
loose.
199
 Small Animal Dentistry
B
B
Figure 8.3 Suture patterns used
commonly in oral surgery.
A: Simple interrupted pattern.
 B: Simple interru pted pattern
with a bu ried knot.
C: 'Side view': Far-near-near-far
and crossed-mattress sutu re pattern.
e-  d, 
pattern.
CVetraos
D: Crossed-mattress pattern.
200
 Developing and using the ‘buried knot technique’ will minimise challenges to
Suture Material
knot integrity (Figure 8.3). It is good practice not to take hold of the suture
material which is to remain within the mouth with forceps, as this reduces the
strength of the material. Clamping the knot to prevent slippage between
throws is incorrect, not only because it damages the suture material, but also
because this is an indication of extrinsic suture tension.
Suture patterns
The simple interrupted suture pattern is most often used in oral surgery
(Figure 8.3A). The benefit of this pattern over the simple continuous pattern is
that if the knot should come loose only one suture is compromised and not the
whole wound edge. Using the buried knot technique, the frst bite of tissue
is taken deep in the incision and the needle brought out sub-mucosally. The
second bite is taken sub-mucosally on the opposite side of the wound and the
needle brought out deep in the incision. Both free and attached ends (needle
end) of the suture material should be on the same side and a reinforced
surgeon's knot is then tied at the deeper level. The suture material must be
trimmed off at an appropriate length (Figure 8.3B). The suture can also be
placed on the mucosal surface as illustrated in Figure 8.3B.
The far-near-near-far vertical mattress pattern can be used to appose and
relieve tension on the wound edges concurrently (Figure 8.3C).
The crossed mattress interrupted suture pattern is also very useful as it is
as the simple interrupted pattern using a single reinforced surgeon's knot
(Figure 8.3D). The buried knot technique can also be applied to this suture
pattern but will require more practice to perfect. The suture is begun as a
simple interrupted pattern but instead of the knot being tied after the frst
 pass through each side of the wound, a second pass is made through each side
(beginning on the initial side) and then the knot is tied. The loose end of the
suture material must be passed through under the second loop of the pattern
so that it ends up on the same side as the attached end enabling buried knot-
ting to be performed.
Suture patterns which compromise blood supply to the wound edges (e.g.
parallel matress pattern) should be avoided in the mouth.
Where knots are placed on the surface they should all be to the same side of
the wound and should not be placed directly over the wound edges. This will
provide a straight wound edge. Placing knots on opposite sides of the incision
line will cause a zigzag wound scar.
201
Restoration
9
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 9.1 Caries in the pit of the
 occlusal su rface of maxillary right
molar 1.
Figure 9.2Enamel defects can cause
irritation and trau ma to overlying
mucosa and should be smoothed off
and varnished or sealed.
Tooth restoration is indicated where teeth are damaged either by trauma
or decay (Figures 9.1-9.3) or developmental abnormalities (Figure 9.4) and
where restoration to form and function is required following treatment, e.g.
root canal therapy. Restorations should not be placed within 1 mm of the
gingiva (this is known as the biological width) as doing so leads to gingivitis.
204
Restoration
Figure 9.3  This dog has severe self
inflicted abrasion affecting the distal
aspects of its canine teeth. These lesions
are typical of dogs which 'cage-bite',
also known as 'wire-biters'.
Figure 9.4 Enamel defects also expose
dentinal tu bu les which may lead to
 pulpitis. This animal was affected by
the Distemper Virus before it was
three months old resu Iting in ena mel
dysplasia.
Under no circumstances should restorations be placed directly over exposed
pulps of dog's and cat's teeth. This leads to pulp necrosis and root abscessation
with oral or facial sinus tract formation (Figures 9.5-9.6). Pain associated
with exposed pulps is evidenced in hindsight by the improvement in habitus
after patients suffering from these conditions have been treated definitively.
205
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 9.5
 An inappropriately treated
premolar in a dog. A restoration was
placed directly over an exposed pulp,
resu lting in periapical abscesses. This
tooth was later extracted because of the
endo-perio lesion that had developed.
Figure 9.6 A restoration was
placed over the exposed pu lp of the
 mandibu lar right canine. Note the large
 periapical lesion as a result of pulp
 necrosis. The difference in width of
the root canals of the canines is an
indication that the pulp in the right
canine tooth (left in this buccal view)
 became necrotic some time ago.
Dentine formation has continued in
the left canine. Root canal therapy was
performed on the right canine tooth and
the periapical lesion has since resolved.
affected tooth.
The biting forces in dogs are greater than those experienced in man but the
restorative materials used (almost exclusively designed for use in man) are
often adequate.
206
Restorative material can be used on its own to restore tooth shape and
Restoration
height or it can be reinforced with small pins drilled into the dentine (known
as para-pulpal pins). In some instances prosthetic crowns can be manu-
factured from aesthetic materials or metal alloys to resemble the original
tooth crown.
The simplest form of restoration is the application of a varnish or sealant to
a tooth crown following an uncomplicated crown fracture. The sharp edges of
the crown can be smoothed using a fine diamond finishing bur or polishing
stone. The dentine should then be sealed using a light or self-curing varnish.
Exposed dentinal tubules often cause pain due either to exposed nerve
fbres or changes in fluid pressure within the dentinal tubules leading to nerve
stimulation. Sudden movement of fluid into or out of the dentinal tubule
causes tension on the odontoblastic process resulting in severe pain. The dog
in Figure 9.4 had Distemper Virus infection with resulting enamel dysplasia.
The enamel of poor quality was gently removed using an ultrasonic scaler and
the exposed dentine was sealed (Figure 9.7).
Figure 9.8 illustrates the step-by-step treatment of a tooth affected by
caries.
When teeth are affected by caries (Figure 9.9) and intra-oral radiographs
 d pdad no j dd o si an n us a
carious material should be debrided (Figure 9.10) and a restoration placed
(Figure 9.11). It is often necessary to line the prepared cavity with a lining
material to ^medicate’ the pulp. These materials protect the pulp from the
restorative materials, some of which have been shown to cause pulp inflam-
mation. A permanent restoration is then placed, ensuring a good coronal seal
which prevents communication between the dentine (and pulp) and the
 oral cavity.
Figure 9.7 Teeth of the dog in
Figure 9.4 after debridement of
dysplastic enamel and sealing of
the exposed dentine.
207
AAA
AAAA
AAAA
Figure 9.8  Restoration of caries.
A: Caries lesion in a tooth.
B: A high-speed water-cooled bur is used to remove enamel to expose the caries in the dentine. A slow-speed bur (and spoon
excavator) is used to debride the caries-affected dentine, taking care not to expose the pulp.
C: An undercut is made in the wall of the prepared cavity ensuring that the ena mel is not undermined and that the structure of 
the tooth is not compromised.
material. This is especially important if the dentine covering the pulp is very thin (<1 mm).
 E: If com posite or compomer restorative material is to be used, a bonding agent is applied to the cavity after it has been
conditioned / etched (depending upon manufactu rer's instructions).
material.
G: The final restoration shou ld be polished and varnished to protect it from desiccation and moistu re.
H: Glass ionomer restorative may be used as the initial layer. In this case bonding agent is not required as the ionomer forms a
che mical bond with the tooth su bstance.
I: when the glass ionomer layer has been applied and cured, the exposed dentine and enamel should be conditioned / etched
as in E.
J: The bonding agent applied shou ld be applied as in E.
K: The final restoration is applied and cu red, polished and sealed as in G.
208
Restoration
Figure 9.9  The caries lesion in
Figure 9.1 has been exposed by
removing enamel using a
high-speed bur.
Figure 9.10  The caries has been
debrided using a slow-speed bur and
a small spoon excavator.
When amalgam (silver, mercury and copper alloy) was used routinely in vet-
           s   
walls of the cavity converged coronally (known as an undercut) to ensure that
the restoration was held in place physically (physical retention). The amalgam
209
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 9.11  The final compomer
restoration has been cured and
varnished with an unfilled resin.
A lighter colou red restoration than
the tooth was chosen so that it is not
damaged by excessive scaling at the
 next prophy treatment.
was polished and this created a coronal seal which improved as the amalgam
s pd an  m g sd a is, a nmn
between the restoration and the surface enamel. Modern amalgams are now
placed onto a bonding material which helps keep the restoration in place
and improves the coronal seal, negating the need for undercuts in the cavity
 preparation. Amalgam is rarely used in domestic pets these days.
With the advent of modern (mostly non-metallic) restorative materials it is
no longer necessary to create undercuts as the materials either bond directly
(via chemical bonds) to the tooth substance, or a bonding agent is first applied
to the tooth and the restorative material is in turn bonded to the bonding
 agent in a sandwich technique. A micro-mechanical bond is created when the
enamel is etched and dentine conditioned. Etching and conditioning effect-
ively ^roughens' the surface of these tissues allowing the bonding material
to ‘interlock' with the tooth substance. Both light and chemical-cured (self-
cured) materials are used.
Etching is performed by applying 37-40% phosphoric acid gel to the
enamel surface for 10-15 seconds to demineralise the enamel and thereby
increase the surface area to which bonding agents are applied. A conditioner
is used to create similar conditions on dentine. These materials must be
thoroughly rinsed off and the tooth surface must then be partially dried
depending upon which restorative technique is to be implemented. Desiccation
of the tooth surface following etching and conditioning is detrimental.
Glass ionomer restorative materials bond directly with the tooth substance
via chemical bonds. A bonding agent is therefore not required when using
these restoratives. Once placed and cured, glass ionomer restorations should
be sealed using a varnish to prevent desiccation or imbibition of moisture, as
this can affect the longevity of the restoration.
210
Restoration
Figure 9.12  This dog underwent crown
am putation and partial pulpectomy
and restoration, as treatment for
mandibu lar canine malocclusion.
At the three-month check-up the
restoration was secure and a dentinal
bridge had formed. At about six months
post treatment the client re ported that
the tooth had become discoloured. A5
seen in this photograph, the restoration
in the mandibu lar left canine had been
intruded, disru pting the coronal seal
(com pare with mandibu lar right canine
treated at the same time). when
questioned about the dog's behaviour
the client reported that it insisted on 
biting hard objects. An intra-oral
radiograph revealed a periapical
radiolucency involving the mandibular
left canine. The pulp was necrotic and
root canal therapy was therefore
performed.
Composites are restorations comprising particles and resin which require a
 bonding agent to sandwich them to the tooth surface.
Compomers are hybrids between composites and glass ionomers often used
in veterinary dentistry as they provide restorations which appear to withstand
 normal chewing behaviour in our patients.
Although, as mentioned above, it is not necessary to create undercuts to
retain modern restorations, an undercut at the depth of the cavity preparation
is desirable to aid in restorative retention in hard biting patients (Figure 9.12).
Care must be exercised when making these undercuts to ensure that they do
not undermine the enamel or unduly weaken the tooth. Ideally, the floor of the
cavity should be flat and the junction with the walls curved so as to prevent
 trapping of air within or under the restoration. The enamel surface should be
 tapered slightly to increase the surface area to which bonding occurs.
Restorations should be polished smooth. A varnish can also be applied to
improve surface smoothness as it makes the restorative surface less plaque
retentive, thereby reducing gingival inflammation.
Light cured restorative materials polymerise as a result of initiation by a
light source of specific wavelength. The curing light cannot penetrate bey-
ond about 2 mm and therefore these restorations must be placed and cured
incrementally (i.e. in layers) (Figure 9.8 F). This not only creates a thoroughly
cured restoration but also reduces post-curing dimensional changes such as
restorative shrinkage. The advantage of light-cured restorations is that they
can be placed and shaped prior to initiation of polymerisation. The use of
a cellophane strip against the restorative surface will lead to an extremely
smooth restoration which may not require polishing.
The endotracheal (ET) tube must be removed to check occlusion and neces-
sary adjustments made prior to the patient being woken. Six-monthly checks
211
Small Animal Dentistry
should be performed at which intra-oral radiographs may be taken under
sedation to ensure that the pulp is still vital. Where evidence of pulp necrosis is
 present the patient should be referred to a colleague able to perform root canal
therapy.
The client should be warned that treatment failure may present as tooth
discolouration or a draining sinus either into the oral cavity or onto the face /
chin and that immediate treatment will be necessary.
 In some patients that chew hard objects the restoration may become
dislodged therefore the client must be advised to prevent the animal from
chewing these objects. Regular examination by the client will pick up changes
to the restoration in good time.
When required, prosthetic crowns may be manufactured to place on teeth
which have been fractured. The client must be warned about failure of these
prostheses since hard biting dogs can dislodge the crown soon after place
ment, or they may fracture the tooth again apical to the crown necessitating
extraction.
Further reading
Craig, R.G., Powers, J.M. and Wataha, J.C. (2000) Dental Materials Properties and
Manipulation (7th edn). Mosby, St Louis, Missouri.
Kidd, E.A.M. and Smith, B.G.N. (1998) Pickard's Manual of Operative Dentistry
(7th edn). Oxford Medical Publications, Oxford.
Jacobsen, P. (2000) Restorative Dentistry. Wright, Oxford.
212
10 Endodontic Therapy
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 10.1   Mandibu lar molar
radiograph showing pulp horns,
pu Ip cha mber and root canal.
 rg p s soa a jo nn a si a oo
 purposes of this text a brief outline of partial and complete pulpectomy, root
canal therapy and endodontic access restoration will be given. These proced-
ures are usually undertaken by colleagues who have the necessary equipment,
 practical knowledge and expertise to perform specialised veterinary dental
procedures.
The endodontic system includes the pulp chamber and pulp canal or root
canal. Both structures are continuous and in multi-rooted teeth there are
 projections of pulp into each cusp known as pulp horns (Figure 10.1). These
structures are developed to a greater or lesser extent depending upon the
tooth, e.g. the pulp horns in the crown of the mandibular molar 1 tooth are
well developed and it is via these that the pulp chamber may become exposed
in a complicated crown fracture.
The pulp consists of blood and lymph vessels, nerves, odontoblasts, fibrob
lasts and other undifferentiated mesenchymal cells. The pulp communicates
with the periodontal tissues via the apical delta and accessory or lateral canals.
The pulp may become inflamed for a number of reasons including: blunt
trauma to the tooth, uncomplicated and complicated tooth fracture, enamel and
dentine hypoplasia / dysplasia, via the haematogenous route and iatrogenic
causes, including inappropriate use of polishing devices, electromechanical
scalers, restorative materials and placement of dental acrylic during ortho-
dontics or inter-dental splinting. Playing with tug toys has also been shown
to cause reversible pulpitis. Pulpitis inevitably leads to pulp necrosis and
 periapical pathology which may extend to involve the periodontium and
sometimes erupt through the skin of the face or chin or into the mouth.
Incarceration of the coronal pulp due to pulp canal stenosis leads to ischaemia
and necrosis of the coronal pulp (Figure 10.2). This is usually evidenced by
sudden changes in tooth colour. In these cases the apical part of the pulp is
214
Endodontic Therapy
Figure 10.2   The crown of this
maxillary right lateral incisor beca me
acutely discoloured - an indication of
pu Ipitis / pulp necrosis.
Figure 10.3  Survey radiograph of the
tooth in Figu re 10.2. Note that there is
no periapical pathology indicating that
the apical pu lp is still viable.
 inaccessible and periapical radiographs usually reveal intact periapical tissues,
an indication that the apical pulp is still viable (Figure 10.3). Endodontic
treatment of the coronal part of the tooth is required and the apical pulp must
be monitored by regular periapical radiographic evaluation (Figures 10.4
and 10.5).
215
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 10.4  Working length is
determined by inserting a fine
endodontic file until a firm stop is felt.
This shou ld only be done after the
presence of an apex is confirmed or the
file may be inserted through an open
apex. In this case there is canal stenosis
 just below the alveolar margin.
Figure 10.5  Post-treatment radiograph
showing the root canal treatment.
Follow-up radiographs shou ld be
re peated at three and six months post
treatment.
Partial pulpectomy
Partial pulpectomy and restoration should not be undertaken by inexperi-
enced clinicians as the procedure has been known to fail even in the hands of
experienced veterinary dentists. It must also be stated that partial pulpectomy
 ixade n   sd  aand aeo n si
complete). Exceptions to this rule are where the procedure is performed as a
temporary measure in the treatment of jaw fracture repairs or in geriatric
patients where prolonged anaesthesia is undesirable. If the patient has mature
teeth (apexogenesis is complete) the procedure of choice is complete pulpec-
tomy followed by root canal therapy. Apexogenesis is the normal formation of
the apical delta. When apexogenesis is complete the root will have attained its
final length.
 Periodically, the clinician may elect to perform crown shortening proced-
ures in the treatment of patients with malocclusions. During this procedure
the crown of the tooth is amputated at the desired height (usually to the height
of the adjacent lateral incisor) and a partial pulpectomy is performed where
216
 Endodontic Therapy
Figure 10.6 Radiograph showing
the final restoration and calcium 
hydroxide dressing in a dog on which
both mandibu lar canines underwent
crown amputation, partial pu lpectomy
and restoration.
Figure 10.7Illustrating the creation
of an undercut (*) in the dentine during
the preparation of a cavity prior to
restoration.
about 5 or 6 mm of pulp is resected using a new, sterile, sharp, round diamond
bur. Once haemostasis is attained a calcium hydroxide dressing is very gently
placed onto the pulp without it being forced into the pulp. A calcium hydrox-
ide base / liner is applied before the access site is restored using the clinician's
restorative material/s of choice (Figure 10.6). When preparing the cavity for
restoration a small undercut (Figure 10.7) should be created to ^key' the
217
Small Animal Dentistry
restoration into the dentine. Some dogs that are in the habit of chewing hard
substances have been known to dislodge restorations inwardly (apically)
resulting in treatment failure. It bears mentioning that the pulp cavity is
almost conical at this point, with the base being apical. Keying' the restora-
tion in gives added security to the restoration.
The calcium hydroxide dressing dissociates and stimulates odontoblasts to
produce a dentinal bridge which will separate the pulp from the restoration.
Calcium hydroxide dressing material which has been inappropriately stored
(i.e. exposed to light, heat and air) will undergo a chemical change to calcium
carbonate which will not stimulate the production of the dentinal bridge and
the procedure will fail. Mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) has been used in
place of calcium hydroxide in the treatment of pulpectomy with good results.
In these patients the dentinal bridge has been found to be confluent with sec-
 ondary dentine in the area.
The teeth of patients who have undergone partial pulpectomy must be
re-evaluated radiographically on a regular basis (three-month intervals) to
 determine the success of the procedure. Failed procedures may require repeat
treatment or apexification treatment (treatment of an immature tooth with
 pulp necrosis in an attempt to induce delta formation, the discussion of which
is beyond the scope of this text).
Successful treatment is recognised by the development of a dentinal bridge
(seen as a distinct band of increased radiodensity apical to the restoration) and
completed apexogenesis (Figure 10.8). The dentinal bridge, like all dentine,
is porous and therefore if the restoration becomes dislodged or shows signs
of marginal leakage it must be replaced immediately or the pulp may become
inflamed and necrotic. A void usually develops between the restoration and
the dentinal bridge (the space originally occupied by the calcium hydroxide)
and it might therefore be good practice to remove the restoration and replace
it with a base liner and permanent restoration as soon as the dentinal bridge
has formed and is visible radiographically.
Some veterinary dentists are of the opinion that partial pulpectomy and
restoration are temporary measures to enable apexogenesis and that once this
has happened the restoration should be removed and the tooth subjected to
complete root canal therapy. Others, however, believe that treated teeth
should be monitored on a regular basis and that endodontic therapy should
only be performed when indicated.
Figure 10.8 A successful treatment
outcome is confirmed by complete
apexogenesis and a dentinal bridge
apical to the restoration.
218
Root canal therapy
Endodontic Therapy
Steps in root ca nal therapy
create access to the pulp chamber / root canal. This may be via the com-
plicated crown fracture site or at the crown amputation site
 extirpate the pulp using barbed broaches and Hedstrom files
 gently insert the smallest file until it reaches a solid stop. Determine the
working length radiographically; measure and mark all fles
shape and debride the root canal by sequential filing (beginning with the
smallest diameter file and working up to the master file)
flush the canal after each fling episode with copious volumes of sodium
hypochlorite solution (5% solution at about 60 °C)
 when the next file size up does not go all the way to the apex when inserted
into the canal it should be gently worked to the apex and becomes known
 as the master file
f
flush repeatedly using sodium hypochlorite. Finally, rinse using sterile water
 dry the canal using paper points
insert the master cone (gutta percha (GP) point of equivalent size to master
fle) and radiograph to confirm seating at apical extent of root canal
remove cone and apply root canal sealant to walls of canal
reseat master cone, driving it to the apex using a condenser if needed
(vertical condensation)
 accessory cones should be packed around the master cone until the canal
is completely obturated (filled in its entirety). A spreader can be used to
 create space for additional accessory points
 when the root canal procedure is completed, obturation is confirmed
radiographically, excess gutta percha is trimmed and a base liner applied
· final restoration placed using the clinician's restorative materials of choice
as indicated for this procedure
· final radiograph taken to confrm complete apical and coronal seals
· follow-up radiographs are scheduled six monthly.
Root cana! therapy procedure
This procedure requires extirpation of the pulp and obturation of the pulp
system using an inert substance and final restoration.
Once access to the pulp system has been gained, the pulp is removed using
a combination of root canal files and barbed broaches. In some instances a
second access is created to facilitate a straight line access to the root apex,
requiring an access hole to be burred into the pulp canal about 2 mm coronal
to the gingiva. Once the pulp is removed, the walls of the root canal and pulp
chamber are debrided and shaped to accommodate an inert filling material,
usually GP points (made of rubber) and a sealant paste. Once obturation is
completed the access site/s are restored.
219
Small Animal Dentistry
115
80
20
70
25
30
30
35
50
Figure 10.9 Aset of Hedstrom files
45
ranging from Is0 15-80, each with a
silicone 'end stop' used to mark working
length on the file.
Two commonly used root canal fling instruments are:
[1]
 Kerr fles manufactured from a triangular or rectangular tapered rod
which is twisted to create flutes. These instruments operate in a watch-
winding fashion, a reciprocating motion created by rolling the instru-
ment handle clockwise and anti-clockwise berween the thumb and
forefinger.
(2)  Hedstrom fles are machined from a conical blank with the cutting edge
of the fle facing up the shaft. These files have their effect on the pull
stroke and are inserted into the canal and pulled out to clean and shape
the wals. The pulling action shaves material off the canal walls cleaning
and shaping the canal.
Files are manufactured in a number of lengths 25-31 mm are adequate for
 most dog incisors and premolars and cat teeth; 55-60 mm files are used for
canine teeth. Files come in standard sizes from ISO 8 to 130. A fle with an
ISO size of 25 will have a tip diameter of 0.25 mm (Figure 10.9).
The working length is determined by introducing a fle into the root canal
 a ie si d a a ri h n pad e  p
extremity of the root canal. Once the working length is determined, all files
are measured and marked accordingly (Figure 10.10) and the canal instru-
mented (debrided and shaped) using sequentially larger fles until the fle,
which is the next size up, does not go all the way to the measured working
length when inserted into the canal. This file should be gently worked down
until it reaches the working length, it then becomes known as the master fle.
By this time all dentinal shavings produced by the fles should be clean, i.e.
white or ivory instead of grey / black.
220
Endodontic Therapy
Figure 10.10  Endodontic files with
'end stop' markers in place. A ruler is
used to measure the files to working
length. A barbed broach is used to
remove the pulp. Endodontic fushing
need les are used to flush the canal
between filing episodes. A Lentu lo
spiral paste filler is used to deliver
calciu m hydroxide paste into the canal,
ensuring it is delivered to the apex.
The pulp chamber and root canal must be flushed with copious volumes
 of sodium hypochlorite (approximately 5% solution preferably at 60 *C)
ensuring that surrounding soft tissues are protected from this substance.
Flushing should be performed following each filing episode to remove debris
and necrotic material, and to disinfect the canal. The hypochlorite also acts as
a filing lubricant. Thicker fles can compact dentinal debris into the apical part
of the canal and therefore it is necessary to recapitulate (revert to a smaller
sized file) regularly to remove fling debris from the apical part of the canal.
Under ideal circumstances the canal will have been fled to a tapered void
with its base at the pulp chamber and its apex corresponding with the
apical extent of the root canal. The canal should be flushed a few more times
using sodium hypochlorite and then rinsed thoroughly using sterile water.
 Following rinsing, the canal should be dried using paper points. Some manu-
facturers produce ISO dimension paper points that fit the canal debrided by
a correspondingly sized master fle (Figure 10.11). Some paper points are
supplied sterile but once the pack is opened they are no longer sterile.
Once debridement and shaping are completed, the master point (the GP
point corresponding in size to the master file (Figure 10.12)) is selected and
 placed into the canal. A radiograph is taken to ensure that the cone is seated
all the way to the apical extremity of the root canal. When this has been
confrmed, the GP point is removed, root canal sealant is applied to the walls
of the canal and the master cone is inserted all the way to the apex. A con-
 denser (fine instrument used to pack GP points into the canal) may be required
to drive the master cone into the apex (vertical condensation). If there are
voids surrounding the master cone coronally a spreader may be inserted to
condense the master cone laterally, creating space for accessory cones to be
221
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 10.11   Paper points are
manufactu red in fine, mediu m and
coarse or according to Iso dimensions.
CIARNT
Figure 10.12 Gutta percha (GP) points
are made in hu man and veterinary
length. In this case the files are hu man
length and range from Is0 15-140.
inserted until the whole canal is obturated (completely filled). After radio-
graphic confirmation that obturation is complete, excess gutta percha is
trimmed and a base liner is applied over the gutta percha prior to placement
of the final restoration (See Chapter 9 - Restoration). If a second access site
has been created it must be restored in the same way as previously described.
A final radiograph should be taken to confrm good coronal and apical seals
(Figures 10.13-10.16).
Follow-up radiographs should be taken six months following the proced-
ure. Currently, root canal therapy is judged as being successful if new bone
has filled the periapical defect around the apex of the root. Histological
confirmation of success is obviously not possible in the living patient!
222
 Endodontic Therapy
Figure 10.13
 Survey radiograph of a
tooth on which root canal therapy is to
be performed is essential, as su bgingival
fractures may be present. Note the
external root resorption at the apex
of this tooth. This is often caused by
 periapical inflammation as a result
of pulp necrosis.
Figure 10.14  Working length is
determined by inserting a fine
endodontic file until a stop is reached.
In this tooth with a wide pulp canal a
larger-sized file was used to determine
working length.
Motorised endodontics
Also known as engine-driven endodontics, this technology makes use of an
electric motor which drives endodontic fles. The crown-down technique is
used, where the coronal part of the pulp cavity is instrumented initially and
223
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 10.15  Obtu ration is com plete
with a good apical fill.
Figure 10.16 Final restoration showing
a good coronal seal. The slightly
radiolucent area between the root-
filling material and the coronal
restoration is glass ionomer which is
not rad iodense.
then sequentially fled and shaped to the apical extremity. This technique
creates a cavity / canal which is tapered from the crown to the apex enabling
more efficient flushing with less likelihood of material being flushed through
the apical delta. Obturation is also improved with GP points available to fit
the prepared canal.
224
Some electric motors are equipped with a torque system which stops the
Endodontic Therapy
motor once excessive friction is encountered and reverses the endodontic fle
momentarily before continuing. This reduces the likelihood of instrument
 separation (breakage).
Uitrasonic endodontics
Some ultrasonic dental scaler units have specially designed endodontic tips
 ii si ss sn n sa  's as p ap on pa
flushing fluid is delivered through the tip ensuring that the entire canal is
flushed continuously during instrumentation.
Thermoplastic obturation
Numerous heated' gutta percha systems are available. Some heat the gutta
percha in a syringe and the canal is subsequently filled with molten material.
Others systems have gutta percha applied to introducers manufactured to
ISO dimensions and heated in specially designed ovens. Once the material has
been heated for the appropriate length of time the gutta percha is placed in the
canal using the introducer which remains in situ. Excess material is trimmed
off prior to the final restoration being placed.
Some interesting cases
The cat in Figure 10.17 was involved in a road traffic accident and sustained
fractures to both maxillary canines. Although these teeth are good candidates
for endodontic therapy, a pre-treatment radiograph revealed that one of the
Figure 10.17 This cat sustained canine
fractures as a result of a road traffic
accident. Pre-treatment radiographs
revealed that one canine had a second 
fracture in the coronal third of the root,
necessitating extraction. The other
canine underwent root canal therapy.
225
 Small Animal Dentistry
canines had a transverse fracture in the coronal third of the root necessitat-
ing extraction. Discoloured teeth (Figure 10.18) should be examined radio-
graphically as pulpitis / pulp necrosis is often associated with periapical
 a   aror  e    a 
Figure 10.18  A necrotic pulp should be
suspected in discoloured teeth. These
teeth must be radiographed to evaluate
periapical tissues.
Figure 10.19   Periapical pathology
was radiographically confirmed and the
access to the pulp chamber confirmed
the presence of a necrotic pulp.
226
Endodontic Therapy
Figure 10.20  Remaining teeth may
cause trau ma to opposing teeth which
may require crown amputation and
root canal therapy.
was necrotic, and root canal therapy was performed on this tooth. When
important teeth (canines and carnassials) are extracted, the occlusion of
remaining teeth must be evaluated to ensure that they do not cause trauma
 to opposing tissues. In Figure 10.20 the mandibular right molar 1 is biting
into the palatal mucosa. By shortening the crown sufficiently to prevent fur-
ther trauma, the pulp chamber may be breached at one of the pulp horns.
Radiography to determine the incisal extent of the pulp horns is essential. In
the event that the pulp horns extend well into the crown, amputation to the
required level should be performed followed by root canal therapy.
Further reading
Craig, R.G., Powers, J.M. and Wataha, J.C. (2000) Dental Materials Properties and
Manipulation (7th edn). Mosby, St Louis, Missouri.
Kidd, E.A.M. and Smith, B.G.N. (1998) Pickard's Manual of Operative Dentistry
(7th edn). Oxford Medical Publications, Oxford.
Jacobsen, P. (2000) Restorative Dentistry. Wright, Oxford.
227
11 Pain Management
Small Animal Dentistry
When considering pain of dental origin in our patients, colleagues and pet
owners alike too often respond with ^well he still eats and drinks so he can't be
 in much pain'. Dogs are pack animals where the hierarchy is usually strictly
observed with a dominant pack leader. An otherwise healthy animal showing
signs of pain may jeopardise its position in the pack.
After root canal therapy in a healthy dog with an exposed canine pulp
canal, clients often report that their pet has begun to play with toys he had not
played with since he broke his tooth. Owners of geriatric animals suffering
from severe halitosis return for their pet's post-operative dental check-up
reporting that the dog is acting like a puppy again. Although only anecdotal it
would appear that these dental procedures are followed by marked changes in
Oral comfort, resulting in improved behaviour.
Some animals suffering from severe periodontal disease and those that have
a malocclusion resulting in palatal trauma are often reluctant to have their
 mouths examined because of oral pain. The former often appear to associate
pain with oral examination because of loose teeth which may obstruct mouth
closure, while the latter inflict more pain on themselves as they tightly clench
their teeth during attempts at oral examination. Maloccluding teeth often
cause deep palatal lesions.
 Let us assume that our patients experience pain to the same extent that we
 do and help them by relieving the pain as soon as we can.
 Dental procedures whether as minor as routine prophylaxis treatment
(scale and polish) or periodontal surgery to remove an epulis, or more
involved procedures such as exodontics, all result in varying degrees of pain.
We need to manage this in such a way that we keep our patients comfortable.
There are rwo sources of pain associated with dental surgery, namely acute
pain associated with tissue damage such as surgery and secondary pain asso-
ciated with inflammation. Dental pain is somatic pain. A-delta fbres (acute,
sharp pain) and C fbres (secondary, throbbing pain) are mainly responsible
for pain conduction.
Sensory nerve fbres recognise stimuli and when the number or intensity of
stimuli reach a threshold an action potential results. The greater the intensity
 of the stimulus, the greater the number of action potentials, and the longer the
duration of the stimulus, the longer the chain of action potentials.
 Pre-emptive pain management ensures that pain cascades and action poten-
tials are inhibited, leading to prevention of the wind-up phenomenon and a
 more comfortable patient in the post-operative period.
Dental prophylaxis may be considered to cause mild pain, while exodontics
results in moderate to severe pain.
The use of multiple analgesics which have different actions helps reduce
 pain sensation.
 There are four main analgesic groups:
·opioids
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
· α-2 agonists
· local anaesthetics.
In selected cases ketamine infusion may be considered as an added mode of
analgesia.
230
Opioids
Pain Management
Opioids relieve pain by binding with peripheral and central opioid receptors.
Morphine and fentanyl are very effective mu-receptor blockers. Fentanyl is
about one hundred times more potent than morphine but has a short-lived
effect and must be delivered by constant infusion or cutaneous patch.
Buprenorphine (partial opioid agonist) is also an effective mu-receptor blocker
which is repeated at six- to twelve-hourly intervals. These drugs can be used
pre-, intra- and post-operatively.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NsAlDs)
Carprophen and meloxicam are effective NSAIDs which can be administered
pre-operatively to dogs undergoing dentistry and oral surgical procedures.
Carprophen can be repeated at twelve-hourly intervals while meloxicam is
repeated at 24-hourly intervals. Carprophen is only registered for a single
        s   s
dosage and specific instructions refer to the manufacturer's instructions.
Local anaesthesia and regional anaesthetic blocks
Local anaesthetic drugs usually have a high pKa (pH at which dissociation is
at an equilibrium) but at physiological pH the cationic form is predominant.
The uncharged base form readily crosses the nerve sheath where it dissociates
and the charged cationic form has its effect. Local anaesthetics inhibit action
 potentials by blocking the sodium channels.
For the drug to be effective it needs to be at high concentrations in the
uncharged base form to cross the membrane into the nerve.
Dissociation of local anaesthetic drugs is described by the formula:
BH+ / B=10(pKa-pH)
or:
BH+=B ×1Q(pKa-pH)
Where BH+ is the concentration of the cationic form (active form); B is the
concentration of the uncharged base form (form in which the drug must be to
pass into the nerve); pKa is the pKa value of the anaesthetic agent and pH is
the pH of the tissue.
If the pKa of the anaesthetic agent is 8 and the pH of the tissue about 7, there
will be ten times as much of the ionised form as of the unionised form. During
inflammation the tissue pH decreases, let us say for example to 6; this will
result in there being 1oo times more ionised than unionised drug in the tissue
(less of the uncharged base to pass into the nerve). In the ionised form the drug
for local anaesthetics being ineffective in the presence of inflammation.
Table 11.1 lists the local anaesthetic agents commonly used in veterinary
dentistry. Some surgeons prefer to use local anaesthetic agents which contain
231
Small Animal Dentistry
Local anaesthetic
 Dosage (total dose
Onset of activity
Duration of
mg/kg body mass)
activity (minutes)
Lidocaine
2.0
Rapid
60-120
Mepivacaine
2.0
Intermediate
90-180
Bupivacaine
2.0
Intermediate
180-240
Ro pivacaine
2.0
Intermediate
180-240
Table 11.1 Local anaesthetic agents.
vasoconstrictive agents in order to reduce local haemorrhage and restrict the
 local anaesthetic agent to the area infused.
The injection sites for local / regional anaesthetic blocks commonly used
  s i         
 anaesthetic sites and the regions anaesthetised by each injection.
Figure 11.1   Local / regional
anaesthetic delivery sites (see
Table 11.2 for effects).
A: Su perficial mental block.
B: Deep mental block.
C: Inferior alveolar nerve -
intra-oral approach.
 D: Inferior alveolar nerve
 percutaneous approach.
E: Su perficial infra-orbital block.
 F: Deep infra-orbital block and 
maxillary block.
G: Maxillary block.
Block
Effect
Mental --
Mental - deep
Mandibular
Infra-orbital --
Infra-orbital -deep
Maxillary
superfi cial
superficial
Nerve blocked
Mental
Rostral inferior
Inferior
Infra-orbital
Middle and rostral
Maxillary
alveolar
alveolar
maxillary alveolar
 Region blocked
Ipsilateral lip,
Ipsilateral lip,
Ipsilateral
 Ipsilateral upper
 Ipsilateral upper
Ipsilateral
chin and 
chin, gingiva,
mandible,
lip and alveolar
lip and alveolar
alveolar mucosa,
rostral alveolar
 alveolar mucosa,
teeth and
mucosa rostral
mucosa, teeth
gingiva, lips and 
mucosa and
canine and
soft tissues
to PM4
rostral to and 
teeth of maxillary
gingiva
incisors
including PM4
quadrant
Teeth blocked
None
Ipsilateral canine
Ipsilateral
None
Ipsilateral
Ipsilateral
and incisors
mandibular
maxillary teeth
 maxillary teeth
teeth
rostral to and 
including PM4
Table 11.2   Local anaesthesia and regional anaesthetic blocks.
232
Mental block
 Pain Management
The superficial mental block is performed by inserting a 23 g (or smaller)
hypodermic needle either just caudal to the labial frenulum or just rostral
to the labial frenulum and advancing it beneath the frenulum, directing it
 towards the middle mental foramen. The latter is located in close proximity to
the mesial root apex of the mandibular second premolar tooth. The neurovas-
cular bundle can be palpated here in most medium to large breed dogs. With
the bevel of the needle facing the mandible, the local anaesthetic is slowly
infused after aspirating to rule out intra-vascular injection (Figure 11.2).
 For the deep mental block the needle is advanced into the middle mental
foramen from the rostral approach. With a finger placed over the foramen the
local anaesthetic is very slowly injected into the rostral mandibular canal after
pressure within the canal (Figure 11.3).
Figure 11.2   The su perficial mental
block. The middle mental foramen is
situated at about the apex of the mesial
root of mandibu lar premolar 2. The
needle is advanced to this point from
a rostral or caudal direction and the
local anaesthetic is injected after
aspiration to ensure the needle is
 not intravascu lar.
Figure 11.3  The deep mental block.
In mediu m to large dogs the mental
neurovascular bundle can be palpated
caudal to the labial frenu lum. The
needle is advanced from the rostral
aspect and inserted into the middle
mental foramen. After aspiration an
anaesthetic agent must be injected
slowly to prevent neuropraxia as a
resu lt of pressure within the mandibu lar
ca nal.
233
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 11.4  The mandibular block -
intra-oral approach. The neurovascular
bu ndle can be palpated intra-orally by
sliding a finger along the medial aspect
of the mandible halfway between
the mandibu lar third molar and the
angular process to where it enters
the mandibu lar foramen. The needle is
advanced su bmucosally until it reaches
the mandibu lar foramen and after
aspiration inject as described before.
Gentle finger pressure over the needle
will help restrict the anaesthetic to
the area.
Mandibular block
The mandibular block can be administered intra-orally or percutaneously.
Using either technique, the neurovascular bundle is palpated intra-orally at
the mandibular foramen which is located lingually about mid mandible
height, dorsal to the ventral margin, midway between the mandibular molar 3
and the angular process. When using the intra-oral route the needle is inserted
through the lingual mandibular alveolar mucosa caudal to the mandibu-
lar second molar and advanced until it reaches the mandibular foramen
(Figure 11.4). The needle bevel should face the mandible and digital pressure
should be used to restrict the anaesthetic agent in close proximity to the neuro-
vascular bundle. Aspiration should be performed prior to infusion. When using
the percutaneous route, once the neurovascular bundle is identified intra-
 orally, the needle is advanced percutaneously just medial to the ventral margin
of the mandible about halfway between molar 3 and the angular process and
slowly advanced towards the mandibular foramen. Inject after aspiration
(Figure 11.5).
Infra-orbital block
Digitally identify the infra-orbital neurovascular bundle in the region of the
roots of the maxillary third premolar. Insert the needle through the buccal
maxillary alveolar mucosa with the bevel facing the maxilla and advance the
needle until it reaches the infra-orbital foramen. Aspirate before injecting
(Figure 11.6).
The deep infra-orbital block is performed by advancing the needle into the
infra-orbital canal to about half the width of the maxillary 4th premolar.
Digital pressure at the infra-orbital foramen will restrict the anaesthetic to the
canal. Aspirate before injecting (Figure 11.7).
234
 Pain Management
Figure 11.5  The mandibular
 block- percutaneous approach.
The neurovascular structures are
identified as in Figure 11.4. The need le
is inserted med ial to the mandible
halfway between the third molar and
the angu lar process and advanced su b-
mucosally to the mandibu lar canal.
Proceed as in Figure 11.4.
Figure 11.6   The su perficial infra-
orbital block. Identify the infra-orbital
neurovascular structures dorsal to the
roots of the maxillary third pre molar (a
pu Ise can often be seen su b-mucosally).
Advance the needle su b-mucosally
until it reaches the infra-orbital canal.
Aspirate and inject using digital
pressure over the needle to restrict
the anaesthetic.
Maxillary block
The maxillary block may be performed intra-orally or percutaneously.
Performing the intra-oral route, the needle is advanced into the infra-orbital
canal to the level of the maxillary molar 1 (Figure 11.8). Digital pressure is
applied to the infra-orbital foramen and injection is performed as described
above. The needle can also be inserted caudal to the maxillary molar 2 and
directed towards the maxillary foramen.
235
 Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 11.7   The deep infra-orbital
block. Proceed as in Figure 11.6. Insert
the need le into the infra-orbital canal
and advance it to about half the width
of the maxillary 4th premolar. Aspirate
and inject. Maintaining gentle digital
pressu re on the infra-orbital fora men
will restrict the anaesthetic to the canal.
Figure 11.8   The maxillary block -
intra-oral approach. Proceed as in
Figure 11.7 but advance the needle to
the level of maxillary molar 1. Apply
digital pressu re and aspirate and
inject as before.
When using the percutaneous route the needle is placed in the angle formed
by the zygomatic arch and the caudal maxilla just caudal to maxillary molar 2.
The needle should be advanced in a rostro-medial direction aiming for the
caudal opening of the infra-orbital canal (maxillary foramen) rostral to
Tenon's capsule (Figure 11.9). Aspirate and inject as previously described.
236
Pain Management
Figure 11.9  The maxillary block -
percutaneous approach. The needle
is inserted in the angle formed by the 
Zygomatic arch and the caudal maxilla,
just caudal to the maxillary molar 2, and 
advanced in a rostro-medial direction 
aiming for the caudal opening of the
infra-orbital canal (maxillary fora men).
Aspirate and inject as before.
The needle can also be directed from
an intra-oral approach, inserting the
needle just caudal to the maxillary
molar 2 and proceeding as described.
Further reading
Cornick-Seahorn, J.L. (2001) Veterinary Anaesthesia. Butterworth Heinemann,
Woburn, MA.
Gayner, J.S. and Muir IIl, W.W. (Eds) (2002) Handbook of Veterinary Pain
 Management. Mosby, St Louis, Missouri.
237
12 Malocclusions and Normal occlusion
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.1 Brachycephalic dogs have
short maxillae and many rotated teeth.
Normal occlusion for one breed may be considered abnormal for another. For
example, the brachygnathic maxillae in Boxer dogs is considered abnormal in
German shepherd dogs and golden retrievers.
Three head shapes are recognised:
(1)  Brachycephalic, e.g. Bull dogs, Boxer dogs, Pugs etc. (Figure 12.1)
(2)]
Mesocephalic, e.g. German shepherd dogs, border collies, Labrador
retrievers etc. (Figure 12.2)
(3)
 Dolichocephalic, e.g. greyhounds, rough collies, Shetland sheepdogs,
Borzoi etc. (Figure 12.3)
In mesocephalic breeds the mandibles are slightly narrower and shorter than
the maxillae resulting in what is termed anisognathic jaws. The mandibular
incisors occlude with the cingula of the maxillary incisors (palatal aspect
of the maxillary incisors) in a scissor bite (Figure 12.4). The mandibular
canine fits evenly between the maxillary lateral incisor and canine with its
lingual aspect occluding against the attached gingiva in the diastema between
these maxillary teeth (Figure 12.5). The palatal aspect of the maxillary canine
lies against the labial frenulum adjacent to the mandibular frst premolar
(Figure 12.6). The maxillary and mandibular premolars interdigitate, with the
mandibular premolar 1 being most rostral (Figure 12.7). The premolars rarely
occlude with each other.
The mesial and middle cusps of the mandibular molar 1 occlude palatal to
the maxillary carnassial tooth. In some dogs the occluso-buccal part of the
mesial cusp of mandibular molar 1 occludes with the palatal cusp of the
maxillary carnassial tooth (Figure 12.8). The distal cusp of mandibular molar 1
occludes with the mesio-occlusal part of the palatal cusp of maxillary molar 1
240
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.2   Mesocephalic dogs have
well proportioned heads with evenly
spaced teeth.
Figure 12.3 Dolichocephalic dogs
have long muzzles with increased 
inter-dental spaces between premolars.
(Figure 12.9). The mesio-occlusal part of mandibular molar 2 occludes
with the distal part of the palato-occlusal cusp of maxillary molar 1 and the
mesial part of the palato-occlusal surface of maxillary molar 2 (Figure 12.9).
The mesio-occlusal part of mandibular molar 3 occludes with the distal
241
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.4   Scissor bite describes
mandibu lar incisors which bite on the
cingu la (palatal aspect) of the maxillary
incisors.
Figure 12.5
The mandibu lar canine fits
evenly between the maxillary lateral
incisor and canine. Often there is a
small, even space between these three
teeth.
242
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.6   The maxillary canine lies
against the labial frenulum when the
mouth is closed.
Figure 12.7  The pre molar teeth
interdigitate, with mandibu lar
premolar 1 being most rostral.
243
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.8   Mandibu lar molar 1
occludes palatal to the maxillary
carnassial tooth. In some animals the
mesial cusp occludes against the palatal
cusp of the maxillary carnassial tooth.
Right maxilla
M1
M2
M1
M3
M2
Figure 12.9  The distal cusp of
mandibu lar molar 1 occludes against
the mesio-occlusal part of the palatal
cusp of maxillary M1. Mandibu lar M2
Rightmandible
occludes against the palatal cusps of
maxillary M1 and M2. Mandibular M3
occludes against the disto-palatal
aspect of maxillary M2.
palato-occlusal surface of maxillary molar 2 (Figure 12.9). The buccal cusps
of maxillary molars 1 and 2 partially overlap the mandibular molars 1, 2 and
3 buccally (Figure 12.10).
Brachycephalic animals may have a normal scissor bite but most will have
either a reverse scissor bite (maxillary incisors caudal / lingual to mandibular
incisors) similar to the dog in Figure 12.11 or the maxillary incisors will be situ-
ated at varying distances lingual to the mandibular incisors when the mouth
244
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.10  The buccal cusps of
maxillary molars 1 and 2 partially
overlap the mandibu lar molars 1-3
bucally.
Figure 12.11   Reverse scissor bite
describes the situation where the
maxillary incisors occlude lingual to
the mandibu lar incisors. This is also
known as a rostral cross-bite.
245
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.12(a)   Premolars are often
rotated in brachycephalic animals.
This animal also has a su pernu merary
maxillary right premolar 1. The PM3 has
a complicated crown fracture.
Figure 12.12(b)  Crowded and rotated
mandibu lar right premolars.
is closed. Inevitably, the premolars are rotated to varying degrees about their
mesiodistal axes (Figure 12.12(a) and (b). Premolars may be missing in some
arimals (Figure 12.13). Severe crowding occurs in some animals (Figure 12.14).
Instead of the fairly straight mandibular teeth alignment seen in mesocephalic
246
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.13The mandibu lar right
premolar 2 is missing.
Figure 12.14   These maxillary left
premolars are crowded and overlap
extensively.
and dolichocephalic breeds the teeth in the mandibular arcades of brachy-
cephalic animals can be arranged in an S-shape (Figure 12.15). Bull dogs often
have supernumerary incisors, but because of their wide incisive bones they go
unnoticed (Figure 12.16). In some dogs the maxillary lateral incisors bite onto
247
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.15 Instead of being in a
straight line, the mandibu lar cheek
teeth of brachycephalic animals are
often arranged in an S-shape.
Figure 12.16 This Bull dog's incisors
are evenly spaced although there are
four in the maxillary left quadrant.
the lingual aspect of the mandibular canines, causing attrition of both teeth
and sometimes severe periodontal disease (Figure 12.17). In exaggerated
 maxillary brachygnathism the mandibles develop a ventral bow with the man-
dibular incisors protruding dorsally beyond the maxillary incisors (Figure 12.18)
and the upper lip margin.
248
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.17   The defect lingually on
the mandibu lar left canine is a resu lt of
malocclusion. The maxillary left lateral
incisor has damaged the canine. The
maxillary incisors have also trau matised
the gingiva lingual to the mandibu lar
incisor teeth.
Figure 12.18  In some brachycephalic
 animals the mandibles develop a
ventral bow resu lting in the mandibu lar
incisors protruding dorsal to the
maxillary incisors.
Dolichocephalic breeds have long muzzles which come to a rather sharp
point. The incisors are usually in normal scissor occlusion but in some
cases the maxillae are longer than the mandibles resulting in maxillary prog-
nathism. The mandibular canines can impinge on the palate and in severe
249
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.19 Diaste mata in
dolichocephalic animals are sometimes
50 wide that it appears as though there
are teeth missing
cases result in oro-nasal communication. Generally the interproximal
(inter-tooth) spaces are enlarged and this gives the impression of gaps in the
dentition (Figure 12.19).
Commonly seen malocclusions
 It is important to remember that each jaw quadrant grows independently of
 the others and therefore a young animal's dentition can vacillate from normal
to abnormal and back to normal again as it develops. Under most conditions
the mandibles grow at the same pace but their growth appears to alternate
with that of the maxillae which also usually both grow at the same pace.
When deciding whether an animal is suffering from a short lower jaw or
long upper jaw it is also important to evaluate the relationship of the pre-
molars and not only the canines and incisors (Figure 12.20). Figure 12.21
shows normal premolar interdigitation.
If a single tooth or a couple of adjacent teeth are out of alignment the condi-
tion is likely to be as a result of a traumatic incident and these teeth or the
adjoining teeth often show signs of enamel damage (Figure 12.22 (a) and (b))
This is a dental malocclusion. If numerous teeth are out of alignment the
condition is most likely due to a genetic predisposition which is inevitably
heritable. This is a skeletal malocclusion. Siblings may have similar dental
conditions (Figures 12.23 and 12.24) but often only one pup or kitten per
litter manifests a malocclusion.
250
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.20  When evaluating jaw
length discrepancies it is important to
examine the premolar occlusion. The
maxillary and mandibu lar premolars
shou ld interdigitate. In this dog the
maxillary and mandibu lar right second 
premolars are in tip-to-tip occlusion, an
indication of a malocclusion.
Figure 12.21  Normal premolar
interd igitation.
Mandibular brachygnathism
If the mandibles are shorter than the maxillae and the maxillary teeth are
evenly spaced one would define the condition as mandibular brachygnathism
rather than maxillary prognathism. Animals with mandibular brachygnathism
251
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.22 (a)  Malocclusions which
affect one or more adjacent teeth, some
of which may have evidence of trau ma,
are called dental malocclusions.
Figure 12.22 (b)   The mandibu lar right
canine has become displaced by biting
against the damaged maxillary right
lateral incisor which has been partially
intruded (see Figure 12.22 (a)). The
persistent 704 (deciduous mandibular
left canine) was an incidental finding.
often have mandibular canine malocclusion resulting in trauma to the
maxillary gingiva or palatal soft tissues (Figure 12.25). This condition is seen
in many breeds, e.g. bearded collies, border collies, German shepherd dogs,
Dachshunds, Scottish terriers (Wheaten coloured Scottish terriers appear to
252
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.23 Palatal trau ma is due to
maloccluding mandibu lar canine teeth.
Figure 12.24  Very similar lesions in
this animal - a litter mate of the dog in
Figure 12.23.
be well represented) and English bull terriers. If left untreated the canine can
form an oro-nasal fistula.
Some breeds, with normal incisor scissor bite, have mandibular canines
which are more upright than normal and which impinge on the palatal soft
253
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.25   Deep palatal mucosa
defects can become oro-nasal fistulas.
Figure 12.26  Lingu0-verted
 mandibu lar canines in an English
bull terrier.
tissues, e.g. English bull terrier and border terrier. These teeth are termed
linguo-verted mandibular canines (Figure 12.26). In these patients the diastema
between maxillary lateral incisor and canine can become obliterated as the
incisive bones tip ventro-caudally under the pressure of the upper lip (the
lower canine not maintaining the diastema) (Figure 12.27).
254
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.27   The ostral maxillary left
quadrant of the dog in Figure 12.26.
Note that the canine - lateral incisor
diastema has been obliterated by the
caudo-ventral tipping of the incisive
bones. This is as a resu lt of pressure
from the upper lip.
Figure 12.28  Deep gingival ulcers in
the canine-lateral incisor diastema
caused by mandibu lar deciduous canine
teeth resu lt in pain and reluctance on 
the part of these animals to have their
mouths examined.
Young puppies with undiagnosed mandibular brachygnathism may have
deep holes in their maxillary gingiva (Figure 12.28) or palatal soft tissues
   s      
bony hard palate and bleed on probing. Dorso-ventral intra-oral radiographs
255
Small Animal Dentistry
may reveal a marked periosteal reaction on the bony hard palate in associ
 n  sd ss s ss os pd a  
have their mouths examined as it appears that clenching their teeth during
attempts at examination causes severe pain. Mandibular canines, when deeply
embedded in the palatal soft tissues, inhibit longitudinal jaw growth and
the mandibles often develop a ventral bow in compensation.
Extraction of the deciduous canines is the treatment of choice and is known
as interceptive orthodontics as it allows any remaining potential mandibular
elongation to occur. An added advantage of extracting these teeth is that it
reduces the likelihood of linguo-verted permanent canines as there is now
space for them to move into their normal position.
Animals presented with mandibular brachygnathism who have permanent
teeth causing palatal trauma will require one of three treatments: the canines
should be moved (requiring orthodontic treatment (Figures 12.29-12.32)),
Figure 12.29 Maloccluding
mandibu lar canine teeth can be
moved into their normal position
using an inclined plane made in situ.
A figure-of-eight wire is placed arou nd
the maxillary canines and held in place
by restorative material ledges bonded
to the teeth buccally. In this case, blue
restorative material is used to
differentiate it from tooth su bstance
when the inclined plane is removed.
Figure 12.30  The inclined plane with
'tracks' to direct the teeth into their
normal position.
256
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.31 Before the animal is
awoken, the ET tu be is removed and
the jaws closed, to ensu re that both
 mandibu lar canines engage the inclined
plane. If only one tooth engages the
plane the jaw can shift to the side where
the tooth is engaged but will not resu It
in orthodontic movement.
Figure 12.32  Once the teeth have
moved into the desired position the
inclined plane shou ld be kept in place
for a further two to three weeks to act
as a retainer in order to allow new bone
to fill in on the lingual aspects of the
mandibu lar canines otherwise they may
tip back lingually.
shortened (requiring endodontic treatment (Figure 12.33)) or extracted.
Extraction of immature teeth (teeth in which root apices have not yet devel-
oped) can be challenging and it is possible that remnants of the developing
root may remain.
257
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.33  Another option in the
treatment of maloccluding mandibu lar
canine teeth is crown am putation and
 root canal therapy. These teeth were
am putated to the level of the lateral
incisor giving the animal a fu nctional
and comfortable bite.
Figure 12.34   Reverse scissor bite may
be seen in animals with an otherwise
normal occlusion.
Reverse scissor bite - a severe form of anterior cross-bite
The reverse scissor bite can be associated with an otherwise normal occlusion
(Figure 12.34) or seen in animals with prognathic mandibles (Figure 12.35) or
in brachycephalic breeds.
258
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.35 An exaggerated reverse
scissor bite in a dog with prognathic
mandibles.
Figure 12.36   Rostral cross-bite with
some incisors in reverse scissor bite and
others in scissor bite.
Rostral cross-bite
This describes the malocclusion where some mandibular incisors are in reverse
scissor bite while the others are in normal scissor occlusion (Figure 12.36) or
all mandibular incisors may be in reverse scissor bite. It is usually unnecessary
259
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.37 Candal cross-bite. The
maxillary third premolar is occluding
pa latal to the mandibu lar 4th premolar.
to treat these patients but if there is tip-to-tip occlusion or softissue damage
the offending teeth should be extracted. Although orthodontics may be a pos-
sible treatment it is rarely performed.
Candal cross-bite
This describes the malocclusion where the mandibular premolars and some
times mandibular molar 1 occlude buccal to the maxillary teeth (Figure
12.37). If the animal has a comfortable and functional bite no treatment is
indicated. However if there is discomfort or trauma due to the malocclusion,
the offending teeth should be extracted. Orthodontics is usually not indicated
in these cases. The normal physical cleansing of the mandibular molar tooth
by the maxillary carnassial does not occur and therefore the mandibular
molar accumulates plaque and calculus which will require more regular pro-
fessional treatment. Once treated, the client should be able to keep the teeth
 clean using dental home care techniques.
Wry bite
This describes the malocclusion resulting from the patient having a crooked
face. This may be congenital or as a result of trauma (Figure 12.38). The
incisors in these cases are often in an ^open-bite' where they do not occlude.
Some dental malocclusions can obstruct the jaws from closing and inter
fere with mastication. In these cases the tooth of lesser importance should
be sacrificed and extracted to create a functional and comfortable bite
(Figure 12.39 (a) and (b)).
Supernumerary teeth often do not cause problems but when they do they
should be extracted. Indications for extraction of supernumerary teeth
260
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.38  Wry bite. This animal had
a maloccluding mandibu lar right canine
which was 'trapped' in the palatal
mucosa inhibiting longitudinal growth
of the right mandible. Consequently the
mandibu lar right incisors and canine
are positioned caudal to their left
cou nterparts.
Figure 12.39(a)  Dental malocclusion
inhibiting jaw closure. The mandibu lar
left canine is biting against the
maxillary left lateral incisor, resulting in
an 'open-bite'.
include trauma and pain and inflammation caused by the extra teeth and
existing or potential compromise of the normal dentition (Figures 12.40-
12.42). Some supernumerary teeth appear normal and do not cause problems
and can therefore be maintained in the mouth (Figures 12.43 and 12.44).
261
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.39(b) The tooth of lesser
importance (maxillary left lateral
incisor) was extracted, enabling this
dog to close its mouth and have a
comfortable and functional bite.
Figure 12.40 'Supernumerary' teeth
shou ld be radiogra phed before a
decision is made to extract any, as some
may be persistent deciduous teeth,
as in this mandibu lar left persistent
deciduous lateral incisor.
262
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.41   Crowding of teeth often
leads to failure of the normal tooth :
tooth cleansing mechanism.
Figure 12.42 Crowding has
exacerbated periodontitis in this cat.
263
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.43
 The incisors are well
spaced in this dog even though there
is a su pernu merary maxillary left
middle incisor (202). The dog was
presented for treatment of the fractu red
maxillary right middle incisor (102).
Figure 12.44   This su pernu merary
maxillary left premolar 1 is not
compromising any other teeth and
can be maintained in the mouth.
264
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.45  Malaligned teeth can be
unsightly but there is no need to extract
any teeth in this case.
Figure 12.46This cat has a similar
incisor pattern to the dog in Figure
12.45 and does not need any teeth
extracted.
Malaligned teeth may be unsightly but if they are not crowded or causing
trauma they should be maintained in the mouth (Figures 12.45 and 12.46).
Some malocclusions are functional and painless and therefore the offending
teeth can be maintained in the mouth (Figures 12.47 (a) and (b)-12.49).
265
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 12.47 (a)   This dog has severely
brachygnathic mandibles but a
comforta ble bite. The mandibu lar
canines have created a gingival defect
into which they fit on each side.
Figure 12.47 (b)  Ventral view of the
dog in Figure 12.47 (a).
266
Malocclusions and Normal Occlusion
Figure 12.48   This Jack Russell terrier
has its mandibu lar left canine distal to
the maxillary canine instead of mesial to
it. The maxillary canine has been moved
mesially closing the normal diaste ma
into which the mandibu lar canine
shou ld have fitted.
Figure 12.49
This Dachshund has a
comfortable bite even though the
 mandibu lar canines are palatally
displaced. The canines have formed
shallow mucosal defects on the palate
and are no longer eru pting. The palatal
lesions will be monitored long term
and odontoplasty or crown am putation
performed if req uired.
267
Small Animal Dentistry
Further reading
Crossley, D.A. and Penman, S. (Eds) (1995) Manual of Small Animal Dentistry.
BSAVA Publications, Cheltenham, UK.
Holstrom, S.E., Frost, P. and Eisner, E.R. (1998) Veterinary Dental Techniques for the
Small Animal Practitioner (2nd edn). W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
Wiggs, R.B. and Lobprise, H.B. (1997) Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
268
Cases to Refer to Your Local Veterinary
Dentist
3
 Small Animal Dentistry
Congenital cleft palate (Figure 13.1).
Figure 13.1  Congenital cleft palate.
Careful planning is necessary before
surgery is undertaken in these patients
as the first attem pt at repair has the 
best prognosis.
Acute oro-nasal communication or chronic oro-nasal fistulation (Figure 13.2).
Figure 13.2 Chronic oro-nasal fistula.
These defects can be repaired using a
single- or dou ble-fap technique. When
mu Itiple attempts have been made at
their repair the prognosis for com plete
healing deteriorates.
270
Avulsed teeth (Figure 13.3 (a)).
Cases to Refer to Your Local Veterinary Dentist
Figure 13.3(a)   Avu lsed teeth may still
be attached to the gingiva or may be
carried to the practice by the client.
Teeth that are avu lsed and out of the
mouth should be transported in a
receptacle containing milk to prevent
the ligament fibres from desiccating.
Luxated teeth (Figure 13.3 (b)).
Figure 13.3(b)  This mandibu lar right
canine is luxated with the buccal
alveolus still attached to the tooth.
271
 Small Animal Dentistry
 Teeth requiring crown elongation procedures (Figure 13.4).
Figure 13.4  Crown elongation
techniques including an apically
repositioned flap will need to be
performed on this tooth prior to
root canal therapy and restoration.
Teeth requiring endodontic therapy (Figure 13.5).
Figure 13.5  Root canal treatment
is indicated in discoloured teeth with
necrotic pulps.
272
Patients requiring prosthodontics, including crown placement (Figure 13.6).
Cases to Refer to Your Local Veterinary Dentist
Figure 13.6 "Wire-biter' patients can
have three-quarter jacket crowns fitted
to protect the teeth, but behavioural
therapy will also be required to stop
the habit.
Patients with malocclusion requiring orthodontic treatment (Figures 13.7
and 13.8).
Figure 13.7   This patient had
mandibu lar malocclusion with the
canines biting into the palatal mucosa.
 Orthodontic treatment is appropriate
but removal of the animal from
breeding programs is essential to
prevent transmission of the 'skeletal
malocclusion genes'.
273
Small Animal Dentistry
Figure 13.8This ‘distracter' was
manufactu red for the patient in
Figure 13.7.
 Patients requiring oral surgery, including tumour resection (Figure 13.9).
Figure 13.9
Patientswithoral tumours
may also bereferred to thosecolleagues
with expertise in dentistry and oral
surgery.
274
Index
abbreviations in dental
attrition, 51, 136
charting, 51
canine, 249
abrasion, 51,136,205,273
malocclusion and, 248
abscess, post extraction, 19
avulsed teeth, 271
access sites, root canal, 219
accessory canal, 214
barbed broach, 219,221
accessory cones, 219, 221
bearded collie, 252
acrylic, 177,178,180
bell stage, tooth development,2,3
adult dentition, 15
biological width, 204
age, tooth eruption,22
bisecting line technique,101, 105, 106
air-d riven polisher, 68
black spot, 4
air-extraction system, 60
body of mandible, fracture, 174
air polisher, 79
bond ing agent, 210
air-water syringe, 70
bone l0ss, 49,88
alveolar bone, 5,25
border collie, 240, 252
compression, 149
border terrier, 254
necrosis, 161
Borzoi, 240
alveolar buccal bulge,143
Boxer dog,41,145,186,240
alveolar crest, 6
brachycephalic, 240, 244, 246,247,248,
alveolar mucosa, 30, 31
249, 258
alveolar osteitis, 187
malocclusion, 244, 247,248, 249
alveolar periosteum, 155, 156
 brachygnathism
alveoloplasty, 168
mandible,251,255,256,266
alveolotomy, 154,156,157,168
maxillary, 240, 248
alveolus, 3, 5
buccal,24,26
alveoplasty, 154, 157,159,161
buccal cusp, sectioning, 163
amalgam, 209,210
buccal fap, 192
ameloblasts, 2, 3, 4
bud stage, tooth development, 2, 7
amelogenesis, 3
bulldogs, 240
 Distemper Virus infection, 11
bunodont, 22
anachoresis, 120, 140
buphrenorphine, 231
anaesthetic system, 61
bupivacaine,232
analgesics, 230
buried knot, 200, 201
 anatomy of tooth, 25
burnout, 112
anisognathic, 240
burs, 71, 72
anodontia,6,8
apex formation, 4
cage-biter,205
apexification, 218
calcium hydroxide
apexogenesis,4,216,218
dressing,217,218
Distemper Virus infection,
paste, 208, 221
12,13
calculus, 47-56, 75
apical,26
calculus cracking forceps, 51, 52, 53, 75, 76
apical delta, 4,25,214
use of in cats, 54
apical fibres, 7
calculus index, 47
apical fill, endodontics, 224
canine occlusion, 242
apposition phase, 3, 10
cap stage, tooth development, 2, 7
arrested caries, 90
caries de bridement
artefacts, 114
slow-speed bur, 209
attached gingiva, 25, 30, 31
spoon excavator,209
275
Small Animal Dentistry
carie5,4,46,51,64,90,204,207,
deciduous tooth root, 166, 167
208,209
deep infra-orbital block, 232
carnassial occlusion, 244
deep mental block, 232
carnassial tooth,28, 31, 134, 162
dens in dente, 7
developmental groove, 169
dental acrylic, 177, 178, 180
carprophen,231
dental burs, 71,72
caudal cross-bite, 260
dental charting
cavitation, 66
abbreviations, 51
cementoblasts, 4
scoring, 51
cementocytes, 4
dental elevators, 73,74, 75, 79,81, 152
cemento-enamel junction (CE), 5, 23, 25
handling, 74
cementoid,4, 5
sharpening, 79, 81
cementum, 3-5, 24,25
dental epithelium, 5
cervical loop, 4
dental explorer,46,55,63,65
chairside darkroom, 96, 99
dental extraction forceps, 146, 147, 152
charting, 51
dental formula, 15, 18
cheek-biter syndrome, 192, 194, 195
dental lamina, 2, 3
chemical processing artefacts, 129 
dental luxators, 73,74,75,79, 80, 146, 147,
Chinese crested dog, 6, 8
148,149,152
chlorhexidine gluconate, 48, 50, 56
handling, 74,146,148
cingula, 240,242
shar pening, 79, 80
circlage wire, 183
use of, 73, 75, 149, 152
cleft palate
dental malocclusion, 250, 252, 261, 262
congenital, 190,270
dental mirror, 64,65
traumatic, 181, 183, 190, 191
dental operatory, 60
closed extraction, 145
dental pain, 207,230
see aiso simple extraction
dental papilla, 2-4
collagen fibres, 5
dental prophylaxis, 51,75-7
 compomer restoration, 210
dental recording chart, 39, 40
compomer restorative material, 208, 211
dental room, 60
composite, restorative material, 208, 211
dental sac, 2-5
condylar process, 174
dental X-ray machine
contra-angled handpiece, 71
advantages, 94
coronal seal, 224
settings, 96
coronal, 26
dentigerous cyst, 145
coronoid process, 174
dentinal bridge, 218
crossed mattress suture, 200
dentinal hypersensitivity, 5
crowded incisors, 16
dentinal tubules, 4, 207
crowding,6,16,135,137,142,246,
dentine,2,3,4,25
247,263
crown, 4
crown,23,24
dysplasia,11
amputation, 141,143,144,154,217,258
exposed,4
elongation, 272
root, 4
fracture, 87,89,90,122
dentino-cemental junction, 4, 5
mirror image,8
dentino-enamel junction (DEj), 2-4
shortening, 216, 227
dentinogenesis, Distemper Virus infection,
crown:root proportion, deciduous canine,
11
167
dentino-gingival fibres, 7
crown-down technigue, 223
dermatitis, 176
curettage, open,192,193
developing X-ray film, 95, 99
curette, 54, 65, 66
developmental gr0ove, 120, 121, 169
sharpening,77,78
developmental process, tooth, 3
curing,211
diastema obliteration, 254 -5
cusp, additional, 9,20,91
diastema, 30,31
cysts, 4, 145
trauma, 255
wide, 250
Dachshund, 252, 267
Digastricus muscle, 175
deciduous dentition, 2, 15, 17,18
digital imaging, 109,112,113
cat, 18
direct, 109 
formula, cat, 18
indirect, 109
formula, dog, 15
dilacerated root/s, 121, 123-5, 137
276
dilaceration,4
instruments required, 143
Index
directional terminology, 23, 24, 26,41-43
occlusion,162
discolouration
palatal cusp gingival attachment, 161
enamel, 12
surgical extraction instruments, 144
tooth, 212, 226
tooth luxating, 150-1
distal, 26
exposed dentinal tubules, 207
Distemper Virus infection, 11, 12, 13,
exposed pulp, 205,206
205, 207
external fixator, 181
divided tooth (gemination), 8, 9, 10, 92
extirpation of pulp, 219
double-flap technique, 191, 192, 279
extraction,22,132,150-2,155-7,161-2,
D-speed film, 97, 98
164-70,179, 189,257
complications, 169, 179
Eco 30 rm film, 95
forceps, 146, 147,152
ectoderm,2
immature teeth, 257
edentulous, 123
indications, 132-42
electromechanical scalers, 51, 53, 54,66
maxillary carnassial, 161
electrosurgery, 187
persistent deciduous teeth,164-9
elevation, 73,74,154,156,157
single rooted teeth, 153
elevators,73,74,75,79,81,146,148,
three rooted teeth, 161-5
152,153
two rooted teeth, 154-8
handling, 146, 148
extra-oral film placement, 104
rotational forces, 153
extrinsic suture tension, 198
sharpening, 79,81
elongation, 106, 109,110,127
fabric muzzle, 176-7
correction of, 110
fauces, 35
enamel, 3,25
feline odontoclastic resorptive lesion, 51,
defects, 12,13,14,46,51,133,169,
84,141
204,205
fentanyl, 231
discolouration, 12
figure-of-eight wire, 256
dysplasia,10,12,13,205,207
film focal distance (FFD), 94
Distemper Virus infection, 12, 13 
fistula,85,86
restoration, 207
fap, see aiso mucoperiosteal flap
epithelium, 5
envelope,143,144,156,193
hypo-mineralisation, 10
forces acting on mandible, 175
hypoplasia, 10,11
foreshortening, 106, 109, 111, 112
 Distemper Virus infection, 12
FORL, 141
organ,2,3,4,7,169
fracture,13,14,51,87,89,90,122,132,
pitting, 10
133,134,174,176,180,181,225,
endo stops, 220, 221
226, 272
endodontic file, 216,220, 221,223
complicated crown, 87,89, 90,122
endodontic Hushing need les, 221
deciduous canine, 13, 14, 87
endodontic therapy, 214,272
favourable (stable), 174
endodontic-periodontic lesions,121,206
mandible, 174, 175, 178, 179,
endodontics, motorised, 223-5
180,181
endo-perio lesion, 121,206
root, 174,225,226
endotracheal tube, 35,36,37, 61
sub-gingival, 134, 225, 226
cuff inflation, 35
unfavourable (unstable), 174
English bull terrier, 253-4
fracture repair techniques, 174-80
envelope fap, 143,144, 156,193
fracture stabilisation
eosinophilic granuloma, 143
inter-dental acrylic, 177, 180
epistaxis, 170, 189
inter-dental wiring, 177
epithelial rests of Malassez, 4
inter-fragmentary wiring, 178
epulis, 92, 186,187
muzzles, 177
E-speed film, 97
free gingival margin,25
etching, 210
furcation bone, 161, 165
Etka film, 97
furcation incision, 158
exodontics
furcation lesions, 139
crown sectioning, 162-3
furcation score, 51
crown/root segments, 164-5
furcation, 157-8
gingival attachment severing, 165
fused roots, 20, 122, 124
iatrogenic fractures, 170
fusion, 9,10
277
Small Animal Dentistry
gemination (divided tooth), 8, 9, 10, 92
incisivo-palatine ducts, 27
Geniohyoideus muscle, 175
incisor occlusion, 240
geriatric animals, 170
inclined plane, 256-7
German shepherd, 240, 252
ind ications for tooth extraction, 132-43
gingiva,3
induction, tooth development, 2
gingival epithelial attachment, 145, 146,
inferior alveolar nerve,232
156,161
infra-0rbital block, 234-6
severing, 165
infra-orbital
gingival hyperplasia (overgrowth), 41, 51,
canal, 117,146,234-6
186,187
foramen, 234-6
gingival papilla, 158
nerve,232
gingival recession, 43, 51
initiation stage, tooth development, 2,6
gingival resection, 187-8
inner enamel (dental) epithelium, 2-4
gingival sulcus,25,41,44
instrumentation of pulp canal, 220
gingival third, crown, 24
instruments
gingival ulcer, 255
exodontics, 143,144
gingivectomy, 187,188,191
hand, 63-6,77,78
gingivitis,45-7,49
intrusion, traumatic, 252
index, 45
inter-arcade acrylic bonding, 178
restoration,204
interceptive orthodontics, 256
score, 51
inter-dental
glass ionomer restoration, 208, 210,224
acrylic, 177-80
glass ionomer restorative materials, 210
sutures, 193
glosso-palatine folds,32,35,36
wiring, 177,179,180
golden retrievers, 240
inter-fragmentary fixation, 177
GP(gutta percha) point, 219,221, 222,
inter-fragmentary wiring, 176,178
224, 225
interproximal spaces, 250
Gracey curette, 65
inter-radicular fibres,6
greyhounds,240
intra-0ral dental X-ray film, 95, 97-99
grinding surface,21,22
intrinsic suture tension, 198
gutta percha (GP), 219,221, 222,224, 225
intruded tooth, 252
ISO file sizes, 220
haematogenous infection of pulp, 120, 140
hand curette, 54, 65,66, 77,78
Jack Russell terrier, 267
hand instruments, 63-6, 77, 78
jaw fracture, 174,175,178,179,180, 181
hand polishing, 66
re pair, 174-80
hand scaler, 65,77
jaw quadrant growth, 250
handpiece
juga,154,157,167,168
contra-angled,71
junctional epithelium, 25
high-speed, 71, 72
turbine,71
Kerr files, 220
health and safety, 61, 97, 129
ketamine infusion, 230
Hedstrom files, 219, 220
Hertwig's root sheath, 4, 5
abial, 24
high-rise syndrome, 190
labial frenulum,26,27,243
hobby drill, 66
Labrad or retrievers, 240
horizontal bone loss, 88
lamina dura, 119,120
horizontal fibres, 7
laser surgery, 187
hypercementosis, 5, 6
lateral canal, 25, 214
hyperplasia, (overgrowth), gingiva, 43, 51,
lateral excursion of mand ible, 36, 37
186,187
Lentulo spiral paste filler, 221
hypodontia,6,8
leverage slot, 159, 160
lidocaine, 232
iatrogenic trauma
light curing, 208
dental, 12, 182
light-cured restoration, 211
soft tissue, 182
light-cured restorative materials, 208, 211
immature teeth, 4, 118, 257
line angles, 156, 159
radiology, 118
lingual frenulum, 26-8
impaction, 123, 125
lingual, 24, 26
incisal, 26
linguo-verted canine, 16, 254,256
incisive papilla, 27-8
linguo-verted deciduous canines, 16
278
local anaesthesia, 231, 232
medical X-ray machine
Index
local anaesthetics, 231, 232
disadvantage5, 94
lubrication, 80
 positioning, 95
luxated tooth, 183, 271
settings, 94
luxating, 149,150-2,154,156-7
meloxicam, 231
luxator,73,74,75,79,80,146,147,148,
 mental block, 233
149,152,156
mental foramen, 116, 146,233
handling,74,146,148
mental nerve, 232
sharpening, 79, 80
mental neurovascular bund le, 146
use of, 73, 75,149, 152
mepivacaine,232
mesenchyme, 2
macrodontia, 7
mesial, 24, 26
magnetostrictive scaler, 66
mesoce phalic, 240, 241, 246
maintenance of high-speed turbine, 79
mesoderm, 2
maintenance of polishers, 79
microdontia,7
maintenance of prophy equipment, 77
micro-motor hobby drill, 66
major palatine artery, 146
midd le mental foramen, 233
malaligned teeth, 265
mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA), 218
malocclusion,216,249-67
mirror-image crown, 8
brachycephalic, 244, 247,248, 249
mixed dentition, 15, 17
canine,255,256,258
mobility score, 51
comfortable bite, 266, 267
molar 0cclusion, 240, 241, 244, 245
dental, 250,252,261,262
morphine,231
gingival defect, 266
morphogenesis, 2
gingival ulcer, 255
motorised endodontics, 223-5
mand ibular, 273
mucogingival fap,192,193
pain associated with , 255
mucogingival line, 25, 30, 31, 190
palatal defect, 254,267
mucoperiosteal flap, 153-7,160-1, 166-7,
premolar, 246, 247,248,251
170,171, 1902
siblings, 253
advancement, 155
skeletal, 250
closure,160
trauma, 249, 255
multi rooted teeth, 157
mammography film, 98
palatal repair, 191
mandible
split thickness, 190 
compression side, 175
suturing, 155
forces acting on, 175
mucoperiosteum,31
tension side, 175
mucosal fold, 32
mandibular block, 234, 235
mandibular canal, 146, 180, 235
necrotic pulp,4,91, 120, 121,122,205-6,
mand ibular carnassial tooth (M1), 134, 162
214-5, 226, 272
mandibular foramen, 234
nerve, Infra-orbital,232
mandibular fracture
nerve, Mandibular, 232
favourable, 175
nerve, Maxillary, 232
jaw shift, 174
nerve, Mental, 232
tooth involvement, 174
neural crest cells, 2
unfavourable, 175
 non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
mandibular nerve, 232
(NSAIDs), 231
mandibular sta bilisation, 178, 180
mand ibular sym physis
oblique fibres, 7
fibrous, 29
obturation, pulp canal, 219, 222, 224, 225
separation, 181
Dcclusal third, crown, 24
masseter muscle, 174, 175
occlusion
master cone, 219, 221
canine,242
master file, 219, 220, 221
carnassial, 244
master point, 221
exodontics,162
maturation phase 3, 10
incisor,240
mature teeth, radiology, 118
molar, 240, 241, 244, 245
maxillary block, 232, 235, 236, 237
normal, 240
maxillary carnassial tooth (PM4), 162-5
post extraction, 227
maxillary foramen, 237
premolar, 240, 243, 251
maxillary nerve, 232
restoration, 211
279
Small Animal Dentistry
odontoblastic process, 4
periodontal pocket, 41,43,44, 121, 142,
odontoblasts, 3,4
191
odontoclastic resorption, 51, 56, 84, 85,
depth,41, 51
140, 141
periodontal probe,41-44, 63, 65, 187, 188
canine, 85
periodontal probing, 41-43
feline, 84
periodontal surgery,191-3
open bite, 260,261
periodontic-endodontic lesions, 120
open curettage, 192, 193
periodontitis, 138,188,263
open extraction, 145
food trapping, 23
see aiso surgical extraction
periodontium, 2
open-mouth locking, 35
perio-endo lesions, 120
opioids,231
periosteal elevator, 143, 144, 156,190
oral antiseptic, 48, 50, 56
periosteal reaction, malocclusion, 256
oral examination, 34, 50 
periosteum, 190
oral rinse,48, 50, 56
permanent dentition, 2, 15, 18,22
oral surgery, 274
permanent tooth eruption age, 22
Dral tumour, 93,143
persistent deciduous canine, 12, 13, 22, 23,
 oro-nasal communication, 170, 250
24,134, 135,252
see aiso oro-nasal fistula
extraction complication, 14
iatrogenic, 188, 189
persistent deciduous incisor, 135, 262
repair, 170,171, 188-90, 192
extraction, 164-6
0ro-nasal fistula, 51, 85, 254, 270
pharyngeal pack,35-8,63
repair, 191,192
philtrum, 29, 30
orthodontic device, 274
piezoelectric scalers, 55, 66, 68
 orthodontic retainer, 257
plaque, 44,56
orthodontic treatment, 256,257,273
plaque-d isclosing solution, 44,45, 56, 65, 75
orthopaedic pins, 180
pneumatic scalers, 51
orthopaedic wire, 178-81, 183,256
pocket de pth, 41, 51
osteoclasts, 5
reduction, 191,193
 outer enamel (dental) epithelium, 3, 4
pocket, periodontal, 41,44, 121, 142, 199
overgrowth, gingiva (hyperplasia), 41, 51,
polishers, 67-69
186,187
polishing paste,56,70,75
polishing speed, 68, 71
pain,207,230
polishing,45,56,65,66,68-71,75,76
A-delta and Cfibres, 230
power scalers, 66-7
dental, 207,230
pre-ameloblasts, 3
malocclusion, 255, 256
pre-dentine,3, 4
palatal, 24, 26
premolar interdigitation, 240, 243, 250, 251
palatal cusp
premolar 0cclusion, 240, 243, 251
epithelial attachment, 161
pre-odontoblasts, 3
sectioning, 162
primary dentine, 4, 117
palatal trauma, 253, 254, 256
primary dentition, 2, 15, 17
palatine tonsils, 32
primary tooth germ, 3
paper points, 219,221, 222
primitive oral cavity, 2
parallel technique, 101-4
probing,41-43
para-pulpal pins, 207
prognathism
parotid salivary duct, 29
mandible, 258-9
partial pulpectomy, 216-8
maxillary, 249
peg tooth,137
prophy cup/brush, 56-7,65,67-9,75
periapical abscess, 86,206
prophy head,68
periapical pathology, 86, 87, 91, 120-2,
prophylaxis,51,75-7
139,206,214,226
prosthetic crowns, 207, 212
periapical radiographs, 215
prosthodontics, 273
periodontal disease, 8, 48,49
protective spectacles, 61, 62
 Distemper Virus infection, 12
pseudopocket,4,186,187,188
periodontal explorer,46, 55,63,65
pugs, 240
periodontal ligament, 3-7,25, 168
pulp,2-5,214
access, 154
pulp (root) canal, 214
fibres,5,6
debridement, 221
space, 118-20, 155,
instrumentation, 220
 geriatrics, 170
shaping, 221
severing,148,149
stenosis, 214,216
280
pulp chamber,25,118, 214,219
therapy, 211,222,214,216,219-21,223,
Index
pulp dressing (med ication), 207-8
225, 227
pulp exp0sure, 51,133,136,272
radiographs,222-4
pulp extirpation, 219
successful outcome, 222
pulp horns, 25, 215
root configurations, 18, 19, 20
pulp necrosis, 4, 91, 120, 121, 122,205-6,
root curettage, 192
214 -5, 226, 272
root debridement, 193
pulpectomy,214,216-8
root development, 4
pulpitis,4, 55-6, 91, 120, 187,205,215
root fracture, 174,225, 226
causes of, 214
root planing, 54
consequences of, 214
root remnants, 20, 84-6, 145
root res0rption, 143,165, 166,223
radiographic
root:crown proportion, 19
anatomy,117
ropivacaine,232
artefacts, 114, 126-9
rostral cross-bite, 258-9
equipment, 93
rough collies, 240
film, 95, 97-99
radiographs
safe light
malocclusion,255,256
orange,97
root canal therapy, 222-4
red,98
storage and labelling, 126
salivary gland puncta, 28-9
superimposition,20,107,127,128
salivary glands, 27-8
survey series cat, 100
same lingual opposite buccal rule (SLOB),
 survey series dog, 101
107-109
rad iography
scale and polish, 51
indications for, 19, 20, 50, 56, 84,93
scaler
positioning, 20, 99-101, 103-106 
piezoelectric, 55
radiology, 112-5,116,119, 120
sharpening, 77
recapitulate, endodontics, 221
scaler tip, 53, 54,77,78
recording chart, 39, 40
length, 77,78
regional anaesthesia, 231,232
scalers
reinforced surgeon's knot, 199
electromechanical, 51, 53, 54, 55,66
releasing incision, 154-5, 160 
hand, 65
reparative dentine,4
pneumatic, 51
replacement resorption, 141, 143
power,66-7
resorption, see odontoclastic resorption
sonic, 67,68
restoration, 204,206-7,217-219,224
ultrasonic, 66-7
caries,208
scaling, 51-6, 75
 coronal seal disruption, 211
scissor bite, 240, 242, 244, 259
dimensional changes, 211 
scoring in dental charting, 51
failure, 211,212
Scottish terriers, 252
inappropriate use, 206
sealant, 207, 221
intruded, 211
sealing, 207,208,210, 211
polishing, 208,210,211
secodont, 22
sealing, 207,208, 210,211
secondary dentine, 4, 51, 117, 119
varnish, 207,208, 210,211
secondary dentition,2
restorative materials, 207
secondary tooth bud, 3
compomers, 211
sensory ne rves, 4
composites, 211
sharpening curette, 77,78
glass ionomer,210
sharpening elevators, 79-81
varnish, 211
sharpening luxators, 79, 80
rests of Malassez, 4, 5
sharpening rod, 80
rests of Serres, 5
sharpening scalers, 77
retained (unerupted) teeth, 16, 123,
sharpening stone, 79
126,145
Shetland sheepdogs, 240
retrobul bar injuries, 81 
simple extraction technique, 145, 146
reverse scissor bite, 244 -5, 258-9
simple interrupted suture, 200
root abscess, 205
sinus tract, 86, 87, 122, 139, 205,212
root apex,216
skeletal malocclusion, 250
root canal (pulp canal), 25, 214, 219
slab fracture, 134
acces5, 219
SLOB rule, 107-109
sealant, 221
slow-speed air motor, 71
281
Small Animal Dentistry
sodium hypochlorite, 219, 221
throat pack, 35-8, 63
sonic scalers, 67, 68
tip-to-tip occlusion, 259
5paniels, 9
Tome's process, 3
split root, 9
tongue-biter syndrome, 192-4
squamous cell carcinoma, 36
tonsillar squamous cell
stained teeth, 56, 57
carcinoma, 36
stellate reticulum, 3
tonsils, 32, 35-6
sterilisation, 79
tooth anatomy, 23
storage of radiographs, 126
tooth bud, 3
stratum intermedium, 3
tooth bulge,155-6
sub-gingiva, 64
tooth development stages, 2
sub-gingival
tooth d iscolouration, 212, 226
curettage,66,191,193
tooth eruption, age,22
exploration, 55
tooth germ,2,3
plaque,44,45,56
tooth type and shape, 14
polishing, 45, 57, 68, 69,76
trans-furcation fibres, 6, 7
scaling, 54
Triadan numbering system, 15
visualisation, air, 55, 64, 70, 71
tube rcles, 9
succedaneous teeth, 22
tumours, 93,274
sulcular epithelium, 25
turbine handpiece, 71
sulcus depth, 41, 44
sulcus, 25, 44
Ultra, X-ray film, 97
superficial infra-orbital block, 232
ultrasonic endodontics, 225
superficial mental block, 232
ultrasonic scaler, 66, 67
supernumerary
undercut, 208,209,211,217
canine, 137
unerupted teeth, 16, 123, 126, 145
incisor, 90,247,248,264
Universal curette, 65
premolar,7,8,46,142,246,264
Universal hygienist scaler, 65
root, 1921, 122-3 145
teeth, 6,260,261
varnish, 207,208, 210,211
surgical extraction, 145, 153-4
ventral bow of mand ible, 248, 256
instruments, 144
ve rtical condensation, endodontics, 221
surgical Hap,154,156-7,160-1, 166-7,
ve rtical mattress suture, 200
170-1,1902
surgical masks, 61, 62
wear facet, abbreviation, 51
survey radiograph, 100, 101,223
Williams 14 periodontal probe, 63
suture material, 198, 199
wire-biter,205,273
handling, 201
working length, endodontics, 216, 219,
 suture patterns, 200, 201
220, 223
suture tension,198
wound dehiscence, 198
suture, knotting, 199
wry bite, 260,261
suturing,154,155
gingival apposition, 153
X-ray developing, 95, 96, 99
X-ray film
tape muzzle, 176
hand ling, 99
temporal muscle, 174, 175
positioning, 20, 99-101, 103-6
tem poromandibular joints, 35
processing, 95, 99
tertiary dentine, 4, 51
X-ray machine, 93, 94
thermoplastic obturation, 225
positioning, 101, 106, 110-2
three-way syringe, 55, 58, 64, 70
settings,94,96
282