noteson
veterinary
ophthalmology
sheila m crispin
Blackwell
Publishing
小尾巴宠物健康中,心http://ttahc.taobao.com
NOTESONVETERINARYOPHTHALMOLOGY
NOTeS On VETerInarY
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Sheila Crispin MA Vet MB BSc PhD
DVA DVOphthal DipECVO FRCVS
Professor of Comparative Ophthalmology
University of Bristol
Colour pictures
sponsored by
Blackwell
JANSSEN
Science
NIHAL HEALTH
 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
a Blackwell Publishing company
Editorial offices:
Blackwell Science Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 1865 776868
Blackwell Publishing Professional, 2121 State Avennue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
Tel: +1 515 292 0140
Blackwell Science Asia Pty Ltd, 550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
The right of the Author to be identified as the Author of this Work has been asserted in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise, except as perrmitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,
without the prior permission of the publisher.
First published 2005
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Crispin, Sheila M.
 Notes on veterinary ophthalmology / Sheila Crispin. - 1st ed.
Includes bibliographical references (p. )
ISBN 0-632-06416-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Veterinary ophthalmology. I. Title.
SF891.C75 2005
636.089'77 - dc22
2004009930
ISBN 0-632-06416-1
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library
Set in 9 on 11.5pt Sabon
by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong Kong
Printed and bound in India
by Replika Press Pvt. Ltd Kundli
The publisher's policy is to use permanent paper from mills that operate a sustainable forestry
policy, and which has been manufactured from pulp processed using acid-free and elermentary
chlorine-free practices. Furthermore, the publisher ensures that the text paper and cover board
used have met acceptable environmental accreditation standards.
For further information on Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
www. blackwellpublishing.com
CONTENTS
Prefaceand Acknowledgements
ix
Abbreviations
X
Section 1
Ophthalmic Equipment and Examination
1
Instruments and equipment
3
Examination
11
Section 2
 Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
21
Introduction
23
Acute exophthalmos (proptosis)
24
Foreign bodies
30
Trauma
35
Endophthalmitis and panophthalmitis as complicating factors in ocular insult
49
Complicated ulcers and corneal infection
51
Liquefactive stromal necrosis
52
Chemical injuries
54
Thermal burns
56
Acute uveitis
57
Acute glaucoma
57
Sudden loss of vision
59
Sudden ocular pain
61
Referrals
62
Section 3
General and Canine Ophthalmology
65
Introduction
9
Globe and orbit
69
Eyelids
74
Lacrimal system
95
Conjunctiva
101
 Limbus, episclera and sclera
105
Cornea
109
Uveal tract (iris, ciliary body and choroid)
123
Anterior chamber and aqueous humour
142
Glaucomas
146
Lens
151
Vitreous
155
Ocular Fundus
158
Optic nerve
171
Contents
Section 4
Feline Ophthalmology
177
Introduction
179
Globe and orbit
181
Eyelids
182
Lacrimal system
186
Conjunctiva
188
 Limbus, episclera and sclera
196
Cornea
196
Uveal tract
202
Anterior chamber and aqueous humour
213
Glaucomas
215
Lens
216
Vitreous
218
Ocular fundus
218
Neuro-ophthalmology
227
Section 5
Rabbit Ophthalmology
229
Introduction
231
Orbit
232
 Eyelids and conjunctiva
233
Lacrimal system
234
Cornea
235
Uveal tract
236
Lens
237
Glaucomas
237
Fundus
237
Section 6
 Farm Animal Ophthalmology
239
Introduction
241
Anatomy
241
Handling and examination
241
Congenital and early-onset developmental conditions 
244
Globe and orbit
250
Eyelids
250
Lacrimal system
252
Conjunctiva
252
Cornea
258
Uveal tract
258
Lens
260
Ocular fundus
261
 Some causes of cortical blindness in farm animals
263
Contents
vii
Section 7
 Equine Ophthalmology
265
Anatomy
268
Examination
269
Lavage devices
272
Ocular and adnexal conditions
274
Globe and orbit
275
Eyelids
276
Lacrimal system
281
Conjunctiva
285
Cornea
287
Uveal tract
294
Glaucomas
306
Lens
310
Vitreous
311
Ocular fundus
312
Appendix 1
Ophthalmic Terminology
323
General
325
Globe and orbit
326
Eyelids
327
Lacrimal apparatus
328
Conjunctiva
328
Limbus, episclera and sclera
328
Cormea
328
Uveal tract
329
Anterior chamber and aqueous humour
330
Glaucomas
330
Lens
330
Vitreous humour
330
Retina
331
Optic nerve head (ONH) and optic nerve
331
Appendix 2
Topical Ophthalmic Preparations
333
General notes
335
 Diagnostic preparations
335
Local anaesthetics
335
 Tear-replacement agents and ocular lubricants
336
Immunosuppressa nts
337
Anti-infective preparations 
337
Anti-inflammatories
339
Glaucoma treatment
341
Mydriatics and cycloplegics
343
vili
Contents
Appendix3
Basic Principles of Ocular and Adnexal Surgery
345
Preoperative preparation and postoperative care
347
General anaesthesia
347
General equipment
349
Instrument sets
349
Appendix 4
Cranial Nerve Innervation of the Eye and Adnexa
353
FurtherReading
357
Index
361
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This brief text comprises the ophthalmology notes used to teach the theory of veteri-
nary ophthalmology to generations of veterinary students. They have been expanded
to provide a more comprehensive overview for those in general practice with an inter-
est in, but no specialist knowledge of, veterinary ophthalmology. The first section sets
out the instruments that are used and the manner in which examination of the eye and
adnexa is performed; this is followed by a section on emergencies and trauma that
crosses the species. There are then sections that cover general and canine ophthal-
mology, feline ophthalmology, rabbit ophthalmology, farm animal ophthalmology
and equine ophthalmology. The notes conclude with brief appendices on ophthalmic
terminology, topical medical preparations, basic principles of anaesthesia and surgery
and the cranial nerves innervating the eye and adnexa.
I am indebted to Janssen Animal Health for a most generous donation towards the
Bristol Veterinary School for many of the photographs taken by Mr John Conibear
and Mrs Tracy Dewey and to Mr Nick Crabb for the line drawings. I am particularly
indebted to Mr John Mould for the excellent gross and microscopic preparations of
theeye.
I wish to acknowledge the major contributions of Professor Dennis Brooks and Dr
Andy Matthews to uveitis and glaucoma in the equine section. My past colleagues in
            
ticular thanks go to Dr David Gould for commenting on early drafts of the manuscript
and also to Mr Jim Carter and Mr Rob Lowe for their support. Any errors, however,
rest entirely with the author.
 My thanks go to many colleagues, in both medical and veterinary ophthalmology,
for engendering and stimulating my interest in this fascinating subject.
S. Crispin
2004
ABBREVIATIONS
ORGANISATIONS
BVA
British Veterinary Association
CERF
Canine Eye Registration Foundation
ECVO
European Collge of Veterinary Ophthalmologists
ISDS
 International Sheep Dog Society
KC
Kennel Club
TERMS
AP
auriculopalpebral
BVD-MD
bovine virus diarrhoea-mucosal disease
CALT
conjunctival-associated lymphoid tissue
CEA
Collie eye anomaly
CT
computed tomography
CNS
central nervous system
CPRA
central progressive retinal atrophy
ERG
electroretinogra phy
ERU
equine recurrent uveitis
EUA
examination under anaesthesia
FB
foreign body
FeLV
feline leukaemia virus
FECV
feline enteric coronavirus
FIP(V)
feline infectious peritonitis (virus)
FIV
feline immunodeficiency virus
GME
 granulomatous meningoencephalitis
GPRA
 generalised progressive retinal atrophy
GSE
general somatic efferent
GVE
general visceral efferent
HA
hyaloid artery
HDL
high density lipoprotein
IBKC
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
IBR
infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
IL-2
interleukin-2
IOKC
infectious ovine keratoconjunctivitis
IOP
intraocular pressure
KCS
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
KP
keratic precipitates
MRD
multifocal retinal dysplasia
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
NSAID
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
NTF
non-tapetal fundus
HNO
optic nerve head
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
Abbreviations
xi
PHPV
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
PIFM
pre-iridal fibrovascular membrane
PLL
primary lens luxation
PLR
pupillary light reflex
PPM
persistent pupillary membrane
PRA
progressive retinal atrophy
PTF
preocular tear film
RD
retinal dysplasia
RPE
 retinal pigment epithelium
RPED
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
SARD
sudden acquired retinal degeneration
SCC
squaemous cell carcinoma
SOL
space-occupying lesion
STT
Schirmer tear test
TEME
 thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
TRD
total retinal dysplasia
TSCL
therapeutic soft contact lens
TVL
tunica vasculosa lentis
VCTM
 viral and chlamydial transport medium
SECTION 1
OPHTHALMIC EQUIPMENT
AND EXAMINATION
EXAMINATION
Ophthalmic Equipment and Examination
3
INSTRUMENTS AND EQUIPMENT
AND
BASIC INSTRUMENTS FOR OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
IN
●Penlight (focussing or narrow beam)
UIPME
Z
● Condensing lens (20D or 2.2 pan retinal@)
0
●Magnifying loupe or otoscope with speculum removed
ATI
● Direct ophthalmoscope
●Schiotz tonometer
W
U
ADDITIONAL INSTRUMENTS
OPHTHAI
●Finoff ocular transilluminator
●Slit lamp biomicroscope
● Monocular indirect ophthalmoscope
●Binocular indirect ophthalmoscope
● Tonometer (e.g. TonoPen@)
●Gonioscopy lens (e.g. Barkan or Koeppe)
BASIC EQUIPMENT FOR DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
● Ophthalmic stains - fluorescein sodium (1% and 2%) and rose bengal 1%
● Sterile water, sodium chloride 0.9%, Hartmann's solution
● Local anaesthetic for topical use (e.g. proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.5%, ametho-
caine hydrochloride 0.5% and 1%)
● Combined local anaesthetic and ophthalmic stain (e.g. proxymetacaine hydrochlo-
ride 0.5% and fluorescein sodium 0.25%)
2%, prilocaine hydrochloride 1%, mepivacaine hydrochloride 2%)
●Mydriatic (e.g. tropicamide 1%)
●Miotic (e.g. pilocarpine hydrochloride 1%)
●Schirmer Tear Test papers
● Kimura spatula or other sterile scraper, e.g. disposable scalpel blade
● Sterile swabs or cytobrushes for sample collection for culture
· Clean, dry, grease-free microscope slides
● Suitable stains for smears, e.g. Gram and Giemsa
+ Cotton wool
● Calipers/ruler
●Nasolacrimal cannulae (re-usable sterilisable metal or disposable sterile plastic)
·●Sterile syringes and needles
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
OPHTHALMIC EQUIPMENT AND
EXAMINATION
[a]
{b}
[c)
Figure 1.1(a-c} Normal canine head [a], close up of the eye [b] and ocular Fundus [c). A sound
knowledge of normal ocular structure and function, together with a logical examination technique,
underpins diagnosticophthalmology.
INSTRUMENTATION
Penlight or other light source
 Disposable and non-disposable penlights (Figure 1.2(a) are available. Focussing ability
is desirable, as is a detachable cobalt blue filter. The Finoff ocular transilluminator
with halogen illumination and a detachable cobalt blue filter is probably the most
useful light source for ophthalmic examination. A Finoff ocular transilluminator
can be attached to the rechargeable battery handle of a direct ophthalmoscope
(Figure 1.2(b))
Ophthalmic Equipment and Examination
AND
EQUIPMENT 
[a)
(b)
OPHTHAlmIC.
Figure 1.2 (a) Penlight light source. (b) A Finoff ocular transilluminator (Welch Allyn) can be
Used to provide a white light source or a cobalt blue filter can be attached to provide a blue light source.
Technique
● The light source is used on its own or in conjunction with a magnifying lens
● It is better to conduct the examination in the dark, so as to minimise distracting
reflections
● The information obtained from light source examination is enhanced when the light
is shone from a number of different angles
Magnification
Magnification can be achieved using an otoscope with the speculum removed (Figure
1.3(a), a convex lens, a loupe (e.g. simple monocular magnifying glass or binocular
loupe), a slit lamp biomicroscope or a direct ophthalmoscope (see below). Magnifica-
tion, combined with a light source, is ideal for detailed examination of the adnexa
(eyelids, lacrimal apparatus, orbit and para-orbital areas), anterior segment (anterior
part of the globe, up to and including the lens) and posterior segment (lens, vitreous
and fundus).
● A slit lamp biomicroscope (Figure 1.3(b) is an essential purchase for those with a
serious interest in ophthalmology, but cost is the major limiting factor for those in
general practice
● Both portable and table mounted types of slit lamp are available. The advantages
of portable, cordless models for veterinary ophthalmology are obvious
[a)
Figure 1.3 (a) An otoscope (Welch Allyn]) with the speculum removed provides a simple means
of magnification. (b) A slit lamp biomicroscope is the best instrument available for examination of
the anterior segment.
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
AND
Lens
· A lens is a device that refracts (bends) light, and the vergence (bending) power is
measured in dioptres (D). A convex, magnifying (plus) lens causes convergence of
AENT
incident light, whereas a concave, reducing (minus) lens causes divergence of inci-
Z
dent light.
QUIPM
● The focal length of a lens is directly proportional to its curvature radius, so that
ATI
a lens of high curvature has a shorter focal length, and is more powerful, than a
lens of longer focal length. A strong convex lens (high plus) produces a small,
E
 ss  e sad (d  sa x a  s  
U
M
image.
● Lenses of 10D or 15D can be used to aid examination of the adnexa and anterior
OPHTHAL
segment. Lenses of 20D-40D can be used for indirect ophthalmoscopy. Lenses of
60D-90D are also available and usually used in conjunction with a slit lamp for
fundus examination.
Indirect ophthalmoscopy
Commercially-manufactured monocular and binocular types are available, but are
expensive. A penlight, or Finoff transilluminator, and condensing (convex) lens may
be combined to provide an inexpensive means of performing monocular indirect
ophthalmoscopy and this is probably the technique of choice for those in general
practice.
Monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy
Optics
● If a convex (plus) lens is held in front of the eye, an aerial image of the fundus can
 be seen. This technique is known as indirect ophthalmoscopy, because the examiner
is not observing the fundus directly.
● The image obtained is virtual, inverted, reversed left-to-right and magnified. The
 si ( ao  ie uas a u i sy a jo  a) mi jo p
albeit with less magnification, than can be obtained with a direct ophthalmoscope.
Dilating the pupil will enlarge the field of view, irrespective of whether indirect or
direct ophthalmoscopy is used.
● Indirect ophthalmoscopy is useful when the ocular media are opaque as it provides
affected by major refractive errors in the patient's eyes.
Equipment
● Penlight: Any type of penlight or transilluminator, or even a small torch with narrow
beam of light, will be adequate. The light source should be bright. Focussing ability
is valuable, but not essential.
● Indirect lens and penlight (Figure 1.4(a)): In most domestic mammals, a 2.2 pan
retinal@ lens (Volk) or a 20D convex lens are the most versatile. The pan retinal@
2.2 is particularly valuable as it combines magnification of 2.68x - nearly that of
the 20D lens (image magnification 3.13x, field of view 46°), with a field of view
of 56° - almost that of a 30D lens. A 30D lens (image magnification 2.15x, field of
view 58°) or 40D lens (image magnification 1.67x, field of view 69°) may be used
if the eye or pupil is relatively small (e.g. puppies).
Ophthalmic Equipment and Examination
● Indirect lens and slit lamp biomicroscope: A 60D lens (image magnification
AND
1.15x, field of view 68°) and a 90D lens {image magnification 0.76x, field of view
74°) are valuable for examination of small eyes and pupils, but their use may be
regarded as specialist because they are best used in conjunction with slit lamp
biomicroscopy.
Z
● Commercially-manufactured monocular indirect ophthalmoscopes (lens and light
O
source in one instrument) are also available and have the advantage that they are
simple to use and the image viewed is upright (Figure 1.4(b)). Models of this type
are useful for the widely varying conditions under which ophthalmoscopy is per-
formed in large animal ophthalmology.
LMI
OPHTHAL
[a]
(b}
Figure  1.4 Indirect ophthalmoscopy.  The
technique is performed in the dark cnd is most
rewarding when the pupil is dilated. (a} Mono-
alar indirect ophthalmoscopy using a condens-
ing lens cnd penlight. (b) Monocular indirect
ophthalmoscopy using an American Opticl
monocular indirect ophthalmoscope. (c} Binoc-
ular indirect ophthalmoscopy using a Keeler all
pupil model.
[c]
Technique using penlight and condensing lens
● Mydriasis (tropicamide 1%) is required for complete examination
·A darkened room is necessary for proper examination
· The condensing lens is held between forefinger and thumb, some 2-8 cm from the
patient's eye and it is usual to steady the hand holding the lens by resting the little
finger and ring finger against the animal's head
+ The light source is held close to the observer's head; the observer-patient distance
is approximately 50-75 cm
● The observer's eye, the light source, the lens and the patient's pupil should all lie in
the same axis. It is easier to achieve this in small animals if the person holding the
animal's head elevates the nose slightly
8
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
AND
● The lens can be held close to the eye initially and then gradually moved away from
the eye until the image fills the lens. The correct distance of the lens from the eye is
soon learned
IN
Binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy
E
QUIPM
● The technique is as for monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy, but with the advantage
that the examiner has a free hand, as the ophthalmoscope is head mounted, so that
it is easier to position the patient (Figure 1.4(c)
E
● Spectacle models are probably most comfortable for extended use, but there are
U
M
many models available
● Binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy has the real benefit of stereopsis (ie. depth
OPHTHAL
perception) and many models also incorporate a teaching mirror
● Cost is a limiting factor
Direct ophthalmoscopy
The correct choice of instrument is crucial and it is better to purchase a well-designed,
robust ophthalmoscope that will last for years, rather than compromise on quality. It
is sensible to purchase a model that can be used with other devices, such as the Finoff
 tra nsilluminator and otoscope.
Optics
● The image obtained is real (examined directly), erect and magnified; the field of view
is small, at only some 6°
● The instrument's optical properties are affected by refractive errors in the patient's
eyes
Equipment
· A suitable instrument has an on/off switch and rheostat, a lens magazine and
lens indicator window, a range of apertures (e.g. large and small diameter
round, round with graticule, slit beam) and both white light and red-free (green)
light
● The lens range is approximately +30D (magnifying lenses) to -30D (reducing lenses).
 Most of the reducing lenses are not needed in veterinary ophthalmology
· A darkened room is needed for detailed examination
● Mydriasis {tropicamide 1 %) is helpful, as it will increase the field of view
Distant direct ophthalmoscopy (Figure 1.5(a,b))
Technique
● Distant direct ophthalmoscopy utilises an observer-patient distance of 25-40 cm and
usually a O setting.
● The direct ophthalmoscope is ergonomically designed to provide a close orbital fit"
for the examiner and should always be held as close to the observer's eye as
possible.
· Spectacle wearers {i.e. those with refractive errors) should remove their spectacles
and set the prescription of the relevant spectacle lens in the lens aperture of the direct
ophthalmoscope. The observer's eye should be placed as close to the viewing
aperture of the ophthalmoscope as possible in order to maximise the field of
view.
Ophthalmic Equipment and Examination
+
● Distant direct ophthalmoscopy may be used to compare the direction of gaze and
AND
pupil size (symmetry of gaze, symmetry of pupil size). In addition, any opacities
present in the ocular media (cornea, aqueous, lens, vitreous) will appear as black
forms against the fundus reflex (the reflection from the back of the eye), so this is
a useful screning device prior to close direct ophthalmoscopy.
Z
·It is a useful way of distinguishing senile nuclear sclerosis of the lens {concentric
dark rings) from cataract (black opacity).
●The colour of the fundus reflex varies according to the colour of the tapetum.
U
|W]
EXA
OPHTHAL
[a]
(b)
Figure 1.5(a,b)Distant direct ophthalmoscopy. With the ophthalmoscope (Welch Allyn] at
arm's length from the animal, both the eyes can be viewed simultaneously and compared to check
the direction of ocular gaze and the symmetry of pupil size cnd shape (a). In addition, any true
opacities of the ocular media will appear as dark, even black, silhouettes by retro-illumination (b),
as illustrated here in relation to lens opacities.
Close direct ophthalmoscopy (Figure 1.6(a,b)
● The direct ophthalmoscope is used for fundus examination {image magnification
15x) as well as to provide a magnified illuminated view of other ocular and adnexal
-xa  x e ol pau aa si u  s
nal ocular features) as the plane of focus moves anteriorly.
● The slit beam is useful for examination of the anterior chamber if aqueous flare is
a possibility and is also helpful when examining the fundus for potential elevations
(e.g. retinal detachments, papilloedema) or depressions (e.g. papillary and peri-
papillary colobomas).
● Red-free (green) light will enhance contrast. It can help to distinguish resolving
retinal haemorrhage from normal retinal pigment and will also allow the depth of
conjunctival, episcleral and scleral blood vessels to be more readily differentiated.
● The graticule provides an approximate means of measuring the area of a lesion.
When sequential measurements are made it is easiest to compare the lesion with
something of fixed diameter, providing it is normal, in order to check whether
the lesion is static, enlarging or reducing. The optic nerve head (optic disc) is most
commonly used as a fixed reference point for retinal and choroidal lesions.
● It is also possible to obtain approximate measurements of the height and depth
of gross lesions by making use of the fact that a difference of focus of one dioptre
represents a difference of level of 0.3-0.4 mm.
10
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
AND
AENT
Z
UIPM
[a]
(b)
Figure 1.6(a,b) Close direct ophthalmoscopy. It is sometimes ea sier to put the ophthalmoscope
OPHTHAL
(Welch Allynj in the correct position First (a) before attempting to view the ocular Fundus (b). Note
how close the instrument is to the animal and that the observer's fingers are resting against the
animal's head.
Technique
● If the observer is emmetropic (normal vision), a 0 setting is most commonly used
when examining the fundus. Spectacle wearers should remove their spectacles and
set the prescription of the relevant spectacle lens in the lens aperture of the direct
ophthalmoscope.
● It is crucial to keep the light intensity as louw as possible, especially when the tapetum
is highly reflective, as in the normal cat or any animal in which retinal thinning
results in hyperreflectivity.
● Note that fundus examination can detect areas that are thickened or raised {appear
 dull) and areas that are thinner than usual (appear hyperreflective).
● Ideally, the observer's right eye is used to examine the animal's right eye and the
observer's left eye is used to examine the animal's left eye.
head with the middle and ring fingers. The field of view becomes larger as the
distance between the observer and subject decreases, so the maximum available
field of view is obtained with the observer as close as possible to the subject's
eye.
● Fundus examination is straightforward if the ophthalmoscope has been positioned
d sns a y s sh  a   a p a
before the observer's eye is brought as close as possible to the viewing aperture. Thus
the ophthalmoscope is correctly aligned and in place before the observer attempts
to look at the fundus.
● Once the fundus has been examined, the ophthalmoscope can be used for exami
nation of more anterior features, although it is easier to use other magnifying devices
{e.g. loupe, otoscope, slit lamp) for examination of the anterior segment. The
ophthalmoscope is kept in the same position as before, close to the eye, and the
lens diaphragm rotated clockwise in order to move up through the lenses {usually
from 0 to +20).
·As the observer increases the strength of the plus lenses, the focus of observation
gradually extends anteriorly, so the magnified details of the fundus, vitreous, lens,
iris, aqueous, cornea and lids are successively visualised.
● The approximate settings (±5D) required when the ophthalmoscope is placed 2cm
Ophthalmic Equipment and Examination
11
from the patient are: eyelids and ocular surface +15 to +20; anterior chamber and
D
iris +14 to +12; lens +12 to +8; fundus 0. When the 0cular media {vitreous, lens,
Z
aqueous humour and cornea) are clear, as in the normal eye, it will not be easy to
A
focus on essentially transparent structures.
HN
Z
O
EXAMINATION
AMINATI
PROTOCOL
IW]
EXA
● The protocol seeks to provide a logical order of examination; it is usual to proceed
from external to internal, so that the fundus is examined last (Figure 1.7)
HTHAL
● Both eyes and their adnexa should be examined
● Note that whilst the examination protocol is standard not every diagnostic proce-
dure will be required on each patient
OP
· Most ophthalmic examinations in domestic animals are best performed in the
minimally-restrained, conscious, non-sedated animal
· Ophthalmic examination can be summarised as *hands off' in the light, then hands
on' in the light without any aids other than magnification. Examination in the light
is followed by examination in the dark, using first a light source and magnification
and second ophthalmoscopy, both indirect and direct
+ It is important to make careful drawings of any abnormalities detected: meticulous
recording encourages proper examination. Photography is also of value. Sequential
recording provides an accurate record of the disease process and response to
treatment
12
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
OPHTHALMICEXAMINATION
Z
Animal's Name
Date of Examination
Reference Number(s)
Owner's Name, Address and Telephone Number
E
Z
M
UIP
7
E
Referring Veterinary Surgeon
U
M
Species..
Breed.
Age..
.Sex..
.Weight.
IW]
OPHTHAL
E
Primary complaint 
General examination
Ophthalmic examination .
Diagnosis.
Examination technique:
Mydriatic Yes  No:Penlight Yes  No: Magnification Yes  No:
Slit lamp biomicroscopy Yes  No : Indirect ophthalmoscopy Yes  No
Direct ophthalmoscopy － Distant Yes  No : Close Yes  No 
Diagnostic tests:
Schirmer Tear Test Yes No STT I right... lef.... [STT I..].
Scrape Yes No :Swab Yes  No :Culture Yes No:
Impression smear YesNo: Cytology Yes No: Biopsy Yes No
Tonometry YesNo IOP right.... IOP left.... GonioscopyYesNo
Diagnostic imaging ....
..ERG.
Ophthalmic examination
RightLeft
Illustrations and comments
 Orbit and periorbita
Eyelids
Lacrimal system
Conjunctiva
Limbus, episclera, sclera
Cornea
Anterior chamber
Drainage angle
Iris and pupil
Lens
Vitreous
Fundus
Neurological examination
Vision
 Palpebral/corneal reflexes
PLR and related responses
Figure 1.7F
Record of ophthalmic examination. The columns marked right and left eye can be
marked with a simple tick (normal] or cross [abnormal] and Further comments added under lllus-
trations and comments'. Such examination forms can have diagrams of the eye as part of the Form
cnd abnormalities noted can be added to these. However, when different species are examined it
is often more accurate to make line drawings of the eye and its abnormalities for each case.
Ophthalmic Equipment and Examination
13
BASIC TECHNIQUE OF PATIENT EXAMINATION
AND
● Careful observation of the whole patient (without handling), can usefully be done
whilst taking the history
IN
·Physical examination of the whole patient
● Neuro-opbthalmological examination ± full neurological examination if indicated
O
(see Appendix 4, pp 353-355)
· Opbthalmic examination of both eyes and their adnexa
NIW
Box 1.1  Basic principles of routine ophthalmic examination
OPHTHAL
1
Always examine borh eyes in light and darkness and always look internally as well
as exrernally
2 Under normal lighing conditions perform a ‘hands off assessment initilly (naked
eye) and then a “hands on' examination of the adnexa and external eye (magnifi-
cation may be essential
3  Basic neuro-ophthalmological tests performed in the light: oculovestibular reflex,
menace and visual tracking responses, palpebral and corneal reflexes
4  Under conditions of darkness check for ocular symmetry and examine the internal
eye:
o Symmetry of gaze, pupil size and shape and opacities in the ocular media - distant
direct ophthalmoscopy
0 Anterior segment (external eye to lens) - light source ± magnification
o Posterior segment (vireous to fundus) - indirect and close direct ophthalmoscopy
5  Basic neuro-ophthalmological tests performed in the dark: pupillary light reflex
swinging Hlashlight test, dazzle reflex and visual tracking using a beam of light
6  Perform relevant diagnostic tests (see text) after completing the routine examination
7 If unsure seek advice - do not adopt a 'wait and see' approach
Neuro-ophthalmological examination
Visiontesting
● Menace response of each eye in turn, with the other eye covered. A threatening
gesture should be made, without touching the patient or creating air turbulence in
order to elicit a protective blink. The pathway for this learned response involves the
optic nerve (Il) as the afferent arm, central cerebral and cerebellar interconnections
and the facial nerve (Vll) as the efferent arm.
● Fixating response associated with visual tracking using, for example, cotton wool
balls dropped from a height, or the fine beam of a penlight playing upon surfaces;
the latter method is more effective under dim or dark light conditions.
· Visual placing reaction. Small animals can be carried towards an object that they
can see, such as a table surface. Normal animals approaching a table in front of
14
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
AND
table. Peripheral vision can be assessed by approaching the table from the side. Large
animals can be led towards a kerbstone, step or similar.
● Maze test, for example, negotiating in a strange environment or in a maze con-
AENT
structed of haphazardly placed obstacles under both normal light and dim lighting
conditions. Blindfolding allows each eye to be assessed in turn.
Z
O
Pupillary light reflex (PLR), swinging Flashlight test and dazzle reflex
A
pe pap aaisodi usuo oi sdnd qoq sasneo aa auo ou suus ul uauq v e
7
consensual response). The pathway for the reflex is subcortical and involves the optic
U
M
nerve {Il) as the afferent arm and parasympathetic fibres in the oculomotor nerve
{Ill) as the efferent arm. The afferent fibres cross in the optic chiasma and pretec-
OPHTHAL
tum to influence both oculomotor nerve nuclei. Iris sphincter-muscle function must
also be normal for the PLR to be normal. It is usual for initial pupillary constric-
tion to be followed by a slight redilation, this phenomenon is termed ‘pupillary
escape’ and is due to light adaptation of the photoreceptors.
● If the light source is moved rapidly from one eye to the other (swinging flashlight
test), a direct response can be observed in the first eye and a consensual response in
the fellow eye in the normal animal. The fellow eye will then remain constricted
while the light is focussed upon it (direct pupillary response).
● The dazzle reflex provides some indication of retinal and optic nerve function, as
well as that of the facial nerve. A bright light (preferably a halogen light source)
shone into the eye along the visual axis should elicit a rapid blink. The pathway
for the reflex is subcortical and involves the optic nerve (Il) as the afferent arm.
rostral colliculus, subcortical connections and the facial nerve {VIl) as the efferent
arm.
Reflex pupillary dilation
If the animal is placed in a darkened room for some 30 seconds, reflex pupillary dila-
tion occurs. The afferent arm is the optic nerve {Il) and the efferent arm is reduced
parasympathetic tone to the pupillary constrictor muscle leaving the actions of the
dilator muscle, which is under sympathetic control, unopposed.
Palpebral and corneal reflexes
These reflexes are used to test sensory innervation to the periocular skin, eyelids
(palpebrae) and cornea. The afferent arm is the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal
nerve (V,) and the efferent arm for the palpebral reflex is the facial nerve (VIl) - the
normal response is a rapid blink. The efferent arm for the corneal reflex is the facial
nerve and the abducens nerve (Vl) - the normal response is a rapid blink and retrac-
tion of the globe {retractor buibi muscle) with an indirect mechanical effect that causes
protrusion of the third eyelid (nictitating reflex).
Oculovestibular reflex
If the animal's head is moved in different directions, both eyes tend to maintain their
original direction of gaze. The eyes move slowly in the opposite direction to the move-
ment and then, under the influence of the vestibular system, flick rapidly in the direc
tion of the movement. In normal animals the eyes move in unison and the physiological
nystagmus ceases as soon as the head movements stop.
Ophthalmic Equipment and Examination
15
STAGES OF OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
AND
Daylight or artificial light (naked eye ± basic magnification)
T
Adnexa (eyelids, lacrimal apparatus, orbit, para-orbital areas)
● Note eye size, symmetry, position and movement
● Observe and palpate the supra-orbital fossa in horses
O
● Palpate the incomplete, bony, orbital rim and orbital ligament of cat and dog and the
complete, bony, orbital rim of horses and farm animals {e.g. cattle, sheep and pig)
NIW
● Check normal blink {adequacy and rate) and protective blink (e.g. menace response
U
and palpebral reflex)
EXA
W]
● Check apposition of the eyelids to the globe (so-called “congruity')
OPHTHAL
● Note direction of the upper eyelid lashes in dogs, horses and farm animals
● Observe presence, position and size of the lacrimal puncta
● Check for presence of the nasal ostium in horses and cattle
· Check for presence and position of the third eyelid
Globe
● Note the appearance of the ocular surface. In the presence of tear film dysfunction
or ocular surface disease there will be disruption of the corneal light reflex (the reflec-
tion of a light source on the cornea)
● Decide what diagnostic tests will be needed if the ocular surface is abnormal
· Carry out a brief preview examination of the "white' of the eye {bulbar conjunctiva,
episclera and sclera), limbus, cornea, anterior chamber, pupil, iris and lens
Darkness (light source ± magnification or slit lamp biomicroscope)
· Perform detailed examination of bulbar conjunctiva, episclera and sclera; note
colour, thickness, blood vessels and degree of pigmentation
· Examine the limbus, note its definition and degree of pigmentation and the dis-
position of any blood vessels
● Examine the cornea, note its lustre and clarity, the presence and position {including
depth) of any opacities, the presence and depth of any blood vessels; decide whether
further diagnostic tests will be required
● In horses, note the grey zones (medial and lateral cornea) which mark the insertion
● Observe the depth and transparency of the anterior chamber, note the position and
colour of any opacities. Focal illumination from a number of different angles is
rewarding
● Examine the filtration angle of cats and horses by direct inspection; in dogs a
gonioscopy lens is used for this purpose at a later stage of examination if
required
● Note the appearance, position and stability of the iris. Pay particular attention to
the pupillary margin and note whether it is regular or irregular in outline, observe
the grarula iridica present in herbivores
● For comprehensive examination of the lens, vitreous and fundus mydriasis is essen-
tial and a mydriatic may be applied to the eye once other diagnostic tests have been
completed
16
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
ND
● Observe the position and clarity of the lens; localise any lens opacities; in old dogs,
note whether the pearly grey opalescence of nuclear sclerosis of the lens is obvious
to the naked eye
IN
● Examine the vitreous, noting whether any opacities are present
E
UIPM
Darkness (direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy)
● Examine the ocular fundus using indirect ophthalmoscopy, followed by direct
ophthalmoscopy
E
● Distant direct ophthalmoscopy is used as a screening method for symmetry of gaze.
M
equality of pupil size and shape, identification of opacities in the ocular media and
the distinction of cataract and senile nuclear sclerosis of the lens - cataract appears
OPHTHAL
as a dark, often black, silhouette, while nuclear sclerosis does not
● With indirect and close direct ophthalmoscopy, note the appearance of the optic
nerve and immediate peripapillary area, the retinal vasculature, choroidal vascula-
ture, tapetal fundus (when present) and non-tapetal fundus
● If haemorrhage is suspected on fundus examination, use the red-free light option
haemorrhage
● If depressions or elevations are suspected on fundus examination {e.g. papillary or
peripapillary coloboma, papilloedema) the slit beam option on the direct ophthal-
moscope can be used to aid confirmation
Order of diagnostic tests
The order in which appropriate diagnostic tests might be performed after initial oph-
thalmic examination. Those tests placed in parentheses are not performed as part of
routine assessment.
● (Corneal sensitivity measurement) - This measurement can be approximated by
using a fine wisp of cotton wool touched on the cornea from the side, a blink should
be elicited
● Schirmer tear test (STT) to check production of the aqueous portion of the tear film:
 STT I must be performed before any preparations are applied to the eye (STT II is
less commonly performed). This test is illustrated later in Section 3, pp 96-97.
for a few seconds. In normal animals, the pH of the conjunctival sac is on the
alkaline side of normal.This is a useful test if chemicalinjury is known or
suspected.
●Eyelid or conjunctival suwabs and scrapes (may be taken without using local anaes-
thetic): A pre-moistened (e.g. with culture medium) sterile swab is rolled against the
palpebral conjunctiva of the ventral fornix - usually from a bout the centre of the eyelid
medially so that the third eyelid prevents inadvertent corneal damage (Figure 1.8).
· Corneal scrapes and suwabs require prior application of a topical local anaesthetic,
usually proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.5 % (Figure 1.9). It is important to ensure
that the whole area is sampled, especially the peripheral part of the ulcer, as this is
where organisms may be replicating {Figure 1.10).
● Smears can be made using clean, dry, glass slides {similar technique to that for
haematology preparations). The slides are air dried, usually fixed in alcohol and then
stained (e.g. Gram stain).
● Fluorescein sodium is an orange solution that changes to green in alkaline condi-
Ophthalmic Equipment and Examination
17
AND
scrapes have been taken. Fluorescein 1% or 2% is most commonly used to delin-
eate corneal ulcers. A 2% solution is best used to check for aqueous leakage (Seidel
test). Topical fluorescein application as part of diagnostic tests is illustrated in
Sections 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7.
Z
●Rose bengal is a dark red solution which is not widely used in veterinary medicine
O
as it is irritant to the eye. It is a vital stain, and will be taken up by exposed cells
MINATI
with inadequate mucin cover. Rose bengal is of value in the study of ocular-surface
disease, dry-eye syndromes and ulcerative keratitis. Topical rose bengal can be used
after topical fluorescein and is illustrated in the equine Section 7, p. 289.
EXA
● Tests that might be used to investigate nasolacrimal drainage include application of
W]
fluorescein 1% to demonstrate patency of the nasolacrimal drainage system, can-
HTHAL
nulation, irrigation, dacryocystorhinography and catheterisation of the whole
system.
● (Tonometry) - Topical local anaesthetic should be applied to the cornea if the
OP
intraocular pressure is to be measured by contact tonometry (e.g. Schiotz, Mackay-
Marg or TonoPen@). The Schiotz and TonoPen@ tonometers are those most
commonly used in veterinary practice (Figure 1.11{a,b).
● (Gonioscopy) - In the dog, particularly, the iridocorneal (drainage) angle can only
be examined using a gonioscopy lens (specialist procedure). Topical local anaesthetic
should be applied to the cornea prior to the procedure.
● Biopsy samples, including needle aspirates, would be taken after other routine diag-
nostic tests {amethocaine hydrochloride, applied for some 30 seconds by direct
contact using a cotton-tipped applicator, is normally selected if the sample is to be
taken under topical anaesthesia).
● A mydriatic may be applied after routine diagnostic tests and gonioscopy have been
completed. Tropicamide 1% takes about 15 minutes to dilate the pupil in adult
animals. In dogs and cats the effects last for up to three hours and rather longer
than this in most farm animals and horses.
● Any other diagnostic drugs that affect the pupil (e.g. phenylephrine or pilocarpine)
should be applied after the ophthalmic examination and once other diagnostic tests
have been completed.
test and is used to assess retinal function, especially in cases of sudden blindness or
as part of cataract patient assessment (specialist procedure).
Figure  1.8  Taking  a conjunctival
swab from the ventromedicl conjunctival
sac of a cat.
18
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
OPHTHALMIC EQUIPMENT AND
EXAMINATION
Figure 1.9  Application of topiccl
local ancesthetic to the eye.The hand
holding the drops is steacied by resting
it on the animal's head.
Figure 1.10 The blunt (handle) end of
a disposable scalpel blade can be used
to obtain a corneal scrape.
[a}
(b)
Figure 1.1 1(a,b) Tonometry using α Schiotz tonometer in a dog (a) and a TonoPen? in a horse
(b).
Ophthalmic Equipment and Examination 
19
Record keeping (Figure 1.7, p. 12)
OPHTHALMIC EQUIPMENT AND
● Accurate recording {using simple line drawings as part of the clinical record or
employing a standard ophthalmic examination form)
·Photography
SECTON2
OPHTHALMIC EMERGENCIES
OPHTHAlMIC EMErGENCIES
AND TRAUMA
TRAUM
AND
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
23
INTRODUCTION
An emergency is an unexpected event requiring immediate action. In all the examples
listed below in Box 2.1, prompt and correct action will offer the best chance of full
S
recovery at least cost to the client. The severity of the situation must be assessed as
accurately as posible atthe frst examination, otherwise the best opportunity to restore
Z
normality is lost. Management options include referral to a specialist veterinary
ophthalmologist if the facilities of the practice are inadequate or the expertise of the
ER
TRAUm.
staff is insufficient to cope with the problem.
M
ZD
Box 2.1 Ophthalmic emergencies
OPHTH,
 Acute exophthalmos including globe prolapse (globe prolapse commonest in dog)
Orbital inflammation - abscess and cellulitis (all species, but commonest in dog)
Foreign bodies (all species)
 Gross trauma to globe and/or adnexa (all species)
Complicated corneal ulceration and corneal infection (all species)
Thermal and chemical injuries (all species)
Acute uveitis (mainly dog and horse)
Acute glaucoma (mainly dog, but other species can be affected)
Sudden loss of vision (all species)
 Sudden onset of ocular pain (all species)
There are some general rules that are common to all species, of which meticulous
examination of the eyes and the rest of the animal is the most important, followed by
the ability to decide, at an early stage, the most appropriate course of action, includ.
ing prioritisation of the clinical findings (Figure 2.1(a,b)). Sedation and local nerve
blocks are helpful in the assessment of large-animal ocular emergencies and, some-
assessment in all species. Topical local anaesthesia may be a useful adjunct to ocular
examination and may also be used to reduce the amount of general anaesthetic required
in patients under general anaesthesia, but it should not be used as part of any treat-
ment regime. Systemic analgesia is helpful for both the examination and subsequent
management of many ophthalmic emergencies. Indwelling lavage devices will make
treatment of large animals with painful eyes very much easier and, certainly, more
 precise. For periocular and ocular insults in herbivores, and for some deep penetrat-
ing injuries in carnivores, prophylactic tetanus treatment should be administered.
When intraocular surgery is required it is assumed that it will be performed under
 general anaesthesia and a brief resumé of routine general anaesthesia is outlined in
Appendix 3. For extraocular and adnexal surgery the anaesthetic techniques that may
be selected are mentioned briefly in the text. Similar considerations apply to surgical
procedures outlined in other sections of the book.
24
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
IES
GENCII
TRAUMA
MER
[a)
(b)
OPHTHALMIC
ND
Figure 2.1(a,b)Gross appearance (a) and section (b) of a ruptured globe (with acknowledge
ments to J.R.B. Mould]
ACUTe EXOPHTHALMOS (PROPTOSIS)
The differential diagnosis of acute exophthalmos or proptosis (forward displacement
of the globe) is not always easy, as the location of the underlying abnormality can be
periorbital, orbital or a combination of both and, on occasion, there may also be globe
involvement. Causes include trauma, periorbital and orbital infection, inflammation,
abscessation and haemorrhage. Rarely, aggressive tumour growth with neoplastic infil
tration can also present acutely. The commonest causes of orbital neoplasia are out.
lined later.
TRAUMATIC GLOBE PROPTOSIS AND PROLAPSE
Traumatic globe proptosis and globe prolapse (dislocation of the globe beyond the
plane of the eyelids) are usually the result of direct impact to the eye, orbit or peri-
orbita, but can also be associated with head and neck injuries. Adnexal, sub-
conjunctival and orbital haemorrhage are common accompaniments; the latter may
dissect anteriorly beneath the conjunctiva.
Acute proptosis
In cases of acute proptosis, provided that the globe is retained within the orbit and
within the plane of the eyelids, treatment is conservative and consists of ocular lubri-
cation to protect the cornea, systemic analgesics and restricted activity. Early applica-
tion to the periocular region of an ice pack wrapped in a towel may help to reduce
 periocular swelling. Emergency tarsorrbapby (suturing the upper and lower eyelids
together) to provide effective tamponade is sometimes needed if progressive proptosis
Occurs as a result of, for example, continuing retrobulbar haemorrhage. Possible com-
plications of extensive haemorrhage include an increase of intraocular pressure {IOP)
 r       
Globe prolapse (Figure 2.2(a,b))
Globe prolapse is commoner in dogs than other species and in commoner brachy-
cephalic dogs with a shallow orbit. It may sometimes occur if the animal is not handled
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
25
properly, especially if the dog is manipulated by the scruff of the neck. The Persian cat
is unusual amongst cat breeds in having a relatively shallow orbit. Globe prolapse is
rarer and more serious in non-brachycephalic dogs and other species because more
force will be required to dislocate the globe from a deeper orbit. The prognosis for
IES
normal vision in the long term is always guarded because traction damage to the optic
nerve often results in Wallerian degeneration and eventual optic atrophy. Fewer than
C1
Z
50% of dogs retain vision in the long term and in cats almost 100% will be left with
a blind eye. Avulsion of extraocular muscles (especially the medial rectus muscle) and
TRAUM
nerve damage are common, so the animal is sometimes left with a squint.
L
M
L
OPHTHALMI(
ND
[a}
(b)
Figure 2.2(a,b)   Globe prolapse of the right eye in α Pekingese following direct trauma to the
head fom a kick The zygoma was also Fractured. The clinical presentction of this 'red eye' is α
combination of subconjunctival haemorrhage and venous congestion - the latter because the eyelids
have gone into spasm behind the globe equator, resulting in impeded venous return (a). Following
restoration of the prolapsed globe to the orbit, the lateral canthotomy was closed and the upper
and lower eyelids were sutured together (b). Three horizontal mattress sutures of 4-0 silk were laid,
withverticalentrythroughthelowereyelidskin,viatheloweranduppereyelidmarginsandupper
eyelid skin, horizontally through hollow silastic tubes and then vertically back to emerge From the
lower eyelid skin. The sutures do not penetrate the Uull thickness of the eyelids. The position of all
the sutures should be checked before they are tied, incorporating cdditional horizontal hollow silcas-
fic tubes For each lower eyelid suture. The cim of the temporary tarsorrhaphy is to provide good
ocular surface protection whilst ensuring that that the suture tension is spread so that there is no
possibility of inadvertent abrasion to the underlying cornea.
Diagnosis of globe prolapse
● This is straightforward and can usually be made from the owner's description
● History may be helpful (e.g. road traffic accidents and fighting) or unhelpful
(e.g. genuinely unknown and non-accidental injury)
● Check for and prioritise any other injuries present (i.e. may need to stabilise the
patient before attending to the eye)
● Assessment of potential ocular damage (e.g. globe rupture) can be aided by
ultrasonography
Treatment
● Speed is of the essence, so the animal should be seen immediately. The owner may
26
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
gently applying pressure to the region with soft material such as a clean tea towel
or cotton handkerchief that has been soaked in water. This action sometimes restores
the globe to the orbit in brachycephalic dogs, but the owner should still seek rapid
veterinary attention.
E
● Very soon after prolapse has occurred the eyelids go into spasm behind the equator
of the globe making reduction more difficult and adding to the oedema and marked
Z
E
vascular congestion {redness) which are a rapid consequence of this problem {Figure
A
2.2(a). Once this situation is reached it may be impossible to reposition the globe
ER
TRAUM
without general anaesthesia.
M
● Provided other injuries permit, and the optic nerve remains intact, general anaes-
E
thesia is performed without delay. Following application of ophthalmic ointment
OPHTHALMI(
with an oily excipient (e.g. fucidic acid gel or chloramphenicol ointment), the eye is
ZD
repositioned by gently easing the eyelids over the globe (not by simply attempting
△
to force the eye back into the orbit). It is often sensible to perform a generous lateral
canthotomy before attempting this manoeuvre if swelling is marked. If the globe has
been completely dislocated from the orbit and the optic nerve avulsed, then it is
better to remove the globe.
· Once the eye is back in the orbit it should be retained in place by temporary
tarsorrhaphy (Figure 2.2(b)). The upper and lower lids are sewn together using ap-
proximately three horizontal mattress sutures of non-absorbable soft material such
as 3-0 to 4-0 silk. These are preplaced so as to avoid contact between the sutures
and the globe. Stents, made from, for example, silastic tubing are used to support
the horizontal passage of the sutures as they are often under considerable tension.
If a lateral canthotomy has been performed it is closed after the tarsorrhaphy has
been completed.
● If there are no contraindications, the patient is usually given a single dose of corti
costeroid (e.g. dexamethasone) at the time of surgery and a 7-10 day course of sys-
temic antibiotic. The sutures are removed (following topical local anaesthesia) after
14 days. A lateral squint (because of avulsion of the medial rectus muscle) may
be obvious at the time of the prolapse, but is more likely to be observed when the
tarsorrhaphy is taken down.
ORBITAL INFLAMMATION
The origins of orbital cellulitis and orbital abscess may be identical, and both can be
a cause of proptosis. Orbital cellulitis is typified by diffuse inflammation, whereas a
retrobulbar abscess (orbital abscess) is characterised by localised inflammation. Other
less common ca uses of orbital inflammation include acute inflammation of the lacrimal
(dacryoadenitis) or zygomatic gland (sialoadenitis), acute masticatory myositis and
acute extraocular polymyositis, all of which can present as acute exophthalmos.
Dacryoadenitis and sialoadenitis may be associated with infection, in which case a
course of systemic antibiotic is indicated. Anti-infammatory therapy may also be
required if the inflammation fails to respond to antibiotics. For acute masticatory
myositis and acute extra ocular polymyositis, immunosuppressive levels of systemic cor
ticosteroids (prednisolone 2 mg/kg) are indicated initially and then slowly tapered off
if there is a positive response.
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
27
RETRObULbAR (ORbItAL) ABSCeSS
Clinical signs (Figure 2.3)
● Not uncommon; affected animals usually present with unexplained acute onset of
IES
ocular discomfort and they may be pyrexic
● A history of previous trauma, including fights and stick injuries, is helpful, but may
Z
be separated from the acute onset of clinical signs by days or weeks. Infections of
E
the nose, mouth or sinuses also have the potential to involve the orbit
Wn
·● Affected animals are often very reluctant to eat and there is invariably severe pain
M
 on attempting to open the mouth
● There is often marked conjunctival injection and a mucopurulent ocular discharge.
Conjunctival oedema (chemosis) may also be present
W7
● Exophthalmos, which is generally, but not invariably, axial (i.e. there is no associ-
Z
人
ated squint). Ocular motility is usually restricted because of the space-occupying
OPHTHA
effect of the inflammation
● The third eyelid is prominent
Figure 2.3 Retrobulbar abscess in a dog.
Ocular redness, exophthalmos and third eyelid
prominence are the most obvious clinical
Features, although a sparse ocular discharge
was also present.
Additional investigations
● It is important to differentiate orbital inflammation from orbital neoplasia (see later)
● Routine haematology may indicate neutrophilia with a shift to the left
● Diagnostic imaging; ultrasonography with or without ultrasound-guided needle
biopsy can be helpful. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI) are less frequently employed in the diagnosis of inflammatory orbital
disease
· Careful examination of the oral cavity under general anaesthesia: redness, a soft,
fluctuating swelling or a draining tract behind the last upper molar tooth may be
present
Treatment of retrobulbar abscess
● Systemic analgesia will be required while the animal is in pain, whichever course of
action is adopted.
● A retrobulbar abscess consists of a localised or loculated abscess that can be treated
with a course of broad-spectrum systemic antibiotic {usually for three weeks
28
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
minimum) in all species. A combination of cephalexin (effective against aerobic
bacteria) and metronidazole (effective against anaerobic bacteria) is normally
selected.
● Abscess drainage is an alternative in carnivores, but only if there is obvious redness
E
and a fluctuating swelling or a draining tract behind the last upper molar tooth. The
animal is anaesthetised (an analgesic premedicant is sensible) and positioned with a
Z
head down tilt. A cuffed endotracheal tube (uncuffed e/t tube in the cat) is passed
A
 ot pns a ueo ieu q an dp m aed si xud aui p
ER
TRAUM
endotracheal tube. The abscess is drained immediately posterior to the last upper
M
molar tooth. A small nick is made in the mucous membrane with a scalpel and the
E
actual probing of the region is best done with fine haemostats; sharp instruments
C
OPHTHALMIC
ZD
should be avoided. Success is indicated when free drainage is established and pus or
serosanguinous fluid is released. The material should be subjected to a smear for
cytology, as well as culture and sensitivity, so that the correct choice of broad-
spectrum systemic antibiotic is made. The wound is left open.
ORBITAL CELLULITIS
Orbital cellulitis is, strictly speaking, diffuse inflammation of structures posterior to
the orbital septum, and is most commonly caused by infection. Orbital cellulitis is rare,
but can be life threatening because of the proximity of the brain and meninges. Any
infection involving the nose, mouth or sinuses has the potential to spread to the orbit,
but occasionally there is extension from sites such as the pituitary gland (e.g. pituitary
abscess) and equine guttural pouch. The most frequently identified causes include punc-
ture wounds of the periorbita and eye, penetrating foreign bodies that migrate from
the oral cavity and sinusitis. Actinobacillosis (Actinobacillus lignieresi) is a possible
infectious ca use in herbivores, cattle particularly.
Clinical signs
● Similar to those of retrobulbar abscess, but the periorbital swelling is more diffuse
and there is often marked swelling of the eyelids and conjunctiva. Ocular motility
may be restricted if the inflammation surrounds the globe
● The onset is usually sudden and exophthalmos can be a key presenting sign; third-
eyelid prominence is not always present
● Painful and serious
● Pyrexia and anorexia may be present
● Leukocytosis can be marked
Diagnosis
● Diagnostic imaging can be helpful
● Needle aspiration or biopsy is required to provide material for culture and cytology
or histology
Treatment of orbital cellulitis
· Any wound should be thoroughly cleaned and debrided; more radical excision may
be required if there is a deep penetrating injury or tissue necrosis
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
29
● Hot compresses can be helpful
● A course of systemic antibiotic should be given as outlined above for a retrobulbar
abscess and, ideally, selected on the basis of culture and sensitivity testing
● Exposed cornea and conjunctiva require protection with a bland ophthalmic lubri-
IES
cant, with or without antibiotic (e.g. chloramphenicol ointment), during the period
of globe prominence
● Systemic analgesics will be required for as long as pain persists
Z
L
● If the cellulitis is a consequence of a deep penetrating injury then prophylactic
tetanus treatment should be administered
Y
WO
M
A
L
ORbItAL NEOPLASIA
W7
Z
Orbital neoplasia is an uncommon cause of acute exophthalmos as most types of
HIH
orbital neoplasia are associated with a chronic time course. There is a wide range of
possible tumour types and acute onset exophthalmos is usually associated with highly-
OPH
of primary tumours is likely to be orbital or nasal, the latter invade the orbit via
the thin medial orbital wall. Secondary tumours are often multifocal and the orbit is
one of a number of sites involved. Multicentric lymphoma is the commonest second-
ary tumour to involve the orbit and affected borses, in particular, can present
   ae   i     
considered.
Diagnosis and differential diagnosis
● The classical signs of an orbital space-occupying lesion may be present (exophthal-
mos and third-eyelid prominence)
+ In addition there may be some or all of globe deviation, resistance to globe retropul-
sion, vascular congestion, chemosis, ocular discharge, nasal discharge, reduced
airflow from the nostrils, epistaxis and intraoral swelling
· Clinical signs may also be more generalised, particularly if the orbital involvement
is indicative of metastatic spread
● Diagnostic imaging techniques (radiography, ultrasonography, computed tomo
graphy, magnetic resonance imaging) are key to establishing the location and extent
of the tumour
● Accurate diagnosis invariably requires histological examination of biopsy material
and allows management options to be defined more precisely
Management
● The prognosis for tumours associated with acute onset exophthalmos is guarded to
gra ve
● The major treatment options are surgical removal, radiotherapy and chemo-
therapy, with or without sacrifice of the eye. The location and extent of most orbital
tumours render the retention of a functional eye most unlikely if surgery is
undertaken
● Such cases are best referred
30
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
FOREIGN BODIES
The majority of foreign bodies are associated with acute onset of ocular pain, ble-
pharospasm and lacrimation. The history can be very helpful and careful examination
E
often reveals the source of discomfort.
C
Z
E
Clinical approach
A
TRAUM
ER
to specific events, like the last period of exercise or to factors in the animals
M
E
environment
U
● Careful examination of the eye, adnexa and periocular region is crucial
● It is usually sensible to examine the eye following topical application of local anaes-
thetic (e.g- proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.5%)
OPHTHAL
A
● In large animals, systemic sedation/analgesia and an auriculopalpebral (AP) nerve
block will aid examination
● In some small animals, and occasionally in large animals, the eye is so painful that
general anaesthesia should be selected at the outset
● Diagnostic imaging is an important part of clinical assessment (radiography, ultra-
sonography and CT scanning)
● Magnetic resonance imaging must not be used if there is any possibility of magnetic
foreign material (ferrous metals)
Clinical signs
● Acute discomfort, with excessive lacrimation, blepharospasm ± conjunctival
oedema are the most common early clinical signs. If the foreign body is not
identified and removed then the discharge may quickly become mucopurulent or
haemorrhagic.
● The foreign body may be visible. However, if it is not immediately obvious a thor-
ough examination of all aspects of the conjunctiva should be carried out, looking
carefully under the upper and lower eyelids and beneath the third eyelid (see Section
3, pp 101-109 for the technique). The upper and lower puncta should be inspected.
The cornea, limbus and “white' of the eye should be examined minutely, followed
by the internal ocular structures. Magnification is often required, particularly in, for
example, small rodents.
● If no obvious cause is found then referral should be considered, particularly when
the history is suggestive of a foreign body. It is not accepta ble to adopt a wait and
see approach as foreign bodies can migrate to less accessible sites, including within
the eye.
INTRAOCULAR AND INTrAORBItAL FOREIGN bODIES
The history may be helpful, but in many cases there is no history and it is the pres-
ence of a relatively innocuous wound to the periocular region or globe, or a change
of ocular appearance, that prompts further investigation. Some foreign bodies,
typically gunshot, will have penetrated and traversed the globe before they become
embedded in the orbit. The entry wound in gunshot injuries is not always obvious in
hairy animals and any unexplained periocular or ocular wound should prompt further
investigation, including diagnostic imaging (e.g. ultrasonography).
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
31
Many foreign bodies are relatively inert (glass, high quality plastic, stone and high-
quality alloys such as stainless steel) whereas others (organic material, low-grade
plastic, iron, copper and low-quality alloys) are not well tolerated. Gunshot injuries
are common in cats (usually non-accidental injury) and gun dogs {usually accidental
IES
injury).
 Metallic foreign bodies that have travelled at high speed into the eye or orbit will
Z
thalmitis is less likely (Figure 2.4(a-c). In contrast, intraocular or orbital organic mate-
A
rial may well provoke endophthalmitis or orbital cellulitis. Organic material may reach
MER
TRAUM
the orbit or eye directly (e.g. stake injuries from wood) or following migration from
other sites, such as the conjunctival sac (e.g. grass seeds).
WI
OPHTHALMIC
ND
[a}
(b)
Figure 2.4(a-e) Intraocular foreign body in a dog
[aj. This was the result of a ricochet - an cirgun pellet
had struck a tree and then the dog. The 22 pellet had
apparently entered the posterior globe via a dorsolat-
eral periocular skin wound (a), it had then been
deflected anteriorly by the orbital wall, to lodge finally
just beneath the cornea (b). The intraocular damage
was devastating, as the pellet (c) had Flattened when
it hit the tree.
[c)
Diagnosis
●History
● The naked-eye appearance is highly variable, ranging from no indication of exter-
nal damage to complete disruption of the globe
● Comprehensive examination of the periocular region, adnexa and eye
· Diagnostic imaging techniques may include orbital radiography, ultrasound exami-
nation and CT scans. MRI may be used to identify non-metallic foreign bodies not
identified by the other techniques, but must not be used if there is any chance of the
foreign body consisting of magnetic foreign material
32
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Management
The assessment and management of these cases requires specialist assistance, unless
the eye is beyond repair and painful, in which case it is best removed.
IES
GENCI
LACRIMAL SYSTEM FOREIGN BODIES
Foreign bodies (FBs) may become lodged in the puncta, canaliculi or nasolacrimal
AER
TRAUM
ducts. Investigation is as for lacrimal dysfunction (see later) and should be performed
EM
in such a way that the foreign body is not inadvertently flushed into the narrow
OPHTHALMIC
intraosseous portion of the nasolacrimal duct (Figure 2.5{a,b,c)).
ND
[a)
[b}
[c]
Figure 2.5(a-e) Foreign body (grass seed) in the upper punctum of a dog. A unilateral profuse
mucopurulent ocular discharge is the most striking Feature of the clinical presentation (a), but the
owner had also reported intermittent haemorrhage. Once the discharge had been carefully cleaned
away it was apparent that the haemorrhage was a consequence of the mechanical irritation from
α Foreign body whose tip can be seen protruding fom the upper punctum (b). The grass seed has
been removed and the upper punctum and canaliculus cannulated prior to gentle irrigation to remove
any remaining small particulate matter via the lower canaliculus and punctum (c).
Treatment
● Visible foreign bodies are grasped with fine forceps and gently extracted from the
affected punctum, taking care to ensure that no small particles remain behind. Gentle
(retrograde) irrigation usually via the normal, unaffected, punctum with digital
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
33
 Occlusion of the lacrimal sac region (to prevent access to the nasolacrimal duct) may
be needed to remove detritus from the affected punctum and canaliculus. This is
because the foreign body may undergo some disintegration within the affection
punctal and canalicular portions of the lacrimal drainage system.
IES
● There is usually no need to provide antibiotic treatment in the management of acute
cases. Where a short course of antibiotic treatment is felt to be necessary it is better
C1
Z
to supply a solution rather than an ointment or gel.
GEN
● Complex cases, particularly those where the foreign body is not visible, may require
MER
TRAUm.
specialist help and early referral should be considered.
E
CONJUNCTIVAL FOREIGN BODIES INCLUDING THOSE
OPHTHALMIC
ZD
INVOLVING THE THIRD EYELID
Foreign bodies are a reasonably common source of conjunctival injury and are fre-
quently of an organic nature (seeds, barley awns, wood, etc). The conjunctival sac can
accommodate surprisingly large foreign bodies, whereas less spectacular, but usually
more traumatic, are foreign bodies, sometimes small in size located beneath the third
eyelid (Figure 2.6{a,b). The rapid onset of conjunctival oedema, especially in cats, can
make the task of finding foreign bodies more difficult.
[a)
[b)
Figure 2.6(a,b) Foreign body (grass seed) behind the third eyelid of a dog. The owner had
been walking through fields with the dog only hours earlier and had noted her pet's acute ocular
discomfort during the walk. There were intense pcin, blepharospasm and lacrimation and the tip
of a grass seed was just visible behind the third eyelid (aj.Afer several applications of topical loccl
anaesthetic the grass seed was removed (b) and the eye checked for additional debris and Further
damage, neither of which was present.
Treatment
● The foreign body is removed carefully, usually under topical local anaesthesia.
● A short course of antibiotic ointment (chloramphenicol) or gel (fucidic acid) may be
needed if there has been conjunctival desiccation or damage and especially if there
is any secondary corneal trauma.
34
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
CORNEAL FOREIGN BODIES
Clinical signs are similar to those for any acute corneal injury (i.e. pain, blepharospasm
IES
and lacrimation), with the foreign body being visible in many instances {Figure
2.7(a-c). Referral should be considered for complex cases (e.g. deep FBs with risk of
Z
ocular damage or collapse of the globe on extraction).
GEI
A
ER
TRAUM
M
"*spud
needle*
OPHTHALMIC
ND
(b)
[a}
[c)
Figure 2.7(a-e)Corneal foreign body (thorn) in a dog (a). Note that the thorn is of regular
shape and does not penetrate the Fullthickness of the cornea, so it can be removed safely without
Fear of additional corneal damage or globe collapse. General ancesthesia is not usually required
cnd the foreign-body in this case was removed using a foreign-body needle (b] as illustrated (c)
Pllowing the topical application of local anaesthetic.
Treatment
● Foreign bodies require removal if they are causing irritation or are capable of causing
irritation. Organic foreign bodies are the commonest necessitating this approach.
local anaesthetic (e.g. proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.5%) using a foreign-body
spud, a surgical spear, or cotton wool wound round the tips of fine mosquito forceps.
 Patience is required. Flat foreign bodies in particular (e.g. plant material, fakes of
metal or paint) can be quite difficult to remove as they become embedded in the
superficial cornea where they set up a considerable reaction.
● Foreign bodies that have penetrated the cornea and are accessible are best removed
using a 2S-gauge needle or a foreign-body needle, inserted at 90° into the protrud-
ing tip of the foreign body. The foreign body is removed slowly and carefully in the
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
35
direction exactly the reverse of the angle of entry. Whilst it is tempting to attempt
to grasp the foreign body with tissue forceps, this may cause it to penetrate more
deeply and is better avoided. It is sometimes necessary to undermine corneal foreign
bodies with a 15-gauge scalpel blade or a Beaver blade to facilitate removal.
IES
● Advice or referral should be sought for animals with complex foreign bodies (e.g.
fish-hooks), intracorneal foreign bodies, those that may also have penetrated the iris
C1
Z
± lens, and those of uneven shape (e.g. some thorns).
● Corneal foreign bodies and micropuncture wounds in general may become the site
A
G
of a corneal stromal abscess (see Section 7, p. 289), especially when organic mate-
ER
TRAUM
rial is involved. Infection {usually by fungi or bacteria) is an additional complicat-
M
ing factor when there has been a puncture wound or foreign body retention. The
E
history and clinical appearance (white, cream or yellow in colour) may help in reach-
OPHTHALMIC
ND
ing a diagnosis. Abscesses often show no tendency to heal, particularly if they are
deep, and natural resolution will only occur if the foreign material triggers a vas-
cular response. If topical medical treatment does not bring about improvement
and resolution of an abscess, then surgical extirpation is probably the treatment of
choice.
TRAUMA
Traumatic injury is common in veterinary ophthalmic practice and there are a variety
of causes. The clinical approach is as already outlined for foreign bodies. It is also
worth noting that the number of cat-related traumatic ocular injuries has increased in
dogs and cats in the UK in parallel with the increase in the cat population.
ORBITAL TRAUMA
Trauma in this region, especially that associated with penetrating injury, can result in
direct damage to the blood vessels, nerves and muscles of the orbit. Damage to bone
is lesscommon.
Clinical signs
● Pain, blepharospasm and lacrimation are common to most acute insults involving
the globe and orbit
● Asymmetry of the head, ± eye, and palpable disruption of normal bony contour if
a displaced fracture is present
● Strabismus with or without exophthalmos. Enophthalmos in the acute stage is rare
and may indicate globe rupture, major orbital disruption or entrapment of extra-
ocular muscles associated with displacement of bony fragments
● Vision may or may not be affected according to such factors as associated intra-
ocular damage (e.g. intraocular haemorrhage, globe rupture) and the type of
extraocular damage {e.g. stretching or avulsion of the optic nerve may have an
immediate effect on vision). In some cases, however, the eye and vision are normal
· Other possible clinical signs include epistaxis, crepitus and subcutaneous emphy-
sema. The latter usually indicates a fracture involving a paranasal sinus
36
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Diagnosis
●History and clinical signs
● Careful visual inspection to compare both sides of the head
● Gentle palpation of the orbital and periorbital region
IES
● Ophthalmic examination
● Diagnostic imaging - radiography - at least two views of the skull if fractures are
Z
a possibility. Other techniques (e.g. CT and MRI) can be very useful, but will require
A
specialist facilities
ER
TRAUM
· Ultrasonography can be of value in establishing the extent of the damage and
M
whether there is any retained foreign material
E
C
OPHTHALMI(
ZD
Treatment
● Surgical intervention is not normally required unless foreign material is present, there
is gross loss of alignment or the orbital contents have become entrapped; such cases
are best referred to a specialist centre
● In the majority of animals, medical therapy with broad-spectrum systemic anti-
biotics and anti-inflammatory agents is required, as is some form of topical ocular
lubricant if exposure keratopathy is a likely complication
BLUNT AND PENETRATING INJURY TO THE GLOBE
Ocular trauma is caused by a variety of moving and static objects. Referral may be an
early option for accurate assessment of the damage.
The prognosis is guarded with various types of penetrating injury beca use infection
is a possibility, especially following cat claw injury and when foreign material is
implanted in the lens or vitreous. Endophthalmitis {severe intraocular inflammation
which does not extend beyond the sclera) may develop.
Blunt trauma is often more damaging to the globe than penetrating injury as the
globe may actually rupture under the force of the impact (Figure 2.1{a,b) and, even
when rupture does not occur, the shearing forces generated within the eye may cause
severe damage to the intraocular tissues (Figure 2.8). The impact may be great enough
to cause the globe to collapse, but more commonly the posterior scleral coat ruptures
and this damage will not be apparent on ophthalmic examination.
Figure 2.8Combination of blunt and pene-
trating injury in a dog. The damage to the globe
and eyelids of this police dog was the result of
being hit by a beer botle. Deep lacerations to
the eyelids are apparent and there were also
severe corneallacerations. Extensive intraocular
haemorrhage was present and the globe had
ruptured. There was no possibility of restoring
vision in this eye and it was removed.
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
37
Clinical signs
● The anterior segment triad associated with pain (blepharospasm, lacrimation and
photophobia) is invaria bly present
· Blepharoedema and possible accompanying eyelid damage
S
● Other injuries to the head and elsewhere on the body may be present
LE
● Corneal opacity (e.g. panstromal oedema) or obvious injury (e.g. laceration)
Z
        o    o
L
transparency of the aqueous in the anterior chamber
ER
TRAUM
·Aqueous leakage is likely when there is an acute penetrating injury faqueous
coagulates in air and may provide a smooth coating to an underlying prolapsed iris)
● Alteration in depth of the anterior chamber (usually shallower than normal)
● Intraocular haemorrhage {hyphaema or whole eye) can be a feature of both blunt
ZD
and penetrating injuries
● Irregular or constricted pupil; if there has been full-thickness perforation the pupil
HIH
margin and iris are often drawn towards the hole in the cornea.
● Thickened inflamed iris in which the fine detail is no longer apparent. Iris prolapse,
OPH
 a      s    
directly, particularly horses, some tearing of pectinate fibres may also be observed
following blunt trauma
· Lens luxation or signs of lens damage (e.g. capsular tears and leakage of lens
material)
● Lens perforation is best appreciated by careful examination of the anterior chamber
with magnification and a light source, looking from the side. Traumatic damage to
the lens can result in a number of early-onset sight-threatening and painful compli-
cations, so it is sensible to refer such cases quickly for specialist assessment
+Vitreal changes fe.g. detachment of the vitreous face, subhyaloid haemorrhage [i.e.
haemorrhage beneath the vitreous])
● Hyperaemia ± oedema ± haemorrhage of the optic nerve head (papilla)
● Peripa pillary oedema and haemorrhage
●Retinal and choroidal oedema ± haemorrhage
●Retinal detachment
Diagnosis
● History and clinical signs
+ Ophthalmic examination
● Measurement of intraocular pressure: low intraocular pressure is most commonly
associated with uveitis, or globe rupture; high intraocular pressure is usually asso-
ciated with glaucoma secondary to internal ocular pathology, but in trauma cases
may, rarely, be a consequence of external pressure on the globe from, for example,
extensive orbital haemorrhage
● Utrasonography (or diagnostic imaging techniques such as MRI) may be useful for
assessing the extent of ocular damage, especially if there are splits in the posterior
ocular coats (retina, choroid and sclera), lens luxation, vitreal or retinal detachment
and intraocular haemorrhage
38
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Treatment
● Treatment of blunt injuries is symptomatic and consists of systemic and topical
antibiotics and anti-inflammatory agents. The prognosis for vision is often poor, par-
IES
ticularly in animals such as the cat, in which there is a close orbital fit of the globe
within the orbit and little orbital fat
GENCI
● The management of penetrating injuries is dealt with in more detail below
● Eyes that are blind and painful should be removed (Figures 2.8 and 2.1 (a,b))
MER
TRAUM
THIRD EYELID INJURY
OPHTHALMIC
AND
Third eyelid damage is common after cat scratch injuries. It is important to ensure that
the globe is intact, as penetrating ocular injury may well ha ve occurred at the same time.
Treatment
● Many injuries heal rapidly without surgical intervention, others require minimal
debridement of damaged tissue following topical local anaesthesia (proxymetacaine
hydrochloride 0.5%)
● If normal third eyelid movement has been compromised, primary repair under
general anaesthesia is required. Sutures, usually in simple interrupted pattern, are
placed so that they do not damage the cornea. Fine absorbable material {e.g. 6-0
polyglactin 910 or finer) is used (Figure 2.9(a,b)).
[a]
[b}
Figure 2.9(a,b)Third eyelid injury in a puppy. The third eyelid has become partially avulsed
bllowing a claw injury inflicted by a cat (aj. Third eyelid function will be severely compromised if
the injury isnot repaired.Afer establishing that there was no damage to the globe, or the rest of
the puppy, the third eyelid was re-attached with simple interrupted sutures of 6-0 polyglactin 910
[b] and the puppy made an uneventful recovery.
UPPER AND LOWER EYELID INJURY
Traumatic injuries to the eyelids may look dreadful but are very rewarding to treat as
eyelids heal with remarkable facility because of their rich blood supply. The highly
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
39
mobile nature of the eyelids means that any wounds involving the eyelid margin require
early surgical repair (Figure 2.10{a,b)).
IES
RGENCIE
TRAUMA
MER
L
ZD
OPHTHAL
[b]
Figure 2.1O(a,b) Traumatic injury to the
lower eyelid of a horse (aj. This was the result 
of becoming entangled in barbed wire. There
were extensive skin lacerations that needed
suturing as well as the injury to the eyelid. The
eyelid was repaired with a single layer of
simple interrupted sutures of 5-0 silk (b)] and
[a)
the horse made an uneventful recovery.
Treatment
● Eyelid lacerations should be repaired following minimal debridement as soon as is
practicable. Primary repair is always the aim for this type of eyelid damage, so as
to avoid later complications such as infection, cicatrisation, eyelid deformity, expo-
sure keratopathy and epiphora.
● Most small-animal eyelid injuries requiring surgical repair are operated on under
general anaesthesia. Many large-animal eyelid injuries can be repaired following
sedation and local infiltration or regional anaesthesia (e.g. supraorbital nerve block
for upper eyelid injuries), using a local anaesthetic such as lignocaine hydrochloride
(lidocaine hydrochloride) 1% or 2%, with or without adrenaline, or mepivacaine
hydrochloride 2%.
● Gross eyelid swelling can be reduced with an ice pack (e.g. a bag of frozen peas)
wrapped in a towel. The wound is closed in one or two layers and, in general, one-
layer closure is simpler and perfectly satisfactory. Simple interrupted sutures of 6-0
polyglactin 910 can be used to close the conjunctiva if two-layer closure is used.
Skin closure is effected with a simple interrupted pattern using 4-0 to 6-0 non-
absorbable suture material (e.g. silk) or absorbable suture material (e.g. polyglactin
ans is an g psn aq us uad pi aus o iua jo any  ie
which re-apposes the tissues of the eyelid margin. Whichever pattern is used this
first suture is critical as apposition must be perfect. Topical antibiotic ointment and
a course of systemic antibiotic should be provided routinely for animals with
40
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
contaminated wounds. In herbivores particularly, it is also sensible to give tetanus
antitoxin.
● Eyelid injuries may involve the lacrimal drainage system, causing damage to the
IES
puncta or canaliculi. If so, referral should be considered, as the repair of such injuries
requires microsurgical facilities.
Z
E
A
CONJUNCTIVAL INJURY
wn
M
TRAI
Blunt and penetrating ocular trauma are common causes of subconjunctival haemor-
E
rhage. Most conjunctival injuries result in extensive chemosis, which can result in
C
OPHTHALMI(
ZD
conjunctival exposure and desiccation.
[a]
(b)
Figure 2.1l(a,b) Subconjunctival cnd intraocular haemorrhage in a cat following a road
tralfic accident. Subconjunctival haemorrhage as the only finding is not of concern, as it willresorb
naturally, usually over a period of days. In this cat, observable Features of concern that indicate
intraocular involvement include a fightly constricted pupil (traumatic miosis} and a small amount of
haemorrhage in the pupillary aperture (a), which usually originates from the ciliary body. Pupillary
dilation (traumatic mydriasis) may develop afer a few hours as happened in this patient. A few
days later the subconjunctival haemorrhage has almost resorbed, but the extent of intraocular haem-
orrhage is clear and the pupil remains dilated (b). Prognosis For retention of vision Following blunt
injury to the globe is invariably guarded in cats, because of the close orbital fit, and this eye
remained without vision.
Treatment
● Subconjunctival haemorrhage may be left to resorb naturally over a matter of days.
It is, however, important to check that the globe is intact in all cases that present
with subconjunctival haemorrhage of traumatic origin (Figure 2.11(a,b)).
· Penetrating conjunctival injury may also be associated with haemorrhage and
obvious conjunctival laceration. Again, it is important to check that the damage is
limited to the conjunctiva alone as damage to the underlying sclera and uvea may
also be present.
· Chemosis and conjunctival desiccation are not unusual after trauma. Antibiotic
preparations which contain a suitable excipient (e.g. fucidic acid or chlorampheni-
col ointment) will lubricate the exposed conjunctiva effectively until swelling has
subsided.
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
41
● Few cases require suturing, as healing is so rapid and uncomplicated, always pro-
vided that the damage is limited to the conjunctiva and does not involve deeper
structures. On occasions, minimal debridement is required to remove loose flaps of
tissue, sometimes combined with suturing using buried absorba ble 6-0 to 7-0 sutures
S
of polyglactin 910.
E
Z
E
LIMBal, EPISCleRAL AND SCleRaL INJURY
TRAUM
E
The limbus and the contiguous episclera and sclera are, in theory, susceptible to full-
M
thickness rupture after blunt ocular injury. However, in most animals such injuries
E
damage the posterior part of the globe rather than the anterior part of the globe. Ultra-
C
ZD
sonography and tonometry are of value in assessment. The prognosis for the eye and
vision is usually very poor after severe blunt trauma (Figure 2.1(a,b).
Penetrating injuries are often easier to diagnose, however the site of corneal pene-
PHTH
tration is not always obvious when there is blood or pus in the anterior chamber. The
extent of damage to the episclera and sclera may be obscured by chemosis and an
intact, or seemingly intact, conjunctiva. Careful examination of the anterior segment,
paying particular attention to the depth of the anterior chamber, position of the iris
and shape of the pupil, together with tonometry and ultrasonography, should help to
     n       
ha ve not been disrupted and microsurgical repair is undertaken. The extent of corneal
and scleral involvement is often best ascertained during surgical exploration (Figure
2.12(a,b)).
42
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
IES
IDN
山
MER
TRAUM
(b)
E
(
OPHTHALMI(
ND
[a)
Figure 2. 12(a,b} Full thickness corneal penetration, conjunctival and scleral laceration in a cat
as the result of a cat claw injury (aj. There is a large laterally-placed corneal wound through which
the iris has prolapsed, so the pupil is deformed in consequence. A thin film of aqueous covers the
prolapsed iris and the anterior chamber is partially formed; a forced Seidel test was positive. The
grey area at approximately 2 o'clock to the prolapsed iris is a loose Hap of badly-damaged corned.
Hyphaema is present, making it more difficult to assess potential lens damage. In this case there
was none. The posterior segment was undamaged. Microsurgical repair under general anaesthe-
sia was undertaken afer reforming and deepening the anterior chamber with viscoelastic injected
via a stab incision at about 90° away from the iris incarceration (in this case the dorsal cornea].
Initial exploration indicated a complex wound, which extended both along and across the limbus.
In such cases the conjunctiva must be opened so that the extent of any scleral injury can be ascer
tained and repaired. AHer closure of all sites other than that of iris incarceration, the uveal tissue
was Freed From the edges of the wound and reposited and the remainder of the cornea repaired.
The appearance of the eye on the first post-operative day (bj. The pupil has been dilated as part
of the medical treatment (topical mydriatic cycloplegic, broad-spectrum antibiotic and non-steroidal
cnti-inflammatory agent). The cat made an uneventful recovery.
CORNEAL INJURY
Traumatic corneal injury is common in veterinary practice. Careful examination is
required to ascertain the extent and depth of the injuries and, if it is impossible to
examine the eye properly, or if there is any risk of expulsive loss of the intraocular
contents, then examination under anaesthesia {EUA) may be needed. It may be sen-
sible to obtain specialist advice before this is done, and early referral should always
be considered for complex injuries if the practice lacks microsurgical facilities and
expertise.
The prognosis is guarded if extensive intraocular haemorrhage is also present. In
many cases it is sensible to obtain plain radiographs of the orbit, utilising two views,
in case radio-opaque foreign bodies such as gunshot are the cause of the trauma. Ultra-
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
43
sound examination is of considerable value in assessing the extent of the damage, espe-
cially the degree of intraocular invol vement, but must be performed with great caution
if there is any risk of expulsion of the intraocular contents.
IES
Clinical signs
●Acute,usually
 unilateral, onset of pain, blepharospasm, lacrimation and
Z
photophobia
E
+ Corneal oedema ± third eyelid damage
ER
TRAUM
fluorescein sodium to the corneal wound and examining the eye with blue light and
M
magnification in the dark. Aqueous lea kage dilutes the green fluorescein. Gentle pres-
L
OPHTHALMIC
ZD
easier to assess aqueous leakage if 2% concentrations of fluorescein are used for the
Seidel test (Figure 2.13(a,b)).
dap aui u saaueuo 'dnd pauosip 'euauday sa auereadde iejnoo jo saueu ·
or even loss of the anterior chamber, aqueous leakage or a coagulum of aqueous,
iris prolapse ± incarceration of the iris, globe collapse
[a)
(b)
Figure 2. 13(a,b) Positive Seidel test associated with a penetrating corneal injury in a Domes-
tic Longhair. Subtle aqueous leakage was apparent with a Forced Seidel test (b). Note the damage
to the free border of the third eyelid From previous trauma.
Treatment
● Superficial oblique corneal lacerations, involving no more than a quarter of the
corneal thickness, do not usually require surgical repair, but wound healing will
often be enhanced if the loose flap of corneal epithelium is trimmed with fine scis-
sors after applying local anaesthetic solution (proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.5%).
Protection during healing is not necessarily required, although a therapeutic soft
contact lens (TSCL) can be used as a bandage lens when pain relief and protection
are needed.
● For deeper non-penetrating corneal injuries support for healing may be required and
choices include a therapeutic soft contact lens, collagen shield, conjunctival graft or
porcine submucosal graft. A rotation conjunctival pedicle graft is an excellent means
of providing support for healing. Conjunctival grafts can be used in a number of
44
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
situations where support for healing is required (e.g. corneal ulceration, descemeto-
coele, small corneal perforations and after keratectomies involving more than
approximately one third of corneal depth). They are usually left in situ for some 2-4
weeks and then, after application of topical anaesthetic, the unattached portion of
E
the pedicle is sectioned, between the attached graft and the limbus, using Stevens
tenotomy scissors (Figure 2.14(a-g) and Box 2.2).
Z
E
● When full thickness corneal damage has occurred, the wound, if small, may be self-
sealing and, in this situation, a therapeutic soft contact lens, collagen shield or
ER
TRAUM
pedicle graft can be used. This approach can only be used if the anterior chamber
M
is of normal depth, when there is no aqueous leakage and provided that there is no
E
C
OPHTHALMIC
ZD
cated when the wound is large, there is aqueous leakage or any other indication of
intraocular disruption, and such cases should be referred if adequate microsurgical
facilities are not available (Figure 2.16).
●A course of topical antibiotic solution, rather than ointment, is usually required {see
under Ulcerative Keratitis in General and Canine Ophthalmology and as listed in
Appendix 2).
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
45
OPHTHAlMIC EMERGENCIES
AND TRAUMA
[a}
(b)
(c)
(p)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 2.14(a-g) Traumatic cat scratch injury in a Domestic Shorthair. Note the Faint diffuse
cloudiness in the region of the injury, which is often indicative of cellular infiltration and infection.
There is also constriction of the pupil on the affected side. Necrotic debris plugged a small hole in
the cornea (a-b). Support for healing was provided using a rotation pedicle graff. The technique is
 outlined (c-d) and the graf illustrated in situ (e-f). Medical treatment consisted of ten days' topical
atropine and, on the basis of culture and sensitivity, ofloxacin eye drops. The pedicle graf was sec-
tioned after a month and the appearance, showing some residual corneal scarring is illustrated
some 12 months later (gj.
46
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
2.14(a-g))
IES
1 Patient under general anaesthetic, standard aseptic skin preparafion
 2  A lateral canthotomy should be performed if the surgical access is poor
Z
 3 If there is any possibiliy of corneal perforation, it may be preferable to prepare the
A
ER
TRAUM
pedicle graft first
4  The pedicle graft is ideally harvested from the dorsal bulbar conjunctiva so that it
M
can be orientated vertically and in line with eyelid movement
U
5  The extent of conjunctival dissection in relation to the position and size of the corneal
OPHTHALMIC
ZD
ulcer should be assessed, as the graft must not be under tension when it has been
△
placed
6  The conjunctiva is elevated with fine tissue forceps (e.g. Castroviejo or Colibril and
a small entry wound made in the conjunctiva at 90" to the limbus and some 1-
2mm from the limbus
7  Blunt dissection (e.g. Stevens tenotomy scissors) is used to undermine the conjunc-
tiva in radial fashion, so as to create a thin transparent portion of conjunctiva that
has been freed from underlying episcleral connective fissue
8  The graft is fashioned by means of two parallel radial cuts that can diverge slightly
towards the base of the pedicle; the perilimbal cut should be approximately paral-
lel to and I mm posterior to the limbus
9 While the recipient bed (the ulcerated area) is being prepared, the graft should be
 protected with a surgical swab soaked in sterile saline
10 Material for culture should be obtained from the ulcer, ensuring that swabs and
scrapes include material from the edge of the ulcer
Il Instruments that are used to prepare the recipient site are discarded after use
12  Necrotic material should be cleaned from the ulcerated area by sharp dissection
(e.g. Number 64 Beaver blade or corneal trephine), paying particular attention to
freshening the walls of the ulcer
13 The graf is rotated into place and trimmed, if necessary, to the shape of the pre-
pared ulcerated area (recipient site)
14 8-0 polyglactin 9l0 is used to suture the graft into place in the bed of the ulcer,
with the first suture placed at 6 o'clock
15  The sentinel sutures (6 o'clock, 3 o'clock and 9 o'clock] should pass through the
entire thickness of the conjunctiva and into the wall of the ulcer at about two thirds
of corneal thickness
16 Once the sentinel sutures have been placed, other sutures are placed in similar
fashion, approximately I mm apart, until the graft is firmly attched to the cornea
17  The bulbar conjunctiva can be leff open or closed with a continuous suture of 8-0
to 9-0 polyglactin 910
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
47
IES
EMERGENCIE
TRAUMA
OPHTHALMIC
ND
Figure 2.15 Fullthickness cornecl penetration in a dog cs the result of a cat claw injury.
Although the eye appears quiet, careful examination with magnification indicated lens material asso-
ciated with a tear in the cnterior lens capsule almost underlying the site of corneal penetration.
There was also a small haemorrhage From a primary retinal vessel in the damaged eye. This eye
was managed medically (topical mydriatic cycloplegic, broad-spectrum antibiotic and non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agentj without surgical intervention, cs the hole in the lens capsule was small
enough to seal soon after the injury The preretinal haemorrhage resorbed over two weeks.
Figure 2.16Full-thickness corneal penetrction in αa puppy cs the result of a cat claw injury. There
is marked corneal oedema cnd aqueous Hlare. The iris is swollen and its detcilis no longer appar
ent. Careful examination indicated that lens damage had occurred and that leakage of the lens con-
tents was continuing. There is no option other than removal of the lens contents in such cases.
Smallincision surgery and use of phacoemulsification is preferable, particularly as the gross corneal
thickening cssociated with cornecl oedema makes watertight wound closure difficult.
UVEAL TRAUMA
after ocular penetrating injury, and secondary uveitis is a common feature of many
types of ocular injury. Initial damage to the uveal tract can be complicated by later
secondary problems such as glaucoma (mainly dog), cataract formation and endoph-
thalmitis. Penetrating injuries must be repaired as soon as they are recognised and the
uveitis associated with both penetrating and blunt injuries should be treated sympto-
matically. Early referral should be considered for penetrating ocular injuries (Figures
2.12, 2.15 and 2.16).
48
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Clinical signs
● Classical signs of uveitis (see below) ± indications of blunt or penetrating injury
● Hyphaema (haemorrhage in the anterior chamber) and intraocular haemorrhage
may both be associated with trauma and uveitis, but they can also occur because of
E
U
other problems, for example neoplasia, systemic hypertensive disease and various
blood disorders, so accurate differentiation is important
Z
A
ER
Wn
LENS TRAUMA
M
A
E
RK
The possibility of lens damage should always be considered when there has been
penetrating ocular injury (see earlier), as a devastating pbacoclastic uveitis can follow
Z
leakage of lens protein in dogs and borses (Figures 2.15 and 2.16). In cats, the initial
OPHTHAI
inflammation is less intense, but in this species there is a very real risk of intraocular
neoplasia developing later in life. Animals with suspected penetrating lens injuries and
those with post-traumatic lens luxation should be referred to a specialist centre with
the appropriate facilities and skills.
Clinical signs
● Lens luxation or subluxation is most likely after blunt injury
● Penetrating injury is most likely to be associated with capsular damage and leakage
of lens material. Floculent darkish lens material ± vitreous will be apparent on
careful examination {ideally using a slit lamp at high magnification)
· Corneal oedema is often associated with lens penetration and makes accurate
assessment of these cases more difficult
Treatment of penetrating lens injuries
● A small tear in the anterior capsule, without obvious loss of lens material, may self-
seal swiftly, and such cases will require only symptomatic treatment for uveitis. A
small capsular cataract is the only legacy of this type of injury. If there is any doubt
as to the integrity of the lens capsule the animal should be referred as soon after the
injury as possible.
● When there is leakage of lens material, early surgical intervention is needed, so as
to avoid the likelihood of intractable and painful phacoclastic uveitis. These cases
should be referred. In very young animals, the lens contents can be removed by
simple irrigation and aspiration, but in most adult animals pbacoemuisifcation
(ultrasonic fragmentation) is used to remove the lens contents.
● It is pertinent to note that lens injuries can sometimes be associated with inocula-
tion of infectious organisms and intralenticular infection is a potential, but rarely
recognised, complication of this type of injury. Affected eyes remain painful,
inflamed and, usually, opa que.
VITREAL TRAUMA
Vitreal haemorrhage may be an early complication of ocular trauma, whereas vitreal
abscessation, degeneration and liquefaction are later complications. Detachment and
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
49
disruption of the vitreous can often be demonstrated with ultrasonography. Vitreous
 prolapse into the anterior chamber may complicate ocular trauma and is usually found
when traumatic lens luxation is also present.
IES
Management
C1
Referral will be required, as specialist equipment and expertise are both necessary for
Z
treatment. For example, prolapsed vitreous can be removed most simply from the ante-
rior chamber using cellulose sponges and taking care to avoid traction on the vitreous
base, whereas, for more complex vitreal involvement, vitrectomy may be required.
ER
Intraocular haemorrhage is left to resorb naturally and will take weeks or months to
M
resolve, in contrast to haemorrhage in the anterior chamber, which usually takes only
L
da ys to disappear.
OPHTHALMIC
ZD
TRAUMA INVOLVING THE OCULAR FUNDUS
Some, or all, of retinal oedema, retinal haemorrhage, retinal tears, retinal detachment,
optic nerve damage and haemorrhage (subretinal, intraretinal and preretinal) may be
early complications of traumatic injury to the head and eye (Figure 2.17). Examina-
tion of the eye, including the fundus, at the time of the injury may make it easier to
 determine the prognosis and to explain subsequent complications. The eye may be
blind, or partially sighted, or appear normal immediately after the injury. In the latter
case sequential examination may be necessary to detect subsequent degenerative
changes in the retina, choroid and optic nerve.
Figure 2.17Preretinal haemorrhage From primary
retinal vessels after blunt trauma to the globe. Haem-
orrhage in this site may take many months to resorb.
ENDOPHTHALMITIS AND PANOPHTHALMITIS
AS COMPLICATING FACTORS IN OCULAR INSULT
Endophthalmitis is severe intraocular inflammation that does not extend beyond the
sclera, and intraocular infections of this type, once established, become the equivalent
of an intraocular abscess. The vitreous provides an ideal culture medium and toxic
enzymes, low pH and low oxygen tension make treatment of established infection
50
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
difficult. Exogenous endophthalmitis is a potential complication of penetrating ocular
injury, retained intraocular foreign bodies and perforating infected corneal ulcers,
although it can also be a complication of ocular surgery (Figure 2.18). Ocular infec-
IES
tions caused by blood-borne infections are termed endogenous to distinguish them
from those caused by the introduction of external environmental pathogens. When
blunt and penetrating injuries also involve orbital tissues, panophthalmitis (severe
Z
intraocular inflammation extending into the orbit) may result.
ER
WO
M
RA
Figure 2.18 Endophthalmitis after previous
U
penetrating injury in a horse.  Intraocular
OPHTHALMIC
ND
implantction of foreign organic matericl is α
relatively common cause of subsequent endo-
phthalmitis, and the progression of intraocular
infection to frank endophthalmitis can be rapid
in the horse. The site of original corneal pene
tration is often apparent, as in this eye, even
when the eye itself is pus-filled and opaque.
Once endophthalmitis of this severity has devel-
oped, the only management option is to remove
 the eye, which is blind and painful.
Clinical signs of endophthalmitis
● Pain is often a prominent feature. Pyrexia and lethargy are common
● An ocular discharge is often present, the ocular media are cloudy or frankly opaque
and the vessels of the globe are markedly congested
● Corneal vascularisation is invariably present, usually as a peripheral circumcorneal
fringe of straight vessels running at 90° to the limbus
● Panuveitis with recurrent inflammation is common
● There may be corneal, conjunctival and eyelid oedema. The site of previous pene-
trating injury is sometimes apparent
Management of endophthalmitis
● The prognosis is very guarded, and most veterinarians would regard the manage-
ment of these severe inflammations as best carried out at appropriately-equipped
referral centres. For example, vitrectomy may be necessary if there is a retained
foreign body and the medical management is complex whatever the cause.
● Vitreocentesis is indicated in order to obtain material for culture in a variety of media
(chocolate and blood agar and Sabouraud's agar). It should be noted that culture-
 negative growth does not rule out bacterial infection.
● Broad-spectrum antibiotics for intravenous use are injected directly into the
vitreous. Vancomycin (human dose 1 mg) or cephazolin (2.2 μg) are effective against
dose 200μg because of the drug's retinotoxicity) are effective against Gram -ve
organisms. It is usual in human patients to use a combination of vancomycin and
amikacin as the first-line treatment.
● If fungi are isolated then specialist advice should be sought.
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
51
● Systemic antibiotics, selected ideally on the results of blood culture, will also be
required if the endophthalmitis is of endogenous origin.
● The prognosis for restoration of vision is poor and eyes that are irreversibly blind
and painful should be removed.
IES
Clinical signs and management of panophthalmitis
C1
Z
In panophthalmitis, the ocular and systemic signs are similar, but the additional
involvement of the orbital tissues means that the clinical presentation can include
prominence of the third eyelid and, in horses and farm animals, swelling in the region
MER
TRAUM
of the supraorbital fossa.
As there is potential for infection to spread along the optic nerve to the brain, it is
usual to take material for culture and sensitivity and surgically remove the globe and
OPHTHALMI
ZD
orbital contents (exenteration). Based, if possible, on the results of culture, an appro-
priate course of systemic antibiotic treatment should also be given and antibiotic
instilled directly into the operation site at the time of surgery.
COMPLICATED ULCERS AND CORNEAL INFECTION
The ancillary factors contributing to complications and the potential for infection
include:
● Species: for example, ulcers in horses should always be regarded as serious
● Corneal exposure and sensitivity: for example, brachycephalic dogs are more 'at risk'
than most dolicocephalic breeds
● Initiating event, extent, progression and depth of ulcer, general health of the patient
and subsequent management in all species
There is a tendency to forget about ancillary factors until complications supervene.
For example, it is safest to accept that any ulcer in the horse may become complicated
or infected, in order to try and prevent such complications developing. The general
health status of the animal should always be taken into account, both hyperadreno-
corticism and diabetes mellitus can adversely influence corneal wound healing, and it
could also be argued that other factors such as age and chronic disease fe.g. renal
failure) might also exert an effect (Figure 2.19).
The initial history-taking must be detailed, particularly with regard to when the
ulcer was first suspected, the possible aetiology and details of any treatment the animal
has received. The work-up should establish if bacterial pathogens are present, as it is
much easier to obtain this knowledge at the outset. Similar precautionary principles
underlie assessment of the normal and protective blink response. Some idea of corneal
sensitivity can be obtained by eliciting a protective blink response, using either a very
fine wisp of cotton wool or, more accurately, an aesthesiometer {e.g. Cochet-Bonnet)
It is axiomatic that any treatment given should not make matters worse, so that,
for example, corticosteroids are contraindicated in the majority of cases of ulcerative
keratitis. The principle of “if in doubt refer? should be followed.
52
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
S
E
Z
ER
wn
M
A
E
R
C
OPHTHALMIC
Figure 2.19 Complicated ulcer in a dog. Note the single long lash on the upper eyelid. This
Z
dog also had diabetes mellitus and reduced cornecl sensitivity, which is not uncommon in diabetic
patients. The tear film can provide a good culture medium in such animals, as it is usually more
glucose-rich than that of normal dogs. Pseudomonas ceruginosa was cultured from the cornea in
pure growth. Sparse numbers of Gram -ve rods (Pseudomonas ceruginosa) were also demonstrated
from corneal scrapes, and topical treatment with tobramycin was initiated while awaiting the
definitive results of culture. Subsequent sensitivity results indicated that the choice of antibiotic was
appropriate.
Clinical signs
● Pain, photophobia, blepharospasm, lacrimation ± mucopurulent discharge
●Anterior uveitis in most cases, with hypopyon in some cases
● Fluorescein positive ulceration (to avoid false positives, it is important to carry out
gentle irrigation with sterile saline to remove excess stain)
● Infiltration of the corneal stroma and often diffuse opacification and oedema
● Signs of liquefactive stromal necrosis (see below)
● Descemetocoele formation - exposed Descemet's membrane is fluorescein negative
● Rapid progression to corneal perforation
Management
● Identify and, if possible, remove the underlying cause and any exacerbating factors
● Corneal scraping for Gram staining and culture is essential, but undue pressure on
the globe should be avoided if the cornea is compromised
based on the results of initial Gram stain, culture and sensitivity as well as the
response to treatment
● Antibiotic selection is a critical feature of successful treatment and the available
antibiotics for topical use are discussed under Ulcerative Keratitis in General and
 Canine Ophthalmology and listed in Appendix 2
● Support for healing may be needed, most simply as a conjunctival pedicle graft
LIQUEFACTIVE STROMAL NECROSIS ('MELTING' ULCER)
Liquefactive stromal necrosis ('melting ulcer') is a feared complication of corneal
ulceration. It is a particular problem in certain species (e.g. brachycephalic animals
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
53
and horses), some types of corneal insult (e.g. alkali burns) or infection (e.g.
Pseudomonas spp ulcers) and may be a complicating factor of treatment (e.g. corti-
costeroid  therapy)   or  systemic  disease (e.g.  hyperadrenocorticism  and  diabetes
mellitus) (Figure 2.20(a-c)).
OPHTHALMIC EMERGENCIES
 TRAUMA
AND
[a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.20(a-c) Liquefactive stromal necrosis ('melting ulcer') in a horse. This mare had inad
vertently received contaminated tear-replacement solution from a multidose botle that had been
Used to keep the eyes lubricated whilst she was under general anaesthesia for colic surgery. The
innocuous appearcnce of the corneal ulcer in the left eye on the first post-operative day (a) sug
gests a superficicl,although extensive,ulcer. The situation deteriorated rapidly over a matter of
hours and the corneal liquefaction is striking (b). Pseudomonas ceruginosa was cultured from the
tear replacement solution and both corneas. The mare responded well to intensive medical therapy
delivered via a nasolacrimal lavage device (c) cnd was left with only minor corneal scarring.
54
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Diagnosis
● The affected region of the cornea initially loses transparency and then progresses via
Dedema to frank liquefaction. Perforation is a likely and rapid complication (within
hours) if the condition is not recognised. If in doubt, specialist advice should be
E
obtained without delay.
U
● Scrapes and swabs should be submitted for culture and sensitivity. Gram -ve organ-
Z
E
isms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa or excessive numbers of inflammatory cells
A
confirm the likelihood of collagenolysis.
ER
wn
M
TRA
Treatment
E
● As a general rule, management of these cases requires specialist assistance
U
ZD
● Debridement of necrotic tissue should be performed and an early decision taken with
IW]
regard to providing support for healing (e.g. conjunctival pedicle graft)
● Initially treatment of all types of liquefactive necrosis should be undertaken on an
HIHdO
hourly basis, the frequency of application is only reduced when sustained improve-
ment has been achieved
● For horses, and other large animals, it is best to insert a subpalpebral lavage device
or similar at the outset, as it will make treatment easier and more accurate
● A fortified antibiotic solution or a broad-spectrum topical preparation that is effec-
tive against Pseudomonas aeruginosa (e.g. gentamicin or tobramycin solution)
should be used and only changed if the organisms are insensitive on culture and
sensitivity
● Empirical approaches include the use of topical whole fresh serum and acetylcys-
teine 5-10% to prevent collagenolysis
● Uveitis accompanies deep keratitis, so the pupil should be dilated with atropine 1%
± phenylephrine 10% to relieve the pain of ciliary spasm
● Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (given orally or intravenously) are useful to
relieve ocular pain and will help to stabilise the blood-aqueous barrier when uveitis
is also present
· Treatment frequency can be reduced and proprietary antibiotic preparations sub-
CHEMICAL INJURIES
Chemical injuries can occur in any species, but guard dogs, police dogs and horses
are at increased risk. Referral may be required for the management of chemical
injuries. Acids precipitate protein and unless they are particularly strong {i.e. pH
 2.5 or less) they do not penetrate beyond the corneal epithelium. Alkalis react with
fats to form soaps, which damage cell membranes. They thus have the capacity to
penetrate the eye, so that their damaging effects are widespread (cornea, limbus,
anterior chamber, iris, ciliary body and lens and its zonules) (Figure 2.21{a,b)). The
speed of penetration of alkalis, from fastest to slowest, is ammonium hydroxide,
sodium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide and calcium hydroxide. The latter, which is
found in plaster and mortar, does not penetrate well, as the calcium soaps formed upon
saponification are relatively insoluble and precipitate out, forming a barrier to further
penetration.
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
55
IES
Z
TR
Wn
[a]
{b)
E
Figure 2.21(a,b) Chemical injury in a Domestic Shorthair. This was an alkali burn from
sodium-hydroxide-containing cleaning fluid that was accidentally splashed into the cat's eye (a).
ZD
Intensive topical medical trectment was recsonably effective given the delay between the cccident
cnd the diagnosis, although the cat was left with residual corneal scarring (b).
Clinical signs of acute chemical injury
● Conjunctival changes range from mild hyperaemia and chemosis to disastrous limbal
ischaemia
● Corneal changes range from focal or diffuse corneal clouding ± punctate epithelial
erosion to pancorneal opacification, ulceration and, occasionally, perforation. When
alkalis or strong acids are involved, the changes are essentially similar to those of
liquefactive stromal necrosis
● Other anterior-segment changes range from mild aqueous flare to frank uveitis or
more generalised anterior-segment inflammation. Lens luxation can follow damage
to the lens zonules
● Intraocular pressure may rise soon after the injury, probably because of an imme
diate shrinkage of collagen fibres
Emergency management of acute chemical injury
· As an emergency measure, the owner should be advised to irrigate the eye with
copious quantities of tap water
● As part of initial veterinary assessment, the pH of the conjunctival sac should be
checked and the offending chemical using standard pH paper, as well as ensuring
that none of the chemical is retained within the conjunctival sac. Strong alkalis (pH
12-14) are the most damaging
● Mild chemical burns can be treated as described below for Thermal Burns
Treatment of alkali burns
● In cases of alkali burns, irrigation of the eye with tap water should be maintained
until specialist help has been obtained and the animal hospitalised for treatment
under close observation
· Topical treatment usually consists of citrate 10% drops every two hours, ascorbate
10% drops every two hours, chloramphenicol ointment four times daily, atropine
1 % drops three times a day and fluorometholone acetate 1 % drops every two hours
· Ascorbate can be used orally, for example, oral treatment for dogs with alkali burns
consists of ascorbate So0 mg four times daily
56
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
THERMAL BURNS
Burns may be a consequence of both accidental and non-accidental injury. The eye
S
itself is less commonly damaged than the eyelids because of the rapidity of the blink
E
#
response. Corneal damage is usually typified by diffuse corneal haze and fluorescein
uptake (the tight junctions of epithelial cells have been disrupted, thereby allowing
Z
E
fluorescein access to the stroma) (Figure 2.22)
TRAUM
M
E
U
/W7
ZD
Figure 2.22 Thermal injury in a dog. Mild
corneal oedema and fluorescein uptake are
OPHTHAL
present as a result of superficicl cornecl damage
caused by the intense heat generated by a
chip pan that caught fire. Both corneas healed
rapidly Following topical treatment with antibi-
otic ointment and a short course of systemic
analgesic was also dispensed. Respiratory prob-
lems as c result of smoke inhalation took slightly
longer to resolve.
Treatment of corneal burns
● Topical antibiotic ointment and systemic analgesic are usually sufficient
● If pain is more severe because of secondary iridocyclitis, a short-acting cycloplegic
should also be used
Thermal burns involving the eyelids are similar to those of the skin, but because the
thermal burns is classified as first degree (epidermis only), second degree (epidermis
and dermis) and third degree (epidermis, dermis and subcutaneous tissue). The
management of eyelid burns is based on a similar classification of the depth of
involvement.
Treatment of eyelid burns
● Remove the animal from the heat source and cool the eyelid tissues as rapidly as
possible (e.g. ice pack wrapped in a towel which, ideally, should be sterile)
● Administer systemic analgesics
● First-degree eyelid burns should be treated with topical antibiotic ointment, second-
 degree burns require antibiotic-impregnated non-occlusive dressings. Third-degree
burns may require reconstructive eyelid surgery, including skin grafting, to preserve
eyelid function, and such cases should be referred early
● Bacterial colonisation and eyelid infection may complicate the situation, in which
case systemic antibiotic treatment will also be required
● Prophylactic tetanus treatment should be administered to horses and other
herbivores
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
57
ACUte uveItIS
See under uveal tract for further details. If the cause is not obvious it may be sensible
to seek specialist advice or refer the case at the outset (Figure 2.23)
IES
C1
Z
ER
TRAUM
E
OPHTHALMIC
ZD
Figure 2.23 Acute uveitis in α dog. In this severe unilateral uveitis of unknown cause the eye is
reddened and painful with the classical signs of blepharospasm, lacrimation and photophobia. There 
is c suspicious Focal grey area at approximately 2 o'clock in the limbal cornec that may be indica-
tive of a previous penetrating injury and it is important to rule out a retained foreign body in this
area.The whole cornea is mildly oedematous,hyphcema is present,iris detcil is lost and the pupil
is constricted. When viewed From the side it was possible to see that the anterior chamber was
shallow as a result of profound iris inflammation.
Salient clinical signs of acute anterior uveitis
● Pain, photophobia, blepharospasm and lacrimation
· Ocular redness, often most marked in the perilimbal area above the ciliary body
(perilimbal byperaemia)
●Mild corneal opacity
●Aqueous flare
● Loss of iris detail; iris will be swollen because of inflammation
● Anterior chamber is shallower than normal because of iris inflammation
● Constricted (miotic) pupil, which does not change shape under different lighting
conditions
● Although the direct pupillary light response is absent, the consensual pupillary light
response is usually present in unilateral cases
● Low intraocular pressure
● Variable effect on vision, but can be a cause of sudden blindness in severe cases
ACUTE GLAUCOMA
If the practice lacks facilities for accurate measurement and monitoring of intraocular
pressure and examination of the drainage angle, of both eyes, with a goniolens, sus-
pected cases should be referred as a matter of urgency (Figure 2.24).
58
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Figure 2.24 Acute glaucoma in a dog. The
eye is painul, there are conjunctival and epis-
cleral congestion, panstromal corneal oedema,
Z
a clear anterior chamber of normal depth,
E
apparently normal iris detail and a widely
ER
Wn
dilated pupil. The intraocular pressure mea sured
with an applanation tonometer(Mackay Marg)
M
RA
was 55 mm of mercury.
E
1ALMI
Z
Salient clinical signs of acute glaucoma in the dog
HIHdO
● Pain, photophobia, blepharospasm and lacrimation 
· The patient may be head shy and reluctant to move because the pain is so severe.
Affected animals may also lose their appetite and, occasionally, they vomit
● Ocular redness due to ciliary injection and conjunctival and episcleral congestion.
A circumcorneal brush border of blood vessels may be apparent within a few days
of onset, especially if there is marked corneal oedema
● Corneal oedema (if the intraocular pressure is greater than 40-50 mm Hg)
● Dilated (mydriatic), non-responsive pupil, but note that when a previous uveitis has
caused extensive posterior synechiae (adhesions), the pupil will be immobile and
constricted (miotic)
● There is no direct or consensual pupillary light response
● High intraocular pressure {in excess of 30 mm Hg)
● Abnormal anterior chamber depth - e.g. iris inflammation and iris bombe will cause
the anterior chamber to be shallower than normal, posterior lens luxation will cause
the anterior chamber to be deeper than normal. There may, however, be no change
in the depth of the anterior chamber
● Reduced vision or blind: affected animals can become acutely blind within hours of
the onset of glaucoma. Owners are unlikely to notice a partial unilateral reduction
in vision, but may, if observant, pick up unilateral blindness
PRIMARY LENS LUXATION
Primary lens luxation is the commonest cause of acute glaucoma in terrier breeds
and cases should be referred as a matter of urgency if the expertise and facilities for
 a tt d ' u a  n a as 
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
59
IES
C1
ER
M
E
Figure 2.25 Primary lens luxation with secondary glaucoma in a Miniature Bull Terrier. The clas-
sical pain triad of lacrimation,blepharospcsm cnd photophobia was present.The eye is reddened,
ZD
the lens is lying in Front of the iris and the dorsal lens equator is highlighted by the light source.
Contact of the anteriorly luxated lens with the posterior cornea has caused localised corneal oedema.
OPHTHAL
The intraocular pressure (Mackay Marg tonometer] was 65 mm Hg. Lens luxation occurred in the
Fellow eye some weeks later.
Clinical features of acute lens luxation (in addition to those of
glaucoma outlined above)
● Local corneal oedema if the lens is, or has been, anterior. The anteriorly-luxated lens
can cause mechanical damage to the endothelial cells of the posterior cornea
● The lens can be visualised in an abnormal position - in the anterior chamber, pupil-
lary aperture, immediately posterior to the iris or within the vitreous. Part, or all,
of the edge of the lens (equator) can be highlighted as a bright reflective rim with
penlight illumination. If the lens has moved from an axial position, an apbakic cres-
cent may be apparent. The lens moves with ocular movement (phacodenesis) and
 n d     n    
when intraocular pressure is high
●Anterior-chamber depth may be abnormal, e.g. deep, if the lens is in the anterior
chamber, or has dropped back into a liquefied vitreous, shallow if the lens and
vitreous are causing pupil block
● Trembling of the iris (iridodenesis) when the dog moves its head, as the iris has lost
the support of the lens
● Vitreous may be apparent in the anterior chamber, visible as faint, cloudy opacities
at the pupillary margin
SUDDEN LOSS OF VISION
If the cause is not obvious, it is sensible to seek early specialist help: some types of
acute visual loss benefit from early intervention if sight is to be restored, and elec-
troretinography {ERG) is a critical tool in the evaluation of vision loss. The causes can
be empirically grouped into those that affect the normal transparency of the ocular
media, those that affect retinal function and those that affect the central nervous system
Hoptic nerve to visual cortex). In addition to local ocular insults as a cause of vision
loss, many generalised diseases are associated with acute blindness.
60
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Causes of sudden blindness
● Acute-onset pancorneal opacity (e.g. panstromal oedema)
● Lipaemic aqueous because of chylomicronaemia
●Uveitis (anterior, posterior and panuveitis)
E
●Acute glaucoma (mainly dog)
+ Globe rupture
Z
E
● Haemorrhage {intraocular haemorrhage, local intracranial and extracranial haem-
orrhage and generalised severe haemorrhage) can all be causes of sudden blindness
Wn
● Retinal detachment (e.g. systemic hypertensive disease - intraocular haemorrhage
M
RA
may also be present)
E
●Sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD) in the dog
OPHTHALMI(
●When the blood supply to the optic-nerve head is severely disrupted, ischaemic optic
Z
neuropathy can result. Acute blindness associated with ischaemic optic neuropathy
△
is an occasional complication of both primary and secondary haemorrhage, septic
emboli and the surgical ligation of arteries. In horses, arterial ligation (e.g. maxil-
lary, greater palatine, internal, external carotid) is a treatment for epistaxis associ-
ated with guttural-pouch mycosis and an occasional cause of acute vision loss on
the ipsilateral side
● Optic neuritis and retrobulbar neuritis (e.g. associated with distemper virus)
· Toxic damage (e.g. toxic hepatic encephalopathy, quinolone antibiotics, anthel-
mintics like ivermectin, salt poisoning and lead poisoning) (Figure 2.26)
· Severe ocular trauma (e.g. intraocular haemorrhage, globe prolapse) and head
trauma fe.g. poll injuries in horses, as a result of rearing and falling over backwards,
can cause partial or complete shearing of the optic nerve as it leaves the brain
through the optic canal)
● Metabolic disease e.g. hypoglycaemia in all species
● Intracranial lesions such as brain tumours {e.g. optic chiasma compression by
 neoplasm), haemorrhage, hydrocephalus, tentorial herniation 
● Consequence of hypoxia/anoxia (e.g. anaesthesia-associated and following cardiac
arrest in all species)
● Feline ischaemic encephalopathy (cerebral vascular infarction)
●Post-ictal (epilepsy)
Figure 2.26 Suddenblindnessin a cat
within 18 hours of oral administration of the
quinolone anfibiotic enrofloxacin. Note the
widely-dilated pupils, which were unresponsive
 to light. Retinal changes in this cat are illustrated
in the feline section.
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
61
Clinical findings
● The history can be of crucial importance, but on occasions is misleading, particu-
larly when the loss of vision is the result of non-accidental injury
● External signs of damage to the head or eye may be apparent
S
● Partial or complete unilateral or bilateral blindness
E
● Sudden bilateral loss of vision usually renders animals nervous, easily startled and
Z
unable to function normally, even in a familiar environment. Unilateral blindness
L
may not be recognised as quickly, although affected animals may show a similar
behaviour pattern when approached on the affected side
Y
WO
● Normal or abnormal pupillary light reflexes (usually abnormal)
M
● Intraocular haemorrhage, or other signs of intraocular damage
●Retinal detachment, or more subtle retinal changes
ZD
● Optic nerve head (ONH) oedema (papilloedema) ± peripapillary and retinal
W7
haemorrhage
OPHTHAL
· When the cause of blindness is central only, there will be no indication of intra-
ocular abnormality
Management
● Accurate case assessment is crucial, as it helps to determine if the damage is reversible
or irreversible
● Treatment regimes for common causes of vision loss are listed in the relevant
sections under specific conditions
SUDDEN OCULAR PAIN
If the cause is not obvious after careful examination, and particularly if the pain is
intractable, it is important to seek early specialist advice. Reduction of ocular pain
 after the application of topical local anaesthetic (e.g. proxymetacaine hydrochloride
0.5%) implies external eye disease {e.g. ocular surface disease, ulcerative keratitis)
rather than an intraocular problem (e.g. uveitis, glaucoma). Successful treatment
depends upon establishing and eliminating the cause and the treatment of common
(Figure 2.27(a-c)).
● Traumatic damage to eye, adnexa, orbit (including foreign bodies)
●Retrobulbar (orbital) abscess and orbital cellulitis
●Endophthalmitis and panophthalmitis
● Allergic blepharoconjunctivitis (mainly horse): acute conjunctivitis in all species is
usually uncomfortable, rather than frankly painful
· Ectopic cilia and, less commonly, distichiasis and other lash and hair problems
(mainly dog) producing corneal irritation or frank ulceration
● Acute dry eye, particularly if there is accompanying cormeal ulceration
● Ulcerative keratitis (superficial ulcers are often more painful than deeper ulcers)
●Acute uveitis
●Acute glaucoma (mainly dog)
62
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
IES
EMERGENCII
TRAUMA
(b)
OPHTHALMIC
AND
[a)
[c)
Figure 2.27(a-e} Sudden ocular pain in a horse (a). This horse had sustained blunt trauma to
the globe hours earlier. Sedation and an auriculopalpebral nerve block were administered and sub-
sequent examination revealed intense miosis and hyphaema (b). Medical treatment with atropine
1% cnd prednisolone acetate 1% was instituted. The pain diminished within cn hour of treatment
commencing and recovery was uneventful. The hcemorrhage had almost resorbed two days after
initial presentation (c) and the horse went on to make a complete recovery.
REFERRALS
The list given in Box 2.3 should not be regarded as exhaustive. Referral should always
be considered as one of the management options for difficult cases and the art of refer-
ral lies in recognising not only which cases to refer, but how and when to refer them.
A letter of referral should set out the reason for referral, any information of relevance,
the results of investigations and any treatment that has been given. It is discourteous,
and usually unhelpful, to send computer print-outs of the patient's life history, and
even worse to send no information whatsoever. Problems requiring urgent or
emergency referral are signified by an asterisk (*) and for these cases brief details
(including treatment) can be passed to the receptionist at the time of making the
appointment, emailed or faxed through or sent with the client.
Ophthalmic Emergencies and Trauma
63
Box 2.3 Ocular conditions for possible referral
Acute proptosis and prolapse when the aetiology is not obvious*
IES
Orbital neoplasia (and other orbital problems for which surgery may be required)
RGENCI
 Complex adnexal and intraocular neoplasia
Endophthalmitis and panophthalmitis*
Complicated blunt and penetrating trauma, including complex foreign bodies*
MERO
TRAUM
Complex eyelid problems, including cases which require revision because of pre
vious failed eyelid surgery
 Parotid duct transposition, unless proficient and practised in the technique
OPHTHALMIC
ZD
 Deep corneal ulcers and penetrating corneal injuries*
Liquefactive stromal necrosis including alkali burns*
Corneal problems requiring keratectomy or keratoplasty
Acute glaucoma*
Lens luxation in the dog* and other species
Cataract surgery (dogs with diabetic cataracts should be referred as soon as pos-
sible for assessment)
 Acute canine* and equine* uveitis and uveitis where the aetiology is complex or not
obvious
 Sudden blindness*
 Unexplained ocular pain or redness (urgency of referral depends upon the degree
of pain]
* Denotes urgent or emergency referral
SECTION 3
GENERAL AND CANINE
OPHTHALMOLOGV
 General and Canine Ophthalmology
67
INTRODUCTION
In this section, the basic principles of veterinary ophthalmology are described using the
 dog as the type species. Knowledge of normal ocular anatomy underpins the recogni-
tion of ocular abnormality (Figure 3.1(a-c)). Subsequent sections will highlight species
differences, so as not to repeat much of the material outlined in this section. The
common canine ocular and adnexal conditions and those that are important to recog-
NINE
nise because of the serious implications of misdiagnosis are summarised in Box 3.1.
In many countries, dogs that are to be used for breeding are examined for inher-
OPHTHALMOLOGY
ited eye disease, and in some countries there is also a DNA testing scheme. In the USA,
CAI
canine hereditary eye disease certification is run by the Canine Eye Registration Foun-
dation (CERF) and for much of Europe the European College of Veterinary Ophthal-
mologists (ECVO) fulfils this function. In the UK, the ECVO plays a lesser role, and
examination for hereditary eye disease comes under the auspices of the British Veteri-
nary Association/Kennel Club/International Sheep Dog Society (BVA/KC/ISDS) Eye
 Scheme. An up-to-date list of the conditions and breeds covered by this scheme is pub-
lished annually by the British Veterinary Association {In Practice Supplement on
GEI
Hereditary Eye Disease) and the pamphlet is available free from the British Veterinary
Association.
[a)
(b)
Figure 3.l(a-c)  Gross specimen of the normal
canine globe (a); higher power view of the anterior
segment (b);Fundus (c) (with acknowledgements to J.
RB.Mouldj
68
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Box 3.1  Common and important canine ocular and adnexal conditions
Trauma
 Primary and secondary neoplasia (e.g. benign eyelid neoplasia and multicentric
ymphoma!
 Periocular abnormalities associated with abnormal skull shape (e.g. brachycephalic
dogs) and poor facial anatomy (e.g. nasal folds)
Upper and lower eyelid imperfections (e.g. entropion)
CA
Third eyelid imperfections (e.g. kinked cartilage and prolapse of the nictitans gland)
Horner's syndrome (e.g. idiopathic type in Golden Retriever)
M
 Distichiasis in many breeds of dog
Ectopic cilia (much less common than distichiasis, but important to recognise as ①
工
IH
cause of acute ocular pain]
 Dry-eye syndromes (particularly immune-mediated keratoconjunctivitis sica in breeds
like the West Highland White Terrier!
E
 Conjunctivitis and its differential diagnosis
ulcerative keratitis)
Other causes of ulcerative keratitis
Corneal lipid deposition (may be indicative of systemic disease)
Chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis (pannus)
Uveitis (uncommon, but important to recognise and differentfiate from other causes of
red eye'!
Primary and secondary glaucoma (uncommon, but important to recognise and dif-
ferentiate from other causes of 'red eye')
 Primary lens luxation and secondary glaucoma (mainly terriers)
Cataract
 Sudden blindness and its differential diagnosis
Inherited diseases of the eye (e.g. cataract and fundus condions) and adnexa (e.g.
Club/lnternational Sheep Dog Society (BVA/KC/ISDS) Eye Scheme can be obtained
From the annually-updated in Pracrice artide on Hereditary Eye Disease published by
the Veterinary Record
 Common generalised problems with ocular manifestations include a variety of infec
tfious diseases (e.g. distemper) and metabolic diseases (e.g. hypothyroidism and
diabetes mellitus)
General and CanineOphthalmology
69
GLObE AND ORBIT
Anatomy
● In the dog, as in other domestic animals, the orbital floor is incomplete and the
medial wall of the orbit relatively thin
● Incomplete bony orbital rim with the dorsolateral portion completed by dense
collagenous orbital ligament
● The extraocular muscles encircle the optic nerve and form a cone that is directed
caudally, ventrally and medially towards the optic foramen; the apex of the cone is
caudal and the base rostral
● Orbital contents - globe, extraocular muscles, blood vessels, nerves and intraorbital
O
fat
L
● The lacrimal gland lies deep to the orbital ligament and the zygomatic salivary gland
is present in the ventral orbit in a recess of the maxilla ventral to the globe
● Disease processes in the frontal and maxillary sinuses, caudal nasal chamber, caudal
molar tooth roots, pharynx and muscles of mastication, the lacrimal and the
zygomatic salivary glands may impinge on the orbit
CONDITIONS OF THE CANINE GLOBE AND ORBIT
Causes of enophthalmos (backward displacement of the globe)
● Small eye - may be congenital (e.g. cystic eye and microphthalmos) or acquired (e.g.
ruptured globe and phthisis bulbi)
● Dehydration and debility
● Horner's syndrome
● Anterior-segment pain with active retraction of the globe by action of the retractor
bulbi muscles
●Tetanus
● Chronic stage of masticatory myositis
Causes of exophthalmos (forward displacement of the globe)
● Traumatic prolapse/proptosis of the globe
● Inflammation of periorbital tissues: retrobulbar foreign body, orbital cellulitis,
retrobulbar abscess
● Retrobulbar neoplasia and neoplasia that has invaded from adjacent regions (e.g.
nasal chamber)
● Acute stage of masticatory myositis {third eyelid is prominent as the swelling is
extraconal, see below) and extraocular polymyositis (third eyelid is not prominent
as the swelling is intraconal, see below)
· Zygomatic inflammation, mucocoele formation and other cystic swellings are
uncommon causes
+ Orbital vascular abnormalities, both congenital and acquired, are rare causes (e.g.
arteriovenous shunts)
● Temporomandibular osteopathy in the West Highland White Terrier (very rare cause
of exophthalmos, as the periosteal proliferation is usually sufficiently ventral to ha ve
no effect on globe position)
70
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
INVESTIGATION OF ORBITAL DISEASE
History
● Acute onset with pain suggests inflammation, which is a reasonably common cause,
gradual onset without pain is more likely to be neoplasia, a cyst or a zygomatic
mucocoele (of these three, neoplasia is the most common).
● History of trauma preceding the onset of clinical signs can be helpful, but note that
E
there may be a gap of days or weeks between the original injury and the observed
Z
problem and often the ca use is unknown.
CA
Examination
Z
M
· A full examination of the animal, the eyes and adnexa should be undertaken.
A
● It is essential to examine the eyes both from in front and from above; exophthal.
mos is more obvious than globe enlargement when the eyes are examined from
above.
Z
● Check the position of the third eyelid; it may be more prominent than usual if there
E
is an orbital lesion, especially if the orbital lesion lies outside the endorbital muscle
G
cone (extraconal). Intraconal lesions (those within the endorbital muscle cone) do
not usually result in third-eyelid protrusion, the proptosis is usually axial and stra-
bismus (squint) is subtle or absent.
● Note whether strabismus is present. Strabismus may reflect the position and size
of an orbital {usually extraconal) or paraorbital lesion, but can also be the result of
muscle or nerve damage, or indicative of CNS involvement. Occasionally it will be
necessary to perform a forced-duction test to ascertain if strabismus is the result of
following orbital trauma) or is of neurological origin. Under general anaesthesia,
the conjunctiva and underlying Tenon's capsule is grasped close to the limbus and
the globe is manipulated to ascertain the degree of free movement. Mobility will
be normal if the origin of the stra bismus is neurological.
● Attempt to repulse both globes back within the orbit by gentle pressure through the
closed upper lid; a unilateral space-occupying lesion (SOL) will produce an obvious
disparity between the two eyes, with increased resistance being felt on the affected
side.
· Check the blink response and mobility of all three eyelids and ensure that there is
no exposure keratopathy.
● Check that there is no pain or difficulty in opening the mouth.
● Check whether a nasal discharge is present and ensure that there is free passage of
air from the nostrils using a wisp of cotton wool.
+ Check the local lymph nodes to ascertain if they are of normal size.
● Diagnostic imaging of the orbit can be helpful in the investigation of orbital disease.
In general, radiography is the least useful unless there is bony involvement or a radio-
opaque foreign body. Ultrasonography may be of value and CT and MRI provide
superb soft-tissue detail.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
71
Possible ocular and oral signs of orbital space occupying lesions
+Exophthalmos
● Third eyelid prominence
●Strabismus
● Increased resistance to globe retropulsion, especially obvious in unilateral cases
● Corneal profle will be more obvious on the affected side when viewed from above
● Lagophthalmos (inability to close the lids) ± exposure keratopathy
+ Conjunctival hyperaemia/congestion/chemosis
● Periorbital swelling
● Pain or difficulty in opening the mouth
CA
O
● Swelling or other abnormality caudal to last upper molar tooth
0
Z
W
ORBITAL NEOPLASIA
A
工
IH
History, aetiology and clinical signs
● Tumours may arise from any of the orbital tissues, or by extension from neigh-
Z
bouring tissues (e.g. nasal), or because of secondary spread (e.g. multicentric
E
lymphoma).
● The history is usually that of a slowly-developing exophthalmos with third eyelid
prominence and globe deviation: findings that enable space occupying orbital lesions
to be differentiated from globe enlargement (Figure 3.2(a-b). Pain is not usually a
feature in these slowly progressive cases with orbital neoplasia.
● The patient is usually middle aged or old.
● There are exceptions: beware the situation in which a rapid-onset with pain tempt
a diagnosis of retrobulbar abscess, for there are occasions in dogs of any age when
· Always check the nasal airflow {using a fine wisp of cotton wool) and the local
lymph nodes (by palpation) when neoplasia is suspected.
● The ocular signs can be very helpful. For example, a nasal tumour that has infil-
trated the orbit may produce lateral globe deviation as well as the expected exoph-
thalmos and third eyelid prominence. In addition to ocular signs, there may also be
reduced airflow, a nasal discharge or haemorrhage from the nostril on the affected
side.
72
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
E
ND
HTH
NERAI
Z
[a)
(b)
Figure 3.2 (a) Orbital neoplasia in an old Boxer. Prominence of the third eyelid is the most
obvious feature and there is also an upward and outwards squint, both of which are helpful in
establishing the ventromedial position of the space-occupying mass. The dog's open mouth and
absence of any signs of pcin indicate that the cause is more likely to be neoplastic than inflamma-
tory, as was indeed the case. This dog should be compcred with that in (bj. (b) A young Boxer
with an enlarged globe because of glaucoma secondary to previous trauma (penetrating cat claw
injury) in which there is no third-eyelid prominence. In (a) the corneal profile was more obvious on
the affected side when viewed from above.
Diagnosis and management
● Most cases are best referred if there is a prospect of retaining a functional eye, or
if the extent and nature of the tumour are unclear, especially as the prognosis is
guarded.
● Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration/biopsy of the lesion, or sampling from a
local lymph node, may provide diagnostic material, but many orbital lesions are not
easily accessible.
● The use of computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
have greatly improved the investigation of neoplasia in and near the orbit. The two
techniques are complementary rather than exclusive, although MRI is the more
generally useful, especially if there is intracranial involvement.
● Skull radiography is useful if there is bony involvement, intraoral views are helpful
if dental involvement is suspected and chest radiography should be performed if
there is any sus picion of distant meta stasis.
● Under no circumstances should orbital exploration be attempted without a precise
knowledge of orbital anatomy, the requisite skills in orbital surgery and an accurate
diagnosis for which refined imaging techniques are mandatory.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
73
ENUCLEATION OF THE GLOBE AND
EXENTERATION OF THE ORBIT
Removal of the globe is indicated for blind, painful eyes (e.g. unresponsive glaucoma),
for eyes with inoperable intraocular tumours, for irreparably damaged eyes and for
serious infections of the eye that have not responded to treatment fe.g. endoph-
thalmitis). Orbital exenteration may be needed if there is inflammatory or neoplastic
orbital involvement. Samples for culture and sensitivity should be taken prior to
E
Z
surgery if infection is present.
The commonest methods of globe removal are trans-palpebral and trans-
conjunctival enucleation. Prostheses (e.g. silicone implants) are sometimes used
O
following globe removal and are of potential value in young growing animals to
M
minimise skull deformity. In other situations their use is more equivocal, as the animal
is unconcerned about the cosmetic result. Evisceration {removal of the ocular contents
H
via a perilimbal incision) and implantation of a prosthesis into the remaining cor-
     i        
P
and this may reflect, in part, owner attitude and expectations.
6
Trans-palpebral (en-bloc) enucleation
· General anaesthesia
● Usual preparations for aseptic surgery
● Infiltration of the orbit with local anaesthetic provides good peri-operative and post-
operative analgesia. Use bupivacaine and lignocaine (4:1 ratio) and a total dose of
3-5 ml
o Palpate orbital rim and globe to affirm landmarks
o Use 1” needle for small dogs and 1'%" needle for large ones
o Enter orbit medially at 2 o'clock following the orbital wall caudally, draw back
before injecting anaesthetic in the posterior orbital region
o Repeat laterally at 8 o'clock, again drawing back before injecting anaesthetic
behind the globe
-saue leool aui peauds ot 'sumdnu oi klll si ll ssalun kuaa aka aui aaese o
thetic within the orbit
● The eyelids are held closed with Allis tissue forceps, or sutured together so as to
provide a bridle suture for handling. Make an encircling skin incision that will
● The underlying tissues are dissected as far as the orbital margin taking care not to
penetrate the conjunctival sac
● Heavy scissors are used to section first the lateral canthal ligament and then the
shorter medial canthal ligament
● Gentle traction is applied to the lids to elevate them so that their connection with
the orbital margin can be sectioned. The globe and extraocular muscles should be
handled gently so as to avoid potential vagal effects (bradycardia via the oculocar-
diac reflex)
● The attachments of the globe to the orbit are sectioned, if possible identifying each
individual extraocular muscle then sectioning it as close to the globe as possible
● The optic nerve is clamped with curved forceps, taking care to avoid excessive trac-
tion. A scalpel blade or curved scissors are used to section the nerve between the
74
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
globe and the forceps. It is not essential to ligate the optic nerve if it has been
clamped, but the forceps should be left on for at least 5 minutes
● Before closing it is important to check that all haemorrhage is under control. The
orbit should not be packed as this increases the risk of infection, may be uncom-
fortable for the patient and gives a poorer long-term cosmetic result
●Absorbable sutures (e.g. 5-0 to 6-0 polyglactin 910) are placed through connective
tissue/muscles to close the dead space. Usually two or so interrupted sutures may be
E
placed deeply and continuous sutures subcutaneously in order to achieve tight
Z
closure. The skin is closed with simple interrupted sutures {e.g. 3-0 to 4-0 nylon or
polyglactin 910)
C
u Aan e sunns Aa pndde aq uo anssard uaqod e si aaedaas punm f o
up large swab over the wound and removing it after two days
Z
M
● Immediate systemic postoperative analgesia should be provided
● If the globe or orbit is infected, topical antibiotic can be instilled into the orbit when
the globe has been removed and a course of systemic broad-spectrum antibiotic
provided. The selection of antibiotic should be based on previous culture and
sensitivity results
E
● Non-absorbable sutures are removed after 7-10 days
Trans-conjunctival (sub-conjunctival) enucleation
· This technique should not be used when there is orbital neoplasia or infection
● The eyelids remain open during the procedure and the conjunctival space is opened
by an initial incision close to the limbus
● Pathogens may be ina dvertently introduced into the orbit once the conjunctival space
is entered
● Less extraocular tissue is removed and there is usually less haemorrhage
● Once the globe has been removed, the conjunctival sac, nictitating membrane and
eyelid margins are excised
● Retained conjunctival tissue may become cystic and lead to sinus formation
Exenteration
● Exenteration involves removal of the globe and all other orbital tissues. The indi
cations for this technique include orbital neoplasia fprimary tumours and those that
have extended from the globe) and non-responsive orbital infections (usually
panophthalmitis).
● The surgical technique involves dissection close to the wall of the orbit and is invari
ably associated with more haemorrhage than the others described.
EYELIdS
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The eyelids function to protect and lubricate the eye and the integrity of all three eyelids
is important in terms of these functions.
Upper and lower eyelids
The upper and lower eyelids consist of three layers. The outer layer of skin contains
hair follicles, eyelashes {upper eyelid only) and their respective sebaceous glands. The
General and Canine Ophthalmology
75
middle layer consists of muscle, tarsal (meibommian) glands and the collagenous con-
nective tissue known as the tarsal plate. The inner layer is palpebral conjunctiva. Skin
and conjunctiva meet at a mucocutaneous junction known as the eyelid margin. The
eyelids are richly supplied with nerves, blood vessels and lymphatic tissue.
Third eyelid
The third eyelid (nictitating membrane, membrana nictitans) arises as a fold from the
ventromedial aspect of the conjunctiva. The free border is usually darkly pigmented.
NE
The amount of third eyelid which is visible in the normal dog largely depends on the
relationship between the globe and orbit; thus in brachycephalic breeds with a shallow
orbit the third eyelid is unobtrusive, whereas third eyelid prominence is a conspicuous
feature of those dolicocephalic breeds with small eyes. Retraction of the globe into the
10
orbit results in passive protrusion of the third eyelid.
The third eyelid consists of inner (bulbar) and outer (palpebral) conjunctiva (nicti-
tating conjunctiva) and both surfaces are covered by nonkeratinised stratified squa-
mous epithelium. The stroma is fibrous connective tissue and a T-shaped hyaline
cartilage plate reinforces the structure of the third eyelid. There is substantial glandu-
lar and lymphoid tissue. A superficial seromucous gland, the nictitans gland, is located
at the base of the T-shaped cartilage, and this gland contributes significantly to the
preocular tear film (PTF).
EXAMINATION OF THE EYELIDS
Examination of the upper and lower eyelids
● Careful examination of the eyelids should be performed in good light and with mag-
nification. The outer and inner surfaces should be inspected as well as the fornices
and lid margins. It is easy to miss penetrating injuries, sparse distichia, ectopic cilia
and foreign bodies
● Swabs and impression smears should be taken when relevant. Local anaesthesia is
not usually necessary for this, but will be required for eyelid biopsies
Examination of the third eyelid (nictitating membrane)
● Examination of the outer (palpebral) surface is achieved by applying gentle pressure
to the globe through the upper eyelid in order to repulse the globe and mechanically
protrude the third eyelid
● The inner (bulbar) surface can be examined following topical application of local
anaesthetic drops (e.g. proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.5%)
o The slightly-raised ridge close to the free border of the third eyelid is grasped with
thumb forceps (taking care to avoid inadvertent damage to either the cornea or
the free border of the third eyelid)
o The inner surface is inspected by gently pulling the leading edge away from the
eye
· Whilst examination of the inner aspect of the third eyelid is not performed routinely,
it is an essential part of ophthalmic examination if there is any possibility of a foreign
body (e.g. grass seed)
· Direct inspection of the lymphoid tissue on the inner surface of the eyelid is also of
importance in chronic conjunctivitis cases, as follicular hyperplasia can cause direct
low-grade physical trauma to the cornea
76
 Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
CONDITIONS OF THE CANINE THIRD EYELID
Causes of prominence - and apparent prominence -
of the third eyelid
●Anatomical e.g. small eyes
●Reduced volume of orbital contents e.g. because of debility and severe dehydration,
loss of retrobulbar fat, atrophy of the pterygoid muscles 
E
● Lack of pigment, particularly if unilateral, can give a spurious impression of promi-
Z
nence
A
·Horner's syndrome
● Dysautonomia {much less common in the dog than the cat - see Section 4, pp
D
182-183
Z
M
·Scrolling of third eyelid cartilage
工
·Hypertrophy and prolapse of the nictitans gland
· Cystic swelling of the nictitans gland is a rare cause of prominence
IER
● Pain produces globe retraction and consequent protrusion of the third eyelid
Z
(Figure 3.3)
E
(oi da as sn sd sy sa sd a u o
and chronic lymphoid hyperplasia
Trauma,injury and infection
· Systemic and generalised problems e.g. tetanus
● Neoplasia primary (rare) and secondary (most commonly lymphoma)
●Retrobulbar space-occupying lesions e.g. inflammation or neoplasia
● Drug-induced e.g. phenothiazine tranquillisers
Figure 3.3 Prominence of the third eyelid. This Border Collie lacks pigment in the third eyelid
Cs α normal variant. The eye is pcinful because of ciliary spasm (note the pupil constriction] as α
resul of a penetrating corneal injury (the circular white dot) of unknown cause an hour previously.
Itisimporntnsrehatthererendiionlcmlicatinsuchsqeouskageren
foreign material or intraocular damage in such ca ses. No such complications were present, and the
dog made a complete recovery after symptomatic treatment with a mydriatic cycloplegic (atropine)
and antibiotic drops (chloramphenicol)l.
Pigment variations
The free border of one or both third eyelids is usually pigmented. Non-pigmented
third eyelids are common and part of normal variation, their pink colour and lack
General and Canine Ophthalmology
77
of pigment should be differentiated from colour variations due to inflammation and
from the pigment loss associated with plasmacytic conjunctivitis (see this section,
pp 120-121).
Horner's syndrome
Horner's syndrome indicates damage to the efferent sympathetic nerve supply to the
eye at any point along its three-neurone pathway between the brain and eye. The first-
order neurones pass from the hypothalamic region of the brain via the lateral tec-
totegmental spinal pathway to emerge in the chest at T1-T3. The second-order
preganglionic neurones join the vagus nerve to form the vagosympathetic trunk and
O
synapse in the cranial cervical ganglion caudoventral to the ear. Third-order postgan-
0
glionic neurones run through the tympanic bulla and middle ear, enter the skull and
M
transit the cavernous sinus, then leave the skull via the orbital fissure to supply the eye
and orbit.
IH
Ophthalmic Features
OP
● Miosis (pupil construction) with the affected pupil being smaller than the normal
30
one under all conditions of illumination - inequality of pupil size is termed aniso-
coria. Miosis may be the only ophthalmic feature in lesions affecting the brachial
plexus when damage is limited to the T1 nerve root of the T1-T3 sympathetic
outflow
● Ptosis (drooping) of the upper eyelid. There may also be a mild lower eyelid ectro-
pion. Both are the result of loss of smooth-muscle tone in the eyelids (Miller's
muscle)
·Enopbthalmos, because of loss of muscle tone in the smooth muscle of the orbit
· Prominence of the third eyelid occurs secondarily to the enophthalmos
· Conjunctival byperaemia occurs because of loss of peripheral vascular tone. This
feature is usually more obvious in the early stages
Aetiology
As the cranial cervical ganglion is anatomically close to the tympanic bulla, ear prob
lems are probably one of the commonest causes of Horner's syndrome, but other pos-
sible causes include central nervous system disease, thoracic disease and lesions
involving the neck and head, including the cavernous sinus. Neoplasia, inflammation
or trauma affecting any of these regions may be relevant.
A form of idiopathic Horner's syndrome, usually third order, is relatively common
in the Golden Retriever. No treatment is required for these cases and the appearance
will gradually return to normal over a period of weeks or months.
Pharmacological testing to localise the lesion
Although a number of pharmacological agents can be used to help localise the site of
the lesion, topical phenylephrine 10% is the agent most commonly used. One drop of
the drug is applied to each eye and the time taken to achieve pupillary dilation is noted
as an indication of denervation hypersensitivity (Box 3.2). It should be noted that the
results can be equivocal and that it is often only possible to differentiate preganglionic
lesions from postganglionic lesions.
78
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Box 3.2 Time to pupillary dilation as indication of denervation hypersensitivity
60-90 minutes suggests a normal eye, or first-order Horner's syndrome
20-45 minutes suggests second-order Horner's syndrome
 Less than 30 minutes suggests third-order Horner's syndrome
Scrolling of the third eyelid cartilage
CA
The cartilage may be abnormally kinked, usually in the vicinity of the upper part of
the T. The kinking results in eversion or, less commonly, inversion of the third eyelid
0
M
The appearance is unsightly and the functional mobility of the third eyelid may be
Z
A
impaired. The problem is often developmental and is quite common in some of the
工
larger breeds of dog (e.g. Great Dane, St Bernard, Mastiff and Weimaraner) (Figure
IH
3.4(a)). The deformity may be a consequence of unequal growth between the cartilage
and the conjunctiva during development.
O
E
[a}
(b)
[c)
(p)
Figure 3.4 (a} Scrolling of the third-eyelid cartilage in a Great Dane. (b-d} The kinked portion
of the carilage in (aj was surgically removed to restore normal anatomicol relations between the
third eyelid and the globe (b-d).
Clinical signs
· The appearance is characteristic, as the kink can be appreciated by simple visual
inspection
General and Canine Ophthalmology
79
● Although the majority of cases have a kink in the long arm of the T, others may
have deformity of the short arms
● In some dogs, prolapse of the nictitans gland is also present
Treatment
● If tear flm distribution is affected, with or without accompanying prolapse of the
nictitans gland, then surgery is usually the treatment of choice
INE
Surgery involves removal of the kinked section of cartilage only, normally utilising
an approach via the inner aspect of the third eyelid. Following general anaesthesia, the
IZ
GY
third eyelid is everted and stabilised with stay sutures, or a pair of Allis tissue forceps,
CA
（）
OPHTHALMOLC
placed so as to avoid inadvertent damage to the free border. The overlying conjunctiva
AND
is incised, most commonly at 90 degrees to the free margin over the long arm of the *T'
and the affected portion of cartilage is filleted out and excised. It is important to ensure
that no sharp edges of cartilage protrude. No suturing is required. If there is also a pro-
lapse of the nictitans gland, it can be relocated as described below (Figure 3.4(b-d).
Hypertrophy and prolapse of the nictitans gland
GEI
Protrusion of the nictitans gland over the free border of the third eyelid is of charac
teristic appearance (popularly known as cherry eye') and is relatively common (Figure
3.5(a). It should be distinguished from neoplasia, which is uncommon. There appears
to be a breed predisposition in, for example, the Beagle, Bulldog and Boston Terrier,
but it is an occasional finding in many breeds of dog. The condition may be caused
by inherent instability of the connective tissue which anchors the gland at the base of
the third eyelid, it may also be a direct consequence of chronic glandular hypertrophy.
Whatever the initiating cause, the prolapsed gland becomes reddened in its abnormal
location and most owners find it unsightly.
[a]
(b)
Figure 3.5  (a) Hypertrophy and prolapse of
the nictitans gland. {b,c} A pocket inversion
(c)
technique was used to correct the cbnormality
80
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Clinical signs
● The glandular tissue protrudes beyond the free border of the third eyelid. In obese
animals the appearance may be particularly florid
● Kinking of the cartilage of the third eyelid may also be present
Differential diagnosis
● Primary and secondary neoplasia
E
● Chronic inflammatory disease
Z
Cysts
Treatment
D
Excision of the prolapsed gland should not be carried out, because of the deleterious
Z
M
effects on tear production. Instead it should be relocated. There are a number of
published techniques of which the pocket inversion technique (Figures 3.5(b,c) is
工
the easiest to perform.
Z
Pocket inversion technique
E
G
Following general anaesthesia, the third eyelid is everted and stabilised with stay
sutures or a pair of Allis tissue forceps, placed so as to avoid inadvertent damage to
the free border. A curved incision is made parallel to the free border of the third eyelid,
proximal to the prolapsed gland. A second curved incision is made distal to the pro-
lapsed gland. The gland is covered by suturing the proximal edge of the first incision
and the distal edge of the second incision together, effectively burying the prolapsed
gland in a pocket.
The continuous buried sutures of 6-0 polyglactin 910 commence with a buried knot
externally on the outer aspect of the third eyelid and also finishes externally with a
second buried knot, so as to avoid any possibility of corneal abrasion. It is usual to
leave small gaps at each end of the suture line so that the nictitans gland secretions
can reach the conjunctival sac.
Surgery may be frustrating because the gland can reprolapse in giant breeds of dog
and those with prominent eyes. In the event of reprolapse it may be better to seek
specialist advice.
Third eyelid inflammation
As the third eyelid is covered by conjunctiva it can be involved in acute and chronic
conjunctivitis (see this section, pp 102-103).
Third eyelid neoplasia
Primary neoplasia is rare. Examples reported in the dog include papilloma, melanoma,
adenocarcinoma, adenoma, squamous cell carcinoma, haemangioma, angiokeratoma
and mastocytoma. Secondary involvement is most commonly a consequence of multi
centric lymphoma and systemic histiocytosis. It is important that primary tumours
of the third eyelid are differentiated from primary tumours that have infiltrated from
elsewhere (e.g. nasal tumours) and from secondary tumours.
Ireatment
General and Canine Ophthalmology
81
and this is one of the few situations in which it is permissible to sacrifice part or all
of the third eyelid
● All third eyelid tumours should be submitted for histopathological examination
+ Lifelong tear replacement therapy will be required in those animals in which corneal
health is compromised by third eyelid loss
CONDITIONS OF THE CANINE UPPER AND LOWER EYELIDS
E
Ophthalmia neonatorum
CA
The eyelids of neonatal puppies remain naturally fused (ankyloblepbaron) for some
O
 7-15 days postnatally. Occasionally infection behind the fused eyelids results in oph-
0
W
complications such as globe rupture and endophthalmitis are to be avoided. Canine
herpes virus and bacteria such as coagulase-positive Staphylococci are the usual cause.
Opbtbalmia neonatorum is commoner in kittens than puppies and is illustrated in
OP
Section 4, pp 183-185.
GE
Clinical signs
 Swelling is apparent behind the fused eyelids and there is usually an ocular discharge
 or beads of pus in the medial canthal region.
Treatment
● Premature opening of the eyelids is required if vision-threatening complications
(ulceration, perforation, endophthalmitis) are to be avoided
● It is usually possible to separate the eyelids in the conscious puppy. A topical local
anaesthetic can be applied to the medial canthus beforehand
● One tip of blunt-tipped tenotomy scissors is inserted medially and slid gently and
with considerable care along the presumptive opening, in the same way as a paper
knife is used to open an envelope. Avoid applying pressure to the globe while
separating the eyelids
● Once the eyelids have been separated, all ocular discharge should be gently cleaned
     
excipient (chloramphenicol ointment or fusidic acid gel) should be applied to ensure
that the eyelids remain open. Note that the ocular media may not be transparent if
the puppy is less than five weeks of age. This is a normal feature of carnivore eyes,
 as postnatal development continues for some 12 weeks after birth
● General nursing care, as appropriate, should accompany local ocular treatment
Entropion
Entropion is the in-turning {inversion) of the whole eyelid or part of the eyelid and is
segment pain), anatomical entropion (breed related), cicatricial entropion (a result of
fibrosis and scarring) and atonic entropion (a consequence of laxity and often associ-
ated with senility)
Entropion is common in certain breeds and is probably inherited in many dogs with
anatomical entropion. When examining affected animals it is important to make the
assessment without distorting the eyelid appearance by handling the head. Sedation or
82
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
general anaesthesia should also be avoided when calculating the extent of the entro-
 pion, particularly if surgery is contemplated. If surgery is required it is performed with
the patient under general anaesthesia.
Spastic entropion
 If a spastic component is suspected, topical local anaesthesia is an essential part of the
investigative procedure. If the blepharospasm and accompanying entropion resolve
following the application of local anaesthetic, it is obvious that entropion surgery is
not required as the entropion is of pain-related (spastic) origin. It is important to
establish and eliminate the reason for the anterior-segment pain.
CA
0
ZD
Anatomical entropion
M
Anatomical entropion is a unilateral or bilateral condition that may affect part of the
eyelid or the whole length of the eyelid. Although the lower eyelid is most commonly
工
affected, both upper and lower can be involved. The situation can be further compli-
cated by the lateral canthal ligament providing poor support (as in breeds with a
 diamond-shaped eye) or the ligament being too taut. The age of onset is variable: in
breeds such as the Shar Pei, the condition may develop almost as soon as the eyelids
first open (Figure 3.6(a)), whereas in other breeds the entropion develops at a few
months of age.
Many breeds of dog can be affected by entropion and a dominant mode of inher
itance may operate in some of them. The possible genetic implications should be dis-
   e s      o ae m ss
aim of such counselling being the prevention of heritable malformations, rather than
their perpetuation by continued breeding.
[b]
Figure 3.6 (a) Anatomical entropion in a
young Shar Pei. (b) A temporary tacking pro-
cedure is used to evert the eyelid margins in
entropion. For mild cases, only the lower eyelid
requires suturing, but in the majority of cases
both upper and lower eyelids are sutured (with
[a]
ccknowledgements to D. J. Gouldj
General and Canine Ophthalmology
83
In young animals with mild entropion it is sometimes possible to delay corrective
excisional surgery until maturity. If, however, there is any pain and discomfort, or if
corneal damage is occurring, then treatment must be undertaken. Temporary sutures
without incision {see below) provide the easiest solution in young animals and tem-
porary tacking procedures often break the cycle of iritation and blepharospasm that
exacerbates the existing entropion; so producing a satisfactory long term solution
(Figure 3.6(b)).
山
Cicatricial entropion
Z
IZ
Cicatricial entropion is not particularly common in small animals. Causes include
 previous surgery, trauma, chronic inflammation and injuries from caustic chemicals.
O
0
Atonic (senile} entropion
Atonic entropion is seen most commonly in the aged Cocker Spaniel and the accom-
damage. The discomfort produced by the condition may result in self-inflicted trauma,
OP
and it is not unusual for affected patients to develop further problems such as ble-
pharitis and periorbital dermatitis.
GE
Correction of the entropion is all that is required for mild cases, whilst more radical
procedures are needed for severe cases. A course of systemic antibiotic is needed prior
to surgery in those animals with established blepharitis or dermatitis. Staphylococci
and streptococci are the commonest causative organisms, and oral penicillin, or similar,
given for three weeks, is indicated.
Entropion surgery
There are many surgical techniques for entropion correction, but in general the sim-
plest effective method of repair for the type of entropion present is the one which
should be selected. It is worth emphasising, however, that techniques such as the injec-
tion of materials like liquid paraffin into the eyelid bave no place in the treatment of
lipogranuloma formation and severe eyelid distortion.
o e      s   s  
tion of blepharoplastic techniques, including section of the lateral canthal ligament
(lateral canthal tendonotomy) and are probably best referred.
Temporary suturing
Temporary suturing without incision may be used in young animals (e.g. Shar Pei).
Vertical mattress sutures are usually employed, using 5-0 silk, braided nylon or
between forefinger and thumb just below the eyelid margin to restore normal anatomi-
 s   s s  t   s 
tacking procedure is an effective means of everting the eyelid in dogs, lambs and foals
with neonatal entropion.
Hoiz-Celsus procedure
The Hotz-Celsus procedure of skin-muscle resection is the commonest excisional tech-
nique used for uncomplicated entropion. At the time of examination of the conscious,
84
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
revised once the animal is more relaxed because it is sedated and/or anaesthetised. A
finger, lid plate, tongue depressor or scalpel handle is placed within the conjunctival
sac to tense the lid and protect the cornea and, of these, a finger is the most effective.
An incision is made parallel to the affected portion of eyelid, and it is important
that the first incision is placed sufficiently close to the lid margin {approximately
2mm). The second incision is elliptical, made at a distance far enough away from
the first to correct the entropion. The incised skin and muscle is usually removed
with Stevens tenotomy scissors or by sharp dissection with a scalpel, using a 15-gauge
Bard-Parker blade.
The defect is closed with simple interrupted 5-0 or 6-0 silk sutures which are
CA
removed 5-7 days later. Alternatively, absorbable material such as S-0 to 6-0
0
 polyglactin 910 may be used. The suture knots are placed as far from the eyelid margin
Z
M
as possible (Figure 3.7(a,b,c) and 3.8(a,b,c,d)).
A
When the Hotz-Celsus procedure is used to correct medial canthal lower eyelid
工
entropion, the incision made is triangular in shape, with its base closest to the eyelid
NER
margin (Figure 3.12(b,c).
Z
O
Y- to V-plasty
 Y-to-V plasty is a procedure that is used for simple cases of cicatricial entropion.
[a]
(b)
Figure 3.7(a-c)Anatomical entropion.The lower
kteral portion of the eyelid is affected in this Labrador
Retriever [a] and the entropion is corrected using the
(c)
Hotz-Celsus technique (b-c]
General and Canine Ophthalmology
85
NINE
(b)
GY
[a}
CAI
GEI
(p)
(c)
Figure 3.8(a-d}] Anatomical entropion. If there is also a tendency for the eyelid to kink' at the
kateral canthus [a], the Hotz-Celsus technique is modified by extending the tissue excision to incor-
porate a portion of the upper eyelid as ilustrated (b-d).
Ectropion
 Ectropion is an outward turning of the eyelid (Figure 3.9(a). In mild form some breed-
ers would consider it a “desirable” breed feature. As such it is reproducible and pre-
sumed to be inherited in many of the affected breeds. There is a gap between the eyelid
and the cornea so that the conjunctiva and cornea are relatively exposed, the tear film
is poorly distributed and there is an increased propensity for foreign material to gain
access to the lower conjunctival sac. However, ectropion rarely produces any major
discomfort for the animal and in many cases it is better to leave it alone, providing
that recurrent conjunctivitis and/or keratitis are not causing problems.
In some dogs the degree of ectropion varies considerably according to whether the
animal is relaxed and tired or alert. If normal conformation is present in the alert state,
surgery is not usually required.
Ectropion may be anatomical {usually a consequence of selective breeding),
cicatricial, atonic and paralytic.
Anatomical ectropion
Anatomical ectropion usually involves the lower eyelid (Figure 3.9(a)), except when
more complicated deformity results in a “diamond eye'. Lower eyelid ectropion is a
typical feature of breeds such as the Basset Hound, St Bernard and Clumber Spaniel.
Cicatricial ectropion
Cicatricial ectropion has the same possible origins as cicatricial entropion.
86
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
[a]
CA
(b)
0
ND
PHTHALM
NERAL
Figure 3.9 (a) Anatomical ectropion. (b,c) The
0
GE
simplest means of shortening the eyelid in ectropion is
by a Full-thickness wedge-shaped excision of the
(c)
affected lower eyelid right next to the lateral canthus.
Atonic ectropion
Atonic ectropion is usually a consequence of senility and predominantly affects the
lower eyelid, just as senile atonic entropion affects predominantly the upper eyelid.
Paralytic ectropion
          i  
sis, but is also occasionally seen in mild form in dogs with Horner's syndrome.
Ectropion surgery
There are many possible techniques for the correction of ectropion, some of which are
unnecessarily complicated unless there is a real problem with defective eyelid tone.
Wedge excision (Figure 3.9(b,c)) is the commonest technique and is used for the treat-
ment of both ectropion and eyelid neoplasia.
Wedge excision
 The assessment of these cases is made exactly as already outlined for entropion surgery.
The appropriately-sized wedge of tissue is excised right next to the lateral canthus and
the lid is closed using a single layer of S-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted silk or polyglactin
910 sutures. The first suture re-apposes the eyelid margin and may be inserted as a
figure of eight suture or a simple interrupted suture, but, whichever is selected, appo-
sition must be perfect.
V-to-Yplasty
V-to-Y Plasty is very useful for simple cases of cicatricial ectropion.
Macropalpebral fissure-'diamond'eye
The “diamond-shaped’ eye is achieved through selective breeding. Breeds affected
General and Canine Ophthalmology
87
include the Bloodhound, Clumber Spaniel and St Bernard (Figure 3.10). The confor-
 mation of the skull and the amount of redundant skin, together with overlong eyelids
and weak support from the lateral canthal ligament, combine so that there is a ten-
dency for the central portion of the eyelid margin to evert and the medial and lateral
eyelid margins to involute. There is thus combined ectropion and entropion and,
 often, a degree of exposure keratopathy. Permanent spastic entropion and secondary
keratitis eventually supervene.
Treatment
Surgery is complex and can include some, or all, of eyelid shortening by wedge exci-
sion, Hotz-Celsus resection and re-alignment of the lateral canthal tendon, so such
cases are better referred.
O
M
NERAL
P
6
GEI
Figure 3.10 Macropalpebral fissure ('dia-
mond eye' in a St Bernard. This was corrected
by removing Full-thickness wedges From the
lateral aspects of both the upper and lower
eyelids to shorten the eyelids, together with
tensioning the lateral canthus by direct suture to
the periosteum of the zygomatic arch.
Micropalpebral fissure - blepharophimosis
This is seen as an isolated feature in breeds such as the Shetland Sheepdog or com-
bined with other eyelid problems such as entropion and excessive skin folds in breeds
such as the Chow Chow (Figure 3.11)
Treatment
· Treatment is not always required, but may be complex when it is needed because
of the other accompanying abnormalities
· The simplest way of increasing the palpebral fissure is by modified lateral
canthotomy
Figure 3.11  Micropalpebral fissure  (ble-
pharophimosisj in a Chow Chow. This dog also
had smalleyes, and animals with this degree of
anatomical abnormality require referral.
88
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Pekingese and pug adnexal disease
Possible problems (Figure 3.12(a))
●Prominent globe/shallow orbit (excessive palpebral aperture)
●Anaesthetic cornea (insensitive)
● Inadequate blink (lagophthalmos)
● Distichiasis (see this section, pp 90-91)
● Medial canthal hairs and/or hairy caruncle
●Medial lower eyelid entropion
●Nasal folds
CA
Solutions
D
0
● Shorten eyelid opening (permanent medial or lateral canthorrhaphy - usually best
Z
M
referred for this technique)
A
● Medial lower eyelid entropion can be treated using the modified Hotz-Celsus tech-
工
nique outlined earlier (Figure 3.12(b,c))
IH
IER
● Medial canthoplasty is the simplest means of shortening the eyelids, negating the
Z
O
effects of lower medial entropion, medial canthal hairs and a hairy caruncle {usually
E
best to refer cases for this technique)
● Catholysis for distichia if the extra eyelashes are causing a problem (animals with
troublesome distichiasis may require referral)
● Nasal folds can be excised with strong sharp scissors and the skin defect closed
with simple interrupted sutures or a continuous running suture, using S-0 silk or
polyglactin 910
● Tear replacement therapy may also be required
[a)
(b)
Figure 3. 12  (a) Multiple adnexal abnormalities in
α Pekingese. Previous partial tarsal plate excision had
exacerbated the situation cs distichic were sill
present, but many of the hairs had become misdi-
rected and corneal ulceration was present in the left
eye, illustrated here. (b,c) Quality of life for the dog 
in (a) was improved considerably by a modified Hotz-
Celsus technique to correct the medial lower eyelid
entropion,excision of the nascl folds,catholysis for
the distichicsis and a short course of tear replacement
[c)
therapy.
 General and Canine Ophthalmology
89
Cocker spaniel adnexal disease
Possible problems (Figure 3.13(a,b))
● Upper eyelid entropion, usually age-related (atonic) and trichiasis (see this section,
p. 90)
+Lower eyelid ectropion, usually age-related (atonic)
+Distichiasis
● Ina dequate tear production (KCS)
●Ina dequate tear distribution
.NINE
●Secondary blepharoconjunctivitis
GY
CAI
OPHTHALMOLO
GEI
(b)
[a}
Figure 3. 13(a,b) Multiple adnexal abnormalities in a Cocker Spaniel. Anatomical imperfection
was associated with lower eyelid ectropion and upper eyelid entropion with trichiasis (the normal
upper eyelashes are in contact with the cornea]. Sparse distichia were present in the upper and
lower eyelids of both eyes. Tear production was low in both eyes (Schirmer I tear test of 5 mm/minute
in each eye). Secondary blepharitis (Staphylococcal spp on culture) and corneal pathology were
apparent. The dog was given systemic and local cantibiotic treatment over a four-week period for
the staphylococcal infection. Tear replacement therapy was also instituted for the dry eye after ascer-
tcining that there was no underlying treatable cause, such as hypothyroidism. Rhytidectomy was the
surgical procedure chosen to restore normal anatomical relations in this dog.
Solutions
● Antibiotic therapy for the blepharoconjunctivitis (may require local application as
well as systemic treatment) for at least three weeks
90
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Medical treatment for KCS {rarely surgical)
● Catholysis for distichia if the extra lashes are causing a problem (cases may require
referral)
● Surgical treatment for anatomical problems. Minor problems can be corrected by
eyelid surgery (many techniques), whereas major problems (so called *slipped facial
mask') require more complex surgery (e.g. face lift or rhytidectomy). Many of these
cases are best referred
E
Z
Trichiasis
Trichiasis denotes normal eyelashes in contact with the cornea. It is seen in conjunc-
C
tion with entropion or as a consequence of laxity or deformity of the upper eyelid.
口
Untreated trichiasis will cause keratitis and, in chronic cases, pigmentation of the area
Z
M
of cornea subjected to low-grade tra uma is the most prominent feature. Medial-canthal
hair (caruncular region) and facial hair {e.g. associated with medial lower eyelid entro-
pion and nasal folds) in contact with the cornea will also cause similar problems.
Medial canthal hair is seen most commonly in breeds such as the Lhasa Apso, Shih
ON
Tsu and Tibetan Spaniel and is invariably a cause of chronic epiphora.
E
Treatment
● Minor cases of trichiasis are most readily treated by the most appropriate type of
some aged Cocker Spaniels, a more radical approach {e.g. Stades procedure or
rhytidectomy) may be needed and referral is necessary
· Medial canthal hairs may be treated by medial canthoplasty, by excision of the
caruncle, or hair follicles can be destroyed using catholysis. When there is also subtle
medial lower eyelid entropion a medial canthoplasty or Hotz-Celsus resection of the
affected region of eyelid can be performed
● Nasal folds can be excised with strong sharp scissors and the skin defect closed with
simple interrupted or continuous sutures as outlined previously
Distichiasis
Extra eyelashes are common in a number of purebred and crossbred dogs. The extra
lashes usually arise from the tarsal (meibomian) gland orifice and there may be one or
several cilia emerging from each opening. In affected animals, the meibomian gland
openings are often more haphazardly arranged than in normal animals. The problems
caused by the extra lashes depend on the relationship between the eyelids and the
cornea, particularly the degree of globe prominence, and the stiffness and length of
the cilia (Figure 3.14).
Breeds affected include the Boxer, Bulldog, Flatcoated Retriever, Miniature Long-
haired Dachshund, Miniature and Toy Poodle, Pekingese, Rough Collie, Shetland
sheepdog and some spaniels (American and English Cocker, Welsh Springer). It is
worth advising owners as to the possible inherited nature of distichiasis in most of the
breeds in which it is seen.
Treatment
If the extra lashes are causing the dog no problem other than premature disruption of
the tear film then they should be left alone, especially as some procedures (e.g- partial
tarsal-plate excision) destroy meibomian-gland function.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
91
Figure 3.14 Distichiasis. This American
Cocker Spaniel had been referred for cataract
surgery and the distichia were an incidentcl
Finding, as the dog had lived with distichiasis
without apparent untoward effect for most of its
INE
life.Note that the cataract is total and tending
to hypermaturity with concomitant darkening of
the iris.
0
ZD
M
NERA
Carholysis
P
Catholysis is an excellent method of treatment for those dogs which have problems,
O
but general anaesthesia, good magnification and a commercial electroepilation unit are
required and the procedure is moderately time consuming, so cases are often referred.
Only those extra lashes that are visible can be destroyed, although if the eyelids are
squeezed gently at the time of the procedure other lashes may be partially extruded.
The catholysis needle is placed directly into the affected meibomian gland opening
 and the hair folicles are destroyed using a setting of 3-5 milliamps for approximately
ten seconds for each distichium. Because of the cyclical growth pattern of hairs, a
second treatment is occasionally necessary, to deal with distichia that have sub-
 sequently emerged from untreated openings.
Cryosurgery
Cryosurgery with either nitrous oxide or liquid nitrogen, using a small cryoprobe and
a double freeze-thaw cycle, is also an effective and selective means of treatment, as the
hair follicles are more susceptible to cold than the meibomian glands. Owners should
be warned of the temporary, rarely permanent, loss of eyelid pigment that will follow.
The procedure is carried out under general anaesthesia. There is more eyelid swelling
in the immediate postoperative period than is encountered after catholysis, but this
can be reduced by the judicious use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents. It is
usually better to consider referral unless familiar with the use of cryosurgery at this
site.
Ectopic cilia
The cilia (multiple), or cilium (single), emerge through the palpebral conjunctiva and
impinge directly on the cornea. The condition is therefore painful and may present
 s   s o ss    
excessive lacrimation). The usual location for these lashes is underneath the middle
part of the upper eyelid a few millimetres from the eyelid margin (Figure 3.1 5(a)), but
a careful search may be required as the cilia can arise in other sites. As with distichia
the extra lashes usually arise from hair follicles within the meibomian glands.
Breeds of dog affected include the Bulldog, Flatcoated Retriever, Pekingese, Cocker
Spaniel, Rough Collie, Shetland Sheepdog and Yorkshire Terrier.
92
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
E
[a]
O
二
IH
Figure 3.15 (a) Ectopic cilium. The ectopic
Z
cilium in this Shetland Sheepdog has caused a
O
E
superficial corneal ulcer and the position and
shape of the ulcer mirrors accurately the excur-
sion of the upper eyelid. (b) Sharp excision
from the palpebral surface of the eyelid was
used to remove the hair-producing Follicle in [a).
The ulcer healed uneventfully without any addi-
tional treatment afer the underlying cause was
removed.
(b)
Treatment
●The most effective technique is simple resection of the hair-producing follicle(s) from
the palpebral aspect of the eyelid under general anaesthesia (Figure 3.15(b))
A sharp triangular-shaped incision is made around the extra lash, making sure that
it is deep enough to remove the follicle from which the cilium or cilia arise. No
sutures are required
Dermatoses
Other eyelid diseases are reasonably common in the dog. There are a number of pos.
sible causes, which include parasitic (e.g. demodectic and sarcoptic mange), mycotic
(e.g. Microsporum spp and Trichopbyton spp) and bacterial infection (e.g. Stapbylo-
coccus spp). Non-infectious causes include hypersensitivity reactions (e.g. atopy,
 contact hypersensitivity reactions, food intolerance), immune-mediated diseases (e.g.
pemphigus complex, uveodermatological syndrome, discoid and systemic lupus
erythematosus), zinc-responsive dermatoses and mucocutaneous pyoderma.  In
non-temperate climates, eyelid involvement may be a feature of generalised fungal
disease.
help from other methods such as impression smears, culture {in a range of growth
media) and, most importantly, biopsy. Routine histopathology may need to be sup-
plemented by special techniques such as immunofluorescence, especially for putative
General and Canine Ophthalmology
93
immune-mediated problems. Intradermal skin tests and skin biopsy may also be appro
priate and details should be obtained from standard veterinary dermatology texts.
Acute eyelid inflammation
+ Hypersensitivity reactions, of which atopy is the commonest, are not uncommon.
Atopic dermatitis can also present as a chronic problem, with breeds such as the
English Setter, Labrador Retriever and West Highland White Terrier being over-rep-
 q o     s   
山
Z
elsewhere (e.g. skin)
GY
● Juvenile pyoderma may be a type of bacterial hypersensitivity. It typically affects the
head region only, affects puppies less than three months of age and responds to sys
0
temic treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics and immunosuppressive doses of
M
corticosteroids
● Reactions to insect bites and stings should also be considered when there is an acute
presentation - usually swollen eyelids ± facial swelling
Chronic eyelid inflammation
● Meibomianitis is the commonest chronic eyelid infection reported in the dog.
Although it may have acute origins it is most likely to be diagnosed when chronic,
particularly if granuloma formation (chalazion) supervenes
● Management of meibomianitis can be difficult. Warm compresses can be helpful and
meibomian secretion should be expressed and cultured before an appropriate topical
● When chalazia ha ve formed, excision and curettage of the inspissated material util-
panbau aq Aeu ganounluoo lenqadied aul ea yoroudde ue su!
Neoplasia
Primary eyelid neoplasia is common in dogs, and such tumours are usually benign
(Figure 3.16fa). Sebaceous adenoma and adenocarcinoma, melanoma and papilloma
account for approximately 80% of eyelid neoplasms. Others reported include squa-
mous cell carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, sebaceous gland epithelioma, histiocytoma
and mast cell tumour Most canine eyelid tumours are removed surgically under general
anaesthesia.
Treatment
The majority of canine primary eyelid tumours can be excised by a deep full-thickness
modified wedge excision (deep and house-shaped or V-shaped), taking care to check
the full extent of the tumour before surgery (look beneath the eyelid) (Figure 3.16(b).
A 2 mm rim of normal tissue should be included. The eyelid can be closed in one layer
using 5-0 to 6-0 non-absorba ble {silk) or absorbable {polyglactin 910) suture material
On a cutting needle. The eyelid margin is closed first, with either a figure of eight suture
or a simple interrupted suture, the remainder of the incision is closed with simple inter.
rupted sutures (Figure 3.16(c). In most dogs direct closure is possible with loss of up
B asn oi isalduis si i papaaoxa si sunoue sui uaua syaual Paaa aul jo piu e o
sliding lateral canthoplasty to relieve tension and prevent eyelid distortion as an
94
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Referral should be considered for more complex problems, as there are a consid-
erable number of possible blepharoplastic techniques. As a general principle, eyelid
surgery should be kept simple, and the aim is to ensure normal congruity {accuracy of
apposition between the eyelid and the globe) and mobility. A surgically-created eyelid
should have a conjunctival- or mucous-membrane-lined inner surface and some form
of hairless eyelid margin (e.g. transposed eyelid margin as with the Mustarde tech-
nique, or transposed buccal mucosa as with lip-to-lid procedures) so that there is no
 possibility of skin hairs coming into contact with the cornea.
● Rarely, surgery may need to be combined with other treatments such as cryother
CAI
apy or radiotherapy.
●Any atypical or unusual tumours must be submitted for histopathology.
0
HTH
NERAL
GE
[a]
[b)
[c)
(d)
Figure 3.16 (a] Eyelid neoplasic [sebaceous
cdenoma] in a West Highland White Terrier. (b)
When the eyelid in (a) is everted, the extent of the
tumour is apparent. (t) A full thickness V-shaped inci-
sion was used to excise the mass and the wound
closed in one layer with simple interrupted sutures of
5-0 silk. (d,e) When eyelid tumours are large enough
to distort the eyelid contour ater primary closure a
simple releasing technique (sliding lateral cantho-
[e)
plasty) can be used at the lateral canthus.
 General and Canine Ophthalmology
95
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
INTRODUCTION
The lacrimal system consists of the lacrimal and nictitans glands; the accessory glands
(e.g. the meibomian or tarsal glands and the glands of Zeiss and Moll); the preocular
tear film (PTF); the lacrimal lake; the upper and lower lacrimal puncta and canaliculi;
the lacrimal sac (which is a defined structure in humans, but not in domestic animals);
NINE
the nasolacrimal duct and the nasal ostium or punctum. The tears usually drain into
GV
the vestibulum of the nasal cavity. In brachycephalic dogs (and most cats) the naso-
CAI
010
lacrimal duct is short and wide and often opens more caudally, so that the tears drain
into the nasopharynx (Figure 3.17).
ND
PHTHALMO
The PTF is complex, and consists of an external oily {lipid) layer (mainly from mei-
bomian glands), aqueous {lacrimal and nictitans glands) and mucin {conjunctival
goblet cells and surface epithelial cells). The normal canine tear film has a pH of
6.8-8.0 with a mean of around 7.5.
0
E
Nasolacrimal duct
Nasal ostium
Lacrimal gland
(located in a fold of periorbita
over the dorso-lateral globe)
Upper punctum
and canliculus
Nictitans gland
(at base of third eyelid)
Lower punctum
and canaliculus
Figure 3.17 The canine lacrimal system. The main secretory components comprise the nictitans
and lacrimal glands (shown in light grey at the medial and dorsolateral canthus respectively], the
conjunctival goblet cells and the meibomian glands in the eyelid margins. The excretory compo-
nents consist of the upper and lower puncta and their respective canaliculi. These conjoin at the ves-
tigial lacrimal sac to Fomm the nasolacrimal duct, which terminates rostrally as the nasal ostium.
96
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
The preocular tear film covers the ocular surface and quantitative, qualitative or
tear-film distribution problems should always be considered when the ocular surface
appears abnormal. Note that the ocular surface is a term used to describe the contin-
uous epithelium which covers the third eyelid, extends from the eyelid margins onto
the back of the eyelids, into the fornices and onto the globe. It includes the conjunc.
tival, limbal and corneal epithelium.
INE
INVESTIGATION OF LACRIMAL DYSFUNCTION IN
SMALL ANIMALS
CA
● Investigation of lacrimal dysfunction requires careful inspection of the external eye
Z
M
and adnexa, paying particular attention to conformation, eyelid congruity, the fre-
quency and adequacy of blinking, the presence, position and size of the lacrimal
工
puncta and the position of normal and extraneous hairs. The nature and position
of any ocular discharge and the site and extent of any inflammation must also be
Z
assessed.
E
● The aqueous portion of the tear film is most commonly assessed using the Schirmer
         
are applied to the eye. The test strip is bent at the notch and the short portion is
placed in the ventral conjunctival sac. In normal dogs a reading of 15 mm ±
5 mm is obtained for reflex tear production over one minute. Readings of less than
S mm per minute are significant. Fear, sedation and general anaesthesia all reduce
the values.
● Scrapes, impression smears and swa bs should, if relevant, be taken before the tissues
are handled to any extent to avoid inadvertent contamination.
● Fluorescein dye can be used to assess the patency of the nasolacrimal drainage
system. Fluorescein usually appears at the nostrils within five minutes of installation
into the lower conjunctival sac. However, in brachycephalic dogs, the back of the
tongue and throat region should also be examined if fluorescein does not appear at
the nostrils. The dye is most readily detected in the dark using a light source fitted
with a cobalt blue filter. If there is doubt as to patency, further investigation is
warranted.
● The system can be irrigated {under local or general anaesthesia) via a lacrimal
cannula placed in the upper punctum. Patency of the lower punctum and canalicu-
lus is established first (digital pressure should be applied to the lacrimal sac region),
then the lower punctum is occluded so that patency of the nasolacrimal duct can be
demonstrated. Fluid for culture is usually collected from the nostrils if culture is
required and the samples should be cultured both aerobically and anaerobically.
When the whole system is to be catheterised, general anaesthesia is required. The
nasal ostium is not visible in the dog without special equipment.
the injection of iodine-based contrast medium via the upper punctum and canalicu-
lus. The lower punctum is usually occluded with fine mosquito forceps. Lateral and
dorsoventral radiographic views should be taken within a few seconds of injection.
Slightly oblique views may also be useful to avoid superimposition of, for example.
the tooth roots.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
97
Z
O
Figure3.18Schirmer | tear test being
ZD
0
carried out. In this dog production was normal
W
[15mm/minute).
A
HIH
NERAL
CANINE LACRIMAL SYSTEM PROblEMS - THE DRY EYE
P
6
GE
Whilst aqueous deficiency (keratoconjunctivitis sicca or “dry eye’) is the commonest
 clinical condition, lipid abnormalities (e.g. after partial tarsal plate excision) and mucin
 abnormalities (e.g. associated with chronic conjunctivitis) can also occur as independ-
ent problems.
Defective spreading of tear film is usually associated either with eyelid problems
(absence, defects, masses, abnormal lashes), prominent or enlarged eyes or abnormal
blinking (e.g. of neurological origin).
If complex ocular surface disorders are suspected, or if there is inadequate response
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Incidence
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) is a common and frequently misdiagnosed problem,
most likely to be mistaken for a simple *conjunctivitis'.
Aetiology
● Congenital causes include aplasia or hypoplasia of the lacrimal gland ± nictitans
gland. In affected animals (e.g. Yorkshire Terriers) the nose is often dry
● Acquired causes include immune-mediated disease, the commonest cause, especially
in the West Highland White Terrier (Figure 3.19(a); systemic diseases (e.g. canine
distemper); direct insult {injuries to the head, chemical injury, irradiation); neuro-
genic; drug-induced (e.g. sulphonamides, topical atropine); meta bolic (e.g. hypothy-
roidism); unknown.
98
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
CA
[a]
(b)
0
Figure 3.19 (a) Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye) in a two-yecr-old West Highland White
Z
M
Terrier, the breed most commonly affected by the immune-medliated type of dry eye in the UK. Both
eyes were affected.A profuse cand tacky mucoid discharge is adherent to the cornea of the right
eye. The Schirmer tear test reading in this eye was O mm/minute and 5mm/minute in the left eye.
IH
(b) The left eye responded to topical cyclosporin and this treatment was maintained, whereas it was
discontinued in the right eye after two months'of treatmentbrought about no improvement and a
parotid-duct transposition was performed. The right eye is illustrated some two years after parotid
duct transposition.
Clinical signs
● The eye is usually uncomforta ble, rather than frankly painful, although frank pain
and corneal ulceration may accompany acute onset KCS
● Disruption of the corneal refex and lacklustre appearance of the cornea
● Superficial keratitis with neovascularisation, oedema and, eventually, secondary
pigmentation; in chronic KCS corneal desiccation {xerosis) also occurs
·Diffuse conjunctivitis
● Mucopurulent ocular discharge (yellow or green in colour and of tenacious consis-
tency)
● Secondary bacterial infection
● In neurogenic dry eye the nostril on the affected side, or both nostrils in bilateral
cases, are dry and crusty. Acquired KCS of neurogenic origin is sometimes associ-
ated with chronic middle ear disease
Diagnosis
● Breed, age and sex; systemic and ophthalmic history including any previous
treatment
●Clinical signs
● A Schirmer I Tear Test should always form part of the work-up for animals with an
ocular discharge, or any indications of ocular surface disease - it is important to test
both eyes
Medical treatment
· The KCS can be managed medically by careful cleaning of the eyes to remove the
tenacious discharge, followed by frequent application of a proprietary ocular lubri-
cant such as carbomer 980 (polyacrylic acid)
● Preparations containing mucolytics, such as acetylcysteine, can be of value initially
if excessive amounts of mucin are present
General and Canine Ophthalmology
99
·● Topical antibiotic treatment may be necessary in the early stages, as secondary
bacterial infection is common
·Drugs that have immunosuppressive activity and stimulate tear production (e.g.
topical cyclosporin) are the most useful, especially for possible immune-mediated
KCS. A commercial preparation of cyclosporin ointment is available for clinical use
and this is now the treatment of choice for most cases of KCs. The drug has a
beneficial effect on mucin secretion as well as stimulating aqueous production.
Cyclosporin should be applied twice daily for at least six weeks to assess the ade-
quacy of response and the Schirmer tear test repeated during this time. Responsive
cases require twice daily treatment for life
Z
D
● The parasympathomimetic agent pilocarpine may be beneficial, by the oral or topical
route, in KCS of neurogenic origin, but is of no value for immune-mediated
types
● Topical corticosteroids may be helpful in initial management, provided that no
corneal ulceration is present. Some of the proprietary preparations contain ocular
lubricants as well as corticosteroids (see Appendix 2)
OP
GE
Surgical treatment - parotid duct transposition
● If the loss of tear production is absolute and permanent, or the owners cannot
manage medical therapy, or the clinical signs are not kept under control with medical
   is  os   d  
not thoroughly familiar with the technique, it is sensible to practise it first or refer
the patient.
parotid duct transposition is carried out in greedy animals and, in all cases, it is
usual to divide the feeds up over a 24-hour period to provide optimal lubrication.
● Parotid duct transposition is carried out under general anaesthesia and should only
be performed after checking that the parotid salivary gland actually produces saliva,
that the pH of the saliva is not too alkaline (ideally less than 8.4, from clinical expe-
rience) and after discussing the possible postoperative management at some length
with the owners.
● Possible immediate complications of parotid duct transposition include those asso-
ciated with poor case selection and surgical mistakes.
● Chronic postoperative problems include excessively wet eyes and face, periorbital
hair loss, skin excoriation and corneal deposition {usually calcium salts). Very rarely,
if the results are not satisfactory, the parotid duct can be ligated either to reduce the
flow of saliva or stop it altogether.
● If patients are chosen carefully the results of parotid duct transposition are very
rewarding (Figure 3.19(b)).
CANINE LACRIMAL SYSTEM PROBLEMS - THE WET EYE
Epiphora is tear overflow resulting from poor drainage, the aetiology is outlined below
and epiphora should be distinguished from the excessive lacrimation that is associated
with ocular pain (Figure 3.20).
100
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
CA
Figure 3.20 Epiphora (tear overflow)
0
in an American Cocker Spaniel. This
M
eight-year-old dog had only recently
developed epiphora,  so congenital
causes can be discounted despite the
IH
dog's   somewhat  imperfect  eyelid
anatomy. In this case dacryocystitis had
Z
O
developed after conjunctivitis. Staphylo-
E
coccus spp were cultured from material
irrigated from the nasolacrimal duct and
the condlition resolved soon affer c course
of topical antibiotic drops was instituted.
Aetiology of developmental abnormalities of the nasolacrimal
drainage system
Poor or imperfect anatomy
● Long-nosed dogs ('pocket? effect at medial canthus), especially when the dog has
both a long nose and small eyes
● Tight apposition between the cornea and eyelid margin, especially if combined with
 a prominent eye
·Medial canthal entropion
●Hairs on the caruncle
●Distichiasis and trichiasis
●Abnormal location of lacrimal puncta
Imperforate puncta and micropuncta
Imperforate puncta and micropuncta are common, and it is usually the lower punctum
that is affected. There is a breed predisposition in the English Cocker Spaniel and
Golden Retriever and epiphora is first noticed at an early age. The diagnosis is usually
straightforward in that the punctum is either absent or very small, the dog is young
and the owners have noted persistent tear staining {unilateral or bilateral) from an
early age.
Treatment of imperforate puncta and micropuncta
● Treatment is not always required in mildly-affected cases
General and Canine Ophthalmology
101
· With the patient anaesthetised, the correct site is identified by careful inspection or
by cannulating the upper punctum and injecting saline or viscoelastic material to
raise a bleb in the region of the occluding conjunctiva
· Any occluding conjunctiva is removed with scissors, usually as a single piece
● Topical antibiotic-corticosteroid eye drops are given for three days postoperatively
Aetiology of acquired nasolacrimal problems
· Internal blockage may affect nasolacrimal drainage (e.g. foreign bodies and
INE
inflammation)
●External influences such as nasal and tooth-root problems, space-occupying lesions,
surgery and tra uma may also produce nasolacrimal obstruction
ZD
Treatment of acquired nasolacrimal problems
● Depends on the site of blockage and the cause, so careful investigation is necessary
● Some aspects of investigation and treatment require general anaesthesia
● Foreign bodies such as barley awns can be difficult to remove because of their shape
OP
and their tendency to disintegrate. It is important to avoid flushing the foreign body
into the narrow intraosseous portion of the nasolacrimal duct and to ensure that all
GE
the material has been removed
● Complex cases should be referred
CONJUNCTIVA
The conjunctiva is a thin, variably-pigmented, mucous membrane. It has a rich vas-
cular supply and bright-red, freely-branching blood vessels are visible in the non-
pigmented areas. The blood flow is from fornix to limbus. Vessels move with the
mobile bulbar conjunctiva and the blood flow is from fornix to limbus. In disease,
conjunctival vessels may invade the superficial cornea. Sensory nerve supply is from
the ophthalmic division of the fifth cranial nerve and pain fibres are somewhat sparse.
The conjunctiva is freely mobile except for areas of closer attachment at fornix,
limbus and eyelid margins. Because of the loose arrangement, conjunctival oedema
(chemosis) and subconjunctival haemorrhage form readily after insult.
Conjunctival epithelium contains goblet cells that contribute mucin to the preocu-
lar tear film. There is also a contribution (transmembrane mucin) from surface epithe-
lial cells. The conjunctival stroma is divided into a superficial (adenoid) layer and a
deep (fbrous) layer. Lymphoid tissue is rich in the superficial layer of adults, but may
be sparse, or absent, in neonates. Conjunctival-associated lymphoid tissue (CALT) is
associated with immune-mediated conjunctival responses.
Palpebral conjunctiva covers the inner surface of the upper and lower eyelids,
terminating in the mucocuta neous junction at the eyelid margin and refecting at the
fornices as bulbar conjunctiva, which covers the anterior portions of the globe,
        o   
eyelid.
102
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
DISEASES OF THE CANINE CONJUNCTIVA
Epibulbar dermoid (see Cornea, this section pp 109-123)
Conjunctivitis
Conjunctivitis is one of the commonest problems encountered in most species (Figure
3.21), but is unsatisfactorily classified unless the aetiology can be determined. It is
important to remember that conjunctivitis is often a self-limiting disease, that not all
cases require treatment and that, in the dog, it is frequently secondary to some other
Z
problem. In many types of conjunctivitis it is common for the ocular discharge to
persist for several weeks after the acute signs have subsided, a situation that is some-
times exacerbated when ointments are used for treatment beca use of ^mucus tra pping'.
口
If the eye is comfortable and no longer inflamed the treatment should not be prolonged
Z
M
solely because of an ocular discharge.
IH
IER
Z
O
E
Figure 3.21 Acute conjunctivitis in a dog
(leff eye). There is an ocular discharge and the
eye is uncomfortable and red because of con-
junctival hyperaemia. Conjunctival  oedema,
most obviously involving the third eyelid, is also
a Feature. Despite a comprehensive work-up, the
cause was not established and the acute signs
resolved within seven days without any treat-
ment, althougha mild ocular discharge persisted
or some three weeks aferwards.
Aetiology of canine conjunctivitis
● Viral - e.g. distemper virus
● Bacterial - usually Gram +ve cocci
●Parasitic - Thelazia spp common in parts of Europe {Italy), Russia, Asia and western
America
● Mycotic - e.g. blastomycosis (non-temperate climates)
● Immune-mediated and allergic (e.g. atopy is common)
● Physical (common) and chemical (uncommon)
● Preocular tear film abnormalities (common - see earlier)
● Iatrogenic (home remedies, ina ppropriate therapy); quite common
●Unknown; common
Clinical signs of acute conjunctivitis
● Conjunctival discomfort (probably itchy rather than frankly painful)
● Active hyperaemia (dilatation) of conjunctival vessels {diffuse redness of conjunc-
tiva) - usually all the conjunctival surfaces are involved (palpebral, nictitating and
bulbar)
● Chemosis (conjunctival oedema)
● Ocular discharge (serous, mucoid, purulent, haemorrhagic or combinations of these)
General and Canine Ophthalmology
103
Clinical signs of chronic conjunctivitis
● Follicle formation (lymphoid hyperplasia); occasionally the follicles can be localised
to specific areas of conjunctiva, such as beneath the third eyelid
● Conjunctival thickening and conjunctival vascular injection
● A persistent discharge; the nature of the discharge can vary
Differential diagnosis
Conjunctivitis is the commonest reason for a red eye in dogs (Figure 3.21). There are,
E
however, a number of other conditions that can present with an acute red eye and they
Z
must be distinguished from conjunctivitis. It is helpful to remember that simple
conjunctivitis is not associated with corneal or intraocular involvement. The brief list
below highlights the key ocular features that aid differentiation of non-traumatic
0
causes of acute red eye in the dog.
Z
>
·Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
● Keratitis - corneal involvement, extent and depth of which varies
NERA
· Episcleritis and episclerokeratitis - nodular or diffuse, perilimbal oedema ± superfi-
cial cormeal lipid infiltration
Z
● Scleritis - nodular or, less commonly, diffuse, perilimbal oedema ± deep corneal lipid
GE
infiltration ± uveitis
● Anterior uveitis - aqueous flare, iris is oedematous and inflamed, pupil may be constricted
● Glaucoma - non-responsive, dilated pupil, corneal oedema may be present if the
Protocol for investigation and diagnosis
● History {e.g. unilateral or bilateral, duration, lifestyle, management, treatment,
seasonal variation, vaccination status, others at risk or affected)
· Clinical appearance
● Schirmer I Tear Test to check tear production
● Conjunctival scrapes, swabs or cytobrush samples
·Biopsy on occasions
● If ophthalmic stains are to be used to aid diagnosis, they should be applied after the
samples have been taken
Conjunctival scrapes may be taken for cytology, and swabs or cytobrush samples for
culture and sensitivity. In first opinion practice, scrapes and swabs are usually taken
only from those cases that do not respond to treatment. Topical anaesthesia is not nor-
mally required for sampling. Swabs and cytobrush samples are usually taken from the
ventral fornix and palpebral conjunctival region by firm application of a moist sterile
swab. Bacteria can often be recovered from the conjunctival sac of normal dogs, so
the results should always be interpreted with caution.
In complex or chronic cases, conjunctival biopsy may be performed following
topical local anaesthesia. Several drops of proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.5% should
be applied first, then a cotton wool bud soaked in amethocaine hydrochloride 1% is
held, for several minutes, against the area to be biopsied. A piece of affected con-
junctiva is tented up with small tissue forceps and removed with tenotomy scissors
(crushing or distorting the sample should be avoided). The sample is placed flat on
very thin card for routine histological fixation so as to avoid distortion.
Canine infectious conjunctivitis
Viral
● Canine distemper virus is the most important cause
104
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Ocular signs may include bilateral conjunctivitis, ocular discharge, KCS, corneal
ulceration, multifocal choriotretinitis, optic neuritis and acute loss of vision
● There is no specific therapy, but the animal should be isolated and nursing care
should include adequate cleansing of the eyes and tear replacement therapy
Bacterial
Aetiology and diagnosis
● Although there is a range of possible pathogens, they are most commonly second-
ary to an underlying predisposing problem such as KCS, eyelid abnormalities and
contaminated traumatic injuries
CA
C
● The diagnosis is made on the basis of the history, clinical signs, conjunctival scrap
D
ings and swabs
Z
M
● The most common bacterial pathogens are Gram +ve cocci (Stapbylococcus and,
less commonly, Streptococcus). Neonatal conjunctivitis (opbthalmia neonatorum)
has been described under Eyelids
Treatmen!
· Successful treatment depends upon establishing and removing the underlying cause
· For Gram +ve organisms, the commonest situation, topical fusidic acid gel is the
first choice and topical chloramphenicol (as drops or ointment) is a useful second
choice. If Gram -ve bacteria are involved, then gentamicin solution is the agent of
choice. For mixed infections, fucidic acid and gentamicin can be used together
●For confirmed staphylococcal infection, topical corticosteroids are also appropriate,
to lessen the hypersensitivity reaction to staphylococcal toxins
Allergic conjunctivitis
Aetiology and diagnosis
● Variety of causes (e.g. atopy, drug sensitivity, food sensitivity, following insect and
arachnid bites, insect stings, hypersensitivity to bacterial toxins and unknown)
● The history can be diagnostic when hypersensitivity reactions are immediate
● Intradermal skin testing will be required for diagnosis of possible atopy
Treatment
● Depends upon identifying and removing the allergen(s). Hyposensitisation is effec-
tive in some cases, but the range of possible allergens complicates the situation
● Acute allergic conjunctivitis requires early treatment with corticosteroids
· If allergen(s) cannot be identified, then palliative treatment with topical anti-
inflammatories (e.g. sodium cromoglycate or corticosteroids) is indicated
● Note that with the exceptions already stated (atopy and staphylococcal toxins), the
routine use of corticosteroids to treat conjunctivitis may obscure the cause, make
correct diagnosis difficult, lengthen the time course of the disease and can prevent
resolution of the inflammation
Physical causes of conjunctivitis
Aetiology and diagnosis
● Usually a consequence of consistent trauma from dust, cilia or masses which irri-
tate or abrade the conjunctiva
● History and lifestyle may be helpful - an acute unilateral problem might suggest a
General and Canine Ophthalmology
105
conjunctival foreign body, a more chronic problem may relate to the dog's environ-
ment, including bedding materials like sawdust
 d  hs oe    aa lo  o
anatomy {e.g. ectropion) and other abnormalities, for example, anatomical entro-
pion can also cause conjunctivitis because of chronic irritation
Treatment
Identify and remove the primary ca use
Chemical causes of conjunctivitis
Aetiology and diagnosis
● Various causes (e.g. shampoo, insecticidal sprays, antiseptic skin preparation, acid
O
ZD
or alkali burns)
● Identify the cause, check the pH of both the conjunctival sac and the offending
chemical
OP
Treatment
● When shampoos and weak acids are involved, use bland ophthalmic ointment after
first flushing the conjunctival sac with water
● For any alkalis and strong acids, continue to flush the conjunctival sac with water
while seeking urgent specialist help and possible referral. Ask the owner to bring
the offending chemical with them whenever possible
"latrogenic' and idiopathic causes of conjunctivitis
Aetiology and diagnosis
● It is always worth enquiring if the owner has used home remedies
● It is important to avoid creating iatrogenic problems by inappropriate medication
● Check tear-film distribution and production if there is any suggestion of ocular
surface disease
● Take swabs and scrapes if there are any signs of infection (e.g. mucopurulent
discharge)
Treatment
· Stop inappropriate treatment
● Check all the conjunctival surfaces carefully. If follicular conjunctivitis is present,
then a dry swab can be used to rub the follicles firmly under topical local anaes-
thesia - an empirical approach that often leads to their resolution
LIMbUS, EPISCLeRA AND SCLeRA
THE LIMBUS
The limbus is the transition zone between the orderly arrangement of the cornea and
the less ordered tissues of the conjunctiva and underlying episclera and sclera (Figure
3.22(a,b). It may be a site of chronic proliferative disease and neoplasia. The limbus
can also be used as a site for surgical entry into the eye as well as being a common
site for accidental intraocular penetration.
106
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
[a]
(b)
CA
Figure 3.22(a,b)  Scanning electron micrograph (a) and histological section (b) of the normal
0
canine conjunctiva, episclera, sclera limbus and cornec.
M
工
IH
0
Limbal-based changes are invariably the result of inflammation or neoplasia and
E
should be distinguished from pathology of similar appearance involving the cornea
and anterior chamber. For example, multicentric lymphoma may be associated with
peripheral corneal and iris infiltration and anterior-chamber involvement. Physical
examination of the whole animal may help to differentiate local ocular disease such
as episclerokeratitis from generalised disease such as multicentric lymphoma.
Inflammatory problems
Benign proliferation of connective tissue is reasona bly common at the limbus. It should
be differentiated from cysts and neopla sia.
Treatment
Treatment consists of surface-active topical corticosteroids {e.g. dexamethasone,
prednisolone, fluorometholone) combined with complete excision or excisional
biopsy. Most limbal inflammations are, strictly speaking, forms of episcleritis and/or
episclerokeratitis {see this section, pp 107-108).
Neoplasia
Aetiology and diagnosis
● Pigmented limbal (epibulbar) tumours are usually benign, and the majority can be
classified as melanocytomas (Figure 3.23), rather than melanomas, based on their
behaviour and histological appearance
● In old dogs the growth rate is invariably slow, whereas in younger dogs it may be
rapid
● The German Shepherd Dog is the most commonly affected breed
● Gonioscopy is a useful adjunct to routine ophthalmic examination in these cases
Differential diagnosis
● Limbal pigmented neoplasia should be distinguished from scleral defects (e.g. staphy-
loma and scleromalacia perforans) and post-traumatic uveal prolapse
· Non-pigmented limbal neoplasia should be classified as primary (focal or invasive)
or secondary {metastatic) neoplasia and differentiated from inflammatory disease
General and Canine Ophthalmology
107
Treatment
Tumours at this site can be kept under observation if they are static or of slow growth.
-oxa Aq eisauisaeue [eausa 1apun paaouau isaq Aqeqoid are qmoia pideu jo asou
sion. If necessary, a graft (e.g. scleral homograft) can be used to make good the defect
and support healing, although a number of different approaches e.g. cryotherapy, laser
photocoagulation, corneoscleral transposition) have also been described. It is unusual
to have to sacrifice the eye. If in doubt seek specialist opinion and consider referral.
Z
GY
CA
010
Figure  3.23 Limbal  melanocytoma in α
PHTHALMO
German Shepherd Dog. Note the lipid infiltra-
tion of the cornea (arcus) which is a common
Feature of most limbal, episcleral and scleral
pathology, whether it is neoplastic or inflamma-
tory in origin. The serum lipid and lipoprotein
GEI
profile was normal.
THE CANINE EPISCLERA
The episclera consists of collagen, blood vessels, some elastic fibres, fibroblasts,
melanocytes, phagocytic cells and nerves (both myelinated and unmyelinated). The
episclera is most developed between the limbus and the extraocular muscle insertions
where it blends superficially with the overlying Tenon's capsule.
Episcleritis
This condition is seen occasionally in dogs and may be diffuse (simple) or nodular and
either unilateral or bilateral (Figure 3.24).
Figure 3.24 Diffuse (simple) episcleritis in a dog. Note the radial configuration of the episcle-
ral vessels. There is Faint dorsolateral anterior stromal corneal lipid deposition and more marked
paraxial medial lipid deposition. In the latter region lipid deposition has been exacerbated by the
presence of a small sebaceous adenoma of the lower eyelid, just visible overlying the corneal lipid.
The serum lipid and lipoprotein profile was mildly abnormal, mainly because of an increase in high-
density lipoprotein. The eyelid tumour was surgically excised and the episcleritis treated with topical
surface-active corticosteroid (fluorometholone],
108
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Clinical signs
● The diffuse form involves the visible “white’ of the eye, the nodular form is most
commonly found in the region of the limbus in the palpebral aperture
● Accompanying hyperaemia, both episcleral and conjunctival, is often striking, but
the eye is not painful
● The conjunctiva moves freely over the inflamed episclera and this is an easy way of
distinguishing the two layers
E
· Hyperaemia of the episcleral vessels is usually obvious, although there will also be
Z
some hyperaemia of the overlying conjunctival vessels
· Corneal oedema and lipid deposition are ubiquitous accompaniments and the depth
of corneal involvement is the easiest way of determining the level of inflammation
● If lipid deposition is extensive, particularly in cases of diffuse episcleritis, analysis
Z
M
of the lipid and lipoprotein profile is desirable, as recurrent hyperaemia may simply
reflect intermittent raised levels of circulating lipid
Nodular episclerokeratitis
Z
E
This is a bilateral condition and, in the USA, is most commonly found in Rough Collies
G
and Shetland Sheepdogs. It differs from episcleritis in the more extensive corneal
involvement and the fact that similar granulomatous masses are sometimes found at
other sites (e.g. eyelids and lip commisures). It resembles nodular episcleritis in con-
sisting histologically of plasma cells, lymphocytes and histiocytes and so treatment
regimes for both conditions are similar.
Treatment ofepiscleritis and episclerokeratitis
· Some forms of diffuse episcleritis are probably ocular manifestations of
hyperlipoproteinaemia, so that the clinical signs will resolve if the lipid and
lipoprotein profile is restored to normal. Topical corticosteroids will also speed
resolution
· For nodular episcleritis and episclerokeratitis, an extended course of topical corti-
costeroids may be effective, although other regimes including oral corticosteroids ±
oral azathioprine, or niacinamide and tetracycline can be used
● Surgical excision, local radiotherapy (e.g. beta-irra diation) and cryotherapy are other
possible approaches for the nodular types
● Specialist advice should be sought for more complex cases
THE CANINE SCLERA
The sclera is relatively avascular and has a more compact arrangement of collagen
than the overlying episclera. The cell types are similar but sparser. Most of the blood
vessels found in the sclera can be regarded as in transit, so that the sclera can be
regarded as a relatively avascular tissue.
Scleritis
Scleritis is very rare and is not as obvious as conjunctivitis or episcleritis because the
inflamed tissue is located at greater depth.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
109
Clinical signs
● The affected sclera is of darker colour, usually salmon pink, or even purple, rather
than bright red
● Rather confusingly, inflammatory changes are also usually present in the overlying
conjunctiva and episclera. Phenylephrine 10% will blanch the more superficial
vessels and allow the inflamed sclera to be visualised (Figure 3.2S{a))
● The anterior, posterior or whole sclera may be involved. Whilst it is most likely to
present as a granulomatous inflammation, necrosis may be an additional, if rare,
complicating factor (necrotising granulomatous scleritis)
Z
GY
● Scleral thickening can be detected on slit-lamp biomicroscopy and/or ophthalmo-
CA
010
scopic examination depending on its location. Diagnostic imaging can also be used
to demonstrate the scleral thickening
● Uveitis may also be present, typically granulomatous in type and with keratic pre-
OPHTHALMO
cipitates as the most obvious feature (Figure 3.2S(b)
● Scleritis in the dog is not as intensely painful as it is in human patients; furthermore,
it is not associated with generalised immune-mediated collagen disease, but is appar-
ently a local ocular phenomenon
GEI
Treatment
Scleritis cases are proba bly best referred.
[a)
(b)
Figure 3.25 (a} Nodular scleritis in a Labrador Retriever. The location of the inflammation was
much more clearly defined following the use of topical phenylephrine 10% to blanch the more super-
ficial conjunctival vessels and most of the episcleral vessels. (b) Fundus examination of the eye in
[a)revealed that posterior nodules were also present as well as some pigmentary disturbance.One
of the nodules is appcrent to the right of the optic disc beneath an arteriovenous crossing.
CORNEA
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The cornea contains both ectodermal and mesenchymal elements. It consists of an
anterior epithelium, basement membrane, substantia propria, Descemet's membrane
110
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
and endothelium and it is normally less than 0.7mm in thickness. The preocular
tear film is inextrica bly linked with corneal health and any investigations of corneal
disease should include assessment of the production, distribution and drainage of the
tear film.
The corneal epitbelium consists of an outer layer of squamous cells, a middle layer
of polyhedral, or wing, cells and a single layer of columnar cells, which produce the
basement membrane. The epithelium is attached to the underlying stroma by
E
hemidesmosomes and anchoring fibrils link the basal epithelium, basement membrane
Z
and subepithelial stroma.
The substantia propria comprises the bulk of the cornea. It contains some unmyeli-
nated nerves (particularly anteriorly), fibroblasts (keratocytes), regularly-arranged col.
lagen fibrils and ground substance. The fibrils are of uniform size and extend across
Z
the entire length of the cornea, from limbus to limbus, as bundles (lamellae) which
cross at approximate right angles to each other. The ground substance, a hydrated
matrix of proteoglycans, occupies the space between lamellae. The corneal fibroblasts
have a slow turnover rate in normal adult cornea and are located in and between the
Oz
collagen lamellae; they produce both collagen and ground substance. Other cells are
E
less common, but all the cells found in the stroma, including the fibroblasts, are able
to move through the tissues in response to stimuli.
 Blood vessels and lymphatic vessels are conspicuously absent from the cornea, but
they are present in the perilimbal tissues and the limbal vessels contribute to the
gaseous and metabolic requirements of the peripheral cornea. The epithelium and
endothelium are the most metabolically active parts of the cornea.
Descemet's membrane is the basement membrane of the endothelium. The corneal
endothelium produces it throughout life, but its own powers of replication are limited
in all but young puppies. When endothelial cells die, they are replaced by neighbour-
ing cells spreading to fill the gap. Hence the endothelium thins and Descemet's mem-
brane thickens as the animal ages. The endothelium is a single layer of cells of high
metabolic activity and is of critical importance in maintaining corneal deturgescence
CORNEAL WOUND HEALING
Epithelium
Epitbelial damage is repaired by corneal epithelial slide {early response - within one
hour) and epithelial mitosis (later response - within 24 hours). Limbal stem cells also
contribute to the repair process. Phagocytic cells, notably polymorphonuclear leuco-
cytes, gain access to the injured cornea through the tear film. The entire epithelium
turns over in seven days, so uncomplicated epithelial healing should not exceed seven
days.
Stroma
Stromal damage is repaired with help from the overlying epithelial cells which fill the
defect, migration of cells from the limbus and by generation from the stromal elements
-- fibroblasts derived from resting keratocytes produce collagen and ground substance.
The type of collagen that is laid down in damaged stroma is different from the
General and Canine Ophthalmology
111
original collagen in type and orientation, so the transparency of the damaged region
is compromised. Neovascularisation is usual when the stroma is damaged by, for
example, infection, trauma or chemicals. Clean wounds of the cornea heal by avascu-
lar scarring. When neovascularisation accompanies wound healing more fibrous tissue
is laid down.
Descemet's membrane
Descemet's membrane rupture is followed by recoil, as Descemet's membrane is elastic.
山N
Reduplication of Descemet's membrane can occur from production by the endothelial
GY
cells, which slide in over the injured area.
Endothelium
10
Endothelial damage repairs poorly in most adult species and because of poor, or
WT
CORNEAL OPACIFICATION
GE
Oedema
● Corneal oedema is indicative of corneal damage, and stromal oedema can result after
insult to the anterior epithelium or posterior endothelium as well as to the stroma
itself. When stromal oedema develops the cornea swells and becomes thicker and
its optical properties are compromised.
● Discrete damage to the epithelium will result in a focal area of corneal oedema fe.g.
following superficial ulceration), but more widespread injury (e.g. chemical or
thermal burns) may result in more diffuse involvement. When diffuse oedema accom-
panies corneal ulceration it is likely that infection is present.
● Damage to the corneal endothelium will affect the corneal pump mechanism and
stromal oedema results. The oedema may be localised (e.g. at the site of contact of
an anteriorly luxated lens) or diffuse (e.g. associated with widespread endothelial
loss in endothelial dystrophy or with immune-mediated endothelial damage in canine
viral hepatitis).
● Other ca uses of corneal oedema include blunt and penetrating injury and iatrogenic
damage caused during intraocular surgery. Severe inflammation (e.g. endoph-
thalmitis) and intraocular neoplasia are often associated with corneal oedema.
Glaucoma is an important cause of corneal oedema as the increased intraocular
pressure adversely affects the endothelial pump mechanism, and the degree of
endothelial damage is directly related to the level of pressure elevation and its
duration.
Vascularisation
● The normal canine cornea is devoid of blood vessels, but corneal neovascularisation
is a common response to corneal insult.
they cross the limbus, the vessels branch dichotomously and are bright red in colour.
Superficial keratitis often accompanies conjuncti vitis.
● Deep vessels arise from the ciliary plexus and cannot be observed until they enter
112
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
the cornea. These vessels are usually short, dark and straight, occasionally they are
so extensive that they form a complete circle (ciliary flush). Deep vascularisation
may be associated with a variety of ocular conditions, including keratitis, uveitis,
glaucoma, endophthalmitis and intraocular neoplasia.
● Persistence of the pupillary membrane may be associated with intracorneal haem
orrhage if vessels connecting the iris and posterior cornea remain patent. Leakage
of blood from extensive corneal neovascularisation can also result in intracorneal
E
haemorrhage, as new blood vessels are inherently leaky.
Z
· Vascularisation can enhance corneal healing. Once healing has taken place the
vessels narrow and become faint, but permanent, ghost’ vessels.
CA
Pigmentation
Z
M
● Posterior pigment deposition may be a feature of congenital abnormalities such as
工
dysgenesis.
● Acquired corneal pigmentation is commoner, often as a non-specific response
to corneal insult. It is associated with pigment proliferation and migration of
E
melanocytes and neovascularisation. The location, extent and depth of pigment dep-
G
osition often depend on the initiating insult (e.g. medial canthus hairs in brachy-
cephalic dogs).
● Endothelial pigment deposition, encroaching onto the posterior cornea from the
limbus, appears to be a feature of ageing in some dogs, it may also be seen when
uveal cysts have ruptured and adhered to the cornea and in association with
anterior synechiae.
● Pigment deposits on the posterior cornea should be distinguished from keratic
precipitates. The latter darken with age and can resemble pigment, but they are
usually deposited on the posterior ventromedial cornea and this 'regionalisation' is
helpful, as are any accompanying indications of active uveitis or legacies of previ
ous uveitis.
Other causes of corneal opacification
●Foreign bodies
●Xerosis {drying and desiccation)
● Cellular infiltration
● Lipid deposition
● Calcium deposition
● Neoplastic infiltration (e.g. peripheral infiltration by lymphoma)
● Degenerative changes and scarring
CONDITIONS OF THE CANINE CORNEA
A considerable number of corneal conditions have been identified in the dog and only
the more important are described here. Congenital conditions include corneal dermoid,
which is reasonably common, various types of anterior-segment dysgenesis and rare
imperfections of development such as absence, microcornea and megalocornea that
are usually associated with globe abnormalities. Acquired problems that are not dis
cussed include a presumed epithelial dystrophy identified most commonly in the
General and Canine Ophthalmology
113
Shetland Sheepdog, lysosomal storage disease, calcium keratopathy, immune
mediated disease other than pannus, Florida keratopathy, epithelial inclusion cysts and
neoplasia.
Epibulbar dermoid
Dermoids are superficial masses, present from birth, which contain many of the ele-
ments of normal hairy skin. They usually involve the cornea and conjunctiva and, less
commonly, the eyelids. Dermoids are reasonably common in the dog and are usually
INE
unilateral (Figure 3.26{a)).
Z
GY
CA
GEI
[a)
[b)
Figure 3.26 (a) Epibulbar dermoid in a Cocker Spaniel puppy. The position at the lateral limbus
is typical. (b} A superficial keratectomy was performed to remove the dermoid and a lateral can-
thotomy has been used to improve access. A bridle suture allowed the dermoid to be manipulated
more easily during removal.
Treatment
● These cases are often referred for corneal surgery (lamellar keratectomy).
● Surgical excision should be performed when the puppy is old enough for routine
general anaesthesia. Lateral canthotomy may be required to allow adequate expo-
sure, and good fixation of the dermoid (e.g. a bridle suture) makes surgery simpler.
The dermoid is excised from the corneal side at the correct plane of cleavage {i.e.
beneath the dermoid, some 4 of corneal thickness) ensuring that the affected con-
junctiva is included in the excision (Figure 3.26{b))
0.5%) or corticosteroids (e.g. fluoromethalone 0.1%) can be given, to minimise
corneal scarring, once epithelialisation is complete.
Corneal dystrophies
 The description corneal dystropby is appropriate for functional and morphological
changes occurring bilaterally, but not necessarily symmetrically, in a previously-normal
cornea, not caused by disease elsewhere in the eye or elsewhere in the body. To justify
the use of the term dystrophy the condition should ideally be of proven inheritance.
Although a number of familial canine corneal dystrophies are suspected, their mode
of inheritance is poorly understood.
114
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Epithelial basement membrane dystrophy
This form of superficial ulceration (synonyms: recurrent epithelial erosion, indolent
ulceration) is not uncommon and is associated with abnormal adherence of the corneal
epithelium to the underlying stroma. Certain breeds are over-represented, although
other factors, such as age and previous ocular insult, may also be of relevance. Whilst
it most frequently presents as a unilateral condition, both eyes are potentially at risk
in the course of an animal's life. The predisposing factors are poorly understood and
any possible mode of inheritance is unknown.
Clinical Findings
CA
O
● Commonest in older dogs (6-7 years), particularly in the Boxer (should also check
0
ZD
for distichiasis in this breed) and Pembroke Corgi
M
● The ulcer produces moderate pain accompanied by blepharospasm and lacrimation
A
AL
● The appearance of the ulcer is quite characteristic in that it is always superficial,
工
does not incite inflammation, shows little if any tendency to resolve, and is sur-
rounded by a rim of non-adherent corneal epithelium (Figure 3.27(a))
O
● The ulcer is fluorescein positive
E
[a]
(b)
[c)
Figure 3.27 (a) Epithelial basement membrane dystrophy in a Pembroke Welsh Corgi that had
received a variety of topical treatments over a period of months to no effect. Retroillumination is a
Useful ancillary technique to demonstrate the apparent edge of the ulcer and the extensive abnor-
mal surrounding area. Note the complete lack of any vascularisation or other inflammatory response.
[b)  Within c week of chemical cautery with liquefied phenol the eye in (a) was free of pain cnd
the cornea had re-epithelialised.(c) The cautery must extend beyond the areas of abnormal epithe-
lial adhesion cs illustrated here in another Pembroke Welsh Corgi.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
115
Differential diagnosis
● Superficial corneal ulcers have a variety of causes (see Ulcerative Keratitis, this
section, pp 117-120) and the aetiology should be investigated in all cases that
present with epithelial loss in order to differentiate them from epithelial basement
membrane dystrophy.
● Qualitative and quantitative tear-film deficiencies must always be considered in the
presence of corneal disease, especially so when the superficial cornea is involved.
● Tear-film distribution and corneal sensitivity should be assessed if the underlying
山
cause of superficial corneal disease is not apparent.
IZ
● Other dystrophic conditions of the canine cornea may occur. For example, in the
Shetland Sheepdog, multiple grey-and-white, ring-shaped opacities primarily involv-
CA
ing the epithelium may constitute a form of epithelial dystrophy, or may simply be
1o
a manifestation of tear-film dysfunction. Affected dogs usually respond to topical
WT
cyclosporin, suggesting that the latter hypothesis is more likely.
Treatment of epithelial basement membrane dystrophy
OP
A number of different types of treatment have been reported, including chemical
GEN
cautery, punctate and grid keratotomy and superficial keratectomy. Of these tech-
niques, chemical cautery is the safest in inexperienced hands as both keratotomy and
keratectomy can result in complications, such as corneal scarring and even corneal per-
foration, when performed by those unfamiliar with corneal surgery. A major advan-
tage of chemical cauterants is that they can be applied under topical local anaesthesia
and there is no need for a general anaesthetic (Figure 3.27(c)).
Chemical cautery
Possible chemical cauterants include liquefied phenol (80% w/w of phenol:20% w/w
water), pure trichloracetic acid and 6% aqueous iodine solution. Phenol is a most effec-
tive agent in the treatment of primary persistent corneal erosions. Unfortunately, in
common with other benzene derivatives, there is some concern about its potential car-
cinogenic effects.
● Chemical cautery is performed in the conscious, non-sedated dog following topical
anaesthesia (e.g. proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.5%)
● No more than 2 ml of the selected cauterant should be poured carefully into a small
container. A tiny pledget of cotton wool is grasped using Halstead's mosquito
forceps, wound tightly around the closed jaws of the forceps and moistened by
dipping the tip of the forceps into the cauterant
● The cauterising agent is applied with precision, starting at the rim of loosened epithe-
lium and working outwards to the true edge of the erosion (the region where the
epithelium is properly attached to underlying stroma) and just beyond. The cau-
terised areas will become greyish because phenol precipitates protein (Figure 3.27(c))
●After cautery the eye is flushed with sterile water or saline, although such is the pre-
cision of application that this is not really necessary
● In addition to its cauterising action phenol also has local anaesthetic, antiseptic and
bactericidal properties, so there is no need to provide any further treatment after
cautery
● Phenol cautery is simple, cheap and effective, although a mild inflammatory response
may be associated with healing
116
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
If the problem does not resolve within a few days of initial treatment it is usually
because of inadequate cautery or misdiagnosis. For example, the cautery may not have
extended to the region of normal epithelial adhesion, or the dog may have some other
primary problem, or an additional problem, such as distichiasis or ectopic cilia.
Grid keratotomy
Grid keratotomy is best performed under general anaesthesia, although the adjunctive
application of topical anaesthetic will allow a lighter plane of anaesthesia.
· The loose corneal epithelium is removed as described for chemical cautery using a
sterile dry cotton swab
CA
● A 25-gauge hypodermic needle is used to create a grid pattern of microsurgical inci-
D
sions, some 1-2 mm apart, at a depth not exceeding 0.3 mm
Z
M
● The grid pattern should extend some 2-3 mm beyond the area of abnormal epithe-
lial adhesion
工
Crystalline stromal dystrophy (see under Lipid Deposition, this section,
Z
0
pp 121-122)
E
Corneal endothelial dystrophy
G
Clinical Findings
● This is a rare condition, associated with degeneration of the corneal endothelial cells.
The breeds most commonly affected in the UK are the English Springer Spaniel (early
onset) and the Boxer (later onset). In the USA the condition is most frequently
reported in the Boston Terrier, Chihuahua and Dachshund.
● Bilateral stromal oedema is the most constant feature. The two eyes are often dis-
similar in the early stages and at this stage the condition is not painful. Many cases
progress to bullous keratopatby and loss of the normal corneal profile (keratoglobus)
(Figure 3.28). Discomfort, or frank pain, is likely at this stage.
Treatment
Specialist advice should be sought, as referral for penetrating keratoplasty may be an
option in early cases and thermokeratoplasty a means of achieving pain relief in later
cases.
Figure 3.28 Endothelialdystrophyinα
young EnglishSpringer Spaniel. The right eye is
illustrated, and both eyes were affected. In addi-
fion to stromal oedema there is buffous ker
atopathy and the corneal profile is abnormal
[keratoglobus]). There was also a single dis-
tichium on the upper eyelid.
Keratitis
Inflammation of the cornea (keratitis) is a common condition with a multiplicity of
causes in dogs. Keratitis is best classified according to aetiology and is broadly classi
General and Canine Ophthalmology
117
fied into ulcerative and non-ulcerative types. Direct mechanical trauma (see below) is
the commonest cause of canine ulcerative keratitis.
Ulcerative keratitis
Aetiology
Preocular tear-fim defects
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (see earlier)
INE
Direct mechanical trauma
● Claws and teeth
G
● Foreign bodies
●Eyelid tumours
● Eyelid abnormalities (e.g. entropion, absence or partial absence of eyelid)
Z
M
● Ectopic cilia and, less commonly, distichiasis and trichiasis
A
●Aberrant hairs (e.g. nasal folds)
H
NER
lrrirants
·Thermal injuries
● Ultraviolet light
●Alkalis and acids
Immune-mediared disease
Both local and systemic causes {rare as a cause of ulcerative keratitis)
Neurogenic
 Nerve damage (e.g. neuroparalytic - Vlth cranial nerve; neurotrophic - Vth cranial
nerve)
Dystrophic
See under Corneal Dystrophies, this section, p. 113
Other
 Note that bacteria (e.g. Pseudomonas aeruginosa) can only become established if there
 is pre-existing epithelial damage, so that bacterial keratitis is a secondary, rather than
a primary, problem.
Clinical signs of ulcerative keratitis
● Pain, blepharospasm and excessive lacrimation
● Corneal oedema (implies infection if diffuse, as does stromal loss)
● Vascularisation is usually associated with chronicity
● Ocular discharge may replace initial excessive lacrimation
+ The ulcer can be delineated by careful examination and following the application
of fluorescein (Figure 3.29(a,b). It is the exposed cormeal stroma that takes up the
stain, intact anterior epithelium and Descemet's membrane do not
Diagnosis of ulcerative keratitis
●Accurate history, including duration of the clinical signs and any previous
treatment
118
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Meticulous examination of both eyes and their adnexa with adequate magnification
is essential
● Check that tear production of both eyes is normal (likely to be excessive, but
occasionally it is reduced in the affected eye if tear production is abnormal). The
Schirmer tear test is performed before any other preparations are applied to the
eye
● Corneal scrapings and swabs for culture should be taken early in the course of
disease and before treatment has altered the initial presentation. Topical local
anaesthesia is necessary. Sample from the edge of the ulcer, as this is where organ-
isms will be replicating if infection is present
CA
O
● The results of Gram staining may enable appropriate antibiotic therapy to be
selected, but note that Gram +ve organisms are often easily found and may not
Z
M
always be of great significance. Gram -ve organisms are likely to be of significance
if any can be found
● It is essential to use ophthalmic stains such as fluorescein to aid diagnosis, but after
IH
swabs and scrapes have been taken. Excess stain should be rinsed away with sterile
O
saline and the eye examined as soon as possible after fluorescein application so as
to avoid false positives
[a)
(b)
Figure 3.29(a,b)  Ulcerative keratitis in α Boxer. Delineation of the ulcer (a) is obvious after
stcining with Hluorescein (b) and the ulcer is clearly superficicl. A single short extra lash on the upper
eyelid was the cause. The lash, like most of the coat hair, was white and this made it difficult to see
cgcinst the white background of the conjunctivca without good magnification.
Basic management of ulcerative keratitis
● Identify and eliminate the primary problem (e.g. ectopic cilium)
● Address any secondary complications (e.g. infection)
● Assist healing (e.g. appropriate selection of topical drugs, pedicle graft)
● Monitor the situation carefully to ensure that the ulcer is healing, rather than
progressing
Superficial corneal ulceration (loss of epithelium ± anterior stroma only)
● Uncomplicated ulcers heal quickly and without scarring if epithelium only is
General and Canine Ophthalmology
119
involved. A faint scar will remain if there has been stromal involvement. Topical
     e  a    i 
eliminated {e.g. ectopic cilium).
●Protection during healing is not usually required, however, a therapeutic soft contact
(bandage) lens (TSCL) or third eyelid flap can be used for those cases in which pain
relief and protection are needed. A bandage lens can be put in after applying topical
local anaesthetic and the edge of the lens should reach some 2mm beyond the
limbus. The lens may be left in situ for up to six weeks. A general anaesthetic
E
is needed for the placement of third eyelid flaps, and the ulcerative lesion is less-
Z
easily monitored as it is hidden from sight. TSCLs provide a useful and preferable
Z
alternative to third eyelid flaps, but should be avoided when there is keratocon-
10
junctivitis sicca, active ocular surface infection, serious eyelid dysfunction,
ND
hypoaesthesia {an anaesthetic cornea) or uveitis.
W
HAI
Deep corneal ulceration {loss of approximately half or more of
NERA
IH
the corneal thickness)
● Deep ulceration may be an immediate result of the initial injury or a later compli-
P
cation. If there is any likelihood of corneal perforation then healing must be aided
E
by support from a graft fe.g. free conjunctival graft, conjunctival pedicle graft,
porcine submucosal graft). A rotation conjunctival pedicle graft is the most com-
monly used means of support (Figure 2.14(a-g), p. 45), as it brings a blood supply
direct to the damaged region. It is probably the treatment of choice. The graft is
placed with the patient under general anaesthesia and it is usually left in situ for at
least four weeks before it is sectioned, following the application of topical local
anaesthetic. It is important to warn owners that the graft will become white and
necrotic once it has been sectioned and it is axiomatic that sectioning does not take
place until hea ling is complete.
● Full-thickness complications will need primary repair and may also require kerato-
plasty techniques. Such cases should be referred if microsurgical facilities and
expertise are not available.
● Intensive treatment with topical antibiotic solution (proprietary preparation or
specially made up fortified solution) will be required for the management of deep
corneal ulcers.
· Deep corneal injuries are invaria bly accompanied by uveitis, and symptomatic treat-
ment of the uveitis with topical atropine sulphate 1% must accompany treatment.
● Anticollagenases, such as acetylcysteine or EDTA, are of largely unproven benefit in
the treatment of complicated ulcerative keratitis, and careful removal of necrotic
tissue is a more rational approach. Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) has proved useful in
human patients for treating the stromal lysis that follows alkali burns and may be
given orally. Whole fresh serum is easy to obtain from the patient and is an empir-
ical and readily available topical therapy for any situation where collagenases and
proteases complicate the situation. Acetylcysteine (S-10%) may be used in con-
junction with fresh serum to prevent collagenolysis.
● If the ulcer progresses despite treatment, the patient is best referred before perfora-
tion occurs.
Antibiotic selection
120
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
should be selected. For most Gram +ve infections, topical chloramphenicol can be
used; for most Gram -ve infections gentamicin is effective. For mixed infections, a
triple preparation containing, for example, polymixin B, neomycin and gramicidin,
is useful. For confirmed Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection gentamicin is the drug
of choice. On the rare occasions when gentamicin-resistant Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa infection is encountered, ciprofloxacin can be used
E
infections
Z
● Ointments and suspensions can be used to treat ulcers with epithelial loss only; they
should not be used in situations where they can become incorporated in the healing
tissues, or when there is full-thickness perforation
● Proprietary solutions are the treatment of choice for uncomplicated ulcers up to mid-
Z
M
stromal depth
● Fortified liquid preparations should be reserved for complicated ulcers and for when
corneal penetration has 0ccurred (see Appendix 2, pp 333-344)
Points to note in the treatment of vlcerative keratitis
E
● Local anaesthetics should never be used as part of treatment regimes, as their action
G
is of short duration only and they are epitheliotoxic. If pain is marked then systemic
analgesics should be given.
· Topical corticosteroids should not be used to treat ulcerative keratitis as they can
adversely affect the reparative functions of epithelial cells and fibroblasts and also
enhance stromal collagenolysis. The only exception to this rule is the carefully
monitored treatment of certain rare immune-mediated corneal problems.
● Topical non-steroidal inflammatory agents (e.g. ketorolac trometamol 0.s%) may
be used with caution when significant uveitis accompanies ulcerative keratitis. They
 appear not to cause collagenolysis, but may delay epithelialisation.
Chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis (pannus)
Aetiology
· An immune-mediated problem
also Belgian Shepherd Dog, Border Collie, Dachshund and gaze hounds such as the
Greyhound and Lurcher
● Predisposing factors include ultraviolet light, altitude and smoke
Clinical Findings
● In the UK, dogs first present with pannus at approximately 3-5 years of age
● The condition usually produces mild ocular discomfort
● Some or all of the conjunctival limbus (follicular hyperplasia), cornea (initially infer-
otemporal/ventrolateral pink-grey fibrovascular infiltration, but will extend across
the whole cornea if untreated) and third eyelid {follicular hyperplasia with depig
mentation) may be involved (Figure 3.30)
● Involvement of the third eyelid alone is sometimes separately classified as plasma-
cytic conjunctivitis, a plasma cellinfiltrate, or plasmoma, but it is treated in the same
way as pannus. The condition is usually bilateral
· Corneal pigmentation and lipid deposition may complicate the presentation, but
corneal ulceration is not usually present
General and Canine Ophthalmology
121
+ Note that the roughened nature of the infiltrate can lead to false positives after flu-
orescein application unless excess stain is rinsed away gently with saline or water
● Pannus is essentially a superficial, subepithelial, fibrovascular infiltration in which
lymphocytes and plasma cells predominate
Treatment
● The clinical appearance can be largely reversed by topical application of cyclosporin.
Topical cyclosporin ointment 0.2% applied once or twice daily is the treatment of
choice, especially as it appears to reduce the degree of corneal pigmentation. A side
GY
effect of no clinical relevance is that it will also increase tear production.
● A surface-active preparation such as fluorometholone, or other topical corticosteroid
such as prednisolone, betamethasone, or dexamethasone, can also be used in the
ND
early stages of treatment to achieve a quick resolution of clinical signs. For example,
WT
the corticosteroid preparation should be applied at least five times daily for five days,
then four times daily for four days, then three times daily for three days, then two
times daily for two days, then once daily for one day. Long-term topical corticos-
teroids are not usually indicated and cyclosporin can be introduced as the dose of
GE
corticosteroid is tapered off.
● Note that recurrence is likely when either of the above treatment regimes is stopped,
almost universally so in the commonly-affected susceptible breeds. In most cases,
therefore, treatment should be maintained for life once the diagnosis has been made.
The treatment regime is varied to take into account known predisposing factors such
as ultraviolet light.
● Surgery (superficial keratectomy) is required only in the very rare instances of those
dogs that remain blind despite medical therapy, usually because of extensive pigment
O aains iae aiso se uoos  phis a pinous suaa ieidoi uoiso
Figure 3.30  Chronic superficicl keratocon-
junctivitis (pannus) in a German Shepherd Dog.
There was fibrovascular infiltration of the lateral
quadrant of the cornea and also some third
eyelid involvement in the Form of Follicular
hyperplasia and pigment loss.
Lipid deposition in the cornea
Crystalline stromal dystrophy
Crystalline stromal dystropby (Figure 3.31) is a relatively common condition in some
breeds (e.g. Cavalier King Charles Spaniel) in which lipid is deposited in a central or
paracentral position in the corneal stroma of both eyes, without any sign of inflam-
matory response. In a proportion of cases the lipid and lipoprotein profile is abnor-
mal, in others, temporary variations occur during oestrus, pregnancy or lactation and,
122
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
in the remainder, there are no discernible abnormalities. Additional factors, such as
distichiasis, may modify the local appearance.
In some breeds the condition is likely to be inherited, and in others a familial ten-
dency is demonstrable. Crystalline stromal dystrophy may be a consequence of an
inherent meta bolic defect in the corneal fibroblasts, possibly a temperature-dependent
enzyme defect, and slit-lamp examination with maximum magnification often indicates
panstromal accumulation of lipid material in the fibroblasts. The grossly apparent axial
and paraxial crystalline appearance is associated with fibroblast death and liberation
of the accumulated lipid material.
It should be noted that the central cornea is more than 3°C cooler than the periph-
eral cornea, so the central cornea would be preferentially affected by a temperature.
dependent enzyme defect.
M
IER
Z
O
Figure 3.31Crystalline stromal dystrophy in
α Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Both eyes were
alffected. Note the typical crystalline appearance
and axial position of the gross lesion. The dog
was normolipoproteincemic.
Lipid keratopathy
Lipid keratopathy (Figure 3.32) is the deposition of lipid within the cornea of one or
both eyes. The appearance is very variable. Vascularisation is a constant feature of
lipid keratopathy and it may precede or follow the predominantly-stromal lipid dep-
osition. Lipid keratopathy may be a complication of ocular inflammation, and some
affected animals, but by no means all, have plasma hyperlipoproteinaemia {usually
raised high density lipoprotein cholesterol).
Figure 3.32 Lipid keratopathy in a Golden
Retriever that had been scratched by a cat
when he was a puppy. The eye had subsequently
become phthitic.  Low intraocular pressure is
one of many factors that can enhance lipid
deposition, and phthitic eyes have very low
intraocular pressure. The dog also had
 mild  hyperlipoproteinaemia (mainly  affecting
cholesteroll.
Arcus lipoides corneae (corneal arcus)
Arcus lipoides corneae or corneal arcus (Figure 3.33{a,b)) is bilateral peripheral
corneal lipid deposition. The condition in dogs is always associated with plasma hyper.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
123
lipoproteinaemia, most commonly secondary to a problem such as primary acquired
hypothyroidism.
GY
CAI
（）
WT
[a]
(b)
OPHTHAL
NERAL
Figure 3.33(a,b)  Arcus fipoides cornece (corneal arcus] in α Rottweiler. The dog had primary
acquired hypothyroidism and was hyperlipoproteinaemic (both cholesterol and triacylglycerides
were raised]. Peripheral lipid deposition was present in both eyes, but the right eye [a] was first to
become involved, and the lipid has a more crystalline appearance than that of the left eye (b).
GEN
Management of corneal lipid deposition
● As local and systemic factors can be involved, both must be considered in assessing
the management options. In general, progressive corneal opacification, any indica-
tions of active ocular inflammation, any ocular manifestations of hyperlipopro
teinaemia (e.g. lipaemic aqueous, lipaemia retinalis), or any signs of systemic disease,
are indications for detailed investigation
● The total serum or plasma cholesterol and triacylglyceride levels and lipoprotein
profle should be analysed. Total cholesterol and triacylglyceride values alone
provide insufficient information
● Systemic disease should be diagnosed and treated
● Dietary manipulation (e.g. low fat, high fibre) may be used to modify the evolution
of the corneal opacity if no other abnormalities are established. Most of the lipid-
lowering drugs curently used in human medicine are not applicable to management
of dyslipoproteinaemia in the dog
● Any ocular inflammation must also be investigated and treated, as should any poten-
tial exacerbating factors such as distichia
● Other factors that may affect the potential for lipid deposition, but are not amenable
to treatment, such as ocular hypotension {reduced intraocular pressure) must be
taken into account
UVEAL trACt (IRIS, CIlIaRY bodY ANd ChORoId)
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE IRIS
The iris is the most anterior part of the uveal tract, and functions as a movable
diaphragm in front of the lens. It consists of a cellular anterior border layer, which is
a modification of the loosely-arranged stroma that lies beneath it. The iris sphincter
124
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
muscle is located in the pupillary portion of the stroma. Two layers of epithelial cells
form the posterior part of the iris. The anterior epithelium consists of an epithelial
apical portion and a muscular basal portion, the iris dilator muscle, which projects
into the iris stroma. The posterior surface of the iris consists of very heavily pigmented
 epithelial cells. Iris musculature and the epithelial la yers are of neuroectodermal origin,
and the stroma is of mesenchymal origin.
Iris colour depends on the number of melanocytes in the stroma and the thickness
E
of the anterior border layer. The anterior surface is grossly divisible into a central
Z
Apupillary) zone and a peripheral (ciliary) zone, separated by the collarette. The pupil-
lary zone of the iris is usually darker and thinner than the ciliary zone and the differ-
ences are obvious in most dogs.
Z
M
Control of pupil size
The main function of the sphincter and dilator muscles is to control pupil size under
工
different lighting conditions. The sphincter muscle encircles the iris at the pupillary
zone and pupil constriction is mediated by the parasympathetic branches of the ocu-
Oz
E
increases the depth of focus for near vision and reduces optical aberrations.
The dilator muscle controls pupillary dilation and consists of radially orientated
fibres that pass from close to the pupil towards the root of the iris. Dilation is medi-
ated by postganglionic sympathetic nerves.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE CILIARY BODY
The ciliary body is located posterior to the iris and anterior to the choroid and is
roughly triangular in cross section, its base facing the anterior chamber and its apex
merging with the choroid. The ciliary body can be divided into the pars plicata and
pars plana, the latter extending to the edge of the retina, a zone known as the ora cil-
aris retinae. The stroma, ciliary muscles and blood vessels are of mesenchymal origin,
the epithelium originates from neuroectoderm. The ciliary body serves to anchor the
zonular fibres of the lens. Ciliary muscles are poorly developed in domestic animals
and there is little dynamic accommodation of the lens in consequence.
Aqueous production
Aqueous is produced from the non-pigmented epithelium of the pars plicata of the
ciliary body. The rate of aqueous production equals that of outflow, thus maintaining
a relatively constant intraocular pressure.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE CHOROID
The choroid, a highly-vascularised structure, is situated between the retina and
the sclera. The energy requirements of the outer retina are served by diffusion of
glucose and oxygen from the choriocapillaris vessels. The outer retina is exposed to
near arterial levels of oxygen because of the high rate of blood flow through the
choroid.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
125
The choroid consists of:
1 A poorly-developed basal complex known as Bruch's membrane, adjacent to the
retinal pigment epithelium
 2  The choriocapillaris, a network of highly fenestrated capillaries, linked to the large
vessels of the stroma
3  A cellular tapetum located in the dorsal choroids, which increases visual sensitiv-
ity by reflecting light back through the photoreceptors. The fine vessels (choroidal
arterioles) that traverse the tapetum to link the blood vessels of the stroma and the
choriocapillaris are such an obvious feature of fundus examination that they are
referred to as the ‘stars of Winslow*
D
4
The stroma (fibrocytes, melanocytes, elastic fibres and collagen fibres) and blood
C
vessels
0
5  The suprachoroidea (heavily-pigmented connective tissue) adjoins the lamina fusca
W
of the inner sclera
NERA
IH
CONGENITAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL ABNORMALITIES OF
P
6
THE IRIS
GE
Colour variations
Normal variations in the colour of the iris are common in dogs of different breeds and
coat colour. Some of these variations are illustrated later together with photographs
of the normal fundus. The two eyes of the same animal may differ and there may also
be variations of colour in the same eye. Colour differences are termed heterochromia.
Ocular heterochromia may be the only manifestation of colour dilution, or may be
part of more widespread colour dilution, especially in merle animals. Sub-albinism
refers to a lack of normal pigmentation and manifests as a blue iris. It is reasonably
common in dogs.
 - s        
patients with chronic or previous uveitis it is common for the iris to become darker
and lose fine structural detail.
Merle animals
A range of ocular abnormalities may be encountered in merle animals of any species.
Mildly-affected animals have heterochromia and iris hypoplasia (incomplete iris devel-
opment) often with abnormal pupil position (correctopia) and shape (dyscoria). Per-
sistent remnants of the pupillary membrane and iris colobomas are also common.
Severe ocular defects, often multiple in nature, are more likely to be encountered in
animals which are homozygous for the merle trait; they include microphthalmos,
retinal dysplasia, optic nerve hypoplasia and cataracts. Affected animals are also likely
to be congenitally deaf. The combination of a white coat, blue eyes and deafness in
Persistent pupillary membrane
Persistent pupillary membrane (PPM) is the most obvious and common example of
faulty differentiation of the anterior segment, and is a result of failure of the normal
process of atrophy of the vascular arcades {tunica vasculosa lentis anterioris) and asso-
ciated mesenchymal tissue (Figure 3.34). Remnants of the pupillary membrane may be
126
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
found as an isolated defect or in conjunction with other abnormalities fanterior
 segment dysgenesis and multiple ocular defects). Persistent pupillary membrane may
be inherited in the Basenji and possibly in other breeds.
GY
CAI
PHTHALMOLO
ND
4
Figure 3.34  Persistent pupillary membrane in @
0
E
cross-bred puppy. Note that the remnants arise,
predominantly, from the iris collarette.
Clinical features
 go uaa a au  as uo su auea and sisad
iris. They may run across the face of the iris ± span the pupil ± attach to the anterior
lens capsule ± attach to the posterior cornea. They should be distinguished from
acquired adhesions (synechiae).
Incomplete iris development
There is a range of appearances, from apparent absence of the whole iris (aniridia)
which is very rare, to incomplete iris development (bypoplasia) or absence of a portion
of the full thickness of the iris {coloboma) which are uncommon (Figure 3.35). Iris
hypoplasia and colobomatous defects should be differentiated from acquired iris
atrophy.
Figure 3.35Atypical colobomatous defect of the
iris (2 o'clock) in α Shetland Sheepdog. This was an
incidental finding as the dog had actually been
referred because of an epitheliopathy. Note the dis-
ruption of the camera Flash on the ocular surfcace.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
127
ACQUIRED ABNORMALITIES OF THE UVEAL TRACT
Iris pigmentation
Discrete hyperpigmentation and pigment proliferation on the iris surface can occur as
a phenomenon of ageing and is usually of no clinical significance in such cases (Figure
3.36). However, all unexplained changes of pigmentation should be observed carefully
over time, as it is not usually possible to differentiate focal pigmented lesions on the
basis of a single clinical examination alone. Malignancy may be associated with pro-
liferation, elevation and iris infiltration. Iris freckles are of no clinical significance and
GY
consist of focal accumulations of normal, but hyperplastic, melanocytes. Iris nevi
CA
represent proliferations of abnormal melanocytes and are of significance as they can
undergo malignant transformation. Iris neoplasia, most commonly melanoma, should
AND
always be considered in the differential diagnosis; malignancy is associated with rapid
enlargement.
GEI
Figure 3.36  Benign melanosis in a Labrador
Retriever.Note the superficial nature of the
pigment.
In breeds such as the Cairn Terrier diffuse ocular melanosis, associated with
proliferation of melanocytes, is recognised as a breed-related problem in middle-aged
and older dogs. The large numbers of pigment-laden cells that accumulate can cause
an insidious secondary glaucoma and the prognosis for retention of long term vision
is poor (Figure 3.37).
Figure 3.37Diffuse ocular melanosis and
secondary glaucoma in a Cairn Terrier.
128
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Eversion of the heavily-pigmented posterior pigment epithelium of the iris, visible
at the pupillary border, is termed ectropion uveae and is most commonly seen
following previous iris inflammation. Note that poorly-pigmented eyes may have a
pigmented ruff at the pupil margin as a normal feature of colour dilution.
Pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes (PlFMs)
Neovascularisation of the iris surface occurs when angiogenic factors, released as a
feature of, for example, chronic uveitis and intraocular neoplasia, stimulate produc-
tion of blood vessels by the iris stroma. The abnormal blood vessels can be a source
of haemorrhage into the anterior chamber, resulting in the formation of peripheral
O
anterior synechiae and subsequent secondary glaucoma. Neovascularisation is most
ZD
readily observed in a lightly-pigmented iris and may not be obvious in the dark iris
M
found in most breeds of dog.
工
Iris atrophy
Senile iris atrophy is observed most commonly in breeds such as the Miniature and
Z
Toy Poodle (Figure 3.3 8), but it can also follow trauma, chronic uveitis and gla ucoma.
E
The atrophy can result in full-thickness defects, including loss of the iris sphincter
muscle, and is associated with poor pupil constriction in such cases. In some instances
the atrophy is restricted to certain sectors of the iris, for example the pupillary margin
{Figure 3.39).
Figure 3.38 Senile iris atrophy in an aged
Miniature Poodle. There are a number of full-
thickness iris defects in the pupillary zone of the
iris, and it is possible to see the lens equator
through the defects. The ciliary zone does not
appear to be alffected on gross inspection. The
dog also had generalised progressive retinal
atrophy with secondary total cortical cataract.
Figure 3.39 Senile iris catrophy in an old
English Springer Spaniel. The pupillary margin
is affected and there is also a cortical catarac
and a benign cystic lesion on the upper eyelid.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
129
Iridociliary cysts
Although iridociliary cysts can be of developmental origin, they are most commonly
observed as an acquired phenomenon. They may be a feature of ageing or follow uveitis
or appear for reasons unknown. The cysts are of variable size and intact cysts are
usually free-floating and can be transilluminated with a bright light even when they
are heavily pigmented (Figure 3.40). Sometimes the cysts rupture, lea ving remnants on
the anterior face of the lens or the posterior surface of the cornea. They should be dif-
ferentiated from primary tumours of the iris and ciliary body and from metastatic
tumours.
Z
In some breeds, notably the Great Dane and Golden Retriever, there is an associa-
O
tion between iridociliary cysts, uveitis and secondary glaucoma and suspected cases
should be referred early.
ND
0
W
AHIH
Treatment
● Any underlying abnormalities such as uveitis should be addressed
NERAL
● No treatment is usually required for iris cysts, although multiple cysts that obstruct
the visual axis can be treated by needle puncture and extraction, or using non-
P
invasive laser therapy
GE
● In those breeds in which iridociliary cysts are associated with uveitis it is sensible to
seek early specialist advice.
Figure 3.40Iridociliary cysts in α Labrador
Retriever. These cysts usually arise From the pos-
terior face of the iris and are ofen found in
ageing Labrador Retrievers; they are invariably
of no clinical significance.
Synechiae
These are adhesions that form as a result of iris inflammation and they should be dif-
ferentiated from persistent pupillary membrane (PPM) remnants. The formation of
anterior synechiae, adherence of the iris to the cornea, is a common complication of
corneal penetrating injury (Figure 3.41). The formation of posterior synechiae,
adherence of the iris to the anterior lens capsule, is a likely sequel to anterior uveitis.
Peripheral anterior synechiae involve the iridocorneal angle and are usually associated
with iris inflammation especially that associated with the formation of pre-iridal
fibrovascular membranes.
130
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Figure 3.41Anterior synechice in a Border
Collie that had been scratched by a cat when he
was a puppy. No treatment had been given and
the dog has been lef with a large and deep
corneal facet, anterior synechiae, an irregular
pupil and a darkened iris. Note that the adhe-
sions arise from the pupillary border and attach
△
on the posterior cornea.
0
口
Z
M
Canine uveal neoplasia
Primary neoplasia
工
The majority of primary tumours of the uveal tract arise from the iris and ciliary body
IER
rather than the choroid and are usually benign with little tendency to metastasise.
Z
C
The commonest primary intraocular neoplasm is the melanoma ( Figure 3.42) and most
E
anterior uveal melanomas are unilateral, circumscribed and benign. Choroidal
G
melanomas, the commonest site in human eyes, are very rare. Primary iris melanoma
is over represented in the Labrador Retriever in the UK. Melanomas can cause sec-
ondary intraocular disease such as uveitis and glaucoma and, rarely, they metastasise
to distant sites.
Figure 3.42 Iris melanoma in a Labrador
Retriever. The melanoma is most obvious medi-
ally and extends from about 7 o'clock to9
o'clock, but note that there are also pigmentary
changes in the dorsomedial quadrant of the iris.
Ciliary body tumours (adenoma and adenocarcinoma) (Figure 3.43) are the most
frequently reported primary ciliary body tumours and are usually unilateral. Other
primary anterior uveal tumours are rare: they include fibrosarcoma, medulloepithe-
lioma, haemangioma, haemangiosarcoma and leiomyosarcoma.
Diagnosis
● History and clinical appearance. The owner should be questioned about changes of
appearance and growth pattern
● The iris should be examined carefully under magnification
· Transillumination of the eye, scleral depression techniques, gonioscopy and
ultrasonogra phy
● Thoracic and abdominal imaging
 General and Canine Ophthalmology
131
difficult. Needle biopsy and histology of the tumour are appropriate diagnostic aids.
Figure 3.43 Ciliary body adenoma in an
old Labrador Retriever The tumour is quite dis-
crete and has interposed itself between the lens
ND
0
and the iris. Note also the tumour extension into
the anterior chamber ventrally. There is second-
>
ary cataract formation as well as senile nuclear
A
sclerosis of the lens.
工
NERA
IH
Differential diagnosis of iris melanoma
Q
● Acquired hyperpigmentation - benign localised changes, diffuse changes associated
with chronic uveitis, breed-related hyperpigmentation (e.g. diffuse ocular melanosis 
in the Cairn Terrier)
● Uveal cysts - smooth and usually free-floating spheres that can be transilluminated
with a bright light even when they are hea vily pigmented. Ultrasonography will dif-
ferentiate a fluid-filled cyst from a solid mass
 Management of iris melanoma
● The abnormal region of the iris should be kept under careful observation and left
alone if there is no indication of growth
● For those masses that demonstrate a temporal increase in size, laser ablation, or
local excision is effective and such cases may require referral
· For those melanomas that produce secondary complications, most commonly gla u-
coma, the whole eye should be removed and this decision is made easier if the eye
is blind or intractably painful
● If local excision or globe removal is undertaken, the tissues or globe should be sub-
mitted for histopathology
Secondary neoplasia
●Secondary neoplasia may involve the uveal tract, and lymphoma (Figure 3.44) is the
most common secondary tumour to affect the eye and orbit. Ocular involvement
follows lymphadenopathy as the most frequently diagnosed clinical sign
●Haemangiosarcoma is probably the next most common secondary tumour after
lymphoma, and may present with hyphaema as the most obvious ocular feature
· Other metastatic tumours include adenocarcinoma, fibrosarcoma, rhabdomyo-
sarcoma, osteosarcoma, phaeochromocytoma, seminoma, transmissible venereal
tumour and malignant melanoma
132
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Figure 3.44 Multicentric lymphoma in @
German Shepherd Dog. Early invasion of the iris
usually involves the ciliary zone, rather than the
pupillary zone and in this dog the medial iris
shows signs of tumour infiltration. The infiltration
is much more obvious in such cases if the ante
Z
rior chamber is viewed from the side. There was
clso some ill-defined haemorrhage from the iris.
CA
D
Diagnosis
Z
M
● History, ocular signs and clinical signs
● The ocular manifestations are variable; there is not only infiltration of the uveal
tract by the tumour, but there may be associated generalised abnormalities such as
anaemia, thrombocytopaenia and disseminated intravascular coagulation, all of
Z
which can present with ocular manifestations
E
● Haematology and biochemistry profiles, together with appropriate tests (e.g. lymph
node and bone marrow biopsy) where indicated
Management
● Treatment depends upon the type of tumour and the stage of development. Malig-
nant lymphoma is the commonest type of disseminated neoplasia that is treated rou-
tinely and responds well to chemotherapy; the earlier the diagnosis and treatment
the better the success
· Chemotherapy is also the commonest approach adopted for other disseminated
tumours judged to be treata ble
Miscellaneous conditions
Histiocytosis
Histiocytosis is an example of immunoproliferative disease that is remarkably similar
to malignant lymphoma; the same chemotherapy protocol is used for management.
Granulomatous meningoencephaliis
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME) is an inflammatory disease in which there
is proliferation of reticuloendothelial cells and involvement of the central nervous
system, optic nerves and globes. The ocular manifestations usually involve the
posterior segment and anterior uveitis is unusual.
Canine uveitis
It is inevitable that the inflammatory boundaries in uveitis are not as distinct as the
terminology would suggest. In addition, ocular changes in bilateral cases are rarely
symmetrical, as they may reflect different time courses in the pathogenesis {Figure
3.45(a,b)). Anterior uveitis may involve the iris (iritis) or both the iris and the ante-
rior part of the ciliary body (iridocyclitis). Intermediate uveitis mainly involves the pos
terior part of the ciliary body and the region of the ora ciliaris retinae (pars planitis).
Posterior uveitis involves the choroid (choroiditis), but close association of the retina
General and Canine Ophthalmology
133
means that inflammation of both choroid and retina {chorioretinitis) is the usual situ-
ation. Paruveitis is inflammation of the entire uveal tract - iris, ciliary body and
choroid (Figure 3.45(c)). In addition to what is described below, some aspects of uveitis
are reviewed with diseases of the fundus.
GV
0101
AND
Figure 3.45(a) Acute/subacute uveitis in α dog. Both eyes of this Bearded Collie were involved
GEI
and the uveitis was probably a sequel to immune-mediated inflammatory bowel disea se. The dog
was antinuclecr antibody positive. Pain, blepharospasm, lacrimation and photophobia were promi-
nent. In the right eye there is a more acute presentation, with perilimbal hyperaemic, subtle
pancorneal opacification, aqueous Flare and sparse keratic precipitates, reduced anterior chamber
depth, loss of iris detail and pupil constriction. The intraocular pressure measured with an appla-
nation tonometer (Mackay Marg) was 7mm of mercury.
Figure 3.45(b)  Uveitis has been present for longer in the left eye and the uveitis is less ccute.
Hyperaemia is more diffuse and corneal oedema is more obvious, otherwise the changes are similar.
lor 60 minutes with a mydriatic cycloplegic [atropine) and corticosteroids (prednisolone acetate].
Examination of the posterior segmentrevealed vitiritis,chorioretinitis cnd opticneuritis,confirming
panuveitis. On the basis of the history and ocular findings medical treatment was adjusted to
include systemic immunosuppressive agents (corticosteroids and azathioprine).
Clinical signs of acute uveitis (Figures 2.21(a,b), p. SS)
●Unilateral/bilateral involvement
● Pain, photophobia, blepharospasm and increased lacrimation*
+ Variable effects on vision, from no effect to blind
* Readily identifiable key features
134
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Inflammation hyperaemia, as perilimbal hyperaemia or more diffuse redness *
● Hypotony, sometimes so obvious that digital tonometry can be used to confirm the
low intraocular pressure*
· Corneal oedema (usually subtle, occurs because of endothelial dysfunction)
● Aqueous flare (protein-rich aqueous produces a Tyndall light-scattering effect, which
can most easily be detected with a slit beam of light)
● Hyphaema, or hypopyon in some cases, although hypopyon is more a feature of
chronicity
Z
● Iris swelling and loss of iris detail*
● Anterior chamber may be shallower than normal (related to the inflammatory
O
changes in the iris)
口
● Synechiae (adhesions) may form rapidly
Z
M
● Miosis, the pupil is constricted because of ciliary spasm, there may be a sluggish or
incomplete response to bright light*
● Inflammatory debris on the anterior lens capsule
IER
●Vitritis
Z
● Active chorioretinitis ± vascular changes
E
+ Choroidal effusion
G
● Choroidal haemorrhage
● Optic neuritis
Clinical signs of chronic uveitis (Figures 3.46(a,b))
● Mild ocular discharge may be present
● Keratic precipitates/mutton-fat precipitates on posterior surface of the cornea*
● Hyphaema or hypopyon
· Corneal oedema and corneal neovascularisation may be present in some cases
● Gross iris changes, such as alteration in colour (usually darker), iris bombe, post-
inflammatory iris cysts*
● Pupil changes because of synechiae formation - the pupil is irregular in shape and
may be partially reactive or immobile*
● Neovascularisation of the iris
● Pigment deposition on the lens {iris rests), inflammatory debris on the lens, cataract
or lens luxation*
● Cobblestone effects in the fundus, pigment proliferation, focal and/or diffuse
hyperreflectivity*
● Retinal detachment
●Optic atrophy
● Glaucoma (a complication of posterior synechiae or peripheral anterior synechiae)
Diagnosis
●Patient details, ocular and systemic history (including vaccination), plus details of
any previous treatment
· Complete physical examination should always be performed, neurological exami
nation may also be required
● Ophthalmic examination of both eyes and their adnexa. Bilateral uveitis can indi-
cate systemic involvement, but one eye may be affected before the other
*Readily identifiable key features
General and Canine Ophthalmology
135
· Diagnostic imaging techniques can be useful, and thoracic radiography may be
needed if neoplasia suspected
● If the cause is not obvious, routine haematology, blood biochemistry, serodiagnosis
and, if possible, specific diagnostic tests should be performed whenever practicable
● Other samples are sometimes required (e.g. for culture, cytology, histopathology) by
paracentesis, aspiration or biopsy
INE
CA
AND
0
GE
[a}
(b)
Figure 3.46 (a) Chronic uveitis. The pupil is slightly irregular and the iris darkened. Iris rests
the typical 'cobblestone' appearance of chronic uveitis. Chronic vitritis is also present, so that the 
vitreous is hazy.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TrEATMENT FOR CANINE UVEItIS
Corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroids
Prednisolone acetate 1% is currently the preparation of choice for anterior uveitis, and
topical application is the route of choice. Initially one drop is applied to the eye up to
five times daily, and treatment should be tapered off over a period of some S-10 days,
when the uveitis has resolved.
Subconjunctivalcorticosteroids
Subconjunctival injections delivered beneath the dorsal bulbar conjunctiva are painful,
so this route is used less commonly than others in the conscious patient. Its advantage
 is that one injection lasts for 2-3 weeks. The disadvantages, aside from the pain of
injection, include the risk of accidental ocular penetration, continuing absorption in
the face of complications, varia ble intraocular concentrations {accurate deposition is
difficult and absorption of the drug can be variable) and occasional granuloma for-
mation at the site of injection. Dexamethasone and betamethasone are both suitable
 preparations. Dose rate is 0.7s-2.0 mg per eye according to the dog's size.
Systemiccorticosteroids
Oral prednisolone is indicated for the treatment of intermediate and posterior uveitis.
136
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Both topical and oral corticosteroids will be required for the treatment of panuveitis
and for immune-mediated types of uveitis. Higher dose rates are selected when
immunosuppression is the prime purpose of treatment (2 mg/kg prednisolone every 12
hours) and lower dose rates may be used when anti-inflammatory effects are prima-
rily required (1 mg/kg of prednisolone every 12 hours). Treatment should be tapered
off when the condition has resolved and not stopped abruptly.
INE
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAlDs)
Topical NSAIDs
NSAIDs available as topical preparations include diclofenac sodium 0.1%, flurbipro-
fen sodium 0.03% and ketorolac trometamol 0.5%. Although these drugs are mainly
-is ui aou Aoie1ui-ue yueodw ue aae ose Aau iaains poeieie ui pa5n
Z
M
tions where corticosteroids would be contraindicated, and ketorolac trometamol is
commonly selected for this purpose.
工
Systemic NSAIDs
ON
Carprofen (4 mg/kg i/v or s/c initially, followed by oral treatment at a dose rate of 2
E
mg/kg) is usually selected to control mild to moderate pain and inflammation. It is
most effective when given prior to inflammation and pain {e.g- preoperatively), so its
NSAIDs and corticosteroids should not be used concurrently because of their poten-
tial adverse effect on the gastrointestinal tract.
Cytotoxic drugs
These systemic preparations {e.g. azathioprine) are occasionally used in cases of pre-
sumed immune-mediated uveitis, often in conjunction with immunosuppressive doses
of systemic corticosteroids.
Mydriatic cycloplegics
Usually atropine 1% alone is sufficient, but phenylephrine 10% can also be used
initially when pupillary dilation is difficult to achieve. The patient's progress should
be monitored closely and the aim is to eliminate pain (by relaxing ciliary spasm)
and to reduce the risk of synechiae formation. Once the pupil has dilated, mydriatic
cycloplegics can be applied only as often as is necessary to maintain this state.
The patient should be monitored carefully for potential complications, particularly
gla ucoma.
NON-INFECTIONS CAUSES OF CANINE UVEITIS
Reflex
This is the transient and mild uveitis that can follow an ocular surface or corneal
insult. It is mediated by an axon refex within the trigeminal nerve and is usually
self-limiting.
Associated with keratitis (see also Section 2, p. 57)
Ulcerative keratitis and corneal insult (e.g. chemical injury) can both be associated with
uveitis, which may be transient or sustained.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
137
Trauma (see also Section 2, pp 35-49)
Transient reflex uveitis associated with minor corneal insult is common, but sustained
uveitis will accompany deep keratitis and more serious cormeal injury. Hypopyon is
often present as a feature of deep keratitis.
The uveitis that follows penetrating or blunt traumatic injury may become com-
plicated by secondary problems such as glaucoma, cataract and pbthisis bulbi. Endoph-
thalmitis is also possible following traumatic injury, because of the high risk of
infection being introduced into the eye by direct inoculation.
E
Z
Uveitis associated with lens damage (see also Section 2, p. 48)
Lens-induced uveitis occurs when there is a breakdown of the normal T-cell tolerance
to lens proteins. It is usually a consequence of traumatic rupture of the lens capsule,
0
ND
for example from a penetrating claw injury or a gunshot wound. The release of anti-
M
genic lens protein initiates a pbacoclastic uveitis. Phacoclastic uveitis tends to be very
HA
intense in dogs, and short-term complications include the development of persistent
uveitis, glaucoma or fulminating endophthalmitis.
 Small puncture wounds in the lens capsule may seal, and such cases can be managed
P
6
GEN
medically, but, when there is likely to be extensive or sustained release of lens con-
tents, surgery to remove the antigenic lens protein, usually by phacoemulsification,
should be undertaken without delay. Because the examination, assessment and man-
agement of lens damage can be difficult, early referral is advised.
Slow leakage of soluble lens protein though an intact lens capsule, as, for example,
leakage associated with hypermature cataracts, produces a low-grade pbacolytic uveitis
that may be treated symptomatically (Figure 3.47).
Figure 3.47 Uveitis associcted with hyper
mature cataract in a dog. The iris of this eye
wcs slightly darker than that of theFellow unaf-
fected eye. The total cataract is not of uniform
appearance.
Immune-mediated uveitis
The uveodermatological syndrome in dogs has been compared with the Vogt-
Koyanagi-Harada syndrome in humans, and in both species the disease is a possible
example of an autoimmune reaction against melanocytes. Breeds at risk include the
Japanese Akita, Chow Chow and Samoyed.
Clinical signs
● Depigmentation of the lids, muzzle, rhinarium, skin and whitening of the hair
● Acute, usually bilateral, panuveitis that may precede or follow mucocutaneous
138
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
involvement and skin and hair changes. The ocular inflammation is often intense,
painful and sustained
· Complications include degenerative changes in the retina and optic nerve and
secondary glaucoma
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the characteristic clinical signs and supplementary tests such as
INE
dermal, as well as uveal, mela nocytes.
Treatment
● Should be started as early as possible and maintained long term, as the management
Z
M
can be difficult and the prognosis guarded. Many of these cases are best referred for
initial assessment
工
● Combination of immunosuppressive doses of systemic corticosteroids foral pred-
nisolone 1-2 mg/kg/day initially, with gradual reduction to the lowest dose which
prevents recurrence) and immunosuppressive drugs such as azathioprine (oral dose
E
of 2 mg/kg/day, reducing after 3-5 days)
G
● The uveitis must also be treated locally with topical applications of corticosteroid
(prednisolone acetate 1% some five times daily for the first 5-10 days) and atropine
1 % (as frequently as is necessary to achieve and maintain pupil dilation)
● If there is any suspicion of secondary glaucoma, the animal should be hospitalised
and the intraocular pressure monitored
● Even with early and aggressive treatment the prognosis is guarded, so management
requires specialist help
CANINE UVEITIS ASSOCIATED WITH INFECTION
Systemic viral disease
Infectious canine hepatitis
Infectious canine hepatitis {canine adenovirus type I) is the most important viral
cause of canine uveitis. The initial clinical signs consist of a mild, usually unilateral.
uveitis, with photophobia, that occurs during the acute phase of clinical illness, fol-
lowed by a much more severe keratouveitis 1-3 weeks after infection, in a proportion
of cases.
Ocular signs
● In addition to the usual clinical features of iritis, the most striking ocular sign is
corneal oedema (*blue eye'), as a result of a delayed hypersensitivity response that
damages the corneal endothelium. The corneal oedema is usually unilateral. If the
corneal damage is severe enough, bullous keratopathy and keratoglobus can
develop. In some animals there is slow resolution of the corneal oedema, which clears
from the limbus towards the centre over a period of weeks. In other animals,
however, the corneal opacity persists.
● The intraocular pressure is lower than normal in most cases, but rises if secondary
glaucoma supervenes. A substantial rise in intraocular pressure may produce per-
General and Canine Ophthalmology
139
Treatmen!
The treatment of infectious canine hepatitis is symptomatic {as outlined earlier under
general principles) and supportive.
Canine herpes virus
Canine herpes virus is an occasional cause of neonatal death in litters of puppies.
Ocular signs include severe panuveitis, keratouveitis and chorioretinitis and survivors
may be severely visually impaired or blind.
山
Z
Canine distemper virus
Canine distemper virus infection is frequently associated with chorioretinitis and optic
neuritis, especially in dogs with neurological signs (see under Fundus, this section,
O
pp 138-142).
Z
M
Rickettsial diseases
The tick-borne diseases, monocytic ebrlichiosis or tropical canine pancytopaenia
OP
(Ehrlichia canis),Rocky Mountain spotted fever (Rickettsia rickettsii) and infectious
cycfic thrombocytopaenia (Ehrlichia platys) have all been reported as causes of uveitis
GE
in tropical and sub-tropical zones.
Monocytic ebrlichiosis is the most important disease in this group. After the acute
phase of infection, some dogs eliminate the organism, while others become subclini-
cally infected so that chronic disease can develop years later. Although not endemic in
the UK, subclinically infected dogs imported into the country pose a risk.
Clinical signs
· All these tick-borne rickettsial diseases are associated with vasculitis and thrombo-
cytopaenia. Serious bleeding problems, especially epista xis and ocular haemorrhage,
are most likely to be associated with monocytic ehrlichiosis and this infection should
be considered in the differential diagnosis of intraocular haemorrhage.
● Uveitis, vasculitis and intraocular haemorrhage are common ocular findings in tick-
borne disease. Severe ocular haemorrhage, retinal detachment and secondary glau-
coma are common complications.
Treatment
● Doxycycline is usually the drug selected for treating acute rickettsial infections
(5mg/kg twice daily for 14 days). Sub-clinical infections are less-successfully
treated and imidocarb dipropionate (5 mg/kg intramuscularly once, repeated at 14-
21 da ys) is probably the treatment of choice.
+ The uveitis is treated symptomatically.
Bacterial infections
Leptospirosis
Leptospirosis is caused by a number of potential serovars, and the kidney is usually
the main target organ in dogs. The zoonotic implications of infection should be
explained to the owner.
Clinical signs and diagnosis
· Vasculitis, endotheliitis and renal failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation
140
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Uveitis seems most likely to occur after a latent period following previous acute
infection
● The diagnosis is usually confirmed from the clinical signs, urinalysis and serology
Trearmen!
· Acute leptospiral infection can be treated with penicillin and its derivatives and tetra-
          s
E
● Doxycycline is an alternative drug for treatment of the acute infection and as follow-
Z
up therapy
· Supportive care is required for those cases with renal disease
● The uveitis is treated symptomatically
Z
M
Systemic bacterial infections
Systemic bacterial infection may also be associated with uveitis, and it is the posterior
IH
uvea that is most likely to be involved in blood-borne infection; examples include
salmonellosis and tuberculosis. Uveitis can be initiated by circulating toxins and is
ON
thus associated with a variety of conditions that result in toxaemia or sepsis. The
山
commonest associations are with endocarditis, dental disease and pyometritis.
Local bacterial infections
Direct introduction of pathogens such as Pasteurella multocida following a penetrat-
ing injury may be a cause of exogenous uveitis with complications such as abscessa-
tion or endophthalmitis.
Fungal and algal infections
These disseminated infections are only likely to be seen in dogs that have been imported
into the UK from non-temperate climates, or in severely immunocompromised animals.
Ocular involvement, notably posterior uveitis and panuveitis, is often an obvious
feature of infection and lesions are typically granulomatous or pyogranulomatous in
type. Examples of systemic mycoses include blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, coccid-
ioidomycosis, geotrichosis, aspergillosis and histoplasmosis. Protothecosis is a rare
disease caused by colourless algae.
Specialist advice should be obtained with regard to the specific diagnosis and
management of these conditions, relapse is common and most cases are best
referred.
Parasitic infection
Leishmaniasis
Leishmaniasis is caused by a diphasic protozoan parasite. Old World leishmaniasis is
caused by Leisbmania donovani infantum and New World leishmaniasis by Leishma
nia donovani chagasi. Clinical disease develops in a high proportion of infected dogs
after an incubation period of several months to several years. Leishmaniasis is an
endemic problem in many parts of the world, but may also occur in dogs that have
been imported to the UK. It is a difficult condition to treat effectively as the relapse
rate is high. The zoonotic implications should be discussed before considering treat-
ment, and it is sensible to seek specialist advice from a referral centre when treatment
is contemplated.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
141
Clinical signs
● Chronic emaciation and non-pruritic skin disease
● Periocular lesions, including blepharitis
· Ocular lesions include conjunctivitis, keratitis, scleritis, keratouveitis and uveitis
Diagnosis
●History of visiting an endemic area
●Clinical signs
山
·Serology
Z
● Identification of causative organism from lymph node or bone marrow aspirates, or
biopsy specimens
O
Z
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis, caused by the protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondi, is unusual in
H
dogs, and most of the ocular lesions encountered in clinical practice are associated
with chronic and sub-clinical infection. Concurrent disease may well be present on the
P
rare occasions when generalised toxoplasmosis develops.
Clinical signs
Anterior and posterior uveitis, scleritis and optic neuritis, less commonly, extraocular
myositis
Diagnosis
● Serological testing may be indicative of active infection if a fourfold increase in anti
+ Histopathological identification of the organism
Trearment
+ Oral clindamycin, 12.5 mg/kg twice daily for 3-4 weeks
●Symptomatic treatment of the uveitis
● Relapse is possible, so regular follow up is necessary
Neosporosis
Neosporosis caused by Neospora canimum shares similarities with toxoplasmosis, but
can be differentiated, as the two protozoan organisms do not crossreact serologically.
Most cases occur in very young dogs and ascending paralysis is the classical clinical
presentation. Any accompanying uveitis is generally mild. Treatment is as for
toxoplasmosis.
Parasitic larvae
Migrating metazoan parasitic larvae may provoke uveitis of differing intensities. For
example, canine toxocariasis, angiostrongylosis and filariasis have all been reported as
causes of uveitis. Working Border Collies demonstrate a high incidence of chori-
oretinopathy lesions that have been ascribed to previous infestation with Toxocara
canis.
Aberrant Angiostrongylus vasorum larvae may provoke a range of responses, from
minimal to severe granulomatous uveitis, if they reach the eye. The most spectacular
142
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
ocular manifestation is undoubtedly the free nematode or nematodes within the eye.
 e     n  i i    e  
rior chamber surgically, and such cases are usually referred.
Diroflaria immitis is not endemic in the UK, but may be encountered in animals
imported from the Americas and parts of Europe. Ocular signs include anterior uveitis
with varying degrees of corneal oedema. It is also possible to detect aberrant dirofi-
laria in the anterior chamber of some cases.
Intraocular diptera larvae (ophthalmomyiasis interna) that are thought to penetrate
the eye through the conjunctiva are also a potential cause of uveitis. Opbthalmomyi-
asis interna may present as anterior uveitis in the acute phase of invasion by the
dipteran larva, but is more likely to be an incidental finding in the chronic stage of
C
infection when fundus examination reveals typical curvilinear criss-crossing tracts.
二
ANTERIOR CHAMBER AND AQUEOUS HUMOUR
Z
The anterior chamber is the space delineated by the posterior surface of the cornea,
E
the anterior surface of the iris and the anterior surface of the lens in the pupillary
aperture. It is normally filled with clear aqueous humour.
Production and drainage of aqueous humour
The intraocular pressure is a consequence of the balance between aqueous production
and drainage, but may be affected by other factors, such as ocular rigidity.
Aqueous resembles an ultrafiltrate of plasma and is produced by the processes of
rior surface of the lens and the posterior surface of the iris), passes through the pupil
and enters the anterior chamber. The majority of aqueous outflow in the dog occurs
through the iridocorneal angle, the so-called conventional route. The iridocorneal angle
consists of the pectinate ligament and the sponge-like tissue of the trabecular mesh-
work. Aqueous drains across these structures to the avascular aqueous plexus and
thence to the scleral venous circulation.
Blood-aqueous barrier
The blood-aqueous barrier consists of the endothelium of the iris and ciliary vessels
and the non-pigmented ciliary epithelium. Breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier
results in modification of the aqueous humour composition, primarily by increased
quantities of protein.
EXAMINATION
● Examination of the anterior chamber and aqueous humour requires good lighting,
preferably with a focussed light beam and magnification. Most information is
obtained when the examination is performed in a darkened room and when the light
useful in the assessment of aqueous transparency and anterior chamber depth.
● It is important to note the transparency of the aqueous humour as well as the
details of posterior cornea, iris and anterior lens. The depth of the anterior chamber
General and Canine Ophthalmology
143
should also be assessed with a narrow beam of light shone across the anterior
chamber.
● Gonioscopy (examination of the iridocorneal angle) may also be required, but
because there is bewildering normal variation, it is a technique best performed in
referral centres.
● In a very small number of cases, anterior chamber paracentesis is useful for differ-
entiation of anterior chamber infiltrates, but interpretation of aspirates can be dif-
ficult, so requirements should be discussed with a pathologist before taking samples.
Z
ABNORMALITIES OF THE CANINE ANTERIOR
CHAMBER AND AQUEOUS HVMOUR
O
Anterior chamber and aqueous involvement are secondary to disease elsewhere, and
the appropriate parts of the notes should be consulted for further details.
Inflammation
OPH
Aqueous flare
Protein-rich aqueous scatters light (Tyndall effect), and aqueous flare is best appreci-
ated in the dark utilising a narrow slit beam and magnification.
Cellular infiltrates
Most common are keratic precipitates (KPs). If large enough they are called mutton
fat precipitates. Because of the thermal currents within the anterior chamber that influ
ence aqueous circulation, they usually end up adhering to the ventral (inferior) corneal
endothelium, particularly ventromedially.
Hypopyon
White cell infiltrates, commonly sterile, are most commonly associated with deep
corneal ulceration and uveitis. Hypopyon is usually whitish in colour and located in
the ventral aspect of the anterior chamber. Hypopyon should be distinguished from
chylomicrons {lipaemic aqueous) and anterior chamber infiltration by neoplastic cells.
Lipaemic Aqueous
Triacylglyceride-rich lipid in the aqueous humour is a possible ocular manifestation of
systemic hyperlipoproteinaemia. A pre-existing uveitis will increase the likelihood of
lipid leakage because of the brea kdown of the blood-aqueous barrier. The lipid is only
visible if triacylglyceride levels are abnormally high (>25 mmol/l); raised cholesterol
levels do not alter aqueous appearance. If there is hypertriglyceridaemia alone, the
aqueous appears turbid, but if chylomicrons are also raised the aqueous may appear
milky white. In both primary chylomicronaemia (e.g. Miniature Schnauzer) and
secondary hypertriglyceridaemia or chylomicronaemia (e.g. animals with diabetes
mellitus) triacylglyceride-rich or chylomicron-rich aqueous is a possible ocular
manifestation (Figure 3.48). The whole of the anterior chamber is turbid or opaque.
Fundus examination can also be useful, in both fasting and non-fasting animals, as
lipaemia retinalis is commoner than lipaemic aqueous in animals with raised serum
triacylglycerides.
Normolipoproteinaemia {especially normal levels of triacylglycerides) and effective
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
144
control of uveitis can be critical to the success of elective procedures such as cataract
surgery in susceptible breeds, and preoperative preparation is key to the management
of such cases. Routine preoperative screening should include measurement of serum
or plasma triacylglycerides, as well as cholesterol, and investigation of any underlying
causes of hyperlipoproteinaemia. If no underlying treatable causes can be found, then
a low-fat-high-fibre diet, with fish oil supplementation, for life, should be instituted.
A low-fat diet and good control of diabetes mellitus, together with careful periopera-
tive and postoperative management of intraocular inflammation, will reduce the post-
operative complications in animals at risk.
O
0
ZD
IH
Z
O
W
Figure 3.48 Lipaemic aqueous in a Minia
turePinscher with chylomicronaemia secondary
to diabetes mellitus. Only the right eye was
affected, cnd this eye had mild kerato-uveitis
and a healing ulcer.
Haemorrhage (hyphaema)
Hypbaema, haemorrhage in the anterior chamber, is not uncommon. It is important
to establish the cause of any intraocular haemorrhage (Figure 3.49),
Figure 3.49 Hyphaema associated with
immune-mediated   thrombocytopaenia   in @
Cocker Spaniel. Compare this photograph with
Figure 2.23 and note that there are no signs of
Uveitis and the visible mucous membranes are
very pale. The dog also had petechiation of the
oral mucous membranes.
Differential diagnosis of intraocular haemorrhage
Congenital and developmental condifions
· Collie eye anomaly
● Persistence of the primary vitreous and persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
 General and Canine Ophthalmology
145
Acquired condirions
●Trauma
● Severe inflammation
· Chronic glaucoma
·Neoplasia
●Systemic hypertensive disea se
● Immune-mediated disease (e.g. thrombocytopaenia, auto-immune haemolytic
anaemia)
INE
● Clotting defects - genetic and acquired (e.g. warfarin [coumarin] poisoning)
GY
+ Sepsis
● Disseminated intra vascular coagulation (DIC)
0
Neoplasia
Z
On the basis of ophthalmic examination alone it may be impossible to distinguish
inflammatory exudates from neoplastic infiltrates within the anterior chamber. Both
inflammation and neoplasia may be unilateral or bilateral (Figure 3.s0(a,b)). The
patient's history and the results of physical examination may help in differentiation,
GEI
O
as may paracentesis.
[a]
[b)
Figure 3.50(a,b) Blood-tinged neoplastic cells in the anterior chamber of a Golden Retriever
with multicentric lymphoma, both eyes were involved.
Clinical approach to anterior-chamber opacities
● Careful examination of the whole animal, as well as both eyes. The changes that
are observed in the anterior chamber reflect pathology elsewhere (e.g. breakdown
of the blood-aqueous barrier, metastatic neoplasia)
● Ultrasound examination ± other imaging techniques, particularly if the anterior
chamber is opaque
● Laboratory examination may be useful (e.g. plasma lipid and lipoprotein profile)
● Direct sampling can be helpful, but the techniques of obtaining the material and
interpretation of the samples require skill
Differential diagnosis of a 'white' anterior chamber
·Hypopyon
● Neoplastic cells
● Chylomicronaemia
146
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
GLAUCOMAS
Glaucoma is a consequence of an abnormally high and usually sustained increase of
intraocular pressure (IOP). The increase is sufficient to damage the eye and vision and
the underlying abnormality is invariably defective aqueous drainage. It is increasingly
recognised that many of the damaging effects are a consequence of ischaemia and
subsequent necrosis. Glaucoma is a challenging condition that may result in acute
E
vision loss and severe pain and the prognosis, even in specialist hands, is usually
Z
guarded.
There are a number of causes and it is better to consider the glaucomas as a group,
O
rather than a specific condition. These cases often constitute complex ocular emer-
口
gencies, so it is crucial to be able to recognise the acute clinical signs. Unless there are
Z
M
facilities for accurate monitoring of intraocular pressure and assessment of the irido-
corneal angle, all acute glaucoma cases should be referred as a matter of urgency.
IH
Z
CANINE GLAUCOMA
E
G
Clinical features of acute glaucoma (Figure 2.24, p. 58)
● Pain (usually very head shy), blepharospasm and increased lacrimation*
· Globe is of normal size but feels very tense*
● Episcleral congestion (vessels run at right angles to the limbus)*
● Redness may not be confined to episcleral vessels alone, may also have distended
conjunctival vessels. A “brush border' of corneal vessels may also be apparent at a
relatively early stage
● Corneal oedema (steamy, bluish cornea) especially if the IOP is greater than 45-
50mmHg*
● Unresponsive, mid-dilated to dilated pupil (because of oculomotor nerve neuro-
pra xia )*
● Vision loss in affected eye (inability to negotiate a maze, absence of tracking response,
loss of consensual pupillary light reflex, loss of dazzle reflex, loss of menace response)
● Lens luxation may also be present
Confirmation of glaucoma
● The breed of dog is often highly relevant (see below)
● Tonometry - the intraocular pressure of both eyes should be measured. Normal IOP
in the dog is 10-25 mm Hg. IOP, in canine cases with acute angle closure glaucoma,
regularly exceeds 50 mm Hg
● Gonioscopy - examination of the drainage angle of both eyes with a goniolens to
assess the state of the iridocorneal angle
Clinical features of chronic glaucoma (Figure 3.51(a-c))
● Blindness and persistent pain
· Globe usually permanently enlarged because of stretching of the ocular coats - this
happens more readily in young animals than adults *
*Readily identifiable key features
General and Canine Ophthalmology
147
● Corneal vascularisation {deep brush border peripheral vessels advance axially with
chronicity)*
● Thinning of Descemet's membrane (Haab's striae or Descemet's streaks) - grey lines,
rather like a snail track crossing the cornea
● Corneal ulceration because of exposure keratopathy and inadequate blink
● Equatorial staphyloma - scleral thinning, of dark blue colour, posterior to the limbus
● Iris atrophy - iris can be readily transilluminated
· Cataract
● Lens subluxation or luxation {but note that this may also be a primary event - see
GY
below)
CAI
● Increased tapetal reflectivity, attenuation of retinal blood vessels, retinal and optic
atrophy, loss of vision
AND
· Cupping of the optic disc, the lamina cribrosa is a weak region of the sclera
● Intraocular haemorrhage, which may be recurrent
● Phthisis bulbi is much less common than globe enlargement, but may supervene in
some chronic cases
GEI
[a)
(b)
Figure 3.5 l(a-e) Chronic glaucoma. The eye is
painful and red, the pupil widely dilated and the globe
slightly enlarged.CharacteristicHaab's strice (thinning
of Descemet's membrane) are present and the lenshas
become subluxated (a). Fundus examination indicates
cupping of the optic nerve head (b) and the change
of optic nerve head shape is very obvious when this
(c)
eye is compared with the Fellow, unaffected eye (cj.
*Readily identifiable key features
148
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
PRIMARY GLAUCOMA
In this type of glaucoma there is no other recognised antecedent ocular disease process.
and primary glaucoma is thought to be hereditary. It is invariably a bilateral condi-
tion, although the two eyes are not usually affected simultaneously. There are two
forms: that associated with goniodysgenesis (abnormal drainage angle development)
and open angle. For an up-to-date list of affected breeds see In Practice Supplement
on Hereditary Eye Disease.
Goniodysgenesis
This is the commonest cause of primary glaucoma in dogs in the UK. It most com-
 a ssd xa a   a  a s 
Z
M
quently encountered in some types of anterior-segment dysgenesis. Affected breeds
include the Basset Hound, Bouvier des Flandres, Great Dane, Samoyed, Siberian
工
Husky, spaniels (English and American Cocker, English and Welsh Springer) retrievers
(Flatcoated, Golden and Labrador) and terriers (Dandie Dinmont and Welsh).
Z
E
G
'Open-angle' glaucoma
This is the type seen in the Norwegian Elkhound and possibly other breeds, including
the Miniature and Toy Poodle in the UK. In the USA it has also been well documented
in a laboratory strain of Beagle. It is rare, but may be under-diagnosed.
Management of primary glaucoma
●Seek immediate referral to a specialist centre
● Both surgical and medical treatment may be needed (see Management of Glaucoma.
this section, pp 150-151).
● Long term management may include prophylactic treatment of the second eye before
any clinical signs of raised IOP are present
SECONDARY GLAUCOMA
Abnormal elevation of IOP associated with recognisable antecedent, or concurrent,
eye disease. May be unilateral. Some types, notably primary lens luxation, are breed-
associated, others are not.
Lens-associated
Lens-induced uveitis
Lens-induced uveitis with secondary glaucoma usually occurs because of a penetrat
ing injury to the lens and consequent release of lens protein (phacoclastic uveitis).
Primary lens luxation (PLL)
lens may also luxate as a complication of other types of glaucoma, so advice should
be sought if unsure.
· Terrier breeds are susceptible to primary lens luxation {Jack Russell Terrier, Wire
and Smooth Fox Terrier, Sealyham Terrier, Tibetan Terrier, Miniature Bull Terrier
General and Canine Ophthalmology
149
for example). PLL has also been recorded in the Border Collie, in which it is un-
common. The Shar Pei is rarely affected
· The condition has been shown to be an autosomal recessive in the Tibetan Terrier
and is due to an inherent weakness of the lens zonules (suspensory ligament). It is
probably inherited in similar fashion in other susceptible breeds and should always
be considered as a possible diagnosis in young adult terriers (usually 3-6 years) with
ocular redness or pain
● The condition is essentially bilateral, although only one eye may be affected at initial
presentation
●When the lens has moved anteriorly, or is causing pupil block, secondary glaucoma
results and the lens should be removed as a matter of urgency (ie. as an emergency
O
referral)
0
D
● Posterior lens luxations do not necessarily produce glaucoma and surgery in such
Z
M
cases can be delayed, beca use lens removal in this position is technically difficult and
may not be necessary unless the lens moves
· The majority of luxated lenses move anteriorly with time
P
6
Clinical signs of lens luxation (Figure 2.25, p. 59)
● Glaucoma in most cases, therefore usual clinical signs with pain, photophobia,
blepharospasm, lacrimation, redness and dilated unresponsive pupil*
● Greyish strands of prolapsed vitreous may be apparent in pupillary aperture
● The lens is not in its normal position. Look for signs such as instability of the lens
(pbacodenesis), abnormal location of the lens, aphakic crescent, refractile ring at
lens equator *
● Localised corneal oedema if the lens is contacting the cornea, more extensive corneal
Oedema if the intraocular pressure exceeds 40-50 mm Hg*
● Trembling of the iris {iridodenesis) is pathognomonic; it occurs because the iris has
lost the support of the lens*
● May appear to be a unilateral problem, but early signs {e.g. vitreous prolapse or
lens subluxation) or actual lens luxation may be present in the other eye, so always
look carefully at both eyes
Inflammatory
● Following uveitis {a result of, for example, pre-iridal fibrovascular membrane
formation; inflammatory debris, fibrin or haemorrhage in the filtration angle or
tra becular meshwork; iris swelling)
● Adhesions may be in the form of posterior synechiae (iris to lens), if they ring the
entire circumference iris bombe is present
● Adhesions may be peripheral anterior synechiae (iris base to corneoscleral tissue),
usually beca use of pre-iridal fibrova scular membranes
·Anterior synechiae {iris to cornea) are not usually extensive enough to produce
secondary glaucoma
● Secondary glaucoma associated with uveitis and multiple iridociliary cysts is an
unusual problem in the Golden Retriever and Great Dane
*Readily identifiable key featuresi
150
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Neoplastic
from primary tumour elsewhere (most commonly mammary adenocarcinoma)
● Glaucoma is a consequence of fibrovascular membrane formation, blood-aqueous
barrier breakdown, inflammatory material and solid tumour or tumour cells
obstructing the drainage angle
INE
Traumatic
● Blunt, non-penetrating trauma may result in extensive hyphaema, complicated by
glaucoma
● Penetrating trauma may result in glaucoma as a complication of inflammation asso-
口
ciated with the injury and the disruption of the normal intraocular relationships
Z
M
Haemorrhagic
Extensive haemorrhage may compromise the drainage angle with subsequent glau
coma. Note, however, that recurrent haemorrhage may itself be a feature of chronic
zO
glaucoma.
Pigment-associated
The Cairn Terrier and occasionally other breeds of dog fe.g. Labrador Retriever,
Boxer) are subject to a form of abnormal pigment deposition, termed diffuse ocular
melanosis, in middle-aged and older dogs. Glaucoma may develop when accumulated
pigment-filled epithelioid cells, presumed to be melanocytes, block the drainage
angle.
Diagnosis of secondary glaucoma
Breed, history, aetiology and clinical signs
Management of secondary glaucoma
● Seek early expert advice as to initial treatment and subsequent management. All
cases will require referral for initial assessment if the practice lacks facilities for accu
rate measurement of intraocular pressure. The majority of cases will require early
referral if there is a possibility of restoring and retaining vision
● The underlying cause must be identified and, whenever possible, treated
● Surgical and medical options are available, often a combination of both is needed
MANAGEMENT OF GLAUCOMA
Summary of surgical techniques available for glaucoma management
● Aqueous outflow can be increased by means of bypass procedures that provide an
alternative aqueous outflow pathway. Bypass can be achieved with or without the
aid of drainage implants; medium to long-term results are better if implants are used.
● Patients with primary lens luxation invaria bly require surgery to remove the luxated
lens by intracapsular extraction. When the lens is subluxated, phacoemulsification
may be the treatment selected for removal of the lens contents
● Patients with lens luxation secondary to primary glaucoma rarely benefit from lens
General and Canine Ophthalmology
151
removal, as the eye is often blind and enlarged by the time the lens luxates. Enu-
cleation is the preferred option for permanently blind and painful eyes with this
pathogenesis
· Aqueous production can be reduced using laser cyclophotocoagulation or
          
 o   5    
● For end-stage glaucoma where eyes are painful and permanently blind, irrespective
of whether they are enlarged or not, enucleation is the most simple and effective
E
choice
Z
Medical management of acute glaucoma
Osmotic agents
0
● Mannitol 20% is usually used as an emergency therapy to reduce IOP rapidly in
Z
acute glaucoma and also during surgical intraocular procedures
A
● Mannitol is administered intravenously at a dose rate of 1-2g/kg over 20-30
工
IH
minutes, and will produce ocular hypotension within minutes
● When used prior to intraocular surgery, mannitol should be used some 30-60
P
minutes prior to surgery for maximum effect. Repeat in six hours if necessary
GE
● State of hydration should be monitored, particularly in small dogs, and consider-
able caution should be exercised if there is pre-existing renal disease
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
● Usually used as part of long-term management
● Topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (dorzolamide and brinzolamide) work well
for moderate increases of IOP
● There appear to be no systemic side effects, which represents a considera ble advance
on previous treatments
● For dorzolamide, one drop three to four times daily is required for 24-hour control
and, for brinzolamide, one drop two to four times daily in the same time period
Prostaglandin analogues
● These drugs increase uveoscleral outflow, but should be used with caution when
there is a possibility of uveitis
● The best known is latanoprost, which is expensive, but it is used only once or twice
daily. Travaprost is an alternative choice used at the same application rate
● They may be used in conjunction with topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and are
usually reserved for the more severe cases of glaucoma
· Both agents are very effective at lowering the IOP, albeit with intense pupil
constriction as a side effect of treatment in dogs
LENS
EMBRYOLOGY
The lens develops from surface ectoderm, and four distinct stages are apparent:
1 Formation of the lens placode
 2  Formation of the lens vesicle
152
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
3 Formation of the primary lens fibres
 4  Formation of the secondary lens fibres
Primitive vascular supply
● The hyaloid system (HA) extends from the developing retina to the posterior aspect
of the lens where it divides into a capillary network that invests the lens, known as
the tunica vasculosa lentis (TVL)
E
● The posterior part of the vascular system disappears some 2-3 weeks after birth,
Z
For most of the animal's life, therefore, the lens is avascular
●Any parts of the primitive vascular system remaining in situ eight weeks after birth
口
will persist for life
Z
M
FEATURES OF THE LENS
IH
Z
O
● Biconvex structure made up of lens fibres, contained within an elastic capsule. In
E
the adult lens there is a single layer of epithelial cells beneath the anterior lens capsule
G
● The lens grows throughout life by the production of lens fibres from epithelial cells
in the equatorial region. The epithelial cells turn inward and elongate to become
secondary lens fibres. Old fibres are compressed centrally into a solid nucleus while
younger ones form a softer cortex
●Avascular, but meta bolically active
● Naturally-occurring lens tumours are unrecognised in the dog
● Consists of approximately 65% water and 35% protein. Soluble proteins (crys-
tallins) predominate with lesser quantities of insoluble albuminoids. The insoluble
proteins increase as the lens ages, with concomitant decrease in the soluble proteins
EXAMINATION
● In the normal animal, pen light and slit lamp examination of the lens following
topical application of one drop of mydriatic (tropicamide) will reveal details of the
anterior and posterior lens sutures, the corticonuclear junction and Mittendorf's dot.
Mittendorf's dot is located the posterior lens capsule, beneath and between the
ventral suture lines, which marks the original attachment of the hyaloid artery.
● In older animals, ruclear sclerosis, a normal feature of ageing that affects the lens
nucleus, is apparent (Figures 3.52(a,b) and 3.53). The lens appears grey on naked
  s  aoo     a 
nuclearcortical interface can be delineated clearly. Senile nuclear sclerosis should be
differentiated from the true opacities of cataract in which lens opacities appear as
black silhouettes with distant direct ophthalmoscopy.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
153
GY
[a]
CAI
ZD
0
(b)
WT
Figure 3.52(a,b) Senile nuclear sclerosis in an aged Collie Cross. Gross appecrance (a) and
NERAL
appecrance with distant direct ophthalmoscopy (b). The distinction of the nuclecrcortical interface
and the lack of any true opacity are particularly clear with the latter technique. Note that benign
melanosis of the iris is also present.
GE
Figure3.53Senilenuclearsclerosisof
the lens andequatorial cataract lperipheral
vacuoles] in  an  old  Miniature  Long-Haired
Dachshund.
CATARACT
Cataract is defined as any opacity of the lens and/or the lens capsule and is a common
problem in the dog.
Classification (applies to all species)
●Time of onset (e.g. congenital, juvenile, senile)
● Location (e.g. capsular, subcapsular, equatorial, cortical, nuclear, axial, polar)
● Degree of maturation (e.g. incipient, immature, mature, hypermature, Morgagnian)
● Aetiology (e.g. primary and secondary inherited, traumatic, metabolic, nutritional,
toxic, radiation-induced, electrocution, complicated). Complicated cataracts accom-
pany or follow other ocular disease, such as neoplasia, or inflammations, such as
uveitis
Developmental canine cataract
Developmental cataracts are almost certainly congenital (i.e. present from birth) but
they will only be apparent when the eyelids open after birth. They may be inherited,
154
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Or more commonly, non-inherited (as a reaction to intrauterine influences, e.g.
teratogens).
Clinical Findings
 n k  l no li a 'u sl jo ss  i o u
not be associated with other ocular anomalies (e.g. microphthalmos, nystagmus, per-
sistent pupillary membrane, iris abnormalities, persistent hyperplastic primary vitre-
E
ous, retinal dysplasia).
Z
Inherited canine cataract
CA
Primary
D
Primary inherited cataract is associated with no other ocular abnormality and is a rel-
Z
M
atively common cause of canine cataract; both congenital and acquired types are recog-
nised (Figure 3.54). For an up-to-date list of affected breeds see In Practice Supplement
工
on Hereditary Eye Disease.
Z
O
E
G
Figure 3.54 Primary inherited cataract in a Golden Retriever
Posterior polar subcapsular cataract is a common type of inherited
cataract in a number of breeds. The photograph approximates to the
view obtained with distant direct ophthalmoscopy and the cataract
appears as a black silhouette (compare this appearance with that in
Figure 3.52(b))
Secondary
Secondary inherited cataract is associated with other ocular abnormality, for example.
generalised progressive retinal atrophy, retinal dysplasia, persistent pupillary mem-
brane, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous and multiple ocular defects. The
luxated lens of animals with primary lens luxation can also become secondarily
cataractous.
Acquired cataract
●Traumatic: blunt and penetrating injuries
● Metabolic: e.g. diabetes mellitus is a common cause of rapid-onset total bilateral
cataract
· Nutritional: e.g. hand rearing on milk substitutes
● Toxic: e.g. drug-induced and teratogenic
·Radiation and electrocution
· Complicated: e.g. following severe ocular inflammation
Management of cataracts
Potential cataract patients should be referred as early as possible in order to allow
accurate assessment and simplify the surgery.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
155
● Cataract surgery is the only means of treatment at present and is a specialist
procedure
● It is wise to refer cataract cases early for specialist assessment (e.g. fundus exami-
nation, diagnostic imaging, electroretinography). Hypermature cataracts, for
example, are not ideal for surgery as the leakage of lens protein produces low-grade
uveitis {Figure 3.47, p. 137)
should be referred as early as possible, provided their diabetes is under effective
E
control
Z
      e       o
cataracts secondary to other inherited eye diseases such as generalised progressive
0
secondary to, or associated with, uveitis
Z
M
·Prior to referral, the patient should be examined carefully, especially for other
adnexal and ocular abnormalities (e.g. eyelid infections, eyelid tumours, distichia-
sis, KCS, uveitis, GPRA) and for systemic disease (e.g. diabetes melltus)
OP
● Cataract surgery is an elective procedure, so the patient can be prepared thoroughly
● The patient should be of good temperament and easily handled
GE
● The age of the patient is not a contraindication
VItREOUS
Embryologically, development of the vitreous occurs in three stages:
The primary vitreous forms initially, mainly as a primitive mesodermal vascular
2
The secondary vitreous forms the definitive adult vitreous
3 The tertiary vitreous forms the lens zonule
In the normal adult eye, Cloquet's canal is all that remains of the primary vitreous.
The vitreous fills the posterior cavity of the eye; it is a transparent, semi-fluid hydro-
gel which is almost 99% water. Collagen fibrils make up the framework of the vitre-
ous and the collagen content varies between species. Hyaluronic acid interacts with
the collagen network, both to sta bilise the system and to produce a type of molecular
sieve. This means that the normal vitreous excludes large molecules and impedes
others.
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES OF THE CANINE VITREOUS
Persistent primary vitreous
Anterior remnants
● Persistent hyaloid remnants, sometimes with a network of branching ghost vessels,
are normal findings in puppies of a few weeks of age. Hyaloid remnants may not
be obvious without a slit lamp.
● A small spiral tag, or a focal lens opacity (Mittendorf's dot), inferonasal to the con-
fluence of the posterior suture lines, is usually all that is apparent in adults. These
remnants may not be apparent without a slit lamp.
156
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
· Persistence of an extensive hyaloid system in the adult is abnormal and may be asso
ciated with congenital posterior capsular cataracts.
Posterior remnants
The posterior part of the hyaloid artery may persist, usually extending from the central
optic disc into the posterior vitreous within Cloquet's canal. It may or may not contain
blood.
INE
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHpV)
● In this condition there is failure of regression of the foetal vasculature and fibrob-
CA
lastic hyperplasia of mesodermal tissue within the posterior vascular tunic of the
ZD
0
lens. The result is a plaque of fibrovascular tissue on the posterior surface of the
M
lens, with an attached hyaloid stalk, presenting as leukocoria (a white pupil) and
A
interfering with vision (Figure 3.5S{a,b)).
工
● Hereditary PHPV has been described in the Dobermann and Staffordshire Bull
Terrier. It is pleomorphic in both breeds and usually bilateral. For an up-to-date list
0
of affected breeds see In Practice Supplement on Hereditary Eye Disease.
GEI
[a}
(b)
Figure 3.55  (a) Unilateral persistent hyperpla stic primary vitreous with intralenticular haemor-
rhage in an English Mastiff puppy. (b) Total catcract developed in the same eye some months later.
Differential diagnosis of leukocoria
Congenital and developmenta!
· Congenital and early-onset cataract
· Congenital non-attachment and early detachment of the retina
● Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous and other vitreous abnormalities
●Endophthalmitis
Acquired
·Cataract
General and Canine Ophthalmology
157
·Retinal detachment
● Severe vitritis {active inflammation)
●Endophthalmitis
● Chronic degenerative changes of the vitreous (e.g. asteroid hyalosis - see below)
●Neoplasia
ACQUIRED CONDITIONS OF THE CANINE VITREOUS
E
Z
Syneresis
Vitreal liquefaction is known as syneresis. It is a degenerative process associated with
ageing and disease.
0
Z
>
Asteroid hyalosis
L
A
● Asteroid hyalosis is an occasional finding in dogs with no previous history of ocular
工
A
IH
or generalised disease. The condition usually affects only one eye, but can affect
NER
both, and is more frequently encountered in older animals 
Z
O
● The asteroid bodies are calcium soaps (calcium-lipid) attached to the vitreous
 n  i       o  
original position when the eyes are still
● The opacities usually have little or no effect on vision, and the majority are of no
clinical significance
Synchysis scintillans (Figure 3.56)
● This condition is also known as cholesterolosis bulbi. The numerous scintillating
crystals that are present in the vitreous are indeed cholesterol, but the condition is
not associated with systemic dyslipoproteinaemia
+ The vitreous is liquefied and the crystals swirl around the vitreous cavity when the
● The condition is not uncommon and is seen in association with a variety of ocular
insults and diseases (e.g. after intraocular haemorrhage and other inflammatory and
degenerative eye conditions)
+ There is no obvious effect on vision, the condition is non-progressive and treatment
is not required
Figure 3.56 Unilateral synchysis scintillans
in an old Border Collie. This eye had suffered
an intraocular haemorrhage some years previ-
ously when the dog was kicked by a cow.
158
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Vitreous inflammation
·The vitreous can become secondarily involved in the inflammations of neighbour
ing tissues, especially as there is no defined barrier between the aqueous humour
and vitreous or the vitreous and retina
● Vitreous inflammation (vitritis) encompasses a wide range of clinical appearances,
from a few scattered inflammatory cells to vitreal abscessation (endopbthalmitis)
E
Vitreous haemorrhage
Z
● The clinical appearance varies according to the location and amount. At worst, the
CA
O
whole eye appears red as the haemorrhage also fills the anterior chamber
● Fresh blood is readily identified. In time (over months or years), and providing that
口
 no fresh haemorrhage occurs, there is some clearing of the optical pathway and the
Z
M
resorbing blood becomes darker
Summary of the causes of intraocular haemorrhage
Z
● Blunt and penetrating ocular injury
E
· Congenital intraocular anomalies (e.g. Collie eye anomaly, retinal dysplasia,
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous)
soun Aepuoss pue ruounouape se qns sinoun Arewud da) eisedon o
such as haemangiosarcoma and lymphoma)
● Systemic hypertension
● Clotting disorders and vasculopathies
● Inflammatory eye disease (e.g. uveitis, chorioretinitis)
+ Chronic glaucoma
● Toxins and generalised diseases (e.g. sepsis)
● Iatrogenic - as a result of surgery, inappropriate or prolonged drug use (e.g. drugs
a ffecting platelets)
OCULAR FUNDUS
A number of diseases affecting the ocular fundus are inherited or of suspected
inheritance. For an up-to-date list of affected breeds see In Practice Supplement on
Hereditary Eye Disease.
NORMAL GROSS APPEARANCE OF THE FUNDUS (Figures 3.57-3.60)
Topetum
The ocular fundus is that part of the posterior segment of the eye viewed with an oph-
 aueadde un sua Aunu sous snuny aue ou aul pue 'adoosow
most dogs, the fundus is divided into tapetal and non-tapetal areas with the optic nerve
head (ONH) or optic disc usually located at the junction between the two. Fundus
variations relate to age, breed and size of dog as well as to eye colour and coat colour
- the colour variants are related to the amount of pigmentation.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
159
In merle dogs and animals with sub-albinotic eyes, the tapetum is usually absent
(atapetal) and the lack of pigment in these colour-dilute animals allows details of both
retinal and choroidal vessels to be viewed against the creamy white background of the
sclera. A number of other breeds are atapetal and the entire fundus has a non-tapetal
appearance being dark and non-reflective, although sometimes islets of tapetal tissue
 are apparent dorsal to the ONH.
When a tapetum is present, it is located in the dorsal half of the fundus and is of
almost triangular shape, with the base located ventrally. Tapetal colour can be shades
NINE
of yellow, orange, green or blue.
GV
In puppies there is no tapetum, but differentiation of the future tapetal and non-
CAI
tapetal regions is apparent from about four weeks of age onwards, and the fundus is
of adult appearance by about four months of age.
The highest cone density is found in the area centralis, which is a region devoid of
large blood vessels situated lateral and slightly dorsal to the ONH. Rods are the
predominant photoreceptors in the canine retina.
GE
Figure 3.57 Normal Border Collie puppy, six
weeks of age {left eye). The eye is still immature and
the developing tapetum is of blue-grey colouration; the
cdult tapetal colour was yellow in this dog. Note that
the optic nerve head is round as it is unmyelinated at
this stage.
Figure 3.58 Normally pigmented eye of an adult
Border Collie ocular Fundus. The optic nerve head is
located in the tapetal fundus close to the border of the
tapetal and non-tapetal Fundus. The retinal vasculature
is clearly distinguished and there is an incomplete
venous circle on the optic nerve head. The optic nerve
head is myelinated and the physiological pit can be
seen as an obvious dark spot at almost the centre of
the optic nerve head.
160
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
NERAL AND CANINE
OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a)
(b)
the iris (a] is reflected in the fundus (b).
GEI
[a]
[b)
Figure 3.6O(a,b) Subalbinotic eye of a Border Collie. Iris (a] and ocular undus [b]. There is
no tapetum and, in addition to the superficial retinal vessels, the underlying choroidal vessels cre
clearly visible.
Optic nerve head (ONH)
The ONH is approximately circular in puppies, but postnatal myelination produces
a change of shape, so that most of the variations seen in adult dogs are related to
the degree of postnatal myelination. Excessive myelination is referred to as pseudopa-
pilloedema and is most likely to be observed in the Golden Retriever and German
Shepherd Dog. A small round depression, the physiological pit, is usually apparent
in the centre of the ONH and represents the origin of the hyaloid vasculature.
A rim of pigment may surround the ONH in some animals and in those dogs
with a small ONH a distinct reflective surround, known as corus, is a normal
variant.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
161
Blood vasculature
The dog has a holangiotic retinal blood supply. There are usually some 3-4 primary
retinal veins and satellite arterioles located on the retinal surface. It is possible to dis-
tinguish these vessels as the arterioles are of smaller diameter and lighter colour than
the veins. Smaller vessels cannot be so readily distinguished.
The arterioles, some 15-20 in number, radiate peripherally from their peripapillary
origin, whereas veins and venules can be traced to a complete, or incomplete, venous
circle on the surface of the ONH. Choroidal vessels fpredominantly choroidal arteri-
NE
oles), perforating the tapetum to supply the retina, may be viewed against the tapetal
GY
background as fine dots ('stars of Winslow'). In colour-dilute dogs in which the fundus
lacks pigment and there is no tapetum, the choroidal vessels can be seen radiating from
the ONH in an organised spoke-like fashion.
0
D
Z
M
NORMAL HISTOLOGY OF THE RETINA
The retina has ten layers: the outermost layer, the retinal pigment epithelium, which
P
6
GE
whereas the remaining nine layers, the neurosensory retina, develop from the inner
layer of the optic cup (also ectoderm). The pigment epithelium is pigmented except
over the tapetum, as is the case in all animals with a tapetal fundus.
Retinal layers
1
 Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
21
 Photoreceptors (rods and cones)
3 External limiting layer
4
 Outer nuclear layer
5
 Outer plexiform layer
6
 Inner nuclear layer
7
 Inner plexiform layer
8
 Ganglion cell layer
9 Optic nerve fibre layer
10  Internal limiting layer
1 = retinal pigment epithelium
2-10 = neurosensory retina
DEVELOPMENTAL CONDITIONS OF THE CANINE RETINA
AnD CHOROID
Collie eye anomaly (CEA) (Figs. 3.60 and 3.61)
+Inherited congenital condition.
● The key feature of choroidal hypoplasia is inherited as a single autosomal recessive
trait
· Affects the Rough Collie, Smooth Collie, Shetland Sheepdog, Border Collie and
Lancashire Heeler. The incidence in the first three breeds is very high (Figures 3.61
and 3.62(a,b))
162
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
NINE
OPHTHALMOLOGY
CAI
Figure 3.61 Collie eye anomaly in a six-week-old
AND
Border Collie puppy (left eye). The choroidal hypopla-
sia forms a very obvious ‘pale patch' lateral to the
NERAL
optic nerve head.
0
GE
(b)
[a}
Figure 3.62 (a) Collie eye anomaly in a Rough Collie. In the right eye there is a large papil-
kry colobomatous defect and an extensive area of choroidal hypoplasia ('pale patch') adjoining
it. (b} In the left eye there is also choroidal hypoplasia lateral to the optic nerve head and a small
peripapillary coloboma ventrally.
Clinical signs
● The condition is almost always bilateral and the two eyes are usually dissimilar.
● Easiest to diagnose in S-6 week-old puppies; the tapetum has not developed in
puppies of this age and so choroidal hypoplasia is more obvious. It is important to
stress the value of examination of 5-6 week-old puppies, for later development of
the fundus may obscure the mild lesion and lead to the erroneous supposition that
the animal is genotypically and phenotypically normal, whereas it is, in fact, only
phenotypically normal. The inappropriate designation of go normal has been
applied to dogs of this type.
●Most dogs show no obvious visual disability, but some animals {<10%) are
General and Canine Ophthalmology
163
obviously visually impaired or blind, usually because of intraocular haemorrhage or
retinal detachment.
· The classical feature of CEA is a 'pale patch' of choroidal hypoplasia ± retinal and
scleral involvement. The extent of the hypoplasia is variable, but, irrespective of size,
always involves an area lateral to the optic disc. The retinal vessels may be of bizarre
appearance {excessive tortuosity, preretinal vessels) and any visible choroidal vessels
in the affected areas are abnormal.
● Colobomas, if present, are located in or near the optic nerve head. They may be the
only observa ble abnormality when postnatal development has obscured minor areas
of choroidal hypoplasia.
Z
● Intraocular haemorrhage and retinal detachment are the major reasons for visual
O
ND
M
A
Treatment
There is no treatment for CEA, so advice to breeders is crucial.
Retinal dysplasia (RD)
● Retinal dysplasia may be inherited and there are two types: total and multifocal
(focal and geographic lesions)
· Breeds affected by total retinal dysplasia {TRD) in the UK include the English
Springer Spaniel, Labrador Retriever, Bedlington and Sealyham Terrier (Figure
3.63(a,b))
● Multifocal retinal dysplasia (MRD) in the UK is most commonly seen in Spaniel
breeds (American Cocker, Cavalier King Charles and English Springer), Hungarian
 Puli, Golden and Labrador Retrievers and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
in the breeds that have been studied (Figure 3.64)
· Geograpbic retinal dysplasia in the UK is most likely to be encountered in the
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Golden Retriever and Labrador Retriever (Figure
3.65)
● Retinal dysplasia can also be non-inherited, and is either present from birth or
induced in early perinatal life by, for example, infection, irradiation, intrauterine
trauma, drugs and toxins
Clinical signs
● The clinical signs of retinal dysplasia (RD) are variable and may alter {remodelling)
● Total retinal dyplasia (TRD) is associated with congenital non-attachment and
infundibular detachment of the retina, and affected animals are blind at an early
age
● In animals with multifocal retinal dysplasia (MRD), both focal and geographic,
vision is not usually affected, but haemorrhage is occasionally observed from
abnormal retinal vessels in dogs with the geographic type. Multifocal lesions should
be differentiated from inactive post-inflammatory chorioretinopathy lesions
Treatment
There is no treatment for RD, but advice to breeders and litter screening is important
for the inherited types.
164
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
GEnERAL ANd CANinE
OPHTHALMOLOGY
(b)
Figure 3.63(a,b) Total retinal dysplasia in
α Labrador Retriever puppy. The non-attached
retina is obvious behind the lens. Both eyes were
[a}]
involved and the puppy was blind.
Figure 3.64 Mulifocal retinal dysplasic in
cn English Springer Spaniel with the multifocal
type of retinal dysplasia. If it were not For the
presence of vermiform lesions, the focal dys-
plastic areas could easily be confused with inac-
tive chorioretinopathylesions.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
165
INE
CA
O
Figure 3.65  Geographic type of multifocal retinal
0
dysplasia. A Cavalier King Charles Spaniel with the
>
geographic type in the typical location some distance
L
dorsal to the optic nerve head and involving the dorsal
A
primary blood vessels.
NERAL
GEI
ACQUIRED CONDITIONS OF THE CANINE RETINA
AND CHOROID
Generalised progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
● Many different types in this group, e.g. photoreceptor dysplasia (early onset) and
photoreceptor degeneration (later onset)
   a a   u e o  s a o
Miniature Long-haired Dachshund, Miniature and Toy Poodle and Labrador
Retriever
● GPRA is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
● Electroretinography (ERG) is a sensitive method for early diagnosis
Clinical signs and ophthalmoscopic appearance (Figure 3.66)
● The clinical features include progression from night blindness (ryctalopia) to day
blindness {bemeralopia) and eventual total blindness
● Bilateral and symmetrical retinal changes
· Tapetal hyperreflectivity and attenuation of the retinal blood vessels
● Patchy depigmentation of the non-tapetal fundus (NTF)
● The pupillary light response is gradually lost as the condition advances. Also note
that it may still be present when no functional vision remains
● Secondary cataracts are common in advanced cases
● Secondary atrophy of the optic nerve can be observed in advanced cases
Treatment
There is no treatment, but prevention by selective breeding is a realistic aim.
166
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
CA
O
Figure  3.66   Generalised  progressive  rtincl
口
atrophy [progressive rod-cone degeneration] in a Toy
Poodle. The undus changes were bilateral and sym-
metrical, with attenuation of the retinal vessels, retinal
工
hyperreflectivity and pallor of the optic nerve head.
IH
Z
O
E
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED)
● Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy, originally known as central progressive retinal
atrophy (CPRA), is a condition in which the primary defect lies with the retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE). Autofluorescent lipopigment (lipofuscin) accumulates
within the amelanotic RPE of the tapetal fundus.
● This condition has been described in the Briard, collie breeds {Border, Smooth and
Rough), Cocker Spaniel, Golden and Labrador Retrievers and Polish Lowland
Sheepdog.
● ERG is not helpful as an early diagnostic tool.
● In some of the breeds studied in detail the condition appears to be an example of
the inherited lysosomal storage disease ceroid lipofuscinosis.
● Poor vision in bright light or daylight and affected dogs often collide with station-
ary objects. There is usually a slow and progressive loss of central vision and the
changes are bilateral, but not usually symmetrical
● Retinal changes occur from about 14 months of age onwards, but the age at which
clinical signs are apparent is quite variable, ranging from 2-6 years of age
● The early ophthalmoscopic features consist of small light-brown spots within the
tapetal fundus. Later in the evolution of the condition, the spots increase in number
and coalesce (cobweb-like)
● Tapetal hyperreflectivity and attenuation of the retinal vessels are obvious later
features
● The pupillary light response may remain normal and is not always lost
· Some dogs retain partial vision, whereas others become blind
Treatment
● Vitamin E deficient diets have produced lesions of similar appearance in experi-
mental animals, and there may be an association between low plasma vitamin E
levels and the development of RPED
General and Canine Ophthalmology
167
● Vitamin E has anti-oxidant properties that help to prevent damage from free radi-
cals and may also have a primary role in the maintenance of normal retinal function
● It is possible that vitamin therapy may be of value in the early stages of disease
● There is no treatment for dogs with established fundus changes
GY
CAI
01
GEI
[a)
[b)
Figure 3.67(a,b) Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy in a Cocker Spaniel. The changes were
bilateral, but not symmetrical. The right eye has been photographed in white light. The Fellow (lef)
eye has been photographed in blue light to reduce the Hashback from the hyperreflective retina.
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD)
● Sudden onset of blindness with bilateral, dilated, fixed pupils and, initially,
no detectable ophthalmoscopic abnormality. Ophthalmoscopically visible retinal
degeneration occurs within weeks or months
● Total extinction of the ERG at the outset of blindness is pathognomonic and
distinguishes SARD from optic and retrobulbar neuritis and most types of CNS
neoplasia
● Essentially an uncommon disease of rather overweight adult dogs, especially female
(6-14 years)
● There may be sub-clinical hepatopathy and hypera drenocorticism
● Affected animals should be subjected to laboratory screen and their blood pressure
should be checked - any systemic disease detected can be treated
Management of SARD
No treatment is available at present to restore vision or prevent the retinal changes,
but it is important to differentiate SARD from other potential causes of sudden blind-
ness, some of which may be amena ble to treatment.
Inflammatory conditions of the fundus
Active
Active fundus inflammation {Figure 3.68) is associated with some or all of vasculitis,
168
 Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
perivascular cuffing and poorly defined opacities near blood vessels, pre-retinal
exudates, vitritis and optic neuritis. Animals with bilateral optic neuritis are blind.
Active inflammation is usually less obvious than inactive and is not observed with
 anything like the same frequency.
NINE
GY
CAI
PHTHALMOLO
Figure 3.68Active inflammation of the ocular
E
Uundus in a Labrador Retriever with distemper. Multi-
ple Focal lesions were present in the tapetal fundus of
both eyes and the dog also had neurological signs.
Inactive
Inactive post-inflammatory lesions (Figures 3.69 and 3.70) consist of either focal or
diffuse changes in the tapetal and non-tapetal fundus. In the tapetal fundus, there may
be sharply-demarcated hyperreflective foci of variable size. Pigment-cell proliferation
results in pigment placed centrally in such foci. Disseminated inflammation can
produce changes in the whole of the tapetal fundus.
In the non-tapetal fundus, focal and, less commonly, diffuse depigmentation is
apparent. The blood vessels crossing affcted areas are sometimes tortuous and
 constricted and perivascular pigment may be present.
Other possible findings include retinal detachment, vitreal changes and optic
atrophy. Inactive chorioretinopathies are a common finding in many breeds of dog,
especially working Border Collies.
Figure 3.69Inactive inflammation{focal chori
cretinopathy) of the ocularFundus in a Border Collie.
There was a history of heavy roundworm infestation
[Toxocara canis) as a puppy. Only one eye was
affected.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
169
INE
Figure 3.70  Inactive inflammation (diffuse chori-
oretinopathy] of the ocular Uundus in a Border Collie.
This is the end stage of severe retinal degeneration,
0
口
irrespective of the cause. In addition to the panretinal
Z
>
degeneration there is gross vascular attenuation and
L
optic nerve atrophy and the eye is blind.
NERAI
P
6
GE
Aetiology and diagnosis
● Establishing the cause of active fundus inflammation is not always easy
· The causes of fundus inflammation have been summarised under Uveitis {this
section, pp 132-135)
● Complete physical examination, blood samples (routine haematology, serum pro-
teins, biochemistry and serology) and specific tests, if available, are best undertaken
when the inflammation is active
● Imaging techniques are sometimes helpful if the ocular media are cloudy and if
retinal detachment is suspected
Treatment
 Depends on finding the cause
Retinal detachment
The embryological intraretinal space remains throughout life, and the neuroretina is
only loosely attached to the retinal pigment epithelium, so that the two may separate
to produce a retinal detachment. The retina is firmly attached (or inserted) at the ora
ciliaris retinae and also around the optic nerve head, and the gel-like consistency of
the normal vitreous helps to hold the retina in place.
Causes of retinal detachment
Congenita!
 For example, associated with CEA, RD, PHPV and multiple ocular defects. There is
a range of presentations, from congenital non-attachment to detachment.
Traumatic
For example, blunt trauma. Retinal tears may be produced because of the different
rates at which the vitreous and the coats of the eye change shape. Retinal tears and
holes usually result in a rhegmatogenous detachment.
170
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Intraocular problems
For example, the development of fibrous vitreoretinal adhesions following severe
inflammation may produce a traction detacbment. The retina is also more likely to
detach in the presence of severe vitreal degeneration and syneresis.
intraocular and extraocuiar space-occupying lesions
For example, choroidal tumours and extraocular tumours can push the retina off,
resulting in a solid detachment.
Z
Systemic problems
O
Systemic hypertension (primary and secondary) is associated with the accumulation of
D
subretinal fluid, which lifts the retina off. Initially there are bullous detachments and
Z
M
later, without treatment, there is total detachment. Detachments as a consequence of
systemic hypertension are examples of serous or exudative detachment (Figure 3.71).
The subretinal fluid has the composition of a transudate initially, but later may become
more exudative in nature.
Z
Systemic hypertension is also associated with changes in choroidal and retinal vas-
E
culature and retinal haemorrhage. Causes of secondary systemic hypertension include
renal disease, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, phaeochromocytoma and
dia betes mellitus.
Other causes of serous detachment include the uveodermatological syndrome
and severe inflammation (e.g. systemic mycoses and parasitic infections such as
toxoplasmosis).
Figure 3.71 Total retinal detachment in α
Collie Cross with hyperadrenocorticism cnd
associated systemic hypertensive disease.
Anomalies and abnormalities of retinal vasculature
Developmental
Changes of colour, calibre and tortuosity may be present in the retinal vessels of
animals with congenital heart disease and shunts.
Acquired
Anaemia, cyanosis, hyperviscosity, polycythaemia, ocular ischaemia, systemic hyper
tension, diabetic retinopathy and lipaemia retinalis can all be recognised ophthalmo-
scopically (Figures 3.72(a,b) and 3.73).
General and Canine Ophthalmology
171
OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a)
(b)
Figure 3.72(a,b)] Hyperviscosity syndrome in a Toy Poodle with the congenital heart disease
tetralogy of Fallot. The external eye (a] and Fundus (b] are illustrated. The dog was cyanotic cnd
compensatory polycythaemic was the reason For the hyperviscosity.
GEI
Figure 3.73 Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia in
an Old English Sheepdog. Note the extreme pallor
of the retinal vessels, giving a spurious impression of
cttenuation.
Retinal haemorrhage (see vitreous haemorrhage, this section, pp 155-158)
OPtIC NErvE
The shape, size and colour of the canine optic nerve head is variable. The variation
can largely be related to the age of the animal and the extent of medullation {i.e. non-
myelinated and round in young puppies). The optic nerve head (optic disc, or papilla)
is the bulbar portion of the optic nerve. The retrobulbar and cranial portions of the
nerve cannot be examined ophthalmoscopically. Congenital anomalies of the optic
nerve head are rare and include aplasia, hypoplasia and coloboma.
172
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
ACQUIRED ABNORMALITIES OF THE CANINE OPTIC NERVE
Optic neuritis or papillitis (intraocular)
History, ophthalmoscopic signs and diagnosis (Figure 3.74(a,b))
● An uncommon problem which presents as sudden blindness or defective vision. May
be unilateral, or bilateral
● Affected eyes are blind during the active inflammation, with an impaired or absent
INE
PLR and a fixed dilated pupil
· Optic nerve head appears enlarged and hyperaemic; the normal physiological pit is
CA
O
a bsent
● Focal haemorrhages may be present within or surrounding the optic nerve head
0
● Peripapillary retinal oedema or detachment
Z
M
AL!
● May be cellular infiltrates in posterior vitreous
A
●Normal ERG
[a}
(b)
Figure 3.74(a,b) Optic neuritis in a Collie Cross with toxoplasmosis. Active stage of inflam
mation (a] and the same eye afer treatment (b). The pathological conus [reflective halo surround-
ing the optic nerve head) apparent in (b) indicates the extent of the peripapillary oedema during
the active phase.
Treatment
See Retrobulbar optic neutritis p. 173.
Aetiology
● Systemic disease, e.g. distemper, toxoplasmosis, leptospirosis
● Local disease, e.g. orbital cellulitis, orbital abscess 
● Trauma, e.g. to globe or orbit
● Neoplasia, e.g. retrobulbar neoplasia
● Neurological, e.g. granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME)
● Toxic and metabolic
● Idiopathic, presumed immune mediated
General and Canine Ophthalmology
173
Retrobulbar optic neuritis (retrobulbar)
Ophthalmoscopic signs
● Uncommon, dilated pupil {unilateral or bilateral) and blindness but the optic nerve
head appears normal
·Normal ERG
Differential diagnosis of retrobulbar optic neuritis
+SARD
INE
· Disorders of the central nervous system
Treatment of optic neuritis (both intraocular and extraocular]
O
+ Urgent referral necessary if the diagnosis is in doubt
D
● Drug treatment for optic neuritis and retrobulbar optic neuritis is the same
●High levels of systemic corticosteroids {usually oral prednisolone at 1-2 mg/kg each
24 hours)
● Rapid response to therapy gives better prognosis than failure to respond, but, for
all cases, the prognosis is guarded, as permanent damage occurs rapidly and relapses
are common
● Monitor carefully and check for systemic or CNS involvement
● A region of peripapillary hyperreflectivity or even optic atrophy may develop as a
sequel to optic neuritis and the animal may recover vision, be partially sighted or
blind
Optic nerve neoplasia
● Primary tumours (e.g. glioma, meningioma, astrocytoma) are rare, but an expand-
ing brain tumour may compress the intracranial optic nerve
· Meningioma is the commonest primary tumour and can involve the optic nerve
by primary neoplastic transformation of cells within the optic nerve sheath, or
secondary extension of intracranial neoplasia
· Infiltration of the optic nerve by tumour cells can also occur, most commonly in
animals with lymphoma
Oedema of the optic nerve (papilloedema)
Papilloedema is a clinical sign, not a diagnosis, and is usually the result of raised
intracranial pressure.
Aetiology
● Congenital or acquired hydrocephalus
● Intracranial and extracranial space-occupying lesions which may be infectious,
inflammatory or neoplastic in origin
● Ischaemia (e.g. severe systemic hypertension)
Clinical signs and ophthalmoscopy
· Unusual, affected animals usually have gross neurological signs (e.g. behavioural
changes and locomotor problems)
● May be associated with visual disturbance, including vision loss, depending on the
aetiology
● Swollen optic nerve head, with an indistinct and elevated margin (Figure 3.75)
174
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● May be venous engorgement and increased tortuosity of the retinal vessels. The
retinal vessels may deviate as they cross the margins of the optic nerve head
Differential diagnosis
● Differentiate from optic and retrobul bar neuritis
● Differentiate from pseudopapilloedema, a normal variant as a consequence of
marked myelination of the optic nerve head that is common in German Shepherd
Dogs and Golden Retrievers
●Vision may be affected and so may the pupillary light response, reflecting the under-
CAI
lying aetiopathology, rather than any specific feature of papilloedema
0
Treatment
ALM
Remove the primary cause, if possible
NERAL
HTH,
0
GE
(b)
[a}
Figure 3.75(a,b) Papilloedema in the right eye of a Papillon with a brain tumour in the chics
mal region. Optic atrophy was present in the left eye of the Papilon in Figure 3.75.
Optic nerve atrophy
● The end stage of severe insults such as inflammation, chronic optic nerve oedema
and ischaemia (Figures 3.70 and 3.7S(b)
● The changes may not develop for some weeks after the initial insult or disease
process
● Optic atrophy is quite frequently a complication of eyeball prolapse, so a suitable
guarded prognosis should be given in such cases, even when the eye has been
replaced rapidly into the orbit
Ophthalmoscopic signs
The optic nerve head usually appears pale and shrunken (loss of myelin results in
a round optic nerve head, rather like that of a puppy or cat) and the eye is blind.
General and Canine Ophthalmology
175
Treatment
There is no treatment.
Cranial nerve supply to the eye and adnexa (see Appendix 4)
OPHTHALMOLOGY
SECTION 4
FELINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
FELINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
FelineOphthalmology
179
INTRODUCTION
The cat has a relatively large eye (Figure 4.2{a,b)), which is well adapted to vision in
dim light, because of good light-collecting features such as a large cornea and lens, a
rod-dominated retina and a tapetum cellulosum. The eyes are placed frontally, and
about 67% of the optic nerve fibres cross at the optic chiasma, so there is reasonable
binocular vision. This compares with a 50% crossover in humans and a 75% crossover
inthedog.
FELINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a)
[b)
[c)
P]
Figure 4.l(a,b,c,d) Gross cross specimen of Feline globe (a) and Fundus (b), histology of the
cornea, limbus, iris and ciliary body (c), retina and choroid (d] (with acknowledgements to J. R. B.
Mould].
180
 Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
(b)
[a)
OPHTHALMOLO
Figure 4.2(a,b) In the cat illustrated in (a) the eyes were normal and the subtle anisocoric
[inequality of pupil size] was of central origin [diffuse inflammationj. In (b] a normal external eye
is shown.
ANATOMICAL DIFFERENCES FROM THE DOG
FELINE 
● There are no true eyelashes, and modified skin hairs close to the upper eyelid margin
serve in this capacity
● The third eyelid has both striated and smooth muscle, so that there is some volun.
tary control over its movements
● The cornea almost fills the palpebral aperture, the third eyelid is unobtrusive and
there is little visible bulbar conjunctiva
● It is possible to view the drainage angle directly without needing to use a goniolens
● The iris is generally less heavily pigmented than that of the dog, and the distinction
between the pupillary and ciliary zones is not always clearly defined
● The pupil is round when dilated and a vertical slit when constricted
● The tapetum is larger and more reflective than that of the dog, and the iridocytes
{tapetal cells) are rich in riboflavin
● The optic nerve head is almost always unmyelinated, so it is round in shape and
slightly recessed
The combination of voluntary control over third-eyelid movement, a very effective
pupil-constriction mechanism and a reflective tapetum make it essential to examine
the cat's eye, and the fundus especially, with as low a light intensity as possible. This
is also the case if a mydriatic is used. Subtle fundus lesions will be obscured if the light
is too bright because of the mirror-like effect of the tapetum. As emphasised previ
ously, physical and neurological examination may be just as important as ophthalmic
examination in determining if the eyes and their adnexa are normal (Figure 4.2a,b).
The common feline ocular and adnexal conditions, and those that are important
to recognise because of the serious implications of misdiagnosis, are summarised in
Box 4.1.
Feline Ophthalmology
181
Box 4.1  Common and important feline ocular and adnexal conditions
All types of trauma
Congenital eyelid defects, such as medial lower eyelid entropion (Persian cats) and,
kss commonly, partial absence in all breeds (oolobomas)
Conjunctival problems such as ophihaimia neonatorum (including its complications,
e.g. symblepharon} and conjunctivis (usually of infectious origin - Chlamydophila
felis or FHV-1}
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Ulcerative keratitis (including herpetic keratitis), proliferative keratoconjunctivitis and
corneal sequestrum
A e d  uo s yo sn Asa s o a  wy y
loxoplasmosis - as well as idiopathic and traumatic
 Neoplasia, notably squamous cell carcinoma (usually eyelids), iris melanoma and the
many potential ocular manifestations of lymphoma
 Common generalised problems with ocular manifestations include systemic hyper-
tensive disease and taurine deficiency. Less common, but important to recognise, are
FELINE 
dysautonomia, various types of lysosomal storage disease and hyperlipoproteinaemia
(hypertriglyceridaemia and chylomicronaemia)
GLOBE AND ORBIT
· As in the dog there is an open orbit, and the supraorbital ligament completes the
bony orbital rim laterally
● The globe fits snugly in the orbit, and there is little extraorbital fat
Globe proptosis and prolapse
● Orbital/periorbital trauma may result in orbital haemorrhage, fracture of the bony
orbit/zygomatic arch/mandible and proptosis (forward displacement of the globe) or
prolapse (displacement of the globe from the orbit)
● Proptosis may be a complication of orbital haemorrhage, especially when there is
damage to the orbital rete
● Globe prolapse is less likely in cats than dogs, as the eye is set quite deeply within
the well-defined orbit. Considerable force is required to dislocate the globe from the
 orbit in most breeds of cat, the Persian cat being an exception
● It is important to check for other injuries, such as facial fractures, particularly involv-
ing the lower jaw
● The technique for globe replacement is substantially similar to that in dogs. The
prognosis for retention of vision is very poor and almost 100% of cats will not retain
long-term vision in the affected eye
Enucleation
●The encircling skin incision must be closer to the lids than is necessary in the dog,
especially so at the medial canthus, where skin mobility is limited.
182
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Visualisation of the deep orbit is less easy in cats than dogs, so the optic nerve is
clamped blind and it is most important to avoid excessive traction on the globe and
optic nerve during removal.
·Excessive traction while the optic nerve is intact may cause damage to the other
optic nerve via the optic chiasma, so that the fellow eye is blinded at the time of
surgery.
● Otherwise the surgery is similar to that in the dog.
Orbital neoplasia
GY
Clinical signs
OPHTHALMOLOC
Some 90% of orbital tumours in cats are malignant. Orbital tumours are often of
epithelial origin {usually squamous cell carcinoma), or reach the orbit by extension
from neighbouring tissues fe.g. from the eye into the orbit, along the optic nerve into
the orbit, from the nose into the orbit) (Figure 4.3). Tumours may also reach the orbit
as a result of spread (metastasis) from elsewhere (e.g. multicentric lymphoma).
Management
All cases are best referred if there is a prospect of retaining a functional eye, or if the
FELINE 
extent {and nature) of the tumour is unclear. Orbital tumours in cats are difficult to
manage and the prognosis is usually grave.
Figure 4.3Orbital neoplasia in a Domestic
Shorthair. There is prominence of the third eyelid
and dorsolateral deviation of the right globe.
Tcken in conjunction with the hcemorrhagic
discharge From the right nostril, the primary site
ncsal with orbital extension through themedial
orbital wall. The tumour was subsequently con-
irmed as a nasal adenocarcinoma at post-
mortem examination.
EYElidS
CONDITIONS OF THE THIRD EYELID
(NICTITATING MEMBRANE)
Generalised disease
Dysautonomia
Dysautonomia (an autonomic polygangliopathy) may be associated with unilateral or
 bilateral third eyelid prominence, although dilated pupils and absence of the pupillary
light response are the most constant ocular features.
Feline Ophthalmology
183
Chronic diarrhoea
Chronic diarrhoea is sometimes associated with a self-limiting, bilateral, third eyelid
protrusion. The cause is unknown. Viral disease has been suggested, but never proved.
Debility, weight loss and reduction in the amount of retrobulbar fat, do not produce
the obvious third eyelid prominence seen in the dog.
Prominence of the third eyelid - summary of causes
+ Anatomical: e.g. small eye
● Pain: produces globe retraction and consequent protrusion of the third eyelid
·Inflammation and infection: extensive symblepharon formation may be associated
90
with enophthalmos and third eyelid prominence
· Systemic and generalised problems: e.g. tetanus, dysautonomia and chronic
diarrhoea
OPHTHALM
·Primary and secondary neoplasia:very rare
●Retrobulbar space occupying lesions: e.g. inflammation and orbital neoplasia
● Horner's syndrome: third eyelid prominence, together with enophthalmos, narrow-
ing of the palpebral fissure, ptosis and miosis
● Drug-induced: e.g. phenothiazine tranquillisers
FELINE 
CONDITIONS OF THE UPPER AND LOWER EYELIDS
Ophthalmia neonatorum
The eyelids of neonatal kittens remain fused for some time after birth {usually 412
days). Occasionally, infection behind the closed eyelids results in neonatal conjunc
tivitis (opbtbalmia neonatorum), which is invariably caused by feline herpes virus
{FHV-1).
Clinical signs and complications
●Swelling behind the closed eyelids often with escape of pus medially (Figure 4.4(a))
● Other signs of FHV-1 infection as, for example, respiratory disease
· The inflammation caused by FHV-1 is severe and may result in symblepharon,
occluded lacrimal puncta, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, corneal ulceration, perforation,
endophthalmitis and pa nophthalmitis
Treatment
● The eyelids can be opened with a blunt-tipped probe or blunt-tipped tenotomy scis-
sors as described previously in the dog. The eyelids should be eased open starting
in the region of the medial canthus, working from medial to lateral, and carefully
cleaning away any purulent material (Figure 4.4(b))
● A short course of topical antibiotic will be required and any ocular discharge should
be removed before antibiotic is applied
● Adequate supportive care should be provided
● If the condition is not treated promptly, the severity of the inflammation results in
complications (Figure 4.4(c))
184
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
FELINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a)
(b)
Figure 4.4 (a) Ophthaimic neonatorum
caused by Feline herpesvirus (FHV-1). There was
considerable swelling behind the Fused eyelids
and beads of pus escaped from the medial
cspect.This kitten and the others in thelitter were
systemically ill and had respiratory disease. (b]
All the kitens received nursing care, their eyelids
were opened prematurely and they received
topical antibiotic for any secondary bacterial
infection. (c) Only one kitten had developed
complications prior to referral, in the Form of
(c)
globe rupture and secondary endophthalmitis.
Symblepharon (see under Conjunctiva, this section, pp 189-90
Agenesis and coloboma
Complete (agenesis) or partial (coloboma) absence of the eyelid or eyelids is not
uncommon in cats (Figure 4.5).
Figure 4.5 Partial absence of the upper
lateral eyelid. This is the usual site of eyelid
colobomas in the cat and is sometimes much
more subtle, consisting only of a poorly-defined
or incomplete eyelid margin. When the de-
fect is large, secondary corneal pathology is
inevitable. Corrective blepharoplastic surgery is
required.
Management
● Treatment consists of cleaning and ocular lubrication until the animal is old enough
for surgery
Feline Ophthalmology
185
● Repair may be effected by a number of techniques, depending upon the extent of
the defect. Cases with large defects that cannot be repaired by primary closure should
be referred. In some breeds, such as the Burmese, eyelid defects may be associated
with dermoids
Entropion
Entropion is relatively uncommon in cats and is usually a result of chronic inflamma-
tion, or of spastic type associated with pain. Persian cats are the exception, as they
may have congenital entropion, usually of the lower medial eyelid, which may require
corrective surgery (Figure 4.6).
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Treatment
●Perform surgical correction for anatomical (Hotz-Celsus technique) and cicatricial
 s    a r  g s (t )
FELINE 
Figure 4.6 Entropion affecting the lower
medial eyelid in α Persian Cat.This is the
commonest site for anatomical entropion and,
in this case, is cssociated with the Formation of
a corneal sequestrum.
Meibomianitis
Meibomianitis (Figure 4.7), chronic inflammation of the meibomian glands, can cause
inspissation of meibomian lipid and consequent formation of chalazia when the glands
become overloaded and rupture. The condition is most likely to present as lipogranu
lomatous conjunctivitis. Cystic glandular changes are also seen occasionally, especially
in Persian cats.
Figure  4.7  Meibomianitis  (chronic lipo-
granulomatous conjunctivitisj in a Domestic
Shorthair. Lipid histochemistry of biopsy ma-
terial indicated large quantities of lipid cassoci-
ated with the meibomian glands.
186
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Treatment
Usually the removal of the inspissated material by curettage after incising the
palpebral conjunctiva is curative.
Eyelid neoplasia
Eyelid tumours are uncommon, and histopathology should always be undertaken.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most frequently encountered eyelid neoplasm, espe-
cially in white cats and those with non-pigmented lids (Figure 4.8). These tumours are
often locally invasive, but are also potentially metastatic, so careful examination of
the whole animal is mandatory. Animals with extensive eyelid involvement should be
OPHTHALMOLOC
referred.
Management
● Squamous cell carcinoma responds to a variety of treatments, including local radio-
therapy and surgical excision combined with blepharoplasty. Local radiotherapy on
 an m p ua si se aa aa aq uo umo h
radiotherapy
● For other eyelid tumours (e.g. mast cell tumours) wide-based excision and ble-
FELINE 
pharoplasty is usually the treatment of choice
● All feline eyelid tumours should be submitted for histopathology
Figure 4.8 Squamous cell carcinoma in a
white Domestic Shorthair. Both the lower eyelids
cre involved and the tips of both ears have
clready been amputated because of squamous
cell carcinoma.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
● In cats the Schirmer tear test 1 (STT 1) reading is usually lower than in dogs, usually
12 mm ± 5 mm over one minute. In normal cats less than a year of age it may be
very low: readings as low as 0 are sometimes obtained.
● Investigative procedures involving nasolacrimal drainage require a general anaes-
thetic, as the puncta are small and can easily be damaged
THE WET EYE
● The cat is much less frequently affected than the dog
● Epipbora (tear overflow) is the commonest presenting sign, and the problems tend
Feline Ophthalmology
187
to be resolved into those with increased tear production and those with inadequate
tear drainage
● Topically-applied fluorescein 1 % does not always appear at the ipsilateral nostril,
as the nasolacrimal duct is short and fluorescein may enter the oropharyngeal region
and be swallowed
· It may be easier to tilt the head downward and examine the ipsilateral nostril, rather
than attempting to identify fluorescein in the oropharyngeal region
● Fluorescein is most readily observed using blue light in the dark
Tear distribution problems
Y
90
Agenesis and colobomatous eyelid defects are the commonest reason for poor tear film
distribution.
0
OPHTHALM
Increased tear production
Any painful eye condition may increase tear production. Follicular conjunctivitis may
ca use sufficient irritation to increase tear production when follicles are prominent on
the inner surface of the third eyelid. Very rarely, increased production can be caused
by inflammation of the lacrimal or nictitans gland.
0
FELINE 
Inadequate tear drainage
Congenital problems
● Absence or atresia of the lacrimal puncta; the upper and/or lower punctum is affected
and other eyelid anomalies may also be present
● Anatomical imperfection is a possible cause of tear-drainage problems. Flat-faced
cats such as the Persian are often severely affected (combination of shallow orbit,
prominent globe, shallow lacrimal lake and occlusion of the nasolacrimal duct asso-
ciated with brachycephalic conformation). Anatomical imperfection may also result
from trauma or surgery
Acqvired problems
● Loss of punctum ± canaliculus through destruction as a result of inflammation or
- n    s n i  s s
ably common, but is not readily amenable to surgery, as adhesions reform
● Blockage of any part of the nasolacrimal system occurs because of problems within
the system (e.g. foreign bodies, dacryocystitis), or external influences, such as nasal
and tooth-root problems, space occupying lesions and trauma
THE DRY EYE - UNDERPRODUCTION AND ABNORMALITIES
OF TEARS
The feline tear film has received little study to date, and it is assumed that, as in the
dog, the commonest clinical problem is a lack of aqueous production resulting in
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Clinical signs and aetiology
● Disruption of the cormeal reflex and lacklustre appearance of cornea, superficial
188
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
vascular keratitis, xerosis {corneal desiccation), recurrent ulceration and diffuse
conjunctivitis may all be seen (Figure 4.9)
● In most cases there is a tenacious ocular discharge, but this is less conspicuous in
cats than dogs, especially in the early stages
● STT 1 values <S mm/min, but remember that values are generally lower than those
of dogs
● Feline herpes virus-1 (FHV-1), symblepharon formation and dysautonomia should
be ruled out
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
Treatment
·Tear replacement therapy in most cases
● Parotid duct transposition is rarely used, but is a useful surgical alternative in
selected cases
FELINE 
Figure 4.9 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a
Domestic Shorthair. The cornec is of slightly
lacklustre appearance cnd the camera Hlash is
disrupted. A tacky ocular discharge and chemo-
sis cre present. The condition was unilateral and
the cause unknown.
CONJUNCTIVA
In the normal cat there is very little exposed conjunctiva. It is usually confined to part
of the nictitating conjunctiva and a small area of bulbar conjunctiva visible at the
lateral canthus.
DISEASES OF THE CONJUNCTIVA
Epibulbar dermoid
Epibulbar dermoids may be the result of incomplete fusion of the eyelids, with dis-
placement of skin elements into the dermoid. In cats they are usually located on the
skin or conjunctiva in the region of the lateral canthus, but they may be found at other
sites, and corneal involvement is also encountered. Certain lines of Birman cats show
a genetic predisposition, and combined eyelid defects and dermoids in the Burmese cat
may also be inherited.
Feline Ophthalmology
189
Treatment
Surgical excision, as described previously for the dog (Section 3, pp 101-105).
Symblepharon
Conjunctival adhesion of the palpebral, bulbar or nictitating conjunctiva, to each
other or to the cornea, is termed symblepharon and, whilst very rare in dogs, it is
neonatal infection, particularly that caused by feline herpes virus. Less commonly,
severe conjunctival inflammation, chemical and thermal injuries can cause this problem
at any age.
0101
OPHTHALMO
Figure 4.10 Symblepharon formation in a young
Siamese cat. The adhesions are extensive cnd have
obliterated the dorsal and ventral fornices as well as
FELINE 
occluding the upper and lower puncta. Note the‘con-
junctivalisation' of the cornea as a consequence of
destruction of the limbal stem cells during the acute
phase of inflammation. The cat had suffered from
severe conjunctivitis (presumed FHV-1) as α kiten and
both eyes were affected.
Clinical features
· The adhesions are usually between the upper and lower eyelids and third eyelid,
upper and lower eyelids and bulbar conjunctiva ± cornea (i.e. all the epithelium-
covered tissues of the ocular surface)
● The fornix is often obliterated, so the nasolacrimal puncta may also be non-
functional and tear production may also be affected beca use of occlusion of lacrimal
gland ductules
● Symblepharon is usually seen as a distinct entity, but may also occur in conjunction
with other ocular defects such as microphthalmos
Treatment
● Surgical section of the symblepharon is simple, but the adhesions usually reform
rapidly and corneal opacities may be more marked than they were originally. These
disappointing results reflect the pathogenesis, nota bly the destruction of limbal stem
cells at the time of acute inflammation. In consequence, corneal epithelium cannot
be generated for repair and conjunctival epithelium resurfaces the cornea, causing
'conjunctivalisation’ of the cornea
+ The clinical picture is of ocular surface failure, characterised by conjunctival over-
growth, corneal epithelial defects, vascularisation and scarring
● Therapeutic soft contact lenses delay the postoperative complications, but do not
prevent them. It is therefore sensible to avoid surgery in most cases
190
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Animals with poor or absent vision, impaired eyelid and globe mobility may benefit
from complex blepharoplastic procedures and such cases should be referred
● Limbal autograft transplantation offers the most rational future treatment for a
variety of ocular surface disorders, including symblepharon
Chemosis
As the cat has a loosely-arranged conjunctiva, conjunctival oedema (chemosis) may be
of spectacular appearance and a ubiquitous accompaniment to many types of con-
junctival disease. In addition to addressing the underlying problem it is important to
GY
prevent conjunctival desiccation.
OPHTHALMOLOC
Subconjunctival haemorrhage
This is commonest in cats after blunt or penetrating trauma (see Section 2, pp 40-41).
Conjunctival neoplasia
Conjunctival neoplasia is rare
The commonest neoplasm to encroach on the conjunctiva is squamous cell carcinoma
(Figure 4.8). Primary conjunctival tumours include papilloma, adenoma, adenocarci-
FELINE 
noma, basal cell tumour, haemangioma, haemangiosarcoma, lymphoma, neurofi
broma, neurofibrosarcoma, fibroma, fibrosarcoma and malignant melanoma. Tumours
           
carcinoma.
Figure 4.11  Infiltration of the conjunctiva by
ymphoma. Bilateral prominence of the third
eyelid, more marked on the left than on the right,
suggests that there is also orbitcl infiltration in
this cat.
Management
● As many conjunctival tumours in cats are potentially malignant, it is important to
assess tumours carefully to make sure that complete excision is a realistic possibil-
ity and exfoliative cytology or histopathology should always be performed
● Squamous cell carcinomas may require local radiotherapy, or a combination of
surgery, radiotherapy or cryotherapy and reconstructive eyelid surgery for effective
cure. Many cases will require referral
● For other types of primary neoplasia the treatment is usually surgical excision,
debulking, or biopsy combined with other therapy (e.g. radiotherapy, cryotherapy,
laser therapy!
● For secondary neoplasia, treatment other than palliative treatment may not be a
realistic option
Feline Ophthalmology
191
CONJUNCTIVITIS
The diagnosis of conjunctivitis is not difficult, but effective management depends upon
establishing the precise aetiology. It is important to emphasise that respiratory tract
viruses are widespread in the cat population, so the isolation of potentially pathogenic
viruses should correlate with the clinical presentation and history. The history should
include an assessment of the cat's age, vaccination status and lifestyle and whether
there are other cats at risk or affected. Clinical appearance may be helpful, but is likely
to be remarkably similar with a range of different causes, so laboratory confirmation
OPHTHALMOLOGY
of infectious causes is of value.
Aetiology
· Infectious agents - Chlamydophila felis (formerly known as Chlamydia psittaci var.
felis) is the commonest cause of infectious conjunctivitis in cats in the UK. Respira-
tory tract viruses such as FHV-1 and, possibly, calicivirus may also be causes of con-
junctivitis (Figures 4.12 and 4.13)
+ Tear-film abnormalities
● Other causes of conjunctivitis are less common in cats, but note the possibility of
FELINE 
allergy (e.g. to topically-applied drugs in particular), trauma and foreign bodies
Figure 4.12 Feline herpes virus (FHV-1)
 in a kiten. Ocular and respiratory signs
were present.
192
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Figure 4.13 Infectious conjunctivitis caused
by Chlamycophila felis in a young cat. This
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
 typically presents as a unilateral problem, and
 in this cat, at this early stage, is affecting the left
eye only.
Clinical signs
● Active hyperaemia of conjunctival vessels and conjunctival inflammation
●Chemosis
● Ocular discharge (serous, mucoid, purulent, haemorrhagic and combinations of
FELINE 
these)
● Variable degrees of irritation, blepharospasm, excessive lacrimation and pain
· Chronic changes include follicle formation, conjunctival thickening, ulceration and
persistent discharge (Figure 4.14)
Figure 4.14  Chronic follicular conjunctivitis
of unknown cause in a Domestic Shorthair. There
were also Follicles beneath the eyelids tincluding
the third eyelidj and these can be a source of
chronic corneal irritation long after the initiating
cause has gone.
Protocol for investigation and diagnosis
● As for the dog, except that both conjunctival and oropharyngeal swabs should
be taken for virus isolation, preferably using a wire-handled nasal swab for the
 oropharyngeal sample
● Combined viral and chlamydial transport medium (VCTM) should be used for viral
 and chlamydial isolation
Differential diagnosis
● Redness of the eye is not synonymous with conjunctivitis and may occur in a number
of other situations. For example, as a consequence of haemorrhage after trauma, as
Feline Ophthalmology
193
a local manifestation of impeded venous return with an orbital mass, as part of a
systemic vascular response or associated with cardiovascular disease
+ Conjunctival infiltration by a tumour, most commonly lymphoma, can be confused
  g      s 
INFECTIOUS CONJVNCTIVITIS
Viral
Feline herpes virus type 1 (FHV-l) (Figure 4.12)
OPHTHALMOLOG'
+ The most important virus associated with ocular disease in cats
· In neonates {up to four weeks of age) a cause of opbthalmia neonatorum
● Usually the whole litter is affected, but the severity may vary between kittens
● Complications of neonatal infection may be severe and include symblepharon
formation as a result of conjunctival epithelial necrosis, corneal ulceration, corneal
perforation, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, occluded lacrimal puncta and obliteration of
the fornices (because of symblepharon), endophthalmitis and panophthalmitis
● In young kittens, infection is usually associated with respiratory signs (rhinitis,
tracheitis, bronchopneumonia)
FELINE 
● Acute, usually bilateral, conjunctivitis is the most frequent ocular manifestation in
older kittens and cats
● Initially the ocular discharge is serous, but becomes purulent within a week of the
onset of the clinical signs
● Most cases also show signs of upper respiratory tract infection
+ Uncomplicated infections usually take some two weeks to resolve.
● Some 80% of infected cats become latently infected, and any form of stress in later
life may produce a relapse; virus may be shed intermittently and chronic asympto-
matic carriers are common
+ Recrudescence of infection is likely in chronically infected cats and any form of stress
(e.g. re-homing, cat shows, introduction of new cats, lactation, general anaesthesia
and surgery), endogenous immunosuppression (e.g. FeLV and FIV) and exogenous
immunosuppression (e.g. corticosteroids, cyclosporin and chemotherapy) may
produce a relapse
· The clinical signs in chronically affected cats are diverse; they include epiphora, low
grade conjunctivitis and ulcerative and non-ulcerative keratitis
Feline calicivirus (FCV]
● Feline calicivirus is a much less common cause of viral conjunctivitis than FHV-1
and there is some doubt as to whether it is a genuine conjunctival pathogen
● Cats of any age are affected, but FCV infection is commoner and more severe in
young kittens
● Ocular signs may be associated with other pathogens
● Clinical signs of infection largely relate to the effects of the virus on the upper
respiratory tract, typically producing rhinitis and a serous nasal discharge
● Vesicles that rupture to produce clearly delineated ulcers are commonly found in the
mouth (e.g. tongue and oral mucosa)
● Asymptomatic carriers are common, and, since the virus is excreted constantly, it is
194
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Diagnosis of viral conjunctivitis
+ Clinical signs
● Virus isolation from conjunctival swabs and oropharyngeal swabs
· PCR (polymerase chain reaction) provides the most sensitive and specific test for
viral identification and the detection of asymptomatic carriers
● Intermittent excretion of FHV-1 means it is difficult to confirm infection in many
cases, whereas calicivirus is excreted constantly
● Serology is of no value in vaccinated animals
GY
Trearment of viral conjunctivitis
OPHTHALMOLOO
● Topical antiviral treatment for FHV-1 is described under Cornea. Calicivirus is not
· Nasal and ocular discharges should be removed by regular, gentle cleaning and
topical antibiotic applied to control secondary bacterial infection. White petroleum
jelly can be smeared below the eyes to prevent skin excoriation
● Nursing care (rehydration and good nutrition)
● Systemic broad-spectrum antibiotic will also be needed when upper respiratory tract
involvement is present
FELINE 
● Tear replacement therapy (e.g. 0.2% polyacrylic acid; 0.2% w/w carbomer 940) will
be required if KCS is present until tear production returns to an adequate level.
Occasionally parotid duct transposition is needed in the long term
Bacterial
Feline chlamydiosis (Figure 4.13)
Chlamydopbila felis (obligate intracellular bacterium)
Clinical signs
· The most important bacterial feline conjunctival pathogen
● Clinical signs may be observed in cats from four weeks of age onwards
·Initially unilateral conjunctivitis, several days later it becomes bilateral. Initially
there is a serous discharge with obvious chemosis and conjunctival hyperaemia,
later the discharge can become mucopurulent and other organisms may be
isolated
● There is no corneal involvement, and no primary respiratory disease, although mild
rhinitis may be present. In a proportion of cases both respiratory tract viruses and
Chlamydophila felis will be isolated
● Lymphoid follicle formation is common in chronic cases
Diagnosis
● Conjunctival swab, cytobrush, or a Kimura spatula, are used to obtain samples from
the ventral conjunctival sac for culture and indirect fluorescent antibody or PCR
testing
● Diagnosis is confirmed by chlamydial isolation and by demonstration of intracyto-
plasmic inclusion bodies in the epithelial cells during the acute phase of the disease.
Intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies can be difficult to differentiate from intracyto-
plasmic pigment granules
● Serology is of limited value in that a low antibody titre is not diagnostic of
Feline Ophthalmology
195
chlamydiosis, whereas a high antibody titre may indicate, but does not confirm,
infection. Titres may remain high for up to a year after infection
Trearmen!
● Treatment consists of systemic treatment with the tetracycline group of antibiotics,
for example, doxycycline {5 mg/kg by mouth every 12 hours for 3-4 weeks) or a
combination of amoxycillin/clavulanate (12.5-25 mg/kg every 8-12 hours for 3-4
weeks). The tetracycline group should not be used in pregnant queens or kittens.
· Topical tetracycline is no longer made commercially in the UK. It is not always well
tolerated in the cat as it may provoke a rapid hypersensitivity response initially and,
if its use continues, marginal blepharitis can develop.
OPHTHALMOLOG'
● A proportion of previously-infected cats become chronic carriers and may be a pos-
sible source of infection for other cats {the organism can be isolated from the uro-
genital and gastrointestinal tracts), a situation which may pose problems in catteries,
especially for breeding colonies. In this type of environment all the cats will require
at least four weeks.
Feline mycoplasmosis
FELINE 
Mycoplasma felis, posibly in association with primary pathogens such as FHV-1 and
Chlamydopbila felis, may be associated with feline conjunctivitis. Mycoplasma felis
 alone is unlikely to be a primary pathogen and can be isolated from the conjunctival
sac of normal cats.
Clinical signs
Blepharospasm, epiphora and conjunctival hyperaemia, but within 14 days the most
striking finding is pallor of the conjunctiva with some thickening and chemosis and a
typical pseudomembranous conjunctivitis.
Diagnosis
Confirmation of mycoplasmal conjunctivitis is difficult, as isolation requires specific
mycoplasma culture media and the possibility of concurrent pathogens must also be
in vestigated.
Trearmen!
● Mycoplasma felis is susceptible to tetracycline given topically for S-7 days, but with
the potential disadvantages already outlined above
● The clinical course is shortened to some five days in treated cases; without treat-
ment the time course is some 30-60 days
Other bacteria
· Other bacteria identified (e.g. Pasteurella spp, Stapbylococcus spp, Streptococcus
spp, Salmonella spp, Moraxella spp) are of uncertain pathogenicity
● Bacterial conjunctivitis may occur secondary to other ocular disease (ocular, adnexal
or orbital infection, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, dacryocystitis) and in cats that are
stressed or immune compromised
· Pasteurella multocida may be transmitted in fight injuries
196
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
ALLERGIC CONJUNCTIVITIS
Allergic conjunctivitis (and allergic blepharitis) is most frequently encountered as a
Long-term treatment with topical preparations (e.g. tetracycline) is sometimes associ-
ated with periocular pigment loss and marginal blepharitis.
Treatment
● The allergen should be avoided
GY
● Topical antihistamines or corticosteroids can be given, but most cases have resolved
 OPHTHALmOLOC
completely by 12-48 hours after removal from the allergen
Other causes of conjunctivitis are rare in cats and similar to those already described
for the dog
LImBUS, EPISCLERA AND SCLERA
NEOPLASIA
FELINE 
Primary
This is a rare site for primary neoplasia. Limbal epibulbar melanoma (scleral shelf
melanoma) is the most frequently encountered and, in most cases, and unusually
amongst feline tumours, is both slow growing and benign.
Treatment
Sequential observation without intervention, or total resection, or partial resection
with radiotherapy or cryotherapy. A graft may be required at the excision site and
such cases are usually referred.
Secondary
Secondary neoplasia associated with the feline leukaemia-lymphoma complex are the
most likely to be encountered. For example, scleral deposits of lymphoma can present
as a red and often painful eye. Biopsy is diagnostic.
CORNEA
Developmental and early onset corneal problems include inherited neurometabolic
disease (e.g. mucopolysaccharidosis, mannosidosis, gangliosidosis). Specific enzyme
deficiencies lead to the widespread accumulation of abnormal products in tissues and
in the cornea this manifests as pancorneal clouding (Figure 4.15(a,b)).
FelineOphthalmology
197
[a)
(b)
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 4.15 (a) Mucopolysaccharidosis in a 3-month old Domestic Shorthair. The kitten
had Facicl dysmorphia (a broad Hlattened Face) and disproportionately large pows. (b) The corneal
douding seen in the kiten in (a) was caused by pancornecl mucopolysaccharide accumulation.
Many of the acquired causes of corneal disease in the cat are similar to those found
in the dog, although eyelid and cilia abnormalities as causes of ulcerative keratitis are
FELINE
uncommon in cats. Claw injuries are a common ca use of feline ulcerative keratitis and
bacterial infection is often introduced (Figures 4.16(a,b)). Damage to the feline lens
following penetrating injury has been associated with the development of poorly
differentiated, malignant, intraocular sarcomas up to several years later.
Feline herpes virus (FHV-1) is a primary cormeal pathogen in the cat and it is impor-
tant always to consider FHV-1 as a possible cause of feline ulcerative keratitis, in
addition to other possible causes.
There is no primary pathogen in the dog and, in addition, corneal sequestrum and
proliferative keratoconjunctivitis are feline conditions that have no direct parallel in
the dog.
[a)
(b)
Figure 4. 16(a,b)  Traumatic ulcerative keratitis in a Domestic Shorthair. The ulcer marks the site
of a recent cat claw injury before [a] and afer fluorescein application [b].
198
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
ACQUIRED DISEASES OF THE FELINE CORNEA
Epithelial erosion
The cat appears to have a chronic type of refractory superficial erosion, which is similar
to canine epithelial basement membrane dystrophy in presentation (see Section 3,
pp 114-16, for description of typical clinical appearance) (Figure 4.17). In addition to
the usual diagnostic work up (including tear production and adequacy of blink) it is
worth checking for feline berpes virus (the commonest confirmed aetiological agent)
and also the cat's FeLV and FIV status. In some cases there is also a history of topical
GY
or systemic corticosteroid use.
OPHTHALMOLOC
FELINE 
Figure 4.17 Epithelial erosion of the cornea in an
adult Domestic Shorthair. The erosions have been
stcined with Fluorescein and demonstrated using @
cobalt blue light source, note that superficial vascu-
larisation is also present.
Treatment
● If no predisposing cause can be found, the ulcer should be treated by removing
redundant epithelium at the rim of the ulcer with saline-soaked cotton wool wound
round the tips of Halstead's mosquito forceps
● The procedure can be performed under topical local anaesthesia and can be repeated
after 10 days only if there has been no improvement, if the erosion persists despite
treatment, consider referral
·A therapeutic soft contact lens can be used to provide protection and pain relief
during healing (but avoid if tear production is abnormally low)
uawaedau eah ieidoi uaui uoonpoud ieat leue jo uousaans aue si aia i 
therapy should be given until tear production returns to normal, and for life if it
ou saop
Herpetic keratitis
Aetiology and clinical signs
●Caused by feline herpes virus-1
● Epithelial keratitis occurs commonly during primary infection in young cats, but
resolves spontaneously in most cases (Figure 4.18)
● Stromal keratitis (usually unilateral) in adult cats often represents reactivation
        e  s   
complications are likely (Figure 4.19)
Feline Ophthalmology
199
Figure 4.18 Acute herpetic keratitis in c
Domestic Shorthair. The pathognomonic super-
ficial dendritic lesions have been stained with
OPHTHALMOLOGY
fluorescein.
FELINE 
Figure 4.19 Chronic herpetic keratitis in α
Domestic Shorthair. The lesions are predomi-
nantly stromal in the chronic phase. This cat was
clso FIV positive.
Clinical findings
● Mild blepharospasm and lacrimation, or a serous ocular discharge, are common pre-
sentations in the initial stages
+ The epithelial keratitis consists of discrete superficial punctate opacities in the early
stages; later the pathognomonic linear branching (dendritic) ulcers may form and
these can progress to produce an irregular and superficial geogra phical ulcer (Figure
4.18). These changes are the direct result of viral cytopathic effect on the corneal
epithelium
· Chronic cases, with stromal involvement, are a consequence of a cell-mediated
immune response
● Stromal keratitis is usually characterised by stromal oedema, superficial and deep
vascularisation and cellular infiltration (Figure 4.19)
+ A number of affected cats are FIV or FeLV positive, indicating that herpetic keratitis
 in these cases is an example of an essentially opportunist infection in an immuno-
suppressed host. The prognosis is poor in immunosuppressed animals
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the clinical findings, which can be so diverse as to be unhelpful
in chronic cases, and the detection of FHV-1 by viral isolation (insensitive in chronic
cases) or FHV-1 DNA using PCR {more sensitive) from corneal samples.
200
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Management
There is no simple and effective means of managing chronic disease. In practice, many
cases relapse because of persistent conjunctival infection, or reactivation of a latent
viral infection {in trigeminal ganglia). Reactivation of latent virus is triggered by many
forms of stress (both local ocular and systemic), intercurrent disease and systemic cor-
ticosteroid administration. In view of the known association with FIV and FeLV, it is
sensible to screen affected animals for the presence of these viruses.
Antivira! agents
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
Herpetic keratitis responds unpredicta bly to topical antiviral agents (e.g. idoxuridine,
trifluorothymidine, acyclovir). Ideally, treatment should be given every 2-4 hours for
at least six days, and then less frequently until the eye appears quiet. Acyclovir may
these agents, together with newer agents, such as ganciclovir {used to treat acute her-
petic keratitis in humans), require evaluation in clinical trials to assess their efficacy
against FHV-1.
Mechanical removal
FELINE
Mechanical removal of affected corneal epithelium may assist in the treatment of
epithelial keratitis, whereas lamellar keratectomy or even penetrating keratoplasty
(corneal graft) may be of value in the treatment of stromal keratitis.
Immunotherapy
The use of one drop of intranasal vaccine to each eye, or oral human interferon
alpha-2 are being evaluated at present, as is dietary therapy with L-lysine (200 mg
mixed with food on a daily basis, maximum 400 mg bid).
Corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroids may reduce post-herpetic scarring, but they should only be used
in conjunction with antiviral agents in chronic cases as they will exacerbate active viral
infection.
Cornealsequestrum
Aetiology
This is a condition of unknown cause, which has many descriptive names. It is unique
to the cat and there is both a breed disposition (e.g. Colourpoint, Persian, Siamese,
Birman, Himalayan) and a tendency for the condition to appear after previous corneal
insult (e.g. trauma, herpetic keratitis), irrespective of breed (Figures 4.6 and 4.20).
Clinical Findings
The condition is usually unilateral, although the other eye may be affected at a later
date, and, both eyes may be involved at the same time in susceptible breeds. It is sen-
sible to conduct a comprehensive examination, to exclude complicating factors, such
as entropion, tear film abnormalities and infection, for the appearance of the lesion is
often so striking that the necessity for complete examination is forgotten.
The lesion is of somewhat variable appearance, ranging from an ill-defined brown
staining of the corneal stroma to a clearly-demarcated black plaque {sequestrum) which
Feline Ophthalmology
201
is raised above the level of the corneal epithelium (Figure 4.6). It is likely that the
-njoaa aui ul saaeis juauap ot pue sasneo Auew aui ot aelau saoueiradde uauap
tion of the opacity and that epithelial damage allows the pigment to deposit in the
corneal stroma. The pigmented material contains melanin and it may derive from the
pe uo sanenne osie leaieu puauid sieo auos u 'pue wy iean ienond
near the eyelid margins.
● A discrete zone of oedema sometimes surrounds the sequestrum and, apparently as
a feature of chronicity, there may be obvious neovascularisation
· The sequestrum may extend as deeply as Descemet's membrane
● In most cases the corneal sequestrum is eventually sloughed, but this is a process
that may take many months and, if ulceration or other problems are present, there
OPHTHALMOLO
may be long-term discomfort for the patient and risk of additional complications,
such as corneal perforation
Management
This will depend on the extent and progression of the condition and the amount of
 discomfort that is present. In time, many of these lesions slough without complication
and the cat may be treated with topical tear-replacement preparations or antibiotic
 ointment during this period if any discomfort is present.
FELINE 
A number of cases, however, will remain uncomfortable on conservative medical
treatment and, in such cases, a therapeutic soft contact lens, or keratectomy combined
with a conjunctival or free pedicle graft, gives good results. Superficial keratectomy
 greatly reduces the time course of the disease and potential surgical cases may be best
referred.
After surgery, the patient is usually given a short course of topical antibiotic. Recur-
rence is unusual with careful assessment and treatment. In many respects, the
management approach is similar to that adopted for ulcerative keratitis.
Figure 4.20 Corneal sequestrum cs αa com-
plication of a traumatic ulcer in α Persian cat.
The loose fap of lacerated cornea should have
been removed at the time of the injury as this
would have aided the healing process.
Eosinophilic (proliferative) keratoconjunctivitis
Aetiology
● The cause of this condition is unknown
● Some cats have a circulating eosinophilia, but many have only ocular involvement
202
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Ultraviolet light may be a predisposing factor, and the disease is strikingly similar
to human vernal disease
Clinical Findings (Figure 4.21)
● Usually unilateral initially, but without effective treatment it frequently progresses
to affect both eyes
● The clinical appearance is of diffuse oedema, neovascularisation and plaque
formation
● The dorsolateral corneal quadrant is most often affected
GY
● The proliferative vascularised plaques are of bizarre and irregular form, frequently
OPHTHALMOLOC
whitish in colour and sometimes resembling cottage cheese
● The eyelid margins of affected cats are often partly, and patchily, depigmented
● Adjacent conjunctiva is often inflamed, and the palpebral conjunctiva is invariably
abnormal
FELINE 
Figure 4.21  Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis
in a Domestic Shorthair. Both eyes were
involved. Note the superficial nature of the white
deposits that are so characteristic of this disea se,
as well as the superficial corneal vascularisation.
Diagnosis
The clinical appearance is usually diagnostic, but the diagnosis can be confirmed by
exfoliative corneal cytology.
Treatment
The condition responds to topical corticosteroid therapy and also to megestrol acetate
given by mouth. All these drugs have potentially undesirable side effects. Megestrol
acetate in particular may induce diabetes mellitus and should be used with great care.
Unfortunately, treatment usually achieves only remission rather than cure and
this means that caution must be exercised in the long-term treatment of eosinophilic
keratoconjunctivitis. In practice therefore, an initial short course of either topical
corticosteroid (betamethasone, dexamethasone or prednisolone) or oral megestrol
acetate is given and followed up with topical cyclosporin (once or twice daily) for
long-term therapy.
UVEaL TraCT
The iris of young kittens is grey to slate blue in colour. In most adult cats the iris
Feline Ophthalmology
203
is yellow to gold in colour, but other variations include shades of green and blue.
Occasionally, especially in oriental and white cats, each iris is of different colour, with
one eye blue and the other yellow to green.
DIFFERENCES FROM THE DOG
● Less pigment in the iris of most cats, therefore normal vasculature and pathological
changes such as neovascularisation and post-inflammatory darkening are easier to
see
● Distinction between the iris collarette, ciliary zone and the pupillary zone of the
LOG'
normal iris is not always obvious, although when persistent pupillary membrane
 OPHTHALMOL
remnants are present, they arise most commonly from the collarette region, just as
in the dog
● Iris vessels are relatively leaky' in kittens, but become less permeable with maturity,
remaining, however, more permeable than those of the dog
● The dilated pupil is round, whereas the fully constricted pupil is a very narrow
vertical slit
· The iris sphincter muscle has a scissor-like action dorsally and ventrally, which
FELINE 
causes the vertical slit
● It is possible to perform a rudimentary examination of the iridocorneal (drainage)
angle without using a gonioscopy lens, and the anterior chamber is relatively deep
● There is a high rate of aqueous production
CONGENITAL AND EARLY ONSET
DISORDERS OF THE FELINE UVEA
Sub-albinism
Partial or complete congenital deafness is not uncommon in white cats, especially when
combined with a blue iris. There may also be ocular anomalies such as iris hypopla-
sia. Chediak-Higashi syndrome is a rare type of partial oculocutaneous albinism, inher-
ited as an autosomal recessive trait and the ocular abnormalities associated with the
syndrome include cataracts and decreased pigmentation of the iris and fundus.
Anterior segment dysgenesis
Anterior segment dysgeneses are rare in cats. The commonest abnormality is persist-
ence of the pupillary membrane, but it appears much less commonly in cats than in
dogs.
UVEITIS
With the possible exception of uveitis resulting from acute traumatic injury, uveitis
tends to be more insidious in cats than in dogs; therefore it is the chronic features that
are most commonly seen. Many cases of uveitis in the cat are associated with systemic
disease so it is easier to esta blish a specific aetiology, but consider referral if the cause
cannot be established. It is worth noting that uveitis in cats rarely reaches the inten-
204
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
sity of that seen in dogs, as chronic granulomatous types of uveitis account for a high
proportion of cases.
Clinical signs of sub-acute/chronic feline uveitis
● No pain to mild discomfort, no inflammatory hyperaemia in most cases
· Usually no effect on vision, occasionally complications such as retinal detachment
result in blindness
● Some or all of keratic precipitates, mutton fat deposits, hypopyon, fibrin and
haemorrhage*
● Some or all of swollen iris, iris nodules, iris neovascularisation, pre-iridal fibrovas-
OPHTHALMOLO
cular membranes*
● Pupil responds normally to light unless synechiae are present*
● Synechiae distort pupil and result in an irregular shape*
● Intraocular pressure normal or low
● Snowflake opacities and retrolental snow banking may be seen when there is periph-
eral retinal vasculitis (pars planitis is the term used to describe the clinical appear-
ance, but is actually an inaccurate description of the underlying pathology)
● Some or all of retinal vasculitis, perivascular exudates, chorioretinitis, retinal haem-
FELINE 
orrhage and retinal detachment
●Optic neuritis
Uveitis associated with infection
Systemic viral disease
Clinical signs
uveitis is the main presenting clinical sign.
● All the viruses may present with a low-grade anterior uveitis. In such cases there is
a loss of iris detail and iris neovascularisation. Keratic precipitates may be obvious
on the posterior cornea, especially ventrally. Frank hypopyon or cellular infiltration
may be present in the ventral anterior chamber. Fibrin and haemorrhage may be
present anterior to the lens and iris and may cause mechanical restriction of the
pupil. Pupil mobility may also be affected by synechiae formation, so it is very
common to find that the pupil shape is abnormal.
● The posterior segment should also be examined, as vasculitis and optic neuritis are
possible presentations, occurring in conjunction with, or distinct from, anterior
uveitis.
Feline infectious peritonitis (FiP) (Figures 4.22 and 4.23{a,b))
· This is a problem that is commoner in younger cats than older cats and is most
common in pedigree cats kept in multicat households
● There is no specific diagnostic test, and it is known that enteric types of coron-
          ( 
FIP serology is fraught with difficulty, as the tests detect antibody to any coron-
avirus, and while a high coronavirus antibody titre (>160) and hypergammaglobu-
*Readily identifiable key features
Feline Ophthalmology
205
linaemia may be suggestive of FIP disease, an intermediate, low or even negative
titre does not rule out infection
● Cats with FIP often demonstrate subtle neurological involvement and are often small
for their age
● FIP infection is usually confirmed by histological examination, usually of post-
mortem material
FELINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 4.22 Anterior uveitis associated with
Feline infectious peritonitis. FIP is associated with
typical perivascular pyogranulomatous inflam-
mation and in this cat the aqueous is red-cell
and fibrin rich and there is marked neovc scu-
larisation of the iris.
[a)
(b)
Figure 4.23{a,b} Posterior uveitis cssociated with feline infectious peritonitis in a Domestic
Shorthair. White light (a) and blue light (b) photographs of the same area demonstrate the intense
va sculitis and perivascular oederma. Both eyes were affected.
Feline leukaemia-lymphoma complex (FellC) (Figures 4.24 and 4.25)
● Cats of all ages may be infected by feline leukaemia virus (FeLV), although infec-
tion is commoner in young cats and is rare in cats over ten years of age
● The ophthalmic signs are usually a consequence of neoplastic involvement ± anaemia
and thrombocytopenia
● Laboratory tests can provide confirmation of FeLV infection
206
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 4.24 Hyphaema, originating from the
major arterial circle, associated with the Feline
leukcemia-lymphomacomplex inaDomestic
Shorthair.
FELINE :
Figure 4.25 Neoplastic infiltration of the optic
nerve (infiltrative optic neuropathy] cnd neovascular-
isationassociatedwiththe felineleukaemia-
ymphoma complex in a Domestic Shorthair.
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) (Figure 4.26(a,b))
● FIV occurs most often in adult, free ranging, non-pedigree cats and is more common
in males than females
● A positive antibody test is diagnostic of FIV However, a significant proportion of
FIV-infected cats have no detectable antibody, and therefore a negative antibody
result does not preclude FIV infection
Treatmen!
Treatment of the uveitis associated with FeLV, FIV and FIP tends to be symptomatic
and supportive, although there are chemotherapy protocols available to treat FeLV
infection. Some cats with FIV and FeLV can be given a good quality of life for some
years after the diagnosis has been made, but this is not usually the case for FIP, where
any treatment tends to be palliative only.
Feline Ophthalmology
207
Y
G
OPHTHALMOLOC
[a)
(b)
Figure 4.26(a,b) Chronic anterior uveitis in an FIV-positive Domestic Shorthair. Bilateral
Uveitis. Lens luxation has occurred in the right eye (a] and the lens has become secondarily catarac-
tous. In the left eye (b], dark keratic precipitates (KPs) acherent to the ventral cornea indicate that
the uveifis has been present for some time (KPs darken as they age). Lighter, Fawn-coloured KPs
indicate that the uveitis is still active. Both iridal surfaces show considerable new blood vessel
formation. The anisocoria [inequality of pupil size] was due to the position of the luxated lens:
the dorsal cspect was anterior and the ventral aspect occupied the pupillary aperture. Intraocular
FELINE 
pressure (Mackay Margl was 9 mm Hg in both eyes.
Bacterial infections
· Generalised bacterial diseases associated with uveitis are rare. Typical and atypical
mycobacterial infections are rarely encountered, and ocular involvement is usually
in the form of a granulomatous posterior uveitis. Combination treatment {e.g. oral
clarithromycin at a dose rate of 10 mg/kg and rifampicin at a dose rate of 20 mg/kg)
over a period of months may bring about resolution. Animals must be monitored
carefully during treatment.
● Local injury, usually as a result of a bite or scratch, may result in direct intraocu-
lar inoculation of bacteria (e.g. Pasteurella multocida). This is a relatively common
cause of uveitis which is amenable to symptomatic treatment for the uveitis and
topical (e.g. chloramphenicol drops) and systemic administration of antibiotic (e.g.
newer-generation penicillins).
Toxoplasmosis (Figures 4.27(a,b) and 4.28)
● Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular coccidian parasite, and the domestic cat and
Other felidae are the only definitive hosts
● Clinical problems are most likely to be seen in debilitated or immunocompromised
animals, and ocular features consist of retinitis, posterior uveitis, intermediate
uveitis, anterior uveitis or panuveitis
● The zoonotic implications should be borne in mind, and it is important to discuss
them with clients
208
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a)
(b)
Figure 4.27 (a} Panuveitis in a Domestic Shorthair with toxoplasmosis. Keratic precipitates are
present in the anterior chamber and the white‘snowbanking'behind the lens indicates inflamma
tory cells at this site. (b} The same eye as in (a] became glaucomatous some time later. Intraocular
pressure measured with a Mackay Marg tonometer was 11 mm Hg in (a) and 49mm Hg in (b).
FELINE 
Figure 4.28 Posterior uveitis in α Domestic Short
hair with toxoplasmosis. Focal inflammatory lesions
and peripapillary sub-retinal effusion with indications
of retinal detachment and reattachment. Despite treat
ment, total detachment of the retina occurred in this
eye.
Diagnosis
● Diagnosis of toxoplasmosis is based on ocular involvement and negative results for
FeLV, FIV and FIP
● Detection of T. gondi-specific antibodies is helpful, and IgM titres >1:64 may be
indicative of active infection
● Note that there is a strong association of toxoplasmosis with FIV-positive status
Systemic mycotic infections (Figure 4.29(a,b))
Systemic mycotic infections may occur in countries with suitable climatic conditions.
Uveitis as a consequence of cryptococcosis is the commonest, although coccidiomyco-
sis, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis and candidiasis have all been reported in cats. These
problems are unlikely to be seen in the UK unless the animal has been imported or is
immunos uppressed.
Feline Ophthalmology
209
OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a)
(b)
Figure 4.29 (a) Posterior uveitis associcated with cryptococcosis in α Sicmese cat. (b) The Focal
granulomatous lesions of active inflammation in [a) are less obvious than the same lesions when
they have become inactive after the cat was treated with ketaconazole and 5-fluorocytosine.
FELINE 
Idiopathic uveitis (Figure 4.30)
● Idiopathic uveitis is of unknown cause, although an infectious origin is possible, and
the problem may simply reflect the inadequate sensitivity of some diagnostic tests
or the involvement of other organisms, such as feline herpes virus 1 and Bartonella
henselae
● It tends to be commoner in older cats and responds poorly to treatment
● Idiopathic uveitis appears more likely to become complicated by epithelial erosion
and secondary glaucoma ± lens luxation than other types, and because some of these
complications could also relate to the long-term use of topical corticosteroids the
benefits of treatment are equivocal
●Histopathology indicates lymphocytic and plasmacytic infiltration of the uveal tract
Figure 4.30  Idiopathic uveitis in a Domestic
Shorthair. Note the keratic precipitates adherent
to the ventral cornea cand the dull metallic
appearance of the iris.
Uveitis associated with trauma
Intraocular haemorrhage may be associated with blunt and penetrating trauma, and
uveitis is a ubiquitous accompaniment {Figure 4.31{a,b))
210
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a)
(b)
Figure 4.31 (a) Uveitis caused by α penetrating cat claw injury and complicated by intraocular
infection. There was a delay of several days between the injury and the owner seeking veterinary
help. (b) Note that the site of cornecl penetration is not apparent until the hypopyon starts to resolve
and that intensive use of mydrictics has failed to dilate the pupil because of extensive posterior
synechice coupled with continuing inflammation.
FELINE 
Differential diagnosis of common causes of intraocular haemorrhage
in the cat
●Trauma
● Severe uveitis
● Systemic hypertensive disease
● Neoplasia
● Haematological problems such as severe anaemia, thrombocytopenia, vascu-
lopathies, coagulopathies
Uveitis associated with lens damage
Direct lens trauma
Uveitis most commonly arises as a result of direct lens trauma, for example from a
penetrating injury or gunshot wound (Figure 4.32). If the damage is not too severe it
is often possible to control acute onset lens associated uveitis in cats, but the man-
agement of cases of this type is made more difficult because intraocular neoplasia can
 develop and is usually apparent about five years later.
Figure 4.32Domestic Shorthair with an
old penetrating cat claw injury in which both
cornecal and lens penetration had occurred. The
lens has become secondarily catcractous.
Feline Ophthalmology
211
Blunt trauma
Blunt trauma is also a cause of lens associated uveitis. In milder injuries, when the eye
survives the impact, cataract formation and chronic darkening of the iris may be the
only chronic features, but the possibility of later sarcoma formation cannot be dis-
missed (see below).
Malignant intraocular sarcoma
Malignant intraocular sarcoma {Figure 4.33) seems to develop in feline eyes that have
been subjected to major insult in the past (e.g. severe damage to the lens and uvea).
The morphological features of these tumours indicate that some of them may be
derived from lens epithelium. The tumours are malignant and both local and distant
OPHTHALMOLO
spread occur. Affected eyes are usually opaque and cartilage and bone may form within
the tumour.
FELINE 
Figure 4.33Malignant intraocular sarcoma
in a Domestic Shorthair. The cat had received a
Treatment
· The early consequences of lens trauma are managed as already described for the
dog. Symptomatic treatment of accompanying uveitis is all that is required for mild
injury, early advice and referral should be obtained for more serious insult. The
owner should be alerted to the possibility of intraocular sarcoma.
● It is sensible to consider the early removal of blind traumatised eyes, rather than
to risk subsequent neoplastic change. Histopathology of the enucleated globe is
recommended.
● If there is any suspicion of intraocular sarcoma, ultrasonography of the eye, orbit
and chest is indicated, as is examination of local lymph nodes. Thoracic radiogra-
phy, or other diagnostic imaging techniques, may also be helpful. If the tumour
is localised to the eye then globe removal and orbital exenteration should be
performed.
Uveitis associated with neoplasia
Both primary and secondary neoplasia can involve the uveal tract and mimic uveitis
and, in addition, neoplastic cells can elicit an inflammatory response.
212
 Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
UVEAL NEOPLASIA
Primary neoplasia
As in the dog, the commonest primary intraocular tumour is a melanoma, but although
the histopathology is wide ranging, the tumour is usually more malignant in the cat
than the dog with a greater potential for metastasis. The iris and ciliary body are more
frequently affected than the choroid. There is a range of clinical presentations: some-
times the tumour involves a sector of iris, but often the iris is diffusely involved. Both
pigmented and non-pigmented lesions occur, and there may also be hyphaema and
GY
intraocular inflammation. Consider referral if unsure of the diagnosis.
OPHTHALMOLO
Treatmentofdiscrete(nodular)melanomas
● If the growth pattern is slow then sector iridectomy or laser ablation may be an
option, so specialist help should be sought
● If the growth pattern is fast then early enucleation, after ensuring that there has been
no secondary spread, is the correct approach
Diffuse iris melanomas (Figure 4.34), with an initially benign behaviour pattern and
ELINE
superficial location, pose a real diagnostic challenge. In this type there is a change of
iris colour {darkening and a velvety sheen) and extension into the iris stroma with
subtle distortion of the pupil. Owners usually seek veterinary advice because of a
F
change of iris colour or secondary glaucoma as a result of pigment-rich cells blocking
the filtration angle. The clinical appearance is of benign melanosis initially, and the
transformation to iris melanoma can take months or years, but the risk of metastasis
increases with time, so early enucleation is usually the treatment of choice if progres-
sion is noted.
Figure  4.34  Diffuse  iris  melanoma  in αa
Domestic  Shorthair.  The  multiple  patches  of
pigment have become slightly raised.
Other neoplasms
Tumours may also arise in other sites, such as the ciliary body {usually adenocarci-
noma). The possibility of trauma-associated intraocular sarcoma, sometimes several
years after the initial ocular trauma, should always be considered in cats.
Diagnosis
● Observation ± ultrasound or other imaging techniques
Feline Ophthalmology
213
● The clinical presentation is various combinations of, for example, visible mass,
uveitis, hyphaema, fundus changes, intraocular haemorrhage, retinal haemorrhage
or detachment
Trearment
● If there is a chance of saving the eye and retaining vison then consider referral
● Early enucleation is the treatment of choice for the majority of primary feline uveal
tumours, provided that there is no sign of distant metastasis
Secondary neoplasia
90101
Lymphoma
Lympboma associated with FeLV is the commonest secondary neoplasm affecting the
feline eye and orbit and the uveal tract is commonly involved (Figure 4.35)
OPHTHALMO
Clinical signs
● There is a range of clinical appearances and it is not always possible to differenti-
ate lymphoma from other feline conditions on the basis of ocular appearance.
·● General physical examination may locate abnormalities elsewhere in the body (e.g.
intestinal and renal masses).
FELINE 
● Diagnosis is usually confirmed from a positive FeLV-antigen test, but some affected
cats are FeLV negative. Tumour or bone marrow biopsies can be used to aid diagnosis
in such cases.
Metastaticcarcinoma
Metastatic carcinomas of the uveal tract should also be considered as causes of
secondary uveal neoplasia. They arise from a number of primary sites (e.g. mammary
gland) and the prognosis is grave.
Figure 4.35Lymphomatous infiltration of the
iris in α Domestic Shorthair. Examination from
the side indicated that the anterior chamber had
been almost obliterated by the extent of the iris
infiltration.
ANTERIOR CHAMBER AND AQUEOUS HUMOUR
Developmental defects can involve the anterior chamber {various types of anterior
segment dysgenesis), but it is much commoner for anterior chamber abnormalities
to be secondary to acquired disease in sites such as the uveal tract {e.g. uveitis) or
214
 Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
generalised disease (e.g. dyslipoproteinaemias, multicentric lymphoma and systemic
hypertensive disea se).
Lipaemic aqueous
Transient lipaemic aqueous is encountered on occasions in apparently normal eyes,
especially in young Burmese cats {Figure 4.36), and may be an ocular manifestation
of familial primary hypertriglyceridaemia. It tends to become less common as the
 animal matures and the iris vessels become less leaky. Lipids and lipoproteins should
always be analysed in cases with recurrent lipaemic aqueous and, if uveitis is a pre-
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
disposing factor, it should be investigated and treated.
Differential diagnosis
● Hypopyon (usually post traumatic)
● Neoplastic infiltrates (most commonly lymphoma)
FELINE 
Figure    4.36  Unilateral  lipaemic
cqueous associcted with hypertriglyceri-
daemia in a young Burmese cat. The
short-lasting phenomenon, which is self-
limiting if the lipid levels return to normal.
should be differentiated from genuine
inflammation.
Hyphaema
Systemic hypertensive disease (this section, pp 223-225) is the commonest non-
traumatic cause of hyphaema in the adult cat (Figure 4.37). Developmental causes
(e.g. vascular anomalies) are exceptionally rare as a cause of hyphaema. Acquired dis-
orders including coagulopathies, clotting disorders and hyperviscosity syndrome are
also rare.
Differential diagnosis of hyphaema
· Systemic hypertensive disease
●Trauma (both blunt and penetrating)
● Neoplasia (e.g. associated with feline leukaemia)
● Uveitis (e.g. associated with feline infectious peritonitis)
● Haematogical problems
Feline Ophthalmology
215
Figure 4.37 Hyphcema in an adult Domes-
tic Shorthair caused by systemic hypertensive
disease. The hcemorrhage arises from the
90
greater arterial circle.
OPHTHALMOL
GLAUCOMAS
Glaucoma (Figure 4.27(b)) in the cat is much less common than it is in the dog, partly
because of the well-developed and deep drainage angle in this species. The feline
drainage angle can be examined reasonably well by direct inspection. As in the dog,
FELINE 
cases are best referred initially for specialist assessment.
Enlargement of the globe occurs more readily in cats than dogs, as the ocular coats
stretch more easily. Glaucoma is often less painful, therefore, and vision is retained for
longer than in dogs, because the retina is not subjected to such damaging pressure.
However, exposure keratopathy is a likely complication of globe enlargement.
Most cases of glaucoma in cats are secondary to uveitis and neoplasia. Some may
be associated with the chronic use of corticosteroids. Primary gla ucoma is rare.
Clinical signs
● Less obvious than those encountered in dogs, the onset is frequently insidious
+ Pain, redness, corneal oedema and Haab's striae are often absent or mild
· Dilated pupil, globe enlargement or a visual defect are first noticed
● Sometimes the underlying cause (e.g. inflammation or tumour) is obvious
Management
● If an underlying cause, such as uveitis, is identified, it should be treated {but idio-
pathic uveitis responds poorly). If there is pupil block because of adhesions (poste-
rior synechiae), atropine is used in an attempt to dilate the pupil and break down
the adhesions - but this is the only indication for the use of a mydriatic in glaucoma
therapy.
● Cats do not tolerate oral medical treatment for glaucoma as well as do dogs (dichlor-
phenamide 0.5-2 mg/kg reduces IOP for four hours; acetazolamide 10 mg/kg reduces
IOP for five hours). Inappetence is common and careful monitoring is required, so
it is better to avoid their use.
● Topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (dorzolamide and brinzolamide) have no
 obvious systemic side effects and so they are both useful as the first line of therapy
in cases with moderately elevated intraocular pressure.
· Surgical drainage procedures can be used, but are rarely employed because of the
secondary nature of most cases.
216
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Enucleation is the preferred option for blind unsightly eyes with raised intraocular
pressure.
LENS
The cat has a large lens (Figure 4.1(a)), of remarka ble transparency in most individu-
als. Senile nuclear sclerosis does occur in old cats, but is much less obvious than it is
in dogs. Congenital disorders are rare, and conditions such as microphakia, aphakia
GY
and congenital cataract are usually seen only in conjunction with other congenital
OPHTHALMOLOO
ocular defects such as microphthalmos and persistent pupillary membrane.
CATARACT
Hereditary
 Most types of cataract are rare in cats. Those reported as of possible inherited origin
(British Blue and Himalayan) have been present from an early age and assumed to be
FELINE
congenital.
Traumatic
Trauma is a common cause of feline cataract and may be a consequence of blunt or,
more usually, penetrating trauma. Cataracts may form some time after the initiating
injury. The putative association of lens penetration with intraocular sarcoma must be
remembered.
Post-inflammatory
Uveitis may be associated with secondary cataract. Cataract formation is usually asso-
ciated with posterior synechiae and chronic inflammatory changes.
Lens luxation
Luxated lenses in cats invariably become cataractous if they are left in situ.
Glaucoma
Glaucoma with cataract formation is uncommon, but may sometimes be seen in
chronic cases.
Metabolic and nutritional
Diabetic cataracts are less common and seem to progres more slowly in cats than
dogs (Figure 4.38). Nutritional cataracts (e.g. associated with hand rearing on milk
substitutes) are rare.
Feline Ophthalmology
217
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 4.38Bilateral cataracts in α
Domestic Shorthair with diabetes mellitus.
Diabetic cataract is commoner in dogs
than cats, nevertheless in both species is
probably the commonest cause of acute
onset bilateral cataract.
FELINE 
LENS LUXATION
Lens luxation may follow chronic uveal inflammation (Figure 4.26{a)), trauma or be
secondary to globe enlargement associated with chronic glaucoma. It may also be seen
in old cats without any antecedent history, possibly as a form of primary lens luxa-
tion resulting from zonular degeneration. Chronic uveitis is the commonest cause, but
note that lens luxation can itself provoke a mild uveitis. Lens luxation does not cause
the severe problems seen in the dog and affected animals do not constitute ocular
emergencies.
Diagnosis
● The diagnosis is usually straightforward, as the lens is large and easily visualised
and secondary cataract is common
● As the eye is not particularly painful, it is generally easier to examine than a canine
eye with lens luxation
● It is important to determine if uveitis is present and to measure the intraocular pres-
sure, as these parameters may help in deciding treatment priorities
Treatment
+ Treatment depends on the cause, the effect on vision and the amount of discomfort
· Lens luxation in the cat does not necessarily result in glaucoma, indeed the IOP may
be reduced when lens luxation is secondary to uveitis, and management of the uveitis
then takes priority
● Surgery for lens luxation carries an excellent prognosis in the right hands, provided
that other factors have also been taken into account
218
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
VItrEOUS
Congenital disease of the feline vitreous is very rare, and acquired problems, as in other
species, are usually a consequence of extension from neighbouring structures (e.g.
snowflake opacities in pars planitis; intravitreal haemorrhage beca use of bleeding from
retinal vessels in systemic hypertensive disease).
OCULAR FUNDUS
OPHTHALMOLOGY
ANATOMY
The feline globe is well adapted to vision under dim lighting conditions (relatively large
eye, large diameter cornea, large lens, rod-dominated retina and a highly efficient
tapetum). Because the tapetum is highly reflective and the normal pupil constricts
readily to a vertical slit, fundus examination should be performed with very low levels
of illumination.
snpuy auueo peu au uun auiadde jo suonea ramag sous snpuy aus
FELINE 
{Figures 4.1{b), 4.39(a,b) and 4.40(a,b)). The optic disc or optic nerve head (ONH) is
circular and is located in the tapetal fundus when a tapetum is present. The retinal
vessels often hook over the edge. It is not unusual to see a rim of pigment or other
colour surrounding the disc: the latter variant may appear reflective and is known as
conus.
[a)
(b)
Figure 4.39(a,b] Normal iris [a] and ocular Fundus [b] in a Domestic Shorthair. The optic nerve
head is loccted in the toapetal fundus cnd is unmyelinated, so that the retinal vessels hook over its
edge. The normal tapetcl fUundus is more reflective than that of the dog and herbivores, so the light
intensity must be kept as low as possible if subtle fundus lesions are not to be missed.
The shape, size and colour of the optic disc show much less variation in cats than
dogs. In dogs, most of the variations are related to the degree of myelination, whereas
in cats, myelination does not usually extend beyond the lamina cribrosa and is rarely
FelineOphthalmology
219
observed in the retinal nerve-fibre layer. The physiological pit is often obvious and the
 ONH appears slightly “cupped’ in most cats, a detail more readily appreciated using
the slit beam option on a direct ophthalmoscope.
Different fundus appearances are largely related to the amount of pigment present
and the presence or absence of a tapetum. The tapetum develops postnatally and its
colour varies between yellow to green, sometimes blue. Sub-albinotic eyes are usually
atapetal(Figure 4.40{a))
The retinal blood supply is holangiotic. The usual pattern of retinal vessels consists
of three major cilioretinal arterioles and a similar pattern of veins, the veins being of
greater diameter and slightly darker than the arterioles. In the commonest fundus
appearance, choroidal vessels, which perforate the tapetum to supply the choriocapil-
OPHTHALMOLOG'
laris, may be viewed end on against the tapetal background. In colour-dilute cats where
the fundus lacks pigment, or those in which there is no tapetum, considerably greater
detail of the choroidal vasculature is apparent (Figure 4.40(b)).
The area centralis (equivalent of human macula) is located dorsolateral to the optic
disc and is usually obvious because of the lack of blood vessels in the region. The area
centralis contains the highest concentration of cones in the retina; even so, the feline
fundus is rod dominated.
FELINE 
[a}
(b)
Figure 4.4O(a,b} Normal sub-albinotic iris [a] and Fundus (b] in a blue-eyed Domestic
Shorthair.
CONDITIONS OF THE OCULAR FUNDUS
Neurometabolic diseases (lysosomal storage disorders)
● Although the enzyme defect is present from birth in these unusual lysosomal storage 
disorders, the progressive clinical signs appear later because of the accumulation of
substrate in many cells throughout the body. In the retina, retinal ganglion cells and
the retinal pigment epithelium are involved. There are more reports of ocular
involvement with lysosomal storage diseases in cats than dogs.
●Retinal involvement has been reported in GMi-gangliosidosis, O-mannosidosis,
mucopolysaccharidosis (type Vl) and mucolipidosis (type Il).
220
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● It is often difficult or impossible to identify the subtle fundus changes {e.g. multiple
focal spots) because of accumulation of substrate in the corneal cells, which pro-
duces corneal cloudiness.
Retinal dysplasia
● Uncommon in cats and usually associated with perinatal viral infection (e.g. natural
         s
leukaemia virus)
● In addition to impaired retinal development, the development of cerebral and cere-
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
bellar tissues may also be affected and the commonest neurological signs relate to
cerebellar hypoplasia with feline panleucopaemia virus infection
Inherited progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)
● An autosomal-dominant rod-cone dysplasia observa ble ophthalmoscopically at 8-12
weeks of age exists in a closed colony of Abyssinian cats at the Animal Health
Trust in the UK. There is also an autosomal recessive type of rod-cone degeneration
observable ophthalmoscopically at 1.5-2 years in this breed
· The British Shorthair and Siamese are other breeds in which inherited PRA might
FELINE
occur
● The ophthalmoscopic signs of inherited PRA are a bilateral increase in tapetal reflec-
tivity, vascular attenuation and a poor PLR; the changes are symmetrical
· PRA is much less common in cats than dogs and, as in dogs, there is no treatment
Nutritional retinopathies
Taurine deficiency retinopathy
Taurine deficiency produces a retinal degeneration that is most obvious in the ared
centralis in the early stages, hence the description of feline central retinal degeneration
Figure 4.41). Progression of the condition results in a band-shaped lesion dorsal to
the optic disc and eventually there is generalised retinal degeneration and irreversible
blindness.
Figure 4.41 Taurine deficiency retinopathy photo-
graphed in blue light. Note the somewhat granular
hyperreflective zone in the region of the area centralis
in this Domestic Shorthcir.
Taurine deficiency retinopathy is not uncommon. It may be a consequence of
inadequate intake or faulty absorption and metabolism, and it is possible to produce
Feline Ophthalmology
221
this condition in some cats by feeding unusual diets, for example, exclusively dog food,
which lacks taurine. This is because taurine is an essential amino acid for cats, whereas
dogs can synthesise their own.
 Treatment involves taurine supplementation (the daily requirement for an adult cat
is 10 mg/kg body weight).
Thiamine deficiency retinopathy
● Thiamine deficiency is unusual and may be a consequence of feeding diets deficient
in thiamine (e.g. heat-processed commercial cat foods) or containing thiaminases
(e.g. raw fish)
Y
90
● Clinical signs include anorexia and neurological signs (mydriasis with normal vision,
ataxia, ventroflexion of the head and neck)
0
● Fundus examination may reveal retinal haemorrhage, papilloedema, peripapillary
OPHTHALM
 oedema and neovascularisation
· Coma and death result if the condition remains untreated
● Treatment involves thiamine (50-75 mg per dose every eight hours) to reverse the
deficit, and corticosteroids to reduce the oedema; both may be given intravenously
Infections
FELINE
Viral infection
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
Fundus changes are associated with vasculitis, pyogranulomatous inflammation or
hyperviscosity because of increased protein levels.
Feline leukaemia-lymphoma complex (FellC)
Fundus changes are usually a consequence of neoplastic involvement ± anaemia and
thrombocytopaenia.
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
Fundus changes are probably related to concurrent toxoplasmosis.
Bacterial infection
Mycobacteria
Mycobacterial infections may  be associated  with  chorioretinitis and retinal
detachment.
Sepsis
 Sepsis can produce multifocal inflammatory lesions by haematogenous spread.
Parasitic infection
Toxoplasmosis
The parasite may invade the retina and choroid, but the inflammation it produces is
not distinctive and concurrent infection (e.g. FIV) is possible.
Ophthaimomyiasis interna
Dipteran larvae may gain access to the eye and produce highly-characteristic criss-
crossing tracks in the fundus.
222
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Systemic mycotic infection
 Fundus changes are usually the result of haematogenous spread and consist of sub-
retinal and intraretinal pyogranulomas.
Neoplastia
● Primary tumours include astrocytoma and meningioma
● Metastatic tumours include lymphoma, squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma
and haemangiosarcoma
● Ophthalmoscopic findings include neoplastic infiltration, retinal detachment, retinal
GY
haemorrhage and retinal degeneration
0100
● Ischaemic degenerative changes, including pigmentary disturbance, have been assO-
ciated with angioinvasive tumours such as primary bronchogenic carcinoma
OPHTHALM
Trauma
Blunt trauma
● Retinal detachment may be associated with blunt trauma. Although the retina may
reattach spontaneously, degenerative changes will mark the site of the original
detachment
FELINE
· Intraocular haemorrhage, including hyphaema, may also be associated with trauma
Penetrating trauma
● Intraocular haemorrhage is the commonest complication
● Prognosis depends upon the site and extent of the injury
● Damage to the lens ± uveal tract may be complicated by malignant intraocular
sarcoma formation, sometimes years after the initial injury
Toxic changes
· Acute retinal degeneration/necrosis may follow the administration of substances
toxic to the feline retina
●Parenteral enrofloxacin {and possibly other quinolone antibiotics) has been associ-
ated with an apparently idiosyncratic adverse reaction. Affected cats become acutely
blind, with widely-dilated non-responsive pupils, often within hours of treatment
(Figures 2.24 and 4.42)
● Bilateral diffuse retinal degeneration is apparent within a few days of drug
a dministration
● The outer retina, particularly the photoreceptor layer, is damaged
● There is no specific treatment, but there may be a degree of recovery if the asso·
ciation is recognised and the drug stopped immediately
● If this antibiotic is selected for use in cats the dose rate should not exceed 5 mg/kg
every 24 hours
Feline Ophthalmology
223
Figure 4.42 Enrofloxacin-associated
 retinal
degeneration in a Domestic Shorthair. The cat went
0
acutely blind overnight (Figure 2.24, Section 2, p. 58)
cndbiltereinldegenerationwasapprentwihin
10Wl
d week of the cat receiving the drug.
OPHTHAL
Systemic hypertensive disease
Both primary and secondary systemic hypertension occurs in cats and is certainly the
commonest reason for fundus abnormality in older cats. The eye is a sensitive and
FELINE 
be performed in any adult cat that presents with haemorrhage in the anterior chamber.
Hypertensive Fundus changes and their progression (Figures 4.43-4.45)
● The hypertension-induced damage to the choroidal, retinal and optic nerve head vas-
culature (mainly the result of ischaemia followed by degeneration) allows serum and
even whole blood to escape
● Leakage may first be apparent as focal, hazy areas associated with choroidal vessels,
mainly arterioles, which are viewed end on as the *stars of Winslow'. These vessels
are most easily viewed in the tapetal fundus as they pierce the tapetum en route to
the choriocapillaris
● The histology of the normal tapetal retina and choroid is illustrated at the head of
this section, and a choroidal vessel perforating the tapetum can clearly be seen
(Figure 4.1(a))
● Leakage at this site allows subretinal fuid to accumulate. Subretinal fluid accumu-
lation results in focal bullous retinal detachment
● In the early stages partial retinal detachment may be followed by reattachment in
some patients, producing pathognomonic, often localised, branching linear folds,
but eventually total detachment will occur if the condition is not recognised
● The retinal vessels become grossly abnormal (variable diameter, notably narrow
segments ± aneurysmal dilatations)
● Arterioles are most severely affected
● Haemorrhage from choroidal and retinal vessels can produce marked intraocular
haemorrhage and, in some cases, there will also be haemorrhage from iris vessels
and hyphaema
● The optic nerve head may become oedematous (papilloedema)
● Retinal detachment and intraocular haemorrhage are the complicating factors most
likely to be encountered
● End-stage fundus changes comprise panretinal degeneration and optic atrophy, and,
224
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
although such animals are irreversibly blind, they can still have a good quality of
life if the systemic hypertension is treated
● The differential diagnosis of feline panretinal degeneration is summarised later
Diagnosis
It is important to recognise systemic hypertension as early as possible, ideally when
the choroidal vessels appear “fuzzy' and there is early mild subretinal fluid accumula-
tion. Vision will be severely compromised or lost once retinal detachment has occurred,
as retinal degeneration starts within hours of detachment in the cat. All cats of eight
OPHTHALMOLOGY
years of age and older should undergo regular screening {including examination of the
ocular fundus and blood-pressure measurement) to detect early systemic hypertensive
changes.
● History (e.g. to identify secondary associations such as renal failure and hyper-
thyroidism) and clinical signs
· Systemic arterial blood pressure {if there are no facilities for accurate measurement
such as Doppler flow oscillometry, then the cat should be referred)
●Relevant laboratory tests
FELINE 
Management
● Emergency treatment of systemic hypertensive crises may include titrated dosage of
sodium nitroprusside and can only be attempted when specialist facilities for con-
tinuous monitoring of blood pressure are available. This is unlikely to be available
in all but a limited number of referral centres.
● The cause of the systemic hypertension must be investigated to establish whether
it is primary or secondary to other conditions such as chronic renal failure or
hyperthyroidism.
● Patients can be given good quality of life on medical treatment ( usually a low-sodium
diet and oral medication). The drugs used most commonly are ACE inhibitors, such
as benazepril (0.25 mg/kg each day), or calcium channel blockers, such as amlo-
dipine besylate (0.625 mg total dose every 24 hours). These drugs may be given
alone, or if either drug alone is insufficient, they may be given together.
● Treatment aims to keep the mean systolic blood pressure below 180 mm Hg and
ideally approximately 160 mm Hg
Figure 4.43 Systemic hypertensive disease in a
Domestic Shorthair. The earliest Fundus signs are con
sistent with leakage From abnormal choroidal vessels
to produce a serous subretinal effusion and subtle
creas of retinal detachment. Similar leakage from
retinal vessels produces intraretinal oedema. The com-
bination of subretinal effusion, intraretinal oedema 
and regions of retinal detachment, creates a False
impression of variction of retinal-vessel calibre. Mean
systolic blood pressure was 245mmHg at the time of
the photograph.
Feline Ophthalmology
225
Y
[a}
(b)
0101
Figure 4.44 (a} Systemic hypertensive disease in a Domestic Shorthair. In this fairly severe
case there are true variations of retinal-vessel calibre. Preretinal hcemorrhage is apparent dorsally.
OPHTHALMO
Multiple bullous detachments cre present cs a consequence of subretinal effusion. Mean systolic
blood pressure was 280 mmHg at the time of the photograph. (b) Within a week of initiating
treatment to reduce the systemic blood pressure the retina hasre-attached and the large preretinal
haemorrhage has begun to resorb. Mean systolic blood pressure was 210 mm Hg at the time of
the photograph.
FELINE 
Figure 4.45  Systemic hypertensive disease in α
Domestic Shorthair In this blind and severely-affected
cat there is extensive intraocular haemorrhage and
retinal detachment. The two distinct blood-containing
bullae, at approximately 11 and 12 o'clock, indicate
haemorrhage from ruptured aneurysms. The more
extensive haemorrhage, from 4 o'clock to 8 o'clock, is
associated with extensive retinal detachment. The optic
nerve head of this eye was obscured by the haemor-
rhage, but papilloedema was present in the other eye.
Mean systolic blood pressure was 360 mmHg at the
fime of the photograph.
End-stage retinal degeneration and its differential diagnosis
(Figure 4.46)
Congenital and developmental conditions
● Feline panleucopenia virus infection in foetus
Acquired conditions
● Inherited progressive retinal atrophy
●Taurine deficiency retinopathy
●Post-inflammatory chorioretinopathy
●Retinotoxicity
●End-stage glaucoma
● End-stage systemic hypertension
226
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 4.46 Panretinal degeneration and optic
ctrophy. The cause was unknown in this cat, the
condition was bilateral and severe vascular attenua-
tion cnd intense tapetal hypereflectivity are notable
Features.
Haematological disorders associated with retinal haemorrhage
● Anaemia, especially when profound, may be associated with haemorrhage and is
also a cause of bullous detachments. Retinal vessels (and choroidal vessels if visible)
FELINE
will be pale
· Coagulopathies and vasculopathies
·Myeloproliferative and myelodysplastic disorders
● Platelet defects such as thrombocytopaenia
Hyperviscosity syndromes
Vessels, especially retinal veins and venules, appear engorged and tortuous. If cyanosis
is also present their colour will reflect this, as will the colour of the visible mucous
membranes.
●Raised plasma proteins (e.g. FIP)
● Increased red cells (polycythaemia)
●Increased twhite cells (leukaemia)
Lipaemia retinalis (Figure 4.47)
● Chylomicron-rich blood (circulating triacylglycerides exceed 25 mmol/l) imparts a
tomato-soup to creamy appearance to the blood column in retinal vessels
· Lipaemia retinalis can be caused by inherited primary chylomicronaemia and
chylomicronaemia secondary to disease (e.g. diabetes mellitus)
Feline Ophthalmology
227
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 4.47 Lipcemia retinalis in a kitten with chy-
lomicronaemia (serum triacylglycerides 41.6 mmol/l].
This Four week-old kitten was also anaemic because of
a heavy flea burden.
NEURO-OPHTHALMOLOGY
Most complex neurological problems in cats require referral for comprehensive
FELINE 
investigation.
Feline dysautonomia
This is an autonomic polygangliopathy and any ocular involvement will be bilateral.
The commonest ocular feature is widely-dilated non-responsive pupils and there may
also be prominent third eyelids and reduced tear production. Generalised signs include
depression, anorexia, weight loss, dry mucous membranes, megoesophagus, inter-
mittent regurgitation, constipation, ileus, urinary retention and bradycardia.
Management
● Patients require long-term nursing and avoidance of stress
● Complete recovery may not occur and relapses are possible
Anisocoria
Anisocoria is common in cats and may be of CNS {e.g. inflammation or neoplasia) or
Ocular origin (e.g. Horner's syndrome).
Temporary Horner's syndrome is common after bulla osteotomy and may also be
seen after aural administration of ototoxic agents (Figure 4.48).
Figure 4.48 Horner's syndrome (right eye)
 in a young cat, which developed afer the ears
were cleaned with detergent solution.
SECTION 5
RABBIT OPHTHALMOLOGY
RABBIT OPHTHALMOLOGY
RabbitOphthalmology
231
INTRODUCTION
The normal eye is illustrated in Figure 5.1(a,b). As is to be expected of a prey species,
the rabbit has prominent laterally-placed eyes with large uniocular fields on each side
and very small binocular fields in front and behind. The rabbit fundus is described
below (this section, p 237-8).
Applied anatomy features of note are:
● Communication between the right and left orbits
● The presence of an orbital venous sinus - this makes enucleation hazardous and it
is safer to perform transconjunctival enucleation or eviscerate the globe
● Lacrimal and accessory lacrimal glands
● The third eyelid has a superficial nictitans gland and a deep Harderian gland that is
OPHTHALMOLOGY
closely invested by the orbital venous sinus
● A single ventromedially-placed lacrimal punctum and a rather tortuous nasolacrimal
duct; the nasolacrimal duct is largely encased in bone and passes close to the roots
of both the molar and incisor teeth before terminating within the nasal vestibule
RABBIT:
[a)
(b)
Figure 5.1 (a) Normal rabbit eye. (b) Normal gross rabbit globe (with acknowledgements to
J.R.B. Mouldj.
Points to note about clinical disease in the rabbit
● Husbandry, environment and stress factors are of critical importance.
● Infectious organisms, notably Stapbylococcus spp and Pasteurella multocida may be
of relevance in orbital cellulitis, orbital abscess, blepharitis, blepharoconjunctivitis,
conjunctivitis, dacryocystitis, uveitis and endophthalmitis.
The common ocular and adnexal conditions of the rabbit and those that are impor-
tant to recognise because of the serious implications of misdiagnosis are summarised
in Box 5.1.
232
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Box 5.1   Common and important rabbit ocular and adnexal conditions
Traumafic damage (especially cornea)
Congenital defects such as colobomas of the retina, choroid and optic nerve head
(and, less commonly, other ocular tissues such as the lens)
Orbital infection
Globe prolapse
Ocular lipid infiltration and deposition linked with high fat (usually high cholesterol)
diets
 Blepharoconjunctivitis and conjunctivitis (e.g. myxomatosis, rabbit syphilis, bacterial
OPHTHALMOLOGY
infections)
Dacryocystitis
Ulcerative keratitis
 Lens-induced uveitis and cataracts associated with E. cuniculi
 Neoplasia, most commonly squamous cell carcinoma afecting the eyelids
Glaucoma
RABBIT 
ORBIT
Traumatic globe prolapse
The prominent nature of the globe means that it is relatively easy to displace it from
the orbit. Prognosis for retention of vision after the globe has been restored to the
orbit is guarded.
Orbital abscess and orbital cellulitis
Orbital infection is common in rabbits, and may be associated with septicaemia or
dental disease {Figure 5.2). Diagnosis is as for other species, and the common presen-
tation is exophthalmos and third eyelid prominence. Most cases are unilateral.
Figure 5.2 Orbital abscess Iprominent and
hyperaemic third eyelid) and iris abscessation
[(hwo caseous plaques) as the ocular manifesta-
fions of disseminated infection. At post mortem,
multiple abscesses were present and Staphylo-
coccus cureus was cultured.
Rabbit Ophthalmology
233
Differential diagnosis
●Whilst bilateral exophthalmos may be a consequence of disseminated infection (e.g.
pyaemia and septicaemia) it is more likely to reflect the jugular engorgement that
may accompany cardiothoracic disease, including neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma and
thymoma ).
● Prolapse of the nictitans gland or the Harderian gland of the third eyelid should be
distinguished from third eyelid prominence due to a space occupying lesion of the
orbit.
Treatment
+ Attend to any dental problems
●Drainage is difficult, even if orbital exenteration is performed, because of poor access
LMOLOGY
and the tenacious nature of the pus
● Systemic antibiotics effective against Stapbylococcus spp and Pasteurella multocida
are indicated - instillation of gentamicin after evacuation may help
OPHTHAL
EYElIdS AND CONJUNCTIVA
Conjunctival overgrowth
The cause of this condition is unknown and it may be either congenital or acquired
(Figure 5.3). As with symblepharon surgery, there is a tendency for the condition to
RABBI
recur following simple resection, so referral for more complex procedures, such as the
Arlt technique, should be considered.
Figure  5.3  Unilateral   conjunctival   over-
growth in α young rabbit, presumed to be
 congenital in this case.
Conjunctivitis
● Blepharoedema  and blepharoconjunctivitis may be caused by myxomatosis
(myxovirus). The severe, white, ocular discharge is probably a feature of secondary
bacterial infection. Although most commonly seen in wild rabbits, it may also be
seen in domestic pets and animals at risk are best vaccinated to provide protection.
· Treponema cuniculi {rabbit syphilis) also presents with blepharoconjunctivitis and
blepharitis and is transmitted to the neonate by genital infection in the dam.
● Conjunctivitis can be secondary to environmental factors {e.g. dust from poor-
quality hay).
● Secondary bacterial infections (e.g. Stapbylococcus aureus and Pasteurela spp) are
also causes of conjunctivitis.
234
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Neoplasia
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common eyelid tumour to be encountered, and
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
Normal tear production shows marked breed variation, and zero Schirmer I tear test
rea dings can be recorded in apparently normal eyes. Average Schirmer I tear test values
are about Smm/minute. When unilateral ocular surface disease is thought to be
associated with tear film abnormalities, careful comparison of both eyes, including
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Schirmer tear testing, is essential.
Dacryocystitis
Aetiology
● Dacryocystitis is common and is usually a consequence of dental disease causing
obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct and secondary bacterial infection
● Stapbylococcus spp and Pasteurella spp are important isolates from rabbits with
epiphora or frank dacryocystitis, but other bacteria (e.g. Bordetella spp, Moraxelld
spp, Neisseria spp and Streptococcus spp) may also contribute
二
● Predisposing factors include poor husbandry {e.g. dietary imbalance, poor ventila-
RABBI
tion, ammonia build up)
Clinical signs
● The rabbit is unusual in that drainage of tears takes place through a single large
punctum located in the ventromedial fornix, and a profuse white ocular discharge
can be seen to originate from the lacrimal punctum (Figure 5.4(a,b))
● Conjunctivitis and, less commonly, corneal ulceration or a corneal abscess, may also
be present
Management
·Address any underlying husbandry problems
● Take samples for culture and sensitivity
● For mildly-affected cases, topical chloramphenicol drops are applied directly into
the lacrimal punctum after careful cleaning
● For more serious cases, the lacrimal punctum is cannulated with a 22- or 23-gauge
catheter or similar, and gentle irrigation with sterile water used to restore patency,
followed by application of aqueous antibiotic solution (e.g. chloramphenicol or
fusidic acid, or a combination of fusidic acid and gentamicin drops)
●The catheter can be reinserted for each treatment or left in situ, but the latter is not
always well tolerated and the catheter needs to be fixed in place
● In the later stages of dental disease, parenteral treatment with antibiotics, e.g.
cephalexin given by subcutaneous injection at a dose rate of 20 mg/kg for 5-10 days,
may be required
● Treatment may need to be repeated at regular intervals, especially if the dental
disease progresses
RabbitOphthalmology
235
Prognosis
The prognosis is guarded to poor, depending on the extent of any underlying dental
disease and the adequacy of the husbandry.
OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a]
(b)
Figure 5.4 (a) Dacryocystifis, with extensive periocular changes, including α copious ocular dis-
charge. (b) A closer view of the ventral conjunctival sac shows pus emerging From the single lacrimal
 punctum and secondary corneal involvement.
RABBIT 
CORNEA
Keratitis
Ulcerative keratitis is not uncommon and is often the result of trauma from fibrous
 bedding or feed. There also appears to be a form of recurrent epithelial erosion.
Lipid deposition
Corneal lipid deposition will occur readily if fat-rich foods are fed by well meaning,
but misguided, owners. The rabbit, as an obligate herbivore, is particularly suscep-
tible to the adverse effects of high circulating cholesterol. Normal circulating levels of
total cholesterol are usually less than 3 mmol/l; on a high cholesterol diet the levels
often exceed 25 mmol/l. Accelerated atherosclerosis develops if these abnormal levels
are maintained, and there is widespread infiltration and deposition of lipid in the
tissues, including those of the eye {Figure S.S{a,b)).
236
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
[b)
RABBIT OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a)
Figure 5.5 (a} Bilateral ocular lipid deposition as a result of a diet that included butter and
cheese. In the right eye lipid can be visualised in the cornea, iris, ciliary body and lens. (b) The
left eye is not so heavily infiltrated (with acknowledgement to S.D. Carringtonj.
UVEAL TRACT
Uveitis
Uveitis may be a consequence of disseminated infection or the result of lens infec
tion by the ubiquitous microsporidium parasite Encepbalitozoon cuniculi (Figures
5.6(a,b)). Intralenticular Encephalitozoon cuniculi (probably acquired in utero from
an infected dam) causes eventual lens rupture (usually the anterior lens capsule) and
release of lens material with consequent phacoclastic uveitis.
Encephalitozoonosis can be treated by phacoemulsification to remove the lens
contents, and agents such as oral albendazole (1s-30 mg/kg daily) or fenbendazole
(10-20 mg/kg daily) over 2-4 weeks, may eliminate infection.
[a)
(b)
Figure 5.6 (a) Phacoclastic uveifis secondary to intralenticular Encephalitozoon cunicull. (b)
Gross globe from cnother rabbit with this condition to illustrate the lens rupture (with acknowl-
edgements to J. R. B. Mouldj
Rabbit Ophthalmology
237
LENS
Cataract
Aetiology
·Intralenticular E. cuniculi
●Trauma
● Inherited cataract
● Posterior capsular lens opacities may be observed in conjunction with persistent
hyperplastic primary vitreous
GLAUCOMAS
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Glaucoma
Congenital glaucoma (buphthalmos) is known to be inherited (recessive) in the
New Zealand White rabbit, but is also seen in other breeds. It develops in early life
{1-3 months of age) and is associated with pectinate ligament dysplasia.
Clinical signs
● Most typically corneal oedema and globe enlargement (Figure 5.7)
● Severe cupping of the optic disc is an easily-recognisable feature, but early cupping
RABBIT
is not easy to diagnose because of the depth and extent of the normal physiological
pit
Treatment
Treatment may not be necessary as the condition is not painful, and the intraocular
 pressure often returns to normal when degenerative changes in the ciliary body cause
a reduction in aqueous production.
Figure 5.7Unilateral glaucoma affecting the
left eye. Note the globe enlargement and lack of
pain.
FUNDUS
Anatomy
The rabbit has a merangiotic (i.e. a partially-vascularised) retina and the retinal blood
vessels are confined to a horizontal zone on either side of the optic nerve head (ONH).
The horizontally-located vessels consist of a major temporal (lateral) and nasal (medial)
veins and usually several arterioles. No tapetum is present in the rabbit fundus.
238
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
The ONH has such a deep physiological cup that the surface and bottom of the pit
cannot be viewed in focus together using a direct ophthalmoscope. This normal reces-
sion also makes it difficult to diagnose early pathological cupping in glaucoma cases.
The optic cup may occupy up to half the diameter of the ONH.
In the pigmented rabbit, obvious myelinated nerve fibres, the medullary rays, are
present beneath the retinal blood vessels, and additional myelinated nerve fibres are
often present ventral to the ONH (Figure 5.8{a)). The ONH is located dorsal to the
horizontal midline of the eye and the area centralis is in the form of a broad horizontal
band located ventral to the ONH. There is a greyish crescent immediately ventral to
the ONH, which is usually more obvious in albinos (Figure 5.8{b)).
RABBIT OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a]
(b}
Figure 5.8 (a) Rabbit fundus. In this pigmented rabbit, there are obvious myelinated nerve fibres
present beneath the horizontally located retinal blood vessels and ventral to the ONH. (b) In the
albino rabbit Fundus, there is an obvious greyish crescent immediately ventral to the ONH. In both
Iundi note that there is no toapetum cand the physiological pit is deep and extensive.
Congenitalabnormalities of therabbit fundus
Colobomatous defects of the optic nerve, retina and choroid are commonest in
microphthalmic eyes and usually of no clinical relevance.
Acquired abnormalities of the rabbit fundus
Active chorioretinitis and inactive chorioretinopathy are seen occasionally, but are
uncommon. Other changes observed include pigmentary disturbance and retinal
atrophy. The aetiology of acquired fundus lesions is poorly understood in rabbits
SECTION 6
FARM ANIMAL
OPHTHALMOLOGV
FARM ANIMAL OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
241
IntRODUCTION
Neonatal animals and small farm animals are remarkably easy to examine, but larger
farm animals will require good handling facilities (e.g. halter and cattle crush).
Chemical restraint may be required in adult cattle in addition to physical restraint,
especially when ocular pain is present. Any neuro-ophthalmological tests required
should be performed before sedatives are administered.
ANAIOMY
The eyes are laterally placed, especially in sheep, goats and cattle, so the binocular
visual field is small and the uniocular visual fields extensive. The orbit is enclosed and
the orbital floor is incomplete; there is substantial orbital fat in cattle.
OPHTHALMOLO
An upper and lower lacrimal punctum is the usual arrangement for tear drainage
in farm animal species. In the pig, however, a single upper punctum is usually all that
 is present. In cattle, the nasal ostium is obvious. Supernumerary openings are some-
times present in the nasolacrimal duct, but do not necessarily give rise to any clinical
problems.
In ruminants, the pupil is horizontally oval and granula iridica (corpora nigra) are
located on the dorsal and ventral pupillary borders. Heterochromia of the iris is
common and related to iris pigmentation and coat colour. True albinos have a white
ANIMAL
to pink iris; with greater amounts of pigment the iris appears blue, grey or brown, the
latter being the commonest adult colour. In pigs, the pupil is circular when dilated and
a subtle horizontal oval at rest. Granula iridica are absent.
A patent hyaloid artery is a common finding in young ruminants, whereas in adults
FARM
the site of the original attachment of the hyaloid artery at the optic nerve head is
marked by prominent glial tissue known as Bergmeister's papilla. Details of normal
fundus variations are outlined later (this section, pp 261-262).
HANDLING AND EXAMINATION
Sedation and analgesia
● Intramuscular injection of xylazine (approximately 0.05 mg/kg) provides excellent
sedation in cattle some 25 minutes after administration. Note that xylazine should
not be used in the last trimester of bovine pregnancy.
● In pigs, azaperone administered by deep intramuscular injection at a dose rate of
1-2 mg/kg will provide effective sedation some 20 minutes after administration.
· An auriculopalpebral nerve block can be given, if required, once the animal is
sedated. In cattle, some 10-15 ml of lignocaine 2% is injected beneath the fascia at
approximately the highest point of the dorsal border of the zygomatic arch and in
front of the base of the ear.
● Application of topical local anaesthetic will be needed if the eye is painful, as the
auriculopalpebral nerve block is motor and not sensory.
242
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
[a]
(b)
FARM ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
(d)
(c)
Figure 6.1  (a} Whole head of normal adult
cow. (b) Close up of adult alpaca eye. (c)
Whole head of young sheep. (d) Close up of
the eye of an adult sheep. (e) Cross-section of
(e)
the globe of a normal sheep (with acknowl-
edgements to J.R.B Mould for illustration of the
globej.
History and ophthalmic examination
As with other species, careful history-taking is essential and should include details
of previous or present drug therapy, nutrition, including feed supplements, and
the animals normal environment. Any potential exposure to poisons or toxins
should be investigated. The animal should be observed unrestrained in its normal
environment initially and note taken of its body condition, size for age, posture and
coordination.
Examination of the eyes and their adnexa follows the usual protocol. Assessment
 of ocular abnormalities are rendered simpler if normal species variations are recog-
nised and understood (Figure 6.1a-e).
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
243
● The complete bony orbital rim should be palpated as part of ocular examination
● The direction of the well developed upper eyelid lashes should be noted, to aid iden-
tification of exophthalmos or enophthalmos
● Constriction of the pupil in response to a bright light stimulus is slower than that
1eo pue sop aul Jo
Common and important farm animal ocular and adnexal conditions
The common farm animal ocular and adnexal conditions and those that are impor-
tant to recognise because of the serious implications of misdiagnosis are summarised
inBox 6.1.
Some of these conditions are important because of the financial implications of
disease, particularly so when there is herd or flock involvement. Unfortunately, the
harsh economics of many commercial enterprises means that management decisions
are frequently made on purely economic grounds, but veterinary surgeons must also
OPHTHALMOLOC
be aware of the welfare implications of such decisions.
Nutritional deficiencies - and excesses - including those of trace elements, are com-
moner in production animals than other domestic species, and ocular manifestations 
Paoe jo uq kusud ui uaas aq keu kaui sua yns jo ioadse auo aie
mothers and in animals that become affected later in life. It is important to ask about 
husbandry practices in any investigation of production animal disease, especially when
a number of animals are affected. Flock and herd problems tend to be of infectious,
nutritional, toxic or environmental origin. Hereditary factors may also be of impor-
ANIMAL
tance when groups of animals are affected.
FARM
Box 6.1  Common and important farm animal ocular and adnexal conditions
Ocular and adnexal trauma in most farm animal species, pigs seem least likely to
suffer traumatic damage.
 Neoplasia, parficularly squamous cell carcinoma and lymphoma (all farm animal
species, particularly catfle).
 Muliple ocular defects associated with nutrition, toxins and teratogens (e.g. bovine
virus diarrhoea in catlel.
 Entropion (lambs) and a variety of eyelid defects in some breeds of overweight pet
pig (e.g. Vietnamese pot bellied pig).
Infectious keratoconjunctivitis (catle, sheep and goats).
Cataract (congenital nuclear cataract in cale is commonest).
Uveifis from a variety of causes (in all farm animal species).
Blindness from a variety of nutritional (e.g. hypovitaminosis A, in catle and piglets),
toxic (e.g. lead in all farm animal species, bracken in sheep), metabolic (e.g. preg-
nancy toxaemia in sheep and ketosis in catle) and generalised diseases.
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
244
CONGENITAL AND EARLY-ONSET DEVELOPMENTAL
CONDITIONS
Ocular congenital and early-onset defects have been recorded in all farm animal
species. The most important economically are entropion in lambs, some forms of
cataract in cattle and defects associated with teratogens, of which the most notable is
bovine virus diarrhoea.
Other neonatal diseases of infectious origin in ruminants (e.g. blue tongue virus and
Listeria monocytogenes) may also present with ocular manifestations.
Rare developmental conditions that are not discussed further include lysosomal
storage diseases fe.g. ceroid lipofuscinosis, globoid cell leukodystrophy, gangliosido-
sis, mannosidosis) in ruminants.
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
Globe abnormalities - anophthalmos, cystic eye and microphthalmos
(Figures 6.2 and 6.3)
● Rare, but described in all farm animals
· The cause is often impossible to determine, but infectious, toxic, nutritional,
environmental and inherited factors should be considered
● May be unilateral or bilateral, occurring as isolated ocular defects or in conjunction
with defects elsewhere (e.g. muscular dystrophy and hydrocephalus in Hereford
cattle and blue tongue virus, usually in sheep)
FARM ANIMAL 
Figure 6.2 Bilateral cystic eyes in twins. The
cause was unknown.
Figure 6.3 Microphthalmos in a piglet due to
maternal vitaminA deficiency.The other piglets in the
liter were also affected.
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
245
Bovine virus diarrhoea (BvD) and ocular abnormality
● The pestivirus which causes the bovine virus diarrhoea-mucosal disease complex
(BVD-MD) has a worldwide distribution.
● Persistently-infected cattle are the major source of transmission, as they shed large
amounts of virus throughout life, but acutely-infected cattle are also an important
source of BVD-MD virus transmission.
● The developing foetus can be infected transplacentally in either acutely-infected or
persistently-infected cattle.
● BVD virus is a common cause of ocular insult to the developing eye and produces
a range of defects in calves when the mother is infected (Figure 6.4(a,b)). The ocular
manifestations depend upon the age at which the foetus is infected, with the devel-
oping eye being most susceptible to infection at about 150 days of gestation. Per-
sistent infection occurs when there is in ttero exposure of the foetus to BVD virus
earlier than at 12s days of gestation.
OPHTHALMOLOC
● The teratogenic insult coincides with immune-system development, so that there is
also an inflammatory response to infection. Many of the fundus changes observed
in young calves are a consequence of inflammation and post-necrotic scarring (e.g.
retinal degeneration after in utero chorioretinitis and optic atrophy after in utero
optic neuritis).
● BVD should always be considered as a likely diagnosis for any congenital ocular
lesion in cattle {e.g. blindness, nystagmus, microphthalmos, corneal lesions, persist-
ANIMAL
ent pupillary membrane, cataracts, retinal dysplasia, retinal degeneration, optic
atrophy).
● As the foetus is infected during the final stages of nervous-system development,
affected calves may also have hydrocephalus, hypomyelinogenesis and cerebellar
FARM
hypoplasia and consequent gross ataxia. Other likely changes include skeletal
defects, hypotrichosis and retarded growth.
● Pre-colostral serum samples from calves are diagnostic when they show titres to BVD
virus.
246
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
[a]
G
(b)
OPHTHALMOLOC
Figure 6.4 (a) Multiple ocular anomalies in a calf, associated with the teratogenic effects
of BVD-MD. Both eyes were affected. The left eye (pictured here) is microphthalmic (note the
large amount of exposed ‘white' of the eye and slight prominence of the third eyelidj. Persistent
pupillary membrane remnants are present and there is a dense Focal cataract where they are in
contact with the anterior lens capsule. {b) The fundi of both eyes were also abnormal. That of the
night eye is illustrated and shows marked attenuation of the retinal vessels and retinal
hyperreflectivity.
ANIMAL 
Progressive exophthalmos and strabismus
In cattle, particularly, there are a number of rare abnormalities, some with a genetic
basis, that are associated with progressive exophthalmos and strabismus {both con-
FARM
vergent squint - esotropia - and divergent squint - exotropia). There is no treatment
and animals will effectively become blind if the strabismus is severe enough.
Dermoid
Dermoids occur in all species, and in farm animals can arise from various sites (cornea,
conjunctiva and eyelids) as isolated ocular defects, or in association with other dis.
eases (e.g.BvD).
Eyelid coloboma
Colobomatous defects of the eyelid {usually upper eyelid) may be inherited in
Jacob and Manx sheep and is seen most often in those with four horns {Figure
6.5(a)).
Treatment
The eyelid should be reconstructed to avoid exposure keratopathy, most simply
by freshening the edges of the defect with a deep V-shaped incision (Figure 6.5(b).
The full-thickness wound created is closed with a single layer of sutures, commencing
at the eyelid margin, using a figure of eight suture or a simple interrupted suture
pattern.
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
247
[a)
(b)
Figure 6.5 (a) Upper eyelid coloboma in a Jacob sheep. Note the exposure keratopathy and
fank vascular and pigmentary keratitis in the area of cornea devoid of eyelid protection. (b)
GY
Appecrance following repairutilising a deep,ull-thickness,V-shaped incision and primary closure
OPHTHALMOLO
with 4-0 silkThekeratis soonresolved Following surgery nd retroilluminationhighlightsc number
of corneal ghost vessels.
Entropion
Entropion may be inherited as a polygenic trait in certain breeds of sheep, usually
affecting the lower eyelid of one or both eyes from birth or soon afterwards, although
it is often not detected until the lamb shows signs of ocular pain as a consequence of
ANIMAL
keratitis. Untreated severe cases usually progress to corneal ulceration with additional
secondary spastic entropion. Bilaterally affected animals can go blind, if the condition
[o 'anss uenua leuo se yns suoduos oi anp pasoun saos
perforation and endophthalmitis. Blind lambs may die of starvation.
FARM
● In some Piebald sheep, the upper eyelid is notched and ectropion is present at the
notch with entropion to either side
● Entropion can be inherited in miniature pigs. The upper eyelids of neonatal animals
are affected, and treatment is not usually needed
● Anatomical entropion is also seen in breeds such as the Vietnamese pot-bellied pig
and these cases may require surgical correction {usually Hotz-Celsus technique) and
strict weight control
● Previous injury is a common reason for secondary (cicatricial) entropion in all species
Management of entropion in sheep
Lambs with entropion should not form part of the future breeding flock, and rams
that produce affected lambs should not be kept for breeding. For primary entropion
in lambs there are many treatment techniques available. The method to select is the
one that is simple, cost effective and curative. Dry the eyelids carefully first whichever
treatment option is selected.
Manval eversion
 Manual eversion can work in mild cases and may need to be combined with manual
pinching.
● After drying the eyelids, a fold of lower-eyelid skin, close to the eyelid margin and
sufficient to correct the entropion, is taken between finger and thumb and pressed
briefly and firmly
248
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Lambs appear unconcerned by this manoeuvre
● This squeezing technique can be repeated in several other sites parallel to the eyelid
margin
● The mild swelling that this provokes is often sufficient to break the vicious cycle of
lower eyelid inversion
● The shepherd can carry out this technique
FARM ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
(a)
(b)
(c)
(p)
Figure 6.6(a-e)   Mild lower eyelid entropion
affecting the right eye only in a lamb. Manual
repositioning or a couple of Michel clips is
usually all that is required for such cases. The
manner in which Michel clips work (b and c],
(e)
their insertion (d) and removal (e) is illustrated.
Michelclips
Some 2-4 Michel clips {e.g. 14 × 3 mm size) can be inserted approximately 3-5 mm
below and parallel to the eyelid margin, in order to evert the eyelid (Figure 6.6(b,c,d,e).
●A fold of skin is tented up between thumb and forefinger, or, occasionally, with tissue
forceps in very small lambs, and the clips inserted with Michel forceps
● This method is probably the quickest and arguably the most economical for those
cases that do not respond to simple eyelid drying and eversion ± squeezing
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
249
● The clips are usually left in situ, as the majority fall out naturally within a week or
so; they can also be removed, if necessary, using the clip remover provided
Figure 6.7  Severe lower eyelid entropion.
The whole of the lower eyelid is involved
and secondary corneal damage has occurred.
Michel clips cre the quickest means of restoring
normal eyelid congruity in such cases.
Retention sutures
0
It is relatively easy to insert 2-4 temporary retention sutures {e.g. vertical mattress
W]
OPHTHAL
sutures) through the intact skin of the affected eyelid to evert the eyelid margin in the
same position and manner outlined for Michel clips, but it is difficult to maintain clean-
liness if large numbers are involved. One large horizontal mattress suture is a quicker,
but less aesthetically pleasing, alternative.
ANIMAL
Adhesive
Various types of impact adhesive applied to the skin to create the effect achieved by
Michel clips or skin sutures can also be effective, but it is obvious that such adhesives
must be applied with precision and the technique is more time consuming-
FARM
Injechion into the eyelid
Many veterinary surgeons favour the use of antibiotic preparations or, occasionally,
air, injected into the eyelid, most easily via the palpebral conjunctiva. It is difficult
to maintain cleanliness if many lambs are involved, and it is slower, and therefore
potentially less cost effective, than Michel clips.
A one-inch, 18-20 gauge needle is inserted through the lateral aspect of the palpe.
bral conjunctiva of the lower eyelid and pushed medially. Antibiotic {1 ml) or air is
injected as the needle is slowly withdrawn. The use of liquid paraffin is not recom-
mended as it provokes a persistent granulomatous response.
Surgery
Non-responsive congenital entropion and acquired types of entropion may require the
standard skin-muscle resection techniques already described in Sections 2 and 3, or
other blepharoplastic surgery according to cause, extent, use and value of the animal.
Cataract
● Congenital cataracts are commonest in cattle, but have also been reported in sheep
s1008pue
· Congenital cataracts may be associated with BVD infection in calves {usually
cortical)
● Congenital, bilateral, progressive cataracts, possibly hereditary, in Holstein-Friesian,
Hereford and Jersey cattle
250
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Optic nerve coloboma
Typical colobomas of the papillary and peripapillary region are inherited and common
in Charolais cattle.
GLOBE AND ORbIT
Exophthalmos
· In all farm animal species, exophthalmos may be a consequence of a space-
occupying lesion in the orbit or periorbita. Acquired exophthalmos should be
differentiated from the progressive developmental exophthalmos described earlier.
● Examples of possible causes include tooth abscess, maxillary cysts, sinusitis (sinusi-
GY
tis can be a complication of dehorning), granulomatous infections, pituitary abscess,
 OPHTHALMOLOC
neoplasia (squamous cell carcinoma and lymphoma).
Orbital neoplasia
● Investigations include careful examination to determine whether the mass is of
primary (e.g. squamous cell carcinoma) or secondary (e.g. lymphoma) origin.
· Lymphoma is the commonest secondary tumour in farm animals, particularly cattle,
and the orbit is the predilection site (Figure 6.8). Chemosis may be part of the pres
entation (probably because of impeded venous drainage from the orbit) and gross
ANIMAL
conjunctival thickening is a consequence of neoplastic infiltration.
FARM
 Figure 6.8  Orbital lymphoma in a Friesian
cow. A grass seed is adherent to the desiccated,
tumour-infiltrated, palpebral conjunctiva. This
animal also has bilateral nuclear cataracts.
EYELIdS
Causes of third eyelid (nictitating membrane) prominence
● Orbital, para-orbital or retro-orbital space-occupying lesions
● Inflammation (e.g. solar-induced) of the conjunctiva of the third eyelid
●Pain
● Neoplasia, most commonly squamous cell carcinoma (treat by local resection or
third eyelid removal) or lymphoma (not usually treated, affected animals are sent
for slaughter)
·Phthisis bulbi
● Tetanus is associated with bilateral involvement, usually as a rapid and intermittent
protrusion
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
251
Upper and lower eyelid neoplasia
Squamous cell carcinoma {eyelids, conjunctiva, limbus, cornea) is the commonest
primary neoplasm of cattle, especially Hereford cattle in countries with a high inci
dence of sunlight (Figure 6.9(a,b)). Affected animals are at least four years of age,
usually seven to nine years. It is rarer, but still the commonest eyelid tumour, in sheep.
Solar-induced inflammation may precede neoplastic changes in those animals that are
'at risk' because they lack protective pigment.
Papillomas are sometimes encountered in young cattle and sheep. They are of viral
 papillomas are usually self-limiting, so treatment is not normally required.
FARM ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a}
(b}
Figure 6.9 (a) Periocular squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in a Hereford cow. SCC in this region
may be of rapid and invasive growth and the history is ofen a good guide to prognosis. In this
case,the prognosis was adjudged tobe poorbecuseoftherapid growthof the tumourfromcom-
mencement to presentation in approximately 15 daysj. This animal was pregncnt, but because the
tumour was causing corneal damage and pain it was Felt necessary to intervene on welfare grounds.
The tumour was debulked under local infiltration anaesthesia. (b) The corneal damage healed
rapidly, but tumour regrowth occurred within a month.
Management
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) can usually be treated by local radiotherapy or sur-
gical debulking, combined with cryotherapy or radiotherapy (see Section 7, pp 294-
306). Complex cases may require referral. Occasionally, highly-malignant squamous
cell carcinomas, especially those involving the periocular skin, with a rapid growth
pattern and potential for spread are seen in cattle. The growth rate, size and position
of the lesion, as well as the value of the animal, will determine the correct approach.
252
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
Investigative procedures are as for small animals, except that in cattle the nasal ostium
is usually visible and accessible and so is used in preference to the lacrimal puncta for
cannulation and retrograde irrigation. Normal STT I in cattle is at least 20-30 mm per
minute.
Problems of tear production and drainage are very rare. In the very unlikely event
of KCS, parotid duct transposition should not be contemplated in ruminants as they
 secrete saliva continuously.
CONJUNCTIVA
GY
 OPHTHAlmOLO(
Conjunctivitis
Ca uses include allergies, viruses {infectious bovine rhinotracheitis), bacteria ( Moraxella
bovis) and parasites (Thelazia spp).
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR)
● The main ocular manifestation of IBR in cattle is conjunctivitis, which may be uni-
lateral or bilateral
● Conjunctivital form of IBR can occur as a herd disease with or without respiratory
ANIMAL
infection
● Typified by excessive lacrimation initially, progressing to copious mucopurulent
discharge
●Affected cattle do not usually exhibit blepharospasm or photophobia, but chemosis
FARM
and conjunctival hyperaemia ± petechiation can be marked
● Multiple, small, focal, white plaques may develop on the conjunctiva within two
weeks of the onset of clinical signs; Peripheral corneal involvement is rare
● Most cases resolve in 2-3 weeks and do not require treatment, although topical
antibiotic can be given to prevent secondary bacterial infection
Differential diagnosis of IBR and other cavses of keratoconjunctivitis
·Classical IBR can be distinguished from infections bovine keratoconjunctivitis
{IBKC) by the lack of central corneal involvement, however, both conditions can
occur concurrently with more severe and extensive ocular manifestations.
·IBR is easily differentiated from malignant catarrhal fever in which severe anterior
uveitis is the predominant early ocular sign, and generalised vasculitis contributes
substantially to the clinical presentation.
● Listeriosis may be associated with keratoconjunctivitis in ruminants and is usually
readily distinguished from other causes because of the accompanying neorological
signs.
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (IBKC) (New Forest Eye)
IBKC (New Forest Eye or pink eye) affects cattle and is the most important ocular
cause of suffering and economic loss in this species.
Aetiology
● Moraxella bovis (a Gram-ve bacillus) is the pathogen most commonly isolated from
clinical cases
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
253
● Piliated strains are associated with clinical disease, as they can adhere to the corneal
surface
+ Haemolytic strains are more likely to be isolated from clinical cases
· Pathogenic strains of Moraxella bovis are able to invade an intact cornea, although
the mechanism whereby this is achieved is unknown
· Some strains of M. bovis may release factors that encourage the detachment of
epithelial cells and there may even be a direct cytotoxic effect on corneal epithelial
cells
Pathogenesis
● The condition is commonest in young animals at pasture in summer, but in suscep-
tible herds cattle of any age and under a wide variety of management systems can
be affected
● The infection is highly contagious and is spread by direct contact, ocular and nasal
discharges and mechanical factors such as flies {e-g. Musca autumnalis, Musca
domestica,Stomoxys calcitrans)
0
W7
● Flies cause local mechanical irritation, and the organism may survive on their legs
for several days. M. autumnalis is the most important insect vector
OPHTHAL
 o  a  i   i a  o
● Incidence varies from year to year, but spread within a group is very rapid and mor-
bidity can be as high as 80%
● Although some recovered animals develop protective immunity, subclinical carriers
ANIMAL
are a problem. In such cases M. bovis can be isolated from ocular and nasal dis-
charges throughout the year
+ In some herds the infection becomes endemic
FARM
Other Factors that may contribute to the pathogenesis of disease
● Environmental factors, such as flies, dust, ultraviolet radiation, geographical loca-
tion, season and climate
· Systemic factors, such as breed, age, immune status and the effects of stress
● Concurrent pathogens (e.g. infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus and possibly
Mycoplasma spp)
● Vaccination with modified, live IBR virus will also place animals at greater risk of
IBKC, and the ocular signs in affected animals are more severe
● Local ocular factors, such as superficial trauma and the amount of ocular pigment
may also be of relevance
Clinical signs
● Affected animals are commonly inappetent and dull
● Usually one eye is affected initially, but infection will often spread to the other eye
so that ocular signs may be unilateral or bilateral
● Typically there are pain, blepharospasm, photophobia and excessive lacrimation
● A serous or mucopurulent discharge develops later in the time course of disease
● Conjunctivitis (hyperaemia and chemosis) and keratitis (tiny superficial vesicles and
corneal oedema) are relatively early clinical features; there are sometimes also eyelid
Dedema and blepharitis
●A greyish-white, centrally-located corneal opacity develops, usually within 2-4 days
of the initial signs of discomfort, followed by corneal necrosis (white or yellow in
appearance) and central corneal ulceration (Figure 6.10(a)
254
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Ulcerative changes may be confined to one eye
● The extent and depth of corneal vascularisation depends upon the age of the lesion
and the extent of corneal involvement
● Despite the spectacular appearance, the cornea heals with minimal scarring in most
cases over some 2-3 weeks, but when there has been stromal involvement and more
serious ulceration, dense axial corneal scarring can persist {Figure 6.1ofb))
● Unusual sequelae, usually as a complication of globe rupture, include blindness,
endophthalmitis, panophthalmitis and even death, beca use of ascending infection to
the central nervous system
● The time course and extent of ocular involvement is variable, for example the con-
 dition can follow a more protracted and severe course (some 2-3 months) in younger
animals
GY
● Some cattle become carriers and show no clinical signs, or there may be intermittent
 OPHTHALMOLOC
or more persistent excessive lacrimation in such animals
· Reasonable protective immunity follows infection
FARM ANIMAL 
[a]
[b)
Figure 6.10 (a) Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis in a Friesian heifer. Some 30% of the herd
were affected at the time of examination. Note the cellular infiltration of the central cornea (asso-
ciated with corneal necrosis). There is also mild conjunctival hyperaemia, perilimbal oedema, fine
corneal neovascularisation and periphercl cellular infiltration. (b) Within a Few days of treatment,
corneal healing is progressing well.
Preventative measures
disease.
● Cull carrier animals
● Regular inspection of animals and their immediate isolation in the event of identi-
fication of disease is crucial
● Stringent measures should be taken to control flies
● Adequate feed space should be provided
● Other factors such as the reduction of stress (e.g. avoidance of long journeys) may
reduce the potential for disease transmission
● Vaccination is not yet an effective means of preventing clinical disease
Management
Affected animals should be isolated to limit spread and shade should be provided.
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
255
Topical trearment
Topical benzathine cloxacillin ointment or cephalonium ointment both give effective
therapeutic levels for 24-48 hours, and one or other is the treatment of choice in the
UK. One or two treatments are effective. Other effective topical antibiotics include
tetracyclines, gentamicin and first-generation cephalos porins.
Subconjunctival injections
Subconjunctival injections are painful for the animal and difficult to administer in the
correct site (beneath the bulbar conjunctiva) in a clean fashion to multiple animals.
The uptake of antibiotic, and therefore the therapeutic levels achieved, are quite vari-
able, although tear-film concentrations of antibiotic may be adequate. Injections
beneath the conjunctiva of the eyelids may not achieve therapeutic levels, as the blood
flow tends to be away from the eye. Bulbar subconjunctival procaine penicillin given
once daily for three days has been claimed to be an effective treatment for dairy cattle.
OPHTHALMOLOC
Parenteral treatment
 Parenterally administered antibiotics are also effective, but the potential disadvantage
of this route is the meat and milk withdrawal period. In commercial beef animals not
close to slaughter, intramuscular long-acting tetracycline (20 mg/kg, two doses, 72
hours apart) is probably the drug of choice. In dairy herds, procaine penicillin is more
likely to be used as the milk withdrawal time for this drug is only three days. The
 ANIMAL
Other
 In severe cases corneal protection (e.g. temporary tarsorrhaphy) should be provided.
Enucleation is rarely required.
FARM
Infectious ovine keratoconjunctivitis (lOKC)
[OKC (pink eye) occurs in sheep and goats throughout the world and affects animals
of all ages, although adults are usually the most severely affected. Mycoplasma spp
{most frequent isolate) and Chlamydopbifa spp (next most frequent isolate) are thought
to be primary pathogens. Other bacteria may be involved, but it is likely that they play
a secondary role.
Aetiology
·Mycoplasma spp (M. conjunctivae var ovis and M. mycoides var capri)
·Chlamydophila (formerly Chlamydia) spp (C. psittaci group)
·Aerobic bacteria (Branhamella ovis, Escherichia coli and Stapbylococcus aureus)
Pathogenesis
● Infection is usually introduced into a flock by mildly-infected or carrier animals
● Spread within the flock is more likely when the animals are in close proximity (e.g.
when gathered, housed, penned, fed or transported)
● Outbreaks occur at all times of year, but are usually seen in winter and early spring
in the UK because of the inereased crowding associated with, for example, supple-
mentary feeding and lambing
● Ultraviolet light may be an exacerbating factor, as cases tend to be more severely
affected during the summer
 Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
256
● Post-infection immunity after chlamydophiliosis is poor, and some animals can
become infected repeatedly; immunity after mycoplasmosis seems to be rather better
· Carriers can pose a problem as both Mycoplasma and Chlamydophila can be iso-
lated from the eyes after apparent recovery. Mycoplasma organisms show greater
persistence and some previously-infected animals can provide a source of infection
the following year
·Relapse can occur after Mycoplasma and Chlamydopbila infection in both
naturally-recovered and treated animals
Ocular signs
The ocular signs are similar, irrespective of the causal agent. Resolution can occur after
any of the stages outlined and treatment tends to diminish the severity of the clinical
GY
signs and shorten the time-course of disease (Figures 6.11(a,b,c) and 6.12(a,b)).
● Initially there are pain, blepharospasm, increased lacrimation and conjunctival
 OPHTHALMOLO
hyperaemia, first in one eye and then, within a few days, in both eyes
● Corneal oedema develops and new blood vessels enter the cornea from the limbus;
vascularisation is usually first apparent in the dorsal cornea and both superficial and
deep vessels can be distinguished.
● The ocular discharge becomes more serous
● The serous discharge becomes more purulent, cellular infiltration and microabscesses
may become apparent in the cornea and corneal ulceration can develop
FARM ANIMAL
● Conjunctival lymphoid follicular hyperplasia is common in established infection.
● Frank corneal abscessation ± hypopyon and iritis may be found in some severe cases.
· Complications are rare and include blindness, permanent corneal opacities and scar-
ring, endophthalmitis and pbthisis bulbi
[a]
[b)
Figure 6.1l(a-c) Infectious ovine kerato-
conjunctivitis affecting a high proportion of a
Flock of crossbred ewes at the time of examina-
fion. Three are illustrated. In (a), the predomi-
nant findings on ophthalmic examination were
conjunctival hyperaemia and perilimbal corneal
oedema with some vascularisation, particularly
dorsally. In {b), peripheral corneal vascularisc-
tion is prominent and in (c) there is also marked
[c]
cellular infiltration of the cornea.
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
257
[a]
(b)
Figure 6.12 (a) Infectious ovine keratoconjunctivitis associated with frank corneal abscessation.
There is also a change of corneal profile. (b} Temporary tarsorrhaphy was performed and corneal
hecling was progressing well when the tarsorrhaphy was taken down ten days later.
OPHTHALMOLO
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and laboratory samples, which should be taken
early in the course of disease. Only samples taken from the conjunctival sac are listed.
● Swabs and scrapes should be taken into mycoplasma transport medium, chlamydial
 and viral transport medium and Stuart's transport medium for bacteriology
ANIMAL
· Culture of Mycoplasma requires special media, whereas culture of Chlamydopbila
is slightly easier and culture of other bacteria is straight forward
●Experimental work identifying these organisms by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
offers the possibility of rapid and specific diagnosis
FARM
· Giemsa staining can be used to detect Mycoplasma and Chlamydopbila in smears
and scrapes, but it is easy to confuse intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies and melanin
granules, so fluorescent antibody tests with specific antisera are more accurate.
Treatment
· Affected animals should be isolated to limit the spread of disease, and treated
affected animals should be separated from untreated ones
●If the problem is severe and widespread, the whole flock should be treated
·Although in many cases the ocular signs associated with Mycoplasma and
Chlamydopbila are self-limiting, it is usual to shorten the time course of disease by
treating affected animals and to consider prophylactic treatment for others at risk
● Adults and weaned stock can be treated with a single intramuscular injection of
long-acting oxytetracycline (10-20 mg/kg body weight). The higher dose can be used
prophylactically at 48-72 hour intervals 
● Local treatment poses difficulties, as topical ophthalmic tetracycline ointment is no
 o   l  n  
 preparations (contain corticosteroids) do not provide suitable alternative choices and
there are no ideal antibiotics for subconjunctival use
● Recovery usually starts within 3-4 days and is complete within a week with treat-
ment and rather longer than this twithout treatment
· Although medical treatment produces a good clinical response within days, it does
not eliminate either M. conjunctivae or Chlamydopbila
258
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
CORNEA
For IBKC in cattle and IOKC in sheep and goats see pp 252-257. Ulcerative keratitis
is usually of infectious or traumatic origin (Figure 6.13),
Figure 6.13 Severe keratitis in a ram Fol-
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
lowing chronic traumatic damage from the
animal's own misdirected horn. The horn had
grown too close to the eye and was removed
prior to photography.
UVEAL TRaCT
Neonatal uveitis
ANIMAL
Neonatal uveitis (Figure 6.14) may be associated with, for example, umbilical infec-
tion (navel-ill), pneumonia and septicaemia in all farm animals.
FARM
Figure 6.14 Neonatal uveitis cassociated
with navel-ill in a calf. Mild hypopyon is the most
obvious feature and the eye is reasonably com-
fortable. Although topical symptomatic treat
ment for uveitis is usually given, the systemic
trectment of the underlying cause is the most
important aspect of management in resolution of
the ocular signs.
Acquired uveitis
Uveitis may be associated with trauma, severe keratoconjunctivitis and keratitis,
toxins, immune-mediated and generalised disease, including neoplasia (e.g. lym-
 phoma). As in other species, the uveitis is termed idiopathic when a precise aetiology
cannot be determined
Malignant catarrhal fever
● Malignant catarrhal fever is a high mortality, low morbidity, pansystemic vascu-
lopathy of ruminants caused by a herpes virus
● The virus affects all epithelial surfaces as well as vascular endothelium
● Pyrexia, generalised lymphadenopathy, oral erosions, mucopurulent nasal discharge,
diarrhoea, lameness and encephalitis are possible systemic features in cattle
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
259
· Ocular manifestations include keratoconjunctivitis, uveitis and dense corneal
oedema (Figure 6.15(a,b,c))
· Treatment of severely-affected animals is not usually attempted, as it is not
particularly successful
·Animals with severe disease usually die; those with mild disease may survive
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
(a)
ANIMAL
[b)
(c)
FARM
Figure 6.15 (a,b) Uveitis associated with malignant catarrhal fever in a Friesian steer. Note
the intense pupillary constriction cand loss of iris detail (right [a] and lef [b] eyes]. Corneal changes
include peripheral cellular infiltration and vascularisation as well as mild corneal oedema. When
viewed from the side the anterior chamber was relatively shallow because of the swollen, inflamed
iris. (e) The leff eye is shown after topical treatment with atropine and prednisolone acetate, which
 produced considerable symptomatic relief.
Listeriosis
· The feeding of silage {especially big bale) has been associated with uveitis {usually
unilateral presentation) in cattle and sheep
● Affected animals should be taken off silage
● In neonates, listeriosis is most likely to be associated with encephalitis or septicaemia
and infection is acquired from the mother's milk
● Note that when listeriosis affects the nervous system of ruminants (notably cattle,
sheep and goats), the ocular manifestations include nystagmus, blindness, facial
 paresis or paralysis (upper eyelid ptosis) and strabismus (usually medial and on the
same side as invol vement of the abducens nucleus)
Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
● Infectious thromboembolic meningoencephalitis ( TEME) is a septicaemia caused by
the Gram-ve bacterium Haemophilus somnus in young cattle (commonest at less
than one year of age)
260
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
· Of economic significance in the USA and Canada, but is apparently rare in the UK
● Ocular manifestations include conjunctivitis, retinitis (thrombosis of retinal vessels)
and chorioretinitis
● Anterior segment involvement is less common
Other infectious causes of uveitis
· Toxoplasmosis can be a cause of uveitis and retinitis in sheep
● Uveitis may be associated with leptospirosis and bovine tuberculosis in cattle
● Uveitis may also be seen as part of the clinical presentation in adult animals with
septic foci and septicaemia (e.g. mastitis, metritis, traumatic reticuloperitonitis and
reticulopericarditis)
GY
Signs of acute anterior uveitis
● Pain, blepharospasm, lacrimation (anterior segment triad)
 OPHTHALMOLOC
● Photophobia
● Hypotony, corneal vascularisation, corneal oedema, anterior chamber infltration,
miosis, loss of iris detail and early synechiae formation
Signs of chronic anterior uveitis
Synechiae, darkening of iris, fixed, irregular pupil, iris rests, cataract, hydrophthalmos,
and, sometimes, phthisis buibi (Figure 6.16)
ANIMAL
FARM
Figure 6.16 Phthisis bulbi following post-
traumatic uveitis in a cow. Note that there is also
prolapse of orbital Fat.
Symptomatic treatment of anterior uveitis
● Topical corticosteroids, but avoid if corneal ulceration is present
● Topical mydriatics (1-4% atropine sulphate)
● Topical antibiotic {e.g. tetracycline)
● Intravenous or intramuscular long-acting tetracycline is useful as a first-choice
 antibiotic in silage-associated types, and may be effective in halting the development
of uveitis if given early
LENS
Cataract
● Secondary to teratogens (e.g. BVD-MD virus), ill-defined insult (e.g. environmental
factors), anterior uveitis and trauma
· Nutritional cataracts have been reported following use of the feed additive
hygromycin B in pigs
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
261
OCULAR FUNDUS
ANATOMY
The optic nerve bead is often myelinated and of variable shape and size in farm
animals, and may be heavily pigmented in sheep. It is usually located within the non-
ta petal fundus.
The retinal blood supply is holangiotic. The 3-4 primary retinal vessels are large
and very distinct, and it is not unusual to find that the dorsal arteriole and venule
spiral around each other. The small choroidal vessels {mainly capillaries) that perfo-
rate the tapetum en route for the choriocapillaris can be viewed ophthalmoscopically
as distinct dark dots - the stars of Winslow.
FARM ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
The tapetum of herbivores, yellow, green or blue in colour, is formed from colla-
gen (tapetum fibrosum) and this forms an effective barrier, so that in herbivores gen-
erally it is often easier to identify fundus pathology by examining the non-tapetal
fundus. Pigs do not have a tapetum, and the fundus is a uniform light grey to red-
brown colour in most pigs and of pinker appearance when less pigment is present.
[a)
(b)
(c)
[p)
Figure 6.17(a-d} Normal bovine Undus (a], ovine Fundus (b], caprine fundus [c) and camelid
fundus (d).
262
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
ACQUIRED DISEASES INVOLVING THE FUNDUS
Infectious disease
●Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium bovis), malignant catarrhal fever, infectious throm-
boembolic meningoencephalitis - TEME (Haemophilus somnus), in cattle
● Blue tongue virus, Borna disease and scrapie in sheep
● Teschen disease and Aujeszky's disease in pigs
Nutritional and toxic disease
·Hypovitaminosis A (mainly cattle, sheep and goats)
 o Occurs because there is no access to pasture and deficiencies in compounded
rations
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
o In cattle associated with poor dark adaptation initially, then night blindness, then
complete blindness if unrecognised (Figure 6.1 8(a,b,c))
o There is raised intracranial pressure, stenosis of the optic canals, papilloedema
 and, eventually, retinal degeneration and optic atrophy
o There may also be decreased corneal sensitivity as well as more generalised signs
such as unsteadiness, diarrhoea, convulsions and fading hair colour
·Bright blindness, a retinopathy from consumption of bracken ( Pteridium aquilina),
in sheep
● Rafoxanide toxicity in sheep and goats (optic nerve damage)
FARM ANIMAL
● Arsanilic acid toxicity in pigs (demyelination and axonal degeneration of optic nerve
and optic tract)
[a]
(b)
Figure 6.18 (a) Hypovitaminosis A in young bulls
rations. Note the widely-dilated pupils (photographed 
under daylight conditions in a covered yard). (b)
Fundus examination revealed abnormalities in most of
the group. Here there is a degree of papilloedema,
peripapillary hcemorrhage and subtle attenuation of
the retinal vessels. (c) The vascular attenuation is more
obvious here, and there is a degree of optic atrophy
[c)
and a small haemorrhage between 1 and 2 o'clock.
Farm Animal Ophthalmology
263
SOME CAUSES OF CORTICAL BLINDNESS IN FARM ANIMALS
● Lead poisoning - most farm animals
● Thiamine deficiency ( polioencephalomalacia or cerebrocortical necrosis) - most farm
animals
●Ketosis in cattle
●Pregnancy toxaemia in sheep
·Hydatid disease (Coemurus cerebralis) in sheep
● Sodium toxicosis (salt poisoning) and water deprivation in ruminants
● Meningoencephalitis and encephalitis from any cause (e.g. TEME in cattle, listerio-
sis in cattle, sheep and goats, toxoplasmosis in sheep, sarcocystosis in cattle, sheep
(s0o8 pue
FARM ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
SECTION 7
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
Equine Ophthalmology
267
InTRODUCTION
The horse has laterally-placed eyes with large, panoramic, uniocular visual fields and
small binocular visual fields {Figures 7.1{a-c) and 7.2(a,b)). As in all species with lat-
erally placed eyes, there is a high percentage of crossover (some 85%) at the optic
chiasma. The lateral positioning of the eyes enables the horse to have extensive
duces a relative image size some S0% greater than that of the human eye. Visual acuity
        q s    5 
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a]
(c)
(b)
Figure 7.l(a-c) Normal gross equine globe (a); fundus (b); cornea and dorsal iris and gronulc
iridica (c] (with acknowledgements to J. R. B. Mould].
268
 Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
[b)
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 7.2 (a) Whole head of normal horse.
[a)
(b) Externcl eye of normal horse.
ANATOMY
EQUINE 
● The supraorbital fossa and direction of the well-developed eyelashes on the upper
eyelid should always be inspected as part of ocular examination. The supraorbital
fossa should also be palpated.
· Obvious indentations, the dorsal and ventral orbital sulci, are apparent close to
and parallel to the eyelid margins. A rounded prominence, the lacrimal caruncle,
located in the medial canthus proximal to the third eyelid is an obvious feature
of many horses; it may be pigmented or non-pigmented and usually bears fine
hairs.
· The nasal palpebral aperture and cornea are wider medially than laterally and the
pupil is horizontally oval.
● The grey lines that are such a striking feature of the medial and lateral cornea in
some horses mark the insertion of the pectinate ligaments into the termination of
the cornea at Descemet's membrane. The pectinate ligaments and entrance to the
 drainage angle can be directly observed in these regions.
● The commonest iris colour is dark brown, although heterochromia of the whole iris
or a sector of the iris, are common (this section, pp 294-295) and persistent pupil-
lary membrane remnants are a very common finding (this section, p. 294). Colour
dilution is associated with blue, cream or tan iris colour and there is usually focal
or diffuse lack of stromal pigment as well as a relatively under-developed iris.
· The gramula iridica are better developed on the dorsal pupillary border.
● Although the pupillary light response to a penlight is often somewhat slow and
incomplete, the pupil responds briskly and completely when exposed to bright
sunlight.
Equine Ophthalmology
269
● The equine lens is large and may demonstrate a number of non-progressive minor
aberrations. The lens suture lines are usually apparent: the anterior suture lines are
  a       r    n  a
the form of an inverted Y or of stellate or sawhorse configuration. The tips of the
suture lines sometimes have a somewhat feathered appearance. It is very common
to be able to visualise the nuclear-cortical interface.
· As the eye is relatively large, some details of vitreal structure, such as the fibrillar
condensations, are often quite clearly defined. For example, the anterior hyaloid face
is readily visualised with a slit lamp and appears as an irregular, grey, veil-like struc-
ture just posterior to the posterior lens capsule. Hyaloid remnants persist to some
four months of age in most foals.
● The fundus has a number of features of note - the retinal blood supply is pauran-
giotic, the optic nerve head is located within the non-tapetal fundus and two regions
of higher visual acuity (approximating to the human macula) have been identified.
EXAMINATION
.90
ASSESSMENT
10
OPHTHALMO
The initial assessment is important and should include details of the horse's age, breed,
of their treatment. The animal's lifestyle, management, performance and behaviour
should also be recorded.
The nature of the present problem should be established, especially in relation to
the clinical signs observed, including the rapidity of onset and whether there have been
EQUINE 
similar problems in the past. Any treatment that the animal has received should be
documented, as should the response to treatment.
Ophthalmic examination is usually carried out in a loose box from which light has
been excluded. Any stray light entering may complicate interpretation as the light
reflects on the cornea and lens.
Proper handling is essential and a twitch is occasionally required. Sedation and
analgesia will be needed on occasions, particularly if the eye is painful, but in most
cases routine ophthalmic examination is performed without chemical restraint. Local
nerve blocks, if needed, should be administered after systemic sedation has been given,
although motor nerve blocks may be unnecessary after effective sedation.
Note that if the significance of any ophthalmic finding at a pre-purchase examina-
tion is not apparent, then referral should be considered.
SEDATION AND ANALGESIA
The drugs (Table 7.1) are given by slow intravenous injection, and additional, smaller
doses can be given if deeper sedation is required. The horse should be left undisturbed
to allow these drugs to take effect before proceeding to the next stage. Young foals
should not be given injectable sedatives and analgesics.
270
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Table 7.1Sedation for ophthalmic examination
Purpose
Drug
Dosage
Sedation
 Detomidine
up to 10mcg/kg
Romifidine
up to 50mcg/kg
Profound sedation
 Detomidine or romifidine
+ systemic analgesic, e.g. butorphanol
0.02-0.05mg/kg
ncg = micrograms
mg = milligrams
LOCAL ANAESTHESIA
Topical anaesthesia (Figure 7.3)
● As an aid to examination of a painful eye and for diagnostic techniques such as corneal
 culture, conjunctival biopsy and cannulation of the lacrimal puncta or nasal ostium.
● Topical local anaesthetic can be administered directly from the single use ampoule
OLOGY
or using a 1 ml hypodermic syringe to which the hub of a 23-gauge needle, from
which the needle has been broken off, has been fitted.
● Proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.s% drops are most commonly used to desensitise
OPHTHALMO
the ocular surface, and this agent produces excellent short-term analgesia of rapid
onset.
●Amethocaine hydrochloride (tetracaine hydrochloride), 0.5% and 1 %, provides an
alternative when more profound anaesthesia is needed.
EQUINE 
Figure 7.3 Application of topical
anaesthesia  using  α  1 ml  hypodermic
syringe and 23-gauge needle hub with
the needle broken off {with acknowl-
edgements to R. C. Lowe).
Equine Ophthalmology
271
Local infiltration anaesthesia
● Local infiltration of the eyelid is needed prior to placing a subpalpebral medication
device (this section, pp 272-274)
● Local infiltration is also used prior to skin suture placement in the conscious horse
● Lignocaine hydrochloride (lidocaine hydrochloride) 1% or 2%, with adrenaline, and
mepivacaine hydrochloride 2% are effective
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
● This motor-nerve block is of value when blepharospasm makes examination diffi-
cult and if there is any possibility that full-thickness rupture of the globe may be
present. The auriculopalpebral nerve is a branch of the facial nerve.
● The sensory supply to the eye (ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve) is not
affected by this block which is why topical local anaesthetic may also be required
if there is ocular pain.
● The palpebral branch of the auriculopalpebral nerve can be blocked as it crosses the
 dorsal border of the zygomatic arch, immediately medial and slightly anterior to the
highest point of the zygomatic arch and approximately halfway between the eye and
00
the ear. A 5/8-inch 22- to 25-gauge needle and 2-3 ml of prilocaine hydrochloride
1% or mepivacaine hydrochloride 2% are used for this block.
10
· Alternatively, the auriculopalpebral nerve can be blocked just caudal to the ramus
OPHTHALMO
of the mandible, approximately one inch below its highest point (Figure 7.4). A one
inch 22-23 gauge needle and 5-7 ml of prilocaine hydrochloride 1% or mepivacaine
hydrochloride 2% are used for this block.
EQUINE 
Figure  7.4  Administration of an  auricu-
lopalpebralnerve block (with cacknowledge-
ments to R. C. Lowe).
Supraorbital nerve block
· The supraorbital or frontal nerve is a branch of the ophthalmic division of the
trigeminal nerve and supplies sensory innervation to the medial two thirds of the
upper eyelid. The supraorbital foramen is located on the orbital rim in the supra-
 orbital process of the frontal bone dorsal to the medial canthus of the eye.
● The supraorbital nerve block anaesthetises the upper eyelid and makes ophthalmic
examination easier, as the animal cannot feel the manipulations of the eyelid.
● The nerve is blocked by injecting 3-5 ml of prilocaine hydrochloride 1% or mepi
vacaine hydrochloride 2% using a 5/8-inch 22- to 25-gauge needle placed in the
region of the supraorbital foramen to a depth of no more than a quarter of an inch.
There is no need to place the needle through the foramen as the globe is located not
far beneath.
272
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Some motor paralysis of the facial nerve may also be produced, as there are palpe.
bral branches at this site.
    s n e  si  s  
eyelid surgery, including eyelid biopsies.
PRE-PURCHASE AND INSURANCE EXAMINATION
At examinations for purchase and insurance purposes, findings that may be difficult
for non-specialists to interpret include opacities of the ocular media, especially those
involving the cornea, lens or vitreous, iris variations including those affecting the
grarula iridica and normal and pathological alterations in the appearance of the ocular
fundus. Many of the findings are normal variants - indeed this type of examination is
usually conducted on the assumption that the eye will be normal. There is no doubt
that, as in other species, examination of as many normal animals as possible is the
best way of gaining confidence in interpreting the findings.
.90101
The intended use of the animal is obviously of relevance when purchase and
insurance examination is carried out: for example, what is expected of an animal
used for quiet hacking places quite different demands on the eye than those that
OPHTHALMO
would be required of a three-day eventer. It is always sensible to categorise changes
identified at these examinations as anomalies or abnormalities of no clinical signifi
cance, abnormalities of minor clinical significance and abnormalities of major clinical
significance.
QUINE 
Abnormalities of major clinical significance include:
· Any abnormality that may become, or already is, painful
EQ
· Any abnormality that affects, or may affect, vision
● Any abnormality that is progressive, chronic or recurrent
●Any abnormality that cannot be cured by a course of medical treatment or by
surgical correction
LAVAGE DEVICES
Highly-strung animals, particularly those in pain, can be difficult or impossible to treat
with topical medication applied directly to the eye and it is sensible to consider insert-
ing some form of indwelling medication device at the initiation of treatment. These
devices can be inserted in the sedated conscious horse following infiltration with local
anaesthetic, or at the end of any surgical procedure under general anaesthesia.
Subpalpebral lavage devices
sisisuoo a kua-aus ai Aua anop pue Aiua aauis raq aue sad o
of delivery tubing at the end of which is a small central hole surrounded by a foot-
plate. Inserting this type is associated with fewer complications for the occasional user
than the double entry type and its insertion is described below (Figure 7.5{a-d)).
 Equine Ophthalmology
273
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a)
(b)
(c)
(p)
Figure 7.5(a-d)  Insertion of a single-entry subpalpebral lavage device via the ventromedial
approach (with acknowledgements to R.C. Lowe).
274
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● In the conscious animal, topical anaesthetic is applied to the cornea and local anaes-
thetic is infiltrated at the site where the trochar (or needle) will exit.
● The trochar is placed as deeply as possible in the dorsal or ventral conjunctival sac
through the skin {Figure 7.5{a,b)). This is slightly more difficult to achieve when
tion of the third eyelid makes inadvertent corneal damage from the footplate less
likely (Figure 7.S{c)).
● The tubing is then threaded through the trochar, after which the trochar is
removed and the tubing is adjusted so that the footplate rests snugly against the
conjunctiva.
● The tubing is retained in place with skin sutures or cyanoacrylate adhesive, applied
to “butterflies’ made from zinc oxide tape wrapped around the tubing. The first
suture is placed close to the eyelid, the second one closer to the midline between
the eyes and a third, if required, close to the ear. It is usually convenient to lead the
              
 OPHTHAlMOLOGY
head collar (Figure 7.S(d)).
● Topical solutions are injected into the system and flushed through with air. If mul-
tiple solutions are used in therapy, at least five minutes should be allowed to elapse
between different drugs.
● These devices should be checked regularly as a number of complications can occur,
including local haemorrhage when they are inserted and simple blockage during use.
● Eyelid swelling and corneal damage can result if they are improperly located, or
become displaced from their original position.
QUINE 
Indwelling nasolacrimal cannula (Figure 2.20, p. S3)
A commercial cannula is availa ble, which is inserted into the nasolacrimal duct via the
nasal ostium after applying local anaesthetic drops to the lower lacrimal punctum and
local anaesthetic spray or gel to the nasal ostium. Indwelling nasolacrimal cannulae
and catheters may be used as a means of delivering drugs or other preparations to the
eye, or to the nasolacrimal drainage system, or as a means of retaining patency within
the nasolacrimal drainage system. The volume of lavage solution used in this system
is greater than that required for subpalpebral devices, although if air is used to drive
the bolus of drug the difference is insignificant.
· The indwelling cannula is passed into the nasal ostium via a stab incision over the
cranial aspect of the false nostril and fed up the nasolacrimal duct until the moulded
collar abuts against the ostium
● Non-absorbable sutures are used to retain the cannula in place at this point
● The remainder of the tubing is led up between the ears and kept in place as already
described for the subpalpebral lavage device
OCULAR AND ADNEXAL CONDITIONS
The common equine ocular and adnexal conditions and those that are important
to recognise because of the serious implications of misdiagnosis are summarised in
Box 7.1.
Equine Ophthalmology
275
Box 7.1  Common and important equine ocular and adnexal conditions
Ocular and adnexal trauma
Entropion (foals)
Non-ulcerative and ulcerative keratitis, including melting ulcers
Uveifis from a variety of causes; the immune-mediated aspects are of particular
significance
 Neoplasia, particularly periocular sarcoids and ocular and adnexal squamous cell
carcinoma. Less common, but clinically significant, tumours include uveal melanoma
and lymphoma
 Differentiation of normal variants and pathological changes affecting the cornea, iris,
lens, vitreous and fundus
 Space-occupying orbital and paraorbital neoplastic and non-neoplastic lesions are
uncommon, but important in terms of differential diagnosis and prognosis
.OGY
10
GLOBE AND ORBIT
OPHTHALMO
PHTHISIS BULBI
The commonest sequel to severe ocular damage in horses is pbthisis bulbi - a small,
shrunken, blind, painless globe (Figure 7.6). It should be distinguished from a
EQUINE 
congenitally small eye (e.g. microphthalmos).
No treatment is required, unless there is an unacceptable amount of ocular dis-
charge, which may, in turn, attract flies and lead to chronic infection. In such cases 
the eye should be removed.
Figure 7.6 Phthisis bulbi following severe
intraocular inflammation.
OrbItaL, retro-OrbItal And ParaorbItal LeSIoNS
Exophthalmos
● The depression of the supraorbital fossa may be obliterated, and there may be
276
 Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
swelling in this region. It is comparison of each side that is most revealing. This is
an early and important sign in many cases
● Exophthalmos is a frequent finding ± an associated stra bismus
● The third eyelid may become prominent
● Note, also, the direction of the eyelashes - they may be more horizontal than usual
when exophthalmos develops
Aetiology and diagnosis
● Neoplastic, inflammatory, cystic (hydatid disease) and other space-occupying lesions
within the orbit {retrobulbar) and outside the orbit (paranasal, retro-orbital and
 paraorbital). For example, both ethmoidal haematoma and carcinoma involving the
ethmoidal labyrinth can produce exophthalmos as the ethmoidal labyrinth is
anatomically close to the orbit (Figure 7.7).
· Extraorbital lesions are a commoner cause of exophthalmos in horses than intra-
orbital lesions
● Radiology, ultrasonography, sinus trephination and endoscopy (including of the
OLOGY
guttural pouch) can help in differentiation, and such cases are often best referred
for comprehensive investigation
OPHTHALMO
EQUINE 
Figure 7.7 Exophthalmos and third-eyelid
prominence because of an ethmoidal carci-
noma. Note that the pupil is widely dilated as a
result of chronic compressive optic neuropathy-
optic  atrophy  was  apparent  on ophthalmic
examination.
EYELIDS
THIRD EYELID (NICTITATING MEMBRANE)
Prominence -summary
● Orbital, retro-orbital and paraorbital space-occupying lesions
· Prolapse of the extraorbital fat pad (corpus adiposum extraorbitale)
●Inflammation of the third eyelid {including solar-induced inflammation in non-
pigmented lids)
● Neoplasia of the third eyelid, most commonly SCC or lymphoma
● Tetanus: in all species there is bilateral prominence of the third eyelid in this disease,
but it is more likely to be seen in herbivores than carnivores.
● Horner's syndrome is rare in horses. Ptosis is usually the most obvious feature, and
the third eyelid is often not prominent. Increased skin temperature and sweating
Equine Ophthalmology
277
may also be observed and give a useful insight into the location of the damage to
the neurological pathway.
Neoplasia (Figures 7.8(a,b) and 7.9(a,b,c))
See also under Conjunctiva and Upper and Lower Eyelids (this section pp 285-287
and pp 278-281). Commonest tumour is squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the third
eyelid and this condition {and pre-cancerous solar-induced inflammation) should
altways be considered in animals with an unexplained ocular discharge. Animals in
which the eyelids and caruncle are poorly pigmented are most at risk.
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
[a)
(b)
Figure 7.8(a) Squamous cellcarcinoma of the third eyelid in a Thoroughbred. The third eyelid
has been protruded prior to excisional surgery of the tumour and part of the third eyelid. (b) The
immedliate postoperative appearance of the eye in (aj. The third eyelid conjunctiva was closed with
a continuous buried suture of 5-0 polyglactin 910.
EQUINE :
[a)
(b)
Figure 7.9(a-c} Squamous cell carcinoma
of the third eyelid in a Shire X Thoroughbred.
Appearance at rest (a) and after manual pro-
trusion of the third eyelid (b). The third eyelid
was resected at its base and there were no prob-
lems relating to either squamous cell carcinoma
or loss of the third eyelid during a six-year follow
up (c].
[c)
278
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Diagnosis
● Affects non-pigmented or poorly pigmented third eyelids ± caruncle and the appear-
ance is usually characteristic (e.g. plaque-like or follicular)
● The full extent of the tumour should be assessed by protruding the third eyelid
● Exfoliative cytology from impression smears can be helpful to aid diagnosis prior
to surgery, but it is best to submit excised tissue for histopathology to confirm the
diagnosis
Treatment
● Local resection of the third eyelid with a full-thickness wedge excision of the tumour
and a wide margin of normal tissue, or complete removal of the third eyelid at its
base if the tumour is more extensive
● Whichever technique is needed, the wound should be closed with a continuous
buried suture of absorbable material (e.g. 5-0 to 6-0 polyglactin 910) because of
the possibility of extraorbital fat herniation and because it produces a better post-
 operative and long-term appearance
.OGY
● Additional forms of therapy are not usually required at this site, but would follow
the lines outlined under upper and lower eyelids as set out below
10
OPHTHALMO
UPPER AND LOWER EYELIDS
Entropion (Figure 7.10(a,b,c))
● May be perinatal or acquired
● Sick foals are at risk of the early onset type, which is bilateral
QUINE
● Previous injury the commonest reason for acquired unilateral (cicatricial) entropion
Diagnosis
The appearance is characteristic and the history may be helpful.
Treatment
● Perinatal entropion in foals may correct spontaneously in the first few weeks of life
and mild cases require no treatment other than management of any underlying
disease { usually including rehydration), careful drying of the eyelids and manual cor-
rection of the entropion.
● For congenital entropion that is producing pain and corneal damage, temporary
retention (tacking') sutures {5-0 silk or polyglactin 910 vertical mattress or hori-
zontal mattress) through the skin of the affected eyelid, close to the eyelid margin,
are usually sufficient to evert the eyelid (Figure 7.10{c)).
● Non-responsive perinatal (and acquired) entropion may require standard skin
-muscle resection techniques, or cosmetic surgery, according to cause and extent.
Equine Ophthalmology
279
[a)
(b)
9010
Figure 7.10 (a) Entropion (bilaterall in a focl. The
whole of the lower eyelid is involved. (b} There is a
spastic component because of low-grade corneal
OPHTHALMO
trauma, but the entropion persisted after topical local
cnaesthesia. (e) Temporary tacking sutures were used
(c)
to rectifly the problem.
Neoplasia
● Periocular papilloma of viral origin may be encountered in young horses and most
EQUINE 
gradually disappear over a period of months, so no treatment is required
· Sarcoid is the commonest periocular and eyelid tumour of horses and donkeys in
the UK. Sarcoids may be single or multiple (Figure 7.11)
● Squamous cell carcinoma (adnexa and eyelids) is also common and this tumour may
also involve the conjunctiva, limbus and cornea (Figure 7.12(a,b))
· Melanoma is a common tumour of grey horses, and the eyelids and caruncle are
possible sites
● Less common primary eyelid tumours include adenoma, adenocarcinoma, angioma.
angiosarcoma, basal cell carcinoma, fibroma, fibrosarcoma, haemangiosarcoma and
mast cell tumour
●Both isolated and metastatic lympboma may involve the eyelids
Diagnosis
· Clinical appearance of the lesion
● Biopsy should be submitted for confirmatory histopathology
Differential diagnosis
● Tumours should be differentiated from inflammation (e.g. granulomas associated
with habronemiasis)
● Infiltrative conjunctival tumours should be differentiated from very rare conditions
like amyloidosis
● Differentiation may only be possible after an adequate biopsy has been obtained
280
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Figure 7.11 Periocular sarcoid. This
was treated successfully using intrale-
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
sional injections of BCG
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.12 (a) Squcamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the lower eyelid. Note the lack of upper
cnd lower eyelid pigment. (b) The other eye had normally pigmented upper and lower eyelids cnd
no pathology. In both eyes, the third eyelid lacked pigment and itis important to assess this region
Treatment
Periocular sarcoids
● Periocular sarcoids are usually treated with intralesional injections of BCG in general
practice
· Usually 1 ml of intradermal BCG is injected into each lesion, and the treatment is
repeated in 2-3 weeks
● Usually two treatments are sufficient, but occasionally three are required
● Intralesional cisplatin and radiotherapy are alternative forms of treatment
● Surgery should not be used, as the recurrence rate (80%) is unacceptably high
Equine Ophthalmology
281
Squamous celf carcinoma
● Standard treatments for SCC of the upper and lower eyelids include surgical exci-
immunotherapy (e.g. BCG) or cryotherapy.
● For cryotherapy, liquid nitrogen is the cryogen of choice and a double freeze-thaw
cycle is used. The temperature should be lowered to -25°C throughout the affected
tissue, and the ice ball should extend 2 mm into healthy tissue.
Melanomas
 Melanomas are usually surgically excised or treated using cryotherapy (as outlined
ma ss.
Other types of neoplasia
Most other tumours are surgically removed, as already described in the general and
canine section. Advice should be sought if the management strategy is unclear, and a
proportion of cases will require referral.
.OGY
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
10
OPHTHALM
TEAR FILM PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION PROBLEMS
The trigeminal nerve (Vth cranial nerve) provides the sensory supply to the eye and
both sensory and autonomic nerve fibres to the lacrimal gland. The ophthalmic divi-
sion of the Vth cranial nerve supplies the afferent arm of the trigeminal-lacrimal reflex
EQUINE 
pathway and the facial nerve (Vlth cranial nerve) supplies the efferent arm.
Damage to the motor fibres of the facial nerve may result in an inadequate blink
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
Aetiology
● Trauma associated with fractures of the stylohyoid bone or mandible is the com-
monest cause of damage to the parasympathetic fibres that run in the superficial
petrosal nerve to supply the lacrimal gland
● Guttural-pouch pathology, middle ear disease and vestibular disease may also be
associated with keratoconjunctivitis sicca
● Damage to the lacrimal gland itself (e.g. toxic, eosinophilic and chronic dacryoad-
enitis) can affect lacrimal-gland function so that keratoconjunctivitis sicca results
Clinical signs of KCS (Figure 7.13)
● Ocular discomfort or more obvious pain
● Blepharospasm, but without any signs of excessive lacrimation
● Lacklustre cornea - the corneal light reflex is disrupted. Subtle epithelial defects or
frank ulceration may be present, as well as fine neovascularisation
● There is often rather sparse ocular discharge and any accompanying conjunctivitis
is mild
282
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Diagnosis
● History and clinical signs
● Mean normal STT I in the horse is approximately 13 mm ± 9 mm/minute. Consis-
tent values of 10mm/minute or less should be regarded as indicative of KCS, espe-
cially in conjunction with relevant clinical signs
Treatment
● KCS is usually treated with topical ocular lubricants (e.g. polyvinyl alcohol or car-
bomers such as polyacrylic acid)
· Neurogenic dry eye is the commonest type of KCS encountered in the horse, but
there has been no clinical evaluation of the efficacy of parasympathomimetics such
as pilocarpine (topical or oral)
● Immune-mediated KCS has not been identified as a specific entity in the horse, so
it is unlikely that immunosuppressive drugs, such an important mode of treatment
in the dog, would achieve a great deal
OLOGY
OPHTHALMO
Figure  7.13   Unilateral  keratoconjunctivitis
EQUINE 
sicca following head trauma. The Schirmer tear
test reading was 6mm weting/minute in the
offected eye and 14mm wetting/minute in the
Fellow eye.
TEAR-FILM DRAINAGE PROBLEMS
These problems are not uncommon, and they can be congenital or acquired. Inves-
tigative procedures are as for small animals, with the important difference that in
horses the nasal ostium is visible and accessible and so can be used instead of the
lacrimal puncta for cannulation and retrograde irrigation. Some drainage problems are
quite complex and affected animals will be best referred.
Congenital dysgenesis
Dysgenesis (abnormal development), including atresia (absence) of the nasal ostium
and varying portions of the rostral (nasal or distal) nasolacrimal duct, is the com-
monest abnormality of the lacrimal system encountered in foals.
Clinical diagnosis
●Veterinary advice is usually sought when the animal is quite young; the problem is
usually unilateral
Equine Ophthalmology
283
● Clinical examination reveals no sign of a nasal ostium and considerable epiphora,
or a mucopurulent discharge, may be present at the medial canthus and on the side
of the face (Figure 7.14(a))
● If the nasal ostium is absent it is likely that surgery will be required, therefore the
additional investigations are usually performed under general anaesthesia so that
surgery can follow immediately
Additional investigations
● Congenital dysgenesis cases are often referred, following the initial clinical exami-
nation, for additional investigations and treatment
● A sterile catheter (e.g. feline urinary catheter) can be passed via the upper lacrimal
punctum and down the nasolacrimal duct to establish the degree of abnormality
 Dacryocystorhinography may also be required to esta blish the extent of any dysge-
nesis (Figure 7.14(b)). Note that it is not uncommon to encounter diverticula, both
patent and impatent, at the rostral (nasal) end of the nasolacrimal duct in some
horses
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
EQUINE :
[a]
(b)
[c)
Figure 7.14 (a)  Congenital dysgenesis of the rostral (distal) nasolacrimal drainage system.
External inspection indicated that there was no sign of a nascl ostium. (b) Dacryocystorhinogra-
phy was used to confirm that the terminal portion of the rostral nasolacrimal duct was absent. (c)
Patency was established by passing a catheter to the site of obstruction, incising the mucosc over-
lying the tip of the catheter, delivering the catheter through the incision and retaining it in situ for
about three weeks to ensure permanent canalisation.
Treatment
               
284
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
nasolacrimal duct is palpated and a cruciate incision made over the tip, the four
flaps of tissue are then excised, so creating a nasal punctum
● The proximal end of the catheter will be retained with more comfort for the patient
if it is placed as for subpalpebral lavage devices; the rostral end can be routed to
the skin via the false nostril as described previously for indwelling nasal cannulae
● The catheter is left in situ for 2-3 weeks and is kept in place by sutures or super-
glue through “butterflies’ made from sticking plaster (Figure 7.14(c))
Acquired drainage problems - trauma, infection,
inflammation and neoplasia
Stenosis or occlusion of the lacrimal drainage system may be a complication of inflam-
matory, infectious, neoplastic or tra umatic disease processes within the drainage system
or external to it (Figure 7.15(a,b)). Granulomatous reactions (parasitic and fungal)
should always be considered as a cause of obstruction in horses and donkeys. Cases
of traumatic injury to the lacrimal drainage apparatus are usually complex and refer-
ral should be considered.
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
[b)
Figure 7.15 (a)Acquired obstructionof
nasolacrimal drainage because of a mast cell
tumour occluding the nasal ostium. (b) Diagno-
sis was made by external inspection, cnd
removal of the mast cell tumour solved the
[a}
problem.
Aetiology
●Internal reasons for obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct include dacryocystitis
(inflammation of the lacrimal sac and duct), neoplasia, parasites (Habronema spp
and Thelazia spp), foreign bodies and other traumatic causes
Equine Ophthalmology
285
● External reasons for obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct include trauma, neopla-
sia, rhinitis, sinusitis and upper-arca de dental disease
Clinical signs of acquired drainage problems
● Epiphora or some form of ocular discharge
[  d  s   o o a a o
ostium) or by indirect inference {e.g. dental disease, sinusitis)
Clinical signs of habronemiasis
· Usually a rapid onset of swelling, which is both painful and pruritic. The lesion is
usually raised and ulcerated, or of caseous plaque-like appearance (Figure 7.16)
● In addition to causing lacrimal drainage obstruction and secondary dacryocystitis,
habronemiasis may also be associated with granulomas of the eyelids and conjunc-
tiva, especially in the region of the medial canthus
● The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy
Treatment of parasitic causes of dacryocystitis
OPHTHALMOLOGY
A single dose of oral ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg) is usually effective.
EQUINE 
Figure 7.16 Habronemiasis as a cause of
acquired obstruction of nasolacrimal drainage.
CONJUNCTIVA
Conjunctivitis
Aetiology
Causes of conjunctivitis include foreign debris (e.g. dust), allergies (e.g. fly spray and
drugs), parasites (e.g. Habronema spp, Thelazia spp and Onchocerca spp), viruses
(e.g. equine viral arteritis, equine herpes virus and adenovirus), bacteria (almost exclu-
sively secondary pathogens) and mycoses in tropical countries (e.g. blastomycosis)
(Figure 7.17).
286
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Figure 7.17 Acute allergic conjunctivitis in
a Hanoverian. Acute blepharoconjunctivitis is
often a painful condition in horses, as is appar-
enthere.
Treatment
● Treatment of conjunctivitis depends upon establishing and eliminating the cause
● Environmental factors are the commonest causes (physical, chemical and allergic)
● As horses live in a relatively contaminated environment, growth of organisms from
conjunctival swabs is common, but they may not be pathogenic, so expert assistance
90101
may be required if the clinical significance of any isolates is unclear
Neoplasia involving the bulbar conjunctiva
OPHTHALMO
● Squamous cell carcinoma is the commonest and may be confirmed by histopathol-
ogy (Figure 7.18)
· Other tumours are uncommon and include papilloma, haemangioma, haeman-
giosarcoma, melanoma and lymphoma
+ The extent of the tumour, and any indications of local or distant spread, should be
esta blished before contemplating removal
EQUINE 
Figure 7.18 Squamous cellcarcinoma
involving the conjunctiva, limbus and cornec.
Differential diagnosis
Tumours that involve the conjunctiva (bulbar, palpebral or nictitating) should be
differentiated from amyloidosis, which is very rare.
Treatment
· For SCC involving the conjunctiva of the lids, see under Eyelids {this section
pp 276-281)
● For SCC involving the bulbar conjunctiva, limbus and cornea, keratectomy and
conjunctivectomy can be used to debulk or excise the tumour
Equine Ophthalmology
287
● Surgery can be combined with radiotherapy (e.g. beta irradiation with a strontium
90 applicator) or radiotherapy can be used on its own
● The presence of unrecognised micrometastases can complicate the management of
these cases, as local ischaemia and limbal keratomalacia may result
· Referral should be considered for any case with corneal involvement {e.g. SCC and
carcinoma in situ)
● Other tumours can usually be removed using wide-based excision, and, as with SCC,
the diagnosis should be confirmed by histopathology
CORNEA
Non-specific corneal opacities
Band opacities
Band opacities (linear keratopathy), in the form of linear streaks crossing the cornea,
are an occasional finding. They represent thin regions of Descemet's membrane and
are most commonly associated with glaucoma ± globe enlargement, so the rest of the
9010
eye should be checked very carefully.
Corneal oedema
OPHTHALMO
Corneal oedema is not uncommon in horses. It may be a primary *dystrophic' condi-
tion, but is more likely to be a sequel to a variety of ocular insults {e.g. blunt trauma,
keratitis, uveitis and glaucoma).
Keratitis
Keratitis accounts for a high proportion of all eye cases examined in equine practice
EQUINE 
- and donkeys and mules, as well as horses, are involved. There are a number of pos-
sible causes that include trauma (physical and chemical), infection, hypersensitivity,
immune-mediated disease and neoplasia, and it is important to try to esta blish the aeti-
ology if treatment is to be effective. On occasions it is impossible to establish the cause,
so early specialist advice may be required to help with such cases.
When pain and blepharospasm are features of the clinical presentation, topical local
anaesthesia, systemic sedation ± analgesia and an auriculopalpebral nerve block may
be required for examination. If indicated, Schirmer I tear tests should be performed
before local anaesthetic is applied and swabs and scrapes should be taken before agents
such as fluorescein and rose bengal are applied. The insertion of an indwelling
 medication device after initial assessment may make subsequent management easier.
Non-ulcerative keratitis
Eosinophilic keraroconjunctivitis
Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis is an unusual form of limbal-based keratoconjunc-
tivitis of possible immune-mediated origin. It bears comparison with human vernal
disease, canine chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis and feline proliferative kerato-
conjunctivitis. Horses present with conjunctival hyperaemia and chemosis, as well as
characteristic superficial, white, corneolimbal plaques. There is usually some ocular
discomfort with blepharospasm and lacrimation and, sometimes, a mucoid discharge.
Treatment consists of topical 0.1% lodoxamide four times daily. Alternatively,
topical corticosteroids may be effective.
288
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Kerarouveitis
Keratouveitis is a rare limbal-based type of inflammation of unknown cause, also pre-
sumed to be immune-mediated, but the stromal infiltrate is more deeply situated and
uveitis is also present.
Treatment consists of topical immunosuppressive agents (e.g. cyclosporin) and/or
topical corticosteroids, together with mydriatic cycloplegics {atropine) used to effect.
Systemic non-steroidal anti-inflammatories may also be indicated.
Differential diagnosis of limbus-based disease of the eqvine cornea
● Neoplastic - squamous cell carcinoma and related neoplasia (e.g. papilloma, includ-
ing keratosis, intraepithelial carcinoma), isolated and metastatic lymphoma
· Non-neoplastic - this broad category includes inflammatory and degenerative
causes, possible immune-mediated disease and parasitic disease
o Stromal abscess, eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis, keratouveitis
o Limbal-based keratomalacia
o Amyloidosis
o Onchocerciasis
90101
Ulcerative keratitis (Figure 2.20, Section 2, p. S3 and Figures 7.19-7.21)
OPHTHALMO
● Ulcerative keratitis is common, and all corneal ulcers in horses should be viewed as
potentially serious
● The blink rate should be assessed
· A Schirmer I tear test should be performed on most occasions and it may also be
necessary to assess corneal sensitivity
● Topical local anaesthetic is applied before swabs and scrapes are taken
QUINE 
·All corneas should be stained with fluorescein to check for ulceration
● Subtle erosions may be easier to identify in the dark with a blue light source
EQ
● Refer early if there are problems. Many eyes are lost because of poor work-up and
late referral
● The earlier sections on the general approach to corneal ulceration should also be
consulted (Section 2, pp 51-52)
Figure 7.19Equine ulcerative keratitis.Note
the lateral position of the ulcer, which is in a
region of relatively exposed cornea, beyond the
range of third eyelid excursion.Investigations in
ca ses of this type must include assessment of the
production and distribution of the tear film.
EquineOphthalmology
289
[a}
(b)
Figure 7.20 (a) Equine ulcerative keratitis, superficicl medial ulcer. (b) Support for healing pro
vided by therapeutic soft contact lens.
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 7.21Superficial geographic ulceration in a donkey. It was thought that this presentation
EQUINE 
might indlicate a viral cetiology, as acute-phase lesions of putative viral keratitis are likely to be
superficial, with a range of possible appearances in affected animals (punctate, geographic). These
superficicl lesions take up Hluorescein, but the staining is not always obvious and examination in
the dark using a cobalt blue light is advised, or rose bengal can be used afer Hluorescein to pick
up subtle staining. No virus was isolated From this case, or other donkeys similarly affected, using
a variety of techniques.
Complicafions of equine vlcerafive kerarifis
● Progression - e.g. descemetocoele formation and corneal perforation
●Keratomalacia and liquefactive stromal necrosis (see Section 2, pp 52-54)
● Corneal stromal abscesses - most abscesses follow penetrating injury in which there
is implantation of foreign material, usually organic in nature
● Bacterial or fungal infection may follow beca use the implanted material, which may
also include infectious agents, is effectively walled off when neighbouring epithelial
cells divide and migrate to cover the micropuncture site
● Once the foreign material is encapsulated, it is difficult for medical treatment to
achieve therapeutically effective levels
●Endophthalmitis
Superficial ‘indolent' ulcers
As in the dog and cat, superficial non-healing ulcers of unknown aetiology can occur
and, in horses, ulcers of this type are often located laterally.
290
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Clinical signs
● Usual anterior-segment triad associated with pain (blepharospasm, lacrimation and
photophobia)
· Superficial, fluorescein-positive erosion, with epithelial loss only and a characteris-
tic rim of non-attached epithelium
● No indication of inflammatory reaction or neovascularisation
Treatment
● Mechanical debridement is probably the treatment of choice
● Pain relief and support for healing can be provided by use of a therapeutic soft
contact lens
Viral keratitis
Equine herpes virus (e.g. EHV 2) has long been suspected as a cause of equine
keratitis, but, despite these suspicions, there is as yet no definitive proof that equine
herpes virus, or indeed any other equine virus, is a primary corneal pathogen in
.OGY
clinical patients. The diagnosis is usually made by default, in so far as response to
treatment, rather than actual virus isolation and serological findings, are taken as
10
confirmatory.
OPHTHALMO
 In view of the doubts as to the pathogenicity of the ubiquitous herpes virus, it is
important to make quite sure that no other potential causes are present, particularly
as equine herpes virus has been isolated from normal eyes as well as those with disease
Putative viral keratitis should be differentiated from other forms of ocular surface
disease and corneal conditions.
QUINE
Clinical signs
● Acute onset of, usually, unilateral pain, blepharospasm and lacrimation
● The clinical appearance is variable. The commonest presentation is multiple, punc-
tate and, less commonly, faint linear, superficial corneal opacities. More extensive
superficial geographic erosions, of similar or identical appearance to the superficial
indolent ulceration described above, may also be encountered
· The focal lesions may stain with fluorescein 1%, but if they are fluorescein -ve then
rose bengal 1% should be applied, and this is often retained after excess stain has
been removed by gentle irrigation with sterile saline
● Neovascularisation and stromal involvement both seem to be more typical of
chronicity and it is possible that immune-mediated mechanisms are of relevance in
the pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
● Ocular surface disease associated with production (quantity and quality) and
distribution of the preocular tear film 
● Corneal pathology associated with poor corneal sensitivity and exposure keratopathy
● Superficial indolent ulcers and other types of epithelial erosion
● Unsuitable topical treatment regimes for corneal disease (e.g. topical corticosteroids
for fluorescein +ve lesions)
Treatment
● Treatment of acute cases consists of topical antiviral agents, such as trifluorothymidine
Equine Ophthalmology
291
or acyclovir, every two hours for the first two days, then three to four times daily
for approximately five days
· Antiviral agents are epitheliotoxic and should not therefore be used continuously
for longer than 2-3 weeks
Bacterial keratitis
Bacterial keratitis may follow corneal injury or some other corneal insult, particularly
when ulceration is present. Gram -ve organisms are the important pathogens. The
intact cornea is resistant to bacteria.
Clinical signs
● Pain, blepharospasm and lacrimation initially
● The ocular discharge may become purulent and there may be marked conjunctival
hyperaemia and chemosis
● Corneal oedema and frank ulceration may be present
● The cornea should be examined carefully for indications of penetrating injury or
stromal abscess formation
GY
● Anterior uveitis is a likely associated finding and hypopyon may also be present
· Beware those cases in which the appearance changes to one where the cornea
0
0
becomes diffusely opaque or appears gelatinous or 'mushy', as this is typical of
HALMO
a *melting' ulcer (liquefactive stromal necrosis) (Figure 2.20) and demands immedi-
ate aggressive therapy if perforation and loss of the eye are to be avoided.
OPHTH.
Specialist help and referral should be sought early in such cases (see Section 2,
pp 52-54)
Isolation of bacteria
EQUINE
It is important to take corneal scrapes and swabs (Gram staining, culture and sensi-
tivity) at the onset of inflammation, because of the relatively contaminated environ-
ment and the possibility of liquefactive stromal necrosis.
Treatment
+ The treatment of uncomplicated non-infected corneal ulcers where there has been
epithelial loss consists of topical broad-spectrum antibiotic only applied four times
neomycin sulphate, polymixin B sulphate)
● For deeper lesions, with stromal involvement, a lavage device should be inserted
(this section pp 272-274)
●A commercially-available antibiotic preparation or fortified antibiotic solution,
selected on the basis of cytology and confirmed by culture and sensitivity results,
should be used
● The drops are applied topically every 15-30 minutes for the first six hours,
then every 30-60 minutes for the next six hours, ater which the frequency
can be reduced, but not below four times daily, until the course of treatment
is completed. The maximum duration of treatment should not exceed three
weeks
● Gentamicin or tobramycin are effective against Gram +ve and Gram -ve rods. Cep-
hazolin or tobramycin are effective against Gram +ve cocci. Fluoroquinolones, such
292
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● When there is any possibility of a corneal *melt' (e.g. Gram -ve organisms such as
Pseudomonas or excessive numbers of inflammatory cells), debridement of necrotic
tissue should be performed and an early decision taken with regard to providing
support for healing (e.g. a conjunctival pedicle graft)
●Fortified antibiotic solutions should be selected for potential melting ulcers
● Empirical treatment with topical whole fresh serum, usually with 5-10% acetylcys-
teine, or other anticollagenases such as sodium EDTA, can also be used {the latter
achieved most simply using large-animal EDTA vacutainers made up with 3 ml of
sterile, isotonic, saline or false tears)
●Heparin {1000 IU/ml) suppresses the migration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes
(PMNs) into the ulcer, and has direct anticollagenase activity
● Serum or anticollagenases should be used every 1-2 hours until the situation has
been brought under control. It is important to emphasise that these preparations
● Uveitis accompanies deep keratitis, and the pupil should be dilated with topical
atropine 1% to relieve the pain of ciliary spasm. Once the pupil has dilated, the
OPHTHALMOLOGY
 drug need only be applied frequently enough to maintain dilation (usually once daily
or less}
● Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories {orally or intravenously) may be used under
careful supervision because they will relieve ocular pain and help to stabilise the
blood-aqueous barrier when uveitis is also present
● If the suggested regime cannot be followed, then early referral often gives the best
results
Mycotic keratitis
QUINE 
  ss an un sd a e  sis i y an as
can often be isolated from the normal conjunctival sac, mycotic keratitis is rare in
temperate climates, so is unusual in the UK. Climate change is likely to increase the
prevalence of fungal ocular disease, particularly so when the weather is hot and
E
humid (Figure 7.22). Mycotic keratitis should be considered in all instances of non-
healing ulcers and refractory interstitial (stromal) keratitis, especially when the history
suggests trauma or foreign body implantation originally and treatment has included
corticosteroid ± antibiotic use. Specialist advice may be helpful when mycotic kerati-
tis is suspected.
Figure 7.22 Mycotic keratitis associated
with traumatic ulceration. Climatic conditions of
heat and humidity at the time of the injury were
such cs to support rapid fungal growth. The
diagnosis (Aspergillus spp] was confirmed by
material from a deep corneal scrape.
Equine Ophthalmology
293
Clinical features
● Pain, blepharospasm, lacrimation and photophobia
● A degree of uveitis is usually present, and hypopyon may also be a feature
· Opacities, usually whitish to yellowish in colour, can involve the ocular surface
or superficial cornea as well as being subepithelial, stromal and at the level of
Descemet's membra ne
●Yeasts and fungi often demonstrate affinity for Descemet's membrane
● Stromal abscessation is a likely complication of deep implantation of fungal mate-
rial (more so than after implantation of bacteria)
● Mycotic keratitis is usually a chronic problem in the UK, but when conditions are
hot and humid it may present more acutely
Diagnosis
● Cytology and culture (corneal scrapes and swabs)
●Histopathology from keratectomy specimen
Management
.90
● Keratectomy may be required to allow better access to the organisms located in the
stroma and to obtain material for confirmation of diagnosis
10
· Antifungal preparations for the eye are not generally available in the UK, and are
OPHTHALMO
usually obtained on a per-case basis from hospital pharmacies
· Antifungal preparations for the treatment of non-ocular conditions such as vagini
tis (e.g. miconazole 1%, clotrimazole 1%) are sometimes used
● When a deep, stromal, corneal abscess forms, the most effective treatment usually
EQUINE 
trating keratoplasty
Neoplastic keratitis
Primary corneal neoplasia is rare in most animals, but in horses may have pre-
neoplastic epithelial dysplasia and intraepithelial carcinoma in situ as well as exten-
sion of squamous cell carcinoma from adjoining tissues (i.e. conjunctiva and limbus)
(Figure 7.18).
Clinical features
+ Superficial, white-to-pink corneal opacities
● The benign types (e.g. keratosis) are entirely superficial, usually originate in the
lateral limbal region and do not involve the corneal stroma
+ Squamous cell carcinoma infiltrating from adjoining tissues, most commonly the
lateral limbus, is often of florid follicular appearance and pinkish in colour
● Intraepithelial carcinoma in situ is usually whitish in colour, rather poorly defined
and involves any region of the cornea
Management
● Specialist advice should be sought, as the most appropriate treatment is usually
surgical excision followed by radiotherapy or cryotherapy
● It is important to perform histopathology to confirm the nature of the lesion
294
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Trauma (see also Section 2)
Partial and full-thickness lacerations of the equine cornea are common, and early
assessment and, usually, referral is required if a functional eye is to be retained. In
most cases of perforation, aqueous loss and iris prolapse occur and the prolapsed iris
frequently seals the wound. If the wound is left the iris becomes incarcerated and
restoration of normal ocular anatomy is then difficult, if not impossible.
Immediate complications of corneal trauma include hyphaema, iris damage, lens
luxation, loss of intraocular contents and collapse of the anterior chamber or the whole
globe.
Delayed complications include corneal abscess, synechiae formation, intractable
uveitis, secondary glaucoma, endophthalmitis and globe enlargement or phtbisis buibi.
Partial or complete loss of vision can occur acutely or at a later date.
Diagnosis and management
● Diagnosis of corneal trauma is relatively easy, but calculating the true extent of any
injuries requires such careful examination that topical local anaesthesia is manda-
OPHTHALMOLOGY
tory and heavy sedation and analgesia plus auriculopalpebral (AP) block or, rarely,
general anaesthesia, may be necessary
● An AP block ensures that there is no excessive pressure on the globe fe.g. from
squeezing the eyelids shut) and, if the intraocular pressure is kept as low as possi-
ble, expulsion of intraocular contents through the wound is less likely
● The prognosis is much more guarded when intraocular haemorrhage is also present
● Superficial traumatic injury is managed as described previously (Section 2, pp 35-49)
● Early referral must be considered in most cases of extensive corneal trauma if the
EQUINE 
UVEAL TRACT
● The equine pupillary light response is slower than that of carnivores. In foals it is
particularly weak for the first few days of life
● Whilst the pupillary aperture of adults is horizontally oval, that of foals is almost
circular
· Pigmented grarula iridica (corpora nigra) are a normal feature of the pupillary
Arednd jesiop aui uo paieool Ajuieu ane Aaun sasiou ui sauoaiquay u apnoq
border (Figure 7.1(c))
Persistent pupillary membrane (PPM) (Figure 7.2(b))
Persistent pupillary membrane remnants are very common in horses, and are of no
consequence unless related corneal opacity or cataract obstructs the visual axis.
Heterochromia (Figure 7.23)
● Heterochromia may involve a sector of the iris or the whole iris ("wall' eye or *china
eye)
· Can occur in older horses
● Of no significance unless associated with uveal inflammation
● Sub-albinism is typified by a blue or grey iris and albinism by a pink or white iris
● Colour-dilute animals may be very photophobic
Equine Ophthalmology
295
Figure 7.23 Heterochromia of the iris.A
sector of the iris is normally pigmented and the 
majority of the iris is poorly pigmented. This is
a normal variant.
Enlargement of the granula iridica (Figure 7.24(a,b))
Hyperplasia is quite common, and the enlarged granula iridica (which may also be
cystic - see below) can be of considerable size without interfering with vision. Treat-
ment is not usually necessary.
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
EQUINE 
[a}
(b)
Figure 7.24(a,b) Enlargement of the granula iridica. This is a common finding and rarely of
cny Functional significance. In this show jumper both eyes were affected (a-b), but without cny
discernible effects on vision.
Cystic anomalies (Figures 7.2s-7.27)
Stromal 'cysts'
 Stromal “cysts" are associated with hypoplasia of the mid-dorsal portion of the iris in
animals with pale irises (e.g. Welsh ponies) and very rarely in animals with a dark iris.
The hypoplastic region bulges anteriorly, creating a *cystic' appearance. No treatment
is required.
Posterior pigment epithelium cysts and cysts of granula iridica
●Common
● Rarely, may enlarge to obstruct visual axis
● On the very rare occasions when vision is compromised or the horse's behaviour
affected, evacuation of the cysts or laser ablation is effective
● Most cysts should be left alone
Iridociliary cysts can be associated with other ocular anomalies and glaucoma,
especially in the Rocky Mountain horse.
296
 Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Figure 7.25Bilateral hypoplasia of the iris
and associated miosis in a colour-dilute horse.
The right eye is illustrated.
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 7.26 Uveal cysts arising from the granula
iridica. Both cysts are round and smooth and can be
transilluminated with a bright light.
Figure 7.27 Pigmented uveal cyst in the
ventral pupillary border. Cysts in this position
 than those positioned dorsally.
UVEITIS
Equine uveitis is an important and painful problem and is probably the single most
common cause of blindness in this species. Prevalence may approach 25%. A propor-
tion of cases (e.g. unknown aetiology, post-traumatic and unresponsive) may require
referral.
Equine Ophthalmology
297
Aetiology
In common with uveitis in other species there are a number of potential identifiable
causes of acute equine uveitis. Triggering antigens include infectious agents such as
Leptospira spp and non-infectious antigens (Table 7.2). Whatever the initiating event,
the greatest concern is of immune-mediated chronic complications.
Table 7.2  Aetiology of equine uveitis
Aetiology of equine uveitis
Possible examples
(most infectious causes are unproven)
Infectious agents
Viruses - Herpesvirus (EHV-1 and EHV-4), equine
influenza virus
Bacteria - Leprospira interrogans (number of serovars),
Rhodococcus equi, Escherichia coli, Sirepfococcus equi
Parasites -, Toxoplasma gondil , Onchocerca cervicalis2,
intestinal strongyles
Inflammation
0
Ulcerative and non-ulcerative keratitis
OPHTHALMO
Kerato-uveitis
Trauma
Blunt and penetrating trauma (including phacoclastic
uveitis)
Foreign bodies
EQUINE 
Surgery
 Physical and chemical injury
Immune-mediated
Delayed response to local or circulating antigens
1 Serum and vitreous samples rom animals with toxoplasmosis suggest that I. gondi is not implicated in
ERU.
 2 Onchocerca cervicalis is probably not a primary initiator of uveis.
Classical equine recurrent uveitis {ERU) consists of active episodes of uveitis fol-
uveitis in human patients. Acute, active ERU primarily involves the iris, ciliary body
and choroid with concurrent involvement of the cornea, anterior chamber, lens, vitre-
ous and retina {Figure 7.28{a,b)). After variable lengths of time, the quiescent, or
chronic phase, is inevitably followed by further and increasingly severe episodes of
acute uveitis. The severity of the clinical signs differs between cases and between
attacks. It is possible to predict neither how long the quiescent period between attacks 
will last, nor how serious the next attack will be.
Although the precise aetiology of equine recurrent uveitis (ERU) is unknown and
    a          
circulating antigens (heteroantigens) or native ocular antigens {autoantigens) are
298
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
involved, and the triggering antigens may well vary in different parts of the world. A
T-cell-mediated autoimmune mechanism is the ba sis of the recurrent episodes of inflam
mation. T-lymphocytes are the predominant cell type to infiltrate the anterior uvea of
horses with ERU and cell-mediated immunity to uveal antigens has been demonstrated
in affected horses.
[a]
[b)
OLOGY
the classical signs of ocular pain. It is also reddened, aqueous Hlare is present and iris detcails are
not apparent. The single most useful ocular sign of the acute iritis is intense pupillary constriction.
OPHTHALMO
Hyphaema marks the track of penetration and may indicate a retained foreign body. (b) The situ-
ation remcins unclear, even afer thehaemorrhagehad cleared.Note that application of combined
topical atropine 4% and phenylephrine 10% has failed to dilate the pupil
Diagnosis
EQUINE 
Non-traumatic aetiology
· A careful and accurate case history should be taken, including any previous and
function may also need to be assessed
● Examination of both eyes and their adnexa forbital, paraorbital, eyelids and lacrimal
system) must be meticulous, so that normal lighting and darkness will both be
needed, as well as a penlight, some form of magnification, indirect and direct
ophthalmoscopy
● Systemic sedation/analgesia and an auriculopalpebral nerve block may be necessary
if the eye is painful, or if there is any doubt as to the integrity of the globe
· Relevant laboratory investigations (in most cases routine haematology, urea,
enzymes, total protein, protein electrophoresis, faecal analysis for parasites and
urinalysis)
● Serology (paired samples) should also be undertaken if a microbial cause is
suspected, particularly for leptospirosal and viral antibodies
● If necessary, a conjunctival biopsy (e.g. in suspected onchocerciasis) and aqueous
 and vitreous paracentesis can be incorporated into the diagnostic work-up
Traumatic aetiology
● Blunt trauma is usually more damaging to the globe than penetrating injury, as the
intraocular contents can be severely disrupted. Autoimmune uveitis may follow local
release of potentially autoantigenic intracellular material when there is cellular
ood on papieng Aensn si Anlui sunq yahe sisououd aui aaeup
Equine Ophthalmology
299
·Penetrating trauma is not uncommon in horses, and may involve entry via the
cornea, limbus or sclera with or without direct injury to the iris and lens. Elective
procedures such as corneal and intraocular surgery will also be associated with
breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier and consequent uveitis.
● Recurrent bouts of uveitis can follow traumatic injury, especially when uveal tissue
is incarcerated in the wound, when there is leakage of lens material, when necrotic
tissue is present, when haemorrhage persists, or when foreign bodies remain.
· Penetration of the lens can result in phacoclastic uveitis, which carries a poor
prognosis, particularly if it is not recognised and treated aggressively in the early
stages.
● The clinical signs of acute lens rupture include pain, blepharospasm excessive
lacrimation, evidence of corneal penetration, aqueous flare, lens material in the
anterior chamber, focal cataract and an intraocular pressure that is lower than
normal.
● If uveitis cannot be controlled after traumatic injury, the eye may eventually become
phthitic, a common sequel to serious ocular insult in the horse.
● Other findings in chronic trauma-related uveitis include corneal opacification,
OPHTHALMOLOGY
pigmentation and vascularisation, hypotony and blindness.
Key features of examination and diagnosis
· The examiner must ascertain that the globe is intact before the eyelids and globe are
manipulated as part of the ocular examination.
● If aqueous leakage is a possibility, topical fluorescein (2%) should be used for Seidel's
test - the escaping aqueous dilutes the fluorescein and causes it to fluoresce. This
test is easier to interpret if the eye is examined in the dark with a blue light.
● If corneal ulceration is suspected, topical fluorescein {1 %) should be used to check
EQUINE :
for uptake of the stain by the corneal stroma. The eye should be gently irrigated
with sterile saline to remove excess fluorescein before checking for fluorescein uptake
with a blue light in the dark.
● Ultrasonography may be needed to aid diagnosis if adequate intraocular examina-
tion cannot be performed.
· Radiography may be needed if there is any suggestion of orbital or periorbital
damage.
Clinical features of acute equine uveitis (Figures 7.28(a,b) and 7.29(a,b))
● Pain, blepharospasm, lacrimation and genuine photophobia *
● Apparent enophthalmos - the painful eye is actively retracted, the third eyelid may
be prominent and the upper eyelid lashes will be directed more downwards than
normal
· Eyelid oedema may be present, as may chemosis
● Corneal oedema {especially near the limbus) and neovascularisation (an early
response in horses)
● Eye may be reddened as a consequence of inflammatory hyperaemia (conjunctival
and ciliary injection, particularly towards the limbus), but not necessarily so
*Readily identifiable key features
300
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Anterior chamber may appear shallower than normal because the iris is often
swollen
● Plasmoid aqueous imparts a hazy appearance to the anterior chamber (a slit beam
is the easiest way of detecting aqueous flare)
● Aqueous may be an abnormal colour (usually yellow, or green-tinged)
● Hyphaema is an occasional finding when non-traumatic uveitis is severe, but is a
common finding in uveitis associated with trauma
● The pupil is miotic (constricted), often intensely so, and different lighting conditions
do not usually have any effect on the intense constriction. It is helpful to compare
the affected eye with an unaffected eye under the same lighting conditions to confirm
this pathognomonic feature *
● Details of superficial iris structure are lost and the iris may appear thickened and
dull in colour, mainly as a result of iris oedema and inflammatory hyperaemia
● Early posterior synechiae formation, abnormal pupil shape*
●Low intraocular pressure (hypotony)
● Inflammatory cells in vitreous (vitritis) - hazy appearance
OPHTHALMOLOGY
● Vasculitis, perivascular oedema, focal or diffuse oedema (fundus details are indis-
tinct), subretinal exudation, focal or diffuse chorioretinitis
● Optic neuritis and peripapillary oedema
● Vision may appear unaffected or show varying degrees of impairment. Some animals
are blind
EQUINE 
[a)
(b)
Figure 7.29 (a) Unilateral panuveitis of unknown cause. It is important always to examine the
posterior segment in uveifis cases once topical treatment has achieved mydriasis, beccuse inflam-
mation may not be confined to the anterior segment. (b) In this case vitritis is present and inflam-
matory debris can be seen on the ventral pupil
Additional clinical features of traumatic uveitis
particularlyperiocular
/periorbital/orbital - including soft tissue and bony damage e.g. eyelid lacerations
and orbital fractures.
● Alterations of ocular appearance may include:
o External signs of ocular penetration or splits in the ocular coats, aqueous loss,
aqueous coagulation and iris prolapse
*Readily identifiable key features
Equine Ophthalmology
301
o Internal signs of damage to the anterior segment - hyphaema, irregular pupil, dis-
tortion of the iris, damage to the grarula iridica, disruption of iridal pigment,
change of anterior chamber depth, avulsion of the trabecular meshwork, anterior
and posterior synechiae, lens opacities/cataract {often focal), perforation of the
lens capsule, lens material in the anterior chamber
ruption of vitreous, retinal oedema, retinal haemorrhage, retinal detachment, optic
neuritis, extrusion of myelin in papillary and peripapillary region
Clinical features of chronic equine uveitis (Figures 7.30 and 7.31)
+ Corneal neovascularisation
●Keratic precipitates {usually requires a slit lamp), hypopyon, hyphaema
● Focal or diffuse iris hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation, loss of iris detail
· Marked darkening of the iris is the commonest chronic feature seen in the normal
pigmented eye, but in animals with a pale iris the lack of pigment enables rubeosis
iridis (neovascularisation of the iris) to be readily observed
●There is sometimes iris atrophy
OPHTHALMOLOGY
● Alterations of iris colour are very common in chronic uveitis*
· Degeneration/absence of gramula iridica*
· Synechiae, usually posterior, but may be anterior synechiae when there has been
previous corneal perforation*
● Pupillary seclusion (the adhesion of the whole pupillary circumference to the
lens) and pupilary occlusion (opaque fibrous tissue crossing the pupil) are possible
sequelae
● Immobile, or partially mobile, irregular pupil *
● Cell rests (pigment deposition on anterior lens capsule)*
EQUINE 
· Cataract formation is a common complication, particularly in the presence of
synechiae or cyclitic membranes {organized exudate behind the lens as a result of
cyclitis) and such patients are unsuitable for cataract surgery
●Cataract may be incipient, immature, mature or hypermature, depending on
chronicity*
+ Lens subluxation/luxation
● There may be vitreal discolouration, opacities (floaters) and liquefaction (syneresis)
● Thickened vitreal membranes are quite common. Those of the posterior vitreous
usually appear as grey striae radiating into the vitreous from the vicinity of the optic
nerve head; unfortunately they may eventually cause traction detachments of the
retina
● Retinal detachment is a possible complication of vitreal alterations, alternatively any
subretinal and retinal oedema present during the acute inflammatory phase may
contribute to subsequent retinal detachment
● Peripapillary chorioretinopathy, focal or diffuse inactive chorioretinopathy
+ Optic atrophy
● Secondary glaucoma - intraocular pressure higher than normal, globe may enlarge
● Shrinkage of globe (phthisis bulbi) - intraocular pressure extremely low
*Readily identifiable key features
302
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Figure 7.30 Subacute equine recurrent
Uveitis. In this colour-dilute eye it is possible to
observe new blood vessels [rwbeosis iridis] on
the iris surface [rubeosis iridis is not usually
apparent in darkly-pigmented eyesj.In addition,
the pupil is irregular, there is partial degenera-
tion of the granula iridica and there are pigment
deposits (iris rests] on the anterior lens capsule.
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 7.31 Chronic equine recurrent
Uveifis. The eye is quiet, but severely damaged
by previous recurrent episodes. There is marked
darkening of the iris, degeneration of the
granula iridica, an irregular pupil, posterior
synechice, iris rests, secondary catcract and the
eye is blind.
EQUINE 
Management of uveitis
Complete resolution is achievable in some cases if early treatment is given the first time
uveitis occurs and when the cause is readily identifiable (e.g. trauma). However, the
 prognosis in traumatic cases is guarded when there is extensive intraocular haemor-
rhage and/or disruption of the intraocular contents. The prognosis is also guarded
when there have been previous episodes of inflammation, and the prognosis for restora-
tion of normal visual function is very poor in chronic recurrent cases. Once vision is
permanently lost, the only consideration is provision of adequate pain relief and this
may be most readily achieved by removal of the globe.
The horse should be walked twice daily in dim light, and, in addition to the usual
principles of animal management, vital signs should be monitored. It is important to
be aware of any potential undesirable side effects of treatment.
●When uveitis is confirmed, house the affected animal in a dim, quiet and clean
environment
● Dust and insects should be kept to a minimum fe.g. feed wet hay at ground level,
avoid dusty bedding, control insects)
● Place a subpalpebral lavage device or similar at the time of the initial examination,
preferably before sedation/analgesia and local nerve blocks have worn off
● Collect the requisite samples before treatment is started
● Petroleum jelly should be applied to the face beneath the lower eyelid to avoid
EquineOphthalmology
303
scalding from excessive lacrimation and to protect from the effects of frequent
medication
● Institute medical treatment promptly while investigations as to aetiology are in
progress
the combination of topical mydriatic cycloplegic and corticosteroid and systemic
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
· The eye must be re-evaluated at regular intervals
Treatment
Topical
Mydriarics
A mydriatic cycloplegic (atropine sulphate 1-4%) should be applied with sufficient fre-
quency to achieve and maintain mydriasis. This means that the drug is given inten-
sively in the early stages of treatment, and once the pupil has responded it is only given
as needed to maintain mydriasis ( proba bly once daily). A directly-acting mydriatic such
as phenylephrine hydrochloride 10% may be used in conjunction with atropine in an
.OGY
attempt to disrupt established synechiae.
If there is no pupil response to this two-drug combination within six hours of fre-
10
quent applications, it is unlikely that successful mydriasis will be achieved. Treatment
OPHTHALMO
can be stopped when the eye is free of any signs of pain or inflammation. Owners
should be advised that pupillary dilation may persist for up to four weeks after treat-
ment has stopped.
Precautions - topical atropine may cause ileus and subsequent colic, especially in
foals, and should only be used with sufficient frequency to maintain pupil dilation. If
necessary, intestinal sounds can be monitored, but there is unlikely to be a problem if
EQUINE 
applications are not given more frequently than every six hours and atropine ointment
is always an option in foals.
Corticosteroids
Topical prednisolone acetate 1% is the drug of choice, as it has excellent powers of
intraocular penetration. It can be applied every 30 minutes for the first two hours and
then every 2-4 hours for the next two days, tapering off to 34 times daily if the
response is positive. The aim is to cease treatment approximately two weeks after
clinical signs have resolved. Topical corticosteroids may be supplemented with less-
frequent subconjunctival injections using 10-40 mg methylprednisolone acetate if
frequent topical application is not possible.
Precautions - topical and subconjunctival corticosteroids are contraindicated when
there is corneal ulceration or abrasion.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are not as potent as corticosteroids
e1l leoidoi pasea-piouaisoioo e ol pappe aq Aew Aaui 'saisuadxa arow ae pue
ment regime in resistant cases. Ketorolac trometamol 0.s% and flurbiprofen sodium
0.03% every 6-12 hours are the drugs of choice.
Precautions NSAIDs should be used with caution and with regular reassessment
when ulcerative keratitis is present.
304
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Antibiotics
Topical antibiotics are only required if intensive and prolonged corticosteroid therapy
encourages opportunistic bacteria.
Systemic
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents such as flunixin meglumine have proved of
value as part of non-specific uveitis treatment. Initially flunixin meglumine can be given
intravenously at a dose rate of 1 mg/kg body weight every 12 hours for 3-5 days.
Flunixin meglumine can also be given at the same dose rate orally and intramuscu-
larly. Ketoprofen can be used as an alternative to flunixin meglumine at a dose rate of
2mg/kg every 24 hours for 3-5 days.
Follow-up treatment is given at the minimum effective dosage and can be effected
with intravenous or oral dosage of flunixin meglumine (0.25-0.5 mg/kg twice daily)
or other prostaglandin inhibitors like phenylbutazone {3-5 mg/kg twice daily). In cases
that relapse, prolonged oral administration of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) at a dose
OPHTHALMOLOGY
rate of 15 mg/kg may be helpful, but it is not usually selected for acute cases.
Precautions - NSAIDs can produce gastrointestinal ulceration and haemorrhage and
renal damage. These effects can be potentiated by concurrent use of corticosteroids.
Corticosteroids
Steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can be used as well as, or instead of, the
non-steroidal type, always providing that their use is not contraindicated. If both
QUINE
haemorrhage. Prednisolone is the drug of choice at a dose rate of 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
per day for 5-7 days reducing thereafter. Dexamethasone {intramuscular dose rate
of 1040mg/day) is more likely to be associated with undesirable side effects.
Corticosteroids should be administered with caution in animals predisposed to
laminitis.
Precautions Systemic corticosteroids can cause immunosuppression, laminitis and
iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome. They should be used with appropriate cover if infec-
tion is present and with considerable care, or not at all, if corneal ulceration is present.
Antibiotics
If a specific cause for the uveitis is identified, then therapy can be targeted pharmaco-
logically (e.g. parenteral penicillin-streptomycin may be selected if Leptospira titres are
rising).
New therapeutic options under investigation
Cyclosporin
Cyclosporin is a non-cytotoxic immunosuppressive cyclic peptide that blocks the tran-
scription of the cytokine interleukin-2 {IL-2) and therefore decreases the responsive
ness of T-cells to inflammatory stimuli. The drug may therefore be of value in blocking
the non-specific activation of T-cells in recurrent episodes of ERU.
to achieve effective intraocular levels. Intravitreal implantation of a sustained-releasé
cyclosporin delivery device has been assessed in horses with experimentally-induced
Equine Ophthalmology
305
ERU and naturally occurring ERU and the duration and severity of inflammation
decreased significantly.
Subconjunctival delivery systems for cyclosporin are being evaluated, so as to avoid
the necessity for intraocular microsurgery.
Pars plana vitrectomy
Pars plana vitrectomy has been used to obtain diagnostic material and remove vitreal
debris {and leptospires in some cases). The technique is claimed to improve vision
and delay progression of disease in affected horses and it is hypothesised that it works
by removing the uveitis-induced “immunological memory” in the vitreous, thereby
reducing adverse interaction between the vitreous and the uveal tract. The results
obtained have shown some variation, ranging from prevention of recurrence of
ERU and stabilisation of vision to no great improvement and postoperative cataract
formation.
General therapeutic principles in traumatic uveitis
● Medical thera py is as already described for non-tra umatic uveitis, except that topical
7
.90
corticosteroids and, sometimes, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are usually
avoided when there is corneal damage, for the reasons outlined below.
10
● Ulcerative keratitis is often a complication of ocular trauma and the presence of an
OPHTHALMO
ulcer complicates the medical therapy, as corticosteroids should not be used. Topical
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, if selected as an alternative, should be used
with caution because their use has been associated, anecdotally, with liquefactive
stromal necrosis.
● Penetrating ocular trauma (e.g. full-thickness penetrating injury to the cornea) may
require microsurgical repair.
EQUINE :
● Penetrating lens injuries may require emergency phacoemulsification ± vitrectomy
to remove the lens fragments if the lens perforation does not reseal rapidly and the
equipment and expertise is available. For the greatest chance of success, the surgery
must be carried out as soon after the injury as possible. Adjunctive medical
therapy is as already described for non-traumatic uveitis, with the addition of a
broad-spectrum topical antibiotic such as ciprofloxacin.
● If there is extensive intraocular haemorrhage and/or gross disruption of the intra-
ocular contents then microsurgical reconstruction may not be indicated, as the
prognosis for restoration of vision is guarded at best and hopeless at worst. In such
cases the eye should be removed.
UVEAL NEOPLASIA
Uveal neoplasia is rare, the commonest being melanoma. Melanomas are usually
locally invasive with no cellular malignancy, and should be differentiated from
cysts.
Differential diagnosis of melanomas and uveal cysts
● Melanomas will continue to enlarge, they are attached to the tissue of origin and
may provoke local or more widespread reaction (including haemorrhage), they are
solid and cannot be transilluminated (Figure 7.32).
306
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Cysts are smooth and usually spherical. They may reach a certain size and remain
static, or occasionally rupture spontaneously. Cysts transilluminate with a bright
light source, even when heavily pigmented. In horses they usually remain attached
to their tissue of origin, but they are not infiltrative and do not provoke any inflam-
matory reaction.
Treatment of melanomas
Localised surgical excision is possible for small melanomas, so refer early for assess-
ment, otherwise enucleation will be required.
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 7.32 Iris melanoma. There is exten-
sive iris involvement in this case.
GLAUCOMAS
QUINE 
Intraocular pressure is dependent on the balance between production and outflow of
 aqueous humour. Glaucoma is the result of imbalance between aqueous humour pro-
duction and outflow that causes an increase of intraocular pressure above that which
E
is compatible with normal function of the retinal ganglion cells and optic nerve. Glau-
 coma is rare in horses and suspected cases are best referred.
As outlined in Section 3 (pp 146-151), glaucomas in all species are usually grouped
into primary, secondary and congenital types. In primary glaucoma there is no overt
ocular abnormality to account for the increase in intraocular pressure {IOP), and this
type has not been reliably confirmed in the horse. Secondary glaucomas are the com-
monest encountered in horses and have an identifiable cause, such as intraocular
inflammation, neoplasia or lens luxation. Congenital glaucoma has been reported in
foals and is associated with developmental anomalies of the iridocorneal angle
(goniodysgenesis).
Horses older than 15 years of age and Appaloosas are at increased risk of devel-
 oping glaucoma, although it has been reported in a number of other breeds including
Thoroughbreds, Arabs and Welsh ponies. The presence of active or inactive uveitis
appears to be a major risk factor. Anterior uveitis often leads to the formation of
 pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes that may limit aqueous absorption by the uvea,
and cause physical and functional obstruction of the iridocorneal angle with inflam-
matory cells and debris.
In horses, the importance of the conventional pathway (whereby aqueous humour
passes through the pupil, into the anterior chamber and exits via the trabecular mesh-
Equine Ophthalmology
307
work of the iridocorneal angle and associated outflow channels) is matched by the
sclera). The presence of extensive outflow channels allows aqueous drainage to be
x      a       
why glaucoma is a relatively rare sequel to uveitis in the equine eye.
Diagnosis
Glaucoma in horses is being recognised with increased frequency, although the preva-
       5     
Ocular injury and marked intraocular inflammatory responses. Diagnosis is made on
the basis of clinical signs and measurement of the intraocular pressure.
Tonometry
● Tonometry is essential to confirm the diagnosis and to monitor the results of therapy.
Sequential measurements of intraocular pressure are recommended as there are
diurnal variations in normal eyes, and, in addition, horses with glaucoma have quite
marked fluctuations of IOP during a 24-hour period.
OPHTHALMOLOGY
● The normal equine intraocular pressure measured with a TonoPen applanation
tonometer ranges from 7-37mm Hg, with a mean IOP of approximately 23 mmHg.
● An auriculopalpebral nerve block is recommended prior to tonometry in fractious
horses, as the results will be more reproducible and accurate.
Clinical signs (Figure 7.33(a,b))
● There is generally a low index of suspicion of glaucoma in horses in the early stages,
the pupils are often only slightly dilated and any discomfort is subtle
● Although it is often a bilateral condition, one eye may be affected before the other,
EQUINE 
so it is common to find that the two eyes are dissimilar
· Corneal oedema may be a presenting feature, and its appearance is slightly variable,
a u sql ha on sn s   ds a e  
central cornea to pancorneal involvement*
· In chronic cases, subtle bullous keratopathy develops in addition to the stromal
oedema, and corneal function can become compromised with eventual multiple
superficial erosions and corneal decompensation
· Corneal vascularisation can also be a chronic feature
· The presence and appearance of corneal oedema may well relate to the extent and
duration of IOP elevation
● Linear corneal striae {Haab's striae) indicate stretching and thinning of Descemet's
 membrane; the striae appear as faint, grey, parallel lines (snail tracks) and they some-
times branch *
● Mild uveitis is sometimes apparent, particularly of the anterior uvea; the gramuld
iridica may have degenerated
● It is sensible to compare pupil size between the two eyes and between the patient
and a normal horse under the same lighting conditions
· The lens may be subluxated or luxated
*Readily identifiable key features
308
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Vision is often decreased when the IOP is high and some animals become acutely
blind*
● Cupping of the optic nerve head may be observed and occasionally optic atrophy is
found in eyes of horses with advanced glaucoma
● The eye may enlarge (buphthalmos)
a}
[b)
OLOGY
Figure 7.33(a,b)Equine glaucoma during an acute flare up [a] with intraocular pressure
of 46 mm Hg, and after treatment to reduce the intraocular pressure to normal (21 mm Hg) (b). In
[a] it was possible to see that the pupil was dilated despite the panstromal oedema and bullous
OPHTHALMO
keratopathy. In (b) it is appcrent that the pupil is of irregular shape. The leff eye subsequently
became affected in this Appaloosa.
Management of equine glaucoma
The underlying pathogenesis of aqueous humour outflow obstruction with consequent
EQUINE 
increased IOP is not understood, which makes it very difficult to institute effective
therapy. Medical management of equine glaucoma follows the same general guidelines
as that of other species, and the aims of therapy are to maintain vision and minimise
ocular pain by decreasing production of aqueous humour and increasing its outflow.
The response to medical therapy in equine glaucoma is usually poor, with the long-
term prognosis for maintaining vision guarded, although there is some variation
between individuals. Various combinations of medical therapy and surgery may be nec-
essary to reduce the IOP to levels that are compatible with long-term preservation of
vision in horses with glaucoma. Control of IOP can improve vision in equine glau-
coma patients, due to resolution of marked corneal oedema and improvement of optic
nerve vascular perfusion. Glaucoma is particularly aggressive and difficult to control
in the Appaloosa.
Medical therapy
Reduction of aqueous humour production
Agents that reduce aqueous humour production, such as topically-administered
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and beta-adrenergic antagonists, appear to be the most
successful at lowering IOP in the horse. The topically-administered carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitor dorzolamide 2% (three times daily), and the systemically-administered
carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide (orally 1-3 mg/kg four times daily) are
useful. The topical miotic pilocarpine 2% (four times daily), and the topical beta-
*Readily identifiable key features
Equine Ophthalmology
309
blocker timolol maleate 0.5% (twice daily) can also be used to lower IOP in horses.
Combinations of dorzolamide and timolol maleate may be selected.
Miotics
Glaucoma treatment with miotics may provide varying amounts of IOP reduction in
horses. Miotics and synthetic prostaglandins, such as latanoprost, can potentiate the
clinical signs of uveitis and should be used cautiously in horses with mild or quiescent
anterior uveitis.
Atropine
Topical atropine therapy was once thought to reduce the incidence of glaucoma in
horses with uveitis, but should be used cautiously in horses with glaucoma, as it may
cause IOP spikes and does not appear to have the benefit of lowering IOP previously
proposed.
Anti-inflammatories
Anti-inflammatory therapy, consisting of topically- and systemically-administered
.OGY
corticosteroids, and/or topically and systemically administered non-steroidal anti-
inflammatories, such as phenylbutazone and flunixin meglumine, also appear to be
OPHTHALMOLO
beneficial in the control of IOP. Aspirin (15 mg/kg orally once daily) may be helpful in
chronic cases.
Surgical therapy
Surgical therapy is more likely to be effective for long-term retention of vision, so cases
should be referred for specialist opinion as early in the course of disease as possible.
The two techniques employed are ciliodestructive surgery (lowers aqueous humour
EQUINE 
production by damaging the ciliary body) and bypass surgery. Chronically painful and
blind buphthalmic globes should be enucleated, or have an intrascleral prosthesis
implanted.
Lasers
Laser therapy usua lly employs neodymium:yttrium-aluminium-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser
cyclophotoablation which is probably the most effective means of controlling IOP
and maintaining vision in the horse. Diode laser therapy is an alternative. Laser
cyclophotoablation is particularly useful in those animals that do not respond to
trea tment.
Cyclocryoablation
Cyclocryoablation (e.g. with nitrous oxide) results in more diffuse and generalised
damage to the ciliary body than laser cyclophotoablation and the ciliary inflammation
it evokes is often difficult to control. Cyclocryoablation may produce a number of
undesirable complications including severe postoperative pain, ocular hypertension,
choroidal effusion, serous retinal detachment and phthisis bulbi.
Bypass
 Bypass procedures (e.g. gonioimplantation and iridencleisis) improve aqueous humour
drainage. Gonioimplantation using Ahmed gonioimplants has been reported in the
horse, but is still considered experimental.
310
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
LENS
The equine lens is large, and minor imperfections are relatively easy to observe. If there
is any suggestion of lens abnormality at the time of examination, a short-acting topical
mydriatic {tropicamide 1%) should be applied, and the horse re-examined 20-30
minutes later. Ideally, the examination technique should utilise a focal light source, slit
lamp biomicroscopy, distant direct ophthalmoscopy (some 30-60 cm from the eye) and
close direct ophthalmoscopy (some 2-10 cm from the eye).
Note that if the significance of any ophthalmic finding at a pre-purchase examina-
tion is not apparent then referral should be considered.
Lens variations of no clinical significance
● Anterior {upright Y) and posterior suture lines {inverted Y) ± variations {e.g. further
subdivisions of the Y sutures) are easily visualised
●“Concentric rings', are commonly observed at the nuclear-cortical interface in horses
of any age
GY
● Nuclear sclerosis may occasionally be observed in older horses
● Mittendorf's dot, common embryonic remnant that marks the original attachment
10
of the hyaloid artery to the posterior lens capsule
OPHTHALMO
●Vacuolation (minute bubbles') in the lens substance is reasonably common
CONGENITAL LENS ANOMALIES AND ABNORMALITIES
EQUINE
● Congenital cataract is seen occasionally, sometimes in association with other ocular
defects. Congenital nuclear cataracts are thought to be inherited in the Morgan
horse.
·Aphakia {lens absence), microphakia (small lens), lens coloboma {section of lens
missing) and imperfections of shape (e.g. lenticonus) and position (e.g. congenital
lens luxation) have all been reported in foals, but they are rare.
ACQUIRED LENS DISEASES
Cataract
Aetiology of acquired equine cataract
● Uveitis is the commonest cause of secondary equine cataract
● Trauma is the next most common cause of secondary cataract
●Unknown and age-related (Figure 7.34)
Cataract surgery
● Foals less than six months of age are the best candidates for surgery. Some adult
horses are also suitable, usually provided that the only ocular abnormality is cataract
● Patient selection is of crucial importance and early referral for assessment is
sensible
● Many horses with cataract will not be suitable candidates for surgery because the
common causes are associated with ocular inflammation
Equine Ophthalmology
311
● Active ocular inflammation is a contraindication to surgery; previous inflammation
may substantially reduce the success rate
●Phacoemulsification without lens implantation is the technique that is usually
adopted
Figure 7.34 Equine cataract. In this horse
the peripheral (equatorial} extent of the cataract
is only apparent after the pupil has been dilated.
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
Lens luxation
Lens luxation is most commonly the result of trauma (e.g. blunt tra uma in polo ponies)
or severe inflammation (e.g. uveitis) (Figure 7.35).
EQUINE 
Figure 7.35 lens luxction in a yearling
Following viral encephalomyelitis and panuveitis
cs a foal.
Lens rupture
Lens rupture is usually associated with blunt or penetrating injury and has been
discussed earlier. Cases should be referred to a specialist centre as a matter of
urgency.
VITREOUS
Congenital opacities
● Vitreous opacities of no significance appear as dust-like particles, filamentous and
membranous structures and they are relatively common. Most variations represent
remnants of the tunica vasculosa lentis posterioris and/or hyaloid system.
+ There may be no obvious signs of the hyaloid system at birth in many foals. In others
remnants of the hyaloid vasculature are present at birth, but usually regress com-
312
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
pletely by 3-9 months of age. Persistence of parts of the hyaloid vasculature is
usually incidental, unusual and of no visual significance.
● Dense retrolental vitreal opacities suggest persistence ± hyperplasia of the primary
vitreous.
Acquired opacities
●Vitritis is a very common finding in horses with uveitis, a dull or reduced fundus
reflex is a helpful diagnostic feature and a bnormally opaque vitreoretinal membranes
and other detritus may also be apparent on ophthalmoscopic examination (Figure
7.29(b))
● Severe inflammatory changes, such as endophthalmitis, are less common and may
be associated with sepsis, for example associated with neonatal bacterial septicaemia
● Vitreal degeneration is a common feature of equine ageing. Vitreal floaters are the
most likely abnormality to be encountered and should be considered as part of the
differential diagnosis in “head shakers’ or in horses that ‘spook' for no apparent
reason. Liquefaction of the vitreous (syneresis) also tends to be associated with
ageing, but can follow intraocular inflammation
90101
●Asteroid hyalosis and synchisis scintillans (see Section 3, p. 157) are relatively rare
in horses
OPHTHALMO
OCULAR FUNDUS
Considerable variation is observed during examination of the equine fundus (Figures
7.36 and 7.37). Evaluation of vision is, inevita bly, highly subjective. If the significance
EQUINE 
 of any ophthalmoscopic finding at a pre-purchase examination is not apparent then
referral should be considered.
Figure 7.36 Normal equine ocular fundus in an
adult horse with a normally pigmented iris. In this
Thoroughbred, a blue tapetum is present and the optic
nerve head is located in the non-tapetal fundus. The
retinal vessels consist of a Fine peripapillary halo, dis-
continuous ventrally at the site of the original foetol
Fissure. In the ocular Fundus of most herbivores,
choroidal vessels are also apparent as they perforate
through to the choriocapillaris layer - the so-called
'stars of Winslow. The tapetum, being collagenous, is
less reflective than that of carnivores.
Equine Ophthalmology
313
Figure 7.37  Normal equine ocular fundus. In this
colour-dilute eye, including a blue iris, there is a sub
albinotic fundus and absence of the tapetum cs @
normal variant. The small peripapillary vessels are
retinal, the larger peripapillary vessels cre choroidal
and are very distinct, cs are other choroidal vessels
seen in transverse, oblique cnd longitudinal section.
There is a well-demarcated, peripapillary, non-
pigmented ‘halo' over which retinal vessels pass
without distortion.
ANATOMY
OPHTHALMOLOGY
The optic nerve head (ONH) or optic disc is horizontally oval, usually salmon-pink
in colour and myelination can extend beyond the edge of the disc. The edge of the
ONH can be smooth or sca lloped depending on the amount of peripapillary myelina-
tion. The physiological pit is not obvious and the ONH often has a fasiculated appear
ance that relates to the contrast between the optic nerve fibres and the lamina cribrosa;
the contrast becomes accentuated with age, or if there is a pathological loss of nerve
fibres.
Equine retinal vasculature is described as paurangiotic. Some 30-60 fine vessels
extend only a short distance from the optic nerve head and most of the retinal nutri
EQUINE 
tion comes from the underlying vascular choroid. The retinal vessels most commonly
originate from the periphery of the optic nerve head; central vessels are uncommon.
In general, the presence of normal retinal vasculature is assumed to indicate the pres-
ence of a functional retina. It is usual to have an area ventral to the optic disc where
 retinal vessels are sparse or absent (original position of foetal/embryonic fissure/cleft).
It is not possible to distinguish retinal arterioles and venules. Small perforating
choroidal vessels appear as dark spots in transverse section (end on) and small rods
 in oblique or longitudinal section when viewed against the background of the tapetum.
In colour-dilute animals, short or complete sections of large choroidal vessels will be
apparent and choroidal veins can sometimes be seen converging to form a draining
vortex vein.
 In the immediate peripapillary region, especially dorsally, there is often a relative
lack of pigment in the retinal pigmented epithelium and choroid, as well as tapetal
thinning. In such regions a discrete choroidal vessel is sometimes apparent, or a less
well defined reddish colour from the underlying choroidal vessels.
Grossly, the fundus of normally pigmented animals is divided into dorsal tapetal
 and ventral non-tapetal regions and the optic nerve head is usually located in the non-
ta petal fundus, just ventral to the tapetal-non-tapetal junctional zone {Figure 7.1{a,b)).
Tapetal colour varies with coat colour, so that light-coloured animals have a yellow
tapetum, chestnut animals have variations between green and yellow, bay horses
           
tapetum. In colour-dilute partially albinotic or albinotic animals, which usually have
314
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
blue irises, the tapetum may be thin or absent and the extent to which large choroidal
vessels are visible is also determined by the amount of overlying pigment. In some
animals in which the tapetum is absent, the retinal vasculature and choroidal vessels
can be viewed against the whitish colour of the sclera. The non-tapetal fundus is brown
to dark brown in normally pigmented horses. Colour dilution allows the large
choroidal vessels to be visualised.
Points to note in the assessment of the equine fundus
● Complete darkness is necessary for comprehensive examination
● Mydriasis is not always needed, but should certainly be used if fundus lesions are
suspected
● Indirect and direct ophthalmoscopy should be used for examination, as the two
methods are complementary rather than exclusive
● The order of examination is usually the optic nerve head, retinal and choroidal
vasculature, non-tapetal fundus and tapetal fundus
● The tapetum fbrosum (collagen) forms a tough barrier, so pathological changes are
OPHTHALMOLOGY
most likely to be seen in the non-tapetal fundus and are most readily observed
ventrally
● Attenuation or loss of retinal vasculature usually indicates local or generalised retinal
dysfunction, possibly causing a visual deficit
CONGENITAL FUNDUS DISEASE
Colobomatous defects
EQUINE 
Colobomatous defects are relatively common congenital, non-progressive defects
{Figure 7.38).
Figure 7.38 Colobomatous defects of the equine
Undus.  Several  clearly-defined  focal  regions of
hypoplastic retina lie ventral to the optic disc. Over
these defects fine retinal vessels pass without distor-
fion. In this old horse there is also some peripapillary
pigmentary disturbance and the edge of the optic disc
is not very clearly defined.
Clinical features
● Usually an incidental finding and not a cause of visual deficit
● Clearly defined round or oval reflective lesions in the tapetal and non-tapetal fundus;
the papillary region is less commonly involved
Equine Ophthalmology
315
● Large colobomas are sometimes associated with pigmentary disturbance
● They may be unilateral or bilateral, single or multiple
Congenital stationary night blindness
Congenital stationary night blindness is mainly a condition of the Appaloosa, but has
also been recorded occasionally in other breeds including Thoroughbreds. It may be
inherited as a sex-linked recessive trait in the Appaloosa and has not yet been described
in the UK. There is no treatment.
Clinical features
● There is some variation in the severity of clinical signs, although the condition is
usually static
● In severely-affected foals, owners note disorientation, particularly if the foal is sep-
arated from its mother; there are also stargazing and a head tilt. Closer examina-
tion may indicate a bilateral dorsomedial strabismus as the only obvious ocular
abnorma lity
● Most commonly there is normal vision under good lighting conditions and visual
impairment in dim light
● Electroretinography is required to confirm the diagnosis
ALM
Congenital retinal detachment
Congenital non-attachments of the retina and congenital retinal detachments are rare
OPHTH.
conditions; they are usually bilateral and a cause of impaired vision or blindness. Total
detachment may be found as an isolated abnormality, whereas congenital non-
attachment is usually associated with other ocular defects fe.g. microphthalmos, ante
EQUINE
rior segment dysgenesis, lens subluxation/luxation, cataract, colobomatous defects and
retinal dysplasia). There is no treatment.
Clinical features
● The pupils are usually dilated and poorly-responsive, or unresponsive, to bright light
● Vision may be impaired or absent
● Ophthalmoscopy reveals retinal detachment. Most commonly, the dorsal retina
detaches (disinserts from the ora ciliaris retinae), but remains attached in the region
 of the optic nerve head. The tapetal fundus in the affected region appears more
reflective, and grey-white folds of detached retina hang ventrally, often partly obscur-
ing the ONH
Congenital retinal haemorrhage
 Multiple small retinal haemorrhages are sometimes present in normal foals, and those
suffering from the neonatal maladjustment syndrome, and they resolve without treat-
ment a few days after birth.
Optic nerve hypoplasia
can be related to the severity of the defect (i.e. the number of retinal ganglion cells).
There is no treatment.
316
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Clinical features
● Usually bilateral
● Most affected foals have dilated pupils and an abnormal pupillary light reflex
· Affected animals are visually impaired or blind
● The optic nerve head is smaller and usually paler than normal
ACQUIRED FUNDUS DISEASE
Pigmentary retinopathy
Pigmentary retinopathy may be a non-specific finding in older animals, of unknown
cause, or may be part of the clinical presentation of equine motor neurone disease (see
below) (Figure 7.39)
OLOGY
OPHTHALMO
EQUINE 
Figure 7.39Pigmentary retinopathy with normal
retinal vasculature. In this bilaterally-affected animal
there was no indication of generalised disease (with
acknowledgement to A.G.Matthews).
Equine motor neurone disease retinopathy
This condition is associated with neurodegenerative motor neurone disease and the
fundus changes that are found in approximately one third of clinical cases are the result
of accumulation of dark brownish-coloured ceroid lipofuscin in the retinal pigment
epithelium.
Clinical features
● Pigmentary disturbance in an irregular mosaic pattern affecting the tapetal-
non-tapetal junctional zone and the tapetal fundus
· The extent of the disturbance is variable, as is any identifiable effect on vision
● The changes are bilateral and similar
Treatment
The neurological signs of the disease can be stabilised by oral vitamin E supplemen-
Equine Ophthalmology
317
Senileretinopathy
Senile degenerative changes associated with pigmentary disturbance are not unusual
in older animals, and their prevalence increases with advancing age.
Clinical features
● Affected animals are usually over 15 years of age and the fundus changes are usually
bilateral
● Although vision may be reduced in some cases, owners of the majority of affected
animals report no visual impairment
● Pigmentary disturbance is most obvious in the non-tapetal peripapillary region
● Subtle hyperreflectivity of the tapetal fundus and vascular attenuation are inconstant
findings
● Other age-related degenerative changes involving the vitreous and lens may also be
present
Inflammatory fundus lesions
In common with other species, active chorioretinitis lesions are seldom seen, but inac-
.90
tive chorioretinopathy lesions are reasonably common. The cause is rarely esta blished,
but active chorioretinitis has been observed in association with systemic viral and bac
10
terial (Streptococcus equi) disease.
OPHTHALMO
Inflammatory optic nerve lesions are most commonly seen in horses with vasculi-
tis, chorioretinitis, panuveitis and equine recurrent uveitis. Less frequently, optic neu
ritis and retrobulbar neuritis are the only obvious sites of inflammation. Recognisable
causes include multifocal central nervous system infections (viral, bacterial and pro-
tozoan parasites) and severe systemic problems such as septicaemia.
EQUINE 
Clinical Features
Focalor multifocal lesions
Focal or multifocal bullet-hole' lesions are commonest and are most readily observed
-xondde ane Aaui "ot' aunlil uoau Aeldedad pue snpuny ieiadeiuou au u
mately circular, with a depigmented periphery and hyperpigmented centre. In the acute
ns un u suisa aaxa am-usa se iae suosl asi s
the ta petum to supply the chorioca pillaris.
Figure  7.40Focal (bullet-hole) chorioretinopathy
as an incidental unilateral finding (with acknowledge-
ments to A.G. Matthews]
318
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Peripapillary lesions
Peripapillary lesions are also relatively common, and when they are located lateral and
medial to the ONH are designated *butterfly' lesions (Figure 7.41). The affected area
often surrounds the ONH completely and the distribution of these lesions would
suggest an association with blood vessels, particularly those of the choroid. Active
exudative inflammation may well be accompanied by vasculitis. Putative association
of these lesions with vascular pathology suggests that they are not necessarily of purely
inflammatory origin; ischaemia and immune-mediated damage, for example, may be
other possible causes. Infectious diseases such as leptospirosis have been linked with
equine recurrent uveitis (ERU) and peripapillary lesions (see earlier under ERU).
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 7.41 Peripapillary chorioretinopathy. This
is a relatively common and non-specific finding that
usually reflects previous posterior-segment inflamma-
fion. lts clinical significance is usually judged, quite
empirically, by the appearance of overlying retinal
vessels. If these cre of normal appearance then it is
assumed that there is no associated visual abnormal-
ity, but if they are attenuated then vision in the
corresponding sector may be impaired (with acknowl-
edgements to A.G. Matthews].
EQUINE 
Diffuse lesions
Diffuse lesions are uncommon. They appear hyperreflective in the tapetal region and
depigmented in the non-tapetal region. Infarction, as well as inflammation, are possi-
ble causes.
Inflammarory optic nerve lesions
Inflammatory optic nerve lesions can render the horse blind (see below). Possible causes
include viral (e.g. equine herpes virus), bacterial (e.g. Streptococcus equi) and parasitic
(e.g- protozoal) infections.
Treatment
There is no treatment for inactive chorioretinopathy, but if the cause can be estab-
lished it may be possible to treat active chorioretinitis.
Fundus abnormalities associated with acute vision loss (see also
Section 2)
Aetiology
● Acute unilateral blindness can occur after direct trauma to the head or eye or severe
damage to the optic nerve. Optic neuritis and retrobulbar neuritis are also causes,
as is blindness caused by uveitis, glaucoma or retinal detachment. It is also possi-
ble, but rare, for such cases to be bilateral.
EquineOphthalmology
319
· Intraocular haemorrhage and generalised severe haemorrhage can cause sudden
blindness. When the blood supply to the optic nerve head is severely disrupted
ischaemic neuropathy ensues. Acute blindness associated with ischaemic optic neu-
ropathy can be a complication of both primary and secondary haemorrhage, septic
emboli and the surgical ligation of arteries (e.g. maxillary, greater palatine, internal
and external carotid) as a treatment for epistaxis associated with guttural pouch
mycosis. Such cases are usually unilateral, but not invariably so.
● Inflammation (especially that associated with infectious agents such as viruses),
toxins and neoplasia should also be considered in the differential diagnosis of uni-
lateral and bilateral visual impairment.
Clinical findings in trama-related visual loss
● The history can be of crucial importance, but on occasions is misleading, particu-
larly when the loss of vision is the result of non-accidental injury
● External signs of damage to the head or eye may be apparent
· Partial or complete unilateral or bilateral blindness
● Normal or abnormal pupillary light reflexes {usually abnormal)
OPHTHALMOLOGY
● Sub-retinal haemorrhage, retinal haemorrhage, preretinal haemorrhage and intraoc-
ular haemorrhage
+ Partial or complete retinal detachment
● Optic nerve head oedema (papilloedema) ± peripapillary and retinal haemorrhage
● Ischaemic retinopathy and optic neuropathy are consequences of severe damage or
disruption to the blood supply to the retina and optic nerve. Progressive retinal
depigmentation and focal pigment hypertrophy are characteristic findings in the non-
tapetal fundus; vascular attenuation and more generalised retinal atrophy may also
be apparent. Optic nerve atrophy is always present in long-standing cases
EQUINE 
Possible treatment For suspected cerebrocortical oedema associated
withtrauma
· The success of treatment depends upon establishing and eliminating the cause. The
damage may, however, be irreversible in some cases, as for example when there has
been a fracture of the basisphenoid or basioccipital bone, shearing of the optic nerve
following injury to the poll, following severe blood loss or damage from toxins
+ Broad-spectrum antibiotics
●Vitamin E (20 000 units orally every 24 hours for an adult)
● If cerebral oedema or papilloedema is present then:
o Dexamethasone 0.5 mg/kg intravenously every 6-8 hours for the first 24 hours
after the injury
o Dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) 1 g/kg intra venously as a 10-20% solution in saline
every 12-24 hours for five days
o Mannitol, but not if there is risk of further haemorrhage {0.5-2g/kg of 20%
solution by slow intravenous injection, twice daily)
● If skull fractures are present and there is gross displacement, repair should be
considered
Retinal detachment
Acquired retinal detachment may be a consequence of severe inflammatory disease
320
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
so far as there is no obvious cause, although this type is usually found in older horses
and there is often accompanying vitreal degeneration. Treatment regimes that may
horses.
Clinical features
● Depending upon the extent of retinal detachment there may be no obvious vision
loss, partial vision loss or blindness
● Clinical presentation ranges from giant retinal tears to total detachment with dis-
insertion (see earlier)
Optic neuropathies
described as exudative and proliferative; but common to all is the fact that they are
usually incidental findings.
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
Exudarive
The exudative type of optic neuropathy consists of delicate translucent material at the
periphery of the optic nerve head, and is a common incidental finding of no clinical
significance.
Proliferative
 Proliferative lesions appear as raised masses at the periphery of the optic nerve head
and may be focal or generalised (Figure 7.42); the latter can be large enough to obscure
the optic nerve head. The origin and composition of these lesions cannot be deter-
EQUINE 
mined from ophthalmoscopic examination.
Figure 7.42Focal proliferative optic neuropathy.
This is α relatively common finding on ophthalmic
examination, particularly in older horses, and is not
associated with any discernible effect on vision. More
Hlorid types, especially when there are muliple pro-
liferative lesions, may be of clinical significance (with
ccknowledgements to A. G. Matthews]
The focal type is generally benign and consists of whitish material at the periphery of
the optic nerve head. Fine blood vessels are often associated with these lesions. The
material may be nervous tissue ± macrophages (myelin-rich or lipid-rich).
Equine Ophthalmology
321
The generalised type may be a consequence of insults such as trauma and severe acute
blood loss and may represent extruded nervous tissue ± macrophages. Affected eyes 
are usually visually impaired or blind and there may be some indications of optic
atrophy.
Optic nerve neoplasia
A number of primary tumours have been described. Astrocytoma of the optic nerve
head resembles focal proliferative optic neuropathy and, similarly, is of no clinical sig-
nificance. Medulloepithelioma and neuroepithelioma of the optic nerve are very rare
tumours and both types can be locally invasive and a cause of blindness and even
exophthalmos if there is orbital extension.
Optic atrophy
Optic atrophy is the end result of severe insult to the eye or the optic nerve, including
the compressive effects of infltrative neoplasia and space-occupying lesions. The effects
are often a consequence of local ischaemia and Wallerian degeneration. The optic nerve
 head becomes pale and there is invariably profound attenuation of the retinal vessels
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
(Figure 7.43).
EQUINE 
Figure 7.43 Optic atrophy. The optic disc is pale
and the architecture of the lamina cribrosa has
become more prominent because of the optic nerve
ctrophy. The retinal vessels were attenucted and
the eye was blind. This was an incidental unilateral
finding.
SUMMARY
Normal fundus variants
● Partial albinism - generalised deficiency of chorioretinal pigment; the tapetum may
be thin or a bsent in some of these animals
● Albinism - complete absence of chorioretinal pigment; the tapetum is absent in these
eyes
● Lipid deposition - localised yellow inclusions within the chorioretina
·Peripapillary medullated nerve fibres
·Peripapillary pigmentation and bypopigmentation
322
Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● Absence of retinal vessels in the ventral region of the optic nerve head
· Focal pigment proliferation (ectopic pigment) in tapetal fundus
Fundus abnormalities of no visual significance
● Colobomas - not uncommon; both typical (6 o'clock) and atypical (anywhere else),
they may be single or multiple. The non-tapetal fundus is the commonest site, less
commonly elsewhere, including the papillary and peripapillary region
●Isolated focal chorioretinopatby - small depigmented foci in non-tapetal fundus
● Focal proliferative optic neuropatby - localised proliferation of tissue from periph-
ery of ONH, usually in older horses. They may slowly enlarge or remain the same
size. Optic nerve is functionally normal
● Transient retinal baemorrbage may be found in normal foals and those with neona-
tal maladjustment syndrome
Fundus abnormalities of doubtful visual significance
·Peripapillary chorioretinopathy with intact retinal vasculature - so-called butterfly
OLOGY
lesions'. Of unknown significance in the absence of signs of present or past uveitis,
or previous intraocular inflammation
· Pigmentary disturbance associated with senile retinopathy and equine motor
neurone disease does not cause obvious visual problems in the majority of cases
OPHTHALMO
Fundus abnormalities of probable visual significance
·Peripapillary chorioretinopathy with retinal vasculature abnormality.Significant
when occurring in association with signs of present or past uveitis, or other intraoc-
ular inflammation
EQUINE 
·Multiple focalchorioretinitis and chorioretinopathy lesions-generalised focal depig
mentation in non-tapetal fundus
Fundus abnormalities of certain visual significance
· Retinal detachments - giant retinal tears, bullous detachment, partial and total
detachment
·Extensive intraocular haemorrhage
· Generalised proliferative optic neuropathy
·Ischaemicchorioretinopathy and opticneuropathy
·Panretinalinflammationordegeneration
Optic atrophy
APPENDIX 1
OPHTHALMIC
TERMINOLOGY
OPHTHAlMIC terMINOLOGY
Ophthalmic Terminology
325
GENERAL
Abiotrophy
Premature degeneration of a tissue after it has reached maturity
Adnexa
 Eyelids, lacrimal apparatus, orbit and paraorbital areas
Amaurosis
Complete loss of sight in one or both eyes in the absence of
ophthalmoscopic or other marked objective signs
Amblyopia
Partial loss of sight in one or both eyes in the absence of
ophthalmoscopic or other marked objective signs
Anophthalmos
Absence of an eye
● Primary - optic pits fail to deepen and form outgrowths from
forebrain
● Secondary - whole of forebrain fails to develop
· Degenerative
optic
vesicle forms
but subsequently
degenerates
Aplasia
Failure of differentiation of a tissue during embryonic life
Atrophy
A diminution of size, a shrinking of cells, fibres, or tissues that
 previously had reached their full development
Canthus
Angle at either end of the eyelid aperture, specified as medial
(nasal) and lateral (temporal)
Y
Coloboma
An absence or defect of some ocular tissue, usually resulting from
0
a failure of part of the embryonic cleft to close, and seen as a
0
notch, hole, fissure or cleft. If the defect is in the line of the embry-
Z
onic cleft {i.e. at approximately 6 o'clock) it is spoken of as a
TERMII
typical coloboma, other positions are referred to as atypical
Cyclopia
Single eye
Degeneration
A secondary phenomenon resulting from previous disease; it may
U
be unilateral or bilateral and occurs in a tissue that has reached
IALMI
its full growth
Dioptre
 Unit of measurement of the refractive powers of lenses, equal to
HIH
the reciprocal of the focal length of the lens expressed in metres
Diplopia
Double vision
Dysplasia
 Disorderly cellular proliferation during embryonic life
Dystrophy
A primary, bilateral, inherited disorder with distinct clinico-
pathological findings
Ectasia
Dilation, expa nsion or distension
Emmetropia
Refractive condition in which no refractive error is present with
accommodation at rest
Eye
 Globe or eyeball 
Hypermetropia
Refractive error in which the focal point for light rays from a
distant object is behind the retina (long sighted)
Hyperplasia
Increase above the normal number of individual cells in a
tissue
Hypertrophy
Increase above the normal size of individual cells, fibres or tissues,
without an increase in the number of individual elements
Hypoplasia
Lack of differentiation beca use of arrested development of a tissue
during embryonic life
Metaplasia
Transformation of one type of tissue into another type
326
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Microphthalmos
An eye which is smaller than normal and imperfectly developed
Miosis
Pupillary constriction
Mydriasis
Pupillary dilation
Myopia
 Refractive error in which focal point for light rays from a distant
object is in front of the retina (short sighted)
Nanophthalmos
An eye which is smaller than normal but perfectly formed and of
normal function
Neoplasia
A continuous increase above the normal number of cells in a
tissue
Nystagmus
Involuntary oscillation of the eyeballs
Ocular
Pertaining to the eye or to vision
Ocular surface
The term used to describe the continuous epithelium which begins
at the eyelid margin, extends onto both surfaces of the third
eyelid, the back of the upper and lower eyelids, into the fornices,
and onto the globe
Ophthalmia
Inflammation of the eye, usually refers to conjunctival
inflammation
Ophthalmic
Pertaining to the eye
GY
Ophthalmoplegia
 Paralysis of one or more muscles of the eye
● External - extraocular muscles
0
TERMINOLO
●Internal - intraocular muscles
●Total - both sets of muscles
Palpebralaperture
 Aperture between the eyelids
Photophobia
Abnormal sensitivity to, and discomfort from, light
Photopic
 Pertaining to vision in the light, an eye which has become light
HALMIC
ada pted
Presbyopia
Physiologically blurred near vision, commonly evident soon after
40 years of age in humans
Scotopic
 Pertaining to vision in the dark, an eye which has become dark
HIHdO
ada pted
Stapbyloma
Protrusion {ectasia) of wall of the eye, lined with uveal tissue
Strabismus
Squint (medial squint - esotropia; lateral squint - exotropia)
Synophthalmos
Fused orbits, varying degrees of ocular fusion
GlOBe AND ORbIt
Buphthalmos
Literally ^ox eye'; used to describe enlarged globe in con-
genital and early-onset glaucoma
Endophthalmitis
Severe intraocular inflammation, which does not extend
beyond the sclera
Enophthalmos
A recession of the globe into its socket
Enucleation of the eye
Removal of the globe
Evisceration of the eye
Removal of the contents of the eye with retention of the
sclera
Exenteration oftheorbit
t Removal of the eyeball and all soft tissues within the bony
orbit
Ophthalmic Terminology
327
Exophthalmos
 Similar to proptosis - a forward (anterior) displacement of
the globe
Globe orientation
● Poles of the eye - central points of the anterior and
posterior curvatures of the globe
●Optic axis - line connecting the poles
●Visual axis - line from the object viewed to the centre
of the most sensitive area of the retina (area centralis)
● Equator - Imaginary line drawn around the eye midway
between its poles
Hydrophthalmos
Enlarged globe, secondary to glaucoma
Orbital cellulitis
Inflammation of the orbit
Panophthalmitis
Severe intraocular inflammation which also involves
the sclera, Tenon's capsule and even the orbital tissues
themselves
Phthisis bulbi
Shrinking of the eyeball following some pathological
process, the eye is blind and degenerate
Prolapse
Displacement of the eyeball from the orbit
Proptosis
A forward displacement of the eyeball/globe
Retrobulbar
Behind the eyeball (but usually within the orbit)
GY
0
EYELidS
0
Z
TERMII
Ablepharon
Absence of eyelid margin
Ankyloblepharon
 Fused eyelids (a normal feature of neonatal carnivores)
Blepharitis
Inflammation of the eyelids
Blepharospasm
Spasm of the eyelids - typical response to ocular pain
U
ALMI(
Chalazion
Chronic, sterile, lipogranulomatous inflammatory lesion caused by
blockage of meibomian gland secretions
Dermoid
A congenital growth consisting of skin and its appendages
工
Distichiasis
The presence of two rows of lashes on one eyelid {i.e. an extra row
H
of eyelashes); The extra lashes {single or multiple) usually arise
from hair follicles abnormally located within the meibomian
glands
Ectopic cilia
Single or multiple cilia emerging from the conjunctival surface of
the eyelid; the cilia commonly originate from hair follicles abnor-
mally located within the meibomian glands
Ectropion
Eversion of one or both eyelid margins
Entropion
Inversion of one or both eyelid margins
Lagophthalmos
 Inability to close eyelids completely
Meibomianitis
Inflammation (and obstruction) of the meibomian glands
Ptosis
Drooping of the upper eyelid (may be a result of damage to the
oculomotor nerve, Horner's syndrome or a result of damage to the 
facial nerve)
Symblepharon
 Fusion of cornea or bulbar conjunctiva to palpebral or nictitating
conjunctiva (beca use of pathological denudation of epithelium and 
loss of stem-cell population)
328
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Trichiasis
Misdirection of one or more normal eyelashes so as to cause
corneal or conjunctival irritation
LACRIMAL APPARATUS
Dacryoadenitis
Inflammation of the lacrimal gland
Dacryocystitis
Inflammation of the lacrimal drainage apparatus
Dacryops
Ductal cyst of the lacrimal gland
Epiphora
Overflow of tears, strictly speaking a consequence of poor
-od 1eal aaissaoxa anouap ol pasn uato inql aaeuieip eat
duction, or inadequate drainage, or both)
Lacrimation
Excessive tear production
Preocular tear flm (PTF)
The PTF covers the ocular surface; major components
lipid (oil), water, mucin
CONJUNCTIVA
GY
Chemosis
Oedema of the conjunctiva
0
TERMINOLO
Conjunctivitis
Inflammation of the conjunctiva
LIMBUS, EPISCLeRA AND SCLERA
Episcleral congestion Usually used with reference to the congestion of the episcleral
U
IALMI
vessels that results when venous outflow is impeded as in glau-
coma, or in the presence of an orbital space-occupying lesion
Episcleritis
Inflammation of the episclera
OPHTH,
Episclerokeratitis
Inflammation of the episclera and cornea
Limbus
Junctional zone between the white of the eye and the clear
cornea
Scleritis
Inflammation of the sclera
CORNEA
Corneal scars:
·Nebula - small, cloudy corneal opacity
● Macula - moderate corneal scar
· Leucoma - large, dense, white, corneal opacity
Descemetocoele
Protrusion of Descemet's membrane at the base of a deep ulcer
Dry eye
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), consequence of deficiency of
aqueous portion of PTF
Keratectomy
Excision of part of the cornea
Keratitis
Inflammation of the cornea
Keratoconus
Cone-shaped deformity of cornea; some corneal thinning will have
occurred at the corneal apex
Keratoglobus
Dome-shaped protrusion of a uniformly-thin cornea
Ophthalmic Terminology
329
Keratoplasty
Corneal grafting (lamellar - partial thickness; penetrating - full
thickness)
Megalocornea
A cornea which is larger than normal
Microcornea
A cornea which is smaller than normal
Pannus
Chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis
Xerosis
Abnormal dryness of the cornea
UveAl trAct (IrIS, CIlIarY boDY AND ChoroId1
Anisocoria
Inequality in pupil size, may be physiological or pathological
Choroiditis
Inflammation of the choroid, may be focal or widespread
(posterior uveitis)
Chorioretinitis
Inflammation of the choroid and retina
Cyclitis
Inflammation of the ciliary body
Cyclodialysis
The establishment of a communication between the anterior
chamber and the suprachoroidal space in order to relieve
intraocular press ure
Cycloplegia
Paralysis of the ciliary muscle giving rise to paralysis of
GY
accommodation
0
Heterochromia iridis
One sector of the iris is a different colour from the
0
remainder
Heterochromia iridum
A difference of colour between the two irises {irides)
Z
TERMII
Iridectomy
 Surgical excision of part of the iris
 Iridencleisis
Incarceration of a portion of the iris in a surgical incision at
the limbus
Iridocyclitis
U
Inflammation of iris and ciliary body, hence an anterior
IALMI
uveitis
Iridodenesis
Trembling of the iris on movement of the eye due to lack of
support behind the iris; seen in aphakia or after dislocation
H
of the lens
H
Iridotomy
Incision of the iris
Iris bombe
Iris adherent to lens around whole of pupillary margin, hence
non-attached parts bulge forward because of increased pres-
sure from behind; a cause of secondary glaucoma
Iris prolapse
 Prolapse of iris through a perforated cornea or corneoscleral
wound
Iritis
 Inflammation of the iris
Leukocoria
A white pupil
Panuveitis
Inflammation of the whole uveal tract
Pars planitis
Inflammation in the region of the pars plana of the ciliary
body (intermediate uveitis)
Persistent pupillary
Persistence of foetal mesodermal tissue anterior to the iris;
membrane (PPM)
small strands may float freely or be attached to iris, lens or
cornea; attachment of PPM to the anterior lens capsule is
referred to as an epicapsular star
Synechiae
·Adhesions betweenirisand
corneal
 endothelium
(anterior)
330
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
·Adhesions between iris root and corneoscleral tissue
(peripheral anterior synechiae)
● Adhesions between iris and anterior lens capsule (posterior)
AnIerIOr chAMbEr ANd AQUeoUS HuMOuR
Aqueous flare
Increased opalescence of aqueous humour due to greater
than normal protein content associated with uveitis
Aqueoushumour
A clear watery fluid produced by the ciliary processes of
the ciliary body; aqueous clots in contact with air
Aqueousoutflou
● Conventional outflow - irido-corneal angle
● Unconventional outflow - uveoscleral tissue
Hyphaema
Haemorrhage in the anterior chamber
Hypopyon
Pus in the anterior chamber
Keratic precipitates (KPs)
 Deposits of inflammatory cells on the posterior aspect of
cornea, indicative of uveitis
OGY
GLAUCOMAS
TERMINOLC
Glaucoma
A rise in intraocular pressure which is sufficient to damage the eye
and vision
● Primary - no antecedent ocular disease
oopen angle
0 associated with goniodysgenesis
HALMIC
+ Secondary - associated with demonstrable ocular disease (e.g.
inflammation, neoplasia, lens luxation)
Goniodysgenesis Abnormal drainage angle (pectinate ligament dysplasia ± abnormal
OPHTH,
width)
Gonioscopy
Examination of the drainage angle with a special lens (goniolens)
Tonometry
Measurement of the intraocular pressure
LENS
Aphakia
The lens is absent
Aphakic crescent
 The clear area between the pupil margin and lens equator which
may be seen when the lens has luxated
Cataract
An opacity of the lens or its capsule
Phacodenesis
Trembling (wobbling) of the lens because it is subluxated or luxated
VItREOUS HUMOUR
Asteroid byalosis
Calcium soaps (small yellow spheres) sus-
pended in vitreous gel
Ophthalmic Terminology
331
 Persistent byperplastic primary vitreous Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous -
(PHPV)
persistence and hyperplasia of primary
vitreous, which may be associated with
abnormalities in neighbouring structures
(e.g. lens)
Synchysis scintillans
Also known as cholesterolosis bulbi; cho-
lesterol crystals present in an abnormally
PITU
vitreous
Vitritis
Inflammation of the vitreous (hyalitis)
RETINA
Cones
Concerned with visual acuity and colour vision in some animals;
particularly concentrated in area centralis, which tends to be free
of macroscopic blood vessels (area centralis approximates to the
macula of humans)
Electroretinogram
The response of the retina to a brief flash of light; the technique
Y
of measurement is known as electroretinography (ERG); The
0
electrical change produced by sensory stimulation is an example
of an evoked response and ERG is used in the assessment of
0
retinal function
Z
TERMII
Hemeralopia
Day blindness
Nyctalopia
Night blindness
Ora ciliaris retinae
Termination of the retina at the equator where it merges into the
U
ciliary epithelium (known as ora serrata in primates)
IALMI
Retinal atropby
Loss of retinal tissue; inherited and acquired forms
Retinal dysplasia
Abnormal embryonic development of the retina (proliferation
HIH
with imperfect differentiation); may be other associated ocular
and systemic abnormalities
H
Retinitis
Inflammation of the retina
Rods
Concerned particularly with night (light/dark) vision
OPtIC NervE HeaD [ONH] ANd OPtIC Nerve
Optic atropby
Loss of nervous elements such that the ONH appears smaller
and usually paler than normal
Optic nerve aplasia
Total failure of differentiation of the optic nerve
Optic nerve bead
Optic disc (papilla); ophthalmoscopically visible part of
optic nerve (cranial nerve II)
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Partial failure of differentiation of the optic nerve
Optic neuritis
Inflammation of the optic nerve {bulbar and retrobulbar
inflammations are distinguished)
Papillitis
 Inflammation of the optic nerve head; also known as optic
neuritis
332
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Papilloedema
Oedema of the ONH as a result of some pathological
intracranial process
Pseudopapilloedema
The ONH looks oedematous, but both eyes are similar and
the appearance is due to excessive myelination; pseudo-
papilloedema is a normal feature of some breeds of dog
e.g. German Shepherd Dog and Golden Retriever
OPHTHAlMIC TerMINOLOGY
APPENDIX 2
TOPICAL OPHTHALMIC
PREPARATIONS
TOPICAL OPHTHAlMIC PrEPArATIONS
Topical Ophthalmic Preparations
335
GENERAL NOTES
● The drugs are listed by their non-proprietary (generic) names, as they were in the
text, followed by the relevant proprietary preparations and their manufacturers.
Only the proprietary preparations used in the UK are listed, and the list is not
exhaustive.
● "V” signifies a proprietary veterinary preparation and “M’ a proprietary medical
preparation. The veterinary prescribing cascade should be followed.
● Topical preparations are generally instilled into the lower conjunctival sac {drops),
or as a ribbon of material (ointment) across the cornea, taking care to avoid touch-
ing the eye with the nozzle of the bottle or tube, to avoid contaminating the
prepa ration.
● The conjunctival sacs of most animals cannot accommodate a whole drop of
solution, so there is no point in using more than one drop per eye for topical
medication.
● If more than one agent is to be applied, an interval of at least five minutes should
be allowed before the next agent is given, in order to prevent dilution and wash out
of the previous preparation.
S
Z
0
DIAGNOSTIC PREPARATIONS
 PrEPArATIC
+ Fluorescein sodium 1% or 2% eye drops for single use: Minims? Fluorescein Sodium
(Chauvin), M
Fluorescein is an orange dye that turns green under alkaline conditions; it may be
applied topically to confirm corneal ulceration, to detect aqueous leakage (Seidel test)
U
and to check the nasolacrimal duct for patency. It is also used in studies of ocular
HALMI
surface disease, either on its own or prior to rose bengal application.
● Rose bengal 1% eye drops for single use: Minims? Rose Bengal (Chauvin), M
OPHTH,
Rose bengal is a red dye that is used in studies of ocular surface disease and to demon-
strate subtle corneal erosions, either on its own or after topical fluorescein. As rose
bengal is irritating to the eye local anaesthetic can be instilled beforehand.
TOPICAL
LOCAL ANAESTHETICS
 In addition to their diagnostic use in conscious animals, application of topical local
anaesthetics prior to surgery that is to be performed under general anaesthesia may
reduce the amount of general anaesthetic needed for procedures on the adnexa, ocular
surface and cornea. It is important to emphasise that local anaesthetics should not be
used to provide symptomatic relief or for the treatment of ocular disease.
Proxymetacaine hydrochloride
● Proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.5 % eye drops for single use: Minims@ Proxymeta
caine (Chauvin), M
● Proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.s% and fluorescein sodium 0.25% eye drops for
single use: Minims? Proxymetacaine and Fluorescein (Chauvin), M
336
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Proxymetacaine hydrochloride is an excellent choice for short-acting anaesthesia (dura 
tion of 15-20 minutes) prior to corneal sampling (scrapes and swabs) and before
contact tonometry and gonioscopy.
Tetracaine hydrochloride (amethocaine hydrochloride)
● Tetracaine hydrochloride 0.5% and 1% eye drops for single use: Minims? Ametho-
caine Hydrochloride (Chauvin), M
Provides more profound anaesthesia than proxymetacaine and can be used prior to
minor surgical procedures.
TEAR-REPLACEMENT AGENTS AND OCULAR LUBRICANTS
Carbomers are more effective than aqueous tear substitutes like hypromellose (colloid)
and polyvinyl alcohol (resin) as their mucinomimetic properties prolong corneal
replacement agent for tear-deficiency syndromes, a number of other products for
topical medication of the eye usefully include hypromellose in the formulation.
Dose: Apply 6-8 times daily or more frequently if required.
IONS
Acetylcysteine
 PREPARATI
● Acetylcysteine 5% and hypromellose 0.35% eye drops: Ilube? (Alcon), M
Dose: Apply 3-4 times daily or more frequently if required.
Useful when there is impaired or abnormal mucus production.
Carbomers (polyacrylic acid)
OPHTHALMIC
● Carbomer 980 (polyacrylic acid) 0.2% gel: Viscotears? (Cibavision), M; GelTears?
liquid gel (Chauvin), M
Dose: Apply 4-6 times daily or more frequently if required.
The carbomers are long-acting artificial tear preparations with mucinomimetic prop-
erties and are the most useful for tear replacement in veterinary practice.
Colloids and resins
TOPICAL 
●Hypromellose 0.3% eye drops (Non-proprietary)
● Hypromellose 0.3% and dextran *70" 0.1% eye drops: Tears Naturale? (Alcon), M
● Polyvinyl alcohol 1.4% eye drops: Liquiflm? (Allergan), M
Dose: Apply 6 times daily or more frequently if required.
Liquid paraffin
●White soft paraffin 57.3%, liquid paraffin 42.5% and wool alcohols 0.2% eye oint-
ment: Lacri-Lube? (Allergan), M
● White soft paraffin 60%, liquid paraffin 30% and wool fat 10% eye ointment:
Lubri-Tears? (Alcon), M
These preparations are ideal for overnight use in animals with tear-deficiency syn-
dromes and corneal epithelial erosion. They can also be used to protect the eye during
 general anaesthesia.
Sodium chloride
· Sodium chloride 0.9% eye drops for single use: Minims° Saline (Chauvin), M
Topical Ophthalmic Preparations
337
Used for irrigation, including the removal of harmful substances. It may also be used
 in conjunction with fluorescein to enhance staining and to flush excess fluorescein from
the eye.
IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS
Cyclosporin
Cyclosporin (ciclosporin/cyclosporine)  0.2% ointment:  Optimmune@ (Schering-
Plough), V
Dose: Twice daily initially, reducing to maintenance level (occasionally to zero) accord-
ing to response to therapy.
 Used to treat a variety of immune-mediated disorders such as keratoconjunctivitis sicca
and certain types of keratitis, including canine chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis
(pannus) and feline proliferative keratoconjunctivitis.
Tacrolimus
Tacrolimus is a macrolide lactone with potent immunonosuppressive activity, but it is
not licensed for ophthalmic use in the UK. It has been used empirically at various
S
strengths (ranging from 0.03%-0.1%) to treat ocular conditions in animals for which
Z
0
cyclosporin is indicated. Tacrolimus awaits scientific evaluation in controlled clinical
trials.
RA
PREPAR
ANTI-INFeCTIVE PREPARATIONS
ANTIBACTERIALS
OPHTHALMI
● The term *broad-spectrum' denotes that the drug is effective against Gram +ve and
Gram -ve bacteria.
● Preparations are manufactured as eye drops (solutions, suspensions and emulsions)
and ointments. Drops need to be applied more frequently than ointments because
of their lower corneal contact time. The addition of tear-replacement agents to eye
TOPICAL
drop preparations increases the corneal contact time.
Chloramphenicol
● Chloramphenicol eye drops 0.5% and ointment 1% (Non-proprietary), M
· Chloramphenicol eye drops 0.s%: Chloromycetin V Redidrops (Pharmacia and
Upjohn), V
Dose: Apply 3-4 times daily or more frequently if required.
A valua ble drug with a broad spectrum of activity that includes a wide range of Gram
+ve and Gram -ve bacteria, but not recommended for confirmed Proteus spp and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections. Acquired resistance may be a problem in enter-
obacterial infections.
Ciprofloxacin
· Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride 0.3% eye drops: Ciloxan@ (Alcon), M
338
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Dose: Follow the manufacturer's recommendations, usually intensive application (e.g.
every 15-30 minutes) throughout a 24-hour period is required for the first 2 days of
treatment.
Ciprofloxacin is a new-generation broad-spectrum antibiotic, licensed for use in bac-
terial infections, including ulcerative keratitis. It should be reserved for complex situa
tions, including gentamicin-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. Ciprofloxacin
is not always effective against Stapbylococcus spp and Streptococcus spp.
Fucidic acid
● Fucidic acid 1% viscous eye drops with carbomer gel excipient: Fucithalmic Vet?
{Leo), V
Dose: Apply 3-4 times daily or more frequently if required.
Fucidic acid is active against a number of Gram +ve bacteria, and is particularly
effective against Staphylococcus spp. It can be used in conjunction with gentamicin
sul phate to provide broad-spectrum cover.
Gentamicin sulphate
Gentamicin sulphate 0.3 % and hypromellose eye drops: Clinagel Vet (Janssen), V
S
● Gentamicin sulphate 0.3% eye drops: Tiacil (Virbac), V
NO
Dose: Apply 3-4 times daily or more frequently if required.
Gentamicin sulphate is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that is effective against Gram +ve
 PREPARATI
bacteria such as Stapbylococcus spp and Pasteurella spp as well as a wide range of
Gram -ve bacteria including Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Neomycin sulphate
● Neomycin sulphate, gramicidin and polymixin B sulphate eye drops: Neosporin?
(Dominion), M
OPHTHALMI
Dose: Apply 2-4 times daily or more frequently if required.
A useful mixture of antibiotics for mixed ocular-surface infections. Spectrum of activ.
B (mainly Gram -ve).
Ofloxacin
TOPICAL
● Ofloxacin 0.3% eye drops: Exocin° (Allergan), M
Dose: Follow the manufacturer's recommendations as outlined for ciprofloxacin.
Ofloxacin is a new-generation broad-spectrum antibiotic, licensed for use in bacterial
infections. It should be used only in complex situations and is effective against
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Fortified preparations
to 5 ml bottle of topical gentamicin makes 14.3 mg/ml fortified gentamicin solution
stable for 30 days (store in fridge).
 uos  e  sh  aat  l   o
to one 500 mg vial of cephazolin makes 33 mg/ml fortified cephazolin solution stable
for 48 hours (store in fridge).
Dose: Fortified solutions are reserved for serious ocular infections and are usually used
every hour, day and night, in the initial period of treatment.
Topical Ophthalmic Preparations
339
These antibiotics are synergistic so can be used together for mixed infections if
required.
ANTIVIRALS
No topical antiviral agents for veterinary use are manufactured in the UK. Acyclovir
(aciclovir) and ganciclovir are both proprietary medical preparations that are used to
treat herpetic keratitis, and acyclovir is sometimes used to treat confirmed or suspected
viral keratitis in animals. Trifluorothymidine is more effective than acyclovir against
feline herpes virus and some hospital pharmacies will supply trifluorothymidine on
request. The efficacy of acyclovir combined with human interferon-o2 requires
evaluation.
Acyclovir
●Acyclovir 3% ointment: Zovirax@ (GSK), M
Dose: Apply S-6 times daily or more frequently if required.
S
Z
ANTIFUNGALS
6
ARATI
No topical antifungal agents for ophthalmic use are manufactured in the UK, although
a number of unlicensed preparations have been used. Moorfields Eye Hospital in the
PREPAR
UK will compound topical antifungal preparations (e.g. miconazole) on a named-
patient basis.
HALMI
ANTI-INFLAMMATORIES
OPHTH,
Although there are a number of products that contain a corticosteroid and an anti-
infective, the use of these combination products is rarely indicated.
ICAL
CORTICOSTEROIDS
TOPI
Betamethasone
● Betamethasone sodium phosphate 0.1% eye drops: Betsolan? (Schering-Plough), V
● Betamethasone sodium phosphate 0.1% eye drops and ointment: Betnesol@
(Celltech), M
● Betamethasone sodium phosphate 0.1% and neomycin sulphate 0.5% eye drops and
ointment: Betmesol-N? (Celltech), M
Betamethasone penetrates the cornea poorly, so is best used for superficial ocular
inflammation.
Dose: Drops are usually applied every one to two hours for up to 48 hours if the
inflammation is severe, otherwise 4-6 times daily. The dose should be tapered off,
reducing to zero once the eye is quiet.
Ointment is usually applied 2-4 times daily.
340
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Dexamethasone
● Dexamethasone 0.1% and hypromellose 1% eye drops: Maxidex (Alcon), M
· Dexamethasone 0.1%, neomycin sulphate 0.35% and polymyxin B sulphate eye
drops: Maxitrol(Alcon), M
● Dexamethasone 0.05%, framycetin sulphate 0.5% and gramicidin 0.005% eye
drops and ointment: Sofradex? (Florizel), M
● Dexamethasone sodium phosphate 0.1% eye drops for single use: Minims
Dexamethasone (Chauvin), M
Dose: Drops are usually applied every 1-2 hours for up to 48 hours if the inflamma-
tion is severe, otherwise 46 times daily. The dose should be tapered off, reducing to
zero once the eye is quiet.
Ointment is usually applied 2-4 times daily.
Dexamethasone may be used to treat anterior uveitis.
Fluorometholone
●Fluorometholone 0.1% and polyvinyl alcohol (Liquifilm) suspension (eye drops):
FML? (Allergan), M
Dose: Drops are usually applied every 1-2 hours for the first 48 hours if the inflam-
S
mation is severe, otherwise 4-6 times daily. The dose should be tapered off, reducing
Z
0
to zero once the eye is quiet.
RATI
Fluorometholone is the first-choice corticosteroid for ocular-surface inflammation and
superficial ocular inflammations.
PREPAP
Hydrocortisone acetate
● Hydrocortisone acetate eye drops 1% and ointment 0.5% (Non-proprietary)
U
Dose: Drops are usually applied 46 times daily; the dose should be tapered off,
HALMI
reducing to zero once the eye is quiet.
Ointment is usually applied 2-4 times daily.
OPHTHA
Useful for short-term treatment of superficial ocular inflammation.
Prednisolone
TOPICAL
● Prednisolone acetate 1 % eye drops: Pred Forte? (Allergan), M
 Dose: In the treatment of uveitis, apply every 1-2 hours until the inflammation is con-
trolled. Once the eye is quiet, the dose should be tapered off, reducing to zero.
This corticosteroid preparation offers excellent corneal penetration, combined
with effective anti-inflammatory activity. It is the drug of choice for the treatment of
anterior uveitis.
NON-STEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORIES
Ketorolac trometamol
·Ketorolac trometamol 0.0s% eye drops: Acular (Allergan), M
Dose: Apply 4 times daily.
This is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) which can be used to treat
anterior uveitis.
Topical Ophthalmic Preparations
341
Flurbiprofen sodium
● Flurbiprofen sodium 0.03% eye drops: Ocufen? (Allergan), M
Dose: Prior to cataract surgery, apply at 30-minute intervals for 2 hours.
Flurbiprofen 0.03% is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) which can be
used alone or in conjunction with topical corticosteroids for the treatment of intraoc-
ular inflammation. In practice, however, it is mainly used to reduce intraoperative
Diclofenac sodium
●Diclofenac sodium 0.1% eye drops: Voltarol Ophtha (Novartis), M
 Dose: Prior to cataract surgery, apply at 30-minute intervals for 2 hours.
Diclofenac sodium 0.1% is a NSAID that is similar to flurbiprofen. It is similarly used
to reduce intra operative miosis and intraocular inflammation in cataract surgery.
OTHER ANTI-INFLAMMATORIES
· Antazoline sulphate 0.s% and xylometazoline hydrochloride 0.os% eye drops.
Otrivine-Antistin? (Nova rtis), M
S
NOI
● Lodoxamide trometamol 0.1% eye drops: Alomide@ (Alcon), M
RATI
Dose: Apply 4 times daily.
These drugs are used to treat allergic conjunctivitis and lodoxamide has also been used
PREPAR
to treat equine eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis.
L
GLAUCOMA TREAIMENT
HALMI
MIOTICS
OPHTH,
Pilocarpine
·Pilocarpine hydrochloride 0.5%, 1%, 2% and 3% and 4% eye drops (non-
ICAL
proprietary)
● Pilocarpine nitrate 1%, 2% and 4% eye drops for single use: Minims Pilocarpine
TOPI
Nitrate (Chauvin), M
Dose for treatment of open-angle glaucoma: Pilocarpine 1% drops 2-3 times
daily.
outflow. It can be used to treat primary open-angle glaucoma, but, as this is a rare
form of glaucoma in the dog, the most commonly-affected animal species, indications
for its use in glaucoma therapy are limited.
In passing, it should be noted that some neurogenic forms of dry eye have been
treated with this drug. It may also be used in the assessment of parasympathetic
firmed when the affected pupil constricts more rapidly than the normal pupil. Miosis
usually results within ten minutes of the application of pilocarpine 1% in a normal
eye.
342
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Echiopate iodide and demacarium bromide
Echiopate iodide and demacarium bromide are long-acting anticholinesterases that are
no longer commercially available in the UK. They can be obtained on the rare occa-
sions when their use is indicated, more likely as a means of immobilising intraocular
parasitic nematode larvae prior to their surgical extraction, rather than for glaucoma
therapy.
CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS
·Brinzolamide 10 mg/ml eye drops: Azopt (Alcon), M
Dose: Apply 2-4 times daily
● Dorzolamide hydrochloride 2% eye drops: Trusopt (MSD), M
Dose: Apply 3-4 times daily.
Brinzolamide and dorzolamide are topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors which may
be used to treat glaucoma. Dorzolamide is the more widely used of the two in veter-
inary medicine. Topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors have all but replaced systemic
preparations such as dichlorphenamide, because they have fewer systemic side effects.
S
NOI
PROSTAGLANDIN ANALOGUES
PREPARATI
· Latanoprost 50 mcg/ml eye drops: Xalatan? (Pharamacia), M
· Travoprost 40 mcg/ml eye drops: Travatan? (Alcon), M
Dose: Apply once or twice daily.
Latanoprost and travoprost are prostaglandin (PGFzalpha) analogues which increase
uveoscleral outflow. Both agents are used in the same way, but latanoprost is the
prostaglandin analogue that is selected most commonly in small animal glaucoma
OPHTHALMI(
cases. Its use is associated with intense miosis, in the dog particularly, and the drug
should be avoided if uveitis is present. Latanoprost and dorzolamide can be used
together to treat glaucoma.
SYMPATHOMIMETICS
TOPICAL
Brimonidine tartrate 0.2% eye drops: Alphagan? (Allergan), M
Dose: Apply twice daily.
Brimonidine tartrate is a selective alpha2-adrenoceptor stimulant which lowers the
intraocular pressure by reducing aqueous production and enhancing uveoscleral
outflow. The effectiveness is receptor dependent (alpha2 receptors) and therefore varies
between species. It penetrates the posterior segment and has some neuroprotective
effects, so that optic-nerve function is preserved. All the currently available sympath-
omimetic drugs require evaluation under controlled conditions for the treatment of
glaucoma in animals, and drugs that exert a neuroprotective effect are desirable.
BETA-BLOCKERS
●Timolol maleate 0.25% eye drops (non-proprietary)
● Timolol maleate 0.25 % eye drops: Timoptol (MSD), M
Topical Ophthalmic Preparations
343
● Betaxolol hydrochloride 0.5% eye drops: Betoptic (Alcon), M
Dose: Apply twice daily.
The beta-blockers achieve their effect mainly by reducing aqueous production, and are
sometimes used in conjunction with topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. Betaxolol
causes fewer cardiac side effects (i.e. bradycardia) than timolol. Beta-blockers for glau-
coma therapy in animals require evaluation under controlled conditions.
MYDRIATICS AND CYCLOPLeGICS
When mydriatic cycloplegics are used to break down posterior synechiae in early iris
bombe, there is usually no point in prolonging treatment if the desired effect is not
obtained within two hours of frequent topical application, because of the risks asso-
ciated with these drugs in glaucoma patients.
ANTIMUSCARINICS
NOI
Atropine sulphate
+ Atropine sulphate 0.5% eye drops and 1% ointment (non-proprietary)
PREPARATI
● Atropine sulphate 1% eye drops for single use: Minims Atropine Sulphate?
(Chauvin), M
Dose: Atropine sulphate takes approximately an hour to achieve maximal dilation in
the normal eye, but the effects will obviously be more varia ble when the eye is inflamed.
In the treatment of acute anterior uveitis, with intense miosis, it is usual to apply
atropine initially every 15-30 minutes to dilate the pupil and relieve ciliary spasm.
OPHTHALMI
treatment frequency is reduced and the drug given to effect, so as to maintain dilation.
 In farm animals and horses, application may not need to be as frequent as it is in dogs
and cats.
Atropine sulphate is most commonly used as a mydriatic cycloplegic in the treat-
ment of anterior uveitis. It is also used, but rarely, to try and break down posterior
TOPICAL
synechiae in early iris bombe, a potentially devastating cause of secondary glaucoma.
It may be combined for both purposes with the directly-acting sympathomimetic
phenylephrine 10%. It is too long acting to be used for diagnostic purposes. Cats
usually tolerate ointment more readily than drops and in young animals of all species
ointment may be preferable as this formulation reduces systemic absorption.
Tropicamide
● Tropicamide 0.5 % and 1 % eye drops: Mydriacyl (Alcon), M
Dose: One drop of tropicamide 1% applied to the normal eye will be sufficient to
dilate the pupil.
This agent is a short-acting and relatively weak mydriatic. Tropicamide 1% produces
maximal pupillary dilation some 30 minutes after application in most species and is
the most commonly used strength. It is used primarily to facilitate examination of the
lens, vitreous and fundus.
344
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
SYMPATHOMIMETICS
Phenylephrine hydrochloride
● Phenylephrine hydrochloride 2.s% and 10% eye drops for single use: Minims?
 Phenylephrine hydrochloride (Chauvin), M
Phenylephrine 10% can be used in conjunction with atropine to dilate the pupil in
anterior uveitis. It is also used to blanch superficial vessels in the differentiation of
episcleritis and scleritis and as a means of attempting to establish the site of lesions in
Horner's syndrome.
TOPICAL OPHTHALMIC PREPARATIONS
APPENDIX 3
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF
OCULAR AND ADNEXAL
SURGERY
AND ADNEXAL
Basic Principles of Ocular and Adnexal Surgery
347
PreOPerATIVE PREPaRATION AND POSTOPErATIVe CARE
· Correct positioning of the patient and the eye for the procedure to be undertaken
is essential
(may be better not to clip)
● For skin preparation can use baby shampoo diluted 1 in 5 with water
● For ocular and periocular surfaces use 5% povidone-iodine sterile ophthalmic prep
solution (Betadine S%)
● Flush eye thoroughly with sterile saline after using baby shampoo or Betadine
● Disposable drapes are ideal for patients undergoing ophthalmic surgery
●Effective fixation of the globe, if required, can be achieved by the use of stay sutures
● Postoperatively, it is sensible to cover sharp dew claws with a light bandage;
Elizabethan collars are not necessarily required but are widely used
● Healing after most types of adnexal and extraocular surgery is usually rapid and
uncomplicated, so there are no special nursing requirements. Nursing care for
animals undergoing intraocular surgery is beyond the remit of these notes
● Preoperative, perioperative and postoperative systemic analgesia, topical and sys-
temic antibiotics can be provided as dictated by the type of surgery
● Prophylactic tetanus treatment is given if indicated
● Non-absorbable skin sutures are removed 7-10 days after surgery - for uncompli-
cated eyelid surgery the sutures can be removed within seven days because of the
rapidity of healing
A
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
OG
R
General principles in the management of surgical patients
● Preoperative assessment should take into account pre-existing disease (e.g. diabetes
S
JEXAL
mellitus) and current therapy (e.g. osmotic diuretics such as mannitol)
IPLE
● Systemic analgesics are valuable as part of the management of many ocular con-
ditions and may form part of the anaesthetic protocol for patients undergoing pro-
Z
L
cedures under general anaesthesia
● Preoperatively and postoperatively a quiet environment is helpful for the patient,
口
and dim lighting is essential if photophobia is present
Z
● It is important to position the patient properly to provide good surgical access and
S
to ensure that the anaesthetic equipment cannot become dislodged, blocked or
BA
kinked when hidden under drapes; armoured endotracheal tubes are very useful for
patients undergoing ophthalmic procedures
●Topical local anaesthesia can be a useful adjunct if the procedure is likely to cause corneal
or conjunctival pain and should be applied 1-2 minutes before surgery is to start
Basic monitoring of the anaesthetised patient
● This is more difficult in ophthalmic patients, as jaw tone, visible mucous membranes,
palpebral and corneal reflexes, and pupillary size and response cannot be assessed
rea dily
● An oesophageal stethoscope for monitoring respiratory and heart sounds and pal-
pation of the peripheral pulse at regular intervals should be regarded as the minimum
required
348
 Nbtes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
● In addition, the peripheral pulse and systolic blood pressure can be monitored with
a Doppler flow probe and cuff and end tidal carbon dioxide can be measured by a
capnograph (carbon dioxide monitor).
Anaesthetic protocol
● Pre-anaesthetic agents - may be used singly or in combination, usually a sedative
(e.g. acepromazine) and analgesic (e.g. buprenorphine)
● Pre-oxygenation can be used to avoid hypoxaemia at induction, but it is important
to avoid pressure on the globe from the facemask
● Induction agents - intravenous induction is preferable to minimise excitement:
thiopentone is applicable to most species, propofol provides smooth induction in
dogs and can also be used for maintenance
● Endotracheal intubation is usually necessary when procedures involve gaseous
 agents for maintenance and laryngeal reflexes can be deadened by pre-treatment with
topical or intravenous lignocaine or intravenous fentanyl
● It is important to avoid stimulating the larynx when performing intubation and
extubation
● Maintenance is usually achieved with a gaseous anaesthetic agent and isoflurane is
an excellent choice
● Whilst neuromuscular blocking agents are useful (e.g. to immobilise the globe prior
requisite skills and equipment are available
● The use of regional and local blocks for specific procedures is outlined in the rele-
vant parts of the main text
5
● All intraocular procedures require a soft eye (the intraocular pressure is slightly
E
lower than normal), whereas adnexal and ocular surface surgery is often easier if
OG
the eye is firm (the intraocular pressure is normal). Some of the factors that modify
R
intraocular pressure are summarised in Appendix Table 3.1 below.
S
E
X
Appendix Table 3.1 Factors affecting intraocular pressure
E
7
Intraocular pressure is increased by:
Intraocular pressure is decreased by:
Z
Increased venous pressure (e.g. jugular
Most anaesthetic agents
R
occlusion from neck collar, choke chain,
口
Z
poor positioning, anything that causes
S
airway obstruction, coughing, gagging,
BA.
retching, vomiting!
Systemic hypertension
Decreased central venous pressure or
arterial pressure
Hypercapnia
Hypocapnia
Hypoxaemia
Drugs (suxamethonium; ketamine)
Drugs (osmotic diuretics, carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors)
External pressure (e.g. direct pressure on
 Oculocentesis (release of aqueous or
the globe)
vitreous)
Basic Principles of Ocular and Adnexal Surgery
349
GENERAL EQUIPMENT
INSTRUMENTS
General instruments
● Surgical drapes and towel clips (NB adhesive drapes excellent for ophthalmic
surgery)
+ No.3 Swann Morton scalpel handle with numbers 15 and 11 blades
●Standard 1 × 2 teeth tissue forceps {e.g. Gillies)
●Stout, straight scissors (e.g. Mayo)
●Needle holders (e.g. Crile Wood)
● Mosquito artery forceps x4 (e.g. Halstead)
●Tissue forceps x4 (e.g. Allis)
●Swabs
Ophthalmic instruments
●Small 1 × 2 teeth tissue forceps (e.g. Lister)
●Fixation forceps x2 (e.g. Graefe)
● Small needle holder (e.g. Castroviejo)
●Small, straight, blunt-tipped tenotomy scissors {e.g. Stevens)
·WeissCEL microspears or similar
LAR
Suture material
四
● For skin sutures: 4-0 to 6-0 non-absorbable braided silk, 0r absorbable polyglactin
00
910 with curved, swaged-on, spatula, micropoint needle
R
● For conjunctival sutures: 6-0 to 7-0 absorbable polyglactin 910 with curved, swaged-
on, round-bodied or tapercut needle
S31d1
+ For corneal sutures: 8-0 to 9-0 absorbable polyglactin 910 with curved, swaged-on,
spatula, micropoint needle or 9-0 to 10-0 nylon, with curved, swaged-on spatula,
U
micropoint needle
D
A
D
U
Z
OTHER EQUIPMENT
BA.
● Operating specatacles, or binocular loupe, or operating microscope {latter is essen-
tial for microsurgical techniques)
● Catholysis equipment
●Cryosurgical equipment
● Bipolar wet field cautery
INSTRUMENT SEtS
Eyelids and conjunctiva
+ General and ophthalmic packs of instruments
350
 Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
●Standard ophthalmic needlholder (e.g. Castroviejo)
●Speculum (e.g. Barraquer or Clarke)
●Entropion spatula (e.g. Jaeger)
Points to note
● For eyelids: precise apposition of skin edges with little tension on the knot is impor-
tant. In general, single-layer closure with simple interrupted sutures is satisfactory
for most eyelid problems. The eyelid margin is closed first and apposition should be
perfect. The aim is always for primary repair.
● Buried absorbable sutures should be avoided in general, but may be required for
conjunctival closure (including eyelid closure with complex blepharoplastic proce-
dures, because more tension is needed for effective closure).
Distichiasis
●Catholysis equipment
● Cilia forceps (e.g. Whifield)
Ectopic cilia
● General pack of instruments
● Tarsal cyst forceps or chalazion clamp {e.g. Desmarre) - eyelid immobilisation is
easier and haemorrhage is reduced
Lacrimal apparatus
LAR
● Ophthalmic pack of instruments
5
● Lacrimal cannulae, silver, non-disposable
●Sml or 10ml syringe
OG
● Balanced salt solution or distilled water for irrigation
R
L
● Lacrimal probe set
● Monofilament nylon, polyethylene tubing to catheterise the duct
S
E
IEX
PL
Superficial keratectomy
Z
● General and ophthalmic packs of instruments
Z
D
● Speculum (e.g. Barraquer or Clarke)
R
A
● Beaver handle and blades or disposable knife with miniature edged blades
P
口
S
A
Enucleation
BA.
● General pack of instruments
·Additional artery forceps
● Stout, curved scissors (e.g. Mayo) for dissection
● Curved forceps (e.g. Wright's orbital forceps) for clamping optic nerve
Parotid-duct transposition
· General and ophthalmic packs of instruments
● Monofilament nylon (heat-blunt end to avoid tra uma) to cannulate the parotid duct
● Stra bismus hook (e.g. Graefe) useful for elevating the duct during dissection
Basic intraocular set
● Ophthalmic instrument tray
Basic Principles of Ocular and Adnexal Surgery
351
● Fixation forceps x2 (e.g. Graefe)
●Wells artery forceps x2
●Halstead's mosquito artery forceps X2
●Balanced salt solution for intraocular use
●Viscoelastic material for intraocular use
●Range of cannulae and syringes
●Swabs
●WeissCEL microspears or similar
· Adhesive drapes and standard drapes with towel clips
●Speculum (e.g. Barraquer or Clarke)
+ Callipers
●Mayo scissors (straight)
● Standard 1 × 2 teeth tissue forceps (e.g. Gillies)
● Diamond knife or disposable knife, or razor blade and handle, or Beaver blades and
handle
●Small 1 × 2 teeth tissue forceps {e.g. Lister)
●St Martin forceps
●Birks forceps
● Colibri forceps (e.g. Barraquer)
●Capsule forceps (e.g. Arruga)
●Capsulorhexis forceps (e.g. Utrata)
● Small, straight, blunt-tipped tenotomy scissors, straight and curved (e.g. Stevens)
● Left and right corneoscleral scissors (e.g. Castroviejo)
LAR
· Castroviejo corneal scissors
●Westcott tenotomy scissors
叉
●Iris scissors
●Vannas scissors
OG
R
● Iris repositor (e.g. Nettleship)
● Needle holders (e.g. Crile Wood)
●Standard needleholder (e.g. Castroviejo)
S
● Micro needleholder without catch (e.g. Castroviejo, Barraquer)
X
E
●Strabismus hooks (Graefe) x2
U
N
●Vectis (Bell Taylor)
Z
R
A
P
U
A
BA.
APPENDIX 4
CRANIAL NERVE
NNERVATION OF
THE EYE AND ADNEXA
Cranial Nerve Innervation of the Eye and Adnexa
355
GSE: Squint lateral and inferior - 'down and out')
Neurotrophic keratopathy (because of a loss of
Horner's syndrome ftypicall ptosis, miosis,
Dilated or completely unresponsive pupil
GVE: Dilated pupil (mydriasis)
Partial or complete blindness 
(spioadn - psiopi uinbs
Squint (medial - inwards)
corneal sensitivity}
Corneal desiccation
Not applicable
Damage
GVE: Pupil constriction and dynamic accommodation of the
variation of its rhythm, and slowing of heart in some species
if there is manipulation of the globe +/- adnexa (e.g. the 
 afferent, to internuncial fibres in reficular formation, to 
GSE: Eyeball movement - supplies dorsal, ventral and
Eyeball movement - supplies dorsal oblique muscle 
Oculocardiac and oculorespiratory reflex (Vih nerve
medial recti and ventral oblique muscles; raises
CrANIAL NERVE INNERVATION
SVE: Muscles of facial expression
 OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA 
Sensory to globe and adnexa 
and refractor bulbi muscles
extraocular muscles)
Function
Vision
Sympathetic Nerves (GVE)
general somatic efferent (GSE)
general visceral efferent (GVE)
somatic visceral efferent (SVE)
Cranial nerve IV (GSE)
Cranial nerve V (GSE)
Cranial nerve VI (GSE)
Cranial nerve X (GVE)
Cranial nerve Il
Cranial nerve Vll
Oculomotor 
Trigeminal
Trochlear
Abducens
andGVE
Optic
Facial
sn60A
Nerve
FURTHER READING
(Useful texts first published
in English)
FuRTHER READING
Further Reading
359
GENERAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Barnett, K.C. (1996) Veterinary Ophthalmology. Mosby-Wolfe, London.
Gelatt, K.N. (ed) (1998) Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd edn. Lipincott, Williams &
Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Gelatt, K.N. (2000) Essentials of Veterinary Ophthalmology. Lipincott, Williams &
Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Gelatt, K.N. & Gelatt, J.P. (2001) Small Animal Ophthalmic Surgery; Practical Tech-
niques for the Veterinarian. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Grahn, B.H. Cullen, C.L. & Peiffer, R.L. (2004) Veterinary Ophthalmology Essentials.
Butterworth-Heinema nn, Phila delphia.
Rubin, L.F (1974) Atlas of Veterinary Ophthalmoscopy. Lea and Febiger,
Philadelphia.
Slatter, D.H. (2001) Fundamentals ofVeterinary Opbthalmology. 3rd edn. W.B. Saun-
ders, Philadelphia.
SMALL ANIMAL
Gelatt, K.N. & Gelatt, J.P. (2001) Small Animal Ophthalmic Surgery: Practical Tech-
niques for the Veterinarian. Butterworth-Heineman, Oxford.
Peiffer, R.L. & Petersen-Jones, S.M. (eds) (2001) Small Animal Opbthalmology: A
Problem-Oriented Approach. 3rd edn. W.B.Saunders, London.
Petersen-Jones, S.M. & Crispin, S.M. (eds) (2002) Manual of Small Animal Ophthal-
mology. 2nd edn. BSAVA Publications, Cheltenham.
Riis, R.C. (2002) Small Animal Opbthalmology Secrets. Hanley & Belfus,
Philadelphia.
CANINE
 READING
Barnett, K.C. Heinrich, C. & Sansom, J. (2002) Canine Opbthalmology: An Atlas and
Text. W.B. Sa unders, London.
FURTHEr 
FELINE
Barnett, K.C. & Crispin, S.M. (1998) Feline Ophthalmology: An Atlas and Text. W.B.
Saunders, London.
Ketring, K.L. & Glaze, M.B. (1994) Atlas of Feline Ophthalmology. Veterinary Learn-
ing Systems Co Inc, Trenton, N.J.
EQUINE
Barnett,K.C.et al. (eds) (1983) Equine Opbthalmology. Equine Veterinary Journal
Supplement 2.
360
Notes on Veterinary Ophthalmology
Barnett, K.C. et al. (eds) (1990) Equine Ophthalmology Il. Equine Veterinary journal
Supplement 10.
Barnett, K.C., Crispin, S.M., Lavach, J.D. & Matthews, A.G. (2004) Equine
Ophthalmology: An Atlas and Text. 2nd edn. Mosby-Wolfe, London.
Brooks, D.E.(2002) Ophthalmology for the Equine Practioner.Teton NewMedia,
Jackson, Wyoming.
FARM ANIMAL
Lavach, J.D. (1990) Large Animal Ophthalmology. Mosby, St Louis.
TEXTS CONTAINING USEFUL MATERIAL ON THE EYE
Auer, JA. (ed) (1999) Equine Surgery, 2nd edn. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Birchard, S.J. & Sherding, R.G. (eds) (1994) Saunders Manual of Small Animal Prac-
tice. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
Bojrab, M.J. et al. (eds) (1997) Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery. 4th edn.
Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore.
Day, M.J. (1999) Clinical Immunology of the Dog and Cat, (second edition in prepa-
ration). Manson Publishing, London.
De Lahunta,A.Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology, 2nd edn.WB.
Saunders, Phila delphia.
Dunn, J.K. (ed) (1999) Textbook of Small Animal Medicine. W.B. Saunders,
 Philadelphia.
Evans, S.A. (ed) (1993) Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edn. WB. Saunders,
Philadelphia.
Gorman, N.T. (ed) (1998) Canine Medicine and Therapeutics, 4th edn. Blackwell
Scientific, Oxford.
Morgan, R.V. (ed) (2002) Handbook of Small Animal Practice, 4th edn. W.B.
READIN
 Saunders, Philadelphia.
Slatter, D.H. (ed) (2003) Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd edn. W.B. Saunders,
Philadelphia.
Smith, B.P. {ed) (2002) Large Animal Internal Medicine, 3rd edn. Mosby, St Louis,
 FURTHER 
Missouri.
OTHER
Veterinary Clinics of North America series
Veterinary Ophthalmology (journal)
INDEX
Page numbers in itafic refer to figures
abscesses,26,27-8,35,231,232-3,289,
asteroid hyalosis, 157, 312
293
atropine sulphate,136,138,260,303,343
acid burns, 54, 55, 105
azathioprine, 136, 138
acyclovir, 291,339
adenoma, ciliary body, 130-31
Bergmeister's papilla, 241
adnexa, 15,16,347-51,355
beta-blockers, 342-3
see also eyelid; lacrimal system; orbit
betamethasone, 135, 339
albinism,203,241,321
betaxolol hydrochloride, 343
algal infections, 140
biopsy samples, 17, 103
alkali burns, 54, 55, 105
 blepharophimosis, 87
allergic conjunctivitis, 104, 196, 286
“blue eye', 138
amethocaine hydrochloride, 336
bovine keratoconjunctivitis {IBKC), 252-5
anaemia,170,171,226
bovine rhinotracheitis {IBR), 252
anaesthesia, principles of, 347-8
bovine virus diarrhoea {BVD), 245
anaesthetics,16,17,23,241,269,270-72,
bright blindness, 262
335-6
brimonidine tartrate, 342
analgesia, 241, 269-72
brinzolamide, 151,342
see aiso local anaesthetics
bullous keratopathy, 116, 138
angiostrongylosis, 141-2
burn injuries, 54-5, 56, 105
anisocoria, 227
anophthalmos, 244
calicivirus, feline {FCV), 193, 194
antazoline sulphate, 341
canine adenovirus type I, 138-9
anterior chamber, 15,142-5,213-15,330
 canine ophthalmology, 67-175
antibacterials,139,140,222,260,291-2,
anterior chamber, 142-5
337-9
applying local anaesthetic, 18
antifungals, 293, 339
aqueous humour, 142-4, 150, 151
anti-inflammatories,135-6,303-4,
choroid, 124-5,130,132-3,139,161-3
339-41
dliary body, 124,130-31,132,142
antimuscarinics,17,136,138,260,303,
conjunctiva, 101-5, 113
343
cornea, 109-123, 138
antivirals, 290-91, 339
episclera, 105, 107-8
aqueous fare, 143
eye disease certification, 67
aqueous humour
eyelid, 74-94
blood-aqueous barrier, 142
fundus, 158-75
canine, 142-4, 150, 151
glaucomas, 58, 146-51
cellular infiltrates, 143
globe,68-70,73-4
equine, 299, 306-7, 308-9
iris, 123-4, 125-31, 132
examination, 142-3
lacrimal system, 95-101
feline, 213-14
lens, 137, 148-9, 150, 151-5
hypopyon, 143
limbus, 105-7
inflammation, 143
normal views, 4, 67
leakage, Seidel test, 43, 299
optic nerve head, 158, 159, 160, 171-5
lipaemic aqueous, 143-4, 214
orbit, 68,69-72,73,74
production,124,142,308-9
retina, 133, 139, 161-7, 169-71
terminology, 330
sclera, 105, 108-9
see atso glaucomas
strabismus, 70
arcus lipoides corneae, 122-3
third eyelid, 75, 76-81, 120
arsanilic acid toxicity, 262
tonometry, 18
362
Index
canine ophthalmology (cont'd)
ciliary body
uveal tract, 57, 123-42, 149
anatomy,124,180,203
vitreous, 155-8
canine,124,130-31,132,142
 see also emergencies and trauma
feline,179,180,203,212
carbomers,336
neoplasia,130-31,212
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, 151, 342
physiology, 124
carcinomas
uveitis {iridocyclitis), 132
equine, 276, 277, 279,281,286,293
ciprofloxacin, 291, 337-8
farm animals, 251
collie eye anomaly (CEA), 161-3
feline, 182,186,190,213
colloids, 336
rabbit,234
colobomatous defects, 16, 184-5, 246, 250,
carprofen, 136
314-15,322
cataract
conjunctiva
canine,152,153-5
canine, 81, 101-5, 113
equine, 301, 310-311
chemical burns, 55, 105
examination,16,17,152
chemosis, 190
farm animals, 249, 260
conjunctivitis see below
feline,216
dermoids, 113, 188-9, 246
rabbit, 237
equine,270,285-7
catarrhal fever, 258-9, 262
examination,103,270
catholysis, distichiasis, 91
farm animals, 246, 252-7
cattle see farm animal ophthalmology
feline, 180, 188-96
cellulitis,26,28-9,231,232-3
foreign bodies, 33
cephazolin,291,338-9
neoplasia, 190, 286-7
chemical cautery, 115
oedema, 190
chermical injuries, 54-5, 105
ophthalmia neonatorum, 81, 183-5
chemosis, 190
overgrowth,233
*cherry eye', 79-80
pedicle grafts, 43-4, 46
chlamydiosis, 194-5, 255, 256, 257
rabbit,233
Chlamydophila spp, 191, 194, 255, 256, 257
swabs and scrapes, 16, 17, 103
chloramphenicol, 337
symblepharon, 189-90
cholesterolosis bulbi, 157, 312
terminology,328
chorioretinitis,133,139,238,317,318
traumatic injury, 40-41
chorioretinopathy,317,318,322
conjunctival sac, 16, 17, 335
choroid
conjunctivitis
anatomy, 124-5,261,312,313
canine, 102-5
canine, 124-5,130,132-3,139,161-3
equine, 285-6
chorioretinitis,133,139,238,317,318
farm animals, 252
chorioretinopathy,317,318,322
feline, 191-6
choroiditis, 132
neonatal, 81, 183-5
collie eye anomaly, 161-3
rabbit,233
equine, 312, 313,317,318,322
conus, 218
farm animals, 261
cornea
feline, 179, 212, 223-4
anatomy, 109-110,180, 268
histology, 179
arcus lipoides corneae, 122-3
hypertensive changes, 223-4
canine,109-123
neoplasia, 130, 212
chemical burns, 54, 55
physiology, 124-5
 chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis,
rabbit,238
120-21
uveitis, 132-3,139
complicated infection, 51-2
choroiditis, 132
dermoids, 113,246
chylomicronaemia,143,144,226,227
dystrophies, 113-16,121-2
Index
363
emergencies, 23, 34-5, 41,42-7, 51-4,
cryptococcosis,140,208
56
crystalline stromal dystrophy, 121-2
endothelial dystrophies, 116
cycloplegics, 136, 303, 343-4
eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis, 287
cyclosporin, 304,337
epithelial basement membrane dystrophy,
cystic eye, farm animals, 244
114-16
cytotoxic drugs, 136, 138
epithelial erosion, 198, 235
equine, 267, 268, 269, 270, 272,287-94,
dacryoadenitis, 26
305
dacryocystitis, 234-5,284,285
examination,15,16,17,18,269,270,272
dacryocystorhinography, 96,283
farm animals, 246, 252-7
dazzle reflex, 14
feline, 179,180,196-202
demacarium iodide, 342
foreign bodies, 34-5
derrmatoses, canine, 92-3
keratitis,116-20,197,198-200,235,247,
dermoids,113,188-9,246
258,287-93,305
Descemet's membrane, 110, 111, 268, 287
keratouveitis, 288
dexamethasone, 135, 304, 340
lipid deposition, 107, 121-3, 235
diagnostic tests, 3, 16-19, 335
liquefactive stromal necrosis, 52-4, 291
'diamond’ eye, 86-7
neoplasia, 286, 293
diclofenac sodium, 136, 341
neurometabolic disease, 196
direct ophthalmoscopy, 8-11, 16
oedema, 111,138,287
Dirofilaria immitis, 142
opacification, 111-12, 123,287
distemper virus, 139
pannus, 120-21
distichiasis, 90-91,350
physiology, 109-110
dorzolamide,151,342
pigmentation,112
drugs, topical see topical preparations
proliferative keratoconjunctivitis, 197,
dry eye, 97-9, 187-8, 252, 281-2, 336
201-2
dysautonomia,182,227
rabbit, 235
dystrophies, 113-16,121-2,166-7
sequestrum,197,200-201
stromal abscesses, 35, 289, 293
echiopate iodide,342
stromal damage, 110-111
ectopic cilia, 91-2, 350
stromal oedema, 111
ectropion,85-6
terminology, 328-9
ectropion uveae,128
thermal burns, 56
electroretinograms (ERG), 17
traumatic injury, 41, 42-7, 51-4, 56, 294,
emergencies and trauma, 23-63
305
abscesses,26,27-8,35
ulcers see corneal ulcers
anaesthetics, 23
vascularisation, 111-12
assessment, 23
wound healing, 110-111
cellulitis, 26,28-9
corneal reflexes, 14
chemical burns, 54-5
corneal ulcers, 51-3
complicated ulcers, 51-2
epithelial baserment mermbrane dystrophy,
conjunctiva,40-41,42,55
114-15
cornea, 34-5,41, 42-7,51-4, 56, 294,
examination, 16,17
305
keratitis,117-20,197,235,258,288-9,
endophthalmitis, 49-51
305
episcleral injury, 41
liquefactive stromal necrosis, 52-4, 291
exophthalmos, 24-9, 181
superficial indolent,289-90
eyelid, 38-40, 56
corticosteroids,135-6,138,260,303,304,
foreign bodies, 29-35, 50
339-40
glaucoma,57-8
cranial nerve innervation, 355
inflammation,26-9,50,51
cryosurgery, distichiasis, 91
lens, 37, 47, 48, 55, 58-9, 137, 305, 311
364
Index
 emergencies and trauma (cont'd)
limbus, 286,288
limbal injury, 41
optic nerve/nerve head, 269, 313,317,
liquefactive stromal necrosis, 52-4
318-19, 320-21, 322
neoplasia, 29
orbit,268,275-6
ocular see globe
pre-purchase examination, 272
orbital, 23,26-9,30-32, 35-6, 50,51,
pupil, 268
181
retina see retina, equine
panophthalmitis, 50, 51
sedation, 269-70
primary lens luxation, 58-9
third eyelid, 268,276-8
referrals, 62, 63
tonometry, 18, 307
scleral injury, 41, 42
vitreous,269,272,301,311-12
sudden pain, 61, 62
see atso emergencies and trauma
sudden vision loss, 59-61, 222, 318-19
equipment, 3-11, 349-51
therrmal burns, 56
examination
uveal tract, 47-8,57, 137, 209-211, 294,
neuro-ophthalmological, 13-14
298-9, 300-301
ophthalmic
vitreal, 48-9
diagnostic tests, 3, 16-19, 335
encephalitozoonosis, 236
in emergencies, 23
endophthalmitis, 49-51, 312
equine, 268, 269-72, 299, 314
endothelial dystrophies, 116
farm animals, 241-3
enophthalmos, 69
instruments for, 3-11
enrofloxacin,222
protocol,11
entropion, 81-5, 185, 247-9, 278
recording, 11,12,19
enucleation, 73-4,181-2,231,350
stages, 15-16
epibulbar dermoids, 113, 188-9, 246
technique, 13-14
epiphora, 99-101,186-7, 252, 282-5
see atsa specific eye parts
episclera, 41, 105, 107-8, 196, 328
exenteration,orbital,73,74,181-2
episcleritis, 107-8
exophthalmos, 24-9,69, 181,246, 250,
episclerokeratitis, 108
275-6
epithelial basement rmembrane dystrophy,
eye disease certification,67
114-16
eye socket see orbit
epithelial erosion, corneal, 198, 235
eyeball see globe
epithelial keratitis, 198, 199
eyelashes, 90-92, 180, 243, 268, 350
equine ophthalmology, 267-322
eyelid
analgesia,269-72
agenesis, 184-5
anatomy,268-9
anatomy, 74-5, 180, 231, 268
common conditions, 274-5
blepharophimosis, 87
conjunctiva, 270,285-7
canine, 74-94
cornea, 267,268,269, 270, 272,287-94,
Cocker spaniel adnexal disease, 89-90
305
coloboma, 184-5, 246
examination,268,269-72,299,314
dermatoses, 92-3
eyelid, 268, 276-81
dermoids, 246
fundus,267,269,272,312-22
'diamond’ eye, 86-7
glaucoma, 287,306-9
distichiasis, 90-91
globe, 267,271, 274-6, 301
ectopic cilia, 91-2
granula iridica, 267, 268, 272, 294, 302
ectropion, 85-6
handling, 241
entropion, 81-5, 185, 247-9,278
history-taking, 269
equine,268,276-81
insurance examination, 272
examination, 15, 16, 75
iris, 267,268,272,294, 295,301,306
farm animals, 246-9, 250-51
lavage devices, 272-4
feline, 180, 182-6, 189-90
lens, 269, 272,301, 305, 310-311
foreign bodies, 33
Index
365
 macropalpebral fissure, 86-7
episclera, 196
meibomianitis, 93,185-6
eyelid, 180, 1826
micropalpebral fissure, 87
fundus, 179, 180, 218-27
neoplasia, 80-81, 93-4, 186, 234, 250,
glaucomas, 215-16
251, 277-8, 279-81
globe, 179, 181-2,218-19
ophthalmia neonatorum, 81, 183-5
iris, 179,180,202-3,204,212
 Pekingese adnexal disease, 88
lacrimal system, 186-8
physiology, 74-5
lens,210-211,216-17
pug adnexal disease, 88
limbus, 179, 196
rabbit, 231,234
neuro-ophthalmology, 227
surgical instruments, 349-50
optic nerve head, 180, 182, 218-19, 223
symblepharon, 189-90
orbit, 181-2
terminology,327-8
retina,179,219-26
thermal burns, 56
sclera, 196
third eyelid, 76-81,120,182-3,250,
third eyelid, 180, 182-3
276-8
uveal tract, 202-213, 217
traumatic injury, 38-40, 56
vitreous, 218
trichiasis, 90
see atso emergencies and trauma
filariasis, 141,142
farrm animal ophthalmology, 241-63
fixating response, 13
analgesia, 241
flunixin meglumine,304
anatomy, 241
fluorescein sodium, 16-17, 43, 96, 335
common conditions, 243
fluorometholone, 340
congenital conditions, 244-50
flurbiprofen sodium, 136, 303, 341
conjunctiva,246,252-7
foreign bodies, 29-35, 50
cornea,246,252-7,258
fucidic acid, 338
cortical blindness, 263
fundus
developmental conditions, 244-50
canine, 158-75
examination,241-3
equine, 267,269,272,312-22
eyelid,246-9,250-51
examination of,15,16,180,218,272,314
fundus, 241, 261-2
farm animals, 241, 261-2
globe,242,243,244-6,250
feline,179,180,218-27
handling, 241
rabbit,231,237-8
history-taking, 242
traumatic injury, 49, 222
iris, 241, 259
fungal infections, 140, 208, 222, 339
lacrimal system, 241,252
lens, 249, 260
ganciclovir, 339
optic nerve head, 241,250,261,262
gaze, examination, 16
orbit,241,243,250
general anaesthesia, 347-8
pupil, 241,243, 259
gentamicin,338-9
sedation, 241
glaucormas, 57-8
third eyelid, 250
canine, 58, 146-51
uveal tract, 241, 258-60
equine, 287, 306-9
see aiso emergencies and trauma
feline, 215-16
feline ophthalmology, 179-227
rabbit, 237
anatomy, 180, 218-19
terminology,330
anterior chamber, 213-15
treatment,151,341-3
aqueous humour, 213-14
globe
choroid,179,212,223-4
acute glaucoma, 57-8
dliary body, 179, 203, 212
blunt injuries, 36-8, 41, 50
conjunctiva, 180, 188-96
canine, 67, 68, 69, 70, 73-4
cornea, 179, 180, 196-202
chemical injuries, 54-5
366
Index
globe (cont'd)
hyperviscosity syndrome, 170, 171, 226
chronic uveitis, 301
hyphaema,144-5,214
emergencies, 23,24-32, 36-8, 41-51,
hypopyon, 143
54-6, 57-9, 60, 61
hypovitaminosis A, 262
endophthalmitis, 49-51
enophthalmos, 69
immune-mediated uveitis, 137-8
enucleation, 73-4, 181-2, 231, 350
immunodeficiency virus (FTV), 206, 208,
equine, 267, 271, 274-6, 301
221
examination, 15-16, 70,271
immunosuppressants, 136,138,304-5,337
exophthalmos, 24-9, 69, 181, 246,250,
indirect ophthalmoscopy, 6-8, 16
275-6
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (IBKC),
farm animals,242,243,244-6,250
252-5
feline, 179, 181-2
infectious bovine rhinotracheitis {IBR), 252
foreign bodies, 30-32, 50
infectious canine hepatitis, 138-9
innervation, 355
infectious ovine keratoconjunctivitis {IOKC),
panophthalmitis, 50, 51
255-7
penetrating injuries, 36-8, 41-8, 50
infectious peritonitis, feline {FIP), 204-5, 206,
phthisis bulbi, 275, 301
221
prolapse, 24-6, 181, 232
infectious thromboembolic
rabbit,231,232
meningoencephalitis (TEME), 259-60,
rupture,24,36
262
sudden pain, 61, 62
injury, traumatic see emergencies and trauma
surgical principles, 347-51
instruments, 3-11,349-51
terminology, 326-7
iridociliary cysts, 129, 295
thermal burns, 56
iridocyclitis, 132
see also cornea; episclera; fundus; lens; 
iris
limbus; sclera; uveal tract; vitreous
anatomy, 123-4,180, 268
goats see farm animal ophthalmology
atrophy, 128
goniodysgenesis, 148
canine, 123-31,138
gonioscopy, 17
colour variations, 125, 127-8,203, 241,
granula iridica, 241, 267, 268, 272,294,
268, 294-5
302
cystic anomalies, 295
 granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME),
enlarged granula iridica, 295
132
equine, 267,268,272,294-5, 301,302,
grid keratatomy, 116
306
examination,15,272
habronemiasis, 285
farm animals, 241, 259
hepatitis, infectious canine,138-9
feline, 179, 180, 202-3, 204, 212
hereditary eye disease certification, 67
heterochromia, 294
herpes virus
incomplete development, 126
canine, 139
iridociliary cysts, 129
equine, 290
malignant catarrhal fever, 259
feline, 183,191,193,194,197,198-200
neoplasia, 127,130,131,212, 306
malignant catarrhal fever, 258-9
persistent pupillary membrane, 125-6,
herpetic keratitis, 198-200
268
histiocytosis, 132
physiology, 123-4
Horner's syndrome, 77-8, 183, 227,276-7
pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes, 128
Hotz-Celsus procedure, 83-4
sub-albinism, 203
hyaloid vasculature, 241, 269, 311-12
synechiae,129,343
hydrocortisone acetate, 340
traumatic injury, 37,42, 47, 294
hypersensitivity, 92, 93, 104, 196, 286
uveitis,57,132,138,204,301,302
hypertensive disease, 223-5
iritis see iris, uveitis
Index
367
keratatomy, 116
lenses {ophthalmic), 6, 7-8
keratitis
leptospirosis, 139-40, 260, 318
canine,116-20,136
leukaemia-lymphoma complex (FeLLC), 205,
equine, 287-93, 305
221
farm animals, 247, 258
leukaemia virus (FeLV), 205, 206, 213
feline, 197, 198-200
leukocoria,156
rabbit, 235
light sources, 4-5, 6, 7
keratoconjunctivitis, 120-21, 197, 201-2,
limbus
2527,287
canine,105-7
keratoconjunctivitis sicca {KCS), 97-9,
equine,286,288
187-8,252,281-2,336
examination, 15
keratoglobus, 116,138
feline, 179,196
keratouveitis, 288
inflammation, 106
ketoprofen, 304
keratouveitis, 288
ketorolac trometamol, 136, 303, 340
neoplasia,106-7,196,286,288
terminology,328
lacrimalsystem
traumatic injury, 41
canine, 95-101
lipaemia retinalis, 226
dacryoadenitis, 26
lipaermic aqueous, 143-4, 214
dacryocystitis, 234-5, 284, 285
lipid deposition, corneal, 107, 121-3, 235
dacryocystorhinography, 96, 283
lipid keratopathy, 122
epiphora, 99-101, 186-7, 252, 282-5
liquefactive stromal necrosis, 52-4, 291
equine, 268, 270, 281-5
liquid paraffin, 336
examination,15,96,186,234,252,270
listeriosis, 259
farm animals, 241, 252
local anaesthetics, 16, 17, 18, 335-6
feline, 186-8
emergencies and trauma, 23
foreign bodies, 32-3
equine, 269, 270-72
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 97-9, 187-8,
farm animals, 241
281-2
loxodamide trometamol, 341
preocular tear film, 95-6
lymphoma
rabbit, 231, 234-5
canine,131-2,145
surgical instruments, 350
equine, 279,286
tear-replacerment agents, 336
feline,182,190,196,205,213,221
terminology, 328
lysosomal storage disorders, 196, 219-20
wet eye, 99-101, 186-7
latanoprost, 151, 342
macropalpebral fissure, 86-7
lavage devices, 272-4
magnification instruments, 5
leishmaniasis, 140-41
malignant catarrhal fever, 258-9, 262
lens
mannitol,151
canine,137,148-9,151-5
masticatory myositis, 26
cataract see cataract
maze test, 14
embryology, 151-2
medications see topical preparations
equine,269,272,301,305,310-311
meibomianitis, 93, 185-6
examination,15,16,17,152,269,272
melanocytoma, limbal, 106, 107
farm animals, 249, 260
melanoma
feline, 216-17
canine,127,130,131
luxation, 58-9, 148-9,150, 217, 311
equine, 279,281, 286, 305-6
nuclear sclerosis, 16, 152
feline, 196,212-13
rabbit, 237
melanosis, diffuse ocular, 127, 150
terminology,330
*melting' ulcer, 52-4, 291
trauma, 37,47,48,55,58-9,137, 305,311
mermbrana nictitans see third eyelid
uveitis and, 137,210-211,217,301,305
menace response, 13
368
Index
merle animals, 125
optic nerve head and optic nerve
micropalpebral fssure, 87
acute vision loss, 318-19
microphthalmos, 244, 246
atrophy,174-5,262,321,322
miotics, 341-2
canine, 158, 159, 160, 171-5
Mittendorf's dot, 152
colobomatous defects,238,250
Monocytic ehrlichiosis, 139
equine, 269, 313, 317, 318-19, 320-21,
motor neurone disease retinopathy, 316-17,
322
322
farm animals, 241, 250, 261,262
mucopolysaccharidosis, 196, 197
feline, 180,182,218-19,223
mycobacterial infections, 140, 221, 262
hypertensive changes, 223
mycoplasmosis, 195, 255, 256, 257
hypoplasia, 315-16
mycotic infections,140,208,222,292-3
inflammatory lesions, 317, 318
mydriasis, 15, 17, 136, 260, 303, 343-4
neoplasia, 173,321
myxomatosis,233
neuritis, 172, 173
neuropathies,320-21,322
neomycin sulphate, 338
oedema (papilloedema), 16, 173-4
neonatal conjunctivitis, 81,183-5
papillitis, 172
neoplasia, 29
rabbit, 238
 anterior chamber, 145
terminology,331-2
conjunctiva, 190, 286-7
orbit
cornea,286,293
abscesses,26,27-8,231,232-3
eyelid, 80-81, 93-4, 186, 234, 250, 251,
anatomy, 69,181,231,241, 268
277-8, 279-81
canine,68,69-72,73,74
glaucoma-associated, 150
cellulitis,26,28-9,231,232-3
limbus, 106-7,196, 286, 288
emergencies,23,26-9,30-32,35-6,50,
optic nerve, 173, 321
51
orbit,29,71-2,182,250,276
equine,268,275-6
retina,222
examination,15,70-71,72,241,243
uveal tract, 127, 130-32,211, 212-13,
exenteration,73,74,181-2
305-6,306
exophthalmos,181,250,275-6
neosporosis, 141
farm animals, 241, 243, 250
neurormetabolic diseases, 196, 219-20
feline, 181-2
neuro-ophthalmology, 13-14, 227, 263,
foreign bodies, 30-32
316-17
inflammation,26-9,50,51
New Forest Eye, 252-5
neoplasia,29,71-2,182, 250,276
nictitans gland prolapse, 79-80
rabbit,231,232-3
nictitating membrane see third eyelid
terminology,326-7
night blindness, 262, 315
traumatic injury, 35-6, 181
nodular episclerokeratitis, 108
otoscopes, 5
non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, 136, 303,
ovine keratoconjunctivitis {JOKC), 255-7
304, 340-41
nuclear sclerosis, 16, 152
palpebral reflexes, 14
nutritional deficiencies, 243,244, 262
pannus, 120-21
mutritional retinopathies, 220-21,262
panophthalmitis, 50, 51
papillary coloboma, 16, 250,322
ocular fundus see fundus
papillitis, optic, 172
oculovestibular reflex, 14
papilloedema, 16, 173-4
ofloxacin, 291, 338
papilloma, 251, 279, 286
"open-angle’ glaucoma, 148
parasitic infections, 140-42, 207-8, 221,
ophthalmia neonatorum, 81, 183-5
236, 260
Ophthalmomyiasis interna, 142, 221
parotid duct transposition, 99, 252, 350
ophthalmoscopy, 5, 6-11, 16
penlights, 4-5, 6, 7
Index
369
peripapillary chorioretinopathy, 318, 322
degeneration, 167, 225
peripapillary coloboma, 16, 250, 322
detachment see retinal detachment
peritonitis, feline infectious {FTP), 204-5, 206
dysplasia,163,220
persistent hy perplastic primary vitreous
electroretinograms, 17
{PHPV), 156-7
end-stage degeneration, 225
persistent primary vitreous, 155-6
equine,267,312
persistent pupillary membrane {PPM), 125-6,
chronic uveitis, 301
203,268,294
detachment, 301,315, 319-20, 322
phacoclastic uveitis, 48, 137, 236, 299
haemorrhage, 315, 322
phacolytic uveitis, 137
inflammatory lesions, 317-18
phenylbutazone,304
motor neurone disease retinopathy,
phenylephrine, 136, 303, 344
316-17, 322
phthisis bulbi, 260, 275, 301
pigmentary retinopathy, 316
pigs see farm animal ophthalmology
senile retinopathy, 317, 322
pilocarpine, 341
variants, 322
pink eye, 252-5
vasculature, 269, 313, 314
plasmacytic conjunctivitis, 120
farrm animals, 260, 261, 262
polyacrylic acid, 336
feline, 179, 219-26
polymyositis, extraocular, 26
haematological disorders, 226
prednisolone, 135-6, 138, 303, 304, 340
hypertensive changes, 223-5
 pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes (PIFMs),
hyperviscosity syndromes, 226
128
hypovitarminosis A, 262
proptosis see exophthalmos
infections affecting, 221-2
prostaglandin analogues, 151, 342
lipaemia retinalis, 226
proxymetacaine hydrochloride, 335-6
neoplasia, 222
pseudopapilloedema, 160, 174
neurometabolic diseases, 219-20
pupil
nutritional retinopathies, 220-21
canine, 124,125-6
pigrment epithelial dystrophy, 166-7
equine,268
 pigmentary disturbance, 238
examination,15,16,243
rabbit,237,238
farm animals, 241, 243, 259
retinochoroiditis,133,139,238,317,318
feline,179,180,203
sudden acquired degeneration, 167
leukocoria,156
terminology,331
malignant catarrhal fever, 259
toxic changes, 222
mydriasis, 17, 136, 303, 343-4
traumatic injury, 49, 222
reflex dilation, 14
uveitis, 260, 301
pupillary light reflex (PLR), 14
vasculature,170-71,219,226,261
pupillary membrane, persistent, 125-6, 203,
retinal detachment
268,294
canine, 169-70
equine, 301, 315, 319-20, 322
rabbit ophthalmology, 231-8
feline,222,223,224,225
 see also emergencies and trauma
retinal dysplasia, 163, 220
rafoxanide toxicity, 262
record keeping, 11, 12, 19
166-7
referrals, 62, 63
retinochoroiditis,133,139,238,317,318
reflex pupillary dilation, 14
retinopathies,220-21,262,316-17,318,
resins, 336
322
retina
retrobulbar abscesses, 26, 27-8, 231, 232-3
atrophy,165,166,220
retrobulbar optic neuritis, 173, 318
bright blindness, 262
rhinotracheitis, bovine {IBR), 252
canine, 133, 139, 161-7, 169-71
rickettsial diseases, 139
collie eye anomaly, 161-3
rose bengal, 17, 335
370
Index
sarcoids,279,280
farm animals, 250
sarcoma, 211, 212,222
feline,180,182-3,227
Schirmer tear test (STT), 16, 96, 186, 234,
foreign bodies, 33
252
Hormer's syndrome, 77-8, 183, 227, 276-7
sclera, 41, 105, 107, 108-9, 196, 328
hypertrophy, 79-80
scleritis, 108-9
neoplasia, 80-81, 250, 277-8
scrapes, 16, 18,103
nictitans gland prolapse, 79-80
scrolling, third eyelid, 78-9
pannus, 120
sedation,241,269-70
pigment variations, 76-7
Seidel test, 43, 299
rabbit, 231
sepsis,140,221,259,260
scrolling of cartilage, 78-9
sequestrum,corneal,197,200-201
traumatic injury, 38
sheep see farm animal ophthalmology
thromboermbolic meningoencephalitis
sialoadenitis, 26
{TEME),259-60,262
smears, 16
tick-borne rickettsial diseases, 139
sodium chloride eye drops, 336-7
timolol, 342
sodium cromoglycate, 341
tonometry,17,18,307
squamous cell carcinoma
topical preparations, 335-44
equine, 277,279,281,286, 293
administration, 335
farm animals, 251
anti-infective,290-92,293,337-9
feline, 182,186,190
anti-inflammatories, 135-6, 303, 339-41
rabbit,234
cycloplegics, 136, 303, 343-4
stationary night blindness, 315
glaucoma treatment, 151, 341-3
strabismus, 70, 246
immunosuppressants, 337
substantia propria, 110
local anaesthetics see local anaesthetics
surgery, principles of, 347-51
mydriatics, 136, 303, 343-4
swabs, 16, 17, 103
ocular lubricants, 336-7
swinging flashlight test, 14
tear-replacement agents, 336
symblepharon, 189-90
toxicosis,222,262,263
sympathomimetics, 342, 344
toxocariasis, 141
synchysis scintillans, 157, 312
toxoplasmosis,141,207-8,221,260
synechiae,129,343
trauma see emergencies and trauma
syneresis, 157,312
travoprost, 151, 342
trichiasis, canine, 90
tacrolimus,337
trifluorothymidine,290-91,339
ta petum
tropicamide, 17, 343
canine,158-9
tuberculosis, 140, 262
equine, 312, 313-14, 321
tumours see neoplasia
farm animals, 261
feline,179,180,218,219,223
ulcers, corneal see corneal ulcers
tarsorrhaphy, 24, 25, 26
uveal tract
taurine deficiency retinopathy, 220-21
anatomy,123-5,180,202-3,241,268
tear-replacerment agents, 336
anterior segment dysgenesis, 203
tears/tear film see lacrimal system
canine,57,123-42,149,203
tetracaine hydrochloride, 336
cystic anomalies, 295
thermal injuries, 56
enlarged granula iridica, 295
thiamine deficiency, 221
equine, 267,268, 272, 294-306
third eyelid
farm animals, 241, 258-60
anatomy, 75,180, 231,268
feline,180,202-213,217
canine, 75-81, 120
heterochromia, 241, 294
dysautonomia,182,227
neoplasia, 127, 130-32, 211,212-13,
equine, 268,276-8
305-6
Index
371
persistent pupillary membrane,125-6,203,
vision loss, sudden, 59-61, 222, 318-19
268,294
vision tests, 13-14
physiology, 123-5
visual placing reaction, 13-14
rabbit, 236
vitamin deficiencies,262
sub-albinism, 203
vitreous
synechiae, 129,343
asteroid hyalosis, 157, 312
terminology, 329-30
camine, 155-8
traumatic injury, 47-8, 137, 209-211, 294,
cholesterolosis bulbi, 157, 312
298-9,300-301
embryology, 155
uveitis see uveitis
equine, 269,272,301,311-12
uveitis
examination of, 15,16,272
canine,57,132-42,149
feline, 218
equine, 296-305
haemorrhage, 158, 218
farm animals, 258-60
inflammation {vitritis),158, 312
feline, 203-211,217
persistent hyperplastic primary, 156-7
with ocular injury, 47, 48, 57, 137,
persistent primary, 155-6
209-211
synchysis scintillans, 157, 312
horses, 298-9, 300-301, 305
syneresis, 157, 312
phacoclastic, 48, 137,236, 299
terminology,330-31
rabbit, 236
traumatic injury, 48-9
reflex, 136
vitritis, 158,312
treatment,343,344
canine,135-6,138,139,140
wet eye, 99-101, 186-7
equine,303-5
see atsa epiphora
farm animals, 260
feline, 211
xylometazoline hydrochloride,341
rabbit,236
uveoderrmatological syndrome, 137-8
zygomatic gland, sialoadenitis, 26