Veterinary
OcularPathology
acomparativereview
RichardR.Dubielzig·Kemy L.Ketring·GillianJ.McLellan·Daniel M.Albert
SAUNDERS
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://tahc.taobao.com
Veterinary
Pathology
Ocular 
a comparafive review
Richard R. DubieIzig DVM, DACVP, DACVO (Hon)
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wl, USA
Kerry Ketring DVM, DACVO
All Animal Eye Clinic, Cincinnati, OH, USA
Gillian J. McLellan BVMS, PhD, DVOphthal, DECVO, DACVO, MRCVS 
Associate Scientist, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison Wl, USA
Clinical Instructor, Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin,
Madison Wl, USA
Daniel M. Albert MD, MS
Emmett A Humble/RRF Distinguished Director, UWw Eye Research Institute, Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wl, USA
Introduction by
Daniel M. Albert MD. MS
James A. Render
DVM, PHD, DACVP
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
Edinburgh  London New York  Oxford  PhiladelphiaSt LouisSydney Toronto2010
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
First published 20l0, @ Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any fom or by any means. electronic or mechanical.
including photocopying. recording. or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in wniting from
1o (sr) boge bez 5iz (1+) :auoud juaredaa suely sjataas[a woig Aparip nuanos aq kew suorssurad rausqnd ay]
1ok aado ose k1 n0 w0raaasa@su0ssadun(eau :[ew-a 55558 59g1 (0+) xe (11) 05898 5981 (1+)
request online via the Elsevier website at http:/www.elsevier.com/permissions.
ISBN 978-0-7020-2797-0
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Bnitish Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Notice
 Knowledge and best practice in this feld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our knowledge.
changes in practice, treatment and drug therapy may become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the
 most current information provided (i) on procedures feabured or (ji) by the manufacturer of each product to be adminis-
tered. to venify the recommended dose or formula. the method and duration of administration. and contraindications. [t
is the responsibility of the pracitioner, relying on their own expenience and knowledge of the patient, to make diagnoses.
to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions. To
the fullest extent of the law. neither the Publisher nor the Authors assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage to
 persons or property arising out of or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
The Publisher
your source for books,
ELSEVIER
 journals and multimedia
 in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Working together to grow
The
publishers
libraries in developing countries
policy is to use
peper manufactured
www.celsevirt.com | wwww.bookaid.ortg | www.sabrr.otg
from sustalne ble forests
BOOKAIB
 Sabre Foundation
ELSEVIER
Printed in China
Contents
Figure acknowledgements
Vi
7.DiseasesoftheEvelidsand Coniunctiva
143
Acknowledgements
.vii
8.Diseasesofthe Comea and Sdera
201
Introduction....
ix
9.TheUvea.
245
1.ThePrinciplesand Practice of OcularPathology...
10.Diseasesof the Lens
323
2.PathologicMechanisms in OcularDisease.
6
11.The Retina
349
3.Congenital,Developmental,orHereditary
Abnormalitiesin Animals..
29
12.The OpuicNerve
399
4.Surgical Trauma and latrogenic Lesions
59
13.The Glaucomas
419
5.Non-surgical Trauma.
81
Index
449
6.Diseases of the Orbit.
115
Acknowledgements
It has been 30 years since Gustavo Aguirre asked me if I would be
morphologic variants of ocular disease throughout his long and pro-
 interested in reviewing ocular pathology cases for the benefit of the
ductive career. His photography skills are widely admired and he has
ophthalmology residents and faculty at the University of Pennsylva-
assembled numerous photographic essays and atlases illustrating vet-
nia, and 25 years since the Comparative Ocular Pathology Laboratory
erinary ophthalmology. It was a delight to work with Kerry on this
of Wisconsin (COPLOW) began receiving specimens. With more than
project and his contributions add a rich dimension that bridges the
ro yo siea asaun e pue aiue moldoo aul ui sas ooo 57
 gap between clinical ophthalmology and ocular pathology.
n r sg u a uq s r ro y
I have learned about veterinary eye pathology. I hope this will benefit
decades and, during that time, I have attended meetings of ophthal-
those who are active in the feld and those who will continue the work 
in the future.
logues about case material with ophthalmologists, my perspective is
 aud uaa pue youe uoian Aq ysopound xrno punoy aney 1
always as a pathologist. Co-author Gillian McLellan has made this text
(Mosby) to be helpful in my own work and borrowed from their text
accessible to veterinary ophthalmologists. A veterinary ophthalmolo-
the idea of combining clinical and pathology photographs. My goal
gist familiar with ocular pathology, she has an exceptional and com-
is to present a more unifed clinical and pathological context to under-
 prehensive knowledge of the literature. Gillian is an academic
stand veterinary ocular pathology. Like Yanoff and Fine this book is
veterinary ophthalmologist, with extensive experience in the practice
in an outline format, because I have found that model helpful to
of ophthalmology, who has used ocular pathology throughout her
access descriptive information.
research career. Most importantly, she was able to rephrase my words
One of the unique aspects of our text is that it uses the COPLOW
and make them more appropriate and understandable to practition-
database to provide information about the relative frequency of
ers. Clinicians and pathologists use medical terminology in different
various diagnoses. Emphasis is given to conditions seen in the pathol-
ways andwe see different case material. There are also different priori-
Ogy laboratory. There is a bias toward removal of the globe and
ties and different goals in our approach to vision science. Gill's editing
submission of the specimen, when ocular disease is seen as a risk to
and reworking of the text has had a huge and positive impact on the
the health of the animal, such as cancer. For that reason, neoplastic
final product. Dan Albert deserves to be acknowledged in many ways.
conditions are over-represented in a pathology archive and, therefore,
He has been a friend, an inspiration, and a mentor for most of my
Yu paiaiad e iou si araun uaum zxan soouied ieino sn ui os
career. Dan's sage advice was helpful in managing my career path. We
to the health of the animal, there is little reason to remove an eye.
are delighted that he agreed to read this material and write the 'Com-
as a 'usn sn rn  r d pu pu q st ii ssan
parative Comments' interspersed throughout the text articulating the
severe intractable glaucoma, trauma, or inflammation over-
similarities and differences between veterinary ocular pathology and
represented in the pathology laboratory. We seldom see conditions
human ocular pathology.
that may cause visual impairment but leave the eye comfortable and
The authors are also indebted to the support and skills of several
unblemished. Retinal conditions, anomalies and treatable conditions
individuals who made significant contributions to this project Marsha
are usually not submitted to the pathology laboratory and have
Ketring was an invaluable resource, who put together the clinical
received less emphasis in this book.
photography for the text. Her skills with Photoshop and her ability
Readers should be aware that we present conditions that appear as
to convert Kerry Ketring's images, which are archived as two-by-two
diagnoses from the COPLOW laboratory but have not yet appeared
s aissd yooq sapeu sau eip aen yay ou sas
in other veterinary literature. We hope that pathologists will use this 
 Dubielzig's talents as an editor and wordsmith were also a valuable
text as a guide to diagnosis and that insight from the experience of
 part of the project She devoted a huge effort into taking the figure
 Im Asoiouied 1einoo jo peoiases aiel e pageueuu sey oum auoaos
legends, written by two authors with different styles, and blending
be valued. We expect that, in time, either the COPLOW laboratory or
them so that the styles and word use are consistent. To compensate
others will take the effort to properly document those topics that 
for a lack of familiarity with the technical language, she constantly
appear in the text but not in the peer-reviewed literature.
sought the most accepted terminology. We are also indebted to Dan
In ocular pathology, as in skin pathology, the clinician is able to
Williams, as well as Doris, who both entertained the McLellan-
make direct observation of the pathology both outside and inside the
Williams twins while Gillian edited the book.
globe. That is why it is exciting to put together a text that is so rich in
The soil from which this book has taken root has been the work of
clinical photography. Kerry Ketring has been a careful recorder of the
the Comparative Ocular Pathology Laboratory of Wisconsin
vii
Acknowledgements
(COPLOW). The lab has received, photographed, processed, diag-
collection for their studies. Chuck pioneers new immunohistochem-
nosed and archived more than 3000 mail-in cases in each of the last
istry techniques, interfaces with the electron microscopy laboratory.
3 years. The results are maintained in a digital format that allows easy
and interacts with veterinary students on both research and educa-
searching for case retrieval and quick comparative studies. This is the
tional projects. To date, we have had 14 ocular pathology fellows
work of many individuals and they all deserve our appreciation. Kate
study at and contribute to COPLOW. These young veterinarians, inter-
Lieber, in particular, manages the nuts and bolts of the lab. She
a us a sasaans a ai sau su au sa
a year at COPLOW as a step toward reaching their career goals. These
and accommodates the needs of our frequent visitors. She has an
bright, motivated, energetic, and hardworking young people have
amazing facility with the smallest details and makes order when all
forced me daily, to explain, justify and clarify my thoughts about
else slips towards chaos. Kate has great empathy for the clients and
ocular pathology.
the animals, keeping us focused on the customer and not just the
pathology. Dr Chuck Schobert is the coordinator of COPLOW's
Richard R. Dubielzig, Madison, Wisconsin
au 'yoieasan umo siy sunonpuos ol uope ul 'soaloid yoieasa
2010
coordinates the projects of scientists at other institutions who use the
vii
Introduction
The organ of vision, as it appears in the infnitely varied forms of
major contributions to veterinary ophthalmology, which were
animal life has amazed and inspired man since prehistoric times.
included in his book, Lehrbuch der Augenheilkunde fir Tierarzte. Physi-
 Observations regarding diseases of the eye across the animal kingdom
cians teaching ophthalmology at the veterinary colleges developed a
can be found in the ancient writings of India, China, Assyria, Egypt,
broad interest in ocular diseases in animals, and some, like Rudolf
Greece, and Rome. From the time of Hippocrates, the study ofthe eye
Berlin at the Veterinary College of Stuttgart, became interested in
1an
 attempt to understand ocular disease Although not formally recorded
devoted to the study of equine recurrent uveitis; while at the Vienna
 in studies on medical history, the beginning of ophthalmology was
Veterinary College, he examined hundreds of enucleated eyes of
also the beginning of comparative ophthalmology. As medicine and
horses. His fndings were published in books and papers, and many
veterinary medicine evolved, the significant findings of the postmor-
 of the specimens ended up in a notable museum collection in Vienna.
tem examination, including an examination of the eye became
 By the late 19th and early 20th century, the study of veterinary
important for understanding diseases. A notable example is Leonardo
ophthalmology and veterinary ocular pathology was well underway
da Vinci's many dissections of both human and animal cadavers.
throughout Europe. In Vienna, Otto Uberreiter made important
 Numerous early works in veterinary ophthalmology focused on the
 observations on canine glaucoma and equine cataract. In Hungary.
study of the equine eye. As early as the 13th century, Giordano Ruffo
wrote a chapter on equine eye diseases in his text, Ippiatrics, and Theo-
Royal Veterinary College. Bela Plosz worked on the ocular histology
dorico Borgognoni mentioned equine eye diseases in the text, Ippiat-
of farm animals and studied lenticular opacities of horses. Laszl6
raia Mulomedicinae. The continuing interest in the equine eye is
Szutter was active in the area of ocular pathology and wrote a book,
evidenced in the l600s, by the chapter on the eye in the book by
Tierarztiche Augenheilkunde. In England, Edward Nettleship, an oph-
Andrew Snape, The Anatomy of the Horse.
thalmic pathologist at Moorfields Eye Hospital in London, published
aq ot papiean aleaug s rooed sueuudo jo iapunoy au
information on ocular diseases in dogs as well as humans, and George
James Wardrup (1782-1869), a Scottish general surgeon with a life-
Coats, also an ophthalmic pathologist at that institution, studied
long interest in the diseases of the eye of both man and horse. Sub-
congenital anomalies of animals' eyes. Edward Hilding Magnusson, a
sequently, human and veterinary ophthalmic pathology specialties
veterinary pathologist, described observations of hereditary retinal
have for the most part evolved separately, except for the notable study
atrophy in the Gordon setter, and Theodor Kitt, a pathologist, pro-
of laboratory animals and experimental models. We hope this book
duced the first textbook of veterinary pathology to seriously treat the
will help to bring these separated disciplines together again as com-
subject of ophthalmic diseases [Lehrbuch der pathologischen Anatomie
parative ophthalmic pathology.
der Haustiere). Henry Gray, an English veterinarian, contributed to the
The early history of comparative ophthalmic pathology has been
literature on veterinary ophthalmology, while in France, Eugene
primarily the domain of veterinary ophthalmology, and its achieve-
Nicolas, a veterinary ophthalmologist, published a text on veterinary
 a e    i  r s
and comparative ophthalmology (Ophtalmologie, Veterinaire et Com
Wyman, a veterinary ophthalmologist, and Leon Saunders, a veteri-
nary pathologist The 19th century saw veterinary ophthalmology
served as a major source of information for veterinarians in the British
advance and the importance of veterinary ocular pathology gain rec-
Empire and in the United States into the 1950s.
Ognition.J.Carver a veterinary surgeon,published a signifcant study
The 5th and final edition of Kitt's textbook appeared in 1927, and
related to the pathology of the horse's eye and, with other publica-
three decades elapsed before a comparable section on the diseases of
tions on the eye of animals starting to appear, veterinary ophthalmol-
the eye was published This occurred in the American textbook on
Ogy developed as a viable discipline in European veterinary schools.
veterinary pathology published by Thomas C. Jones. Jones had previ-
Urbain Leblanc a Parisian veterinarian, wrote a book on veterinary
 ously published a series of articles on ocular pathology, particularly
ophthalmology that was later translated into German. With Helm-
on uveitis in horses. Then, in the early 1950s, another veterinary
holtz's discovery of the ophthalmoscope in 1850, the ability to diag-
 pathologist in the United States, Leon Saunders, published a paper in
nose ocular disease in humans and animals became a reality.
the Cornell Veterinarian on blindness in dogs and a paper in the Jouwmal
The late 19th through the early 20th century was a critical period
of Comparative Pathology on intraocular lesions of canine distemper.
for veterinary ophthalmology, with increased activity in veterinary
 In 1957, Hilton A. Smith and Thomas C. Jones included a chapter on
schools in Europe. In Berlin, Heinrich Moller, a veterinarian, made
Ocular pathology in their textbook, Veterinary Pathology. This book
ix
Introduction
chapter marked the beginning of renewed interest in veterinary oph-
Saunders, Herb Whiteley, and Stuart Young as faculty members. The
thalmic pathology. especially in North America, and included infor-
faculty gradually changed over the years to include additional veteri-
mation on intraocular tumors in dogs by veterinary pathologists Leon
nary pathologists and ophthalmologists with an interest in veterinary
Saunders and Charles Barron.
ophthalmic pathology. The course continues to meet every other year
During the 1960s, veterinary ophthalmology and veterinary ocular
-uo Auaa uo ason ire e o pnu uaaq seu ue
 pathology continued to evolve in the United States. In 1964, William
G. Magrane started a clinical practice focused exclusively on veterinary
in Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology).
ophthalmology, and Stuart Young, a veterinary pathologist at Colo-
 In the 1990s, the International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI) spon-
rado State University and honorary diplomateofthe American College
sored a course, organized by Thomas C. Jones of the Harvard Medical
of Veterinary Ophthalmologists (ACVO), began to be actively involved
School, Ulrich Mohr of the Hannover Medical School in Germany and
in veterinary ocular pathology. In 1968, the main topic of the annual
meeting of the American College of Veterinary Pathologists (ACVP)
Isll 'oad siun suna 'sauno aan aut ul paiaa sem ieun aa a
was ophthalmic pathology, with Lorenz E Zimmerman, head of the
sponsored a book by Thomas C. Jones, Ulrich Mohr, and Ronald D.
Ophthalmic Pathology Branch ofthe Armed Forces Institute of Pathol.
Hunt, entitled Eye and Ear, which discussed the pathology of the eye
ogy (AFIP), as the featured guest.
and ear in laboratory animals. Although the book was not a compre-
The development of veterinary ophthalmology and veterinary
hensive review, it mentioned comparisons with other species and with
Ocular pathology continued in the United States during the 1970s.
similar lesions in man. Also at this time, the topic of veterinary ocular
 In 1974, Lionel Rubin, a veterinary ophthalmologist, published an
s d ai jo uaa iue an ie pauand sm sooid
atlas of veterinary ophthalmoscopy that included information on
meeting was held jointly with the annual meeting of the ACVO to
 both domestic animals and laboratory animals. Included in the text-
foster the interactions between veterinary pathologists and veterinary
book were pictures, provided by Leon Saunders, of histopathologic
ophthalmologists.
findings in the retina that correlated to the funduscopic pictures. This
 In the present millennium, Brian Wilcock and Richard Dubielzig
was the beginning of many subsequent interactions between clinical
were honored for their advancements in the area of veterinary oph-
veterinary ophthalmologists and  veterinary ocular pathologists.
thalmic pathology by becoming honorary diplomats of the ACvO. In
William Carlton, a veterinary pathologist at Purdue University, rou-
addition, Kenneth Simons, an ophthalmologist with expertise in
tinely examined enucleated eyes as part of a diagnostic service and
 Ocular pathology from the Medical College of Wisconsin, and Robert
incorporated his fndings into material for a graduate course on oph-
Peiffer, edited a publication entitled, Ocular Tumors in Animals and
 pn m sias un ' sun i  
Humans. This publication took the novel approach of combining
his contribution to veterinary ophthalmology by becoming an honor-
information on veterinary and human ocular oncology for compara-
ary diplomate of the ACVO, and another veterinary pathologist,
tive purposes. The editors solicited contributions from experts in
 Richard Dubielzig, began to give lectures on comparative ophthalmic
human ocular pathology (Daniel Albert from the University of Wis-
pathology.
consin); veterinary ocular pathology (Jeffrey Everitt, CIIT Centers for
 During the 1980s, the fndings in diagnostic veterinary ophthalmic
Health Research, and William Carlton); and veterinary ophthalmol-
pathology from previous years of study were being shared and organ-
Ogy [Nedim Buyukmihci from the University of California in Davis.
ized. The C L Davis Foundation offered symposia on ophthalmic
Bernard Clerc from d'Afort Veterinary School, Craig Fischer from
 'r g a a   a 
Animal Eye Clinics of Florida, Gia Klauss from the University of Wis-
Dubielzig, and William Carlton were invited speakers. In December
consin, Denise Lindley from Animal Eye Consultants, John Mould
1980, a symposium on comparative ophthalmic pathology was held
from the Glasgow University Medical School, and Claudio Peruccio
in Chapel Hill, bringing together veterinary ophthalmologists and
from the University of Turin).
 pathologists with an interest in comparative ocular pathology. This
The present book, Veterinary Ocular Pathology: a Comparative Review,
is an accumulation of years of painstaking observations regarding the
actively involved in comparative ocular pathology: Robert Peiffer Jr.
Jo Aiaea apim e oy saa jo auieadde yidoosi pue sso
at the University of North Carolina, and Robert Trucksa, at the AFIP.
Among the presenters was Richard Dubielzig. The symposium was
The book draws heavily from the extensive collection of ocular pathol-
followed by the publication of the textbook, Comparative Ophthalmic
Ogy specimens housed at the Comparative Ocular Pathology Labora-
Pathology. in 1983. This textbook contained contributions from veteri-
tory of Wisconsin (COPLOw). With the same spirit of enthusiasm
nary pathologists William Carlton, Brian Wilcock, and Jantine van der
and interest in discovery as their predecessors in the field, Richard
Linde-Sipman from the University of Utrecht; and veterinary ophthal-
 Dubielzig and his associates have written a textbook on comparative
mologists Stephen Bistner from the University of Minnesota, Craig
ophthalmic pathology that is current and comprehensive, to aid oph-
Fischer from the Animal Eye and Medical Clinic of Tampa Bay, Charles
thalmologists and pathologists in both the veterinary and human
Martin of the University of Georgia, Ron Ris of Cornell University.
medical fields.
and Frans Stades of the University of Utrecht.
 This symposium gave rise to the ophthalmic pathology short course,
Daniel M. Albert
The Histologic Basis of Ocular Disease', which included Robert
James A. Render
Peiffer, Brian Wilcock, Richard Dubielzig. William Carlton, Leon
2010
X
The 1
princl
es
pue
 practice of ocular patho
0g
referenced to provide data regarding the relative numbers for catego-
CHAPTER CONTENTS
ries of disease. The COPLOW collection as it exists at January 2008
Objectives
1
will be used. Throughout the book, at the conclusion of each chapter.
General points
readers seeking further detail will find lists of suggested published
1
texts, papers and other source material. It should be noted that these
Characteristics of eyes submitted to the COPLOW
lists are intended to be illustrative, rather than exhaustive.
pathology service
Characteristics of conditions infrequently
encountered in the pathology laboratory
2
Comparative Comments
COPLow recommended tissue handling procedures
2
Most human ocular pathology laboratories handle all of the tissue
Enucleated globes
2
Adnexa and other soft tissues
2
exenteration specimens, including the lids and orbital contents, or the
Bone
3
specimens, however, are skin lesions, conjunctival lesions, and orbital
Tissue fixation and mailing
3
lesions following incisional or excisional biopsy.
General considerations in the selection of fixatives for the eye
3
General considerations in the mailing of specimens 
4
Characteristics of eyes submitted to the
Trimming and photography
5
COPLoW pathology service
Techniques for trimming globe for processing
5
Special stains and other histological techniques
Reasons for submissions: Most submissions are from animals where the
commonly used in ocular pathology
5
globes have been enucleated in the interest of the patient with the
following justifications:
Alcian blue-PAS
5
Trichrome stain
 Blind, non-cosmetic and painful eyes
To facilitate the diagnosis of a systemic disease, eg.
Melanin bleach
5
blastomycosis
Polarized light
5
au oi ieair e juasaidai oi paaiaiad uoisal ssu e aouai o
Other commonly used stains and their use
7
 general health of the animal, should local invasion or metastatic
Immunohistochemical staining techniques
8
disease subsequently occur.
Speciesrepresented include:
68% canine (15016 cases)
·
24% feline (5203 cases)
OBJECTIVES
4% equine (758 cases)
4% other [1.2% avian)].
 To characterize the case material seen in an ocular pathology
Tissue:
service
·B
Enucleated globes: 67%
To present the basics of tissue handling
+B
 Evisceration specimens: 10%
 To present the nuts and bolts of an ocular pathology service.
Other specimens: 23%
Disease type (these categories are not mutually exclusive):
 Neoplasia: 39%
GENERAL POINTS
·
Glaucoma: 34%
 Inflammation: 29%
Throughout this book, when relevant, the collection of the Compara-
Trauma: 15%
tive Ocular Pathology Laboratory of Wisconsin (COPLOw) will be
Congenital disease: 2%.
1
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Characteristics of conditions infrequently
Cataract: cataracts are generally removed surgically by phaco-
encountered in the pathology laboratory
emulsifcation and specimens are seldom submitted for
histopathology
Conditions that have largely cosmetic implications:
Conditions that may affect vision but rarely necessitate eye remval, such
+
 Breed-related pigmentary variations
as:
Congenital abnormalities where vision and comfort are not
 Retinal degenerations, including progressive retinal atrophy
impacted and which remain static
●Non-progressive focal lesions, eg. corneal scars.
(Fig. 1.2)
Chronic but inactive keratitis
Conditions that may be successfiully treated by means other than enucleation
Optic neuritis or compression without progressive disease.
or excision including:
+1
 Inflammatory conditions amenable to medical therapy, eg.
chronic superficial keratitis (Fig. 1.1)
Comparative Comments
A large percentage of the globes removed and submitted to a
 saa pulg jo pasoduon s! Auoje soqel Aojouied yeinoo uewny
following surgical or non-surgical trauma. Others represent end-stage
diabetes, glaucoma, vascular occlusion, retinopathy of prematurity.
phakomatoses, and malignant tumors. Criteria for enucleation are 
similar in that, except in the case of neoplasia, only blind eyes that
are painful and/or disfiguring are generally removed.
COPLOW RECOMMENDED TISSUE HANDLING
PROCEDURES (Figs 1.3, 1.4)
Enucleated globes
 Immediately dissect all extraneous tissues from the globe, unless
important for orientation, eg conjunctival squamous cell 
arcinoma or an orbital meningioma
Identify the location of the lesion of interest with a suture or a
mark or provide a simple drawing.
Figure 1.1 Canine chronic superficial keratitis (degenerative pannus).
This potentially blinding disease is seen frequently but treated
Adnexa and other soft tissues
results in a pathology submission. German Shepherd dog. 5 years old:
 Label each tissue submitted using sutures or ink to provide the
the right cornea illustrates tempor al pigment with a cellular infiltr ate and 
pathologist with anatomic orientation. A simple drawing is also
neovascularization extending nasally.
often an important aid in orientation
A
B
Figure 1.2 Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA). Funduscopic images of two cases of canine progressive retinal atrophy. There is no advantage to
removing the eye from an affected dog. The pathologist is occasionally asked to verify that there is retinal atrophy when the eye is removed for other
reasons or in globes removed at necropsy. By this time, the atrophy might be end-stage, when the best diagnosis is that the atrophy may or may not
be compatible with PRA. (A) Akita, 2.5 years old: photographed with a neutral density filter, the tapetum is hyperreflective, retinal vessels are 
attenuated, and the optic disc is pale. (B) Labrador Retriever 3 years old: the non-tapetal retina has a cobblestone appearance caused by
depigmentation and pigment clumping of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE).
2
The principles and practice of ocular pathology
Chapter
1
·Tiny fagments of tissue that cannot be properly oriented should
Formalin (10% neutral buffered formalin,
be identifed as to their anatomic origin or source. If they are all
or 4% formaidehyde)
from one source, they can be processed and sectioned together
100% formalin is a concentrated solution (40% w/w) of
but, if they are each from different areas, they might have to be
formaldehyde in water.
labeled separately
This most common of fixatives is cheap and effective as a
 Tissues prone to wrinkling or folding, like keratectomy
 general all-purpose fixative.
specimens, should be supported on plastic, not paper or wood
(Fig 1.4)
Avoid placing delicate tissues onto porous material, like
wood or paper because they will adhere to these materials
and may be destroyed during attempts to remove them from
these substrates (Fig. 1.5).
Bone
The pathologist should be alerted to the presence of bone in a
sample in order to ensure that the tissue is decalcified prior to
further processing and histo-sectioning
A simple drawing on the submission form will help with the
orientation of a specimen with a bony component.
Tissue fixation and mailing
General considerations in the selection of fixatives
for the eye (Table 1.1)
Figure 1.4 Keratectomy specimens mounted flat on plastic. These
specimens from the left and right eyes are mounted on a non-absorbent 
Regardless of the fixative used, the volume of tissue to be fixed should
be kept to a minimum, without sacrifcing the integrity of the tissue's
 surface, which will allow them to fix flat and rigid and make orientation 
easier.
anatomic orientation.
Figure 1.5 Evisceration sample on paper. This specimen was wrapped in
Figure 1.3 A drawing by the submitting clinician can be very useful in
absorbent paper which is difficult to remove without damaging the
understanding the orientation and anatomic distribution of a lesion
tissues.
Table 1.1 Comparison of fixatives for ocular tissues
FIXATIVE
CONTENTS
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
Formalin
Formaldehyde
Cheap. fast, good general fixative
 No serious disadvantages
Glutaraldehyde
Glutar aldehyde
 Best for electron microscopy
Slow penetration. Must open the globe 
for surface fixation
Davidson's
Formaldehyde, ethanol,
Added rigidity, excellent retinal fixation
Shrinkage, not as good as formalin for EM
acetic acid
Bouin's
Picric acid, formaldehyde,
Added rigidity plus good for
EM impossible, opaque yellow color, dry
acetic acid
immunohistochemistry
picric acid is explosive
3
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
●Favorable qualities of formalin fixation:
■Inexpensive
■  Excellent tissue penetration
Very good tissue fixation
Very good preservation of gross anatomic pathologic detail
for photography and for selection of site for further
processing
■
 Adequate but not ideal for both electron microscopy and
immunohistochemistry
 Unfavorable qualities of formalin fixation
 Less than adequate tissue rigidity can lead to folding artifacts
and artifactual retinal detachments.
Bouin's fixative (picric acid, formaidehyde, and glacial
acetic acid)
 Favorable qualities of Bouin's fxative:
Excellent tissue rigidity making it easy to maintain the shape of
the globe and prevent artifactual retinal detachment
Figure 1.6 Formalin leakage in mailing. Damage to a submission form
 Excellent quality of retinal preservation in paraffin sections
inadequately protected from fixative leakage (arrow).
Excellent for immunohistochemistry.
Unfavorable qualities of Bouin's fixative:
 pue saysem snoanbe orui sasuep paun sduoid saunbay 
 Must be changed into buffer solution
subsequent preservation in alcohol
Very poor tissue penetration so that only thin or carefully
Imparts an opaque yellow color to the fixed tissues which
trimmed tissues will fix adequately
distorts the appearance for photography or site selection
 Poor for immunohistochemistry
Tissue penetration is inferior to that of formalin, Bouin's should
Less suitable for use with paraffin embedding. gutaraldehyde
therefore be avoided when it is necessary to fix the globe and
is often used in conjunction with plastic sectioning
surrounding tissues without separating them
techniques.
Inappropriate for electron microscopy
 Picric acid is dangerous, becoming explosive when it dries. It is,
General considerations in the mailing of specimens
therefore, tightly regulated from a mailing perspective.
General considerations
Davidson's fixative (formaidehyde, alcohol, and glacial
It is the responsibility of the individual submitting a
acetic acid)
 regulations regarding the mailing of medical specimens
Favorable qualities of Davidson's fixative>
and fixative chemicals. These regulations vary depending
Excellent tissue rigidity making it easy to maintain the shape of
 on the geographic location, the service used, and the fxatives
 the globe and to prevent artifactual retinal detachment 
used
 Excellent tissue penetration
Under some circumstances, the regulations pertaining to
Excellent quality of retinal preservation in paraffn sections
formalin in the mail do not apply provided the dilution is less
 Excellent for immunohistochemistry.
than 10%.
Unfavorable qualities of Davidson's fixative:
Packaging
 Requires timed changes into aqueous washes and preservation
 The volume and concentration of fxative can be reduced for
in alcohol
mailing once fixation has been accomplished
 Imparts a white opacity to the tissues, which is not as
 Never squeeze unfixed tissue through a narrow topped
unfavorable as the yellow color of Bouin's but still distorts
container, as the fixed tissue will be difficult to retrieve from the
udeioioud ym saaau pue aueeadde anss
container
● Inappropriate for electron microscopy.
 The wet tissue must be carefully protected in an
unbreakable rigid container and in a waterproof wrapping.
Glutaraldehyde (often combined with purified
 The paperwork should be separately wrapped and waterproofed
formaidehyde or paraformaidehyde to increase
(Fig. 1.6)
The container should be mailed in a second crush-proof
tissue penetration)
container.
 Favorable qualities of glutaraldehyde fixative:
●The best fxative for electron microscopy
Imparts tissue rigidity
Comparative Comments
 Excellent preservation of true tissue colors for photography.
The basic principles of tissue handling and fixation are similar for
Unfavorable qualities of glutaraldehyde fixative:
human ocular tissues, although formaldehyde is the fixative of
 Must be saved frozen or it deteriorates with time
choice. In many laboratories, eye bank eyes, either unused or 
Glutaraldehyde is very caustic if it comes in contact with
following removal of the cornea, are examined.
unprotected skin
4
The principles and practice of ocular pathology
Chapter
1
Trimming and photography
2. Make an initial cut which avoids the lens, with subsequent 
step-sectioning the tissue in paraffn to achieve a central cut
Techniques for trimming globe for processing
 An advantage of this technique is that the lens is untouched
Plane of section
and less likely to be artifactually dislodged
■Disadvantages are that the off-center cut is not ideal for
● The default plane of section for species with a tapetum is the
photography and the sectioning process is time-consuming
vertical section which samples the tapetal (typically superior)
and expensive.
and non-tapetal (typically inferior) retina
3. Ensure the inclusion of lesions in the section plane
 Exceptions are made to sample lesions in the temporal or nasal
The ideal is to have the clinician indicate the location of a
aspect of the globe
focal lesion in the globe with a careful description and
 The horizontal plane is preferred in primates because the fovea
drawings, as well as some indication directly on the tissue
is temporal to the optic nerve
with a suture or another marking technique
The horizontal plane is also useful for avian globes because it is
■
 Gentle palpation of the globe is valuable in detecting large
easier to obtain a section which samples the optic nerve and
localized lesions before sectioning. The orientation of the
pecten along with the lens and pupil
initial section can be changed in such a way as to sample the
 In rodents with extremely small eyes, trimming is to be avoided
palpable lesion
and the whole globe is submitted and oriented at the time of
 paraffn embedding.
'Candling' the globe with a bright light in a darkened room
can help to localize an opaque focal lesion
Select a standard technique for trimming globes. Generally, the goal
 Careful examination of the sectioned globe using a dissecting
is to obtain a histological section that includes the optic nerve and
microscope facilitates the identification of focal lesions.
passes through the pupil Below are several techniques that are helpful:
Additional steps may then be indicated to sample a focal
1. Make the initial cut near the optic nerve. The lens is sectioned
lesion as indicated below
with a quick forceful cut while supporting the globe on the
- Re-cutting of the primary calotte so that only the segment
qutting board. This is the preferred technique in COPLOW
 of the globe with the lesion is embedded
(Fig. 1.7)
- Instructing the histology technician to step-section to a
 A major advantage of this technique is that sections may be
specified depth to sample focal lesions.
obtained after only a few step sections from the embedded
tissue to reach the optic nerve
■ Another advantage is that the globe is cut close to the
Comparative Comments
anatomic center, which is appealing for the purpose of
Trimming and photography are carried out in a similar manner in
photography
veterinary and human ocular laboratories. Likewise, special stains are
The disadvantage is that the lens is often misplaced or
 similarly employed.
damaged during trimming.
SPECIAL STAINS AND OTHER HISTOLOGICAL
TECHNIQUES COMMONLY USED IN OCULAR
PATHOLOGY
Alcian blue-PAS (Fig. 1.8)
This is a very useful stain for the globe because the PAS stains carbo-
hydrate rich proteins such as basement membranes, including lens
capsule and Descemet's membrane, and zonular ligaments. The Alcian
blue stains the hyaluronic acid of the vitreous.
Trichrome stain (Fig. 1.9)
 The various trichrome stains are mainly useful to distinguish collagen
from other protein deposits and to recognize cellular cytoplasm, as in
muscle cells.
Melanin bleach (Fig. 1.10)
Various techniques are used to bleach the melanin pigment in tissues.
allowing the observer to visualize features of tissue differentiation and
nuclear details.
Figure 1.7 Landmarks for trimming with an initial central cut. A canine
Polarized light (Fig. 1.11)
globe is oriented to reveal the landmarks for proper trimming in the
si ino puonas aul pue l aueid ie apeu s! ino isalj aui aueid jenilian
Examination of the tissues using intense polarized light will highlight
made at plane 2.
'o se yns anis ensaiou sueaai e uim sisodap anssl
5
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
A
C
Figure 1.8 Alcian blue stain. (A) A subgross photomicrograph of a feline globe showing Alcian blue staining of the anterior vitreous face (*). (B) Low 
cavernous atrophy. (C) Photomicrograph showing myxosarcoma with characteristic Alcian blue-stained mucoid material in the intercellular spaces.
Figure 1.9 Trichrome stain for collagen.
(A) Subgross photomicrograph of a
trichrome-stained normal globe from a
tapir showing the collagen of the sclera
and cornea. (B) Photomicrograph
showing the celular and collagen matrix 
typical of a spindle cell tumor of
blue-eyed dogs. The delicate trichrome-
positive collagen matrix appears in blue.
Figure 1.10 Melanin bleaching. (A) A
 dog. (B) The same tumor after bleaching
the melanin pigment.
(B)
6
The principles and practice of ocular pathology
Chapter
1
 Figure 1.11 Birefringence with polarized
light. (A) Phagocytic cells within a
lipogranuloma adjacent to a canine
meibomian gland tumor (H&E). (B) The
same field viewed with polarized light
showing the birefringent nature of the
cytoplasmic inclusions.
A
B
A
B
D
F
Figure 1.12 Other special stains. (A) Photomicrograph illustrating mast cells stained with toluidine blue. (B) Photomicrograph of the pars plicata of a
dog showing elastin-positive staining of zonular ligaments with Verhoeff's van Gieson stain. (C) Hemosiderophage cells in the iridocorneal angle of a
dog stained with Prussian blue. (D) Acid-fast positive bacilli stained with Ziehl-Neelsen stain. (E) Mineralized material in a cataract stained with the von 
Kossa stain. (F) Fungal hyphal elements stained with Gomori's methenamine silver stain. (G) Corneal stromal lipid stained with Oil Red O stain on
frozen, non-fixed corneal tissue from a falcon.
keratin,  and many foreign bodies.  This phenomenon  is called
Prussian blue: hemosiderin or free iron deposition
birefringence.
 Ziehl-Neelsen: acid-fast bacteria
Tissue Gram's stain: bacteria
Silver stains for fungi (techniques and names of stains are
Other commonly used stains and their use
variable)
(Fig. 1.12)
Silver stains for axons (techniques and names of stains are
variable)
Giemsa or toluidine blue: mast cell granules
Oil Red O for lipid (cannot use paraffin-embedded
Verhoeff stain: elastic fbers
tissue, alcohol used in fixation and processing removes the
von Kossa stain: mineralization
lipid).
7
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Immunohistochemical staining techniques
Comparative Comments
● Detailed consideration of methodology is beyond the scope of
Immunohistochemical labelling techniques and special stains are in
this text 
general the same for humans and other animals. The pathologist 
The use of immunohistochemical markers in the diagnosis of 
should be aware of the source of the antibodies in 
 specific ocular diseases, including neoplasia, will be highlighted
immunohistochemical stains in determining its appropriateness for 
as appropriate throughout the chapters which follow.
use in a particular animal.
Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Neoplasia
25
Aging
26
Objectives
6
 Fundamental cellular and tissue responses to injury
6
Cellular degeneration and death
10
OBJECTIVES
Cellular degeneration
10
 Necrobiosis-physiologic cellular degeneration and
To introduce the terminology and principles used in the
death of cells
11
morphologic interpretation of general tissue responses to disease
Necrosis (oncosis)
11
To present, in a simplifed manner, general pathology concepts
Apoptosis (programmed cell death)
12
that need to be considered when interpreting pathological
Tissue degeneration
13
changes in eyes on a routine basis
Edema
13
To provide an overview of the mechanisms of disease. It is
og 'uaum iandeu siu on umau Aeu uapns a ie paesaa
Uveal edema
13
example, evaluating a globe with suppurative inflammation, in
 Corneal edema
13
order to better understand the morphologic features that are
 Retinal edema
13
used in making that interpretation
 Osmotic cataract
13
The goal is not to present a detailed discussion of the most
basic principles of general pathology, such as cell degeneration
Atrophy
13
 or inflammation, which are addressed adequately by other texts.
Mineral deposition
13
 Inflammation and immunobiology
14
Acute inflammation
14
FUNDAMENTAL CELLULAR AND TISSUE
Morphologic features of acute inflammation
14
RESPONSES tO INJURY
Lymphoplasmacytic, non-suppurative
inflammation
17
Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease are essentially the same for
 Morphologic features of lymphoplasmacytic inflammation
17
human and veterinary pathology. How they are grouped and taught
Significance of lymphoplasmacytic inflammation 
17
is largely a matter of style and experience. It can be stated at the outset
Tissue fibrosis in inflammation
17
that the cells comprising the tissue can react to adverse events in
Gross morphologic features of tissue fibrosis
17
several ways, which may be sequential. Depending on the severity and
duration of the insult, cell injury may be reversible or irreversible.
Granulomatous inflammation
21
The initial response is an attempt at adaptation, with potentially
Morphologic features of granulomatous inflammation
21
reversible injury. but culminating in cell death if the insult is not 
Significance of granulomatous inflammation
21
remediated.
Immunologic or tissue healing features unique
 Even under normal conditions, cells attempt to maintain a steady
to the eye
24
state, in response to a changing environment; these environmental
 Abnormalities of cellular or tissue development or
factors include: changes in workload, levels of hormonal stimulation,
 and exposure to growth factors and other factors. Comparable adap-
differentiation
24
tive mechanisms also operate in many pathologic conditions, the
Aplasia and hypoplasia
24
affected cells becoming altered but remaining viable. These mecha-
Metaplasia
25
nisms include atrophy, hypoplasia and aplasia, hypertrophy and
Dysplasia
25
hyperplasia, metaplasia; and dysplasia.
6
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Hemosiderosis involves accumulation of an intracytoplasmic
Comparative Comments
protein and iron conglomerate that results from the breakdown of
The principles discussed in this chapter, regarding cellular
hemoglobin. Hemosiderin appears as a brown pigment by micros-
degeneration and death, tissue degeneration, inflammation and 
saduexg Kissois uaas uaum anueieadde pai Aisnu e seu pue Adon
immunobiology. and abnormalities of cellular or tissue development,
include:
are identical in human and veterinary pathology. Similarly. the 
 Hemosiderin-laden macrophages, which accumulate within the
specific examples of cellular adaptation and reversible and irreversible
 globe in response to hemorrhage (Fig. 2.3)
uai asoui ot lelluis Aawaxa ae suewny jo saa aut ui Aunu! lia
 Hemosiderin also accumulates in retinal pigment epithelial
for other animals' eyes. The causes of injury are multiple, with
cells, ciliary epithelial cells, and in the neurosensory retina
ischemia and toxicity accounting for most cases in humans.
following intraocular hemorrhage
juauaseq au ul aleiadsa 'anssn au oi Aoaip puq ae uoil
membranes of the retinal blood vessels.
CELLULAR DEGENERATION AND DEATH
 Lipofuscinosis involves the intracellular accumulation of a conglom-
erate containing oxidatively modified lipids. Lipofuscin appears as a
light brown granular accumulation in the cytoplasm of affected cells
Cellular degeneration
and exhibits autofluorescence. Lipofuscin accumulates as a result of
aging or under oxidative stress. Within ocular tissues, lipofuscin is
Intracellular edema/hydropic degeneration. Examples include:
saxn aa aid euan a u uas au i
·
Corneal epithelial cells in corneal edema
include:
+1
 Lens fiber swelling in osmotic cataract
 Toxic change in feline photoreceptors in acute fluoroquinolone
Accumulation of lipofuscin in retinal pigment epithelial cells in
vitamin E defciency, or central progressive retinal atrophy/
toxicity (Fig. 2.1).
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (Fig. 2.4)
Cytoplasmic lipid accumulation/fatty degeneration. Examples include:
Cytoplasmic swelling in lysosomal storage diseases. There are
?
Keratocytes in corneal lipid degeneration (Fig. 2.2)
many hereditary lysosomal storage diseases that affect the eyes
Vascular smooth muscle in atherosclerosis.
of animals. These genetic disorders affect lysosomal enzymatic
Figure 2.1 Celular degeneration from
fluoroquinolone (enrofloxicin) retinal 
toxicity in cats. (A,B) Fundus photographs
illustrating the clinical appearance of the 
affected retina. (A) DSH, 14 years old:
the temporal hyperreflective tapetum in 
the left eye is totally void of vessels.
(B) DSH, 10.5 years old: blind for 3
months; severe tapetal hyperreflectivity is
present. (C) Photomicrograph of the
retina showing degeneration of the
photoreceptors 90 days after first
receiving a toxic dose of fluoroquinolone.
(D) Photomicrograph of the retina 3 days
after administration of a known toxic
dose. There is profound cellular
vacuolation of the photoreceptor cells.
A
B
D
10
Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease
Chapter
Figure 2.2 Canine corneal lipid 
degeneration. (A-D) Clinical photographs 
of canine corneas with lipid deposits.
(A) Golden Retriever, 9 years old: white
elevated lipid deposits are present 
bilaterally with fine superficial vessels.
(B) Golden Retriever cross, 3.5 years old:
lipid deposits can be seen encircling the 
limbus 360° in this hypothyroid dog.
(C) Dogue de Bordeaux, 3 years old: this
dog was hypothyroid and has bilateral
lipid deposits with superficial corneal
vessels. (D) Cockapoo, 5 years old; Axial
unilateral lipid deposits with corneal
vascularization are present. (E)
Photomicrograph showing keratocytes
with lipid vacuoles (arrow) in the 
cytoplasm. (F) Photomicrograph of a
A
B
superficial stromal cholesterol granuloma.
D
F
degradation and, for that reason, lead to the intracellular
Necrosis (oncosis)
accumulation of the metabolic by-product that cannot be
processed (Fig. 2.5).
The irreversible changes preceding cell death and necrosis are multi-
 reual aiuaod jo soy ie ul siaaa ay uea ina aid
injury can be identified: an influx of ionic calcium, a depletion of
Necrobiosis-physiologic cellular
 energy-providing enzyme systems, and an increase in cell membrane 
degeneration and death of cells
permeability.
 Such irreversible defects ultimately result in cell death and necrosis
Examples include:
through autolysis, as lytic enzymes are released from degenerating
Lens epithelial cells in the formation of the lens nucleus during
lysosomes and as cellular proteins are degraded. Necrosis is character-
normal lens development
ized by cytoplasmic expansion, followed by disruption ofthe nucleus,
?
Epithelial keratinization.
cellular swelling, membrane rupture, loss of organelles, mineraliza-
11
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 2.3 Hemosiderosis of ocular
tissues. (A) Hemosiderophage cells in the 
canine retina (arrows). (B) Prussian blue
stain of retinal hemochromatosis.
(C) Prussian blue stain showing 
hemosiderophage cells in the iridocorneal 
angle of a dog. (D) Prussian blue stain 
showing hemochromatosis of the retinal
 pigment epithelial cells in a canine eye 
with longstanding hemorrhage.
(E,F) Gross photograph of a canine 
globe with extensive accumulation of
A
hemosiderin-laden macrophage cells
(hemochromatosis), as a result of
longstanding hemorrhage into the globe.
D
E
tion of the mitochondria, and eosinophilic cytoplasm. Necrosis even-
although it is increasingly being recognized as a feature of a wide
tually excites an inflammatory reaction, as the degradative products
escape outside the cell. Examples include:
in the regulation of tissue growth, normal development, and the
 Necrosis of ganglion cells in the earliest stages of canine
elimination of damaged and potentially neoplastic cells.
glaucoma (Fig. 2.6)
 Cells undergoing apoptosis are phagocytosed and removed without
Necrosis of neoplastic cells deprived of blood supply
exciting a significant leukocytic response. Apoptosis implies the loss
 Infarction of retinal tissue after vascular compromise in
of individual cells within viable tissue and is characterized by nuclear
hypertensive vasculopathy.
pyknosis, autophagocytosis, and rapid digestion of cellular elements
by surrounding tissues.
Examples include:
Apoptosis (programmed cell death)
 Rapid retinal degeneration, within days after the first clinically
apparent signs of disease, in canine glaucoma (Fig. 2.7)
 In contrast to necrosis, apoptosis is an essentially physiologic means
Corneal epithelial degeneration in acute bacterial keratitis
of removing redundant or damaged cells on an individual basis.
 Lymphoma cells in tumors with the starry sky' appearance.
12
Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease
Chapter
2
Uveal edema
·The globe has no lymphatic drainage so extracellular fluid in the
uvea must be resorbed into blood vessels
Uveal edema occurs in uveitis.
Corneal edema
 The histologic appearance of corneal edema is characterized by:
 A washed out' appearance of the corneal lamellae due to
stromal edema
 Cytoplasmic swelling (intracellular edema) or expansion of the
extracellular space (extracellular edema) within the corneal
epithelium.
Corneal edema may result from:
Vascular leakage or limbal inflammation
 Loss of corneal endothelial cell function
The clarity of the normal cormea is related to its relatively
dehydrated state that relies on the active pumping of fluid
from the stroma into the anterior chamber, by the
endothelium, against a pressure gradient
A
 Relative overload of the endothelial pump
At least partly responsible for corneal edema in gaucoma.
 Retinal edema
 Retinal edema occurs as a result of disruption of the blood retinal
barrier.
The blood retinal barrier is a function of tight junctions in the
retinal vascular endothelial cells and tight junctions at the apex
of retinal pigment epithelial cells
 Retinal edema results from:
 Hypertensive vasculopathy
 Retinitis, which is often an extension of choroiditis
+1
 Diabetic retinopathy.
Osmotic cataract
Osmotic cataract results when fluid is drawn into the lens by increased
 osmolarity of the lens fiber cytoplasm due the accumulation of organic
 molecules such as sorbitol, as seen in diabetic cataract.
C
Atrophy
Figure 2.4 Lipofuscinosis. (A) English Cocker Spaniel, 3.5 years old:
 Decrease in the volume of a tissue due to decrease in the size and/or
fundus photograph of a dog with canine lipofusin retinopathy.
the number of the cells that make up the tissue (Fig. 2.9). Character-
characterized by lipofuscin accumulation in the RPE. Subtle tapetal
istics of atrophy:
hyperreflectivity with subjective attenuation of vessels is present with
 Are often associated with a loss of tissue organization
May be accompanied by fibrosis or gliosis
abundant PAS-positive granular lipofuscin in the RPE and loss of
May be associated with a change in the nature of the blood
photoreceptors. (C) Autofluorescent lipofuscin appears in the RPE when a
 supply to the tissue, as in infarction.
non-stained section is examined with fluorescent light.
Mineral deposition
TISSUE DEGENERATION
Mineral deposition may occur in association with tissue degeneration
Or cormeal desiccation. Examples include (Fig. 2.10):
Edema
Chronic cataract
Excessive fluid in the extracellular space. Edema may result from vas-
Band keratopathy
 mineralization of the cormeal epithelial
cular leakage in inflammation or vascular disease (Fig. 2.8).
basement membrane or the adjacent superficial stroma.
13
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 2.5 Lysosomal storage disease.
(A) Photomicrograph of a canine retina
stained with Luxol-fast blue showing
accumulation of storage product in
ganglion cells and glial cells (arrows)
(B) Photomicrograph of a bovine retina
showing accumulation of storage
product in the retinal pigment epithelium 
(*) in mannosidosis.
Figure 2.6 Cellular necrosis. (A)
Photomicrograph of feline post-traumatic
sarcoma, round cell variant. Surviving.
neoplastic cells are only around blood
vessels, and cellular necrosis occurs away
from vessels. (B) Necrotic ganglion cell
profiles (arrow) in acute canine glaucoma
 are characterized by excessive
eosinophilic staining.
Figure 2.7 Cellular apoptosis. (A)
Photomicrograph of the retina from a
dog with acute glaucoma showing a
regional area of apoptosis of cells in all
layers (arrows). (B) TiUNEL stain of the 
retina from a dog with acute glaucoma.
The brown marker indicates DNA
cleavage in a pattern that is typical of
apoptosis. (C) Transmisson electron
micrograph of a canine retina from a
dog with day-4 glaucoma showing
apoptotic nuclear profiles (arrows) and
 extruded nuclear fragments.
 Initiation of the cloting cascade resulting in the formation of fibri-
INFLAMMATION AND IMMUNOBIOLOGY
nous exudates within the tissues or within the aqueous, vitreous, Or
sub-retinal space, and recognizable as:
Acute inflammation
 Deposition of opaque membranous exudates
 Increase in tissue fragility.
Morphologic features of acute inflammation
(Fig. 2.11) include:
Cellular exudation
Protein exudation
Suppurative inflammation, with neutrophilic exudate, is a hallmark
 Leakage of serum protein from blood vessels resulting in:
feature of acute inflammation initiated by bacteria or fungi.
● Tissue edema
Neutrophilic infltration is often accompanied by macrophage
Proteinaceous exudates within the aqueous, vitreous, or
cells that do not form clusters or granulomas (Fig. 2.12). Examples
sub-retinal space.
include:
14
Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease
Chapter
Figure 2.8 Edema of ocular tissues.
(A,B) Clinical photographs illustrating corneal
edema. (A) Boston Terrier, 7 years old:
bilateral endothelial dystrophy led to
keratoconus in the right eye. (B) Cocker
Spaniel, 5 years old: bilateral idiopathic
anterior uveitis resulted in a swollen iris with
loss of the normal iris architecture, ectropion 
uvea (arrow). and mild corneal edema.
(C) Miniature Schnauzer, 10 years old: the
intumescent cataract in this diabetic produced
 a wide anterior cortical suture line because of
an influx of water (arrow). (D) DsH, 9 years
dld: fundus photograph showing multiple 
areas of edema present in the outer retinal
layers of this systemic hypertensive cat.
(E) Profound corneal opacification in an
B
edematous canine cornea. (F)
 Photomicrograph showing corneal stromal
thickening and the typical 'washed out'
appearance of corneal stromal edema.
(G) Bouin's-fixed canine globe showing the
thickened edematous cornea.
(H) Photomicrograph showing bullous change
in the corneal epithelium of an affected
canine cornea.
D
F
E
H
15
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 2.9 Tissue atrophy. (A) Gross
image of a canine globe with phthisis
bulbi illustrates atrophy and wrinkling
of the entire globe. (B) Gross 
photograph showing segmental
peripheral retinal atrophy in a Shih Tzu 
dog. (C) Photomicrograph of a feline 
cornea showing atrophy of the axial
stroma. (D) Photomicrograph of a cat
retina with feline central retinal
euawbas idnage bulmous uoie lauabap
 photoreceptor atrophy.
A
B
?
D
Figure 2.10 Mineralization of ocular
tissues. (A) Gross photograph of a canine 
globe with a mineralized cataractous 
lens. (B) Photomicrograph of an equine
retina with segmental mineralization
(arrows) accentuated with the von Kossa
 stain (inset) (C) Band keratopathy.
mineralization of the corneal epithelial
basal lamina and superficial stroma (von
Kossa stain). (D) Photomicrograph of 
B
 mineralization in a hypermature cataract
in a horse.
A
C
D
16
Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease
Chapter
2
Figure 2.11 Protein exudation in ocular
tissues. (A,B) Gross photos of feline eyes
affected with feline infectious peritonitis
(FIP). The opaque appearance of the
vitreous body is due to formalin fixation
of the dense protein exudates. (C)
Subgross photomicrograph of a feline
globe with FIP showing cell poor
exudates in the choroid and subretinal
 space and protein exudates in the
vitreous body (*). (D) Gross photograph
 of a dog eye showing fibrin exudates in
A
C
 the anterior chamber.
B
D
 Cormeal stromal abscess in mycotic keratitis
Absence of protein exudation or tissue destruction
Peri-lenticular exudates in cat scratch injuries, where bacteria are
+
 Formation of lymphoid follicles within the affected tissues.
implanted into the lens
Intraocular exudates from a penetrating injury.
Significance of lymphoplasmacytic inflammation
Eosinophilic exudate is a hallmark feature of acute inflammation
Indicates chronicity (at least several days)
Septic disease is not likely to manifest as lymphoplasmacytic
Conjunctivitis or episcleritis due to onchocerciasis 
inflammation
Eosinophilic conjunctivitis/keratitis in cats.
 Indicative of immune-mediated disease such as:
Macrophage exudation is another feature of acute inflammation,
■Equine recurrent uveitis
however, macrophages, when present in the form of epithelioid cells
Feline lymphoplasmacytic uveitis.
are the hallmark of granulomatous inflammation. Examples include
(Fig. 2.13):
Tissue fibrosis in inflammation
 Inflammatory cellular response to foreign material
 Inflammatory cellular response to many fungi and some
Gross morphologic features of tissue fibrosis include:
bacteria, such as mycobacteria
 Firmness of affected tissues
 Inflammatory cellular response to exposed lens proteins.
 Adhesions within affected tissues
Loss of color distinctions within affected tissues
Lymphoplasmacytic, non-suppurative
Tissue fibrosis is suggestive of a chronic process (Fig. 2.15).
inflammation (Fig. 2.14)
When seen in conjunction with acute inflammation, fibrosis
Morphologic features of lymphoplasmacytic inflam-
defines chronic active' inflammation
The uveal tract resists direct fibrosis; however, the chambers and
mation include:
 spaces of the globe (anterior chamber posterior chamber, and
● Perivascular accumulations of lymphocytes and/or plasma cells
vitreous space) are often affected by fbrosis or fbrovascular
within intact connective tissues
proliferation. Examples include: (Fig. 2.16)
17
Veterinary OcularPathology
A
D
IEE
Figure 2.12 Acute suppurative inflammation of ocular tissues. (A) Gross photograph of a canine globe filled with suppurative exudates caused by a 
penetrating injury. (B) Photomicrograph of a plant foreign body (arrow) embedded in the vitreous body of a dog with suppurative endophthalmitis and
retinal detachment. (C) Photomicrograph showing a suppurative infiltrate around a monofilament suture in the peripheral cornea (*). (D) Subgross
photomicrograph of a canine globe with suppurative endophthalmitis. The arrow indicates an area of high neutrophilic infiltrate in the vitreous body.
neovascular sprouts (arrow) bursting into the subretinal space from the choriocapillaris like 'volcanoes'
18
Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease
Chapter
A
(D）
Figure 2.13 Macrophage-rich exudates. (A) Gross photograph of a canine globe with subretinal (*) and anterior chamber exudates rich in macrophage 
macrophage cells in the iridocorneal angle, where the arrow points in Figure (A). (D) Photomicrograph showing granulomatous inflammation, in the
substantia propria of the conjunctiva, which resulted from an injection of methylprednisolone acetate suspension. (E) Pyogranulomatous inflammation
centers on foreign material embedded in the conjunctival substantia propria (arrow). A multinucleate giant cell is seen (*).
19
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 2.14 Feline lymphoplasmacytic
anterior uveitis. (A) DSH, 6 years old:
toxoplasmosis was diagnosed, based on
serology. as the etiology for the swollen 
iris and aqueous flare. (B) DsH, 8.5 years 
old: rubeosis irides and Busacca nodules
(arrow) are present. Toxoplasmosis was 
diagnosed, based on rising serum titers.
(C) Persian, 5 years old: rubeosis irides
and endothelial pigment are present. The 
white appearance through the pupil is a
total retinal detachment with retinal
exudates. Only positive serology was for
Bartonella. (D) Ragdoll, 9 months old:
severe iritis with aqueous flare and 
blood-tinged mutton fat precipitates
were present in this seropositive
A
B
Bartonella cat. (E) Gross photograph of 
 an affected cat showing lymphoid 
follicles in the iris (arrows). (F)
 Photomicrograph of an affected cat
showing a lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate in 
the iris, including several lymphoid 
follicles.
C
D
E
20
 Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease
Chapter
2
Figure 2.15 Fibrosis of tissues. (A) Gross 
photograph of the globe from a dog
with episcleral fibrosis near the posterior
pole (arrow) subsequent to traumatic
proptosis. (B) Extensive fibrosis and 
orbital inflammation (arrows) in a dog
with a migrating foreign body.
Inflammation extends to the inside of the
globe secondary to a penetrating wound 
(panophthalmitis). (C) Photomicrograph 
of a dog eye showing fibrosis of the
conjunctival substantia propria and 
limbus following acid burn. (D)
 Photomicrograph showing idiopathic
fibrosis of the inner choroid (*) in a dog.
A
B
 Pre-iridal fbrovascular membrane
cellular infiltrate, even when the macrophage cells fail to form
■
 Pupillary membrane
 aggregated clusters of epithelioid cells.
■
Cyclitic membrane
Phagocytic cells identified as epithelioid macrophages may take
■
 Fibrovascular proliferation into the vitreous from the optic
several different forms (Fig. 2.19):
nerve head.
Aggregated clusters with features that resemble epithelial cells,
hence the name 'epithelioid cell'
Granulomatous inflammation (Fig. 2.17)
Fusion of phagocytic cells to form multinucleate giant cells
which, in turn may be further classified as:
 Morphologic features of granulomatous
 Langhans giant cell (peripheral rim of nuclei)
inflammation
Foreign body giant cell (randomly distributed nuclei)
The diagnostic criteria for granulomatous inflammation are depend-
Touton giant cell (foamy outer rim of cytoplasm, seen in
ent on identifying certain specific features and some pathologists use
xanthogranuloma).
more restrictive criteria whereas others use more inclusive criteria ( Fig.
2.18):
Significance of granulomatous inflammation
 By the most restrictive criteria, granulomatous inflammation is
only diagnosed if 'lassical' tubercle-like granulomas are seen,
 Suggestive of the persistence of material thatis hard to eliminate from
such as in tuberculosis
the tissues. May be associated with:
By moderately restrictive criteria (as used in this book), the
Deep mycoses
phagocytic cells should form 'epithelioid' macrophages, forming 
Mycobacteria
aggregates with indistinct cell borders in some part of the 
·
Foreign bodies
inflammatory infiltrate
Tissue break-down products
 By the least restrictive criteria, granulomatous inflammation is
Idiopathic granulomatous syndromes (commonly encountered
diagnosed any time macrophage cells predominate in the
in veterinary pathology).
21
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 2.16 Phthisis bulbi, atrophy and
wrinkling of the globe. (A) Pony. 1 year
old: the right eye was phthisical due to
trauma. (B) DSH, 6 years old: the reduced
palpebral fissure Os was caused by prior
trauma to the globe. (C) Canine Mixed 
breed, 3 years old: a chronic corneal
ulcer and uncontrolled anterior uveitis
produced a phthisis bulbi. (D) Cocker 
Spaniel, 12 years old: a vitreal injection 
for end-stage glaucoma led to the small 
hypotensive globe. (E-G) Gross 
photograph and subgross 
photomicrographs of a feline globe with
phthisis bulbi. The lens capsule is
collapsed and fibrosis is pulling the
tissues of the globe together (arrows)
and towards the center (H&E and
trichrome stains).
C
D
E
F
22
Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease
Chapter
2
 Figure 2.17 Feline lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis. (A) DsH, 2 years old:
a firm opaque subconjunctival mass is present in the dorsal and ventral 
palpebral conjunctiva and visible through the intact conjunctival 
epithelium. (B) Photomicrograph showing lipid vacuoles and lipophage
cells. (C) Photomicrograph showing large lipid lakes' and multinucleate
giant cells (inset).
B
B
Figure 2.18 Histologic characteristics of granulomatous inflammation. (A) Photomicrograph showing a 'classical' granuloma with a necrotic and
suppurative center surrounded first by epithelioid macrophage cells, and then by lymphocytes, plasma cells and fibrosis. This is a dog with 
lining the surface of the pars plana. (C) Loose aggregates of an almost pure macrophage infiltrate in the posterior chamber, but without the 
char acteristics of epithelioid macrophage cells.
23
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
A
B
C
lia pueih sueyhuen (a) wseido aul po iatuan aui oi pand japnu yi lian juei Apog ubiaio () shin ueii aieanunu yobeud ht'z ana
with nuclei clustered at the cell membrane. (C) Touton giant cel with vacuolated cytoplasm and central nuclei.
Figure 2.20 Fibrosis in the globe.
(A) Low magnification photomicrograph 
of a canine globe with fibrosis in the 
anterior chamber (*) and cyclitic
membrane (arrow). The uveal tissue is
entrapped, but not fibrotic (trichrome 
stain). (B) Subgross photomicrograph of a
canine globe showing extensive fibrosis
in the vitreous, anterior chamber and 
posterior chamber. The entrapped uveal
tissue is wrinkled, but not fibrotic.
A
B
Immunologic or tissue healing features
 When fibrosis is seen in the uvea, it is often because there is
unique to the eye
scleral rupture with fibrosis extending directly from the
orbital tissue
●The globe has no lymphatic drainage
The eyes of neonatal animals subjected to penetrating injury or
·The anterior surface of the eye (i.e. cormea) has no blood supply
corneal perforation are remarkably resistant to the development
and is dependant on the physical washing effect of the tear flm
of intraocular inflammation.
as well as immunoglobulin and other antimicrobial factors
 present in tear film
The tissues of the globe exhibit a deviant immunologic response
ABNORMALITIES OF CELLULAR OR TISSUE
termed the Anterior Chamber Associated Immune Deviation
DEVELOPMENT OR DIFFERENTIATION
(ACAID)
Soluble antigens injected directly into the anterior chamber
impair the ability to develop a delayed-type immune
Aplasia and hypoplasia (Fig. 2.21)
response to that antigen
Definitions:
■
 This is associated with a systemic immune deviation, with
 suppression of the delayed-type hypersensitivity response to
+
 Aplasia: complete failure of a tissue to develop
the specific antigen, or acquired specific immune tolerance
 Hypoplasia: failure of a tissue to achieve the expected size
Relative resistance of the uveal tract to fibrosis (Fig. 2.20)
Coloboma: segmental aplasia of one or more of the layers of
■Fibrosis is often extensive in the anterior or posterior
the globe, leaving a defect. In embryologic terms, typical
chambers or the vitreous body but not apparent within the
coloboma occurs when there is a failure of dosure of the fetal
uveal tissues directly
fissure.
24
Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease
Chapter
2
Figure 2.21 Hypoplasia of ocular tissues.
(A) Dachshund, 5 months old: fundus
photograph of optic nerve hypoplasia.
No optic disc can be discerned at the 
confluence of the major vessels (arrow)
in this blind dog. (B,C) Gross 
photographs of canine globes with
hypoplastic lenses (microphakia).
(D) Gross photograph of an equine globe
illustrates a coloboma (arrow) within and 
adjacent to the optic nerve head.
A
D
Metaplasia
1. Abnormal or disorganized tissue differentiation or development
2.
Definition: The abnormal transformation of one differentiated tissue
or a pre-neoplastic state.
into another. Examples include (Fig. 2.22):
?
 Osseous metaplasia in chronic trauma
 Squamous metaplasia of the cormeal or conjunctival epithelium
Neoplasia
in response to chronic inflammation.
 Definition: cellular proliferation with impaired growth regulation
leading to distortion or destruction of the normal tissues (Fig. 2.23).
Dysplasia
 Benign: a neoplastic lesion that does not carry a risk of
Note that the word 'dysplasia' is used in different ways in different
metastasis or aggressive infltration
circumstances, which may lead to confusion. Two important defini-
 Malignant: a neoplastic lesion displaying aggressive local
tions of dysplasia that are commonly encountered in ocular and
infltration and causing extensive damage to tissues, disruption
general pathology are:
of perfusion or distant metastasis.
25
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 2.22 Osseous metaplasia in
ocular tissues. (A) Photomicrograph
of a guinea pig eye showing osseous
metaplasia in the ciliary body.
(B) Photomicrograph of a feline globe 
with phthisis bulbi showing oseous
metaplasia adjacent to the wrinkled
remnants of the lens capsule (arrow).
(C,D) Photomicrographs of the choroid 
from a cat (C) and a dog (D) showing 
osseous metaplasia adjacent to Bruch's
membrane. Both of these animals had 
long standing ocular disease secondary
to trauma.
A
D
Figure 2.23 Histologic features of
benign and malignant neoplasia.
(A) Photomicrograph of a bleached 
section showing a canine benign uveal
melanocytoma showing a small, bland,
featureless nuclei. (B) Photomicrograph
 of a malignant uveal melanoma showing
features of nuclear and cellular anaplasia
 and numerous mitotic figures, including 
bizarre forms.
A
Aging
 Deposition of cell-poor 'glassy' collagenous membrane adjacent
to the ciliary epithelium 
Many of the tissues of the eye are at particular risk with respect to the
 Progressive iris atrophy
effects of aging because:
Senile cataract
+
Many ocular tissues are terminally differentiated and have a
Cystic degeneration of the neuroepithelia:
limited ability to respond to damage.
 Typically the peripheral retina in dogs
By virtue of the function of the eye, ocular tissues are exposed
 More pronounced in the ciliary body pars plana in cats and
to direct sunlight and, in the case of the retina, focused sunlight
horses
 on annsodxa yim anssn paneuax ay e si euan iano au
 Degenerative changes in Bruch's membrane leading to choroidal
oxidative free radicals.
jo sisauaouied a u dans juo ue 'uozeinosaiu
 Examples of aging effects on the eye include:
age-related macular degeneration in humans.
pue ajnsde sual ioaue au jo suuayp aissaigoid
 Descemet's membrane
26
Pathologic mechanisms in ocular disease
Chapter
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Yanoff, M., Fine, B.S., 2002. Ocular Pathology.
 5th edn. Mosby Inc., St Louis.
McGavin, M.D., Zachary, J.F., 2006. Pathologic
Basis of Veterinary Disease, 4th edn.
Mosby-Elsevier, St Louis.
27
Congenita
opmental
or hered
abnormalitles
s in animals
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Iris coloboma
49
Scleral coloboma
49
Objectives
29
Congenital corneal edema in association with multifocal
General principles of ocular embryology in relation to
defects in Descemet's membrane and endothelium
49
spontaneous developmental ocular diseases
30
Sporadic congenital abnormalities of undetermined
 Abnormalities associated with infectious diseases or
origin
50
maternal intoxication
32
 Microphthalmia syndromes
50
Cyclopia or, more correctly, synophthalmos, in lambs,
Microphthalmia in white-tailed deer
50
Veratrum californicum toxicity
32
Sporadic microphthalmic syndromes
53
Abnormal ocular development in cattle associated 
with maternal infection with bovine viral diarrhea
Feline neovascular vitreoretinopathy
53
- mucosal disease (BVD-MD) virus
32
Retinal dysplasia associated with perinatal
infections in dogs and cats
33
Abnormalities associated with specific animal breeds
34
OBJECTIVES
Collie eye anomaly (CEA)
Merle and white spot coat color (merle ocular
dysgenesis)
34
· To illustrate the pathological changes seen in developmental
ocular malformations, in a way that is helpful to both the
diagnostic pathologist and the clinician who seeks insight
horses
34
into the pathology and pathogenesis of clinically observed
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV)
lesions
and persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis
These cases are infrequently seen in a pathology collection. Of
(PHTVL)
37
case submissions to the COPLOW collection, 2% are congenital
 Retinal dysplasias 
69
disease or abnormalities of ocular development. Typically, only
The vitreoretinopathies - vitreoretinal dysplasia
39
cases in which the abnormality leads to euthanasia or
Oculo-skeletal dysplasia syndrome
41
enucleation are submitted. Examples include:
■  Euthanasia because of other concurrent developmental
Congenital cataract (lens opacity) and other
problems
congenital abnormalities of the lens
41
■Euthanasia because the affected animal may be considered
Normal lens structure
41
unsuitable for breeding
Congenital lens abnormalities other than cataract 
41
 Euthanasia or enucleation because of disfguring eye
Congenital cataract
42
disease
■ Enucleation because of glaucoma
 Hereditary cataracts
45
 Almost every species and breed of domestic animal has a list of
Goniodysgenesis and other anterior segment
 genetic or presumed inherited diseases which are seen in greater
dysgenesis syndromes
45
numbers in the specific breeds. However, few of these
 Peter's anomaly and persistent pupillary membranes
46
conditions are regularly sampled for histopathology and, in
Congenital failure in the formation of the anterior segment,
general, only those which are represented in the COPLOW
anterior segment dysplasia or dysgenesis 
47
collection are presented in this chapter.
29
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Lens vesicle
,Invasion of mesoderm
 into the optic cup
 Optic fissure
Surface Ectoderm
Lensplacode
Brain
Figure 3.1 Schematic drawing of early embryogenesis of ocular tissues.
The lens placode forms and then invaginates in response to the optic
vesicle making contact with surface ectoderm. With the subsequent
invagination of the optic vesicle to form the double-layered optic cup.
eye showing the lens vesicle separated from the surface ectoderm and
the rat eye at the early stage of development with osmium tetroxide
fissure, through which mesenchyme enters the developing globe to form
staining.)
the earliest vitreous.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF OCULAR
EMBRYOLOGY IN RELATION TO
Primary vitreous
SPONTANEOUS DEVELOPMENTAL OCULAR
DISEASES (Figs 3.1-3.4)
The optic vesicle bulges out from the primitive neural tube
ectoderm, making contact with the surface ectoderm, thus
stimulating the local ectoderm to form the lens placode
(Fig. 3.1)
Lens placode invaginates to form the lens vesicle which
separates from the surface ectoderm (Fig. 3.2)
 Incomplete separation of the lens vesicle leads to
 developmental abnormalities of the anterior segment,
involving the lens, cornea and anterior uvea.
● Invagination of the optic vesicle to form a bi-layered optic
cup
■ Failure of normal growth and invagination of the optic
vesicle may lead to optic cyst, anophthalmia.
microphthalmia, or combined abnormalities of the brain and
eye.
Figure 3.3 Late embryonic eye. Photomicrograph of a bovine embryonic
 Invasion of vessels and associated mesenchyme into the optic
eye showing the primary vitreous, and the forward budding of neural 
sua rsomosm miu pue snoa Aieud a uoy on dn
au jo juawdoaaap anelui oi dno pido aut jo suibeu aun ie anss
Failure of the primary vitreous and tunica vasculosa lentis to
ciliary body and iris (box).
form can lead to microphthalmia
 jo ue ioaiue au woy wmauannau au jo gunaids
the optic cup to form the double-layered ciliary and iridal
 Colobomatous microphthalmos may result from subsequent
epithelia (Fig. 3.3)
failure to establish the intraocular pressure that normally
Closure of the optic fissure separating the vasculature of the
contributes to globe expansion
 primary vitreous from the mesenchyme outside the optic cup.
 Development of a multi-layered neuroretina, extension of
and establishment of a continuous inner neuroretina and an
retinal ganglion cell axons into the optic nerve, formation of
 outer retinal pigment epithelium.
ciliary and iridal epithelia, and the formation of lens fbers and
Failure of optic fissure closure is one mechanism that can
eventually sutures (Fig. 3.4).
lead to the formation of typical scleral colobomata, usually
Failures in the normal development of the retinal and/or
in the dependant posterior globe
uveal neuroepithelia, and lens fbers may be responsible for
30
Chapter
3
Figure 3.4 Progressive differentiation
of the tissues of the optic cup.
(A) Photomicrograph of early retinal
development before clear differentiation
of distinct layers. (B) Photomicrograph
showing the development of and 
separation of the layers of the retina.
(C) Photomicrograph showing continued
development of the ciliary body and iris 
by molding and proliferation of
mesenchymal tissue.
IA
B
C
A
B
C
Figure 3.5 Differentiation of the vitreous. Vascular structures in the primary vitreous undergo regression as the primary vitreous is replaced by the
 po ueu sse p (a) sno ed au uiss po buius yeou san () sno s es
neonatal bovine eye showing a vestige of the hyaloid artery. (C) Photomicrograph showing vestiges of the tunica vascufaris lentis.
retinal dysplasia, optic nerve aplasia/hypoplasia, uveal
colobomas and congenital cataract, respectively.
 Establishment and remodeling of the stromal layers of the eye
including the uveal, scleral, and corneal stroma
■ Failure of this normal mesenchymal development may be
responsible for goniodysgenesis, choroidal hypoplasia,
persistent pupillary membrane, Peter's anomaly, variations in
uveal pigmentation, and some colobomatous lesions 
 Regression of the hyaloid vasculature of the primary vitreous
and tunica vasculosa lentis and formation of the secondary
vitreous (Fig. 3.5)
 Abnormalities in this process are associated with persistent
Figure 3.6 Retinal blood vessel growth. Photomicrograph of a neonatal
vasculosa lentis, and persistent hyaloid artery, as well as
canine retina showing retinal blood vessel proliferation and 
vitreoretinopathies such as vitreoretinal dysplasia.
differentiation. The arrow points to a newly formed vessel in the
Vascularization of the retina, and the continued development of
developing nerve fiber layer.
retinal ganglion cells and their axons, which enter the optic
nerve (Fig. 3.6)
■ Failure of these processes leads to neovascular sprouting into
the vitreous and optic nerve hypoplasia, respectively.
 Many of the ocular tissues continue to develop throughout
 The full development of a multi-layered retina with functional
the early post-natal period, or, as in the case of the lens,
and differentiated photoreceptors (this process continues after
throughout life. Abnormalities of these processes can lead to
birth) (Fig. 3.7)
 diseases that are not manifest in young animals, eg. many
■ Failure results in retinal dysplasia or photoreceptor
forms of inherited cataract, hence they will not be covered in
dystrophies.
this chapter.
31
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 3.8 Veratrum californicum induced teratogenesis. A neonatal
 Photomicrograph of the normal, fully-differentiated feline retina sampled 
lamb has toxic synophthalmos, caused by maternal ingestion of Veratrum
in the area centralis, the region with the highest density ganglion cells.
californicum on day 14 of gestation. (Courtesy of Ron Ris, Diplomate -
American College of Veterinary Ophthalmology).
 Affected lambs have numerous developmental anomalies of the
Comparative Comments
face, including arhinencephaly characterized by a proboscis-like
These general principles of ocular embryology apply to humans as
nose developed above the fused globes
 well as other vertebrates. Specific congenital abnormalities in the 
Arhinencephaly with synophthalmos in humans is associated
human eye will be considered in the chapters which follow,
with very similar facial and ocular anomalies but no single
discussing specific tissues within the eye and in the orbit and adnexa.
teratogenic association has been made.
The various congenital anomalies arise because of variation in size,
location, organization, or amount of tissue that represents a
departure from normal.
Abnormal ocular development in cattle
A number of congenital abnormalities in humans fall under the
 associated with maternal infection with
classification of hamartomas or choristomas.
bovine viral diarrhea - mucosal disease
·A hamartoma is an excessive amount of mature tissue
(BVD-MD) virus (Figs 3.9 & 3.10)
yium u! uoenol e ui buuno (eiseidladky xoypue Aydoady)
that tissue is usually found. An example of a hamartoma would 
 Caused by a pestivinus
be any of the hereditary phakomatoses such as neurofibroma (a
 In post-natal infection, the virus causes a necrotizing
mass of mature neural tissue and fibroblasts) occurring in the 
epitheliotropic disease characterized by diarrhea
 orbit. No such collection of congenital disorders is described in
 Infection of the fetus is associated with several syndromes
 animals 
Early maternal infections (before 40 days' gestation) results
A choristoma, in contrast, consists of normal, mature tissue in an
in infertility, or fetal death and resorption
abnormal location. Embryologically, this is a result of one or two
 Infections later may be associated with abortion
germ layers forming mature tissue that is not normally found in 
 Infection after 40 days gestation can result in normal,
that topographic location. An example of a choristoma is lens 
occurring in the lid (a phakomatous choristoma).
immune-deficient, or stunted calves that are immune-tolerant
of the virus and remain persistent carriers of the virus. These
calves are of great importance in the spread and control of
the disease
■ Some calves infected after 40 days' gestation develop
congenital abnormalities (Fig. 3.9)
ABNORMALITIES ASSOCIATED WITH
- Cerebellar hypoplasia 'dummy calf
INFECTIOUS DISEASES OR MATERNAL
Brachygnathia
INTOXICATION
- Ocular abnormalities, typically seen in calves
infected later than 76 days but before 150 days gestation,
include:
Cyclopia or, more correctly, synophthalmos,
0 Microphthalmos
in Iambs,
, Veratrum californicum toxicity
0 Microphakia/cataract
(Fig. 3.8)
 Retinal detachment
0 Retinal atrophy/dysplasia
This is caused by consumption of alkaloids from the weed
0 Spindle cell metaplasia of the retinal pigment
Veratrum californicum (Western False Hellebore) by the pregnant
epithelium
ewe on day 14 of gestation
0 Immunohistochemistry for BVD-MD virus antigen shows
 The 14 day embryo is undergoing gastrulation to form a neural
staining in blood vessels and punctate staining in the
tube with lateral symmetry
outer plexiform layer (Fig. 3. 10).
32
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
3
Figure 3.9 Teratogenic effects of
maternal infection with bovine virus
diarrhea (BVD). (A) A neonatal calf brain
showing profound hypoplasia or atrophy
of the cerebellum. (B) Gross photograph
showing both eyes from four affected 
calves with microphthalmos, protein
exudation and lens displacement.
A
B
A
Redundant spindle cell tissue proliferates from the metaplastic retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) (arrow). (D) BVD immunohistochemistry labels foci in
the inner plexiform layer (arrowheads). (E) BVD immunohistochemistry labels blood vessels.
Retinal dysplasia associated with perinatal
Comparative Comments
infections in dogs and cats
The principle infectious embryopathies in humans are congenital
· In cats infected in utero with feline panleukopenia virus
rubella syndrome (Gregg's syndrome) consisting of cataracts,
retinal dysplasia is frequently associated with cerebellar
cardiovascular defects, mental retardation, and deafness; cytomegalic
hypoplasia
'sisowseldoxot pue is!udks jenuabuon raseasip uoisnpu!
 The major drug embryopathies associated with a variety of
experimental infection with feline leukemia vinus
eye changes in humans are: fetal alcohol syndrome, maternal
 Dogs surviving neonatal canine herpesvirus infection
thalidomide ingestion during the first trimester of pregnancy. and 
demonstrate retinal dysplasia, necrosis and degeneration,
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) ingestion during the first trimester of 
often associated with other ocular abnormalities related to
 pregnancy.
panuveitis.
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
specimens are rarely submitted for evaluation. There are only
ABNORMALITIES ASSOCIATED WITH
three cases in the COPLOW collection
SPECIFIC ANIMAL BREEDS
 The merle gene is a color dilution gene that lightens the coat
color. Many breeds or mixed breed dogs have merle coat color
Collie eye anomaly (CEA) (Fig. 3.11)
variants
 A dog homozygous for the merle gene will have a lighter coat
● Although a common disorder in dogs, specimens are seldom
sauaaa aa-oi-aa aoua snoazaiaaq e ue ro
submitted for histopathological evaluation. Only six cases are
are not recommended
logged into the COPLOW collection
The merle gene does not affect white coat color or white
·A congenital, recessively inherited, ocular disease seen in Collies
spots
and Shetland Sheepdogs, and also in Australian Shepherds.
The merle gene does affect the color of the eye, although
Border Collies, Lancashire Heelers and other herding breeds.
associated abnormalities may affect eyes with brown as well as
The genetics of the disorder are discussed in greater detail in
blue irides
Chapter 11
 Dogs of any breed, or mixed breeds, with the merle color
 Bilateral but not always symmetrical
 dilution (homozygous merle) and abundant white spots are at
 A wide spectrum of severity of phenotypic expression is
risk of congenital abnormalities in ocular development. These
recognized, including:
abnormalities include:
 All cases demonstrate a regionally defined area of choroidal
■Microphthalmos
hypoplasia and segmental tapetal aplasia lateral to the optic
■ Iridal abnormalities
Iridal coloboma, iris hypoplasia
disc. In isolation, this lesion has no clinically appreciable
effect on vision
Asymmetric pupil size, shape, or position (dyscoria and/or
 Tortuous retinal blood vessels, may be apparent, most 
corectopia)
 obvious in the area of choroidal hypoplasia
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Segmental lamina cribrosa or scleral defect (coloboma) with
 Lens abnormalities
outward bulging or ectasia
- Microphakia
- Although usually adjacent to or involving the lamina
Cataract
cribrosa, the scleral coloboma can be slightly separate from
 Abnormal lens shape (coloboma)
the disc
 Lens luxation/subluxation
 Often unilateral
Scleral defects (coloboma / staphyloma)
一
 Atrophic or dysplastic neural tissue, rather than uvea, lines
Colobomata are usually not located at the optic disc as in
the staphyloma
CEA, and are frequently equatorial in location
■Retinal detachment
Colobomata may be very large (coloboma with cyst) The
Can be localized to the area of the optic disc, i.e.
clinical picture in coloboma with cyst might be that of a
 peripapillary, or complete detachment.
fluid filled cyst making it difficult to recognize other ocular
Usually unilateral
structures
- Usually associated with a large coloboma
Retinal defects
Vitreous within the sub-retinal space probably gains access
- Retinal detachment, associated with severe dysplasia or
through tears in the atrophic neural tissue within the
large colobomata/staphylomas
coloboma
Retinal dysplasia, characterized by inner retinal thickening
■Retinal dysplasia
and the formation of inner retinal rosettes
- Solitary or multifocal folds, or disorganized development
Affected dogs are frequently also deaf.
 of retinal layers with dysplasia may be seen 
Jo suid e ayeu sueu pue sioune aun 
distinguishing retinal dysplasia, which has a component of
Congenital ocular anomalies in Rocky
disorganization, from retinal folds, which are simply a fold
Mountain horses (Fig. 3.13)
or wrinkle affecting all layers
■Hemorrhage into the posterior segment
An inherited complex of multiple ocular abnormalities has been
 The source of hemorrhage may be neovascular
reported in the Rocky Mountain horse and related breeds. In
sprouts from the choroid; the margins of the coloboma:
this dominantly inherited disorder, that may have incomplete
the dysplastic retinal foci, or traction on existing
penetrance, disease expression is linked to the silver dapple
retinal vessels, however, the source is usually
locus, responsible for the chocolate coat color with white or
undetermined
flaxen mane and tail
Pre-iridal fbrovascular membranes (PIFVM)
 Bilateral ocular involvement is seen in affected horses
 This secondary abnormality may, in turn, lead to
Heterozygous horses have large, translucent, temporal ciliary
cysts and may also have retinal dysplasia
 Homozygous horses have a complex of abnormalities that may
neovascular glaucoma.
include the following:
Microphthalmos
Merle and white spot coat color (merle
■ Cormea globosa
ocular dysgenesis) (Fig. 3.12)
- In some affected horses the radius of curvature of the
cornea appears to be shortened, leading to excessive
●As with CEA, merle ocular dysgenesis is seldom submitted to
anterior corneal curvature and the appearance of
the pathology laboratory, although the condition is relatively
 protruding eyes. These horses have abnormally deep
common in certain breeds, such as the Australian Shepherd,
anterior chambers 
 Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
3
Figure 3.11 Collie eye anomaly (CEA).
(A-D) Fundus photographs show various
 () e a   ss
Collie, 3 months old: choroidal 
hypoplasia is present temporally in this 
left eye. (B) Shetland Sheepdog.
. 7 weeks
old: this right eye has choroidal
hypoplasia (below arrow) and a
peripapillary coloboma at the arrow.
(C) Collie, 2 years old: a large coloboma
(arrow) totally surrounds the optic disc.
(D) Collie, 1 year old: the retina is
detached in the left eye of this
subalbinotic atapetal dog. The white 
arrows point to a hole in the detached
retina. (E) Bouin's fixed globe showing
coloboma (arrow) near the optic nerve
B
with retinal tissue entrapped within the 
coloboma. (F) Subgross photomicrograph
of affected dog showing intraocular
hemorrhage and optic nerve head 
coloboma (arrow).
C
D
F
35
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 3.12 Merle ocular dysgenesis.
(A) Shetland Sheepdog. & months old:
this color dilute, deaf dog is a result of a
merle-X-merle breeding. (B) The left eye
of the dog in (A) shows a
microphthalmic globe with multiple
 ocular defects including a cataract and 
corectopia. (C) Great Dane, 6 years old:
a harlequin-X-harlequin breeding resulted 
in this visual dog. which had dyscoria
and corectopia in both microphthalmic
eyes. (D) The left eye of the dog in (C)
shows the dyscoria and hypermature 
cataract. (E) Clinical photograph showing
a sharply delineated scleral coloboma.
(F) Subgross photomicrograph of the 
same globe as (E) showing a large
A
B
segmental scleral outpouching, retinal 
dysplasia and microcornea. (G) Subgross
photomicrograph of a microphthalmic 
globe with retinal dysplasia.
(H) Photomicrograph of the retina from 
(G) showing the typical features of
retinal dysplasia in merle- and white-
coated dogs. There is retinal thickening 
and jumbled differentiation.
C
D
F
G
H
36
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
3
Hgure 3.13 Rocky Mountain horse.
(A) The right globe has a megalocornea
and a diffuse cortical cataract. (B) A
lateral view ilustrates the increased 
corneal curvature (arrows) in addition to
the enlarged cornea, i.e. cornea globosa.
(C) A close-up photograph showing the 
dyscoria. (D) There is dyscoria and 
ectropion uvea. Diffuse lens opacity can
be seen through the non-mobile pupil.
A
（B
C
D
Iridal abnormalities, that include:
●The primary vitreous, including the hyaloid vasculature
Iris hypoplasia
一
and the tunica vasculosa lentis, provide a blood supply to
一
 Dilator muscle hypoplasia, so that the pupils are miotic
the fetal lens, and in dogs completely regress shortly after
and resistant to pharmacologic mydriasis
birth
Abnormal, circumferential position of the granula iridica
 In dogs with PHPV/PHTVL, the frst observable abnormalities
(e1Bu e10d10)
are seen about halfway through gestation (30-33 days), when
Abnormal iris surface contour
the hyaloid vasculature and tunica vasculosa lentis appear
- Irido-corneal adhesions.
over-developed relative to normal, and a retro-lental membrane
一
Abnormalities of the irido-corneal drainage angle
 may first be recognized
- Widened palpebral fissures
  The abnormalities are usually centered on the vitreous
■
Ciliary cysts
but there can be variable involvement of the whole
■ Nuclear cataracts
retro-lental vascular system, and anterior tunica vasculosa
 Lens subluxation.
lentis
 In moderate and severe cases, tissue may be recognized that
would not be identifed in the normal primary vitreous
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Cartilage
(PHPV) and persistent hyperplastic tunica
- Pigmented tissue
 Nests of glial tissue
vasculosa fentis (PHTVL) (Fig. 3.14)
■ Posterior lenticonus, cataract and posterior lens capsule
 There is a sporadic occurrence in any breed, but PHIV/PHTVL is
defect is often seen
considered to be inherited in the Doberman Pinscher and
 Intralenticular hemorrhage is sometimes seen
Staffordshire Bull terrier breeds.
 pooa e si suat au uum auau yanoua
 Specimens rarely submitted for evaluation
morphologic marker for a congenital abnormality of the
■ There are only 12 cases logged into the COPLOW collection
fetal hyaloid vasculature, it does not discriminate between
- Three of the 12 are in Doberman Pinschers
PHPV, PHTVL, and persistent hyaloid artery
LE
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 3.14 Persistent hyperplastic
primary vitreous and persistent 
hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis
(PHPV/PHTVL). (A) Labrador Retriever.
1.5 years old: the arrow points to the
 network of fine blood vessels on the 
posterior lens capsule. A posterior axial 
cataract resulted from the PHPV.
(B) Dachshund, 7 months old: fine
vessels can be seen extending to the
equator of the posterior lens in this 
bilateral condition. (C) Doberman 
Pinscher, 6 months old: the PHTVL
resulted in an axial vascular area
surrounded by a retrolental fibrovascular
plaque (arrow). (D) German Pinscher, 1.5
years old: through the dilated pupil, the 
A
severe bleeding into the lens can be seen
with PHPV. (E) Gross photograph
showing PHPV and retinal detachment.
(F) Subgross photomicrograph of the 
same globe as (E). (G) Gross photograph
of retinal detachment and PHPV.
(H) Photomicrograph showing a PHPV on
the posterior pole of the lens (the insert 
is a higher magnification of the vessel in 
the mid-vitreous). () Photomicrograph of 
vascular structures extending from the
 pars plicata to the lens capsule.
C
F
38
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
■ Retinal detachment may be seen in severe cases
regular updates available from the Canine Eye Registration
- Retinal detachment can lead to pre-iridal fbrovascular
Foundation (CERF)
membrane, and contribute to neovascular glaucoma or
This diagnosis is made when there is abnormal development of
anterior segment hemorrhage
both the vitreous and the retina. Because the two tissues are so
 Retinal dysplasia may accompany PHPV, as has been
intimately connected, disease of one impacts the health of the
reported in the Miniature Schnauzer as a recessively
other
inherited condition, and as a familial trait in the Bouvier
鲁
The vitreous body is formed by scant spindle cells, a connection
des Flandres.
to the retina by attachment to the inner limiting membrane [a
basal lamina secreted by retinal Muiller cells), and hyaluronic
acid secreted by the ciliary epithelium
Retinal dysplasias (Fig. 3.15)
The vitreous changes seen include:
?
 An important hereditary abnormality in dogs, retinal dysplasia,
 Areas of liquid vitreous which can only be recognized on
is seldom encountered as a genetic disease in other species
gross examination, prior to embedding
Globes with retinal dysplasia in isolation are almost never
 Areas of more dense, organized, or 'solid' vitreous
submitted to the diagnostic ocular pathology laboratory
These areas create traction on the retina and can be
■ The only cases identified in the COPLOW collection are
associated with subsequent retinal detachment
those in which retinal dysplasia accompanies other
- Traction on the retina from the abnormal vitreous can be
abnormalities of serious consequence to ocular health and/or
associated with broad peripheral retinal disinsertion
vision
(tearing) or with more localized peripheral retinal tears.
 Because so few cases are seen in a pathology collection, and
Retinoschisis is also sometimes recognized. Abnormal
 because the only cases seen are in a special context, a
cellular membranes on the inner retinal surface are often
diagnostic ocular pathologist has little beyond generalities to
seen in vitreoretinopathies
add to the understanding of these developmental disorders
 Areas of solid vitreous can be best seen with an Alcian blue
 Definition: the disorganized development of retinal tissue
stain, and they often stain positively for collagen with a
  Solitary or multi-focal disease
trichrome stain
 Many breeds of dog are affected, and the reader is referred to
 Retinal detachment, and resulting retinal hypoxia, leads to the
the most recent edition of Ocular Disorders Presumed To Be
release of vasoproliferative cytokines, particularly vascular
Inherited in Purebred Dogs, with regular updates available from
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which stimulate pre-iridal
the Canine Eye Registration Foundation (CERF)
fibrovascular membrane (PIFVM) formation. This, in turn, leads
m se adosnuy pazane si esesp eu
to peripheral anterior synechiae and neovascular glaucoma and/
demarcated, linear, curvilinear or larger, geographic foci, that
Or hemophthalmos.
may be raised or wrinkled, and may be accompanied by
Vitreoretinopathy of the Shih Tzu dog
pigment disturbance or evidence of associated retinal
■Vitreoretinopathy in this breed is often not recognized until
degeneration. In some cases, funduscopic lesions may not be
neovascular glaucoma is seen secondary to retinal
readily identifiable until secondary degenerative changes become
detachment
a ui idouao nz us go ss oe ae aau 
 Linear lesions are generally considered to represent 'folds'.
COPLOW collection (Figs 3.16, 3.17)
which some consider as a distinct entity not qualified to be
- In this breed, the disease is usually presented in middle-
considered as dysplasia, in the absence of significant tissue
aged dogs, rather than very young dogs
uoeziuegiosip
- The detection of vitreous changes often requires either
- Some feel that simple retinal folds in puppies are likely to
jo au au ie Aooudiou ssog au o uouane [nyaim
 disappear with the subsequent maturation and physical
globe trimming, or an Alcian blue stain 
enlargement of the globe
- The vitreous is usually liquid in much of the
 Geographic lesions are likely to include retinal lesions
 posterior segment but condensed at the inner retinal
beyond just folding
surface
- Rosettes
- Retinoschisis is often seen in the detached retina
- Thickening or thinning
 There is traction and peripheral retinal tearing leading to
- Jumbling of the retinal layers
local or extensive retinal detachment (rhegmatogenous
Focal retinal detachment, or local changes in the RPE, with
retinal detachment and giant retinal tears)
一
accompanying retinal degeneration.
 The formation of peripheral retinal tears associated with
vitreous degeneration and traction may represent a good
comparative model for the study of pathogenesis, treatment
The vitreoretinopathies - vitreoretinal
and prevention of peripheral rhegmatogenous retinal
dysplasia (Figs 3.16, 3.17)
 detachment in humans
au a aa ai aie sa pae a a a 
By virtue of the blinding effect of retinal detachment, intraocular
neovascular glaucoma or intraocular hemorrhage associated
hemorrhage and the risk of neovascular glaucoma, vitreoretinopathy
with the formation of pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes
is more often seen in the pathology laboratory than retinal dysplasia
and peripheral anterior synechiae
alone, with 58 cases logged into the COPLOw collection.
a on Aem iia puy iu huu ss aau yanou 
?
 Congenital, inherited retinal detachment/non-attachment is
 pathologist until complete retinal detachment and
recognized in Bedlington and Sealyham terriers. For a
disinsertion leads to neovascular glaucoma, they are
comprehensive breakdown of the breeds affected by vitreoretinal
 regularly presented to veterinary ophthalmologists. In recent
dysplasia, the reader is referred to the most recent edition of
years surgical re-attachment of the retina has become an
Ocular Disorders Presumed To Be Inherited in Purebred Dogs. with
option.
68
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 3.15 Retinal dysplasia.
(A) Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, 8
weeks old: multiple linear retinal folds
(arrow) are seen in this immature fundus.
(B) Golden Retriever, 2 years old: the
large geographic tapetal lesion is 
discernible due to the change in tapetal
coloration. (C) English Springer Spaniel,
18 months old: large areas of abnormal
pigmentation and tapetal hyperreflectivity
are indicative of severe geographic retinal
dysplasia. (D) English Springer Spaniel.
2.5 years old: a complete retinal
detachment obscures the fine detail of 
the underlying tapetum and non-tapetal 
pigmented fundus. (E,F)
Photomicrographs show multifocal retinal
A
B
dysplasia, characterized by retinal folds 
and disorganization of the retinal layers.
C
D
F
40
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
E
Figure 3.16 Vitreoretinopathy in the
Shih Tzu, clinical. (A) Shih Tzu, 6 years
old: the vitreous degeneration can be
seen by retroillumination. (B) Shih Tzu,
4.5 years old: total retinal detachment
resulted in tapetal hyperreflectivity and
vitreous hemorrhage (arrow). (C) Shih
Tzu, 4.5 years old: the gray discoloration
(between arrows) represents the
detached retina. (D) Shih Tzu, 15 months
old: the optic disc can be seen at the 
black arrow with the veil-like detached
retina inferior (white arrow).
A
B
C
D
Oculo-skeletal dysplasia syndrome
 Decreased amounts of type II collagen in the vitreous of
(Figs 3.18, 3.19)
affected Labrador retrievers. Type Il collagen is a
component of the growth plate as well as normal vitreous
There are seven cases of oculo-skeletal dysplasia in the COPLOW
The end-stage ocular disease occurs when the retinal
collection.
detachment leads to pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes
 Seen in Labrador retrievers and Samoyeds
and subsequent neovascular glaucoma, and intraocular
 Autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance
hemorrhage.
has been postulated
 Heterozygous animals usually have mild retinal dysplasia
Congenital cataract (lens opacity) and other
 Homozygous animals have skeletal changes and mild to
congenital abnormalities of the lens
severe retinal dysplasia
- There is a correlation between the phenotypic severity of
Normal lens structure (Fig. 3.20) (see Ch. 10)
the ocular and the skeletal manifestations of the disease.
Animals with severely affected eyes generally have
·
 Nucleus and cortex
pronounced chondrodysplastic dwarfism
·1
 Lens capsule [anterior and posterior)
Skeletal abnormalities affect the growth plate and result in
 Lens epithelium
shortened and hypoplastic chondrocyte columns
 Lens fibers
Ocular changes
·
 Anterior and posterior sutures.
0 The least affected eyes have focal or multifocal retinal
 dysplasia and prominent vitreous strands
Congenital lens abnormalities other than cataract
0 Mildly affected globes have focal retinal detachment and
a combination of liquefied areas in the vitreous and
Aphakia
thick vitreous strands attached to the inner retina
 Primary aphakia, no lens anlage developed 
0 Severely affected globes have complete retinal
This extremely rare abnormality occurs in combination with
detachment, with disinsertion and wrinkling of the
 other anterior segment abnormalities (see anterior segment
 peripheral retina inward towards the optic disc
dysgenesis) and/or microphthalmos
41
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 3.17 Vitreoretinopathy in the Shih Tzu, gross pathology. Six gross photographs of Shih Tzu globes with vitreoretinopathy and giant retinal
tears.
 Secondary aphakia, early lens extrusion, resorption or
Histologically there is thinning. or rupture, of the posterior
destruction
capsule and a posterior bulging of the posterior polar lens
 Early life trauma or inflammation
cortex
  Wrinkled remnants of lens capsule may be seen if the tissue
+
Often seen in combination with persistent hyaloid artery or
is sectioned in the appropriate plane.
PHPV/PHTVL
Lens coloboma and microphakia (Fig. 3.21)
Development of anterior lens features on the
●These conditions may represent abnormalities of the zonular
posterior pole
suspensory apparatus, rather than primary abnormalities in lens
?
 This unusual phenomenon happens when other features, such
development
as PHPV/PHTVL or dysplastic retinal tissue, make broad contact
 Often associated with other congenital abnormalities such as
with the posterior pole of the lens, and the posterior lens
uveal colobomata, retinal detachment, anterior segment
differentiates like the anterior pole
dysgenesis and PHPV/PHTVL.
The lens epithelium wraps around to the posterior pole
(posterior migration)
Posterior lenticonus and lentiglobus (Fig. 3.22)
The posterior capsule becomes thick
·Posterior protrusion and increased curvature of the posterior
+
 The epithelium, displaced to the posterior pole, forms a second
pole of the lens
posterior nuclear bow.
Seen as a breed-related problem in Cavalier King Charles
Spaniels but seen sporadically in many breeds of dog and in
Congenital cataract (Fig. 3.23)
many species, and is often associated with cataract
a o ao raisd a un say u si niii au au
Congenital cataract should imply that the cataract is present at
lens, which has a globular appearance
birth. However, animals are seldom evaluated at birth, therefore
42
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
Figure 3.18 Oculo-skeletal dysplasia
syndrome. (A) Labrador Retriever, 10
months old: showing shortened and 
deformed long bones. (B) Clinical
photograph of the left eye of the dog
depicted in (A), with a diffuse cortical
cataract and retinal detachment;
condition was bilateral. (C) Labrador
Retriever, 5 years old: the short stature is
associated with varus elbow deformities
and valgus deformities at the carpi. (D)
Labrador Retriever, 11 months old: the 
totally detached and disinserted retina is
seen as a gray veil hanging from the
optic disc. (E) Sectioned pectoral limb
bones show foreshortened bone growth.
D
Et
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 3.19 Oculo-skeletal dysplasia
syndrome, ocular pathology. (A) Gross
photograph of both globes from a
Labrador Retriever with oculo-skeletal
dysplasia showing strands in the vitreous
body. (B) Both globes from another dog
have complete retinal detachment and 
giant retinal tears, accompanied by
inward scrolling of the free ends of the
peripheral retina. (C) Gross photograph
showing a vascularized inner retinal 
membrane from an affected dog. (D)
Photomicrograph of the retina showing a
cellular membrane on the inner retinal
surface (arrow).
A
B
44
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
3
Figure 3.20 The normal lens. In these
three photomicrographs of the normal
lens, the lens capsule is indicated with an
asterisk (*). (A) The anterior pole. (B) The
lens capsule gets thinner (*). (C) The
nuclear bow (*) at the equator. The
 arrow points to a nucleus in the nuclear
bow.
B
B
：1
Figure 3.21 Congenital lens coloboma
in a ferret. (A) Gross photograph of a
bilobed lens in a ferret. (B) Subgross
photomicrograph of the globe.
A
B
the condition is defined by the age of frst appearance, and
Hereditary cataracts
because of that, the definition may differ between authors
●Morphologically, most breed-related cataracts are cortical
(Fig. 3.23)
cataracts that are not present at birth. Hereditary cataract is
Congenital cataract, in isolation, is very unlikely to be seen in a
discussed further in Chapter 10.
'yuied aq ot Aial iou s aa a asneaq Aoieioqel Aoouid
the health of the animal is not likely to be adversely affected,
and there is an effective surgical therapy
Goniodysgenesis and other anterior
 Congenital cataract is often associated with more complex
segment dysgenesis syndromes
 syndromes involving other ocular abnormalities, including
(Figs 3.24, 3.25)
microphthalmos, PHPV/PHTVL, PPM and/or anterior segment 
dysgenesis
Goniodysgenesis is also known as pectinate ligament dysplasia, and
 Although inherited forms of congenital cataract are recognized
mesodermal dysgenesis (Figs 3.24, 3.25). There are l100 cases of dogs
in a wide range of species, congenital cataract often occurs
with a diagnosis of goniodysgenesis in the COPLOW collection.
 sporadically, or as a result of maternal exposure to toxins.
infection, or other in utero insult during lens development
development of 'primary glaucoma' of dogs; the glaucoma
 Congenital cataract, as any cataract, can affect the lens in a
syndrome will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 13
variety of morphological patterns
Morphologic features of goniodysgenesis
 Lesions involving the lens capsule and epithelium 
 Gross appearance as described by gonioscopy in vivo, or by
- Disorganization of the lens epithelium 
direct inspection with a dissecting microscope during gross 
 Posterior migration of lens epithelial cells
evaluation
 Duplication of lens capsule
- The normal pattern of the primary pectinate ligament
 Lesions involving the relative formation of the nucleus and
is replaced focally or in broad sheets by a solid band
cortex
 Of uveal tissue, that may be fenestrated to a variable
- Nuclear cataract is most likely to be encountered in
isolation
■  Microscopic appearance of goniodysgenesis in the
Cortical cataract.
normotensive eye
45
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 3.22 Posterior lenticonus.
(A) Siberian Husky, 6 months old: arrows
outline the area of posterior protrusion
of the lens. (B) Golden Retriever. 1 year
old: the dark circle outlines an area of
lenticonus with additional cortical
opacities radiating toward the lens 
equator. The arrow points to the 
equatorial water cleft. (C) Gross
photograph of an equine globe with
lenticonus. (D) Photomicrograph of the
same globe as (C). (E) Both globes from
a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel show the
abnormal tubular extension from the
posterior pole of the lens blending into
hyaloid arterial remnants.
A
B
D
- The hallmark feature is a solid sheet of iris-like tissue
The defining feature of Peter's anomaly is a congenital defect in
 extending from the base of the iris to the termination of
the posterior cornea, resulting from failure of normal kerato-
Descemet's membrane
lenticular separation
 0 Classically this membrane should have both pigment
■ Segmental defect in Descemet's membrane and endothelium
cells and dense collagen, similar to the canine iris
(required abnormality)
0 The termination of Descemet's membrane is distorted by
 Clinically, there is a segmental corneal opacity
branching. bulging, or both
 Attachment of uveal tissue to the posterior surface of the 
0 In the normotensive eye, the ciliary cleft is open and the
cormea
corneoscleral trabecular meshwork is readily identifable.
- Pigmented tissue
-Vascular tissue
Peter's anomaly and persistent pupillary membranes
- Uveal strands stretching from the iris to the cornea focally
(Figs 3.26, 3.27)
 or multifocally
Usually not associated with congenital gaucoma
There are 10 cases of Peter's anomaly in the COPLOW collection, six
 The defining feature of persistent pupillary membranes is
in dogs and four in cats.
vascularized uveal strands or membranes stretched across the
46
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
3
Figure 3.23 Congenital cataracts.
(A) Miniature Schnauzer, 1 year old: the 
central opacity seen is a nuclear cataract.
(B) Bloodhound, 5 months old: the PHPV
resulted in a diffuse cortical opacity with
hemorrhage into the posterior cortex.
(C) Subgross photomicrograph of
congenital cataract. (D) Photomicrograph 
of the same lens as (C), showing cataract
in the posterior pole and nucleus.
(E) Photomicrograph showing congenital
cataract and focal lens capsular wrinkling
highlighted in the inset (PAS stain).
(F) Photomicrograph showing severe lens 
fiber degeneration at the posterior suture
(arrow) of a congenital cataract.
(G) Photomicrograph of the anterior
capsule, epithelium and redundant 
capsular deposits in a congenital canine 
cataract (PAS stain).
（D
F
E
pupil, extending from one side of the iris to the other, or to the
 Lens may make contact with cornea within a defect in
anterior pole of the lens.
 Descemet's membrane
 This represents a failure of kerato-lenticular separation at the
time of formation of the lens vesicle from the surface
 Congenital failure in the formation of the anterior
ectoderm
segment, anterior segment dysplasia or dysgenesis
 May be associated with congenital gaucoma and buphthalmos.
 or with microphthalmos
(Fig. 3.28)
●This diagnosis should be made with care. The diagnosis of
 The defining feature is broad anterior adhesion of iris, or iris 
 congenital disease needs to be carefully differentiated from early
remnants, to the posterior cornea in association with
life trauma with acquired anterior segment collapse. The
abnormalities in Descemet's membrane and endothelium. The
Aq pauiidxa aq rouu yum saeay iau yo auasai
space that normally represents the anterior chamber may be
acquired disease, particularly trauma will aid in making the
narrow or non-existent
diagnosis of congenital disease
47
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 3.24 Canine goniodysgenesis,
gonioscopy. (A) Beagle, 2 years old: this
clinical image is of a normal irido-corneal
angle. The ciliary cleft can be seen
between the pectinate ligaments (arrow).
(B) Basset Hound, 2 years old: this image
shows goniodysgenesis in a normotensive
eye. A broad band of tissue (arrows)
 obscures the ciliary cleft.
A
B
Figure 3.25 Goniodysgenesis, pathology.
(A,B) Magnified gross photographs of 
canine iridocorneal angle show features
of severe (A) and mild (B)
 goniodysgenesis. (C) Photommicrograph of
A
a normal canine irido-corneal angle
showing a primary pectinate (arrowhead)
and the corneoscleral trabecular
meshwork (small arrows). (D,E)
 Photomicrographs show canine
goniodysgenesis in two normotensive
dogs
B
G
（D)
Figure 3.26 Peter's anomaly. clinical. (A)
Chow Chow, & weeks old: fine persistent
pupillary membranes from the iris to the
cornea (arrow) associated with a diffuse
Corneal edema. (B) DSH, 2 years old:
thick bands of uveal tissue (arrow) led to
severe edema and keratoconus.
48
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
E
Figure 3.27 Peter's anomaly, pathology.
(A) Gross photograph of a canine globe
with Peter's anomaly. (B)
Photomicrograph, of the dog in (A),.
showing the attachment point of a cord
of uveal tissue to the posterior cornea.
Descemet's membrane is discontinuous 
 and uveal stroma blends into the corneal 
lamellar stroma. (C) Low magnification
photomicrograph, of the dog in (A).
A
showing delicate uveal cords spanning
B
 the anterior chamber. (D) Low
magnification photomicrograph of 
another dog globe showing a broader
sheet of uveal tissue stretched between
the iris and posterior cornea. There is 
also deep invasion of the corneal
epithelium into the lamellar stroma
(trichrome stain). (Reproduced with
permission from Swanson H L, Dubielzig
R R, Bentley E et al 2001 A case of 
Peters' anomaly in a Springer spaniel. J
Comp Pathol 125:326-30.)
D
Figure 3.28 Anterior segment dysgenesis 
in a horse. (A) Gross photograph of both 
globes from a horse. While there is
obvious asymmetry, both globes have
anterior segment dysgenesis with a
failure in the formation of the anterior
chamber. (B) In the sectioned enlarged 
globe from (A), pigmented iris tissue is 
plastered against the posterior aspect of
the cornea.
A
lummmmimlnam
 In the COPLOW collection these diagnoses are made
Congenital corneal edema in association with
infrequently, as follows:
multifocal defects in Descemet's membrane and
Canine early life trauma causing collapse of the anterior
chamber: 23 cases
endothelium (Fig. 3.31)
Canine anterior segment dysgenesis: 26 cases
 Rare cases of young animals with cormeal edema and increased corneal
 Feline early life trauma causing collapse of the anterior
thicknes, otherwise unexplained, should be evaluated carefully for
chamber: 19 cases
 segmental defects of Descemet's membrane and endothelial cells
Feline anterior segment dysgenesis: 16 cases
embedded in the posterior stroma.
 Equine anterior segment dysgenesis: 9 cases.
Comparative Comments
Iris coloboma (Fig. 3.29)
The spectrum of congenital abnormalities seen in different breeds in
veterinary medicine is similar to that encountered in humans,
Congenital segmental defect in the formation of the iris, leading to
 however, there is no clearly discernable ethnic or racial predominance
 an abnormal pupil shape or a focal absence of iris tissue.
in humans.
 On the other hand, the link between specific developmental
Scleral coloboma (Fig. 3.30)
disorders and the human genome is, in general, much better worked 
out.
Congenital segmental scleral defect leading to outward bulging
 For example, trisomy 13 (Patau's syndrome) is seen in one out of 
(ectasia) of the sclera. May be associated with strabismus due to
14 000 live births.
 abnormal extraocular muscle insertion.
49
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 3.29 Iris coloboma. (A) Australian
Shepherd, 1.5 years old: there is an iris 
coloboma at the arrow. (B) Australian 
Shepherd, 9.5 years old: two iris
colobomas, at 3 o'clock and 9 o'clock,
are visible. (C) Thoroughbred, colt: a
superior coloboma resulted in
visualization of the lens equator
superiorly (arrow). (D) DSH, 1 year old:
visualization of the posterior pigmented 
epithelium of the iris is possible due to a
Coloboma of the iris stroma.
A
8
C
D
 Microscopic findings may include:
SPORADIC CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES
- Microphthalmos
OF UNDETERMINED ORIGIN
- Often see epidermal/hair follicular differentiation at the
cormeal limbus (dermoid)
- Aphakia or profound microphakia
Microphthalmia syndromes
- Failure to develop any normal anterior chamber
0 No Descemet's membrane
 Microphthalmos may arise early in development due to
abnormal development of the optic vesicle, or later in
0 No normal corneal endothelium (ciliary and iridal
epithelium is often present but disorganized or cystic)
which normally contributes to growth and expansion of the
Heterotopic development of fully differentiated tissue not
appropriate to the globe in the anterior segment
globe
Microphthalmia in horses (Fig. 3.32):
0 Stratifed squamous epithelium (can be cystic)
0 Glandular tissue
There are six cases of congenital microphthalmia in horses in
0 Cartilage.
the COPLOW collection
 This syndrome is seen sporadically in foals that are otherwise
fully developed and without other, systemic abnormalities
Microphthalmia in white-tailed deer
 The Thoroughbred is over-represented, but the condition has
(Fig. 3.33)
been observed in many breeds
 There is no known or suspected cause, and this condition is
This condition shares many features of the condition in
 not believed to be inherited
horses
■
 Affected animals are generally affected bilaterally but often
 Affected fawns are well developed, with no identifiable
not symmetrically
congenital abnormalities in other systems
 Ranges in severity from a small but otherwise normal eye.
There is no known cause, and there is no reason to believe that
'nanophthalmos', to extreme microphthalmos with multiple
this condition is heritable. Environmental teratotoxicosis is
ocular anomalies
suspected
50
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
3
Figure 3.30 Scleral ectasia and
coloboma. (A) DSH, 6 months old: a
large temporal and a smaller peripapillary
lid agenesis was also present.
(B) Australian Shepherd, 2 years old: the
arrows indicate a large area of scleral 
ectasia in the inferior nasal fundus.
(C) Australian Shepherd, 2 months old:
an area of scleral ectasia is present at the
arrow. (D) American Eskimo dog. 6 years 
old: in the subabinotic, atapetal right 
fundus, a large staphyloma is present 
between the arrows. The condition was
bilater al.
A
B
C
D
In Wisconsin, the condition is seen more commonly in areas
where the land is used for intensive agriculture, with
application of chemicals and intense irrigation. This may
indicate a possible environmental cause 
 Affected animals are always affected bilaterally but not always
symmetrically
Morphologic abnormalities include:
■Microphthalmos
■ Opaque and pigmented cornea
■
 Aphakia, except focal differentiation of dysplastic lens cells
Failure to develop any normal anterior chamber
- The deep corneal stroma resembles sclera in appearance
A
- No Descemet's membrane
- No normal corneal endothelium 
- Normal but disorganized iridal or iliary epithelium may
be present
■ Heterotopic development of fully differentiated tissue not 
 appropriate to the globe within the anterior segment
- Stratified squamous epithelium
B
- Glandular tissue
an ou 'uisuosm ug paia suaas oe ro -
Figure 3.31 Canine congenital corneal edema. (A) Gross photograph of
tissue was found. However, cartilage has been reported in
both globes from a dog with corneal edema and extreme thickening. (B)
eyes of fawns from other states
 Severely disorganized neuroretinal tissue often extends across
and dysplastic endothelium in a dog with congenital corneal edema.
the posterior aspect of the abnormal tissues of the anterior
51
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 3.32 Congenital equine 
microphthalmos. (A) Gross photograph
showing both globes from a horse with
congenital equine microphthalmos. (B)
Subgross photomicrograph of an equine
globe with congenital microphthalmos.
There is no formed anterior chamber, no
lens tissue, and a large glandular 
structure occurs in the center of the
image (arrow). (C) Gross photograph of a
severely microphthalmic and aphakic
A
equine globe. (D) Subgross
photomicrograph of a microphthalmic
and aphakic equine globe showing
cartilage tissue within the globe (arrow).
D
A
B
C
D
Figure 3.33 Congenital microphthalmos in white-tailed deer. (A) This microphthalmic white-tailed deer globe has a partially pigmented cornea. (B) A
sectioned white-tailed deer globe showing no lens, no anterior chamber and a persistent hyaloid vascular remnant. (C) Subgross photomicrograph of
the globe in (B) showing absence of lens and abnormal tissues in the collapsed anterior uvea. (D,E) Low magnification photomicrographs of white-
tailed deer globes show no lens. Sheets of disorganized tissue in the anterior segment include glandular tissue, stratified squamous epithelium and
gliotic neuroretinal tissue.
52
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
3
Figure 3.34 Microphthalmos in several
species, clinical. (A) Labrador Retriever,
6 months old: in this bilateral case, the 
nictitans is slightly prolapsed and the
small cataractous lens is sub-luxated
(arrows) with visible zonular fibers.
(B) Miniature Schnauzer, 4 months old: a
diffuse nuclear and cortical cataract is
associated with the unilateral
microphthalmia. (C) Thoroughbred, foal:
the nictitans is prolapsed in this case of
severe microphthalmia. (D) DSH, 3.5
years old: in addition to the reduced
palpebral fissure and small globes, both
pupils had dyscoria and immature
cataracts were present.
A
segment. Within this disorganized neural tissue, there is
Neovascular membranes within the vitreous body
often dysplastic lenticular differentiation.
  An avascular peripheral retina
  Pre-iridal fibrovascular membrane and peripheral anterior
Sporadic microphthalmic syndromes
synechiae
(Fig. 3.34)
retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) in humans, which is also
Microphthalmos, with variable associated ocular anomalies, such as
discussed in Chapter 1l
 The ROP is a major concern in premature infants
PHPV/PHTVL, coloboma or retinal dysplasia, may be seen as a spo-
subject to positive pressure ventilation with supplemental
radic fnding in any species.
 Oxygen in the management of respiratory distress. In ROP
the normal post-natal development of retinal blood
vessels is interrupted because vasoconstriction occurs
Feline neovascular vitreoretinopathy
[euai au u sanein pooa paieuaxo-iadau uaum
(Fig. 3.35)
vasculature
- This leads to local hypoxemia and subsequent neovascular
There are l0 cases of feline neovascular vitreoretinopathy in the
tufts which extend into the vitreous rather than developing
COPLOW collection.
along the inner retina
 This condition is generally not recognized until glaucoma
- Traction from the resulting neovascular membranes may
develops at 6 months to 3 years of age, however the peripheral
lead to retinal detachment and blindness
retina remains avascular which suggests that the condition is.
- ROP is easily induced in newborn kittens by
indeed, congenital
exposure to increased oxygen tension and then
 The hallmark lesions:
withdrawal
■
 Complete retinal detachment
 In the spontaneous feline disease, there has been no
■ Unilateral in all affected animals to date
known history of perinatal difficulties.
ES
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 3.35 Feline neovascular vitreoretinopathy. (A,B) Photomicrographs of feline neovascular vitreoretinopathy in two cats. There is a vascularized
intravitreal membrane internal to the detached retina (arrows). (C) Low magnification photomicrograph showing the detached retina and a
vascularized membrane in the central and posterior retina. (D) Photomicrograph showing gliotic retina with a vascularized vitreal membrane on the
inner surface (arrow). (E) Photomicrograph showing a gliotic peripheral retina with no blood vessels.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
the age of molecular neuroscience. J. Med.
Kahrs, R.F., Scott, FW., de Lahunta, A, 1970.
Genet. 41, 881-891.
Congenital cerebella hypoplasia and ocular
Priester, W.A., 1972. Congenital ocular defects
in cattle, horses, cats, and dogs. I. Am. Vet.
Zeiss, C.J., Zarfoss, M.K., Johnson, E.E., et al.
defects in calves following bovine viral
Med. Assoc. 160, 1504-1511.
 2008. Ocular anomalies and
diarrhea-mucosal disease infection in
holoprosencephaly in a lamb. Vet.
pregnant cattle. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 156,
Bellhorn, R.W., 1973. A survey of ocular
fndings in 16- to 24-week-old beagles. J.
Ophthalmol. 11, 30-33.
1443-1450.
Scott, EW., Kahrs, R.F., De Lahunte, A., et al.,
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 162, 139-141.
Cyclopia/synophthalmos
1973. Virus induced congenital anomalies
Wilcock, B.P., 1983. Ocular anomalies. In:
 of the bovine fetus. I. Cerebellar
Peiffer, R.L. (Ed.), Comparative ophthalmic
Keeler, R.F., Binns, W., 1966. Teratogenic
degeneration (hypoplasia), ocular lesions 
 pathology. Charles C. Thomas, Springfeld,
compounds of Veratrum californicum
and fetal mummification following
pp. 3-46.
(Durand). Il. Production of ovine feta]
experimental infection with bovine viral
Barnett, K.C., 1988. Inherited eye disease in the
cyclopia by fractions and alkaloid
diarrhea-mucosal disease virus. Cornell. Vet.
dog and cat. J. Small Anim. Pract. 29,
 preparations. Can J. Biochem. 44,
829-838.
63, 536-560.
462-475.
Brown, T.T., Bistner, S.l., de Lahunta, A., et al.
Narfstrom K., 1999. Hereditary and congenital
Bryden, M.M., Evans, H.E., Keeler, R.F., 1971.
1975. Pathogenetic studies of infection of
 Ocular disease in the cat. J. Feline Med. Surg.
 Cyclopia in sheep caused by plant
the bovine fetus with bovine viral diarrhea
1, 135-141.
teratogens. J. Anat. 110, 507.
virus. ll. Ocular lesions. Vet. Pathol. 12,
394-404.
Embryology of the eye
Abnormalities associated with
Percy, D.H., Scott, EW., Albert, D.M., 1975.
Cook, C.S., 1995. Embryogenesis of congenital
maternal/perinatal infections
 Retinal dysplasia due to feline 
 eye malformations. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol.
Bistner, S.l., Rubin, L.F., Saunders, L.Z.
panleukopenia virus infection. I. Am. Vet.
5, 109-123.
1970. The ocular lesions of bovine viral
Med. Assoc. 167, 935-937.
Gregory- Evans, C.Y., Williams, M.J., Halford, S.,
diarrhea-mucosal disease. Pathol. Vet. 7,
Albert, D.M., Lahav, M., Colby, E. D., et al.
2004. Ocular coloboma: a reassessment in
275-286.
1977. Retinal neoplasia and dysplasia. I.
54
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
3
Induction by feline leukemia virus. Invest.
Lowe, J.K., Kukekova, A.V., Kirkness, E.F., et al..
Andersson, L.S., Juras, R., Ramsey, D.T., et al.
Ophthalmoi. Vis. Sci. 16, 325-337.
2003. Linkage mapping of the primary
 2008. Equine multiple congenital ocular
Percy, D.H., Carmichael, L.E., Albert, D.M., et
disease locus for collie eye anomaly.
anomalies maps to a 4.9 megabase interval
al, 1971. Lesions in puppies surviving
Genomics 82, 86-95.
on horse chromosome 6. BMC Genet 9.
 infection with canine herpesvirus. Vet.
Molleda, J.M., Simon, M., Martin, E., et al.
88.
Pathol.8, 37-53.
1994. Congenital corneal opacity resembling
Brunberg, E., Andersson, L, Cothran, G., et al.,
Albert, D.M., Lahav, M., Carmichael, L.E., et al..
human sclerocornea concurrent with scleral
 2006. A missense mutation in PMEL17 is
1976. Canine herpes-induced retinal
ectasia syndrome in the dog. Vet. Comp.
associated with the Silver coat color in the
dysplasia and associated ocular anomalies.
Ophthalmol 4, 190-192.
horse. BMC Genetics. 7, 46.
Invest. Ophthalmol. 15, 267-278.
Rampazzo, A., D'Angelo, A., Capucchio, M.T.,
et al., 2005. Collie eye anomaly in a
Persistence and hyperplasia of the fetal
Collie eye anomaly
mixed-breed dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8,
hyaloid vascular system
Roberts, S.R., Dellaporta, A., Winter, F.C., 1966.
357-360.
Stades, F.C., 1980. Persistent hyperplastic tunica
 The collie ectasia syndrome. Pathologic
Parker, H.G., Kukekova, A.V., Akey, D.T., et al..
vasculosa lentis and persistent hyperplastic
alterations in the eyes of puppies one to
2007. Breed relationships facilitate fne-
primary vitreous (PHTVL/PHPV) in 90
fourteen days of age. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 61,
mapping studies: a 7.8-kb deletion
closely related Doberman pinschers: cinical
1458-1465.
cosegregates with Collie eye anomaly across
aspects. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 16,
Roberts, S.R., Dellaporta, A., Winter, F.C., 1966.
multiple dog breeds. Genome. Res. 17,
1562-1571.
739-751.
The collie ectasia syndrome. Pathology of
van der Linde-Sipman, J.S., Stades, F.C., de
eyes of young and adult dogs. Am. I.
Wolff-Rouendaal, D., 1983. Persistent
Ophthalmol. 62, 728-752.
Merle ocular dysgenesis
hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis and
Roberts, S.M., 1969. The collie eye anomaly. J.
Gelatt, K.N., Veith, L.A., 1970. Hereditary
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous in
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 155, 859-878
 multiple ocular anomalies in Australian
the Doberman pinscher: pathological
Wyman, M., Donovan, E.F., 1969. Eye anomaly
shepherd dogs (preliminary report). Vet.
aspects. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19,
of the collie. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 155,
Med. Small Anim. Clin. 65, 39-42.
791-802.
866-871.
Gelatt, K.N., McGill, L. D., 1973. Clinical
Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C., Leon A., 1984.
Donovan, R.H., Freeman, H.M., Schepens, C.L.,
characteristics of microphthalmia with
1969. Anomaly of the collie eye. J. Am. Vet.
colobomas of the Australian Shepherd Dog.
the Staffordshire bull terrier Vet. Rec. 115.
Med. Assoc. 155, 872-875.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 162, 393-396.
385.
Latshaw, W.K., Wyman, M., Venzke, W.G..
Gelatt, K.N., Powell, N.G., Huston K., 1981.
Boeve, M.H., van der Linde-Sipman, T., Stades.
1969. Embryologic development of an
Inheritance of microphthalmia with
FC., 1988. Early morphogenesis of persistent 
anomaly of ocular fundus in the collie dog.
 coloboma in the Australian shepherd dog.
 hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis and
Am. J. Vet. Res. 30, 211-217.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 42, 1686-1690.
primary vitreous. The dog as an ontogenetic
Yakely, W.L., 1972. Collie eye anomaly:
Cook, C.S., Burling, K., Nelson, E.J., 1991.
model. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 29,
decreased prevalence through selective
Embryogenesis of posterior segment
1076-1086.
breeding. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 161,
colobomas in the Australian shepherd
Boeve, M., Stades, FC., van der Linde-Sipman,
1103-1107.
dog. Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 1,
J.S., et al., 1992. Persistent hyperplastic
Barnett, K.C., Stades, EC., 1979. Collie eye
163-170.
 tunica vasculosa lentis and primary vitreous
anomaly in the Shetland sheepdog in the
Hedan, B., Corre, S., Hitte, C., et al., 2006.
(PHTVL/PHPV) in the dog: a comparative
Netherlands. J. Small Anim. Pract. 20.
Coat colour in dogs: identification of the
review. Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 2.
321-329.
Merle locus in the Australian shepherd
163-172.
Bedford, PG.C., 1982. Collie eye anomaly in
breed. BMC Vet. Res. 2, 9.
Leon, A., Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C., 1986.
the Border collie. Vet. Rec. i11, 34-35.
Clark, L.A., Wahl, J.M., Rees, C.A., et al., 2006.
 Hereditary persistent hyperplastic
Bedford, PG.C., 1982. Collie eye anomaly in
Retrotransposon insertion in SILV is
 primary vitreous in the Staffordshire bull
the United Kingdom. Vet. Rec. 111,
responsible for merle patterning of the
terrier. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 22,
263-270.
domestic dog. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA.
765-774.
Rubin, L.F., Nelson, E.J., Sharp, C.A., 1991.
103, 1376-1381.
Grahn, B.H., Storey, E.S., McMillan C., 2004.
Collie eye anomaly in Australian shepherd
 Inherited retinal dysplasia and persistent
dogs. Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 1,
Congenital ocular anomalies of Rocky
 hyperplastic primary vitreous in Miniature
105-108.
Mountain horses
Schnauzer dogs. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7,
Bjerkas E., 1991. Collie eye anomaly in the
Ramsey, D., Ewart, S., Render, I., et al., 1999.
151-158.
rough collie in Norway. I. Small Anim. Pract.
 Congenital ocular abnormalities of Rocky
van Rensburg, I.B.j., Petrick, S.W., van der Lugt.
Mountain Horses. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2.
J.., et al., 1992. Multiple inherited eye
32, 89-92.
47-59.
anomalies including persistent hyperplastic
Bedford, PG.C., 1998. Collie eye anomaly in 
Ramsey, D.T, Hauptman, J.G., Petersen-Jones,
tunica vasculosa lentis in Bouvier des
the Lancashire heeler Vet. Rec. 143,
Fandres. Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 2.
354-356
S.M., 1999. Corneal thickness, intraocular
 pressure, and optical corneal diameter in 
133-139.
Wallin-Hakanson, B., Wallin-Hakanson, N..
Hedhammar A., 2000. Collie eye anomaly in 
Rocky Mountain Horses with cornea globosa
and clinically normal corneas. Am. J. Vet.
Retinal dysplasia, vitreoretinal
 the rough collie in Sweden: genetic
transmission and influence on offspring
Res. 60, 1317-1321.
dysplasia and oculo-skeletal dysplasia
vitality. J. Small Anim. Pract. 41, 254-
Ewart, S.L., Ramsey, D.T., Xu, I., et al., 2000.
MacMillan, A.D., Lipton, D.E., 1978.
258.
The horse homolog of congenital aniridia
 Heritability of multifocal retinal dysplasia in
Wallin-Hakanson, B., Wallin-Hakanson, N.
conforms to codominant inheritance. J.
American cocker spaniels. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Hedhammar A., 2000. Influence of selective
Hered 91, 93-98.
Assoc. 172, 568-572.
breeding on the prevalence of chorioretinal
Grahn, B.H., Pinard, C., Archer, S., et al., 2008.
Lavach, J.D., Murphy, J.l., Severin, G.A., 1978.
dysplasia and coloboma in the rough
 Congenital ocular anomalies in purebred 
 Retinal dysplasia in the English springer
collie in Sweden. J. Small Anim. Pract. 41,
 and crossbred Rocky and Kentucky Mountain
spaniel. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 14,
56-59.
horses in Canada. Can. Vet. I. 49, 675-681.
192-199.
55
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
O'Toole, D., Young, S., Severin, G.A., et al.
Narfstrom, K., 1981. Cataract in the West
1983. Retinal dysplasia of English springer
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 193, 1269-1272.
Highland White terrier. J. Small Anim. Pract.
spaniel dogs: light microscopy of the
Aroch, I., Ofri, R., Aizenberg I., 1996.
22, 467-471.
 postnatal lesions. Vet. Pathol. 20, 298-311.
Haematological, ocular and skeletal
Gelatt, K.N., Das, N.D., 1984. Animal models
Schmidt, G.M., Ellersieck, M.R., Wheeler, C.A..
abnormalities in a Samoyed family. J. Small
for inherited cataracts: a review. Curr. Eye.
et al., 1979. Inheritance of retinal dysplasia
Anim. Pract. 37, 333-339.
Res. 3, 765-778.
in the English springer spaniel. J. Am. Vet.
Du, F, Acland, G.M., Ray J., 2000. Cloning and
Barnett, K.C., 1985. Hereditary cataract in the
Med. Assoc. 174, 1089-1090.
expression of type Il collagen mRNA:
Miniature Schnauzer. I. Small Anim. Pract.
Nelson, D.L., MacMillan, A.D., 1983. Multifocal
evaluation as a candidate for canine
26, 645-652
retinal dysplasia in feld trial Labrador
oculo-skeletal dysplasia. Gene 255, 307-316.
Bjerkas, E., Haaland, M.B., 1995. Pulverulent
retrievers. j. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19,
nuclear cataract in the Norwegian buhund. J.
388-392.
Congenital cataract, cataract associated
Small Anim. Pract. 36, 471-474.
Whiteley, H.E. 1991. Dysplastic canine retinal
with multiple ocular anomalies
Strande, A., Nicolaissen, B., Bjerkas, I., 1988.
morphogenesis. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
Martin, C.L., Leipold, H., 1974. Aphakia and
 Persistent pupillary membrane and
32, 1492-1498
 multiple ocular defects in Saint Bernard
congenital cataract in a litter of English
Crispin, S.M., Long, S.E., Wheeler, C.A., 1999.
puppies. Vet. Med. Small Anim. Clin. 69,
Cocker spaniels. J. Small Anim. Pract. 29,
Incidence and ocular manifestations of
448-453.
257-260.
multifocal retinal dysplasia in the golden
Stades, FC., van der Linde-Sipman, J.S., 1983.
Beech, I.,. Aguirre, G., Gross, S., 1984.
retriever in the UK. Vet. Rec. 145, G69-672
Pathology of the lens. In: Peiffer Jr., R.L.
Congenital nuclear cataracts in the Morgan
Long, S.E., Crispin, S.M., 1999. Inheritance of
(Ed.), Comparative ophthalmic pathology.
horse. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 184,
multifocal retinal dysplasia in the golden
Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, pp 213-253.
1363-1365.
retriever in the UK. Vet. Rec. 145, 702-704.
Peiffer Jr., R.L., Fischer, C.A., 1983.
McLaughlin, S.A., Whitley, R.D., Gilger, B.C.,
Holle, D.M., Stankovics, M.E., Sarna, C.S., et al.,
Microphthalmia, retinal dysplasia, and
1992. Diagnosis and treatment of lens
1999. The geographic form of retinal
anterior segment dysgenesis in a litter of
diseases. Vet. Clin. North. Am. Equine. Pract.
dysplasia in dogs is not always a congenital
Doberman Pinschers. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
8, 575-585.
abnormality. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2, 61-66.
183, 875-878.
Roberts, S.M., 1992. Congenital ocular
Genetics Committee of the American College of
Bergsjo, T., Arnesen, K., Heim, P., et al., 1984.
anomalies. Vet. Clin. North. Am.: Equine.
Veterinary Ophthalmologists, ACVO, 2009.
 Congenital blindness with ocular
Pract. 8, 459-478.
Ocular disorders presumed to be inherited in
developmental anomalies, including retinal
Gelatt, K.N., 1971. Cataracts in cattle. I. Am.
purebred dogs, 5th edn. American College of
dysplasia, in Doberman Pinscher dogs. J.
Vet. Med. Assoc. 159, 195-200.
Veterinary Ophthalmologists, New York.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 184, 1383-1386.
Ashton, N., 1977. Congenital nuclear cataracts
Rubin, LF., 1963. Hereditary retinal detachment 
Gelatt, K.N., Samuelson, D.A., Barrie, K.P,
in cattle. Vet. Rec. 100, 505-508.
in Bedlington terriers. A preliminary report.
et al., 1983. Biometry and clinical
Small Anim. Clin. 3, 387-389.
Anterior segment dysgenesis and
characteristics of congenital cataracts and
Rubin, L.F., 1968. Heredity of retinal dysplasia
microphthalmia in the Miniature Schnauzer.
goniodysgenesis
in Bedlington terriers. J. Am. Vet. Med.
I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 183, 99-102.
Williams, D.L., 1993. A comparative approach
Assoc. 152, 260-262.
Gelatt, K.N., Samuelson, D.A., Bauer, J.E., et al.
to anterior segment dysgenesis. Eye 7 (Pt 5),
Ashton, N., Barnett, K.C., Sachs, D.D., 1968.
1983. Inheritance of congenital cataracts and
607-616.
Retinal dysplasia in the Sealyham terrier. J.
microphthalmia in the Miniature Schnauzer.
 Martin, C.L., 1975. Scanning electron
Pathol. Bacteriol. 96, 269-272.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 44, 1130-1132.
microscopic examination of selected canine
Vainisi, S.J., Packo, K.H., 1995. Management of
Aguirre, G., Bistner, S.1., 1973. Posterior
iridocorneal abnormalities. J. Am. Anim.
giant retinal tears in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Jenticonus in the dog. Cornell. Vet. 63,
Hosp. Assoc. 11, 300-306.
Assoc. 206, 491-495.
455-461.
Bedford, PG., 1975. The aetiology of primary
Vainisi, S.J., Wolfer, J.C., Smith, PJ., 2007.
van der Woerdt, A., Stades, FC., van der
glaucoma in the dog. I. Small Anim. Pract.
Surgery of the canine posterior segment.
Linde-Sipman, J.S., et al., 1995. Multiple
16, 217-239.
In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary
 ocular anomalies in two related litters of Soft
Cottrell, B.D., 1988. Primary gaucoma in the 
ophthalmology. 4th edn. Blackwell, Oxford,
Coated Wheaten terriers. Vet. Comp.
Welsh springer spaniel. J. Small Anim. Pract.
pp. 1026-1058.
Ophthalmol. 5, 78-82.
29, 185-199.
Carrig, C.B., MacMillan, A., Brundage, S., et al..
Narfstrom, K., Dubielzig, R., 1984. Posterior
Ekesten, B., Narfstrom K., 1991. Correlation of
1977. Retinal dysplasia associated with
lenticonus, cataracts and microphthalmia:
 morphologic features of the inidocorneal
skeletal abnormalities in Labrador Retrievers.
congenital ocular defects in the Cavalier King
angle to intraocular pressure in Samoyeds.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 170, 49-57.
Charles spaniel. J. Small Anim. Pract. 25.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 52, 1875-1878.
Meyers, V.N., Jezyk, PF., Aguirre, G.D., et al..
669-677.
Gelatt, K.N., Brooks, D.E., Samuelson, D.A..
1983. Short-limbed dwarfism and ocular
Davidson, M.G., Nelms, S.R., 2007. Diseases of
1998. Comparative glaucomatology. I: The
defects in the Samoyed dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
 the canine lens and cataract formation. In:
spontaneous glaucomas. J. Glaucoma. 7,
Assoc. 183, 975-979.
Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary ophthalmology.
187-201.
Blair, N.P., Dodge, I.T., Schmidt, G.M., 1985.
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 859-887.
Wood, J.L., Lakhani, K.H., Read, R.A., 1998.
 Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in
Lloyd, I.C., Goss-Sampson, M., Jeffrey, B.G.
Pectinate ligament dysplasia and glaucoma
Labrador retrievers. I. Development of retinal
 et al., 1992. Neonatal cataract: aetiology.
in Flat Coated Retrievers. ll. Assessment of
tears and detachment. Arch. Ophthalmol.
pathogenesis and management. Eye 6,
prevalence and heritability. Vet. Ophthalmol.
103, 842-847.
184-196.
1, 91-99.
Blair, N.P., Dodge, I.T., Schmidt, G.M., 1985.
Koch, S.A., 1972. Cataracts in interrelated old
Wood, J.L., Lakhani, K.H., Mason, I.K., et al..
 Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in
English Sheepdogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
2001. Relationship of the degree of
Labrador retrievers Il. Proliferative
160,299-301.
 goniodysgenesis and other ocular
vitreoretinopathy. Arch. Ophthalmol. 103.
Olesen, H.P., Jensen, O.A., Norn, M.S..
measurements to glaucoma in Great Danes.
848-854.
1974. Congenital hereditary cataract in
Am. J. Vet. Res. 62, 1493-1499.
Carrig, C.B, Sponenberg, D.P., Schmidt, G.M.
Cocker spaniels. J. Small Anim. Pract. 15.
Bjerkas, E., Ekesten, B., Farstad W., 2002.
et al., 1988. Inheritance of associated ocular
741-750.
 Pectinate ligament dysplasia and narrowing
56
Congenital, developmental, or hereditary abnormalities in animals
Chapter
3
of the irnidocorneal angle associated with
Halenda, R.M., Grahn, B.H., Sorden, S.D.
other ocular abnormalities occurring in a
glaucoma in the English Springer Spaniel
et al., 1997. Congenital equine glaucoma:
white-tailed deer. J. Comp. Pathol. 82,
Vet. Ophthalmol. 5, 49-54.
clinical and light microscopic fndings in
219-221.
Gelatt, K.N., MacKay, E.O., 2004. Prevalence of
two cases. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7,
the breed-related glaucomas in pure-bred
105-109.
Retinopathy of prematurity and
dogs in North America. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7,
oxygen-induced retinopathy
97-111.
 Sporadic microphthalmia syndromes
Patz A., 1975. The role of oxygen in retrolental
Kato, K., Sasaki, N., Matsunaga, S., et al., 2006.
Dziezyc, I., Kern, T.l., Wolf, E.D., 1983.
 fbroplasia. Albrecht Von. Graefes Arch. Klin.
Possible association of glaucoma with
Microphthalmia in a foal. Equine. Vet. J.
Exp. Ophthalmol. 195, 77-85.
pectinate ligament dysplasia and narrowing
Suppl. 2, 15-17.
Kremer, I., Kissun, R., Nissenkorn, I..
of the iridocorneal angle in Shiba Inu dogs
Williams, D.L., Barnett, K.C., 1993. Bilateral
et al., 1987. Oxygen-induced retinopathy
in Japan. Vet. Ophthalmol. 9, 71-75.
 optic disc colobomas and microphthalmos
in newborn kittens. A model for 
Smith, R.l.E., Peiffer Jr., R.L., Wilcock, B.P.,
in a thoroughbred horse. Vet. Rec. 132.
ischemic vasoproliferative retinopathy.
1993. Some aspects of the pathology of
101-103.
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 28, 126-
canine glaucoma. Prog. Vet. Comp.
Fulton, A.B., Albert, D.M., Buyukmihci, N.,
130.
Ophthalmol. 3, 16-27.
et al., 1977. Spontaneous anophthalmia and
Chan-Ling, T., Tout, S., Hollander, H., et al.
Swanson, H.L., Dubielzig, R.R., Bentley, E.
microphthalmia in white-tailed deer. J.
1992. Vascular changes and their
et al., 2001. A case of Peters anomaly in a
Comp. Pathol. 87, 557-568.
 mechanisms in the feline model of
Springer spaniel. J. Comp. Pathol. 125,
Wyand, D.S., Lehay, M., Albert, D.M., et al.
 retinopathy of prematurity. Invest.
326-330.
1972. Intraocular lacrimal gland tissue with
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 33, 2128-2147.
Peiffer Jr., R.L., Belkin, PV., 1983.
Keratolenticular dysgenesis in a kitten.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 182, 1242-1243.
57
Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
CHAPTER CONTENTS
 Lacrimal or nictitans glands
76
Lens
76
Complications of intraocular surgery
59
 Retina 
76
General categories of surgical complications
59
Intraoperative complications leading to submission of
specimens to the pathology laboratory
59
COMPLICATIONS OF
Inflammation associated with known or presumed infection
or toxic contamination during surgery 
60
INTRAOCULAR SURGERY
Long-term postoperative complications (manifesting long 
 after the surgery)
61
Of submissions in the COPLOW archive, 1.3% are related to compli-
The full-thickness corneal incision and its variations
64
cations of surgery.
Morphologic features of the uncomplicated corneal
incision
64
General categories of
 Iridal entrapment or prolapse
64
surgical complications
Adverse reactions around sutures
65
Intraoperative complications leading to submission
Wound dehiscence
65
 of specimens to the pathology laboratory (FHg. 4.1):
Aspiration or injection sites
66
Tissue effects of electrocautery. cryosurgical and
?
Expulsive choroidal hemorrhage (Fig. 4.1)
67
Rapid hemorrhage in the suprachoroidal space in an open,
laser applications
decompressed globe causes expulsive anterior displacement
The effects of electrocautery
67
of ocular tissues, and is a devastating complication
 The effects of cryotherapy
67
- This is associated with the sudden onset of ocular
The effects of surgical laser
68
hypotony
 Diode lasers
68
- In the COPLOW collection, this is often seen in
 association with acute non-surgical trauma. This could
COz laser
69
reflect a failure to submit surgical cases, or may indicate
Nd:YAG laser
69
that this is a rare complication of intraocular surgery in
 Photodynamic therapy
69
animals
Lens surgery
69
- Fortunately, when this is seen in the COPLOW collection
 Surgery to remove the lens in cases of lens luxation
as a surgical complication, it is usually in eyes where the
69
sclera was inadvertently cut during an enucleation
 Phacoemulsification or manual extracapsular extraction
procedure
surgery for cataract
70
 Evisceration procedures aborted due to unanticipated findings
Glaucoma drainage implant surgery
72
 Or procedural complications
 Intrascleral prostheses and evisceration surgery
73
■ The COPLOW collection contains 29 cases where evisceration
Advantages
73
Aeed au yo uoeanua pue paoqe uaaq sey Aaains
Disadvantages
collapsed globe performed
73
- All but three of these submissions were from evisceration
Ocular complications following radiotherapy
 procedures aborted by the surgeon because evidence
where the eye is in the irradiation field
76
 of neoplastic or active inflammatory processes was
Eyelid margin and haired skin of the eyelid 
76
encountered.
59
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 4.1 Acute trauma, expulsive
 choroidal hemorrhage. (A) Gross
 photograph of a canine globe with a
pue (moe) Ainlui yewne buneauad
expulsive hemorrhage in the choroid.
(B) Subgross photomicrograph of a
canine eye showing expulsive choroidal
hemorrhage, which occurs when the 
 pressure in the globe rapidly decreases.
A
?
B
C
 Figure 4.2 Postoperative inflammation. (A) Gross photograph of severe endophthalmitis/vitreitis, which occurred after cataract surgery in a dog. (B,C)
 Subgross and low magnification photomicrographs of the same canine globe show suppurative endophthalmitis and posterior synechia (*). The arrow
in (C) points to the surgical incision.
Inflammation associated with known or presumed
 incisional complications may also have directly
 infection or toxic contamination during surgery
contributed to the development of endophthalmitis
 Only a single case from one of the series had histologically
(Hgs 4.2-4.4)
 demonstrable bacteria, identified in the vitreous near the
'Outbreaks' of endophthalmitis in multiple consecutive, or
 posterior lens capsule
nearly consecutive, cases from the same practice
 Sporadic endophthalmitis following intraocular surgery
■ COPLOW has examined a series of cases from three such
(Fig. 4.2)
outbreaks
 There are 40 cases in the COPLOW database
 Contamination or manufacturing defects in viscoelastic
■ Affected globes were typically enucleated between 3 days and
(one series) and prosthetic intraocular lenses (two series)
3 months postoperatively
were implicated as sources of intraocular contamination
- Those cases, in which enucleation occurred within 7 days
 Endophthalmitis was recognized clinically within a few
of intraocular surgery, had intraocular sepsis, based on
days of the surgical procedure and progressed rapidly
direct observation of bacterial organisms
 Suppurative, neutrophilic endophthalmitis centered on the
- The cases in which enucleation took place more than
anterior segment
 Delayed healing of the surgical incision and suture track
sepsis
inflammation were seen in several of the globes. In these
■ These cases often had evidence of severe corneal pathology.
cases, incisional abnormalities were assumed to be
that included (Figs 4.3, 4.4):
secondary to endophthalmitis. However, as definitive
- Dehiscence of the surgical incision
cause-and-effect relationship could not be established,
- Suture tract suppuration
60
 Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
Chapter
4
A
B
?
D
E
F
Figure 4.3 Complications of the corneal surgical incision. (A,B) Photomicrographs showing the keratotomy site in canine cataract surgery without 
the inner aspect of a canine cataract surgery corneal incision showing mild fibroblast proliferation, vascularization, and corneal epithelial down-growth.
intraocular complications or wound dehiscence.
- Collagenolytic keratitis
 Intraocular surgery is a major hazard to the corneal
- Stromal abscessation
endothelium, which has limited or no regenerative potential
- Perforation away from the surgical wound.
in adults
  Direct mechanical contact can be harmful to the
 Long-term postoperative complications (manifesting
endothelium
■
 Separation of the endothelium from the stroma during
long after the surgery) (Fgs 4.5-4.9)
surgery can also be harmful
Implantation of cormeal or conjunctival epithelium, within the
■ Exposure to irrigating solutions, viscoelastic materials (used
cormeal stroma leading to the formation of inclusion cysts
to protect the endothelium and help maintain the anterior 
(Fig. 4.5)
chamber intraoperatively), or other pharmacologic
 Epithelial inclusion cysts present as focal, opaque nodules in
preparations can be harmful to the endothelium, particularly
the cornea at the site of surgery or other trauma (see also
if contaminated with endotoxin, or if contact with the
Ch. 8)
 endothelium is prolonged. Permanent damage to the
■
 Histologically, inclusion cysts are bland, localized nodules 
that have a lining of fully-differentiated epithelium and are
saline or balanced salt solution are used in limited volumes
often filled with keratin or mucin
[100 mL or less) over limited periods of time
 Corneal edema associated with endothelial damage
Morphologic changes seen in the corneal endothelium after
 Corneal edema associated with compromised endothelial
intraocular surgery include (Fig. 4.6):
function causes pronounced stromal thickening, a blue/white
Attenuation
corneal opacity, and an increased susceptibility to infection
 Spindle cell metaplasia and retrocorneal membrane
as well as an increased risk of collagenolysis
formation
61
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 4.4 Collagenolysis. (A) Gross
 photograph of a canine globe with
collagenolysis of the axial corneal stroma.
(B) Photomicrograph of a canine globe
with a mid-stromal abscess. (C) Acute
collagenolysis (*) in an affected canine
cornea.
A
C
 Duplication of Descemet's membrane
Glaucoma (Fig. 4.8)
 0 The mechanism of this duplication is not clear, but it
■Neovascular glaucoma
is commonly observed after surgery or blunt trauma.
- Retinal detachment is associated with the release of the
Endothelial separation and reattachment may induce
growth factors, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
duplication of Descemet's membrane
and pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF). Soluble
0 This morphologic feature may also be seen following
VEGF, in particular, stimulates pre-iridal fbrovascular
 non-surgical trauma (discussed in Ch. 5).
membrane formation. This, in turn can cause peripheral
- Multiple breaks in Descemet's membrane (striate
anterior synechiae and the development of neovascular
keratopathy)
glaucoma
 0 Manipulation and bending of the cornea during surgery
Glaucoma secondary to posterior synechiae (iris bombe)
 can cause Descemet's membrane to rupture
Glaucoma secondary to anterior synechiae
Intravitreal traction bands and retinal detachment
■'Malignant glaucoma' may occur in the immediate
■Disruption of the vitreous and low-grade inflammation in
the globe lead to fibrous bands (traction bands) across the
This may result from disruption and posterior
anterior vitreous and subsequent retinal detachment
 misdirection of aqueous humor flow by anteriorly
(Fig. 4.7)
 prolapsed vitreous, and/or inflammatory membranes
 Vitreal traction bands are more likely to occur if there
extending across the anterior vitreous face, ciliary body
is inflammation or hemorrhage in the postoperative
(cyclitic membranes) or pupil, in eyes following lens or
period
cataract extraction
62
Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
Chapter
4
Figure 4.5 Epithelial inclusion cysts.
(A) German Shorthaired Pointer, 6 years
dld: following trauma, this large cyst 
developed. Epithelial cells can be seen
settling in the cyst (arrow). (B) Boston
Terrier, 3 years old: multiple inclusion 
cysts are present (arrows) following a
grid keratotomy. (C) German Shepherd 
Dog. 12 years old: limbal inclusion cysts 
are present (arrow) following a limbal
incision for lens extraction. (D) Boston
Terrier, 9 years old: the cyst (arrow)
formed following the placement of a
conjunctival flap. (E,F) Photomicrographs
of an epithelial inclusion cyst embedded
in the substantia propria of canine limbal
conjunctiva.
A
B
C
D
Epithelial down-growth and epithelial lining of the globe
(Fig. 4.9)
Comparative Comments
n a a o aua u u aa s a 
A greater proportion of human eyes submitted for pathology have 
the surgical incision or through suture tracts. In many
May saa Moldoy aui yl paeduo se Aabans ieinnoeui pey 
instances, its presence signals poor incision closure technique
 of these human eyes, however, are submitted because of direct 
 Once stratified squamous epithelium or conjunctival
aidnu 'saaa uewny u! 'lauiey Aabans yenoeu! jo suonesjduon
epithelium is introduced into the globe, it can slowly cover 
operations are commonly done to avoid blindness following
the internal surfaces of the ocular tissues, interfering with
non-surgical trauma or to prevent further vision loss in conditions
their function, stimulating inflammation in response to
such as glaucoma, retinal detachment, or retinal vascular disease.
released keratin, or obstructing aqueous flow
 Expulsive choroidal hemorrhages, endophthalmitis, corneal 
 Entrapped fragments of epithelium can become cystic within
decompensation, retinal detachment, glaucoma, and epithelial 
■
the corneal or scleral stroma, forming epithelial inclusion
in-growth are all feared complications of intraocular surgery that are 
 encountered in human specimens as well as in animals.
cysts.
63
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
THE FULL-THICKNESS CORNEAL INCISION
AND ItS VARIATIONS
Morphologic features of the uncomplicated
corneal incision (Fig. 4.10)
A
 In the first few weeks after surgery, a granulomatous response
to suture material within cornea may be seen. Suppurative
response and epithelialization of suture tracts may be greater
with absorbable (eg. polyglactin 910) than with non-absorbable
(e.g. monoflament nylon) suture materials
corneal stroma, and recognizing the incision site is diffcult,
unless the submitting clinician clearly identifies its location.
(B)
Below are clues to identifying the healed, uncomplicated
surgical wound:
■Identify the break in Descemet's membrane
- In a surgical incision or traumatic rupture of the cormea.
there is often recoil of the membrane which causes it to
have curved edges
 Examine the corneal surface, looking for any evidence of
disruption to the epithelial basal lamina, or of epithelial
down-growth
Using low magnification, look for a full-thickness, lineal
disruption in the regular, lamellar structure of the normal
cormeal stroma.
Iridal entrapment or prolapse (Fig. 4.11)
Figure 4.6 Corneal endothelial and Descemet's membrane changes.
(A) Photomicrograph showing a Descemet's membrane with distinct
 Due to the hypotonic nature of the opened globe that leads
to anterior displacement of iris tissue, or because the iris was
consisting of spindle cells, which replace the native endothelium.
inadvertently pulled into the incision during closure, it is
(B) Photomicrograph showing complete duplication of the Descemet's
'uoisioul ayl ul paddenua anssi su! puy ol jensnun jou
membrane. The endothelium is still recognizable but attenuated.
Subsequently, these uveal remnants will become incarcerated in
(C) Descemet's membrane has a variable thickness and blends with a
the incisional scar tissue
retrocorneal membrane anterior to the attenuated endothelium
'ueay punom pajadui io paneiap sanes juamdenua siu 
(PAS stain).
focal corneal opacity and anterior synechiae The latter may
 contribute to postoperative glaucoma if extensive.
Figure 4.7 Retinal detachment.
(A) Gross photograph of a canine globe
showing retinal detachment associated
with traction bands (arrow) between the
lens capsular bag and the peripheral
retina. (B) Low magnification 
retina (R) pulled toward the lens capsular
bag (LC and arrow) because of a
contracting spindle cell membrane (PAS
stain).
A
(B
64
Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
Chapter
4
Figure 4.8 Glaucoma. (A,B)
Photomicrographs of canine iris and
iridocorneal angle show pre-iridal
fibrovascular membrane and peripheral
 anterior synechia leading to neovascular
 glaucoma. (C) Photomicrograph of a dog 
eye showing anterior synechia at the
surgical scar contributing to angle 
closure. (D) Low magnification
photomicrograph of a dog eye showing 
hemorrhage and posterior synechia 
between the iris and the lens capsular
bag (arrow) causing pupillary block.
A
B
D
Figure 4.9 Epithelial down-growth. (A)
Photomicrograph of a dog eye showing
 severe corneal inflammation at the
 surgical incision, with granulation tissue
pocket within the deep stroma (*) and
also within the anterior chamber (arrow).
(B) Photomicrograph of a dog eye with
fully-differentiated stratified squamous
 epithelium in the anterior chamber
associated with pre-iridal fibrovascular
membrane and broad anterior synechia.
B
Adverse reactions around sutures (Fig. 4.12)
 Epithelial down-growth
Inflammation.
Wound dehiscence
 Dehiscence of the surgical incision is usually seen in
conjunction with inflammation
Consequences of dehiscence of the corneal incision
■Delayed healing of the incision
Figure 4.10 Uncomplicated corneal incision. Photomicrograph showing
  Weakened surgical scar 
an uncomplicated corneal incision scar in a canine cornea indicated by
■
 Comeal opacity
the line.
 Introduction of sepsis leading to endophthalmitis.
65
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 4.11 Corneal perforation and 
iris prolapse. (A,B) Photomicrographs of
the same dog eye viewed at different 
magnifications show iris prolapse into the
surgical incision causing acute surgical 
wound dehiscence.
Figure 4.12 Epithelial down-growth
and inflammation around sutures. (A)
 Photomicrograph showing suppurative
inflammation in the corneal stroma 
where the suture (arrow) penetrates
the cornea. (B) Low magnification
photomicrograph showing epithelial
down-growth and suppurative
inflammation in a suture track. (C,D)
Higher magnification photomicrographs
show the same suture track as in (B). The
 arrow points to the monofilament suture 
B
in (C)
A
C
D
Aspiration or injection sites (Fig. 4.13)
■Glial and spindle cell proliferation within the vitreous 
Vitreous prolapse into the site (this is more likely with
 Injection or aspiration sites are often sampled as part of the
aspiration techniques)
protocol in studies involving intraocular injection or aspiration 
Epithelial down-growth.
 Although properly performed injections or aspirations have a
low rate of complications, no procedure is entirely 'safe: It is
instructive to look at the local tissue reactions that occur at the
site of such a common and, seemingly, innocuous procedure 
Comparative Comments
 Lesions that may be seen at aspiration or injection sites include:
Following the advent of microscopic surgery, iris incarceration or 
 Disruption of scleral collagen
prolapse, suture problems, and wound dehiscence are extremely rare
 Phagocytosis of hypodermic needle lubricant, recognized as
Aoe logel Aojouied aul ol paugns saha uewny ui sanuaunoo
refractile, non-staining material
66
Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
Chapter
D
liws aa aewd e ui ais uoaui eueid shed e jo pade leaps aui buimous ydenoiuoioud (v) sans uoieninse pue uoalul eh't ane
numbers of bland macrophage cells are seen within the cavitated area of the sclera (arrow). (B) Photomicrograph showing the ciliary body aspect of
Slli ei pue sllan auids po ueaod aean ea ue pe (e wnina o e au u aap e si aaul () se an uoalui aes a
('a) sin el sopue slin auids po uoieaud peu ue buus aoi auuen e ui ats uoaui eued sed e jo ydeouooud () (x)
Aspiration site in a canine globe. In this case, the aspiration was performed immediately before enucleation, but vitreous pulled into the aspiration 
defect might have complicated healing.
 The effect on epithelia is to cause cells to elongate into a
TISSUE EFFECTS OF ELECTROCAUTERY,
distorted, spindle cell profile.
CRYOSURGICAL AND LASER APPLICATIONS
The effects of electrocautery (Fig. 4.14)
The effects of cryotherapy
 Used for surgical cutting and hemostasis
Used for focal ablation of ciliary body tissue in glaucoma; for
Electrocautery creates a tissue artifact that the pathologist
retinopexy in the treatment or prevention of retinal detachment;
needs to be aware of when interpreting histopathological
treatment of mass lesions, including cormeal, limbal and adnexal
saupuy
 neoplasms, and in the management of distichiasis. Cryogens
Electrocautery affects the tissue immediately in contact with
used in ophthalmic practice include liquid nitrogen, nitrous
the device regardless of the tissue type
oxide and carbon dioxide The advantages and disadvantages of 
■
 These effects are seen at surgical margins where electrical
different cryogens and cryosurgical instruments are important 
considerations in their selection for specific ophthalmic
■
 Electrocautery imparts a coagulation effect on connective
applications
tissues, seemingly fusing the collagen and other protein
Cryotherapy affects a sphere of tissue within a radius extending
structures
from the application device
67
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 4.14 Tissue artifacts resulting 
from electrocautery. (A,B) Low
magnification photomicrograph (A) and
higher magnification (B), of the area by
the arrow, show coagulated tissue (*)
typical of electrocautery. (C,D) Low
magnification photomicrograph (C)
showing electrocautery burn similar to 
(A) and (B) (*). The higher magnification
photomicrograph (D) showing. from the 
area near the arrow, the stretching effect
of electrocautery on epithelial cells.
A
■ Cellular tissues undergo coagulation necrosis followed by
●The radius of the ice ball generated and the rate of freezing is
diminished in highly vascular tissues because the flow of blood
resorption
moderates the temperature of the tissues. Pigmentation does not
 With time, stromal tissue might reform, but complex
significantly influence tissue cryobiology
elements of tissue reorganization do not occur. The end
Freezing causes cell lysis, cellular dehydration and thermal
result is an atrophic scar
shock with ischemic/and coagulation necrosis, with subsequent
 Uses of diode lasers
removal of the affected cellular components. Freezing has little
Cyclophotocoagulation for glaucoma (Fig. 4.15) transscleral
effect on the qualitative nature of the connective tissues, such as
or endoscopic delivery of laser energy is used to elicit focal
the sclera. Eventually stromal elements and epithelium may
ablation of ciliary body tissue
grow back', but return of more complex tissue organization is
- The goal of cyclophotocoagulation is to destroy the
incomplete
aqueous-producing ciliary body epithelium
 The acute effects of cryotherapy are tissue edema and necrosis
 The efects of cyclophotocoagulation are different in dogs
which stimulates a granulation tissue response
with brown versus blue irides:
The end effects are atrophy and disorganization of the affected
0 In heavily pigmented dogs. much of the energy is
tissues.
absorbed by, and destroys, the pigmented tissues of
ciliary stroma just inside the sclera. This results in
necrosis and ablation of pigmented stroma, inner sclera,
The effects of surgical laser (Figs 4.15, 4.16)
ciliary nerves, blood vessels, and ciliary muscles, but not
ciliary epithelium
Diode lasers
0 In blue-eyed dogs, the light energy passes through
 Penetrate deeply into the tissues until preferentially absorbed by
the non-pigmented sclera and ciliary stroma and is
pigmented tissue, when their energy is converted to heat
absorbed directly by the pigmented ciliary epithelium,
May be delivered through the clear cornea without causing
creating a local ablation which is more focused on the
significant damage to the corneal endothelium
target tissue
Morphologic consequences of diode laser use:
Retinopexy (Fig. 4.16)
 The effect occurs by thermal coagulation of tissues within a
- Transpupillary or transscleral delivery typically used for
certain radius of where the heat energy is generated (usually
this application in veterinary patients
 pigmented tissue)
 Lesions produced are inconsistent, due to variations in
Collagen is affected by a coagulation reaction much like
 pigmentation of the ocular fundus in dogs, particularly in
electrocautery
tapetal region
68
Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
Chapter
4
Figure 4.15 Laser retinopexy. Gross 
photograph of a canine globe, taken
immediately after surgery, showing laser
retinopexy sites.
B
Used to create a controlled surgical ablation of surface tissues,
[eos go zuaaaue au o padde uaaq sey uedde si
squamous cell carcinoma and eyelid neoplasia in veterinary
patients
The characteristic morphologic change is a narrow line of
coagulated collagen seen at the incision site.
Nd:YAG laser
For cyclophotoablation in the management of canine glaucoma
 Cataract formation appears to be a more common
complication following cyclophotoablation with Nd:YAG,
than with diode laser
?
 For the ablation of pigmented mass lesions
Used in the Q-switched mode, the Nd:YAG laser has a photo-
disruptive tissue effect that has been used for:
  Laser posterior capsulotomies in the treatment of lens
capsular opacities following cataract surgery
■
 Iridotomies, synechiotomies and sclerostomies
For the rupture of pigmented uveal cysts
■Treatment of cystic corpora nigra in horses.
Figure 4.16 Transscleral laser cyclophotocoagulation. (A)
Photomicrograph showing transscleral laser cyclophotocoagulation in a
dog with a pigmented ciliary body. The cauterized tissue is centered on
Photodynamic therapy
the inner sclera adjacent to the first pigmented tissue in the lasered
Photodynamic therapy makes use of light energy combined with
cyclophotoablation in a blue-eyed dog. The cauterized tissue is around
chemical photosensitive agents which amplify the tissue effect. If the
the pigmented epithelial cells. The laser energy is converted to heat by
photosensitive agent is administered intravascularly the light-induced
the melanin pigment of the ciliary epithelium (white arrows).
effect will center on blood vessels potentially destroying the blood
supply to a neoplasm. Since less light energy is used and the damage
 is more localized the morphologic affects are limited.
- By the transpupillary route, optimal energy delivery is
characterized by outer retinal necrosis and RPE migration,
with minimal gliosis or inflammation. Excessive energy
Comparative Comments
settings may be associated with pan-retinal and choroidal
 Few complications are encountered in humans as a result of
necrosis, and with focal retinal detachment
electrocautery. cryoapplication, or surgical laser treatment.
- Transscleral delivery is associated with mild perivascular
scleritis and scleral thinning, choroidal thinning and
variable retinal degeneration with RPE migration
Lens surgery
 Ablation of pigmented mass lesions
- Ablation of epibulbar and iris melanoma
Surgery to remove the lens in cases of lens luxation:
 Rupture of pigmented uveal cysts
 Treatment of hypertrophic and cystic corpora nigra in
There are 42 canine globes in the COPLOW collection that were enu-
cleated following surgery to remove the lens.
horses
- The corneal endothelium may sustain localized damage
 Relatively common complications are related to:
 as a result of thermal energy released by the treated
 Integrity of the surgical wound
 pigmented masses.
 There are seven cases of cormeal perforation
 Postoperative inflammation (uveitis or endophthalmitis)
 There are 22 cases of severe inflammation in the COPLOW
CO, laser
collection
 Less commonly used in veterinary ophthalmology
 Attenuation of the cormeal endothelium, resulting in cormeal
 Does not penetrate tissues
edema, that may reflect pre-existing trauma by contact with
69
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 an anteriorly luxated lens, or as a result of endothelial touch
  Lens epithelial cell metaplasia
during intraocular surgery (as discussed above)
 The cell undergoes a transformation to a mesenchymal,
·Anterior prolapse of the destabilized, and often degenerate,
spindle cell/myofibroblast-like morphology, with
vitreous may contribute to:
extracellular collagen deposition
■ Glaucoma
With time, the metaplastic cells 'disappear', and only the
Retinal detachment, related to vitreous traction.
collagen remains
  Lens epithelial cell proliferation
Proliferating cels remain attached to the lens capsule but
Phacoemulsification or manual extracapsular
they can form pronounced nodules of spindle cells
extraction surgery for cataract (Fgs 4.17. 4.18)
 Lens epithelial cell migration after cataract surgery
 Residual lens epithelial cells remaining after cataract
 There are ll7 cases of globes removed following cataract surgery in
surgery can migrate to the posterior capsule, leading to
the COPLOW collection, ll3 in dogs and four in cats.
 posterior capsular opacification
 In cataract surgery patients, non-specifc complications of
o This complication is less likely to occur if a prosthetic
intraocular surgery relate to:
intraocular lens is inserted into the capsular bag, and is
 The integrity and healing of the surgical wound
influenced by the material from which the prosthetic
 Inflammation (that may reflect exacerbation of pre-existing
lens is manufactured, as well as the lens design
lens-induced uveitis, or endophthalmitis related to
 Lens epithelial cells can also migrate outside the lens capsule
intraoperative contamination)
0 These cells continue to remain attached to tissue surface.
■
 Attenuation of the corneal endothelium (see above)
 They can cause pre-iridal membranes and, particularly
The formation of intra-vitreal traction bands, leading to
when there is evidence of posterior lens capsule rupture,
retinal detachment
can incorporate the ciliary processes or extend across
 Formation of pre-iridal fbrovascular membranes and
the anterior vitreous face. These lens epithelial cell
neo-vascular glaucoma (see above)
membranes can contribute to traction bands leading to
Complications directly associated with metaplasia, proliferation,
retinal detachment
and migration of lens epithelial cells after phacoemulsification,
 Lens epithelial migration and proliferation outside the
 Or manual extracapsular, cataract surgery include:
capsular bag rarely happens in human globes but is seen
Figure 4.17 Elschnig's pearls, capsular
opacities. (A) Labrador Retriever cross,
5 years old: a large area of Elschnig's
pearls can be seen. (B) German Shepherd 
Dog. 11 years old: Elschnig's pearls are
present at the arrows. Severe capsular 
opacities are also present. (C) Old English
Sheepdog. 8 years old: anterior and 
posterior capsular opacities are present 
inferiorly. (D) Boston Terrier, 7 years old:
the arrows point to the margins of the
intraocular lens (IOL). Diffuse capsule 
opacities reduce the tapetal reflex.
A
C
D
70
Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
Chapter
A
B
C
F
G
Figure 4.18 Cataract surgery complications, pathology. (A) Gross photograph showing both globes from a dog with postoperative endophthalmitis
following cataract surgery. (B) Subgross photomicrograph of a canine globe with complete retinal detachment and giant retinal tear associated with
traction from spindle cell membranes attached to the lens capsular bag. (C) Subgross photomicrograph of a rabbit globe showing extensive lens fiber
re-growth. (D) Lens fiber re-growth in the capsular bag of a dog eye. (E) Collagen both inside and outside of the capsular bag in a dog eye. The
squared-off empty space (arrow) outlines where the foldable IOL was positioned. (F) Photomicrograph of a canine globe with extensive cyclitic
membrane and a traction band on the anterior vitreous (arrow). (G) Extensive fibroblast proliferation as well as hemorrhage around the lens capsule.
The roughly rectangular empty space is where the foldable IOL was in place. (Hl)Photomicrographs showing lens epithelial cells characterized by
PAS-positive basement membranes surrounding individual cells. The cells have migrated into the anterior chamber and are associated with a broad 
anterior synechia.
71
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 4.19 Glaucoma drainage implant.
(A,B) Gross photograph and subgross
photomicrograph showing a canine 
globe with an intact Ahmed valve device
used to treat glaucoma. The device is
designed to create a subconjunctival
reservoir around the implant. Drainage
 into the reservoir is by way of a tube.
inserted into the anterior chamber. (C)
Gross photograph of a feline globe
similar to (A). (D) Gross photograph of a
canine globe with endophthalmitis from
infection spreading via the implant.
?
C
D
in both dogs and cats after surgical or spontaneous trauma
The intent of the surgical procedure is to provide an
(see Ch. 5)
alternate route for the drainage of aqueous from the anterior
Cataract 're-growth' secondary to lens epithelial proliferation
chamber. This is accomplished by placement of a device
 and lens fiber differentiation may occur (Elschnig's pearls 
which consists of a narrow tube implanted into the anterior
and Soemmerring's ring cataract)
chamber, through which aqueous humor typically drains
into a subconjunctival bleb, or reservoir, from which it is
were removed after cataract surgery, however, two of the four
absorbed into the circulation. This sub-conjunctival reservoir
had feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma, spindle cell variant
is generally maintained by a variably shaped plate that
(see Ch. 5).
is anchored to the sclera. Alternate routes for aqueous
drainage from anterior chamber implants include the frontal
Comparative Comments
sinus
 Cyclo-destructive procedures such as transscleral or endoscopic
Cataract surgery is the most commonly performed surgical procedure
laser cyclophotocoagulation or cyclocryotherapy (as discussed
 of any type in humans, and lens epithelial proliferation and migration
 previously) may be combined with, precede, or follow drainage
 are commonly encountered but rarely contribute to loss of the eye.
 implant surgery, and will contribute to pathological findings in
subsequently enucleated globes
Glaucoma drainage implant
surgery (Fig. 4.19)
Comparative Comments
Globes may be enucleated after drainage implant placement 
Lens epithelial migration and proliferation outside the capsular bag 
because of surgical or mechanical complications contributing to
rarely happens in human globes.
failure of the procedure
72
Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
Chapter
4
B
D
E)
Figure 4.20 Uncomplicated intrascleral prosthesis. (A) Gross photograph of silicon rubber implant stillin the scleral shell. (B) The same globe as (A)
photographed after removing the prosthesis. (C,D) Photomicrographs of the posterior cornea show an avascular collagen-rich membrane (*) internal to
Descemet's membrane. The arrows show fragments of Descemet's membrane. (E) Photomicrograph showing a similar membrane internal to remaining 
pigmented uveal tissue in the posterior segment.
● Implant failure is often associated with the formation of fbrin
Intrascleral prostheses and evisceration
Or, ultimately, scar tissue, which obstructs the capillary effect
surgery (Figs 4.20-4.22)
of the anterior chamber tube, or results in obliteration of the
fltering bleb
Evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis placement is a common surgi-
■ A great deal of effort may be required on the part
cal alternative to enucleation in the management of severe, untreat-
of the pathologist to obtain sections required to
able ocular disease in veterinary patients. The most common indication
determine the cause of implant failure, particularly if
for evisceration is intractable glaucoma in an irreversibly blind eye.
the location of the device is not marked on the enucleated
globe
Advantages
Other relatively common postoperative complications include
inflammation, dehiscence of the implant or conjunctival
Advantages of evisceration and intrascleral prosthesis over enuclea-
incision, epithelial growth into the reservoir, cataract, and
tion include:
cormeal endothelial attenuation.
 The superior cosmetic outcome
Many owners express a psychological hostility to the removal of
the eye and this procedure seems to offer what seems like a
 more acceptable compromise.
Comparative Comments
 Disadvantages
Complications from glaucoma valve surgery in humans parallel those
 seen in animal eyes.
 Disadvantages of evisceration and intrascleral prosthesis over enuclea-
tion include:
EL
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Complexity of surgical procedure relative to enucleation
 22 of 60 cases: re-growth of neoplasm
iseiads e Aq Auo auop Allensn 
 Of 1448 evisceration specimens, a diagnosis of neoplasia
 Additional expense
was made in 146 (10%) (Fig. 4.22)
 Suboptimal specimen available for pathological evaluation
 All but two of the 22 cases with intrascleral prosthesis
Corneal health is a significant postoperative concern, affecting
failure related to recurrence of neoplasia involved 
patient comfort, the ability of the corneoscleral shell to retain a
maligmant tumors
prosthesis and the cosmetic outcome
13 of 60 cases: failure of the corneoscleral shell, including
 If the intrascleral prosthesis fails, a second surgical procedure is
wound dehiscence, severe keratitis, cormeal abscessation, and
required, with the possibility of attendant complications that
one case with a corneal stromal cyst
might adversely affect the health of the animal.
Cats: 76 eviscerations and ll corneoscleral shell/intrascleral
prosthesis failures (14.5%)
  2 of ll cases: inflammatory disease within the corneoscleral
COPLOW archive, are consistent with previously published reports
shell
(see references), and include:
 9 of l cases: re-growth of malignant neoplasia
17 evisceration samples had tumors (22.4%).
 Dogs: 1448 evisceration specimens and 60 corneoscleral shell/
intrascleral prosthesis failures submitted (4.1%)
 Our experience highlights the importance of appropriate case selec-
 38 of 60 cases: inflammatory disease, including
tion for evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis placement:
severe inflammation within the cormeoscleral shell.
 Evisceration does not represent a good option in cats
with or without epithelial down-growth (ll cases)
The ratio of corneoscleral shell failures to evisceration
(Fig. 4.21)
samples in the COPLOW collection is 14.5%
Figure 4.21 Corneoscleral shell failure.
(A) Photomicrograph showing extensive
stromal keratitis, which may predispose 
to scleral shell failure or be the cause of
failure.(B) Photommicrograph of a canine
corneoscleral shell showing retained 
choroid and retinal tissue entrapped by
the typical collagen-rich membrane.
(C) Photomicrograph showing epithelial
down-growth (arrows) forming defects
in the corneal stroma and filling the 
inner aspect of the corneoscleral shell.
 There is also an excessive amount of
retained ciliary body tissue. (D,E)
B
Photomicrographs showing epithelial
down-growth, both within the corneal
stroma and filling the inner lining of the 
scleral shell.(F) Photomicrograph
showing extensive corneal stromal 
fibrosis, ulcerative keratitis and a thick
 collagen-rich membrane on the inner
cornea (Alcian blue PAS).
（D)
F
74
Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
Chapter
4
A
B
C
F
Figure 4.22 Neoplasia and evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis. (A) Gross photograph of an evisceration specimen containing a nodular white
neoplasm (canine iridociliary adenoma). (B) Subgross photomicrograph of an evisceration specimen showing a basophilic neoplasm (canine malignant
melanoma). (C-E) Three gross photographs showing re-growth of neoplastic tissue within the corneoscleral shell. (C) Canine spindle cell tumor of 
blue-eyed dogs: (D) feline lymphoma; (E) amelanotic feline diffuse iris melanoma
■ Of corneoscleral shell failures, 82% were due to the
 Retrocormeal membrane
The corneal endothelium was absent from almost every
potential
cormeoscleral shell examined
 Evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis is a reasonable option
 The endothelium is replaced by an avascular, lamellar,
in dogs with a history of a well-defined ocular disease like
collagen rich, spindle cell membrane that is not only
primary glaucoma with confirmed goniodysgenesis. The
adjacent to the cormea, but lines the interior of the globe
procedure may also be considered in dogs where a thorough
■Remnant uveal tissue
ocular exam, in combination with other clinical diagnostic
- Most corneoscleral shells examined contained some
fndings, can essentially rule out neoplasia or severe, active
remnant uveal tissue
intraocular inflammation
- The remnant uveal tissue does not seem to have a major,
Evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis is not a good option in
adverse effect on postoperative outcome
dogs with conditions precluding a thorough ocular exam and
 - Perhaps surprisingly, these uveal tissue remnants do not
Piseidoau ino anu aliu m aqissodm aiqisuaiso il u
undergo fibrosis.
or significant, active intraocular inflammation
Caution should be exercised when considering this procedure in
dogs with suspected intraocular neoplasia, or with pre-existing
Comparative Comments
corneal disease, or other disease that may compromise the
 integrity or healing of the corneoscleral shell.
The most serious complications following evisceration surgery in
humans are the development of sympathetic ophthalmia, an entity
Common lesions observed in cormeoscleral shells submitted from
limited to humans, and the return or extension of a previously
animals that had intrascleral prostheses include:
unrecognized tumor. Otherwise, problems following intrascleral 
 Stromal keratitis
 prostheses and evisceration are similar to those described for animal
 Most corneoscleral shells submitted had some degree of
eyes.
corneal vascular infiltrate
75
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 4.23 Radiation-induced lesions.
(A) Photomicrograph of the eyelid skin
from a dog with a history of radiation 
therapy showing follicular atrophy
(arrow). (B) Atrophy of the gland of the
third eyelid in a dog following radiation 
therapy. (C) Retinal and subretinal
uoeipen buimolloy bop e ui abeuoway
therapy. (D) Retinal vascular damage in a
 canine retina resulted from previous
radiation therapy. (E) Retinal
hemosiderophage accumulation in a dog
with a history of radiation therapy. (F)
 Cataract in a dog attributed to previous
radiation therapy.
B
C
(D
F
Ocular complications following
Retina
radiotherapy where the eye is in the
 Retinal vasculopathy is recognized as a relatively common,
irradiation field (Fig. 4.23)
chronic, long-term adverse effect:
■Retinal hemorrhage
Eyelid margin and haired skin of the eyelid
Retinal edema
●Necrosis followed by atrophy of the pilosebaceous unit
■Regional retinal ischemia.
Vasculopathy
·
 Atrophy of the Meibomian glands, contributing to ocular surface
disease (keratoconjunctivitis).
Comparative Comments
Lacrimal or nictitans glands
Ocular complications of radiation therapy in humans, in which the
 Necrosis followed by atrophy
eye is in the irradiation field, usually involve retinal vasculopathy.
although dry eye, loss of lashes and eyebrow, and chronic erythema
Can be responsible for reduced tear production, leading to signs
 are all encountered.
of keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Lens
Necrosis of the proliferative layer of the lens epithelial cells
leads to equatorial cortical cataract.
76
Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
Chapter
4
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Intraoperative complications
Gwin, R., Warren, J., Samuelson, D., et al.
(Ed.), Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th edn.
Chu, T.G., Green, R.L., 1999. Suprachoroidal
1983. Effects of phacoemulsifcation and
Blackwell, Ames, pp. 690-752.
hemorrhage. Surv. Ophthalmol. 43,
extracapsular lens removal on corneal
thickness and endothelial cell density in the
Effects of electrocautery, cryosurgical
471-486.
dog. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 24,
 and laser application
227-236.
Edmonds, C., De Roetth Jr., A., Howard, G.M.,
Intraoperative inflammation: toxins
Nasisse, M.P., Cook, C.S., Harling, D.E., 1986.
1970. Histopathologic changes following
and infection
Response of the canine comeal endothelium
qyosurgery and diathermy of the rabbit
Moore, D.L., McLellan, G.l., Dubielzig, R.R.,
to intraocular irrigation with saline solution,
ciliary body. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 69, 65-72.
2003. A study of the morphology of canine
balanced salt solution, and balanced salt
Howard, G.M., De Roetth Jr., A., 1967.
eyes enucleated or eviscerated due to
solution with glutathione. Am. J. Vet. Res.
Histopathologic changes following
complications following
47, 2261-2265.
Cyosurgery of the rabbit ciliary body. Am. J.
phacoemulsification. Vet. Ophthalmol. 6.
219-226.
Gerding Ir., PA., McLaughlin, S.A., Brightman,
Ophthalmol. 64, 700-707.
A.H., et al., 1990. Efects of intracameral
Rosenberg, L.F., Karalekas, D.P., Krupin, T.
Olivero, D.K., Davidson, M.G., Nasisse, M.P.,
 injection of viscoelastic solutions on corneal
et al., 1996. Cyclocryotherapy and
et al., 1993. Canine intraocular lens quality
endothelium in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 51,
noncontact Nd:YAG laser
control: light and scanning electron
1086-1088
cyclophotocoagulation in cats. Invest.
microscopic evaluation. Prog. Vet. Comp.
Hyndiuk, R.A., Schultz, R.O., 1992. Overview of
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 37, 2029-2036.
Ophthalmol. 3, 98-104.
the corneal toxicity of surgical solutions and
Merideth, R.E., Gelatt, K.N., 1980. Cryotherapy
Taban, M., Behrens, A., Newcomb, R.L., et al.,
drugs: and clinical concepts in corneal
in veterinary ophthalmology.Vet. Clin.
2005. Acute endophthalmitis following
edema. Lens Eye Toxic. Res. 9, 331-350.
North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 10, 837-846.
cataract surgery: a systematic review of the
Glasser, D.B., Schultz, R.O., Hyndiuk, R.A.,
Vestre, W.A., Brightman 2nd., A.H., 1983.
literature 10.1001/archopht.123.5.613. Arch.
1992. The role of viscoelastics, cannulas, and
Effects of cyclocryosurgery on the clinically
Ophthalmol. 123, 613-620.
irrigating solution additives in post-cataract
normal canine eye. Am. J. Vet. Res. 44.
Mamalis, N., Edelhauser, H.F., Dawson, D.G..
surgery corneal edema: a brief review. Lens
187-194.
et al., 2006. Toxic anterior segment
Eye Toxic. Res. 9, 351-359.
West, C.S., Barrie, K., 1988. The use of
syndrome. J. Cataract Refract. Surg. 32.
Postoperative glaucoma
 Cyosurgery in veterinary ophthalmology
324-333.
practice. Semin. Vet. Med. Surg. (Small]
Holland, S.P., Morck, D.W., Lee, T.L., 2007.
Miller, PE., Stanz, K.M., Dubielzig, R.R., et al..
Anim.) 3, 77-82.
Update on toxic anterior segment syndrome.
1997. Mechanisms of acute intraocular
Gilmour, M.A., 2002. Lasers in ophthalmology.
Qurr. Opin. Ophthalmol. 18, 4-8.
 pressure increases after phacoemulsification
Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 32,
Taylor, M.M., Kern, T.J., Ris, R.C., et al., 1995.
lens extraction in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 58.
649-672.
 Intraocular bacterial contamination during
1159-1165
Chandler, M.J., Moore, PA., Dietrich, U.M.,
cataract surgery in dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med.
Biros, D.J., Gelatt, K.N., Brooks, D.E., et al.
et al., 2003. Effects of transcorneal iridal
Assoc. 206, 1716-1720.
2000. Development of glaucoma after
Ledbetter, E.C., Millichamp, N.j, Dziezyc. I..
 photocoagulation on the canine corneal
cataract surgery in dogs: 220 cases (1987-
endothelium using a diode laser. Vet.
2004. Microbial contamination of the
1998). I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 216,
Ophthalmol. 6, 197-203.
anterior chamber during cataract
1780-1786.
Cook, C.S., 1997. Surgery for glaucoma. Vet.
phacoemulsification and intraocular lens
Lannek, E.B., Miller, PE., 2001. Development
Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 27.
implantation in dogs. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7.
of glaucoma after phacoemulsifcation for
327-334.
1109-1129.
removal of cataracts in dogs: 22 cases
Cook, C., Davidson, M., Brinkmann, M., et al.,
[1987-1997]. 1. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 218,
Epithelial inclusion cysts and epithelial
1997. Diode laser transscleral
70-76.
down-growth
cyclophotocoagulation for the treatment of
Johnsen, D.A., Maggs, D.J., Kass, P.H., 2006.
glaucoma in dogs: results of six and twelve
Koch, S.A., Langloss, J.M., Schmidt, G., 1974.
Evaluation of risk factors for development
month follow-up. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol.
Comeal epithelial inclusion cysts in four
of secondary glaucoma in dogs: 156 cases
7. 148-154.
dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 164,
(1999-2004). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 229,
Nadelstein, B., Wilcock, B., Cook, C., et al.
1190-1191.
1270-1274
1997. Clinical and histopathologic effects
Schmidt, G.M., Prasse, K.W., 1976. Corneal
Strubbe, T., 2002. Ulveitis and pupillary block
 of diode laser transscleral
epithelial inclusion cyst associated with
glaucoma in an aphakic dog. Vet.
cyclophotocoagulation in the normal canine
keratectomy in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
Ophthalmol. 5, 3-7.
eye. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7, 155-162.
Assoc. 168, 144.
 Denis, H.M., 2002. Anterior lens capsule
Hardman, C., Stanley, R.G., 2001. Diode laser
Bedford, P.G.C., Grierson, I., McKechnie, N.M.
 disruption and suspected malignant
transscleral cyclophotocoagulation for the
1990. Corneal epithelial inclusion cyst in the
glaucoma in a dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 5.
treatment of primary glaucoma in 18 dogs:
dog. I. Small Anim. Pract. 31, G4-68.
79-83.
a retrospective study. Vet. Ophthalmol. 4.
Kostuik, H., 2007. Intraocular epithelial
Corneal incision: normal healing 
209-215.
downgrowth in a dog. Can. Vet. J. 48,
O'Reilly, A., Hardman, C., Stanley, R.G., 2003.
943-945.
 and complications
 The use of transscleral cyclophotocoagulation
van Ee, R.T., Nasisse, M.P., Helman, G., et al.
with a diode laser for the treatment of
Endothelial damage
1986. Effects of Nylon and Polyglactin 910
glaucoma ocurring post intracapsular
Gwin, R.M., Lermer, I., Warren, J.K., et al., 1982.
 suture material on perilimbal corneal wound
extraction of displaced lenses: a retrospective
Decrease in canine corneal endothelial cell
healing in the dog. Vet. Surg. 15, 435-
study of 15 dogs (1995-2000). Vet.
density and increase in corneal thickness as
440.
Ophthalmol. 6, 113-119.
functions of age. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis.
Gilger, B.C., 2007. Diseases and surgery of the
Bras, I.D., Robbin, T.E., Wyman, M.
Sci. 22, 267-271
canine cornea and sclera. In: Gelatt, K.N.
et al., 2005. Diode endoscopic
LL
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
cyclophotocoagulation in canine and feline
Weigt, A.K., Herring, I.P., Marfurt, C.F., et al.,
and without diabetes mellitus: 153 cases
glaucoma. 36th Annual Conference
2002. Effects of cyclophotocoagulation with
(1991-1992). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 205,
American College of Veterinary
1165-1169
Ophthalmologists, Nashville, TN, p. 50.
on corneal sensitivity, intraocular pressure.
Johnstone, N., Ward, D.A., 2005. The incidence
Morreale, R.J., Wilkie, D.A., Gemensky-Metzler.
aqueous tear production, and corneal nerve
of posterior capsule disruption during
A.J., et al., 2007. Histologic effect of
morphology in eyes of dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res.
 phacoemulsification and associated
semiconductor diode laser transscleral
63, 906-915.
 postoperative complication rates in dogs:
cyclophotocoagulation on the normal equine
Peiffer Ir., R.L., Nobles, R.D., Carter, J., et al.
244 eyes (1995-2002). Vet. Ophthalmol. 8,
eye. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10, 84-92.
1997. Internal sclerostomy with a
47-50.
Sullivan, T.C., Davidson, M.G., Nasisse, M.P.,
mechanical trephine versus the
Sigle, K.J., Nasisse, M.P, 2006. Long-term
et al., 1997. Canine retinopexy - a
neodymium:YAG laser in dogs. Ophthalmic.
complications after phacoemulsification
determination of surgical landmarks, and a
Surg. Lasers. 28, 223-230.
for cataract removal in dogs: 172 cases
comparison of cryoapplication and diode
Beale, A.B., Salmon, I., Michau, T.M., et al..
(1995-2002). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 228,
laser methods. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7, 89-
2006. Effect of ophthalmic Nd:YAG laser
74-79.
95.
energy on intraocular lenses after posterior
Fife, T.M., Gemensky-Meizler, A.l., Wilkie,
Pizzirani, S., Davidson, M.G., Gilger, B.C., 2003.
capsulotomy in normal dog eyes. Vet.
D.A., et al., 2006. Clinical features and
 Transpupillary diode laser retinopexy in
Ophthalmol. 9, 335-340.
outcomes of phacoemulsification in 39
dogs: ophthalmoscopic, fluorescein
Gilger, B.C., Davidson, M.G., Nadelstein, B.,
(0-egGt) Ams sadsonai e ssiou
ia apms doouedoisu pue siudeisoiue
et al., 1997. Neodymium-yttrium-aluminum-
Vet. Ophthalmol. 9, 361-368.
Ophthalmol. 6, 227-235.
garnet laser treatment of cystic granula
Cook, C.S., Wilkie, D.A., 1999. Treatment of
iridica in horses: eight cases [1988-1996). J.
Capsular opacification, lens epithelial 
 presumed iris melanoma in dogs by diode
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 211, 341-343.
 metaplasia, proliferation and migration
laser photocoagulation: 23 cases. Vet.
Ophthalmol. 2, 217-225.
 Photodynamic therapy
Bras, I.D., Colitz, C.M., Saville, W.J., et al.,.
2006. Posterior capsular opacification in
McCally, R.L., Bargeron, C.B., Green, W.R.
Giuliano, E.A., Ota, I., Tucker, S.A., 2007.
diabetic and nondiabetic canine patients
et al., 1983. Stromal damage in rabbit
 Photodynamic therapy: basic principles
following cataract surgery. Vet. Ophthalmol.
corneas exposed to CO, laser radiation. Exp.
and potential uses for the veterinary
Eye Res. 37, 543-550.
9, 317-327.
 ophthalmologist. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10,
Gerardi, J.G., Colitz, C.M., Dubielzig, R.R.,
English, R.V., Nasisse, M.P., Davidson, M.G..
337-343.
et al., 1999. Immunohistochemical analysis
1990. Carbon dioxide laser ablation for
of lens epithelial-derived membranes
 treatment of limbal squamous cell
Lens surgery
following cataract extraction in the dog.
carcinoma in horses. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Moore, D.L., McLellan, G.J., Dubielzig, R.R.,
Vet. Ophthalmol. 2, 163-168.
196, 439-442.
Bussieres, M., Krohne, S.G., Stiles, I., et al..
2003. A study of the morphology of canine
Bernays, M.E., Peiffer, R.L., 2000. Morphologic
2005. The use of carbon dioxide laser for the
eyes enucleated or eviscerated due
 alterations in the anterior lens capsule of
to complications following
ablation of meibomian gland adenomas in
canine eyes with cataracts. Am. J. Vet. Res.
dogs. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 41,
phacoemulsifcation. Vet. Ophthalmol. 6.
61, 1517-1519.
227-234.
219-226.
Colitz, C.M., Malarkey, D., Dykstra, M.J., et al.,
Davidson, M.G., Nasisse, M.P., Rusnak, I.M..
Nasisse, M.P., Davidson, M.G., MacLachlan,
2000. Histologic and immunohistochemical
et al., 1990. Success rates of unilateral vs.
characterization of lens capsular plaques in
N.J., et al., 1988. Neodymium:yttrium,
aluminum, and garnet laser energy delivered
bilateral cataract extraction in dogs. Vet.
dogs with cataracts. Am. J. Vet. Res. 61,
 transsclerally to the ciliary body of dogs.
Surg. 19, 232-236.
139-143.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 49, 1972-1978.
Peiffer Jr., R.L., Gaiddon, I., 1991. Posterior
Davidson, M.G., Morgan, D.K., McGahan, M.C.,
Nasisse, M.P., Davidson, M.G., English, R.V.,
chamber intraocular lens implantation in the
2000. Effect of surgical technique on in vitro
et al., 1990. Treatment of glaucoma by use
dog: results of 65 implants in 61 patients. J.
posterior capsule opacification. J. Cataract 
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 27, 453-462.
Refract. Surg 26, 1550-1554.
 of transscleral neodymium:yttrium
aluminum garnet laser cyclocoagulation in
Collinson, P.N., Peiffer Jr., R.L., 2002. Pathology
Davidson, M.G., Wormstone, M., Morgan, D.,
dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 197, 350-354.
 of canine cataract surgery complications.
et al., 2000. Ex vivo canine lens capsular sac
Nasisse, M.P., Davidson, M.G., Olivero, D.K.
New Zealand Vet. J. 50, 26-31.
explants. Graefes Arch. Clin. Exp.
et al., 1993. Neodymium:YAG laser
Glover, T.L., Davidson, M.G., Nasisse, M.P.,
Ophthalmol. 238, 708-714.
 treatment of primary canine intraocular
et al., 1995. The intracapsular extraction of
displaced lenses in dogs: a retrospective
Glaucoma drainage implant surgery
tumors. Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 3.
152-157.
study of 57 cases (1984-1990). J. Am. Anim.
Gelatt, K.N., Gum, G.G., Samuelson, D.A., et al..
Sapienza, IS., Miller, T.R., Gum, G.G., et al.
Hosp. Assoc. 31, 77-81.
1987. Evaluation of the Krupin-Denver valve
1992. Contact transscleral
Nasisse, M.P., Glover, T.L., 1997. Surgery for
implant in normotensive and glaucomatous
cyclophotocoagulation using
lens instability. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small
beagles. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 191,
neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet laser
Anim. Pract. 27, 1175-1192.
1404-1409.
 in normal dogs. Prog. Vet. Comp.
Nasisse, M.P., Glover, T.L., Davidson, M.G.,
Bedford, PG.C., 1989. A clinical evaluation of a
Ophthalmol. 2, 147.
et al., 1995. Technique for the suture fixation
one-piece drainage system in the treatment
Rosenberg, L.F., Burchfield, J.C., Krupin, T.,
 of intraocular lenses in dogs. Vet. Comp.
 of canine glaucoma. J. Small Anim. Pract. 30,
et al., 1995. Cat model for intraocular 
Ophthalmol. 5, 146-150.
68-75.
 pressure reduction after transscleral Nd:YAG
Wilkie, D.A., Gemensky-Metzler, A.J., Stone,
Tinsley, D.M., Betts, D.M., 1994. Clinical
cyclophotocoagulation. Curr Eye Res. 14,
S.G., et al., 2008. A modifed ab externo
experience with a glaucoma drainage
255-261.
approach for suture fixation of an intraocular
device in dogs. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 4.
Sullivan, T.C., Nasisse, M.P, Davidson, M.G..
lens implant in the dog. Vet. Ophthalmol.
77-83.
et al., 1996. Photocoagulation of limbal
11, 43-48.
Bentley, E., Nasisse, M.P., Glover, T., et al.
 melanoma in dogs and cats: 15 cases
Bagley 2nd., L.H., Lavach, J.D., 1994.
1996. Implantation of fltering devices in
[1989-1993). I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 208,
Comparison of postoperative
 dogs with glaucoma: preliminary results in
891-894.
phacoemulsifcation results in dogs with
13 eyes. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 6, 243.
78
Surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions
Chapter
4
Bentley, E., Miller, P.E., Murphy, C.., et al.
dog. I. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 13,
Ocular complications of
1999. Combined cycloablation and
481-485.
radiation therapy
gonioimplantation for treatment of
Koch, S.A., 1981. Intraocular prosthesis in the
Roberts, S.M., Lavach, J.D., Severin, G.A., et al..
glaucoma in dogs: 18 cases (1992-1998). 1.
dog and cat: the failures. I. Am. Vet. Med.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 215, 1469-1472.
1987. Ophthalmic complications following
Assoc. 179, 883-885.
 megavoltage irradiation of the nasal and
Qullen, C.L., 2004. Cullen frontal sinus valved
Whitley, R.D., Shaffer, K.W., Albert, R.D., 1985.
paranasal cavities in dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med.
glaucoma shunt: preliminary findings in
Implantation of intraocular silicone
Assoc. 190, 43-47.
dogs with primary glaucoma. Vet.
 prostheses in dogs. Comp. Cont. Edu. Pract.
Ophthalmol. 7, 311-318.
Jamieson, V.E., Davidson, M.G., Nasisse, M.P.,
Vet. 7, 802-811.
et al., 1991. Ocular complications following
Sapienza, J.S., van der Woerdt, A., 2005.
Hamor, R.E., Whitley, R.D., McLaughlin, S.A.,
cobalt G0 radiotherapy of neoplasms in the 
 Combined transscleral diode laser 
et al., 1994. Intraocular silicone prostheses
canine head region. I. Am. Anim. Hosp.
 cyclophotocoagulation and Ahmed
in dogs: a review of the literature and 50
Assoc. 27, 51-55.
gonioimplantation in dogs with primary
 new cases. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 30,
Ching, S.V., Gillette, S.M., Powers, B.E., et al..
66-69.
Ophthalmol. 8, 121-127.
1990. Radiation-induced ocular injury in the
McLaughlin, S.A., Ramsey, D.T., Lindley, D.M..
eey 1 iul 4pms [esooisy e 8o
et al., 1995. Intraocular silicone prosthesis
Evisceration and intrascleral
Oncol. Biol. Phys. 19, 321-328.
implantation in eyes of dogs and a cat with
prosthesis placement
intraocular neoplasia: nine cases [1983-
Brightman, A.H., Magrane, W.G., Huff, R.W.
1994). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 207,
et al., 1977. Intraocular prosthesis in the
1441-1443.
79
Non-surgical trauma
CHAPTER CONTENTS
THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF
The relative importance of ocular trauma in a
OCULAR TrAUMA IN A MAIL-IN
mail-in pathology practice
81
PATHOLOGY PRACTICE
General post-traumatic response of ocular tissues.
regardless of the type of trauma
81
 The relative importance of non-surgical trauma is hard to estimate:
Non-specific proliferative reaction
81
It is the third most common reason for enucleation in dogs and
Intraocular hemorrhage
83
ats, behind glaucoma and neoplasia
 Blood in the anterior chamber (hemophthalmos)
83
It is estimated that 20% of canine submissions to COPLOW are
 Non-penetrating (blunt) ocular trauma
84
related to non-surgical trauma.
Corneal effects
84
Uveal effects
85
Comparative Comments
Lens effects
85
Non-surgical trauma is the leading cause of enucleation in the
Cataract
85
experience of the University of Wisconsin Eye Pathology Laboratory.
Lens capsule rupture
85
It is estimated that about 20% of the human eye submissions are
Traumatic lens subluxation or luxation
87
related to non-surgical trauma.
Yanoff and Fine (2002) state that trauma (both surgical and
 Retinal effects
87
 non-surgical combined) accounts for 35% of all enucleations.
Scleral effects, scleral rupture
87
 Penetrating injuries
88
 Corneal penetrating injury
88
GENERAL POST-TRAUMATIC RESPONSE OF
 Scleral penetrating injury
88
OCULAR tISSUES, REGARDLESS OF tHE
 Suppurative endophthalmitis
91
TYPE OF TRAUMA
 Septic implantation syndrome ('cat scratch'
injuries)
94
Non-specific proliferative reaction
Chemical injury
94
(Figs 5.1-5.3)
 Acid burn
94
Alkali burn
95
Within a few hours of trauma, cellular proliferation may be
 Snake bite
95
recognized in the lens epithelium and the non-pigmented ciliary
body epithelium (Fig. 5.1)
 Proptosis and optic nerve trauma
95
·
 After about 48 h of trauma, spindle cell and neovascular
End-stage disease (atrophy of the globe and
phthisis bulbi)
97
of the globe (Fig. 5.2) (see also Ch. 9)
 Feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma (FPTOS)
97
Neovascular proliferation
Spindle cell variant FPTOS
100
May contribute to subsequent intraocular hemorrhage.
 potentially setting up a vicious cycle
Round-cell variant FPTOS
102
■Pre-iridal fbrovascular membrane
Post-traumatic osteosarcoma and/or chondrosarcoma
103
- May lead to peripheral anterior synechiae that, in turn,
Prophylactic enucleation of traumatized feline globes
103
contributes to the development of neovascular glaucoma
81
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 5.1 Cellular effects of trauma.
(A) Gross photograph of a feline globe
removed 3 h after blunt trauma showing 
lens capsule rupture and retinal tear.
(B) Photomicrograph showing the lens 
 capsule and lens epithelial cell
 proliferation and spindle cell metaplasia
 in a feline globe removed 8 h after a
traumatic event. (C) Photomicrograph
B
showing the non-pigmented ciliary
epithelial cells proliferating in a canine 
 globe removed 5 h after a traumatic
event.
A
Figure 5.2 More cellular effects of
trauma. (A) Gross photograph of a
canine globe showing broad anterior
synechiae and developing cyclitic
membrane (arrow). (B) Gross photograph
of a canine globe showing posterior
synechia (arrows) and iris bombe.
(C) Photomicrograph of the anterior
surface of the iris showing a pre-iridal
fibrovascular membrane in a canine
globe after trauma.
R
82
Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
5
Figure 5.3 Fibrovascular proliferation
in the globe. (A) Photomicrograph
showing a choroidal neovascular
proliferation in a traumatized canine 
globe. (B) Photomicrograph showing a
fibrovascular membrane extending from
the optic nerve head into the vitreous
body in a traumatized dog globe (arrow).
(C) Low magnification photomicrograph
of a canine globe showing extensive 
intravitreal hemorrhage and neovascular 
proliferation near the optic nerve head.
A
B
C
  Posterior iridal neovascular membrane
 The general absence of granulation tissue formation within
一
Which may lead to posterior synechiae
the tissues of the uveal tract is quite striking
 Cyclitic membrane
If fibrosis is observed within the uvea, it is important to
- This can lead to traction resulting in retinal detachment
look for evidence of scleral rupture, which provides a
D Retinal detachment and subsequent hypoxia leads to 
 portal for fbrosis originating within the episcleral tissues
the release of growth factors which further stimulate
to enter the globe.
neovascular proliferation
 Choroidal neovascular membranes (Fig. 5.3)
 This can lead to subretinal hemorrhage or serous
Comparative Comments
exudation, with subsequent retinal detachment 
 Neovascular membranes extending from the optic disk into
The post-traumatic reaction of ocular tissues described for animal
the vitreous in dogs
eyes applies also for human eyes.
- This can lead to traction and retinal detachment, with
 retinal hypoxia contributing to further neovascular
proliferation
  Retinal neovascular membranes rarely occur in domestic
INTRAOCULAR HEMORRHAGE
animal species
Blood in the anterior chamber
Comparative Comments
(hemophthalmos) (Fig. 5.4)
Proliferative vitreoretinopathy occurs in humans secondary to trauma,
May result from blunt or penetrating trauma, but has many
 or can be secondary to retinal detachment, and is rare in domestic 
other potential causes; including intraocular inflammation,
species
neoplasia, fbrovascular membranes, retinal detachment,
systemic hypertension or disorders of hemostasis
E8
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
D
E
Figure 5.4 Effects of hemorrhage. (A) Gross photograph of a canine globe with retinal detachment and accumulation of blood pigments in a nodular
lesion that distorts the peripheral retina and vitreous body. (B,C) Photomicrographs of the lesion in (A) show hemosiderin stained with Prussian blue
enoeui bupueishuol ym agoh auuen e jo yde ooud sso (a) () ui sheadde juawbid upioeuay mollak () ui jasui aun ui pue (a) ui
 of the same globe as (D), show a loose accumulation of macrophage cells and abundant cholesterol crystals indicated by the spindle-shaped empty
spaces in (F).
Hemophthalmos (blood in the anterior chamber) can contribute
acicular cholesterol clefts in tissues or free in the chambers of
directly to the pathogenesis of glaucoma by obstructing
the globe. Cholesterol crystals are birefringent when viewed
conventional aqueous outflow via the drainage angle
with polarized light but only if the tissues are unprocessed.
 Hemophthalmos may play a role in stimulating a neo-vascular
proliferative response which can lead to anterior or posterior
Comparative Comments
synechiae, as well as predisposing to further episodes of
intraocular hemorrhage
The occurrence and sequelae of intraocular hemorrhages are little
 In its aftermath, hemophthalmos can lead to secondary
different in humans from those described in animal eyes.
hemosiderosis
Blood pigment staining of the cormea, after traumatic
hemorrhage, can involve hemoglobin, hemosiderin, or
NON-PENETRATING (BLUNT)
hematoidin. Staining is seen most often in the peripheral
cormea and the tissues of the iridocorneal angle A Prussian 
OCULAR TRAUMA
blue stain is useful to distinguish hemosiderin from melanin
Continued hemorrhage can fill the globe (hemophthalmos)
Corneal effects
 Recurrent episodes of intraocular hemorrhage may reflect
underlying disease; vicious cycles of hemorrhage associated
Abrasion - not often a feature of a pathology submission
with clotting and subsequent activation of the fibrinolytic
Ruptures in Descemet's membrane
pathway, or leakage from new vessels formed as part of a
 May lead to striate keratopathy
fbrovascular response
■ Relatively common clinical presentation in horses and may
Cholesterolosis bulbi (synchysis scintillans, cholesterol granuloma)
follow blunt trauma, such as whip or rope injuries to eye.
■Blood which pools within the globe and is not resorbed will
Buoel uao si eunen yo Aoisy e yanoue
eventually be broken down to hemosiderin and cholesterol.
Careful evaluation is required to exclude glaucoma, which
stimulating a profound phagocytic response. Frequently, free
may cause of ruptures in Descemet's membrane related to
cholesterol crystals are identifiable within the globe as
globe stretching (see Ch. 13)
84
Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
5
Angle recession is characterized by the dramatically increased
distance between the end of Descemet's membrane and the
anatomic irido-corneal angle Angle recession has implications
in aqueous drainage and is a risk factor in the development of
glaucoma (see Ch. 13)
 In some cases, Descemet's membrane extends over the inner
sclera beyond the limbus and, in those cases, angle recession
is recognized by the increased distance between the anatomic
 angle and the limbus.
 Rupture or avulsion of corpora nigra is often seen after blunt 
trauma in horses.
Lens effects (see also Ch. 10)
Cataract (Fig. 5.7)
Cataract is a common consequence of blunt trauma. Cataract can be
Figure 5.5 Acute cyclodialysis. Photomicrograph of a feline iridocorneal
prominent within days of trauma (Fig. 5.7).
Anterior or posterior subcapsular cataract
chamber and iridocorneal angle, as well as tearing away of the iris and 
Cortical cataract, focal or complete, is often seen and it is good
iliary body from the sclera (cyclodialysis).
to search for other morphologic indicators of trauma such as
retinal detachment or retinal necrosis/atrophy.
Retrocorneal membrane; duplication of Descemet's membrane.
Lens capsule rupture (Fgs 5.8-5.10)
and extension of Descemet's membrane over the iridocorneal
Lens capsule rupture is a commonly observed consequence of non-
angle:
oud au o suisns un 'aq au o anui suuad
 These changes can be focal or diffuse and can be associated
laboratory.
with corneal edema, causing corneal opacity
■
 Traumatic changes to the endothelium and Descemet's
Pathologic lens capsule rupture
 membrane are characterized by the follwing:
Pathologic lens capsule rupture is differentiated from artifact by
- Spindle cell metaplasia of the endothelium
the following findings (in descending order of diagnostic value)
 Deposition of a cell-poor collagen posterior to the cornea
(Fig. 5.8):
even if the endothelium is still present
Duplication of Descemet's membrane
● Presence of inflammatory cells such as macrophages or
D Most often the secondary Descemet's membrane is about
 neutrophils, or blood vessels, inside the lens capsule
the same thickness as the original
 This feature may be encountered, even if the actual lens
0 Multiple thin membranes are often seen
capsule defect has not been sampled in the section
0 Extension of Descemet's membrane and extension of
 Presence of a cellular reaction at the severed margins of the lens
endothelium over the iridocorneal angle is sometimes
capsule
 This reaction can involve proliferating lens epithelial cells,
seen.
inflammatory cells, or spindle cells and may be associated
with synechiae
Uveal effects (Figs 5.5, 5.6)
 Recoil or scrolling of the severed ends of the lens capsule.
Cyclodialysis, the tearing and separation of the ciliary body
Infammation
and iris base from the sclera creating an opening into the
suprachoroidal space (Fig. 5.5)
Inflammation (phacoclastic uveitis) is an important consequence of
lens capsule rupture (Fig. 5.9).
ssop
 Immediately adjacent to the released lens material, there will be
- This is because of the absence of a robust primary
 a foreign body granulomatous reaction
 pectinate ligament structure in the feline iridocorneal angle
■ Some authors assert that lens proteins released following
■
 Cyclodialysis is relatively even more likely to occur in birds
capsule rupture frequently elicit a robust pyogenic or
for the following reasons:
pyogranulomatous response However, one must be cautious
 The rigid scleral ossicles of the avian eye magnify shearing
in distinguishing the effects of sepsis; which would be
forces, which act to strip the soft tissues of the ciliary body
expected to elicit a pyogenic reaction, and may be introduced
away from the sclera
Aq Alalos pasnpu asuodsa au uoy :Anju suenauad e Aq
 The attachment apparatus at the iridocorneal angle is
Aaeiai e Aleid si yium 'suanid sual a jo ainsoxa
delicate
"bland' foreign body, granulomatous reaction
 Cyclodialysis is recognized in the acutely traumatized eye by
Away from the immediate area of exposed lens protein, a
paying close attention to the loss of integrity of the ciliary
lymphocytic and plasmacytic uveitis develops, that may
cleft and the tissues around the ciliary cleft
be associated with synechiae or neovascular membrane
However, years after the traumatic event, 'angle recession'
may still be observed as evidence of prior trauma to the
 Phacoclastic uveitis often results in secondary glaucoma, due to
structures of the irido-cormeal angle (Fig. 5.6)
the formation of synechiae or neovascular membranes.
85
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 5.6 Iridocorneal angle recession.
(A,B) Gross photographs of two feline
globes show a wide space between the
end of Descemet's membrane and the
displaced iridocorneal angle (angle
recession). (C) Low magnification 
photomicrograph of a feline globe
showing an expanded distance between
the end of Descemet's membrane 
(arrow) and the iridocorneal angle in
angle recession.
A
B
Spindle cell metaplasia of lens epithelial cells and
 In dogs and cats, metaplastic lens epithelial cells often
migration of lens epithelial cells (Fig. 5. 10)
 migrate along the surface topography of the inner aspect of
the globe, including:
+
 Spindle cell metaplasia of lens epithelial cells is the first step in
0 The outer surface of the lens 
the formation of subcapsular cataract in response to trauma.
O The anterior and posterior surfaces of the iris
and is associated with posterior capsular opacification after
0 The surfaces of the detached retina
ieinou au jo aieag iuodu ue si ll ans iei
 The inner choroid, within the sub-retinal space
reaction to lens capsule rupture in domestic animals
 In cats, metaplastic lens epithelial cells may give rise to
 Metaplastic lens epithelial cells express vimentin and smooth
 post-traumatic sarcoma
muscle actin, and they proliferate and migrate They also
0 This neoplasm is discussed in detail later in this chapter.
 produce collagen and secrete a thick basement membrane
reminiscent of lens capsule
  Lens epithelial cells of dogs and cats appear to have a greater
Comparative Comments
tendency to proliferate and migrate in response to injury
bue auad-uou o asuodsan aut ui uaas anuanah suenubis t
than those of humans
(blunt) ocular trauma in humans is a less aggressive spindle cell
- Metaplastic lens epithelial cells in damaged human lenses 
metaplasia and migration of lens epithelial cells after the lens capsule 
 may migrate but they seldom migrate away from the lens
is ruptured.
capsule
86
 Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
5
Figure 5.7 Traumatic cataract. (A,B)
Gross photographs show trauma-induced
(8) bop e pue (v) ien e u! speyeie)
There is lens capsule rupture,
displacement of lens fiber protein, and 
synechiae in both globes. (C,D) Low 
magnification and higher magnification
 of a canine post-traumatic cataract show
lens capsular rupture and remodeling.
A
B
Traumatic lens subluxation or luxation
 Separation of the photoreceptor processes from the outer
nuclear layer is seen in acute trauma
This is rarely seen in isolation, as the forces required to disrupt the
zonular attachments of domestic animals are generally associated
Hemorrhage in the retina or vitreous
+
Within 5 days, the severely affected retinal tissue becomes
with other signs of severe ocular trauma.
liquefied and phagocytes (gitter cells) predominate
The end-stage is regional, severe retinal atrophy
Retinal effects (Figs 5.11, 5.12)
Retinal detachment and retinal tears are frequently seen
 A useful clue that trauma was involved as the cause of severe
Because of the precise anatomic and functional organization of
retinal damage is the finding of well-preserved blood vessels,
normal retinal tissue, it is at great risk of damage associated with
 seemingly 'free in space', separated from the atrophic retinal
contusive injury.
tissue adjacent to them.
 The neuroretinal tissue is 'stretched' across the posterior
segment, and it has a semi-liquid consistency that makes it
vulnerable to disruption by the shearing forces of a pressure
Scleral effects, scleral rupture
wave propagating within it 
(Figs 5.13, 5.14)
 This type of injury can be associated with 'whiplash'
forces, which may result from shaking, as seen in the
There are over 240 cases of scleral rupture in the COPLOW collection
 0l moq e uoy io 'sjueyu uenq ul aoipus Aqeq-uaeus
in dogs and cats. Scleral rupture results from a deforming blow to the
the head
globe. The blow may or may not directly penetrate the globe but
If the damage is mild, the retina may not degenerate, and a
deformation of the globe results in rupture of the sclera at points of
return to function is possible
ee uon rea au apui sd yeam asa ssamm
If the damage to the retina is locally severe, the retinal
to rectus muscle attachments and, less commonly, the posterior pole.
tissue undergoes rapid degeneration. The damage occurs
 Most commonly, scleral rupture is the result of blunt trauma
acutely, is non-progressive over the long-term, and it is often
without a penetrating component (Fig. 5.13)
segmental
 In these cases you will find the following features:
Within the first 24 h, retinal contusion is associated with
 Segmental uveal fibrosis in the region of the scleral rupture
apoptosis and physical disruption
8
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 5.8 Lens capsule rupture.
(A) Gross photograph of a canine globe
showing a small lens remnant and
 adhesion of iris, ciliary body, and 
detached retinal tissue.
(B) Photomicrograph of a feline globe
after traumatic lens capsule rupture
showing coiling of the capsule and 
cellular proliferation on both sides of the
capsular defect. (C,D) Photomicrographs 
showing macrophage and multinucleate
 giant cell reaction to exposed lens
proteins, which is a reliable indication of
lens capsular rupture.
D
 A scleral defect, which typically extends from the equator
radially towards the posterior pole
PENETRATING INJURIES
 Episcleral and orbital fbrosis with displaced fragments of
 pigmented uveal tissue or disorganized neural tisue of
retinal origin
Corneal penetrating injury (Fig. 5.15)
 Episcleral damage involving peripheral nerve tissue, with
In the COPLOW collection, it is generally not possible to differentiate
neuroma formation
asasip leauo Aieud sisuui on anp eauo aui jo uoenauad
 An example of trauma to the globe with both direct penetration
anpieu uoy (8 u u jiap aneais ui passnsip se) uoeiojiad ym
and scleral rupture would be a ballistic injury (Fig. 5.14)
to penetrating trauma. Although traumatic penetrating injury to the
 In these cases, you will find the following features:
-asuos pue saimieay anbiun aul 'jueodu Aipanqnopun sl eauo
- An entry wound
quences of traumatic corneal penetrating injuries will not be specif-
 Uveal fbrosis in association with the scleral defect
cally addressed in this chapter, because it is often not possible for the
0 If segmental uveal fibrosis but no scleral defect is found.
 pathologist to establish the sequence of events.
it can be rewarding to cut deeper into the block in
search of a scleral defect
 A scleral rupture starting at the equator that extends 
Scleral penetrating injury (Figs 5.16, 5.17)
radially toward the posterior pole, but does not involve the
 optic disc
In the scleral penetrating injury cases recorded in the COPLOW col.
Possibly an exit wound
lection, we have seldom been provided with a history of a traumatic
- Metallic fragments
'eias aul ot Anlu sueauad e isans ieu saieay aie aiau 'luaa
 0 Polarized light can be very useful to identify tiny
which include the following:
metallic fragments, which otherwise may masquerade as
Episcleral, orbital, and/or subconjunctival fibrosis or fistulating
melanin
inflammation
 Extensive episcleral and orbital hemorrhage or scarring.
 If the inflammation is more severe in the superior part of the
 depending on chronicity
 orbit/globe, this suggests injury related to an attack or a
 Displaced pigmented uveal tissue and disorganized neural
falling object
tissue of retinal origin.
If the inflammation is more severe inferiorly, this suggests
s e io oq uiay reo ue o peiau nu ud
Comparative Comments
from below
- There are seven cases in the COPLOW collection, as well as
The retinal effects and scleral effects of blunt trauma are very similar
 ai e yim 'aiail Areuaiaa aul ul pausand sasi
 in the human eye to those described for domestic animals.
history of dentistry and in some cases, accidental slippage
 of a dental instrument
88
Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
Figure 5.9 Lens-induced uveitis,
phacoclastic uveitis. (A) Mixed Breed, 12
weeks old: prior trauma resulted in lens
rupture, cataract formation, and uveitis.
Pigment is present on the lens and
ectropion uvea is indicated by the arrow.
(B) Vitreous protein exudation is adjacent
 to the ruptured lens capsule (arrow) in a 
traumatized dog globe. (C) Subgross
photomicrograph of a canine globe 
showing a nearly empty lens capsular
bag and protein exudates in the vitreous
body secondary to the release of
denatured lens proteins. (D) Gross
photograph of a feline globe showing 
distinctive protein exudates (arrow) in the
vitreous body near the posterior pole
of the lens, which is associated with
posterior lens capsule rupture and 
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis. (E)
Photomicrograph of the globe in (D)
showing the granular hypereosinophilic
protein characteristic of posterior lens 
capsular rupture in feline uveitis.
A
C
E
89
VeterinaryOcularPathology
B
D
Figure 5.10 Metaplasia and proliferation of released lens epithelial cells. (A) Photomicrograph of a canine globe showing the iridocorneal angle
 with a spindle cell proliferation and broad anterior synechia secondary to lens epithelial cell proliferation and migration into the anterior chamber.
Surrounding each spindle cell is a thick PAS-positive basement membrane, characteristic of lens epithelial cell origin (PAS stain). (B) Low magnification
photomicrograph showing lens capsule rupture (arrow), with proliferation and migration of metaplastic lens epithelial cells. The lens is entrapped in the
anterior chamber and the proliferating cells are between the lens and the iris (PAS stain). (C,D) Photomicrographs of a traumatized dog globe showing
metaplastic lens epithelial cells, labeled with immunohistochemical stain for smooth muscle actin, within the lens capsule (*) (C) and surrounding the 
wrinkled lens capsule (*) (D). (E) Photomicrograph of a traumatized feline globe showing the tapetum and a membrane on its inner surface composed 
of metaplastic lens epithelial cells. A distinct PAS-positive basement membrane surrounds individual cells (PAS stain).
90
Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
5
 Figure 5.11 Traumatic retinal tear.
fundoscopy. (A) Doberman Pinscher,
3.5 years old: blunt trauma caused
 papilldema and preretinal hemorrhage.
(B) Mixed Breed, 3 years old: extensive
posterior segment hemorrhage is present 
after being hit by a car. The arrow points
to the edge of a giant retinal tear in the
detached retina. (C) Beagle. 1.5 years
old: acute blindness was present after
being hit by a car. Peripapillary and 
horizontal linear areas of tapetal
hyperreflectivity are present (black 
arrows). Abnormal tapetal pigmentation
is also present. (D) Non-tapetal fundus 
 of the globe in (C). Linear areas of
depigmentation and pigment migration
A
B
in the outer layer of the retina are
present.
C
D
·A full-thickness scleral defect
Among dogs, the brachycephalic breeds (also prone to
 This finding is good evidence of a penetrating injury but,
 keratitis) are most likely to have suppurative
unfortunately, is seldom found in the standard plane of
endophthalmitis
section
- The Shih Tzu is the most commonly represented canine
Some evidence of direct damage within the globe, that includes
breed, accounting for 12l of the 954 cases in the
at least one of the following (Fig. 5.17):
COPLOW collection with this diagnosis
Lens capsule rupture
■  Larger hunting breeds, perhaps due to their propensity for
Fistulous inflammatory tracts that extend through the uvea or
running through brush, are also prone to endophthalmitis
retina
related to perforating/penetrating injuries
 Bacterial sepsis
Common morphologic features of suppurative endophthalmitis
 Identification of a fragment of foreign material in the section
(gI's Bu) apnput Ainlui sunenauad ylm paeiosse 
■
- By far the most common foreign body found in tissues in
A similarity in the degree of suppurative exudates throughout
the COPLOW collection is a plant fragment (32 cases).
all of the compartments of the globe
However, hair, mineral (three cases), bone, feather, metal,
■
Lens capsule rupture
and plastic have also been found. Porcupine quills are not
■
 Liquefactive necrosis of the retina
uncommon as causes of penetrating or perforating ocular
■
 Focal or multifocal, very localized neovascular extensions
injury in certain geographic locations.
from the choroid into the subretinal space
 At COPLOW, these neovascular extensions are often
referred to as 'volcanoes' because of their eruptive
Suppurative endophthalmitis (Fig. 5.18)
appearance
 A very early change seen in acute cases, is the appearance of
Suppurative endophthalmitis is the most common consequence
suppurative infiltrate within the choriocapillaris, before other
identified in eyes removed after a penetrating injury
exudates are apparent.
91
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 5.12 Retinal trauma, microscopic.
(A) Photomicrograph showing the effects
of recent trauma on the retina from a
Canine globe penetrated by a pellet 5 h
before enucleation. There is hemorrhage
and a segmental loss of structural 
 integrity. (B) Photomicrograph of the
 retina from a young horse necropsied
24 h after a head trauma showing
segmental apoptosis of photoreceptors
and disruption of inner and outer
[A
(B
segments. (C) Photomicrograph of the 
retina from a dog necropsied 5 days 
after head trauma showing segmental
retinal disruption, necrosis and phagocyte
 aCcumulation. (D) Photomicrograph 
 showing complete retinal atrophy with
remaining macrophage cells (gitter cells)
(arrow) 10 days after blunt trauma.
A
B
C
Figure 5.13 Ballistic foreign bodies in the globe. (A) Anterior view of a canine globe removed shortly after penetrating trauma from a shotgun injury.
(B.C) A dog globe (B) and a cat globe (C) show disorganization of ocular tissues associated with bullet fragments (*) visible within the globe.
92
Non-surgical trauuma
Chapter
A
B
C
D
?
Figure 5.14 Scleral rupture, blunt trauma. (A-F) A montage showing six dog and cat globes with scleral rupture associated with blunt trauma. Scleral
rupture in blunt trauma starts at the equator, where the sclera is thinnest, and extends towards the posterior pole.
E6
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 5.15 Traumatic corneal
perforation. (A,B) Gross photographs of a
canine globe with traumatic corneal
perforation and iris prolapse. (C,D) Low
magnification photomicrographs of the
same globe showing iris tissue prolapsed
through the cornea and entrapped,
leading to swelling. edema and vascular
prolifer ation.
A
Septic implantation syndrome ('cat scratch'
 About 60% of cases have identifiable bacterial colonies
injuries) (Figs 5.19, 5.20) (see also Ch. 10)
within the lens substance but away from the inflammatory
cell infiltrate
· This is a canine and feline syndrome of endophthalmitis, often
- In affected canine eyes, bacteria are usually Gram-positive
resulting from cat scratch injury, that can be defined by a
cocci
specifc set of morphologic criteria:
 In feline cases there is more likely to be a mixed
■ There are 75 canine and 20 feline eyes in the COPLOW
 population of bacteria.
collection with endophthalmitis and features of 'septic
implantation syndrome'
 All ages are affected but there is a bias towards younger
Comparative Comments
animals
The sequelae of perforating injuries in the human eye are similar to
provided. However, when the inciting cause is known, it is often
those discussed in the COPLOW collection
related to an incident involving a cat scratch
A feature of this syndrome is a period of latency, during which
the globe is relatively quiet, between the inciting injury and the
onset of endophthalmitis that leads to enucleation
CHEMICAL INJURY (Fig. 5.21)
A latency period of several months is typical, but latencies as
long as 2 years have been observed among the cases in the
COPLOW collection
In contrast to the situation in human ocular pathology services, sub.
This syndrome is characterized by the following morphological
missions to COPLOW from cases affected by known chemical injury
features:
are extremely rare.
Suppurative and histiocytic inflammation which intimately
surrounds the lens
Acid burn
 Broad posterior synechiae, with spindle cells and collagen
that are consistent with temporal chronicity
aul jo uoneingeos shoaueueisul ue sasnes anss ol ainsodxa piy
■
 Lens capsule rupture with suppurative inflammation
aa ae inq 'suiaioi go uoeiiaid ym 'sanss ieyains iso
extending into the lens substance
 does not extend deeply.
94
Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
5
Figure 5.16 Traumatic penetrating injury.
(A) Gross photograph of a canine globe
with endophthalmitis due to a
penetrating injury. (B) Subgross
photomicrograph of a canine globe 
penetrated by a migrating porcupine 
quill. The arrow indicates the point of 
scleral penetration. (C) Photomicrograph
showing the scleral penetration point
from a slipped dental instrument.
A
B
 Acute: coagulation necrosis of superficial epithelial and stromal
Snake bite (Fig. 5.22)
tissues
There are three cases in the COPLOW collection of venomous snake
Chronic: granulation tissue response.
bites directly to the globe.
 The damage is dominated by tissue lysis, presumed to be related
to lytic factors in the venom
Alkali burn
+
Retinal and optic nerve tissue are notably destroyed, and
 Alkali exposure causes extensive damage due to its ability to penetrate
seemingly liqui fied.
deeply into ocular tissue.
 Acute: There is swelling and loss of the corneal epithelium and
coagulation of conjunctival blood vessels. Tissue swelling and
PROPTOSIS AND OPTIC NERVE
vascular damage extend deep into the tissue, with intraocular
TRAUMA (Figs 5.23, 5.24)
extension of these effects
Chronic: tissue atrophy, collagenolytic lysis, and granulation
tissue. Keratomalacia is associated with the release of
There are 82 cases in the collection with a history of proptosis (ante-
collagenases from corneal epithelial and stromal cells, and from
rior prolapse of the globe, which becomes entrapped by the eyelid
neutrophils.
 margins behind the globe equator).
95
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
A
B
C
D
(F)
Figure 5.17 Endophthalmitis with a foreign body. (A-E) A montage of gross photographs of canine and feline globes with scleral penetrating injuries.
White arrows in images (B), (C) and (D) indicate the points of penetration or tracks within the globe. (E) Low magnification photomicrograph showing 
a plant foreign body (black arrow) imbedded in the globe near the optic nerve.
Of these 82, 80 are dogs and only two are cats. Brachycephalic
0 Detachment and/or retinal tear
breeds, young dogs, and small terrier breeds are
0 Segmental malacia followed by atrophy
over-represented
- A loss of retinal ganglion cells secondary to the optic
The time between proptosis and subsequent enucleation ranges
nerve trauma may be observed and, when seen, the loss
from hours to months
of ganglion cells occurs within days of the traumatic
The morphologic features in enucleated canine globes with a
episode
history of proptosis include:
■Corneal effects
■ Global optic nerve necrosis
 In proptosed eyes, acute and profound corneal necrosis
 Most globes removed following proptosis have immediate
occurs, because of desiccation, loss of innervation and/or
total necrosis of the optic nerve tissue
loss of blood supply to the anterior segment There can be
 If removed within 4 days of proptosis, degeneration of the 
a full-thickness devitalization of the corneal stroma. This is
 neuropil and apoptotic nuclear profles will be observed 
ueqt aou yjo uoisjnae j iroso cn Alax! aiou Aipauodind
within the optic nerve
two extraocular muscles is recognized
- If removed 5-10 days after proptosis, optic nerve tissue
Loss of corneal sensation or reduced ability to blink may
 malacia, dominated by macrophage cells (gitter cells) will
also contribute to chronic keratitis, following surgical
be observed
replacement of a proptosed globe
 If removed 2 weeks or more after proptosis,
 In rare cases, total infarction of the globe may occur after
 profound atrophy and fbrosis of the optic nerve will be
proptosis resulting in global necrosis of ocular tissues
observed
■ Orbital effects
■Retinal effects
 Muscle damage, orbital hemorrhage, and other effects of
 The effects of retinal contusion (as described previously)
soft tissue trauma can lead to inflammation or scar tissue
 may be observed
in the episclera and orbital tissue.
96
Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
Figure 5.18 Suppurative 
endophthalmitis, microscopic. (A)
Photomicrograph showing liquefactive 
necrosis of retinal tissue in suppurative
endophthalmitis. (B) Photomicrograph 
showing a focal proliferative lesion in
the choriocapillaris from a dog with
suppurative endophthalmitis. (C)
Photomicrograph showing retinal
necrosis and neutrophilic infiltr ation. (D)
High magnification photomicrograph
 showing bacteria in the vitreous body
(arrow).
(B
C
atrophy and shrinkage of the globe. Often, this shrinkage of the
END-STAGE DISEASE (ATROPHY OF THE
globe is accompanied by disorganization and distortion of
GLOBE AND PHTHISIS BULBI) (Fig. 5.25)
ocular tissues, and is termed 'phthisis bulbi'
Other effects often seen are mineralization and osseous
Many of the consequences of trauma to the globe result in a prolifera-
metaplasia.
tive response which extends into the anterior and posterior chambers 
and the vitreous body, and this may be accompanied by tissue
Comparative Comments
atrophy.
 Phthisis bulbi in the human consists of shrinkage, atrophy, and 
Cell types that participate in the proliferative response include:
■ Corneal endothelium and deep corneal stromal cells
 degeneration similar to that seen in animal eyes.
■
 Ciliary body epithelial cells
■
Vascular endothelial cells and spindle cells from the anterior
iris, posterior iris, ciliary body, or choroid
Feline post-traumatic ocular
 Vascular endothelial cells or spindle cells associated with the
sarcoma (FPT0S) (Figs 5.26-5.37)
 optic nerve head
 It is noteworthy that the proliferative response in the globe
This malignant neoplasm is the third most common intraocular
seldom causes pronounced distortion or fibrosis of the uvea
tumor in cats in the COPLOW collection, with 234 diagnosed. There
itself.
are three morphological variants of FPTOS, all of which tend to line
 Tissue proliferation within ocular compartments and
the inner aspect of the globe:
chambers can undergo contracture, a feature of granulation
1.
 Spindle cell variant (lens epithelial cell-derived): 70%
tissue throughout the body
(Fig. 5.26)
Contracture of the proliferating tissues of the globe in
2.
Round-cell variant (B-cell lymphoma): 24% (Fig. 5.27)
combination with a failure to produce aqueous humor leads to
3.
Osteosarcoma/chondrosarcoma: 6% (Fig. 5.28).
97
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 5.19 Septic implantation 
syndrome. (A) Persian, 5 years old:
the lens was ruptured and posterior
synechiae developed. Gram-positive cocci
were identified. (B) Boxer, 4 years old: a
penetrating injury at the superior limbus
was the cause of the severe ocular
inflammation. Gram-positive cocci were
identified. (C) Each of 12 canine and
feline globes with septic implantation
syndrome showing endophthalmitis
centered on a ruptured lens.
C
98
Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
Figure 5.20 Septic implantation
syndrome, microscopic. (A,B)
Photomicrographs of the same globe
show lens capsule rupture and deep 
implantation of suppurative exudates into
the lens. (C,D) Photomicrographs show 
the ruptured lens and spindle cell
proliferation on the anterior surface of 
the lens. (E) Gram-positive cocci are 
embedded in a cataractous lens away
from the suppurative exud ates.
A
B
D
Figure 5.21 Acid burn. (A,B) Subgross
and low magnification photomicrographs
of a canine globe show extensive tissue
fibrosis following an acid burn on the
cornea and conjunctiva.
A)
66
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 5.22 Snake bite. (A-D)
Photomicrographs of a canine globe
show extensive necrotic changes in
ocular tissues after a rattlesnake bite 
directly to the globe. (A) and (B) show
the optic nerve, (C) shows corneal
necrosis and rupture and (D) shows
extensive hemorrhage.
A
B
D
Spindle cell variant FPTOs (Fgs 5.26 and 5.29-5.33)
 Tumors that are sampled at a relatively early stage in the
 neoplastic process occur adjacent to the wrinkled lens 
Of the FPTOS cases in the COPLOW collection, 70% are spindle cell
capsule
variant.
Cellular features of spindle cell variant FPTOS (Fig. 5.30):
 Epizootiologic features of spindle cell variant FPTOS:
 These are pleomorphic, mesenchymal neoplasms,
This neoplasm typically occurs in cats with a prior history of
with cellular features that can range from fusiform
severe ocular disease
spindle cells to polygonal cells, with marked anaplastic
e poa uae u e asuuap ei siu au 
features
the initiating injury, but can be recognized from 2 months
About l0% of tumors have prominent multinucleate giant
[rare) to more than l0 years (common) after a traumatic
cells with large numbers of nuclei. The phenotype of these
injury. The average time between a traumatic event and
 giant cells differs from that of the main population of
 enucleation for FPTOS is 7 years
neoplastic cells, in that:
 Almost all cases have histologically identifed lens capsule
 Their nuclear profle is not as anaplastic
rupture
 They do not demonstrate positive intranuclear p53
■
 Only about 20% of cases submitted to COPLOw have a
antigen staining even when all the surrounding cells do
history that documents a known traumatic incident but
(Fig. 5.31)
many of the cats reportedly had abnormal eyes when
 Many tumors have at least some localized areas where
acquired as kittens or as adopted adults
 PAS-positive staining, suggestive of thick basement
Morphologic features of spindle cell variant FPTOS (Fig. 5.29):
 membranes, surrounds individual tumor cells, or segments
Distribution in the globe
 of individual tumor cells
 There is generally extensive involvement of the tissues
 Immunohistochemical features of spindle cell FPTOS
 of the globe, with infiltration of the iris, ciliary body.
(Fig. 5.32)
 peripheral cornea, and the atrophic remnants of retinal
Neoplastic cells may be positively immuno-labeled with the
tissue
following immuno-histochemical markers:
- Tumors tend to line the inner aspect of the choroid
- Vimentin, in almost 100% of affected eyes
 internal to the choriocapillaris
- Smooth muscle actin, in about 20% of affected eyes
 Tumors may infiltrate the sclera, peripheral nerve tissue
- Broad spectrum cytokeratin, in about 15% of affected eyes
and the optic nerve
- Alpha A Crystallin, in about 33% of affected eyes
100
Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
5
Figure 5.23 Proptosis, clinical. (A) Mixed
Breed, 2 years old: the lids are trapped
behind the globe. The pupil is dilated.
(B) Shih Tzu, 2 years old: following the
proptosis of the right globe, this dog was 
blind in both eyes. The arrow is at the
insertion of the avulsed medial rectus 
muscle. (C) Lhasa Apso, 5 years old:
previous proptosis led to a pale, slightly
depressed optic disc, characteristic of 
atrophy, in this blind eye. (D) DSH, 3
years old: the optic disc is extremely pale
in this blind eye, 1 year after proptosis.
(E) Peke-a-poo, 1 year old: Retinal
edema, preretinal hemorrhage and optic
nerve head swelling are visible 1 week
post-trauma. (F) Same eye as in (E), 7
weeks later. Hemorrhage and swelling
have resolved, but the disc is pale and 
slightly depressed in this blind eye.
C
D
E
101
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
B
c
D
F
 Figure 5.24 Proptosis, pathology. (A) Gross photograph of a canine globe removed after proptosis showing exposure of the episcleral tissues deep in
the orbit and corneal desiccation. (B) Gross photograph of a globe removed 3 days after proptosis showing diffuse necrosis of the optic nerve. (C)
Photomicrograph of optic nerve necrosis from the same globe as (B). (D) Photomicrograph of the optic nerve from a proptosed canine globe removed
 The PAS-positive extra-cellular matrix labels positively for
 A careful evaluation of the optic nerve should be made,
collagen type IV, which is characteristic of basement
including examination of the portion of the nerve farthest
membrane/basal lamina
away form the globe Evidence of optic nerve involvement
Features that support a lens epithelial origin for FPTOS:
carries a poor prognosis.
  Lens capsule rupture is almost universally present in affected
cats
  In large tumors other than FPTOS, lens capsule rupture is
Round-cell variant FPTOs (Fgs 5.27 and 5.34)
only occasionally observed
■
 Early tumors develop around the lens (Fig. 5.33)
There are 54 cases of round-cell variant FPTOS in the COLPOW col-
 The presence of lens capsule-like basement membrane
lection, representing 24% of the total FPTOS cases. The round-cell
■
surrounding the neoplastic cells in at least some areas of
variant is also associated with longstanding ocular disease, and the
many of these tumors.
sase mag e aie aiau iaamoh aeep ansdes sual aey aioleu sa
 Positive labeling of alpha A crystallin in some tumors
in the collection where the lens is either intact or had been previously
●Prognosis
removed
Spindle cell variant FPTOS can be highly locally invasive,
 Morphologic features of round-cell variant FPTOS (Fig. 5.34):
with extension into optic nerve, peripheral nerve and
Distribution in the globe
through the sclera into the orbital soft tissues
 The round-cell variant also flls the globe, but the tumor
■
 Local orbital recurrence is common following enucleation.
is much more likely to be effacing than the spindle cell
■
 Extension along the optic nerve or peripheral nerve to the
variant, and is less likely to line the inner aspect of the
brain is common.
globe
■
 Distant metastasis may occur, but its incidence is unknown
 The round-cell variant may extend beyond the sclera, but
■ One should carefully evaluate the specimen, attempting to
[eaudad io aau sdo a ou adaap aeiu ou sa
gather evidence of prognostic value:
nerves
 Evidence of extension beyond the sclera indicates a poor
Cellular features of round-cell variant FPTOS:
 prognosis. The prognosis appears to be better if the tumor
■Typically there is extensive tumor necrosis, with viable
is confined within the globe
neoplastic cells surviving around blood vessels
102
 Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
5
A
D
E
F
Figure 5.25 Phthisis bulbi. (A) Gross photograph of a phthisical feline globe. (B) Photomicrograph of the same globe showing anterior synechia
(arrows) and distortion of the anterior uvea. (C) Photomicrograph of a phthisical canine globe showing fibrovascular proliferation in the anterior
chamber (arrow),but not in the anterior uveal tissues (*).(D,E) Gross photographs of a phthisical feline globe.(F) Subgross photomicrograph of the
same globe showing collapse of the tissues around the wrinkled lens capsule and fibrosis of the inner aspects of the globe with relative sparing of the
uveal tract (Alcian blue PAS).
 This neoplasm lacks a rich blood supply
Morphologic features of FPTOS-osteosarcoma type (Figs 5.35,
■
 The neoplastic cells are predominantly pleomorphic
5.36):
round-cells, with a large nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio,
The distribution of tumor is diffuse within the globe
hyperchromatic nuclear features, and abundant mitoses
 All cases have lens rupture
Immunohistochemical features of round-cell variant FPTOS:
 Features suggestive of lens epithelial cell origin are variably
 These tumors are not positively labeled for vimentin, smooth
present
muscle actin, or cytokeratin
 The tumor may demonstrate areas of chondromatous
They stain with a complex staining pattern and are not easily
■
differentiation or, as in four cases, contain only cartilaginous
categorized as T-cell or B-cell lymphoma.
differentiation and no osteoid
Prognosis
A lack of follow-up information makes it difficult to predict the
 Insuffcient follow-up information is available to allow
biological and clinical behavior of these tumors.
accurate prognostication
Local recurrence and systemic spread are both seen, but the
features that are predictive of a poor prognosis have not been
elucidated
Prophylactic enucleation of traumatized
 Primary ocular or systemic lymphoma
feline globes (Hg. 5.33)
一
 Lymphoma in feline globes is often seen in conjunction
with inflammation. It is likely that the round-cell variant
Approximately 8% of feline globes in the COPLOW collection, where
 jo aldexa ue suasaidan eones enen-isod auag go
it could be determined that the globe was removed primarily for
lymphoma developing in association with the chronic
 prophylactic reasons, had an early spindle cell variant FPTOS
inflammation that may ensue following trauma to the
This percentage does not take into consideration the long
globe.
latency period that often precedes the development of a
clinically apparent neoplasm
Post-traumatic osteosarcoma and/or chondrosarcoma
The prophylactic removal of feline globes with trauma and
Fgs 5.28 and 5.35)
lens capsule rupture should be considered, particularly if vision 
There are 29 cases of osteosarcoma or chondrosarcoma FPTos in the
has already been lost and long-term diligent monitoring is
COLPOW collection representing l0% of the total FPTOS cases.
unlikely.
EOL
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 5.26 Feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma, spindle cell variant. This montage of 12 gross feline globes shows the morphological variations of
the spindle cell variant of feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma
104
Non-surgical traluma
Chapter
Figure 5.27 Feline post-traumatic sarcoma, round-cell variant. This montage of 10 feline globes shows the morphological variations of round-cell
variant of feline post-tr aumatic ocular sarcoma.
105
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 5.28 Feline post-traumatic ocular
sarcoma, osteosarcoma. (A) Four feline 
globes showing the morphological 
variations of the osteosarcoma/
chondrosarcoma variant of feline 
post-traumatic ocular sarcoma. (B) Low
magnification photomicrograph showing
 neoplastic osteoid deposition internal to
the pigmented choroid.
A
B
106
 Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
5
Figure 5.29 Feline post-traumatic ocular
sarcoma, distribution in the globe.
(A,B) Subgross photomicrographs
showing the typical distribution of the
spindle cell variant of feline post-
traumatic ocular sarcoma. The neoplastic
tissue is dispersed circumferentially
around the globe as is pointed out by
the arrows in (A). The arrows in (B) point 
to areas of osseous metaplasia within 
the tumor. (C) Low magnification
photomicrograph showing a carpet of
neoplastic tissue just internal to the 
choroid.
A
C
107
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
D
Figure 5.30 Spindle cell variant post-traumatic ocular sarcoma, histopathology. (A) Photomicrograph showing an anaplastic spindle cell variant tumor.
(B,C) Photomicrographs highlight the basal lamina-like matrix between individual tumor cells with the PAS stain (B) and the Jones basement membrane
stain, a silver stain (C). (D) A transmission electron micrograph showing the same matrix with broad, banded collagen fibers (arrow), a feature common
to lens capsule. (E) Neoplastic cells internal to the choroid with less distinct PAS-positive staining around individual tumor cells.
Figure 5.31 p53 Staining in spindle cell variant post-traumatic ocular
sarcoma. Immunohistochemistry of a spindle cell variant feline post-
traumatic ocular sarcoma shows intranuclear p53-positive staining. The
multinucleate cells show no staining.
108
 Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
Figure 5.32 Spindle cell variant 
 post-traumatic ocular sarcoma,
immunohistochemistry. (A) Vimentin-
positive staining typical of a
 mesenchymal tumor. (B) Smooth muscle
actin-positive staining. similar to 
metaplastic lens epithelial cells seen in
posterior capsular opacification after 
cataract surgery. Less that half of these
tumors stain positive with smooth muscle
actin. (C) Cytokeratin-positive staining.
About 25% of these tumors stain 
 positive with cytokeratin. (D) Collagen 
iV-positive staining of the extracellular
 matrix is consistent with basal lamina or
lens capsular collagen. (E) α-Crystallin 
A-positive staining. This is the most 
common crystallin protein of the lens
epithelium. (Reproduced with permission 
from Zeiss C J, Johnson E M, Dubielzig R 
R 2003 Feline intraocular tumors may
 arise from transformation of lens 
epithelium. Vet Pathol 40:355-362.)
D
Figure 5.33 Early spindle cell variant
post-traumatic ocular sarcoma. (A-C)
Early feline post-traumatic sarcomas in
globes that were removed for
prophylactic reasons. The arrows point to
the areas of early neoplastic proliferation 
in each globe. (D,E) Gross globe and 
 subgross photomicrographs showing an
the ruptured lens.
A
B
C
D
109
VeterinaryOcularPathology
A
C
D
E
F
Figure 5.34 Round-cell variant post-traumatic sarcoma. (A,B) Two gross images of a round-cell variant feline post-traumatic sarcoma. Advanced
disease (A) and early disease (B). (C) Subgross photomicrograph showing the distribution of neoplastic tissue circumferentially within the globe similar
to the spindle cell variant. (D) Higher magnification of (C). (E) Neoplastic round-cells survive around blood vessels in a sea of necrotic cells. (F)
Immunohistochemistry (CD79a for B-cells) confirms the diagnosis of round-cell variant, but it is still unclear if these tumors are of B-cell or T-cell
lineage.
110
 Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
5
Figure 5.35 Feline post-traumatic
 ocular sarcoma, osteosarcoma variant,
histopathology. (A,C) Subgross
photomicrographs of osteosarcoma/
chondrosarcoma variant of feline
post-traumatic ocular sarcoma (A, H&E;
C. Alcian blue PAS). (B,D) Low
magnification photomicrographs showing
neoplastic osteoid deposition (arrows)
within affected globes.
(A)
B
C
D
Comparative Comments
 Rarely. neoplastic or tumor-like proliferations have been described for
capsule rupture, both following trauma and post-operatively
the traumatized human eye, but no true counterpart for FPTOs has
following cataract surgery
been observed to date.
● In humans, although lens epithelial cells may proliferate and 
 Ocular pleomorphic adenocarcinoma is an extremely rare intraocular
migrate, they retain their contact with the remnants of the lens 
malignancy in humans that occurs in previously traumatized globes.
capsule
This tumor is also seen in dogs, as discussed in Chapter 9 
 Long-established dogma, in the human ophthalmic pathology 
This neoplasm is thought to be derived from ciliary body
 experience, holds that lens epithelial cells do not spontaneously
 epithelial cells 
give rise to neoplasia. However, our experiences that support
 In contrast to the canine and feline lens epithelium, lens epithelial
a lens epithelial cell origin for many cases of FPTOs challenge this 
 cells in humans have a more limited proliferative response to lens 
dogma.
111
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 5.36 Post-traumatic sarcoma
seen early. (A) DSH, 1 year old: clinical
photograph, taken after ocular trauma.
showing cataract in a small, anteriorly
luxated lens. Trauma resulted in lens 
resorption with only nucleus attached to 
the inferior iris (arrow). The detached
retina was also observed. The cat
developed feline post-traumatic sarcoma
years after this clinical photograph was
taken. (B) Gross photograph showing
post-traumatic sarcoma 11 years after
Figure 5.36A was taken. (C)
Photomicrograph showing post-traumatic
sarcoma, spindle cell variant (PAS stain).
A
B
C
112
Non-surgical trauma
Chapter
Figure 5.37 Uveitis diagnosed as
Cryptococcosis and Toxoplasmosis in a
cat leading to post-traumatic sarcoma.
(A) Siamese, 7 years old: left eye
represents the bilateral anterior uveitis.
Chorioretinitis was also present. Based 
 on serology. Cryptococcus and
Toxoplasmosis was diagnosed as the
etiology. (B) Same cat as in (A) 2 months
after treatment: mild diffuse cortical
opacities are developing. (C) Same cat
as in (A,B) 2 weeks later: the cortical
opacities are increasing in density.
(D) Same cat as in (A-C) 3 years later:
 the lens appears hypermature. Posterior
synechia is present with vessels extending
from the iris onto the lens. lris bombe
B
is present and is especially obvious 
temporal. Histopathology demonstrated
an early lens induced sarcoma. (E) Low
 magnification photomicrograph of the
same eye, with Alcian blue PAS stain,
showing hypermature cataract broad 
synechia and thick cellular and fibrous 
tissue around the wrinkled lens capsule
(arrows). (F) Photomicrograph showing
neoplastic spindle cells from the same
eye internal to the tapetum (*).
D
（F）
113
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Relative importance of
characterization of lens capsular plaques in
Li, Y., Schlamp, C., Nickells, R., 1999.
 non-surgical trauma
dogs with cataracts. Am. J. Vet. Res. 61,
Experimental induction of retinal ganglion
139-143.
cell death in adult mice. Invest. Ophthalmol.
Yanoff. M., Fine, B.S., 2002. Ocular pathology.
Bernays, M.E., Peiffer, R.L., 2000. Morphologic
Vis. Sci. 40, 1004-1008.
 5th edn. Mosby, St Louis.
alterations in the anterior lens capsule of
Spiess, B.M., 2007. Diseases and surgery of
Erie, J.C., Nevitt, M.P., Hodge, D., et al., 1992.
canine eyes with cataracts. Am. I. Vet. Res.
the canine orbit. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.),
Incidence of enucleation in a defined
61, 1517-1519.
Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th edn.
 population. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 113,
Davidson, M.G., Morgan, D.K., McGahan, M.C.
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 539-562.
138-144.
de Gottrau, P., Holbach, L.M., Naumann, G.O.
 2000. Efect of surgical technique on in vitro
1994. Clinicopathological review of 1146
posterior capsule opacification. J. Cataract
Feline post-traumatic sarcoma
Refract. Surg. 26, 1550-1554.
enucleations (1980-1990). Br. J.
Davidson, M.G., Wormstone, M., Morgan, D.
Woog, I., Albert, D.M., Gonder, J.R., et al., 1983.
Ophthalmol. 78, 260-265.
et al., 2000. Ex vivo canine lens capsular sac
 Osteosarcoma in a phthisical feline eye.
Corneal effects of trauma
explants. Graefes Arch. Clin. Exp.
Vet. Pathol. 20, 209-214.
Ophthalmol. 238, 708-714.
Dubielzig, R.R., 1984. Ocular sarcoma following
Walde, I., 1983. Band opacities. Equine Vet. J.
trauma in three cats. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
(Suppl. 2), 32.
 Retinal effects of trauma
184, 578-581.
Brooks, D.E., Matthews, A.G., 2007. Equine
Mansour, A.M., Green, W.R., Hogge, C., 1992.
Dubielzig, R.R., Everitt, I., Shadduck, J.A., et al.,
ophthalmology. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.),
Histopathology of commotio retinae. Retina.
1990. Clinical and morphologic features of
Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th edn.
12, 24-28.
 post-traumatic ocular sarcomas in cats. Vet.
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 1165-1274.
Pathol. 27, 62-65.
Kafarnik, C., Murphy, C., Dubielzig, R., 2009.
Scleral trauma
Dubielzig, R.R., Hawkins, K.L., Toy, K.A., et al..
Canine duplication of Descemet's
1994. Morphologic features of feline ocular
membrane. Vet. Pathol. 46, 464-473.
Rampazzo, A., Eule, C., Speier, S., et al., 2006.
sarcomas in 10 cats: light microscopy.
Bourne, W., Nelson, L., Buller, C., et al., 1994.
 Scleral rupture in dogs, cats, and horses.
ultrastructure, and immunohistochemistry.
 Long-term observation of morphologic and
Vet. Ophthalmol. 9, 149-155.
Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 4, 7-12.
functional features of cat corneal
Penetrating injuries
Cullen, C.L., Haines, D.M., Jackson, M.L., et al.,
emndothelium after wounding. Invest.
1998. The use of immunohistochemistry and
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 35, 891-899.
Davidson, M.G., Nasisse, M.P., Jamieson, V.E.
the polymerase chain reaction for detection
et al., 1991. Traumatic anterior lens capsule
 of feline leukemia virus and feline sarcoma
Uveal effects of trauma
disruption. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 27,
virus in six cases of feline ocular sarcoma.
Murphy, C.J., Kern, Tl., McKeever, K., et al..
410-414.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 1, 189-193.
1982. Ocular lesions in free-living raptors. J.
Chmielewski, N.T, Brooks, D.E., Smith, PJ.
Grossniklaus, H.E., Zimmerman, L.E., Kachmer.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 181, 1302-1304.
 et al., 1997. Visual outcome and ocular
M.L., 1990. Pleomorphic adenocarcinoma
Williams, D.L., Gonzalez Villavincencio, C.M.,
survival following iris prolapse in the horse:
of the ciliary body. Immunohistochemical
Wilson, S., 2006. Chronic ocular lesions in
a review of 32 cases. Equine Vet. J. 29,
 and electron microscopic features.
tawny owls (Strix aluco) injured by road
31-39.
Ophthalmology 97, 763-768.
traffic. Vet. Rec. 159, 148-153.
Smith, M.M., Smith, E.M., La Croix, N., et al.,
Zeiss, C.J., Johnson, E.M., Dubielzig, R.R., 2003.
2003. Orbital penetration associated with
Feline intraocular tumors may arise from
Lens effects of trauma
tooth extraction. J. Vet. Dent. 20, 8-17.
transformation of lens epithelium. Vet.
van der Woerdt, A., Nasisse, M.P., Davidson,
Grahn, B.H., Szentimrey, D., Pharr, J.W., et al..
Pathol. 40, 355-362.
M.G., 1992. Lens-induced uveitis in dogs:
1995. Ocular and orbital porcupine quills in
Carter, R.T., Giudice, C., Dubielzig, R.R.
151 cases [1985-1990). J. Am. Vet. Med.
the dog: a review and case series. Can. Vet. J.
et al., 2005. Telomerase activity with
Assoc. 201, 921-926.
36, 488-493.
concurrent loss of cell cycle regulation in
Van Der Woerdt, A., 2000. Lens-induced uveitis.
Wagoner, M.D., 1997. Chemical injuries of the
feline post-traumatic ocular sarcomas. J.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 3, 227-234.
eye: Current concepts in pathophysiology
Comp. Pathol. 133, 235-245.
Grahn, B.H., Cullen, C.L., 2000. Equine
and therapy. Sury. Ophthalmol. 41.
Grahn, B.H., Peiffer, R.L., Cullen, C.L., et al.
phacoclastic uveitis: the clinical
275-313.
 2006. Classification of feline intraocular
manifestations, light microscopic indings.
Chen, C.C., Yang, C.M., Hu, E.R., et al., 2005.
neoplasms based on morphology.
and therapy of 7 cases. Can. Vet. J. 41,
 Penetrating ocular injury caused by
histochemical staining, and
376-382.
venomous snakebite. Am. J. Ophthalmol.
immunohistochemical labeling. Vet.
Gerardi, J.G., Colitz, C.M., Dubielzig, R.R.,
140, 544-546.
Ophthalmol. 9, 395-403.
et al., 1999. Immunohistochemical analysis
of lens epithelial-derived membranes
Proptosis
following cataract extraction in the dog.
Gilger, B.C., Hamilton, H.L., Wilkie, D.A., et al.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 2, 163-168.
1995. Traumatic ocular proptoses in dogs
Colitz, C.M., Malarkey, D., Dykstra, M.J., et al.,
and cats: 84 cases [1980-1993). J. Am. Vet.
 2000. Histologic and immunohistochemical
Med. Assoc. 206, 1186-1190.
114
Diseases of the orbit
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Tumors of the skull, extending to the orbit
129
Osteosarcoma
129
Inflammatory disease of the orbit
115
Canine multilobular tumor of bone (chondroma rodens)
131
Orbital cellulitis or abscess secondary to tooth root
Feline skeletal osteochondromatosis (multiple cartilaginous
inflammation
115
exostoses)
131
Orbital inflammation secondary to deep orbital
 Other hyperostotic syndromes that may affect the orbit 
131
soft tissue injury
117
Canine orbital meningioma
131
 Penetrating injury from the oral cavity
117
 Salivary or lacrimal gland adenocarcinomas
134
Penetrating injury from external trauma, including
bite-wounds
117
Canine orbital multilobular adenoma
134
Orbital inflammation associated with specific
Secondary, metastatic neoplasms
138
 organisms
117
Mycotic infections
117
Bacterial infections
117
Diseases of the orbit may originate within the structures of the
 Parasitic infestations
117
bony orbit (that vary between species), or in the orbital soft tissues,
 Canine extraocular polymyositis
120
including the globe, extraocular muscles, and variable secretory
 Masticatory muscle myositis
121
tissues such as the zygomatic salivary gland, as well as the rich neu-
 Other, poorly characterized, orbital sclerosing
Suae saseasip Aueu 'aaamoh sanssh asau on Aiddns rennssiao
-oid ssedoau io Aioeuuyui jo uoisuaa au uasaidan zqio a
conditions
121
esses from adjacent tissues. Thus, important anatomic considerations
Feline restrictive orbital sarcoma (feline sclerosing
in the diagnosis of orbital disease also include the proximity of the
pseudotumor)
121
 Oral and nasal cavities, the para-nasal sinuses, muscles of mastication,
Canine systemic histiocytosis
121
 and brain.
Cystic lesions of the orbit
123
 Acquired conjunctival cyst
123
Dermoid cyst
123
INFLAMMATORY DISEASE OF THE ORBIT
 Salivary or lacrimal ductular cyst
125
Zygomatic salivary mucocele
125
Orbital inflammatory disease is relatively common
Vascular lesions of the orbit
126
 In the COPLOW collection, orbital inflammation is usually
Orbital fat prolapse (herniation)
126
diagnosed in conjunction with panophthalmitis, in globes that
Neoplastic diseases
126
were enucleated because of intraocular inflammation that had
concurrent orbital inflammation
 Lymphoma
126
1g aie aau pue saop un uoon isou si uoeunqmon siu
Soft tissue sarcomas
127
cases in the COPLOW collection.
Fibrosarcoma, high grade
127
Morphologically low-grade, biologically high-grade
Orbital cellulitis or abscess secondary to
fibrosarcoma of dogs
127
tooth root inflammation (Fig. 6.1)
Anaplastic sarcoma 
128
 Liposarcoma
128
Most common in dogs, rabbits, chinchillas, and horses
Periodontitis extending to the root apex
Extraskeletal osteosarcoma
129
■ Pulpitis due to exposure of the root canal from trauma or
Rhabdomyosarcoma
129
caries, which occurs less frequently in domestic animal
Hemangiosarcoma
129
 species than in humans
115
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 6.1 Orbital abscess. (A) Gross
photograph of sectioned rabbit skull with
orbital abscess related to dental disease. (B)
Golden Retriever, 5 years old: periocular
swelling and serosanguineous discharge was 
due to a dental abscess. (C) DsH, 8 years old:
this globe is exophthalmic, the conjunctiva is 
hyperemic and chemotic, and the right side of 
the face is swollen secondary to a dental
abscess. (D) DSH, 5 years old: the third eyelid is
hyperemic and prolapsed over the exophthalmic
globe. Exposure keratitis resulted in poor
visualization of the anterior segment. (E) Rabbit
sis auog lenidead buous ydebopen lns
(arrow). (F) Gross photograph of the skull in (E)
showing abscess extending into the calvarium
(arrow). (G) Gross photograph of canine globe
A
B
showing an orbital abscess in the posterior pole
as well as panophthalmitis. (H) Subgross 
photomicrograph of a similar canine globe with
abscess in the orbital tissues at the posterior
pole.
C
E
G
116
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
·Radiographic evidence of osteolysis at the tooth root apex,
Cryptococcus neoformans
particularly involving the caudal maxillary tooth roots
There are three cases in the COPLOW collection, in which the diag-
Consider the possibility of trauma and iatrogenic spread of
nosis was made from orbital biopsy specimens.
infection to the orbit during dental procedures
■There are six cases in the COPLOW collection in which
Two in cats and one in a dog
The canine case had concurrent malignant sarcoma in the orbit.
orbital suppurative inflammation and panophthalmitis
occurred shortly following a dental procedure.
Coccidioides immitis
 There are two canine cases represented in the COPLOW collction,
Orbital inflammation secondary to deep
both submitted from the South-western United States.
orbital soft tissue injury (Fig. 6.2)
Candida spp.
Most of these cases are presented because there is panophthalmitis
and the orbital inflammation itself is not well-characterized, either
There are two feline cases of localized orbital candidiasis in the
clinically or histopathologically.
COPLOW collection.
Aspergillus spp.
Penetrating injury from the oral cavity
There are three canine cases of orbital aspergillosis in the COPLOW
 Most severe disease is seen in the inferior tissues of the orbit,
collection, all of which were associated with nasal aspergillosis. This
dependent to the globe
is consistent with previously published reports.
 Fistulous and suppurative processes generally characterize the
Although not represented in the COPLOW collection, feline orbital
inflammatory response
aspergillosis has been reported in the literature.
The degree of fbrosis is variable but, in some cases, can
Affected cats may or may not show clinical evidence of disease
dominate the pathology
in the paranasal sinuses or nasal cavity
Foreign bodies can be challenging to identify and are rarely
 There is an apparent breed predisposition for Persian cats.
found on histopathology. Orbital foreign bodies are more
commonly identified in dogs than in cats (82 dogs versus 12
cats in the COPLOW collection)
Bacterial infections
 Plant material is most common
 41 documented cases in dogs
Bacteria were observed in specimens from 15 cases in the COPLOW
 Four documented cases in cats
collection that had orbital inflammation. Nine canine cases, three
 Porcupine quills may penetrate the orbit directly or migrate
rabbits, one cat, one horse and one chinchilla.
from adjacent tissues. There are two such cases in the
 In none of these cases was the identity of the bacterial organism
COPLOW collection.
established. This may reflect a failure to submit samples for
 microbiological culture, or difficulty in isolating organisms due
Penetrating injury from external trauma, including
to specific culture requirements.
bite-wounds
Such injury is more likely to occur in species such as the dog and cat
Parasitic infestations
that have a relatively 'open' bony orbit.
Canine episcleral onchocercosis (Fig. 6.3)
 This disease of emerging importance is most common in
orbit, rather than inferior orbit
Mediterranean Europe with reports from Greece, and lesser
If the wound is lateral, then it is less likely to be sampled
numbers from Hungary and Germany
with the standard vertical section of the globe. Special
 In the European cases, the morphologic features of adult
instructions from an alert clinician are essential if the
worms have been reported as being consistent with
primary lesion is to be located
Onchocerca lupi (from wolves). However, this is controversial
Other findings similar to penetrating injury from the oral
because nucleotide sequences for this canine form appear to
cavity.
be unique within the genus, and this canine disease may
represent host switch and site shift that has resulted in a new
Orbital inflammation associated with
Onchocerca species
specific organisms
 There are 12 cases in the COPLOW collection from dogs in
North America
 Mycotic infections
■All originated in California or neighboring Western states
Infection of the orbit may result from hematogenous spread in dis-
The parasites involved have previously been identified as
Onchocerca lienalis but this remains controversial, as the
seminated, systemic mycoses, or by extension of local infection from
definitive identity of the parasite has not yet been established
the nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses, or from the globe. The systemic
- Cattle are the definitive host for Onchocerca lienalis; the
mycoses are considered in greater depth in Chapter 9.
adult parasites live in the gastrosplenic ligament
Blastomyces dermatitidis
 patent infection (as the presence of adult male and female
There are five cases in the COPLOW collection in which a diagnosis
worms, with microfilaria within the adult female worms in
 of blastomycosis was made from orbital biopsy specimens.
the orbital tissue suggests) would only be expected if dogs.
●Four in dogs and one in a cat.
Or a closely related species were the definitive host
117
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 6.2 Orbital and episcleral
inflammation. (A) Miniature Poodle.
10 years old: the exophthalmic globe has
severe conjunctival hyperemia, corneal
edema and a dense cataract. Zarfoss KM,
 Dubielzig RR, Eberhard ML, and Schmidt
KS. Canine ocular onchocerciasis in the
United States: two new cases ano a
review of the literature. Vet. Ophthal. 8:
51-57, 2005. (B) English Bulldog. 5 years
old: the conjunctiva and sclera are
hyperemic and thickened. Adjacent
 cornea is edematous and vascularized in
this exophthalmic globe. (C,D) Gross 
photographs of canine globes showing 
orbital soft tissue inflammation and
fistulous tracts. (E) Subgross
photomicrograph of a canine globe
showing orbital fibrosis with suppurative
inflammation. (F) Photomicrograph of the
episcleral tissues from a dog showing a
porcupine quill within an inflammatory
fistula.
C
D
118
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
Figure 6.3 Canine orbital Onchocerca.
(A,B) Gross photograph and subgross
photomicrograph showing a proliferative 
 nodule in the orbit and bulbar
conjunctiva associated with infestation by 
the nematode parasite Onchocerca sp.
(C) Higher magnification 
photomicrograph, of the boxed area in 
(A,B) showing nematodes within
granuloma-lined clefts in the orbital
episcleral tissue of a dog.
(D) Photomicrograph showing an adult
A
B
female nematode. The inset shows a
circumferential ridge (*), which is
 characteristic of Onchocerca.
C
D
·The clinical manifestations of canine ocular onchocercosis
■ Single or multiple raised, red lesions seen on the bulbar
conjunctiva, with chemosis, erythema, and periocular
swelling
■ More chronic cases demonstrate red, nodular, 2 mm to 2 cm
mass lesions
■
 Exophthalmos, protrusion of the nictitans, or anterior
 segment involvement may be observed clinically. The latter
may include corneal edema and peripheral
neovascularization, and anterior uveitis
■
 Two of the cases in the COPLOW archive had no clinical
 signs attributable to the infestation. In these dogs, ocular
 onchocerciasis was an incidental finding following
enucleation for uveal neoplasia
 Figure 6.4 Trichinosis. Photomicrograph showing Frichinelfa spiratis in the
Morphological features of canine ocular onchocercosis
extraocular skeletal muscle from a dog.
There is a nodular infiltrative lesion in the substantia propria
of the conjunctiva, extending into the episcleral tissue and
orbital fascia
The following features may help distinguish Onchocerca spp.
■
 Granulation tissue admixed with eosinophils, lymphocytic
from Diroflaria spp.
inflammation and macrophages
- The cuticle of adult female Dirofilaria spp. worms, have
- It is not essential to find eosinophils in the infiltrate
 ridges that run longitudinally and therefore are only seen
 In the posterior aspect of the subconjunctival mass lesions
when the worms are sectioned in cross-section
and extending all the way around the episcleral tissues, there
 The cuticle of adult female Onchocerca spp. worms consists
are cavities containing adult male and female parasites.
 of two distinct layers with interior striae and, on the
surrounded by a pure population of epithelioid macrophages
exterior surface, ring-like, circumferential ridges which are
■
 Male and female worms are often seen together, and the
 only seen when the worms are cut in the longitudinal
females contain microfilaria
plane.
Morphologic features useful for the identification of Onchocerca
Spp.
Infestation of extraocular muscles with Trichinella spiralis
 These worms are easily identifed as flarial nematodes
(trichinosis) (Fig. 6.4)
because they have an obvious cuticle and have coelomyarial
musculature, as well as digestive and reproductive system
 There are two cases of canine extra-ocular trichinosis in the COPLOW
structures
collection.
 The adult females are easily recognizable as filarial worms
because they contain microflaria
wasting and fever that were suggestive of systermic disease.
119
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
In many cases, an antecedent stressor, such as recent kenneling.
Comparative Comments
surgery or estrus is reported prior to the onset of clinical signs
The spectrum of inflammatory diseases of the orbit encountered in 
 The condition is bilateral but not always symmetrical and, in its
human pathology differs rather markedly from that seen in the 
acute phase, causes exophthalmos, chemosis, and retraction of
veterinary pathology laboratory. Orbital cellulitis in humans is most 
the upper eyelid without protrusion of the third eyelid
 commonly caused by extension of an inflammation from the 
 The muscle pathology is dominated by a lymphocytic infltrate
paranasal sinuses. Its cause includes common bacterial infections,
within the muscle tissue. CD3+ lymphocytes predominate
with the most commonly identified organisms being Staphylococcus 
Chronic fibrosing extraocular myositis with restrictive strabismus
 aureus. Streptococcus. Haemophilus inffuenzae, and other Gram-
Has been reported in young large-breed dogs and Shar Peis
 positive rods. Infection may also incur by endogenous routes, as with
May be unilateral or bilateral
bacteremia or septic embolization, and from exogenous sources 
Clinical presentation is of rapid onset and progression of
following trauma. Fungal infections may occur in 
 enophthalmos and severe ventro-medial strabismus leading
immunocompromised patients and are usually caused by Mucor or
 to visual impairment
Aspergillus species. Echinococcus granurosus is the most common 
  May represent a chronic phase of extraocular muscle
parasitic cyst seen in the orbit.
polymyositis
 Characterized by fibrosis and lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate
restricted to the extraocular muscles.
Canine extraocular polymyositis (Fig. 6.5)
Comparative Comments
This diagnosis is generally made based on clinical presentation alone.
This condition has many features similar to Graves' disease in
Extraocular muscle biopsy is seldom performed to support the clinical
humans.
diagnosis, and there are no cases represented in the COPLOW collec-
 The orbital manifestations of severe ophthalmopathy with
tion; however, the pathology of the condition has been well described.
exophthalmos in Graves' disease usually begin in adults. Older
Golden Retrievers are over-represented
males are affected more often than younger females, in contrast 
Affected dogs are generally 6-18 months old and more often
to the mild form of thyrotoxic exophthalmos 
female than male
Figure 6.5 Extraocular polymyositis of
Golden Retrievers. (A) Golden Retriever,
18 months old: characteristic bilateral 
axial exophthalmia with increased scleral
'showr' is present. (B) Golden Retriever,
10 months old: gross photograph of the
brain, eyes, optic nerve and still-
connected extraocular muscles showing
thickening and pallor in the extraocular
 muscle tissues. The arrows point to two
 swollen extraocular muscles. Reproduced
with permission from Carpenter JL,
Schmidt GM, Moore, FM, Albert DM,
Abrams KL and Elner VM. Canine
bitateral extraocutar polymyositis. Vet.
Pathol. 26: 510-512, 1989. (C) Golden
Retriever, 9 months old: the bilateral
A
exophthalmia was also associated with 
chemosis and hyperemia of the
conjunctiva.
C
B
120
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
61
Comparative Comments (continued)
Comparative Comments
 Patients with this severe form of disease are often hyperthyroid,
 Pseudotumor in humans:
but patients may be hypothyroid or euthyroid 
 Categorized as granulomatous, or non-granulomatous 
The disease is an inflammatory extraocular myopathy, with a
 Sclerosing pseudotumor is a subtype of non-granulomatous 
 predominantly T-cell infiltrate
pseudotumor
 In the later stages of disease the affected extraocular muscle
 The hallmark of sclerosing pseudotumor is the early appearance
tissue may become fibrotic
 of fibrosis that is out of proportion to the lymphocytic
 Thyroid orbitopathy is the most common cause of unilateral and 
inflammation
bilateral exophthalmos in adults. This usually involves extraocular
 This is similar to idiopathic restrictive orbital sarcoma or
jo puawabejua Auotewwejui Ag pazlapeeup s! pue sapsnu 
 sclerosing pseudotumor in cats.
extraocular muscles and subsequent scarring.
Masticatory muscle myositis
Canine systemic histiocytosis (Fig. 6.7) (see Ch. 7 for
detailed discussion)
There is a predisposition for young, large-breed dogs
 May cause exophthalmos, due to displacement of the globe
There are seven cases with orbital involvement diagnosed in the
secondary to swelling of pterygoid and/or temporalis muscles
COPLOW collection: two in Bernese Mountain dogs, three in Labra-
that form soft-tissue boundaries of the open, canine orbit
dor Retrievers, and two in other breeds. The three forms of canine
Subsequent fbrosis of the pterygoid and temporalis muscles
histiocytosis that have been described include:
may lead to enophthalmos
1.
Cutaneous histiocytosis, the most benign and localized - this
 Muscle biopsy and detection of serum antibodies against type
diagnosis has not been made in the COPLOW collection.
2M muscle fbers may be helpful in the diagnosis of masticatory
2.
Systemic histiocytosis, which has been diagnosed in the
myositis
COPLOW collection.
Generalized polymyositis and infectious causes of myositis
3.
Malignant histiocytosis, the most malignant of the three, based
(including neosporosis, toxoplasmosis and leishmaniasis)
on morphological and biological behavior. Malignant
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of extraocular
histiocytosis has not been diagnosed in the COPLOW
and masticatory myositis.
collection.
The morphologic features useful in diagnosing systemic histiocytosis
Other, poorly characterized, orbital
are as follows:
sclerosing conditions
 Solid nodular tumors characterized by sheets of only moderately
dysplastic histiocytes, that lack anaplastic features
Feline restrictive orbital sarcoma (feline sclerosing
+
Minimal lymphocytic or neutrophilic involvement
pseudotumor) (Hg. 6.6)
 No classical granulomatous nodules
 There are 10 cases diagnosed in the COPLOW collection.
Evidence of vasocentricity
This ranges from histiocytic cells tightly surrounding blood
This condition has a very characteristic clinical appearance:
■There is variable exophthalmos, with very pronounced
vessels, to blood vessel destruction and obliteration
- Vasocentric infiltration is considered a very important
reduction in globe motility
diagnostic consideration at COPLOW
■
 Retraction of the upper eyelid contributes further to severe 
 Reticulin fibers surrounding the histiocytes.
cormeal exposure and desiccation, which is often associated
with ulcerative keratitis
 Systemic histiocytosis may regress spontaneously but often requires
Morphologically, the condition is characterized by a mixture of
aggressive anti-inflammatory chemotherapy
bland spindle cells, associated with variable amounts of
extracellular collagen deposition and perivascular infiltration of
lymphocytes
■ The spindle cell infiltrate and collagen accumulation extends
Comparative Comments
from the conjunctival substantia propria to the episcleral
tissue at the posterior pole of the globe
Specific causes of non-infectious orbital inflammation in humans
include: ruptured dermoid cysts; idiopathic orbital inflammatory
Gradual progression, over weeks to months, to involve the
DiuaisAs pue sisoploue (sisopiosies (yowniopnasd) aseasip
second eye is typically reported
autoimmune vasculitides. The most common of this latter group is
Involvement of the skin, lip, and/or oral mucosa, with
Wegener's granulomatosis, characterized by a necrotizing
pronounced gingival thickening, has also been reported
granulomatous inflammation of the arterioles and venules. Other 
 The etiopathogenesis of this condition has not yet been
vasculitides include: systemic lupus erythematosus and polyarteritis 
elucidated
nodosa. Kimura's disease occurs most commonly in Asians, and it is 
Evaluation of the head from cats after euthanasia, reveals bone
pue 'eiseidladky pioudwkl 'uone saloud seinosea Aa paziape eu
lysis and neoplastic infiltration of the empty orbit. At the end of
eosinophilic inflammation. Less commonly seen non-infectious 
life mass lesions are more likely to be a part of the syndrome
inflammations include: necrobiotic xanthogranuloma with 
 The progressive, nature and the histological appearance of the
 paraproteinemia, pseudorheumatoid nodules, foreign body
proliferative lesions are more consistent with a form of
 granulomas, histiocytosis X, sinus histiocytosis, juvenile
fibrosarcoma rather than with a non-neoplastic inflammatory
xanthogranuloma, and Erdheim-Chester disease.
disease.
121
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 6.6 Feline restrictive orbital
sarcoma (orbital sclerosing pseudotumor).
(A) Gross photograph of feline globe and
orbital tissues showing orbital contents 
bound together by bland neoplastic
fibrous tissue in restrictive orbital 
sarcoma. (B) Photomicrograph showing
sclera and spindle-cell proliferative
reaction in the episcleral orbital tissue (*).
(C) Low magnification photomicrograph
showing fibrous tissue (arrows) wrapped
around the sclera, adipose tissue and 
facial planes. (D) Photomicrograph 
showing the orbit from a cat eventually
euthanized with feline restrictive orbital
sarcoma showing neoplastic tissue
associated with bone lysis (arrows). (E)
Gross photograph of the head of the cat
euthanized with feline restrictive orbital
sarcoma. The upper image shows the 
B
side of the head not affected with
neoplastic tissue and the lower image is 
of the side of the head affected. The 
affected side shows a blanket of
neoplastic tissue covering the facial
 planes and obscuring muscles. Notice
that there is no well-defined mass lesion,
even in this late stage of disease.
C
E
122
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
Figure 6.7 Canine systemic histiocytosis.
(A) Gross photograph of a globe with
systemic histiocytosis, causing a diffuse 
swelling in the uveal tissues. (B) Clinical
photograph showing an eyelid nodule 
with systemic histiocytosis. (Image
courtesy of Jane Cho.) (C) Clinical
photograph showing episcleral tissue
swelling associated with systemic
histiocytosis. (D,E) Photomicrographs of
systemic histiocytosis showing vasocentric
histiocytic infiltrate (arrows). (F) Higher
magnification photomicrograph showing
atypical histiocytic cells, which
predominate in systemic histiocytosis.
A
B
C
D
 Inflammation may or may not be a feature
CYstiC lesIonS of the orbIt
■Some cases have excessive keratinization within the cyst.
Acquired conjunctival cyst (Fig. 6.8)
Dermoid cyst
There are 13 cases of acquired cysts diagnosed in the COPLOW
These are rare congenital cystic lesions that may occur within
collection.
the orbit. Although isolated canine and equine cases are
lou si sisouep su aimeal Aeuaan a u paoda
Acquired cysts are the result of the traumatic displacement of
represented in the COPLOW archive
epithelial tissue which then develops into a cystic lesion is the
 These lesions are present at early age, probably from birth, but
displaced location
may not present clinically until adulthood due to slowly
 Acquired cysts can develop after trauma or surgery
progressive enlargement of the cyst
■  Most cases occurred as a complication following enucleation
 Morphologic features of dermoid cyst include:
AIaB1ns
■ Contain fully-differentiated but disorganized epidermal
Conjunctival cyst is characterized by the following
structures such as stratifed squamous epithelium, hair 
features:
follicles, sebaceous glands or sweat glands
 Fully-differentiated conjunctival epithelium or stratified
Rarely they contain other structures of surface ectodermal
 ansde snoiqy e Aq papunouns wnauida snowenos 
origin.
123
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 6.8 Conjunctival epithelial cysts
of the orbit. (A) DSH, 7 years old: the
right globe was enucleated 3 months
previously. A soft swelling was present
within the bony orbit at the arrow.
(B) Gross photograph of the cyst
dissected from the orbit of (A).
(C) Golden Retriever, 2 years old: the
dark area below the globe represents a
large inferior subpalpebral cyst. (D) This
brown serous fluid is from the fine
needle aspirate of the cyst shown in (C).
(E,F) Photomicrographs showing the
inner epithelium and the fibrous wall of
 conjunctival cysts in dogs
B
D
124
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
Figure 6.9 Mucocele of the lacrimal
glands of the nictitans. (A) English
bulldog. 9 months old: bilateral
hypertrophy glands nictitans were
surgically treated with the pocket 
technique 3 months before the
photograph. (B) This photograph of the
left eye of (A) shows the large cystic
 structure protruding from the bulbar
 surface of the nictitans. The arrow points
to the normal free lid margin of the
nictitans. (C) Photomicrograph showing
the cyst epithelium, which is cuboidal
epithelium and the loose connective
tissue immediately outside the cyst.
B
C
Salivary or lacrimal ductular cyst (Fig. 6.9)
 The 'mucoid' appearance of the connective tissues may
lead to the misdiagnosis of myxosarcoma
There are eight cases of orbital salivary ductular cysts in the COPLOW
Away from the cavitary lesion containing thick, mucinous
collection.
material, there is granulation tissue, inflammation, or
 These cysts can be associated with the lacrimal gland or the
evidence of recent or old hemorrhage
 s 
■It is unclear whether the inflammatory changes Or
Morphologic features characteristic of ductular cyst
hemorrhage described above are indicative of trauma related
 In order to make the diagnosis of ductular cyst, there has to
ansil io 'uoisal au uuoy saieise uieiqo on suae o
be an epithelial lining to the inner aspect of the cyst
response to the liberation of salivary secretion, or whether
 The cyst wall may be thin and fbrous and devoid of
ssanaid Aouuu suapun ue joddns Aa
inflammation. However, the adjacent associated glandular
(sialadenitis)
tissue often demonstrates an inflammatory infltrate and
- Sialadenitis may be an important consideration in the
fbrosis
 etiopathogenesis of zygomatic salivary mucoceles, given
There may or may not be evidence of a mucinous
that some cases appear to resolve with conservative
component within the cyst.
therapy.
Zygomatic salivary mucocele (Fig. 6.10)
There are six cases diagnosed in the COPLOW collection.
Comparative Comments
?
Morphologic features helpful in making the diagnosis of
 Regarding cystic lesions of the orbit, congenital epithelial cysts are
mucoceleinclude:
common. These are subgrouped into epidermoid, dermoid,
 Mucocele has a thick fibrous capsule but no epithelium. For
conjunctival dermoid, and cysts lined by other types of epithelium.
that reason, mucocele is not a truly cystic lesion
Acquired epithelial cysts include: mucocele, caused by erosion or 
■
 PAS + mucin is an important component within the cavitated
displacement of sinus epithelium into the orbit; lacrimal ductal cysts;
lesion and also within the connective tissues around the
Jo hnsan e se asiue Aewu siss suabounan sis/o uonienueidu! pue
cavitated lesion
125
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 6.10 Orbital salivary mucocele.
(A) Gross photograph of an orbital
mucocele removed at orbitotomy. (B-D)
Photomicrographs of orbital mucocele 
showing a mesenchymal
 pseudoepithelium and a thick fibrous
capsule. (D) Osseous metaplasia (arrows)
A
R
mass lesion within the orbit, detected on ultrasonography,
Comparative Comments (continued)
may suggest a diagnosis of lipoma rather than prolapse of
developmental abnormalities of the eyes and are lined by
normal adipose tissue.
neuroepithelia. Hematic cysts result from repeated hemorrhage into
softer bony tissue in the orbit, in association with lymphangioma or
 other pre-existing lesions.
Comparative Comments
Not uncommonly, orbital fat will prolapse through the orbital septum
in humans and cause a “lump' in the lids. This may be removed for
VASCULAR LESIONS OF THE ORBIT
diagnostic purposes or as a cosmetic procedure.
There are two cases of orbital arteriovenous or venous malformations
in the COPLOW collection.
●Rarely, congenital or acquired arteriovenous fstulae or orbital
varices may present with exophthalmos
NEOPLASTIC DISEASES
Exophthalmos associated with vascular lesions may be
intermittent and/or pulsatile.
Lymphoma (Figs 6.12, 6.13)
There are 12 canine cases of orbital lymphoma in the COPLOW col-
lection, representing 0.3% of canine neoplasms and 7% of canine
ORBITAL FAT PROLAPSE (HERNIATION)
lymphomas in the collection. There are ll feline cases of orbital
(Fig. 6.11)
lymphoma in the COPLOW collection, representing 0.5% of feline
neoplasms and 5% of feline lymphomas in the collection.
There are four canine cases of this condition diagnosed in the
Orbital lymphoma is most common in the bovine dairy breeds,
COPLOw collection.
but this is not well represented in the COPLOW case material
■ The condition has also been reported in other species,
due to the predominance of companion animal submissions
including horses
There are three cases of orbital lymphoma in ferrets in the
The diagnosis is made by recognizing a mass of fully
COPLOW collection, out of a total of ll ferret submissions
differentiated adipose tissue and ruling out other
Lymphoma should always be considered a systemic disease
conditions
unless there is a compelling reason to believe that a particular
This can be difficult to distinguish pathologically from
Suui eudu (s u aas) poui aud si uen
lipoma, and clinical features, including presence of a distinct
the orbit should be considered part of a systemic process.
126
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
Figure 6.11 Orbital fat prolapse
(lipoma). (A) Beagle, 10 years old:
lobulated subconjunctival masses are
present at the nasal bulbar conjunctiva.
Fine needle aspirate (FNA) confirmed 
fully-differentiated adipose tissue. (B)
Opossum, adult: this is the right eye of a
grossly overweight pet. A FNA confirmed
 normal adipose tissue in these
subconjunctival masses. (C,D) Gross
photographs showing orbital adipose
tissue prolapsed forward, distorting the
 conjunctival profile.
A
B
D
Soft tissue sarcomas (Fig. 6.14)
 Total scores of 3 or 4 are grade 1 sarcomas, scores of 5 or 6
are grade 2 sarcomas, and scores of 7 to 9 are grade 3
Fbrosarcoma, high grade
sarcomas.
There are eight canine cases and two feline cases in the COPLOW
collection.
 The morphologic features useful in reaching a diagnosis of
Morphologically low-grade, biologically high-grade
high-grade fbrosarcoma are as follows:
fibrosarcoma of dogs (Fig. 6.15)
 Spindle-shaped cellular profile
 Extracellular collagen deposition
There are six cases of this tumor in the COPLOW collection, represent-
■
 These tumors should be graded in order to offer the most
ing 0. 15% of canine tumors in the collection.
accurate prognosis, although our impression is that the orbit is
As the awkward name suggests, this tumor of the soft tissues of
an unfavorable location for a soft tissue sarcoma of any kind.
the canine skull defes the sarcoma grading scheme described
The grading system of Barbara Powers is used by COPLOW and
above and needs to be carefully evaluated in order to make an
described below:
accurate diagnosis
■ Feature l: Cellular differentiation, scored from 1 (tumor cells 
 These tumors have a breed predilection for the Golden Retriever,
resemble normal tissue cells) to 3 (tumor cells are very
but can affect any breed of dog
anaplastic)
These are locally aggressive tumors of the skull and they carry a
 Feature 2: Mitotic rate, expressed as number of mitotic figures 
poor prognosis
 per ten x400 microscopic felds
 In order to accurately diagnose these challenging neoplasms, the
-1=1to 9
following morphologic features must be taken into
2 = 10 to 19
consideration:
3 =More than 20
The hallmark feature of the morphologically low-grade,
Feature 3: Tumor necrosis
biologically high-grade sarcoma is abundant collagen within
1 =No necrosis
the neoplastic tissue
- 2= Less than 50% of the tissue is necrotic
 By grading criteria, this is a grade 1 (low-grade) sarcoma for
- 3 = More than 50% of the tissue is necrotic
the following reasons:
127
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 6.12 Orbital lymphoma, clinical
(A) DSH, 1 year old: the globe is
exophthalmic and the nictitans is
prolapsed. (B) The fundus of the eye in
(A) shows a change in the tapetal
coloration superior and nasal due to
indentation of the globe by a retrobulbar
mass. The mass was identified by FNA as
lymphoma. (C) Border Collie, 10 years
old: severe corneal edema and
vascularization prevents visualization of
the anterior segment in this 
exophthalmic globe. Retrobulbar and
intraocular lymphoma was diagnosed at
necropsy. (D) Golden Retriever mix, 5
years old: both globes are exophthalmic
with swelling of upper and lower lids.
B
 Retrobulbar and intraocular lymphoma
 was diagnosed by FNA and confirmed at 
necropsy.
- The neoplastic cells either look exactly like native
Anaplastic sarcoma (Fg. 6.16)
fibroblasts, or they have only mild cellular enlargement
There are l0 cases of this orbital tumor in dogs and three cases of this
and large nuclei
tumor in cats in the COPLOW collection.
 Mitoses and necrosis are never prominent in these
tumors
 iaun a ap 'ss ae-uiy 'uyap q 'ae au
The challenge for the pathologist is to accurately distinguish
 of the features of tissue differentiation and failure to form any
between sarcoma and granulation tissue The following
extracellular matrix, by which a more specific name can be
features are helpful:
given.
- Granulation tissue has a prominent vascular bed, with
small blood vessels crossing at right angles to the direction
 of the spindle cells and collagen fibers; whereas sarcoma
Liposarcoma (Fig. 6.17)
has fewer vessels and a more random distribution of blood
 There are 10 cases of orbital liposarcomas in the COPLOW collection,
vessels
■The challenge for the pathologist lies in answering the
all of them in dogs.
question of whether or not the lesion is neoplastic or
There are two morphologic subtypes:
reactive
Anaplastic tumors showing the following features>
However, the clinician might already consider the lesion as
 Cellular pleomorphism
being neoplastic, because of its aggressive and extensive
一
 Multinucleate cells 
behavior
 Scant extracellular matrix
- In these cases, it can be rewarding for pathologist to seek
- Lipid vacuoles in the cytoplasm
further input from the submitting clinician regarding their
 Sharply delineated nodular masses with features of brown fat
impression of the lesion's biological behavior
(hibernoma) showing the following features:
If the clinician is reluctant to determine that the lesion is
- Delineated nodules with little focal invasion
 neoplastic, particularly if it is early in the course of the
 Large monomorphic neoplastic cells with abundant
 disease, then the pathologist is faced with a diffcult
 delicately vacuolated cytoplasm
diagnostic decision.
- A rich capillary vascular supply.
128
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
Figure 6.13 Orbital lymphoma,
pathology. (A,B) Gross photographs of
canine globes with orbital lymphoma.
(C,D) Gross photograph and subgross
photomicrograph of a ferret globe with
 orbital lymphoma.
A
Extraskeletal osteosarcoma (Fig. 6.18)
 These tumors can be either primary or secondary, but there are
There are seven cases of extraskeletal osteosarcoma of the orbit in dogs 
no reliable morphologic features to make a distinction
and four cases in cats in the COPLOW collection.
Morphologic features of diagnostic importance are as follows:
The defining feature is the extracellular deposition of osteoid
The morphologic hallmark of the tumor is the relationship
between neoplastic cells and the red blood cells around
matrix in tumors that do not arise from bone
Orbital osteosarcomas may or may not be directly connected to
them. In hemangiosarcoma the RBCs are within slit-like
the orbital bone
spaces defined by the tumor cells.
 One case in a cat arose within the fbrous reaction surrounding
 The cellular profile can be extremely variable ranging from
 primarily spindle cells, to polygonal cells with an epithelial
an orbital prosthesis implanted after enucleation years before.
appearance to anaplastic forms.
Rhabdomyosarcoma (Fg. 6.19)
aul ul soop ul eosieoaopqeuu leiqio jo saseo uanas aie arau
Tumors of the skull, extending to the orbit
COPLOW collection.
Osteosarcoma (Fg. 6.20)
Morphologic features of diagnostic significance include the
following:
 There are 10 cases of orbital osteosarcoma in dogs and three cases in
Strap cells with abundant cytoplasm, parallel cell boundaries,
cats in the COPLOW collection.
and multiple lined up nuclei
 In dogs, osteosarcoma of the axial skeleton, including the skull,
■
Cross striations in the cytoplasm
is rarer than osteosarcoma of the appendicular skeleton, and
■
 Positive desmin, actin, myoglobin, or skeletal muscle actin
less likely to spread by systemic metastasis. However, this
labeling by immunohistochemistry
distinction in biological behavior may be of limited clinical and
+
Five of the seven cases are in dogs less than 3 years old.
 prognostic signifcance because radical surgical excision by
amputation is not an option
Hemangiosarcoma
Generally, osteosarcoma of the skull in dogs grows outwards
from the skull
 There are six cases of orbital hemangiosarcoma in dogs and three cases
The histological appearance can be that of a well-differentiated
in cats in the COPLOW collection.
tumor sugesting a low-grade neoplasm in terms of biological
129
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 6.14 Orbital fibrosarcoma. (A)
Gross photograph of a canine skull
sectioned in the midline. A very large
invasive fibrosarcoma is destroying much
of the hard palate as well as the orbit.
(B) Gross photograph of a feline skull
with the recurrent orbital fibrosarcoma 
apparent in the exposed orbital tissue.
(C) Gross photograph of a canine globe
with orbital fibrosarcoma. (D)
Photomicrograph of orbital fibrosarcoma.
A
B
C
Figure 6.15 Morphologically low-grade,
biologically high-grade fibrosarcoma. (A)
Canine skull with an extensive 
 morphologically low-grade, biologically
high-grade fibrosarcoma. Sarcoma has
effaced much of the maxilla. (B) Gross
photograph of globe and orbital tissues
from a dog with morphologically
low-grade, biologically high-grade
fibrosarcoma. (C) Photomicrograph
showing bland collagen-rich connective
tissues and sparse well-differentiated
fibroblasts.
A
B
130
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
Figure 6.16 Orbital anaplastic sarcoma.
(A) Gross photograph of canine globe 
and orbital anaplastic sarcoma. (B)
Photomicrograph of orbital anaplastic
sarcoma showing poorly-differentiated
neoplastic cells, including multinucleate
giant cells (arrows).
A
B
behavior. However, aside from radical orbitectomy, which is a
 If incompletely excised, tumors can grow back with more
technically demanding procedure, there are few good surgical
malignant features
options. Radical excision, combined with adjunctive therapy
A possible association with retroviral infection has been
may be of benefit in some patients.
 proposed but the causal relationship between naturally
unconvincing.
Canine multilobular tumor of bone (chondroma
rodens) (Fg. 6.21)
Other hyperostotic syndromes that may affect the
There are l2 cases of canine multilobular tumor of bone in the
COPLOW collection.
orbit
These are always tumors of the skull and often arise in suture
 Craniomandibular osteopathy is characterized by irregular
Osseous proliferation of the skull bones in young dogs. Scottish,
lines between the flat bones of the skull
They are locally effacing and aggressive, but they only rarely
Cairn and West Highland white terriers are predisposed to this
metastasize. Thus, local recurrence following excision is a
condition, that may affect orbital structures, leading to
problem but relatively long survival times may be achieved
exophthalmos
Morphologic features useful in establishing a diagnosis are as
 Idiopathic calvarial hyperostosis has been reported in young
follows:
male Bull mastiffs. This rare syndrome of excessive bone
As the name suggests, these tumors have a very characteristic
proliferation affecting the calvarium may involve bones of the
lobulated pattern
orbit, producing a mass effect or impinging on neurovascular
Each lobule is always surrounded by collagen rich spindle
structures
cells and not bone or cartilage matrix
 Both of these conditions appear to be self-limiting when
Within the nodule (or lobule), there is fully differentiated
affected animals reach skeletal maturity.
bone, cartilage or both, with accompanying osteocytes and
chondrocytes.
Canine orbital meningioma (Figs 6.23, 6.24)
There are 60 cases of canine orbital meningioma in the COPLOW
Feline skeletal osteochondromatosis (multiple
collection, representing 1.5% of canine tumors in the collection.
cartilaginous exostoses) (Fig. 6.22)
 This tumor shows distinctive morphology and biological
Affected cats develop one, or several, widely separated boney
behavior in the dog
proliferations that grow outward from the skeleton, distorting
Characteristically, orbital meningiomas envelope the optic nerve
the surrounding soft tissue
outside the dura mater invading adipose tissue and loose
 Multifocal osteochondromatosis can occur in any bone as
connective tissues. Tumors form a cone around the optic nerve
exostotic skeletal masses, and often involve the skull and
that conforms to the shape of the orbit
orbit
 Neoplastic cells are derived from the arachnoid cap cells which
normally exist outside the dura mater near the globe, as
growth plates and stops growing when the growth plate closes,
discussed in Chapter 12
the feline tumors continue to grow relentlesly after skeletal
■ Tumor cells may or may not extend into the dura mater, but
sisouoid laod yon e A aojaaun Aau a
they are always outside the dura because of the extradural
origin
bones
Kianaduos asixa on pieu inq suimoig mois aie siouni asau
Tumors are made up of a mixture of well-differentiated bone
Thus, local recurrence is relatively common. They can locally
infltrate into the optic foramen, and cranial vault and may
a growth plate in the relationship between bone and cartilage
displace or invade the brain, optic chiasm and contralateral
131
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 6.17 Orbital liposarcoma. (A)
Boxer, 10 years old: the large mass 
caused an exophthalmic and temporal-
deviated globe. The neoplasia extended
into the base of the third eyelid. (B,C)
Gross photograph and subgross 
photomicrograph showing liposarcoma in
the orbit. (D,E) Photomicrographs
showing neoplastic adipocytes with
characteristic vacuolated cytoplasm.
B
132
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
Figure 6.18 Orbital extraskeletal
osteosarcoma. (A) Cocker Spaniel. 10 
years old: the third eyelid is prolapsed.
The extensive tumor was diagnosed by
FNA. The mass contributed to the
swelling in the temporal area. (B) Gross 
 photograph of orbital extraskeletal
 osteosarcoma involving the soft tissues of
the orbit. (C) Photomicrograph of orbital
extraskeletal osteosarcoma showing
neoplastic osteoid deposition (arrows).
A
B
 Figure 6.19 Orbital rhabdomyosarcoma.
(A,B) Gross photograph and subgross
 photomicrograph of orbital
rhabd omyosarcoma.
A
B
133
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
optic nerve Metastasis is uncommon, but has been reported in
isolated cases
 diagnosing intracranial meningiomas
 Morphologic features useful in the diagnosis of canine orbital
A very characteristic feature present in about 90% of canine
meningioma include:
 orbital meningiomas, but never seen in intracranial
 Tumors are solid near the optic nerve and show invasion
meningioma, is the presence of foci of myxomatous,
between individual adipocytes, loose connective tissue, 0r
cartilaginous, or osseous metaplasia
myocytes away from the optic nerve
 This can be a useful diagnostic feature if detected on
 The most common cellular profile of the neoplastic cells
appearance
Salivary or lacrimal gland adenocarcinomas
 Neoplastic cells have abundant cytoplasm, polygonal
uau sayeu uium jo le 'saneaaae nuan uo pue adeus
(Fig. 6.25)
appear as epithelial cells
 There are seven cases in dogs and two cases in cats within the COPLOW
 This tumor is often misdiagnosed as squamous cell
collection of solitary tumors arising from the zygomatic salivary gland
carcinoma by the uninitiated pathologist
or the lacrimal gland.
When in doubt, canine orbital meningioma is generally
Often their location within the orbit was considered to
vimentin-positive and cytokeratin negative on
immunohistochemistry
provide clues as to the likely tissue of origin, e.g. within the
 Less commonly, the neoplastic cells will be spindle cells with
superior orbit is likely to be lacrimal in origin, rather than
 zygomatic salivary gland tumors which arise in the inferior
characteristic cellular whorls, more familiar as features of
orbit
 Adenocarcinoma of the gland of the third eyelid may also
extend posteriorly into the orbit leading to exophthalmos
The majority of salivary gland tumors are malignant but little is
known about tumors of the lacrimal gland or zygomatic salivary
gland specifically.
Canine orbital multilobular adenoma
(Fig. 6.26)
There are 29 cases of canine orbital multilobular adenoma in the
COPLOW collection, representing 0.65% of the total number of
canine tumors in the collection.
These tumors may present as either conjunctival swellings or as
space-occupying orbital mass lesions
 The appearance at surgery is quite distinctive and the following
are characteristic features:
The lesions consist of soft, translucent lobules, each with a
thin capsule, that are tenuously connected together. This
feature makes them very hard to grasp and disset. Because
of this, excision is seldom complete unless enucleation or
Figure 6.20 Osteosarcoma of the skull. Gross photograph of a sectioned
exenteration are performed
canine skull showing orbital osteosarcoma extending from the bony
■ Although benign, tumors ofen recur within 1-2 years of
orbit.
excision, and rare cases are bilateral
Figure 6.21 Canine multilobular tumor
of bone. (A) Gross photograph of canine
skull showing multilobular tumor of bone
on the zygomatic arch. (B) Radiograph of
a slab specimen of skull showing
neoplastic proliferation on the occipital
bone. (C) Photomicrograph showing the
multilobular nature of the tumor.
B
A
134
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
Figure 6.22 Feline osteochondroma,
osteochondromatosis. (A) DSH, 11 years
dld: the firm bony mass, diagnosed as
osteochondromatosis, originated from
the facial zygomatic bone and deviated
the globe nasally. (B) Photograph of a 
feline skull showing osteochondromatosis
lesions on the mandible and on the bony
orbit. (C) CT scan of an affected feline
skull showing osteochondromatosis in
the orbit.
A
B
C
135
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 6.23 Canine orbital meningioma.
clinical. (A) Basset Hound, 6.5 years old:
the left globe is exophthalmic with
moderate chemosis and conjunctival
hyperemia. (B) The fundus of the same
dog as (A) showing a swollen disc with
peripapillary retinal edema. The arrows
point to the edge of the globe 
indentation by the retrobulbar mass.
note the subtle change in tapetal color
 and the change in focal plane of the
retinal blood vessels.
A
Figure 6.24 Canine orbital meningioma,
pathology. (A) Gross photograph of a
canine globe with orbital meningioma.
(B) Subgross photomicrograph of canine
orbital meningioma. (C) Photomicrograph
 showing the typical appearance of
 neoplastic cells in canine orbital
 meningioma. The cells are large with
 abundant cytoplasm, resembling 
epithelial cells. (D) Photomicrograph 
 showing a focus of osseous metaplasia 
within orbital meningioma. (E)
A
?
Immunohistochemistry showing 
vimentin-positive meningioma cells. (F)
Photomicrograph of the normal canine 
optic nerve dura mater showing
arachnoid cap cells (arrow) extending
through the dura mater. Orbital
 meningioma is thought to arise from 
these cells. (G) Photomicrograph of the
retina and choroid from an affected dog
 showing spread of tumor into the 
choroid.
E
136
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
Figure 6.25 Lacrimal gland adenocarcinoma. Gross photograph of a
canine globe with orbital lacrimal gland adenocarcinoma.
Figure 6.26 Canine lobular orbital
adenoma. (A,C) Gross photographs of
canine globes and orbital nodules of 
lobular orbital adenoma. (B) Subgross
photomicrograph showing lobular orbital
adenoma. (D,E) Photomicrographs
showing well-differentiated glandular
tissue typical of canine lobular orbital
adenoma. PAS stain in (E) showing
cytoplasmic secretory material.
?
A
C
137
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
It is not clear in which gland, or glands, the tumor originates.
as the tumors can be seen in multiple locations within the
orbit
Morphologic features of diagnostic value include:
The tissue submitted for evaluation may consist of
 only multiple translucent lobules, with no other tissue
sampled
 The neoplastic cells are fully differentiated glandular
secretory cells with abundant clear, vacuolated or granular
cytoplasm
 A PAS stain highlights the mucinous nature of the
cytoplasmic contents helping to demonstrate the secretory
features of the cell cytoplasm
Acini may or may not be present, but differentiated ducts are
never seen
- The absence of ducts is a useful feature in distinguishing
 these tumor nodules from normal glandular tissue
- In some tumors a few non-neoplastic glandular lobules
may be intermingled with several neoplastic lobules
further confusing the picture regarding what glandular
A
tissue of the origin of these tumors.
Secondary, metastatic neoplasms (Fig. 6.27)
·Nasal adenocarcinoma
■ Adenocarcinomas often infiltrate into the orbit from
the nasal cavity or paranasal sinuses of both cats and
ssop
Metastatic epithelial tumors to the orbit in cats
(Fig. 6.27)
Keu sieiseiau shouagoieuay 'ssop ui wuopias inq 'sies ul 
lead to orbital neoplasia
 These tumors may also invade the globe
 Likely primary sites include lung, nasal cavity, middle ear.
oral cavity, conjunctiva, and mammary gland.
Comparative Comments
In terms of neoplastic diseases of the orbit, similarities exist between
 those found in the COPLOW collection and those received in human
eye pathology laboratories. Lymphoproliferative lesions and leukemia 
commonly involve the orbit, as do metastatic lesions. The most 
common epithelial tumors of the lacrimal gland are pleomorphic 
C
adenoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, and malignant mixed tumors.
Lymphomas of the lacrimal gland are also common. As is the case in 
 other species, the human orbit contains a variety of structures that 
Figure 6.27 Feline orbital metastatic carcinoma. (A) Persian, 12 years
old: the tumor resulted in exophthalmia and lagophthalmos. FNA of the 
give rise to tumors with neurogenic and neural crest differentiation,
 superior nasal mass confirmed the diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma
mesenchymal differentiation, as well as neoplasms arising in bone.
(B) Low magnification photomicrograph of a feline globe showing 
Tumors may also involve the orbit by direct extension into the orbit
metastatic carcinoma in blood vessels adjacent to the optic nerve. (C)
from the sinuses, eyelids, skin, conjunctiva, the eye itself, the optic 
 High magnification photomicrograph showing neoplastic epithelial cells in
nerve, the intracranial cavity, and the lacrimal sac.
vascular structures (arrows) and a desmoplastic stroma (*). The inset is
higher magnification.
138
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General orbital pathology
Albert, R.A., Whitley R.D., Crawley, R.R., 1981.
Hermosilla, C., Hetzel, U., Bausch, M., et al.
Yanoff, M., Fine, B.S., 2002. Ocular
 Ocular blastomycosis in the dog. Comp.
2005. First autochthonous case of canine
 pathology, 5th edn. Mosby, St Louis, pp.
Cont. Edu. Pract. Vet. 3, 303-311.
Ocular onchocercosis in Germany. Vet. Rec.
518-520.
Gerds-Grogan, S., Dayrell-Hart, B., 1997. Feline
156, 450-451.
Koch, S.A., 1969. The differential diagnosis of
qyptococcosis: a retrospective evaluation. J.
Sreter, T., Szell, Z., 2008. Onchocercosis:
Exophthalmos in the dog. I. Am. Anim.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 33, 118-122.
A newly recognized disease in dogs. Vet.
Hosp. Assoc. 5, 229-237.
Jacobs, G., Medleau, L., Calvert, C., et al.
Parasitol. 151, 1-13.
McCalla, T.L., Moore, C.P., 1989. Exophthalmos
1997. Cryptococcal infection in cats: factors
in dogs and cats. Part Il. Compend. Contin.
influencing treatment outcome, and results
Extraocular polymyositis
Educ. Pract. Vet. 11, 911-926.
of sequential serum antigen titers in 35 cats.
J. Vet. Intern. Med. 11, 1-4.
Carpenter, I.L., Schmidt, G.M., Moore, EM.
Calia, C.M., Kirschner, S.E., Baer, K.E., et al.
Willis, A.M., Martin, C.L., Stiles, J., 1999.
et al., 1989. Canine bilateral extraocular
1994. The use of computed tomography scan
 Sino-orbital aspergillosis in a dog. I. Am.
polymyositis. Vet. Pathol. 26, 510-512.
for the evaluation of orbital disease in cats
Vet. Med. Assoc. 214, 1644-1647, 1639.
Ramsey, D.T, Hamor, R.E., Gerding. PA., et al.,
and dogs. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 4.
Halenda, R.M., Reed, A.L., 1997. Ultrasound/
1995. Clinical and immunohistochemical
24-30.
computed tomography diagnosis - fungal
characteristics of bilateral extraocular
Rebhun, W.C., 1998. Exophthalmos in horses.
sinusitis and retrobulbar myofascitis in a cat.
polymyositis of dogs. In: 26th Annual
Equine Vet. Edu. 10, G3-65.
Meeting of the American College of
 Dennis, R., 2000. Use of magnetic resonance
Vet. Radiol. Ultrasound. 38, 208-210.
Veterinary Ophthalmologists, Newport, Rl,
imaging for the investigation of orbital
Hamilton, H.L., Whitley, R.D., McLaughlin, S.A..
pp. 130-132.
disease in small animals. J. Small Anim.
2000. Exophthalmos secondary to
aspergillosis in a cat. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
Allgoewer, I., Blair, M., Basher, T., et al., 2000.
Pract. 41, 145-155.
 Extraocular muscle myositis and restrictive
Assoc. 36, 343-347.
Spiess, B.M., 2007. Diseases and surgery of the
strabismus in 10 dogs. Vet. Ophthalmol. 3.
anine orbit. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.),
Wilkinson, G.T., Sutton, R.H., Grono, L.R.,
21-26.
Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th edn.
1982. Aspergillus spp infection associated
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 539-562.
with orbital cellulitis and sinusitis in a cat.
J. Small Anim. Pract. 23, 127-131.
Masticatory myositis
Orbital complications of dental disease
McLellan, G.I., Aquino, S.M., Mason, D.R.,
Shelton, G.D., Cardinet 3rd., G.H., Bandman,
et al., 2006. Use of posaconazole in the
E., 1987. Canine masticatory muscle
Ramsey, D.T, Marretta, S.M., Hamor, R.E.
management of invasive orbital aspergillosis
disorders: a study of 29 cases. Muscle Nerve
et al., 1996. Ophthalmic manifestations and
in a cat. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 42,
complications of dental disease in dogs and
10, 753-766.
302-307.
cats. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 32,
Gilmour, M.A., Morgan, R.V., Moore, FM..
215-224.
1992. Masticatory myopathy in the dog: a
Bacterial infection in the orbit
Ward, M.L., 2006. Diagnosis and management
retrospective study of 18 cases. J. Am. Anim.
Collins, B.K., Moore, C.P., Dubielzig, R.R., et al.
Hosp. Assoc. 28, 300-306.
of a retrobulbar abscess of periapical origin
in a domestic rabbit. Vet. Clin. North Am.
1991. Anaerobic orbital cellulitis and
Vamvakidis, C.D., Koutinas, A.F., Kanakoudis,
Exot. Anim. Pract. 9, 657-665.
septicemia in a dog. Can. Vet. J. 32.
G., et al., 2000. Masticatory and skeletal
Martinez-Jimenez, D., Hernandez-Divers, S.J..
683-685.
muscle myositis in canine leishmaniasis
Grahn, B.H., Szentimrey, D., Battison, A., et al.,
(Leishmania infantum). Vet. Rec. 146.
Dietrich, U.M., et al., 2007. Endosurgical
 treatment of a retrobulbar abscess in a
1995. Exophthalmos associated with frontal
698-703.
rabbit. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 230,
sinus osteomyelitis in a puppy. I. Am. Anim.
Evans, I., Levesque, D., Shelton, G.D., 2004.
868-872.
Hosp. Assoc. 31, 397-401.
Canine inflammatory myopathies: a
Homma, K., Schoster, J.V., 2000. Anaerobic
clinicopathologic review of 200 cases.
Smith, M.M., Smith, E.M., La Croix, N., et al.
orbital abscess/cellulitis in a Yorkshire Terrier
J. Vet. Intern. Med. 18, 679-691.
2003. Orbital penetration associated with
tooth extraction. J. Vet. Dent. 20, 8-17
dog. I. Vet. Med. Sci. 62, 1105-1107.
 Feline restrictive orbital sarcoma,
Penetrating injuries and foreign bodies
Canine ocular onchocerciasis
'pseudotumor
Stades, F.C., Djajadiningrat-Laanen, S.C.,
Sreter, T., Szell, Z., Egyed, Z., et al., 2002.
Miller S A, van der Woerdt, A., Bartick, T.E.
Boroffka, S.A., et al., 2003. Suprascleral
Ocular onchocercosis in dogs: a review. Vet.
 2000. Retrobulbar pseudotumor of the orbit
removal of a foreign body from the
Rec. 151, 176-180.
in a cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 216,
retrobulbar muscle cone in two dogs. J.
Komnenou, A., Eberhard, M.L., Kaldrymidou,
356-358, 345.
Small Anim. Pract. 44, 17-20.
E., et al., 2002. Subconjunctival flariasis due 
Billson, FM., Miller-Michau, T., Mould, J.R.,
Brightman, A.H., McLaughin, S.A., Brogdon,
to Onchocerca sp. in dogs: report of 23 cases
et al., 2006. Idiopathic sclerosing orbital
J.D., et al., 1985. Intraorbital foreign body in
in Greece. Vet. Ophthalmol. 5, 119-126.
pseudotumor in seven cats. Vet. Ophthalmol.
the dog: a case report. Vet. Med. Small Anim.
Komnenou, A., Egyed, Z., Sreter, T., et al., 2003.
9, 45-51.
Clin. 80, 45-48.
Canine onchocercosis in Greece: report of
wan der Woerdt, A., 2008. Orbital inflammatory
Grahn, B.H., Szentimrey, D., Pharr, J.W., et al.
further 20 cases and molecular
disease and pseudotumor in dogs and cats.
1995. Ocular and orbital porcupine quills in
characterization of the parasite and its
Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 38,
the dog: a review and case series. Can. Vet. J.
Wolbachia endosymbiont. Vet. Parasitol.
389-401, vii-vii.
36, 488-493.
118, 151-155.
Dubielizig, R.R., Bell, C.M., Schobert, C.S..
Zarfoss, M.K., Dubielzig, R.R., Eberhard, M.L..
2008. Feline orbital pseudotumor: a
Fungal infections of orbital tissues
et al., 2005. Canine ocular onchocerciasis in
morphologic review of 14 cases. Proceedings
Buyukmihci, N., 1982. Ocular lesions of
the United States: two new cases and a
of the American College of Veterinary
blastomycosis in the dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
review of the literature. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8,
Ophthalmologists 39th Annual Conference.
Assoc. 180, 426-431.
51 -57.
Boston, MA, p 108.
139
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Hsuan, J.D., Selva, D., McNab, A.A., et al., 2006.
Tidwell, A.S., Ross, L.A., Kleine, L.J., 1997.
Court, E.A., Watson, A.D., Peaston, A.E., 1997.
 Idiopathic Sclerosing Orbital Inflammation.
Computed tomography and magnetic
Retrospective study of 60 cases of feline
Arch. Ophthalmol. 124, 1244-1250.
resonance imaging of cavernous sinus
lymphosarcoma. Austr. Vet. J. 75, 424-
enlargement in a dog with unilateral
427.
Canine systemic histiocytosis
exophthalmos. Vet. Radiol. Ultrasound. 38,
Rebhun, W.C., Del Piero, F, 1998. Ocular
363-370.
Paterson, S., Boydell, P., Pike, R., 1995.
lesions in horses with lymphosarcoma: 21
 Systemic histiocytosis in the Bernese
Adkins, E.A., Ward, D.A., Daniel, G.B., et al.
cases (1977-1997). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
mountain dog. j. Small Anim. Pract. 36.
2005. Coil embolization of a congenital
212, 852-854
233-236.
orbital varix in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Aquino, S.M., Hamor, R.E., Valli, V.E., et al.,
Scherlie Jr., P.H., Smedes, S.L., Feltz, T., et al.,
227,1928-1929,1952-1954.
2000. Progression of an orbital T-cell rich
1992. Ocular manifestation of systemic
B-cell lymphoma to a B-cell lymphoma in a
Orbital fat prolapse
histiocytosis in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
dog. Vet. Pathol. 37, 465-469.
Assoc. 201, 1229-1232.
Bedford, PG., Barnett, K.C., Boydell, P., et al.
Ciekot, PA., Powers, B.E., Withrow, S.J., et al..
Partial prolapse of the antero-medial corpus
1994. Histologically low-grade, yet
Cystic lesions
adiposum in the horse. Equine Vet. J. Suppl.
biologically high-grade, fbrosarcomas of the 
1990, 2-4.
mandible and maxilla in dogs: 25 cases
Martin, C.L., Kaswan, R.L., Doran, C.C., 1987.
Boydell, P., Schrammer, A., Pike, R., 1994.
(1982-1991). I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 204,
 Cystic lesions of the periorbital region.
 Corpus adiposum prolapse in the horse: G
610-615.
Comp. Cont. Edu. Pract. Vet. 9, 1022-1030.
cases. Equine Vet. Edu. 6, 128-129.
Costas, A., Castro, P., Munioz, J.M., 2001.
Davidson, H.J., Blanchard, G.L., 1991.
Boydell, P, Paterson, S., Pike, R., 1996. Orbital
 Primary orbital liposarcoma: case report and
 Periorbital epidermoid cyst in the medial
fat prolapse in the dog. I. Small Anim. Pract.
review of the literature. Int. J. Oral
canthus of three dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med.
37, 61-63.
Maxillofac. Surg. 30, 170-172.
Assoc. 198, 271-272.
Lane, C.M., Ehrlich, W.W., Wright, J.E., 1987.
Williams, D.L., Haggett, E., 2006. Surgical
Multilobular tumors and hyperostotic
Orbital dermoid cyst. Eye 1 (Pt 4), 504-511.
removal of a canine orbital lipoma. J. Small
Anim. Pract. 47, 35-37.
syndromes affecting the calvarium
Walde, I., Hittmair, K., Henninger, W., et al.,
Pletcher, J.M., Koch, S.A., Stedham, M.A., 1979.
1997. Retrobulbar dermoid cyst in a
Orbital neoplasia
 Orbital chondroma rodens in a dog. J. Am.
dachshund. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7.
LeCouteur, R.A., Fike, J.R., Scagliotti, R.H., et al.,
Vet. Med. Assoc. 175, 187-190.
239-244.
1982. Computed tomography of orbital
Munoz, E., Leiva, M., Naranjo, C., et al., 2007.
Straw, R.C., LeCouteur, R.A., Powers, B.E., et al.,
tumors in the dog I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
1989. Multilobular osteochondrosarcoma of
Retrobulbar dermoid cyst in a horse: a case
180,910-913
the canine skull: 16 cases [1978-1988). J.
report. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10, 394-397.
Kern, T.1., 1985. Orbital neoplasia in 23 dogs. J.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 195, 1764-1769.
Speakman, A.J., Baines, S.J., Williams, I.M.,
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 186, 489-491.
et al., 1997. Zygomatic salivary cyst with
McCalla, T.L., Moore, C.P., Turk, I., et al..
Gilger, B.C., McLaughlin, S.A., Whitley, R.D.,
1989. Multilobular osteosarcoma of the
mucocele formation in a cat. J. Small Anim.
et al., 1992. Orbital neoplasms in cats: 21
mandible and orbit in a dog. Vet. Pathol. 26.
Pract. 38, 468-470.
cases (1974-1990). I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
92-94.
Grahn, B.H., Mason, R.A., 1995. Epiphora
201, 1083-1086.
Groff, J.M., Murphy, C.J., Pool, R.R., et al.
associated with dacryops in a dog. I. Am.
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 31, 15-19.
Gilger, B.C., Whitley, R.D., McLaughlin, S.A..
1992. Orbital multilobular tumour of bone
1994. Modified lateral orbitotomy for
in a dog. J. Small Anim. Pract. 33, 597-600.
removal of orbital neoplasms in two dogs.
Zygomatic salivary mucocele
Jones, J.C., Smith, M.M., Sponenberg, D.P.,
Vet. Surg. 23, 53-58.
et al., 1997. Orbital multilobular tumor of
Knecht, C.D., 1970. Treatment of diseases of the
O'Brien, M.G., Withrow, S.J., Straw, R.C., et al.,.
bone in a Basset Hound. Vet. Comp.
zygomatic salivary gland. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
1996. Total and partial orbitectomy for the
Ophthalmol. 7, 111-116.
Assoc. 6, 13-19.
treatment of periorbital tumors in 24 dogs
Dernell, W., Straw, R., Cooper, M., et al., 1998.
Schmidt, G.M., Betts, C.W., 1978. Zygomatic
and 6 cats: a retrospective study. Vet Surg 25.
 Multilobular osteochondrosarcoma in 39
salivary mucoceles in the dog. I. Am. Vet.
471-479.
dogs: 1979-1993. 1. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
Med.Assoc. 172,940-942
Baptiste, K.E., Grahn, B.H., 2000. Equine orbital
34, 11-18.
Miller, P.E., Pickett, J.P, 1989. Zygomatic
neoplasia: a review of 10 cases [1983-1998).
Thompson, K.G., Pool, R.R., 2002. Feline
salivary gland mucocele in a ferret. J. Am.
Can. Vet. J. 41, 291-295.
Osteochondromatosis. In: Meuten, D.J.
Vet. Med. Assoc. 194, 1437-1438.
Hendrix, D.V., Gelatt, K.N., 2000. Diagnosis,
(Ed.), Tumours in domestic animals, 4th
Bartoe, J.T, Brightman, A.H., Davidson, H.J.
treatment and outcome of orbital neoplasia
edn. lowa State Press, Ames, IA, pp.
2007. Modifed lateral orbitotomy for
in dogs: a retrospective study of 44 cases. J.
258-259.
vision-sparing excision of a zygomatic
Small Anim. Pract. 41, 105-108.
Dennis, R., Barnett, K.C., Sansom, J., 1993.
mucocele in a dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10,
Attali-Soussay, K., Jegou J-P., Clerc, B., 2001.
Unilateral exophthalmos and strabismus due
127-131.
Retrobulbar tumors in dogs and cats: 25
to craniomandibular osteopathy. J. Small
Allgoewer, I., Jurina, K., Stockhaus, C., 2004.
cases. Vet. Ophthalmol. 4, 19-27.
Anim. Pract. 34, 457-461.
Canine zygomatic adenitis. Proceedings of
Mason, D.R., Lamb, C.R., McLellan, G.J., 2001.
Pastor, K.F., Boulay, J.P., Schelling, S.H., et al.
the European College of Veterinary
Ulltrasonographic findings in 50 dogs with 
2000. Idiopathic hyperostosis of the calvaria
Ophthalmologists Annual Meeting, Berlin,
retrobulbar disease. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
in five young bullmastiffs. J. Am. Anim.
p 40.
Assoc. 37, 557-562.
Hosp. Assoc. 36, 439-445.
Peiffer Jr., R.L., Simons, K.B., 2002. Orbital
Orbital vascular malformations
tumors. In: Peiffer Jr, R.L., Simons, K.B.
Canine orbital meningioma
Rubin, L.F., Patterson, D.F., 1965. Arteriovenous
(Eds.), Ocular tumors in animals and
Barnett, K.C., Singleton, W.B., 1967.
fistula of the orbit in a dog. Cornell Vet. 55.
humans, 1st edn. lowa State Press, Ames, IA,
Retrobulbar and chiasmal meningioma in a
471 -481.
pp. 3-23.
dog. J. Small Anim. Pract. 8, 391-394.
Millichamp,. N... Spencer, C.P, 1991. Orbital
Rebhun, W.C., 1982. Orbital lymphosarcoma
Perez, V., Vidal, E., Gonzalez, N., et al., 2005.
varix in a dog. I. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 27,
in cattle. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 180,
Orbital meningioma with a granular cell
56-60.
149-152
component in a dog. with extracranial
140
Diseases of the orbit
Chapter
6
metastasis. J. Comp. Pathol. 133, 212-
lacrimal gland origin. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
Carberry, C.A., Flanders, J.A., Harvey, H.J.
217.
Assoc. 13, 691-694.
et al., 1988. Salivary gland tumors in dogs
Mauldin, E.A., Deehr, A.J., Hertzke, D., et al..
Buyukmihci, N., Rubin, L.F, Harvey, C.E., 1975.
and cats: a literature and case review.
 2000. Canine orbital meningiomas: a review
Exophthalmos secondary to zygomatic
J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 24, 561-567.
of 22 cases. Vet. Ophthalmol. 3, 11-16.
adenocarcinoma in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
Headrick, J.F., Bentley, E., Dubielzig, R.R., 2004.
Buyukmihci, N., 1977. Orbital meningioma
Assoc. 167, 162-165.
Canine lobular orbital adenoma: a report of
with intraocular invasion in a dog.
Hirayama, K., Kagawa, Y., Tsuzuki, K., et al.
15 cases with distinctive features. Vet.
Histology and ultrastructure. Vet. Pathol. 14,
2000. A pleomorphic adenoma of the
Ophthalmol. 7, 47-51.
521-523.
lacrimal gland in a dog. Vet. Pathol. 37,
Dugan, S.l., Schwarz, P.D., Roberts, S.M., et al..
353-356.
Secondary and metastatic neoplasia
1993. Primary optic nerve meningioma and
Wilcock, B., Peiffer Ir., R., 1988.
Gelatt, K.N., Ladds, P.W., Guffy, M.M., 1970.
pulmonary metastasis in a dog I. Am. Anim.
Adenocarcinoma of the gland of the third
 Nasal adenocarcinoma with orbital extension
Hosp. Assoc. 29, 11-16.
eyelid in seven dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
and ocular metastasis in a dog. I. Am. Anim.
193, 1549-1550.
Hosp. Assoc. 6, 132-142.
Adenocarcinoma and multilobular
adenoma
Rebhun, W.C., Edwards, N.., 1977. Two cases 
of orbital adenocarcinoma of probable
141
Diseases of the eyelids and conju
111
tiva
Feline mast cell tumors
154
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides)
Congenital anomalies and early life diseases of the
of the eyelid skin 
157
eyelids and conjunctiva
144
Peripheral nerve sheath tumors (PNST) in cats
157
Eyelid agenesis, hypoplasia, coloboma
144
Equine sarcoid and bovine fibropapilloma
158
 Distichiasis, ectopic cilia and trichiasis
145
Eyelid margin masses
160
These conditions are common in purebred dogs,
Canine meibomian gland adenoma/epithelioma
160
 and are seldom encountered in other species
145
Canine meibomian gland adenocarcinoma
162
Entropion and ectropion
145
Lid margin melanocytic tumors (melanocytoma)
162
 Symblepharon syndrome
145
Lipogranuloma (chalazion)
162
Conjunctival or corneal dermoid
145
Squamous cell carcinoma of the lid margin in cats
Inflammatory lesions of the eyelid skin
146
(multifocal squamous cell carcinoma)
162
 Parasitic dermatitis in horses, cutaneous and ocular
 Squamous cell carcinoma of the lid margin in dogs 
164
habronemiasis, 'summer sores'
146
Squamous cell carcinoma of the lid margin in 
Demodicosis
146
horses and cattle
164
Dermatophytosis ('Ringworm')
147
Mesenchymal hamartomas of the lateral canthus
164
Canine cutaneous histiocytosis, sterile cutaneous
Conjunctivitis
166
granuloma
147
General philosophy on the pathology of 
 Miscellaneous other causes of blepharitis
150
conjunctivitis
166
Proliferative and neoplastic lesions of the eyelid
 Pseudopterygium in rabbits
167
skin
150
Ligneous conjunctivitis in dogs
167
Canine juvenile cutaneous histiocytoma
150
Episcleritis and canine nodular granulomatous
Cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis
150
episclerokeratitis (NGE, fibrous histiocytoma,
Canine cutaneous melanocytic tumors
nodular fasciitis)
169
(melanocytoma)
150
Feline herpesvirus keratoconjunctivitis, FHV-1
173
Feline cutaneous melanocytic tumors
150
Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis
173
 Intradermal epithelial cysts
151
 Feline conjunctival papillary mastocytosis 
174
Cutaneous sebaceous adenoma/epithelioma
151
 Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis in cats
174
Canine trichoblastoma (basal cell tumor)
152
 Plasmacytic conjunctivitis ('plasmoma') of the
Trichoepithelioma
152
nictitans in dogs
174
Canine infundibular keratinizing acanthoma
Triamcinolone (depot corticosteroid preparation)
(intracutaneous epithelioma, keratoacanthoma)
152
injection site granulomas
175
Canine sweat gland adenoma
153
Canine conjunctival onchocerciasis
175
 Feline apocrine gland tumor
153
Equine onchocerciasis
175
Apocrine cystadenomas in Persian cats
Conjunctival neoplasms and other nodular lesions
176
(hidrocystomas)
153
Conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma
176
Canine mast cell tumors
153
 Equine squamous cell carcinoma
176
Grade 1 mast cell tumor
153
Bovine squamous cell carcinoma
181
Grade 2 mast cell tumor
154
Canine squamous cell carcinoma
181
Grade 3 mast cell tumor
154
Feline squamous cell carcinoma
181
143
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Feline conjunctival mucoepidermoid carcinoma
184
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES AND EARLY LIFE
Canine conjunctival melanoma and
melanocytoma
184
DISEASES OF THE EYELIDS AND
Feline conjunctival melanoma
187
CONJUNCTIVA (Fig. 7.1)
Canine conjunctival hemangioma,
hemangiosarcoma
188
Eyelid agenesis, hypoplasia, coloboma
Feline conjunctival hemangioma,
hemangiosarcoma
188
This is a sporadic condition, most commonly seen in cats as a
segmental agenesis, defect or coloboma of the upper temporal
Equine hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma,
188
lid
angiosarcoma
 In addition to eyelid abnormalities, affected cats may have other
Canine conjunctival mast cell tumor
188
ocular lesions, including posterior scleral colobomas, choroidal 
 Feline conjunctival mast cell tumor
188
hypoplasia and persistent pupillary membranes. A similar
Canine conjunctival lymphoma
188
syndrome has also been described in captive Snow Leopards
and a Texas Cougar
 Feline conjunctival lymphoma
188
The lid defect results in trichiasis, due to mis-directed facial
Tumors of the canine third eyelid gland
hairs, poor tear flm dispersion, or dry eye due to direct corneal
(nictitans gland)
188
exposure These may all contribute to chronic keratitis
Tumors of the feline third eyelid gland
  Conservative medical management may be beneficial in
(nictitans gland)
188
mildly affected cats, and numerous surgical procedures are
Canine viral papilloma
190
described for correction of the defect. Eyes seen in the
Cysts of the conjunctiva
192
COPLOW collection have been removed because of chronic
Conjunctival squamous papilloma and reactive
cormeal irritation.
papilloma 
192
Figure 7.1 Eyelid agenesis with posterior
segment coloboma. (A) DLH, 10 months
od: agenesis of the superior and lateral 
lid caused trichiasis and corneal irritation.
(B) Fundus of the cat in (A) showing a
large temporal coloboma (arrow) of the
 posterior segment extending to the
margin of the optic disc. (C) DSH, 6
months old: the lid defect resulted in
trichiasis and a mild corneal irritation. (D)
Fundus of the cat in (C) with a
segment, which affects the optic disc
(arrow).
A
B
D
144
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Distichiasis, ectopic cilia and trichiasis
surfaces, or to the cornea. This may lead to obliteration of the
conjunctival formix
These conditions are common in purebred
This is usually an acquired condition secondary to severe
dogs, and are seldom encountered in other
 inflammation that results in loss of integrity of the conjunctival
and corneal epithelia
species
 Symblepharon is most commonly encountered in young cats, in
● Distichiasis is a condition characterized by abnormally
which the cause is usually infection with feline herpesvinus-1
positioned eye lashes/cilia, and is very commonly encountered
(FHV-1) early in life
in dogs
Eyes are most often submitted to the COPLOW collection
 The abnormal cilia emerge from the meibomian (tarsal)
because of severe corneal involvement, with associated corneal
ym peuos ayeu pue suieu paa au uo suuado pue
opacity or perforation
the conjunctival and/or corneal surface causing variable
 Surgical correction of symblepharon is possible, but prevention
irritation. Distichiasis seldom results in significant corneal
of recurrent symblepharon can be a major postoperative
disease
challenge.
The follicles of ectopic cilia may arise within the meibomian
gands, but these cilia emerge on the bulbar surface of the
Conjunctival or corneal dermoid (Fig. 7.3)
eyelid, through the palpebral conjunctiva
 Ectopic cilia typically emerge through the central upper
 A dermoid is a form of choristoma, a congenital disease
eyelid at the 12 o'clock position
characterized by the focal occurrence of fully-differentiated,
■
 Unlike distichiasis, ectopic cilia are almost always associated
non-neoplastic tissue in an abnormal location. In this case skin
with signifcant ocular surface irritation. Signs of ocular pain
on the conjunctiva or cormea
may be of sudden onset, related to the emergence of an
 The disorder occurs sporadically in all species. In dogs, the
ectopic cilia through the palpebral conjunctiva. Significant
temporal limbus is most commonly affected
keratitis, often with ulceration, is a frequent secondary
 Dermoids are frequently a source of irritation, because of the
complication of ectopic cilia
presence of hair, leading to trichiasis, or they may act as a mass
● Trichiasis defines a condition in which hairs arising in a normal
lesion that impacts ocular or eyelid function
location are misdirected to contact the ocular surface, e.g. by an
 Surgical excision is curative, provided that care is taken to
abnormality of facial conformation such as prominent nasal
include the deepest margin of the dermoid.
folds in the brachycephalic breeds of dog
Eyes with these diagnoses in the COPLOW collection have been
removed because of their secondary complications including
Comparative Comments
severe keratitis, not because of the abnormal cilia or abnormal
hair shafts per se.
Many of the basic differences in the pathology of the human
eyelid, as compared with other species, stem from the difference in
jou op pue aueaquaw bujeipju e ypel suewnh Auoieue
Entropion and ectropion
have a nictitans gland or Harderian gland component to their
tears.
· Entropion and ectropion are complex conformational defects
 Human congenital anomalies of the eyelid, however, do parallel
resulting from:
those seen in other species.
 Congenital malformation of the eyelid margins (anatomic)
 Distichiasis, abnormally positioned eyelashes, is occasionally
such as excessive eyelid length or laxity or insuffcient
encountered in man
palpebral fissure length, relative to globe size
 Trichiasis, in which cilia in a normal location become misdirected.
■
 Acquired disease secondary to neuromuscular dysfunction
occurs, most often, as a result of disease rather than breed 
(atonic) or response to severe ocular pain (spastic)
conformation
 Scar tissue [cicatricial)
 An example is in the end stages of trachoma, a conjunctival
Although very common in certain purebred dogs, these
infection by Chfamyoia trachomatis. The resulting trichiasis,
conditions are not described in detail in this text because the
as in animals, abrades the corneal surface, leading to 
eyelid tissue is seldom submitted for evaluation, just the globe
ulceration and scarring and is ultimately a major cause of
which is affected secondarily
blindness
 Entropion is defined as an inversion of the eyelid
 Another major cause of trichiasis in humans is ocular cicatricial
margin
 pemphigoid, a chronic disorder that is characterized by
 Entropion results in trichiasis and cormneal disease that is
recurrent conjunctival surface bullae, which may ultimately 
result in corneal scarring
often severe
 Ectropion is defined as an eversion of the eyelid margin
 Entropion is distinguished from other disorders that result in
lashes misdirected toward the globe by abnormal rotation of the
  Ectropion may lead to exposure of conjunctival surfaces, with
eyelid margin toward the cornea and bulbar conjunctiva. Similar
secondary conjunctivitis but is rarely a factor in corneal
to other species, in humans the underlying cause of the
disease. There are no globes in the COPLOW collection
 malposition may be congenital, spastic, involutional, or due to 
where a direct relationship between this eyelid disease and
 scarring 
enucleation was expressed on the submission form.
woy Aeme uibhew plara aut jo pemino buuani aut 'uoidoa 
 the globe, in humans may be mechanical, cicatricial, paralytic, or
involutional
Symblepharon syndrome (Fig. 7.2)
 For both entropion and ectropion, successful treatment depends 
?
Symblepharon refers to adhesion or fusion of conjunctival
Aojoissydouied buruapun aun jo uotuboan uo 
surfaces of the eyelids or third eyelid, to adjacent conjunctival
145
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.2 Feline symblepharon
syndrome. (A) DSH, 1.5 years old: the
globe has been manually retropulsed to
show a symblepharon (arrow) from the
palpebral surface of the nictitans to the
superior lid margin. (B) DSH, 9 years old:
an extensive symblepharon resulted in
visualization of only the central cornea.
(C) Bengal, 18 weeks old: the pigmented 
symblepharon involved the entire medial
canthus and nictitans. Both lacrimal
puncta were occluded, as was the
inferior cul-de-sac. (D) DSH, 18 months
 old: the thin, translucent symblepharon
extended over the entire cornea.
A
D
Demodicosis (Fig. 7.5)
INFLAMMATORY LESIONS OF
THE EYELID SKIN
Cutaneous demodicosis is a cutaneous acariasis caused by
Demodex species mites. Demodicosis, predominantly due to
Demodex canis infection, is most often seen as a clinical disease
Parasitic dermatitis in horses, cutaneous
ssop u1 Aiua
and ocular habronemiasis, 'summer sores'
 Small numbers of mites can be seen in normal skin but
(Fig. 7.4)
clinically affected individuals have large numbers of the
parasites
Nodular cutaneous or conjunctival lesions associated with the
Mites inhabit the hair follicles, causing excessive keratin
larval stage of the nematode parasites Draschia megastoma,
secretion and ultimately, a destructive, granulomatous
Habronema majus, or H. muscae
dermatitis
 Adult nematodes infest the gastric glandular mucosa and
 Localized demodicosis is a relatively common cause of
their larvae are transmitted by flies, e.g. the housefly and
stablefly, which serve as intermediate hosts. Larvae in feces
s3op
are ingested by fly maggots and subsequently deposited on
 Most cases resolve spontaneously but a small
the horse skin, open wounds and mucous membranes from
 proportion of cases progress to a generalized form of
the mouthparts of the feeding adult fly
disease which is frequently complicated by secondary
 Periocular lesions most frequently involve the medial
pyoderma
canthus region
 Clinical demodicosis in adults is most frequently encountered
Histologically, the lesions are characterized by a cavitated lesion
 in immune suppressed individuals
containing a predominantly eosinophilic infiltrate, including
 These mites are species-specific and D. cati or D. gatoi, D. caballi
aggregates of eosinophilic protein around collagen bundles or
and D. folliculorum may affect cats, horses or humans,
fragments of parasite larvae.
respectively.
146
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.3 Conjunctival dermoid.
(A) Mixed Breed, & weeks old: the
dermoid originated from the temporal 
bulbar conjunctiva only. Extremely long
hairs can be seen. (B) Labrador Retriever,
 6 months old: this dermoid involved the
bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva. The 
lower lid and nictitans were also 
involved. (C) Persian, 13 weeks old: the
long hairs from the dermoid are directed
across the cornea, but only the 
conjunctiva was involved. (D) DsH, 1 year
old: the lateral bulbar conjunctiva and 
 cornea are involved in this dermoid.
 A lid agenesis is also present.
(E) Photomicrograph showing a
conjunctival dermoid with epidermis,
B
follicles, glands, and dermis typical of
4
normal skin.
D
Dermatophytosis ('Ringworm') (Fig. 7.6)
Canine cutaneous histiocytosis, sterile
cutaneous granuloma
The dermatophyte fungi Microsporum canis, Microsporum gypseum,
or Trichophyton mentagrophytes may colonize hair follicles
This idiopathic granulomatous disease of the canine skin may
resulting in focal dermatitis. Clinical disease is frequently seen
involve the periocular skin or eyelid margin. The disease is 
sasiy 'so un aqond uos kiaeiai e osie si inq 'se u
characterized by focal, or multi-focal, nodular lesions.
and cattle
Histologically, granulomatous inflammation is seen, with
Regional foci of crusting, alopecia or pustular inflammatory
features of classical granuloma, i.e a pyogranulomatous center
reaction are typically seen
surrounded by epithelioid macrophage cells
Histologically, fungal elements are seen within or
This is considered by some to be the least aggressive condition
adjacent to the hair shaft and are often associated with
in a spectrum of histiocytic mass lesions which also includes
furunculosis.
147
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.4 Equine habronemiasis.
(A) Grade horse, adult: the yellow gritty
conjunctival lesion was biopsied to 
confirm the diagnosis. (B) This is the 
lesion in (A), magnified. (C) American
Saddlebred horse, 10 years old: a large
erosive lesion is present near the medial
canthus. (D) Thoroughbred, adult: the
medial canthus was involved in both
eyes. (E) Photomicrograph showing 
dermal and subcutaneous eosinophilic,
granulomatous inflammation.
(F) Remnants of intact nematodes
(arrows) are present in this section.
A
C
148
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
Figure 7.5 Demodicosis. (A) DLH, 13
years old: this diabetic cat had an
exudative blepharitis and medial canthus
erosion. (B,C) Photomicrographs showing
hair follicles dilated with keratin debris
and Demodex mites.
A
Figure 7.6 Dermatophyte infection. (A,B)
Photomicrographs showing hair follicles
containing dermatophyte fungi within
and adjacent to the hair shaft (arrow),
and surface hyperkeratosis.
149
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
● In the interest of caution and completeness, this diagnosis
 Histological features
should always be made only after first ruling out infectious
The characteristic histiocytic cells are mixed with a variable
causes of granulomatous disease by using special stains for
population of lymphocytes
bacteria and fungi.
- Lymphocytes often make up the majority of the cellular
infiltrate
Miscellaneous other causes of blepharitis:
- The lymphocytic infiltrate is often most prominent at the
 deepest extent of dermal involvement and les prominent
+
 Other infectious causes of blepharitis include:
superficially
Staphylococcus spp.
■The histiocytic component infiltrates between pre-existing
 In endemic areas, such as the Mediterranean countries and
collagen bundles, often forming single-fle rows of cells
South and Central Americas, Leishmaniasis frequently
  The characteristic cells are often seen invading the epidermis
involves the periocular skin
or follicular epithelium as individual cells, or in small 
 Atopy and auto-immune diseases, including pemphigus
aggregates.
complex disorders and uveodermatologic syndrome (for
detailed discussion of the latter, see Ch. 9)
Cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis
Detailed consideration of periocular dermatoses is outwith the
SCOpe of this text. The reader is referred to a veterinary
(Fig. 7.9)
skin diseases.
There are 18 cases in the COPLOW collection. Four are in Bernese
Mountain dogs and four are in Labrador Retrievers.
Cutaneous histiocytosis (see above) and systemic histiocytosis
Comparative Comments
represent the regional proliferation of histiocytes. There is little
 Diffuse inflammation of the lids, termed blepharitis, occurs
agreement regarding the malignant potential of these
commonly in humans and is caused by either seborrheic dermatitis
conditions, however systemic histiocytosis has the potential to
 or a chronic bacterial infection
recur or to spread
A hordeolum, also commonly seen in man, is an acute purulent 
+
Cutaneous histiocytosis is less likely to spread beyond the skin
inflammation of either the superficial eccrine or sebaceous glands 
whereas systemic histiocytosis is likely to lead to signs of
(external hordeolum, or stye) or the meibomian glands (internal 
systemic disease
hordeolum) of the eyelids
uunou asaua aui ul leuy aq o panoan ae suy yo
● Chalazia, together with hordeolum, constitute one of the most
dog, but the disease is not limited to this breed (see above)
 common causes of lid swelling in people. A chalazion is a chronic,
Ocular lesions may include masses within the eyelid skin or
lipogranulomatous inflammation in the tarsus, resulting from an 
episclera, exophthalmos, uveitis, retinal detachment and
 obstruction in the meibomian gland ducts, often with secondary 
glaucoma
bacterial infection
Both diseases are characterized by a deep intra-dermal and
 Other bacterial infections of note in humans include
subcutaneous infiltrate of large histiocytes, lacking the features
 Mycobacterium feprae and the synergistic infection of
of classical granulomatous inflammation
Aewu ypium snaane snooooyudeis pue sauabod snooonoidais
The characteristic cells in cutaneous histiocytosis are bland and
result in necrotizing fascitis, a disease that causes massive
 demonstrate few features of malignancy
 destruction of the eyelid and adjacent orbital tissue
The characteristic cells of systemic histiocytosis have only mildly
 The principal viral infections of the human eyelid are molluscum 
anaplastic features and may also show a dramatic vasocentric
contagiosum, an infection caused by a poxvirus, that leads to
tendency and reticulin deposition.
formation of small, discrete waxy papules with umbilicated 
centers; verruca vulgaris, papillomatous lesions caused by the
human papillomavirus; and herpes simplex, herpes varicella, and
Canine cutaneous melanocytic tumors
herpes zoster, all of which begin as vesicles or blisters on an
(melanocytoma) (Fig. 7.10)
erythematous base.
Cutaneous melanocytic tumors in dogs are almost always benign
melanocytomas. There are 27 cases in the COPLOW collection.
PROLIFERATIVE AND NEOPLASTIC LESIONS
 The superficial dermis is effaced and infiltrated with neoplastic
spindle cels, polygonal cells, or large round cells which are
OF THE EYELID SKIN
usually, but not always, heavily pigmented
 Individual or tight clusters of neoplastic cells are seen
Canine juvenile cutaneous histiocytoma
immediately below the epidermis or within the epidermis or
(Figs 7.7, 7.8)
follicular epithelium
This feature does not suggest malignancy
This is a common, benign, typically self-limiting, mass lesion on the
Malignant melanomas of the haired skin are seen rarely and
haired skin of dogs. There are 38 cases in the COPLOW collection.
should only be diagnosed upon identification of compelling
Canine juvenile cutaneous histiocytoma is predominantly seen in
anaplastic cellular features and evidence of aggressive
young dogs. decreasing in frequency in dogs older than 3 years.
infiltration.
 The purported cell of origin is the cutaneous antigen-presenting
 macrophage known as the Langerhans cell
Feline cutaneous melanocytic tumors
Grossly, the lesions are characterized by a well-circumscribed,
round flattened nodule with hair loss and often central,
Although cutaneous tumors of melanocytic origin are rare in cats, they
superficial ulceration
are often very malignant in their biological behavior, despite the fact
150
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.7 Canine cutaneous
histiocytoma, clinical. (A) Mixed Breed,
5 years old: lower lid margin is involved
with a smooth pink mass. (B) Yorkshire
Terrier, 4 years old: there is a very
hyperemic mass on the superior lid
margin. (C) Pug. 3 years old: the mass
originated from the bulbar conjunctiva.
(D)West Highland White Terrier,
6.5 years old: an erosive surface is visible
on this mass.
D
that their cytologic features may not be particularly alarming. There
is only one case in the COPLOW collection.
Comparative Comments
The principal cystic lesions affecting the eyelid in humans are:
 Epidermoid cysts (present at birth)
Comparative Comments
Epidermal inclusion cysts (acquired but otherwise identical to
epidermoid cysts)
In humans, benign melanocytic disorders and tumors involving the
 Dermoid cysts (which include adnexal structures)
lid include ephelides or freckles, lentigo, nevocellular nevi, blue 
 Sweat gland cysts
nevi, nevus of Ota, and compound nevus of Spitz
 The malignant melanocytic tumors in humans are generally
 divided into four major subtypes of cutaneous malignant
melanoma: lentigo maligna melanoma, acral lentiginous 
Cutaneous sebaceous adenoma/epithelioma
 melanoma, superficial spreading melanoma, and nodular
(Fig. 7.12)
melanoma. Several rare variants of malignant melanoma are also
seen.
These are benign tumors of sebaceous glands occurring
commonly in dogs, which are also recognized in cats
Sl pue ioum 1ejnouad uowos Aan e sl euouapy
largely made up of fully differentiated sebaceous glandular
Intradermal epithelial cysts (Fig. 7.11)
tissue
Epidermal inclusion cyst: stratifed squamous epithelial lined
 Some pathologists make a distinction between sebaceous
cyst with keratin accumulation
adenoma and sebaceous hyperplasia based on the orientation
Follicular cyst the anatomic location of the cyst is suggestive of
of the secretory tissue around the duct. If the duct is
origins in an isolated or obstructed hair follicle
appropriately positioned it is typical of hyperplasia
Dermoid cyst: containing additional epithelial differentiation of
 Sebaceous adenoma is frequently exophytic, or even
hair follicle and/or glandular elements.
papillary, in appearance, often with central cavitation
151
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.8 Canine cutaneous 
histiocytoma, pathology. (A) Low
magnification photomicrograph of canine
juvenile cutaneous histiocytoma. A
dermal infiltrate causes a raised,
ulcerated, and cellular mass lesion. (B)
 Higher magnification of the margins of 
the mass. The infiltrate abuts the 
epidermis and fills the space between
dermal collagen bundles in the dermis.
(C) Higher magnification showing
histiocytic cells pushed between
pre-existing collagen in the dermis. (D)
Photomicrograph showing the histiocytic
A
cells abutting the epidermis and 
individual or small clusters of histiocytic
cells within the stratum basale (arrows).
8
 Epithelioma is mainly composed of undifferentiated basal cells,
Trichoepithelioma (Fig. 7.14)
with occasional areas of sebaceous or squamous ductular
differentiation
 This is an epithelial tumor of hair follicular origin
Surrounding lipogranulomatous inflammation may accompany
 The neoplasm is often continuous with the surface epidermis
both tumor types.
and extends deeply into the dermis showing variable features of
hair follicle differentiation.
Canine trichoblastoma (basal cell tumor)
(Fig. 7.13)
Canine infundibular keratinizing acanthoma
(intracutaneous epithelioma,
head and neck of dogs
keratoacanthoma) (Fig. 7.15)
The tumor replaces tissue of the dermis with a distinct loose
cellular stroma, and cords, ribbons or nests of poorly-
 This benign neoplasm remains connected to the epidermis by a
differentiated epithelium reminiscent of hair bulb
stalk or pore and forms a central core of solid keratin with
epithelium.
prominent keratin pearls.
152
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.9 Systemic histiocytosis.
(A,B) Mass lesions in the episcleral tissue
accompanied by corneal edema (A) and 
eyelid (B) were caused by systemic
histiocytosis. (B, courtesy of Jane Cho.)
(C) Photomicrograph showing extensive
solid sheets of histiocytic cells. There is a
marked vasocentric histiocytic infiltrate
(arrows), which is a strong diagnostic
indicator of systemic histiocytosis.
(D) Photomicrograph showing reticulin
fibers surrounding individual neoplastic
histiocytes (Snook reticulin stain).
A
B
Canine sweat gland adenoma (Fig. 7.16)
 Each lesion is made up of one or more dilated epithelial cysts
Based on the position of the cystic tumors and the cuboidal
Cyst adenoma: this tumor is usually very well-differentiated and
nature of the epithelial cells, these cysts are thought to arise
Piny Aaiem yim pay sis paneip Aiapim aidnu jo dn ape
from sweat glands
Sweat gland adenoma: this tumor is a nodular, solid to cavitated
The cysts are filled with thick brown material and often a
predominantly histiocytic cellular infiltrate
differentiation
There is a potential for additional lesions to occur at other sites
 Look for evidence of a double cell lining of the glandular
on the eyelids following excision.
structures
■
 Occasionally, these tumors have a component of
myoepithelial cell proliferation (complex adenoma) or
Canine mast cell tumors (Fig. 7.19)
cartilage/bone differentiation (mixed adenoma).
 One of the most common cutaneous or subcutaneous tumors of
the dog
Feline apocrine gland tumor (Fig. 7.17)
 Their clinical appearance on the eyelid is no different from
other sites on the integument 
 This is a common dermal mass lesion, which is frequently
Surgical management of peri-ocular mast cell tumors is
cavitated
complicated by the difficulty in obtaining sufficiently wide
The tumor is a solid mass of poorly-differentiated epithelial cells
showing gandular features, often with focal areas demonstrating
There is a morphological grading scheme consisting of three
prominent doubling of the glandular epithelium. There can also
grades, from grade 1 (most benign) to grade 3 (most 
be a myoepithelial component to the tumors making them a
malignant).
complex tumor or a mixed tumor
■
uao ane Aa paneuaap-ood aie sioum asau asneag
referred to as adenocarcinoma, but they are benign in their
Grade 1 mast cell tumor
biologic behavior.
A well-defined, circumscribed nodule located entirely within the
dermis.
Apocrine cystadenomas in Persian cats
Well-differentiated neoplasm:
(hidrocystomas) (Fig. 7.18)
Oval cell shape with little or no cellular pleomorphism
Oval, bland, centrally-positioned nuclei
These multifocal, pigmented, nodular lesions on the eyelids are
 Abundant metachromatic cytoplasmic granules
most often seen in Persian cats
Small nucleus to cytoplasm ratio
153
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.10 Canine melanocytic
cutaneous tumors. (A) Doberman
Pinscher, 5 years old: this well-delineated 
mass on the lid margin was confirmed to
be a melanocytoma. (B) Golden Retriever,
10 years old: this poorly-delineated 
lobulated mass involved the inferior lid 
and medial canthus. The mass was
confirmed to be a melanoma. The
translucent spherical mass in the pupil is
a uveal epithelial cyst. (C)
 Photomicrograph showing non-
 pigmented clusters of neoplastic
melanocytes abutting the epidermis
(arrows).
A
B
No mitotic activity
Few metachromatic cytoplasmic granules
■Little or no remodeling of the stroma.
■
 Prominent, large and variably shaped nucleoli 
■
Easily detected mitotic activity
■Extensive stromal remodeling
Grade 2 mast cell tumor
- Abundant , glassy collagen
The morphologic features of grade 2 mast cell tumor are
- Pronounced tissue edema
intermediate between those of grade l and grade 3 tumors.
- Areas with scant neoplastic cells.
Grade 3 mast cell tumor
Feline mast cell tumors (Fig. 7.20)
● Extends deeply into the subcutaneous tissue, and may not be
 One of the most common skin tumors of cats
present in the dermis at all
 Occur anywhere on the skin, with neither predilection for, nor
Cellular characteristics of anaplasia, and may not be readily
specifc characteristic appearance or behavior in, the periocular
recognizable as mast cells:
region
■
 Highly variable nuclear shape and nuclear size
Primary feline mast cell tumors are typically small and occur in 
 Large nucleus to cytoplasm ratio
the dermis. Morphologically, they resemble the grade 1 mast
154
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.11 Epithelial inclusion cyst and
dermoid cyst. (A) Low magnification
photomicrograph showing an epithelial 
inclusion cyst in the dermis of the eyelid.
The circular cyst is lined by stratified
squamous epithelium and filled with
keratin. (B) Higher magnification showing
the epithelium and the keratin deposited 
in the cyst center. (C,D)
Photomicrographs showing a dermoid
cyst (*), its lining and differentiated 
sebaceous glands (arrowhead) and hair
A
follicles (arrow).
Figure 7.12 Sebaceous adenoma.
(A,B) Low magnification
photomicrographs of this exophytic 
neoplasm showing solid (A) and cystic
(B) forms.
A
155
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.13 Trichoblastoma, canine.
(A) Great Dane, 12 years old: the mass
was pigmented and ulcerated. (B) Golden
Retriever, 10 years old: this ulcerated,
non-pigmented mass was lobulated.
(C) Photomicrograph showing cords of
poorly-differentiated epithelium radiating
from a central aggregate. The stroma is 
characteristically loose and sparse in
collagen. (D) Higher magnification 
photomicrograph showing the poorly-
differentiated epithelium.
B
D
Figure 7.14 Trichoepithelioma.
(A,B) Photomicrographs showing
neoplastic epithelial structures remotely
 suggestive of hair follicle differentiation
(arrows).
Figure 7.15 Infundibular keratinizing
epithelioma. (A,B) Photomicrographs 
showing a neoplastic epithelial tumor
connected to the surface by a pore (*)
and characterized by prominent
squamous pearls (arrows).
A
B
156
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.16 Canine sweat gland
adenoma. (A) Photomicrograph of a solid 
tumor with numerous glandular lumina
(*). (B) Higher magnification, of the
tumor depicted in (A), showing the
glandular structures. (C) Cystic tumor
with papillary epithelial structures 
(arrow). (D) In this fully differentiated
tumor the sweat glands are markedly
dilated (*).
cytoplasmic granules, that are difficult to recognize as mast
cells.
Epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis
fungoides) of the eyelid skin (Fig. 7.21)
There are 10 cases of epitheliotropic lymphoma involving the eyelid
skin in the COPLOW collection.
Epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) of the
eyelid has been reported to resemble blepharo-conjunctivitis in
s3op
This tumor is, characteristically, a T-cell lymphoma arising in
the dermis. The hallmark of this form of lymphoma is the
invasion of the epidermis and/or follicular epithelium by
neoplastic cells often aggregated in clusters referred to as
Pautrier's microabscesses.
Peripheral nerve sheath tumors (PNsT) in
cats (Fig. 7.22)
Figure 7.17 Feline sweat gland tumor. Photomicrograph showing a solid
 ae ieu seae auo pue () eunl seinpue lews yim soun
There are 25 cases in the COPLOW archive, representing 1% of feline
cystic (arrow).
ocular tumors.
The feline eyelid appears to be particularly at risk for developing
this tumor
The designation of PNST is based on recognition of a
cell tumor of dogs, but there is no grading system for feline
characteristic morphologic and immunohistochemical
mast cell tumors
appearance:
These tumors often recur at other sites, and visceral involvement
 This is a low grade (usually grade l) spindle cell tumor
(spleen, liver, bone marrow), although less common than
with features of Antoni A or Antoni B cellular
qitaneous involvement, is more likely than with canine mast
organization
cell tumors
- The Antoni A cellular pattern is characterized by spindle
The 'histiocytic' subtype occurs in younger cats and is rare
cells arranged in such a way that the nuclei line up to
■'Histocytic' feline mast cell tumors are composed of
make rows or palisades, leaving adjacent areas free of
neoplastic cells with abundant cytoplasm and few
nuclei
157
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.18 Apocrine cystadenoma/
apocrine hidrocystoma. (A) Persian, 1
year old: this early case has a black focal
discoloration of the lid (arrow) with
 minimal elevation. (B) Persian, 8 years
old: advanced case with multiple
elevated lesions. (C) Clinical photograph 
showing cysts visible on the palpebral
conjunctival surface. (D) Low
magnification photomicrograph showing
 a cyst lined by a thin epithelium and
filled with cel-poor pigmented secretory
material (*).
D
- The Antoni B cellular pattern is a more random
to these carefully defined categories. The spectrum of disease
distribution of cells with a diffuse mixing of cell bodies
may be summarized as follows:
and delicate collagen and myxoid stroma
- Small isolated or clustered nodular or wart-like growths.
■Characteristic immunohistochemistry profile:
which are strictly superficial
Vimentin positive
 Large sessile, or deep nodular mass lesions extending into
- S100 positive
the dermis or subcutis
 Collagen IV positive
 The histologic appearance of both sarcoid and bovine
- Laminin positive
fibropapilloma is characterized by a close association between
■PNST of the eyelid is a locally infltrative tumor, requiring
sapida aul pue euois aul ul aseasip aaieiajioid
wide margins of excision that may necessitate enucleation,
 The stromal proliferation resembles a spindle cell sarcoma
but is unlikely to metastasize.
and, in invasive disease, can extend deep into the
subcutaneous connective tissue
At the dermal-epidermal junction the stromal proliferation
abuts the epidermis and there is exaggerated epithelial
Equine sarcoid and bovine fibropapilloma
down-growth, forming characteristic angular spikes pointing
(Fig. 7.23)
into the adjacent region of stromal proliferation
The treatment of equine sarcoid may involve surgery.
Both of these common, cutaneous proliferative diseases are thought
cryotherapy, immunotherapy, laser, radiation or combination 
to be caused by bovine papilloma virus.
therapy
 Equine sarcoid is a very common peri-ocular tumor
 Surgical excision alone is associated with very high
Sarcoid is more common in young horses
recurrence rates
 The clinical/gross appearance is highly variable While
- The response to treatment is unpredictable
sarcoid may be categorized into as many as six different
 Management of periocular tumors is complicated by
subtypes based on clinical appearance, it is not easy to hold
anatomic considerations
158
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.19 Canine mast cell tumor.
(A) Mixed Breed, 10 years old: the mass
involved the superior lid and palpebral 
conjunctiva. (B) Mixed Breed, 6 years old:
this extensive mass involved the medial
 canthus and nasal half of the upper and 
lower lids. The dog also has a mature
cataract. (C) English Setter, 11 years old:
two elevated areas are present on the
lower lid associated with erosion and
alopecia of the overlying skin. (D) Mixed
Breed, 12 years old: in this dissected 
specimen, the globe and lids could not
be visualized on presentation due to a
large firm ulcerative mass. The tumor
 originated from the superior lid. (E)
Photomicrograph of a grade l mast cell 
tumor showing well-differentiated mast
cells nestled between preexisting 
 collagen bundles. (F) Photomicrograph of
a grade Ill mast cell tumor with
poorly-differentiated mast cells. The inset
is a toluidine blue stain showing small 
numbers of metachromatic granules in
the neoplastic mast cells.
D
【E
159
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
2. Non-melanocytic pre-cancerous lesions of the human eyelid
indlude:
Actinic keratoses
Carcinoma in situ
一
 Radiation dermatosis
Xeroderma pigmentosum.
. The major epithelial malignancies of the human lid are basal cell
carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma:
Basal cell carcinoma is a tumor of the basal cells, located at
base of the epidermis
DIt is the most common malignancy of the eyelids and 
accounts for approximately 90% of all malignant tumors of 
the lid and 20% of allid tumors in humans 
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) constitutes less than 5% of
epithelial neoplasms of the human eyelid
Ul uys pabeuep-uns u! sasiue Allenidk sueuny u! oos a
elderly. fair-skinned individuals
 Sebaceous gland carcinoma is the most significant of the many
malignant tumors arising from the adnexal structures of the lid 
 This is the second most common malignancy of the eyelids
A
in humans, and occurs most commonly in elderly women 
and in Asians
D The preferred sites of involvement are the upper lid, brow,
 and caruncle
 Sebaceous gland carcinoma is often clinically misdiagnosed
as unilateral blepharoconjunctivitis or recurring chalazion 
 This is an aggressive tumor that commonly exhibits local
extension, as well as lymphatic and hematogenous spread
 The finding of intracytoplasmic lipid in the tumor cells is
essential for diagnosis.
EYELID MARGIN MASSES
Canine meibomian gland adenoma/
epithelioma (Fig. 7.24)
Meibomian adenoma and epithelioma represent l0% of tumor sub-
Figure 7.20 Feline cutaneous mast cel tumor. (A) DSH, 16 years old: this
mass was present for 10 years, when it became hemorrhagic. (B)
missions to COPLOW. This is probably a gross under-estimate of the
frequency of this tumor, since small masses are likely to either not be
Photomicrograph showing well-differentiated neoplastic mast cells filling
submitted when excised; treated in such a way that the tissue is
magnification (inset) showing the bland morphology and monomorphic
 destroyed, or submitted to a general rather than ophthalmic pathol.
features which are typical.
ogy laboratory.
 Benign meibomian gland tumors present as focal or multifocal
nodular masses which are often exophytic and papillary
 They may cause problems related to their contact with the
cormeal surface causing irritation, or may be considered a
Comparative Comments
cosmetic problem
Tumors of the lid epithelium in humans are common and can be 
Meibomian gland adenoma
divided into three main groups: benign, precancerous, and 
Most of the tumor is made up of fully differentiated
meibomian glandular tissue:
that occur elsewhere on the human skin.
- Holocrine secretory cells
1. Benign lesions of the eyelid in humans include:
- Keratinizing ducts 
Cutaneous horns
 As a general rule: adenoma is smaller, more superficial, and
Papillomas
more likely to be exophytic than epithelioma
Seborrheic keratoses
 Meibomian gland epithelioma
Inverted follicular keratoses 
■ Most of the tumor is made up of undifferentiated basal cells
 Pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia 
with rare sebaceous or squamous differentiation
Keratoacanthoma 
 Epitheliomas are more likely to be pigmented
Large cell acanthomas.
Epitheliomas are slightly larger and more likely to be deeper
in the lid margin dermis than adenomas
160
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.21 Epitheliotropic lymphoma.
(A) Miniature Schnauzer, 11 years old:
the hyperemic, elevated conjunctival 
lesion developed at the same time as the
lid lesion in (B). (B) The lower lid is 
thickened and depigmented. The 
 diagnosis of epitheliotropic lymphoma,
was confirmed by a biopsy of the lower
lid in this left eye of the same dog as (A).
(C) A focal exophytic skin mass was seen
on a dog with epitheliotropic lymphoma,
mycosis fungoides. (D) Photomicrograph
of the epidermis from the same dog as
(C) showing aggregates of neoplastic
cells within defined cavities in the 
epidermis (arrows) and also within the
dermal connective tissue.
A
（D
Figure 7.22 Peripheral nerve sheath
tumors of the feline eyelid/schwannoma.
(A,B) Gross photographs showing
poorly-defined mass lesions infiltrating.
effacing and distorting the connective 
tissue of the eyelid. (C) Photomicrograph
showing neoplastic spindle cells arranged
such that the nuclei form rows and 
 cords, Antoni A pattern. (D)
Immunohistochemistry stains positive for
S-100 protein.
A
B
C
161
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.23 Equine sarcoid. (A)
Thoroughbred, 5 years old: the large,
firm, nonulcerated mass was tightly
adherent to underlying tissue. (B) Mule,
7 years old: this nodular skin tumor was
severely ulcerated, with superficial
necrosis. (C,D) Photomicrographs
showing the typical relationship between
the epidermis and the neoplastic stromal
tissue in equine sarcoid. The epidermis 
interdigitates with the neoplastic spindle
cells via angular epithelial pegs (arrows)
that extend deeply into the stroma.
A
B
 Lipogranuloma surrounding adenoma or epithelioma
 Multifocal eyelid margin melanocytomas are seen in Vizslas,
(Fig. 7.25)
and in Doberman Pinschers, particularly those with the
■  Either variant of the benign meibomian gland tumors is
so-called white color-dilute coat color (Fig. 7.27).
 likely to be surrounded by a variably sized lipogranuloma
with:
Lipogranuloma (chalazion) (Fig. 7.28)
- Epithelioid macrophage cells
- Multi-nucleated cells
- Large, empty lipid lakes'
surrounding benign tumors of meibomian gland origin.
 Linear, birefringent material within the cytoplasm of the
However, lipogranulomata can form a nodular mass lesion in
macrophage cells
isolation, without a co-existing meibomian gland tumor
- Forms complex membranous electron-dense material in
White nodular mass at the lid margin
the cytoplasm of the macrophage cells
■Histologically the lipogranuloma surrounds the non-
 Birefringent material is not seen in lipogranuloma
neoplastic meibomian gland
surrounding canine cutaneous sebaceous gland tumors
It is postulated that the granuloma reflects a reaction to
release of meibomian lipid within the tissues
As with the lipogranuloma that surrounds adenoma, there is
Canine meibomian gland adenocarcinoma
often linear birefringent material in the cytoplasm of
There are only three examples of this tumor in the COPLOW archive.
macrophage cells in lipogranulomas surrounding meibomian
This is a rare, malignant variant of the meibomian gland tumor
glands.
The tumor is characterized by anaplastic cellular features, rare
meibomian gland secretory features and local invasion.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the lid margin
in cats (multifocal squamous cell
Lid margin melanocytic tumors
carcinoma) (Figs 7.29, 7.30)
(melanocytoma) (Fig. 7.26)
 There are 10 cases of multifocal squamous cell carinoma involving
There are 52 cases in the COPLOW collection (0.9% of tumor submis-
the lid margin in the COPLOW collection.
sions). The reader is referred to the section above on melanocytic
Squamous cell carcinoma in cats, when it involves the lid
tumors of the haired eyelid skin
margins, usually also extends into the haired skin and is part of
162
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.24 Canine meibomian gland 
adenoma and epithelioma. (A) Cocker
Spaniel, 12 years old: a non-pigmented 
cerebriform mass involved the lid margin
and palpebral conjunctiva. (B) Cocker 
Spaniel, 10 years old: this mass had a
hemorrhagic surface. (C) Shih Tzu, 9
years old: the pigmented mass involved
the lid margin and palpebral conjunctival
surface. (D) Siberian Husky, 6 years old:
the exophytic hyperemic mass involves
eaunluos jegadied pue uibie p aun
surface. (E) Photomicrograph showing a
meibomian epithelioma characterized by
sheets of poorly-differentiated basal cells.
Inset: occasional cells show sebaceous
differentiation (arrows). There are also
A
scattered melanocytes.
C
1
163
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.25 Canine meibomian gland
adenoma with lipogranuloma. (A) Low
 magnification photomicrograph of the lid
margin of a dog showing a small 
meibomian gland adenoma (arrows)
surrounded and dwarfed by a much
larger lipogranuloma (*) reacting to 
released meibomian gland secretions.
(B,C) Higher magnification showing 
macrophage cells containing birefringent
linear material (C) when viewed with
intense polarized light. About half of the
lipogranulomas surrounding meibomian
glands or meibomian tumors in dogs
have birefringent material in the 
 Cytoplasm. (D) Transmmission electron
micrograph showing phagocytes with
birefringent material reveals complex
linear membranous material in the 
cytoplasm.
a complex of dysplastic epithelium with multicentric squamous
Squamous cell carcinoma of the lid margin
cell carcinoma
in horses and cattle
There is often diffuse conjunctival disease with multifocal areas
of epithelial dysplasia but not necessarily neoplasia. A similar
 This is a very common clinical presentation, particularly in
situation exists in the horse, but in that species the neoplasm
breeds that lack periocular pigmentation
commonly involves conjunctival tissue and will, therefore, be
 As described above for cats, squamous cell carcinoma of the lid
addressed in the next section.
margin in horses and cattle generally shows extensive
Careful evaluation of the margins of the neoplasm in the haired
conjunctival involvement and is therefore considered later in 
skin of the eyelid reveals disorganized and dysplastic
this chapter, as a conjunctival neoplasm.
epithelium, often most easily identifed in the follicular
epithel ium.
Mesenchymal hamartomas of the lateral
canthus (Fig. 7.32)
Squamous cell carcinoma of the lid margin
There are seven of these tumors in the COPLOW collection, six of
which involved the temporal orbital rim.
in dogs (Fig. 7.31)
A hamartoma is a mass lesion associated with fully
differentiated, non-neoplastic tissue, appropriate to the location
noma in the COPLOW collection.
of the mass
164
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.26 Lid margin melanocytoma.
(A,B) Gross photographs showing lid 
margin melanocytomas in submitted
specimens. (C,D) Photomicrographs 
showing variably pigmented neoplastic
masses abutting and within the
epidermis (arrows).
B
C
Figure 7.27 Multifocal melanocytoma.
(A) Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever,
8 years old: the bilateral condition
consisted of multifocal pigmented 
elevated tumors and diffuse areas of 
dermal pigmentation. (B) Vizsla, 10 years 
old: there is diffuse cutaneous
 pigmentation with multifocal raised 
masses predominantly in the lower
eyelid. (C) Photomicrographs showing
multifocal melanocytoma in a white
Doberman Pinscher. Proliferating
melanocytes resemble human nevus cells.
(D) The neoplastic melanocytes stain
positive for Melan-A with 
immunohistochemistry.
165
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.28 Chalazion. (A) DSH, 5 years
old: the yellowish subepithelial nodule is
present on the superior palpebral
conjunctiva in the area of the superior
meibomian glands. (B) Poodle, 6 years 
old: two-thirds of the superior
meibomian glands are involved
(C,D) Inflammation within and 
surrounding diseased meibomian glands
in chalazion. Lipid lakes (*) occur within
lipogranulomatous inflammation.
A
B
 Mesenchymal hamartomas, composed of collagenous connective
Comparative Comments
tissue, adipose tissue and, usually, skeletal muscle tissue, are
Occasionally removed from the orbital rim in dogs.
The opportunity to study conjunctival pathology in humans usually
occurs in the following instances:
·A biopsy specimen, from an inflammatory, degenerative, or 
CONJuNCtIVItIS
eied lo jeuoisxa ag auiia Aew asaul ssanoud piseidoau
biopsies
General philosophy on the pathology of
 Conjunctival scrapings, e.g., in the diagnosis of trachoma
Impression cytology, in which surface cells have been removed
conjunctivitis
and are stained for recognition of malignant cells, inclusions, or
●Small conjunctival biopsies are often submitted in the hope that
other abnormalities for exenteration specimens submitted
following the removal of advanced malignant processes.
the morphology will reveal a cause of inflammatory disease.
 In the organization and teaching of human conjunctival pathology.
Unfortunately, there are seldom morphologic features that
suggest a specific diagnosis
the following categories are usually considered:
 Congenital and developmental anomalies 
 In COPLOW submissions, the diagnosis of conjunctivitis is
 Inflammations and infections
generally made by describing the kind of inflammatory exudates
and/or infiltrates seen
 Degenerations 
 If there is an apparent increase in the relative number of mast
 Systemic diseases 
 cells, the suggestion is made that conjunctivitis might be related
Tumors.
to hypersensitivity.
166
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.29 Feline eyelid margin
squamous cell carcinoma, clinical.
(A) DSH, 5 years old: this erosive lesion
has not yet involved the free lid margin.
(B) DSH, 7 years old: the free lid margins,
lower lid and medial canthus are involved 
in this case. (C) DSH, 17 years old: the
tumor is elevated and erosive. The
nictitans and palpebral conjunctiva are 
also involved. (D) DSH, 8 years old: the
tumor has disfigured the superior lid and 
extended into the superior palpebral 
conjunctiva.
A
B
D
 The axial opening in the conjunctival fold is always
Comparative Comments (continued)
circular, and has smooth margins
Within these categories are encompassed many of the entities
 Surgical debridement of the base of the conjunctival fold
described in this chapter in various other species, such as
results in re-growth
■Histopathology
pseudopterygia, pterygia, non-specific chronic conjunctivitis, ligneous
 conjunctivitis, fibrous histiocytoma, herpes virus infection,
- Minimal inflammation or edema
lipogranulomas, granulomas associated with injection sites, and
- The stroma is generally the typical loose connective tissue
onchocerciasis.
of the conjunctival substantia propria
The frequency and specific appearance of these lesions in man
Rarely, at the axial, migrating margin, contractile cells rich
appear to vary in many instances from that described in other species.
in actin may be observed, that are morphologically similar
to smooth muscle cells.
Pseudopterygium in rabbits (Fig. 7.33)
Ligneous conjunctivitis in dogs
This is an idiopathic disease of the conjunctiva in rabbits, which
(Figs 7.34, 7.35)
has the following characteristic features:
 The disease is often unilateral, although some rabbits show
There are six cases of ligneous conjunctivitis, four in Doberman Pin-
bilateral ocular involvement
schers and two in littermate Golden Retrievers, in the COPLOW col-
 Signs of pain, irritation or inflammation are minimal or
lection (Fig. 7.35).
absent
 This is a rare condition. Ligneous conjunctivitis has been
■
The hallmark of the disease is a circumferential inward
reported as an entity only in Doberman pinschers and Golden
folding of the bulbar conjunctiva, thus closing over the clear
retrievers
cornea like a purse-string. The condition has also been
Clinically, the condition presents as a bilateral ulcerative
termed 'epicorneal conjunctival membrane'
conjunctivitis, with an adherent dense pseudomembranous 
 In contrast to pterygium in humans, the space between the
exudate
conjunctival fold and the corneal surface is only rarely
 In some cases, there are oral mucosal lesions of similar
interrupted by an adhesion
appearance
167
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.30 Feline eyelid margin
squamous cell carcinoma, pathology.
(A,B) Gross photographs showing globes
and lids from cats with lid margin
squamous cell carcinoma invading and 
effacing surrounding tissues. (C,D)
Photomicrographs showing invasive
neoplastic squamous epithelium 
surrounded by a desmoplastic stromal 
response.
B
Figure 7.31 Canine eyelid margin
squamous cell carcinoma. (A) Mixed
Breed, & years old: this proliferative 
tumor first involved the superior lids and 
palpebral conjunctiva. (B) Cocker Spaniel,
12 years old: the entire superior lid,
palpebral conjunctiva and medial canthus 
were involved with this proliferative 
hyperemic mass.
A
B
168
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.32 Mesenchymal hamartoma.
(A,B) Low magnification
 photomicrographs of mesenchymal
hamartomas, from canine orbital rims,
stained with H&E (A) and trichrome (B).
(C) Photomicrograph showing the 
margins of the mass lesion (arrows)
(Trichrome stain). (D) Low magnification 
photomicrograph showing the 
relationship between collagen (blue)
adipose tissue (white) and muscle (red)
(Trichrome stain). (E) Higher
?
magnifications showing that the mass is 
composed of fully-differentiated 
collagenous connective tissue (blue),
 adipose tissue (arrow) and skeletal
muscle (red) (Trichrome stain).
The characteristic clinical feature is the hard and rigid 'wooden
 The human disease is thought to be linked to plasminogen
consistency of the affected tissue
deficiency
There is a reported link to renal glomenular disease, and to
 This link has been reported in one Golden retriever but
respiratory disease in affected dogs.
has not been definitively established in other affected
Morphologic characteristics:
's3op
 Ulcerative lesions
■
 Hyaline, cell-poor matrix with epithelial elements buried
Episcleritis and canine nodular
deeply within this matrix
Fails to stain for amyloid
granulomatous episclerokeratitis (NGE,
Stains bright red with trichrome stain, and does not
fibrous histiocytoma, nodular fasciitis)
demonstrate birefringence with polarized light
(Figs 7.36, 7.37)
 In humans there is a condition, also called ligneous
conjunctivitis, which has a very similar morphologic
There are 234 cases of NGE in the COPLOW collection. Although in
appearance
clinical practice Collie dogs are over-represented, this is not the case
169
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.33 Pseudopterygium in rabbits.
(A) Dwarf Lop-Eared Rabbit: the
conjunctival overgrowth from the limbus
has resulted in a small paracentral
aperture through which the pupil is just 
visible and a cyst-like structure (arrow).
(B) The left eye in the same rabbit as (A)
better demonstrates the small axial area
of clear cornea (arrow). (C) Gross
photograph showing an affected eye and 
an unaffected eye from a rabbit.
(D,E) Lower and higher magnification
photomicrographs showing the fold of
near normal conjunctival epithelium and
connective tissue extending as a flap
from the limbus.
A
H
C
D
170
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.34 Ligneous conjunctivitis.
(A) Doberman Pinscher, 5.5 years old: a
thick firm gray membrane is tightly
adhered to the free-lid margin of the
nictitans and inferior palpebral
conjunctiva of the lower lid. (B) Left eye
of the dog in (A) showing the severely
hyperemic nictitans with the gray
membrane. (C) Doberman Pinscher. 6.5
years old: this individual is similar to the
previous case, but also has firm elevated
conjunctival lesions. (D) Left eye of the 
dog in (C) with the nictitans everted,
showing large conjunctival swellings.
(E,F) Low magnification
A
B
 photomicrographs showing hyaline
protein, typical of ligneous conjunctivitis,
 deposited in the subepithelial stroma of
the bulbar aspect of the third eyelid
(E, stained with H&E; F, trichrome). The
hyaline protein stains bright red with
trichrome (F). (G) High magnification of a
trichrome stained conjunctiva showing
remnants of red-staining ligneous
material away from the main deposit 
(arrows). (H) Photomicrograph showing
 similar ligneous material distorting the
structure of the renal glomerulus.
C
171
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.35 Ligneous conjunctivitis in a
Golden Retriever. (A) Golden Retriever.
4.5 months old: this dog and one
littermate were similarly affected. The 
thick gray membrane can be seen at the
junction of the conjunctiva and skin on
the lower lid (arrow). (B) The left eye of
the dog in (A) showing a similar
membrane and mucous on the margin of 
the nictitans. (C) The same dog had 
erosive lesions on the lower lip and the
gingiva. (D) This dog's tongue had two
erosive lesions (arrows).
A
B
?
D
in the COPLOW collection. The COPLOW collection has only 14
The classic disease is a nodular mass lesion deep to the
cases in Collies out of the 234 total cases.
conjunctival epithelial surface and abutting the sclera at the
●This is an idiopathic, inflammatory disease of the conjunctival
limbus. However, particularly in Collies, the conjunctiva and
substantia propria and/or episcleral tissue in dogs. Lesions may
tissues of the third eyelid and eyelid may also be involved in
 Occur anywhere on the episclera and conjunctiva
the disease process
 Rather than a single, well-defined, clinical and histological
The nodular disease often responds to anti-inflammatory
entity, this represents a broad spectrum of episcleral
treatment or debulking surgery. Therefore, only atypical lesions
inflammatory disease
tend to be sampled and submitted to the pathology laboratory
Clinical presentation ranges from relatively diffuse sub-
Typical morphologic features include:
conjunctival thickening (episcleritis) to well-defined, firm
 The lesion forms a nodule. There should be a well-defined
nodules (NGE)
margin, with adjacent near normal connective tissue
Relative numbers of different inflammatory cell types and
 The lesion subtends the conjunctival epithelium which is
presence and extent of fibroblast proliferation and collagen
characteristically intact over the mass 
deposition are highly variable
■
 There is a mixture of lympho-plasmacytic inflammatory cells
Collie dogs are reported to have a predisposition to the
and larger cells resembling histiocytes, with minimal or no
development of nodular granulomatous episcleritis NGE (but,
 suppurative component The histiocytic component may
see above)
include multi-nucleate cells
 This may be a reflection of clinicians' ability to recognize
 There is often a variable population of spindle cells with or 
very characteristic disease features and response to treatment 
without collagen matrix deposition:
in this breed, and thus reach a clinical diagnosis without
- Mass lesions which are primarily made up of spindle cells
pursuing histologic confrmation
and collagen are diagnosed at COPLOW as NGE- nodular
 Some clinicians refer to this condition as proliferative
fascitis variant
keratoconjunctivitis in the Collie breed
  Nodular granulomatous episcleritis lacks features of classical
■
 The disease in Collies is relatively aggressive but generally
 granulomatous inflammation, with no distinct nodules of
responds well to anti-inflammatory treatment (Fig. 7.38)
epithelioid macrophage cells surrounding a necrotic center
172
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
 Figure 7.36 Canine nodular
granulomatous episcleritis (NGE).
(A) Pembroke Welsh Corgi. 14 years old:
this firm mass originated in the superior
episclera and had not invaded the
cornea. (B) Golden Retriever, 9 years old:
this pink elevated mass originated from
nasal episclera with mild extension into 
the adjacent cornea (arrow). (C) Shetland 
Sheepdog. 10 years old: this mass
extended into the superficial cornea.
Lipid keratopathy (arrow) is present at 
the leading edge of the lesion.
(D) Greyhound, 6 years old: the pink 
mass originated temporally and did not
significantly invade the cornea.
AR
B
D
 Recently it has been reported that not all of the large cells are 
There are no morphologic hallmarks that allow the pathologist
histiocytic. and some may be smooth muscle or
I-AHd ul diusuoelan iaga-pue-asne e ysiqeisa c
myofibroblasts.
conjunctivitis, so the importance of the role of FHV-1 in
non-specific feline conjunctivitis is not well understood
Feline herpesvirus keratoconjunctivitis,
Distinct morphologic patterns of conjunctivitis that might be
FHV-1 (Fig. 7.39)
related to FHV-1 recrudescence include eosinophilic
conjunctivitis and keratoconjunctivitis.
Feline herpesvirus-l causes both a primary and secondary
inflammatory disease of the conjunctiva and cornea, i.e.
conjunctivitis or keratoconjunctivitis
Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis (see also
The primary disease occurs in kittens and is accompanied by
Ch. 8) (Fig. 7.40)
laddn Kaieual laay se yons uoaut uaiss jo sugis
respiratory disease, and inflammatory disease widespread on
 Blepharitis involving the eyelid margins, conjunctivitis and
mucosal epithelial surfaces, as well as ocular disease
keratitis associated with eosinophilic inflammation are common
Biopsies are seldom submitted from cats with primary
clinical presentations in cats. Lesions may occur together Or
disease, but FHV-1 infection likely plays an important role in
 separately, and may be uni- or bilateral
feline symblepharon formation (see above) and neonatal
Morphologic features include:
corneal defects (see Ch. 8)
Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis is a regional lesion which
 The virus becomes dormant in the trigeminal ganglion and
often extends onto the corneal surface but does not involve
 stress-related recrudescence leads to clinical disease involving
the deep stroma
the conjunctiva and cornea. Prior or recrudescent FHV-1
 There is irregular distortion of the surface contour of the
infection may contribute to chronic stromal keratitis, corneal
cormea, with or without ulceration
stromal sequestration or eosinophilic keratitis that may be
 There is often a plexus of relatively large blood vessels within
biopsied in adult cats (see Ch. 8)
the underlying stroma
173
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.37 Nodular granulomatous
episcleritis (NGE), pathology. (A,B) Gross
photograph and low magnification
photomicrograph showing features of a
particularly large and invasive nodular
granulomatous episcleritis. The infiltrate
is sharply delineated, composed of 
granulomatous and lymphocytic
inflammatory infiltrate, and the
epithelium is intact. (C) Low 
magnification photomicrograph of a
typical biopsy specimen of NGE showing
the sharply delimited margins typical of 
the disease. (D,E) Photomicrographs of a
spindle cell lesion (D) showing positive
A
B
immunolabeling for the macrophage
marker CD18 (E)
C
 Lympho-plasmacytic inflammatory cells may out-number
conjunctiva from the lid margin to the fornix. Less frequently,
eosinophils
the bulbar conjunctiva or the nictitans are involved
●The role played by FHV-1 infection in the development of feline
enso-ad asieds im sies iapio ieui isasans siodal 
eosinophilic ocular disease remains controversial, despite the
 pigmentation (e.g. orange cats) are predisposed. There are 81
findings of studies that provide molecular evidence of prior or
cases in the COPLOW collection diagnosed as feline
active FHV-1 infection.
lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis:
28 of the 8l cases have a concurrent neoplasm including 17
cases with conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma
Feline conjunctival papillary mastocytosis
 Pathologists should be aware that lipogranulomas and
(Fig. 7.41)
neoplasia may go together. Thus, a careful search should be
 This is an uncommon disease There are seven cases in the COPLOW
made to rule out neoplasia
 The lesions, involving the palpebral conjunctiva, are non-
collection.
ulcerative, nodular, and pale in color, ranging from opaque
This presents as a poorly delineated, proliferative conjunctival
white to light yellow
lesion and most of the samples submitted are from the
Characteristic morphologic features include:
palpebral surface of the nictitans 
A bland granulomatous inflammatory reaction surrounding
The underlying cause remains unknown
large, cell-free lakes of lipid dissolved during processing
Morphologic features of feline conjunctival papillary
 Large empty spaces which may be surrounded by
mastocytosis include:
inconspicuous multi-nucleated macrophages
 Papillary proliferation of an intact epithelium
 In some areas, and in some lesions, the characteristic profle
  Mixed inflammatory infiltrate and edema in the substantia
is that of solid sheets of large, multinucleate, foreign body
propria
 macrophage cells or of smaller epithelioid cells with foamy
 Large numbers of mast cells including many mast cells
cytoplasm
directly within or on the surface of the conjunctival
 Lympho-plasmacytic or suppurative inflammation are seldom
 epithelium.
prominent.
Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis in cats
Plasmacytic conjunctivitis ('plasmoma')
(Fig. 7.42)
of the nictitans in dogs
 Feline lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis presents as a regional,
This is a common clinical presentation in breeds that are
nodular disease which usually involves the palpebral
predisposed to chronic superficial keratitis (CSK), in
174
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.38 Proliferative
keratoconjunctivitis in Collie dogs.
(A) Collie, 3 years old: the nictitans and
inferior limbus are involved. Corneal lipid
keratopathy (arrow) is present at the
leading edge of this pseudotumor
(B) Collie, 2 years old: a solitary temporal
mass and an elevated lesion of the
nictitans can be seen at the arrow.
(C) Collie, 2 years old: the most
remarkable lesions were the lid
involvement in both eyes. A small limbal
mass was present inferior. (D) This is the
lower lip of the dog in (C). All lesions 
biopsied were indicative of this disease.
B
D
which conjunctivitis may accompany keratitis, or occur in
 The granuloma may be surrounded by minimal lympho-
isolation
plasmacytic infiltrate or minimal fbrosis.
Thickening and hyperemia of the nictitating membrane, with
depigmentation of the leading edge, is observed bilaterally
The disease is considered to have a similar immuno-
Canine conjunctival onchocerciasis
pathogenesis to CSK, which is discussed in further detail in
(Fig. 7.44)
Chapter 8.
This parasitic condition is discussed in detail elsewhere in this
text (Ch. 6)
Triamcinolone (depot corticosteroid
In North America, the disease has been recorded in the Western
preparation) injection site granulomas
United States, in or near California
The conjunctival manifestations of this disease may be
(Fig. 7.43)
recognized as a raised, irregular inflammatory lesion of the
limbal conjunctiva that may be submitted as a biopsy
Several inflammatory conditions of the eye or conjunctiva are
treated by sub-conjunctival injection of a long-acting 
specimen
corticosteroid preparation
Morphologic features that should point toward the diagnosis of
The injected formulation is associated with a distinctive
 onchocerciasis include:
Bumoy au ym 'uonai Aoneuueyu snoeuonues
Tissue fibrosis
characteristics:
■  An eosinophilic component to the inflammatory response
■ Reaction to recently injected product is characterized by the
 A granulomatous component to the inflammatory response.
presence of an acellular, floculent, amphophilic material
with scant macrophage cells
Equine onchocerciasis
 The mature granuloma is characterized by a cell-free center,
surrounded by epithelioid or multinucleate macrophage cells
Microfilaria of Onchocerca cervicalis have been proposed as a
 Macrophage cells have a, very distinctive, rounded
cause of inflammation and depigmentation of the temporal
rectangular, clear vacuole in the cytoplasm
limbal conjunctiva in horse
175
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.39 Feline herpetic
keratoconjunctivitis. (A) DsH, 8 months
dd: moderate chemosis and hyperemia
are present. An adhesion is forming 
(arrow) between the superior and inferior
palpebral conjunctiva. (B) DSH, 1 year
old: moderate chemosis and hyperemia
are present. Two areas of epithelial
erosion have retained fluorescein stain
(arrows). (C) DSH, 1 year old: the
nictitans is hyperemic and prolapsed.
Multiple punctate corneal opacities
indicative of FHV-1 can be seen by
retroillumination. (D) DSH, & years old: a
large superficial corneal ulcer has been
stained with fluorescein dye. (E,F)
A
B
Photomicrographs showing epithelial cell 
necrosis and intranuclear inclusion bodies
(arrows) in feline herpes conjunctivitis.
C
E
●However, the causal relationship between onchocerciasis and
 Ultraviolet (UV) light exposure is thought to be involved in the
Ocular lesions in horses has not been definitively established.
pathogenesis of equine conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma
for the following reasons:
A high percentage of these neoplasms have mutant p53
protein/altered p53 expression
CONJUNCTIVAL NEOPLASMS AND OTHER
 Ocular squamous cell carcinoma has a higher prevalence in
NODULAr LESIONS
those geographic regions where UV light exposure is likely to
be greater
Conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma
 Squamous cell carcinoma is more likely to occur in horses
that are lacking in conjunctival and peri-ocular melanin
Equine squamous cell carcinoma (Fgs 7.45, 7.46)
pigment
 Solar elastosis and actinic keratosis is often seen in
There are 80 cases of conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma in the
association with the early stages of disease
COPLOW collection, l0% of equine submissions.
 Deep in the connective tissue the normal collagen matrix
· This is a relatively common condition in horses, and
is disrupted by areas with an amphophilic matrix
demonstrates increasing incidence with age
deposition, often with wavy elastin fibers
176
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.40 Feline eosinophilic
keratoconjunctivitis. (A) DSH, 3 years old:
lid margin depigmentation, diffuse 
 corneal vascularization, and focal white
superficial corneal and conjunctival 
precipitates (arrows) are present. (B) DSH,
4 years old: multiple elevated white 
 plaques are superficial to the corneal
vascularization. (C) DSH, 9 years old: a
large white gritty deposit is present
temporally. Fine precipitates are present 
over the severely hyperemic conjunctiva 
(black arrow). Dendritic ulcers were also
present. (D) DSH, 4 years old: severe 
corneal edema and vascularization are
present. White precipitates can be seen 
in the superficial epithelium (arrow).
A
R
(E) Low magnification photomicrograph
of a keratectomy specimen showing
distinct regional superficial disease. The 
 affected tissue is raised, edematous and
highly vascularized. (F) Higher 
 magnification photomicrograph showing
the intact epithelium with marked 
epithelial downgrowth and edematous
stroma. (G) High magnification 
photomicrograph showing a few
eosinophils.
C
D
F
177
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.41 Feline conjunctival papillary
mastocytosis. (A,B) Low magnification
photomicrographs showing a papillary
anterior surface proliferation on the
 palpebral surface of the third eyelid
typical of feline conjunctival papillary
mastocytosis. (C) Photomicrograph 
peui buenbipaui xaduon e buimous
epithelium and edematous stroma. (D,E)
Photomicrographs of affected conjunctiva 
showing mast cells largely within the
epithelium (toluidine blue stain).
A
B
（D）
 Stains for elastin are positive, or stain a 'murky' gray rather
 Anaplastic cellular features
than the distinct black staining of individual elastin fbers 
0 Large nucleus to cytoplasm ratio
●Biopsy is done at all stages of this disease process, and multiple
0 Karyomegaly
 stages may be represented within the conjunctival tissues of an
0 Binucleate cells
individual subject, so one will see a variety of morphological
0 Large nucleoli 
presentations:
 Affected cells do not extend beyond the epithelial basal
Dysplastic epithelium, presumed to be pre-neoplastic:
lamina
- Disorganization of epithelium, or abnormal keratinization
  Non-invasive squamous cell carcinoma
patterns
 Fully neoplastic epithelial features with invasion beyond
- Minimal anaplastic cellular features
the basal lamina
- Does not invade the epithelial basal lamina
 Atypical features of keratin formation such as keratin
Carcinoma in situ
 pearls
 Infiltration of lymphatic or vascular structures is not
within the epithelium (dyskeratosis)
seen
178
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.42 Feline lipogranulomatous 
conjunctivitis. (A) DSH, 9 years old: this
white opaque deposit (arrow) was
present in the superior subpalpebral area
in both eyes. (B) DsH, 8 years old: in this
bilateral case, the subconjunctival lesions 
were more lobulated. (C)
 Photomicrograph showing large empty
spaces, lipid lakes', surrounded by
macrophage cells. (D) Photomicrograph
showing huge multinucleated giant cells
and lipid.
A
R
Figure 7.43 Corticosteroid suspension
(Depo-Medrol) injection granuloma.
(A) Photomicrograph showing a
developing granuloma at the site of a
subconjunctival corticosteroid suspension 
product injection. Centrally, there is a 
large amount of vacuolated foreign (*)
 le saobeud may e kuo pue leaieu
the margins. (B) Photomicrograph
showing a more mature granuloma at a
subconjunctival injection site. A distinct 
 granuloma (arrows) is seen in the
substantia propria of the conjunctiva.
(C,D) Higher magnification showing
macrophage cells with distinctive, nearly
rectangular empty spaces typical of an
injection granuloma with a suspension
product.
179
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.44 Onchocerca conjunctivitis.
(A) Low magnification photomicrograph
of the limbus with swollen inflamed 
reaction. The inset shows adult male and
female Onchocerca nematodes in a
 granulomatous space deep within the
 conjunctiva. (B) Photomicrograph
 showing Splendore-Hoeppli reaction 
(arrows) away from obvious nematodes.
Figure 7.45 Equine conjunctival 
squamous cell carcinoma, clinical.(A)
Thoroughbred, 7 years old: the 
hyperemic elevated mass has not invaded
the cornea. (B) Grade horse, 20 years
dld:squamous cell carcinoma was
confirmed at the limbus and lid margin
(arrows). (C) American Saddlebred Horse,
5 years old: this temporal proliferative
mass invaded the cornea. (D)
Thoroughbred, 20 years old: the 
cerebriform elevated SCC was restricted
 to the palpebral surface of the nictitans 
(arrow).
B
D
180
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
 Figure 7.46 Equine squamous cel
carcinoma, pathology. (A,B) Gross
photographs of a horse with exophytic.
poorly invasive, limbal squamous cell 
carcinoma. (C) Subgross
 photomicrograph showing an exophytic.
and also invasive, squamous cell
carcinoma. (D) Subgross
photomicrograph showing invasion into
the corneal stroma.
A
B
C
1
- Desmoplastic, stromal fbrous proliferation is not seen or
 UV light is thought to be an important factor in pathogenesis 
is not prominent
The morphologic subtypes are similar to those of the horse,
 Invasive squamous cell carcinoma
except there is no reported equivalent of the stromal invasive
- Deep invasion of the sub-epithelial tissues is a
prominent feature with vascular invasion or lymphatic
invasion
 Individual neoplastic cells are often seen and they may be
Canine squamous cell carcinoma (Fig. 7.49)
diffcult to distinguish from stromal spindle cells
'ssop u uooun aaa si euouie lin snouinss leasunuo
Stromal invasive squamous cell carcinoma (Fig. 7.47)
There are 24 cases in the COPLOW collection, representing 0.4% of
- This distinctive variant invades the cormea specifically and
all canine tumor submissions.
will be discussed further in Chapter 8.
 The morphologic variations are similar to those seen in other
species.
Bovine squamous cell carcinoma (Fig. 7.48)
Bovine ocular squamous cell carcinoma is very common but under-
Feline squamous cell carcinoma (Fig. 7.50)
represented in the COPLOW collection. This may result from a bias
towards companion animals in clinical veterinary ophthalmology, the
Conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma is relatively rare in cats. There
client base for a mailin comparative ocular pathology service. There
are 6l cases in the COPLOW collection, representing 2.2% of feline
are 16 submissions of ocular squamous cel carcinoma in cattle, rep-
tumor submissions.
resenting 18.8% of all bovine submissions.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the second most frequently
extending into the globe
reported tumor of cattle with only lymphoma being more
Care must be taken to rule out metastatic squamous cell
common
carcinoma because tumors of the lung or middle ear can spread
 Most common in the Hereford breed and its crosses, that show
to the conjunctival area
a characteristic lack of periocular pigment 
Multicentric squamous cell carcinoma is mentioned above.
The condition is often bilateral
This tumor is associated with epithelial dysplasia or
More common when the conjunctiva is not pigmented
neoplastic transformation of the conjunctival epithelium
An estimated 75% occur on the bulbar conjunctiva at the
 Or corneal epithelium and should be ruled out in all
limbus and the rest are widely dispersed
cases.
181
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.47 Equine stromal invasive
squamous cell carcinoma. (A) Clinical
photograph showing a horse with an
opaque cornea as a result of a stromal
invasive squamous cell carcinoma.
(B) Gross photograph of an equine eye 
with stromal invasive squamous cell
carcinoma. There is a smooth surface
because the invasion is inward to the
corneal stroma and not outward.
(C,D) Low magnification 
 photomicrographs showing invasion of
the lamellar stroma by neoplastic
epithelial cells in stromal invasive
A
B
squamous cell carcinoma.
C
（D
Figure 7.48 Bovine ocular squamous cell
carcinoma. (A,B) Gross photographs of a
bovine eye with a limbal exophytic
squamous cell carcinoma. (C) Gross
photograph of a bovine eye with a less
circumscribed conjunctival tumor.
(D) A bovine globe largely effaced by an
aggressive invasive squamous cell
carcinoma.
A
B
C
D
182
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.49 Canine conjunctival/corneal
squamous cell carcinoma. (A) Toy Poodle,
9 years old: this rapidly proliferating 
limbal squamous cell carcinoma 
originated in the superior and temporal
palpebral conjunctiva and extended over
the cornea. (B) Subgross photograph 
showing extensive invasive squamous cell
carcinoma involving the conjunctiva and 
extending into the globe. (C,D) Gross
and subgross photographs showing
canine conjunctival squamous cell
carcinoma with extensive conjunctival
?
spread in a dog with concurrent chronic
inflammation. (E,F) Gross photograph
and photomicrograph of a dog with
more localized squamous cell carcinoma
at the limbus.
E
183
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.50 Feline conjunctival/corneal
squamous cell carcinoma. (A) DSH, 6
years old: the proliferative mass
 originated in the temporal conjunctiva.
(B-D) Gross photographs of feline 
 conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma
showing various degrees of invasion.
A
B
D
The primary cell is a poorly-differentiated secretory cell
Comparative Comments
forming acinar or tubular features 
Considering precancerous lesions and cancerous lesions of the
 The tumors often form papillary fronds on the conjunctival
surface epithelium, there appears to be a close association
surface but they also invade into the tissue
between the entities seen in humans and in other species
■
 Too little is known about this neoplasm to speculate as to
In humans, the term 'conjunctival intraepithelial neoplasia' (CIN) is
the prognosis.
used to describe a spectrum of patterns of celular proliferation,
extending from dysplasia to carcinoma in situ. Tumors with this
designation have not penetrated the underlying basement 
 Canine conjunctival melanoma and
membrane
melanocytoma (Figs 7.52, 7.53)
 Frank squamous cell carcinoma of the conjunctiva is an 
uncommon tumor in humans, occurring most frequently in 
There are 149 cases of canine conjunctival melanocytic tumors
tropical countries.
in the COPLOW collection, representing 2.6% of canine tumor
submissions.
 Of the canine conjunctival melanocytic tumors in the COPLOW
Feline conjunctival mucoepidermoid
collection, 81% are malignant by morphologic criteria and 19%
carcinoma (Fig. 7.51)
are melanocytoma
By histologic observation, most of the affected dogs have
Although this tumor is not reported in the literature, there are 10 cases
pigmentation of their normal conjunctival tissues 
in the COPLOW collection.
The breeds most commonly affected by conjunctival
●Morphologic features of conjunctival mucoepidermoid
melanocytic tumors are retrievers, Rottweilers, and Cocker
carcinoma:
spaniels
184
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.51 Feline conjunctival
mucoepidermoid carcinoma. (A) Clinical
photograph showing papillary and 
multifocal lesions. (B,C) Low 
magnification photomicrographs showing 
 surface oriented mucoepidermoid
carcinoma, characterized by a papillary
growth pattern and local invasion.
(D) Photomicrograph showing neoplastic
 cells spread over the surface replacing 
the native epithelium (arrows).
?
D
 Figure 7.52 Canine conjunctival 
melanocytoma/melanoma. (A) Bluetick
Coonhound, & years old: this pigmented 
lesion on the nictitans was a
melanocytoma. (B) Chesapeake Bay
Retriever, 11 years old: involving the
 palpebral surface and free margin of the
nictitans, this was a melanoma on
biopsy. (C,D) Gross photographs showing 
widespread recurrence of canine
conjunctival melanoma. (E) Subgross 
photomicrograph of widespread
recurrence of canine conjunctival 
melanoma.
A
B
C
185
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.53 Canine conjunctival
melanoma, microscopic. (A) Subgross
photomicrograph showing the bulbar
surface of the excised third eyelid with
conjunctival melanoma. (B,C) Pigmented
and non-pigmented melanoma cells
abutting and within the epithelium 
(arrows). (D,E) Photomicrographs of
conjunctival tissue well away from the
tumor mass showing aggregates of
tumor cells (D). Melan-A 
immunohistochemistry highlights the 
neoplastic cells within the conjunctival
epithelium (E).
C
D
186
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
 Figure 7.54 Feline conjunctival
melanoma. (A,B) Gross photographs
showing the typical appearance of feline
conjunctival melanoma. Pigmented tumor
is nestled deeply in the episcleral 
connective tissue.
A
B
■It is noteworthy that, despite their intraocular pigmentary
 Recommendations based on known behavior:
problems that lead to glaucoma, there are no Cairn Terriers
 Careful observation for local recurrence followed by
with conjunctival melanomas
aggressive surgical excision (with enucleation of the globe)
Morphologic features of canine conjunctival melanocytoma
after the first recurrence.
■
 The cells are mostly large heavily pigmented round cells.
mixed with pigmented spindle cells
Feline conjunctival melanoma (Fig. 7.54)
■
 Melanocytoma, like melanoma cells, tend to form tight
There are 26 conjunctival melanocytic tumors in cats, representing
 aggregates or clusters subtending or within the conjunctival
0.9% of feline tumor submissions.
epithelium
No satellite aggregates of neoplastic or dysplastic melanocytic
 All 26 cases had a malignant potential
e a nn a m e am sn
There was a wide variation in the degree of pigmentation
■Some of these malignant neoplasms have shown aggressive
from the tumor location
infltration or metastatic disease, despite features that would
Morphologic features of canine conjunctival melanoma
suggest benign behavior in dogs
■
 Melanomas have variable pigmentation but many in the
COPLOW collection were totally amelanotic
- This feature is similar to the reported behavior of
cutaneous melanoma in cats
■
 The tumor cells had anaplastic features:
- Large single nucleoli are a common and useful
 The most common location for the primary tumor is the
bulbar conjunctiva with extension deep into the orbit
diagnostic feature that point to the melanocytic origin of
adjacent to the globe.
tumors
- Large nucleus to cytoplasm ratio
 Hyper-chromatic nuclear profiles
Comparative Comments
 Abundant mitotic activity
 Melanocytic neoplasia in humans is seen more frequently in the
■
 Neoplastic cells near the conjunctival epithelium tend to
pathology laboratory than other precancerous lesions and
form aggregated clusters, and are often seen within the
cancerous lesions of the surface epithelium
epithelium 
 These melanocytic lesions may occur as congenital or acquired,
- This feature is useful in recognizing tumors as being of
benign or malignant lesions. Nevocellular nevi are the most
melanocytic origin but it is not a feature which predicts
common conjunctival tumors. The malignant potential of these
biological behavior
nevi vary, with junctional and compound nevi thought to have 
Many of the melanomas had dysplastic or neoplastic
low malignant potential, while the subepithelial nevus usually
 melanocytic cells subtending or within the epithelium well
remains benign
away from the site of the primary mass
 Primary acquired melanosis (PAM) is a condition seen in adults as
Of 23 cases where the location of the primary mass
stippled brown conjunctival pigmentation. The onset is usually at 
was known, 61% were on the third eyelid, 22% were
40-50 years of age and includes a spectrum that extends from 
on the bulbar conjunctiva, and 17% were on the palpebral
benign acquired melanosis (PAM without atypia) to PAM with 
conjunctiva
mild, moderate, or severe atypia. PAM with atypia can evolve into
Follow-up information was available for only 21
melanoma
cases
 Approximately 5o% of conjunctival melanomas arise de novo, and
Half of the tumors recurred in the conjunctiva, often away
 50% arise from acquired melanosis or conjunctival nevi
from the primary site or multi-focally
 The histopathologic features of conjunctival melanoma in humans 
■
 Metastasis was only documented in two of these 2l cases
and both of these were neoplasms that originally involved
to occur in invasive melanomas that are more than 0.8 mm thick.
the palpebral conjunctiva
187
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Canine conjunctival hemangioma,
 Widely disparate biological behaviors have been attributed to
hemangiosarcoma (Fig. 7.55)
this tumor type. Limited follow-up information was available.
but one of the COPLOW cases recurred after local excision.
There are 230 canine conjunctival tumors of vascular endothelial
origin in the COPLOW collection, representing 4% of canine tumor
Canine conjunctival mast cell tumor
submissions.
Of these, 65% are diagnosed as hemangioma and 35% are
(Fig. 7.57)
diagnosed as hemangiosarcoma
There are 32 cases of canine conjunctival mast cell tumors in the
The features that distinguish between hemangioma and
COPLOW collection,
representing 0.5% of canine tumor
hemangiosarcoma are:
submissions.
 The degree of differentiation of blood-filled vascular
 Although the same grading criteria might be used as for
spaces
autaneous mast cell tumors, there are no follow-up studies that
■
 The presence of anaplastic features in the neoplastic cells
establish the prognostic value of this grading scheme in
■ The extent to which the tumor is infiltrative
Tumors most commonly occur on the leading edge of the
conjunctival mast cell tumor
 In the collection there are tumors on the palpebral conjunctiva.
nictitans, or on the temporal bulbar conjunctiva
the bulbar conjunctiva and the nictitans but most of the
The clinical presentation of bright red, exophytic, friable,
bleeding mass lesions is similar for both hemangioma and
submissions do not specify mass location.
hemangiosarcoma
Ysll e si ansodxa iual An ieut panejnads aney siouine snotaaid
Feline conjunctival mast cell tumor
factor in the pathogenesis of conjunctival vascular endothelial
tumors in dogs. The COPLOW collection supports this
There are only four cases of feline conjunctival mast cell tumor in the
hypothesis for the following reasons:
COPLOW collection.
 Almost all of the conjunctival tissue sampled away from the
mass lesion is non-pigmented
Canine conjunctival lymphoma (Fig. 7.58)
There is a trend for affected dogs to be from regions with a
higher ambient UV light exposure
There are 19 cases of canine conjunctival lymphoma in the COPLOW
■ The most frequent tumor locations are consistent with the
 collection, representing 0.3% of canine tumor submissions.
conjunctival locations subject to the highest light exposure,
 Six are simply designated lymphoma and four are
ie the leading, exposed portion of the nictitans and the
epitheliotropic lymphoma, mycosis fungoides.
temporal bulbar conjunctiva
Dogs from the hound and sporting breeds are over-
represented in the affected group. These dogs are more likely
Feline conjunctival lymphoma
ueun uiuns oi ainsodxa iaiai ym 'sioopino iday aq o
There are 10 cases of feline conjunctival lymphoma in the COPLOW
'ssop iad snsauop ieida
collection, representing 0.4% of feline tumor submissions.
 None of these are considered epitheliotropic.
Feline conjunctival hemangioma,
hemangiosarcoma (Fig. 7.56)
Comparative Comments
There are a total of l6 vascular endothelial tumors of the
As described in other species, tumors of lymphocytic or hemopoietic
conjunctiva in cats in the COPLOW collection, representing 0.5% of
origin are seen in humans, as well as tumors of adnexal origin
any pue seuoiueuay Il aie aiaul suoissuqns ioum au
together with Kaposi's sarcoma (described above).
hemangiosarcomas.
The numbers are too low to allow conclusions to be drawn
Tumors of the canine third eyelid gland
regarding their biologic behavior
Morphologically, the tumors have similar features to the canine
(nictitans gland) (Fig. 7.59)
vascular endothelial tumors described above.
There are l09 cases of epithelial tumors of the nictitans gland in
the COPLOW collections, representing 1.9% of canine tumor
Equine hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma,
submissions. Within this series, there is a spectrum of different
morphological types of tumors:
angiosarcoma
Adenoma (13 cases)
■ Complex and mixed tumors
There are six cases in the COPLOW collection, representing 3.6% of
Adenocarcinoma (53 cases)
equine tumor submissions.
 Local invasion with recurrent growth is common but metastasis
 This tumor has also been reported as angiosarcoma in the
is rare.
veterinary literature, due to reluctance on the part of those 
authors to designate the origins of the neoplasm as vascular or
lymphatic endothelial cells. However, all six cases in the
Tumors of the feline third eyelid gland
COPLOW collection were designated as hemangioma or
(nictitans gland) (Fig. 7.60)
hemangiosarcoma
 There are reports of this tumor arising within the cormea and.
There are 19 tumors of the third eyelid in cats in the COPLOW col-
consistent with this observation, one of the five COPLOW
lection, representing 0.7% of feline neoplasms.
appeared to arise within the corneal stroma
 All of these are recorded as adenocarcinoma.
188
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
Figure 7.55 Canine conjunctival
hemangioma/hemangiosarcoma.
(A) Boxer, 8 years old: histopathology
confirmed this focal conjunctival lesion 
was a hemangioma. (B) Beagle. 11 years
dld: this hemangioma involved the
temporal conjunctiva and cornea.
(arrow). (C) German Shepherd Dog cross,
12 years old: limited to the margin of the
nictitans, this mass was diagnosed as a
hemangiosarcoma. (D) Basset Hound, 9
years old: this extensive hemangioma
involved the palpebral surface of the
nictitans and bulbar surface of the globe.
(E) Gross photograph of limbal
A
B
hemangiosarcoma. (FG) Low
magnification photomicrographs showing
exophytic tumors, characterized by 
vascular channels of various diameter. 
 that form a distinct nodular mass lesion.
(H) Higher magnification showing dilated
vascular pattern and also less-
differentiated endothelial cells in
disorganized sheets.
G
189
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.56 Feline conjunctival
hemangioma/hemangiosarcoma.
(A,B) Gross photograph and subgross
photomicrograph of a cat globe showing
a solid tan mass (hemangiosarcoma)
 adherent to the sclera at the equator
extending to the limbus. (Reproduced 
with permission from Pirie C G, Dubielzig
R R 2006 Feline conjunctival
hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma: a
retrospective evaluation of eight cases
(1993-2004). Vet. Ophthalmol.
9:227-231.)
A
B
Figure 7.57 Conjunctival mast cel
tumor, clinical. (A) Siamese, & years old:
the entire length of the inferior palpebral 
conjunctiva was involved (arrows).
(B) Labrador Retriever, 7.5 years old: this 
reddish-gray mass originated from the 
medial bulbar conjunctiva. (C) American 
Eskimo Dog. 6 years old: diffuse swelling 
with chemosis and hyperemia of the
temporal bulbar conjunctiva. (D) Mixed
Breed, 9 years old: pale yellowish mass
originated in the superior bulbar
conjunctiva.
B
C
D
Canine viral papilloma (Fig. 7.61)
 The classical location for canine disease is in the oral cavity.
however mucous membranes anywhere are susceptible, as is
 In the COPLOW collection, there are 24 cases of canine viral papil-
haired skin
loma occurring on the conjunctiva of dogs, representing 0.16% of
canine submissions.
 suppressed adult dogs, or at the site of trauma or surgery
●Viral papilloma is a wart-like, exophytic, cutaneous growth
Viral papilloma is self-limiting, however, it may be irritating and
associated with a papilloma vinus
disfiguring
190
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.58 Conjunctival lymphoma,
clinical. (A)Persian,5years old: the large
firm mass in the superior bulbar
conjunctiva resulted in lagophthalmos.
(B) English Bulldog. 9 years old: this
hyperemic conjunctival mass (arrows)
started inferior temporal limbus. The 
 pigmentary keratitis is the result of 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
A
Figure 7.59 Canine adenocarcinoma of the
gland of the third eyelid. (A) Mixed Breed.
12 years old: the thickened prolapsed
nictitans has a tumor mass (arrow) extending
from its bulbar surface. Histopathology
confirmed an adenocarcinoma of the
nictitans gland. (B) Mixed Breed, 15 years 
dld: an adenocarcinoma was diagnosed from
a biopsy specimen of this thickened and 
hemorrhagic nictitans. (C,D) Gross 
 photographs showing the third eyelid gland
tumor as a lobulated tan mass pushed deeply
into the soft tissues of the ventral medial
orbit, while the globe is unaffected. (E) Gross 
photograph of the dissected third eyelid with
a smaller mass bulging on the bulbar aspect
 of the gland. (F) Subgross photomicrograph
of the sectioned third eyelid showing a
lobulated mass effacing the gland.
(G) Photomicrograph showing a solid but
bland tumor with vacuolated neoplastic
epithelial cells. (H) Photomicrograph showing 
adenocarcinoma with PAS-positive mucin
(PAS stain).
C
D
F
H
191
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.60 Feline third eyelid gland 
tumors, clinical. (A) DSH, 9 years old: the
mass protruding from the bulbar surface
 of the otherwise normal looking nictitans
was diagnosed as a nictitans
adenocarcinoma. (B) DSH, 18 years old:
the free lid margin is difficult to view in
this diffusely swollen nictitans. A
squamous cell carcinoma arising within
the nictitans gland was diagnosed by
biopsy. (C) DSH, 11 years old: this pale
yellowish mass extended to the base of
the nictitans but did not involve the
leading edge. A fibrosarcoma was
 diagnosed by histopathology. (D) DSH, 5
years old: evaluation of a fine needle
aspirate confirmed lymphoma as the
A
B
cause of this smooth hyperemic swelling.
C
● Characteristic morphologic features include:
 They appear as opaque, white, round sub-epithelial
An exophytic papillary mass made up almost entirely by
nodules
hyperplastic epithelium and long, thin cores of vascular
stroma
 Proliferative inflammatory lesions can often masquerade as
■
 Hyperkeratosis which might be parakeratotic or
neoplasia.
orthokeratotic
 Prominent widening of the stratum granulosum with large
■
keratohyalin granules
  The presence of koilocytes within the stratum granulosum,
Conjunctival squamous papilloma and
which represent a hallmark feature
reactive papilloma (Fig. 7.63)
- Koilocytes are rounded cells in, or near, the stratum
 granulosum. They have clear amphophilic cytoplasm and
There are 8l squamous papillomas of the conjunctiva in the
may or may not contain keratohyalin granules
COPLOW collection, representing 0.54% of all canine
Rare intranuclear basophilic viral inclusion bodies are seen.
submissions.
 Squamous papilloma is a discrete arborizing papillary lesion
usually on the conjunctival surface. There is no underlying
Cysts of the conjunctiva
tumor or inflammation and the arborizing units end with a
+
Congenital cysts of the lacrimal canaliculi or other ectopic
sharp angle.
ductular structures
There are 167 reactive papillomas in the COPLOW collection
 These occur as watery-fluid flled cysts under the conjunctival
representing 1. 1% of canine submissions.
or medial canthal epithelium in young animals
 Reactive papillomas are very localized, exophytic, arborizing.
Histologically, there is litle or no inflammation and the cysts
papillary growths characterized by a basal stalk and rounded,
often have a distinctive double epithelium
blunt papillary 'arms'
 Acquired ductular cysts
■ They usually occur at the lid margin and are often
These are usually derived from lacrimal ducts and are
 seen superficial to infammation or a meibomian gland
secondary to obstruction and/or inflammation
tumor
● Inclusion cysts (Fig. 7.62)
 There are no dysplastic or anaplastic epithelial features
  These are usually secondary to trauma and entrapment of
The cause is unknown
conjunctival surface epithelium
 The prognosis is excellent.
192
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
Figure 7.61 Canine viral papilloma
(A) Doberman Pinscher, 5.5 months old:
A papillomas can be seen on the lower
lid and on the buccal mucosa. (B)
Doberman Pinscher, 5.5 months old: this 
littermate of the dog shown in (A)
demonstrates a typical papilloma. The
third eyelid appears as a hyperemic mass
to the right of the papilloma due to 
eversion of the carilage of the nictitans.
(C) Golden Retriever, 15 weeks old:
multiple rostral and buccal papillomas are 
present. (D) Periocular papillomas are
s agoh aul () ui bop aui ui uasaid
A
phthisical as a result of trauma at birth.
(E) Low magnification photomicrograph
showing an exophytic papillary tumor
typical of viral papilloma. (F)
 Photomicrograph showing koilocytes
(arrows) in the stratum granulosum.
D
193
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 7.62 Conjunctival inclusion cysts.
(A) Goldendoodle, 6 months old: this
temporal bulbar conjunctival cyst was
present bilaterally. (B) Bichon Frise, 9
years old: the inferior-temporal palpebral 
conjunctiva was involved. (C) Persian, 5
years old: the superior bulbar conjunctiva
is involved. The cyst and adjacent corneal
disease are from presumed FHV-1
infection. (D) DSH, 12 years old: a
symblepharon resulted in a large cyst and 
the swelling of the lower palpebral
conjunctiva. (E) Low magnification
photomicrograph showing an epithelial
Cyst embedded in the substantia propria
at the limbus
B
?
194
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
Figure 7.62, cont'd (F) Higher
magnification of (E). (G) Photomicrograph
of a similar cyst with thinner walls.
G
Figure 7.63 Conjunctival squamous
papilloma or reactive papilloma. (A)
Mixed Breed, 7 years old: a non-
 pigmented papilloma extends from the
palpebral surface of the nictitans. (B)
Poodle, 7 years old: the tumor originated 
from the lower palpebral conjunctiva. (C)
Pembroke Welsh Corgi. 12 years old: this
pigmented mass involved the lower
 palpebral conjunctiva and the lid margin.
(D) Mixed Breed, 13 months old: this
solitary pigmented tumor involved the
superior palpebral conjunctiva and lid 
margin. (E) Gross photograph of a globe
with a reactive papilloma on the
conjunctiva. The inset shows the same
lesion in a low magnification
photomicrograph. (FG) Low 
magnification photomicrographs showing 
the typical apearance of squamous
 papilloma. Delicate branching fronds are
supported by a minimal vascular stroma.
F
195
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Hurn, S., Turner, A., Mc Cowan, C., 2005.
histopathologic diagnosis, 2nd edn.
Pummer, C.E., 2005. Equine eyelid disease.
 Ectopic cilium in seven horses. Vet.
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 559-893.
Clin. Techn. Equine Pract. 4, 95-105.
Ophthalmol. 8, 199-202.
Krehbiel, J.D., Langham, R.F., 1975. Eyelid
neoplasms of dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 36,
Entropion, Ectropion
Congenital abnormalities and early
115-119.
life diseases
Stades, F.C., Gelatt, K.N., 2007. Diseases and
Roberts, S.M., Severin, G.A., Lavach, J.D., 1986.
surgery of the canine eyelid. In: Gelatt, K.N.
Bellhorn, R.W., Barnett, K.C., Henkind, P.
Prevalence and treatment of palpebral
(Ed.), Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th edn.
1971. Ocular colobomas in domestic
neoplasms in the dog: 200 cases [1975-
Blackwell, Ames, pp. 563-617.
1983). I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 189,
cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 159,
1015-1021.
Corneal/conjunctival dermoid
1355-1359.
McLaughlin, S.A., Whitley, R.D., Gilger, B.C.
Koch, S.A., 1979. Congenital ophthalmic
Gelatt, K.N., 1971. Bilateral corneal dermoids
et al., 1993. Eyelid neoplasms in cats: a
abnormalities in the Burmese cat. J. Am. Vet.
and distichiasis in a dog. Vet. Med. Small 
Med. Assoc. 174, 90-91.
review of demographic data (1979-1989). 1.
Anim. Clin. 66, 658-659.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 29, 63-67.
Dziezyc, J., Millichamp, N.J., 1989. Surgical
Lawson, D.D., 1975. Corneal dermoids in
Riis, R.C., Vitali, C.M., Simons, K.B., 2002.
correction of eyelid agenesis in a cat. J. Am.
animals. Vet. Rec. 97, 449-450.
Eyelid tumors. In: Peiffer Jr., R.L., Simons,
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25, 513-516.
Periocular inflammation/blepharitis
K.B. (Eds.), Ocular tumors in animals and
Martin, C.L., Stiles, J., Willis, M., 1997. Feline
humans, 1st edn. lowa State Press, pp.
colobomatous syndrome. Vet. Compar.
Gross, T.L., Ihrke, PJ., Walder, E.J., et al., 2005.
Ophthalmol. 7, 39-43.
25-86.
Skin diseases of the dog and cat. Clinical
Lewin, G., 2003. Eyelid reconstruction in seven
Wolfer, J.C., 2002. Correction of eyelid
and histopathologic diagnosis, 2nd edn.
dogs using a split eyelid flap. J. Small Anim.
coloboma in four cats using subdermal
Blackwell, Oxford.
Pract. 44, 346-351.
collagen and a modifed Stades technique.
Raphel, C.F., 1982. Diseases of the equine eyelid.
Aquino, S.M., 2007. Management of eyelid
Vet. Ophthalmol. 5, 269-272.
Compend. Contin. Educ. Pract. Vet. 4.
 neoplasms in the dog and cat. Clin. Tech.
Munger, R.J., Gourley, I.M., 1981. Cross lid flap
Johnson, B.W., Campbell, K.L., 1989.
Small Anim. Pract. 22, 46-54.
for repair of large upper eyelid defects. J.
Dermatoses of the canine eyelid. Compend.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 178, 45-48.
Contin. Educ. Pract. Vet. 11, 385-394.
Canine juvenile cutaneous histiocytoma
Esson, D., 2001. A modification of the Mustarde Pena, M.A., Leiva, M., 2008. Canine
 and cutaneous and systemic
technique for the surgical repair of a large
conjunctivitis and blepharitis. Vet. Clin.
histiocytosis
feline eyelid coloboma. Vet. Ophthalmol. 4.
North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 38, 233-
159-160.
249.
Gelatt, K.N., 1975. Histiocytoma of the eyelid of
Gripenberg, Ul., Blomqvist, L., Pamilo, P, et al.
Rebhun, W.C., Mirro, E., Georgi, M.E., et al..
a dog. Vet. Med. Small Anim. Clin. 70, 305.
1985. Multiple ocular coloboma (MOC) in
1981. Habronemic blepharoconjunctivitis in
Yang, T.J., 1987. Spontaneously regressive
snow leopards (Panthera uncia). Clinical
horses. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 179,
canine cutaneous histiocytoma: a counterpart
report, pedigree analysis, chromosome
469-472.
of human regressing atypical histiocytosis?
investigations and serum protein studies.
Glaze, M.B., 1983. Equine adnexal
Anticancer Res. 7, 811-812.
Hereditas 103, 221-229.
 habronemiasis. Equine Vet. J. Suppl. 2.
Fulmer, A.K., Mauldin, G.E., 2007. Canine
Cutler, T.J., 2002. Bilateral eyelid agenesis repair
71-73.
histiocytic neoplasia: an overview. Can. Vet.
in a captive Texas cougar. Vet. Ophthalmol.
Moore, C.P., Sarazan, R.D., Whitley, R.D., et al.,
J. 48, 1041-1043, 1046-1050.
5, 143-148.
1983. Equine ocular parasites: A review.
Coomer, A.R., Liptak, J.M., 2008. Canine
Barnett, K.C., Lewis, J.C., 2002. Multiple
Equine Vet. I. Suppl. 2, 76-85.
histiocytic diseases. Compend. Contin.
ocular colobomas in the snow leopard
Pusterla, N., Watson, J.L., Wilson, W.D., et al..
Educ. Vet. 30, 202-204, 208-216; quiz
(Uncia uncia). Vet. Ophthalmol. 5,
2003. Cutaneous and ocular habronemiasis
216-217.
197-199.
in horses: 63 cases [1988-2002). I. Am. Vet.
Paterson, S., Boydell, P., Pike, R., 1995.
Med. Assoc. 222, 978-982.
 Systemic histiocytosis in the Bernese
Distichiasis, ectopic cilia and trichiasis
Gortel, K., 2006. Update on canine
mountain dog. I. Small Anim. Pract. 36,
Helper, L.C., Magrane, W.G., 1970. Ectopic cilia
demodicosis. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small
233-236
of the canine eyelid. J. Small Anim. Pract.
Anim. Pract. 36, 229-241.
Scherlie Jr., P.H., Smedes, S.L., Feltz, T., et al.
11, 185-189
Collins, B.K., MacEwen, E.G., Dubielzig, R.R.,
1992. Ocular manifestation of systemic
Bedford, PG., 1971. Eyelashes and adventitious
et al., 1992. Idiopathic granulomatous
histiocytosis in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
cilia as causes of corneal irritation. J. Small 
 disease with ocular adnexal and cutaneous
Assoc. 201, 1229-1232.
Anim. Pract. 12, 11-17.
involvement in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
Lawson, D.D., 1973. Canine distichiasis. J.
Assoc. 201, 313-316.
Cutaneous melanocytic tumors
Small Anim. Pract. 14, 469-478.
Chambers, E.D., Severin, G.A., 1984.
Roels, S., Tilmant, K., Ducatelle, R., 1999.
Bedford, PG., 1979. The treatment of canine
Staphylococcal bacterin for treatment of
 PCNA and Ki67 Proliferation markers as
distichiasis by the method of partial tarsal
chronic staphylococcal blepharitis in the
criteria for prediction of clinical behaviour
plate excision. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 15,
dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 185, 422-425.
 of melanocytic tumours in cats and dogs. J.
59-60.
Pena, M.T., Roura, X, Davidson, M.G., 2000.
Compar. Pathol. 121, 13-24.
Wheeler, C.A., Severin, G.A., 1984. Cryosurgical
Ocular and periocular manifestations of 
Smith, S.H., Goldschmidt, M.H., McManus,
epilation for the treatment of distichiasis in
leishmaniasis in dogs: 105 cases [1993-
PM., 2002. A comparative review of
the dog and cat. I. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
1998). Vet. Ophthalmol. 3, 35-41.
melanocytic neoplasms. Vet. Pathol. 39,
20, 877-884.
651-678.
Long, R.D., 1991. Treatment of distichiasis by
Neoplastic/proliferative conditions
Millanta, F., Fratini, F., Corazza, M., et al., 2002.
conjunctival resection. J. Small Anim. Pract.
Gross, T.L., Ihrke, P., Walder, E.., et al., 2005.
Proliferation activity in oral and cutaneous 
32, 146-148.
Skin diseases of the dog and cat: clinical and
canine melanocytic tumours: correlation
196
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
with histological parameters, location, and
pathogenesis, clinical features, pathology and
Theon, A.P., Pascoe, I.R., Galuppo, L.D., et al.,.
dinical behaviour. Res. Vet. Sci. 73, 45-51.
treatment.Vet. Dermatol. 19,321-339
1999. Comparison of perioperative versus 
Allgoewer, I., Schaffer, E.H., Stockhaus, C..
Molander-McCrary, H., Henry, C., Potter, K.
 postoperative intratumoral administration
et al., 2001. Feline eosinophilic
et al., 1998. Cutaneous mast cell tumors in
of cisplatin for treatment of cutaneous
conjunctivitis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 4, 69-74.
cats: 32 cases (1991-1994). 1. Am. Anim.
sarcoids and squamous cell carcinomas in
Day, M.j., Lucke, VM., 1995. Melanocytic
Hosp. Assoc. 34, 281-284.
horses. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 215,
1655-1660.
neoplasia in the cat. J. Small Anim. Pract. 36. F
Buerger, R.G., Scott, D.W., 1987. Cutaneous
207-213.
mast cell neoplasia in cats: 14 cases
Martens, A., De Moor, A., Demeulemeester, J..
van der Linde-Sipman JS, de Wit M M, van
(1975-1985). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 190,
et al., 2000. Histopathological characteristics
Garderen, E., et al., 1997. Cutaneous
1440-1444.
of five clinical types of equine sarcoid. Res.
malignant melanomas in 57 cats:
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R., et al., 1991.
Vet. Sci. 69, 295-300.
identification of (amelanotic) signet-ring and
Qutaneous neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet. Pathol.
Martens, A., De Moor, A., Vlaminck, L., et al.,
balloon cell types and verification of their 
28, 389-395.
 2001. Evaluation of excision, cryosurgery
origin by immunohistochemistry, electron
Turrel, J.M., Farrelly, I., Page, R.L., et al., 2006.
and local BCG vaccination for the treatment
microscopy and in situ hybridization. Vet.
Evaluation of strontium 90 irradiation in 
of equine sarcoids. Vet. Rec. 149, 665-
Pathol. 34, 31-38.
treatment of cutaneous mast cell tumors in
669.
cats: 35 cases [1992-2002). J. Am. Vet. Med.
Knottenbelt, D.C., Kelly, D.F., 2000. The
 Epithelial neoplasms arising in the
Assoc. 228, 898-901.
 diagnosis and treatment of periorbital
eyelid
Litster, A.L., Sorenmo, K.Ul., 2006.
sarcoid in the horse: 445 cases from 1974 t0
Characterisation of the signalment, clinical
1999. Vet Ophthal 3, 169-191.
Abramo, F., Pratesi, F, Cantile, C., et al., 1999.
Survey of canine and feline follicular
and survival characteristics of 41 cats with
Carr, E.A., Theon, A.P, Madewell, B.R., et al.,
mast cell neoplasia. J. Feline Med. Surg. 8,
 2001. Expression of a transforming gene
tumours and tumour- like lesions in central
177-183.
(E5) of bovine papillomavirus in sarcoids
Italy. J. Small Anim. Pract. 40, 479-481.
Hagard, G.M., 2005. Eyelid reconstruction using
Wilcock, B.P., Yager, J.A., Zink, M.C., 1986. The
obtained from horses. Am. J. Vet. Res. 62.
a split eyelid flap after excision of a
 morphology and behavior of feline
1212-1217.
palpebral tumour in a Persian cat. J. Small
cutaneous mastocytomas. Vet. Pathol. 23,
Chambers, G., Ellsmore, VA., O'Brien, PM..
Anim. Pract. 46, 389-392.
320-324.
et al., 2003. Association of bovine
 papillomavirus with the equine sarcoid. J.
Chaitman, I., van der Woerdt, A., Bartick, T.E..
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Gen. Virol. 84, 1055-1062.
1999. Multiple eyelid cysts resembling
apocrine hidrocystomas in three Persian cats
McKeever, P.J., Grindem, C.B., Stevens, J.B.
Munday, J.S., Kiupel, M., French, A.F., et al..
and one Himalayan cat. Vet. Pathol. 36,
et al., 1982. Canine cutaneous lymphoma. J.
2008. Amplification of papillomaviral DNA
474-476.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 180, 531-536.
 sequences from a high proportion of feline 
Wilcock, B.P., Yager, JA., 1989. The behavior of
cutaneous in situ and invasive squamous cell
Cantaloube, B., Raymond-Letron, I., Regnier, A..
epidermotropic lymphoma in twenty-five
carcinomas using a nested polymerase chain
2004. Multiple eyelid apocrine
hidrocystomas in two Persian cats. Vet.
dogs. Can. Vet. J. 30, 754-756.
reaction. Vet. Dermatol. 19, 259-263.
Ophthalmol. 7, 121-125.
Donaldson, D., Day, M.J., 2000. Epitheliotropic
 Photodynamic therapy
 lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) presenting
Canine and feline mast tell tumors 
as blepharoconjunctivitis in an Irish setter. J.
Stell, A.J., Dobson, J.M., Langmack, K., 2001.
Small Anim. Pract. 41, 317-320.
 Photodynamic therapy of feline superficial
Patnaik, A.K., Ehler, W.J., MacEwen, E.G., 1984.
squamous cell carcinoma using topical
Canine cutaneous mast cell tumor:
 Feline peripheral nerve sheath tumor
5-aminolaevulinic acid. J. Small Anim. Pract.
morphologic grading and survival time in 83
dogs. Vet. Pathol. 21, 469-474.
Hoffman, A., Blocker, T, Dubielzig, R., et al.
42, 164-169.
 2005. Feline periocular peripheral nerve
Spugnini, E.P., Vincenzi, B., Citro, G., et al.
Simoes, J.P., Schoning, P., Butine, M., 1994.
sheath tumor: a case series. Vet. Ophthalmol.
2009. Electrochemotherapy for the treatment
Prognosis of canine mast cell tumors: a
8. 153-158.
of squamous cell carcinoma in cats: A
comparison of three methods. Vet. Pathol.
Sundberg, I.P., Todd Jr., K.S., DiPietro, J.A.
preliminary report. Vet. J. 179, 117-120.
31, 637-647.
Murphy, S., Sparkes, A.H., Smith, K.C., et al..
1985. Equine papillomatosis: is partial 
 resection of lesions an effective treatment?
Conjunctival stricture.
 2004. Relationships between the histological
 pseudopterygium in rabbits
grade of cutaneous mast cell tumours in
Vet. Med. 80, 71-74.
dogs, their survival and the effcacy of
Roze, M., Ridings, B., Lagadic, M., 2001.
surgical resection. Vet. Rec. 154, 743-746.
 Equine periocular sarcoid
 Comparative morphology of epicorneal
Simpson, A.M., Ludwig, L.L., Newman, S.J..
Webster, C.J., Webster, J.M., 1985. Treatment of
conjunctival membranes in rabbits and
et al., 2004. Evaluation of surgical margins
equine sarcoids with BCG. Vet. Rec. 116,
human pterygium. Vet. Ophthalmol. 4,
required for complete excision of cutaneous
131-132.
171-174.
mast cell tumors in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Reid, S.W., Smith, K.T., Jarrett, W.F., 1994.
Allgoewer, I., Malho, P., Schulze, H., et al.,.
Assoc. 224, 236-240.
Detection, cloning and characterisation of 
 2008. Aberrant conjunctival stricture and
Fulcher, R.P., Ludwig, L.L., Bergman, Pl., et al.
 papillomaviral DNA present in sarcoid
overgrowth in the rabbit. Vet. Ophthalmol.
2006. Evaluation of a two-centimeter lateral
tumours of Equus asinus. Vet. Rec. 135.
11, 18-22.
surgical margin for excision of grade I and
430-432.
grade ll cutaneous mast cell tumors in dogs.
Nasir, L., Reid, S.W., 1999. Bovine
Ligneous conjunctivitis
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 228, 210-215.
 papillomaviral gene expression in
Ramsey, D.T., Ketring, K.L., Glaze, M.B., et al..
Jacobi, S., Stanley, B.l., Petersen-Jones, S., et al.
equine sarcoid tumours. Virus Res. 61,
1996. Ligneous conjunctivitis in four
2008. Use of an axial pattern flap and
171-175.
 Doberman pinschers. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
 nictitans to reconstruct medial eyelids and
Theon, A.P., Pascoe, J.R., 1995. Iridium-192
Assoc. 32, 439-447.
canthus in a dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 11,
interstitial brachytherapy for equine
McLean, N.S., Ward, D.A., Hendrix, D.V., et al.,
395-400.
 periocular tumours; treatment results and
2008. Ligneous conjunctivitis secondary to a
Welle, M.M., Bley, C.R., Howard, I., et al., 2008.
 prognostic factors in 115 horses. Equine Vet.
congenital plasminogen deficiency in a dog.
Canine mast cell tumours: a review of the
1. 27, 117-121.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 232, 715-721.
197
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Schuster, V., Seregard, S., 2003. Ligneous
Eosinophilic conjunctivitis
Frauenfelder, H.C., Blevins, W.E., Page, E.H.
conjunctivitis. Surv. Ophthalmol. 48,
Latimer, C., Dunstan, R.W., 1987. Eosinophilic
1982. 90Sr for treatment of periocular
369-388.
plaque involving eyelids of a cat. I. Am.
squamous cell carcinoma in the horse. J. Am.
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 23, 649-653.
Vet. Med. Assoc. 180, 307-309.
Episcleritis and episclerokeratitis in
Schwink, K., 1987. Factors influencing
Pentlarge, V.W., 1991. Eosinophilic
sbop
conjunctivitis in five cats. J. Am. Anim.
morbidity and outcome of equine ocular
Hosp. Assoc. 27, 21-28.
squamous cell carcinoma. Equine Vet. J. 19.
Bellhorn, R.W., Henkind, P, 1967. Ocular
Nasisse, M.P., Glover, T.L., Moore, C.P., et al.,
198-200.
nodular fascitis in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
Rebhun, W.C., 1990. Treatment of advanced
Assoc. 150, 212-213.
1998. Detection of feline herpesvirus 1 DNA
in corneas of cats with eosinophilic keratitis
squamous cell carcinomas involving the
Smith, J.S., Bistner, S., Ris, R., 1976. Infltrative
or corneal sequestration. Am. J. Vet. Res. 59,
equine cornea. Vet. Surg. 19, 297-302.
corneal lesions resembling fbrous
856-858.
English, R.V., Nasisse, M.P., Davidson, M.G..
histiocytoma: clinical and pathologic
1990. Carbon dioxide laser ablation for
fndings in six dogs and one cat. I. Am. Vet.
Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis
 treatment of limbal squamous cell
Med. Assoc. 169, 722-726.
carcinoma in horses. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Kerlin, R.L., Dubielzig, R.R., 1997.
Gwin, R.M., Gelatt, K.N., Peiffer Jr., R.L.,
Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis in cats.
196, 439-442.
1977. Ophthalmic nodular fascitis in
Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7, 177-179.
Harling, D.E., Peiffer, R.L., Cook, C.S., 1983.
the dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 170,
Read, R.A., Lucas, J., 2001. Lipogranulomatous
 Excision and cryosurgical treatment of five
611-614.
 conjunctivitis: clinical findings from 21 eyes
cases of squamous cell carcinoma in the
Fisher, C.A., 1983. Inflammatory disease
horse. Equine Vet. J. Suppl. 2, 105-109.
 of the sclera and episclera. In: Peiffer Jr.,
in 13 cats. Vet. Ophthalmol. 4, 93-98.
Wilkie, D.A., Burt, J.K., 1990. Combined
R.L. (Ed.),Comparative ophthalmic
Plasma cell conjunctivitis
treatment of ocular squamous cell carcinoma
 pathology. Charles C Thomas, Springfeld,
in a horse, using radiofrequency
272-288.
Read, R.A., 1995. Treatment of canine nictitans
hyperthermia and interstitial 198Au
Paulsen, M.E., Lavach, J.D., Snyder, S.P., et al.,
 plasmacytic conjunctivitis with 0.2 per cent
implants. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 196,
1987. Nodular granulomatous
cyclosporin ointment. J. Small Anim. Pract.
1831-1833.
episclerokeratitis in dogs: 19 cases [1973-
36, 50-56.
King, T.C., Priehs, D.R., Gum, G.G., et al., 1991.
1985). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 190,
Gonzalez Alonso-Alegre, E.M., Rodriguez
 Therapeutic management of ocular
1581-1587.
Alvaro, A., Rollan Landeras, E., 1999.
squamous cell carcinoma in the horse: 43
Deykin, A.R., Guandalini, A., Ratto, A., 1997. A
Comparison of cyclosporin A and
cases (1979-1989). Equine Vet. J. 23,
 retrospective histopathologic study of
dexamethasone in the treatment of canine
nictitans plasmacytic conjunctivitis. Vet. Rec.
449-452.
primary episcleral and scleral inflammatory
Dugan, S.l., Curtis, C.R., Roberts, S.M., et al..
disease in dogs. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7.
144, 696-701.
1991. Epidemiologic study of ocular/adnexal
245-248.
Hakanson, N., Shively, J.N., Meredith, R.E.,
1991. Granuloma formation following
squamous cell carcinoma in horses. J. Am.
Breaux, C.B., Sandmeyer, L.S., Grahn, B.H.,
Vet. Med. Assoc. 198.
2007. Immunohistochemical investigation of
subconjunctival injection of triamcinolone
in two dogs. I. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 27,
Dugan, S.J., Roberts, S.M., Curtis, C.R., et al..
canine episcleritis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10,
89-92.
1991. Prognostic factors and survival of
168-172.
horses with ocular/adnexal squamous cell
Grahn, B.H., Sandmeyer, L.S., 2008. Canine
Equine onchocerciasis
carcinoma: 147 cases [1978-1988). J. Am.
episcleritis, nodular episclerokeratitis.
Vet. Med. Assoc. 198, 298-303.
scleritis, and necrotic scleritis. Vet. Clin.
Schmidt, G.M., Krehbiel, I.D., Coley, S.C., et al.,
Teifke, I.P, Lohr, C.V., 1996.
North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 38, 291-308.
1982. Equine ocular onchocerciasis:
histopathologic study. Am. J. Vet. Res. 43.
Immunohistochemical detection of P53
vi.
overexpression in paraffn wax-embedded
Dugan, S.J., Ketring. K.L., Severin, G.A., et al..
1371-1375.
squamous cell carcinomas of cattle, horses.
1993. Variant nodular granulomatous
Moran, C.T., James, E.R., 1987. Equine ocular
cats and dogs. J Comp Pathol 114, 205-
episclerokeratitis in four dogs. J. Am. Anim.
pathology ascribed to Onchocerca cervicalis
210.
Hosp. Assoc. 29, 403-409.
infection: a re-examination. Trop. Med.
Mosunic, C.B., Moore, PA., Carmicheal, K.P.,
Parasitol. 38, 287-288.
et al., 2004. Effects of treatment with and
FHV-1 conjunctivitis and keratitis
Conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma
without adjuvant radiation therapy on
Gelatt, K.N., Myers, V.S., Perman, V, et al.
recurrence of ocular and adnexal squamous
Nasisse, M.P., Guy, J.S., Davidson, M.G., et al.,
cell carcinoma in horses: 157 cases [1985-
1989. Experimental ocular herpesvirus
1974. Conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma
2002). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 225,
infection in the cat. Sites of virus replication,
in the horse. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 165.
1733-1738.
dinical features and effects of corticosteroid
617-620.
McCowan, C., Stanley, R.G., 2004. Pigmented
administration. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci
Walker, M.A., Goble, D., Geiser, D., 1986.
squamous cell carcinoma of the conjunctiva
30, 1758-1768.
Two-year non-recurrence rates for equine
of a horse. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7, 421-423.
Nasisse, M.P., Guy, J.S., Stevens, J.B., et al.,
ocular and periorbital squamous cell
Sironi, G., Riccaboni, P., Mertel, L., et al., 1999.
1993. Clinical and laboratory fndings in
carcinoma following radiotherapy.
Comparison to previous repors. Vet. Radiol.
p53 protein expression in conjunctival
chronic conjunctivitis in cats: 91 cases
[1983-1991). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 203,
squamous cell carcinomas of domestic
27. 146-148
834-837.
animals. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2, 227-231.
Grier, R.L., Brewer Jr., W.G., Paul, S.R., et al.,
Hendrix, D.V., 2005. Equine ocular squamous
Andrew, S.E., 2001. Ocular manifestations of
 1980. Treatment of bovine and equine
 ocular squamous cell carcinoma by
cell carcinoma. Clin. Tech. Equine Pract. 4.
 feline herpesvirus. J. Feline Med. Surg. 3.
87-94.
9-16.
radiofrequency hyperthermia. J. Am. Vet.
Med. Assoc. 177.
Plummer, C.E., Smith, S., Andrew, S.E., et al..
Nasisse, M.P., English, R.V., Tompkins, M.B.,
 et al., 1995. Immunologic, histologic, and
2007. Combined keratectomy, strontium-90
Owen, L.N., Barnett, K.C., 1983. Treatment of
 irradiation and permanent bulbar
virologic features of herpesvirus-induced
equine squamous cell carcinoma of the
 oendde og unuons e Susn eaounjuon
conjunctival grafts for comeolimbal
stromal keratitis in cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 56,
squamous cell carcinomas in horses
51-55.
Equine Vet. J. Suppl. 2, 125-126.
198
Diseases of the eyelids and conjunctiva
Chapter
7
[1990-2002): 38 horses. Vet. Ophthalmol.
in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 172,
Conjunctival mast cell tumor
10, 37-42.
832-833.
Johnson, B.W., Brightman, A.H., Whiteley, H.E..
Giuliano, E.A., MacDonald, I., McCaw, D.L.
Buyukmihci, N., Stannard, A., 1981. Canine
1988. Conjunctival mast cell tumor in two
et al., 2008. Photodynamic therapy for the
conjunctival angiokeratomas. J. Am. Vet.
dogs. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 24,
 treatment of periocular squamous cell
Med. Assoc. 178, 1279-1282.
439-442.
carcinoma in horses: a pilot study. Vet.
Murphy, C.J., Bellhorn, R.W., Buyukmihci, N.C.,
Ophthalmol. 11 (Suppi 1), 27-34.
Barsotti, G., Marchetti, V, Abramo, F, 2007.
1989. Bilateral conjunctival masses in two
 Primary conjunctival mast cell tumor in a
Kafarnik, C., Rawlings, M., Dubielzig, R.R.,
dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 195, 225-228.
Labrador Retriever. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10,
 2009. Corneal stromal invasive squamous
Liapis, I.K., Genovese, L., 2004.
60-64.
cell carcinoma: a retrospective morphological
Hemangiosarcoma of the third eyelid in a
Wilcock, B., Peiffer Jr., R., 1988.
description in 10 horses. Vet. Ophthalmol.
dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7, 279-282.
Adenocarcinoma of the gland of the third
12, 6-12.
Pirie, C.G., Knollinger, A.M., Thomas, C.B.,
eyelid in seven dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Townsend, W.M., 2007. Food and fber-
et al., 2006. Canine conjunctival
193, 1549-1550.
producing animal ophthalmology. In: Gelatt,
hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma: a
Komaromy, A.M., Ramsey, D.T., Render, J.A..
K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary ophthalmology 4th 
retrospective evaluation of 108 cases
et al., 1997. Primary adenocarcinoma of the
edn. Blackwell, Ames, pp. 1287-1296.
(1989-2004). Vet. Ophthalmol. 9, 215-226.
gland of the nictitating membrane in a cat. J.
Ward, D.A., Latimer, K.S., Askren, R.M., 1992.
Donaldson, D., Sansom, I., Murphy, S., et al.,
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 33, 333-336.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the
2006. Multiple limbal haemangiosarcomas
corneoscleral limbus in a dog. I. Am. Vet.
in a border collie dog: management by
Med. Assoc. 200, 1503-1506.
lamellar keratectomy/sclerectomy and
 Canine viral and squamous
papillomatosis
Conjunctival melanoma
Anim. Pract. 47, 545-549.
Belkin, PV., 1979. Ocular lesions in canine oral
Collins, B.K., Collier, L.L., Miller, M.A., et al.
Multari, D., Vascellari, M., Mutinelli, F, 2002.
papillomatosis [a case report). Vet. Med.
1993. Biologic behavior and histologic
Hemangiosarcoma of the third eyelid in a
Small Anim. Clin. 74, 1520-1527.
characteristics of canine conjunctival
cat. Vet. Ophthalmol. 5, 273-276.
Bonney, C.H., Koch, S.A., Dice, P.F., et al..
melanoma. Prog Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 3.
Pirie, C.G., Dubielzig, R.R., 2006. Feline
 1980. Papillomatosis of conjunctiva and
135-140.
conjunctival hemangioma and
adnexa in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 176,
Cook, C.S., Rosenkrantz, W., Peiffer, R.L., et al..
hemangiosarcoma: a retrospective evaluation
48-51.
1985. Malignant melanoma of the
of eight cases [1993-2004). Vet.
Bonney, C.H., Koch, S.A., Confer, A.W., et al.,
conjunctiva in a cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Ophthalmol. 9, 227-231.
1980. A case report: a conjunctivocorneal
186, 505-506.
Vestre, W.A., Turner, TA., Carlton, W.W., 1982.
papilloma with evidence of viral etiology. J.
Patnaik, A.K., Mooney, S., 1988. Feline
Conjunctival hemangioma in a horse. I. Am.
Small Anim. Pract. 21, 183-188.
melanoma: a comparative study of ocular.
Vet. Med. Assoc. 180, 1481-1482.
Collier, L.L., Collins, B.K., 1994. Excision and
oral and dermal neoplasms. Vet. Pathol. 25,
Hacker, D.V, Moore, PF, Buyukmihci, N.C.
cyosurgical ablation of severe periocular
105-112.
1986. Ocular angiosarcoma in four horses. J.
papillomatosis in a dog. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 189, 200-203.
Assoc. 204, 881-883.
Hemangioma/histiosarcoma
Moore, PF., Hacker, D.V, Buyukmihci, N.C.,
Playter, R.F., Adams, L.G., 1977. Lacrimal cyst
Hargis, A.M., Lee, A.C., Thomassen, R.W., 1978.
1986. Ocular angiosarcoma in the horse:
(dacryops) in 2 dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Tumor and tumor-like lesions of perilimbal
morphological and immunohistochemical
171, 736-737.
conjunctiva in laboratory dogs. I. Am. Vet.
studies. Vet. Pathol. 23, 240-244.
Sansom, I., Barnett, K.C., Blunden, A.S., et al..
Med. Assoc. 173, 1185-1190.
Bolton, J.R., Lees, M.J., Robinson, W.F., et al.
1996. Canine conjunctival papilloma: a
Peiffer Jr., R.L., Duncan, I., Terrell, T., 1978.
1990. Ocular neoplasms of vascular origin in
review offive cases. J. Small Anim. Pract. 37, 84-
 Hemangioma of the nictitating membrane
the horse. Equine Vet. J. Suppl. 10, 73-75.
86.
199
Diseases of the cornea and s
SC
era
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Chronic superficial keratitis (CsK, previously termed
 pannus or Uberreiter's syndrome)
212
Normal corneal anatomy
202
 Morphologic features of chronic superficial
The tear film
202
keratitis
213
The corneal epithelium
202
Feline eosinophilic keratitis (proliferative keratitis)
213
 Functions
202
Equine eosinophilic keratitis, equine superficial
Components
202
corneal sequestrum, or equine indolent ulcer
216
 The corneal epithelial basal lamina and the
 Feline corneal sequestrum (feline corneal necrosis,
 superficial stroma
202
cornea nigrum)
217
The lamellar corneal stroma
203
 Corneal sequestration in other species
218
 Descemet's membrane
203
Recurrent erosion syndrome (indolent ulcer,
 Corneal endothelium
203
Boxer ulcer, spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial
Congenital and hereditary abnormalities
203
defects)
219
 Fungal keratitis, equine and other species
Congenital abnormalities in corneal size and shape
203
222
Microcornea: abnormally small cornea
203
 Keratomalacia, collagenolytic keratitis, melting
corneal ulcer
223
Cornea globosa in Rocky Mountain horses
203
Corneal perforation
226
Keratoconus, conical distortion of the anterior corneal
Corneal lysis, perforation, and iris prolapse with
curvature
203
epithelialization in young cats
226
Congenital corneal opacities
204
Early life corneal perforation, early life trauma
 Peter's anomaly
204
syndrome, and anterior chamber collapse syndrome
227
Dermoid 
204
Corneal epithelial inclusion cyst
228
Corneal dystrophies and degenerations
204
Inflammation disrupting the endothelium,
Corneal epithelial dystrophies
204
endothelitis
228
Examples of corneal epithelial dystrophies in animals
204
Corneal neoplasia
229
Corneal stromal dystrophies and degeneration
204
Canine corneal squamous cell carcinoma in dogs
Lipid dystrophy, crystalline stromal dystrophy. corneal
with chronic keratitis
229
lipidosis 
206
Equine stromal-invasive squamous cell carcinoma
230
Mineral stromal dystrophy and degeneration
206
Angiokeratoma (vascular endothelial cell tumor
Corneal endothelial dystrophies and degeneration
209
arising within the cornea)
230
209
 Canine viral papilloma
Secondary degenerative endothelial diseases
230
209
 Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Pathogenic mechanisms
230
Morphologic features of corneal endothelial degeneration
211
 Diseases of the sclera
230
Severe corneal edema (corneal hydrops) associated
Staphyloma
230
with Descemet's membrane rupture
211
Granulomatous scleritis, necrotizing scleritis
232
Chronic keratitis, superficial
211
 Canine limbal melanocytoma
234
Morphologic features of chronic keratitis
212
 Feline limbal melanocytoma
234
201
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
  The cormeal epithelium is capable of rapid response to injury.
NORMAL CORNEAL ANATOMY
covering an epithelial deficit by a process of relaxation of
intercellular connections and vigorous cellular migration
The tear film
 A lipophilic barrier to the absorption of hydrophilic substances
This is the principle behind the use of the hydrophilic dye,
 The normal tear film is not visible using standard
fluorescein to detect defects in corneal epithelial integrity
histopathology techniques
(corneal ulceration)
 Functions of the tear film include:
 The afferent branch of the corneal blink reflex
■ Prevention of desiccation of the corneal epithelium and
 Unsheathed nerve endings are distributed within the corneal
anterior stroma
epithelium
 Distribution of oxygen and nutrients consumed by the
 The contribution of the cornea to the maintenance of immune
cormeal epithelium and anterior stroma
privilege in the eye, and to the inhibition of neovascular
 Protection of the ocular surface:
proliferation within the corneal stroma.
 By trapping and flushing away particulate foreign material
 By immunoglobulins and other, non-specific anti-
Components
 microbial proteins and peptides within the tear film, such
 as lysozyme and lactoferrin
Squamous cells
 By providing a medium by which inflammatory cells can
Two or three superficial layers of non-keratinized cells
gain access to the tissues of the anterior cornea
 Microvillae/microplicae present on these cells are postulated to
Provision of a glass-like smooth air-tissue interface that is
help 'anchor' the tear film to the corneal surface
essential for the optical clarity of the cornea
 The number of layers of this cell type is increased in larger
 Allows effective light refraction and the formation of a
species, eg. ungulates and in species whose eyes maintain
high quality focused image on the retina
function underwater.
 The components of the tear film
 The mucous layer
Wing cells
 Secreted predominantly by conjunctival goblet cells, with
 Two or three layers of polyhedral cells
lesser contributions by the Harderian gland where present,
 The number of layers of this cell type is increased in larger
corneal and conjunctival epithelial cells
species, eg. ungulates and in species whose eyes maintain
 Attaches to the anterior surface of the cormeal epithelium
 and adsorbs water, stabilizing the tear film
function underwater.
lae snoanbe au 
Basaf cells
 Secreted by the lacrimal gland, the nictitans gland and
 dispersed lacrimal glandular tissue in the conjunctival
+
 A single layer of columnar cells, attached to the basal lamina by
hemidesmosomes and to neighboring cels by desmosomes
fornix
 The aqueous component of the tear flm is the vehicle for
 Hemidesmosomes attach to anchoring fbrils in the basal
delivery of oxygen and nutrients to the anterior cornea
lamina
■The lipid layer
The basal cell layer rests flat on the basal lamina with no
 Secreted by the tarsal (meibomian) glands at the lid
undulation in contrast to most of the surface epidermis.
margin
 Forms an outer layer which slows evaporation and allows
the even spread of the tear flm over the ocular surface.
The corneal epithelial basal lamina and the
superficial stroma
The corneal epithelium (Fig. 8.1)
The basal lamina of the cormeal epithelium and the superficial
punom leaon u alon juou ue aeid ieun sanons aie eois
Functions
healing and several disease processes that will discussed later in this 
● A physical barrier excluding pathogenic organisms
chapter.
Figure 8.1 Normal cornea. (A) Low
 magnification photomicrograph showing
a normal canine cornea (Alcian blue PAS
stain). (B) Photomicrograph of the normal 
90
corneal epithelium and superficial 
stroma.
(A
202
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Key components of the basal lamina and superficial stroma
■ The endothelium functions to actively pump water out of the
include:
corneal stroma into the anterior chamber against a pressure
Type IV collagen, laminin and fibronectin
gradient
The superficial stroma differs from the lamellar stroma in that it
The endothelium is a monolayer of polygonal cells lining the
is made up of a thin, acellular zone with tangled collagen into
 posterior cornea
which the basal lamina anchors
 In most adult animals, the endothelium has a very limited
  This layer is analogous to Bowman's layer of the primate
ability to proliferate in response to cell loss. However,
cornea and the corneas of cetaceans, elephants and several
metaplasia into spindle cells, movement along a surface, repair
of the endothelium may occur. Damage to the endothelium
 species of bird.
might also be a stimulus for collagen matrix production of
duplication of the Descemet's membrane.
The lamellar corneal stroma
Functions of the lamellar stroma are:
Comparative Comments
 The maintenance of structural integrity, rigidity and the precise
 Although there is variation in the proteins and lipids, the functions
curvature of the globe
and dynamics of the tear film are similar in humans and animal 
■
 The rigidity of the globe is essential to maintain precisely
 defined physical properties that are required to focus
species. Indeed, rabbits and cats represent major experimental 
Ol sueralan 'sapuapyap pue siweurp yeat Apnis ol pasn slapou
light on the retina. This rigidity relies on the tensile
humans
properties of the collagenous corneal stroma and the sclera,
 There are close similarities between the anatomy and histology of
and on the maintenance of a physiologically high intraocular
the human cornea with the description given for other species.
pressure
Bowman's layer is seen in the primate cornea and in certain avian
 The cornea represents a major refractive interface of the eye,
corneas but is not seen as a distinct layer in most of the domestic
and any changes in its curvature or thickness will impact the
mammalian species.
focusing of light on the retina
Optical clarity
 The optical clarity of the corneal stroma is dependant on the
maintenance of a strict, orderly structural relationship
CONGENITAL AND HEREDITARY
between cells, collagen, and inter-cellular,
ABNORMALITIES
glycosaminoglycans within a relatively dehydrated extra-
cellular environment
- Loss of optical clarity occurs if there is a failure to
Congenital abnormalities in corneal size
maintain relative dehydration of the cormeal stroma, as
 and shape
occurs with loss of epithelial barrier function, vascular
leakage, or particularly with loss of endothelial function
Microcornea: abnormally small cornea
(as discussed below)
Often seen with microphthalmos (see Ch. 3)
 The corneal stroma is an immune privileged tissue and it is
avascular
- Loss of optical clarity occurs with even slight inflammation
Cornea globosa in Rocky Mountain horses (Fg. 8.3)
or vascularization.
Descemet's membrane (Fig. 8.2)
horses the radius of curvature of the cornea appears to be shortened,
leading to excessive anterior curvature and protrusion of the cornea.
 Descemet's membrane is the basal lamina of the corneal endothelium.
These horses have abnormally deep anterior chambers. Other features
It forms a thick smooth membrane with elastic properties in terrestrial
of this inherited complex of multiple ocular abnormalities are dis-
mammals but it is very thin in pinnipeds, birds, and reptiles.
cussed in detail in Chapter 3.
Corneal endothelium
Keratoconus, conical distortion of the anterior
corneal curvature
The key function of the corneal endothelium is to maintain the
stroma in a state of relative dehydration
Although animals will occasionally have corneal malformation with
 The endothelium is a physical barrier to the movement of
physical features of keratoconus, there are no documented animal
water into the corneal stroma from the anterior chamber
Figure 8.2 Normal posterior cornea.
(A,B) Photomicrographs showing the
normal posterior canine cornea
(A. H&E: B, PAS)
A
(B
203
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.3 Rocky Mountain horse. (A)
The right globe has a megalocornea and
a diffuse cortical cataract. (B) A lateral
view illustrates the increased corneal
curvature (arrows) in addition to the
enlarged cornea, i.e. cornea globosa.
A
B
●This difference in disease occurrence between species is likely
due, at least in part, to the fact that the human disease involves
CORNEAL DYSTROPHIES AND
breaks in Bowman's layer, which is absent or ill-defined in
DEGENERATIONS
domestic animals.
Corneal epithelial dystrophies (Fig. 8.4)
Congenital corneal opacities
Examples of corneal epithelial dystrophies in animals
Peter's anomaly (see also Ch. 3)
In this complex congenital abnormality, focal corneal opacity is
familial or breed predisposition is often documented or
caused by the attachment of uveal tissue within the posterior cornea.
suspected
and associated defect in Descemet's membrane (i.e. adherent
 Breed-related epithelial dystrophies are reported in dogs, these
leukoma). Attachments between the iris and cornea in dogs are also
include:
often referred to as persistent pupillary membrane but Peter's anomaly
gopdaaus pueaus au u kyedoieiay aieund ieiyadns 
is more accurate.
and Long Haired Dachshund
 Suaiea ym pooune Aa u allesida si nasu
 progression throughout life. Affected animals
Dermoid (see also Ch. 7)
typically present with multi-focal epithelial defects that
A congenital, focal lesion (choristoma), in which corneal tissue is
lend an 'orange peel' appearance to the corneal
replaced by fully differentiated tissue of another sort, typically skin.
surface, and are associated with small, round to annular
opacities
 The cause of these lesions is poorly understood - although
Comparative Comments
some consider this to represent a primary epithelial
dystrophy. qualitative tear film disease and immune-
 With regard to congenital and hereditary abnormalities,
 mediated keratitis have also been proposed as underlying
megalocornea is inherited as an X-linked recessive in humans,
 abnormalities in affected dogs
Alewouge leareli panelos! ue se Auanba
 Morphologic features reported in eyes affected by epithelial
 Congenital corneal opacities may result from anterior cleavage
dystrophy include:
anomalies and may be associated with abnormalities of the
Focal dysplasia of the basal lamina of the corneal
iridocorneal angle and iris
epithelium
ae ueu u ano jey saeue jeuauo ueuis a
■
 Dyskeratosis and necrosis of corneal epithelial cells
congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy, causing bilateral
 In the COPLOW collection, however, there are only two
 congenital corneal edema; posterior keratoconus, a central
examples of corneal epithelial dystrophies and none in
indentation of the posterior cornea; congenital corneal
dogs
staphyloma, characterized by ectasia of part or all of the cornea;
 One in a Basilisk lizard and one in a horse.
and sclerocornea, an abnormality resulting in bilateral
opacification and vascularization of the cornea, leading to its
resembling the adjacent sclera 
Corneal stromal dystrophies and
 Keratoconus in humans is characterized in its early stages by focal
degeneration
disruptions of the epithelial basement membrane and Bowman's 
layer, with subsequent bilateral central ectasia of the cornea
 Dermoids are congenital fibrovascular masses present within the
there is a much greater understanding of the pathologic basis of
 aesans jo aunlet e Ag pasnen ag oi paaaig ae kaul eauion
human corneal dystrophies. In contrast, corneal tissues from uncom-
 ectoderm to differentiate into normal corneal epithelium.
plicated cases of suspected corneal dystrophy in domestic animals are
seldom submitted to COPLOW.
204
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.4 Epithelial dystrophy and
Hound, 3 years old: bilateral elliptical,
superficial stromal dystrophy was
present. (B) Shetland Sheepdog corneal
dystrophy. 3.5 years old: multiple 
superficial facets with associated lipid 
deposits were present in both corneas.
(C) Shetland Sheepdog. 2 years old:
bilateral focal dystrophies can be seen by
retroillumination. (D) Cavalier King
Charles Spaniel, 4 years old: axial
opacities were present bilaterally. (E,F)
 Photomicrographs of suspected corneal
epithelial dystrophy in a horse showing 
marked irregularity in the corneal
epithelial basal lamina (arrows) (E, H&E;
B
F Alcian blue PAS).(G) Photomicrograph
showing the corneal epithelium and 
dysplastic basal lamina (*) from a Basilisk
lizard (PAS stain).
C
D
E
G
205
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.5 Cholesterol deposits, canine.
(A) Photomicrograph showing a
cholesterol granuloma in the 
midsuperficial stroma. (B)
 Photomicrograph showing keratocytes
with vacuolated cytoplasm due to
increased lipid content (arrows) (toluidine
blue stain on 1 μm plastic section).
(A)
B
Lipid dystrophy, crystalline stromal dystrophy.
keratitis or other generalized anterior segment inflammation
corneal lipidosis (Fg. 8.5)
(scleritis, uveitis)
 There may, or may not, be an association with abnormal
Several commonly occurring. breed-related cormeal lipid dystrophy
systemic lipid metabolism, such as endocrine disorders or
syndromes are reported in dogs. Although in some breeds, the inher-
excessive amounts of dietary lipids 
ited basis of corneal disease has been established and histopathologi
Arcus lipoides cormeae
cal findings published, affected cormeal tissues are seldom submitted
 Originates near the limbus
to the pathology laboratory as they are neither painful nor vision-
■Bilateral
threatening in most cases.
 Initially cormeal blood vessels are absent, but vascularization
 In pathology submissions, lipid deposition in the cornea is usually
is a subsequent response to the presence of lipid and
found as a condition secondary to inflammation, Or mass lesions
Paly-p!d! jo anuasaid au Aq paueduome s! Alleidh
involving the limbus and/or cormea.
macrophages. Indeed, the extent of vascularization and
Characteristics of lipid dystrophy which distinguish it from acquired
inflammation can modify further lipid deposition or removal
disease include:
 No causal association with local proliferative and
 Bilateral, generally relatively symmetrical, nature of disease
inflammatory corneal disease
 Breed predisposition that includes the Siberian Husky, Beagle.
 Associated with systemic metabolic diseases, such as
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Collie, German Shepherd,
hypothyroidism
Shetland Sheepdog. Afghan Hound and Airedale
 In domestic and laboratory rabbits, feeding of diets high in
Found in an otherwise clear cormea)
cholesterol, or genetic hyperlipidemia ('Watanabe' rabbits).
pue ymoia-ul iejosea 'paul Aia io ou s aiaui lesidal 
has been associated with lipid infltration of the cornea (lipid
limited inflammatory response
keratopathy, arcus) as well as in other ocular tissues 
 No defined relationship to underlying systemic metabolic
- A distinct form of anterior corneal (epithelial and
disease
epithelial basement membrane) dystrophy has also been
 However, abnormalities in serum lipids and lipoproteins
reported in Dutch Belted rabbits
 may affect the onset and progression of corneal opacities in
■ An association between serum lipids and corneal lipid
dogs with primary corneal lipid dystrophies
deposition has also been widely recognized in captive tree
 Likely represents a primary abnormality in the metabolism of
frogs.
keratocytes.
 Mineral stromal dystrophy and degeneration
Morphology of corneal lipid dystrophy
(Fig. 8.7)
The obvious lesion is free cholesterol between stromal lamellae,
most often involving the anterior stroma. This is recognizable in
As with lipid, mineralization of the corneal stroma is most often
 paraffn-embedded sections as oblong spaces, including
 encountered as a secondary process within our pathology collection.
characteristic, needle-shaped, acicular clefts. Often lipid is
However, there are a few submissions with mineralization of the
evident within or surrounded by macrophage cells (cholesterol
 stroma in which there is either no underlying inflammation evident,
granuloma)
aul on aeiai aaissaxa sieadde uoezienauiu jo aaisap aul 1o
Careful observation of surrounding keratocytes reveals that there 
limited inflammation present.
are lipid vacuoles in the cytoplasm of keratocytes
Lipid deposits whether intracellular or within the stroma will
Corneal stromal mineralization in horses
not be directly observable by standard paraffn histologic
+
 This presents as distinct areas of superficial cormeal opacity
techniques because the lipid is dissolved in xylene and in
 The mineralization is confined to the superficial stroma, with
 paraffn during processing.
minimal or no inflammation present
Cases from the COPLOW collection do not have a history of
Acquired corneal lipid deposits (Fig. 8.6)
metabolic disease and there is no obvious relationship to diet or
●Lipid keratopathy
to any particular breed or age.
 Associated with vascularization of the cormea [that may be
recognized prior to, or following, lipid deposition)
Band keratopathy (Fig. 8.8)
 Lipid deposition may occur in the corneal stroma at the
Band keratopathy represents a nonspecific degenerative
margins of localized proliferative diseases such as
proces, and is named for its appearance as an approximately
melanocytoma, nodular granulomatous episcleritis or focal
axial, horizontal band that lies within the inter-palpebral
trauma, or may be more diffuse when associated with
fissure
206
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.6 Lipid keratopathy and corneal
fatty degeneration, clinical. (A) Golden
Retriever cross, 3 years old: episcleritis
and hypothyroidism resulted in this
bilateral condition. (B) Golden Retriever,
4 years old: blood vessels are present at
the limbus around this dense lipid 
 deposit. (C) Labrador Retriever, 4 years
dld: the corneal lipid is at the advancing
margin of the scleral shelf melanoma.
(D) Rottweiler, 4 years old: diffuse
scleritis, limbal edema and corneal
vascularization are associated with the
lipidosis (arrow).
A
B
C
D
 Band keratopathy is a common degenerative change observed
Can progress to deep stromal ulcers or even cormeal perforation
in myriad ocular diseases, ranging from corneal scars to
Segmental mineralization of epithelial basal lamina (band 
chronic / recurrent uveitis and phthisis bulbi (dystrophic
keratopathy) and mineralization of the deeper stroma
calcification)
 Affected animals may have no history of underlying ocular
 Band keratopathy may also be seen in animals that have
disease or evidence of systemic hypercalcemia.
underlying disease leading to hypercalcemia (metastatic
calcification)
Corneal calcification has also been reported following topical
Comparative Comments
Morphologic characteristics
 Dystrophies of the cornea are defined as primary, inherited bilateral 
 Superficial corneal stromal mineralization or basal laminar
disorders and are classified according to the layer of the cornea most
involved. These have been described, classified, and studied more
mineralization
 The mineralized segment often becomes separated from the 
fully in man than in other species.
■
 Although Cogan's microcystic or map-dot-fingerprint dystrophy is 
epithelium because the cornea continues to grow and
probably the most common, specimens are rarely received in the 
surround the mineralized fragment, which remains as a
eye pathology laboratory
linear, mineralized tissue fragment embedded in the anterior
 The chief histopathologic findings are a thickened basement 
stroma.
membrane that extends into the epithelium, with associated 
 Because the mineralized tissue was originally basal lamina,
abnormal epithelial cells and microcysts
the remnant fragments stain positively with PAS.
 Lipid dystrophy was discussed among the corneal stromal
Calcareous corneal degeneration, in aged dogs
dystrophies in nonhuman species
 In man, the most common form of lipid deposit seen is arcus 
Slowly progressive disease
senilis, which is a primary condition 
Ultimately bilateral although not necessarily symmetrical in
In Schnyder's crystalline dystrophy. a rare primary lipoidal 
onset
degeneration, cholesterol crystals are noted within keratocytes
 The diseased stroma displays white deposits that are gritty in
and adjacent stroma
texture
207
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.7 Corneal mineralization. (A)
Miniature Dachshund, 11 years old: this
is an early case with no vessels
associated with the calcium deposit
visible by retroillumination. (B) Cockapoo,
15 years old: the arrow points to a deep
stromal crater within the calcium
deposits. (C) Yorkshire Terrier, 16 years
old: there is a large area of
mineralization with corneal vessels
superior. (D) Terrier mix, 13 years old: a
central descemetocele is present with
corneal vessels 360°. (E,F)
Photomicrographs of canine corneal
epithelium showing mineralization of the
basal lamina and superficial stroma (band 
keratopathy) (E, H&E; F, elastin stain). (G)
A
B
Photomicrograph of an equine corneal
epithelium showing mineralization of the 
basal lamina. (H) This equine corneal
epithelium shows marked mineral in the
basal lamina and superficial stroma (von
Kossa stain).
G
H
208
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.8 Band keratopathy.
(A) Photomicrograph of a canine anterior
cornea showing thickening and
basophilia of the epithelial basal lammina
typical of the mineralization seen in band
(B
keratopathy (arrow). (B) Photomicrograph
 of a canine anterior cornea showing
mineralized basal lamina in an area of
epithelial loss (arrow). (C) The
mineralized basal lamina and anterior 
stroma in a dog cornea stain black with
von Kossa stain.
A
Affected dogs have cormeal stromal edema and endothelial
Comparative Comments (continued)
cell attenuation as a primary disease, without an identifable
underlying pathogenic mechanism
 Also cholesterol and neutral fats are sometimes found as
secondary lipid deposits following corneal inflammatory disease
■In the COPLOW collection there are 12 cases which are
with new blood vessel formation
considered to represent breed-related corneal endothelial
The major human stromal dystrophies are:
dystrophy
 Granular dystrophy, in which keratohyaline deposits are noted
 Five Boston Terriers, three Chihuahuas, three Puli, and one
 Lattice dystrophy. in which fine-branching amyloid opacities
Poodle
are seen
 In all cases, the only morphologic finding was corneal
 Avellino dystrophy (combined granular/lattice dystrophy)
endothelial cell attenuation, with profound corneal stromal
 edema and no apparent reason for the endothelial cell 
in all layers of the cornea except the epithelium
 degeneration.
 Band keratopathy in humans conforms in appearance to the 
descriptions given here for other species
 Band keratopathy may follow any chronic local corneal disease
Comparative Comments
pue saters jiuanjeniaday puasis yim uoenosse ui anooo io
in eyes with longstanding chronic inflammation.
 asoun wo suaa eadde sueny ui saydosap eauopua aul
described above in young dogs. In man, the endothelial dystrophies 
have three factors in common:
Corneal endothelial dystrophies and
1. The endothelial cells become sparse and irregular.
 2. The abnormal endothelial cells produce excess collagen posterior
degeneration (Fig. 8.9)
to Descemet's membrane, causing a multilaminar structure.
As with the other corneal dystrophies, it can be difficult to distinguish
 3. Excrescences form on Descemet's membrane.
true endothelial dystrophy from acquired endothelial disease which
The most common endothelial dystrophy in humans is Fuchs'
is much more commonly encountered. There are however, several
dystrophy. which constitutes the common indication for corneal
canine examples of endothelial dystrophy in the COPLOW
surgery for a corneal dystrophy.
collection.
 Endothelial dystrophy with multifocal defects in Descemet's
membrane in dogs less than 6 months old
There are three such cases with bilateral disease in the
Secondary degenerative endothelial
COPLOW collection in three different breeds
 Euthanasia was elected in all three cases because of the
diseases (Fig. 8.10)
severe, blinding nature of the corneal disease
 The affected corneas were markedly thickened and
Pathogenic mechanisms
■
anbedo
 Postoperative/iatrogenic (see Ch. 4)
■
 Histopathology shows a relatively normal endothelium, but
 Corneal endothelial attenuation is not uncommon as a
with multiple defects in Descemet's membrane Within these
postoperative complication following intraocular surgery.
defective areas, endothelial cells may be seen to 'colonize' the
 most notably, cataract surgery
posterior stroma
 Any other disease process associated with tissue contact with the
 Breed related corneal endothelial dystrophy and spontaneous
 corneal endothelium such as anterior synechiae, or uveal masses
cormeal endothelial degeneration (attenuation)
such as neoplasms or cysts
Boston Terriers and Chihuahuas are known to have a
 Inflammatory disease may also play a role in endothelial
 breed-related corneal endothelial dystrophy
dysfunction in some of these disease processes
 Mature adult dogs are typically presented with bilateral
Advanced age
corneal edema that begins temporally and progresses to
 Corneal endothelial density reduces progressively with age
involve the entire cornea. Secondary corneal ulceration, due
si ieu Aisuap ie e moaq ey Aianen Ae pue
to rupture of epithelial bullae, is a common complication of
needed to maintain relative dehydration of the corneal
profound corneal edema
stroma
209
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.9 Corneal endothelial
dystrophy. (A) Chihuahua, 10 years old:
bilateral temporal edema was present. (B)
Boston Terrier, & years old: the arrow
points to epithelial bullae superficial to
the stromal edema. (C) Boston Terrier.
7 years old: the arrows delineate the
keratoconus resulting from severe 
corneal edema. (D) Dachshund, 11 years 
dld: the arrow points to the edge of a
deep corneal crater (facet), secondary to
the edema and previous ulcer. (E) Gross
photograph of a canine globe with
endothelial dystrophy showing marked
corneal stromal thickening. (F) Clinical 
photograph of a canine eye with dense
B
corneal edema resulting in a blue to
A
white opacity secondary to endothelial
disease. (G,H) Photomicrographs showing 
the corneal endothelium of the eye in 
(E). The endothelium is attenuated and
there are eosinophilic intracytoplasmic
inclusions (arrows).
C
D
B
G
H
210
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.10 Corneal endothelial disease.
(A,B) Photomicrographs of attenuated 
and abnormal corneal endothelium (B.
PAS stain). (C) Photomicrograph showing
attenuated corneal endothelium in a 
 dog. (D) Retrocorneal membrane and
doubling of Descemet's membrane in a
dog cornea (PAS stain). (E) Prominent
doubling of Descemet's membrane. (F)
A
(B
Corneal epithelium showing
microvesicular change suggestive of
corneal edema.
c
（D）
F
Glaucoma
The rapidity of onset is reflected in the other term for the
Lens luxation
condition, 'acute bullous keratopathy'
 Focal edema due to direct contact between the displaced lens
The condition is characterized by rapidly developing, dense,
and cormeal endothelium
relatively well-circumscribed corneal edema, with large
 Diffuse edema may be associated with secondary glaucoma.
cormeal profile Pronounced conical or globular forward
 protrusion of the anterior profle of the cornea ensues
Morphologic features of corneal endothelial
Histologically, rupture of Descemet's membrane is a consistent
degeneration
fnding, and is associated with marked stromal edema with little
 The early changes are confined to endothelial attenuation,
or no inflammation.
characterized by a reduction in cell density that is recognized as
a 'spreading' of each individual endothelial cell, such that the
distance between sampled nuclei is larger and the cell thickness
CHRONIC KERATITiS, SUPERFICIAL
is reduced
 Retrocormeal membrane formation
More advanced or longer standing cases demonstrate spindle
 Chronic keratitis represents a non-specific end result of many diverse
cell metaplasia of the endothelium, with or without collagen
 pathogenic pathways, including:
formation
Physical irritation from contact with hair, inflammatory or
 Duplication of Descemet's membrane
neoplastic masses, or airborme particulate material
 This phenomenon is seen in dogs and cats, but not in horses,
 Desiccation caused by:
after intraocular surgery, blunt trauma, lens luxation and in
Exophthalmos or buphthalmos which impede eyelid closure
other conditions where the endothelium might be 'stressed'
and leads to inadequate distribution of the tear flm
■
 Descemet's is usually duplicated; with the new, posterior,
 Inability to blink related to neurologic lesions affecting the
 Descemet's being approximately the same thickness as the
facial nerve
original, anterior Descemet's membrane
 Loss of corneal sensitivity related to lesions affecting the
■
 The mechanism responsible for duplication of Descemet's
ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve, with failure to
membrane is unknown.
initiate a protective blink or lacrimal response to irritation
 Disorders resulting in decreased secretion of the aqueous
component of tears
Severe corneal edema (corneal hydrops)
- Chronic inflammation of the lacrimal and/or nictitans
associated with Descemet's membrane
rupture (Figs 8.11, 8.12)
- Atrophy of these glands or obstruction of their ducts,
secondary to trauma, inflammation, chemical injury, or
Most of the examples of this condition in the COPLOW
radiation damage
collection are in cats (five cats), although the condition has
 Conjunctival xerosis or fbrosis
sasioy supnpui saiads iauno ui pauodal uaaq
- Neurogenic disease
211
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.11 Corneal hydrops, clinical.
(A) DSH, 1 year old: the lateral view
 shows the increased corneal curvature
due to the severe edema. (B) DSH,
2.5 years old: the protruding cornea is
irregular in contour. (C) Pomeranian,
5 years old: diffuse stromal edema is
bullae (arrows). (D) Thoroughbred,
3 years old: the acute edema caused the
irregular conical cornea.
A
B
C
D
Qualitative tear film disorders including:
 the limbus. The components of the epithelial response in chronic
- Disorders of the conjunctiva resulting in inadequate mucin
superficial keratitis are:
secretion
Hyperkeratosis
 0 Chronic inflammation
0 Vitamin A deficiency, which causes squamous metaplasia
Acanthosis
Rete ridge formation
with keratinization of mucus secreting epithelia
Melanosis
0 These disorders may also be associated with reduced
The stromal response includes:
secretion of aqueous tears
Vascular in-growth from the limbus
 Disorders of the eyelid margin
 Reorganization of stromal collagen, with scarring 
0 Resulting in inadequate secretion of tear film lipid by
 Melanosis
tarsal/meibomian glands
 Inflammatory cell infltration
■ Recurrent episodes of corneal ulceration for whatever reason
Which depends on the stage of disease, prior therapy and the
 Keratitis due to specific corneal pathogens, e.g., Moraxella
nature of the inflammation locally at the time of sampling
bovis, Feline herpesvirus-1
The basal lamina response:
Immune-mediated disease
 Marked thickening of the basal lamina may occur in response to
- The most commonly encountered breed-related
repeated ulceration and re-epithelialization.
condition being chronic superficial keratitis, previously
known as pannus or Uberreiter's syndrome, in dogs
(see below).
CHRONIC SUPERFICIAL KERATITIS
(CSK, PREVIOUSLY TeRMED PANNUS OR
Morphologic features of chronic keratitis
UBERREITER'S SYNDROME) (Fig. 8.14)
(Fig. 8.13)
The epithelial response (epidermalization) is dependant on an intact
This is a chronic, progressive, immune-mediated inflammatory
limbal epithelium because the stem cells for the cornea reside only in
condition which spreads from the limbus across the
212
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.12 Feline corneal hydrops.
pathology. (A-C) Three gross 
photographs of the same cat eye 
uadeussiuu pue sdopu leaunon bumous
markedly edematous corneal stroma. (D)
Low magnification photomicrograph of 
the same cat eye showing edema,
epithelial separation and a defect in
Descemet's membrane (arrow).
A
B
C
superficial cornea, typically commencing in the temporal
quadrant
FELINEEOSINOPHILICKERATITIS
This bilateral condition has a predilection for the adult
(PROLIFERATIVE KERATITIS) (FigS 8.15, 8.16)
German Shepherd dog, Tervuren, Greyhound, Border Collie and
Siberian Husky, although other breeds may be affected
Feline eosinophilic keratitis is a relatively commonly encountered
sporadically
disease in companion animal veterinary practice However, the disease
Ultraviolet light exposure has been implicated as a factor in the
is under-represented in a pathology collction because it is usually
sunui sioe ieuaiaua paneiai pue 'sisaaoued
diagnosed on the basis of clinical and/or cytological findings alone.
altitude, sunlight exposure and dust may all adversely impact
There are only 24 cases in the COPLOW collection, most of which are
disease onset and severity.
 keratectomy specimens.
Feline eosinophilic keratitis typically extends across the limbus
as a kerato-conjunctivitis. Eosinophilic conjunctivitis and eyelid
Morphologic features of chronic superficial
margin erosive lesions may also be seen in the absence of
keratitis
significant corneal disease
Lesions are most often unilateral, although bilateral
 Lichenoid (interface) lymphoplasmacytic inflammation
involvement does occur
Superficial stromal fbrovascular proliferation and scarring, with
Grossly the disease appears as a vascularized, peri-limbal, raised,
subsequent melanosis
proliferative lesion, with an irregular surface that has
Increased epithelial cell apoptosis
Increased epithelial cell mitotic activity. but no associated
localized, corneal involvement can be extensive
epithelial erosion or ulceration.
An association between eosinophilic keratitis and Feline
The prognosis for achieving disease control and preserving vision may
herpesvinus-1 infection has been demonstrated in some affected
be poorer in those animals that show rapid onset of disease in early
cats but virologic studies have not defined a consistent 
adulthood. However, most affected dogs show a favorable response
relationship between the presence of this virus and eosinophilic
 to topical immunosuppressive therapy.
keratitis in all cases
213
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.13 Superficial chronic keratitis
(A) Shih Tzu, 6 years old: this was the
result of previous keratomalacia. (B) DSH,
7 years old: FHv-1 with secondary
bacterial infection resolved but lead to 
the development of a dense fibrovascular
scar. (C) shih Tzu, 11 years old: poorly
controlled dry eye syndrome led to
severe chronic superficial keratitis. (D)
Chinese Shar-Pei, 1 year old: this resulted 
from primary entropion. (E) Gross 
photograph of both globes from a Pug
dog showing melanin pigment deposition
in superficial chronic pigmentary keratitis.
(FG) Photomicrographs showing
epithelial thickening. rete ridge formation 
B
(arrow), superficial stromal fibrosis and
vascularization, and minimal lymphocytic
infiltr ation in canine superficial chronic 
Keratitis.
E
214
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.14 Canine chronic superficial
keratitis (degenerative pannus). (A)
German Shepherd Dog. 4 years old: the
arrowhead points to the early temporal
limbal vascularization. (B) Belgian
Tervuren, 2 years old: temporal corneal
 pigment is the more remarkable finding
in this right eye. (C) Greyhound, 4 years
dld: thin corneal vessels, lipid and
pigment are present. (D) German
Shepherd Dog. 6.5 years old: the entire
 cornea is vascularized in this advanced 
case. (E) Clinical photograph showing the 
superficial corneal proliferative reaction
advancing over the temporal limbus. (F)
 Photomicrograph showing the typical
interface inflammatory infiltrate (*). (G,H)
Photomicrographs showing necrosis of 
individual epithelial cells typical of the 
disease (arrows).
上
215
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.15 Feline eosinophilic keratitis,
clinical. (A) DSH, 14 years old: the arrow
points to one of the many superficial 
white plaques typical of the disease. (B)
DSH, 4 years old: a thick, white, gritty
plaque covers most of the cornea.
(C) DSH, 1.5 years old: homogeneous
white material (arrows) is present over 
the highly vascularized cornea. (D) DLH,
8 years old: the arrow points to a
 superficial white plaque on the
vascularized cornea.
A
B
D
Roles for mycoplasma and novel chlamydiae in feline
conjunctival and corneal disease have also been proposed.
EQUINE EOSINOPHiLIC KErAtItIS, EQUINE
but have not yet been specifically evaluated in eosinophilic/
SUPERFICIAL CORNEAL SEQUESTRUM,
proliferative keratitis
OR EQUINE INDOLENT ULCER (Fig. 8.17)
 Eosinophilic/proliferative keratitis, and FHV-1 stromal
keratitis likely represent similar immune-mediated disorders
of the feline cornea, that may or may not share the same
 Thesethree conditions share similar clinical and morphologic features
inciting factors
to an extent that, in the cases submitted to COPLOW, it has not been
 Eosinophilic keratitis generally shows a dramatic response to
possible to distinguish one syndrome from another. There are 16 cases
topical immunosuppressive therapy
in the COPLOW collection, with clinical or morphologic features sug-
Morphologic features of feline eosinophilic keratitis:
gesting one or the other of these syndromes. However, samples are
The epithelium is usually intact but, occasionally, an
seldom submitted from cases with a clinical diagnosis of eosinophilic
ulcerated surface may be lined by granular, acellular protein
keratitis for histopathologic evaluation, because the diagnosis is fre-
that likely represents granules liberated from eosinophils
quently made by cytology.
and/or mast cells. In addition to focal absence or thinning of
aul yo eiseidiaay pue Aydoaay 'uaua a
These conditions present as superficial recurrent or non-healing
epithelium may also be seen
ulcers affecting the peripheral cornea
 The normal superficial lamellar stroma may be completely
Similar clinical and histopathological findings have been
effaced
reported in horses with ocular onchocerciasis, in which
 Associated new corneal blood vesses can be large and may
microfilaria have been identifed within the corneal or
cross the lesion obliquely
conjunctival tissues 
■
 The inflammatory infiltrate is lympho-plasmacytic with
 Morphologic features of the disease include:
variable numbers of eosinophils and mast cells
■A failure of epithelial attachment
-Eosinophils often do not dominate the infiltrate and they
A very thin hyper-eosinophilic band of material between the
squ ls a u juasaid aq uaa 
unattached epithelium and the more normal stroma
216
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
 Figure 8.16 Feline eosinophilic keratitis,
pathology. (A) Low magnification 
photomicrograph of a feline cornea
showing the features of eosinophilic
keratitis. There is abrupt effacement of
anterior lamellar stroma by heavily
vascularized, loose edematous connective
 tissue and an inflammatory cell infiltrate
(arrows). (B) Higher magnification
photomicrograph showing the surface
epithelium with deep epithelial pegs 
extending into the loose stroma. (C) In
this photomicrograph, an ulcerated 
surface is carpeted by hypereosinophilic
protein material (*), a rare feature of
feline eosinophilic keratitis.
A
B
- This might be of stromal collagen origin or it might result
  In some cases, stromal discoloration is evident under an
from the degranulation of eosinophils
intact epithelium
Eosinophils and other inflammatory cells are seldom seen in
The extent of pigmentation can range from barely detectable
 samples submitted for pathology
amber discoloration to dense, black opacity when observed
- This may be because the cases with abundant eosinophils
clinically
are readily diagnosed based on clinical appearance and
■
 The precise nature of the dark pigment remains unknown.
cytologic findings.
 Different laboratory analyses of keratectomy specimens both
 support and refute the presence of iron or melanin within
the diseased tissue
 Morphologic features of feline corneal sequestrum include:
FELINE CORNEAL SEOUESTRUM (FELINE
  A localized superficial stromal defect characterized by
CorNEAl NECroSis, CorNEA NIGRUm)
superfcial ulceration and brown to black discoloration of the
(Figs 8.18, 8.19)
diseased stroma
The lesion typically involves just the anterior stroma,
although in rare instances the sequestrum involves the full 
This condition is a commonly recognized clinical entity in cats. There
thickness of the cornea
are lll feline cases documented in the COPLOW collection
 In addition to being discolored, the diseased stroma is
 Key features of corneal sequestrum include:
devoid of keratocytes. The lamellar quality of the stroma is
 Superficial ulceration characterized by a lack of epithelial
maintained but the normally distinct collagen lamellae
attachment
 appear to have blended together
■Neither blood vessels nor inflammatory cells enter the
that ulceration may not always be a feature of the disease.
sequestered stroma, and its collagen appears to resist
However, this may also reflect a failure of hydrophilic
enzymatic degradation
 Opportunistic bacterial or fungal organisms are frequently
 sequestrum that is exposed
seen, on or within the sequestered stromal tissue
■ In some cases, there is a history of chronic, superficial
Varying degrees of inflammatory cell infiltration, blood vessel
cormeal erosion or ulceration preceding sequestrum
in-growth, collagen degradation, edema and granulation
formation
tissue formation occurs at the periphery and deep margins of
 Stromal pigmentation
the lesion
■Brown pigmentation of the affected stroma is an early feature
 Left untreated, the corneal epithelium will eventually
of the disease
undermine the sequestrum, causing the sequestrum to
217
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 Figure 8.17 Equine superficial
sequestrum/eosinophilic keratitis. (A)
 Photomicrograph of the epithelium from
 a horse with equine eosinophilic keratitis
 Or superficial sequestrum. The thin
membranous sequestered protein 
material is wrinkled at the base of the
epithelium (arrow). (B) A fragment of 
sequestered membrane (black) is
entrapped by the epithelium that has 
reformed around it (verhoeff's elastic
A
B
stain). (C) Photomicrograph showing a
 poorly attached epithelium, a wrinkled
remnant of sequestered membrane and
an eosinophilic infiltrate, an infrequent 
finding in a pathology specimen. (D)
Photomicrograph showing a thick and
doubled sequestrum membrane on the
 surface of an ulcerative lesion. (E)
Thoroughbred, adult: the large white
gritty superficial deposit was also
fluorescein-positive. (F) American Quarter
Horse, 11 years old: superficial corneal
vessels and multiple white precipitates 
 are present. Conjunctival cytology
demonstrates many eosinophils.
(Reproduced with permission from
D
Hakanson N E, Dubielzig R R 1994 
Chronic superficial corneal erosions with
 anterior stromal sequestration in three 
horses. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
4:179-183.)
E
slough, with subsequent spontaneous healing. However,
aei Aeu ieui ssanoid paeioid Aiaa e uao si s
CORNEAL SEQUESTRATION IN OTHER
weeks or months. Lesions that extend very deeply into the
SPECIES (Fig. 8.20)
 corneal stroma are unable to resolve spontaneously in this
way
Although seldom mentioned in the published literature, morphologic
 The pathogenesis of corneal sequestration is poorly
features of corneal sequestrum are seen occasionally in eyes or kera-
understood
tectomy specimens from other species, including dogs and horses.
■ There is a breed predisposition for the Persian cat, in which
the disease is more likely to involve both eyes
There are 42 cases of corneal sequestrum in dogs recorded in the
COPLOW collection.
  In some cases, there may be a history of prior corneal insult,
injury and/or ulceration that appears to incite the process of
 As mentioned below, recurrent erosion syndrome shares several
sequestrum formation
features with sequestration
■
 There is strong, but equivocal evidence to support a
+
 Equine eosinophilic keratitis and at least a subset of equine
role for FHV-1 in the pathogenesis of corneal sequestration
chronic superficial erosions have a superfcial acellular protein
 in non-predisposed breeds. Topical corticosteroid therapy
membrane reminiscent of that seen in feline sequestrum
may also predispose to cormeal stromal sequestration in
 Brown pigmentation of the sequestered stromal tissue is seldom
cats.
seen in species other than the cat
218
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.18 Feline corneal sequestrum,
clinical. (A) Persian, 10 months old: the
axial corneal stroma ilustrates bronzing.
The dark elliptical ring (arrow) represents
the extent of the superficial ulcer. (B)
Bombay. 2 years old: the cornea is
ulcerated over the dense sequestrum.
The loose epithelium can be seen at the
margin of the ulcer (arrow). (C) DSH, 5
years old: a zone of necrosis and corneal
vessels surrounds the dense superficial
sequestrum. (D) DSH, 7 years old: the
axial sequestrum is elevated and is about
to be extruded from the corneal surface.
A
R
7
Opportunistic microorganisms are often found within the
 In globes submitted for pathological assessment, this condition
sequestrum, just as in cats
is very often found as an incidental finding and not the focus of
Animals with a history of sudden corneal exposure or acute
 clinical attention
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), and subsequent profound
The characteristic clinical features of recurrent erosion
desiccation of the ocular surface, can develop necrosis and
include:
sequestration of their anterior corneal stroma
Superficial ulcer/erosion that lacks stromal involvement
 One published report documents absolute KCS associated
■A flap or lip of non-adherent epithelium surrounds the 
with development of an equine corneal sequestrum that was
margins of the defect
clinically and histologically indistinguishable from the feline
■
 The ulcer resists healing and may persist for many weeks or
disease.
often months if not treated appropriately
■ Although the individual response to the presence of these 
lesions is highly variable, the degree of associated discomfort,
extent of neovascularization and inflammatory response may
RECURRENT EROSION SYNDROME
be minimal, despite their chronicity
(INDOLENT ULCER, BOXER ULCER,
 Ulceration may recur in either eye
SPONTANEOUS CHRONIC CORNEAL
 Pathologic features of recurrent erosion include
EPITHELIAL DEFECTS) (FigS 8.21, 8.22)
 The adjacent non-adherent epithelium exhibits
 dysmaturation and undergoes a morphologic change such
that both its superficial and basal surfaces keratinize
This condition is very commonly encountered in dogs, but similar
 The basal lamina is essentially absent in the affected area,
-pnpoul 'saiads iauio ul uaas aie Aoiouied pue uoeuasaid ieiu
but fibronectin coats the exposed stroma
ing cats, horses and rabbits
■
 There is a relatively thin, hyalinized, acellular zone in the
 A strong breed predisposition has been documented for Boxer
superficial stroma and any inflammatory cellular infltrate,
dogs, although all breeds can be affected
fbroplasia or vascularization occurs deep to this acellular
219
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.19 Feline corneal sequestrum,
pathology. (A) Gross photograph of left
and right feline globes showing
pigmented sequestrum (arrows). (B) Low
magnification photomicrograph of feline
cornea showing a superficial pigmented 
sequestrum (brown) in the process of
sloughing off the surface of the inflamed
cornea. (C) Low magnification
A
photomicrograph of a keratectomy
?
specimen from an affected cat showing a
brownish superficial sequestrum and, at 
the margin, there is an exophytic 
 overgrowth of granulation tissue (arrow).
(D) Photomicrograph showing the
corneal epithelium healing by sliding
underneath the more superficial
sequestrum (arrow). (E) A fragment of
sequestrum stroma is embedded within a
healed corneal defect. (F) Higher
magnification photomicrograph showing 
the healing response at the margins of 
C
sequestered stroma. There is a foreign
body-like macrophage response, and 
inflammatory cells do not migrate into
the sequestrum itself. (G)
Photomicrograph of feline sequestrum
colonized by opportunistic bacterial 
colonies (arrows). (H) A fragment of
sequestrum is surrounded by granulation 
tissue, however the sequestrum itself is 
free of any cellular infiltrate of protease
degradation.
E
F1
zone. The acellular layer might be as thin as 20 μm and as
are not merely the result of chronic injury to, or a chronic
thick as 100 μm
defect in, the corneal surface
● There are many similarities between recurrent erosion and
 Absence of basement membrane and abnormalities in the
cormeal sequestration:
jye au u ao Aa e Aed otreadde euns ouaue
■  The lack of epithelial attachment at the margins of the lesion
epithelial adhesion and delayed healing of these lesions.
 The acellular superficial stroma which resists degradation and
 Surgical procedures that disrupt the abnormal basement
infiltration
membrane and anterior stroma, such as epithelial
■
 Occasionally the acellular superficial stroma will mineralize
debridement, keratectomy, anterior stromal puncture 
and behave like a sequestrum
aouoid ot painbai Alliauag aie Auonoieiay Pug pue
■
 Development of corneal sequestra has been documented at
healing. However, repeated surgical debridement does not
the site of non-healing erosions in cats
lead to the formation of a condition similar to chronic
No single cause for this condition is recognized
erosion
 Although the initiating cause may be minor, superfcial
■
 Altered patterns of corneal innervation and neuropeptides
trauma, the syndrome's characteristic morphologic features
have been documented in dogs with recurrent erosions
220
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.20 Canine corneal sequestrum.
(A) Photomicrograph showing canine 
superficial sequestrum (arrow) with 
ulceration and failure of the epithelium 
to attach to the corneal surface. (B)
Higher magnification of (A). (C,D)
 Mineralized canine corneal sequestrum
(von Kossa stain).
A
B
D
Figure 8.21 Recurrent erosion, clinical.
(A) Labrador Retriever cross, 5 years old:
the arrow indicates the redundant 
non-attached epithelium that surrounds
the area of superficial ulceration. (B)
Boxer, 9 years old: the stroma in the area
 of ulceration is edematous (arrow). (C)
Boxer, 8 years old: after a 3-month 
history of ulceration, blood vessels are
invading the cornea (arrow). (D) West
Highland white Terrier, 11 years old:
positive fluorescein stain, redundant
epithelium and vessels outline this ulcer
(arrows).
A
221
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.22 Recurrent erosion,
pathology. (A) Photomicrograph showing
the point of epithelial non-attachment in 
recurrent erosion. The unattached
 epithelial flap has lost some of the
 organizing features of the attached
epithelium, particularly the columnar
nature of the basal cells (arrow). (B)
Photomicrograph similar to (A) showing
an inflamed superficial stroma and a
prominent superficial acellular layer
[A
B
(arrow). (C) Higher magnification
 photomicrograph showing a lack of
polarity in the unattached epithelium and 
localized epithelial whorls (inset).
C
 Altered expression of factors that promote epithelial
or traumatic implantation of these opportunistic pathogens, is neces-
 migration and adhesion have been documented
sary to establish fungal keratitis.
■
 Some affected dogs demonstrate increased proteolytic activity
However, epithelial microerosions have been identified in horses at
Adeaui roqiuu aseaoid cn puodai pue pny iea la u
an early stage in the development of mycotic keratitis, which may
■
 Severe stromal edema leading to lifting of the epithelium
indicate that complete removal of the epithelial barrier may not be
associated with subepithelial bullae can lead to several
necessary to fungal colonization of the cornea.
morphologic features similar to chronic erosion
Aspergillus sp. are most commonly implicated but Fusarium sp.
 Florida keratopathy (Florida spots), focal corneal stromal
and others are also found.
opacification (Fig. 8.23)
 This condition is characterized by one or more localized
Infection can be superficial stromal, deep stromal (at the level of
round foci of cormeal stromal opacification in dogs or cats
Descemet's membrane), or both superficial and deep. The clinical
with no symptoms of pain or inflammation
 presentation of fungal keratitis is therefore highly variable:
 Five globes with this condition have been examined at the
Ulcerative keratitis with variable stromal involvement Often a
COPLOW laboratory and, in contrast to a previous report, no
plaque of white, yellow or brown material is present on the
 evidence of abnormal morphology, or of associated
surface of the lesion
pathologic organisms, has been found in any of our
Keratomalacia may occur, and may be a direct result of
specimens by histopathology.
proteases liberated by fungal organisms (see below)
+
Stromal abscess formation may occur deep in the cornea, and in
aul ou Aoaisod ainq on uas aq au ssansqe au sase aos
FUNGAL KERAtItIS, EQUINE AND OTHER
anterior chamber
 Morphologic characteristics of fungal keratitis include:
SPECIES (Figs 8.24, 8.25)
 Suppurative inflammation or, more rarely, pyogranulomatous
inflammation
There are 75 cases of fungal keratitis in horses in the COPLOW col-
 Presence of fungal hyphae within Descemet's membrane
lection, which represents 10% of all equine submissions. There are 18
■ Multiple breaks in Descemet's membrane are often present
ases in dogs and two cases in cats.
near the site of fungal colonization
Fungal keratitis is most frequently encountered in horses, particu-
Silver stains for fungi are often needed to help visualize the
panun uaiseg-unos aut se yons suoeso sydeigoag uieuas ul uel
organisms
States. Fungal keratitis is relatively rare in most other domestic species.
 It the original section does not sample the site with the
The route of infection is not well documented, but it is widely
Organisms, it might be necessary to step-section deeply into
believed that pre-existing disruption of the corneal epithelial barrier.
the block in order to find the fungi
222
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.23 Florida spots. (A) DSH, 10
years old: this cat from Venezuela was
presented with bilateral, multiple focal
opacities in the superficial cornea best
seen by retroillumination (arrows). (B)
Mixed canine, 6 years old: this dog was
a rescue dog from Florida. The bilateral
opacities were located in the deep
epithelial and superficial stroma (arrow).
(C,D) Gross photographs showing the
corneas of two cat eyes with foci of
corneal opacity (arrows) diagnosed as
Florida Spots clinically. No changes were
recognized on histopathology.
A
B
C
D
Tissues containing fungal organisms often lack a significant
of protease inhibition and resulting in liquefaction of the corneal
neovascular response, and the production of anti-angiogenic
stroma.
factors by pathogenic fungi has been proposed
Topical corticosteroids potentiate the activity of proteases and pre-
Definitive identifcation of fungal organisms from
dispose to microbial keratitis.
histopathology or cytology is diffcult, therefore isolation of the 
 Serine proteases and matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) are released
sll ioy painbal uao sl (guunsuos a si qpium) wusiuea10
by certain micro-organisms, inflammatory cells and by native cells
identification. Recently, molecular genetic techniques have been
(including epithelial cells and keratocytes). A number of different
used in the diagnosis of fungal keratitis.
pathogenic mechanisms may therefore be responsible for triggering
keratomalacia, including:
Microbial keratitis: Any form of microbial infection can incite
 KEraToMALACIa, COLlAGENoLYtIC
 an inflammatory response and can lead to liberation of
KERATITIS, MELTING CORNEAL ULCER
endogenous proteases
(Figs 8.26, 8.27)
 Bacterial keratitis: Bacteria are seen in histopathology only in
the most early stages of disease and, in those cases, bacteria can
Keratomalacia is a devastating disease process which occurs in all
be numerous. The lack of bacterial organisms in pathology
submissions with keratomalacia may be due to prior therapy
species.
with antibiotics
 Horses are commonly presented with keratomalacia, secondary
-Certain bacteria, most notably Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
t microbial keratitis
produce exogenous MMPs and have a well-defined
This is also seen in dogs but more rarely
association with keratomalacia
 Brachycephalic dog breeds that typically have prominent
 Mycotic keratitis (see above)
globes and lagophthalmos (e.g. Shih Tzu, Pekingese, Pug)
Certain fungal organisms, e.g. Aspergilus and Fusarium spp.,
appear predisposed to severe keratomalacia.
produce extracellular serine proteases
Increased proteolytic activity occurs to some degree in most inflam-
Viral keratitis
matory conditions of the cornea, and in normal wound healing.
Chemical injury
Keratomalacia occurs when the lysis of stromal collagen proceeds
Particularly alkali burms
rapidly and unchecked, overwhelming normal tissue mechanisms
 Trauma or acute, severe corneal desiccation
223
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.24 Mycotic keratitis. (A) Mixed
Breed, 13 years old: Aspergilus ffavus
was cultured from the area of
keratomalacia (arrow). (B) Shih Tzu, 10
years old: Candida parapsifosis was
 cultured from the area of the ulceration
at the arrow. (C) Thoroughbred, yearling:
Mucor sp. was cultured from the 
ulcerated cornea and from the stromal
abscess. (D) Thoroughbred, 6 years old:
Fusarium sp. was cultured from the large
area of malacia. (E) Gross photograph of
an equine globe fixed with Bouin's 
fixative. A posterior strommal abscess is 
seen bulging into the anterior chamber 
(arrow). (F) Gross photograph of an
equine globe after conjunctival graft 
A
B
showing deep stromal suppurative
inflammation and narrowing of the
 exudate-rich anterior chamber. (G)
Photomicrograph showing Aspergilfus
fungal hyphae in ruptured Descemet's 
membrane (arrow) in a horse (GMS
stain). (H) Photomicrograph showing 
Mucor fungal hyphae in the Descemet's
membrane from a diabetic dog 
(PAS stain).
D
G
H
224
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.25 Corneal mycotic cytology
(based on morphology). (A) Mucor sp. (B)
Aspergillus sp. (C) Afternaria sp. (D)
Acremonium sp.
A
(C
 In many cases, the initiating cause cannot be determined
 Infectious ulcerative keratitis may occur in humans, as in
histopathologically
other species, as a result of viral, bacterial, fungal, and protozoal
Morphologic features of keratomalacia include:
infection.
Abrupt qualitative change in the corneal stromal morphology
 The most common vral pathogens affecting the human cornea 
  The normal lamellar stroma is markedly altered
are herpes simplex and herpes zoster
 Loss of lamellar architecture
 Bacterial infections usually follow disruptions of the integrity of
 Loss of birefringence
the surface epithelium
一
 Collapse of the tissue owing to a loss of structural support 
 The most important predisposing condition is trauma,
because of the liquid nature of the affected tissue
Usually collagenolytic lesions are rich in neutrophils, many
including trauma from contact lenses, as well as bullous
■
keratopathy and connective tissue disorders 
of which are degenerate
 Syphilis may give rise to interstitial keratitis
 Descemetocele formation may be followed by corneal
 Bacterial crystalline keratopathy is a condition that results from
 perforation and iris prolapse if keratomalacia is not controlled.
suppression of the inflammatory response due to steroids in
The prognosis for maintenance of vision in globes with perforations
which there is unchecked bacterial proliferation in the stroma 
following keratomalacia is poorer than that for globes with traumatic,
 White crystalline stromal opacities are seen clinically, and 
 penetrating injury because of the increased likelihood of intraocular
on microscopic examination, clumps containing massive 
infection.
numbers of bacteria occur in the stroma
 Fungal infections may also follow corneal trauma, particularly
when plant material is introduced into the cornea 
 In humans, mycotic keratitis is often seen in 
Comparative Comments
immunocompromised or debilitated patients and may be
 jiuosup lepyadns buipeban laideun sui u! papnpui uoissnosip aul
associated, as well, with the use of certain contact lens 
keratitis, recurrent erosion syndrome, collagenolytic keratitis, corneal
solutions
lysis, and corneal perforation is generally consistent with what the 
In recent years, Acanthamoeba keratitis has become a growing 
ocular pathologist notes in human eyes with similar conditions.
 problem in humans, associated with reusable contact lenses 
225
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.26 Keratomalacia
(collagenolytic keratitis), clinical. (A) DSH,
8 years old: Pseudomonas aeruginosa
was cultured from this severe case of
keratomalacia. (B) DSH, 6 years old:
Mycopfasma felis was cultured and
identified from the axial cornea. (C)
French Bulldog. 1.5 years old:
Capnocytophaga sp. was cultured from
the axial cornea. (D) Pekingese, 11 years
old: the white arrow points to the site
from which Pseudomonas sp. was
cultured. The black arrow points to the
hypopyon.
B
C
D
Full thickness corneal scar replacing the lamellar stroma
Comparative Comments (continued)
dei u uoeulueuos buiseanui y pue paueap Aaneudouddeu!
 Anterior synechia, at the perforation site, or more extensively.
water and swimming pools
 The Acanthamoeba exists in two forms, trophozoite and cyst
It gives rise to a clinical picture similar to herpes keratitis but is
CornEal lySIs, PerForatIon, And Iris
resistant to treatment.
PROLAPSE WITH EPITHELIALIZATION IN
YOUNG CATS (Fig. 8.29)
CORNEAL PERFORATION (see also Ch. 5)
There are four cases of young cats, ranging in age from 4 months to
7 years, in the COPLOW collection with subtotal lysis of the cornea
 COPLOW receives many enucleated globes from animals with perfo-
followed by epithelialization of the prolapsed iris tissue.
 rating corneal lesions.
 Both history and morphology suggest that affected cats
Some are submitted in the immediate aftermath of perforation,
experienced a catastrophic, destructive ocular event as a
when owners elect not to pursue further treatment on the
neonate, perhaps prior to eyelid opening (i.e. ophthalmia
grounds of cost, when given a poor prognosis for vision in the
neonatorum)
affected eye
 In all cases, the affected globe was small, wrinkled and aphakic,
Some are submitted when severe endophthalmitis sets in
in the absence of signifcant inflammation or osseous
 Some are submitted when intractable glaucoma sets in.
 metaplasia. Affected cats demonstrated minimal signs of
 It can be hard to recognize prior corneal perforation, particularly in
discomfort
globes that have extensive corneal scar tissue formation, but the
While there is no specific evidence implicating FHV-1 infection
following features are helpful (Fig. 8.28):
as the cause of this syndrome, this would seem to represent a
Rupture of Descemet's membrane
likely cause that warrants consideration.
226
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.27 Keratomalacia
(collagenolytic keratitis), pathology.
(A,B) Gross photographs of a feline globe 
showing an elevated soft central corneal
stroma typical of collagenolysis.
(C,D) Photomicrographs of a canine
cornea showing early collagenolysis.
There is a suppurative infiltrate, and the 
corneal lamellar stroma is being
degraded and liquefied. (E,F)
Photomicrographs of a canine cornea
from an eye removed only hours after a
traumatic event. Collagenolysis is not yet
apparent. Ulceration and extensive
stromal Pseudomonas bacterial organisms
(arrow) are present in (E). Epithelial
A
B
degradation and necrosis (arrows) appear
in (F).
C
D
E
ocular malformation, i.e. syndromes associated with anterior
EaRLY Life CORNEAl PERFOraTION, EARLY
segment dysgenesis
LIFE TRAUMA SYNDROME, AND ANTERIOR
Morphologic features leading to a diagnosis of early life corneal
CHAMBER COLLAPSE SYNDROME (Fig. 8.30)
perforation include:
 Iris tissue broadly adherent to the posterior cornea
 Full thickness corneal scar tissue
There are 59 cases in the COPLOW collection; including 27 cases in
■
 Pigmented uveal tissue entrapped in the fbrotic remnants of
cats and 30 cases in dogs.
the cormeal stroma
?
 Affected globes are from young animals, representing a range of
  Descemet's membrane remains thin and is focally absent in
species
segments of the diseased cornea
 The age at enucleation varies widely but is usually less than
- Descemet's membrane is often doubled, absent, or
1 year
 markedly attenuated
Generally.
 eyes are enucleated because they have glaucoma and
■
 Often, there is minimal uveal inflammation
marked buphthalmos
 Lens abnormalities may include:
■ A small proportion have phthisis bulbi and not
- Microphakia or aphakia
buphthalmos
- Displaced lens remnants
 They may or may not have a reported history of antecedent
- Remnants of empty wrinkled lens capsule may be
ocular disease, or ocular trauma early in life It is important, but
found
[iuauos wo auoipuas painbe siu ysingusip on Ksea iou
0 Often, but not always, at or within the corneal scar.
227
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.28 Corneal perforation and 
healing. (A-D) Four subgross
photomicrographs showing globes that
have healed and sealed over after
 corneal perforation and iris prolapse (A,
equine; B, canine; C, bovine and D,
equine). (A,B) have broad anterior
synechia with narrowing of the anterior
chamber (arrows).
A
B
D
CORNEAL EPITHELIAL INCLUSION CYST
INFLAMMATION DISRUPTING THE
(see also Ch. 4)
ENDOTHELIUM, ENDOTHELItIS
An uncommon, but important, differential consideration for
Cormeal edema may accompany anterior uveitis of any cause, exam-
cormeal masses, such as dermoid, nodular granulomatous
ples include:
episclerokeratitis, cormeal stromal abscess or corneal
 Equine recurrent uveitis
neoplasia
Antigens common to both Leptospira spp. and the equine
 These are predominantly acquired lesions and there is
often a history of prior corneal disease such as corneal
s on iod n ins-uou io lns o io 'uan
recurrent uveitis in some horses 
 Feline idiopathic lympho-plasmacytic uveitis 
development
 Localized endothelial cell inflammation can be associated
Clinical appearance is of smooth, raised mass or masses. The
with localized corneal edema.
cysts are associated with a variable degree of neovascularization
of the adjacent stroma and range in color from white to pale
Specific viral infections are strongly associated with inflammation of
yellow or pink
the corneal endothelium:
There is seldom any associated discomfort
Canine “blue eye', Canine adenovirus type-1 (CAV-1), infectious
 These intra-stromal cysts consist of a non-keratinized squamous
canine hepatitis) (Fig. 8.31)
epithelial lining and lumen that is filled with a serous fluid of
The descriptor blue eye' refers to the dense corneal
varying viscosity, color and cellularity.
edema which develops secondary to virus infection and
228
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
 Figure 8.29 Feline early life cornea
perforation. (A) Both globes from a
young cat showing broad central corneal
disruption and lysis in the neonatal
period. The globe on the right has
 prolapse and subsequent epithelialization
of uveal tissue (*). (B,C) Gross
photograph and subgross
photomicrograph showing a broad
C
central corneal defect with iris prolapse
A
8
and re-epithelialization. The central
corneal degeneration was thought to
have occurred in the neonatal period.
 Notice that the most peripheral corneal
stroma is well preserved (arrows). (D)
Photomicrograph showing the abrupt
full-thickness disruption of the cornea
with iris prolapse. The peripheral corneal
stroma remains largely normal (*), while 
the conjunctival substantia propria covers 
the cornea (arrow). (E-G) Progressively
higher magnification photomicrographs
showing the cellular infiltrate in cat
globes with broad corneal defects, iris
 prolapse and re-epithelialization. Much of
the infiltrate is, in fact, extramedullary
D
hematopoiesis.
subsequent immune-mediated inflammation of the
Affected dogs in our series have a history of chronic
endothelium
keratitis
■
 Endothelial inflammation can be due to the natural infection
Most cases are in brachycephalic breeds and Pug dogs are the
with CAV-1 or, historically, was related to vaccination with
most frequently affected.
the attenuated strain
 Affected dogs are typically middle-aged and older
■
'Blue eye' may be unilateral, or bilateral
Most are low-grade carcinoma or carcinoma-in-situ, involving
■
 There are anecdotal reports of sporadic cases of blue eye'
 predominantly the axial cornea.
encountered following vaccination with CAV-2 strains
 Morphologic features in these cases include:
Malignant catarrhal fever (MCF) (Fig. 8.32)
 A raised mass lesion in the axial cornea
MCF is a bovine disease with high mortality that is caused by
 Abrupt margins between a well-organized epithelium, with
alcelaphine herpesvirus-l or ovine herpesvirus-2
no dysplastic or anaplastic features, and the raised mass with
 Corneal edema associated with endothelial cell inflammation 
disorganization, dysplastic epithelial features and cellular
is a feature of both African Wildebeest-associated MCF and
features of anaplasia 
American Sheep-associated MCF
- If the neoplastic features are entirely contained by the
aie asau 'sons au aneyui iou op pue euel iesg
carcinoma in situ
CORNEAL NEOPLASIA
 If the neoplasm invades the stroma then it is considered
 squamous cel carcinoma
  In almost all cases the neoplastic tissue is confined
Canine corneal squamous cell carcinoma in
to the superficial stroma and lamellar keratectomy, with
dogs with chronic keratitis (Figs 8.33, 8.34)
or without adjunctive therapy, is usually a successful
treatment.
Corneal neoplasia is relatively uncommon in dogs 
There are 28 cases of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) or
carcinoma-in-situ in dogs in the COPLOW collection
229
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.30 Anterior chamber collapse
syndrome. (A-C) Gross photographs of 
animals with anterior chamber collapse 
syndrome resulting from early life ocular
trauma. The iris tissue is plastered against
the posterior cornea obliterating the 
anterior chamber. (D) Subgross 
photomicrograph of a similar globe
showing pigmented iris tissue plastered 
against the posterior cornea (arrows).
A
B
C
D
Equine stromal-invasive squamous cell
Canine viral papilloma (see Ch. 7)
carcinoma (Fig. 8.35)
Young dogs are affected
●There are eight cases of equine stromal-invasive SCC in the
 Occasionally the disease is limited to the cornea.
COPLOW collection
+
This neoplasm is a variant of a limbal conjunctival SCC
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
(discussed in detail in Ch. 7) which infiltrates primarily into the
corneal lamellar stroma, masquerading clinically as chronic
 There are two cases of epitheliotropic lymphoma ofthe cornea in dogs
stromal/interstitial keratitis
in the COPLOW collection.
Clinically, there is a progressive thickening and opacification of
the affected stroma
Although the majority of the neoplasm lies within the corneal
Comparative Comments
stroma, in some cases tumor tissue may also be recognized in
 Overall, corneal tumors in man are unusual
the peripheral corneal surface and/or the limbus.
Squamous cell carcinomas can present as a primary corneal
tumor, and the cornea may be involved by pagetoid spread of
Angiokeratoma (vascular endothelial
sebaceous carcinoma from the eyelid
cell tumor arising within the cornea)
Aluoseo eiseidoau ellauidaeui jeauno buous saisdoa 
come to the eye pathology laboratory
(Fig. 8.36)
 Although primary melanomas of the cornea have been reported.
 There are rare cases of tumors of vascular endothelial origin arising
corneal invasion by malignant melanoma of the conjunctiva is 
 e u a a  n l a ' a 
more often seen
gop e ul auo pue
 Infiltration of the cormea by an adjacent limbal conjunctival
vascular endothelial mass was not definitively excluded in either
DISEASES OF THE SCLERA
case, as serial sections were not examined
The other possible mechanism by which these tumors might
Staphyloma (Fig. 8.37)
arise would be neoplastic transformation of new vessels
associated with pre-existing corneal disease.
There are 72 cases in the COPLOW collection.
230
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.31 Canine 'blue eye'. (A)
Boston Terrier, 7 weeks old: canine
adenovirus type 2 vaccine resulted in
severe endothelitis and edema. (B)
Golden Retriever, & weeks old: canine 
adenovirus type 1 vaccine initiated this 
case. (C) Boxer, 4 months old: canine 
adenovirus type 2, bilateral disease. (D)
Adult dog with a more profound scleral
injection. (E) Photomicrograph showing 
the disrupted and degenerate corneal
endothelium.
A
B
D
Figure 8.32 Malignant catarrhal fever.
(A) Low magnification photomicrograph
showing basophilic lymphocytic infiltrate
(arrow) in the episclera near the limbus 
 of a moose with malignant catarrhal
fever. (B) Photomicrograph showing the
corneal endothelium from the same
moose with a lymphocytic infiltrate
disrupting the cells (endothelitis).
B
231
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.33 Canine corneal squamous
cell carcinoma, clinical. (A) Cavalier King
Charles Spaniel, 10 years old: the 
elevated axial mass is in an area of
corneal pigmentation associated with dry
eye. (B) Pug. 11 years old: the axial mass
is associated with exposure keratitis. (C)
Pug. 11 years old: the paraxial mass is
located in the center of the pigmented
cornea. (D) Pug. 12 years old: this large
mass is associated with dry eye and
corneal vascularization.
A
B]
●A partial or full thickness defect in the cornea or sclera lined by
The other three cases involved one cat and two birds
 protruding uveal tissue
Granulomatous scleritis can arise by extension of a nonspecifc
Staphyloma, may occur as a congenital lesion in isolation but is
 inflammatory process, e.g., orbital cellulitis or panophthalmitis.
more frequently associated with other congenital ocular defects,
However, in these 93 canine cases, the diagnosis implies a
as discussed previously, in Chapter 3.
specific destructive inflammation within the sclera
 Acquired staphyloma:
Although, in humans, granulomatous scleritis is often seen in
Limbal staphyloma is frequently recognized in glaucomatous
individuals with other autoimmune conditions such as
canine eyes (see Ch. 13)
rheumatoid arthritis, this has not been a consistent feature of
- In our collection, affected globes are always heavily
reported canine cases
pigmented
- No such relationship with documented autoimmune
Dogs with glaucoma as a result of ocular melanosis are
conditions has been seen in any of the cases in the 
particularly prone to developing staphylomas
COPLOW collection
 The relationship between scleral thinning and ocular
 Necrotizing scleritis has been reported in dogs with
 melanosis is not known
Ehrlichiosis
 The appearance of staphyloma is often mistaken for that of
 Clinical features of scleritis may include:
a neoplasm
Redness
■Staphyloma associated with scleritis (see below).
Variable degrees of ocular pain
Mild exophthalmos
 Signs of secondary uveal inflammation
Granulomatous scleritis, necrotizing
 Posterior segment lesions, eg., retinal detachment
scleritis (Figs 8.38, 8.39)
 The inflammation in scleritis always has a pronounced.
granulomatous component characterized by the presence of
There are 93 cases of granulomatous scleritis documented in the
histiocytes/tissue macrophages. In addition, there may be a
COPLOW collection.
suppurative component, i.e. necrotizing scleritis, or in
All but three of these are canine cases, and most were diagnosed
chronic scleritis, a lymphoplasmacytic component may
in enucleated globes
predominate
232
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
 Figure 8.34 Canine corneal squamous
cell carcinoma, pathology. (A) Subgross
photomicrograph of a canine globe
showing a superficially oriented central
corneal squamous cell carcinoma 
(arrows). (B) Low magnification
 photomicrograph showing the marked
thickening of the affected epithelium,
but little invasion of the deep corneal
stroma. (C,D) Photomicrographs of
canine corneal squamous cell carcinoma
showing only minimal epithelial invasion
(arrows), as well as pigmentation
characteristic of the chronic inflammatory
disease.
B
C
D
Figure 8.35 Equine stromal invasive
squamous cell carcinoma. (A) Subgross 
photomicrograph showing an equine 
globe with stromal invasive squamous
cell carcinoma infiltrating the lamellar
stroma (blue). (B) Low magnification
photomicrograph showing a similar
degree of involvement as (A), but with a
little more surface disruption. (C) Tumor,
folded on the surface, extends into the 
lamellar stroma of the cornea. (D) An 
intact and smooth surface epithelium
A
B
with neoplastic cords of epithelium
within the lamellar stroma.
233
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.36 Equine angiokeratoma. (A)
Low magnification photomicrograph of
 cornea showing invasion of the stroma
 by neoplastic vascular channels in equine
angiokeratoma. (B,C) Photomicrographs
showing similar involvement in another
horse. Arrows show vascular channels.
A
B
C
● A diagnosis of scleritis implies that the second eye is at risk of
Based on inter-relatedness of affected dogs in one published
developing scleritis
study, a genetic predisposition to the development of ocular
 The clinician should be alerted to this important prognostic
melanoma has been proposed for Golden and Labrador
information, due to the potentially serious implications for
retrievers
vision
There is a small spike in occurrence in dogs less than 2 years old
 The morphologic features of scleritis in dogs include:
Limbal melanocytomas in dogs are almost always benign but
 The affected area of sclera is usually thickened
they can be quite large
- The thickened sclera is typically a solid white These
Morphologic features of limbal melanocytoma include:
 affected regions are infltrated by granulomatous 
They arise from the melanocytes which form a pigmented
inflammation
ring around the limbal sclera in normal, pigmented dogs 
-Any portion of the sclera may be involved
Limbal melanocytoma is usually a solid mass that is
More rarely, scleral thinning may occur. In these cases
composed of a uniform population of heavily pigmented
dramatic staphylomas may be recognized
round cells, with very few heavily pigmented spindle cells
- Scleritis with staphyloma is usually manifest by a
 Often, biopsy samples submitted are made up of small
lymphocyte rich infiltrate with fewer granulomatous foci
fragments because the tumors are often just sampled
 Histologic features of scleritis include:
for diagnostic purposes prior to cryosurgery or
 Granulomatous inflammation
photocoagulation.
 Lysis or separation of scleral collagen 
- Granulomatous vasculitis, which is a common but not
universal feature.
Feline limbal melanocytoma (Fig. 8.42)
 In the COPLOW collection, there are 46 cases of feline limbal
Canine limbal melanocytoma (Figs 8.40)
melanocytoma, representing 1.7% of all feline neoplastic
8.41)
submissions and 3% of all feline tumors of melanocytic origin
Feline limbal melanocytomas are believed to be benign
 In the COPLOW collection, there are 214 cases of canine limbal
 However, apparent generalized metastatic disease has been
 melanocytoma, representing 4% of all canine neoplastic submissions
reported in one cat following resection of limbal melanoma
and 10% of all canine tumors of melanocytic origin.
 It is important to distinguish limbal melanocytoma from
 German Shepherd dogs are over-represented and Labrador
extra-ocular extension of uveal melanoma, or conjunctival
Retrievers are weakly over-represented in the COPLOW
melanoma (see Chs 9 and 7, respectively, for further discussion
collection.
of these important differential considerations)
234
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.37 Acquired staphyloma. (A)
DSH, 5 years old: iris and endothelial
pigment is present in the elevated area
between the arrows. (B) DSH, 6 years
dld: the large staphyloma (between
arrows) originated from under the 
superior lid. (C,D) Gross photograph and
 subgross photomicrograph showing the
same peripheral corneal and limbal
staphyloma as (B). (E,F) Gross
photographs showing an equatorial
scleral staphyloma in a canine globe.
B
?
235
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.38 Scleritis, clinical. (A)
Dachshund. 12 years old: the arrow
points to the corneal side of the limbus,
where vessels and inflammatory cells 
resulted in the limbal elevation. (B)
Maltese, 5 years old: the severe nasal
infiltrate is also associated with corneal
lipidosis at the arrow. (C) Cocker Spaniel.
4 years old: the sclera is thickened and 
injected. Only edema and thin vessels are
present on the cornea. (D) Cocker
Spaniel, 7 years old: all scleral surfaces
are severely elevated and injected. The
inflammatory reaction has extended onto
the cornea, obscuring the limbus. (E)
German Shepherd Dog cross, 5 years old:
A
e e al ai e sassa ea
the limbus is edematous and vascularized
(arrow). (F) The tapetal fundus of the
dog in (E). The optic disc is swollen.
Areas of abnormal tapetal pigmentation
represent inflammation of sclera, choroid 
and retina (arrows).
C
E
F
236
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
A
B
D
E
Figure 8.39 Scleritis, pathology. (A-C) Gross photographs of canine globes showing segmental or diffuse scleral thickening associated with
granulomatous scleritis. (D-F) Subgross photomicrographs of canine globes showing scleral infiltration. (E) Segmental scleral thinning (arrow) and 
staphyloma, a rarer manifestation of granulomatous scleritis. (G) Photomicrograph showing typical granulomatous reaction in scleritis. Granulomas
surround collagen fragments. (H) Highlights vasocentric granuloma (arrow).
237
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 8.40 Canine limbal
melanocytoma (limbal shelf
melanocytoma), clinical. (A) Golden
Retriever, 4 years old: this small mass 
extended minimally into the cornea. (B)
German Shepherd Dog cross, 5.5 years 
old: the arrows show the extent of the 
tumor into the cornea. (C) Golden
Retriever, 9 years old: the arrow points 
to the associated corneal lipidosis. The
corneal involvement lies between this 
lipid and the scleral mass to the left. (D)
Labrador Retriever, 6 years old: the 
gonioscopic photograph shows the
corneal involvement of this extensive
tumor (arrows).
B
D
 Figure 8.41 Canine limbal
 melanocytoma, pathology. Gross 
photograph (A) and subgross
 photomicrographs (B-D) showing canine
globes with limbal melanocytoma. There
is outward growth but minimal extension
into the globe.
A
B
238
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Figure 8.42 Feline limbal melanocytoma.
(A) DsH, 9 years old: the arrow points to
the mild extension into the cornea. (B)
 DSH, 12 years old: the limbal pigment 
mass is elevated and extends into the
cornea. (C) DSH, 10 years old: the 
 corneal involvement can be seen below
the lipidosis at the arrow. (D) DSH, 9
years old: the arrow points to the normal
sclera still present between the 
pigmented mass and the cornea. (E) Low
 magnification photomicrograph showing
a characteristically small feline limbal 
 melanocytoma. (F) Higher magnification
showing minimal melanocytic infiltrate 
 characteristic of feline limbal
A
B
melanocytomas.
C
E
Morphologic features include:
 An almost pure population of heavily pigmented round cells,.
erythematosus, polyarteritis nodosa, Wegener's granulomatosis,
relapsing polychondritis, and Reiter's syndrome have been
 similar to that observed in canine limbal melanocytomas.
 associated with it
 Scleritis in humans is subdivided into the following
Comparative Comments
categories:
 Anterior scleritis, which may be further characterized as
The major disorder of the sclera dealt with in human ophthalmology
necrotizing or non-necrotizing 
 is scleritis, generally considered an idiopathic autoimmune disease.
Episcleritis, a milder disease, must be differentiated from
 Scleritis may occur in isolation, or may occur in association with 
 anterior scleritis, since the etiology and management 
systemic diseases
differ.
 Rheumatoid disease is most commonly linked to scleritis, but a
 Posterior scleritis is an inflammatory process of the sclera.
 number of other conditions, including systemic lupus,
 posterior to the equator of the eye.
239
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Normal anatomy and physiology
Ekins, M.B., Sgoutas, D.S., Waring, G.O., 3rd,
hyperadrenocorticism: a case report. Vet.
Samuelson, D.A., 1999. Ophthalmic anatomy.
et al., 1983. Oval lipid comeal opacities in
Ophthalmol. 5, 61-64.
In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary
beagles: Vl. Quantitation of excess stromal
ophthalmology, 3rd edn. Lippincott,
cholesterol and phospholipid. Exp. Eye Res.
Corneal endothelial dystrophy and
Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia pp.
36, 279-286.
degeneration
31-150.
Waring, G.O., 3rd, MacMillan, A., Reveles, P.
Martin, C.L., Dice, PF., 1982. Corneal
Gum, G.G., Gelatt, K.N., Esson, D.W., 2007.
1986. Inheritance of crystalline corneal
endothelial dystrophy in the dog. I. Am.
Physiology of the eye. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.).
dystrophy in Siberian huskies. I. Am. Anim.
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 18, 327-336.
Hosp. Assoc. 22, 655-658.
Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th edn.
Gwin, R.M., Polack, EM., Warren, J.K.,
Backwell, Oxford, pp. 149-182.
Crispin, S.M., 1987. Lipid keratopathy in the
et al., 1982. Primary canine corneal
Befanis, PJ., Peiffer, Jr., R.L., Brown, D., 1981.
dog. Vet. Ann. 27, 196-208.
endothelial cell dystrophy: specular 
Endothelial repair of the canine cornea. Am.
Crispin, S.M., 1988. Crystalline cormeal
 microscopic evaluation, diagnosis and
J. Vet. Res. 42, 590-595.
dystrophy in the dog. Histochemical and
therapy. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 18,
Rodrigues, G.N., Laus, I.L., Santos, J.M., et al.,
ultrastructural study. Cornea 7, 149-161.
471-479.
 2006. Cormeal endothelial cell morphology
Roth, S.I., Stock, E.L., Siel, J.M., et al., 1988.
Gwin, R.M., Lerner, I., Warren, J.K., et al., 1982.
of normal dogs in different ages. Vet.
Pathogenesis of experimental lipid
Decrease in canine corneal endothelial cell
Ophthalmol. 9, 101-107.
keratopathy. An ultrastructural study of an
density and increase in corneal thickness as
animal model system. Invest. Ophthalmol.
functions of age. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis.
Congenital abnormalities
Vis. Sci. 29, 1544-1551.
Sci. 22, 267-271.
Ramsey, D.T., Hauptman, J.G., Petersen-Jones,
Crispin, S.M., 1989. Lipid deposition at the
Brooks, D.E., Samuelson, D.A., Smith, P.J.
Jimbus. Eye 3 (Pt 2), 240-250.
S.M., 1999. Corneal thickness, intraocular
1990. Corneal endothelial cell degeneration
 pressure, and optical corneal diameter in
Rodrigues, M.M., Kruth, H.S., Krachmer, J.H..
in a German shepherd dog. J. Small. Anim.
Rocky Mountain Horses with cornea globosa
et al., 1990. Cholesterol localization in
Pract. 31, 31-34.
or clinically normal corneas. Am. J. Vet. Res.
ultrathin frozen sections in Schnyder's
Moore, D.L., McLellan, G.., Dubielzig, R.R..
60, 1317-1321.
corneal crystalline dystrophy. Am. J.
2003. A study of the morphology of canine
Swanson, H.L., Dubielzig, R.R., Bentley, E..
Ophthalmol. 110, 513-517.
eyes enucleated or eviscerated due to
et al., 2001. A case of Peters anomaly in a
Yamada, M., Mochizuki, H., Kamata, Y., et al.,
complications following
Springer spaniel. J. Comp. Pathol. 125.
1998. Quantitative analysis of lipid deposits
phacoemulsifcation. Vet. Ophthalmol. 6.
326-330.
from Schnyder's corneal dystrophy. Br. J.
219-226.
Ophthalmol. 82, 444-447.
Kafarnik, C., Murphy, C., Dubielzig, R., 2009.
Corneal dystrophies, epithelial
Crispin, S., 2002. Ocular lipid deposition and
Canine duplication of Descemet's
hyperlipoproteinaemia. Prog. Retin. Eye. Res.
Cooley, PL., Dice, PF., 2nd, 1990. Corneal
membrane. Vet. Pathol. vp.08-VP-0183-K-FL.
dystrophy in the dog and cat. Vet. Clin.
21, 169-224
North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 20, 681-
Moore, C.P., Dubielzig, R., Glaza, S.M., 1987.
Acute bullous keratopathy, corneal
692.
 Anterior corneal dystrophy of American
hydrops
 Dutch belted rabbits: biomicroscopic and
Andrew, S.E., 2008. Immune-mediated canine
histopathologic fndings. Vet. Pathol. 24.
Glover, T.L., Nasisse, M.P., Davidson, M.G.,
 and feline keratitis. Vet. Clin. North Am.
1994. Acute bullous keratopathy in the cat.
Small Anim. Pract. 38, 269-290.
28-33.
Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 4, 66-70.
Shilton, C.M., Smith, D.A., Crawshaw, G.J.
Hansen, PA., Guandalini, A., 1999. A
et al., 2001. Comeal lipid deposition in
Corneal lipid dystrophies and
retrospective study of 30 cases of frozen
Quban tree frogs (Osteopilus septentrionalis)
degenerations
lamellar corneal graft in dogs and cats. Vet.
and its relationship to serum lipids: an
Waring, G.O., Muggli, F.M., MacMillan, A.,
experimental study lI. Zoo. Wildl. Med. 32.
Ophthalmol. 2, 233-241.
1977. Oval corneal opacities in beagles.
305-319.
J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 13, 204-208.
Qualitative tear film disorders
MacMillan, A.D., Waring, G.O., 3rd, Spangler,
Mineralization of the stroma, mineral
Moore, C.P., 1990. Qualitative tear flm disease.
W.L., et al., 1979. Crystalline corneal
degeneration
Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 20,
opacities in the Siberian Husky. J. Am. Vet.
Ward, D.A., Martin, C.L., Weiser, I., 1989. Band
565-581.
Med. Assoc. 175, 829-832.
keratopathy associated with
Moore, C., Wilsman, N., Nordheim, E., et al.
Ekins, M.B., Waring, G.O., Harris, R.R., 1980.
hyperadrenocorticism in the dog. J. Am.
1987. Density and distribution of canine
 Oval lipid corneal opacities in beagles, part
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25, 583-586.
conjunctival goblet cells. Invest.
Il: natural history over four years and study
Nasisse, M.P., Guy, J.S., Davidson, M.G., et al.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 28, 1925-1932.
of tear function. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
 1989. Experimental ocular herpesvirus
16, 601-605.
infection in the cat. Sites of virus replication,
Chronic superficial keratitis, 'pannus'
Roth, A.M., Ekins, M.B., Waring, G.O., 3rd,
dinical features and effects of corticosteroid
Campbell, L.H., Okuda, H.K., Lipton, D.E..
et al., 1981. Oval corneal opacities in
administration. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
et al., 1975. Chronic superficial keratitis in
beagles. Ill. Histochemical demonstration of
30, 1758-1768.
dogs: detection of cellular hypersensitivity.
stromal lipids without hyperlipidemia.
Taravella, M., Stulting, R.D., Mader, T.H..
Am. J. Vet. Res. 36, 669-671.
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 21, 95-
et al., 1994. Calcifc band keratopathy
Slatter, D.H., Lavach, J.D., Severin, G.A., et al.,.
106.
associated with the use of topical steroid-
1977. Uberreiter's syndrome (chronic
Crispin, S., 1982. Corneal dystrophies in small
phosphate preparations. Arch. Ophthalmol.
superficial keratitis) in dogs in the Rocky
animals. Vet. Ann. 22, 298-310.
112, 608-613.
Mountain area - a study of 463 cases. J.
Crispin, S.M., Barnett, K.C., 1983. Dystrophy.
Laus, J.L., dos Santos, C., Talieri, I.C., et al..
Small Anim. Pract. 18, 757-772.
degeneration and infltration of the canine
 2002. Combined corneal lipid and calcium
Austad, R., Oen, E.O., 1978. Chronic superficial
cornea. J. Small Anim. Pract. 24, 63-83
 degeneration in a dog with
keratitis in the dog. Il. Results of a combined
240
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
non-surgical treatment. J. Small Anim. Pract.
von Bomhard, W., Polkinghorne, A, Lu, Z.H.
Morgan, R.V, 1994. Feline corneal
19, 203-206.
et al., 2003. Detection of novel chlamydiae
sequestration: A retrospective study of 42
Austad, R., Oen, E.O., 1978. Chronic superficial
in cats with ocular disease. Am. J. Vet. Res.
cases (1987-1991). J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
keratitis (keratitis superfcialis chronica) in
64, 1421-1428.
Assoc. 30, 24-28.
the dog. I. A review of the literature. J. Small
Gray, L.D., Ketring, K.L., Tang, Y.W., 2005.
Ejima, H., Hara, N., Kajigaya, H., 1993.
Anim. Pract. 19, 107-201.
Clinical use of 16S rRNA gene sequencing to
Detection of iron in a blackish lesion in a
Bedford, PG., Longstaffe, JA., 1979. Corneal
identify Mycoplasma felis and M. gateae
case of feline corneal sequestrum. J. Vet.
 pannus (chronic superficial keratitis) in the
associated with feline ulcerative keratitis.
Med. Sci. 55, 1051-1052.
German shepherd dog. J. Small Anim. Pract.
J. Clin. Microbiol. 43, 3431-3434.
Featherstone, H.J., Franklin, V.J., Sansom, I..
20, 41-56.
Spiess, A.K., Sapienza, J.S., Mayordomo, A..
 2004. Feline corneal sequestrum: laboratory
Eichenbaum, I.D., Lavach, JI.D., Gould, D.H..
2009. Treatment of proliferative feline
analysis of ocular samples from 12 cats. Vet.
et al., 1986. Immunohistochemical staining
eosinophilic keratitis with topical 1.5%
Ophthalmol. 7, 229-238.
patterns of canine eyes affected with chronic
cyclosporine: 35 cases. Vet. Ophthalmol. 12,
Featherstone, H.J., Sansom, I., 2004. Feline
superficial keratitis. Am. J. Vet. Res. 47,
132-137.
corneal sequestra: a review of G4 cases
1952-1955
(80 eyes) from 1993 to 2000. Vet.
 Stanley, R.G., 1988. Superficial stromal keratitis
 Equine eosinophilic keratitis, anterior
Ophthalmol. 7, 213-227.
in the dog. Aust. Vet. J. 65, 321-323.
 stromal sequestration or 'indolent
Qullen, C.L., Wadowska, D.W., Singh, A., et al..
Chavkin, M.., Roberts, S.M., Salman, M.D.
ulcer'
2005. Ultrastructural findings in feline
et al., 1994. Risk factors for development of
corneal sequestra. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8,
Ramsey, D.T., Whiteley, H.E., Gerding, PA.
chronic superficial keratitis in dogs. I. Am.
295-303.
 et al., 1994. Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis
Vet. Med. Assoc. 204, 1630-1634.
in a horse. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 205,
McLellan, G.1., Archer, F.J., 2000. Corneal
Williams, D.L., 1999. Histological and
stromal sequestration and
1308-1311.
immunohistochemical evaluation of canine
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a horse. Vet.
Yamagata, M., Wilkie, D.A., Gilger, B.C., 1996.
chronic superfcial keratitis. Res. Vet. Sci. 67,
Ophthalmol. 3, 207-212.
Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis in seven
191-195.
horses. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 209,
Bouhanna, L., Liscoet, L.B., Raymond-Letron, I.,
Williams, D.L., 2005. Major histocompatibility
2008. Corneal stromal sequestration in a
1283-1286.nt
class Il expression in the normal canine
dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 11, 211-214.
cornea and in canine chronic superficial
Munger, R.)., 1983. Equine onchocercal
Pizzirani, S., Pirie, C.G., Parry, N.M., 2008.
keratoconjunctivitis. Equine Vet. J. Suppl. 2.
keratitis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8, 395-400.
65-70.
Corneal sequestrum in a dog. ACVO
Chandler, H.L., Kusewitt, D.F., Colitz, C.M.,
 39th Annual Conference, Boston, MA,
Hammond, T., Severin, G.A., Snyder. S., 1983.
2008. Modulation of matrix
p 12.
Equine ocular onchocerciasis: A case report.
 metalloproteinases by ultraviolet radiation in
Equine Vet. J. Suppl. 2, 74-75.
the canine cornea. Vet. Ophthalmol. 11,
Recurrent erosion syndrome.
Cooley, PL., Wyman, M., 1986. Indolent-like
135-144.
 spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial
ulcers in 3 horses. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
defects
Feline eosinophilic keratitis.
188,295-297.
Hakanson, N.E., Dubielzig, R.R., 1994. Chronic
Champagne, ES., Munger, R.J., 1992. Multiple
proliferative keratitis
superficial comeal erosions with anterior
 punctate keratotomy for the treatment of
Prasse, K.W., Winston, S.M., 1996. Cytology and
stromal sequestration in three horses. Vet.
recurrent epithelial erosions in dogs. I. Am.
histopathology of feline eosinophilic
Comp. Ophthalmol. 4, 179-183.
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 28, 213-216.
keratitis. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 6, 74-
Michau, T.M., Schwabenton, B., Davidson,
Morgan, R.V, Abrams, K.L., 1994. A comparison
81.
M.G., et al., 2003. Superficial, nonhealing
of six different therapies for persistent
Morgan, R.V., Abrams, K.L., Kern, T.J., 1996.
comeal ulcers in horses: 23 cases [1989-
corneal erosions in dogs and cats. Vet.
Feline eosinophilic keratitis: a retrospective
2003). Vet. Ophthalmol. 6, 291-297.
Comp. Ophthalmol. 4, 38-43.
study of 54 cases (1989-1994). Vet. Comp.
Stanley, R.G., Hardman, C., Johnson, B.W.
Ophthalmol. 6, 131-134.
Bentley, E., Murphy, C.J., 2004. Thermal cautery
of the cornea for treatment of spontaneous
1998. Results of grid keratotomy, superficial
Nasisse, M.P., Glover, T.L., Moore, C.P., et al.,
 chronic corneal epithelial defects in dogs
keratectomy and debridement for the
1998. Detection of feline herpesvirus 1 DNA
and horses. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 224,
 management of persistent corneal erosions
in corneas of cats with eosinophilic keratitis
250-253, 224.
in 92 dogs. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1, 233-238.
or corneal sequestration. Am. J. Vet. Res. 59.
Willeford, K.O., Miller, W.W., Abrams, K.L.
Brunott, A., Boeve, M.H., Velden, M.A., 2007.
856-858.
Grid keratotomy as a treatment for
et al., 1998. Modulation of proteolytic
Allgoewer, I., Schaffer, E.H., Stockhaus, C..
superfcial nonhealing comeal ulcers in 10
activity associated with persistent corneal
et al., 2001. Feline eosinophilic
horses. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10, 162-167.
ulcers in dogs. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1, 5-8.
conjunctivitis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 4, 69-74.
Bentley, E., 2005. Spontaneous chronic corneal
Nasisse, M.P., English, R.V., Tompkins, M.B.,
epithelial defects in dogs: a review. J. Am.
et al., 1995. Immunologic, histologic, and
Corneal sequestrum in cats and other
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 41, 158-165.
virologic features of herpesvirus-induced
species
Kirschner, S.E., Niyo, Y., Betts, D.M., 1989.
stromal keratitis in cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 56,
Souri, E., 1972. The isolated black lesion of the
Idiopathic persistent corneal erosions:
51-55.
feline cornea. Vet. Med. Small Anim. Clin.
dinical and pathological findings in 18 dogs.
Colitz, C.M.H., Davidson, M.G., Gilger, B.C.
70, 155-158.
J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25, 84-90.
2002. Bilateral proliferative keratitis in a
Gelatt, K.N., Peiffer, R.L., Stevens, I., 1973.
Bentley, E., Abrams, G.A., Covitz, D., et al.
Domestic Long-haired cat. Vet. Ophthalmol.
Chronic ulcerative keratitis and sequestrum
 2001. Morphology and
5, 137-140.
in the domestic cat. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
immunohistochemistry of spontaneous
Volopich, S., Benetka, V., Schwendenwein, I.,.
Assoc. 9, 204-213.
chronic corneal epithelial defects (SCCED)
et al., 2005. Cytologic fndings, and feline
Formston, C., Bedford, P.G., Staton, J.F., et al.
 in dogs. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 42.
herpesvirus DNA and Chlamydophila felis
1974. Corneal necrosis in the cat. J. Small
2262-2269.
 antigen detection rates in normal cats and
Anim. Pract. 15, 19-25.
Murphy, C.J., Marfurt, C.F., McDermott, A.,
cats with conjunctival and corneal lesions.
Souri, E., 1975. The feline cornea nigrum. Vet.
et al., 2001. Spontaneous chronic corneal
Vet. Ophthalmol. 8, 25-32.
Med. Small Anim. Clin. 70, 531-534.
epithelial defects (SCCED) in dogs: clinical
241
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
features, innervation, and effect of topical
Marlar, A.., Miller, P, Canton, D., et al., 1992.
Sansom, I., Featherstone, H., Barnett, K., 2005.
SP, with or without IGF-1. Invest.
Canine keratomycosis: a report of eight cases
Keratomycosis in six horses in the United
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 42, 2252-2261.
and literature review. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
Kingdom. Vet. Rec. 156, 13-17.
Bentley, E., Murphy, C.J., 2004. Thermal cautery
Assoc. 30, 331-340.
Ledbetter, E.C., Patten, V.H., Scarlett, J.M., et al..
of the cornea for treatment of spontaneous
Bernays, M.E., Peiffer, Jr., R.L., 1998. Ocular
2007. In vitro susceptibility patterns of fungi
 chronic corneal epithelial defects in dogs
infections with dematiaceous fungi in two
associated with keratomycosis in horses of
and horses. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 224,
cats and a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 213,
the northeastern United States: G8 cases
250-253, 224
507-509.
(1987-2006). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 231,
Cooley, P.L., Wyman, M., 1986. Indolent-like
Rampazzo, A., Kuhnert, P, Howard, J., et al.
1086-1091.
ulcers in 3 horses. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
2009. Hormographiella aspergillata
188, 295-297
keratomycosis in a dog. Vet. Ophthalmol.
Keratomalacia,collagenolytickeratitis,
Hakanson, N.E., Dubielzig, R.R., 1994. Chronic
12, 43-47.
melting corneal ulcer
superficial corneal erosions with anterior
Miller, D.M., Blue, J.L., Winston, S.M., 1983.
Keratomycosis caused by Cladosporium sp.
Fini, M.E., Cook, J.R., Mohan, R., 1998.
stromal sequestration in three horses. Vet.
Comp. Ophthalmol. 4, 179-183.
in a cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 182,
Proteolytic mechanisms in corneal ulceration
and repair. Arch. Dermatol. Res. 290
Michau, T.M., Schwabenton, B., Davidson,
1121 -1122.
(Suppi), S12-S23.
M.G., et al., 2003. Superfcial, nonhealing
Gerding Ir., PA., Morton, L.D., Dye, JA., 1994.
McLaughlin, S.A., Gilger, B.C., Whitley, R.D..
corneal ulcers in horses: 23 cases (1989-
Ocular and disseminated candidiasis in an
1992. Infectious keratitis in horses:
2003). Vet. Ophthalmol. 6, 291-297
immunosuppressed cat. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Assoc. 204, 1635-1638.
evaluation and management. Comp. Cont.
Brunott, A., Boeve, M.H., Velden, M.A., 2007.
Edu. Pract. Vet. 14, 372-379.
Grid keratotomy as a treatment for
Labelle, A.L., Hamor, R.E., Barger, A.M., et al..
superficial nonhealing corneal ulcers in 10
2009. Aspergillus flavus keratomycosis in a
Sauer, P., Andrew, S.E., Lassaline, M., et al.
 2003. Changes in antibiotic resistance in
horses. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10, 162-167.
cat treated with topical 1% voriconazole
solution. Vet. Ophthalmol. 12, 48-52.
equine bacterial ulcerative keratitis (1991 -
La Croix, N.C., van der Woerdt, A., Olivero,
2000): 65 horses. Vet. Ophthalmol. 6,
D.K., 2001. Nonhealing comeal ulcers in 
Hendrix, D.V.H., Brooks, D.E., Smith, PJ., et al.,
309-313.
cats: 29 cases [1991 -1999). 1. Am. Vet. Med.
1995. Corneal stromal abscesses in the
Strubbe, D.T, Brooks, D.E., Schultz, G.S., et al.,.
Assoc. 218, 733-735.
horse: a review of 24 cases. Equine Vet. J. 27,
2000. Evaluation of tear film proteinases in
Murphy, C.J., Marfurt, C.F., McDermott, A..
440-447.
horses with ulcerative keratitis. Vet.
et al., 2001. Spontaneous chronic corneal
Hendrix, D.V.H., Chmielewski, N.T., Smith, PJ..
Ophthalmol. 3, 111-119.
et al., 1996. Keratomycosis in four horses
Ollivier, F.J., Brooks, D.E., Kallberg, M.E., et al.,
features, innervation, and effect of topical 
caused by Cylindrocarpon destructans. Vet.
Comp. Ophthalmol. 6, 252-257.
2003. Evaluation of various compounds to
SP, with or without IGF-1. Invest.
inhibit activity of matrix metalloproteinases
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 42, 2252-2261.
Hendrix, D.V.H., Ward, D.A., Guglick, M.A.,
in the tear flm of horses with ulcerative
1997. Disseminated candidiasis in a
'florida keratopathy'
keratitis. Am. J. Vet. Res. 64, 1081-1087.
 neonatal foal with keratomycosis as the
Ollivier, F.J., Brooks, D.E., Van Setten, G.B.
Peiffer, R., Jackson, W., 1979. Mycotic
initial sign. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7.
et al., 2004. Profles of matrix
keratopathy of the dog and cat and the
1-10.
metalloproteinase activity in equine tear
Southeastern United States: a preliminary
Brooks, D.E., Andrew, S.E., Dillavou, C.L.
fluid during corneal healing in 10 horses
report. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 15, 93-97
et al., 1998. Antimicrobial susceptibility
with ulcerative keratitis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7.
patterns of fungi isolated from horses with
397-405.
Fungal keratitis
ulcerative keratomycosis. Am. J. Vet. Res. 59,
Ollivier, FJ., Gilger, B.C., Barrie, K.P., et al.
Beech, I., Sweeney, C.R., Irby, N., 1983.
138-142.
 2007. Proteinases of the cornea and
Keratomycosis in 11 horses. Equine. Vet. J.
Andrew, S.E., Brooks, D.E., Smith, P.J., et al.
 preocular tear flm. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10,
Suppl. 2, 39-44.
1998. Equine Ulcerative keratomycosis:
199-206.
Barton, M.H., 1992. Equine keratomycosis.
visual outcome and ocular survival in 39
'05 1 1 3u16g (9661-2861] s955
Chmielewski, N.T., Brooks, D.E., Smith, P.J.,
Comp. Contin. Educ. Pract. Vet. 14,
et al., 1997. Visual outcome and ocular
936-944.
109-116.
survival following iris prolapse in the horse:
Grahn, B., Wolfer, I., Keller, C., et al., 1993.
Gaarder, J.E., Rebhun, W.C., Ball, M.A., et al.
a review of 32 cases. Equine Vet. J. 29,
Equine keratomycosis: clinical and
1998. Clinical appearance, healing patterns,
31-39.
laboratory findings in 23 cases. Prog. Vet.
risk factors, and outcomes of horses with
fungal keratitis: 53 cases [1978-1996). J.
Wang, L., Pan, Q., Xue, Q., et al., 2008.
Comp. Ophthalmol. 3, 2-7.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 213, 105-112.
Evaluation of matrix metalloproteinase
Hamilton, H.L., McLaughlin, S.A., Whitley.
concentrations in precorneal tear flm from
E.M., et al., 1994. Histological fndings in
Brooks, D.E., Andrew, S.E., Denis, H., et al.
dogs with Pseudomonas aeruginosa-
corneal stromal abscesses of 11 horses:
2000. Rose bengal positive epithelial
associated keratitis. Am. J. Vet. Res. 69,
correlation with cultures and cytology.
microerosions as a manifestation of
1341-1345.
Equine Vet. J. 26, 448-453.
equine keratomycosis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 3.
Hamor, R.E., Whelan, N.C., 1999. Equine
83-86.
Whittaker, C.J.G., Smith, PJ., Brooks, D.E..
infectious keratitis. Vet. Clin. North Am.
et al., 1997. Therapeutic penetrating
Massa, K.L., Murphy, C.J., Hartmann, FA., et al.,
Equine Pract. 15, 623-646.
keratoplasty for deep corneal stromal
1999. Usefulness of aerobic microbial
Sweeney, C.R., Irby, N.L., 1996. Topical
abscesses in eight horses. Vet. Comp.
culture and cytologic evaluation of corneal
 treatment of Pseudomonas sp-infected
Ophthalmol. 7, 19-28.
specimens in the diagnosis of infectious
ulcerative keratitis in animals. J. Am. Vet.
corneal ulcers in horses: 70 cases [1977-
Andrew, S.E., Brooks, D.E., Biros, D.J., et al.,
1994). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 209, 954-
Med. Assoc. 215, 1671-1674.
 2000. Posterior lamellar keratoplasty for
957.
Welch, PM., Gabal, M., Betts, D.M., et al., 2000.
treatment of deep stromal abscesses in nine
 In vitro analysis of antiangiogenic activity of
da Silva Curiel, J.M., Murphy, C.l., Jang, S.S.,
horses. Vet. Ophthalmol. 3, 99-103.
et al., 1990. Nutritionally variant streptococci
fungi isolated from clinical cases of equine
Smedes, S.L., Miller, P.E., Dubielzig, R.R., 1992.
associated with corneal ulcers in horses: 35
keratomycosis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 3.
Pseudallescheria boydi keratomycosis in a
cases (1982-1988). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
145-151.
dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 200, 199-202.
197, 624-626.
242
Diseases of the cornea and sclera
Chapter
8
Rebhun, W.C., Cho, J.O., Gaarder, I.E., et al.
associated malignant catarrhal fever in cattle.
scleritis, and necrotic scleritis. Vet. Clin.
 1999. Presumed clostridial and aerobic
Vet. Rec. 140, 519-524.
North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 38, 291-308.
bacterial infections of the cornea in two
Stiles, I., 2000. Canine rickettsial infections. Vet.
horses. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 214,
Corneal neoplasia
Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 30.
151 9-1522.
Latimer, K.S., Kaswan, R.L., Sundberg, J.P.
1135-1149.
Brooks, D.E., Andrew, S.E., Biros, D.J., et al.
1987. Corneal squamous cell carcinoma in a
Komnenou, A.A., Mylonakis, M.E., Kouti, V.
2000. Ullcerative keratitis caused by
dog. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 190,
et al., 2007. Ocular manifestations of natural
beta-hemolytic streptococus equi in 11
1430-1432.
canine monocytic ehrlichiosis (Ehrlichia
horses. Vet. Ophthalmol. 3, 121-125.
Bernays, M.E., Flemming, D., Peiffer Ir., R.L..
canis): a retrospective study of 90 cases. Vet.
Moore, C.P., Collins, B.K., Fales, W.H., 1995.
1999. Primary corneal papilloma and
Ophthalmol. 10, 137-142.
 Antibacterial susceptibility patterns for
squamous cell carcinoma associated with
microbial isolates associated with infectious
pigmentary keratitis in four dogs. I. Am. Vet.
Limbal melanocytoma, limbal 
keratitis in horses: 63 cases (1986-1994).
Med. Assoc. 214, 215-217.
melanoma
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 207, 928-933.
Ward, D.A., Latimer, K.S., Askren, R.M., 1992.
 Martin, C., 1981. Canine epibulbar melanomas
Ledbetter, E.C., Mun, J.l., Kowbel, D., et al.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the
and their management. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
 2009. Pathogenic phenotype and genotype
comeoscleral limbus in a dog I. Am. Vet.
Assoc. 17, 83-90.
of pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates from
Med. Assoc. 200, 1503-1506.
Diters, R.W., Dubielzig, R.R., Aguirre, G.D..
spontaneous canine ocular infections. Invest.
Busse, C., Sansom, I., Dubielzig, R.R., et al.,
et al., 1983. Primary ocular melanoma in
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 50, 729-736.
2008. Corneal squamous cell carcinoma
dogs. Vet. Pathol. 20, 379-395.
in a Border Collie. Vet. Ophthalmol. 11,
Corneal perforation with
Ryan, A.M., Diters, R.W., 1984. Clinical and
55-58.
epithelialization in young cats
 pathologic features of canine ocular
Montiani-Ferreira, F., Kiupel, M., Muzolon, P.,
melanomas. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 184,
Jacobi, S., Dubielzig, R.R., 2008. Feline early life
et al., 2008. Corneal squamous cell
60-67.
ocular disease. Vet. Ophthalmol. 11,
carcinoma in a dog: a case report. Vet.
Wilcock, B.P., Peiffer Jr., R.L., 1986. Morphology
166-169.
Ophthalmol. 11, 269-272.
and behavior of primary ocular melanomas
Kafarnik, C., Rawlings, M., Dubielzig, R.R.,
in 91 dogs. Vet. Pathol. 23, 418-424.
Corneal epithelial inclusion cyst
 2009. Corneal stromal invasive squamous
Wilkie, D.A., Wolf, E.D., 1991. Treatment of
Koch, S.A., Langloss, J.M., Schmidt, G., 1974.
cell carcinoma: a retrospective morphological
epibulbar melanocytoma in a dog, using
Comeal epithelial inclusion cysts in four 
description in 10 horses. Vet. Ophthalmol.
full-thickness eyewall resection and synthetic
dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 164,
12, 6-12.
graft. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 198,
1190-1191.
Buyukmihci, N., Stannard, A.A., 1981. Canine
1019-1022.
Schmidt, G.M., Prasse, K.W., 1976. Corneal
 conjunctival angiokeratomas. J. Am. Vet.
Sullivan, T.C., Nasisse, M.P., Davidson, M.G.
 epithelial inclusion cyst associated with
Med. Assoc. 178, 1279-1282.
et al., 1996. Photocoagulation of limbal
keratectomy in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
Donaldson, D., Sansom, I., Murphy, S., et al.,
melanoma in dogs and cats: 15 cases
Assoc. 168, 144.
2006. Multiple limbal haemangiosarcomas
[1989-1993). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 208,
Bedford, PG.C., Grierson, I., McKechnie, N.M.,
 in a border collie dog management by
891-894.
1990. Cormeal epithelial inclusion cyst in the
lamellar keratectomy/sclerectomy and 
Donaldson, D., Sansom, I., Adams, V, 2006.
dog. J. Small Anim. Pract. 31, G4-68.
strontium-90 beta plesiotherapy. 1. Small
Canine limbal melanoma: 30 cases 
Pirie, C.G., Pizzirani, S., Parry, N.M., 2008.
Anim. Pract. 47, 545-549.
(1992-2004). Part 2. Treatment with
Comeal epithelial inclusion cyst in a Llama.
Jamellar resection and adjunctive strontium-
Vet. Ophthalmol. 11, 111 -113.
Staphyloma
Barros, PS., Safatle, A.M., 2000. Congenital
Vet. Ophthalmol. 9, 179-185.
Endothelitis
scleral staphyloma in a dog repaired with
Donaldson, D., Sansom, I., Scase, T., et al..
Lucchesi, PM., Parma, A.E., 1999. A DNA
preserved homologous peritoneum. Vet.
2006. Canine limbal melanoma: 30 cases
fragment of Leptospira interrogans encodes a
Ophthalmol. 3, 27-29.
[1992-2004). Part 1. Signalment, clinical
protein which shares epitopes with equine
Skorobohach, B.J., Hendrix, D.V., 2003.
 and histological features and pedigree
cornea. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 71,
Staphyloma in a cat. Vet. Ophthalmol. 6.
analysis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 9, 115-119.
173-179.
93-97.
Harling, D.E., Peiffer, R.L., Cook, C.S.
Carmichael, L.E., 1964. The pathogenesis of
 1986. Feline limbal melanoma: four cases.
ocular lesions of infectious canine hepatitis.
Scleritis
J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 22, 795-802.
I. Pathology and virological observation.
Fisher, C.A., 1983. Inflammatory disease of the
Day, M.J., Lucke, V.M., 1995. Melanocytic
Path. Vet. 1, 73-95.
sclera and episclera. In: Peiffer Ir., R.L. (Ed.),
neoplasia in the cat. J. Small Anim. Pract. 36.
Carmichael, L.E., 1965. The pathogenesis of
Comparative ophthalmic pathology.
207-213.
ocular lesions of infectious canine hepatitis.
 Springheld, Charles C. Thomas, pp.
Betton, A., Healy, L.N., English, R.V., et al..
Il. Experimental ocular hypersensitivity
272-288.
1999. Atypical limbal melanoma in a cat. J.
produced by the virus. Pathol. Vet. 2.
Deykin, A.R., Guandalini, A., Ratto, A., 1997.
Vet. Intern. Med. 13, 379-381.
344-359.
A retrospective histopathologic study of
Kanai, K., Kanemaki, N., Matsuo, S., et al.
Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C., 1973. The ocular
 primary episcleral and scleral inflammatory
2006. Excision of a feline limbal melanoma
lesions of infectious canine hepatitis 1.
disease in dogs. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7.
and use of nictitans cartilage to repair the
Clinical features. J. Small Anim. Pract. 14,
245-248.
resulting corneoscleral defect. Vet.
375-389.
Day, M.J., Mould, J.R.B., Carter, W.J., 2008. An
Ophthalmol. 9, 255-258.
Whiteley, H.E., Young, S., Liggitt, H.D., et al.
immunohistochemical investigation of
Plummer, C.E., Kallberg, M.E., Ollivier, F.J..
1985. Ocular lesions of bovine malignant
anine idiopathic granulomatous scleritis.
et al., 2008. Use of a biosynthetic material to
catarrhal fever. Vet. Pathol. 22, 219-225.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 11, 11-17.
repair the surgical defect following excision
O'Toole, D., Li, H., Miller, D., et al., 1997.
Grahn, B.H., Sandmeyer, L.S., 2008. Canine
 of an epibulbar melanoma in a cat. Vet.
Chronic and recovered cases of sheep-
episcleritis, nodular episclerokeratitis.
Ophthalmol. 11, 250-254.
243
uvea
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Uveal epithelial tumors
291
lrido-ciliary epithelia tumors in dogs
291
Background and non-neoplastic diseases
245
Irido-ciliary epithelial tumors in cats 
295
 Normal anatomy
245
Feline ocular neuroglial tumor
295
Anterior uvea: iris and ciliary body
245
Medulloepithelioma
296
The posterior uvea: the choroid
248
Uveal lymphoma and histiocytic neoplasia
298
Congenital conditions 
249
Uveal lymphoma in cats
298
The morphologic features of the canine blue eye
249
Uveal lymphoma in dogs
299
Uveal coloboma
249
Intravascular lymphoma in dogs, malignant 
 lris hypoplasia and aniridia
249
 angioendotheliomatosis 
299
Persistent pupillary membranes (PPM)
249
Histiocytic sarcoma and related tumors
08
Degenerative, hyperplastic, and age-related
Spindle cell tumors of the iris in blue-eyed dogs
conditions
250
(SCTBED)
303
 lris atrophy
250
 Feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma (FPTOS)
309
Cysts of the irido-ciliary epithelium
250
Metastatic neoplasia
608
 Neovascular proliferation and tissue fibrosis
in the uvea
255
 Neovascular proliferation
255
BACKGROUND AND
 Fibrovascular proliferation
255
NON-NEOPLASTIC DISEASES
Clinically significant complications of fibrovascular
 prolifer ation
255
 Neoplastic membranes
 Normal anatomy
255
Inflammation-uveitis
255
Anterior uvea: iris and ciliary body
 Clinical and pathologic diagnoses
255
Iris (Fig. 9.1)
Feline lympho-plasmacytic uveitis (L-P uveitis)
257
+S
Stroma
Equine recurrent uveitis (ERU), periodic ophthalmia,
Embryologically derived from the neural crest, apart from
 moon blindness
258
vascular endothelium derived from mesoderm
Canine uveodermatologic syndrome, Vogt-Koyanagi-
 Loose connective tissue stroma populated by fbroblasts
Harada-like syndrome (VKH)
260
 and melanocytes. Melanocyte population tends to be
Canine asymmetric uveitis
262
more dense in the posterior stroma than in the anterior
Lens-induced uveitis, phacolytic uveitis 
263
stroma
Intraocular xanthogranuloma
266
The anterior border has no epithelial surface and, therefore,
there is little to deter fluid exchange with the anterior
chamber
diseases
266
■Capillaries are non-fenestrated, contributing to the 'blood-
Canine ocular larva migrans with Toxocara canis
278
aqueous barrier. However, blood vessel endothelium lacks
Canine ocular melanosis
280
tight junctions in many domestic animals, with permeability
Ocular melanosis in Cairn Terriers ('pigmentary glaucoma')
differing greatly between species
280
Canine ocular melanosis in breeds other than Cairn Terriers
- Inflammation of the iris leading to increase in vascular
282
un snoane au ui uanaid se sisauu aiqeaad
Uveal neoplasia
282
This is detectable by slit-lamp biomicroscopy as'aqueous
Melanocytic neoplasia
282
flare'
245
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.1 Normal anterior uvea. (A)
Low magnification photomicrograph of
the normal canine iris and irido-corneal
angle structures. (B) Low magnification
of the normal equine iris and irido-
corneal angle structures including the
corpora nigra (arrow). (C) Higher
magnification of a normal canine iris
showing the iris epithelium and dilator
muscle. (D) Low magnification of the 
canine iris and irido-corneal angle from a
normotensive dog with goniodysgenesis.
B
(E) The highly muscular iris from a diving
bird (Loon). In birds, the iridal muscle is 
skeletal muscle, and in this diving bird 
the robust iris muscle is important in
accommodation. It plays a role in
increasing the curvature of the anterior
lens surface, thereby increasing
refraction. (F) Low magnification of a
 canine iris with a blue eye showing the
absence of melanin in the stroma even 
wnaunida suaubid soaisod aui yinoun
 is fully pigmented.
ID
?
■ The iris stroma, and for that matter the entire globe, lacks
Granula iridica (corpora nigra)
lymphatic vessels
- In domestic herbivores such as equidae, bovids, and
Muscles and posterior epithelium
camelids, the iridal epithelia at the superior margin of the
■Sphincter muscle
pupil, and sometimes also at its inferior margin, gather
 Constricts in bright light and during accommodation
and expand anteriorly to form prominent pigmented
- Smooth muscle in mammals, derived from neuroectoderm
nodules or, in the case of the New World Camelids,
of optic cup
well-organized pleats
- Striated muscle in birds and most reptiles, in which it is
-- The postulated role of the granula iridica is to shade the
 predominantly of neural crest origin
structures of the inner eye from ambient sunlight from
 Dilator muscle and posterior pigmented epithelium
 above, much like the bill or visor of a baseball cap
-- The posterior epithelium and the dilator muscle
together form a complex two-layered structure
derived from the neuroectoderm of the anterior optic
Ciliary body (Fig. 9.2)
cp
The ciliary body is continuous anteriorly with the base of the
- The posterior, pigmented epithelium of the iris is
iris. The structure and function of the aqueous outflow pathways
continuous posteriorly with the inner, non-pigmented
will be addressed in Chapter 13, given their importance in the 
epithelium of the ciliary body
pathology of glaucoma
 The myoepithelial cells of the anterior iris epithelium
The ciliary body is divided into an anterior pars plicata,
are among the most complex cells of the body. Basally,
characterized by a series of meridional folds or processes, from
 their cytoplasm is contractile (the dilator muscle) and
e pue 'aheubuo sual aul yo sa nnuoz Aosuadsns au yoium
apically the cytoplasm of these epithelial cells contains 
posterior pars plana. The structure of the ciliary processes,
 melanin ganules. The anterior iris epithelium is
in terms of their topography and angio-architecture differs
continuous with the pigmented epithelium of the ciliary
-uu u pue 'saads ueuu uaamaq aiqeiapisu
body
 In birds and most reptiles, as with the constrictor muscle,
 The stroma and the ciliary muscle
the dilator muscle is striated, although smooth muscle
Das a uamia aeds ieuaod e si aeds Arieins au 
often also plays a role in pupil dilation
au yim Aoaisod shonuuo si pue oq Ae pue
246
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.2 Normal ciliary body. (A,B)
 Photomicrographs of the canine ciliary
body pars plicata showing the inner
non-pigmented epithelium, the
pigmented epithelium, and the zonular 
ligaments (arrows). (C) Canine ciliary
body epithelium, stained with Alcian blue
 PAS, showing the secretion of hyaluronic
acid in blue. (D) Dissecting microscope
image of the canine lens suspensory
apparatus showing normal zonular
ligaments. The formalin-fixed globe was
post-fixed in glacial acetic acid, which 
suawebi yenuoz aut Ajpedo oi sdiau
fibers (arrows)
B
suprachoroidal space. The supraciliary and suprachoiroidal
ciliary body's contribution to the functional blood-aqueous
space play a role in the uveoscleral or unconventional
barrier. Disruption of this barrier by inflammation and
pathway of aqueous outflow. This space becomes prominent
d a u aeu e u ssai sasa asesp 
when exudates or hemorrhage accumulate in the uvea,
 content of aqueous humor, linically detectable as aqueous 
particularly inferiorly due to the additional influence of
flare
gravity
- The inner epithelium is continuous with the neuro-sensory
■
 The stroma of the ciliary body contains the ciliary muscle, or
retina
the muscle of accommodation
- The basal lamina of the non-pigmented epithelium forms
The ciliary muscle is derived from neural crest tissue 
the boundary between the ciliary epithelium and the
The ciliary muscle is smooth muscle in mammals and
vitreous body and the posterior chamber
striated in birds and most reptiles
0 Anatomically as well as functionally, the vitreous body
The ciliary body vasculature is highly permeable, with
and the posterior chamber both represent modified
fenestrated capillaries, thus making no functional
extracellular spaces and not luminal spaces. This feature
contribution to the blood-aqueous barrier
is important to our understanding of how these spaces
 The ciliary body epithelium
are invaded by blood vessels and spindle cells during
 The ciliary body epithelium is a two-layered epithelium
disease states
derived from neuroectoderm of the optic cup
The ciliary epithelium secretes hyaluronic acid. The
 The cells of these two mono-layers are oriented
hyaluronic acid is secreted apically and must be
apex-to-apex
transported around the cell toward the vitreous body in
 The inner epithelium is non-pigmented except immediately
extra-celular channels visible on Alcian blue staining
adjacent to the iris epithelium, where it may contain
 The inner, non-pigmented epithelium of the ciliary body is
pigment
often laden with lympho-plasmacytic inflammatory cells in
Ciliary epithelium actively secretes aqueous humor against
chronic inflammation and also in lymphoma
a pressure gradient
0 This observation leads one to speculate that the
The ciliary epithelium secretes extra-cellular matrix proteins
which assemble to form the zonular ligaments suspending
immune-regulation
the lens
 The native inner epithelium is vimentin positive and
 The ciliary epithelium secretes hyaluronic acid which
cytokeratin negative, a staining pattern which is unusual
provides substance to the vitreous body
among epithelial tissues
 Inner, non-pigmented ciliary epithelium
■The outer, pigmented epithelium
- Junctional complexes in the apico-lateral membranes of
- The basal lamina of the pigmented epithelium of the
the inner, non-pigmented epithelial cells represent the
ciliary body lies at the junction with the stroma
247
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 The outer epithelium of the ciliary body is continuous
The choroidal stroma
with the retinal pigment epithelium.
The choroidal stroma contains many large arteries and veins supply-
ing blood to the choriocapillaris, a capillary bed with a very high rate
The posterior uvea: the choroid
of perfusion.
The choroid (Fig. 9.3) is the vascular tunic of the posterior segment.
The choriocapillaris
 It supplies vascular perfusion for the highly metabolically active
The choriocapillaris is a highly fenestrated capillary bed
and oxygen dependent outer retina via the choriocapillaris
supplying nutrition to the outer retina
The choroid usually contains abundant melanocytes and serves
The choriocapillaris is defined internally by Bruch's membrane,
as a pigmented lining of the rigid globe, which reduces internal
which is a multi-layered basement membrane complex formed
light reflection and also functions as a 'sink' that traps
au pue unauopua Aiede a jo aeuneh leseq a aq
free-radicals.
retinal pigment epithelium, with variable amounts of collagen
and elastin fbers.
The suprachoroidal space
The suprachoroidal space is a potential space immediately adjacent to
The tapetum fucidum
the sclera, which often expands and flls with edema, hemorrhage. or
Most of the common domestic mammalian species have a
exudates in disease states. It is continuous anteriorly with the supra-
ciliary space and plays an important role in unconventional outflow
choriocapillaris and the medium-sized vessel layer of the
of aqueous humor.
Figure 9.3 Normal choroid. (A)
 Photomicrograph of the normal canine
retina and tapetal choroid. There is
no pigment in the retinal pigment 
epithelium. (B) Higher magnification of a
 perfusion-fixed primate outer retina and
choroid. The perfusion fixation makes
the choriocapillaris easily appreciated 
(arrows). Using standard surface fixation 
this important vascular structure 
collapses and is hard to detect. (C)
Photomicrograph of the canine tapetal
retina and choroid showing a thicker
A
tapetum than in (A). (D) The normal
feline tapetum is thicker and has a
brown tincture. (E) Fibrous tapetum from
a horse. (F) Plastic section of a canine 
tapetum showing the characteristic 
parallel stacking of the tapetal cells in
dogs. A blood vessel (arrow) passes
through the tapetum to feed the
choriocapillaris.
D
E
248
The uvea
Chapter
6
wavelength of the light reflected by the tapetum is thought to be
devoid of melanin, but variably hypoplastic. Likewise, the
tailored to that particular species' biological niche
tapetum is often hypoplastic or absent
■ The cellular tapetum
The canine blue eye contains no identifiable melanocytes in
- All carnivores have a cellular tapetum made up of regularly
the iris stroma when stained, by immunohistochemistry, for
arranged cells. Each tapetal cell contains precisely oriented
melanocytic markers. However, premelanosomes have been
Organelles (rodlets) that reflect light in the visible spectrum
described in the cytoplasm of cells presumed to be melanocytes
0 The canine tapetum, in common with that of all
when examined with transmission electron microscopy. Feline
carnivores except cats, has a highly variable thickness
and human blue irides have stromal melanocytes, but their
and the reflective rodlets are composed of a zinc-cysteine
cytoplasm lacks melanosomes.
complex. The canine tapetum can be so thin that it may
Aian isnu auo pue Adossooiu jua Aq juaiedde aq iou
Uveal coloboma
on identifcation of the non-pigmented RPE to
determine the location of the superior fundus
See Collie eye anomaly and anomalies associated with merle ocular
0 The feline tapetum is distinct from that of the dog, in
dysgenesis in Chapter 3.
that it is consistently thicker and the reflective rods,
which are more precisely oriented, are made up of a
Iris hypoplasia and aniridia (Fg. 9.5)
riboflavin-zinc complex. This type of tapetum is strongly
autofluorescent
 Iris hypoplasia generally affects only iris stromal tissue and may
■ The fbrous tapetum
be localized to specific zones of the iris.
- Domestic herbivores generally have a tapetum made up of
Blue irides are most often affected, although pigmented
cell-poor, regularly oriented layers of collagen
irides may also be hypoplastic
 The overlying retinal pigment epithelium lacks pigment in the
■
 Hypoplastic tissue may appear thin in cross-section, or
area of the tapetum
clinically may appear to bulge anteriorly
 Penetrating vessels can be seen in cross-section to passfrom the
■
 In horses, zones of iris stromal hypoplasia are commonly
medium-sized vessel layer through the tapetum at night angles,
 observed superior to the pupil margin. Clinically these often
then terminate in the choriocapillaris.
appear to bulge anteriorly
 Sporadic reports of cases diagnosed dlinically as aniridia
generally represent examples of severe iris hypoplasia, with
rudimentary iris tissue. True aniridia is very rare
Comparative Comments
■ Bilateral aniridia has been reported in horses, and in some
 While in general terms the anatomy of the human uvea conforms to
breeds may be a familial trait
that described for other species, differences exist - some subtle and 
 Aniridia is a rare, sporadic abnormality in other species, but
some profound. Often, when confronted with an eye from a
 has been documented in Llanwenog sheep in the UK
non-human species, an ophthalmic pathologist can find distinctive 
 Dermoid, or corneal vascularization, has been reported as a
clues to the identity of that species from the appearance of the iris,
 cncurrent finding in aniridia, often involving the superior
dliary body. or choroid and tapetum lucidum. Although a broad
limbus
 class of retinal diseases in humans is referred to as tapeto-retinal
 Congenital cataract is also a frequent finding
degeneration, the human does not have a reflective, cellular, or 
a ui eiseidod si aaas jo sas aua aar aie ara
fibrous tapetum lucidum positioned between the choriocapillaris and
COPLOW collection.
the choroidal stroma. The presence of the tapetum lucidum is always
[a a oe ne  ar ui  a l 
intriguing when seen by pathologists accustomed mainly to human
thickening at the limbus with hyperkeratosis but not true
eyes.
dermoid
 All three cases also had concurrent cataract
 Diffuse iris stromal hypoplasia is also observed in Siamese cats
with inherited congenital glaucoma (see Ch. 13)
Congenital conditions
Hypoplasia of the iris dilator muscle, clinically appreciated
as a miotic pupil, is a characteristic feature of the complex of
The morphologic features of the canine
congenital ocular anomalies seen in Rocky Mountain horses
blue eye (Fig. 9.4)
[see Ch. 3].
?
 In the absence of pigment within the iris stroma, the iris color
will appear blue because of the diffraction of incident light
Persistent pupillary membranes (PPM)
within the iris stroma. The absence of pigment is due to a
genetic color diluting effect, eg. associated with the merle gene
These strands of uveal tissue represent remnants of the vessels
in dogs, on melanocytes of the body that are derived from the
and mesenchyme of the anterior tunica vasculosa lentis, or
neural crest, including those of the hair coat and the stromal
pupillary membrane, a sheet that normally overlies the anterior
tissues of the uveal tract. The lack of pigment is not always
surface of the lens during development.
uniform. For example, in some animals only one eye is blue
 The tunica vasculosa lentis mostly regresses by the time of
while the other is brown (heterochromia irides), or in some eyes
 birth, or within the frst several weeks of life, depending on
only a portion of the iris is blue (heterochromia iridis)
the species and their degree of ocular maturity at birth
 The iris epithelium and the retinal pigment epithelium have a
 PPM represent a delay in, or failure of normal regression of
distinct neuroepithelial embryological origin, and are normally
the anterior tunica vasculosa lentis
pigmented
PPMs are a common incidental finding, recognized sporadically
Iris stroma is devoid of pigment but not usually significantly
in dogs and horses. An inherited predisposition has been
hypoplastic. In contrast, the choroid of affected eyes is not only
reported in several breeds of dog, most notably the Basenji
249
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.4 Canine blue eye phenotype.
(A) Clinical photograph of a Siberian
Husky eye with a partially blue iris
(heterochromia iridis). (B,C) Low
magnification photomicrographs, from
the same eye as (A), showing pigmented 
side, (B), and blue side, (C). (D) Gross 
B
photograph of the globe from a
blue-eyed Husky illustrates the lack of
pigment in both the anterior and
posterior uvea. There is still pigment in 
the epithelium of the iris and ciliary body
and, to a lesser extent, the RPE.
(E) Photomicrograph of the iris from
a canine blue eye stained by
immunohistochemistry for glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP). The image shows
expected positive staining in the nerves,
 in the dilator muscle and around 
muscles. There is also a plexus of positive 
staining at the anterior surface (arrows)
that is not seen in similarly stained 
brown irides. (F) Low magnification
photomicrograph showing the non-
 pigmented and hypoplastic choroid
E
(arrow) in a blue eye.
D
Figure 9.5 Equine iris hypoplasia. (A)
Clinical photograph of a horse with iris
hypoplasia. Ciliary processes are visible at
(a) nd apm Alao aui jo suibeu au
Subgross photomicrograph of the eye in
(A) showing the undersized irides.
A
B
 PPM may also occur in association with other lesions, including
distinguished from congenital iris hypoplasia or
microphthalmic syndromes, and with local cataract or corneal
colobomas
opacity if they attach to the anterior lens capsule, or corneal
Atrophy can also be a feature in chronic glaucoma or after
endothelium respectively
trauma.
 Peter's anomaly, refers to a more severe spectrum of anterior
segment malformation characterized by persistent sheets of
Cysts of the irido-ciliary epithelium
mesenchyme and cormeal and lens opacities (see Ch. 3).
Sporadic iridal cysts (Figs 9.7, 9.8)
 Cysts of the posterior iris epithelium may be recognized in
Degenerative, hyperplastic, and
any species, and occur commonly in dogs. They may affect
age-related conditions
any breed, being particularly common in Labrador and
Golden retrievers, but are seldom of clinical significance
Iris atrophy (Fg. 9.6)
 The pigmented epithelium of the iris or, less frequently, the
saipads ieiaaas ui asueup panelai-aae ue se uaas st Audoie sil
inner epithelium of the ciliary body, undergoes spontaneous
 Progressive thinning of the iris stroma can lead to
cystic hyperplasia, in the absence of inflammation or any
the appearance of holes in the iris that should be
other apparent predisposing factors
250
The uvea
Chapter
6
 Similar cystic changes may affect the iris epithelium
associated with the corpora nigra in horses, and if 
 sufficiently large, can impact vision 
Acquired iris cysts, in cats, are a consistent morphological 
feature seen in eyes with a history of blunt trauma, or with
 other morphologic features suggestive of blunt trauma
 Spontaneous iris cysts are more likely to be bilateral and
multiple in cats than in dogs and horses
 Clinical appearance and complications of iris cysts 
 Cysts can break off and float free in the anterior chamber.
although in cats they generally remain attached to the iris 
epithelium. Very rarely, they can move into the vitreous
 In dogs and horses, these cysts are typically spherical or
 ovoid and often darkly pigmented although they may vary
in their degree of pigmentation. Feline iris cysts tend to
be black, or very darkly pigmented, and are often more 
elongated and ovoid in appearance than canine iris cysts 
Figure 9.6 Iris atrophy. Siamese, 13 years old: the tapetal reflex can be
seen in the thin temporal iris. It is especially obvious through the many 
 Cysts can masquerade as pigmented masses and careful
iris holes.
clinical evaluation is essential to avoid inappropriate
 removal of the eye. As they are thin-walled, iris cysts 
can be distinguished from other pigmented masses 
(neoplasms) by trans-illumination using a bright light
source
Figure 9.7 Canine iris or diliary body
cysts. (A) Boston Terrier, 11 years old:
the large central cyst is adherent to the
corneal endothelium. (B) Labrador 
Retriever 7 years old: multiple cysts are
present at the pupil margin. Several cysts
are filled with blood (arrows). (C) Golden
Retriever, 3 years old: both eyes had
multiple cysts visible at the pupil margin.
 The one large translucent cyst is free
floating in the anterior chamber. (D)
Gross photograph taken with a
dissecting microscope showing 
 pigmented iridal cysts on a canine
posterior iris.
A
D
251
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.8 Feline iris or iliary body
cysts. (A) Siamese, 7 years old: two
heavily pigmented cysts originate at the
pupil margin. (B) DSH, 11 years old: a
faint tapetal reflex can be seen through
this large cyst. (C) DSH, 8 years old: large
cysts, which transilluminate poorly, were
present in both eyes. (D) DSH, 7 years
old: a diffuse cortical cataract and large
cysts are present. (E,F) Subgross and low
magnification photomicrographs showing
pigmented epithelial cysts attached to
the posterior epithelium of the feline iris
(arrows). This is often a feature of the
traumatized feline eye.
A
B
C
D
 Cysts can make contact with the lens, resulting in focal
 Multiple irido-ciliary cysts in Golden Retriever dogs. pigmentary
uveitis' (Figs 9.10, 9.11)
 synechiae
 The occurrence of multiple, thin-walled, irido-ciliary cysts is
- Cysts can adhere to the endothelial surface of the cornea,
an important cause of glaucoma in Golden Retrievers. Within
and if they rupture or collapse, may be a source for
the COPLOW collection, there are 134 cases, representing
endothelial pigmentation or atrophy
20% of glaucomas diagnosed in Golden Retrievers
 The presence of multiple uveal cysts in the posterior
■Based entirely on submissions to the COPLOW collection,
chamber can lead to collapse of the ciliary cleft and
this condition was most prevalent in the Golden Retriever
anterior displacement of the iris with closure of the
 population in the North-eastern United States in the 1990s,
irido-cormeal angle, but secondary glaucoma is not
which may reflect the common ancestry of this population
common.
 The condition is seldom diagnosed in Golden Retrievers in
●Pars plana cysts in cats and horses (Fig. 9.9)
Europe, although a very similar condition has been reported
Cystic hyperplasia of the non-pigmented epithelium of the 
in Great Danes. There is one case in a Great Dane in the
se pase u gupuy uouuo e si eueid sied
COPLOW collection, and occasional cases with similar
■
 The cysts are filled with Alcian blue-staining hyaluronic acid,
morphology in other breeds have been diagnosed at
which is digested by treatment with hyaluronidase
COPLOW
 These cysts have no known clinical significance
■
 There are significant differences between the clinical
■
 Cysts of the pars plana epithelium also occur in aged horses
 presenting features and the histopathological features of this 
(see Ch. 11)
disease:
252
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.9 Pars plana cysts feline and 
equine. (A) Gross photograph showing
cysts on the pars plana of the ciliary
body in an aged feline eye (arrow).
(B) Photomicrograph showing ciliary
epithelial cysts filled with Alcian blue
positive material (hyaluronic acid) (Alcian
blue PAs). (C) Gross photograph showing
A
a cluster of pars plana cysts (*) in an
aged horse.
C
Figure 9.10 Golden Retriever thin-walled
cysts (pigmentary uveitis), clinical. (A)
Golden Retriever. 7 years old: the irides
were both hyperpigmented. Focal areas
of anterior capsule pigmentation (arrow)
are present. Iris cysts could not be
visualized on ocular examination. (B)
Golden Retriever, 5.5 years old: pigment 
swirls are present (arrow) primarily at the
equatorial lens. (C) Golden Retriever, 11
years old: posterior synechia resulted
in an irregular pupil. A large white 
proteinaceous mass (between arrows)
is present in the anterior chamber. (D)
Golden Retriever, 10 years old: strands of 
posterior synechia (arrows) are present.
Corneal edema and an anterior chamber
8
 proteinaceous mass contributed to the
axial opacity.
C
253
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.11 Golden Retriever thin-walled
cysts (pigmentary uveitis). pathology. (A)
Gross photograph showing the iris.
 posterior chamber, and remnants of
thin-walled cystic structures stretched 
between the pars plicatus and the lens 
equator (white arrow). Posterior synechia
and pigmented fragments of cysts 
adhere to the lens (black arrow). (B)
Photomicrograph showing epithelial
 membranes and cyst walls crossing the
 posterior chamber and adherent to the 
anterior vitreous face. (C) Partially
B
 pigmented thin epithelial membrane is 
adherent to the lens capsule. (D) Iris 
bombe in an affected Golden Retriever.
 Notice the pigmented epithelial
membrane (arrow) broadly adherent to
the lens capsule. (E) Higher magnification
photomicrograph showing thin epithelial 
cells and a small amount of blue collagen
matrix adherent to the lens capsule
(trichrome stain)
C
E
Clinically, the disease presents as uveitis with aqueous
secondary glaucoma, are available for histopathological
flare, and proteinaceous and cellular debris and pigment
evaluation
recognized in the anterior chamber. Typically there is also
Morphologic features of multiple irido-ciliary cysts in Golden
pigment adherent to the lens capsule, often in a radial
Retrievers
pattern, and to the posterior cornea, hence the clinical
- Thin-walled epithelial cysts, that may be either pigmented
term 'pigmentary uveitis. The condition often affects both
or non-pigmented, extending across the posterior
chamber
symmetrical
0 Cyst epithelium is thin, almost squamous in appearance
 Histologically, the main defining characteristic of this
 O A PAS stain often reveals a magenta-staining basal
 disease is the presence of thin-walled epithelial cysts filling
lamina along with the epithelial cells
the posterior chamber and draped against the lens capsule
0 A cell-poor collagenous matrix may also be identified,
 and anterior face of the vitreous body. Inflammation is
adjacent to the cyst epithelium or attached to the lens
variable, and not consistently seen
capsule
- Affected globes are often heavily pigmented and free
 Cyst walls or portions of cyst walls are adherent to the
melanin pigment in the irido-corneal angle might play an
anterior face of the vitreous body or the equatorial lens
important role in the pathogenesis of inflammation or
capsule
gaucoma. Reduction in aqueous outflow by viscous
0 When present on the lens capsule, the cyst epithelium
material liberated from ruptured cysts, or simply anterior
often extends anteriorly, towards the anterior pole of
asod a u sis anu q s a jo juaae
the lens. These pigmented thin epithelial fragments are
chamber, could also contribute to the development of
 probably what is recognized as pigment adherent to the
 secondary glaucoma in affected dogs
lens clinically
It should be acknowledged that, in a pathology
 Posterior synechiae or iris bombe are frequently seen in
collection, only severely affected globes, often with
globes removed because of secondary glaucoma
254
The uvea
Chapter
9
 Preiridal fbrovascular membranes are commonly
ciliary processes. Advanced cases can span the globe across
encountered, often with concurrent peripheral anterior
the anterior vitreous and extend behind the lens
synechiae
 Intravitreal membranes, extending from the pars plana into
Focal retro-corneal membranes are often seen, frequently
the body of the vitreous. Intravitreal membranes are
with pigment entrapment
generally associated with intraocular hemorrhage
0 Fragments of thin-walled cysts are seldom, if ever.
■ Intravitreal, or epiretinal membranes extending from the
 recognized in the anterior chamber
optic nerve head into the body of the vitreous and on the
-- Intraocular hemorrhage is often seen
inner surface of the retina are infrequently recognized in
 Free pigment in the irido-corneal angle may play a role in
domestic animals
the development of glaucoma, just as it might in glaucoma
 In contrast to the human eye, the eyes of domestic animals
associated with goniodysgenesis.
seldom develop proliferative membranes directly on the
Multiple irido-ciliary cysts are a characteristic finding in Rocky
retinal surface, (proliferative vitreoretinopathy or epiretinal
Mountain horses with an inherited complex of congenital ocular
membranes)
anomalies (see Ch. 3)
 It is appropriate here to re-emphasize that the chambers of the
■
 The cysts are thin-walled and translucent and are generally
eye, the anterior and posterior chamber and the vitreous body.
 present in both eyes of affected horses.
are not luminal spaces. Rather, they are modified, cell-poor,
extracellular spaces. As such, it comes as no surprise that they
are easily invaded by fbrovascular membranes.
Comparative Comments
The major congenital and developmental abnormalities of the human
Fibrovascular proliferation
uveal tract are colobomas, aniridia, persistent pupillary membrane.
Fibrovascular proliferation (granulation tissue formation) is almost
persistence of the tunica vasculosa lentis, and iris cysts.
never seen within the uveal tissue proper.
 It can therefore be assumed that there is some inhibitory process
Neovascular proliferation and tissue
at work within the uveal tissues, preventing the formation of
harmful scar tissue directly within the uveal stroma.
fibrosis in the uvea (Fig. 9.12)
 Neovascular proliferation
Clinically significant complications of
The uvea is prone to neovascular proliferation and tissue fibrosis in
fibrovascular proliferation
circumstances which favor local production of cytokines, most promi-
 Intraocular hemorrhage
nently vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
Synechiae
 Conditions that are commonly associated with uveal
  Peripheral anterior synechiae
neovascular membranes in domestic animals include:
■ Posterior synechiae
■Uveitis
●Traction within the vitreous leading to retinal detachment
■
Trauma, including intraocular surgery
Glaucoma.
  Intraocular neoplasia
■
 Retinal detachment and associated retinal hypoxia
 Other causes of ocular or retinal hypoxia or ischemia,
Neoplastic membranes
■
including glaucoma
 Neoplastic membranes on the anterior surface of the iris are a promi-
 Common sites of uveal neovascular membrane formation are:
nent feature in metastatic neoplasia. See later in this chapter for
 Pre-iridal fibrovascular membrane (PIFVM), which is most
further discussion of metastatic neoplasia involving the uvea.
commonly recognized on histopathology
- Since there is no epithelial lining to the anterior iris 
surface, the new vessels and fibroblasts that constitute the
Comparative Comments
fibrovascular membrane do not have to penetrate an
 In the human, one of the most important and intensely studied 
epithelium, as would be required at other sites of
 examples of neovascular proliferation is in the wet or exudative type
fibrovascular proliferation within the eye
of age-related macular degeneration. These eyes have fibrovascular 
 PIFVM is seldom mentioned as a clinical finding on
tissue present between the inner and outer layers of Bruch's 
pathology submission forms
 membrane, beneath the retinal pigment epithelium or in the
0 In dogs, however, careful slit-lamp biomicroscopic
shouas ot as!u buinib abexeal pinly ot speal s!ul aneds jeulangns
examination by an experienced observer may be
retinal detachments, and vessel rupture, resulting in subretinal and 
required to identify PIFVM, which is much more difficult
 intraretinal hemorrhages.
to appreciate clinically against the darker background of
the typical, brown canine iris
0 Clinicians may recognize the effects of PIFVM, rather
Inflammation-uveitis
 than directly identifying the membrane itself, eg. by
a aqaaum an uda in uana su
Clinical and pathologic diagnoses
pupillary zone of the iris is distorted by the contractile
effects of a PIFVM
 Distinct and separate criteria are used by the clinician and by the
 Posterior iridal fbrovascular membrane
pathologist in the diagnosis of uveitis. Thus, in some cases, it can be
 Cyclitic membrane
difficult to reconcile clinical and pathologic diagnoses.
■
 Fibrovascular tissue penetrates the ciliary epithelium and
The clinical diagnosis of uveitis relies heavily on the
extends across the anterior vitreous face, incorporating the
manifestation of aqueous flare, an indication of protein
255
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.12 Fibrovascular membrane
proliferation. (A) Low magnification
photomicrograph of a canine iris
showing a preiridal fibrovascular
membrane (arrow) and ectropion
uveae on the anterior surface. (B)
A
Photomicrograph showing preiridal 
fibrovascular membrane (arrow) and
peripheral anterior synechia in a dog. A
circumferentially affected globe would
likely have neovascular glaucoma. (C)
Gross photograph of a canine globe 
showing a preiridal fibrovascular
membrane (arrowheads), cyclitic
membrane (*), and an early fibrovascular 
membrane extending into the vitreous
from the optic nervehead (arrow). (D)
Subgross photomicrograph of a dog eye
showing an extensive cyclitic membrane 
(*). (E) Photomicrograph of a dog eye
showing a choroidal fibrovascular
C
proliferation (arrow). (F) Siberian Husky.
10 years old: detail of iris architecture
is lost. No tapetal reflex can be seen.
 Posterior synechia (arrow) resulted in a
secondary glaucoma.
D
256
The uvea
Chapter
9
Or cells in the aqueous humor. Protein in the aqueous
Lympho-plasmacytic uveitis is one of the most common causes
humor is very diffcult for the histopathologist to
of feline glaucoma and, in the COPLOW collection, is second
demonstrate
only to diffuse iris melanoma as the most common cause of
 The histopathologic diagnosis of uveitis relies on the
feline glaucoma resulting in enucleation
demonstration of cellular hallmarks of inflammation directly
 Although L-P uveitis in cats is not always clinically associated
within the uveal stroma. There is no reliable way to make this
with glaucoma, globes with concurrent glaucoma are
determination clinically.
overwhelmingly more likely to be submitted to COPLOW for
histopathologic evaluation
Feline lympho-plasmacytic uveitis
 Although much studied, the etiopathogenesis of L-P uveitis in 
cats has not yet been elucidated, with many cases being termed
(L-P uveitis) (Fg. 9.13)
idiopathic
There are 558 cases of feline lympho-plasmacytic uveitis in the
 Lympho-plasmacytic inflammation is also commonly seen in
COPLOW collection, l1% of feline submissions.
pyiads-uou e st saan d-l ieu susagans 'saa pazeunen
Figure 9.13 Feline lymphoplasmacytic
anterior uveitis. (A) DSH, 6 years old:
multiple Busacca nodules (arrow) are
was the presumed etiology based on
serology. (B) Siamese, 6 months old: the
iris is severely swollen. A severe aqueous 
flare and miosis are also present.
Bartoneffa was the presumed etiology
based on serology. (C) Gross photograph
showing the anterior uvea of a cat with 
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis. Multiple
lymphoid nodules appear as raised 
tan round foci (arrow). There is also
considerable recession of the irido- 
corneal angle. (D) Gross photograph of
A
B
an affected cat eye showing a localized
flare in the vitreous adjacent to the
posterior lens capsule (arrow) typical of
the release of lens protein. When the 
flare is seen, it is not known whether the
lens protein contributes to or is the cause
of uveitis. (E) Photomicrograph of the iris 
from an affected cat showing intense 
inflammatory infiltration with
lymphocytes and plasma cells, including 
the formation of lymphoid follicles (*).
(F) Low magnification photomicrograph
showing condensed vitreous in the
posterior chamber (arrow) of an affected
cat. (G) Photomicrograph of the posterior
 pole of the lens and vitreous showing
the typical granular appearance of the
 released lens protein material, similar to
that shown in (D).
C
D
F
G
257
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
feline ocular immune response that may be initiated by
clinical signs noted until significant secondary complications,
multiple causes
 Based on serologic studies, Toxoplasmosis and Bartonellosis
apparent
have been cited as potential etiologic agents
 The etiopathogenesis of ERU has not been definitively
 Morphologic features of L-P uveitis in cats include:
established and many causes have been postulated. However,
  Lymphocytes and plasma cells in the anterior uvea
current evidence implicates Leptospiral ocular infection and
- The ratio of lymphocytes to plasma cells can vary
auto-immunity as the important factors in the pathogenesis ERU
dramatically between cases
 Evidence to support the role of Leptospirosis in the
 The absolute numbers of inflammatory cells can also vary
pathogenesis of ERU includes:
dramatically between cases, and is important, neither to
- Inoculation of susceptible ponies with Leptospira interrogans
the diagnosis of L-P uveitis, nor to the subsequent
serovar pomona causes a syndrome of recurrent uveitis that
development of secondary glaucoma
is clinically and histopathologically indistinguishable from
Formation of lymphoid follicles in the iris stroma or the
ERU
anterior ciliary body stroma
 Some affected horses have elevated antibody titers and the
 Although not all cases demonstrate lymphoid follicles.
titers are even higher in the aqueous 
these are a feature that is not commonly seen in response
 Leptospira serovars have been detected by culture and/or
to chronic uveitis in other species, except horses
 PCR in vitreous and aqueous, and even fixed ocular
 Lymphocytic cells within the non-pigmented epithelium of
tissues of affected horses. However, this has been a very
the ciliary body
inconsistent fnding in ERU cases in North America
Many cases have lens luxation or subluxation
compared with ERU cases from continental Europe
 This morphologic feature needs to be assessed at the time
While Leptospirosis may induce uveitis in horses, the
of globe trimming
recurrent nature of inflammation in ERU most-likely
 Many cases demonstrate vitreous liquefaction
reflects the role of auto-immunity in its pathogenesis
- This morphologic feature also needs to be assessed at the
 Evidence that supports a role for auto-immunity in the
time of globe trimming
pathogenesis of ERU includes:
- Whereas the bulk of the vitreous body may be liquid, the
- During the active phase of the disease, there are circulating
 anterior vitreous face often appears abnormally dense or
 or local antibodies to various ocular proteins
pasuapuo
- Leptospira organisms are not consistently detected in
■ Changes in the anterior vitreous:
ocular fluids and tissues of all affected horses
- it is important to use an Alcian blue-PAS stain to evaluate
 aissae-ane, a roddns saipns sioouedounl -
 the anterior vitreous
nature of the disease, demonstrating a preponderance
-- The anterior face of the vitreous often contains an excess of
of CD4+ T-cells and increased transcription of IL-2 and
 spindle cells and collagen
IFN- with low IL-4, that are characteristic of a Th1-like
- The anterior vitreous is often displaced into the posterior
inflammatory response
chamber or through the pupil, into the anterior chamber
- A role for retinal auto-antigens, including inter-
 Granular hypereosinophilic protein may be observed in
photoreceptor binding protein, cellular retinaldehyde
the anterior vitreous, adjacent to the posterior lens capsule
binding protein, recoverin and retinal-S antigen (arrestin),
0 Although it is not always possible to demonstrate a
 has been demonstrated in experimental models and
break in the thin, posterior lens capsule, this 
spontaneous ERU
abnormality of the anterior vitreous that is suggestive of
- Immunogenetic investigations have suggested an
association between ERU susceptibility and certain equine
@ses, the inflammation observed may represent a
lymphocyte antigen (ELA) haplotypes
lens-induced uveitis
 Some affected horses develop a subclinical lymphocytic
· Mechanisms of secondary glaucoma in L-P uveitis
 inflammation in the pineal gand which shares many
Many assume that secondary gaucoma is related to
antigens with the retina
 obliteration or occlusion of the drainage angle structures
 Distinctive morphologic features of ERU include:
by inflammation or attendant pre-iridal fibrovascular
Lympho-plasmacytic uveitis, with lymphoid follicle
membranes, however, lens luxation and/or anterior vitreous
formation in some cases. Equine recurrent uveitis and feline
prolapse may also be implicated in some cases.
L-P uveitis are the two diseases in which this feature is
prominent. Lymphoid follicles are otherwise a rare finding in
the uveal tract
Equine recurrent uveitis (ERU), periodic ophthalmia,
 Lymphocytes and/ or plasma cells within the non-pigmented
moon blindness (Figs 9.14, 9.15)
ciliary epithelium
There are 78 cases of equine recurrent uveitis in the COPLOW collec-
non-pigmented ciliary body epithelial cells
tion, 20 of them in Appaloosa horses.
 - Masson's trichrome stain facilitates the identification of
+1
 ERU is the most common cause of cataract, glaucoma, phthisis
these bright red-staining, intra-cytoplasmic inclusions 
bulbi and blindness in horses
 - By electron microscopy these inclusions represent
There is a breed predilection for the Appaloosa
crystalline arrays of protein. At the margins of the
 It is important to be aware that not all cases of uveitis in horses
inclusions, fragments of a double membrane are
are attributable to ERU
seen suggesting that the inclusions develop within
The clinical syndrome is characterized by recurrent bouts of
mitochondria, breaking through the membrane
inflammatory disease leading to progressive ocular degeneration.
■Deposition of a cell-poor hyaline protein on the inner
 In some horses the disease has an insidious onset, with minimal
surface of the non-pigmented ciliary body epithelium 
258
The uvea
Chapter
Figure 9.14 Equine recurrent uveitis.
clinical. (A) American Saddlebred Horse,
7 years old: severe miosis and posterior
syhechia resulted in only two small areas
of visible pupil (arrows). (B) Appaloosa,
10 years old: chronic uveitis resulted in 
 an irregular pupil margin and a yellow
discoloration of the vitreous. (C)
 Thoroughbred, 6 years old: in addition to 
the aqueous flare, hypopyon is present 
inferiorly. (D) Thoroughbred, 10 years
old: aqueous flare, dyscoria, and an 
anterior cortical cataract (arrow) are
present in this case. (E) Thoroughbred, 6
years old: peripapillary chorioretinopathy.
called a 'butterfly' lesion, and anterior
uveitis are present in this eye. (F)
A
B
American Standardbred, 4 years old:
hyalitis, optic neuritis, and radiating 
retinal detachment (arrow), termed a
 sunburst detachment, are present.
C
D
F
- Stains positive with Congo red stain, a feature of
Other morphologic features of ERU, which are common
amyloid
findings but not necessarily specific, include:
 Shows green birefringence when viewed with intense
Cataract
 polarized light, which is also a feature of amyloid
■ Retrocorneal membranes and corneal wrinkling
 Stains blue with Masson's trichrome, which is typical of
 Anterior and/or posterior synechiae
collagen
  Fibrovascular membranes
一
 Filaments have ultrastructural characteristics suggestive of
  Retinal detachment and/or retinal degeneration 
collagen
■ Optic nerve inflammation, degeneration and gliosis
259
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.15 Equine recurrent uveitis,
pathology. (A) Gross photograph of 
equine eye showing an inflammatory
membrane tightly adherent to the inner
aspect of the ciliary body (arrows) in
equine recurrent uveitis (ERU). (B)
Photomicrograph of an affected horse
showing a lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate
in the ciliary body stroma including a
A
lymmphoid follicle (arrow). a feature
highly suggestive of ERU. (C) A
B
photomicrograph of the pars plicata of
the ciliary body of an affected horse
showing a membrane of cell-poor
amyloid-like protein (arrows). (D)
Photomicrograph of the ciliary body
 epithelium showing numerous
inflammatory cells within the epithelium
 and hypereosinophilic linear inclusions in
the cytoplasm of the affected cells (small
arrows). The lower inset shows these
bodies at a higher magnification. (E)
Photomicrograph showing green
 birefringence of a Congo red-stained
section of the ciliary body of an affected
horse. The birefringent membrane is the 
 same one illustr ated in (C).
D
● It appears that significant posterior uveitis, characterized by
tyrosinase-related proteins are considered to represent strong
pronounced chorioretinal disease and vitreous opacifcation, is
aseusoial wuoy sapindad 'uague jaaie aul se saiepipue
less frequently observed in the USA than in Europe
related protein-l have been used to induce experimental 
This may reflect differences in the ability to establish
uveodermatologic syndrome in Akitas
persistent intraocular infections between the predominant
Clinically the syndrome is characterized by uveitis that is 
Leptospira isolates from ocular fluids of horses with ERU in
Europe [L. kirschneri serovar Grippotyphosa, strain Duyster) and
is rare. Retinal detachment and glaucoma are seen in many
North America (L. interrgans serovar Pomona).
A case report describing a dog with unilateral disease
provides an interesting insight into the pathogenesis. This
Canine uveodermatologic syndrome, Vogt-Koyanagi-
dog had asymmetric uveal pigment dilution (heterochromia
Harada-like syndrome (VKH) (Fgs 9.16-9.18)
rides), the blue eye being spared the panuveitis recognized in
thebrown eye
There are 83 cases of uveodermatologic syndrome in the COPLOW
 Poliosis, vitiligo and alopecia are frequently recognized, with
collection, 23 of which are in Akitas.
depigmentation that may be localized to the facial region,
This canine uveo-dermatologic syndrome is considered a model
particularly to the nasal planum and lips, or may be
for human Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome
generalized
The Akita breed is predisposed to uveodermatologic syndrome
 Morphologic features of canine uveodermatologic syndrome
The human disease generally affects dark-skinned people
include:
between 20 and 50 years old and is most common in Japan.
■The hallmark feature of uveodermatologic syndrome is
The bilateral uveitis is accompanied by pigment loss in the skin
granulomatous uveitis
and/or hair. The human disease is strongly related to certain
 Uveal inflammation is always histiocyte-rich
HLA tissue types
0 Some dogs have marked uveal thickening because
 Increased frequency of certain DLA class alleles has been
of solid sheets of histiocytic inflammation, whereas
identified in Akitas in the USA, and these alleles carry a
others have no thickening and a very bland histiocytic
higher relative risk for uveodermatologic syndrome
infiltrate
Canine uveodermatologic syndrome and human VKH are both
0 Histiocytes are peppered with melanin granules
thought to be an autoimmune disease that targets melanin or a
0 Inflammation can be more severe in any part of the uvea
component protein expressed in melanocytes. Tyrosinase, or
but the choroid is always affected
260
The uvea
Chapter
6
 Figure 9.16 Canine uveodermatologic
syndrome (VKH-like), clinical. (A)
Japanese Akita, 10 months old:
 periocular nasal and labial
depigmentation is present. (B) The left 
eye of the dog in (A) showing corneal
edema and vascularization. A poorly
dilated pupil is also present. (C)
Samoyed, 14 months old: severe erosion 
and depigmentation are seen at the
labium and nasal planum. (D) The left 
eye of the dog in (C) showing severe
corneal edema and chemosis. (E)
Japanese Akita, 3 years old: limbal
edema and a swollen iris are present.
(F) Siberian Husky, 18 months old:
dyscoria and engorged iris vessels are
present. Pigment is visible on the anterior
lens (arrow).
C
0 The distribution of the inflammation is highly variable
- Granulomatous inflammation centered on pigmented cells
but, if both eyes are available for examination, the
is a defining feature of canine uveodermatologic syndrome
symmetry in distribution between eyes is striking 
0 Clusters of histiocytes within the choroid and
There is a mismatch between the degree of granulomatous
subtending the pigmented retinal pigment epithelium 
inflammation observed in the uvea, and the relatively
(RPE) in a manner reminiscent of Dalen-Fuchs nodules.
quiet' appearance of the vitreous, aqueous, retina, and
In humans, these collections of epithelioid cells between
cormea
the RPE and Bruch's membrane are associated with
261
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.17 Canine uveodermatologic
syndrome (VKH-like), fundus. (A)
Japanese Akita, 6.5 years old: optic
neuritis is present in this blind dog. The 
arrow points to one of the many areas of 
abnormal pigmentation in the tapetal 
retina. (B) Japanese Akita, 3 years old:
the optic disc is poorly visualized. The 
arrow points to the edge of a large
bullous detachment. (C) Samoyed, 8
months old: retinal vessels are dilated.
The optic disc is swollen and the entire
retina is edematous and elevated. (D)
Japanese Akita, 7 years old: the arrows
delineate a large bullous retinal 
detachment. (E) Samoyed, 2 years old: a
swollen optic disc, dilated retinal vessels,
A
B
 and tapetal pigment changes are
present. (F) Samoyed, 5 years old: the
 same eye as in (E),. 3 years later, showing
the loss of the tapetum and pigment in
the retinal pigmented epithelium and 
choroid.
C
D
E
F
certain forms of granulomatous uveitis, including VKH
Canine asymmetric uveitis (Fig. 9.19)
and sympathetic ophthalmia
 In skin biopsies from affected dogs with de-pigmentation
 There are 79 cases of asymmetric uveitis in the COPLOW
there will be histiocytic inflammation, with melanophage
collection, 17 of which are in Poodles, however the records
 cells subtending the surface epithelium
seldom report which Poodle type. Although this diagnosis
 Inflammation of the meninges is common in the human
is made fairly frequently in the COPLOW submissions, the
 disease but appears to be rare in dogs.
condition has not been reported in the veterinary literature.
262
The uvea
Chapter
9
 Figure 9.18 Canine uveodermatologic
syndrome (VKH), pathology. (A,B) Gross
 photographs showing both globes from
two dogs with canine uveodermatologic
syndrome, illustrating the diffuse 
thickening of the affected uvea and the 
bilateral symmetry that is characteristic of
the disease. The globes in (B) are fixed in
Bouin's solution, which accounts for the 
yellow color. (C) Subgross
A
B
photomicrograph of the globe from an
affected dog showing diffuse uveal
 thickening due to a histiocytic
inflammatory cell infiltr ate. Retinal
detachment is seen but the retina,
vitreous and aqueous are relatively quiet.
(D) Photomicrograph of the choroid from
an affected dog showing a histiocyte-rich
infiltrate, causing thickening of the 
 choroid behind the tapetum.
C
D)
 There are 52 females and 24 males among the cases with this
Aside from the characteristic features which define asymmetric
diagnosis
uveitis, in most instances the first affected globe shows other
 If the histopathological features of asymmetric uveitis are
a[nsde sual se yons Anjul suenauad e Sunsagans saimeaj
identified in an enucleated globe, then the remaining eye
rupture, scleral defect, sepsis in the globe or a foreign body.
should be considered at risk of developing uveitis with similar
However, evidence of a penetrating injury is not always 
morphologic features. Early and aggressive anti-inflammatory
identifed and a history of trauma is seldom reported by the
therapy may prevent severe ocular disease in the second eye
submitting clinician. Careful scrutiny of serial sections may be
■
 There are 23 cases in the COPLOW collection with confirmed
lo Ainlu gueauad jo auapia yns Auapi oi pama
disease in the second eye including 10 cases in which the
 episcleral inflammation
second eye was submitted and had similar pathologic
Severe uveitis that develops in some dogs with diabetic cataract,
features to the original eye
with lens protein-associated, macrophage-rich endophthalmitis.
■
 The time between enucleation of the first eye and the clinical
presents a histological appearance that is very similar to
onset of disease in the second eye ranged from almost
asymmetric uveitis.
immediately to 4 years
The diagnosis of asymmetric uveitis is dependent on recognition
of a characteristic pattern of granulomatous uveitis with the
Lens-induced uveitis, phacolytic uveitis (Fg. 9.20)
following morphologic features:
 Sheets of pyogranulomatous inflammatory cell infltrate,
There are 50 cases of lens-induced uveitis in the COPLOW collection.
forming a blanket-like covering on the inner surface of any
Because this phenomenon is commonly seen as part of a complex,
part of the uveal tract or the inner retina. Rarely, this
multifaceted disease process, it is likely that the condition is signif-
'blanket' of inflammation extends across the posterior cormea
cantly under-represented in our collection.
Histiocytic cells tend to line up perpendicular to the uveal
1
 Lens-induced uveitis almost invariably accompanies mature,
surface
intumescent or hypermature cataract. Induction of an
■ Inflammation within the retina and segmental retinal
necrosis
secondary to the leakage of lens proteins through an intact lens
 The same morphologic features will be seen in the second eye if
capsule, as part of a degenerative process that also results in lens
it is submitted for evaluation, concurrently or subsequently
 shrinkage and capsule wrinkling
263
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.19 Canine asymmetric uveitis.
(A) Poodle, 14 years old: chronic uveitis
resulted in severe corneal edema and 
superficial corneal vascularization in 
the right eye. (B) This is the left eye,
previously normal, of the dog in (A), 3
months later. The detail of the anterior
segment is difficult to view due to the 
severe flare and fibrin. Hypopyon is 
present at the arrow. (C,D) Gross
photographs of globes from two
different dogs with asymmetric uveitis
showing an inflammatory membrane
lining the anterior uvea (arrows) and 
 considerable exudates in the aqueous
 and vitreous and around the detached
retina. (E) Photomicrograph of the
choroid of an affected dog showing a
macrophage-rich membrane carpeting
the inner choroid and subretinal space
(arrows). (F) Photomicrograph of the
iris from an affected dog showing a
macrophage-rich membrane carpeting
the surface of the iris front and back
(arrows).
C
D
· Morphologic features of lens-induced uveitis include:
■ In the COPLOW collection, there are 15 cases of
Mild to moderate lympho-plasmacytic infiltrate in the
anterior uveal stroma. This is a non-specific change and the
intumescent cataract and lens capsule rupture
diagnosis of lens-induced uveitis should only be made if the
Diabetic cataract often develops very rapidly in dogs, with
lens pathology is appropriate and there are no other changes
large amounts of modifed lens proteins being released into
identified that are consistent with a different pathogenesis
10 ajnsde sual ieul ue ybnoiy suissed 1auia 'snoanhe ay1
■
 Globes removed and submitted for histopathology often
after lens capsule rupture
have glaucoma associated with posterior synechiae, iris
 The morphology of macrophage-rich endophthalmitis in
bombe, or pre-iridal fbrovascular membranes with extensive
diabetic dogs differs from most inflammatory diseases which
peripheral anterior synechiae
occur secondary to traumatic lens capsule rupture (see Ch. 5)
 Phacolytic uveitis in the special case of rapidly progressing.
in that the macrophage reaction is widely distributed in the
 intumescent diabetic cataract and lens capsule rupture (Figs
eye and not centered on the lens. There are similarities,
9.21, 9.22)
already mentioned, to asymmetric uveitis
264
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.20 Phacolytic uveitis (lens-
induced uveitis). (A) Siberian Husky. 1
year old: the iris is severely inflamed with
intrastromal hemorrhage. (B) Bichon
Frise, 3 years old: chronic inflammation 
of the iris resulted in the increased iris 
pigment. (C) Cocker Spaniel. 1.5 years
old: the iris is swollen, and ectropion
uvea is present. (D) Golden Retriever. 1
year old: the iris is heavily pigmented and 
ectropion uvea is present 360° at the
pupil. (E) Gross photograph of a dog eye
with hypermature cataract and lens-
induced uveitis phacolytic uveitis). (F)
Subgross photomicrograph of a dog eye
A
R
with lens-induced uveitis, and the
wrinkled remnants of the lens capsule
in hypermature cataract. (G,H) Gross 
photographs of dog eyes with
hypermature cataract, chronic uveitis,
 posterior synechia and retinal
detachment with secondary glaucoma.
D
H
265
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.21 Phacolytic uveitis in diabetic
cataract, clinical. (A) Black and Tan
Coonhound, 9 years old: the intumescent 
lens can be seen. lritis and limbal edema
are also present. (B) Poodle, 10 years old:
iritis with ectropion uvea is present. The
pupil is severely miotic. (C) Miniature
Schnauzer, 6.5 years old: severe corneal
edema and lipid aqueous flare prevent 
visualization of the large fibrin clot in the
anterior chamber and the poorly dilated
pupil. (D) Miniature Schnauzer, 5 years
old: the ventral endothelium has multiple
keratic precipitates (arrow)
A
B
The morphologic features of uveitis associated with diabetic
Uveal involvement in systemic infections and
cataract include:
parasitic diseases
- Protein exudation in the anterior chamber and vitreous
 A histiocyte-rich cellular infiltrate in the uvea
General comments:
- Histiocytic inflammatory cells on the inner retinal surface
 Many systemic infectious diseases, including viral, protozoal.
and extending into the retina.
bacterial, mycotic and parasitic infections, affecting domestic
species are commonly associated with ocular disease in
veterinary patients
Intraocular xanthogranuloma (Fig. 9.23)
Clinical signs referable to uveitis may be the initial reason for
This rare complication of hyperlipidemia may masquerade as
 presentation in many of these disorders
intraocular neoplasia
In addition to the systemic infectious causes of uveitis discussed
There are five cases in the COPLOW archive, all in diabetic and
in this chapter, Bartonellosis, Brucellosis, Borreliosis, Ehrlichiosis,
hyperlipidemic Miniature Schnauzers
Leishmaniasis, Leptospirosis, Mycobacterial infection and Rocky
All five dogs had a history, or other evidence, of chronic uveitis
Mountain spotted fever, are just some of the many potential
and secondary glaucoma
causes of infectious uveitis
Morphologic features of intraocular xanthogranuloma
The relative importance of many systemic infectious diseases,
include:
with respect to their prevalence and clinical significance, varies
 On gross inspection, distorted, firm globes, that appear
widely depending on species and geographic location
to be essentially filled with a solid, heterogeneous, light tan
mass
diagnosed in the COPLOW collection. We recognize that in many
■
 The intraocular structures are effaced by a mixture of
cases, specific infectious causes may be under-represented, because the
lipid-laden macrophages ('foam cells'), and Alcian blue-
changes seen in infectious uveitis can be non-specifc making it
 positive, birefringent crystals
impossible to make a specific diagnosis based on histopathological
 Atherosclerosis of episcleral blood vessels
findings alone.
266
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.22 Endophthalmitis secondary
to diabetic cataract, pathology. (A,B)
Gross photographs of dog eyes with
intense uveitis and endophthalmitis
secondary to diabetic cataract. (C,D)
 Subgross photomicrographs of two dogs
with diabetic cataract and resultant
macrophage-rich uveitis. (E)
Photomicrograph of an affected dog eye
showing hypereosinophilic lens protein
free in the anterior chamber. (F)
Photomicrograph of the iris from an
affected dog showing a membrane of
phagocytic inflammatory cells carpeting 
the posterior surface of the iris, similar 
to that seen in asymmetric uveitis. (G)
Photomicrograph of the exudates in 
the posterior vitreous showing many
 macrophage cells adjacent to and within
the retina.
A
B
C
D
267
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.23 Canine intraocular solid
xanthogranuloma. (A) Gross photograph
 of a canine globe totally effaced by a
bright yellow xanthogranuloma (B)
Photomicrograph of xanthogranuloma 
showing sheets of foamy macrophage
cells and crystals (arrows) (C,D)
Photomicrographs similar to (B) except
using polarized light to highlight the
birefringent crystals. The light in (D) is
manipulated for color effect.
A
B
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
 Ocular and/or neurological involvement is often a feature of
this form of the disease
There are 41 cases of FIP (Fig. 9.24) in the COPLOW collection.
3. Neuro-ocular FIP
 Although young cats are most commonly affected, the collection
■This can be seen in the absence of other systemic
includes six cases in cats over 5 years old
manifestations, or in combination with the dry form of FIP.
 The prevalence is greatest in cats housed in multi-cat
but seldom accompanies the wet form of the disease
environments.
■Neurological involvement can occur in combination with
FIP is caused by a virulent biotype of feline coronavirus and is a rela-
ocular disease, or either manifestation can occur in
-uos Aeiauae pue 'aqenou Auasaid si ieu aseasp uouuon Aia
isolation.
sidered to be fatal.
Morphologic features of ocular involvement with FIP:
Feline coronavirus infection may be limited to the gastrointestinal
Although textbook descriptions suggest that histopathology
tract but some virulent strains acquire the ability to replicate within
is the best way to definitively diagnose this condition,
macrophages. In cats that do not mount an appropriate, strong, cell-
as a pathologist it is always a challenge to make this diagnosis
mediated immune response to the virus, disseminated infection can
because the features of FIP are diverse and highly variable
develop, leading to FIP.
The COPLOW experience indicates that histopathological
Three main variants of FIP are recognized, on the basis of their
diagnosis of ocular FIP presents a challenge. Key to establishing
clinical and pathological presentation:
a diagnosis is the recognition of the interplay of multiple
1. Effusive, wet' form
different morphologic patterns, each of which adds an
 Characterized at necropsy by dear, protein rich, viscous fluid
increment of credence to the diagnosis of ocular FIP. However,
exudates in one or more body cavities and fbrinous exudates
the pathologist's best effort often leads to only a tentative
 adherent to the serosal surfaces
diagnosis of FIP.
Ocular involvement is less common in the purely effusive
Gross lesions
form of the disease
One of the most important lesions indicative of FIP is the
2. Non-effusive, 'dry' form
observation of highly proteinaceous, cell-poor exudates in
  Characterized by pyogranulomatous inflammation in the
Aq paxy st uraioid au Xpoq snoaia pue snoanbe au
parenchyma of the kidney, liver, lung or any of several other
formalin, or other fixative used, and is seen as a semisolid.
organs
translucent exudate filling the sectioned globe
268
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.24 Feline infectious peritonitis
(FIP). (A) DSH, 5 months old: corneal
vascularization and edema are present.
 Multiple keratic precipitates can be seen
by retroillumination. (B) DSH, 4 months 
old: a large fibrinous clot (arrow) fills the 
anterior chamber. (C) Siamese, 4 months 
old: the retinal vessels are dilated. Retinal
hemorrhage and intraretinal white 
exudate are present. (D) Siamese, 5
months old: the retinal vessels are
dilated, and the entire retina is 
edematous. Multiple areas of intraretinal 
exudate are present at the arrows. (E,F)
Gross photographs of cat globes with
A
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) showing
the aqueous and vitreous with a 
translucent and semi-solid appearance.
because the high protein content of the
exudates is fixed semisolid with formalin.
(G,H) Photomicrographs showing the 
mixed nature of the cellular infiltration in 
FIP.
D
F
269
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
·Microscopic lesions
based on clinical appearance, rather than by demonstrating
Mixed inflammatory cellular infltrate in the uvea, retina,
the presence of the organism within ocular tissues
optic nerve and/or meninges
 In humans, disseminated mycoses with ocular involvement
- The predominant cell type is variable
 may be encountered in immunocompromised individuals
 Finding localized areas of plasma cell-rich infiltrate is
Blastomycosis, Blastomyces dermatitidis (Figs 9.25, 9.26)
helpful
 There are 140 cases of Blastomycosis in dogs and eight cases
- Finding areas of suppurative inflammation is not
in cats in the COPLOW collection
particularly helpful in establishing a diagnosis, but
 Blastomycosis is the most commonly reported
relatively common in this disease
 disseminated mycotic infection in dogs
 Finding areas of ganulomatous inflammation is helpful.
Blastomycosis is a systemic mycotic infection, most common
dld pazieiauag ui se aimeay e iuarsisuos se zou yanouie
in the Mississippi River valley. The disease is also endemic in
in other, non-ocular sites
the Ohio and Missouri River valleys and the mid-Atlantic
0 If ganulomatous inflammation is found, it is helpful if
and southern states of the United States
macrophage cells with mildly dysplastic nuclear features 
 The disease occurs in very localized hot beds' of infection
are identified
related to 'point source' exposure. Many cases live in close
0 Identifying vasculitis is an important diagnostic feature
proximity to water courses
 but not absolutely necessary
 The disease is considerably more prevalent in dogs than it is
 FIP is an ultimately fatal, infectious disease, so caution
in humans and more prevalent in humans than it is in cats
should be exercised in making an equivocal diagnosis
- In humans, the disease seldom affects ocular structures
without careful consideration of the clinical fndings.
 other than the eyelid but can be associated with
supporting clinical pathology results and, where possible,
endophthalmitis
 This dimorphic fungus is found in acidic soils, particularly
immunohistochemistry or PCR. However, detection of
those with decaying wood, and is infective only by
 coronavirus antigens has proven to be an unreliable test in
inhalation of spores from infectious soil or by direct
the experience of COPLOW.
implantation into a penetrating wound. While
transmission to humans from dogs is theoretically possible
Toxoplasmosis
by this latter route, the zoonotic potential of blastomycosis is
Although toxoplasmosis is frequently cited and well documented as
very low
■ The disease in dogs:
a cause of uveitis in cats, there are few cases of toxoplasmosis associ-
- Blastomycosis is typically a disease of young adult dogs
ated with uveitis in any species in the COPLOW collection.
who spend a lot of time outdoors, particularly hunting or
● Most commonly reported in cats, which are the organism's host
working breeds
- The primary site of infection is the lung, which is the
 other systemic signs of disease
most commonly affected, and earliest, organ to develop
● A number of studies also support a causal role for 
lesions
toxoplasmosis in some cases of uveitis in cats that show no
 Other organs commonly affected include the eye, skin,
other signs of systemic infection
lymph nodes, and bone. Any other tissue may be involved
■ However, the role and importance of Toxoplasma gondii
occasionally
 infection in the pathogenesis of feline lympho-plasmacytic
 Morphologic features of ocular involvement in blastomycosis
uveitis in otherwise healthy cats remains controversial
include:
Carnivorous or omnivorous species become infected by
- Most commonly, a chorioretinitis is identified, that may be
ingesting bradyzoites (tissue cysts containing hundreds of
nodular or multifocal. Posterior segment involvement is
dormant organisms) in the tissues of other animals
most common, although the location of lesions in the 
 Alternatively, animals may be infected by ingestion of
globe or orbit is highly variable
 sporozoites in foodstuffs or water contaminated by cat feces
- The inflammation is pyogranulomatous in all cases,
containing oocysts
although 'classical' nodular ganulomas are not typical
Once ingested, these infective stages transform into
- The diagnosis is dependent on fnding the yeast form
tachyzoites that are disseminated in a wide range of body
of the organism in histological sections or cytological
tissues, including the CNS, muscles, viscera, and eyes, before
becoming dormant bradyzoites
preparations
-Morphologic features of the Blastomyces dermatitidis
Toxoplasma gondii is reported to elicit a granulomatous and/or
 organism in tissue include:
lympho-plasmacytic inflammatory response
0 Exquisitely round, typically 10-15 μm diameter yeast
 In reported cases of naturally occurring cases and in
form
experimentally induced disease, toxoplasmosis lesions are most
0 One micron refractile cell wall
frequently identified in the anterior uvea, choroid and retina,
0 Broad-based, budding forms
and less frequently in the optic nerve.
0 Live organisms have an amphophilic central body and
dead organisms have only an empty cell wall
Mycotic uveitis
0 Free organisms are often surrounded by Splendore-
Comparative aspects:
Hoeppli reaction
■ Although all of these diseases occur in humans, with the
0 Histopathological fndings in eyes with endophthalmitis
 exception of histoplasmosis, ocular involvement is rare
related to blastomycosis do not appear to be
■
 The 'presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome' in humans
pa uaean ieuye q pae aue
to untreated eyes, eg. in their degree and type of
histoplasmosis is common. However, the diagnosis is made
inflammation and identifcation of budding yeast forms
270
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.25 Blastomycosis, anterior
segment, clinical. (A) Boxer, 3 years old:
the pupil is dilated and a mild aqueous 
flare is present. Chemosis and a 
hyperemic conjunctiva are seen in this
acute case. (B) Miniature Schnauzer, 5
years old: the iris is swollen and the
 pupil is miotic. Corneal edema and.
vascularization obscures the view of the
leukocoria caused by the posterior
segment granuloma. (C) Foxhound, 3
years old: severe corneal edema and
limbal deep vessels hinder visualization of
the anterior segment exudate. (D) Cocker
Spaniel, 2 years old: the leukocoria is
caused by the extensive subretinal
exudate. Poorly-defined retinal vessels
A
B
can be seen at the arrow.
C
Blastomycosis in cats:
 The definitive diagnosis of ocular cyptococcosis is dependent
- The disease in cats differs only minimally from that in
on identification of the organism in affected tissues or
dogs, although it is much rarer and feline blastomycosis is
cytological preparations. Serological testing to detect 
more likely to involve the central nervous system than
cyptococcal antigen is also useful, particularly in monitoring
canine blastomycosis
response to therapy
Cryptococcosis, Cryptococcus neoformans (Figs 9.27. 9.28)
 Morphologic features of ocular cryptococcosis include:
■
 There are 12 cases in dogs and 23 cases in cats in the
- Most commonly, a multifocal, granulomatous 
COPLOW collection
chorioretinitis, although the infection can involve any part
- Cryptococcosis is considered to be the most common
of the eye or orbit
disseminated mycotic infection in cats
- Pyogranulomatous inflammation is the most frequently
 Cryptococcosis affects many species as a systemic yeast
observed type of inflammatory reaction. However, in some
infection, but only dogs and cats with ocular involvement are
cases there is minimal cellular infiltrate
represented in the COPLOW collection
Aasiui aq on sieadde ueuueyui yo aiaap aui a
Immunosuppression plays a role in the establishment of
related to the thickness of the mucoid capsule on the
disseminated infection, especially in humans
 infecting organism
■
Cats are more commonly affected than dogs but the clinical
0 In cases with minimal or no inflammatory cellular
 syndromes are similar in these species
component, the organisms are often found in blood
■
Cryptococcosis has a worldwide distribution and is acquired
vessel lumina
by the inhalation of spores from infectious soil. The
-Morphologic features of the Cryptococcus neoformans
infectious stage is often a contaminant in pigeon
Organism in tissue include:
aaei un u g o s uoy sauei apoq la isea au a
■
 The nasal cavity is the earliest and most likely site to become
and stains poorly with H&E, which reveals no visible
infected
 intermal structure
■
 The tissues of the upper respiratory tract, CNs, lymph
0 The central yeast is surrounded by a thick polysaccharide
nodes, skin, and eyes are most commonly affected by
capsule which does not stain with H&E. The capsule is
cryptococcosis
between 3 and 10 μm thick
271
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.26 Blastomycosis, fundus and
pathology. (A) Mixed Breed, 3.5 years 
dld: the entire retina was edematous
with dilated vessels. A large subretinal
granuloma is present. (B) Mixed Breed,
2.5 years old: only one subretinal
granuloma was found in the inferior
nasal fundus. (C) DLH, 11 years old: the
entire inferior retina is elevated by
subretinal exudate. Retinal hemorrhage
is present and all retinal vessels are 
tortuous and poorly defined. (D) DSH, 5
years old: the optic disc (black arrow) is
poorly defined due to the total bullous
detachment. Subretinal exudate is 
present at the white arrow. (E-G) Three
gross photographs of sectioned canine
globes with pyogranulomatous
inflammation caused by Blastomyces 
A
B
dermatiditis. (H) Photomicrograph
showing a multinucleated macrophage
cell with a PAS-positive Blastomyces
 organism in the cytoplasm. (1)
Photomicrograph of a Blastomyces
organism with *broad-based budding'. (J)
Photomicrograph of Blastomyces yeast 
organism surrounded by spikes of
protein, the Splendore-Hoeppli
phenomenon.
G
D
G
H
272
The uvea
Chapter
9
Figure 9.27 Cryptococcosis, anterior 
 segment, clinical. (A) German Shepherd,
6 years old: white nodules of
inflammatory infiltrate obscure the entire
 iris surface. (B) Mixed Breed, 3 years old:
mild anterior uveitis with aqueous flare
was present. The leukocoria is due to the
totally detached retina and subretinal 
exudate. (C) DSH, 7 years old: aqueous
flare and hyalitis were present. A white
fibrinous clot adheres to the endothelium
at the arrow. (D) DSH, 11 years old: the
white fibrinous clot is present on the
anterior lens (arrow). Many black
inflammatory nodules are present in the 
iris.
A
B
D
0 The central yeast organism stains magenta with PAS, and
- In cats there is often a thick spindle cell layer internal to
the mucoid capsule stains blue with Alcian blue, 0r
the choroid as well as proliferation of the RPE. This is
bright red with mucicarmine stain
Ul suny u uaas uoseai au oi sem Aueu ul ieuis
0 In contrast to blastomycosis, budding forms will not be
the 'Presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome' (Fig. 9.30)
found in Cryptococcosis
- The diagnosis depends on demonstrating the organism
0 Very rarely, short pseudohyphae are seen.
within tissues, which requires PAS or a silver stain for
●Histoplasmosis, Histoplasma capsulatum (Fig. 9.29)
fungus
■ There are two cases in dogs and 16 cases in cats in the
O The organism is always intracellular, within macrophage
COPLOW collection. However, the organism is often hard
cells, and may be numerous or there may be only a few
08 ieun saseo aiou Aueu aq Aeu aiaut pue 'sieo u puy o1
Organisms. Furthermore there may be cases in which the
undiagnosed
organisms are too few to find, or nonexistent in the eye,
 Histoplasmosis is a systemic disease, occurring worldwide,
as is often the case in humans
that affects many species, but only dogs and cats with ocular
- Morphologic features of Histoplasma capsulatum in tissue
involvement are represented in the COPLOW collection
include:
The dimorphic fungus, Histoplasma capsulatum exists as
0 The organism is small, only 3-5 μm in diameter, and is
 uu hos ui aeid 'os a u siois aie aa
always located within macrophage cells
bird or bat droppings
0 The organism has a target appearance with H&E, but
■
In the USA, the disease is most common in the Mississippi
 stains uniformly black with silver stains
and Ohio River valleys
0 Budding is not seen
■
The primary site of infection is in the lungs, following the 
Coccidioidomycosis, Coccidioides immitis (Fig. 9.31)
inhalation of infective spores
 There are 2l cases in dogs and seven cases in cats in the
■
 Disseminated histoplasmosis commonly affects the lungs.
COPLOW collection
intestine, lymph nodes, skeleton, skin and eyes, although
■Coccidioidomycosis is a systemic disease endemic in the
involvement of any part of the body may be seen
southwestern desert regions of the USA, as well as other
■
Morphologic features of ocular histoplasmosis include:
low-lying deserts in Central and South America. The disease
 Pyogranulomatous uveitis, although there is a highly
is acquired by inhalation of spores from the desert soil and
variable distribution of inflammation in the globe or in
animals that have prolonged outdoor exposure show
orbital tissues
enhanced risk of infection 
273
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 Figure 9.28 Cryptococcosis, fundus and
pathology. (A) Cocker Spaniel, 6 years
old: severe subretinal white exudate is
present. (B) German Shepherd, 2.5 years
dld: the multiple dark lesions represent
deep retinal exudate. Areas of
peripapillary retinal edema are also 
present (arrow). (C) DSH, 5 years old:
 retinal and subretinal exudate is present
as multiple foci of pigment. (D) DSH,
5 years old: multiple grey subretinal 
granulomas are present. (E-G) Gross 
photographs showing pyogranulomatous
inflammatory nodules in the anterior 
uvea (E) and posterior segment 
(FG). (H-J) Low magnification
A
B
 photomicrographs showing an intense
chorioretinitis in cryptococcosis (H), 
 numerous organisms in blood vessels 
with almost no inflammation (). and a
few organisms in the choriocapillaris (J).
(K) High magnification of cryptococcal
organisms showing the large non-
staining mucoid capsule and the poorly 
stained cell walls of the organisms in the
center (H&E). (L) Organisms stained with
Alcian blue PAs. The mucoid capsule
stains with Alcian blue and the cell walls 
of the organism stain with PAS. (M) PAS
stain showing a pseudohyphal form of 
Cryptococcus.
C
D
H
(K)
274
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.29 Histoplasmosis, fundus and 
pathology. (A) German Shepherd, 3 years
old: the tapetal retina showing multiple
areas of pigment proliferation
surrounded by retinal edema. (B) DSH, 5
years old: The non-tapetal retina is totally
detached and in folds (white arrow). In 
addition to the many foci of intraretinal
exudate, a large subretinal granuloma is 
present (black arrow). (C) Persian, 6 years 
dld: large and small areas of abnormal
deep pigmentation are present. (D) DSH,
8 years old: a pink-colored subretinal 
exudate detached the retina superiorly
and inferiorly. (E-G) Gross photographs
showing pyogranulomatous
 chorioretinitis in cats with histoplasmosis
A
B
(E,F) and anterior uveitis in an affected 
dog (G). (H) Photomicrograph showing
numerous macrophage cells with 
cytoplasm rich in organisms. (1)
Photomicrograph showing macrophage
cells laden with PAS-positive organisms.
(J) Photomicrograph showing
macrophage cells containing silver-
stained Histoplasma capsufatum
organisms.
C
D
275
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.30 Histoplasmosis, feline,
features of 'presumed histoplasmosis' (A)
 Photomicrograph of a feline eye with
Histoplasmosis showing retinal
detachment (*) and marked thickening
of the inner choroid (arrow) with a
combination of spindle cell proliferation 
 and mixed inflammation. (B)
 Photomicrograph from the same
cat as (A), showing proliferation of
the RPE which is stained by
immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin
(arrows). (C) High magnification
photomicrograph from the same cat as
(A), showing macrophage cells in the 
B
inner choroid with Histoplasma
organisms in the cytoplasm (arrow).
(D) Histoplasmosis organisms stained 
with silver stain from the same field as 
(C). (E) Domestic shorthaired, 2 years old:
leukocoria is due to total retinal 
detachment and subretinal granulomas.
All serology and histopathology of the
globes yielded no etiology. Aspirate of
the submandibular lymph node identified
Histopfasma capsuratum. (F) Domestic
shorthaired, 5 years old: bilateral anterior
uveitis and chorioretinitis were present.
 Fungal serology was negative.
 Histopathology identified Histoplasma
capsutatum.
C
D
  Immunosuppressed animals are at particular risk of
chorioretinitis is a common feature. Ocular involvement is
disseminated infection but the disease is also seen in
often unilateral
 Otherwise healthy individuals
- Coccidioidomycosis is diagnosed by demonstration
  Many species are susceptible to infection but only dogs and
of the organism in tissue sections or cytological
cats with ocular involvement are represented in the
preparations
COPLOW collection
- The organism exists in small numbers in tissues, but it is
■
The disease commonly affects the lungs, bones, and eyes,
large and easily recognized 
however any tissue may be affected
- The organism is more numerous, therefore more easily
■Morphologic features of ocular involvement include:
identified, in cat eyes than in dog eyes
- Pyogranulomatous inflammation in the tissues affected. In
-Morphologic features of Coccidioides immitis in tissues
the eye, the pattern of disease is variable, although
include:
276
The uvea
Chapter
9
 Figure 9.31 Coccidioidomycosis, fundus
and pathology. (A) German Shepherd. 2
years old: a large subretinal granuloma
has elevated the retina. (B) Vizsla, 3 years
dld: generalized chorioretinitis is present.
 Subretinal granulomas can be seen at the
arrows. (C-E) Gross photographs of 
feline eyes with chorioretinitis (C,D)
and a canine eye (E) with episcleral
 pyogranulomatous inflammation
caused by Coccioioides immitis. The
inflammatory focus in the dog eye is
() easida pue eas aed
Photomicrograph of coccidioidal 
endosporulating spherule (H&E). (G)
Photomicrograph of spherules with
developing endospores (PAS). (H)
A
B
Ruptured spherule releasing endospores
(Alcian blue PAS).
C
D
E
F
H
0 The spores from the soil, upon establishing infection in
affects immunocompromised individuals and patients with a
the tissues, transform into large spherules ranging from
history of intravenous drug abuse
20 to 85 μm in diameter
  Morphologic features of ocular disease in canine systemic
0 The spherules consist of a thick, refractile, outer cell
aspergillosis include:
wall, containing small, 2-4 μm subunits called
- Panophthalmitis, often with the most severe exudate being
saodsopua
identifed, grossly and histologically in the vitreous body
0 Budding is not seen, but the mature spherule bursts
- Fungal organisms are most likely to be found in the
releasing numerous endospores
vitreous body adjacent to the inner retina
Canine systemic (disseminated) aspergillosis (Fig. 9.32)
 Organisms are sometimes found within the lens capsule
 In cases where the eye is submitted to COPLOW, ocular
 and capsular rupture may be a feature
disease often precedes signs of systemic illness
0 The hyphae may be found directly within the lens
■
There are 2l cases of canine systemic aspergillosis in the
capsule, which should therefore be carefully scrutinized,
COPLOW collection and of these, nine are in German
'uesol siu ui uaiedde Aian aie susjuesio aun asneiaq
 Shepherd dogs, a breed that appears to be predisposed to
even with H&E stain.
opportunistic fungal infections
-Morphologic features of Aspergillus sp. in tissue include:
■
Affected dogs have widely disseminated infection and the
0 Filamentous fungi that have septate hyphae, with
diagnosis carries a poor prognosis
 parallel cell walls and dichotomous branching
■
Widespread vasculitis is a prominent feature of the systemic
0 Silver stains are usually required to facilitate recognition
disease
of the hyphae
 Immune deficiency, or aberrant immune response, is thought
 Aspergillosis in birds
to be important in the pathogenesis of systemic aspergillosis.
'spiq ui yieap jo asne uoo e si sisoiadse qnouiy 
The disseminated disease in humans almost exclusively
there are only two cases of endophthalmitis and two cases of
277
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.32 Canine systemic
aspergillosis. (A-C) Gross photographs 
of three dog eyes showing suppurative
endophthalmitis with the primary 
exudates in the vitreous adjacent to the
retina, a feature commonly seen in
systemic aspergillosis when it affects the
eye. (D) Photomicrograph showing
Aspergilfus hyphae (arrow) within the
lens capsule. (E) Photomicrograph
showing fungal hyphae extending from
A
B
C
the retinal inner limiting membrane into
the vitreous body. (F) Aspergillus hyphae
are surrounded by Splendore-Hoeppli
(arrow) protein deposition.
keratitis associated with aspergillus infection in avian eyes in
exudate that may be seen with many other infectious causes
the COPLOW collection.
of endophthalmitis
 Granulomatous inflammation carpeting the outer retina and
Canine ocular protothecosis (Prototheca zopfii or.
the inner choroid
less often, Prototheca wickerhamii) (Fig. 9.33)
  Large numbers of organisms are seen in macrophage cells
There are six cases in the COPLOW collection, all in dogs.
and free within the tissue
sss ui 'ds mi ya saea siooyo 
 Disseminated protothecosis occurs in dogs and is extremely rare
 One to 10 μum, round to ovoid organisms are surrounded
in other species
 by a thick, refractile cell wall which stains poorly or 
The organism is classifed as an saprophytic, achlorophyllous
slightly amphophilic with H&E
alga
- A few cells undergo endosporulation and may have two or
 The organism is common in contaminated water but infection is 
 many daughter cells within the cell wall
rare
- The organisms stain intensely positive with PAS stain.
 Infection occurs worldwide but the South-eastern United States
has a relatively high incidence
jo uosatu uoy stnsai aseas oiaisis ieu pateinsod si 1l
 Canine ocular larva migrans with
the organism and invasion of the intestinal mucosa, whereas
Toxocara canis (Fig. 9.34)
local infection occurs by contamination of skin wounds
Clinical syndrome in dogs with systemic disease:
There are five cases of ocular larva migrans in the COPLOW collection,
 all in dogs.
■ Clinical signs depend on the tissues affected, but chronic
gastro-intestinal signs are often a feature
 Toxocara canis was suspected to be the parasite responsible in all
■
 Ocular involvement is common in systemic disease and is
cases
usually bilateral
 In most cases, larva migrans in dogs affects young. working
 Response to treatment has been discouraging in affected
dogs, presumably because of a large parasite burden
■
dogs, and the diagnosis of disseminated protothecosis carries
a poor prognosis in this species
■
 Mild exudates in the vitreous
 Morphologic features of ocular protothecosis
 Perivascular lymphocytic inflammatory infltrate in the retina
Retinal separation, often with complete, 'morning glory'
 Localized granulomatous inflammation
retinal detachment
 It is important to search for the localized granulomas
 The subretinal space, vitreous, and aqueous contain a dry.
 under a dissecting microscope and specifically section 
 granulomatous exudate but not the dense, protein-rich
through the granulomatous lesions
278
The uvea
Chapter
9
Figure 9.33 Protothecosis, clinical and 
pathology. (A) Labrador Retriever, 10 
years old: anterior uveitis is present. The 
deep red tapetal reflex is due to posterior
segment hemorrhage. A granuloma is 
seen at the arrow. (B) The left eye of the
dog in (A) showing retinal edema and 
intraretinal hemorrhage (arrows). The 
large white mass represents a subretinal
granuloma. (C-E) Gross photos of dog
eyes affected with protothecosis. Retinal
detachment and moderate exudates
characterize the disease. (F)
Photomicrograph showing subretinal
macrophage-rich exudates. Each
macrophage cell contains numerous algal
organisms (H&E). (G) Photomicrograph of
A
B
a subretinal exudative process showing
numerous PAS+ protothecal organisms.
(H) Higher magnification photograph of 
a touch preparation showing several
 organisms and the characteristic internal
segmentation (Giemsa stain).
F
CF
H
 Granulomatous lesions track in and out of the uvea, retina
and vitreous
 Important categories of non-infectious uveitis in humans include
 sarcoidosis, Behget's disease, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, and 
Eosinophils are rarely seen in the cases from the COPLOW
collection
 phacoantigenic uveitis. A fascinating and important disease in this
 category that occurs only in man is sympathetic ophthalmia. This is a
 Larval parasites may or may not be found within the
diffuse granulomatous inflammation of the uvea, occurring in the 
granulomata and they may also be found in tissues away
uninvolved eye following injury to the contralateral eye. The onset is 
from these lesions, particularly in the retina
usually a few days or weeks after a perforating injury to the exciting 
Morphologic features of Toxocara canis larvae in tissue
eye, or originally damaged eye, but there are well-documented cases
include prominent lateral alae and excretory columns.
 of the onset being many years after the initial injury.
In infectious uveitis with a bacterial etiology. there are a number 
 of Gram-positive organisms that have a propensity to invade the 
 choroid from the bloodstream. Granulomatous uveitis is seen with 
Comparative Comments
tuberculosis, leprosy, syphilis, Pneumocystis carini choroidopathy.
 As in other species, uveitis in humans is an important and complex
nocardiosis, and Lyme disease. Major viral causes of uveitis in humans
group of diseases. A major focus of the histopathologic study of 
include herpes simplex and herpes zoster viruses, Epstein-Barr 
specimens with uveitis is the determination of the cause. Uveitis may
 virus infection, cytomegalovirus infection, and congenital rubella 
result from non-infectious stimuli, such as surgical or non-surgical 
syndrome. Major fungal causes of uveitis include Candida albicans 
trauma, and endogenous agents, including tissue necrosis and 
infection, histoplasmosis and presumed ocular histoplasmosis,
reactions to allergens. Other non-infectious causes include
 cryptococcal infection and Aspergifus infection. Causes of parasitic
inflammation associated with systemic diseases and predisposing 
 uveitis in humans include toxoplasmosis, toxocariasis, and 
genetic factors, such as HLA antigens and allergic predispositions.
on chocer ciasis.
279
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.34 Toxocara canis ocular larva
migrans. (A) Gross photograph of the
retinal and pars plana surfaces of the eye
el eaas buous bop buno e wo
 granuloma deposits (arrows). (B) Gross
 photograph of a Bouin's-fixed dog eye
showing a migrating larval parasite 
(arrow). (C) Photomicrograph of three
sections of the same larval nematode
depicted in (B). (D) Lower magnification
of the retina and choroid from an
affected young dog showing a mixed
inflammation and segmental retinal 
necrosis (arrow).
A
B
[D]
Canine ocular melanosis (Fig. 9.35)
Ocular melanosis in Cairn Terriers
('pigmentary glaucoma')
There are 208 cases of ocular melanosis in dogs in the COPLOW
collection:
 The Cairn Terrier breed is prone to excessive pigmentation
 50 in Cairn terriers
function
22 in Boxer dogs
 An autosomal dominant mode of inheritance has been
·
 31 in Labrador Retrievers.
 proposed for ocular melanosis in Cairn Terriers
280
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.35 Ocular melanosis. (A) Cairn
Terrier, & years old: the irides are 
extremely darkly pigmented. Focal
subconjunctival pigment is present in the 
superior sclera. (B) Cairn Terrier, 12.5
years old: the same dog as in (A), 4.5
years later, showing increased
 subconjunctival pigment and pigment on
the anterior lens capsule (arrow). (C)
Labrador Retriever, 7 years old: iris detail
was lost due to the heavy pigmentation.
(D) Boxer, 12 years old: pigment 
infiltration totally masks iris vasculature.
Increased pigment is also present at the
pupil margin. (E) Gross photograph of a
Cairn Terrier eye affected with ocular
melanosis (pigmentary glaucoma). (F)
Subgross photomicrograph of a Cairn 
Terrier globe with glaucoma associated 
with ocular melanosis. The whole uvea is
hyperpigmented, but the iris base and a
focus in the pars plana show dramatic
nodular expansion. (G) Low
magnification photomicrograph showing
 a heavily pigmented affected iris filled
with bland round pigment-rich cells. (H)
Low magnification showing a heavily
pigmented choroid and optic nerve head
in an affected dog.
F
H
281
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
·Age of onset and rate of progression are variable
Canine ocular melanosis in breeds other
 The disease, in Cairn Terriers is usually bilateral but often not
than Cairn Terriers
symmetrical
Clinical features of melanosis in Cairn Terriers include:
 All of the clinical and morphologic features are the same as
 An early recognizable feature is that the iris of affected dogs
described for the Cairn Terrier, except that:
is very dark brown or black and has a prominent,
When ocular melanosis occurs in other breeds, it is usually
circumferential ridge at the iris root
unilateral
Pigmented particles may be seen free-floating within the
 Based on limited electron microscopic studies, melanophages
aqueous humor, deposited on the anterior lens capsule, or
may be the predominant cell type in other breeds.
coating the endothelial surface of the cornea and opening to
the drainage angle inferiorly
■Dark pigment patches become evident in the anterior sclera
Comparative Comments
and episclera
Ocular melanocytosis occurs in humans, generally as a unilateral
■
With progression, chronic glaucoma ensues, leading to
diffuse uveal nevus, causing heterochromia of the iris and a darkened 
blindness
choroid, associated with gray patches on the sclera and episclera. If
■ In some cases, progressive pigmentation in the posterior
the eyelid and brow are involved, the condition is known as
segment may be seen, obscuring the tapetum
 Morphologic features of melanosis in Cairn Terriers
development in Caucasians.
Diffuse over-pigmentation of the uvea
- An increase in the size of pigmented cells and an increase
in the number of pigmented cells
UVEAL NEOPLASIA
diau ue ansausuu pue adsnu uoaa -
 to distinguish if the pigmented cells are melanocytes or
melanophage cells
 Uveal neoplasia is an important differential consideration in animals
0 Two distinct cell types can be identified within this
that present clinically with intraocular masses, uveitis, intraocular
 population of large pigmented cells
hemorrhage, glaucoma or retinal detachment.
'souelau aq o sieade ada an zueuuaid au a
with different stages of melanosome development visible
Melanocytic neoplasia
on electron microscopy. These cells are variably
immuno-labelled using markers associated with
Melanocytoma in dogs (benign)
melanocytes that include HMB45, MITF and vimentin,
 This is a common intraocular neoplasm in dogs.
but not S-100 or Melan-A
- There are l090 uveal melanocytomas in the COPLOW
0 A subpopulation of cells have the appearance of
collection
melanophages, with melanosomes contained within
- Of these neoplasms:
lysosomal membranes on electron microscopy.
0 94% are in the anterior uvea (Fig. 9.36)
 Some of these cells are positively immunolabelled
0 6% are in the choroid (Fig. 9.37)
by CD-18, indicating that they are indeed
 The signalment of affected dogs may be summarized as
melanophages
follows:
■ Disruption of the normal uveal contour because of
- The average age of affected dogs is 9.7 years
excessive pigmentation and excessive accumulation of
0 There is a spike in incidence in dogs under 2 years, but
pigmented cells
 otherwise uveal melanocytoma is a disease of older dogs
- This disruption is most prominent at the iris base, anterior
 Affected dogs by gender (where known)
ciliary body and limbal sclera
0 Males: 169
 Infiltration of pigmented cells in the limbal sclera and
0 Neutered males: 302
episclera is often quite pronounced, and contributes to a
0 Females: 105
clinical impression of neoplasia
0 Spayed females: 454
Acquired staphyloma is seen occasionally
- No specific breeds are over-represented
■
 Some affected eyes also have lympho-plasmacytic uveitis
Frequently, melanocytoma occurs within heavily pigmented
and/or PIFVM
globes or those with melanosis
 Melanocytoma or malignant uveal melanoma occasionally
 Regardless of the extent of invasion, adequate removal by
 Occurs in affected eyes
local resection, enucleation or exenteration, is generally
■
 Distinguishing melanosis from melanocytoma
curative
- Many pathologists consider ocular melanosis to be a
-- There are rare but notable exceptions to this generally
diffuse variant of melanocytoma
benign biologic behavior.
At COPLOW, the distinct diagnosis of melanocytoma,
0 In the COPLOW collection, there are three documented
rather than melanosis, is based on the fnding of a
cases in which melanocytoma recurred in the orbit as
E Aq pateindod si uoium sseu e io 'sseu leuoiga1
maligmnant melanoma
mixture of heavily pigmented round cells and heavily
 Photocoagulation of presumed iris melanocytoma in dogs
 pigmented spindle cells. This combination is not seen in
is increasingly carried out by veterinary ophthalmologists,
melanosis
using diode laser. Although uveal melanocytic neoplasia is
Removal of the eye is generally carried out for the management
juauean jo uuoy siu pue saiads siu ul usiuaq Aleiauas
of glaucoma or to rule out neoplasia.
is considered relatively non-invasive, its application in the
absence of a definitive, histopathological diagnosis remains
somewhat controversial. As malignant melanoma may
282
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.36 Canine anterior uveal
melanocytoma. (A) Golden Retriever, 9.5
years old: the pigmented tumor appears
to have originated from the ciliary body
 and extends anteriorly and posteriorly
(arrow) to detach the retina. (B) Labrador
Retriever, 10 years old: the entire iris has 
a blotchy pigmentation. An elevated 
pigmented mass (arrows) resulted in a
dyscoria. (C) Mixed Breed, 9 years old: a
rise in lOP and corneal edema followed
the progression of this diffuse iris tumor.
(D) Mixed Breed, 7 years old: this large 
tumor has resulted in a severe dyscoria,
filled the anterior chamber inferiorly, and 
caused severe corneal edema. (E-G)
Gross photographs of dog eyes with
prominent melanocytoma within the 
globe and extending through the sclera
at the limbus (G). (H-J) Subgross
 photomicrographs showing the
distribution and staining pattern of
anterior uveal melanocytoma. (H)
 Extensive tumor necrosis and a limbal
scleral defect, a common feature of 
anterior uveal melanocytoma in dogs.
These globes can perforate at the limbus,
discharging semi-liquid black material.
G
?
①
283
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.37 Canine choroidal
melanocytoma. (A) Australian Shepherd,
7.5 years old: retinal edema and
elevation surround the rapidly
progressing tumor. (B) Chihuahua, 3
years old: an elevated pigmented mass
is present in this albinoid fundus. (C)
Shetland Sheepdog. 7 years old: the
edge of the mass (arrows) is difficult to 
delineate from the normal choroidal
pigment. (D) Golden Retriever, & years 
dld: the elevated pigmented mass
extends into the nerve fiber layer,
represented by pigment feathering on
the optic nerve and the temporal 
peripapillary retina (arrow). (E-G) Gross 
A
B
photographs showing choroidal
melanocytoma with or without invasion
beyond the sclera. (H-J) Subgross 
 photomicrographs showing choroidal
melanocytomas in dogs.
D
E
F
G
H
284
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.38 Canine uveal
melanocytoma, microscopic. (A)
Photomicrograph showing distortion of
the papillary margin of the iris in a dog 
with iridal melanocytoma. (B,C)
 Photomicrographs showing a
combination of heavily pigmented round 
cells and heavily pigmented spindle cells.
This combination of cell types is typical
of uveal melanocytoma in dogs. (D)
H&E-stained 1-micron section showing
the cellular features of the pigmented
round cells and the pigmented spindle
A
 cells, which characterize uveal
melanocytoma.
arise in eyes with melanocytoma (see below), diligent
 Even though malignant ocular melanoma is characterized
follow-up and monitoring for signs of progression is
warranted following laser therapy
metastasize and the prognosis is therefore only slightly
 Morphologic features of canine uveal melanocytoma) include
guarded
(Fig. 9.38):
 Morphologic features of malignant uveal melanoma include
Melanocytoma is usually made up of heavily pigmented
(Fig. 9.41):
large round cells and heavily pigmented spindle cells in
- Malignant melanoma is usually less pigmented than
variable proportions
melanocytoma, or is amelanotic
- As the tumor takes on a more and more malignant cellular
- Anaplastic nuclear features including anisokaryosis,
 profle, more spindle-shaped, less pigmented cells begin
karyomegaly, folded nuclei, and large nucleoli are
to predominate over a smaller proportion of heavily
characteristic
pigmented round cells
 A mitotic index greater than four mitotic fgures per
 The mitotic index is a valuable means of distinguishing
10 high power fields is indicative of malignant
between melanocytoma and malignant melanoma
melanoma
0 More than four mitotic figures per 10 high power fields
Feline diffuse iris melanoma (FDIM) (Figs 9.42, 9.43)
is indicative of malignant melanoma (see below) but is
■
 FDIM is a common dlinical presentation and pathologic
not necessarily predictive of malignant behavior
diagnosis in cats
 Malignant ocular melanoma in dogs
- There are 1358 cases of diffuse iris melanoma in the
■ This is less common than benign uveal melanocytoma in
COPLOW collection
'ssop
 Diffuse iris melanoma accounts for 26% of total feline
- There are 334 cases of malignant ocular melanoma in the
submissions and 50% of feline neoplasms submitted to
COPLOW (Figs 9.39, 9.40)
COPLOW
0 323 are in the anterior uvea
1 The signalment of affected cats may be summarized as
0 ll are in the choroid
follows:
 The signalment of affected dogs may be summarized as
- The average age of affected cats is 9.4 years old
follows:
- Affected cats by gender
- The average age of affected dogs is 10.3 years
D Males: 55
0 In contrast to melanocytoma, there is no spike in
0 Neutered males: 643
incidence in the 0 to 2 year age group
0 Females: 65
 Affected dogs by gender (where known)
0 Spayed females: 541
0 Males: 37
Clinical histories indicate that FDIM begins as focal or
D Neutered males: 109
multifocal areas of iridal pigmentation that are gradually
0 Females: 21
progressive (Fig. 9.44)
0 Spayed females: 142
 In the earliest stage, the pigmentation is strictly confned
 Frequently, malignant melanoma occurs in eyes with
to the iridal surface. Lesions sampled at this stage are
melanocytoma
diagnosed as iris melanosis
285
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.39 Canine uveal malignant
melanoma, clinical. (A) German Shepherd 
 Dog. 1 year old: the pigmented mass to
the left progressed posteriorly to detach
the retina. (B) Miniature Schnauzer, 8
years old: the entire iris was diffusely
infiltrated, resulting in total loss of the 
fine iris detail. (C) Mixed Breed, 10 years
old: diffuse iris pigmentation, especially 
obvious at the pupil margin, also resulted 
in dyscoria. (D) Mixed Breed, 11 years
old: extensive intraocular involvement led 
to glaucoma and severe exposure
keratitis of the cornea.
B
D
 The extent of the pigmented lesions increases either by
- It is very difficult to accurately estimate the rate of
 enlargement of individual spots, or by increase in the
metastatic disease in affected cats. Obtaining documented
number of pigmented spots
evidence of metastatic disease may be confounded by long
- The disease is designated as early FDIM when the pigment
periods of latency in many cases
cells extend into the iridal stroma but the extent of 
0 Most cats with documented metastatic disease
involvement is still entirely within the iris
had advanced disease, ie., Extension of the
■
 The progression of disease is highly variable
neoplasm beyond the iris and/or neoplastic cells
 Cases have been documented where the disease has slowly
within the scleral venous plexus, at the time of
progressed over a 10-year period with little or no apparent 
emucleation
effect on the health of the eye, or where FDIM has
- Metastasis occurs more often to the abdominal cavity/
gradually led to glaucoma
 abdominal organs than to the lungs
Other cases progress rapidly, developing glaucoma and
 Recurrence in the orbit may also occur
metastases over a short timescale (Fig. 9.45)
FDIM demonstrates a tremendous degree of variation in
 At this time, there is no good way to predict the likely
 progression of disease in individual cats
number of histopathological variants are recognized
■
 This unpredictable progression makes it hard to offer advice
(Fig. 9.46):
on when to enucleate:
-- Round cell or polygonal cell
- Some clinicians will remove a globe when they document
0 Most common
any evidence of continued growth and progression of
 Spindle cell
 pigmented lesions, while others will wait until glaucoma
- Balloon cell
develops
0 Large melanocytes with vacuolated cytoplasm and
- Cats with early FDIM at the time of enucleation, that 
round, central nuclei
 generally have not yet developed glaucoma, survive at the
Anaplastic variants
 same rate as unaffected cats
- Giant cells
286
The uvea
Chapter
9
Figure 9.40 Canine uveal malignant melanoma, pathology. (A) A montage of eight gross photographs of canine globes that contain uveal malignant
anterior or posterior uveal malignant melanomas.
Figure 9.41 Canine uveal malignant
melanoma, microscopic. (A,B)
Photomicrographs of sections from two
dogs with uveal malignant melanoma
showing characteristic features of 
malignancy, including mitotic figures and 
 atypical chromatin distribution.
287
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.42 Feline diffuse iris melanoma
(FDIM), clinical. (A) DSH, 9 years old:
multiple foci of abnormal pigment are 
present. Mild elevation of the iris was
noted nasally. (B) DSH, 12.5 years old:
this is the same cat as in (A), 3.5 years
later. Increased pigment plus elevation of 
the iris due to the infiltration are present.
(C) DSH, 12 years old: diffuse 
 pigmentation is present throughout the 
iris. (D) DSH, 15 years old: this iris is 
diffusely heavily pigmented. (E) Maine 
Coon Cat, 13 years old: the iris is 
diffusely pigmented with focal areas of 
increased pigment. Dyscoria is present 
and the mottled tapetal reflex represents
pigment (arrow) on the anterior surface
of the lens. (F) DsH, 16 years old: the 
heavily pigmented and infiltrated iris 
has resulted in a secondary glaucoma.
 Pigment is present on the anterior lens 
surface (arrow).
C
288
The uvea
Chapter
6
 Figure 9.43 Feline diffuse iris melanoma
(FDIM), pathology. (A-F) Gross 
photographs of feline globes with
variable degrees of involvement with
feline diffuse iris melanoma (FDIM).
Greater involvement increases the risk of 
metastatic disease. (E) The globe from 
a blue-eyed Siamese cat with an.
amelanotic tumor, which would be
expected. (F) A globe with an
atypical distribution. (G-l) Subgross 
 photomicrographs showing FDiM to
variable degrees. The globe in (H) has 
atypical distribution, because the tumor
is not diffuse.
D
E
F
G
(H
Amelanotic variants are often clinically mistaken for
Equine anterior uveal melanocytic neoplasms
inflammatory disease
 There are 17 cases of equine intraocular melanocytic
■
 Not all cases are strictly diffuse in the iris. Variations in
neoplasia in the COPLOW collection
tumor distribution occur where the neoplasm exists as solid
■
 Although dermal melanocytic neoplasia is common in
localized masses or other cases which are primarily in the
horses, equine ocular melanocytic neoplasms are rare, with
ciliary body or even the choroid
few reports in the veterinary literature
■
 Although uveal melanomas have been experimentally
 Reported cases have generally shown benign histological
induced in cats by feline sarcoma virus infection, there is
characteristics.
 no compelling evidence to support an important role for
retrovirus infection in the spontaneous development of feline 
anterior uveal melanoma
Comparative Comments
●Feline atypical melanoma (Fig. 9.47)
 This is an uncommon variant of uveal melanoma in cats:
 Uveal malignant melanoma is the most common primary intraocular
- There are only 23 cases in the COPLOW collection,
tumor in adult humans, with an incidence in the United States of 
approximately six cases per million. These occur predominantly in the 
representing only 1% of feline neoplasms in the collection
choroid (85%) with about 10% in the ciliary body and 5% in the iris.
 These are multifocal masses composed entirely of very
 Except in the iris, uveal malignant melanoma is a highly aggressive
heavily pigmented round cells, with bland small round
tumor, and about half of patients with this type die with metastatic 
nuclei only visible on bleached sections
disease within 10-15 years of diagnosis.
- The tumors are distributed throughout the uvea and may
In 1931, Colonel George R. Callender at the Armed Forces Institute
involve the iris but, in contrast to FDIM, they are not
aul uo paseg 'sadki xis otui showni asaul payissep Abojouied jo
centered on the iris
morphology of the tumor cells. A modified Callender classification 
- A characteristic feature, seen in most cases, is the
 continues to be used for the cytologic classification of these tumors.
appearance of aggregates of tumor cells on the retinal
 The major categories are spindle cell nevus; spindle cell
pigment epithelium, flling the sub-retinal space and
jo anxiwj adkt llin-paxiu pue ewoue jaw pioilaunida ewoue jau 
extending into the retina
spindle and epithelioid cells). This classification has proved less 
 Despite the bland cellular features, several of these
useful in tumors in other species.
■
neoplasms have metastasized
289
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.44 Feline iris melanosis and
early FDIM. (A-C) Gross photographs
showing the early stages of FDIM or, in 
the case of (A) feline iridal melanosis. (D)
Photomicrograph of the anterior surface
 of the iris showing the earliest stages of
 FDIM characterized by neoplastic cells 
extending into the iris stroma (arrows)
and not just on the surface. If dysplastic
 pigment cells are confined to the anterior
surface only, that defines feline iridal
 melanosis. However, these cells extend 
A
B
a short distance into the iris stroma
defining early FDIM. (E) Low
magnification photomicrograph of a
feline iris in which the pigmented cells
are only on the surface (arrows).
therefore, melanosis.
C
D
Figure 9.45 Metastatic FDIM. (A,B)
Metastatic HDlM in the kidney and the
liver. Metastatic disease, when it occurs,
 is most likely to occur in the abdominal
cavity.
A
B
290
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.46 FDIM, microscopic. The
montage illustrates some of the
histologic variability in feline diffuse iris
 melanoma. (A,B) Examples of round and
 polygonal cell tumors, the most common
types. (C) Spindle cells. (D) Balloon cells,
 common as individual cells or in small 
 clusters, and, more rarely. as whole
populations of cells. (E,F) Anaplastic
tumors with multinucleate forms.
B
D
Uveal epithelial tumors
 Irido-ciliary epithelial tumors can arise from either the non-
 pigmented or pigmented epithelium of the ciliary body or, less
Irido-ciliary epithelial tumors in dogs (Hgs 9.48, 9.49)
frequently, the iris
There are 718 cases in the COPLOW collection, accounting for 12.5%
Irido-ciliary epithelial tumors often present because of a pink,
 of canine neoplastic submissions
tan or pigmented mass in the posterior chamber or anterior
chamber
 Tumors of the irido-ciliary epithelium are the second most
The main differential considerations are melanocytoma and
common primary ocular neoplasm in dogs
maligmant melanoma
The signalment of affected dogs represented in the COPLOW
Clinical diagnosis may be complicated in cases with cormeal
collection may be summarized as follows:
 opacity, intraocular hemorrhage, or other opacity of the ocular
The average age of affected dogs is 8.2 years
media
■Affected dogs by gender (where known):
 Other conditions that are frequently associated or concurrent
Males: 83
with irido-ciliary epithelial tumors include:
- Neutered males: 274
■Neovascular glaucoma
Females: 34
■ Intraocular hemorrhage
Spayed females: 288
Asteroid hyalosis, although generally considered to be of 
 There are ll3 Golden Retrievers and 165 Labrador Retrievers,
little clinical significance, is seen in association with 27% of
with this breed accounting for 39% of cases
canine irido-ciliary epithelial tumors
291
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.47 Feline atypical uveal
melanoma. (A) Gross photograph
showing atypical ocular melanoma in a
cat. The tumor is darkly pigmented and 
multifocal. (B) Subgross photomicrograph
of feline atypical ocular melanoma
showing extensive and multifocal
involvement with extension well beyond 
the sclera. (C) Low magnification
 photomicrograph showing the
characteristic involvement of the RPE in
feline atypical ocular melanoma. (D)
Photomicrograph of a bleached section
showing the characteristic bland tumor
cells with a round profile and bland-
appearing round nuclei.
A
B
Classification based on invasiveness (Fig. 9.50)
 These tumors resemble the extremely rare human tumor,
Non-invasive adenoma
0l aayll aie aa pue eouiouae piudowoaid
o iaisod a on pauguo aaua ae so asau -
metastasize
anterior chamber and do not invade the substance of the
- Usually stain with both cytokeratin and vimentin
uvea
Morphologic features of canine irido-ciliary epithelial tumors
Uveo-invasive adenoma
(Fig. 9.52)
- These tumors are still considered benign by morphologic
 Morphologic features of the epithelial cells
criteria. Although they invade the uveal stroma they do not
 90% of the neoplasms are predominantly non-pigmented,
 demonstrate scleral invasion
although about half of the tumors have some pigmented
Irido-ciliary adenocarcinoma
cells
- Tumors which invade the sclera are designated
 Degree of differentiation varies with biologic behavior
adenocarcinoma by virtue of their invasive behavior:
- Morphologic variants are:
116 cases in the COPLOW collection are dassified as
0 Palisading ribbons, the most common pattern
adenocarcinoma based on these criteria
0 Pleomorphic solid sheets
 Adenocarcinoma has a more anaplastic morphologic
0 Anaplastic
 phenotype than adenoma but is still not likely to
Morphologic patterns of the extracellular matrix
metastasize
60% of these neoplasms demonstrate thick, branching
The more aggressive and infiltrative the tumor, the more
basal laminae, in a very distinctive pattern, which
likely the neoplastic cells are to be positively immuno-
au yo uood e is1al ie un uis sad yhm 1iuae 1i1s
labelled for cytokeratin as well as vimentin
tumor
■Pleomorphic adenocarcinoma (Fig. 9.51)
 The remainder have thin basal laminae which subdivide
Very rarely, adenocarcinoma of the irido-ciliary epithelium
 cords, clusters, or sheets of neoplastic cells
is aggressively invasive, extending throughout the globe
  Many exhibit extracellular hyaluronic acid secretion
 and infiltrating deeply into the orbit and into vascular
This can be demonstrated by Alcian blue staining.
structures
before and after treatment of tissue sections with
 There are 10 cases in the COPLOW collection and all
hyaluronidase
of them are in eyes with a history of chronic disease,
 Extracellular metaplastic bone is seen only rarely in canine
diagnosed as uveitis or glaucoma
tumors
292
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.48 Canine irido-ciliary epithelial
tumors, clinical. (A) Japanese Akita, 8
years old: a pink vascularized ciliary body
adenoma is present. (B) Beagle, 10 years
dld: the white cauliflowered mass was
diagnosed as an irido-ciliary adenoma.
(C) Mixed Breed, & years old: the anterior
chamber is filled with a yellow-pink mass
with hemorrhage. This was diagnosed
as a ciliary body adenocarcinoma. (D)
Poodle, 10 years old: the ciliary body
adenocarcinoma totally occluded the 
 angle superiorly. Strands of hemorrhage
 are present on the corneal endothelium.
(E) Boston Terrier, 6 years old: both the 
apigmented massinferiorly and the
pigmented mass (arrow) arising from the
posterior iris were diagnosed as a ciliary
body adenoma. (F) Cocker Spaniel, 12 
years old: detail of the anterior segment
is concealed due to the corneal edema 
and vascularization. The ciliary body
adenoma can be seen adjacent to the
cornea (arrow).
F
 Immunohistochemical profle:
■ TERT (telomerase reverse transcriptase) staining
■Vimentin positive
■
 Neuron specific enolase positive
neoplasm
■
 S-100 labelling is variable
auun yim uoeiosse ul uaas uao saimeay pioouied
■
 Cytokeratin labelling variable
irido-ciliary epithelial tumors include: (Fig. 9.53)
 Benign irido-ciliary adenomas are often cytokeratin
 Pre-iridal fbrovascular membranes (PIFVM)
negative
- These can be associated with intraocular hemorrhage
一
 aseau ot siade uoissia uaoi ao
and/or neovascular glaucoma
increasing aggressiveness of the neoplasm
 Asteroid hyalosis
Cytokeratin 20 expression appears to decrease with
 27% of dogs with irido-ciliary epithelial tumors also have
increasing aggressiveness of the neoplasm
 asteroid hyalosis.
293
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
irido-ciliary epithelial tumors. The characteristic feature is to fill the posterior chamber and cradle the lens. The tumors can be pigmented or 
non-pigmented.
294
The uvea
Chapter
6
 Figure 9.50 Canine irido-ciliary epithelial
tumors, invasiveness. (A) Subgross
 photomicrograph showing canine
irido-ciliary tumor, which is not invading 
the uveal tract and exists entirely within 
the aqueous-filled posterior chamber. (B)
 Subgross photomicrograph showing an
uveoinvasive tumor. (C) Subgross 
photomicrograph showing an
adenocarcinoma, a tumor that invades 
both the uvea and the inner sclera. (D) A
truly malignant canine irido-ciliary 
adenocarcinoma with features of the
human pleomorphic adenocarcinoma.
A
B
?
Irido-ciliary epithelial tumors in cats
They seldom contain cords or ribbons of epithelial
cells; rather, they are composed of solid sheets of
There are 103 cases of irido-ciliary epithelial tumors in cats (Figs 9.54.
 polygonal cells which can be diffcult to recognize as being
9.55) in the COPLOW collection. Together, these constitute 2% of the
epithelial
feline submissions and 3.7% of feline ocular neoplasms.
1 There is a delicate but very regular vascular stroma which
 Irido-ciliary epithelial tumors are the fourth most common
subtly subdivides the tumor mass into small subunits, and is 
intraocular neoplasm in cats, following diffuse iris melanoma,
made more apparent with the PAS stain
lymphoma and post-traumatic sarcoma
■
 About 30% of feline irido-ciliary adenomas have metaplastic
 The signalment of affected cats may be summarized as follows:
bone within the mass
 The average age of affected cats is 9.1l years
  The solid sheets of tumor tissue are often interrupted by
■Affected cats by gender (where known)
cavitated cystic spaces. Occasionally, the tumors are
Males: 6
predominantly cystic.
- Neutered males: 45
- Females: 1
 Feline ocular neuroglial tumor (Fg. 9.57)
 Spayed females: 39
 Feline irido-ciliary epithelial tumors generally fill the posterior
This is a rare but distinctive neoplasm arising in the uvea of cats. There
chamber, cradle the lens equator, and infltrate the iris, ciliary
are four cases in the COPLOW collection.
body, anterior chamber, and rarely the inner sclera
Morphologic features of feline irido-ciliary epithelial tumors:
Morphologic features
(Fig. 9.56)
 The tumor appears solid and white on observation at the time
 These tumors are almost always composed of non-pigmented
of gross sectioning
epithelial cells
The tumor bulges inward, extending from the uveal tract
295
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.51 Canine irido-ciliary
adenocarcinoma (pleomorphic
adenocarcinoma). (A) Gross photograph
of a highly malignant canine irido-ciliary
 adenocarcinoma (pleomorphic
adenocarcinoma). (B) Subgross
photomicrograph of the globe in (A).
(C,D) Photomicrographs showing the 
histologic appearance of pleomorphic
adenocarcinoma using a PAS stain. The
distinct sharply delineated basement 
membrane is often very regionally
apparent. (E) Immunohistochemical stain
for vimentin showing the characteristic
 positive staining. (F) Positive staining for
cytokeratin, a feature seen more often in
A
B
malignant tumors of irido-ciliary origin
 and less commonly in benign tumors.
Histologically, the tumor is a spindle cell tumor with
 Skeletal muscle is a feature of teratoid medulloepithelioma
moderately anaplastic features
in humans, however these feline tumors lack other features
Immunohistochemical profle
characteristic of medulloepithelioma.
Melan A negative (an antigen expressed by melanocytes)
GFAP positive (a marker for glial cells)
Medulloepithelioma (Figs 9.58, 9.59)
S100 positive (indicative of a neural crest derivation)
 Synaptophysin positive [a protein associated with synaptic
Medulloepithelioma is an ocular neoplasm in the general family
transmission and neuroendocrine function)
of primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET)
■
 Chromogranin A positive [a neuroendocrine secretory
 These tumors arise from different tissues that are
protein)
derived from primitive neuroectoderm of the neural
 Desmin positive (indicating muscle tissue differentiation)
tube
 Skeletal muscle actin positive (a skeletal muscle isoform of
 On the one hand, medulloepithelioma is dlosely related to 
actin)
irido-ciliary adenoma and on the other hand, the tumor
 The immunohistochemical profle suggests a neoplasm with
shares many features with retinoblastoma (discussed in
neural, glial, and skeletal muscle features
further detail in Ch. 11)
296
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.52 Canine irido-ciliary
epithelial tumors, microscopic. (A)
Photomicrograph showing the most
typical features seen in canine irido-ciliary
adenoma. Bland epithelial cells are
arranged along thick but indistinct
eosinophilic basement membrane
structures (H&E). (B) Photomicrograph of
an Alcian blue PAS-stained specimen
from an area similar to (A). With PAS,
the basement membranes stand out.
The Alcian blue-positive extracellular
hyaluronic acid is also characteristic
(arrow). (C) Photomicrograph showing
less-differentiated epithelial features
A
日
in a case without the thick basement 
membranes. (D) PAS-stained tumor with
thinner basement membranes than (B)
and more cellular atypia than (A) or (B).
10:7
(E) Irido-ciliary epithelial tumor
with anaplastic cellular features
including multinucleate cells. (F)
Immunohistochemical stain for vimentin 
showing characteristic positive staining.
 Both benign and malignant tumors stain
with vimentin, as does the native
irido-ciliary epithelium. (G)
Immunohistochemical stain for
cytokeratin is positive, which is 
characteristic of the more anaplastic or
invasive tumors. The benign tumors and 
D
the native irido-ciliary epithelial cells do 
not stain with broad-spectrum
cytokeratin.
 Retinoblastoma is a common retinal neoplasm of humans 
 In dogs, the tumors usually originate in the ciliary body and can
but is exceedingly rare in domestic animals
extend to involve the retina, whereas in horses some of the
 Irido-ciliary adenoma in dogs can have features typical of
tumors originate in the optic nerve
medulloepithelioma in segments of the tumor
Morphologic features of medulloepithelioma:
 Medulloepithelioma is a very rare tumor in dogs and horses,
 The tumors are delicate, often multiple white masses, often
and is extremely rare in cats 
within the posterior chamber, and they can be locally
■ There are 29 cases in the COPLOW collection:
infiltrative
24 in dogs
Tumors often have papillary or botryoid extensions
- 2 in horses
within the aqueous humor and, in some cases, can seed
- 1 in a cat
the anterior chamber with miliary, small nodular metastatic
 2 in other species (llama and goldfish)
■ Isolated cases have been reported in other species, including
 Tumors tend to show a pattern of survival around blood
birds and llama. However, reports are too sparse to allow an
vessels with extensive necrosis away from vessels
estimate of the prevalence of this neoplasm
The hallmark histological feature is the formation of
ae aa  siee n u s u e
rosettes
many exceptions:
-- Flexner-Wintersteiner rosettes and Homer-Wright rosettes 
■
 For example, only 7 of the 24 canine in cases in the
are also seen in retinoblastoma and other PNET Tumors
COPLOW archive are from dogs less then 5 years old
and are not specific for medulloepitheliomas
297
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.53 Secondary features
associated with irido-ciliary epithelial
tumors. (A) Gross photograph of a
canine globe with a pigmented 
irido-ciliary adenoma and prominent
asteroid hyalosis (arrow). (B) Gross
photograph of canine globe with
irido-ciliary adenoma and asteroid
hyalosis (arrow). (C) Photomicrograph
showing asteroid hyalosis (Alcian blue
PAS). (D) Photomicrograph showing
 preiridal fibrovascular membrane and
ectropion uvea in a canine globe with
irido-ciliary epithelial tumor (arrow).
8
C
 Larger, more complex multi-layered rosettes or tube
Uveal lymphoma is the second most common intraocular
structures lined by columnar neuroblastic cells are the
neoplasm of cats
defining feature of medulloepithelioma
 These cases do not include the round cell variant of feline
 Although medulloepithelioma is locally invasive it is only
post-traumatic ocular sarcoma (FPTOS). The round cell
rarely meta static.
variant of FPTOS is distinguished from feline uveal
lymphoma unrelated to trauma by its wide distribution in
the globe, presence of lens capsule rupture, extent of necrosis
and history. This tumor, which is also a form of lymphoma.
Comparative Comments
is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 5 and later in this 
Tumors of the retinal pigment epithelium and the epithelium of 
chapter.
the cliary body and iris are uncommon in humans and, in general,
The average age of affected cats is 9.8 years and there is no
parallel the description given for other species. These may take 
breed predilection. The FeLV/FIV status of affected cats is not
the form of adenomas or adenocarcinomas
often recorded in the COPLOW archive, however, there is no
 Medulloepitheliomas (dictyomas) are congenital neuroepithelial
tumors arising from primitive medullary epithelium and are usually
infected by either retrovirus
located in the ciliary body. Although some of these tumors appear 
Approximately half of feline uveal lymphomas are seen in
histologically malignant, most have a relatively benign course if
combination with lympho-plasmacytic uveitis:
 confined to the eye
■ The relationship between lymphoma and inflammation is
 Fuchs adenomas are benign proliferations of the nonpigmented
not clear
je bupu leuappui ue Aiensn aie asaul 'wnauiida Ae 
Lymphoma in association with uveitis is less likely to clearly
autopsy or enucleation and rarely have clinical significance.
express markers of T-cell or B-cell differentiation. However.
 these neoplasms are just as likely to impact lifespan/survival
 Based on limited follow-up information available uveal
lymphoma generally represents a systemic rather than localized
Uveal lymphoma and histiocytic neoplasia
disease process. However, ocular disease is frequently the
presenting complaint and may precede signs of systemic
Uveal lymphoma in cats (Fig. 9.60)
involvement
There are 284 cases in the COPLOW collection, accounting for 5.5%
This experience suggests that chemotherapy may be
of feline submissions and 1o% of ocular neoplastic submissions in
warranted in cats following enucleation of a globe that
cats
 appears to be affected in isolation 
298
The uvea
Chapter
9
 Figure 9.54 Feline irido-ciliary epithelial
tumors, clinical. (A) DSH, 7 years old:
the large pink vascularized ciliary body
adenoma fills almost the entire pupil.
(B) DLH, 9 years old: this irido-ciliary
adenoma has extended through the
 angle and into the anterior and posterior
 chambers (arrow). Resulting hemorrhage
is present in the anterior chamber
inferiorly. (C) DSH, 9 years old: this
irido-ciliary adenoma is extending from 
the posterior iris. The mass also resulted
in a retinal detachment. (D) DMH, 11
years old: the irido-ciliary adenoma has
invaded through the angle and into
the iris stroma. Extensive vitreous
hemorrhage prevented visualization of 
the fundus.
A
C
D!
● The most common ocular tissue to be involved is the anterior
 Ocular involvement is common in dogs with multicentric
uvea (iris and ciliary body). Uveal involvement may be nodular
lymphoma
Or diffuse. However, the retina, choroid, cormea (particularly the
Ocular involvement is more likely to be bilateral in dogs than
limbal region)., adnexa, peripheral nerve tissue or optic nerve
in cats, however bilateral cases are less likely to undergo
 may also be affected
enucleation
 The ciliary body epithelium is often distorted by an infiltrate of
The anterior uvea is the most common tissue involved
neoplastic cells, a feature which may prove useful in making the
but lymphoma can also be recognized in the retina, cornea,
distinction between lymphoma and melanoma, as melanoma is
adnexa, orbit, optic nerve head, or in peripheral nerve
unlikely to specifically affect the ciliary body epithelium
tissue
Immunohistochemical labeling of leukocyte differentiation
As is the case in cats, the ciliary body epithelium is often
antigens and/or melanocytic markers can also help to
distorted by an infiltrate of neoplastic cells, a feature which may
distinguish between lymphoma and amelanotic melanoma
prove useful in making the distinction between lymphoma and
 There is not enough information to draw conclusions 
melanoma, as melanoma is unlikely to specifically affect the
ciliary body epithelium.
ocular lymphoma. However, tumors of both T-cell and B-cell
lineage occur.
Intravascular lymphoma in dogs, malignant
Uveal lymphoma in dogs (Fg. 9.61)
angioendotheliomatosis (Fg. 9.62)
 Lymphoma is the third most common intraocular neoplasm in
There are six cases of intravascular lymphoma affecting the eye in the
s8op
COPLOW collection, all in different breeds.
■ There are 188 cases in the COPLOW collection, representing
 Intravascular lymphoma is a rare condition, characterized by
1.3% of all canine submissions and 3.3% of canine
primary neoplastic proliferation of lymphocytes within the
neoplasms in the collection
lumen of blood vessels
299
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.55 Feline irido-ciliary epithelial
tumors, gross. A montage of gross
photographs of 12 feline globes with
irido-iliary epithelial tumors showing the
variations of involvement. The tumors are
characteristically white, fill the posterior
 chamber and cradle the lens.
300
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.56 Feline irido-ciliary
epithelial tumors, microscopic. (A)
Photomicrograph showing the typical 
solid pattern of polygonal cells and scant 
delicate vascular supply (H&E). (B) The
samme case as (A) stained with PAS to
show the characteristic pattern of thin 
basement membranes around individual
cells or small cell clusters. (C) This case 
has more obvious epithelial cords
and a pigmented background. (D)
Photomicrograph showing metaplastic
bone (arrows), which is a feature in
about half of the feline irido-ciliary
epithelial tumors. (E,F) Photomicrographs 
showing features of two more anaplastic
 irido-ciliary epithelial tumors. The tumor
in (F) is composed of spindle cells.
D
E
●The disease is systemic but the eye and the brain are common
Comparative Comments
sites for involvement
■ Clinical signs of ocular disease, including uveitis,
 Lymphoma of the uveal tract in humans occurs almost exclusively
panophthalmitis and retinal detachment may precede other
in association with systemic malignant lymphoma 
signs of systemic involvement
 In addition, the choroid may be involved with lymphoid 
 Morphologic features of intravascular lymphoma
proliferation, either in association with systemic 
 Neoplastic lymphocytes fill widely dilated vascular spaces in
lymphoproliferative disease or as a primary ocular process 
the uvea
 It is important to distinguish inflammatory pseudotumor from 
 Hemorrhage, edema, and infarction are seen in the tissues
lymphoma on the basis of lymphocyte typing.
 supplied by the affected vessels.
 Neoplastic cells can also spill over into the tissues near
vessels
 This neoplasm does not form mass lesions.
301
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.57 Feline ocular neuroglial
tumor. (A,B) Gross photograph and 
subgross photomicrograph showing the 
characteristic features of feline ocular 
neuroglial tumor. A solid white tumor
extends from the choroid and grows
into the center of the globe. (C-H)
Immunohistochemical stains showing
positive staining for GFAP (C), S-100 (D),
synaptophysin (E). chromogranin A (F).
desmin (G), and skeletal muscle actin (H).
B
10r
D
302
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.58 Canine medulloepithelioma,
clinical. (A) English Springer Spaniel. 2 
years old: the whitish pink mass (arrow)
has displaced the iris anteriorly. (B) Mixed 
Breed, 4 years old: a highly vascularized
mass fills almost the entire pupil with
fluffy white opacities. (C) Chow Chow, 9
years old: this large mass displaced the
iris anteriorly. The histological diagnosis
was medulloepithelioma or ciliary body
adenoma. (D) Cocker Spaniel, 3 years
old: the iris is dark and displaced 
anteriorly. The white mass (arrow)
invading the iris added to the dyscoria.
A
R
Histiocytic sarcoma and related
 Neoplastic cells are pleomorphic, round or polygonal with
abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, cytoplasmic vacuoles, and
tumors (Figs 9.63, 9.64)
multinucleate forms
●Histiocytic sarcoma is a systemic canine neoplasm, in which
Positive by immunohistochemistry for CD18
Ocular disease may represent the initial presentation
 Rarer than histiocytic sarcoma is systemic histiocytosis
 Ocular involvement is typically unilateral
(Fig. 9.65)
■
 The presenting signs frequently relate to uveitis, secondary
There are 19 cases of canine systemic histiocytosis in the
glaucoma and/or the presence of an intraocular mass
COPLOW collection
lesion
■
 Four are in Bernese Mountain dogs
 There are 54 cases in the COPLOW collection with a diagnosis
■
 Ocular involvement is more likely to be episcleral or orbital
 of ocular histiocytic sarcoma
than uveal
  In these cases, ocular disease was the initial presentation
■
 Characterized by a more bland population of histiocytes.
 This neoplasm has a strong breed-association. Of the 54 cases in
 often with a vasocentric growth patterm
the COPLOW archive:
■16 are Rottweilers
18 are Labrador Retrievers
Spindle cell tumors of the iris in blue-eyed
 20 are Golden Retrievers 
dogs (SCTBED) (Fig. 9.66)
 Affected dogs often have other detectable masses or systemic
uodn io 'uoeanua yo aun aui ie paou aq deu ieun susis
There are 43 cases of spindle cell tumor of blue-eyed dogs in the
subsequent evaluation after histologic diagnosis of the ocular
COPLOW collection.
neoplasm
 This is a rare tumor type, accounting for only 0.7% of canine
Life expectancy following diagnosis is very short
neoplastic submissions in the COPLOW collection
Morphologic features of histiocytic sarcoma include:
All affected globes, to date, have had a blue iris or, at least, a
A solid white mass segmentally effacing uveal tissue
partly blue (heterochromic) iris
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.59 Canine medulloepithelioma,
pathology. (A) Gross photograph
showing a solid white 
medulloepithelioma filling approximately
60% of a dog's globe. (B) Clinical
photograph of a dog eye with
medulloepithelioma showing cavitated
white tubes of neoplastic tissue in the
anterior chamber (arrow). (C-E) Subgross
 photomicrographic images show
medulloepithelioma in three dogs.
(F) Photomicrograph showing the
characteristic feature of cavitated tubes
lined by a complex layer of elongated
epithelial cells (arrow).
A
C
D
304
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.60 Feline uveal lymphoma. (A)
DSH, 11 years old: the temporal half of
the iris is infitrated resulting in dyscoria
and a shallow anterior chamber. (B) DSH,
13 years old: the entire iris is infiltrated 
resulting in a posterior synechia and 
a fibrinous exudate in the anterior 
chamber. (C) DSH, 12 years old: the
smooth pink elevation extends to the
Alleseu pue Alle yoduai uibyewu jdnd
(arrow). (D) DSH, 8 years old: the
generalized infiltrate in the iris has
resulted in a severe dyscoria and in
ectropion uvea (arrow). (E-G) Gross
A
B
photographs showing the typical
appearance of solid anterior uveal
Iymphoma. (H, I) Subgross 
photomicrographs showing solid uveal
neoplastic infiltrates. The case in (H)
involves the entire uvea. (J)
snouoouou e bulmous ydeibowooud
 population of neoplastic lymphocytes.
D
F
G
?
①
305
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.61 Canine uveal lymphoma.
(A) Border Collie, 6 years old: nodular
elevations of the iris (arrows) were
present in both eyes with little aqueous 
flare. (B) Samoyed, 6 months old: two 
 pink iris nodules are present. The miotic
pupil is difficult to observe. (C-E) Gross
photographs of canine globes showing 
the typical pattern of segmental invasion
of the anterior uvea with lymphoma.
(F-H) Subgross photomicrographs of
canine globes showing segmental uveal
infiltration by lymphoma. (1) High
magnification photomicrograph showing
anaplastic-appearing neoplastic
lymphocytes in canine lymphoma
affecting the eye. (J) Photomicrograph
A
B
showing tumor in the ciliary body
epithelium (arrows), a common finding
 in lymphoma, but rarely seen in other 
tumors.
F
G
M
306
The uvea
Chapter
6
 Figure 9.62 Canine intravascular
round cell tumor. (A) Subgross 
photomicrograph showing a canine
globe in which the uvea is distorted 
because of intravascular neoplastic round
cells. (B,C) Photomicrographs showing 
neoplastic cellular infiltrate primarily
within the lumina of uveal veins. (D)
Immunohistochemistry showing positive
staining for CD3 (T cells). (E)
Immunohistochemistry showing positive 
staining for CD18, suggesting a
A
macrophage phenotype. (F)
Immunohistochemistry showing positive
staining for MHC-Il, again suggesting a
macrophage phenotype.
Figure 9.63 Histiocytic sarcoma, clinical.
(A) Golden Retriever, 10 years old: the 
iris is heavily pigmented, but the white
iris infiltrate can be seen superiorly
(arrows). The masses in the eye and
 thorax were termed metastatic anaplastic
spindle cell tumors. (B) Golden Retriever,
11 years old: the pink mass originated 
from the iris to fill the nasal anterior
chamber.
B
307
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.64 Histiocytic sarcoma,
pathology. (A) A montage of gross
photographs of 12 canine globes with
histiocytic sarcoma showing the typical
pattern of a large tan mass with
extensive segmental infiltration in
the globe. (B) High magnification 
photomicrograph showing the typical 
appearance of histiocytic sarcoma,
including multinucleate giant 
cells with anaplastic features.
(C) Subgross photomicrograph of 
immunohistochemistry showing positive
staining for CD18, a marker for 
phagocytic cells.
C
 Tumors identified in pigmented uveal tissue have occurred in
 The neoplastic cells are spindle cells but they are highly
a utrm u a ao u 'o si aa aid qim s
tumor was located in the choroid, a pigmented iris and
Individual cells range from small, slender spindle cells,.
non-pigmented choroid
devoid of anaplastic features, to large plump cells which
 The signalment of affected dogs may be summarized as follows:
exhibit karyomegaly and may be profoundly anaplastic
The average age of affected dogs is 7.5 years
- The cellular organization may be consistent with that seen
■ In the 43 cases identified, the following breeds are
in peripheral nerve sheath tumors (Antoni A and Antoni B
Over-represented:
patterns)
Siberian husky (22 cases)
 Immunohistochemistry of SCTBED
 Catahoula hounds (four cases out of a total of 15
 - Vimentin positive, suggesting mesenchymal origin
Catahoula hounds represented in the COPLOW collection)
 S-100 positive, suggesting a neural crest origin
 Ocular neoplasia was suspected at the time of submission in
- GFAP positive in most cases
less than half of the cases in which SCTBED was diagnosed
0 Although considered a marker of astrocytes of the central
The tumor is usually located in the iris, extending into the 
nervous system, Schwann cells of nonmyelinated nerves 
ciliary body, but there are also cases entirely confined to the
are also positively labeled for GFAP For that reason the
choroid
GFAP-positive immunolabelling of the majority of
 The risk of metastasis is still undetermined. However, there are
SCTBED cases provides strong evidence for a Schwann
examples of tumors that have recurred in the orbit or within the
cell origin of this neoplasm
scleral shell, following enucleation or evisceration, respectively
0 GFAP immunohistochemistry in unaffected, normal
Morphologic features of SCTBED include:
canine blue irides demonstrates a plexus of GFAP-
 These tumors lead to a poorly delineated swelling most often
positive fibers in the anterior iris and, to a lesser extent
within the iris stroma, expanding and distorting the uveal
in other areas of the uvea, when compared with normal,
contour
pigmented iris tissue
805
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.65 Canine systemic
histiocytosis. (A) Clinical photograph
 showing neoplastic mass lesion of
 systemic histiocytosis distorting the
conjunctiva and lid tissues. (B) Subgross
 photomicrograph showing a canine
globe and orbital connective tissues with
systemic histiocytosis infiltrating the
muscle and loose connective tissues of
the orbit. (C) Photomicrograph showing
solid sheets of rather bland histiocytic
cells effacing the normal tissues. The
prominent vasocentric pattern (arrows) is
common in systemic histiocytosis. (D)
Photomicrograph showing spindle-
shaped bland-appearing histiocytes
A
?
staining positive for CD18, a marker for
phagocytic cells.
 Melan A is usually, but not always negative indicating that
Metastasis may occur by the following mechanisms:
the neoplasm is unlikely to be of melanocyte origin, which
 Extension into the orbit leading to local recurrence
nules out spindle cell amelanotic melanoma
Extension along the optic nerve or peripheral nerves to the brain
 There is a solitary, published report of a peripheral nerve
·
Hematogenous metastasis
sheath tumor with similar morphology in the eye of a dog.
Rarely, metastasis to lymph nodes.
but in that report the uvea was pigmented.
Feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma
Metastatic neoplasia
(FPToS) (see Ch. 5 for detailed discussion of
Metastatic pattern in dogs (Figs 9.68, 9.69)
this neoplasm) (Fig. 9.67)
 Exclusive of lymphoma, there are 223 cases of metastatic
neoplasia in canine eyes in the COPLOW collection,
most common intraocular tumor in cats.
accounting for 3.9% of all canine tumors submitted in the
 There are three morphologic variants of FPTOS:
COPLOW collection
au aa a on azisisnau uao ieu susidon 
1. The spindle cell variant is most common (70% of FPTOS)
histiocytic sarcoma, melanoma, hemangiosarcoma,
The spindle cell variant is thought to originate from lens
osteosarcoma, mammary adenocarcinoma, as well as many
epithelial cells
 others
 Extension beyond the sclera is a poor prognostic sign
■ Common morphologic features of metastatic neoplasia in the
2. The round cell variant (24% of FPTOS) (also discussed later in
canine eye include:
this chapter)
- Metastases may be present in one globe but recurrent
The round cell variant is thought to be a lymphoma
tumor in the second globe is common
■ Phenotyping the round cell variant FPTOS has proven to be
- A tendency to affect the anterior uvea more than the
diffcult
choroid
3. Post-traumatic osteosarcoma or chondrosarcoma (6% of FPTOS)
- Neoplastic cells are often identifiable in blood vessels
On average, there is a 7-year latency between a traumatic event with
- Neoplastic cells break out' from the uveal stroma and
lens capsule rupture and the diagnosis of FPTOS.
'line' the anterior or posterior chambers
605
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 9.66 Spindle cell tumor of
blue-eyed dogs (SCTBED). (A) Siberian
Husky, 4 years old: a subtle loss of iris
 architecture nasally (arrows) was the only
abnormality in this early case. The 
 prominent iris pigment may have been 
congenital. (B) Siberian Husky, 4.5 years 
old: the inferior anterior chamber is filled 
with the iris mass, associated fibrin, and 
hemorrhage. (C) Siberian Husky, 7 years 
old: the limbal cornea is vascularized.
The entire iris is infiltrated resulting in
dyscoria and posterior synechia (arrow)
(D) Australian Shepherd., 12 years old:
this nasal mass was originally diagnosed
A
as a neurofibrosarcoma of the iris. (E,F)
Gross photographs of globes from two
dogs with spindle cell tumor of blue-eyed 
dogs. (G) Gross photograph showing the 
 scleral shell from a dog that had an
evisceration in a globe with SCTBED. The 
tumor re-grew, leading to removal. (H)
Photomicrograph of SCTBED showing 
a cellular arrangement typical of the
 Antoni B pattern of schwannoma (H&E).
(1) Photomicrograph of a trichrome-
stained SCTBED showing a delicate
interplay between collagen (blue)
and cellular cytoplasm (red). (J)
 Immunohistochemistry showing
GFAP-positive staining. suggesting that 
the SCTBED is a tumor of the Schwann
cells of non-myelinated nerve fibers.
D
H
310
The uvea
Chapter
9
Figure 9.67 Feline post-traumatic ocular
sarcoma (FPTOS), pathology (A) Gross
 photograph showing spindle cell variant 
FPTOs. The tumor is distributed diffusely
around the inside of the globe and 
 extends through the sclera and into the
optic nerve. (B) Subgross photograph
showing spindle cell variant of FPTOs. (C)
Gross photograph showing round cell
variant of FPTOs. The pattern of diffuse 
infiltration within the globe and 
 extension beyond the sclera is common
to all three variants of FPTOS. (D) Gross
photograph showing osteosarcoma
variant of FPTOS. The globe has the
 same tumor distribution.
?
C
R
- In some cases, thorough evaluation fails to reveal a
 A pattern of choroidal infarction is often seen, with
 characteristic, wedge-shaped areas of tapetal discoloration
maligmant neoplasm, such as extraskeletal osteosarcoma or
and profound vascular attenuation visible on funduscopy
chondrosarcoma, may be made.
●Metastatic pattern in cats (Figs 9.70, 9.71)
 posterior segment of the globe
■ Exclusive of lymphoma, there are l0l cases of metastatic
 Ocular metastases may be diagnosed in cats with many
neoplasia in feline eyes in the COPLOW collection,
forms of malignant neoplasia; with pulmonary carcinoma,
accounting for 3.7% of all feline COPLOW submissions with
squamous cell carcinoma of undetermined origin, and
neoplasia
fbrosarcoma being seen most commonly.
■ Common morphologic features of metastatic neoplasia in cat
eyes include:
 Uveal metastases may be recognized in one or both
Comparative Comments
一
globes
 Metastatic carcinoma of the choroid is the most common intraocular
 A tendency to affect the choroid more often than the
malignant tumor in humans. The most common primary site of
anterior uvea
 choroidal metastases in males is the lung and in females the breast.
- When the anterior uvea is affected by metastatic epithelial
leplooup pauaubid (ubll io jouejaue juu Aeu shoun asaul
a o paue uu, e uy sas sseidoau a 'so
pjuaisis Kois!y jo siseg aut uo pausinbuisip aue pue sewouelau
inner surface of the iris and ciliary body
workup. fluorescein angiography, ultrasonography, and fine needle 
 There is often extensive and widespread invasion of blood
 aspiration biopsy when necessary.
vessels
311
VeterinaryOcularPathology
C
Figure 9.68 Metastatic tumors to the eye, canine. (A) Golden Retriever, 11 years old: this was diagnosed as a metastatic hemangiosarcoma.
was diagnosed as a metastatic amelanotic melanoma. (C) A montage of gross photographs of six canine eyes showing metastatic tumors. These
tumors are characteristically in the anterior uvea and anterior segment.
312
The llvea
Chapter
6
D
Figure 9.69 Metastatic osteosarcoma case. (A) Australian Shepherd cross, 5 years old: severe corneal edema prevented visualization of anterior
segment. Some 4 months prior to this photograph, a leg was amputated. Both globe and bone neoplasias were diagnosed as osteosarcoma.
(B) Left eye of the dog in (A), 3 months later. The dark area at the pupil margin and the cloudy area inferior (arrows) represent retinal elevations.
diagnosed on histopathology. (D) Low magnification photomicrograph of the same dog as (A) shows osteosarcoma invading the uvea (arrows).
313
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
A
B
C
D
Figure 9.70 Metastatic tumors to the eye, feline, fundus. (A) DsH, 13 years old: metastatic angioinvasive squamous cell carcinoma was diagnosed as
the cause of the abnormal tapetal coloration and retinal edema. (B) DsH, 14 years old: a metastatic intestinal adenocarcinoma was diagnosed in the 
retina and choroid accounting for the sheets of gray discoloration (black arrow). The optic disc (white arrow) was also infiltrated. (C) DsH, 15 years
old: a metastatic carcinoma was the etiology for the severe cellular infiltrate surrounding the optic disc (arrow). Tumors cells were found in the 
choroid, retina, and optic nerve meninges. (D) DsH, 17 years old: a metastatic adenocarcinoma of the sweat glands was the diagnosis of the choroidal
and subretinal involvement, leading to the retinal detachment.
314
The uvea
Chapter
6
Figure 9.71 Metastatic tumors to the
eye, feline, pathology. (A,B) Gross 
photographs showing how metastatic
tumors in feline globes characteristically
involve the choroid with retinal
detachment. (C) Gross photograph
showing the posterior segment from a
feline globe with chorioretinal metastatic
pattern. (D) Gross photograph of a feline
globe showing choroidal thickening
associated with metastatic neoplasia.
(E) Subgross photomicrograph of a
metastatic epithelial tumor showing a
line of basophilic metastatic tumor
(arrow) surrounding the detached
retina and the anterior uvea. (F)
Photomicrograph from a primary lung 
tumor showing the angioinvasive nature
A
 of the tumor. A pulmonary artery is lined
by neoplastic epithelium (arrows). (G)
 Photomicrograph showing the retina
and choroid from a feline globe with
 choroidal angioinvasive metastatic
carcinoma (arrows).
G
D
E
G
315
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anatomy and embryology
 Purebred dogs, 3rd edn. American College of Feline lympho-plasmacytic uveitis
Veterinary Ophthalmologists, Baton Rouge.
Cook, C.s., 1999. Ocular embryology and
Wilcock, B.P., Peiffer Jr., R.L., Davidson, M.G.,
congenital malformations. In: Gelatt, K.N.
LA.
1990. The causes of glaucoma in cats. Vet.
(Ed.), Veterinary ophthalmology, 3rd edn.
Degenerative, hyperplastic and
Pathol. 27, 35-40.
Lippincott Williams & wilkins, Philadelphia,
Davidson, M.G., Nasisse, M.P., English, R.V.,
 age-related conditions
pp.3-30.
et al., 1991. Feline anterior uveitis: a study
Samuelson, D.A., 1999. Ophthalmic anatomy.
Uveal cysts
of 53 cases. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 27,
In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary
Corcoran, KA., Koch, S.A., 1993. Uveal cysts in
77-83.
ophthalmology, 3rd edn. Lippincott
dogs: 28 cases (1989-1991). J. Am. Vet.
Peiffer Jr, R.L., Wilcock, B.P., 1991.
Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp.
Med. Assoc. 203, 545-546.
Histopathologic study of uveitis in cats: 139
31-150.
Gemensky-Metzler, A.J., wilkie, D.A., Cook,
cases (1978-1988). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Pedler, C., 1963. The fine structure of the
C.S., 2004. The use of semiconductor diode
198, 135-138
tapetum cellulosum. Exp. Eye. Res. 2.
laser for deflation and coagulation of
Chavkin, M., Lappin, M.R., Powell, C.C., et al.
189-195.
anterior uveal cysts in dogs, cats and horses:
1992. Seroepidemiologic and clinical
Bergmanson, J.P, Townsend, W.D., 1980. The
a report of 20 cases. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7,
observations of 93 cases of uveitis in cats.
morphology of the cat tapetum lucidum.
360-368.
Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 2, 29-36.
Am. J. Optom. Physiol. Opt. 57, 138-144.
Gilger, B.C., Davidson, M.G., Nadelstein, B.,
Lappin, M.R., Black, J.C., 1999. Bartonella spp
Lesiuk, T.P., Braekevelt, C.R., 1983. Fine
et al., 1997. Neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-
infection as a possible cause of uveitis in a
structure of the canine tapetum lucidum. J.
garnet laser treatment of cystic granula
cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 214, 1205-1207,
Anat. 136, 157-164.
iridica in horses: eight cases [1988-1996). 1.
1200.
Ollivier, EJ., Samuelson, D.A, Brooks, D.E.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 211, 341-343.
Lappin, M.R., Kordick, D.L., Breitschwerdt, E.B.,
et al., 2004. Comparative morphology of the
Peiffer, R.L., 1977. Iris cyst in a cat. Feline Pract.
2000. Bartonella spp antibodies and DNA in
tapetum lucidum (among selected species).
7, 15-17.
aqueous humour of cats. J. Feline Med. Surg.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 7, 11-22.
Belkin, PV., 1983. Iris cysts in cats. Feline Pract.
2, 61-68.
13, 12-18.
Ketring, K.L., Zuckerman, E.E., Hardy Jr., W.D.,
Congenital abnormalities
Deehr, A.1., Dubielzig, R.R., 1998. A
2004. Bartonella: a new etiological agent of
Cook, C.S., 1995. Embryogenesis of congenital
histopathological study of irido-ciliary cysts
feline ocular disease. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
eye malformations. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol.
and glaucoma in Golden Retrievers. Vet.
Assoc. 40, 6-12.
5. 109-123.
Ophthalmol. 1, 153-158.
Olivero, D.K., Riis, R.C., Dutton, A.G., et al..
Shibuya, K., Hirai, T., Nunoya, T., et al., 2003.
Sapienza, J.S., Simo, FJ., Prades-Sapienza, A.
1991. Feline lens displacement: a
 Unilateral ocular subalbinism in a laboratory
2000. Golden Retriever uveitis: 75 cases
retrospective analysis of 345 cases. Prog. Vet.
Beagle dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 6, 169-
(1994-1999). Vet. Ophthalmol. 3, 241-246.
Comp. Ophthalmol. 1, 239-244.
172.
Spiess, B.M., Bolliger, J.O., Guscetti, E, et al..
1998. Multiple ciliary body cysts and
Equine recurrent uveitis (ERU)
Iris hypoplasia and aniridia
secondary glaucoma in the Great Dane: a
Cook, C.S., Peiffer, R.L., Harling, D.E., 1983.
Buyukmihci, N.C., MacMillan, A., Scagliotti.
report of nine cases. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1,
Equine recurrent uveitis. Equine Vet. J.
R.H., 1992. Evaluation of zones of iris 
41-45.
(Suppl. 2), 57-60.
hypoplasia in horses and ponies. J. Am. Vet.
Abrams, K.L., Brooks, D.E., 1990. Equine
Med. Assoc. 200, 940-942.
Neovascular proliferation and
 recurrent uveitis: current concepts in
Joyce, I.R., 1983. Aniridia in a Quarterhorse.
tissue fibrosis
diagnosis and treatment. Equine Pract. 12.
Equine Vet. J. (Suppl. 2), 21-22.
Peiffer Jr., R.L., Wilcock, B.P., Yin, H., 1990. The
27-34.
Irby, N.L., Aguirre, G.D., 1985. Congenital
pathogenesis and significance of pre-iridal
Schwink, K.L., 1992. Equine Uveitis. Vet. Clin.
aniridia in a pony. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
fbrovascular membrane in domestic
North Am. Equine Pract. 8, 557-574.
186,281-283.
animals. Vet. Pathol. 27, 41-45.
Gilger, B.C., Michau, T.M., 2004. Equine
Joyce, J.R., Martin, J.E., Storts, R.W., et al., 1990.
Zeiss, C.J., Dubielzig, R.R., 2004. A morphologic
recurrent uveitis: new methods of
 lridal hypoplasia (aniridia) accompanied by
 study of intravitreal membranes associated
 management. Vet. Clin. North Am. Equine
 limbic dermoids and cataracts in a group of
with intraocular hemorrhage in the dog. Vet.
Pract. 20, 417-427, vii.
related Quarterhorses. Equine Vet. J. (Suppl.
Ophthalmol. 7, 239-243.
Miller, T.R., Brooks, D.E., Gelatt, K.N., et al.
10), 26-28.
1995. Equine glaucoma: clinical fndings and
Ueda, Y, 1990. Aniridia in a Thoroughbred
Uveitis
response to treatment in 14 horses. Vet.
horse. Equine Vet. I. (Suppl. 10), 29.
Hogan, M.J., Kimura, S.J., Thygeson, P., 1959.
Comp. Ophthalmol. 5, 170-182.
Crispin, S.M., Bazeley, K.J., Long, S.E., et al.
Signs and symptoms of uveitis: I. Anterior
Cullen, C.L., Grahn, B.H., 2000. Equine
2000. Two cases of aniridia in Llanwenog
uveitis. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 47, 155-170.
glaucoma: a retrospective study of 13 cases
sheep. Vet. Rec. 147, 364-365.
Kimura, S.J., Thygeson, P, Hogan, M.J., 1959.
presented at the Western College of
Signs and symptoms of uveitis. Il.
Veterinary Medicine from 1992 to 1999.
 Persistent pupillary membrane
Classification of the posterior
Can. Vet. J. 41, 470-480.
Roberts, S.R., Bistner, S.l., 1968. Persistent
manifestations of uveitis. Am. J.
Wilkie, D.A., Gilger, B.C., 2004. Equine
pupillary membrane in Basenji dogs. J. Am.
Ophthalmol. 47, 171-176.
glaucoma. Vet. Clin. North Am. Equine
Vet. Med. Assoc. 153, 533-542.
Hakanson, N., Forrester, S.D.,
,1990. Uveitis in
Pract. 20, 381-391, vii.
Barnett, K.C., Knight, G.C., 1969. Persistent 
the dog and cat. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small 
Matthews, A.G., Handscombe, M.C., 1983.
pupillary membrane and associated defects
Anim. Pract. 20, 715-735.
Uveitis in the horse: A review of the
in the Basenji. Vet. Rec. 85, 242.
Townsend, W.M., 2008. Canine and feline
aetiological and immunopathological aspects
ACVO Genetics Committee, 1999. Ocular
uveitis. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim.
 of the disease. Equine Vet. J. (Suppl. 2),
disorders presumed to be inherited in
Pract. 38, 323-346.
61-64.
316
The uvea
Chapter
6
Attenburrow, D.P., Donnelly, I.., Soulsby, E.J.L.,
autoantigens and peptides in equine
Morgan, R.V., 1989. Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada
1983. Periodic ophthalmia (recurrent
recurrent uveitis. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis.
syndrome in humans and dogs. Comp.
uveitis) of horses: An evaluation of the
Sci. 42, 393-398
Cont. Edu. Pract. Vet. 11, 1211-1218.
aetiological role of microfilariae of
Deeg, C.A., Ehrenhofer, M., Thurau, S.R., et al..
Lindley, D.M, Boosinger, T.R., Cox, N.R., 1990.
Onchocerca cervicalis and the clinical
2002. Immunopathology of recurrent uveitis
Ocular histopathology of Vogt-Koyanagi-
 management of the condition. Equine Vet. J.
in spontaneously diseased horses. Exp. Eye
Harada-like syndrome in an Akita dog. Vet.
(Suppl. 2), 48-56.
Res. 75, 127-133.
Pathol.27, 294-296.
Williams, R.D., Morter, R.L., Freeman, M.J.
Deeg, C.A, Thurau, S.R., Gerhards, H., et al..
Laus, I.L., Sousa, M.G., Cabral, V.P., et al., 2004.
et al., 1971. Experimental chronic uveitis.
2002. Uveitis in horses induced by
 Lveodermatologic syndrome in a Brazilian 
Ophthalmic signs following equine
interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein
Fila dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7, 193-196.
leptospirosis. Invest. Ophthalmol. 10,
is similar to the spontaneous disease. Eur. J.
Carter, W.l., Crispin, S.M., Gould, D.J., et al.
948-954.
Immunol. 32, 2598-2606.
2005. An immunohistochemical study of
Halliwell, R.E.W., Brim, TA., Hines, M.T., et al..
Deeg, C.A., Reese, S., Gerhards, H., et al., 2004.
Uveodermatologic syndrome in two Japanese
1985. Studies on equine recurrent uveitis. Il:
The uveitogenic potential of retinal S-antigen
Akita dogs. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8, 17-24.
The role of infection with Leptospira
in horses. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 45,
Angles, J.M., Famula, T.R., Pedersen, N.C., 2005.
interrogans serovar pomona. Curr. Eye. Res.
2286-2292.
 Lveodermatologic (VKH-like) syndrome in
4, 1033-1039.
Deeg, C.A., Pompetzki, D., Raith, A.J., et al..
American Akita dogs is associated with an
Dwyer, A.E., Crockelt, R.S., Kalsow, C.M., 1995
2006. Identification and functional
increased frequency of DQA1*00201. Tissue.
 Association of leptospiral seroreactivity and
validation of novel autoantigens in equine
Antigens. 66, 656-665.
breed with uveitis and blindness in horses:
uveitis. Mol. Cell. Proteomics. 5, 1462-
Yamaki, K., Takiyama, N., Itho, N., et al., 2005.
372 cases (1986-1993). J. Am. Vet. Med.
1470.
 Experimentally induced Vogt-Koyanagi-
Assoc. 207, 1327-1331.
 Deeg, C.A., 2008. Ocular immunology in
Harada disease in two Akita dogs. Exp. Eye.
Faber, N.A., Crawford, M., LeFebvre, R.B., et al.,
equine recurrent uveitis. Vet. Ophthalmol. Il
Res. 80, 273-280.
 2000. Detection of Leptospira spp. in the
(Suppl. 1), 61-65.
Moorthy, R.S., Inomata, H., Rao, N.A., 1995.
aqueous humor of horses with naturally
Deeg, C.A., 2009. A proteomic approach for
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome. Surv.
acquired recurrent uveitis. J. Clin. Microbiol.
studying the pathogenesis of spontaneous
Ophthalmol. 39, 265-292.
38,2731-2733
equine recurrent uveitis (ERu). Vet.
Yamaki, K., Ohono, S., 2008. Animal models of
Wollanke, B., Rohrbach, B.W., Gerhards, H..
 Immunol. Immunopathol. 128, 132-136.
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease (sympathetic
2001. Serum and vitreous humor antibody
Deeg, C.A., Hauck, S.M., Amann, B., et al..
ophthalmia). Ophthalmic. Res. 40, 129-135.
titers in and isolation of Leptospira
 2008. Equine recurrent uveitis - a
Sigle, K.J., McLellan, G.J., Haynes, J.S., et al.,
interrogans from horses with recurrent
spontaneous horse model of uveitis.
2006. Unilateral uveitis in a dog with
uveitis. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 219,
Ophthalmic. Res. 40, 151-153.
uveodermatologic syndrome. J. Am. Vet.
795-800.
Deeg, C.A., Marti, E., Gaillard, C., et al., 2004.
Med. Assoc. 228, 543-548.
Verma, A., Artiushin, S., Matsunaga, I., et al..
Equine recurrent uveitis is strongly associated Herrera, H.D., Duchene, A.G., 1998.
2005. LruA and LruB, novel lipoproteins of
with the MHC class I haplotype ELA-A9.
 Uveodermatological syndrome (Vogt-
pathogenic Leptospira interrogans associated
Equine Vet. J. 36, 73-75.
Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome) with
with equine recurrent uveitis. Infect.
Kaese, H., Flickinger, G., Valberg, S., et al.
generalized depigmentation in a Dachshund.
Immunol. 73, 7259-7266.
2005. ELA microsatellite association with
Vet. Ophthalmol. 1, 47-51.
Pearce, J.W., Galle, L.E., Keiboeker, S.B., et al.
uveitis in the Appaloosa horse. In:
 2007. Detection of Leptospira interrogans
Proceedings of 36th Annual Meeting of the
Lens-induced uveitis
DNA and antigen in fixed equine eyes
American College of Veterinary
van der Woerdt, A., Nasisse, M.P., Davidson 
affected with end-stage equine recurrent
Ophthalmologists, Nashville, TN, p. 29.
MG, 1992. Lens-induced uveitis in dogs: 151
uveitis. J. Vet. Diagn. Invest. 19, 686-690.
Kalsow, C.M., Dubielzig, R.R., Dwyer, A.E..
cases [1985-1990). 1. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Gilger, B.C., Salmon, J.H., Yi, N.Y., et al., 2008.
1999. Immunopathology of pineal glands
201, 921-926.
 Role of bacteria in the pathogenesis of
from horses with uveitis. Invest.
Van Der Woerdt, A., 2000. Lens-induced uveitis.
recurrent uveitis in horses from the
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 40, 1611-1615.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 3, 227-234.
southeastern United States. Am. J. Vet. Res.
Keller, C., Schulz, R., 2001. Nucleotide and
Wilkie, D.A., Gemensky-Metzler, A.l., Colitz,
69. 1329-1335
deduced amino acid sequence of equine
C.M., et al., 2006. Canine cataracts, diabetes
Maxwell, S.A., Hurt, D., Brightman, A.H., et al.
retinal and pineal gland phosducin. Am. J.
mellitus and spontaneous lens capsule
1991. Identification and purification of
Vet. Res. 62, 61-66.
rupture: a retrospective study of 18 dogs. Vet.
equine retinal S- antigen. Prog. Vet. Comp.
Dubielzig, R.R., Render, J.A., Morreale, R.J..
Ophthalmol. 9, 328-334.
Ophthalmol. 1, 19-23.
1997. Distinctive morphologic features of
Trogdon Hines, M., Halliwell, R.E.W., 1991.
the ciliary body in equine recurrent uveitis.
Xanthogranuloma
Autoimmunity to retinal S-antigen in horses
Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7, 163-167.
Zarfoss, M.K., Dubielzig, R.R., 2007. Solid
with equine recurrent uveitis. Prog. Vet.
Hartskeerl, R.A., Goris, M.G.A., Brem, S., et al.
 intraocular xanthogranuloma in three
Comp. Ophthalmol. 1, 283-390.
2004. Classification of Leptospira from the
 Miniature Schnauzer dogs. Vet. Ophthalmol.
Zipplies, J.K., Hauck, S.M., Schoeffmann, S.,
eyes of horses suffering from recurrent
10, 304-307.
et al., 2009. Serum PEDF Levels are
uveitis. J. Vet. Med. Series B. 51, 110-
[apou leurue snoauuods e us paseaip
115.
Uveitis related to systemic
for human autoimmune uveitis. J. Prot. Res.
infectious disease
8, 992-998.
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Cullen, C.L., Webb, A.A., 2007. Ocular
Gilger, B.C., Malok, E., Cutter, K.V., et al., 1999.
Kern, T.J., walton, D.K., Ris, R.C., et al., 1985.
 manifestations of systemic diseases. Part 1:
Characterization of T-lymphocytes in the
Uveitis associated with poliosis and vitiligo
The dog. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary
anterior uvea of eyes with chronic equine
in six dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 187,
ophthalmology, 4th edn. Blackwell, Oxford,
recurrent uveitis. Vet. Immunol.
408-414.
pp.1470-1537.
Immunopathol. 71, 17-28.
Cottrell, B.D., Barnelt, K.C., 1987. Harada's
Cullen, C.L., Webb, A.A., 2007. Ocular
Deeg, C.A., Kaspers, B., Gerhards, H., et al.,
 disease in the Japanese Akita. J. Small Anim.
 manifestations of systemic diseases. Part 2:
2001. Immune responses to retinal
Pract. 28, 517-521.
The Cat. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary
LLE
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
ophthalmology, 4th edn. Blackwell, Oxford,
aqueous humour of experimentally.
dogs: north central Wisconsin, USA. J. Med.
pp.1538-1587
inoculated cats. Vet. Parasitol. 79, 181-
Vet. Mycol. 33, 171-176.
Qullen, C.L., Webb, A.A., 2007. Ocular
186.
Chen, T., Legendre, A.M., Bass, C., et al., 2008.
manifestations of systemic disease. Part 3:
Chavkin, M.J., Lappin, M.R., Powell, C.C., et al.,
A case-control study of sporadic canine
The horse. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary
1994. Toxoplasma gondi-specific antibodies
blastomycosis in Tennesse, USA. Med.
ophthalmology, 4th edn. Blackwell, Oxford,
in the aqueous humor of cats with
Mycol. 46, 843-852.
pp. 1588-1616.
toxoplasmosis. Am. J. Vet. Res. 55,
Safneck, J.R., Hogg, G.R., Napier, L.B., 1990.
Cullen, C.L., Webb, A.A., 2007. Ocular
1244-1249.
 Endophthalmitis due to Blastomyces
manifestations of systemic diseases. Part 4:
Lappin, M.R., Burney, D.P., Hill, S.A., et al.
dermatitidis. Case report and review of the 
Food animals. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.),
1995. Detection of Toxoplasma gondii-
literature. Ophthalmology 97, 212-216.
Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th edn.
specific IgA in the aqueous humor of cats.
Li, S., Perlman, Jl., Edward, D.P, et al., 1998.
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 1617-1643.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 56, 774-778.
 Unilateral Blastomyces dermatitidis
Crispin, S.M., 1987. Uveitis associated with
Lappin, M.R., Burney, D.P., Dow, S.W., et al.,
endophthalmitis and orbital cellulitis. A case
systemic disease in cats. Feline Pract. 17,
1996. Polymerase chain reaction for the
report and literature review. Ophthalmology
16-24.
detection of Toxoplasma gondii in aqueous
105, 1466-1470.
Lavach, J.D., 1992. Ocular manifestations of
humor of cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 57,
Legendre, A.M., Walker, M., Buyukmihci, N..
systemic disease. Vet. Clin. North Am.
1589-1593.
et al., 1981. Canine blastomycosis: a review
Equine Pract. 8, 627-636.
Lappin, M.R., Chavkin, M.J., Munana, K.R.,
of 47 clinical cases. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Massa, K.L., Gilger, B.C., Miller, T.L., et al..
et al., 1996. Feline ocular and cerebrospinal
178, 1163-1168.
2002. Causes of uveitis in dogs: 102 cases
fluid Toxoplasma gondii-specific humoral
Arceneaux, K.A., Taboada, I., Hosgood, G.
(1989-2000). Vet. Ophthalmol. 5, 93-98.
immune responses following specific and
1998. Blastomycosis in dogs: 115 cases
Klotz, S.A., Penn, C.C., Negvesky, G., et al.
nonspecific immune stimulation. Vet.
(1980-1995). 1. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 213,
2000. Fungal and parasitic infections of the
Immunol. Immunopathol. 55, 23-31.
658-664.
eye. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 13, 662-685.
Pavesio, C.E., Lightman, S., 1996. Toxoplasma
Albert, R.A., Whitley, R.D., Crawley, R.R., 1981.
 gondii and ocular toxoplasmosis:
Ocular blastomycosis in the dog. Comp.
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
 pathogenesis. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 80.
Cont. Edu. Pract. Vet. 3, 303-311
McReynolds, C., Macy, D., 1997. Feline
1099-1107.
Buyukmihci, N., 1982. Ocular lesions of
infectious peritonitis. Part I. Etiology and
Davidson, M.G., English, R.V., 1998. Feline 
blastomycosis in the dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
diagnosis. Comp. Cont. Edu. Pract. Vet. 19,
 ocular toxoplasmosis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1,
Assoc. 180, 426-431.
1007-1016.
71-80.
Buyukmihci, N.C., Moore PF, 1987.
Andrew SE, 2000. Feline infectious peritonitis.
 Systemic mycoses with
 Microscopic lesions of spontaneous ocular
Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 30,
blastomycosis in dogs. J. Comp. Pathol. 97.
ocular involvement
987-1000.
321 -328.
Rohrbach, B.W., Legendre, A.M., Baldwin, C.A..
Krohne, S.G., 2000. Canine systemic fungal
Brooks, D.E., Legendre, A.M., Gum, G.G., et al..
et al., 2001. Epidemiology of feline
infections. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim.
1991. The treatment of canine ocular
 infectious peritonitis among cats examined
Pract. 30, 1063-1090.
blastomycosis with systemically administered
at veterinary medical teaching hospitals. J.
Davies, C., Troy, G.C., 1996. Deep mycotic
itraconazole. Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 218, 1111-1115.
infections in cats. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
1,263-268
Hartmann, K., Binder, C., Hirschberger, I., et al..
32, 380-391.
Bloom, J.D., Hamor, R.E., Gerding Jr., PA..
2003. Comparison of different tests to
Gionfriddo, J.R., 2000. Feline systemic fungal
1996. Ocular blastomycosis in dogs: 73
diagnose feline infectious peritonitis. J. Vet.
infections. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim.
cases, 108 eyes [1985-1993). 1. Am. Vet.
Intern. Med. 17, 781-790.
Pract. 30, 1029-1050.
Med. Assoc. 209, 1271-1274.
Oliver, A., Ciulla, TA., Comer, G.M., 2005. New
Finn, M.J., Stiles, J., Krohne SG, 2007. Visual
Ocular toxoplasmosis
and classic insights into presumed ocular
outcome in a group of dogs with ocular
Vainisi, S.J., Campbell, L.H., 1969. Ocular
histoplasmosis syndrome and its treatment.
blastomycosis treated with systemic
 toxoplasmosis in cats. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Curr. Opin. Ophthalmol. 16, 160-165.
antifungals and systemic corticosteroids. Vet.
Assoc. 154, 141-152.
Prasad, A.G., Van Gelder, R.N., 2005. Presumed
Ophthalmol. 10, 299-303.
Piper, R.C., Cole, C.R., Shadduck JA, 1970.
ocular histoplasmosis syndrome. Qurr. Opin.
Hendrix, D.V., Rohrbach, B.W., Bochsler, PN.,
 Natural and experimental ocular
Ophthalmol. 16, 364-368.
et al., 2004. Comparison of histologic
toxoplasmosis in animals. Am. J.
Ryan, S.1., 1975. Histopathological correlates
lesions of endophthalmitis induced by
Ophthalmol. 69, 662-668.
of presumed ocular histoplasmosis. Int.
Blastomyces dermatitidis in untreated and
Davidson, M.G., Lappin, M.R., English, R.V.
Ophthalmol. Clin. 15, 125-137.
treated dogs: 36 cases (1986-2001). J. Am.
et al., 1993. A feline model of ocular
Furcolow, M.L., Chick, E.W., Busey, J.F., et al.,
Vet. Med. Assoc. 224, 1317-1322.
 toxoplasmosis. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
1970. Prevalence and incidence studies of
Nasisse, M.P., van Ee, R.T., Wright, B., 1985.
34, 3653-3660.
human and canine blastomycosis. 1. Cases
Ocular changes in a cat with disseminated 
Dubey, J.P., Carpenter, J.L., 1993. Histologically
in the United States, 1885-1968. Am. Rev.
blastomycosis. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 187.
confirmed clinical toxoplasmosis in cats: 100
Respir. Dis. 102, 60-67.
629-631.
cases [1952-1990). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Rudmann, D.G., Coolman, B.R., Perez, C.M.,
Breider, M.A., Walker, T.L., Legendre, A.M.,
203, 1556-1566.
et al., 1992. Evaluation of risk factors for
et al., 1988. Blastomycosis in cats: fve cases
Lappin, M.R., Roberts, S.M., Davidson, M.G.
blastomycosis in dogs: 857 cases [1980-
(1979-1986). I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 193,
et al., 1992. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
1990). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 201,
570-572.
assays for the detection of Toxoplasma
1754-1759.
Rubin, LF., Craig, PH., 1965. Intraocular
gondii-specific antibodies and antigens in 
Archer, J.R., Trainer, D.O., Schell, R.F, 1987.
qyptococcosis in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
the aqueous humor of cats. I. Am. Vet. Med.
 Epidemiologic study of canine blastomycosis
Assoc. 147, 27-32.
Assoc. 201, 1010-1016.
in Wisconsin. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 190,
Kurtz, H.., Finco, D.R., 1970. Granulomatous
Burney, D.P., Chavkin, M.A., Dow, S.W., et al..
1292-1295.
chorioretinitis caused by Cryptococcus
1998. Polymerase chain reaction for the
Baumgardner, D.J., Paretsky, D.P., Yopp, A.C.,
neoformans in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
detection of Toxoplasma gondi within
1995. The epidemiology of blastomycosis in
157, 934-937.
318
The uvea
Chapter
6
Fischer, C.A., 1971. Intraocular cyptococcosis
Graupmann-Kuzma, A., Valentine, B.A., Shubiz,
Font, R.L., Hook SR, 1984. Metastatic
in two cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 158,
L.F., et al., 2008. Coccidioidomycosis in
 protothecal retinitis in a dog. Electron
191-199.
Dogs and Cats: A Review. J. Am. Anim.
microscopic observations. Vet. Pathol. 21,
Gelatt, K.N., McGill, L.D., Perman, V., 1973.
Hosp. Assoc. 44, 226-235.
61 -66.
Ocular and systemic cyptococcosis in a dog.
Cello, R.M., 1960. Ocular manifestations of
Hollingsworth, S.R., 2000. Canine
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 162, 370-375.
coccidioidomycosis in a dog. Arch.
protothecosis. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small
Gwin, R.M., Gelatt, K.N., Hardy, R., et al., 1977.
Ophthalmol. 64, 897-903.
Anim. Pract. 30, 1091-1101.
Ocular cyptococcosis in a cat. J. Am. Anim.
Shively, J.N., Whiteman, C.E., 1970. Ocular
Schultze, A.E., Ring, R.D., Morgan, R.V., et al..
Hosp. Assoc. 13, 680-684.
lesions in disseminated coccidioidomycosis
1998. Clinical, cytologic and histopathologic
Rosenthal, J., Heidgerd, I., Peiffer, R.L..
in 2 dogs. Pathol. Vet. 7, 1-6.
 manifestations of protothecosis in two dogs.
1981. Ocular and systemic cyptococcosis in
Angell, J.A., Shively, J.N., Merideth, R.E., et al.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 1, 239-243.
a cat. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 17,
1985. Ocular coccidioidomycosis in a cat. J.
Rizzi, T.E., Cowell, R.L., Meinkoth, J.H., et al.,.
307-310.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 187, 167-169.
2006. More than meets the eye: subretinal
Malik, R., Dill-Macky, E., Martin, P, et al.,
Angell, JA., Merideth, R.E., Shively, J.N., et al.
aspirate from an acutely blind dog. Vet. Clin.
1995. Cryptococcosis in dogs: a retrospective
1987. Ocular lesions associated with
Pathol. 35, 111-113.
study of 20 consecutive cases. J. Med. Vet.
coccidioidomycosis in dogs: 35 cases
Stenner, V.j., Mackay, B., King, T., et al., 2007.
Mycol. 33, 291-297.
(1980-1985). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 190,
Protothecosis in 17 Australian dogs and a
Gerds-Grogan, S., Dayrell-Hart, B., 1997. Feline
1319-1322.
review of the canine literature. Med. Mycol.
qyptococcosis: a retrospective evaluation. J.
Greene, R.T., Troy, G.C., 1995.
45, 249-266
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 33, 118-122.
Coccidioidomycosis in 48 cats: a
Malik, R., Vogelnest, L., O'Brien, C.R., et al.
retrospective study (1984-1993). J. Vet.
Ocular larva migrans
2004. Infections and some other conditions
Intern. Med. 9, 86-91.
Rubin, LF., Saunders, L.Z., 1965. Intraocular
affecting the skin and subcutis of the
Johnson, L.R., Herrgesell, E.J., Davidson, A.P.
larva migrans in dogs. Pathol. Vet. 2.
naso-ocular region of cats - clinical
et al., 2003. Clinical, clinicopathologic, and
566-573.
experience 1987-2003. J. Feline Med. Surg.
radiographic fndings in dogs with
Hughes, P.L., Dubielzig, R.R., Kazacos, K.R.,
6. 383-390.
coccidioidomycosis: 24 cases (1995-2000).
1987. Multifocal retinitis in New Zealand
Peiffer, R.L., 1979. Ocular manifestations of
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 222, 461-466.
sheep dogs. Vet. Pathol. 24, 22-27.
disseminated histoplasmosis in a cat. Feline
Johnson, B.W., Kirkpatrick, C.E., Whiteley, H.E.,
Pract. 9, 24-29
Disseminated aspergillosis
et al., 1989. Retinitis and intraocular
Gwin, R.M., Makley Jr., TA., Wyman, M., et al..
Weishaar, PD., Flynn Ir., H.W., Murray, T.G..
larval migration in a group of Border
1980. Multifocal ocular hist plasmosis in a
et al., 1998. Endogenous Aspergillus
collies. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25,
dog and cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 176,
endophthalmitis. Clinical features and
623-629.
638-642.
treatment outcomes. Ophthalmology 105.
Percy, D.H., 1981. Feline histoplasmosis with
57-65.
Ocular melanosis
ocular involvement. Vet. Pathol. 18,
Wood, G.L., Hirsh, D.C., Selcer, R.R., et al..
Covitz, D., Barthhold, S., Diters, R.W., et al.,
163-169.
1978. Disseminated aspergillosis in a dog. J.
1984. Pigmentary glaucoma in the Cairn
Wolf, A.M., Belden, N.M., 1984. Feline
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 172, 704-707.
terrier Trans. Am. Coll. Vet. Ophthalmol.
histoplasmosis. A literature review and
Day, M.J., Penhale, W.l., Eger, C.E., et al., 1986.
15, 246-250.
retrospective study of 20 new cases. J. Am.
Disseminated aspergillosis in dogs. Aust. Vet.
Petersen-Jones, S.M., Mould, J.R., 1991. Chronic
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 20, 995-998.
1. 63, 55-59.
 glaucoma in cairn terriers. Vet. Rec. 128,
Huss, B.T., Collier, L.L., Collins, B.K., et al.
Day, M.J., Eger, C.E., Shaw, S.E., et al., 1985.
619.
1994. Polyarthropathy and chorioretinitis
Immunologic study of systemic aspergillosis
Petersen-Jones, S.M., 1991. Abnormal ocular
with retinal detachment in a dog with
in German shepherd dogs. Vet. Immunol.
 pigment deposition associated with
systemic histoplasmosis. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
Immunopathol. 9, 335-347.
glaucoma in the cairm terrier. J. Small Anim.
Assoc. 30, 217-224.
Gelatt, K.N., Chrisman, C.L., Samuelson, D.A.
Pract. 32, 19-22.
Clinkenbeard, K.D., Cowell, R.L., Tyler, R.D.,
et al., 1991. Ocular and systemic
van de Sandt, R.R., Boeve, M.H., Stades, FC.,
1987. Disseminated histoplasmosis in cats:
aspergillosis in a dog. I. Am. Anim. Hosp.
et al., 2003. Abnormal ocular pigment 
12 cases [1981-1986). I. Am. Vet. Med.
Assoc. 27, 427-431.
deposition and glaucoma in the dog. Vet.
Assoc. 190, 1445-1448.
Watt, PR., Robins, G.M., Galloway, A.M., et al.,
Ophthalmol. 6, 273-278.
Johnson, L.R., Fry, M.M., Anez, K.L., et al.
1995. Disseminated opportunistic fungal
Petersen-Jones, S.M., Forcier, I., Mentzer, A.L.,
2004. Histoplasmosis infection in two cats
disease in dogs: 10 cases (1982-1990). J.
2007. Ocular melanosis in the Cairn Terrier:
from California. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 207, 67-70.
dinical description and investigation of
40, 165-169.
Bruchim, Y., Elad, D., Kainbart, S., 2006.
mode of inheritance. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10
Pearce, J., Giuliano, E.A., Galle, L.E., et al.
 Disseminated aspergillosis in two dogs in
(Suppl. 1), 63-69.
 2007. Management of bilateral uveitis in a
Israel. Mycoses 49, 130-133.
Petersen-Jones, S.M., Mentzer, A.L.
Toxoplasma gondii-seropositive cat with
Protothecosis
Dubielzig, R.R., et al., 2008. Ocular
histopathologic evidence of fungal
 melanosis in the Cairn Terrier:
panuveitis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10, 216-
Carlton, W.W., Austin, L., 1973. Ocular
histopathological description of the
221.
 protothecosis in a dog. Vet. Pathol. 10,
 condition, and immunohistological and
Butkiewicz, C.D., Shubitz, L.E., Dial, S.M., 2005.
274-280
ultrastructural characterization of the
Risk factors associated with Coccidioides
Buyukmihci, N., Rubin, L.F., DePaoli, A.
characteristic pigment-laden cells. Vet.
infection in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
 1975. Protothecosis with ocular involvement
Ophthalmol. 11, 260-268.
226, 1851-1854.
in a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 167,
Shubitz, L.E., Butkiewicz, C.D., Dial, S.M., et al.,.
158-161.
Intraocular neoplasia, general
2005. Incidence of coccidioides infection
Meredith, R.E., Gwin, R.M., Samuelson, D.A..
Lavach, J.D., Severin, G.A., 1977. Neoplasia of
among dogs residing in a region in which
1984. Systemic protothecosis with ocular
the equine eye, adnexa, and orbit: a review
the organism is endemic. J. Am. Vet. Med.
manifestations in a dog. I. Am. Anim. Hosp.
 of 68 cases. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 170,
Assoc. 226, 1846-1850.
Assoc. 20, 153-156.
202-203.
319
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Williams, L.W., Gelatt, K.N., Gwin, R.M., 1981.
canine survival with primary intraocular
in a horse. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 199,
Ophthalmic neoplasms in the cat. I. Am.
melanocytic neoplasia. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2.
1049-1050.
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 17, 999-1008.
185-190.
Scotty, N.C., Barrie, K.B., Brooks, D.E., et al.
Gwin, R.M., Gelatt, K.N., Williams, L.W., 1982.
Cook, C.S., Wilkie, DA., 1999. Treatment of
2008. Surgical management of a progressive
Ophthalmic neoplasms in the dog. I. Am.
 presumed iris melanoma in dogs by diode
iris melanocytoma in a Mustang. Vet.
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 18, 853-866.
laser photocoagulation: 23 cases. Vet.
Ophthalmol. 11, 75-80.
Dubielzig, R.R., 1990. Ocular neoplasia in small
Ophthalmol. 2, 217-225.
animals. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim.
Yi, N.Y., Park, S.A., Park, S.W., et al., 2006.
Pract. 20, 837-848.
Malignant ocular melanoma in a dog. I. Vet.
Iris and ciliary body
Sci. 7, 89-90.
epithelial neoplasms
Kato, K., Nishimura, R., Sasaki, N., et al., 2005.
Peiffer Jr., R.L., 1983. Ciliary body epithelial
Uveal melanocytic neoplasia
 Magnetic resonance imaging of a canine eye
tumours in the dog and cat; a report of
Mould, J.R.B., Petersen-Jones, S.M., Peruccio, C..
with melanoma. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 67,
thirteen cases. J. Small Anim. Pract. 24,
et al., 2002. Uveal melanocytic tumors. In:
179-182.
347-370.
Peiffer Jr., R.L., Simons, K.B. (Eds), Ocular
Peiffer Jr., R.L., 1983. Ciliary body epithelial
tumors in humans and animals, 1st edn.
Feline diffuse iris melanoma
tumors. In: Peiffer Jr., R.L. (Ed.).,
lowa State Press, Ames, lowa, pp. 225-288.
Patnaik, A.K., Mooney, S., 1988. Feline
Comparative ophthalmic pathology. Charles
Dithmar, S., Albert, D.M., Grossniklaus, H.E.,
melanoma: a comparative study of ocular.
C. Thomas, Springfeld, pp. 183-212.
2000. Animal models of uveal melanoma.
 oral and dermal neoplasms. Vet. Pathol. 25.
Lavach, J.D., 1984. Iridociliary adenoma in 
Melanoma. Res. 10, 195-211.
105-112.
a dog. I. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 20,
Diters, R.W., Dubielzig, R.R., Aguirre, G.D.,
Duncan, D.E., Peiffer, R.L., 1991. Morphology
468-470.
et al., 1983. Primary ocular melanoma in
and prognostic indicators of anterior uveal
Clerc, B., 1996. Surgery and chemotherapy for
dogs. Vet. Pathol. 20, 379-395.
 melanomas in cats. Prog. Vet. Comp.
the treatment of adenocarcinoma of the iris
Bussanich, N.M., Dolman, PJ., Rootman, I.,
Ophthalmol. 1, 25-32.
and ciliary body in five dogs. Vet. Comp.
et al., 1987. Canine uveal melanomas: series
Day, M.j., Lucke, V.M., 1995. Melanocytic
Ophthalmol. 6, 265-270.
and literature review. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
neoplasia in the cat. J. Small Anim. Pract. 36, Dubielzig, R.R., Steinberg, H., Garvin, H., et al.
Assoc. 23, 415-422.
207 -213.
1998. Iridociliary epithelial tumors in 100
Ryan, A.M., Diters, R.W., 1984. Clinical and
Bertoy, R.W., Brightman, A.L., Regan, K., 1988.
dogs and 17 cats: a morphological study.
 pathologic features of canine ocular
 Intraocular melanoma with multiple
Vet. Ophthalmol. 1, 223-231.
melanomas. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 184,
metastases in a cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
Zarfoss, M.K., Dubielzig, R.R., 2007. Metastatic
60-67.
192, 87-89
lridociliary Adenocarcinoma in a Labrador
Trucksa, R.C., 1983. Canine ocular melanocytic
Bjerkas, E., Arnesen, K., Peiffer Jr., R.L., 1997.
Retriever. Vet. Pathol. 44, 672-676.
neoplasms. In: Peiffer Jr., R.L. (Ed.),
 Diffuse amelanotic iris melanoma in a cat.
Klosterman, E., Colitz, C.M., Chandler, H.L.,
Comparative ophthalmic pathology. Charles
Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7, 190-191.
et al., 2006. Immunohistochemical
C. Thomas, Springfield, pp. 170-182.
Kalishman, J.B., Chappell, R., Lisa Flood, L.A..
 properties of ocular adenomas.
Wilcock, B.P, Peiffer Jr., R.L., 1986. Morphology
et al., 1998. Matched observational study of
adenocarcinomas and medulloepitheliomas.
and behavior of primary ocular melanomas
survival in cats with enucleation due to
Vet. Ophthalmol. 9, 387-394.
in 91 dogs. Vet. Pathol. 23, 418-424.
diffuse iris melanoma. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1,
Hendrix, D.V., Donnell, R.L., 2007. Lenticular
Dubielzig, R.R., Aguirre, G.D., Gross, S.L., et al..
25-29.
Invasion by a ciliary body adenocarcinoma
1985. Choroidal melanomas in dogs. Vet.
Harris, B.P., Dubielzig, R.R., 1999. Atypical
in a dog. Vet. Pathol. 44, 540-542.
Pathol. 22, 582-585.
 primary ocular melanoma in cats. Vet.
Langloss, I.M., Zimmerman, L.E., Krehibiel, J.D.,
Collinson, PN., Peiffer, R.L., 1993. Clinical
Ophthalmol. 2, 121-124.
1976. Malignant intraocular teratoid
 presentation, morphology, and behavior of
Stiles, I., Bienzle, D., Render, JA., et al., 1999.
medulloepithelioma in three dogs. Vet.
 primary choroidal melanomas in eight dogs.
Use of nested polymerase chain reaction
Pathol. 13, 343-352.
Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 3, 158-164.
(PCR) for detection of retroviruses from
Lahav, M., Albert, D.M., Kircher, C.H., et al.,.
Aguirre, G..D., Brown, G., Shields, J.A., et al.
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded uveal
1976. Malignant teratoid
1984. Melanoma of the choroid in a dog. J.
 melanomas in cats. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2.
medulloepithelioma in a dog. Vet. Pathol.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 20, 471-476.
11 3-116.
13, 11-16.
Schoster, J.V., Dubielzig, R.R., Sullivan, L., 1993.
Wilcock, B., williams, M.M., 1980. Malignant
Choroidal melanoma in a dog. I. Am. Vet.
Equine uveal melanocytic neoplasms
intraocular medulloepithelioma in a dog. I.
Med. Assoc. 203, 89-91.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 16, 617-619.
Miwa, Y., Matsunaga, S., Kato, K, et al., 2005.
 Equine melanoma
Jensen, O.A., Kaarsholm, S., Prause, J.Ul., et al..
Choroidal melanoma in a dog. I. Vet. Med.
Murphy, J., Young, S., 1979. Intraocular 
2003. Neuroepithelial tumor of the retina in
Sci. 67, 821-823.
melanoma in a horse. Vet. Pathol. 16,
a dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. G, 57-60.
Render, JA., Ramsey, D.T., Ramsey, C.C., 1997.
539-542.
Aleksandersen, M., Bjerkas, E., Heiene, R., et al..
Contralateral uveal metastasis of malignant
Latimer, C.A., Wyman, M., 1983. Sector
2004. Malignant teratoid
anterior uveal melanoma in a dog. Vet.
 iridectomy in the management of iris
medulloepithelioma with brain and kidney
Comp. Ophthalmol. 7, 263-266.
melanoma in a horse. Equine Vet. J. Suppl.
involvement in a dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7.
Hyman, J.A., Koch, S.A., Wilcock, B.P., 2002.
2, 101-104.
407-411.
Canine choroidal melanoma with
Matthews, A.G., Barry, D.R., 1987. Bilateral
Bistner, S.l., 1974. Medullo-epithelioma of the
metastases. Vet. Ophthalmol. 5, 113-
 melanoma of the iris in a horse. Equine Vet.
iris and ciliary body in a horse. Cornell. Vet.
117.
1.19,358-360.
64, 588-595.
Rovesti, G.L., Guandalini, A., Peiffer, R., 2001.
Barnett, K.C., Platt, H., 1990. Intraocular
Eagle Jr., R.C., Font, R.L., Swerczek, T.W., 1978.
Suspected latent vertebral metastasis of uveal
 melanomata in the horse. Equine Vet. J.
Malignant medulloepithelioma of the optic
melanoma in a dog: a case report. Vet.
(Suppl. 10), 76-82.
nerve in a horse. Vet. Pathol. 15, 488-494.
Ophthalmol. 4, 75-77.
Davidson, H.J., Blanchard, G.L., Wheeler, C.A..
Szymanski, C.M., 1987. Malignant teratoid
Giuliano, E.A., Chappell, R., Fischer, B., et al.
et al., 1991. Anterior uveal melanoma, with
medulloepithelioma in a horse. J. Am. Vet.
1999. A matched observational study of
secondary keratitis, cataract, and glaucoma,
Med. Assoc. 190, 301-302.
320
The uvea
Chapter
6
Ris, R.C., Scherlie, P.H., Rebhun WC, 1990.
cases. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 4, 127-
Dubielzig, R.R., Hawkins, K.L., Toy, K.A., et al.,
 Intraocular medulloepithelioma in a horse.
135.
1994. Morphologic features of feline ocular
Equine Vet. J. Suppl. 10, 66-68.
Kilrain, C.G., Saik, J.E, Jeglum, KA., 1994.
sarcomas in 10 cats: light microscopy.
Knottenbelt, D.C., Hetzel, U., Roberts, V., 2007.
 Malignant angioendotheliomatosis with
ultrastructure, and immunohistochemistry.
Primary intraocular primitive
retinal detachments in a dog. I. Am. Vet.
Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 4, 7-12.
neuroectodermal tumor (retinoblastoma)
Med. Assoc. 204, 918-921.
Qullen, C.L., Haines, D.M., Jackson, M.L., et al.,.
causing unilateral blindness in a gelding.
Cullen, C.L., Caswell, J.L., Grahn, B.H., 2000.
1998. The use of immunohistochemistry and
Vet. Ophthalmol. 10, 348-356.
Intravascular lymphoma presenting as
the polymerase chain reaction for detection
Hendrix, D.V, Bochsler, PN., Saladino, B.,
bilateral panophthalmitis and retinal
of feline leukemia virus and feline sarcoma
et al., 2000. Malignant teratoid
detachment in a dog. I. Am. Anim. Hosp.
virus in six cases of feline ocular sarcoma.
medulloepithelioma in a llama. Vet. Pathol.
Assoc. 36, 337-342.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 1, 189-193.
37, 680-683.
Bush, W.W., Throop, I.L., McManus, PM., et al.
Grossniklaus, H.E., Zimmerman, L.E., Kachmer,
Schmidt, R.E., Becker, L.L., McElroy, J.M., 1986.
2003. Intravascular lymphoma involving the
M.L., 1990. Pleomorphic adenocarcinoma of
central and peripheral nervous systems in a
the ciliary body. Immunohistochemical
in two cockatiels. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
dog. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 39, 90-96.
 and electron microscopic features.
189, 1105-1106.
 McDonough, S.P., Van Winkle, T.J., Valentine.
Ophthalmology 97, 763-768.
Bras, I.D., Gemensky-Metzler, A.J., Kusewitt,
B.A., et al., 2002. Clinicopathological and
Zeiss, C.J., Johnson, E.M., Dubielzig, R.R., 2003.
D.F., et al., 2005. Immunohistochemical
immunophenotypical features of canine
 Feline intraocular tumors may arise from
characterization of a malignant intraocular
intravascular lymphoma (malignant
transformation of lens epithelium. Vet.
teratoid medulloepithelioma in a cockatiel.
angioendotheliomatosis). J. Comp. Pathol.
Pathol. 40, 355-362
Vet. Ophthalmol. 8, 59-65.
126,277-288.
Carter, R.T., Giudice, C., Dubielzig, R.R., et al.
Shields, J.A., Eagle Jr., R.C., Shields, C.L., et al.
Affolter, V.K., Moore, PF., 2002. Localized
2005. Telomerase activity with concurrent
1996. Acquired neoplasms of the
and disseminated histiocytic sarcoma of
loss of cell cycle regulation in feline
nonpigmented ciliary epithelium (adenoma
 dendritic cll origin in dogs. Vet. Pathol. 39.
post-traumatic ocular sarcomas. J. Comp.
and adenocarcinoma). Ophthalmology 103.
74-83.
Pathol. 133, 235-245.
2007-2016.
Naranjo, C., Dubielzig, R.R., Friedrichs, K.R.,
2007. Canine ocular histiocytic sarcoma. Vet.
Neoplasia metastatic to the eye
Lymphoma and histiocytic neoplasia
Ophthalmol. 10, 179-185.
Dubielzig, R.R., Grendahl, R.L., Orcutt, J.C..
Carlton, W.C., Hutchinson, A.K., Grossniklaus,
Moore, PF., 1984. Systemic histiocytosis of
et al., 2002. Metastases. In: Peiffer Jr., R.L.,
H.E., 2002. Ocular lymphoid proliferations.
Bernese mountain dogs. Vet. Pathol. 21,
Simons, K.B. (Eds), Ocular tumors in
554-563.
In: Peiffer Jr., R.L., Simons, K.B. (Eds.),
animals and humans. lowa State Press.
 Ocular tumors in animals and humans.
Moore, PF., Rosin, A., 1986. Malignant
Ames, lowa, pp. 337-378.
1st edn. lowa State Press, Ames, lowa.
histiocytosis of Bernese mountain dogs. Vet.
Ladds, PW., Gelatt, K.N., Strafuss, A.C., et al.
pp. 379-413.
Pathol. 23, 1-10.
 1970. Canine ocular adenocarcinoma of
Corcoran, KA., Peiffer Jr., R.L., Koch SA, 1995.
Rosin, A., Moore, P., Dubielzig, R., 1986.
mammary origin. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
 Malignant histiocytosis in Bernese Mountain
156, 63-69.
Histopathologic features of feline ocular
lymphosarcoma: 49 cases (1978-1992). Vet.
dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 188,
Szymanski, C.M., 1972. Bilateral metastatic
Comp. Ophthalmol. 5, 35-41.
1041- 1045.
 intraocular hemangiosarcoma in a dog. J.
Nell, B., Suchy, A., 1998. 'D-shaped' and
Brearley, M.j., Dunn, K.A., Smith, K.C., et al..
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 161, 803-805.
'reverse-D-shaped' pupil in a cat with
1994. Systemic histiocytosis in a Bernese
Bellhorn, R.W., 1972. Secondary ocular
lymphosarcoma. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1, 53-56.
mountain dog. I. Small Anim. Pract. 35.
adenocarcinoma in three dogs and a cat. J.
Dubielzig, R., Steinberg, H., Fischer, B., et al..
271-274.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 160, 302-307.
2000. Feline primary ocular lymphosarcoma:
Paterson, S., Boydell, P., Pike, R., 1995.
Carlton, w.w., 1983. Intraocular tumors.
immunophenotyping of leukocytes, FeLV
Systemic histiocytosis in the Bernese
In: Peiffer Jr., R.L. (Ed.), Comparative
status and relationship to idiopathic
mountain dog. 1. Small Anim. Pract. 36,
ophthalmic pathology. Charles C. Thomas.
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis. In: Proceedings
233-236.
Springfeld, pp. 289-298.
of the 3i st Annual Meeting of the American
Render, JA., Carlton, W.W., Vestre, W.A., et al.
College of Veterinary Ophthalmology.
Other ocular neoplasms
1982. Osteosarcoma metastatic to the globes
Montreal, Canada, p. 46.
Sato, T., Yamamoto, A., Shibuya, H., et al.
in a dog. Vet. Pathol. 19, 323-326.
Couto, G.C., 2001. What is new on feline
2005. Intraocular peripheral nerve sheath
Schmidt, R.E., 1981. Transitional cell carcinoma
Jymphoma? J. Feline Med. Surg. 3, 171-176.
tumor in a dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8.
metastatic to the eye of a dog. Vet. Pathol.
Grahn, B.H., Peiffer, R.L., Cullen, C.L., et al.
283-286.
18, 832-834.
2006. Classification of feline intraocular
Zarfoss, M.K., Klauss, G., Newkirk, K., et al..
Szymanski, C., Boyce, R., Wyman, M., 1984.
 neoplasms based on morphology.
2007. Uveal Spindle Cell Tumor of
Transitional cell carcinoma of the urethra
histochemical staining, and
Blue-Eyed Dogs: An Immunohistochemical
metastatic to the eyes in a dog. I. Am. Vet.
immunohistochemical labeling. Vet.
Study. Vet. Pathol. 44, 276-284.
Med. Assoc. 185, 1003-1004.
Ophthalmol. 9, 395-403.
 Feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma
Lavach, J.D., 1984. Disseminated neoplasia
Brightman, A.H. 2nd, Ogilvie, G.K., Tompkins,
presenting with ocular signs: a report of 
M., 1991. Ocular disease in FeLV-positive
Woog, I., Albert, D.M., Gonder, J.R., et al., 1983.
two cases. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 20,
cats: 11 cases (1981-1986). 1. Am. Vet. Med.
Osteosarcoma in a phthisical feline eye. Vet.
459-462.
Assoc. 198, 1049-1051.
Pathol. 20, 209-214.
HogenEsch, H., Whiteley, H.E., Vicini, D.S.
Cello, R.M., Hutcherson, B., 1962. Ocular
Dubielzig, R.R., 1984. Ocular sarcoma following
 et al., 1987. Seminoma with metastases in
changes in malignant lymphoma of dogs.
trauma in three cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
the eyes and the brain in a dog. Vet. Pathol.
Cornell. Vet. 52, 492-523.
184, 578-581.
24,278-280.
Krohne, S.G., Henderson, N.M., Richardson,
Dubielzig, R.R., Everitt, I., Shadduck, JA., et al.
Nyska, A., Hermalin, A., Jacobson, B., et al.,
R.C., et al., 1994. Prevalence of ocular
1990. Clinical and morphologic features of
1992. Intraocular vascular embolization of a
involvement in dogs with multicentric
post-traumatic ocular sarcomas in cats. Vet.
malignant canine pheochromocytoma. Prog.
lymphoma: prospective evaluation of 94
Pathol. 27, 62-65.
Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 2, 129-132.
321
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Habin, D.J., Else, R.W., 1995. Parotid salivary
 bed melanoma in a dog. Vet. Ophthalmol.
Hamilton, H.B, Severin, G.A., Nold, J., 1984.
 gland adenocarcinoma with bilateral ocular
10, 262-266.
Pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma with
and oseous metastases in a dog. I. Small 
intraocular metastasis in a cat. J. Am. Vet.
Anim. Pract. 36, 445-449.
Extraskeletal osteosarcoma and
Med. Assoc. 185, 307-309.
Ferreira, A.., Jaggy, A., Varejao, A.P.,
chondrosarcoma
Cook, C.s., Peiffer Jr., R.L., Stine, PE., 1984.
et al., 20o0. Brain and ocular metastases
Patnaik, A.K., 1990. Canine extraskeletal
 Metastatic ocular squamous cell carcinoma
 from a transmissible venereal tumour
osteosarcoma and chondrosarcoma: a
in a cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 185,
in a dog. J. Small Anim. Pract. 41, 165-
clinicopathologic study of 14 cases. Vet.
1547-1549.
168.
Pathol. 27, 46-55.
Gionfriddo, J.R., Fix, A.S., Niyo, Y, et al., 1990.
Pereira, IS., Silva, A.B., Martins, A.L., et al.
Hayden, D.W., 1976. Squamous cell carcinoma
 Ocular manifestations of a metastatic
 2000. Immunohistochemical characterization
 in a cat with intraocular and orbital
pulmonary adenocarcinoma in a cat. I. Am.
of intraocular metastasis of a canine
metastases. Vet. Pathol. 13, 332-336.
Vet. Med. Assoc. 197, 372-374.
transmissible venereal tumor. Vet.
Murphy, C.J., Canton, D.C., Bellhorn, R.W.,
Cassotis, N.J., Dubielzig, R.R., Gilger, B.C.
Ophthalmol. 3, 43-47.
et al., 1989. Disseminated adenocarcinoma
et al., 1999. Angioinvasive pulmonary
Esson, D., Fahrer, C.S., Zarfoss, M.K., et al.,
with ocular involvement in a cat. I. Am. Vet.
carcinoma with posterior segment metastasis
 2007. Suspected uveal metastasis of a nail
Med. Assoc. 195, 488-491.
in four cats. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2, 125-131.
322
Diseases of the Lens
NORMAL ANATOMY (Fig. 10.1)
 Normal anatomy
323
Congenital or hereditary conditions
323
The lens has only one cell type, the lens epithelial cell
 Posterior lenticonus/lentiglobus
323
At all stages of lens development, except embryonic, normal
324
lens epithelial cells are only present anteriorly, where they form
Aphakia, microphakia, lens coloboma
a monolayer of cuboidal epithelium (Chapter 3 provides a more
 Congenital cataract
324
detailed discussion of lens development)
Cataract
327
At the lens equator, the lens epithelial cell elongates, rotates and 
 Cataract categorized by the extent of disease
327
is pushed inward. The cell then continues to elongate until the
 anterior and posterior tips of each lens fiber reach opposite
Cortical cataract, the opacification of the lens
fiber
328
poles of the lens. The fully differentiated lens fiber cells lose
their nuclei and become compacted towards the center of the
Subcapsular cataract, opacification and metaplasia
lens, as new fibers continue to form throughout life
of the lens epithelial cell
328
The lens is surrounded by a thick capsule which represents the
 Inherited cataract in dogs
328
 basement membrane of the lens epithelium. Throughout life.
Age-related cataract
328
 the anterior lens capsule continues to thicken while the
Secondary cataract
329
posterior capsule remains thin, since there are no lens epithelial
cells at the posterior pole
Lens protein breakdown or lens capsule rupture
and its significance in inflammatory eye disease
330
In mammals, the lens is held in place on the anterior vitreous
face by a combination of the gentle pressure exerted from
 Morphologic features suggesting pathologic lens 
behind by the vitreous body, and the tension of zonular
capsule rupture
330
ligaments that suspend the lens circumferentially. These zonules
 Phacolytic uveitis (lens-induced uveitis)
330
are secreted by the ciliary epithelium and insert in a crossover 
Phacoclastic uveitis
330
pattern onto the equatorial lens capsule.
 Septic implantation syndrome
335
Phacoclastic uveitis in rabbits associated with the
Comparative Comments
microsporidium, Encephalitozoon cuniculi
335
 The lens is a simple structure histologically and in the human
The lens epithelium and its role in disease after lens
 generally conforms to the description given for the lens in other
capsule rupture
337
species
Lens luxation
339
 The remarkable complexity of the lens is hidden at the molecular
Subluxation
339
and functional levels.
 Anterior luxation
339
Posterior luxation
339
CONGENITAL OR HEREDITARY CONDITIONS
Detecting pre-existing lens luxation in the
(see Ch. 3)
enucleated globe
339
Vision-threatening consequences of lens luxation
Causes of secondary lens luxation include
Posterior lenticonus/lentiglobus (Fig. 10.2)
341
 Breed-related zonular ligament dysplasia as a risk
Posterior lenticonus or lentiglobus is characterized by the
factor for canine primary lens luxation
341
localized axial elongation and increased curvature of the
323
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 10.1 The normal lens. (A) Gross
photograph of normal canine lens in 
place in situ. (B) Photomicrograph of the
 anterior pole of a Davidson's-fixed canine
lens showing crisp outlines of individual
lens fibers. (C) Photomicrograph of 
canine lens showing the equatorial lens
nuclear bow. Cuboidal lens epithelial
 cells from the anterior pole first elongate,
rotate and then become incorporated
A
B
into the lens cortex (arrow). (D)
Photomicrograph showing the posterior
pole and posterior suture (*) of a canine
lens in a Davidson's-fixed specimen. (E)
 Gross photograph of a canine globe
sectioned across the equator and
postfixed in acetic acid to make the
zonular ligaments more opaque. The
photograph shows the distribution of 
zonular fibers. (F) Photomicrograph of 
the lens equator showing remnants of
zonular ligamment fibers (arrow).
C
D
E
posterior lens, leading to a conical or spherical protrusion of the 
Congenital cataract (Figs 10.4, 10.5)
posterior pole of the lens
Stretching, thinning or discontinuity of the posterior capsule are 
frequent findings in posterior lenticonus/lentiglobus.
include:
 Cataractous changes in the lens nucleus characterized
Aphakia, microphakia, lens coloboma
by an abnormal position of the nucleus or lysis of the
(Fig. 10.3)
nucleus
■Abnormal relationship between the epithelium and lens 
Congenital absence of the lens, an abnormally small lens, or an
capsule such as duplication, wrinkling, or segmental
irregular lens shape may result from developmental
changes
abnormalities affecting the orientation, induction and
  Posterior migration of lens epithelial cells
separation of the lens vesicle. Microphakia and irregularities of
  Vascular or pigmented structures adherent to the
lens shape can be seen alone or, more often, as a part of a
lens capsule might indicate a cataract associated with
syndrome of developmental abnormalities involving the 
abnormal development of the fetal vasculature (persistent
anterior segment of the globe
Aeud snsediaday suaissiad 'sauiquau Aielnd
 Diffuse or focal lack of zonular tension at the lens equator may
vitreous, or persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
result in spherophakia or so-called lens coloboma respectively.
lentis)
These abnormalities in lens shape probably do not represent
 Congenital cataract and associated ocular abnormalities, that
primary abnormalities in lens development, rather they are
may include microphthalmia syndromes and abnormalities
associated with anterior segment developmental abnormalities
in the fetal hyaloid vasculature, are described in detail in
that affect the ciliary processes and zonular integrity.
Chapter 3.
324
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10
Figure 10.2 Lenticonus. (A) Siberian
Husky, 18 months old: the arrows
delineate the area of posterior
lenticonus. (B) Newfoundland, 1 year old:
the dark irregular circle represents the
area of lenticonus. Radiating cortical
 opacities and water vacuoles (arrow) are
also present at the lens equator. (C) Low 
 magnification photomicrograph of an
equine eye showing posterior lenticonus.
(D,E) Photomicrographs of the posterior
pole from the same eye as (C) showing a
complex relationship between the lens 
capsule and the proliferating lens
epithelium. In (E), the lens epithelium has
undergone spindle cell metaplasia (arrow)
and collagen deposition (*).
B
C
D
325
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 10.3 Developmental problems of
the lens. (A) Dachshund, 4 months old:
in addition to being small, the lens was
The ciliary processes with zonular fibers 
can be seen at both arrows. (B) German
Shepherd Dog. 6 months old: the small 
round lens luxated totally into the 
anterior chamber, resulting in corneal
edema. (C) Gross photograph of a canine
globe with microphakia. (D)
Photomicrograph of an equine globe 
with microphakia. (E) Bouin's-fixed ferret
globe with lens coloboma. (F) Gross
photograph of canine globe with 
microphakia and posterior capsular
A
rupture. Opaque lens proteins exude into
the vitreous (*).
C
D
E
326
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10 |
Figure 10.4 Congenital and early onset
cataract, clinical. (A) Labrador Retriever, 
10 weeks old: posterior capsular and
cortical opacity resulted from the
persistent hyaloid artery and its 
branching vessels, persistent hyperplastic
tunica vascularis lentis (arrow). (B) Great
Dane, 8 weeks old: multiple persistent 
pupillary membranes attached to the 
axial anterior lens creating an anterior 
capsular opacity. (C) Boston Terrier, 3.5
months old: the diffuse nuclear opacity
with clear cortex was present in both
eyes. (D) Bassett Hound, 3 years old: the 
lens nucleus is totally opaque with
 diffuse cortical opacities. The lens has an
irregular shape (coloboma). Fine zonular
A
fibers are present only segmentally
(arrow).
D
Comparative Comments
CATARACT
In man, as in animals, in addition to the congenital and hereditary
abnormalities, primary aphakia with complete failure of lens 
Cataract is the pathological opacification of the lens including
formation has been reported in rare instances. More commonly, a
its capsule
small or incompletely formed lens, giving the clinical impression of 
Cataract may be categorized according to extent of lens
 aphakia, has been observed 
involvement, location within the lens, or etiopathogenesis.
 Other congenital abnormalities that are also seen the human lens 
include conditions of imperfect or delayed lens-corneal separation,
anterior lenticonus, and spherophakia. In the latter condition, the 
Cataract categorized by the extent of
lens is relatively more rounded than normal and usually smaller 
disease (Figs 10.6-10.10)
(microphakic)
 Incipient cataracts involve less than 15% of the lens
 An important congenital condition in humans is rubella cataract, 
which occurs in the fetus if the mother is exposed to rubella virus
Immature cataracts affect more than 15% of the lens but lens 
during the first or second trimester of pregnancy. Rubella virus 
involvement is incomplete and they do not completely obscure
may be cultured from surgically removed lenses
the fundus reflection
 Although tumors of the lens do not occur in humans, the lens 
Mature cataracts affect the lens cortex circumferentially and
anlage has been reported to develop aberrantly in the lower lid.
 completely obstruct visualization of the fundus reflection
in a condition known as phakomatous choristoma.
Hypermature cataracts show evidence of lens shrinkage, such as
lens capsule wrinkling, associated with leakage and resorption 
of altered cortical lens proteins.
327
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 10.5 Congenital cataract,
pathology. (A) Low magnification
photomicrograph of a dog lens with
 congenital cataract. The cataractous
changes are predominantly nuclear. The
posterior pole and the equatorial cortex
remain near normal (arrow). (B) Low
magnification photomicrograph showing
a focal dysplastic and wrinkled lens
capsule (arrow). (C) The same focus as
(B) with higher magnification showing 
the relationship between the duplicated
lens capsule and the lens epithelium
(A)
(D,E) Two photomicrographs of the
 anterior poles of two lenses showing
duplications in the lens capsule and lens
epithelium in canine congenital cataracts.
D
Cortical cataract, the opacification of the
 Secretion of collagen around the metaplastic lens epithelial
lens fiber (Fig. 10.11)
cells
 Loss of the lens epithelial cells leaving behind cell-free
●There is not a perfect correlation between the clinical
 collagen matrix
observation of lens opacity and a histologically observable
 Mineralization.
morphologic change in the lens cortex
■Many changes in the lens protein can represent either
Inherited cataract in dogs
be impossible to determine the significance of observed
 Inherited cataract is very common in the purebred canine
morphologic changes
population. An inherited basis for cataract development is
 Reliable morphologic indicators of cortical cataract include:
 proven or suspected in over 100 canine breeds, of which many
- Bladder cells: swollen, rounded lens fibers that still contain
appear to demonstrate complex patterns of inheritance. In some
a nucleus
canine breeds, a genetic basis for cataract development has been
 Morgagnian globules: swollen, rounded lens fibers with no
clearly established, eg. mutations in the HSF4 gene are
nucleus
 Lens mineralization may occur in long-standing cataracts.
the Staffordshire bull terrier and Boston Terrier
Clinical phenotype is highly variable between and within
Subcapsular cataract, opacification and
affected breeds. This variability may result from the influence
metaplasia of the lens epithelial cell
of multiple genes and other metabolic and environmental
factors.
(Fig. 10.12)
●Normal lens epithelial cells are positioned immediately adjacent
Age-related cataract
to the lens capsule and their tropism for the lens capsule is
seldom altered in disease states
Cataracts are a common feature of senescence in most
 In subcapsular cataract the opacity is directly related to
species
abnormalities of the lens epithelial cells
Senile cataracts should be distinguished, both clinically and
 Morphologic features of subcapsular cataract include:
histomorphologically, from the normal process of nuclear
 Proliferation of lens epithelial cells to form a localized
sclerosis which is not associated with true lens opacity
aggregate
In nuclear sclerosis, the density of the lens nucleus increases
 Metaplasia, involving a change in the cells from an epithelial
with age as older lens fibers are progressively tightly packed
centrally and take on a more homogeneous in appearance, as
of a myofbroblast
new cortical fbers are formed more peripherally.
328
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10 |
Figure 10.6 Incipient cataracts, clinical
(A) Siberian Husky,. 10 months old:
feathering along the posterior cortical 
suture lines (arrow) was present in both
lenses. (B) Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,
8 weeks old: the equatorial cortex was
overhydrated (arrow) in this immature
cataract. This overhydration cleared in 
the adult. (C) Golden Retriever, 3 years
old: the posterior cortical suture is
opaque as was the axial subcapsular
cortex surrounding the suture line. (D)
Italian Greyhound, 5 years old: equatorial
 cortical water vacuoles are present
(arrow). The opacity at 10 o'clock
represents vitreous degeneration.
A
B
C
D
Secondary cataract
cataract to be distinguished from any other cortical cataract
morphologically
Cataract may occur secondary to other intraocular disease; such
 Although diabetes mellitus is fairly common in cats and
as uveitis, glaucoma, neoplasia or advanced retinal
saads asaui u uouon iou s ieiee saqep 'sueunu
degeneration; or as a result of trauma, electrocution, nutritional
- The lower incidence of diabetic cataract in cats may relate
imbalance, exposure to toxins or metabolic disease, such as
to lower levels of activity of the enzyme aldose reductase
 diabetes mellitus.
in the lens of older cats, compared to dogs.
 Metabolic cataract is recognized in almost all diabetic dogs
(Fig. 10.10)
Diabetic dogs are far more likely to develop cortical cataract
because of the conversion of glucose to sorbitol within the
Comparative Comments
lens cells and the resulting influx of water
 The types of cataracts occurring in humans and other species
 Diabetic cataracts often develop rapidly and can lead to
appear to be extremely similar, although they have been further
serious inflammatory changes if the lens capsule ruptures
suewny u! sadkt jo laqunu lateaib e oju! papaipgns
(see below) or to secondary glaucoma caused by lens 
 An extremely interesting entity is the exfoliation syndrome, also 
 swelling (intumescent cataract)
known as pseudoexfoliation, in which a fibrillary protein-like 
 The diabetic state can also contribute to complications
material is deposited on the anterior lens capsule
following cataract surgery
peeien y panenosse shapiosip piuaiss ioew aul
- In general, however, substantial differences in post-
development in humans are diabetes mellitus, galactosemia,
operative outcomes are not apparent compared to
hypercupremia, Fabry disease and Down syndrome
 Numerous drugs give rise to cataracts in humans, the most 
■ Although diabetic cataracts are usually cortical cataracts, there
common being corticosteroids.
are no specific morphologic features which allow a diabetic
329
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 10.7 Immature and mature
cataracts, clinical. (A) Boston Terrier, 7
years old: anterior and posterior cortical
opacities are present and radiate to the
lens equator. (B) Cockapoo, 5 years old:
the cortical suture lines are opaque.
Diffuse cortical and nuclear opacities
appear dark due to retroillumination
from the tapetal reflection. (C)
Pomeranian, 15 years old: the entire lens
is opaque with no visible tapetal
reflection in this mature cataract. (D)
Poodle, 6 years old: the homogenous 
appearance of the cataract is due to lens
liquefaction in this hypermature cataract.
A
B
C
Phacolytic uveitis (lens-induced uveitis)
LENS PROTEIN BREAKDOWN OR LENS
(Fig. 10.14)
CAPSULE RUPTURE AND ITS SIGNIFICANCE
IN INFLAMMATORY EYE DISEASE
 Phacolytic uveitis occurs in response to the broken down' lens
proteins that characterize cataract, particularly mature and
hypermature cataract. These altered lens proteins are able to leak
Morphologic features suggesting
through an intact lens capsule into the aqueous inciting a mild 
pathologic lens capsule rupture (Fig. 10.13)
to moderate inflammation
 There is a mild to moderate lymphoplasmacytic uveitis
 Recoil or scrolling of the ends of the lens capsule is a feature
Subsequent formation of extensive posterior synechiae with iris
ee wuoiy aimdnu sigonouied sausingunsip ieu
 bombe, or peripheral anterior synechiae, increases the risk of 
 Entrapment or digestion of lens capsule at the site of rupture is
a feature of pathologic rupture
 Apparent leakage of lens-related granular protein occurs in a
If the lens capsule remains intact, then there should be no cell
small percentage of cats with idiopathic lymphoplasmacytic
a su  n ss eaa s u an aan
uveitis.
cells within the capsule
■Characteristic cells to look for, that suggest pathologic lens
 capsule rupture, include the following:
Phacoclastic uveitis
 Macrophage cells
 In phacocastic uveitis, inflammation occurs in response to the
- Neutrophils 
sudden release of relatively large quantities of lens protein after
- Red blood cells
lens capsule rupture
 Fibroblasts and blood vessels.
 In our opinion, the true incidence of phacoclastic uveitis, not
associated with pathologic organisms such as bacteria, is hard to
determine because bacteria are often identifed within ruptured
lenses (see below)
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10
Figure 10.8 Morgagnian cataract and 
lens resorption, clinical. (A) Poodle, 4
years old: the dense nucleus (arrow) has
settled inferiorly in the fluid cortex in this
Morgagnian cataract. (B) Cocker Spaniel.
6 years old: viewing the lens from the 
side showing the severely wrinkled
anterior lens capsule. This was the result 
of chronic loss of lens protein. (C) Cocker
Spaniel, 2 years old: the orange tapetal
reflection can be seen following lens
resorption. A linear wrinkle in the lens 
capsule is also visible (arrow). (D) Bichon
Frise, 10 years old: the dense nucleus is
present with several areas of posterior 
synechiae (black arrow). Liquefied cortical
material is present within the inferior
capsule (white arrow). (E) DSH, 5 years 
old: the lens has reduced significantly in
diameter and is surrounded 
circumferentialy by stretched ciliary 
processes adhered to the lens capsule. (F)
Bichon Frise, 6.5 years old: the small 
opaque nucleus remains axially.
 Fragments of cortical lens material
(arrow) are trapped between the anterior
and posterior lens capsule.
C
E
331
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 10.9 Classification of cataracts,
pathology.(A) Photomicrograph showing
cortical cataract, characterized by the
presence of Morgagnian globules. (B)
Bladder cells and Morgagnian globules in
 cortical cataract. A Morgagnian globule
is a rounded lens fiber with no nucleus,
and a bladder cell is a rounded fiber that
 contains a nucleus. (C) Photomicrograph 
of mature cataract showing extensive 
equatorial cortical pathology (*). (D)
Hypermature Morgagnian cataract with
wrinkling of the lens capsule (arrow) and 
remnants of lens nucleus floating in
liquefied lens protein (*) within the 
 capsule. (E) Low magnification 
A
B
photomicrograph showing the wrinkled
lens capsule (arrow) after all the lens 
protein has been resorbed. (F)
Hypermature cataract with extensive
collagen-rich subcapsular cataract 
associated with spindle cell metaplasia of
the lens epithelial cells (*).
D
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10 |
Figure 10.10 Diabetic cataract, clinical
(A) Keeshond, 9 years old: equatorial
cortical water vacuoles were present 
circumferentially in both lenses. (B) Mixed 
Breed, 9 years old: equatorial water 
vacuoles were present. Fine radiations of
cortical opacities and larger cortical water
vacuoles (arrows) are present. (C)
Rottweiler, 6 years old: this immature
cataract has wide suture lines (arrow).
which appear dark on retroillumination.
Diffuse opacities throughout the
overhydrated lens reduce the tapetal
reflection. (D) Miniature Schnauzer, 9
years old: this intumescent lens is typical
 of the mature cataract seen in diabetes.
The classical wide anterior cortical suture
A
lines of an intumescent cataract are also 
observable (between arrows).
C
D
Figure 10.11 Histopathologic indicators
of cataract. (A) Photomicrograph
showing a canine lens with Morgagnian
globules and bladder cells, two reliable 
histologic indicators of cataract. (B)
Photomicrograph of a canine lens with
 cortical mineralization.
B
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 10.12 Subcapsular cataract,
pathology. (A) Photomicrograph showing
lens epithelial hyperplasia and metaplasia
in subcapsular cataract. (B)
 Photomicrograph showing a collagenous 
 subcapsular cataract (*) (Alcian blue
PAS). (C) Photomicrograph of a 
 trichrome-stained lens with a collagenous 
subcapsular cataract. (D) Hypermature
cataract with a wrinkled lens capsule and 
 a contractile subcapsular cataract.
C
D
Figure 10.13 Lens capsule rupture.
pathology. (A) Gross photograph of a
canine globe with lens capsule rupture.
release of lens protein and phacoclastic
uveitis. (B) Mineralization within 
subcapsular cataract exposed by lens
capsule rupture which is characterized by
a coiled lens capsule. (C)
Photomicrograph showing the exposed 
lens fibers after lens capsule rupture and 
 consumption of lens protein by
phagocyte proliferation. (D) Lens capsule 
rupture with scrolling of the lens capsule
and proliferation of lens epithelial cells.
A
C
D
334
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10 |
Figure 10.14 Phacolytic uveitis. (A)
Cocker Spaniel, 13 months old: ectropion
uvea is seen at the pupil margin. Deep 
limbal corneal vessels are present at the
limbus. (B) Poodle, 9 years old: the lens
is entrapped in the dilated pupil with
irregular posterior synechiae. The iris has
depigmented. Corneal edema and 
aqueous flare hinder the view of the
keratic precipitates (arrow). (C) Gross
photograph showing a canine globe with
lens capsule still intact and protein
exudates in the chambers of the globe
(arrow). (D) Subgross photomicrograph
from the same dog as 10.9(E) showing
mild inflammation and the empty
remains of the lens capsule in
A
B
hypermature cataract (arrow).
D
 Lens rupture associated with rapidly progressive, intumescent
Bacterial colonies or fungal hyphae are seen away from the
diabetic cataract represents a special case, in which there is
inflammatory infltrate, implanted within the lens substance
often a pronounced, macrophage-rich endophthalmitis
Endophthalmitis is centered around the lens.
associated with the explosive release of lens proteins
(Fig. 10.15).
Phacoclastic uveitis in rabbits associated
with the microsporidium, Encephalitozoon
cuniculi (Fig. 10.17)
Septic implantation syndrome (see Ch. 5)
(Fig. 10.16)
 This syndrome is characterized by a white inflammatory nodule
ym aimdnu ansde sual susne Anlu ieno suenauad y
adherent to the lens at the site of a lens capsule break and
implantation of bacteria or, more rarely fungi, into the lens is a
extending into the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
common occurrence in both cats and dogs 
Dwarf rabbits are over-represented
Although impossible to prove in every case, this syndrome is
Histologic features of Encephalitozoon cuniculi-associated
most frequently caused by a cat scratch
phacoclastic uveitis
a pue yis a uaamiaa poa aue e uao si aiau 
 The inflammation is more confined and circumscribed than
 onset of severe endophthalmitis
in septic implantation syndrome
■
 Because of the time that elapses between the original cat
 There is a more prominent granulomatous component to the 
scratch and the linically apparent endophthalmitis, the
inflammation
morphologic features of the disease include evidence of
■
 Encephalitozoon cuniculi organisms may or may not be found.
chronicity, such as:
They are Gram-positive and a Gram-stain helps to
demonstrate the organisms
 posterior synechiae
The mechanisms of disease transmission and pathogenesis have
 Development of a collagenous cyclitic membrane
not been completely elucidated. Vertical transmission of the 
 There is suppurative and histiocytic inflammation within the
 Organism may be important in these cases, with lens infection
posterior chamber and within the ruptured lens
Occurring during lens development.
SEE
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 10.15 Diabetic cataract and 
phacoclastic uveitis. (A) Miniature
Schnauzer, 7 years old: the posterior lens 
capsule was ruptured, resulting in a
severe uveitis. The corneal edema and 
lipemic corneal vessels prevented 
visualization of the intraocular structures.
(B) Samoyed, 10 years old: the anterior 
lens capsule has ruptured, extruding lens
material into the anterior chamber. (C,D)
Subgross photomicrographs showing
canine globes with macrophage-rich
uveitis and endophthalmitis in phacolytic
diabetic cataract. (E,F) Gross photographs
of eyes from two dogs with diabetic
cataract and endophthalmitis. (G,H)
A
B
Photomicrographs showing the detached
retina (G) and the anterior surface of the
 iris (H) with a macrophage-rich infiltrate 
and multinucleate giant cells (arrow).
?
D
E
H
9EE
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10
Figure 10.16 Septic implantation
 syndrome. (A) Gross photograph of dog
eye showing a suppurative exudate
(arrow) plastered between the lens
capsule and the posterior iris in septic 
implantation syndrome. (B) Low
magnification photomicrograph showing
the relationship between the ruptured 
lens capsule (white arrow), the iris (black 
arrow) and the crystalline lens. (C) Higher
 magnification showing the lens capsule
rupture and the ragged edge of the
capsule (arrow) infiltrated by neutrophils.
B
(D) High magnification photomicrograph
showing Gram-positive bacterial cocci
embedded in the lens away from the
suppurative exudates, typical of septic
implantation syndrome (Gram stain). (E)
High magnification showing long
filamentous bacteria in a cat with septic
 implantation syndrome
A
Together with mesenchymal transformation, this is a major
Comparative Comments
cause of posterior capsular opacifcation following cataract
 Phacolytic uveitis, generally referred to in humans as phacoantigenic 
surgery in humans and animals. Complications of cataract
endophthalmitis, or lens-related uveitis, is a similar pathologic entity
 surgery are discussed in detail in Chapter 4
to that described in other species and is seen commonly in phakic 
 Migration of metaplastic lens epithelial cells to cover the inner 
eyes with sympathetic ophthalmia.
aspect of the uvea, lining the globe
Potential, vision-threatening consequences of the migration
of metaplastic lens epithelial cells out of the lens capsule
include:
■Synechiae formation
THELENS EPITHELIUM AND ITS ROLEIN
■
 Traction leading to retinal detachment 
DISEASE AFTER LENS CAPSULE RUPTURE
■ Glaucoma due to angle dosure or pupillary block
(Fig. 10.18)
■Proliferative membranes in the posterior segment
 Malignant transformation causing spindle cell variant 
post-traumatic ocular sarcoma in cats (see Ch. 5)
Following spontaneous lens capsule rupture, chronic cataract, or fol.
(Fig. 10.19)
lowing cataract surgery, remaining lens epithelial cells undergo a pre-
After a latency period which averages 7 years follwing
dictable series of changes which can lead to serious complications.
 taumatic lens capsule rupture, lens epithelial cells may
 Spindle cell metaplasia, forming cells that express smooth
undergo transformation into malignant spindle cells
muscle actin that are typical of myofbroblastic mesenchymal
■ The malignant cells extend around the interior of the globe
cells
and may infltrate into the sclera, optic nerve, and peripheral
 Proliferation of remaining epithelial cells and migration of
nerve tissue
metaplastic cells within the lens capsule
■ Malignant cells often continue to secrete a thick, lens
■ In humans, the migration of lens epithelial cells is confined
capsule-like basement membrane and may also continue to
to the lens capsule, but this is not the case in dogs and cats 
express alpha A crystallin protein.
LEE
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 10.17 Encephalitozoon cuniculi
and lenticular rupture in rabbits. (A)
Dwarf cross, 1 year old: two raised 
granulomatous, vascularized masses
(arrow) originate in the iris and extend 
into the anterior chamber. A nasal
anterior cortical cataract cannot be 
viewed in this photograph. (B) Gross 
photograph showing a highly cellular
exudate hugging the anterior capsule of 
the lens. This pattern is typical of 
Encephatitozoon cunicufi-induced
inflammation. (C) Subgross 
photomicrograph showing a cellular
exudate between the anterior lens 
capsule and the iris. (D) Photomicrograph
showing the anterior lens with a cluster
of protozoal organisms within the lens 
A
B
(arrow). (E,F) Encephalitozoon cuniculi
 organisms in the lens (Gram stain (E) and
acid-fast stain (F)).
D
E
F
8EE
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10 |
Figure 10.18 Proliferation of lens
epithelial cells after traumatic lens
capsule rupture. (A) Gross photograph of
a traumatized feline globe showing a
hypermature cataract. The retinal
remnants and the uvea are distorted
because of proliferating lens epithelial 
cells. (B) Photomicrograph showing lens
capsule rupture and proliferating lens 
epithelial cells (arrow) spreading over the
iris and iridocorneal angle. (C) Higher
magnification photomicrograph showing 
the ruptured end of a canine lens
 capsule. A membrane composed of lens
epithelial cells, accompanied by 
 PAS-staining basement membrane matrix
B
(arrows), extends from the margin of the
lens capsule. Such a membrane will 
contribute to retinal detachment or
synechia. (D) Photomicrograph of a
canine anterior chamber with a thick
membrane of proliferative and migrating 
lens epithelial cells (*) causing anterior 
synechia.
● Morphologic features of lens luxation apparent on the gross
LENS LUXATION
examination of the globe include:
■ Lens out of position and free within the globe
Lens luxation is the separation of the lens from its zonular
Liquid vitreous body, often with strands across the front or
ligament moorings (Figs 10.20, 10.21)
attached to the free lens 
The position of a highly mobile luxated lens can change rapidly.
 Morphologic features of lens luxation apparent on
before the observer's eye.
histopathology include:
An angular, posterior bend in the profile of the iris ('dogleg'
iris)
Subluxation
■ Atrophy of the pars plicata of the ciliary body
Partial dislocation of the lens which, although somewhat displaced,
yonh ci Aepuosas wmaqiopua leaon au jo uoenuay
'a sa ra a ua esg eiid a u s
by the luxated lens.
Anterior luxation
Vision-threatening consequences of lens
The dislocated lens lies partly or entirely within the anterior
luxation (Fig. 10.22)
chamber
 Physical contact between the luxated lens and the corneal
endothelial cells results in attenuation of the endothelium or
Posterior luxation
formation of a retro-corneal membrane
 The dislocated lens falls back into the vitreous, implying degeneration
 Loss of function of the central or paraxial cormeal
 Or disruption of the anterior vitreous.
endothelium may result in corneal edema
 Corneal edema, in turn, may lead to:
- Bullous keratopathy and corneal ulceration
Detecting pre-existing lens luxation in the
- Secondary infectious keratitis
enucleated globe
 Collagenolysis with corneal perforation
Entrapment of the lens in the anterior chamber causing
 Detecting lens luxation can be problematic because the lens is
angle closure and/or pupillary block with secondary
commonly displaced artifactually during cutting and processing
of the globe
Posterior synechiae leading to pupil block, iris bombe and
 The best way to detect a pathological lens luxation is to read the
history carefully because the ophthalmologic exam is most likely
Anterior vitreous prolapse contributing to retinal detachment or
to be accurate
 pupil-block and secondary glaucoma.
689
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 10.19 Feline post-traumatic 
ocular sarcoma. (A) Gross photograph of 
 a globe with feline post-traumatic ocular
sarcoma, spindle cell variant. (B)
Photomicrograph of the ruptured lens 
capsule from a traumatized cat eye
showing neoplastic cells of lens epithelial 
origin (*). (C) Photomicrograph showing
a neoplastic membrane on the inner
 surface of the choroid in a pattern typical
of post-traumatic sarcoma. (D)
Photomicrograph showing neoplastic
spindle cells in feline post-traumatic
sarcoma and associated multinucleated
giant cells (*), which are seen in some
post-traumatic ocular sarcomas.
340
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10 |
Figure 10.20 Lens luxation, clinical. (A)
 Petit Basset Griffon Vendeen, 4 years old:
an aphakic crescent (arrow) and the
entire equator of the lens can be seen in
this subluxated lens. (B) Brittany Spaniel,
7 years old: the optic disc can be easily
seen through the dilated pupil and over
the posterior luxated lens (arrow). (C)
Dachshund, 6 years old: the lens is tilted
 and subluxated with the nasal aspect of
the lens contacting the corneal
endothelium (arrow) and the temporal
lens still posterior to the iris. (D) Tibetan 
Terrier, 6 years old: the entire lens is
luxated into the anterior chamber
resulting in corneal edema. The equator
 of the lens can be seen superiorly
A
B
(arrow).
Causes of secondary lens luxation include
 Affected animals will have solid sheets of acellular,
eosinophilic protein tightly adherent to the non-pigmented
 Chronic intraocular inflammation leading to degradation of the
epithelium over segments of the ciliary body
lens zonules
-- The abnormality is discontinuous so a careful evaluation
Chronic glaucoma with enlargement of the globe
 of all available ciliary epithelium is needed to rule out 
Long-standing. hypermature cataract with lens shrinkage and
zonular ligament protein dysplasia
phacolytic uveitis
- Thickening of the native zonular ligaments is a non-
Senile degeneration of the zonular ligaments in elderly animals
specific change which can be distinguished from zonular
 Traumatic disruption of the lens zonules
ligament dysplasia because it is not tightly adherent to the
 In domestic animals traumatic lens luxation is seldom
epithelium
recognized in isolation, and is likely to be accompanied by
When viewed with enhanced contrast, these protein deposits
Other signs of ocular trauma, such as intraocular hemorrhage.
have a complex cross-pattern of laminations
■ The abnormal protein stains intensely with PAS and, in
contrast to normal zonular ligaments, stains blue with
Breed-related zonular ligament dysplasia as
trichrome indicating increased collagen and does not stain
a risk factor for canine primary lens
black with an elastin stain
 Affected dogs have bilateral ocular involvement at a young
luxation (Fig. 10.23)
age
· Primary lens luxation is seen as a primary condition,
 Other systemic connective tissue abnormalities, as seen in
presumably with a hereditary basis, in several dog breeds
humans with lens luxation related to Marfan syndrome, have
including terrier breeds, Tibetan Terriers and Shar Peis. Primary
 not been identified in affected dogs
lens luxation is also encountered sporadically in other breeds 
■ In humans with Marfan syndrome, fibrillin gene mutations
and in other species
have been identified
Morphologic features that are useful in the histologic diagnosis
■Mutations in the fibrillin gene have not been identified in
of zonular ligament dysplasia include:
anine breeds with primary lens luxation.
341
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
?
?
?
Figure 10.21 Morphologic features indicative of lens luxation. (A) Gross photograph of a dog eye with displacement of the lens. The pathologist is
yoy e seu abueup sul snoa aun ui sual aun buius ydeouonud ssobans (a) aa aun buissoe alu uoiod sual aui anenaa oi aige isag
probability of being an artifact of handling. (C) Subgross photomicrograph showing the lens displaced and the papillary margin of the iris bent around
the lens equator (arrow). This is a hint that the lens displacement is pathologic. (D) Subgross photomicrograph showing the lens clearly in the anterior 
chamber.
342
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10
D
Figure 10.22 Consequences of lens luxation, clinical. (A) Terrier cross, 14 years old: the lens equator (arrows) can be seen in the anterior chamber.
Glaucoma and keratitis resulted from the anterior lens luxation. (B) Pomeranian, 7 years old: the lens was luxated into the anterior chamber. Anterior
uveitis was apparent on ocular examination. (C) Mixed Breed, & years old: the lens was subluxated posteriorly. Two arrows delineate the corneal
curvature. The central arrow at 9:00 points to the asteroid hyalosis and prolapsed vitreous in the anterior chamber. (D) Yorkshire Terrier, 11 years old:
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 10.23 Lens luxation associated
with zonular ligament dysplasia. (A)
Chinese Shar-Pei, 8 years old: this lens is
subluxated posterior and inferior. Ciliary
processes (arrow) and fine zonular fibers
can be seen at the aphakic crescent. (B)
 Parson Russell Terrier, 4 years old: this 
 normotensive eye had a deep anterior
chamber due to a posterior lens luxation.
Zonular fibers are seen at the pupil 
margin (arrows). (C) Low magnification
photomicrograph showing the ciliary 
body of a Jack Russell Terrier with lens 
luxation and a region of dysplastic
zonular ligament protein (arrow). (D)
Higher magnification of the same dog 
eye as (C) stained with PAS showing 
B
 another region on the pars plicata with
 an acellular carpet of dysplastic zonular
ligament protein (arrow). (E-G) High
magnification photomicrographs showing 
the morphologic features of dysplastic
 zonular ligament protein and its staining 
 characteristics. (E) The features with an
H&E stain. The acellular material shows a
 complex crosshatched lamellar pattern.
(F) The material is trichrome-positive,
unlike the native zonular ligament. (G)
 The dysplastic protein is strongly
 PAS-positive, as is the native zonular
ligament protein.
H&E
Trichrome
PAS
344
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Introduction, anatomy and physiology
Koch, S.A., 1972. Cataracts in interrelated old
Rubin, L.F., Flowers, R.D., 1972. Inherited
Samuelson, D.A., 1999. Ophthalmic anatomy.
English Sheepdogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
cataract in a family of standard poodles. J.
In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary
160, 299-301.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 161, 207-208.
ophthalmology, 3rd edn. Lippincott,
Olesen, H.P., Jensen, O.A., Norn, M.S., 1974.
Barnett, K.C., Startup, EG., 1985. Hereditary
Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp.
Congenital hereditary cataract in Cocker
cataract in the standard poodle. Vet. Rec.
31-150.
spaniels. J. Small. Anim. Pract. 15, 741-750.
117, 15-16.
Gum, G.G., Gelatt, K.N., Esson, D.W., 2007.
Narfstrom, K., 1981. Cataract in the West
Barnett, K.C., 1980. Hereditary cataract in the
Physiology of the eye. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.).
Highland white terrier. J. Small Anim. Pract.
Welsh Springer Spaniel. J. Small Anim. Pract.
Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th edn.
22, 467-471.
21, 621-625.
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 149-182.
Gelatt, K.N., Das, N.D., 1984. Animal models
Gelatt, K.N., 1972. Cataracts in the Golden
Stades, EC., van der Linde-Sipman, J.S., 1983.
for inherited cataracts: a review. Cur. Eye
Retriever dog. Vet. Med. Small Anim. Clin.
Pathology of the lens. In: Peiffer, Ir., R.L.
Res. 3, 765-778.
67, 1113-1115
(Ed.), Comparative ophthalmic pathology.
Barnett, K.C., 1985. Hereditary cataract in the
Roberts, S.R., Helper, L.C., 1972. Cataracts in
Charles C. Thomas, Springfeld, pp.
Miniature Schnauzer. J. Small Anim. Pract.
Afghan hounds. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assocl. 60,
213-253.
26, 645-652.
427-432.
Bjerkas, E., Haaland, M.B., 1995. Pulverulent
Rubin, L.F., 1974. Cataract in Golden Retrievers.
Congenital anomalies, congenital
nuclear cataract in the Norwegian Buhund.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 165, 457-458.
J. Small Anim. Pract. 36, 471-474.
cataract
Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C., 1989. A survey of
Strande, A., Nicolaissen, B., Bjerkas, I., 1988.
cataracts in golden and labrador retrievers. J.
Martin, C.L., Leipold H., 1974. Aphakia and
Persistent pupillary membrane and
Small Anim. Pract. 30, 277-286.
multiple ocular defects in Saint Bernard
congenital cataract in a litter of English
Curtis, R, 1984. Late-onset cataract in the
puppies. Vet. Med. Small Anim. Clin. G9.
Cocker spaniels. J. Small. Anim. Pract. 29,
Boston terrier. Vet. Rec. 115, 577-578.
448-453.
257-260.
Gelatt, K.N., Wallace, M.R., Andrew, S.E., et al.
Peiffer Jr., R.L., Fischer, C.A., 1983.
Beech, I., Aguirre, G., Gross, S., 1984.
2003. Cataracts in the Bichon Frise. Vet.
 Microphthalmia, retinal dysplasia, and
Congenital nuclear cataracts in the Morgan
Ophthalmol. 6, 3-9.
anterior segment dysgenesis in a litter of
horse. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 184,
 Doberman Pinschers. J. Am. Vet. Med. AssoC
1363-1365.
ACVO, 1999. Ocular disorders presumed to be
 inherited in Purebred dogs, 3rd edn.
183, 875-878.
McLaughlin, S.A., Whitley, R.D., Gilger, B.C.,
 American College of Veterinary
Bergsjo, T., Arnesen, K., Heim, P., et al., 1984.
1992. Diagnosis and treatment of lens
Ophthalmologists, Baton Rouge, LA.
Congenital blindness with ocular
diseases. Vet. Clin. North Am. Equine. Pract.
Gelatt, K.N., Mackay, E.O., 2005. Prevalence of
developmental anomalies, including
8, 575-585.
retinal dysplasia, in Doberman Pinscher
primary breed-related cataracts in the dog in
Roberts, S.M., 1992. Congenital ocular
dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 184,
North America. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8,
anomalies. Vet. Clin. North Am: Equine
1383-1386
101-111.
Pract. 8, 459-478.
Gelatt, K.N., Samuelson, D.A., Barrie, K.P.,
Heitmann, M., Hamann, H., Brahm, R., et al..
Gelatt, K.N., 1971. Cataracts in cattle. J. Am.
et al., 1983. Biometry and clinical
2005. Analysis of prevalence of presumed
Vet. Med. Assoc. 159, 195-200.
characteristics of congenital cataracts and
inherited eye diseases in Entlebucher
Ashton, N., 1977. Congenital nuclear cataracts
microphthalmia in the Miniature
Mountain Dogs. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8.
Schnauzer. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 183,
in cattle. Vet. Rec. 100, 505-508.
145-151.
99-102.
Gemensky-Metzler, A.l., Wilkie, D.A., 2004.
Heinrich, C.L., Lakhani, K.H., Featherstone, H.J..
Surgical management and histologic and
Gelatt, K.N., Samuelson, D.A., Bauer, J.E., et al.
et al., 2006. Cataract in the LK Leonberger
1983. Inheritance of congenital cataracts and
immunohistochemical features of a cataract
population. Vet. Ophthalmol. 9, 350-356.
and retrolental plaque secondary to
microphthalmia in the Miniature Schnauzer.
Hunter, LS., Sidjanin, D.J., Johnson, J.L., et al.,
 persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
Am. J. Vet. Res. 44, 1130-1132.
2006. Radiation hybrid mapping of cataract
lentis/persistent hyperplastic primary
Aguirre, G., Bistner, S.1., 1973. Posterior
genes in the dog. Mol. Vis. 12, 588-596.
vitreous (PHTVL/PHPV) in a Bloodhound
lenticonus in the dog. Cornell Vet. 63.
Engelhardt, A., Stock, K.F., Hamann, H., et al.,
puppy. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7, 369-375.
455-461.
2008. A retrospective study on the
van der Woerdt, A., Stades, FC., van der
prevalence of primary cataracts in two
Subcapsular cataract and lens epithelial
Linde-Sipman, J.S., et al., 1995. Multiple
pedigrees from the German population of
ocular anomalies in two related litters of Soft
cell metaplasia
English Cocker Spaniels. Vet. Ophthalmol.
Coated Wheaten terriers. Vet. Comp.
Bernays, M.E., Peiffer, R.L., 2000. Morphologic
11, 215-221.
Ophthalmol. 5, 78-82.
alterations in the anterior lens capsule of
Gelatt, K.N., Das, N.D., 1984. Animal models
Narfstrom, K., Dubielzig R., 1984. Posterior
canine eyes with cataracts. Am. J. Vet. Res.
for inherited cataracts: a review. Curr. Eye
lenticonus, cataracts and microphthalmia:
61, 1517-1519.
Res. 3, 765-778.
congenital ocular defects in the Cavalier King (
Colitz, C.M., Malarkey, D., Dykstra, M.J., et al.,
Bjerkas, E., Haaland, M.B., 1995. Pulverulent 
Charles spaniel. J. Small Anim. Pract. 25,
2000. Histologic and immunohistochemical
nuclear cataract in the Norwegian buhund. J.
669-677.
characterization of lens capsular plaques in
Small Anim. Pract. 36, 471-474.
Davidson, M.G., Nelms, S.R., 2007. Diseases of
dogs with cataracts. Am. J. Vet. Res. 61,
Genetics Committee of the ACVO, 1999. Ocular
the canine lens and cataract formation. In:
139-143.
disorders presumed to be inherited in
Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary ophthalmology.
Purebred dogs, 3rd edn. American College 
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 859-887.
 Inherited cataract
 of Veterinary Ophthalmologists, Baton
Lloyd, I.C., Goss-Sampson, M., Jeffrey, B.G.
Rubin, L.F., Koch, S.A., Huber, R.J., 1969.
Rouge, LA.
et al., 1992. Neonatal cataract: aetiology.
Hereditary cataracts in miniature schnauzers.
Wallace, M.R., MacKay, E.O., Gelatt, K.N., et al..
pathogenesis and management. Eye 6.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 154, 1456-
2005. Inheritance of cataract in the Bichon
184-196.
1458.
Frise. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8, 203-205.
345
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Mellersh, C.S., Graves, K.T., McLaughlin, B.
canine cataracts. Graefe's Arch. Clin. Exp.
with phacoclastic uveitis: confirmation and
 et al., 2007. Mutation in HSF4 associated
Ophthalmol. 245, 249-257.
treatment. Vet Comp Ophthalmol. 7,
with early but not late-onset hereditary
233-238
cataract in the Boston Terrier J. Hered 98,
Electrical, nutritional and toxic cataract
Felchle, L.M., Sigler, R.L., 2002.
531-533.
Phacoemulsification for the management of
Mellersh, C.S., Pettitt, L., Forman, O.P., et al.,
Brightman, A.H., Brogdon, J.D., Helper, L.C.,
et al., 1984. Electric cataracts in the canine: a
Encephalitozoon cumiculi-induced phacoclastic
 2006. Identification of mutations in HSF4 in
case report. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 20,
uveitis in a rabbit. Vet. Ophthalmol. 5.
dogs of three different breeds with hereditary
895-898.
211-215.
cataracts. Vet. Ophthalmol. 9, 369-378.
Ranz, D., Gutbrod, F, Eule, C., et al., 2002.
Giordano, C., Weigt, A., Vercelli, A., et al., 2005.
Kraijer-Huver, I.M., Gubbels, E.J., Scholten, I..
Nutritional lens opacities in two litters of
Immunohistochemical identification of
et al., 2008. Characterization and prevalence
Newfoundland dogs. J. Nutr. 132.
Encephalitozoon cuniculi in phacoclastic
 of cataracts in Labrador Retrievers in The
1688S- 1689S.
uveitis in four rabbits. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8.
Netherlands. Am. J. Vet. Res. 69, 1336-
Martin, C.L., Chambreau, T., 1982. Cataract
271-275.
1340.
production in experimentally orphaned
Harcourt-Brown, F.M., Holloway, H.K., 2003.
Oberbauer, A.M., Hollingsworth, S.R., Belanger.
puppies fed a commercial replacement for
Encephalitozoon cumiculi in pet rabbits. Vet.
J.M., et al., 2008. Inheritance of cataracts and
bitch's milk. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 18,
Rec. 152, 427-431.
 primary lens luxation in Jack Russell Terriers.
115-119.
Kunzel, F., Gruber, A., Tichy, A., et al., 2008.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 69, 222-227.
Remillard, R.L., Pickett, J.P., Thatcher, C.D..
 Clinical symptoms and diagnosis of
Gentilini, F, Rovesti, G.L., Turba, M.E., 2008.
et al., 1993. Comparison of kittens fed
encephalitozoonosis in pet rabbits. Vet.
 Known insertion/deletion mutations in exon
queen's milk with those fed milk replacers.
Parasitol. 151, 115-124.
9 of heat shock transcription factor 4 are not
Am. J. Vet. Res. 54, 901-907.
 responsible for juvenile hereditary cataract in
da Costa, P, Meredith, R., Sigler, R., 1996.
 Lens capsular opacification
Siberian Husky dogs. Anim. Genet 39.
Cataracts in dogs after long-term
Gerardi, J.G., Colitz, C.M., Dubielzig, R.R.,
575-576.
ketoconazole therapy. Vet. Comp.
et al., 1999. Immunohistochemical analysis 
Muller, C., Wohlke, A., Distl, O., 2008.
Ophthalmol. 6, 176-180.
of lens epithelial-derived membranes 
Evaluation of canine heat shock transcription
following cataract extraction in the dog. Vet.
factor 4 (HSF4) as a candidate gene for
Lens capsule rupture and lens-induced
Ophthalmol. 2, 163-168.
 primary cataracts in the Dachshund and the
uveitis
Davidson, M.G., Morgan, D.K., McGahan, M.C.,
Entlebucher Mountain dog. Vet.
Davidson, M.G., Nasisse, M.P., Jamieson, V.E.,
2000. Effect of surgical technique on in vitro
Ophthalmol. 11, 34-37.
posterior capsule opacification. J. Cataract.
et al., 1991. Traumatic anterior lens capsule
Refract. Surg. 26, 1550-1554.
Age-related cataract
disruption. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 27,
410-414.
Davidson, M.G., Wormstone, M., Morgan, D.,
Williams, D.L., Heath, M.F., Wallis, C., 2004.
et al., 2000. Ex vivo canine lens capsular sac
 Prevalence of canine cataract: preliminary
Wilkie, D.A., Gemensky-Metzler, A.J., Colitz,
explants. Graefe's. Arch. Clin. Exp.
results of a cross-sectional study. Vet.
C.M., et al., 2006. Canine cataracts, diabetes
Ophthalmol. 238, 708-714.
Ophthalmol. 7, 29-35.
mellitus and spontaneous lens capsule
rupture: a retrospective study of 18 dogs. Vet.
Lens luxation
Ophthalmol. 9, 328-334.
Diabetic cataract
Martin, C.L., 1978. Zonular defects in the dog: a
van der Woerdt, A., Nasisse, M.P., Davidson,
Marmor, M., Willeberg, P., Glickman, L.T.,
M.G., 1992. Lens-induced uveitis in dogs:
 clinical and scanning electron microscopic
et al., 1982. Epizootiologic patterns of
151 cases (1985-1990). J. Am. Vet. Med.
study. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 14,
diabetes melltus in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 43.
Assoc. 201, 921-926.
571-579.
465-470.
Curtis, R., 1983. Aetiopathological aspects of
van der Woerdt, A., 2000. Lens-induced uveitis.
Basher, A.W., Roberts, S.M., 1995. Ocular
Vet. Ophthalmol. 3, 227-234.
 inherited lens dislocation in the Tibetan
manifestations of diabetes mellitus: diabetic
Terrier. J. Comp. Pathol. 93, 151-163.
Grahn, B.H., Qullen, C.L., 2000. Equine
cataracts in dogs. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small
 phacoclastic uveitis: the dinical
Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C., Startup, FG., 1983.
Anim. Pract. 25, 661-676.
manifestations, light microscopic fndings.
Primary lens luxation in the miniature bull
Bagley, 2nd., L.H., Lavach, J.D., 1994.
terrier Vet. Rec. 112, 328-330.
and therapy of 7 cases. Can. Vet. J. 41,
Comparison of postoperative
376-382.
Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C., Lewis, S.l., 1983.
phacoemulsification results in dogs with
Maehara, S., Itoh, N., Wakaiki, S., et al., 2007.
 Clinical and pathological observations
and without diabetes mellitus: 153 cases
The effects of cataract stage, lens-induced
concerning the aetiology of primary lens
(1991-1992). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
uveitis and cataract removal on ERG in dogs
luxation in the dog. Vet. Rec. 112, 238-246.
205, 1165-1169.
with cataract. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10,
Curtis, R., 1990. Lens luxation in the dog and
Taylor, V.L., Peiffer, R.L., Costello, M.J., 1997.
308-312.
cat. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract.
Ultrastructural analysis of normal and
Wilcock, B.P., Peiffer Jr., R.L., 1987. The
20,755-773
diabetic cataractous canine lenses. Vet.
 pathology of lens-induced uveitis in dogs.
Lazarus, J.A., Pickett, J.P, Champagne, E.S.,
Comp. Ophthalmol. 7, 117-125.
Vet. Pathol. 24, 549-553.
1998. Primary lens luxation in the Chinese
Beam, S., Correa, M.T., Davidson, M.G., 1999. A
Shar Pei: clinical and hereditary
retrospective-cohort study on the
Encephalitozoon cunicufi infection in
characteristics. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1, 101-
development of cataracts in dogs with
107.
diabetes mellitus: 200 cases. Vet.
the rabbit
Morris, R.A., Dubielzig, R.R., 2005. Light-
Ophthalmol. 2, 169-172.
Wolfer, I., Grahn, B., Wilcock, B., et al., 1993.
microscopy evaluation of zonular fber
Richter, M., Guscetti, F, Spiess, B., 2002. Aldose
Phacoclastic uveitis in the rabbit. Prog. Vet.
morphology in dogs with glaucoma:
reductase activity and glucose-related
Comp. Ophthalmol. 3, 92-97.
secondary to lens displacement. Vet.
 opacities in incubated lenses from dogs and
Guandalini, A., Ratto, A., 1996. Phacoclastic
Ophthalmol. 8, 81-84.
cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 63, 1591-1597.
uveitis in the rabbit: a case report. Eur. J.
Sargan, D.R., Withers, D., Pettitt,L, et al.,2007.
Bras, I.D., Colitz, C.M., Kusewitt, D.F., et al..
Companion. Anim. Pract. 6, 39-41.
Mapping the mutation causing lens luxation
 2007. Evaluation of advanced glycation
Stiles, I., Didier, E., Ritchie, B., et al., 1997.
in several terrier breeds. J. Hered 98,
end-products in diabetic and inherited
Encephalitozoon cumiculi in the lens of a rabbit
534-538.
346
Diseases of the Lens
Chapter
10
Oberbauer, A.M., Hollingsworth, S.R., Belanger.
displaced lenses in dogs: a retrospective 
Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 1, 239-
J.M., et al., 2008. Inheritance of cataracts and
study of 57 cases {1984-1990]. 1. Am. Anim.
244.
primary lens luxation in Jack Russell Terriers.
Hosp. Assoc. 31, 77-81.
Collod-Beroud, G., Boileau, C., 2002. Marfan
Am. J. Vet. Res. 69, 222-227.
Olivero, D.K., Riis, R.C., Dutton, A.G., et al.
 syndrome in the third Millennium. Eur. J.
Glover, T.L., Davidson, M.G., Nasisse, M.P.,
1991. Feline lens displacement: a
Hum. Genet. 10, 673-681.
et al., 1995. The intracapsular extraction of
retrospective analysis of 345 cases.
General considerations
350
Plant toxicity
368
 Normal anatomy
350
Retinopathy associated with Scrapie in sheep
368
The neurosensory retina
350
The retina in glaucoma
369
The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
351
General features of retinal morphology in glaucoma 
369
Retinal blood vessels
351
The canine retina in glaucoma
369
 Significance of retinal disease to a mail-in pathology
The retina in glaucoma in cats, and in species other than
service
353
the dog
369
Congenital and hereditary diseases
353
Retinal vascular disease
370
Congenital disorders of the retina
353
Systemic hypertension
370
 Retinal folds and retinal dysplasia
353
Causes of systemic hypertension in dogs and cats
Collie eye anomaly
353
indlude:
370
Congenital stationary night blindness in horses
353
of target organs:
 Inherited retinal degenerations
354
370
 Diabetic retinopathy
373
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
354
Anemia
374
Retinal dystrophy in Briard-beagle dogs, congenital stationary
night blindness (CSNB), lipid retinopathy
358
Hyperviscosity syndrome
374
 Canine multifocal retinopathy
358
 Retinal detachment, retinal separation
374
Lysosomal storage disorders and the neuronal ceroid 
374
lipofuscinoses
358
Factors which can contribute to detachment
374
Other degenerative conditions of the retina
360
Consequences of retinal detachment 
374
 Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome
Morphologic features of retinal detachment 
375
(SARDS) in dogs
360
Morphologic features which suggest that retinal detachment
Clinical features typical of SARDS in dogs
360
is an artifact of tissue processing
376
Morphological features of the retina in SARDS 
360
Retinal tear
376
Feline central retinal degeneration, taurine 
The morphologic features of retinal tears
377
deficiency
360
Trauma
377
Lipofuscin in the RPE and effects on the retina
360
 Retinal contusion, blunt trauma
377
 Clinical features of retinal diseases associated with increased
 The morphological features of peracute traumatic
lipofuscin in the RPE cells
360
retinopathy
377
 Morphologic features of retinal diseases associated with
The morphologic features of acute traumatic retinopathy
377
increased lipofuscin in the RPE cells
361
The morphologic features of chronic traumatic retinopathy 
377
Large amounts of lipofuscin in RPE cells
362
Lenticular metaplasia in the avian retina
377
Age-related degenerative changes
365
Morphologic features of lenticular metaplasia
377
Peripheral cystoid degeneration
365
Inflammatory diseases of the retina
377
 Accumulation of lipofuscin
365
 Retinal inflammation attributable to infectious
Equine senile retinopathy 
365
agents
377
 Light-induced retinopathy, photic retinopathy
365
 Canine distemper virus
377
 Feline fluoroquinolone-induced toxic retinopathy
367
Bovine thromboembolic meningoencephalitis,
Morphologic features of enrofloxacin toxicity
368
Haemophiius somnus infection
379
349
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Herpes viral retinitis in camelids
379
The optic nerve fiber layer
Bovine virus diarrhea (BVD) virus in cattle
379
 Contains the axons of the ganglion cells supported by Muller
West Nile virus in raptors
379
 cell and other astrocyte processes
Toxoplasmosis
380
 Thickest near the optic nerve head and thinnest at the fovea
Toxocara canis ocular larva migrans
380
(where present), or area centralis.
 Retinal neoplasia
382
The ganglion cell layer
Primary neoplasms of the retina
382
 Retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) are unevenly distributed
Canine retinal glioma (astrocytoma)
382
throughout the retina, and their absolute numbers and relative
 Retinal tumors with features of neural differentiation
382
 density vary from species to species
 Although different types of RGCs may be classified based on
 their size or physiological properties, they all have abundant 
cytoplasm containing Nissl substance
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Ganglion cell density is greatest in an area near the macula
(primate) or area centralis (dog or cat) that is known as the
Normal anatomy (Fig. 11.1)
visual streak
+
 A greater density of ganglion cells is typically observed in eyes
The retina extends from the optic nerve head to the ora ciliaris retinae.
adapted for best vision in bright daylight or for maximal visual
where it merges with the two layers of ciliary epithelium. Convention-
acuity, and there are fewer in eyes adapted for vision in dim
ally, the retina is considered to be a highly organized extension of the
light
forebrain that consists of 10 layers of specialized cells.
 A variable number of displaced amacrine cells may be present
C a sas an sian a, saai asaun tais uam 
within the ganglion cel layer.
the vitreous/center of the globe, while'outer' refers to structures that
are closer to the sclera.
The inner plexiform layer
The neurosensory retina refers to the inner nine layers, exclusive of
The synapses between the RGCs and the neurons of the inner
the outermost layer, the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). From inner
 nuclear layer, i.e amacrine and bipolar cells.
to outer these layers consist of:
The inner nuclear layer
The neurosensory retina
 Contains the cell bodies of the following cell types:
■Miller cells
The inner limiting membrane
- The retinal equivalent of glial cells
 The basal lamina separating the neural retina from the vitreous
 The Miller cell processes extend from the innermost retina
body
to the outer limiting membrane, supporting and
Formed by fused inner processes of adjacent Muller cells.
nourishing all of the constituent cells and, at least in some
species, forming a plexus of processes around intraretinal
blood vessels
 Three general classes of neurons that are responsible for
connections between photoreceptors and RGCs:
- Amacrine cells in the inner aspect of the inner nuclear
 hner Limiting Membrane
Nerve Fiber Layer
layer
 0 Amacrine cells have more abundant cytoplasm than
 Ganglion Cell Layer
 bipolar cells
hner Plexiform Layer
0 A population of displaced amacrine cells also exists in
the RGC layer
hner Nuclear Layer
 Bipolar cells lie in the middle of this layer (along with
Miller cell bodies)
 Quter Plexiform Layer
- Horizontal cells lie in the outer aspect of the inner nuclear
layer
 Outer Muclear Layer
0 Horizontal cell nuclei are large and have single,
 prominent nucleoli.
Outer Limiting Membrane
Rod Inner Segment 
The outer pfexiform layer
Cone Inner Segment
Represents the synapses between the photoreceptor cells, and
Cuter Segments
the dendrites of horizontal and bipolar cells that lie in the inner
nuclear layer
 Retinal Pigment Epithelium
 Cone synaptic terminals consist of wide pedicles
Choriocapillaris
  rod synaptic terminals consist of small sphenules
Is thinner than the inner plexiform layer.
The outer nuclear layer
Figure 11.1 Normal retina. Photomicrograph of a plastic section of a
Contains the nuclei of the photoreceptor cells (rods and
 perfusion-fixed primate retina with the various layers as labeled.
cones)
350
The Retina
Chapter
11
+
 aau  u un uisa o pee saa m saas
Together, the basement membranes of the RPE and adjacent
a relatively rod-rich retina and, therefore, a relatively thick outer
choriocapillaris form the structure known as 'Bruch's membrane'
muclear layer, eg. consisting of about 20 rows of nuclei in the
The RPE has a number of important roles in maintaining the
a pue uq u uisa iy pee saas saaum i
adapted for maximum visual acuity, typically have a thinner
 Oxygen and nutrients for the outer retina are transported
outer nuclear layer
through the RPE from the choriocapillaris of the choroid
This layer is thinner in the periphery of the retina, where
 The RPE serves to phagocytose the outermost portion of the
photoreceptor density is lowest
photoreceptor outer segment that is cyclically shed, in a
pau un sus iai pue are as aie janu au
continuous process of outer segment renewal
nuclei and, usually, are positioned adjacent to the outer limiting
'Spent' retinol from visual pigment cycles from the outer
membrane.
 segment to the RPE and back. The RPE cell essentially
regenerates the retinal which is a component of visual
The outer limiting membrane
pigment, so that it is ready to function in the process of
●The outer limiting membrane is not a physical layer but consists 
phototransduction again
of a continuum of tight junctions connecting the cell
 The melanin pigment of the RPE absorbs light and therefore
membranes of photoreceptor cells and Muller cells
reduces intraocular light scatter and glare
The tight junctions of the outer limiting membrane along with
■
 Tight junctions between cells of the RPE help maintain the
tight junctions at the apices of the RPE cells are the anatomic
blood-retinal barrier, and delineate the subretinal space
features that delineate the sub-retinal space
■ The RPE limits photo-oxidative damage that is associated
 The subretinal space is the potential space between the
a ui s-aa ue h x ya sa y a 
 photoreceptor outer segments and the retinal pigment epithelial
outer retina, by a number of antioxidant mechanisms.
cells (RPE) and, since it is enclosed by tight junctions, it
normally only contains secreted substances, within the
Retinal blood vessels (Hg. 11.2i,li)
inter-photoreceptor matrix. This is an important factor in
maintaining organization of the outer retina and preserving the
 Retinal blood vessels have tight junctions and function as part
intimate contact between the neural retina and the RPE.
of the blood-retinal barrier
Where present, retinal blood vessels are found within the nerve
The photoreceptor layer
fiber, ganglion cell and inner plexiform layers of the inner
retina; capillaries are also present in the inner nuclear layer
 The photoreceptor layer is composed of:
The pattern of retinal blood vessels is highly variable between
 Photoreceptor inner segments
different species:
■
Cytoplasmic component of the photoreceptor cell packed
■Holangiotic, with blood vessels distributed throughout most
with mitochondria and rough endoplasmic reticulum
of the neurosensory retina, supplying the inner retina only.
 Photoreceptor cells are among the most metabolically active
 Carnivores, primates, even-toed ungulates, most rodents 
cells in the body, both in terms of oxygen consumption and
Paurangiotic, with blood vessels limited to the retina
■
protein production
immediately adjacent to the optic nerve head and the rest of
■
 Rod and cone photoreceptors can be distinguished by the
the retina being avascular
shape of their inner segments
- Horses and other odd-toed ungulates
■
 The central retina, superior and temporal to the optic nerve.
- Guinea pigs and some rodents
is a relatively cone-rich zone in many species. Furthermore,
■ Merangiotic, with retinal blood vessels confined to a linear
many avian, reptile and primate species have foveae, regions
horizontal streak on both sides of the optic disc,
that are largely devoid of rods
accompanying streaks of myelinated nerve fibers
●Photoreceptor outer segments
- Lagomorphs
■
 The site of phototransduction
■Anangiotic
■
 Both rod and cone outer segments are made up of parallel
- Other vertebrate groups have a variety of vascular
stacked membranes containing visual pigments that consist
structures within the vitreous adjacent to the retina, but
of the appropriate opsin proteins charged with
only mammals have true intra-retinal vasculature
photosensitive vitamin A-derivative, retinal
 - Birds have no retinal vessels but they have a complex
The photoreceptor outer segments are complex modifications
■
vascular structure, the pecten, which extends into the
 of cilia and maintain some of the structural features of cilia
vitreous from the optic nerve head.
at their junction with the inner segments.
The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
Comparative Comments
The RPE is a monolayer of cells that is derived from the outer
+
 The normal anatomy of the human retina resembles in most
layer of neuroepithelium of the optic cup, and is continuous
respects that of other vertebrate species
with the outer pigmented epithelium of the ciliary body at the
The human macula, a feature shared with most other primates,
ora ciliaris retinae
represents a refinement of the area centralis of other mammals. A
?
lano au isaau lin ala yrea jo sasaoid snoiu iei
xanthophyll pigment gives the macula a yellow appearance
segments of numerous photoreceptors
clinically and on gross examination, but the xanthophyll dissolves 
 Although typically densely pigmented, RPE cells are non-
'suoas yibojoisy u! suasaud jou s! pue buissanoad anssil bulunp
pigmented in the area that overlies the tapetum (see Ch. 9).
aul loy algisuodsan s! jeyt euan aul jo uood aul s! einew aul
losing their melanosomes by a process of autophagocytosis 
high degree of visual acuity in primates. In its histologic and 
concurrent with tapetal development within the choroid
351
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
B
A
B
C
D
C
D
E
F
G
?
G
?
  ( as as  (a) n i -a  )  sa  eu a  zt n
Thoroughbred (D) Order Lagomorpha - Lop Eared Rabbit (E) Subfamily Bovinae - Guernsey (F)Family Suidae- Vietnamese Potbelly Pig (G) Order
primates - Lowland Gorilla (H) Family Felidae - White Tiger. (i) The normal fundus, species comparison. (A) Order Rodentia, Family Muridae - Rat (B)
Family Dideiphidae - Opossum (C) Subfamily Caprinae - Anglo-Nubian Goat (D) Family Cameridae - Alpaca (E) Order Rodentia, Family Cavidae
- Guinea Pig (F) Family Equidae - Zebra (G) Family Macropodfidae - Wallaby (H) Class Aves - Great Horned Owl.
352
The Retina
Chapter
11
The challenge is to be able to recognize the features of retinal
Comparative Comments (continued)
disease that are due primarily to congenital or hereditary
pathologic usage, the term 'macula' refers to that portion of the
dysplasia and to differentiate these from secondary or
retina having more than a single layer of ganglion cells. At the
superimposed abnormalities, related to retinal detachment or
center of the macula are the fovea and the foveola, which are 
degeneration, glaucoma, trauma, or inflammation, for
distinctive features of the primate retina within the Mammalia.
example
but are present in birds and reptiles
Acquired retinal folds may be recognized in areas of retinal
 As noted, the pattern of retinal blood vessels is highly variable
re-attachment subsequent to detachment, for example associated
among different mammalian species. In the human retina, the
with sub-retinal effusion or exudates
intrinsic retinal blood vessels nourish the nerve fiber layer. 
ganglion cell ayer inner plexiform layer, and inner two-thirds of
underlying breed-related retinal condition, there should be
the inner nuclear layer. The choroidal vasculature in turn provides
evidence in the form of tissue changes or cellular changes
'ael leapnu lauui aut po puyt auo laino aui ot Aiddns poog au
allowing the observer to distinguish a pathologic fold from a
outer plexiform layer, outer nuclear layer, photoreceptors, and
purely artifactual wrinkling of the retina. These might include
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Consequently, ischemia 
gliosis, vascular changes, or changes in the density of intact
produced by intrinsic retinal vascular lesions produces atrophy of 
retinal elements, such as photoreceptors or Miller cells.
the inner retina, whereas choroidal ischemia produces outer
retinal atrophy.
Collie eye anomaly
This recessively inherited abnormality of the canine fundus has
its primary, ophthalmoscopically visible, effects on the RPE and
Significance of retinal disease to a mail-in
choroid, with affected dogs demonstrating variable degrees of
pathology service
colobomatous defects involving the optic nerve head, or
Primary retinal diseases, primarily congenital or hereditary retinal
peripapillary choroid and sclera
diseases, although fairly common, are seldom submitted for evalua-
Retinal detachment is not uncommon in severely affected eyes,
tion by a pathology service and, for that reason, are under-represented
and often relates to the presence of large colobomas, through
in the COPLOW collection.
as aeds ieuaqns aut oi ssae suee snoaa payanil uim
 When the eyes of animals with retinal disease are submitted to
also Chs 3 and 12)
an ocular pathologist, it is often not until there are secondary
The underlying genetic mutation, a deletion in the NHEJ1 has
complications such as retinal detachment, cataract or intraocular
 been identified and segregates with disease in all affected breeds.
hemorrhage that may subsequently lead to painful ocular
and a commercially available, mutation-based genetic test is
disease, by which time the background retinal disease is chronic
available.
Aonouied pasduans Aa pasup asmauia o
When globes are submitted for evaluation of a disease primarily
Congenital stationary night blindness in horses
affecting the retina the likely reasons include the following:
A request for an opinion regarding a diagnosis of hereditary
There is a breed-predisposition for the Appaloosa, in which the
 progressive retinal atrophy in an animal dying of other
disease appears to be linked to the Leopard complex coat
causes
pattern
 A request to evaluate the retina for suspected toxic
 Although pronounced behavioral and electrophysiological
abnormalities are apparent, no ophthalmoscopic or
■ A request for an opinion from a researcher to describe the
histopathological abnormalities are detectable in affected
iossnpuny aaou e yim ieue ue u oouied
animals.
appearance.
Comparative Comments
CONGENITAL AND HEREDITARY DISEASES
 The most serious congenital disease of the retina is retinopathy of
prematurity (ROP)
 This disease can be induced in neonatal animals and animal
Congenital disorders of the retina
models have been the source of extensive study of this
(see also Ch. 3)
abnormality, but ROP rarely occurs spontaneously in
non-human species. However, a condition described previously
Retinal folds and retinal dysplasia (Figs 11.3-11.6)
in cats (see Ch. 3) shares many of the pathologic features of 
the human disease
Retinal dysplasia represents the disorganized development of
 ROP is classically defined as an oxygen-induced vitreoretinal
retinal tissue. Lesions may be focal or multifocal curvilinear
disease of premature infants. ROP occurs bilaterally. almost 
retinal folds; larger geographic lesions that may be accompanied
u o 'sasueu Aeuauaid pue uoeiauaap ieuai pazeso q
vascular system and particularly in premature infants who
its most severe form, total retinal non-attachment with
weigh less that 1.5 kg at birth and who receive oxygen 
vitreoretinal dysplasia
therapy
There is seldom a clinical indication for enucleation of eyes with
The classic theories for pathogenesis were based on kitten,
retinal folds or dysplasia in isolation. Often, eyes are removed
mouse, and puppy models, in which it was found that 
for secondary or other unrelated disease and, after a significant
hyperoxia induces a vaso-obliterative phase with functional
amount of time has elapsed
ES5
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.3 Canine retinal dysplasia,
fundus. (A) Cocker Spaniel, 2 years old:
the multiple retinal folds are best seen in
the tapetal retina. (B) Golden Retriever, 2
years old: a single geographic area of
dysplasia (arrow) was present in both
tapetal retinas. (C) Springer Spaniel,
18 months old: the entire tapetal retina 
is disorganized with abnormal
 pigmentation, tapetal discoloration and 
areas of tapetal hyperreflectivity.
(D) Labrador Retriever, 13 weeks old: the
 retina is totally detached. The gray lines
represent retinal folds. A retinal vessel is
seen at the arrow.
A
B
C
D
- Diffuse hyper-reflectivity of the tapetum, where present
Comparative Comments (continued)
 Attenuation of the retinal blood vessels
 constriction of the immature retinal blood vessels, followed by
 Pigment clumping visible in the non-tapetal fundus
structural obliteration. If the hyperoxia is sufficiently prolonged,
 Many of these disorders, particularly in dogs and cats, are
on cessation of oxygen exposure the peripheral retina remains 
considered to represent important models for human
inherited retinopathies, and as such have been extensively
fibrovascular proliferation beginning at the junction of the 
characterized. Diagnostic pathologists are unlikely to be
vascular and avascular zones and continuing through the 
involved in these studies, but may be asked to voice an
internal limiting membrane into the vitreous
opinion regarding the presence or absence of PRA in a globe
 Other important congenital abnormalities of the retina in humans
removed from a domestic pet, often years after onset of
include albinism, medullated nerve fibers, vascular anomalies, and
blindness. Such globes are typically enucleated because of a
congenital hypertrophy of the RPE.
 secondary or unrelated condition, eg glaucoma or ocular
neoplasia
 Dogs are much more commonly affected by PRA than
Inherited retinal degenerations
other species, as breeding practices have increased the
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
incidence of inherited disorders in this domestic species.
Most, but not all, forms of PRA are recessively inherited.
(Hgs 11.7-11.9)
X-linked PRA and autosomal dominant PRA have also been
 The collective term, progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) represents
identified
a diverse group of inherited, or presumed inherited.
 The disease features presented in this chapter clearly represent a
photoreceptor disorders that share a number of key features:
simplistic generalization. Comprehensive discussion of the full
■
 Bilateral, symmetrical ocular involvement
extent of current knowledge of the incidence, early structural
■
 Photoreceptor degeneration that is progressive and leads to
and functional abnormalities and the genetic basis of this
blindness
 spectrum of retinal disorders is outwith the scope of this text.
 Common clinical features include:
Hence, a general synopsis is provided for pathologists
 Reduced pupillary light reflexes
attempting to interpret ocular specimens submitted for
354
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.4 Feline retinal folds,
congenital and acquired, fundus.
(A) DSH, 6 months old: the many folds 
 are commonly found in conjunction with
congenital cataracts. (B) DSH, 9 years 
old: the elevated systolic blood pressure 
resulted in a peripapillary retinal 
 detachment and numerous retinal folds
(arrow). (C) DSH, 6.5 years old: the linear
and focal pink lesions are best seen near
the tapetal junction (arrow). The etiology
in this blind cat was Enterococcus avium.
identified in the cerebrospinal fluid.
(D) DSH, 9 months old: the multiple
linear pink lesions appear to be in the
outer layers of the retina.
 Lymphosarcoma was diagnosed on
A
B
histopathology.
C
D
diagnostic purposes and for the clinicians who will be making
 Early morphologic features of PRA include:
use of those interpretations
■ Shortening, disorganization and distortion of photoreceptor
This diverse group of disorders may be broadly subdivided into:
outer segments, progressing to loss of photoreceptor outer 
■  Early onset photoreceptor dysplasias and dystrophies
and inner segments. The age of onset and relative extent of 
- Morphological and electrophysiological abnormalities are
involvement of rods and cones depends on the underlying
detectable prior to maturation of the retina [ie. prior to 
disease process
about 8 weeks in dogs) and significant visual deficits are
■Loss of photoreceptor nuclei, with thinning of the outer
evident early in life
nuclear layer
  Late onset: photoreceptor degenerations
■  Although retinal disease is diffuse, often photoreceptor loss is 
- Although the photoreceptors appear morphologically
not uniform across the fundus. This topographic and
normal in young animals, rod photoreceptor outer
temporal gradation of lesion severity differs between the
segments are often preferentially affected, becoming
various disorders
shortened, disorganized, then degenerating. Ultimately.
 Morphologic features of longstanding PRA, in globes removed
cone photoreceptors are also affected. Blindness ensues in
for other reasons, include:
middle-aged adults
Retinal atrophy, most profoundly affecting the outer
 These disorders may be further classified according to the
retina
principal photoreceptor type involved
 Presence of phagocytic cells within the neurosensory retina
- Many of the well-characterized forms of PRA affect the rod
 Photoreceptor atrophy progresses to end-stage retinal atrophy
with gliosis
Cone dystrophies and degenerations are much less
■
Common intraocular complications of long-standing PRA in
common than disorders involving the rod photoreceptors,
dogs include:
and many forms do not cause night blindnes, or do not 
 Retinal detachment
demonstrate rod photoreceptor abnormalities until late in
 Cataract, which may, in turn, lead to lens-induced uveitis
the course of disease
 or lens luxation, and to glaucoma
355
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 Figure 11.5 Acquired retinal folds.
canine. (A) German Short-haired Pointer,
7 months old: the multiple retinal folds
in the non-tapetal retina were associated
with Coccidlioides, based on serology.
(B) German Shepherd Dog. 2.5 years old:
the linear retinal folds were caused by
systemic Cryptococcus, based on 
o she s aeaa () ooieosy
the multiple folds and focal edema in
this blind eye were caused by ivermectin
toxicity. (D) French Bulldog. 1 year old:
retinal folds found in both eyes from this
blind dog were presumed to be immune
mediated
A
B
C
D
Figure 11.6 Retinal folds and retinal
dysplasia, pathology. (A) Low 
magnification photomicrograph of 
a canine retina with retinal folds.
(B,C) Subgross and higher magnification
photomicrographs showing retinal
dysplasia. (D) Low magnification 
 photomicrograph of a dog retina
showing widespread retinal dysplasia.
A
B
?
356
The Retina
Chapter
11
 Figure 11.7 Canine progressive retinal
 atrophy fundus. (A) English Cocker
Spaniel, 4 years old: the horizontal band 
(arrow) superior to the optic disc was 
an early lesion of progressive retinal
atrophy (PRA), confirmed by an
 electroretinogram. (B) Poodle, 4 years
old: a neutral density filter was used to
reduce glare from the tapetal
hyperreflectivity. Retinal vessels are also 
attenuated. (C) Labrador Retriever, 5
years old: the tapetum is hyperreflective,
and all retinal vessels are severely
attenuated. (D) Australian Shepherd, 6
years old: the cobblestone appearance in
the non-tapetal retina is due to clumping
of pigment and depigmentation.
A
B
C
D
■It is seldom possible to definitively diagnose PRA on the
number of different forms of PRA. The reader is referred to
basis of morphological findings alone It is generally only
online molecular genetic and citation databases, such as OMIM,
possible to say that the changes seen are consistent with that
OMIA and Medline, as well as other online resources such as
diagnosis
the website of the commercial genetic testing company, Optigen
- Knowledge of commonly affected breeds may raise an
(www.optigen.com) for up-to-date information on available
index of suspicion for inherited PRA
tests
Very commonly affected breeds include the miniature and
 Inherited photoreceptor degeneration in cats:
toy Poodle, Labrador retriever, American and English
Aside from retinal degeneration secondary to vascular
Cocker spaniel (prcd) and Miniature Schnauzer, although
disease, nutritional or toxic causes (discussed later in this
primary photoreceptor dystrophies and degenerations have 
chapter), diffuse photoreceptor degeneration is uncommon
been reported and characterized, or are suspected to be
in cats
inherited, in a large number of breeds. The reader is 
■ Clinical and pathologic features of inherited retinal
referred to the most recent edition of Ocular Disorders
degeneration are broadly similar to canine PRA, as described
y Oy Aq pausnd 'soa ui paui sq on paunsaid
in the previous section
regularly updated information on affected breeds
Two distinct forms of inherited retinal degeneration have
 Differential diagnoses for retinal degeneration include:
been extensively studied in the Abyssinian cat:
■
 Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS) in
 An early-onset form with dominant inheritance
s3op
A later-onset, more slowly progressive form with recessive
■
 Toxic retinopathies
inheritance
■
Choroidal perfusion problems/vascular disease
 An early-onset, recessively inherited retinal
■
 Nutritional retinopathies
 degeneration has also been described in a colony of Persian
■
 Diseases of the RPE such as lipofuscinosis
cats
 A number of genetic mutations have been identified in affected
■
 Older Siamese cats have also been over-represented in some
breeds and genetic tests are available for an ever increasing
studies of feline retinal degeneration.
357
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.8 Feline retinal atrophy.
fundus. (A) Abyssinian, 7 months old: a
 neutral density filter was used to reduce
 glare from the tapetal hyperreflectivity
and accounts for the dark optic disc. The
retinal vessels (arrow) are severely
attenuated. (B) Abyssinian. 6 years old:
the tapetum is hyperreflective and the 
retinal vessels are attenuated.
(C) Siamese, 14 years old: the tapetum 
is severely hyperreflective and the retinal
vessels are extremely attenuated.
(D) Burmese, 3 years old: the optic disc is 
pale, the retinal vessels are severely
attenuated, and the tapetum is
hyperreflective.
A
B
C
D
Retinal dystrophy in Briard dogs, congenital
Canine multifocal retinopathy (Fig. 11.10)
stationary night blindness (CsNB). lipid retinopathy
 This unusual retinopathy is characterized by multifocal gray or
Clinical features of this disease include:
tan lesions that appear throughout the fundus of young dogs
 Affected dogs are night-blind, with variable degrees of visual
Morphologically, these lesions correspond with serous 
impairment in daylight conditions 
detachments of the retina and RPE, and associated multi-focal
Fundus appearance is normal for the first few years of life but
areas of RPE hypertrophy, lipofuscin accumulation (see below)
slowly progressive, subtle color changes may be noted in the
and degeneration. These RPE lesions are accompanied by
tapetal fundus, with white, yellowish or brown spots visible
variable degrees of neurosensory retinal degeneration
in some animals and associated with tapetal hyper-reflectivity
Canine multifocal retinopathy demonstrates autosomal recessive
 Morphological features of this disease include:
inheritance in the breeds characterized to date
 Vacuolation of the RPE, with accumulation of large, lipid-
Mutations in the bestrophin gene, which codes for a protein
like, electron-lucent inclusions
that is expressed in the RPE, have been identified in the Great 
Disorganization and degeneration of rod outer segments
Pyrenees, English Mastiff and Bull Mastiff (cmrl) and Coton du
This disease is caused by a mutation in the gene which codes for
Tulear (cmr2) and in humans with Best macular dystrophy.
RPE65, an RPE protein which is essential to the regeneration of
visual pigment that in turn, is vital to photoreceptor function 
Lysosomal storage disorders and the neuronal
This disease is not common but is considered an extremely
important animal model for a human disease (Leber congenital
ceroid lipofuscinoses
amaurosis) that can result from the same genetic mutation
 This diverse group of neurodegenerative disorders are
■
 Reports of restoration of vision in affected dogs marked the
characterized by progressive neurological abnormalities and
first successful demonstration, in a species with comparable
gradual loss of vision. Storage products accumulate within
 eye size to that of humans, of gene therapy to preserve or
lysosomes in various tissues throughout the body, impairing
restore vision in a primary, inherited retinal disease.
tissue function
855
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.9 Canine progressive retinal
 atrophy, pathology. (A) Photomicrograph
of the early stages of progressive retinal
atrophy (PRA) in an Irish Setter puppy
showing early atrophy and degeneration
 of photoreceptor outer segments (arrow).
The only appreciable change is increased
.
space between the outer segments.
(B) Photomicrograph of a canine retina 
from a Poodle whose eye was removed
because of an iridociliary adenoma. This
dog had vision loss and had a fundic 
A
B
exam which showed retinal atrophy
typical of PRA. (C) Photomicrograph
showing end-stage outer retinal atrophy
from a dog with long-standing disease.
Histopathology on client animals with 
eyes removed for other reasons is not a
very reliable method for making a
 definitive diagnosis of PRA, and it is not 
at all useful in distinguishing the many
forms of PRA from one another.
Figure 11.10 Canine multifocal
retinopathy (A) Great Pyrenees, 1 year
dld: multiple tanlesions are present deep
to the retinal vessels. Serous retinal 
detachments are associated with several
lesions. (B) English Bulldog. 2 years old:
multiple lesions are present in the tapetal
fundus. The lesion at the tapetal junction 
has a serous separation of retinal layers 
at the arrow.
A
B
 Several of these disorders have been extensively characterized in
 The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) are a heterogeneous
domestic species, including sheep, dogs and cats, and serve as
group of diseases characterized by intracellular accumulation of
valuable animal models for human diseases
ceroid lipofuscin (see below)
 The range of lysosomal storage disorders that may be associated
 In contrast to disorders associated with photo-oxidation, in
with retinal pathology includes, but is not limited to:
■ GMl gangliosidosis
the RPE, in NCL this autofluorescent ceroid lipopigment
■ MPS VII
 generally accumulates within the neurosensory retina,
Fucosidosis
particularly retinal ganglion cells, as well as other tissues
359
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
■Characteristic 'fingerprint profiles' may be seen within these
 Lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory cells are seen but are present
 granules on ultrastructural studies.
 in very small numbers
 The retinal degeneration is slowly progressive and ultimately.
can involve all the layers of the retina.
Comparative Comments
A number of generalized chorioretinal degenerations are seen in
Feline central retinal degeneration, taurine
humans, many of which have striking similarities to those ocurring 
deficiency (Figs 11.12, 11.13)
aaui Allenibojois!y pue Aliesiup yonouiy sapads lauio pue shop u!
is little evidence of inflammation, this family of diseases is referred to
 Taurine deficiency in cats is associated with both retinal disease
 as retinitis pigmentosa and has a complex and varied genetic basis.
and dilated cardiomyopathy
Cats need a dietary source of taurine as they are unable to
 pathology laboratory. the disease is characterized primarily by the loss
synthesize adequate amounts of this amino acid from cysteine
 of rod photoreceptor cells by apoptosis, with cone photoreceptors
 The classical retinal disease is a focal outer retinal degeneration,
 generally degenerating secondarily to the rods.
initially seen in the area centralis and slowly progressing to
involve both the temporal and nasal fundus superior to the
optic nerve head
 In the earliest stages of this disease, cone disorganization
and dysfunction is greater than involvement of rod
OTHER DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
photoreceptors
OF THE RETINA
aau  ar ' ar  u
 degeneration is seen and these cats may be irreversibly blind
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
(Fig. 11.13)
Taurine deficiency should be considered in the differential
syndrome (SARDS) in dogs
Although SARDS is a relatively common cause of sudden-onset blind-
ness, there is little indication, beyond research interest, to remove the
Lipofuscin in the RPE and effects on
eyes from SARD-affected animals for pathologic evaluation.
the retina (Fig. 11.14)
pathologist after the animal dies for other reasons, or if they
Lipofuscin is a general term for a variety of autofluorescent com-
subsequently develop complicating ocular conditions that
pounds containing cross-linked proteins and lipids. The precise con-
necessitate enucleation, or if they adjust so poorly to their loss
stituents of lipofuscin vary according to the tissue in which it is
of vision that euthanasia is elected
formed as a lysosomal storage product.
● There are only 20 cases in the COPLOW collection.
 The main constituent fluorophore of RPE lipofuscin has been
identifed as A2E, a product of vitamin A metabolism and
Clinical features typical of SARDs in dogs
photoreceptor membrane lipids.
Accumulation of small amounts of lipofuscin in the RPE is a
+
 Sudden onset of blindness noticed by the owner
cmmon finding in eyes submitted to COPLOW
+
Dilated resting pupil size, with pupillary light reflexes that can
+
Lipofuscin may be recognized as a feature of normal aging. and
 still be elicited in response to intense stimuli that are a source
is also known as 'age pigment'
of blue light
Lipofuscin in the RPE is probably the most common ocular
Normal, or near normal, fundus appearance in early disease
abnormality seen in exotic or wild species in the COPLOW
 A'flat' electroretinogram, indicating absence of photoreceptor
collection
function/phototransduction.
Lipofuscin accumulates in conditions associated with enhanced
Over many months, ophthalmoscopic findings are consistent
oxidative stress, or a reduction in the activity of intrinsic defense
with gradually progressive diffuse retinal degeneration
mechanisms against oxidative stress.
sualqoid soqeiau pauyap-l isasans Aeu Aosy iesu au
 Too much lipofuscin in the RPE impedes further
including:
 phagolysosomal degradation, contributes to photo-oxidative
 Polyuria and polydipsia
damage and can impact photoreceptor function, leading to
 A high-normal ACTH response test or abnormalities in the
outer retinal degeneration.
results of other tests of adrenal cortical function
■Obesity, or recent weight gain.
Clinical features of retinal diseases associated with
increased lipofuscin in the RPE cells
Morphological features of the retina in SARDS
 Accumulations of RPE lipofuscin may be visible within the
(Hg. 11.11)
tapetal fundus (where the RPE is normally non-pigmented) as
ldaoxa leu ieau si euai aul 'aseasi jo asno a u a
multiple foci and patches of light-brown pigment
a narrowing of the outer plexiform layer
 Subsequent retinal degeneration may lead to other changes such
 Apoptotic photoreceptor cells may be detected within the outer
as attenuation of retinal blood vessels, pigmentary changes in
nuclear layer
the non-tapetal fundus, and focal regions of tapetal
From several weeks or months into the course of disease, there
hyper-reflectivity
is an atrophy of photoreceptors, resembling PRA. However.
 Depending on the underlying cause of lipofuscin accumulation,
unlike early stages of PRA, involvement is diffuse and relatively
other systemic signs of disease such as neurologic abnormalities
uniform throughout the retina
Or muscle weakness may be evident.
360
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.11 Canine sudden acquired 
retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS).
(A) Mixed Breed, 8 years old: the optic
leadde jeuan leiadei-uou pue ss
ophthalmoscopically normal. (B)
Miniature Schnauzer, 9 years old:
the tapetal retina has a diffuse
hyperreflectivity, and the vessels are
attenuated with areas of sacculation
(arrow). (C) Basset Hound, 7 years old:
the retinal vessels are attenuated and 
sacculated (arrow). (D) Basset Hound. 11
years old: this is the same eye as in C. 4
years later. Tapetal hyperreflectivity has
increased and the retinal vessels, 
although still visible, are subjectively
more attenuated. (E,F) Plastic section
A
B
photomicrograph (E, Toluidine blue stain)
and low magnification electron 
micrograph (F) of a SARDS-affected dog
retina showing photoreceptor atrophy.
C
F
Morphologic features of retinal diseases associated
On transmission electron-microscopy, lamellar membrane
with increased lipofuscin in the RPE cells
profles are often observed within these lysosomal storage
Lipofuscin appears as light brown granules in the cytoplasm of
bodies
the RPE cell, that stain positively with PAS
Pathologic accumulation of lipofuscin in the RPE is a significant
Lipofuscin granules demonstrate characteristic yellow 
finding that can contribute to vision loss
autofluorescence when non-stained sections are observed under
■
 RPE cells are responsible for the continuous
illumination with blue light
phagocytosis and lysosomal degradation of proteins and
361
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 Figure 11.12 Feline central progressive
retinal atrophy. FCRD. (A) DSH, & years
old: the small elliptical area of 
hyperreflectivity is located temporally in
the area centralis. (B) DSH, 8 years old: in
this right eye, the center of the elliptical
lesion is hyperreflective due to the angle
 of light striking the retina and reflecting
to the viewer. (C) Siamese, 14 years old:
in the left eye, the center of the lesion
appears dark and the margin appears
hyperreflective. (D) DSH, 11 years old:
Aisuap lenau e yonoun paude ooud
filter and a 28-diopter lens, this
hyperreflective lesion is superior to the
disc and extends nasally and temporally.
(E) Low magnification photomicrograph
A
B
 showing abrupt loss of the
photoreceptors (arrow), while the inner
retinal layers persist, typical of central 
 retinal atrophy in cats.
C
D
E
phospholipids in photoreceptor outer segment membranes
 Absolute or relative deficiencies in vitamin E, or other
throughout life
antioxidants
 This membrane degradation occurs in an environment
 Absolute or relative dietary deficiency or malabsorption of
that is exposed to light, which can contribute to
vitamin E has been associated with retinal degeneration in a
oxidative damage to the tissues and favors lipofuscin
wide range of species, including dogs and horses
formation.
 Central progressive retinal atrophy, retinal pigment epithelial
dystrophy (RPED) (Fig. 1l.15)
 Although encountered in European populations of several
Large amounts of lipofuscin in RPE cells
dog breeds that include, most notably, the English Cocker
 Large amounts of lipofuscin in RPE cells might be an indication of
Spaniel, Labrador and Briard, this is a rare condition in the
any of the following problems:
United States
362
The Retina
Chapter
11
 Figure 11.13 Feline generalized retinal
atrophy. (A) Tonkinese, 3 years old:
taken with a neutral density filter to
reduce the tapetal hyperreflectivity, the 
optic disc appears very dark. Retinal
vessels (arrow) are extremely attenuated.
(B) DSH, 1 year old: the optic disc is pale.
It is difficult to see any attenuated retinal
vessels in this albinoid and atapetal
fundus. (C) Himalayan-Persian, 4 years 
old: attenuated retinal vessels (arrows)
are still visible in the hyperreflective 
tapetal retina. (D) DSH, 2 years old: the
tapetum is hyperreflective and there are
 no discernible retinal vessels. (E) Gross
 photograph of an affected cat
globe showing blood vessel atrophy.
B
(F) Photomicrograph of the retina from
an affected cat that was blind and died
from other causes, showing
 photoreceptor atrophy.
D
 Clinical features of RPED include:
 In some affected dogs, signs of ocular disease are
- Brown or tan pigment foci that are visible throughout the
 accompanied by neurological abnormalities including
tapetal fundus
ataxia, proprioceptive deficits and muscle weakness 
 Slowly progressive retinal degeneration, with multifocal
Morphologic features of RPED include:
 areas of increased tapetal reflectivity and pigment clumping
 Hypertrophy and degeneration of the RPE, with
within the non-tapetal fundus
 associated degenerative changes in the outer, neurosensory
- Progressive loss of vision
retina
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
B
Figure 11.14 Retinal lipofuscinosis. (A) Photomicrograph of a dog retina showing swollen RPE cells with accumulated light brown pigment (arrow) and 
PAS-positive staining of lipofuscin. (C) Photomicrograph of the same retina with fluorescence microscopy. A non-stained section was illuminated with
an ultraviolet light to excite the autofluorescent lipofuscin.
Figure 11.15 Canine central progressive
retinal atrophy retinal pigment epithelial
dystrophy (A) German Shepherd Dog.
12.5 years old; Bilateral focal areas of
tapetal pigmentation were present. Mild
attenuation of retinal vessels and tapetal
hyperreflectivity are also present.
(B) Brittany Spaniel, 2 years old: Multiple
brown lesions are present in the tapetal
fundus. The retinal vessels appear 
subjectively attenuated.
A
B
-Widespread accumulation of lipofuscin granules within the 
Equine motor neuron disease is frequently accompanied by a
RPE
characteristic retinopathy
 Lesions are initially most severe at the posterior pole,
Pigmented linear lesions are visible throughout the tapetal
 spreading to involve the entire retina as the disease
fundus, often forming a distinctive reticulated pattern
progresses
 Accumulation of lipofuscin in the RPE is associated with
 Other lesions that may be seen in tissues of affected dogs
retinal degeneration
if submitted for necropsy include:
Abnormal blood and tissue levels of vitamin E have been
0 Lipofuscin accumulation in brainstem nuclei
implicated in the development of retinal degeneration as
0 Central neuro-axonal dystrophy and degeneration, that
well as neurodegenerative disease in horses
is most prominent in the sensory relay nuclei of the
Signs of neurological dysfunction are usually the presenting
brainstem
complaint
0 Lipofuscin accumulation in smooth muscle, in particular
 Canine multifocal retinopathy (see earlier in this chapter)
 intestinal lipofuscinosis
 Increased exposure to ultraviolet light and blue light
■  These abnormalities are essentially identical to those
 Jo sjaaal yaiy io juaiuns asuaui ol ainsodxa snonuuo 
saop ui ouayap a uuei Aeiap ym paieosse
artifcial light may increase lipofuscin accumulation
 Low plasma alpha-tocopherol values have been reported in
■Much of the short wavelength light to which the eye is
affected dogs fed diets containing adequate vitamin E. Thus,
lu, siut ot ainsodxa auay 'sual ay Aq paiany s! pasodxa
this familial disease probably represents an ocular
hazard' is increased in aphakic animals
manifestation of systemic antioxidant deficiency. The disease
 Increased or altered turnover of photoreceptor outer segments
appears to be due to abnormal metabolism or transportation
 As may occur in association with photoreceptor
of vitamin E, rather than a primary retinal disorder
degeneration
364
The Retina
Chapter
11
 Dietary exposure to factors which contribute to oxidative stress
Accumulation of lipofuscin
such as high concentrations of fats
●In the RPE (see previous section).
u euan au u upsnyodi yo sunoue aiel ya uoenuny
also result from specific intrinsic errors of metabolism, such as
the neuronal canoid lipofusinoses (see earlier in one chapter
Equine senile retinopathy (Fg. 11.17)
and metabolic problems involving lipo formatting on
eauasap ieuan eiauad e seu asou pae au
breakdown)
degeneration with pigmentary changes
 The peripheral RPE appears to be colonized by pigmented and
Comparative Comments
non-pigmented cells from the ciliary body epithelium
Areas colonized by pigmented cells demonstrate local
 The deposition of lipofuscin in the RPE of non-human animal
hyperpigmented foci and neurosensory retinal atrophy
retinas is related to the entity of drusen seen in human eyes
Areas colonized by non-pigmented cells have neurosensory
 Drusen are localized deposits of extracelular material between the 
retinal atrophy with deposition of basement membrane matrix
basement membrane of the RPE and the inner collagen layer of 
material in the degenerate retina
Aieniooued pue Ainu passe ae aaul aueaua suna
 Since the degeneration is generally confned to the periphery.
into several subtypes: hard, soft, diffuse, basal, nodular, mixed,
this condition seldom results in clinically apparent reduction of
 and calcified regressing drusen
vision.
 The appearance of drusen is the first clinically detectable feature
of age-related macular degeneration. It is not clear, however,
whether the photoreceptor atrophy occurring in age-related
macular degeneration is a primary abnormality of the
Comparative Comments
photoreceptors or is secondary to the drusen and other underlying 
A counterpart to peripheral cystoid degeneration, described in dogs.
changes in the RPE and Bruch's membrane.
 poisouniuu jelaudiad, pawat Aeauab pue suewny u! uaas s!
degeneration.' These are aggregates of microcysts occurring just
posterior to the ora serrata, presumably due to degenerative 
occlusive disease in the peripheral retinal arterioles.
 Peripheral microcystoid disease does not lead to visual signs and
Age-related degenerative changes
symptoms unless the cysts coalesce to form a retinoschisis in the 
 outer plexiform layer.
Peripheral cystoid degeneration (Fg. 11.16)
 The peripheral retina in older dogs is often distorted because of 
the formation of hyaluronic acid filled cysts at the junction
between the peripheral retina and the pars plana of the ciliary
Light-induced retinopathy, photic
body (the ora ciliaris retinae)
retinopathy (Fig. 11.18)
 This is an aging change that is very common and of no known
clinical significance
 Retinal phototoxicity with apoptosis of photoreceptors is well
sid a un iq eai au u paio io aie sis res 'e u
documented in dogs and rodents
plana epithelium of the ciliary body
'a yo yuaam pue Aisuau 'uoeinp aul uo suuada
In horses, the cysts may be multiple, but are often solitary and
and degree of ocular pigmentation, phototoxicity can be
arise at the pars plana.
induced in many species
Figure 11.16 Incidental cystic change.
(A) Photomicrograph showing the
common and inconsequential age-related
peripheral cystoid change in the dog 
retina. (B) Photomicrograph showing 
cystic change in the ciliary epithelium of 
the feline pars plana. The cysts contain 
hyaluronic acid (Alcian blue PAS).
(C) Gross photograph of a dog eye
 change. (D) Gross photograph of an
 equine globe showing several individual
cysts in the pars plana (arrows). This
change is also inconsequential.
C
D
365
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.17 Equine senile peripheral
retinal degeneration. (A,B) Gross
photographs of Bouin's-fixed globes 
from aged horses showing peripheral
retinal and pars plana degeneration,
characterized by pigmentary changes.
(C) Low magnification photomicrograph
showing the peripheral retina from an
affected horse. There is retinal atrophy
and dispersed redundant PAS-positive
material (basement membrane) within 
the atrophic retina. (D) Photomicrograph 
showing the ora ciliaris retinae and 
pigmented epithelium from the pars
 plana extending into the subretinal space
A
B
in an affected horse (arrows). (E) Higher
magnification photommicrograph showing
 a segment of atrophic and disorganized 
retina with a combination of redundant
 PAS-positive material in the retina
(arrowheads) and hyperpigmented RPE
cells in the expected location (arrow).
(F) Photomicrograph of another area in
an affected horse showing only
 segmental hyperpigmented RPE cells,
which extend into the retina in
association with atrophy.
C
E
 Light-induced retinal damage is not commonly recognized, but
Comparative Comments
luail asuaui o papalqns siuaed jeoigins u waiqoid e aq ke
 Although no exact counterpart of light-induced retinopathy is 
from an operating microscope for extended periods
described in humans, light does induce photo-oxidative stress in
Retinal phototoxicity is manifest as a disorganization and loss 
the human retina, and photic retinopathy is a general term used 
of photoreceptor cells in the outer retina
for humans that describes various types of light-related damage
Vacuolation of RPE cells may also be seen in focal areas of
to retinal cells, resulting from photochemical, photodynamic,
light-induced damage
photocoagulative, or even mechanical processes. Light toxicity, in 
as  a i a    a
fact, is widely cited as a major pathogenetic mechanism in the 
affected than the retina within the non-tapetal fundus, where
etiology of age-related macular degeneration
the RPE is typically heavily pigmented.
99E
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.18 Phototoxic retinopathy.
(A) Plastic section of a dog retina 
(Toluidine blue stain). Photoreceptor
atrophy was induced experimentally with
intense regional light exposure in the 
 anesthetized immobilized eye.
(B) Photomicrograph of an albino rat eye
from a chronic oncogenicity study.
a ot uonui si Aydoe odaaoud
induced by ambient light levels over the 
life of the animal. This is a common
finding in albino rodents from chronic
A
IB
studies that are housed in institutional
lighting.
Figure 11.19 Feline fluoroquinolone
(Enrofloxacin) retinopathy, fundus.
(A) DSH, 14 years old: a generalized
atrophy with tapetal hyperreflectivity and
attenuation of vessels is present. (B) DSH,
10 years old: the tapetal hyperreflectivity 
is significant. The superior retinal vein
(arrow) is not as attenuated as in the 
previous case. (C) DSH, 9 years old:
tapetal hyperreflectivity and attenuation 
 of vessels are present. Medication was 
discontinued at this point. (D) This is the 
same eye as in (C), 9 weeks later. Tapetal
hyperreflectivity and attenuation of
vessels have progressed despite
 discontinuing medication.
A
B
C
D
 After the manufacturer increased the label-recommended dosage
Comparative Comments (continued)
 of enrofloxacin to a variable range extending up to 20 mg/kg
 Various researchers have emphasized the protective role of melanin
per day as a single or divided dose, reports of sudden blindness
aeep euan buuaaid ui ada pue pioou au ui sanueae
in cats started to emerge
 Since the recommended dose has been subsequently reduced,
Feline fluoroquinolone-induced toxic
to no more than 5 mg/kg. the widespread reports of retinal
toxicity have stopped
retinopathy (Figs 11.19, 11.20)
 Diffuse photoreceptor degeneration and acute loss of vision is
Acute onset of retinal degeneration has been documented in cats
 generally recognizable in affected cats, within days of
treated with the fluoroquinolone antimicrobial, enrofloxacin.
enrofloxacin administration
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.20 Feline fluoroquinolone
(Enrofloxacin) retinopathy, pathology.
(A) Photomicrograph of the retina from a
cat with fluoroquinolone retinopathy in
the chronic stages. The eye was removed 
from the blind cat at necropsy. after the 
cat died from other causes. (B) High
magnification photomicrograph of an
affected feline retina showing
 photoreceptor atrophy in the chronic
stages of disease. (C) Plastic section of an
experimentally affected cat retina
(Toluidine blue stain). Swelling and 
vacuolar change in the cytoplasm of
 photoreceptor cells are evident three
days after experimental dosing with a
fluoroquinolone antibiotic.
A
B]
● Toxicological studies focused on retinal pathology showed that
Plant toxicity
enrofloxacin at 20 mg/kg per day is toxic to the retina of cats
Subsequent studies of orbifloxacin have shown similar retinal
Chronic ingestion of bracken fern (Pteridium aquilinum) by sheep
in the UK
< causes diffuse retinal degeneration, termed bright
toxicity but it has never become a clinically significant problem
because the recommended dose has remained 'safe'
blindness.
 Toxicological studies indicate that retinal toxicity is dose- and
Diot aun pue Aeuauadxa panpoidan uaaq sey aopuas siu
principle responsible for retinal degeneration shown to be
concentration-dependent. However, it should be borne in mind
that animals with renal or hepatic impairment may show signs
ptaquiloside.
of toxicity, despite receiving fluoroquinolones at lower than the
'safe' doses established for healthy cats.
Retinopathy associated with Scrapie
in sheep
Morphologic features of enrofloxacin toxicity
Scrapie is a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy, or prion
 Acute toxicity is present within hours of a single toxic dose
disease, that leads to clinical signs associated with
The target cell is the rod photoreceptor
neurodegeneration in affected sheep
In acute toxicity there is swelling and cytoplasmic vacuolation
 Multifocal circular retinal lesions have been reported in sheep
and in chronic toxicity there is photoreceptor loss.
with naturally occurring Scrapie
368
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.21 Retinal changes in
glaucoma. (A) Photomicrograph of a
feline retina with glaucoma showing a
loss of ganglion cells, but no other
changes. (B) Photomicrograph of a
canine retina that developed glaucoma
after the retina had become detached.
The ganglion cells are spared.
 Figure 11.22 Tapetal sparing in canine
glaucoma. (A) Photomicrograph showing 
the tapetal retina from a dog with
chronic glaucoma. (B) Photomicrograph 
showing the non-tapetal retina from the
samme dog as (A). Relative sparing of
the tapetal retina is a common but
unexplained feature of canine retinal
degeneration in glaucoma.
Outer plexiform layer atrophy, disorganization and loss of
The canine retina in glaucoma (Fg. 11.22)
nuclei in both nuclear layers, and Muller cell hypertrophy
 The response of the canine retina to glaucoma differs from that
have been identified in some sheep with naturally occurring
seen in other species
Scrapie
■ This is perhaps related to the acute and extreme nature of
 Intense accumulation of abnormal prion protein in the
intraocular pressure elevation in many affected dogs
plexiform layers of the retina, and altered expression of
■
 The entire retina often undergoes necrosis and destruction in
immunohistochemical markers for several retinal cell types, in
canine glaucoma, not just the ganglion cells and inner retina
particular increased expression of GFAP, has been reported in
au ue paae aiaas sa ans si euan oans a
experimentally infected sheep.
inferior retina in canine glaucoma (so called 'tapetal sparing')
- This is true even in breeds lacking a tapetum
The retina in glaucoma
[euai ssaui-ig 'ssop u eonela Aud araas ul
necrosis, and subsequent gliosis and atrophy, occurs very
The general topic of glaucoma and its affects on the eye will be covered
rapidly and can reach 'end stage' within a week of the owner 
in more detail in Chapter 13 but it is appropriate to comment briefly
first noticing disease in severe and rapidly developing cases.
on the retinal changes seen in glaucoma.
These are the type of cases that are likely to be enucleated.
General features of retinal morphology
The retina in glaucoma in cats, and in species
in glaucoma (Fig. 11.21)
 other than the dog
 Glaucoma is a disease of the inner retina, particularly the
Cats, like all other species seen in the COPLOW collection, demon-
ganglion cells.
strate a loss of ganglion cells but, even in chronic and severe glau-
 The pathogenic mechanisms that lead to ganglion cell loss in
Kqdone araaas uoy paieds Aleiaua si euan iano aun 'eo
glaucoma remain unclear
 A number of different mechanisms have been proposed to
account for loss of ganglion cels from the retina, including
Comparative Comments
neurotrophin deprivation and excitotoxicity and an
interruption of vascular perfusion in the optic disc
 Glaucoma is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 13
An observation made in the COPLOW collection is
 In humans, as well as in most other species, glaucoma is in part a
that in cases where the retina is detached before the
disease of the inner retina, and the discussion regarding the 
 development of glaucoma, the ganglion cells are relatively
mechanism of ganglion cell loss in glaucoma applies to humans
spared.
698
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
To hyperthyroidism
Comparative Comments (continued)
 To diabetes mellitus
 The death of ganglion cells is associated with visual field loss and 
To cardiac disease
optic atrophy. it is also associated with the thinning of the nerve 
 To hyperadrenocorticism
fiber layer
To phaeochromocytoma
 Changes in the visual field, appearance of the optic nerve, and
To carcinoid tumor
thickness of the nerve fiber layer are followed routinely in
■To hyperaldosteronism
documenting the progression of glaucoma in human patients.
Primary:
■ Idiopathic or essential hypertension
 An age-related increase in blood pressure has been
documented in both dogs and cats, as well as in 
RETINAL VASCULAR DISEASE
humans.
Systemic hypertension
Systemic pathology of hypertension involves a
number of target organs:
 Systemic hypertension is a relatively common, yet probably under-
recognized, cause of ocular disease in dogs and cats.
Kidney
  Vasculopathy leads to poor renal perfusion
Causes of systemic hypertension in dogs
Brain
 Vasculopathy leads to hemorrhage and ischemia
and cats include:
Eye (Figs 11.23-11.25)
· Secondary:
The eye is frequently the first organ to manifest clinically
■ To renal disease
apparent complications of systemic hypertension in dogs
- Renal disease may also be secondary to hypertension and
and cats
the cause-and-effect relationship between systemic
■
Hypertensive vasculopathy was diagnosed in 145 canine
hypertension and renal disease remains undefined
cases in the COPLOW collection and in 43 feline cases. In 
Figure 11.23 Hypertensive
chorioretinopathy in dogs, clinical
(A) Cocker Spaniel, 11 years old:
intraretinal (black arrow) and a large
preretinal hemorrhage (white arrow) are
present. (B) Cocker Spaniel, 12 years old:
this blind dog has a total inferior retinal 
detachment. Preretinal hemorrhage can
be seen overlying the optic disc (arrow).
Intr aretinal hemorrhage was also present.
(C) Australian Shepherd, 6 years old: the
inferior retina is totally detached (arrows)
due to subretinal hemorrhage.
(D) Brittany Spaniel, 9 years old: the
fundus is not visualized due to the 
 massive preretinal hemorrhage.
A
B
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.24 Hypertensive 
chorioretinopathy in dogs, pathology.
(A) Gross photograph showing a canine
globe with retinal detachment and 
extensive intraocular hemorrhage
characterizing the severe ocular effects of
systemic hypertension. (B) Subgross 
photomicrograph of a canine globe
showing hemorrhage, retinal
detachment, retinal tear and a focus of
fibrin disruption of the retina (arrow).
(C) Higher magnification of (B) showing 
the focus of fibrous disruption of the
retina (*), a feature that is usually
indicative of systemic hypertension.
(D,E) PAS stain showing vascular changes
that are typical of systemic hypertension
in the retina (D) and choroid (E).
A
(F) Hypertensive vasculopathy in a
mandrill affecting the choroidal vessels
and the choriocapillaris.
D
371
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.25 Hypertensive
 chorioretinopathy in cats, clinical.
(A) DSH, 13 years old: focal retinal
edema is present throughout the fundus
(arrow). Pinpoint intraretinal
hemorrhages are present to the right of
the optic disc. (B) DSH, 10 years old:
focal retinal edema and bullous retinal
detachments (arrow) are present 
throughout the retina. (C) Persian,
14 years old: massive intraretinal
hemorrhage is present. (D) DSH, 12 years 
 old: subretinal fluid has totally elevated 
the retina between the ora ciliaris retinae
and the optic disc. The optic disc is 
located below the folds of the bullous
retinal detachment (arrow). Retinal
A
B
vessels can be readily seen through the
dilated pupil.
C
D
most of these cases hypertension was not suspected at the
0 Intravitreal hemorrhage
time of enucleation
0 Retinal hemorrhage
■ Oaular pathology of systemic hypertension in dogs and cats
Retinal detachment
- Lesions are bilateral but not necessarily symmetrical
0 Focal, multifocal or total bullous detachment is a
- Hypertensive vasculopathy
very common feature that reflects hypertensive
0 Recognized clinically and grossly by the variations in
choroidopathy, with sub-retinal effusion or, in some
caliber of individual retinal blood vessels, that may have
cases, hemorrhage
sections of obliteration and sections of aneurysmal or
0 Pre-iridal fbrovascular proliferation may result, and may
sccular dilation
contribute to neovascular glaucoma and to distortion of
0 Vascular lesions are seen in the arterioles of the retina.
the iris profile
choroid, or, less frequently, in the iris
Hypertensive optic neuropathy
0 Diseased arterioles have a thickened vascular profle with
0 Papilledema may rarely be recognized as a clinical
 decreased luminal diameter
feature in animals with severe hypertension
0 Vascular lesions are not consistent throughout the ocular
D
 Optic atrophy may result from optic nerve ischemia,
tissues and their identification requires a PAS stain
particularly in chronic hypertension
0 Solid or lamellar PAS-positive deposits, effacing the
0 Hemorrhage in the optic disc secondary to vascular
vessel wall, are associated with fbrinoid necrosis
disease is common.
D1
 Retinal edema and retinoschisis may be recognized
0 Foci of retinal destruction, including RPE disruption,
Comparative Comments
neovascular proliferation are a common and distinctive
 The discussion of the retinal changes due to hypertension in dogs
feature of systemic hypertension in the dog and cat
and cats is relevant to the human as well
retina
 It should be noted, however, that in the human, the 
- Intraocular hemorrhage may occur as a direct result of
pathophysiology of hypertensive retinopathy. optic neuropathy.
vascular damage
 and choroidopathy remain the focus of sharp controversy.
0 Hemophthalmos
372
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.26 Canine experimental
diabetic retinopathy (A) Fundus
photograph showing retinal hemorrhages 
(arrows) in an aphakic globe from a
dog maintained in an experimentally
induced diabetic state for several years.
(B) Fluorescein angiogram from
 experimental canine diabetes showing
neovascular foci (arrow). (C) Trypsin
 digest preparation showing the retinal
blood vessels from a dog with
experimental diabetes showing a
microaneurysm (arrowhead). a
neovascular focus (arrow) and the inset
B
shows capillary segments (small 
 arrowheads) devoid of endothelial cells
and pericytes. (Courtesy of Ronald 
Engerman.)
vasculature and small, focal retinal hemorrhages is commonly
Comparative Comments (continued)
seen
 Some say it is useful in some ways to classify hypertensive
 Morphological features identified in dogs with spontaneous or
e yons yhnouie seinoseaeaixa pue yeinosen oiui suoisal leuias
experimentally induced diabetes include:
 separation is somewhat artificial
 Loss of capillary pericytes
 Others, after reviewing experimental and clinical data,
■
 Thickening of vascular basement membranes
 proposed dividing hypertensive retinopathy into
■Focal intraretinal hemorrhages
vasoconstrictive, exudative, sclerotic, and complications of the 
 Focal areas of degeneration of the neurosensory retina
sclerotic phase, and they have delineated the mechanisms 
 Diabetic retinopathy may be complicated by secondary
underlying these phases.
hypertensive vasculopathy in some dogs.
Diabetic retinopathy (Fig. 11.26)
Comparative Comments
Although previously thought to be uncommon, with longer
survival times post-diagnosis, and routine surgical management
 Diabetic retinopathy is of greater significance in human retinal
of diabetic cataract allowing clinical visualization of the fundus,
uosuaadu jo spaga leua ueyi aseasip aensen 
 paziuonai mou si Auedouai jo anuapiul uoiu aiaaeiai e
 Although the early changes can be induced in animal models.
dogs with diabetes mellitus
including dogs and rodents, the more advanced changes are
Spontaneous diabetic retinopathy is seldom associated with
 limited to humans
clinically apparent loss of vision in dogs 
 The progressive changes in diabetic humans include capillary
While the more severe, proliferative form of retinopathy seen in
basement membrane thickening. loss of capillary pericytes, the
diabetic humans appears relatively uncommon in dogs.
development of microaneurysms, intraretinal hemorrhages,
 background retinopathy' with micro-aneurysms in the retinal
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.27 Hyperviscosity (A) Mixed
Breed, 10 years old: the total protein was
12.9 g/dL. The electrophoresis and
associated clinical signs were compatible
with the diagnosis. The photograph,
representative of both eyes shows
intraretinal hemorrhage (arrows) and a
total bullous retinal detachment viewed
through the dilated pupil. (B) Golden
retriever, 9 years old: the total protein
was 13.4 g/dL with a total globulin of
12.1 g/dL. The retinal vessels are dilated
and multiple intraretinal hemorrhages are
present. The inferior retina has a retinal
separation and bullous detachment
(arrows). The optic disc is poorly seen
due to the dilated retinal vessels.
A
B
 Factors which can contribute to detachment
Comparative Comments (continued)
(Fig. 11.28)
macular edema, and finally the development of proliferative
The following contributing factors either predispose to tearing of the
diabetic retinopathy, with glial vascular proliferation occurring as a
retina (i.e. rhegmatogenous detachments), traction on the retina, or
response to retinal ischemia.
serous fluid or inflammatory exudates in the sub-retinal space:
suuu pue ueauasap ieuai paueap
Anemia
+
 Ocular trauma leading to tearing, necrosis, hemorrhage or
vascular leakage
 Retinal hemorrhage is a recognized complication of profound anemia
 aaeyeal ejnse 'saenyu! [euai-qns o supea uoneuueul
in cats.
 or hemorrhage
Congenital malformations of the posterior segment including
Hyperviscosity syndrome (Fig. 11.27)
retinal dysplasia, staphyloma and colobomatous lesions (see
Hyperviscosity associated with monoclonal or polyclonal gammopa-
Ch. 3)
thies, or rarely polycythemia, may lead to a range of ocular abnormali-
Cellular bands in the vitreous, segmental vitreal degeneration or
ties that are similar to those seen in hypertension, including retinal
soa nae no 'e  as 'z s a u s) 1iseids
detachment and retinal and intraocular hemorrhage, as well as sec-
prolapse, leading to active or passive traction exerted by the
ondary glaucoma.
vitreous body on the inner retina
 The characteristic feature of hyperviscosity syndrome is pronounced
Neoplasia involving the retina, choroid, anterior uvea, or
tortuosity and distension of retinal blood vessels, with thrombosis
vitreous cavity, that leads to hemorrhage vascular leakage.
and stasis of blood leading to extreme sacculation of blood vessels.
retinal necrosis, or retinal traction
Stretching of the globe leading to retinal tearing. as may occur
in chronic glaucoma
Toxic conditions that lead to vascular leakage or retinal
RETINAL DETACHMENT, RETINAL
degeneration
SEPARATION
Vasculopathy that may lead to hemorrhage, leakage or traction
Systemic hypertension
Retinal detachment is characterized by the focal or total separation of
■
 Diabetes mellitus
the neurosensory retina from the underlying RPE. Since the detach-
■
Hyperviscosity syndrome
ment essentially involves separation between the photoreceptor and
Thromboembolic disease
RPE layers of the retina, rather than actual detachment of the retina
in its entirety, including the RPE from the choroid, some prefer the
Consequences of retinal detachment
more accurate term, retinal separation, over the more widely used
term, retinal detachment.
 The detached retina ceases to function immediately
 Retinal metabolism is abruptly lowered
■
 The recycling of retinol by the RPE is interrupted 
Factors acting to maintain normal retinal attachment
 The outer retina is separated from its blood supply in the
The tight junctions of the outer limiting membrane, and the
choriocapillaris
tight junctions of the RPE cells
 Gradually there is atrophy of the photoreceptor cells
The close anatomic relationship between photoreceptor outer
The hypoxic retina secretes vascular endothelial growth factor
segments and the RPE microvillous processes that surround
(VEGF), which promotes neovascular proliferation in the iris
them
(pre-iridal neovascular membrane), ciliary body (cyclitic
 The gentle and widely distributed force exerted by the semi-solid
membrane). and optic nerve head. These neovascular
vitreous body on the inner retina.
membranes have further serious consequences for the function
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.28 Retinal detachment,
causes. (A) Photomicrograph of an owl
 eye showing the detached retina caused
by blunt trauma. Phagocytic cells are
 cleaning up photoreceptor outer
 segment debris. (B) Photomicrograph of
a canine retina near the optic disc
showing abnormal blood vessels, with
 features typical of systemic hypertension
(Alcian blue PAS). Vascular leakage is
associated with fluid accumulation and 
retinal detachment. (C) Photomicrograph
A
of a dog choroid and hypertrophied RPE.
There is intravascular lymphoma in the
choroidal blood vessels (arrow) with
edema and retinal detachment.
(D) Retinal detachment and retinal tear
associated with a large deposit of fibrin
and neovascular proliferation (*)
associated with systemic hypertension
(Alcian blue PAS). (E) Photomicrograph of 
 a dog eye with hypermature, post-
traumatic cataract, and numerous cellular
strands (arrows) within the vitreous
creating traction on the retina and
causing detachment. (F) Gross
 photograph of a dog eye with retinal
C
[D
detachment associated with suppurative
vitreitis caused by aspergillosis.
of the eye, including hemophthalmos and secondary glaucoma
- Cell swelling without the characteristic 'tombstoning can
(see Chs 5 and 9 for more detailed discussion).
be seen in the absence of pathologic retinal detachment
 and this can be misleading
Morphologic features of retinal detachment
 Sometimes, in cats, the hypertrophied RPE cells will also
form complex fronds associated with folding of Bruch's
(Hg. 11.29)
membrane which then bulges into the subretinal space
Hemorrhage protein, inflammation, or other material in the
- More commonly seen as a pronounced feature in cats
 subretinal space
 Outer retinal atrophy
  The most convincing evidence of pathological retinal
■ Blunting and loss of photoreceptor outer segments
 detachment is the accumulation of material in the subretinal
■Within a few days, apoptosis may be identifed in the cells of 
 space, which normally appears optically clear in standard
the outer nuclear layer
histopathological sections
■ More profound outer retinal degeneration suggests
Hypertrophy of the adjacent RPE cells
chronicity, while inner retinal involvement may suggest
 Enlargement of cell size along with an inward bulging
secondary glaucoma
 of the RPE cell apices, often referred to as 'tomb-
 Upregulation of vimentin and GFAP expression in the detached
stoning'
retina, beginning within hours of detachment.
375
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.29 Retinal detachment,
morphologic features. (A) Gross
 photograph of a feline eye with serous
retinal detachment. There is a protein-
rich exudate in the subretinal space (*).
which suggests that the detachment 
is pathologic and not an artifact.
(B.C) Photomicrographs showing 
detached canine retinas with a cellular
 infiltr ate in the subretinal space.
(D) Photomicrograph showing
hypertrophy and the characteristic
rounded apex ('tombstoning') of the RPE
(arrow). This change occurs within hours
of pathologic retinal detachment.
(E) Photomicrograph showing RPE and 
fragments of photoreceptor outer
segments still attached (arrow). They
have an appearance somewhat like cilia.
This is only seen when the detachment is
 an artifact of issue processing.
[D
Morphologic features which suggest that
 Tractional retinal detachment, in which the neurosensory retinal is
retinal detachment is an artifact of tissue
u sanno wsueupau siut rsaueguau leae u A pand
 processing include:
proliferative retinopathies such as diabetic retinopathy, sickle cell
 Absence of the features described in the previous section 
disease, and retinopathy of prematurity.
However, if one cannot detect the features described above in
3. Exudative, transudative, or hemorrhagic retinal detachment, in 
association with retinal detachment, pathologic detachment 
which there is an accumulation of subretinal fluid from the
cannot be definitively excluded 
choroidal or retinal vessels. This is a mechanism for retinal
 detachment in choroidal melanomas and inflammatory conditions.
 Photoreceptor outer segments still attached to the apices of RPE
cells in the region of apparent detachment
In human eyes with retinal detachment, the principal
This feature indicates, without doubt, that the apparent
histopathologic findings are as follows:
retinal detachment is an artifact.
 Degeneration of the outer segments and eventual loss of
photoreceptor cells
 Migration of Muller cells 
 Proliferation and migration of RPE cells
Comparative Comments
 Development of cystic spaces in the detached retina.
 The discussion on retinal detachment in non-human species applies
to human retinal detachments as well. As indicated in this discussion,
retinal detachment corresponds to a separation between the RPE and 
the neuroepithelium at the junction between the two layers of the 
 optic vesicle, where the embryonic cavity previously existed.
Retinal tear
 The attachment of the neurosensory retina to the RPE is a tenuous
 one, dependent on a number of mechanisms including intraocular
 Many ofthe same factors that lead to retinal detachment can also lead
 pressure, vitreous support and pressure, gravity, interdigitation of 
to a retinal tear.
 photoreceptor outer segments and RPE apical microvilli, as well as
 Traumatic retinal damage is a leading cause of retinal tears
the interphotoreceptor matrix and adhesion molecules.
The three major types of human retinal detachment are as follows:
 or the formation of contractile vitreous bands is another leading
 1. Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, the most common type,
cause of retinal tears
which results from a collection of vitreous fluid beneath the
■Degenerative vitreoretinopathy, as commonly seen in Shih
neural retina through a tear or a hole.
Tzu dogs (discussed in detail in Ch. 3), is often associated
with retinal tears
The Retina
Chapter
11
 Retinal necrosis in association with retinal vascular disease is a
there is extra- or intracellular edema of the retina, with damage
common cause of retinal tears
Vasculopathy associated with systemic hypertension
to the photoreceptor cells 
■
Diabetic vascular disease
As discussed in regard to other species, direct trauma can lead to
■
■
Atherosclerosis
traumatic retinal holes, tears, dialysis, and detachment in the
 Thromboembolism or embolic metastatic neoplasia.
human retina
■
The morphologic features of retinal tears include
(Hg. 11.30)
 Retinal tears usually also imply local or total retinal detachment
Lenticular metaplasia in the avian retina
The torn ends of the retina are remodeled by gliosis, such that
(Fig. 11.33)
they take on a rounded and gliotic appearance
The torn retina often rolls over on itself to adopt a scrolled
Metaplastic lens-like differentiation is a common phenomenon in
 traumatized avian retinas.
appearance
 In the scrolled retina, the outer retina often is in apposition
with the inner retina, a confguration that cannot occur
Morphologic features of lenticular metaplasia
unless there is a tear in the retina.
 Bladder cells or Morgagnian globules found within the atrophic
neural retina or retinal pigment epithelium
Metaplastic lens-like lesions may even demonstrate features
TRAUMA
consistent with lens capsule
Gradual transformation from reactive Miller cells to bladder
Retinal contusion, blunt trauma
cells, with a change from GFAP to alpha A crystallin
expression.
(Figs 11.31, 11.32)
Trauma is frequently suspected as a cause of retinal atrophy, but is
diffcult to diagnose with certainty because there is seldom an accurate
INFLAMMATORY DISEASES OF THE RETINA
history of trauma.
 See Chapter 5 for more detailed discussion of the effects of trauma
on the retina.
Inflammatory disease of the retina seldom occurs in isolation, often
being associated with uveal inflammation, due to its close proximity
to the choroid, or with inflammatory disease of the central nervous
The morphological features of peracute
system.
traumatic retinopathy
Hemorrhage
Retinal inflammation attributable to
 Disruption and fragmentation of photoreceptor outer segments
infectious agents
Disruption and shattering of the lamellar organization of the
retina
Systemic infections with a wide range of bacterial, viral, fungal, algal
Retinal tear.
and parasitic pathogens may result in retinal inflammation. Many of
?
these pathogens lead to retinal disease secondary to infection being
The morphologic features of acute
established with the choroid, i.e by extension of posterior uveitis, and
are considered in Chapter 9.
traumatic retinopathy
 Those pathogens for which the retina may be considered a target
Apoptosis
tissue are addressed below.
 Tissue necrosis or malacia
Unsupported retinal blood vessels
Canine distemper virus (Figs 11.34, 11.35)
Retinal tear.
 Canine distemper is a Morbillivirus (paramyxovirus) which
causes a wide variety of systemic lesions when infecting
The morphologic features of chronic
susceptible dogs or other carnivores 
traumatic retinopathy
Retinal disease is seen in association with encephalitis and,
Gliosis and atrophy
although keratoconjunctivitis sicca and blinding optic neuritis
Unsupported blood vessels
may occur, frequently there are no ocular signs other than the
Retinal tear.
typical ophthalmoscopic findings of multifocal retinitis or
chorioretinitis
Comparative Comments
Morphologic features of canine distemper retinitis
 The retinal manifestations of trauma in humans have been
Grossly, there are multifocal, perivascular areas of
extensively studied and categorized
 Direct blunt ocular trauma is the cause of commotio retinae,
pigmented, or atrophic 
characterized by whitening of the outer retina. Histologically.
■Histologically, in active infection, retinal disorganization,
eosinophilic intranuclear or intracytoplasmic inclusion
bodies, and multi-nucleate syncytia are observed
LLE
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.30 Retinal tear. (A) Shih Tzu,
6 months old: two holes in the retina
(arrows) with perilesional edema are
present. (B) Gross photograph of a Shih 
Tzu eye showing a peripheral retinal tear.
(C) Gross photograph of another Shih
Tzu dog with giant retinal tear 3609
(D,E) Photomicrographs at two
magnifications of the same Shih Tzu as B
showing the rounded edge (arrow)
characteristic of a retinal tear that has 
had time to form a glial scar.
A
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.31 Trauma to the retina,
fundus. (A) Beagle, 1.5 years old: this
 dog was still blind 1 week after being hit
by a car. The photograph is of the 
tapetal retina. Linear areas of retinal
edema (black arrow) and focal areas of 
abnormal pigment and edema (white
arrows) are present. (B) Non-tapetal
retina of the same eye as in (A) showing
multiple areas of retinal edema (arrow).
(C) The tapetal retina of the same eye as
in (A) taken 1 week later. Increased
tapetal pigmentation is present. The
 tapetum is now hyperreflective in the
areas of previous retinal edema (arrow).
(D) This is the non-tapetal retina of the
samme eye as in (A) taken 1 week later.
A
Retinal edema has resolved, leaving areas
B
 of depigmentation and pigment
clumping.
D
■In chronic disease, retinal atrophy and gliosis are seen, along
●Potentially fatal encephalitis is associated with neurologic signs
with migration of pigment epithelial cells into the
and with vision loss in one or more animals
neurosensory retina.
Morphologic features of retinitis in affected animals
Bovine thromboembolic meningoencephalitis,
Acute necrotizing retinitis
Haemophilus somnus infection (Fig. 11.36)
 Eosinophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies.
Haemophilus somnus is a Gram-negative bacterial pathogen of
cattle, which can affect the urinary, reproductive, or respiratory
Bovine virus diarrhea (BVD) virus in cattle (Fg. 11.38)
tacts leading to serious disease
The brain and the eye become affected as a result of widespread
Calves infected with BVD virus in utero, may be affected with a
septic vascular thromboembolism
syndrome that includes cerebellar hypoplasia, microphthalmia,
Ocular signs, although striking. are generally a minor clinical
and retinal disorganization and dysplasia (see Ch. 3)
concern because of the rapidly fatal nature of the embolic form
of the disease
Morphologic features of retinal disease associated with
pre-natal BVD infection
Morphologic features of retinal disease
■Retinal folds or rosettes
 There is focal or multifocal acute hemorrhagic and
 Loss of lamellar retinal organization
necrotizing retinitis associated with septic vascular
■Retinal gliosis
thromboemboli and vasculitis.
 Segmental loss of RPE cells or spindle cell metaplasia of RPE
cells.
Herpes viral retinitis in camelids (Fg. 11.37)
West Nile virus in raptors (Fig. 11.39)
Infection with equine herpesvinus-l can cause clustered
outbreaks of encephalitis and retinitis in camelid species that 
West Nile vinus has a high morbidity in avian species, with a
are in contact with Equidae
highly variable mortality between affected species
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.32 Trauma to the retina,
pathology.(A,B) Photomicrographs, from
two dogs who died within hours after
head trauma, showing regionally variable
apoptosis in the retina (arrows). (C) Low 
 magnification photomicrograph showing
the retina from a dog that had its eyes
removed within hours after a traumatic
penetrating wound caused by a BB.
Notice the segmental disruption and
hemorrhage. (D) Photomicrograph of a
dog eye, that was removed several days
 after blunt trauma, showing atrophy and
apoptosis in one segment (arrowhead)
A
B
 and necrosis and phagocytosis in another
segment (arrow). (E) Photomicrograph
of the retina from a dog that was
necropsied 10 days after severe head
trauma, showing end-stage retinal 
 atrophy. However, there are still
 phagocytic cells in the gliotic remnants of
the retina (arrow).
 Raptors have a fairly high morbidity, and mortality is often
The pathogenesis of ocular toxoplasmosis is discussed in greater
associated with vision loss secondary to retinal or uveal
detail in Chapter 9.
infection
Toxocara canis ocular larva migrans
Morphologic features of West Nife Virus infection
(Figs 11.40, 11.41) (see also Ch. 9)
in the raptor eye
Young dogs raised under conditions that promote a heavy exposure
 Multifocal retinal or uveal lymphocytic infiltration
 Segmental retinal necrosis, or atrophy and gliosis.
to infectious egs, are at risk of developing inflammatory ocular
disease associated with the migration of larval nematodes through
Ocular tissues, including the retina and uvea causing retinitis and
Toxoplasmosis
uveitis, respectively.
·Active, disseminated infection with Toxoplasma gondii is
reported to result in a characteristic multi-focal chorioretinitis in
Morphologic features of canine ocular larval migrans
affected animals, however, there are no cases of chorioretinitis
 The hallmark feature of infestation is a migration tract with
associated with toxoplasmosis in the COPLOW collection
associated granulomatous inflammation which undulates 
la31et e aq oi sieadde eujai aut ypum ui 'sueuny ot isenuos ul
through the uvea, retina, and vitreous
tissue, in domestic species, retinitis tends to occur by extension
The focal granulomas often need to be identified during gross
of inflammation from the adjacent choroidal tissue
examination with magnification, and the tissues embedded and
088
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.33 Trauma to the retina in 
birds, lenticular metaplasia. (A)
Photomicrograph of the traumatized 
retina from a Red-tailed hawk showing
end-stage retinal atrophy and focal
lenticular metaplasia (*), a common
phenomenon in retinal degeneration and 
 gliosis in bird eyes. (B) Photomicrograph 
of another hawk eye with post-traumatic
retinal degeneration and lenticular
metaplasia (*). (C) Immunofluorescence
 photomicrograph of another bird retina
showing the lenticular metaplasia 
 staining positive for alpha crystallinue.
G
381
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.34 Canine distemper
retinopathy fundus. (A) Doberman
Pinscher, 8 weeks old: focal areas of
retinal edema (arrows) were presumed to
be associated with distemper in this 
unvaccinated puppy with respiratory
disease. (B) Beagle, 6 months old: areas
of retinitis with indistinct borders are 
 present in the peripapillary retina. Optic
neuritis is also present in the
unvaccinated dog with a history of
recent seizures. (C) Norwegian Elkhound,
4 years old: the peripapillary retinal
atrophy and kerito conjuctivity sicca are
compatible with previous active
distemper. (D) Mixed Breed, 6 years old:
the large areas of depigmentation are
A
B
compatible with prior distemper retinitis.
This dog was currently having seizures.
C
D
sectioned in such a way that the lesions are isolated for
histologic evaluation
RETINAL NEOPLASIA
Eosinophils are seldom a prominent feature of ocular larval
migrans in dogs
Primary neoplasms of the retina
A high degree of suspicion is warranted on finding unexplained
retinal perivascular lymphocytic inflammation in young
These are rare in domestic animals. There are 13 cases of primary
dogs.
'uoaloo molaoo aui ui sies ui oml pue saop ul sioum [euna
Canine retinal glioma (astrocytoma)
(Figs 11.42, 11.43)
Comparative Comments
There are 10 examples in the COPLOW collection
 Concerning ocular inflammation attributable to infectious agents, the
Although not common, GFAP-positive gliomas are the most
human retina is involved in instances of infectious endophthalmitis 
 secondary to bacterial or fungal disease.
sop u somu jeuan Aeud paaunosua auana
·  Fungal infections of the retina occur in immunosuppressed
Retinal gliomas most often arise in the central retina, near or
human patients as a result of fungemia. The most commonly
continuous with the optic nerve
implicated fungi are Candida, Aspergilfus, and Cryptococcus 
Gliomas can have a bland or an anaplastic cellular profle (see
Ch. 12). The anaplastic tumors are often extensively necrotic.
neoformans
 A number of viruses can affect the human retina, including 
herpes simplex, herpes zoster, cytomegalovirus, human
Retinal tumors with features of neural differentiation
immunodeficiency virus (HIv), rubella, and measles
 Herpes simplex. Herpes zoster and cytomegalovirus can cause
Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET), including medulloepithe-
 a devastating destruction of the human retina, known as acute
lioma and retinoblastoma (Fig. ll.44).
retinal necrosis.
+
 PNET are usually in the peripheral retinal or continuous with
the ciliary body
382
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.35 Canine distemper 
retinopathy. pathology. (A) Gross
photograph showing the retinal surface 
 from a posterior segment with coalescing
foci of degeneration and pigmentation
(arrows). (B) Magnified view of the same 
specimen as (A) showings the affected 
portion of the retina in more detail.
(C) Low magnification photomicrograph
showing multiple foci of retinitis and 
retinal degeneration (arrows) in canine
distemper retinitis. (D,E) Higher
 magnification photomicrographs showing
A
B
a combination of retinal degeneration, 
 pigment invasion and minimal
inflammation. Intranuclear inclusions are
 seen in both photographs (arrows)
E
 PNET have been reported in a number of different species
0 Although rosette structures are a frequent feature of
including dogs, horses and camelids
retinoblastoma, their presence is not required to make
Medulloepithelioma is characterized by the presence of thick
the diagnosis
tubular rosettes with a complex multi-cell lining and a distinct
 Sparse vascularity and associated extensive tumor necrosis,
lumen. More simple Flexner-Wintersteiner or Homer-Wright
except immediately around blood vessels
 rosettes may also be present in medulloepithelioma, but they 
 Mineralization within human retinoblastoma is so
are not the defining feature
common that it is a feature that is essential to make the
 Most medulloepithelial tumors originate in the ciliary body
diagnosis by ultrasound or CT scan.
Or optic nerve, rarely in the retina
Retinoblastoma in animals (Fig. 1l.45)
Most PNET tumors of animals do not satisfy the rather
stringent criteria to be categorized as retinoblastoma. There is
Comparative Comments
one canine case in the literature, which has been designated
as a retinoblastoma using criteria developed in humans
 In humans, the most common primary intraocular malignancy of
Retinoblastoma is a PNET of the retina with the following
childhood is retinoblastoma. This tumor occurs in approximately 1
■
features:
 in 14 000-20 000 live births
- Poorly-differentiated, very primitive neural cells, with a
The tumor is composed of small dark cells, with hyperchromatic 
large nucleus to cytoplasm ratio
nuclei and scanty cytoplasm. Rosettes (Flexner-Wintersteiner and 
Simple rosette structures with characteristics of either
Homer-Wright) are characteristically seen
Flexner-Wintersteiner or Homer-Wright
A benign form of the tumor, known as retinocytoma, can occur
0 Flexner-Wintersteiner rosettes are characterized by a
 Retinoblastoma is extremely rare in other species
single layer of cells with apical tight junctions and a
 Other tumors of the human retina are uncommon and include
distinct lumen
massive gliosis of the retina, astrocytic hamartomas.
0 Homer-Wright rosettes are characterized by a more
hemangioblastomas, as well as adenomas and adenocarcinomas 
of the RPE.
junctions and an indistinct lumen
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.36 Haemophius somnus
 Retinitis. (A) Low magnification
photomicrograph of a bovine retina with
multifocal thrombotic blood vessels 
(arrows) and suppurative retinitis typical
of disseminated Haemophitus somnus
 infection. (B,C) Higher magnifications of 
the same case as (A) showing more
detail of the retinitis (arrow).
B
 Figure 11.37 Retinitis associated with
herpesvirus in cammelids. (A,B)
Photomicrographs of the retina from a
llama showing retinitis, edema and 
degeneration caused by infection with
herpesvirus. Typical herpes viral
intranuclear inclusion bodies (arrow) can
often be found.
88
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.38 Retinopathy associated
with intrauterine bovine viral diarrhea
(BVD) Infection. (A) Gross photograph of 
a neonatal calf brain showing cerebellar
hypoplasia resulting from in utero
infection with BVD virus. (B) The gross 
montage image shows a series of eight
Bouin's-fixed globes, from four neonatal
calves euthanized because of congenital
BVD, with microphthalmos and excess
B
protein in the vitreous. (C)
Photomicrograph of the retina and 
 choroid from an affected calf showing
retinal detachment and a spindle cell 
membrane lining the inner choroid 
(arrow). (D) Photomicrograph showing
outer retinal degeneration and atrophy.
(E) Low magnification showing multifocal
retinal involvement in an affected 
calf. (F) Spindle cell membrane on
the inner aspect of the choroid 
at the level of the choriocapillaris 
(arrow) is a common feature in ocular
involvement by congenital BVD.
(G) Immunohistochemistry showing
BVD antigen in retinal blood vessels.
C
385
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.39 West Nile virus
chorioretinitis in raptors. (A) Gross
photograph of a Red-tailed Hawk eye
infected with West Nile virus (VwNV)
showing protein exudates in the vitreous.
(B) Photomicrograph showing 
lymphocytic infiltrates in the 
pecten. The inset shows the same
with more magnification.
(C,D) Immunohistochemistry showing 
WNV antigen (labeled red) in the retina
and in the ciliary body epithelium (D).
(E) WNV antigen is in the ciliary body
non-pigmented epithelium.
A
386
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.40 Toxocara canis ocular larva
migrans. (A) Borzoi, 1 year old: two focal
 granulomas are present in the temporal 
retina. The diagnosis was based on the 
 dog's age, health and response to
treatment. (B) Golden Retriever, 5
months old: this intraretinal granuloma
has perilesional edema and
neovascularization (arrow). Toxocara
canis larvae were identified in the eye
and the brain of this seizuring dog.
(C) Gross photograph of the posterior
segment from a young dog showing a
migrating larva of Toxocara canis (arrow)
eaudiad au jo ydeoud sso ()
retina from another young dog showing 
a discrete granuloma in the retina. It is a
A
B
good idea to locate and sample these 
foci to look for larval parasites.
D
C
Figure 11.41 Toxocara canis ocular
larva migrans, histopathology.
(A) Photomicrograph showing a section
taken from the granuloma in Figure 
11.33(D). The section includes a
fragment of a larval T. canis parasite
(arrow). (B) Photomicrograph showing a
lymphocytic focus on the inner retina, a
feature that should hint at the diagnosis
when seen in a young dog.
(C) Photomicrograph showing the
migrating larva from the posterior
segment in Figure 11.33(C).
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 11.42 Retinal glioma, pathology.
(A,B) Gross photograph and subgross
photomicrograph showing an 
astrocytoma in the central retina in a
dog. (Reproduced with permission from
Naranjo C, Schobert C, Dubielzig RR
2008 Canine ocular gliomas: a
retrospective study. Vet Ophthalmol
11:356-362.) (C,D) Gross photograph
and subgross photomicrograph of
another central retinal astrocytoma in a
dog. (E,F) Photomicrographs showing
solid tumors within the retina at two
different magnifications. The inset in (F)
shows glial fibrillary acid protein
(GFAP)-positive immunohistochemistry.
B
C
?
388
The Retina
Chapter
11
Figure 11.43 GFP staining in retinal
glioma (A,B) Photomicrographs showing 
positive staining with glial fibrillary acid 
protein (GFAP).
A
Figure 11.44 Retinal medulloepithelioma 
and primitive neuroectodermal tumor
(PNET). (A) Gross photograph of a canine
eye showing a mass within the detached
retina. This 5-year-old dog had a retinal 
tumor composed of primitive neural
tissue with cords of epithelium and 
neuroblastic cells with rosettes. (B-D)
Subgross photomicrographs of dog eyes
with retinal tumors ranging from
primitive to more differentiated tumors:
PNET tumor (B), retinocytoma (C) and 
medulloepithelioma (D). (E) Low 
magnification of a canine retinal
medulloepithelioma showing cords of 
elongate neural cells in tubular arrays
(arrows). (F) Photomicrograph of a
Homer-Wright rosette, a feature of any
A
B
of the varieties of PNET tumors.
D
389
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 Figure 11.45 Retinoblastoma in humans
and animals. (A) Subgross
photomicrograph of a retinal tumor from
 a dog with several features of
retinoblastoma, but also some features 
of medulloepithelioma. (B) Subgross 
photomicrograph of a human globe with 
retinoblastoma. (C) Low magnification
photomicrograph of human retina with
retinoblastoma. (D) Photomicrograph of 
human retinoblastoma showing typical
primitive neural cells in a solid sheet. The 
inset shows how the darkly staining 
nuclei tend to mold with one another.
(E) Photomicrograph showing Homer-
Wright (arrowheads) and Flexner-
Wintersteiner rosettes (arrows). (F) Higher
B
A
 magnification photomicrograph showing
 a Flexner-Wintersteiner rosette.
C
06E
The Retina
Chapter
11
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Normal anatomy
spaniel dogs: Light microscopy of the
fourteen days of age. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 61,
postnatal lesions. Vet. Pathol. 20, 298-311.
1458-1465.
Samuelson, D.A., 1999. Ophthalmic anatomy.
In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary
Nelson, D.L., MacMillan, A.D., 1983. Multifocal
Roberts, S.R., Dellaporta, A., Winter, F.C., 1966.
ophthalmology, 3rd edn. Lippincott,
retinal dysplasia in feld trial labrador
The Collie ectasia syndrome. Pathology of
Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia,
retrievers. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19,
eyes of young and adult dogs. Am. J.
pp. 31-150.
388-392.
Ophthalmol. 62, 728-752.
Mutlu, F., Leopold, I.H., 1964. Structure of the
Meyers, V.N., Jezyk, P.F., Aguirre, G.D., et al.,
Roberts, S.M., 1969. The Collie eye anomaly.
retinal vascular system: Of the dog, monkey.
1983. Short-limbed dwarfism and ocular
J. Am.Vet. Med. Assoc. 155, 859-878
rat, mouse and cow. Am. JI. Ophthalmol. 58.
defects in the Samoyed dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
Wyman, M., Donovan, E.F., 1969. Eye anomaly
261-270.
Assoc. 183, 975-979.
of the Collie. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 155.
Mutlu, F, Leopold, I.H., 1964. Structure of
Blair, N.P., Dodge, I.T, Schmidt, G.M., 1985.
866-871.
retinal vascular system of cat and rabbit. Am.
Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in 
Donovan, R.H., Freeman, H.M., Schepens, C.L.,
J. Ophthalmol. 57, 804-814.
labrador retrievers. I. Development of retinal
1969. Anomaly of the Collie eye. J. Am. Vet.
Engerman, R.L., Molitor, D.L., Bloodworth, Jr.,
tears and detachment. Arch. Ophthalmol.
Med. Assoc. 155, 872-875.
J.M., 1966. Vascular system of the dog retina:
103, 842-847
Latshaw, W.K., Wyman, M., Venzke, W.G..
Light and electron microscopic studies. Exp.
Blair, N.P., Dodge, I.T., Schmidt, G.M., 1985.
1969. Embryologic development of an
Eye Res. 5, 296-301.
Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in 
anomaly of ocular fundus in the Collie dog.
Shively, J.N., Epling, G.P., Jensen, R., 1970. Fine
Labrador retrievers Il. Proliferative
Am. J. Vet. Res. 30, 211-217.
structure of the canine eye: Retina. Am. J.
vitreoretinopathy. Arch. Ophthalmol. 103,
Yakely, W.L., 1972. Collie eye anomaly:
Vet. Res. 31, 1339-1359.
848-854.
Decreased prevalence through selective
Koch, S.A., Rubin, L.F., 1972. Distribution
Carrig, C.B., MacMillan, A., Brundage, S., et al..
breeding. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 161,
 of cones in retina of the normal dog.
1977. Retinal dysplasia associated with
1103-1107.
 skeletal abnormalities in labrador retrievers.
American Journal of Veterinary Research 33.
Barnett, K.C., Stades, F.C., 1979. Collie eye
361-363.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 170, 49-57.
anomaly in the Shetland sheepdog in the
Chase, I., 1982. The evolution of retinal
Carrig, C.B., Sponenberg, D.P., Schmidt, G.M.,
Netherlands. J. Small Anim. Pract. 20,
vascularization in mammals. A comparison
et al., 1988. Inheritance of associated ocular
321-329.
of vascular and avascular retinae.
 and skeletal dysplasia in Labrador retrievers.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 193, 1269-1272.
Bedford, P.G., 1982. Collie eye anomaly in the
Ophthalmology 89, 1518-1525.
Border collie. Vet. Rec. 111, 34-35.
Gum, G.G., Gelatt, K.N., Samuelson, D.A.
Whiteley, H.E., 1991. Dysplastic canine retinal
morphogenesis. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
Bedford, P.G., 1982. Collie eye anomaly in the
1984. Maturation of the retina of the
United Kingdom. Vet. Rec. 111, 263-270.
anine neonate as determined by
32, 1492-1498
Crispin, S.M., Long, S.E., Wheeler, C.A., 1999.
Rubin, L.F., Nelson, E.J., Sharp, C.A., 1991.
electroretinography and histology. Am. J.
Incidence and ocular manifestations of
Collie eye anomaly in Australian shepherd
Vet. Res. 45, 1166-1171.
multifocal retinal dysplasia in the Golden 
dogs. Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 1.
Bellhorn, R., Bellhorn, M.S., 1975. The avian
retriever in the UK. Vet. Rec. 145, 669-672.
105-108.
pecten. I. Fluorescein permeability.
Long, S.E., Crispin, S.M., 1999. Inheritance of
Bjerkas, E., 1991. Collie eye anomaly in the
Ophthalmol. Res. 7, 1-7.
multifocal retinal dysplasia in the Golden 
Rough collie in Norway. J. Small Anim.
De Schaepdrijver, L., Simoens, P, Lauwers H.,
retriever in the UK. Vet. Rec. 145, 702-704.
Pract. 32, 89-92.
et al., 1989. Retinal vascular patterns in
Holle, D.M., Stankovics, M.E., Sarna, C.S., et al.,
Molleda, J.M., Simon, M., Martin, E., et al.,
domestic animals. Res. Vet. Sci. 47, 34-42.
1999. The geographic form of retinal
1994. Congenital corneal opacity resembling
dysplasia in dogs is not always a congenital
human sclerocornea concurrent with scleral
 Retinal dysplasia
ectasia syndrome in the dog. Vet. Comp.
abnormality. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2, 61-66.
Rubin, L.F. 1963. Hereditary retinal detachment
Aroch, I., Ofri, R., Aizenberg, I., 1996.
Ophthalmol. 4, 190-192.
in Bedlington terriers. A preliminary report.
Haematological, ocular and skeletal
Bedford, PG., 1998. Collie eye anomaly in the
Small Anim. Clin. 3, 387-389.
abnormalities in a Samoyed family. J. Small
Lancashire heeler. The Veterinary Record
Rubin, L.F., 1968. Heredity of retinal dysplasia
Anim. Pract. 37, 333-339
143, 354-356
in Bedlington terriers. I. Am. Vet. Med.
Du, F., Acland, G.M., Ray I., 2000. Cloning and
Wallin-Hakanson, B., Wallin-Hakanson, N..
Assoc. 152, 260-262.
expression of type ii collagen mRNA:
Hedhammar, A., 2000. Collie eye anomaly
Ashton, N., Barnett, K.C., Sachs, D.D., 1968.
Evaluation as a candidate for canine
in the Rough collie in Sweden: Genetic
Retinal dysplasia in the Sealyham terrier.
oculoskeletal dysplasia. Gene 255, 307-316.
transmission and influence on offspring 
J. Pathol. Bacteriol. 96, 269-272.
Appleyard, G.D., Forsyth, G.W., Kiehlbauch,
vitality. J. Small Anim. Pract. 41, 254-258.
MacMillan, A.D., Lipton, D.E., 1978.
L.M., et al., 2006. Differential mitochondrial
Wallin-Hakanson, B., Wallin-Hakanson, N..
Heritability of multifocal retinal dysplasia in
DNA and gene expression in inherited
Hedhammar, A., 2000. Influence of selective
American cocker spaniels. J. Am. Vet. Med.
retinal dysplasia in miniature schnauzer
 breeding on the prevalence of chorioretinal
Assoc. 172, 568-572.
dogs. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 47,
dysplasia and coloboma in the Rough
Lavach, J.D., Murphy, I.., Severin, G.A., 1978.
1810-1816.
collie in Sweden. J. Small Anim. Pract. 41,
Retinal dysplasia in the English springer
56-59.
ACVO, 2009. (ongoing) Ocular disorders
spaniel. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 14,
presumed to be inherited in Purebred dogs.
Lowe, J.K., Kukekova, A.V., Kirkness, E.F., et al.
192-199.
5th edn. American College of Veterinary
 2003. Linkage mapping of the primary
Schmidt, G.M., Ellersieck, M.R., Wheeler, C.A..
Ophthalmologists, Urbana, IL.
disease locus for Collie eye anomaly.
et al., 1979. Inheritance of retinal dysplasia
Genomics 82, 86-95.
in the English springer spaniel. J. Am. Vet.
Collie eye anomaly
Rampazzo, A., D'Angelo, A., Capucchio, M.T.,
Med. Assoc. 174, 1089-1090.
Roberts, S.R., Dellaporta, A., Winter, F.C., 1966.
et al., 2005. Collie eye anomaly in a
OToole, D., Young, S., Severin, G.A., et al..
The Collie ectasia syndrome. Pathologic
mixed-breed dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 8.
1983. Retinal dysplasia of English springer
alterations in the eyes of puppies one to
357-360.
391
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Parker, H.G., Kukekova, A.V., Akey, D.T., et al.
Abnormal cyclic nucleotide metabolism in
Aguirre, G.D., Baldwin, V., Weeks, K.M., et al..
2007. Breed relationships facilitate fne-
rod-cone dysplasia. Exp. Eye Res. 35,
1999. Frequency of the codon 807 mutation
mapping studies: A 7.8-kb deletion
625-642.
in the cGMP phosphodiesterase beta-subunit
cosegregates with Collie eye anomaly across
Aguirre, G., Alligood, I., O'Brien, P., et al., 1982.
gene in Irish setters and other dog breeds
multiple dog breeds. Genome Res. 17.
Pathogenesis of progressive rod-cone
with hereditary retinal degeneration. J.
1562-1571.
degeneration in Miniature poodles. Invest.
Hered. 90, 143-147.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 23, 610-630.
Petersen-Jones, S.M., Entz, D.D., Sargan, D.R.,
Congenital stationary night blindness
Aguirre, G., O'Brien, P, 1986. Morphological 
1999. cGMP phosphodiesterase-alpha
in horses
and biochemical studies of canine
mutation causes progressive retinal atrophy
Witzel, D.A., Smith, E.L., Wilson, R.D., et al.,
progressive rod-cone degeneration.
in the Cardigan Welsh corgi dog. Invest.
1978. Congenital stationary night blindness:
3H-Fucose autoradiography. Invest.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 40, 1637-1644.
 An animal model. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 27, 635-655.
Dekomien, G., Runte, M., Godde, R., et al.,
Sci. 17, 788-795.
Acland, G.M., Aguirre, G.D., 1987. Retinal
2000. Generalized progressive retinal
Rebhun, W.C., Mayhew, I.G., Ris, R.C., et al.
degenerations in the dog: IV. Early retinal
atrophy of Sloughi dogs is due to an 8-bp
1984. Clinical manifestations of night
degeneration (erd) in Norwegian elkhounds.
insertion in exon 21 of the PDE6B gene.
 blindness in the Appaloosa horse. Comp.
Exp. Eye Res. 44, 491-521.
Cytogenet Cell Genet 90, 261-267.
Contin. Edu. Pract. Vet. 6, S103-S106.
Aguirre, G.D., Acland, G.M., 1988. Variation in
Petersen-Jones, S.M., Zhu, F.X., 2000.
Sandmeyer, L.S., Breaux, C.B., Archer, S., et al.,
retinal degeneration phenotype inherited
 Development and use of a polymerase chain
2007. Clinical and electroretinographic
at the prcd locus. Exp. Eye Res. 46, 663-
reaction-based diagnostic test for the causal
characteristics of congenital stationary night
687.
mutation of progressive retinal atrophy in
 pue esoeddy au ui ssu 
Millichamp, N.J., Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C., 1988.
Cardigan Welsh corgis. Am. J. Vet. Res. 61,
association with the leopard complex. Vet.
Progressive retinal atrophy in Tibetan
844-846.
Ophthalmol. 10, 368-375.
terriers. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 192,
Petersen-Jones, S.M., Entz, D.D., 2002. An
769-776.
improved DNA-based test for detection of 
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
Acland, G.M., Fletcher, R.T., Gentleman, S.,
the codon 616 mutation in the alpha cyclic
(GPRA) in dogs
et al., 1989. Non-allelism of three genes
GMP phosphodiesterase gene that causes
Narfstrom, K., Petersen-Jones, S., 2007. Diseases
(rcd1, rcd2 and erd) for early-onset
progressive retinal atrophy in the Cardigan
 of the canine ocular fundus. In: Gelatt, K.N.
hereditary retinal degeneration. Exp. Eye Res.
Welsh corgi. Vet. Ophthalmol. 5, 103-106.
(Ed.), Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th edn.
49, 983-998.
Zhang, Q., Acland, G.M., Wu, W.X., et al., 2002.
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 944-1025.
Parshall, C.J., Wyman, M., Nitroy. S., et al.
Different RPGR exon ORF15 mutations in
Parry, H.B., 1953. Degenerations of the dog
1991. Photoreceptor dysplasia: An inherited
canids provide insights into photoreceptor
retina. Il. Generalized progressive retinal
progressive retinal atrophy of Miniature
cell degeneration. Hum. Mol. Genet 11,
atrophy of hereditary origin. Br. J.
schnauzer dogs. Prog. Vet. Comp.
993-1003.
Ophthalmol. 37, 487-502.
Ophthalmol. 1, 187-203.
Sidjanin, D.J., Lowe, J.K., McElwee, J.L., et al..
Barnett, K.C., 1965. Canine retinopathies - Il.
Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C., 1993. Progressive
2002. Canine CNGB3 mutations establish
The miniature and toy poodle. J. Small.
retinal atrophy in Miniature longhaired
cone degeneration as orthologous to the
Anim. Pract. 6, 93-109.
dachshund dogs. Br. Vet. I. 149, 71-85.
human achromatopsia locus ACHM3. Hum.
Barnett, K.C., 1965. Canine retinopathies - Ill.
Mol. Genet 11, 1823-1833.
Suber, M.L., Pittler, S.J., Qin, N., et al., 1993.
 The other breeds. J. Small Anim. Pract. 6.
Irish setter dogs affected with rod/cone
Kijas, J.W., Cideciyan, A.V., Aleman, T.S., et al.,
185-196.
dysplasia contain a nonsense mutation in
 2002. Naturally occurring rhodopsin
Black L., 1972. Progressive retinal atrophy. A
the rod cGMP phosphodiesterase beta-
mutation in the dog causes retinal
review of the genetics and an appraisal of
subunit gene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Ul S A.
dysfunction and degeneration mimicking
 the eradication scheme. J. Small Anim. Pract.
90, 3968-3972
 human dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Proc.
13, 295-314.
Bjerkas, E., Narfstrom K., 1994. Progressive
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. 99, 6328-6333.
Keep. J.M., 1972. Clinical aspects of progressive 
retinal atrophy in the Tibetan Spaniel in
Kijas, J..W., Miller, B.J., Pearce-Kelling, S.E.,
retinal atrophy in the Cardigan welsh corgi.
Norway and Sweden. Vet. Rec. 134.
et al., 2003. Canine models of ocular
Austr Vet. j. 48, 197-199.
377-379.
disease: Outcross breedings define a
Aguirre, G.D., Rubin, L.F., 1972. Progressive
Hakanson, N., Narfstrom, K., 1995. Progressive
dominant disorder present in the English
retinal atrophy in the Miniature poodle: An
 retinal atrophy in Papillon dogs in Sweden:
mastiff and Bull mastiff dog breeds. J. Hered.
electrophysiologic study. I. Am. Vet. Med.
A clinical survey. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 5,
94, 27-30.
Assoc. 160, 191-201.
83-87.
 Djajadiningrat-Laanen, S.C, Boeve, M.H..
Aguirre, G., 1978. Retinal degenerations in the
Petersen-Jones, S.M., Clements, PJ., Barnett,
Stades, F.C., et al., 2003. Familial non-rcd1
dog. I. Rod dysplasia. Exp. Eye Res. 26,
K.C., et al., 1995. Incidence of the gene
generalised retinal degeneration in Irish
233-253.
 mutation causal for rod-cone dysplasia type
setters. J. Small Anim. Pract. 44, 113-116.
Wolf, E.D., Vainisi, S.J., Santos-Anderson, R..
1 in Irish setters in the UK. J. Small Anim.
Zhu, L, Jang, G.F., Jastrzebska, B., et al., 2004.
1978. Rod-cone dysplasia in the Collie.
Pract. 36, 310-314.
A naturally occurring mutation of the opsin
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 173, 1331-1333.
Acland, G.M., Ray, K., Mellersh, C.S., et al.,
gene [T4R) in dogs affects glycosylation and
Santos-Anderson, R.M., Tso, M.O., Wolf, E.D.,
1998. Linkage analysis and comparative
stability of the G protein-coupled receptor. J.
1980. An inherited retinopathy in collies.
mapping of canine progressive rod-cone
Biol. Chem. 279, 53828-53839.
A light and electron microscopic study.
degeneration (prcd) establishes potential
Cideciyan, A.V., Jacobson, S.G., Aleman, T.S.,
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 19, 1281-
locus homology with retinitis pigmentosa
et al., 2005. In vivo dynamics of retinal
1294.
(RP17) in humans. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
 injury and repair in the rhodopsin mutant
Buyukmihci, N., Aguirre, G., Marshall, I., 1980.
USA. 95, 3048-3053.
dog model of human retinitis pigmentosa.
Retinal degenerations in the dog. Il.
Zeiss, C.J., Acland, G.M., Aguirre, G.D., 1999.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. 102,
Development of the retina in rod-cone
Retinal pathology of canine X-linked
5233-5238
dysplasia. Exp. Eye Res. 30, 575-591.
progressive retinal atrophy the locus
Kukekova, A.V., Nelson, I., Kuchtey, R.W., et al.
Aguirre, G., Farber, D., Lolley, R., et al., 1982.
homologue of RP3. Investigative
2006. Linkage mapping of canine rod cone
 Retinal degeneration in the dog. Ill.
Ophthalmol Vis. Sci. 40, 3292-3304.
dysplasia type 2 (rcd2) to CFA7, the canine
392
The Retina
Chapter
11
orthologue of human 1q32. Invest.
neurotrophic factor analogue leading to
progressive retinal atrophy in Persian cats.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 47, 1210-1215.
 long-term photoreceptor survival in
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 46, 1742-
Mellersh, C.S., Boursnell, M.E., Pettitt, L., et al..
hereditary retinal degeneration. Invest.
1747.
2006. Canine RPGRIP1 mutation establishes
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 40, 1298-1305.
Giuliano, E.A., van der Woerdt, A., 1999. Feline
cone-rod dystrophy in Miniature longhaired
Gould, D.l., Sargan, D.R., 2002. Autosomal
 retinal degeneration: Clinical experience and
dachshunds as a homologue of human Leber
 dominant retinal dystrophy (rdy) in
new findings (1994-1997). J. Am. Anim.
congenital amaurosis. Genomics 88,
Abyssinian cats: Exclusion of PDEGG and
Hosp. Assoc. 35, 511-514.
293-301.
ROM1 and likely exclusion of rhodopsin as
West-Hyde, L., Buyukmihci, N., 1982.
Zangerl, B., Sun, Q., Pillardy, I., et al., 2006.
cndidate genes. Anim. Genet 33, 436-440.
 Photoreceptor degeneration in a family of
Development and characterization of a
Narfstrom, K., 1983. Hereditary progressive
cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 181, 243-247.
normalized canine retinal cDNA library for
retinal atrophy in the Abyssinian cat.
genomic and expresson studies. Invest.
J. Hered 74, 273-276.
Retinal dystrophy in Briards
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 47, 2632-2638.
Narfstrom, K., Nilsson, S.E., 1985. Hereditary
(RPE 65 mutation)
Beltran, W.A., Hammond, P., Acland, G.M..
retinal degeneration in the Abyssinian cat:
Riis, R.C, Siakotos, A.B., 1989. Inherited lipid
et al., 2006. A frameshift mutation in RPGR
Correlation of ophthalmoscopic and
electroretinographic findings. Doc.
retinopathy within a dog breed. Inv.
exon ORF15 causes photoreceptor
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 30, 308.
degeneration and inner retina remodeling in 
Ophthalmol. 60, 183-187.
a model of X-linked retinitis pigmentosa.
Aguirre, G.D., Baldwin, V., Pearce-Kelling, S..
Narfstrom, K.L., Nilsson, S.E., Andersson, B.E..
 et al., 1998. Congenital stationary night
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 47, 1669-1681.
1985. Progressive retinal atrophy in the
Zangerl, B., Johnson, J.L., Acland, G.M., et al.
blindness in the dog: Common mutation in
 Abyssinian cat: Studies of the DC-recorded
the rpe65 gene indicates founder effect. Mol.
2007. Independent origin and restricted
electroretinogram and the standing potential
distribution of RPGR deletions causing
Vis. 4, 23.
of the eye. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 69, 618-623.
XLPRA. J. Hered 98, 526-530.
Narfstrom K., 1999. Retinal dystrophy or
Narfstrom, K., 1985. Progressive retinal atrophy
Ropstad, E.O., Bjerkas, E., Narfstrom, K., 2007.
'congenital stationary night blindness' in the
 in the Abyssinian cat. Clinical characteristics.
Briard dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2, 75-76.
Clinical findings in early onset cone-rod
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 26, 193-200.
dystrophy in the Standard wire-haired
Narfstrom, K., Wrigstad, A., Nilsson, S.E., 1989.
Narfstrom, K., Nilsson, S.E., 1986. Progressive
dachshund. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10, 69-75.
The Briard dog: A new animal model of
retinal atrophy in the Abyssinian cat.
congenital stationary night blindness. Br. J.
Turney, C., Chong, N.H., Alexander, R.A., et al.
 Electron microscopy. Invest. Ophthalmol.
 2007. Pathological and electrophysiological
Ophthalmol. 73, 750-756.
Vis. Sci. 27, 1569-1576.
features of a canine cone-rod dystrophy in
Wrigstad, A., Nilsson, S.E., Narfstom, K., 1992.
Narfstrom, K., Nilsson, S.E., 1989.
the Miniature longhaired dachshund. Invest.
Ultrastructural changes of the retina and
 Morphological findings during retinal
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 48, 4240-4249.
retinal pigment epithelium in Briard dogs
with hereditary congenital night blindness
Ropstad, E.O., Narfstrom, K., Lingaas, F, et al.,
rod-cone degeneration in Abyssinian cats.
and partial day blindness. Exp. Eye Res. 55.
2008. Functional and structural changes in
Exp. Eye Res. 49, 611-628.
the retina of wire-haired dachshunds with
805-818.
Ehinger, B., Narfstrom, K., Nilsson, S.E., et al.,
early-onset cone-rod dystrophy. Invest.
Narfstrom, K., Wrigstad, A., Ekesten, B., et al.
1991. Photoreceptor degeneration and loss
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 49, 1106-1115.
1994. Hereditary retinal dystrophy in the
of immunoreactive GABA in the Abyssinian
Wiik, A.C., Wade, C., Biagi, T., et al., 2008. A
Briard dog: Clinical and hereditary
cat retina. Exp. Eye Res. 52, 17-25.
characteristics. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 4. 
deletion in nephronophthisis 4 (NPHP4) is
Narfstrom, K., Ehinger, B., Bruun, A., 2001.
85-92.
associated with recessive cone-rod dystrophy
Immunohistochemical studies of cone
in Standard wire-haired dachshund. Genome
Wrigstad, A., Narfstrom, K., Nilsson, S.E., 1994.
photoreceptors and cells of the inner retina
Res. 18, 1415-1421.
 Slowly progressive changes of the retina and
in feline rod-cone degeneration. Vet.
retinal pigment epithelium in Briard dogs
Ophthalmol. 4, 141-145.
 Inherited photoreceptor degenerations
with hereditary retinal dystrophy. A
May, C.A., Lutjen-Drecoll, E., Narfstrom, K.
morphological study. Doc. Ophthalmol. 87.
in cats
2005. Morphological changes in the anterior
337-354.
Barnett, K.C., Curtis, R., 1985. Autosomal
segment of the Abyssinian cat eye with
Veske, A., Nilsson, S.E., Narfstrom, K., et al.,
dominant progressive retinal atrophy in
hereditary rod-cone degeneration. Curr. Eye
1999. Retinal dystrophy of Swedish Briard/
Abyssinian cats. J. Hered 76, 168-170.
Res. 30, 855-862
Briard-Beagle dogs is due to a 4-bp deletion
Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C., Leon, A., 1987. An
Derwent, J.l., Padnick-Silver, L., McRipley, M.,
in RPE65. Genomics 57, 57-61.
early-onset retinal dystrophy with dominant
et al., 2006. The electroretinogram
Acland, G.M., Aguirre, G.D., Ray, I., et al., 2001.
inheritance in the Abyssinian cat. Clinical
components in Abyssinian cats with
Gene therapy restores vision in a canine
and pathological findings. Invest.
hereditary retinal degeneration. Invest.
model of childhood blindness. Nat. Genet.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 28, 131-139.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 47, 3673-3682.
28, 92-95.
Leon, A., Hussain, A.A., Curtis, R., 1991.
Padnick-Silver, L., Kang Derwent, J.., Giuliano.
Narfstrom, K., Katz, M.L., Ford, M., et al., 2003.
Autosomal dominant rod-cone dysplasia in
E., et al., 2006. Retinal oxygenation and
l[npe pue SunoA u Adeiaui aus oaia ul
the rdy cat. 2. Electrophysiological findings.
RPEG5-/- dogs produces long-term visual
Exp. Eye Res. 53, 489-502.
hereditary retinal degeneration. Invest.
improvement. j. Hered. 94, 31-37.
Leon, A., Curtis, R., 1990. Autosomal dominant
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 47, 3683-3689.
Narfstrom, K., Katz, M.L., Bragadottir, R., et al.
rod-cone dysplasia in the rdy cat. 1. Light
Menotti-Raymond, M., David, VA., Schaffer.
2003. Functional and structural recovery of
and electron microscopic findings. Exp. Eye
A.A., et al., 2007. Mutation in CEP290
the retina after gene therapy in the RPEG5
Res. 51, 361-381.
discovered for cat model of human retinal
null mutation dog. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis.
Chong, N.H., Alexander, R.A., Barnett, K.C.
degeneration. J. Hered 98, 211-220.
Sci. 44, 1663-1672.
et al., 1999. An immunohistochemical study
May, C.A., Narfstrom, K., 2008. Choroidal
Ford, M., Bragadottir, R., Rakoczy, P.E., et al.
of an autosomal dominant feline rod/cone
 microcirculation in Abyssinian cats with
2003. Gene transfer in the RPE65 null
dysplasia (rdy cats). Exp. Eye Res. 68, 51-
hereditary rod-cone degeneration. Exp. Eye
mutation dog: Relationship between
57.
Res. 86, 537-540.
construct volume, visual behavior and
Chong, N.H., Alexander, R.A., Waters, L., et al..
Rah, H., Maggs, D., Blankenship, T.N., et al..
electroretinographic (ERG) results. Doc.
1999. Repeated injections of a ciliary
2005. Early-onset, autosomal recessive,
Ophthalmol. 107, 79-86.
665
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Narfstrom, K., Vaegan, Katz, M., et al., 2005.
disease): Pathogenesis of blindness in the
Katz, M.L., Coates, J.R., Cooper, J.J., et al., 2008.
Assessment of structure and function over a
owine model. Neuropathol Appl. Neurobiol.
Retinal pathology in a canine model of late
3-year period after gene transfer in RPEG5-/-
11, 273-290.
infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
dogs. Doc. Ophthalmol. 111, 39-48.
Aguirre, G., Stramm, L., Haskins, M., et al.
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 49, 2686-2695.
Acland, G.M., Aguirre, G.D., Bennett, J., et al.
1986. Animal models of metabolic eye
2005. Long-term restoration of rod and cone
diseases. In: Renie, W.A. (Ed.), Goldberg's
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
vision by single dose rAAV-mediated gene
genetic and metabolic eye diseases, 2nd edn.
syndrome in dogs
transfer to the retina in a canine model of
Little, Brown and Co, Boston.
Bellhorn, R.W., Murphy, C.J., Thirkill, C.E..
childhood blindness. 12, 1072-1082.
Goebel, H.H., 1992. Retina in various animal
1988. Anti-retinal immunoglobulins in
Le Meur, G., Stieger, K., Smith, A.J., et al., 2006.
models of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
canine ocular diseases. Semin. Vet. Med.
Restoration of vision in RPEG5-deficient
Am. J. Med. Genet 42, 605-608.
Surg. (Small Animal] 3, 28-32.
Briard dogs using an AAV serotype 4 vector
Smith, R.l.E., Sutton, R.H., Jolly, R.D., et al..
Mattson, A., Roberts, S.M., Isherwood, J.M.,
that specifically targets the retinal pigmented
1996. A retinal degeneration associated with
1992. Clinical features suggesting
epithelium. 14, 292-303.
 ceroid-lipofuscinosis in adult Miniature
hyperadrenocorticism associated with
Aguirre, G.K., Komaromy, A.M., Cideciyan, A.V.,
schnauzers. Vet Comp Ophthalmol. 6,
sudden acquired retinal degeneration 
et al., 2007. Canine and human visual cortex
187-191.
syndrome in a dog. I. Am. Anim. Hosp.
intact and responsive despite early retinal
Wrigstad, A., Nilsson, S.E., Dubielzig, R., et al.
Assoc. 28, 199-202.
 blindness from RPEG5 mutation. PLoS Med.
1995. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in the
O'Toole, D., Roberts, S., Nunamaker C., 1992.
4, e230.
 Polish Owczarek Nizinny ( PON) dog. A
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration ('silent
Narfstrom, K., Seeliger, M., Lai, C.M., et al.
retinal study. Doc. Ophthalmol. 91, 33-47.
retina syndrome') in two dogs. Vet. Rec. 130.
2008. Morphological aspects related to.
Jolly, R.D., Walkley, S.U., 1997. Lysosomal
157-161.
long-term functional improvement of the
storage diseases of animals: An essay in
van der Woerdt, A., Nasisse, M.P., Davidson,
retina in the 4 years following rAAV.
comparative pathology. Vet. Pathol. 34,
M.G., 1991. Sudden acquired retinal
mediated gene transfer in the RPE65 null
527-548.
degeneration in the dog: Clinical and
mutation dog. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 613,
Broom, M.F, Zhou, C., Broom, J.E., et al., 1998.
laboratory findings in 36 cases. Prog. Vet.
139-146.
 Owine neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis: A large
Comp. Ophthalmol. 1, 11-18.
 animal model syntenic with the human
Miller, PE., Galbreath, E.J., Kehren, I., et al.,
 Canine multifocal retinopathy
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis variant CLNG.
1996. Photoreceptor cell death by apoptosis
Grahn, B.H., Philibert, H., Cullen, C.L., et al..
J. Med. Genet 35, 717-721.
in canine sudden acquired retinal
1998. Multifocal retinopathy of Great 
Skelly, B.J., Franklin, Rl., 2002. Recognition
degeneration syndrome. Inv. Ophthalmol.
Pyrenees dogs. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1,
and diagnosis of lysosomal storage diseases
Vis. Sci. 37, S497
211-221.
in the cat and dog. I Vet Int Med. 16.
Gilmour, M.A., Cardenas, M.R., Blaik, M.A.,
Grahn, B.H., Cullen, C.L., 2001. Retinopathy
133-141.
et al., 2006. Evaluation of a comparative
of Great Pyrenees dogs: Fluorescein
Awano, T., Katz, M.L., O'Brien, D.P., et al.,
pathogenesis between cancer-associated
angiography light microscopy and
2006. A mutation in the cathepsin d gene
retinopathy in humans and sudden acquired
transmiting and scanning electron
(CTSD) in American bulldogs with neuronal
 retinal degeneration syndrome in dogs via
microscopy. Vet. Ophthalmol. 4, 191-199.
ceroid lipofuscinosis. Mol. Genet Metab. 87.
diagnostic imaging and western blot 
Grahn, B.H., Sandmeyer, L.S., Breaux, C.B.
341-348.
analysis. Am. J. Vet. Res. 67, 877-881.
2006. Multifocal bullous retinopathy of
Awano, T., Katz, M.L., O'Brien, D.P., et al.
Keller, R.L., Kania, S.A., Hendrix, D.V., et al.
Coton de Tulear dogs. Can. Vet. J. 47,
2006. A frame shift mutation in canine TPP1
2006. Evaluation of canine serum for the
929-930.
(the ortholog of human CLN2) in a juvenile
 presence of antiretinal autoantibodies in
Guziewicz, K.E., Zangerl, B., Lindauer, S.J., et al..
Dachshund with neuronal ceroid
sudden acquired retinal degeneration
 2007. Bestrophin gene mutations cause
lipofuscinosis. Mol. Genet Metab. 89.
syndrome. Vet. Ophthalmol. 9, 195-200.
 canine multifocal retinopathy: A novel
254-260.
Grozdanic, S.D., Matic, M., Sakaguchi, D.S.
animal model for Best disease. Invest.
Evans, I., Katz, M.L., Levesque, D., et al., 2005.
et al., 2007. Evaluation of retinal status using
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 48, 1959-1967.
A variant form of neuronal ceroid
 chromatic pupil light reflex activity in
Grahn, B.H., Sandmeyer, L.L., Breaux, C., 2008.
lipofuscinosis in American bulldogs. J. Vet.
healthy and diseased canine eyes. Invest.
Retinopathy of Coton de Tulear dogs:
Intern. Med. 19, 44-51.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 48, 5178-5183.
 Clinical manifestations, electroretinographic,
Katz, M.L., Narfstrom, K., Johnson, G.S., et al.,
Braus, B.K., Hauck, S.M., Amann, B., et al.,
ultrasonographic, fluorescein and
2005. Assessment of retinal function and
2008. Neuron-specific enolase antibodies in
characterization of lysosomal storage body
patients with sudden acquired retinal
coherence tomographic findings. Vet.
accumulation in the retinas and brains of
degeneration syndrome. Vet. Immunol.
Ophthalmol. 11, 242-249.
 Tibetan terriers with ceroid-lipofuscinosis.
Immunopathol 124, 177-183.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 66, 67-76.
Lysosomal storage disorders and the
 Feline central retinal degeneration,
Katz, M.L., Khan, S., Awano, T., et al., 2005.A
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
taurine deficiency
mutation in the CLN8 gene in English setter
Mole, S.E., Williams, R.E., Goebel, H.H., 2005.
dogs with neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis.
Bellhorn, R.W., Fischer, C.A., 1970. Feline
Correlations between genotype.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 327,
central retinal degeneration. J. Am. Vet. Med.
ultrastructural morphology and clinical
541-547.
Assoc. 157, 842-849.
 phenotype in the neuronal ceroid
Sewell, A.C., Haskins, M.E., Giger, U., 2007.
Bellhorn, R.W., Aguirre, G.D., Bellhorn, M.B..
lipofuscinoses. Neurogenetics 6, 107-126.
 Inherited metabolic disease in companion
1974. Feline central retinal degeneration.
Haskins, M.E., Desnick, R.J., DiFerrante, N.,
animals: Searching for nature's mistakes. Vet.
Invest. Ophthalmol. 13, 608-616.
et al., 1984. Beta-glucuronidase defciency in
J. 174, 252-259.
Hayes, K.C., Carey, R.E., Schmidt, S.Y., 1975.
a dog: A model of human
Narfstrom, K., Wrigstad, A., Ekesten, B., et al..
 Retinal degeneration associated with
mucopolysaccharidosis Vll. Pediatr. Res. 18,
2007. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis:
taurine deficiency in the cat. Science 188.
980-984.
Clinical and morphologic findings in nine
949-951.
Mayhew, I.G., Jolly, R.D., Pickett, B.T., et al.
affected Polish Owczarek Nizinny (PON)
Berson, E.L., Hayes, K.C., Rabin, A.R., et al.
1985. Ceroid-lipofuscinosis (Batten's
dogs. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10, 111-120.
1976. Retinal degeneration in cats fed casein.
394
The Retina
Chapter
11
Il. Supplementation with methionine.
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy. Vet.
degeneration (bright blindness) in sheep by
Cysteine or taurine. Invest. Ophthalmol. 15,
Rec. 153, 287-292.
administration of ptaquiloside contained in
52-58.
Hayes, K.C., Rousseau, J.E., Hegsted, D.M.,
bracken. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 55, 979-983.
Schmidt, S.Y., Berson, E.L., Hayes, K.C., 1976.
1970. Plasma tocopherol concentrations and
 Retinal degeneration in cats fed casein. I.
vitamin E deficiency in dogs. I. Am. Vet.
Prion disease and the retina
Taurine deficiency. Invest. Ophthalmol. 15,
Med. Assoc. 157, 64-71.
Barnett, K.C., Palmer, A.C., 1971. Retinopathy
47-52.
Riis, R.C., Jackson, C., Rebhun, W., et al., 1999.
in sheep affected with natural scrapie. Res.
Schmidt, S.Y., Berson, E.L., Watson, G., et al.
Ocular manifestations of equine motor
Vet. Sci. 12, 383-385.
1977. Retinal degeneration in cats fed casein.
neuron disease. Equine. Vet. J. 31, 99-
Greenlee, I.J., Hamir, A.N., West Greenlee, M.H..
Ill. Taurine deficiency and ERG amplitudes.
110.
2006. Abnormal prion accumulation
Invest. Ophthalmol. 16, 673-678.
Divers, T.J., Mohammed, H.O., Cummings, J.F.
associated with retinal pathology in
Aguirre, G.D., 1978. Retinal degeneration
et al., 1994. Equine motor neuron disease:
experimentally inoculated scrapie-affected
associated with the feeding of dog foods
Findings in 28 horses and proposal of a
sheep. Vet. Pathol. 43, 733-739.
to cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 172,
pathophysiological mechanism for the
Hortells, P., Monzon, M., Monleon, E., et al.
791-796.
disease. Equine. Vet. J. 26, 409-415.
2006. Pathological fndings in retina and 
Knopf, K., Sturman, J.A., Armstrong, M., et al..
Craig, A.M., Blythe, L.L., Rowe, K.E., et al.
 visual pathways associated to natural scrapie
1978. Taurine: An essential nutrient for the
1991. Evaluation of the oral vitamin E
in sheep. Brain Res. 1108, 188-194.
cat. J. Nutr 108, 773-778.
absorption test in horses. Am. J. Vet. Res. 52,
Smith, J.D., Greenlee, JJ., Hamir, A.N., et al.
Barnett, K.C., Burger, I.H., 1980. Taurine
912-916.
2008. Retinal cell types are differentially
deficiency retinopathy in the cat. J. Small
affected in sheep with scrapie. I. Comp.
Anim. Pract. 21, 521-534.
Age related degenerative changes
Pathol. 138, 12-22.
Pion, P.D., Kittleson, M.D., Rogers, Q.R.,
Cutler, T, Brooks, D., Andrew, S., et al., 2000.
et al., 1987. Myocardial failure in cats
Disease of the equine posterior segment. Vet.
Hypertensive vascular disease
associated with low plasma taurine: A
Ophthalmol. 3, 73-82.
Littman, M.P., Robertson, I.L., Bovee, K.C.
reversible cardiomyopathy. Science 237.
Ehrenhofer, M.C., Deeg, C.A., Reese, S., et al.
1988. Spontaneous systemic hypertension in
764-768.
2002. Normal structure and age-related
dogs: Five cases [(1981-1983). J. Am. Vet.
Leon, A., Levick, W.R., Sarossy, M.G., 1995.
changes of the equine retina. Vet.
Med. Assoc. 193, 486-494.
eoos mau pe ueigoon uos
Ophthalmol. 5, 39-47.
Littman, M.P., 1994. Spontaneous systemic
features in feline taurine deficiency
Dubielzig, R.R., 1989. Senile multifocal retinal
 hypertension in 24 cats. J. Vet. Intern. Med.
retinopathy. Exp. Eye Res. 61, 731-741.
degeneration in horses. In: Annual Meeting
8, 79-86.
 of the American College of Veterinary
Elliott, I., Barber, PJ., Syme, H.M., et al., 2001.
Lipofuscin in the RPE, general concepts
Ophthalmologists, New Orleans, LA.
Feline hypertension: Clinical findings and
Kennedy, C.J., Rakoczy, PE., Constable, I.J..
response to antihypertensive treatment in
1995. Lipofuscin of the retinal pigment
Light-induced retinopathy
30 cases. J. Small Anim. Pract. 42, 122-
epithelium: A review. Eye 9, 763-771.
Buyukmihci, N., 1981. Photic retinopathy in the 
129.
Sparrow, J.R., Boulton M., 2005. RPE lipofuscin
dog. Exp. Eye Res. 33, 95-109.
Sansom, I., Rogers, K., Wood, J.L., 2004. Blood
and its role in retinal pathobiology. Exp. Eye
 pressure assessment in healthy cats and cats
Res. 80, 595-606.
Retinal toxicity
with hypertensive retinopathy. Am. J. Vet.
Riis, R.C., Sheffy, B.E., Loew, E, et al., 1981.
Gelatt, K.N., van der Woerdt, A., Ketring, K.L..
Res. 65, 245-252.
Vitamin E deficiency retinopathy in dogs.
et al., 2001. Enrofloxacin-associated retinal
Sansom, I., Barnett, K.C., Dunn, K.A., et al.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 42, 74-86.
degeneration in cats. Vet. Ophthalmol. 4.
1994. Ocular disease associated with
Davidson, M.G., Geoly, E.J., McLellan, G.J..
99-106.
hypertension in 16 cats. J. Small Anim. Pract.
et al., 1998. Retinal degeneration associated 
Wiebe, V., Hamilton, P., 2002.
35, 604-611.
with vitamin E deficiency in a group of
 Fluoroquinolone-induced retinal
Stiles, I., Polzin, D.1., Bistner, S.l., 1994. The
hunting dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 213,
degeneration in cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
 prevalence of retinopathy in cats with
645-651.
221, 1568-1571.
systemic hypertension and chronic renal
Parry, H.B., 1954. Degenerations of the dog
Ford, M.M., Dubielzig, R.R., Giuliano, E.A..
failure or hyperthyroidism. J. Am. Anim.
retina Vl. Central progressive atrophy with
et al., 2007. Ocular and systemic
Hosp. Assoc. 30, 564-572.
 pigment epithelial dystrophy. Br. j.
 manifestations after oral administration of a
Sansom, I., Bodey, A., 1997. Ocular signs in
Ophthalmol. 38, 653-668.
high dose of enrofloxacin in cats. Am. J. Vet.
four dogs with hypertension. Vet. Rec. 140.
Aguirre, G.D., Laties, A, 1976. Pigment
Res. 68, 190-202.
593-598.
epithelial dystrophy in the dog. Experimental Barnett, K.C., Watson, W.A., 1970. Bright
Maggio, F., DeFrancesco, T.C., Atkins, C.E.
Eye Research 23, 247-256.
et al., 2000. Ocular lesions associated with
Bedford, PG.C., 1984. Retinal pigment
due to feeding bracken (Pteris aquilina). Res.
 systemic hypertension in cats: 69 cases
epithelial dystrophy (CPRA): A study of the
Vet. Sci. 11, 289-290.
(1985-1998). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 217,
disease in the Briard. J. Small. Anim. Pract.
Watson, W.A., Barnett, K.C., 1970. Bright
695-702.
25, 129-138.
 blindness in sheep-the relationship to
Villagrasa, M., Cacales, M.J., 2000. Arterial 
Lightfoot, R.M., Cabral, L., Gooch, L., et al.,
environment. Br Vet. J. 126, 482-486.
hypertension: Angiographic aspects of the 
1996. Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Watson, W.A., Barnett, K.C., Terlecki, S., 1972.
ocular fundus in dogs. A study of 24 cases.
in Briard dogs. Res. Vet. Sci. 60, 17-23.
Progressive retinal degeneration (bright
 Eur I Companion Anim Pract. 10, 177-
McLellan, G.)., Elks, R., Lybaert, P., et al., 2002.
 blindness) in sheep: A review. Vet. Rec. 91,
190.
Vitamin E deficiency in dogs with retinal
665-670.
Crispin, S.M., Mould, J.R., 2001. Systemic
pigment epithelial dystrophy. Vet. Rec. 151,
Watson, W.A., Terlecki, S., Patterson, D.S., et al.
 hypertensive disease and the feline fundus.
663-667.
1972. Experimentally produced progressive
Vet. Ophthalmol. 4, 131-140.
McLellan, G.l., Cappello, R., Mayhew, I.G.
retinal regeneration (bright blindness) in
et al., 2003. Clinical and pathological
sheep. Br Vet. J. 128, 457-469.
 Diabetic retinopathy
observations in English cocker spaniels with
Hirono, I., Ito, M, Yagyu, S., et al., 1993.
Barnett, K.C., 1981. Diabetic retinopathy in the
primary metabolic vitamin E deficiency and
Reproduction of progressive retinal
dog. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 65, 312-314.
565
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Engerman, R.L., Kern, T.S., 1984. Experimental
Erickson, PA., Fisher, S.K., Guerin, C.J., et al.,
Dukes, T.W., 1971. The ocular lesions in
 galactosemia produces diabetic-like
1987. Glial fbrillary acidic protein increases
thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
retinopathy. Diabetes 33, 97-100.
in Muller cells after retinal detachment. Exp.
(ITEME) of cattle. Can. Vet. J. 12, 180-182.
Engerman, R.L., Kern, T.S., 1987. Progression of
Eye Res. 44, 37-48.
Stephens, L.R., Little, PB., Wilkie, B.N., et al.,
incipient diabetic retinopathy during good
Lewis, G.P., Erickson, PA., Guerin, C.J., et al.,
1981. Infectious thromboembolic
glycemic control. Diabetes 36, 808-812.
1989. Changes in the expression of specific
meningoencephalitis in cattle: A review. J.
 Engerman, R.L., 1989. Pathogenesis of diabetic
 Muller cell proteins during long-term retinal
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 178, 378-384.
retinopathy. Diabetes 38, 1203-1206.
detachment. Exp. Eye. Res. 49, 93-111.
Rebhun, W.C., Jenkins, D.H., Riis, R.C., et al.
Munana, K.R., 1995. Long-term complications
Vainisi, S.J., Peyman, G.A., Wolf, E.D., et al.,.
1988. An epizootic of blindness and
of diabetes mellitus, part I: Retinopathy.
1989. Treatment of serous retinal
encephalitis associated with a herpesvirus
 nephropathy, neuropathy. Vet. Clin. North
detachments associated with optic disk pits
indistinguishable from equine herpesvirus I
Am. Small Anim. Pract. 25, 715-730.
in dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 195.
in a herd of alpacas and llamas. I. Am. Vet.
Kobayashi, T., Kubo, E., Takahashi, Y., et al.,
1233-1236
Med. Assoc. 192, 953-956.
1998. Retinal vessel changes in galactose-fed
Nelms, S.R., Nasisse, M.P., Davidson, M.G.
House, J.A, Gregg, D.A, Lubroth, I., et al.
dogs. Arch. Ophthalmol. 116, 785-789.
et al., 1993. Hemophthalmos associated
1991. Experimental equine herpesvirus-1
Murata, M., Ohta, N., Fujisawa, S., et al., 2002.
with retinal disease in dogs: 17 cases
infection in llamas [lama glama). J. Vet.
 Selective pericyte degeneration in the retinal
[1986-1991). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 202.
Diagn. Invest. 3, 137-143.
capillaries of galactose-fed dogs results from
1289-1292
Bistner, S.l., Rubin, L.F., Saunders, L.Z., 1970.
apoptosis linked to aldose reductase-
Hendrix, D.V., Nasisse, M.P, Cowen, P., et al..
The ocular lesions of bovine viral diarrhea-
catalyzed galactitol accumulation. J. Diabet
1993. Clinical signs, concurrent diseases, and
mucosal disease. Pathol. Vet. 7, 275-286.
Comp. 16, 363-370.
risk factors associated with retinal
Kahrs, R.F, Scott, F.W., de Lahunta, A., 1970.
Kador, PF., Takahashi, Y., Akagi. Y., et al., 2002.
detachment in dogs. Prog. Vet. Comp.
Congenital cerebellar hypoplasia and ocular
Effect of galactose diet removal on the
Ophthalmol. 3, 87-91.
defects in calves following bovine viral
progression of retinal vessel changes in
Vainisi, S.J., Packo, K.H., 1995. Management of
diarrhea-mucosal disease infection in
galactose-fed dogs. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis.
giant retinal tears in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med.
pregnant cattle. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 156,
Sci. 43, 1916-1921.
Assoc. 206, 491-495.
1443-1450.
Landry, M.P., Herring, I.P., Panciera, D.L., 2004.
Andrew, S.E., Abrams, K.L., Brooks, D.E., et al.
Scott, FW., Kahrs, R.F, De Lahunte, A., et al.
Funduscopic findings following cataract
1997. Clinical features of steroid responsive
1973. Virus induced congenital anomalies of
extraction by means of phacoemulsification
retinal detachments in twenty-two dogs. Vet.
the bovine fetus. I. Cerebellar degeneration
in diabetic dogs: 52 cases (1993-2003).
Comp. Ophthalmol. 7, 82-87.
[hypoplasia], ocular lesions and fetal
I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 225, 709-716.
Grahn, B.H., Barnes, L.D., Breaux, C.B., et al.
mummification following experimental
2007. Chronic retinal detachment and giant
infection with bovine viral diarrhea-mucosal
 Other ocular manifestations of
retinal tears in 34 dogs: Outcome
disease virus. Cormell. Vet. 63, 536-560.
 systemic vascular disease
comparison of no treatment, topical medical
Brown, T.T., Bistner, S.l., de Lahunta, A., et al.
 Fischer, C.A., 1970. Retinopathy in anemic cats.
therapy and retinal reattachment after
1975. Pathogenetic studies of infection of
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 156, 1415-1427.
vitrectomy. Can. Vet. J. 48, 1031-1039.
the bovine fetus with bovine viral diarrhea
Lane, I.F., Roberts, S.M., Lappin, M.R., 1993.
Matz-Rensing, K., Drommer, W., Kaup. F-J.
virus. Il. Ocular lesions. Vet. Pathol. 12,
Et al., 1996. Retinal detachment in horses.
Ocular manifestations of vascular disease:
394-404.
Hypertension, hyperviscosity and
Equine. Vet. J. 28, 111-116.
Pauli, A.M., Cruz-Martinez, L.A., Ponder, J.B.,
hyperlipidemia. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
Strobel, B.W., Wilkie, D.A., Gilger, B.C., 2007.
et al., 2007. Ophthalmologic and
29, 28-36.
Retinal detachment in horses: 40 cases 
oculopathologic fndings in red-tailed hawks
Sansom, I., Dunn, J.K., 1993. Ocular
(1998-2005). Vet. Ophthalmol. 10,
and cooper's hawks with naturally acquired
manifestations of a plasma cell myeloma.
380-385.
west Nile virus infection. J. Am. Vet. Med.
J. Small Anim. Pract. 34, 283-287.
Lewis, G.P., Fisher, S.K., 2003. Up-regulation of
Assoc. 231, 1240-1248.
Hendrix, D.V., Gelatt, K.N., Smith, PJ., et al.
glial fbrillary acidic protein in response to
Vainisi, S.1., Campbell, L.H., 1969. Ocular
1998. Ophthalmic disease as the presenting
retinal injury: Its potential role in glial
toxoplasmosis in cats. I. Am. Vet. Med.
 complaint in five dogs with multiple
remodeling and a comparison to vimentin
Assoc. 154, 141-152.
myeloma. JI. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 34.
expression. Int. Rev. Cytol. 230, 263-290.
Piper, R.C., Cole, C.R., Shadduck, JA., 1970.
121-128.
Vainisi, S.1., Packo, K.H., 1995. Management of
 Natural and experimental ocular
giant retinal tears in dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med.
toxoplasmosis in animals. Am. J.
 Retinal detachment, separation and
Assoc. 206, 491-495.
Ophthalmol. 69, 662-668.
retinal tears
Vainisi, S.J., Wolfer, J.C., Smith, P.J., 2007.
Davidson, M.G., Lappin, M.R., English, R.V.,
Erickson, PA., Fisher, S.K., Anderson, D.H.,
Surgery of the canine posterior segment. In:
et al., 1993. A feline model of ocular 
Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary ophthalmology.
et al., 1983. Retinal detachment in the cat:
toxoplasmosis. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
The outer nuclear and outer plexiform layers.
4th edn. Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 1026-1058.
34, 3653-3660.
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 24, 927-942.
Dubey J.P., Carpenter, .L., 1993. Histologically
Lenticular metaplasia in the
Anderson, D.H., Stern, W.H., Fisher, S.K., et al.,.
confrmed clinical toxoplasmosis in cats: 100
1983. Retinal detachment in the cat: The
avian retina
cases (1952-1990). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
pigment epithelial-photoreceptor interface.
Zeiss, C.J., Dubielzig, R.R., 2006. Lentoid bodies
203, 1556-1566.
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 24, 906-926.
in the avian retina. J. Comp. Pathol. 135.
Lappin, M.R., Roberts, S.M., Davidson, M.G.
Anderson, D.H., Guerin, C.J., Erickson, PA..
243-248.
 et al., 1992. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
et al., 1986. Morphological recovery in the
Jubb, K.V., Saunders, L.Z., Coates, H.V., 1957.
assays for the detection of toxoplasma
reattached retina. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis.
 The intraocular lesions of canine distemper.
 gondii-specific antibodies and antigens in
Sci. 27, 168-183.
J. Comp. Pathol. 67, 21-29.
the aqueous humor of cats. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Dziezyc, I., Wolf, E.D., Barrie, K.P., 1986.
Fischer, C.A., 1971. Retinal and retinochoroidal
Assoc. 201, 1010-1016.
Surgical repair of rhegmatogenous retinal
lesions in early neuropathic canine
Burney, D.P., Chavkin, M.A., Dow, S.W., et al.
detachments in dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
distemper. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 158,
1998. Polymerase chain reaction for the
188, 902-904.
740-752.
detection of toxoplasma gondii within
96E
The Retina
Chapter
11
aqueous humour of experimentally.
Davidson, M.G., English, R.V., 1998. Feline
retinoblastoma occur in animals? Prog. Vet.
inoculated cats. Vet. Parasitol. 79, 181-186.
 Ocular toxoplasmosis. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1,
Comp. Ophthalmol. 1, 73-82.
Chavkin, M.J., Lappin, M.R., Powell, C.C., et al.,
71-80.
Syed, N.A., Nork, T.M., Poulsen, G.L., et al.
 1994. Toxoplasma gondi-specific antibodies
Rubin, L.F., Saunders, L.Z., 1965. Intraocular
1997. Retinoblastoma in a dog. Arch.
in the aqueous humor of cats with
larva migrans in dogs. Pathol. Vet. 2.
Ophthalmol. 115, 758-763.
toxoplasmosis. Am. J. Vet. Res. 55.
566-573.
Albert, D.M., Lasudry, I., Klauss, G., 2002.
1244-1249.
Hughes, P.L., Dubielzig, R.R., Kazacos, K.R.,
Retinoblastoma in humans and animals.
Lappin, M.R., Burney, D.P., Hill, S.A., et al.
1987. Multifocal retinitis in New Zealand
In: Peiffer Jr., R.L., Simons, K.B. (Ed.),
1995. Detection of toxoplasma gondii-
sheep dogs. Vet. Pathol. 24, 22-27.
 Ocular tumors in animals and humans. lowa
specifc IgA in the aqueous humor of cats.
Johnson, B.W., Kirkpatrick, C.E., Whiteley, H.E.,
State Press, Ames, lowa, pp. 305-336.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 56, 774-778.
et al., 1989. Retinitis and intraocular larval
Jensen, O.A., Kaarsholm, S., Prause, J.U., et al..
Lappin, M.R., Burney, D.P., Dow, S.W., et al.,
migration in a group of Border collies. J. Am.
2003. Neuroepithelial tumor of the retina in
1996. Polymerase chain reaction for the
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25, 623-629.
a dog. Vet. Ophthalmol. 6, 57-60.
detection of toxoplasma gondi in aqueous
Fugaro, M.N., Kiupel, M., Montiani-Ferreira, F.
humor of cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 57,
Retinal neoplasia
et al., 2005. Retinoblastoma in the eye of a
1589-1593.
Meyerholz, D.K., Haynes, J.S., 2004. Solitary
llama (Llama glama). Vet. Ophthalmol. 8,
Lappin, M.R., Chavkin, M.J., Munana, K.R.,
 retinal astrocytoma in a dog. Vet. Pathol. 41,
287-290.
et al., 1996. Feline ocular and cerebrospinal
177-178.
Knottenbelt, D.C., Hetzel, Ul., Roberts, V, 2007.
[eonu oynads-uo eusedoxoi pi
Caswell, I., Curtis, C., Gibbs, B., 1999.
Primary intraocular primitive
immune responses following specific and
Astrocytoma arising at the optic disc in a
neuroectodermal tumor (retinoblastoma)
nonspecific immune stimulation. Vet.
dog. Can. Vet. J. 40, 427-428.
 causing unilateral blindness in a gelding.
Immunol. Immunopathol 55, 23-31.
Naranjo, C., Schobert, C., Dubielzig, R., 2008.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 10, 348-356.
Pavesio, C.E., Lightman S., 1996. Toxoplasma
Canine ocular gliomas: A retrospective study.
gondi and ocular toxoplasmosis:
Vet. Ophthalmol. 11, 356-362.
Pathogenesis. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 80,
Hogan, R.N., Albert, D.M., 1991. Does
1099-1107.
The Optic Nerve
CHAPTER CONTENTS
NORMAL ANATOMY (Fig. 12.1)
 Normal anatomy
665
Optic nerve head, intraocular optic nerve
Optic nerve head, intraocular optic nerve
(optic disc, optic papilla)
399
(optic disc, optic papilla)
The intrascleral optic nerve
400
The optic nerve is mostly composed of the axons from the
The intraorbital optic nerve
400
retinal ganglion cells. The retinal ganglion cell axons project
The intracanalicular optic nerve
400
centripetally within the nerve fiber layer of the retina, before
The intracranial optic nerve
400
converging at the optic nerve head and turning posteriorly to 
Congenital and hereditary diseases
 project towards the brain
400
There is a central depression within the optic nerve head,
 Canine optic nerve hypoplasia
400
called the physiologic cup and this area is supported by a
Morphologic features of canine optic nerve hypoplasia
401
thickening of the inner limiting membrane, i.e. processes 
Canine optic nerve aplasia
401
of native glial cells, called the supporting meniscus of
Morphologic features of canine optic nerve aplasia
Kuhnt
401
 Peripheral to these glial cells, blood vessels enter from the orbit
 Achiasma and congenital nystagmus
401
and spread out to form the retinal vessels. Unlike primate
Optic nerve coloboma
401
species, dogs and cats lack a central retinal artery. The canine
Morphologic features of optic nerve colobomas
402
and feline optic nerve and retina receive their blood supply
Optic nerve swelling, trauma and degeneration
405
from the short posterior ciliary arteries, derived from
anastomosis of the large external ophthalmic artery and the
 Papilledema (optic disc swelling, edema)
405
smaller internal ophthalmic artery
 Papilledema and optic nerve degeneration in
In dogs, a small dark spot within the center of the optic nerve
Vitamin A deficient in cattle
405
head is known as the physiologic pit, which is considered a
Glaucomatous optic neuropathy
405
remnant of the hyaloid artery. An exaggeration of the normal
Optic nerve trauma and malacia in horses
405
thickening of glial cells over the optic nerve is also considered
to represent a remnant of the hyaloid artery, and is termed
Optic nerve trauma and proptosis in dogs and cats
407
'Bergmeister's papilla' More pronounced vascular remnants of
Inflammation of the optic nerve
408
the fetal hyaloid artery often persist in cattle, as tubular
Clinical findings indicative of optic neuritis
408
structures projecting anteriorly from the optic nerve head into
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME)
408
the vitreous
Morphologic features
408
 In dogs myelination of retinal ganglion cell axons in
408
the optic nerve begins at the optic chiasm and extends
Canine distemper optic neuritis
to the optic nerve head, with variable myelination extending
Feline toxoplasmosis optic neuritis 
409
within the peripapillary nerve fber layer, accounting for
Tumors of the optic nerve
409
the very irregular shape of the optic nerve head seen in
Meningioma
409
ssop Aueu
 Canine optic nerve meningioma by extension
 In cats, myelination stops at the lamina cribrosa and
410
the optic nerve head appears relatively small, dark and
Optic nerve glioma (astrocytoma)
410
round
Medulloepithelioma of the optic nerve head
 In horses, the optic nerve head is typically a horizontally
in horses
411
oriented oval with a very well-developed lamina cribrosa
Proliferative optic neuropathy in horses
414
structure.
665
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
■Dura mater
- Collagen-rich layer farthest from the nerve bordering the
Physiologic Cup
orbital tissue
- This tough, outermost dural sheath fuses with the orbital
 Supporting Meniscus of
 periosteum at the entrance to optic canal (optic foramen)
Kuhnt
and is also continuous with the lining of the cranial vault
Lamina Cribrosa
 Arachnoid mater
 The arachnoid mater is a highly cellular layer with scant
Pial Trabeculi
collagen poorly or unattached to the dura mater. The cells
of the arachnoid are often large and form epithelial-like
 clusters which can be very numerous immediately adjacent
to the globe
Arachnoid
- The cerebral spinal fluid circulates in the space between
the arachnoid and the innermost pia mater
Dura Mater
- Arachnoid cap cells are clusters of epithelial-like cells
which extend through the dura mater and form clusters in
the soft tissue of the orbit
0 It is from these arachnoid cap cells that canine orbital
meningioma arises
Pia mater
-- The collagenous and vascular layer closest to the optic
nerve and continuous with the pial septae which penetrate
the neuropil of the nerve and divide the tissue into
columnar subunits.
The intracanalicular optic nerve
 Posterior to the orbit, the nerve enters the bony optic canal.
The intracranial optic nerve
Represents a small portion of the nerve which merges into the
optic chiasm, where a proportion of the axons cross over, or
decussate, to the contralateral side before projecting to the
 lateral geniculate nuclei as the optic tracts
■ The percentage of optic nerve axons that decussate at the
optic chiasm ranges from about 50% in the primate, 65% in
B
cats and 75% in dogs, to l00% in avian species.
Figure 12.1 Normal optic nerve. (A) Photomicrograph showing the
normal morphological features of the canine optic nerve and optic nerve
head. (B) Higher magnification photomicrograph showing the optic nerve
Comparative Comments
 tissue within the lamina cribrosa.
In general, the human optic nerve conforms to the description given
earlier for the canine and feline optic nerve. The human optic nerve
V buol wo 5 inoqe s! pue shaqy uow L Alajewixoudde suieuoy
The intrascleral optic nerve
branch of the ophthalmic artery gains access to the nerve through
the dura approximately 1 cm posterior to the globe, and pial
●The region of the sclera through which bundles of optic nerve
branches provide the blood supply posteriorly.
axons pass is called the lamina cribrosa. The lamina cribrosa is a
 structure, consisting of collagenous beams or plates, that spans
the optic nerve. This connective tissue meshwork also contains
 elastin and lends support for the nerve tissue
 In glaucoma, physical distortion resulting from elevation in
CONGENITAL AND HEREDITARY DISEASES
intraocular pressure leads to outward bowing of the lamina
cribrosa and physical distortion and misalignment of the
laminar plates, with resulting compression of axons
Canine optic nerve hypoplasia
(see Ch. 13).
(Figs 12.2, 12.3)
 There are 15 canine cases of optic nerve hypoplasia in the COPLOW
The intraorbital optic nerve
collection, 10 of which are bilateral.
The intraorbital optic nerve has an S-shaped bend to
Although no clear breed predilection is evident in the COPLOW
accommodate for globe movement within the orbit 
paauu aq on paiasns si eisedoay aau sdo 'urao
The optic nerve may be considered to represent a white matter
in a number of breeds including Dachshunds, Poodles and 
tract of the brain and is ensheathed by the meninges
Shih Tzu
400
The Optic Nerve
Chapter
12
Figure 12.2 Optic nerve hypoplasia,
fundus. (A) Lhasa Apso, & months old:
the small optic disc is slightly depressed.
(B) Miniature Poodle, 6 months old: the
very small, depressed disc (arrow) is
located in the non-tapetal area. (C)
Bernese Mountain Dog. 8 weeks old: the
optic disc looks cat-like as the retinal 
vessels drop over the edge of the disc.
(D) Collie, 4 months old: the optic disc is
poorly discernible (arrow), as the major
venules appear to be confluent.
A
B
D
Morphologic features of canine optic nerve
Morphologic features of canine optic nerve aplasia
hypoplasia
 No optic nerve tissue is detectable grossly or microscopically.
 A small diameter optic nerve head and optic nerve
except for the rare appearance of vestigial remnants of glial
 The neuropil is densely gliotic
tissue within peripheral nerve tissue
 This feature can be surprisingly hard to recognize unless one
The retina is stretched across the back of the lens and makes no
is very familiar with the normal appearance of nerve tissue
contact with the posterior pole of the globe
●A careful search often reveals vestigial remnants of optic nerve
The retinal tissue is totally devoid of ganglion cells and there is
glial tissue in orbital tissues outside the optic nerve proper. The
disorganization of the retinal layers 
●The retinal tissue is totally avascular.
nerve tissue
 The retina always has markedly decreased numbers of ganglion
Achiasma and congenital nystagmus
cells and there may be segments of retina with more profound
atrophy
 There is a line of black Belgian Sheepdogs with a recessive 
 Several cases within our collection have retinal blood
mutation leading to a chiasmatic optic nerves and congenital
vessels which leave the retina itself and extend into the
nystagmus, that has been studied extensively by vision
vitreous
researchers.
■ This change is peripheral and segmental
■ The far peripheral retina beyond the vascular anomaly is
Optic nerve coloboma (Fig. 12.5)
avascular.
Colobomas of the optic nerve are rarely submitted to the
Canine optic nerve aplasia (Fig. 12.4)
COPLOW service
Optic nerve or posterior scleral colobomas can be a part of
 There are six canine cases in the COPLOW collection, all
a more complex syndrome, such as Collie eye anomaly
unilateral
(see Ch. 3) or feline upper eyelid agenesis (see Ch. 7), or they
 There is no particular bred predilection
may present as an isolated abnormality
401
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 12.3 Optic nerve hypoplasia,
pathology. (A) Gross photograph of the
ventral aspect of a dog brain with optic
nerve hypoplasia showing vestigial
remnants of optic nerve tissue (arrows).
(*oculomotor nerves) (B) Low
magnification photomicrograph of a
canine hypoplastic optic nerve showing
a narrow disc (*) and meandering
pituitary
nerve tissue. (C) Low magnification
photomicrograph of a young Shih Tzu
optic nerve showing hypoplasia. (D)
Photomicrograph of the same optic nerve
as (C), stained with Bielschowsky silver
stain for axons, showing a lack of 
axons within the neuropil. (E) High
magnification photomicrograph of a
 canine optic nerve showing vestigial
remnants of optic nerve neuropil (*)
within peripheral nerve tissue. (F)
Photomicrograph of the inner retina from 
an affected dog showing blood vessels 
extending from the retina into the 
vitreous. Peripheral to this point the
retina becomes avascular.
?
There is an inherited predisposition to optic nerve colobomas in
 Basenji dogs (in which the colobomatous lesions may occur in
Comparative Comments
As in the dog and cat, the major congenital anomalies of the optic
and in Hereford and Charolais cattle
nerve in humans are hypoplasia, colobomatous defects, and pits of
Optic nerve head colobomas may be classified according to their
the optic nerve head. Minor congenital anomalies include persistence 
a ui uosod yoo,o g a ie 'ieida, iauie se uoeo
of the hyaloid system on the disk, projection of vascular loops from 
location of the fetal fissure, or 'atypical' if away from this
the disk, myelination of the nerve fibers extending onto the retina,
location
 and pigmentation of the disk.
 Morphologic features of optic nerve colobomas
The nerve head is widened and there is an outward bulging of
vitreous
 A segmental defect in the lamina cribrosa and ectasia of the
posterior sclera.
402
The Optic Nerve
Chapter
12
Figure 12.4 Optic nerve aplasia. (A)
American Shorthair, 2 months old: only a
hyperreflective tapetum is present in the 
area that should contain the optic disc
and retinal vessels. (B) DSH, 9 months 
old: the tapetum is hyperreflective. White 
striae are present inferior to a gray
amorphous mass (arrow), which
supplants the area that should contain
the optic disc. (C,D) Gross photographs
of canine eyes in which the retina is
stretched across the back of the lens and 
never makes contact with the posterior
pole of the globe, because there is no 
optic nerve. (E) Gross photograph of a
dog eye viewed obliquely showing the
same feature as (C) and (D). A remnant
A
B
string of tissue extends to where the
 optic nerve and optic disc should be.
(FG) Photomicrographs of the retinas
from two dogs with optic nerve aplasia
showing no ganglion cells or blood 
vessels.
D
F
G
E0t
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 12.5 Coloboma of the optic
nerve head. (A) Basenji. 4 years old: the
arrow points to a typical coloboma in the 
years old: a smmall coloboma is identified
by the arrow. (C) Cocker Spaniel, 3 years 
old: this large coloboma (arrow) involves 
about a quarter of the optic disc. (D)
Great Dane, 1.5 years old: this is the
right optic disc in a bilateral condition.
The arrow points to a coloboma that 
extends into the disc. Abnormal
myelination extends on both sides of the
coloboma. (E) Gross photograph showing 
an equine optic nerve head coloboma
(*). (F) Subgross photomicrograph of the
same eye as (E) showing optic nerve
B
head coloboma (*) (trichrome stain).
A
C
D
404
The Optic Nerve
Chapter
12
Figure 12.6 Papilledema, clinical
(A) Chinese Crested Powderpuff dog.
2 years old: the optic disc is full and
extends vitreal. The borders of the disc
are indistinct. Hydrocephalus was
diagnosed based on CT scan.
(B) Shetland Sheepdog. 4.5 years old:
this dog developed severe ataxia. The
retinal vessels have a characteristic bend
(arrows) as they extend over the edge of
the elevated disc.
A
B
Glaucomatous optic neuropathy
OPTIC NERVe SwElliNG, traUmA
AND DEGENERATION
● Initial swelling of the optic nerve head often precedes optic
nerve degeneration in acute glaucoma, particularly in dogs
Glaucomatous optic neuropathy is considered in detail in 
Papilledema (optic disc swelling, edema)
Chapter 13.
(Fig. 12.6)
 Increased pressure in the calvarium or central nervous system
Optic nerve trauma and malacia in horses
for any reason can result in dlinically apparent swelling and
(Fig. 12.7)
anterior displacement of the optic nerve head known as
 papilledema
 This condition is often preceded by a dramatic traumatic event,
 Papilledema may be recognized in association with CNS
most commonly a backward fall and head trauma followed by
neoplasia, hydrocephalus, orbital masses and calvarial
vision loss
hyperostosis, causing direct compression of the optic nerve
■If the traumatic event is not witnessed, or vision loss is not
immediately noticed at the time of optic nerve damage, it
or increased CSF pressure
 Papilledema may be associated with variable visual and
may be hard to establish the relationship between the optic
pupillary light reflex deficits
nerve lesion and the traumatic event
 Morphologic features of equine optic nerve trauma and malacia
Papilledema in dogs may be difficult to recognize clinically.
There will be total or segmental necrosis followed, very
due to the high degree of variation in the presence of
myelination of canine optic nerve heads
rapidly by gitter cells
 Globes with documented papilledema are seldom brought to
 Gitter cells from the damaged nerve tissue migrate into the
the attention of a pathologist when the globe is available at
vitreous and are seen as white nodules/excrescences
 protruding anteriorly into the vitreous from the optic nerve
necropsy. There are no examples of papilledema in the
COPLOW collection.
head (exudative optic neuropathy)
- The clinical appearance of pale extrusions of optic nerve
material into the vitreous is considered a poor prognostic
indicator for recovery of vision after a traumatic event
Papilledema and optic nerve degeneration
■
 The end-stage optic nerve lesion involves profound atrophy
in Vitamin A deficient in cattle
and fibrosis of the neuropil (Fig. 12.8)
The syndrome of optic nerve trauma in horses results in an
 The COPLOW collection contains a small series of cases of vitamin A
end-stage appearance that is very similar to optic nerve ischemia
deficient optic neuropathy in a one small group of cattle.
and only the history can distinguish between the two
?
Vitamin A deficiency optic neuropathy is well-documented in
Profound optic nerve atrophy with peri-papillary retinal
the veterinary literature
degeneration has been reported in horses following episodes
 In addition to causing night-blindness and progressive retinal
of profuse hemorrhage, and following surgical occlusion of
degeneration in adult cattle, vitamin A deficiency in calves and
the external and internal carotid and greater palatine arteries.
young. growing cattle, is associated with papilledema and optic
nerve degeneration
Comparative Comments
 Narrowing of the optic canals, due to excess bone
deposition, thickening of the dura and increased CSF pressure 
Vascular optic neuropathy is an important entity in human
all contribute to compression, edema and ischemia of the optic
ophthalmology. This disorder can be divided into prelaminar.
nerves
 paralaminar, and retrolaminar vascular disease, depending on the site
 Malacia and demyelination of the optic nerve axons is
 of ischemia.
associated with blindness and widely dilated pupils.
405
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 Figure 12.7 Equine traumatic optic
neuropathy (equine optic neuritis/
neuropathy) (A) Fundus photograph of 
an equine eye showing a plume of 
necrotic nerve tissue extruding into the
vitreous from the disc (*). (B) Fundus
photograph showing a similar disc to (A).
but less affected (arrow). (C) Gross
photograph of an equine globe showing 
similar extrusion of necrotic nerve tissue
in optic nerve malacia (arrow). (D)
 Subgross photomicrograph of an
affected equine globe showing similar
extrusion of necrotic material from the
disc (arrow). (E) Higher magnification of
the disc from (D). The extruded material
A
B
(arrow) is a combination of granular
necrotic neuropil and macrophage cells
(gitter cells). (F) Subgross of another
equine globe showing a swollen and pale
necrotic optic nerve (*). (G) Cross-section
from the same nerve as (F) showing
cavitations within the nerve tissue (*)
filled with protein-rich remnants.
C
D
G
F
406
The Optic Nerve
Chapter
12
Figure 12.8 Equine traumatic or
ischemic optic neuropathy. end-stage 
optic nerve fibrosis. (A) Thoroughbred, 6
years old: the optic disc is totally atrophic
and devoid of vessels. The peripapillary 
depigmentation indicates retinal atrophy.
aui pa Aisnaid sem uos s
head. (B) Thoroughbred, 4 years old: the
optic disc is atrophied. Attenuated
yessels were stil present superiorly
(arrow). The pigment changes seen in
the non-tapetal retina indicate retinal
atrophy. This horse had been struck by
lightning. (C,D) Photomicrographs of 
atrophy and fibrosis developing in the
optic nerve of a horse, following 
traumatic optic nerve necrosis.
A
B
Optic nerve trauma and proptosis in dogs
and cats (Figs 12.9, 12.10)
Comparative Comments
In 43 ofthe 80 canine globes in the COPLOW collection with a history
Human eyes with papilledema are frequently seen in the ocular
of proptosis, there is optic nerve necrosis, malacia, fibrosis, or gliosis
 pathology laboratory, particularly following autopsies.
depending on the time between the proptosis and enucleation (see
 Papilledema denotes a swollen disk and is classically associated 
Ch. 5)
with an increase in intracranial pressure
 There are only two feline globes enucleated after proptosis in
 This leads to distension of the meningeal spaces about the
nerve and compression of the nerve itself
the collection and both have optic nerve necrosis
This constriction results in venous congestion, with leakage of 
 Traumatic proptosis is much less common in cats and
serum into the nerve head, and impedance of axoplasmic flow 
dolichocephalic dogs than in brachycephalic dogs, and when
anterior to the lamina cribrosa 
it does occur it is generally accompanied by severe damage to
 The swollen nerve head protrudes into the vitreous cavity and 
ocular and optic nerve tissues as well as other signs of
displaces the retina.
 significant head trauma
 Physical injuries to the human optic nerve may be divided into:
 The most common finding is global necrosis of the optic nerve,
Orbital injuries, which produce proptosis and avulsion of the optic
commencing immediately, at the time of proptosis
nerve
■ This could be due to ischemia, or crushing of the nerve tissue
 Skull injuries, with fractures in the area of the optic foramen.
because of stretching and a drawing together of the dura
The pathologic picture of avulsion of the optic nerve shows extensive
mater
exudate and hemorrhage. Fractures or contusions in the area of the 
Optic nerve trauma can also occur in the absence of globe
pue Aydoe pdo ui hnsan pue uaas Auouuon ae uawesoy ydo
Kesiens paneidai aie ieu saqoia pasoidoid ui io 'sisoidoid
 blindness. Non-accidental injuries in infants (the shaken baby
and these are unlikely to be removed, or at least are unlikely to
syndrome) may be followed by subdural and subarachnoid 
be examined by a pathologist. However, the clinical
hemorrhage around the optic nerve, papilledema, and if the infant 
consequences are similar (Fig. 12.10)
saunun jenaup jo Aaea e uonppe ul Aydoe pdo 'saaans
 Trauma to the optic chiasm leading to contralateral blindness
pldo oi peal Aewu osje ypum snono uen salunlui uoepen pue 
has been associated with excessive traction during enucleation
atrophy.
procedures in the cat.
407
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 12.9 Optic nerve necrosis in
traumatic proptosis. (A) Low 
magnification photomicrograph of a
canine optic nerve showing global
necrosis (*) after proptosis. (B) Higher
magnification of another canine optic 
nerve after proptosis, where the eye was 
removed 2 days after the traumatic
event. There is global necrosis (*) and 
loss of tissue detail, but not yet 
phagocytosis.(C) Gitter cells (arrow)
consume the necrotic neuropil of an
 affected canine optic nerve in an eye
removed 7 days after trauma. (D)
A
Atrophy and collapse of remnant nerve
tissue after the gitter cells (arrow) begin
to recede.
associated clinical signs. Canine GME is a relatively common,
INFLAMMATION OF THE OPTIC NERVE
and probably under-diagnosed, cause of both optic neuritis and
(Figs 12.11, 12.12)
 of central blindness in dogs 
Definitive ante mortem diagnosis can be diffcult, although
elevated CSF protein with pleocytosis, and CT or MRI findings
Inflammation of the optic nerve is seen quite frequently in clinical
practice, often as a part of more generalized inflammatory processes
may be considered suggestive of GME
 Small dog breeds and females appear to be predisposed
involving the CNS, orbit or eye.
Longer survival times appear to be associated with focal GME.
such as optic neuritis, than with the multifocal form
Clinical findings indicative of optic neuritis include
 Immunosuppressive therapy may restore vision in affected
 Swelling and vascular congestion of the optic nerve head
dogs, but a relapsing-remitting course is common despite
+
therapy
+1
 Indistinct margins of the optic nerve head and peripapillary
retinal edema and/or exudates
 Detachment of the peripapillary retina
Morphologic features include:
Hemorrhages within the retina or on the surface of the optic
nerve head
 Histiocytic cells forming cuffs around blood vessels and
Reduced vision with afferent pupillary light reflex deficits
featuring reticulin fbers around individual histiocytic
Inflammation that is confined to the retrobulbar optic nerve
cells
may result only in reduced or absent vision and altered
 The pathogenesis of this condition is unknown
pupillary light reflexes, in the absence of ophthalmoscopic
abnormalities.
 Canine distemper optic neuritis
Specific inflammatory conditions primarily affecting the optic nerve
a ul ais id e ui ra aii a ai
 The disease is associated with infection by Canine distemper
absence of other signs of CNS, orbital or intraocular disease, idio-
virus (paramyxovinus)
pathic/presumed immune-mediated optic neuritis is unlikely to
Optic neuritis may occur in isolation or be recognized before,
warrant either enucleation or euthanasia. In the COPLOW collection
concurrently, or after other systemic signs, such as respiratory.
there are single cases of the following conditions:
gastrointestinal or neurological, or signs of ocular disease, such
as keratoconjunctivitis or retinochoroiditis
Morphologic features include:
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME)
Astrocytosis
+
 Optic nerve involvement may occur in isolation, precede or
■
 Loss of myelin
occur in association with other, multifocal CNS lesions and
 Eosinophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies
408
The Optic Nerve
Chapter
12
Figure 12.10 Optic nerve trauma,
funduscopy. (A) Doberman Pinscher, 3.5
years old: this dog was hit in the eye
with a blunt instrument 2 weeks prior to
the photograph. The optic disc is swollen
and preretinal hemorrhage is present. (B)
This is the same dog as in (A) 14 weeks
later. The optic disc is atrophic and has 
demmyelinated. (C) Mixed Breed, 6.5 years
old: the dog was hit by a car 3 months
prior to the photograph. The optic disc is
pale and indistinct. The retinal vessels 
can be seen dropping over the edge of
the depressed disc (arrow). (D) DsH, 10
years old: this left eye became blind 
following enucleation of the right eye.
The optic disc is pale. Abnormal tapetal 
B
pigment is also present (arrows).
C
D
Feline toxoplasmosis optic neuritis
Zoster-virus, Mucormycosis, Mycobacterium tubercufosis.
 Despite the frequent reference to toxoplasmosis in the literature,
Treponema pallidum. Toxoplasma gondi and Histoplasma
there is only one case in the COPLOW collection in which
capsulatum are the most important.
toxoplasma organisms were identified
 Morphologic features include hemorrhage, malacia, and fnding
the organism bradyzoites
TUMORS OF THE OPTIC NERVE
 The one affected cat had unilateral disease and eventually
 developed neurologic symptoms
 In veterinary patients, ocular toxoplasmosis appears to be more
Meningioma
frequently associated with iridocyclitis and/or chorioretinitis.
(Ocular toxoplasmosis is discussed in greater detail in
Canine orbital meningioma (see Ch. 6 for more detailed
Chapter 9).
discussion) (Figs 12.13, 12.14)
 This is the most common variant involving the optic nerve
- There are 60 cases of canine orbital meningioma in the
Comparative Comments
COPLOW collection, representing 1.5% of canine tumors
 Because of the optic nerve's proximity and vascular continuity
in the collection
with the globe and the brain, optic nerve inflammation in the 
 Although the tumor originates from the arachnoid cap cells of
human is most often the result of extension from primary
the optic nerve, the tumor need not be anatomically located
intraocular or intracranial inflammation
within the optic nerve meninges. However, the tumor always
Multiple sclerosis, sarcoidosis, a multisystem granulomatous 
extends into the orbital connective tissues encircling the optic
disease, and Behget's disease, a multisystem vasculitis, can affect
nerve
the optic nerve
 Morphologic features of canine orbital meningioma
an aaloui uen suoau! lhung pue 'jen 'elanea jo Aaea 
 optic nerve and retina (neuroretinitis). Of these, Variceffa
Aggregates of large polygonal cells infltrating orbital adipose
tissue
409
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 12.11 Optic neuritis or neoplasia
masquerading as neuritis, feline. (A) DSH
cat, 2 years old: this blind cat had
bilateral neovascularization of the optic
 disc and peripapillary edema and
confirmed lymphosarcoma. (B) DSH cat,
10 years old: a proliferative mass
obscures the optic disc. The tapetal
retina shows multiple foci of
inflammation. Lymphosarcoma was
diagnosed on histopathology. (C) DSH
cat, 2 years old: the swollen disc,
peripapillary edema, infiltrate, and
hemorrhage are the most significant 
lesions. Cryptococcosis was diagnosed
from a cerebrospinal tap. (D) DSH cat,
A
B
8 years old: bilateral neovascularization
 of the optic disc was the only lesion
found in this seizuring cat. Meningioma
was the histopathologic diagnosis.
C
D
●The cells can be hard to distinguish from epithelial cells but
aau 'sueun pue ssop ul euoiuua aaau sdo oi uonppe ul
they are vimentin positive and cytokeratin negative
are sparse reports of optic nerve meningioma occurring in other
There are often multiple foci of metaplastic bone, cartilage, or
species, including cattle and rats.
undifferentiated myxomatous stroma
Optic nerve glioma (astrocytoma)
Canine optic nerve meningioma by extension
(Figs 12.16, 12.17)
(Hg. 12.15)
●Within the COPLOW collection, there are five canine cases of
In the COPLOW collection, this disease is only represented in dogs
meningioma with optic nerve involvement by extension from
 It is unilateral and causes expansion of the optic nerve
the cranial vault down the optic nerve
In all ll cases in the COPLOW collection, the tumor lies
The neoplasm spreads into the optic nerve by extension from
near the globe and causes an inward bulging of the optic
the calvarium
nerve head
The tumor is limited within the confines of the dura mater,
The tumor can also occur in the central retina and not involve
expanding the optic nerve thickness diffusely
the optic nerve (see Ch. ll), and extensive involvement of the
·
 Optic nerve involvement is often bilateral
 optic chiasm has also been reported
 Morphologic features of canine optic nerve meningioma
Morphologic features of optic nerve glioma in dogs
by extension include:
include:
The neoplastic tissue expands within the dura mater causing
 There is effcement of the optic nerve neuropil by spindle to
compression of the optic nerve
stellate neoplastic cells 
 Any of the morphologic subtypes that occur in the calvarium
 The cytoplasmic processes of these cells form a tangle of fibrillar
can be seen within the optic nerve meninges
tissue
410
The Optic Nerve
Chapter
12
Figure 12.12 Optic neuritis. (A) German
Shepherd Dog. 3 years old: the optic disc
is severely inflamed with increased
vascularization. The peripapillary retina is
 detached with intraretinal hemorrhage.
 Granulomatous meningoencephalitis was
diagnosed on a cerebrospinal fluid tap 
from this seizuring dog. (B) Golden
 Retriever, 4 years old: the optic disc is 
severely swollen.The peripapillaryretina
(arrow) is elevated. Intraretinal
hemorrhage is also present. Diagnostic 
work-up and response to therapy were 
indicative of an immune-mediated
 disease. (C) Low magnification
photomicrograph showing a dog retina
 and optic nerve with lesions suggestive
 of granulomatous meningoencephalitis 
B
(arrow). (D) Higher magnification of the
 slide in (C) showing a histiocytic focus.
 The inset is of a reticulum stain showing
the characteristic deposition of reticulum
fibers around macrophage cells.
(E) Canine optic nerve with gliosis,
demyelination and, in the inset, an
intranuclear inclusion body typical of 
canine distemper virus (arrow). (F) Low
magnification photomicrograph of a
feline eye with extensive inflammatory
disease involving the optic nerve, retina,
and choroid due to toxoplasmosis.
●The finding of tight, glomerular-like neovascular tangles within
 Glioblastoma multiforme - considered most aggressive
the tumor, or in the surrounding retina, can assist with the
form.
diagnosis
 Malignant forms with anaplastic cellular features are seen
commonly. Cases that extend to the margins of the surgical
Medulloepithelioma of the optic nerve
resection in a biopsy specimen will often re-present with
head in horses (Fig. 12.18)
sugis yibooinau
 The tumor cells are positively labeled for glial fibrillary acidic
 There is one case in the COPLOW collection
protein (GFAP) on immunohistochemistry
Medulloepithelioma in the optic nerve head of young horses is
Classification system for gliomas/astrocytomas in dogs, from
very rare
most to least differentiated forms:
This is a mass which bulges anteriorly from the optic nerve head
■Astrocytoma
and also expands the optic nerve tissue. Exophthalmos and
Anaplastic astrocytoma
blindness may result 
411
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 12.13 Canine orbital
meningioma. (A) Miniature Schnauzer,
7 years old: this dog was blind for
1 year and then died during a seizure.
Histopathology confirmed a meningioma
involving the cerebrum and optic chiasm.
The optic disc is pale and demyelinated.
Striae of abnormal pigment are also
present (arrows). (B) Boxer, 9 years old:
the optic disc is swollen with peripapillary
edema (arrows). (C) Gross photograph of
a canine globe with a gritty mass lesion
broadly attached to the posterior pole of 
the globe. The mass forms a cone
around the optic nerve typical of canine
orbital meningioma. (D) CT scan of an
A
B
affected dog showing a cone of swelling
 surrounding the optic nerve (arrow).
D
412
The Optic Nerve
Chapter
12
Figure 12.14 Canine orbital
meningioma, histopathology. (A)
Subgross photograph of a canine globe
with orbital meningioma broadly
attached to the posterior pole and
surrounding the optic nerve. (B) Low
magnification photomicrograph showing
a canine optic nerve surrounded by a
neoplasm. Infiltration into the adjacent 
loose connective tissue and adipose
tissue is a characteristic feature (arrow).
(C,D) Photomicrographs showing clusters
of the characteristic large epithelial-like 
tumor cells of canine orbital meningioma
(arrows). (E-G) Three photomicrographs
showing foci with mesenchymal
metaplasia: bone (E), cartilage (F) and
myxomatous matrix (G).
413
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 Figure 12.15 Extension of meningioma from the calvarium into the optic
nerve. Gross photograph showing the brain from a dog with a ventral
meningioma (*) extending down the optic nerve meninges on both sides
(arrows)
Figure 12.16 Optic nerve glioma, fundus. Saint Bernard, 5 years old: the
white elevation on the disc margin was diagnosed as a glioma. It 
Morphologic features of optic nerve head
involved the optic nerve and optic chiasm in this blind dog.
medulloepithelioma in horses include:
●Medulloepithelioma is characterized by the presence of thick
tubular rosettes, with a complex cellular lining that is several
cells thick and a distinct lumen
Comparative Comments
 More simple Flexner-Wintersteiner or Homer-Wright rosettes 
 The two major tumors of the human optic nerve are glioma and
may also be identified in medulloepithelioma but they are not
the defining feature
meningioma, both of which most commonly affect the 
retrobulbar portion of the optic nerve 
The neoplasm may also arise from the neuroepithelium of the
 The most common type of astrocytoma is the juvenile pilocytic
anterior uvea or, theoretically, the neural retina [see Chapters 9
and ll for more detailed discussion of the morphologic and
astrocytoma
immunohistochemical features of medulloepithelioma).
 These are usually low-grade tumors that occur in the first
decade of life
 More than 10% of human patients with optic nerve astrocytomas
Proliferative optic neuropathy in horses
have neurofibromatosis (NF1)
 Meningiomas of the optic nerve may occur at any age but 
●These unilateral, benign lesions of the optic nerve head are not
 predominate in middle age and in females
uncommon in older horses and do not appear to have a
significant impact on vision
They may be unilateral or bilateral and are frequently
'sewjue iapio ui asueieadde pue 'ameu usjuaq iau c ana 
aun uy sewoibuuau juapuadapu! yim pate posse
enucleation and submisson to a pathology service is seldom
cranium
 considered and there are no examples in the COPLOW
Tumor growth is slow, and the tumor may invade the optic
nerve itself and the eye
collection
Microscopically, optic nerve meningiomas are usually of the 
● The clinical appearance is of a well-defined, pedunculated white
meningotheliomatous type, with compact masses of
mass protruding from the optic nerve head into the vitreous
protoplasm-rich cells arranged in whorls. Laminated and
cavity, that appears static or very slowly progressive
calcareous concretions (psammoma bodies) are common
 Other less common tumors that principally affect the optic nerve
features, but alternate diagnoses for proliferative optic
head are melanocytoma, peripapillary choroidal melanoma,
neuropathy
 pigment epithelial neoplasms, and hemangioma. Leukemic or
 Large, thin-walled cells with foamy cytoplasm have been
lymphomatous infiltration of the optic nerve is occasionally seen.
described, that were thought to contain lipid
Local extension into the optic nerve from retinoblastoma is 
The lesion should be distinguished from taumatic, exudative
 common, and carcinomatous metastases to the optic nerve have 
optic neuropathy which is associated with loss of vision, and
 also been reported.
from glioma/astrocytoma (see above).
414
The Optic Nerve
Chapter
12
Figure 12.17 Optic nerve glioma,
pathology. (A,B) Gross photographs of 
the same dog eye showing a swollen,
neoplastic optic nerve (astrocytoma)
bulging into the globe. (C) Subgross
 photomicrograph showing an optic 
nerve effaced by an astrocytoma.
(D,E) Photomicrographs showing the
spindle cell appearance of an optic 
nerve astrocytoma and GFAP-positive
staining (E).
A
B
C
D
415
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 12.18 Equine optic nerve
medulloepithelioma. (A,B) Subgross
photomicrographs showing two equine
optic nerve medulloepitheliomas effacing
the optic nerve and extending into the 
 globe and orbital tissue.
A
B
BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Introduction and normal anatomy
Negishi, H., Hoshiya, T., Tsuda, Y., et al., 2008.
associated with brain tumours in twenty-one
Unilateral optical nerve hypoplasia in a
Brooks, D.E., Blocker, T.L., Samuelson, D.A..
dogs. J. Small Anim. Pract. 15, 359-386.
et al., 1995. Histomorphometry of the optic
Beagle dog. Lab. Anim. 42, 383-388.
Morgan, W.H., Chauhan, B.C., Yu, D.-Y., et al..
nerves of normal horses and horses with
Hogan, D., williams, R.W., 1995. Analysis of
2002. Optic disc movement with variations
glaucoma. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 5,
the retinas and optic nerves of a chiasmatic
in intraocular and cerebrospinal fluid
193-210.
Belgian sheepdogs. J. Comp. Neurol. 352,
pressure. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 43,
Brooks, D.E., Strubbe, D.T., Kubilis, PS., et al..
367-380.
3236-3242.
1995. Histomorphometry of the optic nerves
Optic disc coloboma
Vitamin A deficiency
of normal dogs and dogs with hereditary
glaucoma. Exp. Eye. Res. 60, 71-89.
Barnett, K.C., Knight, G.C., 1969. Persistent
Hayes, K.C., Nielsen, S.W., Eaton, H.D., 1968.
Brooks, D.E., Komaromy, A.M., Kallberg, M.E.,
 pupillary membrane and associated
 Pathogenesis of the optic nerve lesion in
1999. Comparative retinal ganglion cell and
defects in the Basenji. Vet. Rec. 85, 242-
vitamin a-deficient calves. Arch. Ophthalmol.
optic nerve morphology. Vet. Ophthalmol.
248.
80, 777-787.
2, 3-11.
Gelatt, K.N., Huston, K., Leipold, H.W., 1969.
Barnett, K.C., Palmer, A.C., Abrams, J.T., et al..
Miyake, E., Imagawa, T., Uehara, M., 2004.
Ocular anomalies of incomplete albino
1970. Ocular changes associated with
 Fine structure of the retino-optic nerve
cattle: Ophthalmoscopic examination. Am. J.
hypovitaminosis a in cattle. Br. Vet. J. 126,
junction in dogs. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 66,
Vet. Res. 30, 1313-1316.
561-573.
1549-1554.
Barnett, K.C., Ogien, A.L., 1972. Ocular
Booth, A., Reid, M., Clark, T, 1987.
Radius, R.L., Bade, B., 1982. The anatomy at the
colobomata in Charolais cattle. Vet. Rec. 91,
Hypovitaminosis a in feedlot cattle. J. Am.
lamina cibrosa in the normal cat eye. Arch.
592.
Vet. Med. Assoc. 190, 1305-1308.
Ophthalmol. 100, 1658-1660.
Papilledema
Optic nerve trauma
Ng, A.Y., Stone, I., 1982. The optic nerve of the
 cat: Appearance and loss of axons during
Hayreh, S.s., 1977. Optic disc edema in raised
Martin, L, Kaswan, R., Chapman, W., 1986.
normal development. Brain Res. 281,
intracranial pressure. Vl. Associated visual
Four cases of traumatic optic nerve blindness
263-271.
disturbances and their pathogenesis. Arch.
in the horse. Equine. Vet. J. 18, 133-137.
Brooks, D.E., 2007. Diseases of the canine optic
Ophthalmol. 95, 1566-1579.
Rebhun, W.C., 1992. Retinal and optic nerve
nerve. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.), Veterinary
Tso, M.O., Hayreh, S.S., 1977. Optic disc edema
diseases. Vet. Clin. North Am.: Equine Pract.
ophthalmology, 4th edn. Blackwell, Oxford,
in raised intracranial pressure. Ill. A
8, 587-608.
pp. 1059-1092.
pathologic study of experimental
Gelatt, K.N., 1979. Neuroretinopathy in horses.
papilledema. Arch. Ophthalmol. 95,
J. Equine. Med. Surg. 3, 91-96.
Optic nerve hypoplasia and achiasma
1448-1457.
Hardy, I., Robertson, J.T., Wilkie, D.A., 1990.
Ernest, J.T., 1976. Bilateral optic nerve
Tso, M.O., Hayreh, S.S., 1977. Optic disc edema
 Ischemic optic neuropathy and blindness
hypoplasia in a pup. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
in raised intracranial pressure. IV.
after arterial occlusion for treatment of
168, 125-128.
Axoplasmic transport in experimental
 guttural pouch mycosis in two horses. J. Am.
Kern, T.J., Riis, R.C., 1981. Optic nerve
papilledema. Arch. Ophthalmol. 95,
Vet. Med. Assoc. 196, 1631-1634.
hypoplasia in three Miniature poodles. J.
1458-1462
Gilger, B.C., Hamilton, H.L., Wilkie, D.A., et al.,
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 178, 49-54.
Wirtschafter, J.D., 1983. Optic nerve axons and
1995. Traumatic ocular proptoses in dogs
da Silva, E.G., Dubielzig, R., Zarfoss, M.K., et al.
acquired alterations in the appearance of the
and cats: 84 cases (1980-1993). 1. Am. Vet.
2008. Distinctive histopathologic features of
 optic disc. Trans. Am. Ophthalmol. Soc. 81,
Med. Assoc. 206, 1186-1190.
canine optic nerve hypoplasia and aplasia: A
1034-1091.
Stiles, I., Buyukmihci, N.C., Hacker, D.V., et al..
retrospective review of 13 cases. Vet.
Palmer, A.C., Malinowski, W., Barnett, K.C.
1993. Blindness from damage to optic
Ophthalmol. 11, 23-29.
1974. Clinical signs including papilloedema
chiasm. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 202, 1192.
416
The Optic Nerve
Chapter
12
Opticneuritis
Vandevelde, M., Zurbriggen, A., 1995. The
Reis, J.L., Kanamura, C.T., Machado, G.M.,
Fischer, C.A., Jones, G.T, 1972. Optic neuritis in
neurobiology of canine distemper virus
et al., 2007. Orbital (retrobulbar)
infection. Vet. Microbiol. 44, 271-280.
dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 160, 68-79.
meningioma in a Simmental cow. Vet.
Vandevelde, M., Zurbriggen, A., 2005.
Pathol. 44, 504-507.
Nafe, LA., Carter, J.D., 1981. Canine optic
Demyelination in canine distemper virus
Yoshitomi, K., Everitt, J.l., Boorman, G.A., 1991.
neuritis. Comp. Contin. Edu. Pract. Vet. 3,
infection: A review. Acta. Neuropathol. 109.
 Primary optic nerve meningiomas in F344
978-981.
56-68.
rats. Vet. Pathol. 28, 79-81.
Nell, B., 2008. Optic neuritis in dogs and cats.
Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 38,
Spiess, B.M., Wilcock, B.P, 1987. Glioma of the
403-415, vili.
Optic nerve neoplasia
 optic nerve with intraocular and intracranial
Buyukmihci, N.C., Chancellor, K.E., Bouldin,
involvement in a dog. I. Comp. Pathol. 97.
Fischer, C.A., Liu, S.-K., 1971. Neuro-
T.W., 2002. Optic nerve neoplasia. In:
79-84.
 ophthalmologic manifestations of primary
reticulosis of the central nervous system in a
Peiffer, R.L., Ir., Simons, K.B. (Eds), Ocular
Caswell, I., Curtis, C., Gibbs, B., 1999.
dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 158, 1240-
tumors in animals and humans. lowa State
Astrocytoma arising at the optic disc in a
1248.
Press, Ames, lowa, pp. 289-304.
dog. Can. Vet. I. 40, 427-428.
Smith, J.S., de Lahunta, A., Ris, R.C., 1977.
Barnett, K.C., Singleton, W.B., 1967.
Siso, S., Lorenzo, V., Ferrer, I., et al., 2003. An
Reticulosis of the visual system in a dog.
 Retrobulbar and chiasmal meningioma in a
 anaplastic astrocytoma (optic chiasmatic-
J. Small Anim. Pract. 18, 643-652.
dog. J. Small Anim. Pract. 8, 391-394.
hypothalamic glioma) in a dog. Vet. Pathol.
Cordy, D.R., 1979. Canine granulomatous
Langham, R.F., Bennett, R.R., Zydeck, FA.,
40, 567-569
meningoencephalomyelitis. Vet. Pathol. 16,
1971. Primary retrobulbar meningioma of
Lipsitz, D., Higgins, R.J., Kortz, G.D., et al.,.
the optic nerve of a dog. I. Am. Vet. Med.
2003. Glioblastoma multiforme: Clinical
325-333.
Assoc. 159, 175-176.
findings, magnetic resonance imaging, and
Thomas, J.B., Eger, C, 1989. Granulomatous
Buyukmihci, N., 1977. Orbital meningioma
pathology in five dogs. Vet. Pathol. 40,
 meningoencephalomyelitis in 21 dogs. J.
with intraocular invasion in a dog.
659-669.
Small Anim. Pract. 30, 287-293.
Histology and ultrastructure. Vet. Pathol. 14,
Naranjo, C., Schobert, C., Dubielzig, R., 2008.
Munana, K.R., Luttgen, PJ., 1998. Prognostic
 factors for dogs with granulomatous
521-523.
Canine ocular gliomas: A retrospective study.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 11, 356-362.
meningoencephalomyelitis: 42 cases
Dugan, S.J., Schwarz, P.D., Roberts, S.M., et al.
(1982-1996). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 212.
1993. Primary optic nerve meningioma and
Eagle, R.C., Jr., Font, R.L., Swerczek, T.W., 1978.
pulmonary metastasis in a dog. I. Am. Anim.
 Malignant medulloepithelioma of the optic
1902-1906.
Hosp. Assoc. 29, 11-16.
nerve in a horse. Vet. Pathol. 15, 488-494.
Cherubini, G.B., Platt, S.R., Anderson, T.J., et al.,
2006. Characteristics of magnetic resonance
Mauldin, E.A., Deehr, A.J., Hertzke, D., et al.
Bistner, S.l., 1974. Medullo-epithelioma of the
images of granulomatous
 2000. Canine orbital meningiomas:
 iris and iliary body in a horse. Cornell Vet.
meningoencephalomyelitis in 1l dogs. Vet.
A review of 22 cases. Vet. Ophthalmol. 3,
64, 588-595.
Rec. 159, 110-115.
11-16.
Knottenbelt, D.C., Hetzel, U., Roberts, V., 2007.
Adamo, P.F., Adams, W.M., Steinberg, H., 2007.
Perez, V., Vidal, E., Gonzalez, N., et al., 2005.
 Primary intraocular primitive
 Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
Orbital meningioma with a granular cell 
neuroectodermal tumor (retinoblastoma)
in dogs. Compend Contin. Edu. Vet. 29,
component in a dog, with extracranial
causing unilateral blindness in a gelding.
metastasis. J. Comp. Pathol. 133, 212-217.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 10, 348-356.
678-690.
Jubb, K.V., Saunders, L.Z., Coates, H.V., 1957.
Riis, R.C., Scherlie, P.H., Rebhun, W.C., 1990.
Barnhart, K.F., Wojcieszyn, I., Storts, R.W., 2002.
The intraocular lesions of canine distemper.
Immunohistochemical staining patterns of 
 Intraocular medulloepithelioma in a horse.
J. Comp. Pathol. 67, 21-29.
canine meningiomas and correlation with
Equine Vet. J. (Suppl 10), 66-68.
Vandevelde, M., Higgins, R.j., Kristensen, B.,
published immunophenotypes. Vet. Pathol.
Gelatt, K.N., Leipold, H.W., Finocchio, E.J..
et al., 1982. Demyelination in experimental
39, 311-321.
et al., 1971. Optic disc astrocytoma in a
canine distemper virus infection:
Montoliu, P., Anor, S., Vidal, E., et al., 2006.
horse. Can. Vet. I. 12, 53-55.
Immunological, pathologic, and
Histological and immunohistochemical
Saunders, L.Z., Bistner, S.l., Rubin, L.F., 1972.
immunohistological studies. Acta.
study of 30 cases of canine meningioma. J.
 Proliferative optic neuropathy in horses. Vet.
Neuropathol. 56, 285-293.
Comp. Pathol. 135, 200-207.
Pathol. 9, 368-378.
417
The Glaucomas
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Aqueous humor misdirection syndrome
(mal ignant glaucoma)
441
General considerations
419
Clinical features of aqueous humor misdirection syndrome
441
Structure and function of the normal aqueous
Morphologic features of the aqueous misdirection syndrome 
442
outflow pathways
419
Angle recession (contusion) glaucoma
442
The glaucomas: significance and general principles
420
Morphologic features which support the significance of angle
Definition
420
recession as a factor in the pathogenesis of some feline
Significance to a mail-in ocular pathology service
420
glaucomas
443
Non-specific changes in ocular tissues associated with
 Spontaneous primary glaucoma is relatively rare
elevated intraocular pressure 
420
in the cat
443
 Underlying pathogenesis
420
The equine glaucomas
446
Critical events in the pathogenesis of the glaucomas
420
The canine glaucomas
423
Goniodysgenesis associated glaucoma (primary
glaucoma, acute primary angle-closure glaucoma,
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
primary open-angle closed-cleft glaucoma)
423
Sequential changes in the drainage angle following acute IOP
Structure and function of the normal
elevation in goniodysgenesis-related glaucoma 
425
aqueous outflow pathways (Fig. 13.1)
Chronic changes
425
dol aine bumoot euan au u sabueyp jeuanbas
 Maintenance of a physiologic intraocular pressure relies on a delicate
elevation in goniodysgenesis-related glaucoma
425
equilibrium between aqueous humor production and outflow.
Chronic changes
425
ueuqon e Aq 'sassaoid Arei a aq panoid si snoany
of mechanisms including diffusion, ultrafiltration and active
Sequential changes in the optic nerve following acute IOP
 elevation in goniodysgenesis-related glaucoma
425
secretion, into the posterior chamber
nd aun ynoiu smoy shoane 'aqeu iouansod aun uo
Chronic changes
426
into the anterior chamber, then enters the ciliary cleft via spaces
Canine primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG)
428
within the pectinate ligament, which spans the irido-corneal
Lens luxation glaucoma
429
angle (ICA)
Neovascular glaucoma
429
Within the ciliary cleft, aqueous humor percolates through
438
spaces between collagenous beams of the ciliary cleft, then the
Glaucoma in canine ocular melanosis
 corneoscleral trabecular meshwork (TM). The corneoscleral TM
Multiple thin-walled iridociliary cysts, pigmentary
is embedded in the sclera and closely associated with the
uveitis in Golden Retrievers
438
collector vessels of the angular aqueous plexus, which are
Glaucoma associated with neoplasia in dogs
438
analogous to the annular 'Schlemm's canal' of primates
The feline glaucomas
440
 Fluid is then transported by a pressure dependent mechanism.
 Some general features of feline glaucoma
via the vacuolating endothelium of the angular aqueous plexus.
 compared to canine glaucoma
440
to the radially oriented collector channels of the intrascleral
pue jeiaps au cul sassed snoanbe 'aiay woiy snxaid snouan
The majority of cases of feline glaucoma are
choroidal veins
secondary to other ocular disease
440
 In addition to pressure dependent 'conventional drainage via
Lymphoplasmacytic uveitis
440
the trabecular meshwork into intrascleral and episcleral veins,
Glaucoma associated with feline diffuse iris
aqueous can also percolate via a posterior 'uveoscleral' route
melanoma
441
through the ciliary body interstitium to the suprachoroidal
419
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
A
B
 po as i  ae a s s ad ae i s t ss a ) s ae noi a e  n
corneoscleral trabecular meshwork (arrows).
space and vortex veins. Uveoscleral outflow has been estimated
Scleral atrophy at the limbus
to account for about 3% of aqueous outflow in normal cats, and
 Thinning, stretching and enlargement of the globe
about 15% of aqueous outflow in normal dogs.
(buphthalmos)
- This is more commonly seen in animals than in humans
with glaucoma
The glaucomas: significance and
 Globe enlargement is more dramatic in young animals and
 general principles
children than in adults
Definition
  Equatorial and limbal staphyloma
Uvea
 The glaucomas represent a large, diverse group of pressure dependant
Collapse of the ciliary cleft
neurodegenerative disorders, that all result in loss of normal function
■ Atrophy of the corneoscleral trabecular meshwork
and integrity of the retinal ganglion cells and their axons in the optic
■Iris atrophy
nerve and ultimately lead to loss of vision.
■
 Ciliary body atrophy
In veterinary patients, the single most consistently recognized
Decreased choroidal perfusion
feature of all glaucomas characterized to date is elevation in
Lens
intraocular pressure (IOP).
 Cataract
 Lens subluxation or luxation
Neurosensory retina
Significance to a mail-in ocular pathology service
 Loss of retinal ganglion cels (all species)
 Glaucoma leads to loss of vision, with varying degrees of ocular
 Full thickness retinal atrophy and gliosis, dogs only
pain or discomfort. Despite advances in medical and surgical
 Less atrophy of the superior [tapetal retina relative to the
therapy, the prognosis for restoration and maintenance of vision
inferior (non-tapetal) retina, dogs only
remains quite poor. Given this relatively poor prognosis for
Optic nerve
vision, and that therapy can be costly for control of a disease
 Necrosis is an early feature, followed by malacia, gliosis and
that is often a source of significant discomfort, glaucoma is a
the formation of a deep cup. In species other than the dog
common reason for enucleation and subsequent submission of
the development of gliosis and cupping follows a less
the globe to a pathology service
precipitous course
41% of canine submissions to COPLOW have glaucoma as a
In glaucomatous optic neuropathy, there is a loss of large
part of the syndrome
diameter optic nerve axons.
 29% of feline submissions to COPLOW have glaucoma as a part
of the syndrome
Underlying pathogenesis
Glaucoma is probably under-represented in equine submissions.
The condition often goes clinically undiagnosed in horses as
It can be challenging for the pathologist to differentiate primary and
aul pue saads siun ui pauoad Auanbay ssal si Anauoun
secondary changes and suggest the underlying pathogenesis, in the
'ssop ui s! lI se Aane se isaueu pou s euosnel jo ued
absence of an informative clinical history. For example, lens subluxa-
tion may lead to, or result from, glaucoma. Consideration of breed
Non-specific changes in ocular tissues associated
with elevated intraocular pressure (Hg. 13.2)
or secondary causes of glaucoma.
Many of the changes listed below can represent either a cause or an
Critical events in the pathogenesis of the glaucomas
effect of glaucoma. It is often diffcult to determine which, with
confidence.
Many of the critical events in the pathogenesis of the glaucomas
● Cornea and sclera
remain poorly understood including the following:
■ Corneal edema
The precise mechanism responsible for the control and
Descemet's streaks (Haab's striae) associated with tears or
regulation of intraocular pressure, particularly at the level of
splits in Descemet's membrane
aqueous outflow, is incompletely understood in both normal
 Cormeal vascularization
and glaucomatous animals.
420
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.2 Non-specific morphologic
features of glaucoma (A)
Photomicrograph of a canine cornea
showing Haab's stria in glaucoma (B)
Gross photograph of a dog eye showing
an acquired staphyloma at thelimbus
(arrow). (C) Photomicrograph of the
irido-corneal angle and the limbal sclera
from a dog with glaucoma showing a
loss of collagen associated with scleral
atrophy (*).
(A)
B
Mechanisms for IOP elevation
- Cataract
 To date, no instances of glaucoma related to increased aqueous
- Lens luxation
humor formation have been documented in veterinary
- Intraocular neoplasia
gaucoma patients
- Intraocular hemorrhage
 The key mechanisms for IOP elevation are therefore:
 Retinal detachment
■ Reduction in capacity for aqueous outflow, and/or
 Increase in episcleral venous pressure may occur:
  Increase in episcleral venous pressure (i.e. "back pressure')
 In animals with orbital space occupying lesions
Reduction in the capacity for aqueous outflow may be:
Transiently, as a result of inappropriate restraint restricting
Primary (goniodysgenesis):
jugular blood flow, including tight collars
- Due to an inherent abnormality in the aqueous outflow
 Mechanisms for aqueous outflow obstruction:
pathways
■Pupil block
0 It is worth emphasizing that the cause of increased
 Anterior lens luxation, anterior vitreous prolapse,
resistance in the aqueous outflow pathway in
intumescent cataract and extensive posterior synechiae are
 goniodysgenesis is not yet known. The possibility that
all relatively common causes of pupil block glaucoma
aqueous outflow obstruction might actually prove to be
Flow of aqueous humour from the posterior chamber to
secondary and not primary cannot be discounted
the anterior chamber is obstructed at the level of pupil and
- Primary glaucoma is fairly common in certain breeds of
 aqueous is therefore unable to exit through the
Bop
conventional outflow pathways via the irido-corneal angle
一
and ciliary cleft
domestic species
 Elevation in pressure within the posterior chamber
 Secondary to other ocular or systemic disease processes, as a
leads to forward displacement of the iris, collapse of the
relatively frequent complication of:
ciliary cleft, narrowing of the irido-corneal angle and a
Uveitis
shallow anterior chamber. The anterior chamber may
- Synechiae
be diffusely shallow, or may vary in depth as in iris
- Pre-iridal fbrovascular membrane
bombe.
421
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
■Angle closure
 Elevated intraocular pressure leads to tissue infarction and
 Secondary angle closure gaucoma may occur as a sequela
sisog juanbasqnss
of pupil block, as the iris is 'pushed forward', occluding
 Retinal ganglion cell loss may also be due to the pathologic
the opening of the irido-corneal angle Multiple iridociliary
release of glutamate from within the damaged retina, which
cysts, as sporadically encountered in the Golden Retriever
initiates the process of apoptosis by a mechanism termed
and Great Dane breeds, may also lead to anterior
displacement of the ciliary zone of the iris contributing to
 Decreased choroidal perfusion causes a segmental retinal
secondary angle closure
degeneration affecting both inner and outer retina
0 Theoretically, in such cases, it should be possible to
Recent evidence suggests that different mechanisms may be
'open' the angle during indentation gonioscopy, but as
involved in the death of the retinal ganglion cell bodies, axons
the ciliary cleft collapses, angle closure can become
and dendritic trees.
permanent
- Alternatively, the iris may be 'pulled forward', as occurs in
Mechanisms of retinal and optic nerve degeneration
association with contracture of pre-iridal fbrovascular
The relevance of the various proposed mechanisms of retinal
membranes (PIFVM), in a mechanism that can ultimately
and optic nerve degeneration to the spontaneous glaucomas of dogs
lead to extensive peripheral anterior synechiae
and cats:
- Obstruction of the trabecular meshwork and/or
Any or all of these proposed mechanisms might be in play.
obliteration of the ciliary cleft by cellular infiltrates or
depending on the species and also the underlying
debris may lead to the development of glaucoma
 pathophysiology of the different glaucoma syndromes in dogs 
secondary to neoplasia, uveitis and intraocular
hemorrhage
and cats
aan ra pe ed u suau ssd a
+
 Clinical and pathological nomenclature: open-angle versus
closed-angle
importance, appear to differ considerably between glaucomatous
dogs, cats and humans
Traditionally, veterinary ophthalmologists have tended to
 In the dog, the changes in the retina and the optic nerve
classify glaucomas clinically, on the basis of gonioscopic
head suggest that abnormal vascular perfusion and ischemia
fndings, as either 'open-angle' or 'closed-angle: In reality.
are major factors in the pathogenesis of optic nerve and
what we are really referring to is not simply the irido-corneal
yap Ae ay ot suuao ayn anq (vil alue
retinal damage encountered in glaucoma syndromes.
 In contrast, veterinary pathologists have tended to classify
Severe damage to the inner and outer retina and optic
many of the primary glaucomas as 'open-angle, closed-cleff.
nerve can be observed in dogs at a very acute stage of
disease. In acute congestive canine glaucoma, where IOP is
This has led to confusing discrepancies in the clinical and
frequently >50 mmHg, there is evidence to support an
histopathological classification of the canine and feline 
important role for ischemia in cell death within both the
inner and outer retina. Breakdown in the blood-ocular
Until relatively recently our ability to visualize and clinically
barrier and inflammation may also contribute to retinal
characterize the ciliary cleft in vivo was extremely limited.
 degeneration
Refined imaging techniques, such as ultrasound
biomicroscopy (UBM), with probe frequencies around
 In the cat, the retinal disease is more restricted to the
 50 MHz, and high resolution ultrasonography (HRUS), with
ganglion cell layer, and optic nerve necrosis and malacia is
 probe frequencies around 20 MHz, offer us a greater
less common.
appreciation for the dynamic changes that take place within
the aqueous outflow pathways in our glaucomatous patients.
These new technologies should facilitate the harmonization
of clinical and pathological cassification schemes as well as
improve our insight into the pathogenic mechanisms
involved in each individual patient
Comparative Comments
Because of the confusion, in this chapter we will avoid the use of this
terminology altogether.
As is the case in other animal species, 'glaucoma' in human
ophthalmology is generally considered a generic term for a common
Mechanisms of optic nerve and retinal damage
group of ocular diseases that, if untreated, can cause an irreversible
loss of visual function. The common underlying factor in all forms of
The mechanisms of optic nerve and retinal damage in the glaucomas
glaucoma is an inappropriate intraocular pressure, which is associated 
remain subject to debate. Proposed mechanisms include the
with damage to the retina and optic nerve head.
following:
 Glaucoma in humans is usually divided into five main categories:
 Elevated intraocular pressure leads to deformation of the optic
1. Congenital glaucoma
nerve axons at the lamina cribrosa and the blockage of
2. Primary open-angle glaucoma 
anterograde and retrograde axonal transport which, in turn,
3.
 Primary angle-closure glaucoma 
leads to the death of retinal ganglion cells. Cell death is due, at
4. Secondary open-angle glaucoma
piudonoinau jo Aiddns au u uodnuaui ue on hed ui seal
 5. Secondary closed-angle glaucoma.
factors from the CNS
Unlike the situation described with canine and feline glaucoma, in
Elevated intraocular pressure leads to deformation of the
developed countries enucleation is practically never carried out for 
lamina cribrosa, leading to a decrease in vascular perfusion of
uncomplicated primary open-angle glaucoma. It is, however.
the optic nerve head microcirculation, that results in a
sometimes performed for the secondary types of glaucoma,
uougues [eunau yo yieap uanbasqns pue Aaurau! leuoxe jo sol
particularly in cases of tumors, vascular disease, uveitis, and trauma.
cells
422
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.3 Gonioscopy of the canine
irido-corneal angle, normotensive eye, in 
goniodysgenesis. The following examples 
represent the 'normotensive' eye in cases
presented with unilateral glaucoma. The 
glaucomatous eye was histopathologically
diagnosed as goniodysgenesis.
(A) Cocker Spaniel, 6 years old: the
 pectinate ligaments have a thick iris base
(B) Cocker Spaniel, 6 years old: the base 
P
B
 of the pectinate ligaments is wide
(arrow). This has been termed 'truncated"
pectinate ligaments. (C) Cocker Spaniel,
9 years old: the sheet of pigmented
tissue extends over most of the ciliary
deft. The arrow points to what is termed 
a 'flow hole' in this extensive sheet.
(D) Cocker Spaniel: 6 years old: the fine 
white areas (arrow) represent small open
 areas in the heavily pigmented tissue.
(E) Australian Cattle Dog. 4 years old:
only the superficial pigmented band 
C
D
(black arrow) can be seen. The iris is
'bowed' forward occluding the view of
the irido-corneal angle (white arrow).
(F) Basset Hound, 4 years old: no normal
pectinate ligaments could be visualized.
The white band (arrow) may represent
the ciliary cleft. (G) Dalmatian, 7 years 
old: the pigmented band covers the 
entire angle recess. (H) Bullmastiff, 2
years old: no ciliary cleft was visible. The
bluish color may represent limbal corneal
edema.
E
H
Goniodysgenesis is characterized, morphologically, by the
THE CANINE GLAUCOMAS
following features:
- A solid iris-like sheet of uveal stroma extending from the
iris base to the arborized termination of Descemet's
Goniodysgenesis associated glaucoma
(eisedsp uaul aeuad) auequa
(primary glaucoma, acute primary angle-
- The abnormal sheets of uveal tissue are intermittent, and 
closure glaucoma, primary open-angle
width of the irido-corneal angle and opening of the
closed-cleft glaucoma) (Figs 13.3, 13.4)
ciliary cleft can vary considerably throughout its 
circumference
?
The defning features of goniodysgenesis (pectinate ligament
0 The extent of goniodysgenesis is therefore best assessed
dysplasia, mesodermal dysgenesis)
 by dlinical observation of both the width of the opening
 This is a familial, breed-related, congenital abnormality in
of the ciliary cleft and the appearance of the pectinate 
the structures of the irido-corneal angle (ICA) and aqueous
ligament, using a special lens placed on the cornea
outflow apparatus
(gonioscopy)
Commonly affected breeds include the Bassett Hound,
0 The glaucomatous eye cannot be used to observe the
English and Welsh Springer spaniel, Flat-coated retriever.
extent of goniodysgenesis because the cornea becomes
Great Dane, Samoyed, Sheba Inu and Siberian Husky
cloudy with edema and the irido-corneal angle is
423
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 13.4 Goniodysgenesis.
pathology. (A) Gross photograph
showing a canine irido-corneal angle
with goniodysgenesis from a
normotensive globe.
(B) Photomicrograph of a normotensive
eye with goniodysgenesis showing a
 solid membrane of iris-like tissue
spanning the angle (arrowhead). The
diliary cleft and the corneoscleral
trabecular meshwork (arrow) are
normal in this normotensive eye.
(C) Photomicrograph of 
goniodysgenesis sectioned through a
small opening (arrow). (D)
Photomicrograph of a canine angle
with goniodysgenesis and glaucoma.
The iris-like membrane is in front of a
collapsed ciliary cleft (*) and the
 corneoscleral trabecular meshwork is 
not apparent. The terminus of 
Descemet's membrane showing
 characteristic thickening and branching.
narrowed by elevated IOP. The unaffected contralateral
 In dogs with goniodysgenesis, the progression to an acute
eye is used to evaluate the extent of affected angle
glaucomatous crisis characteristically does not occur until
0 Severity or grade of goniodysgenesis appears to be
middle age or later in life
heritable
- There is a suspicion that in many affected dogs, transient
0 The greater the extent of circumferential involvement of
episodes of IOP elevation, with subsequent spontaneous
the drainage angle the greater the chances of developing
resolution, precede confirmed glaucomatous crises. There
gaucoma
are competing hypotheses which attempt to explain the
■
Severe goniodysgenesis is clearly a risk factor in the
increased intraocular pressure
development of glaucoma but most dogs affected by
 Elucidating the mechanisms that precipitate acute IOP
goniodysgenesis do not develop glaucoma
elevations in dogs with goniodysgenesis will greatly
 Although gonioscopy may reveal goniodysgenesis or
enhance our ability to treat, and hopefully prevent or delay
the onset of, glaucoma in 'at-risk' eyes
of dogs within certain breeds, only some of these animals
Severe goniodysgenesis, narrow ICA, relatively anterior lens
will actually go on to develop glaucoma. The pectinate
position, thick lens, and shallow anterior chamber, may all
ligament is clearly not the most important source of
be considered as anatomic risk factors, i.e markers indicating
resistance to aqueous outflow
predisposition to glaucoma
 However, goniodysgenesis may signal the existence of
- Similar anatomic risk factors may predispose human and
other developmental abnormalities within the structures of
canine subjects to primary angle closure glaucoma.
the ciliary cleft or may have implications in the way the
However, only a small proportion of individuals with
iris is positioned during miosis and mydriasis perhaps
these characteristic risk factors go on to develop glaucoma
 predisposing to pigment dispersion
 Age-related changes in morphologic features such as lens
 The limitation of gonioscopy in our clinical evaluation of
thickness and narrowing of the irido-corneal angle may, at
pauualy uaaq sey Aemued moyino snoanee auue au
least in part contribute to angle closure and the
by histopathological identification of goniodysgenesis and
development of glaucoma in middle-aged and older
ciliary cleft collapse in Norwegian elkhounds, a breed
s3op
previously classified as affected by a chronic, slowly
■Acute pupil block is a dynamic process that has also been
progressive, 'open-angle' glaucoma
put forward as a factor contributing to acute glaucomatous
 A dog with goniodysgenesis-related glaucoma in one eye is
crises. It has been proposed that a very small segment of the
aa puas au ui ene doanap ot al a
iris, right at the pupil margin, is held in apposition against
- For this reason there is a lot of interest in 'prophylactic'
the anterior lens capsule by a complex dynamic mechanism
treatment which might delay or prevent glaucoma
that involves 'iris stretch' and combined "blocking forces'
 development in the second eye
 generated by both the sphincter and dilator muscles.
● From 'at risk' to acute glaucoma - pathogenic mechanisms in
A role for 'iris touch', i.e iris-lens contact, in the
dogs with goniodysgenesis
pathogenesis of IOP elevation in dogs with
424
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
goniodysgenesis-related glaucoma is supported by the
Sequential changes in the retina following acute loP
fnding of pigment dispersion in affected eyes
elevation in goniodysgenesis-related glaucoma
 Significant uveal inflammation was also identifed in canine
eyes with acute glaucoma. Whether uveitis plays a role in
The first 24 h (Figs 13.8, 13.9)
lo Buuayoiu sui oi anp eonnei jo saposida suedioaid
 Radiating sectors of edematous retina apparent grossly
miosis, or whether inflammation is a secondary
Hypereosinophilic, necrotic retinal ganglion cell profles seen 
 This change is seen rarely at later stages, in association with
unclear
more chronic disease, suggesting that retinal degeneration
- Resistance to the flow of aqueous caused, in some way by
can occur as a cyclic or ongoing process
the abnormal uveal membranes or by matrix deposited by
Outer retinal edema but no cellular necrosis or apoptosis
the membrane
Muller cell expression of glial fbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is
 Obstruction of aqueous drainage at the level of the pupil
little changed from background
associated with contact between the papillary margin of
 Neutrophilic inflammatory cell infiltrate in the retinal tissue
the iris and the lens
 Degeneration of the filtration apparatus secondary to
1-5 days (Fig. 13.10)
entrapment of released melanin
 Radiating zones of retinal edema and degeneration still apparent
Any combination of mechanisms
grossly
■
Extensive, segmental, full-thickness retinal cell apoptosis. The
limitations, including the tendency to examine only globes
pattern of regionally variable severity correlates with the
 obtained at a late stage in the disease process
radiating pattern of edema and degeneration seen grossly
 Disease progression in canine goniodysgenesis-associated
Segmental full-thickness retinal degeneration and necrosis is
glaucoma begins with the sudden development of severe
characteristic in dogs with acute goniodysgenesis-related
disease. Morphologically, the disease progresses in a stepwise
 glaucoma, but is not a typical feature associated with glaucoma
manner, consistent with a rapidly progressive disease course
in any other species
following a dramatic initiating event
Marked upregulation in the expression of GFAP by Miller cells
and astrocytes
Sequential changes in the drainage angle following
+
 Degenerative changes often appear more advanced within the
acute IoP elevation in goniodysgenesis-related
dependant, non-tapetal, retina (a phenomenon referred to as
tapetal sparing’)
glaucoma
The first 24 h (Fig. 13.5)
Chronic changes (Fg. 13.11)
Atrophy of the corneoscleral trabecular meshwork
 The identification of this change so soon after the apparent
?
 Full thickness retinal atrophy with elevated expression of GFAP
onset of acute glaucoma, suggests that there is latent disease
The process of apoptosis continues far beyond 5 days, and
building up to the glaucomatous crisis
rarely, hypereosinophilic ganglion cells, interpreted as necrotic
but not apoptotic, are seen even in long standing disease
 Incomplete collapse of the ciliary cleft
 Disruption of the posterior pigmented epithelium of the iris
The relative sparing of the superior retina is most prominently
?
near the pupillary margin
seen in the eyes of chronically glaucomatous dogs
Free pigment granules within the anterior chamber and in the
■Although this phenomenon is called 'tapetal sparing, in
angle and trabecular meshwork
atapetal dogs there is still relative sparing of the superior
Neutrophilic inflammatory cell infiltrate in the anterior
retina
chamber, irido-cormeal angle, ciliary cleft and the limbal
sclera
 Nuclear enlargement and increased mitotic activity involving
 Sequential changes in the optic nerve following
stromal fbroblasts and endothelial cells at the limbus
acute loP elevation in goniodysgenesis-related
glaucoma
1-5 days (Fig. 13.6)
The first 24 h (Fig. 13.12)
Complete closure of the ciliary cleft with indistinguishable
cormeoscleral trabecular meshwork
 Swelling of the optic nerve head
 Dispersion of pigment remains a prominent feature within the
Necrotic neuropil with a few phagocytic cells (gitter cells)
anterior chamber and fltration angle
 This change can be hard to appreciate because the neuropil is
 Loss of the posterior pigmented epithelium from the pupillary
not very cellular to begin with
margin of the iris
Granular neuropil remnants often protrude into the
Neutrophilic inflammatory cell infltrate is rarely seen
vitreous
Evidence of cellular proliferation remains apparent within the
Neutrophils within the neuropil of the optic nerve head
limbal tissues
2-5 days (Fig. 13.13)
 Malacia of the optic nerve head
Chronic changes (Fig. 13.7)
■ Gitter cells predominate
Complete collapse of the ciliary cleft with indistinguishable
With the phagocytosis of optic disc neuropil, the tissue
cormeoscleral trabecular meshwork
becomes cavitated
No neutrophilic inflammation
Vitreous matrix is often incorporated into the cavitated optic
Pigment dispersion remains, but rarely at a significant level
nerve (Schnabel's cavernous atrophy)
425
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 13.5 Goniodysgenesis
pathology of acute disease. (A,B) Low
magnification photomicrographs
showing the canine irido-corneal angle
from a dog with clinical signs of 
glaucoma for only 2 days. The ciliary
deft is still apparent, but not the
corneoscleral trabecular meshwork 
(arrows). (C) This irido-corneal angle is 
from a dog with goniodysgenesis
within 2 days of the onset of clinical
disease. It shows a neutrophilic
infiltrate (arrow). (D) The corneoscleral
trabecular meshwork, from a dog with
clinical glaucoma less than 2 days,
 shows pigment dispersion and a
neutrophil infiltrate. (E,F) Atrophic 
corneoscleral trabecular meshwork 
from dogs with acute glaucoma. The
 structure is severely atrophied and 
 contains excess pigment cells.
Chronic changes (Figs 13.14, 13.15)
 Other factors include hyperopic eyes, in which the sizes of the
 End-stage gliosis, atrophy and cupping of the optic nerve head
lens and the anterior chamber are disproportionate, and small 
 In the progression of optic nerve cupping in dogs the distortion
eyes
of the nerve head is more a matter of necrosis and collapse than
Primary angle-closure glaucoma is more common in Eskimos and
a backwards thrust against the lamina cribrosa of the optic
East Asians, as well as in middle age and in women. There is 
nerve.
often a family history
uaum ano oi puat eonei aunsop-ajbue Aewud jo syoeir
Comparative Comments
the pupil is in mid-dilatation. Here, greater iris contact with the 
anterior lens capsule increases resistance to the passage of
Primary angle-closure glaucoma in humans is a form of glaucoma 
aqueous humor through the pupil, and this increased resistance
in which there is an anatomic predisposition to obstruction of 
displaces the iris root anteriorly. In this situation, angle closure 
aqueous outflow by irido-trabecular contact as a result of a
may occur
narrow angle and/or shallow anterior chamber
● On histopathologic examination of an untreated globe with 
 An additional predisposing anatomical feature is a plateau iris 
narrow-angle glaucoma, the anterior chamber is seen to be
426
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.6 Goniodysgenesis and
(A) Low magnification photomicrograph
from a dog with a 4-day history of
glaucoma and goniodysgenesis 
showing large amounts of free pigment 
 in the dependent aspect of the anterior
chamber and complete collapse of the
ciliary cleft. (B,C) Higher magnification
 photomicrographs showing what
remains of the atrophied corneoscleral
trabecular meshwork. Notice the 
pigment in the atrophied structure
(arrows)
A
B
C
Comparative Comments (continued)
 narrow and the angle closed. Usually a relatively large lens is
evident 
Necrosis of the dilator and sphincter muscles is observed and 
leads to irregularities in the pupillary shape
 Segmental iris atrophy is often present, together with 
generalized atrophy of the iris stroma
Small subcapsular anterior white opacities in the lens 
(glaukomflecken) are characteristic if there have been multiple 
attacks
 The corneal epithelium shows damage, and the corneal stroma
may be edematous 
Because of blockage of venous return, optic disk edema and 
even central retinal vein occlusion may be seen
Commonly, the prolonged contact of the iris with the 
trabecular meshwork has led to peripheral anterior synechiae
Figure 13.7 Goniodysgenesis, chronic disease. Photomicrograph, from a
(PAS), as well as fibrosis of the trabecular meshwork 
dog with glaucoma for 1 week or longer, showing the completely
 Often there is evidence of laser peripheral iridotomy or surgical
collapsed and atrophied ciliary cleft and corneoscleral trabecular 
iridectomy.
meshwork.
427
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 13.8 Retinal disease in acute
goniodysgenesis glaucoma, fundus.
(A) Samoyed, 4 years old: the optic disc
is swollen and retinal vessels are dilated.
 The peripapillary retina is edematous and 
has a large bullous detachment (arrow).
(B) The same eye as in (A), 12 days
following treatment, is now a
normotensive eye. The optic disc is pale.
 pue uoenuawbid jeaden Aelldediad
hyperreflectivity (arrow) are present. The
eye was visual. (C) Cocker Spaniel, 8
years old: the peripapillary retina is
edematous. The optic nerve changes are
discussed in Figure 13.12. (D) This is the 
same eye as (C). 4 weeks later. The
 peripapillary retina is atrophic, resulting
A
B
 in tapetal hyperreflectivity. The eye was
visual.
C
D
Canine primary open-angle
glaucoma (POAG)
Comparative Comments
●Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is by far the most common 
 Infrequently encountered in practice or submitted to diagnostic
type of human glaucoma, affecting 1-2% of the population over 
pathology services
40 years of age. If untreated, it can lead to marked visual loss and
Heritable POAG has been extensively studied in Beagles, within
blindness
a colony of affected dogs at the University of Florida
POAG is a chronic, slowly progressive, usually bilateral disease,
 Abnormalities in ocular vascular resistance, tonographic
characterized by an increased resistance to aqueous outflow.
aqueous outflow facility (which progressively declines from
 There is usually an increased intraocular pressure with associated 
several months of age) and IOP have been confirmed in affected
injury to the retinal ganglion cell axons 
dogs. prior to the late-stage development of angle closure and
 The pathogenesis of this disease is unclear. The microscopic
advanced glaucoma that occurs from about the third year of
structure of the anterior chamber angle is normal. The 
life
histopathology findings related to POAG are controversial, with 
 Of the few cases that are encountered sporadically in clinical 
leadde Aaul ing 'sabueys buibe o1 lejuwis bulueadde sabueup aul
veterinary practice, many are presented once glaucoma is
to be more severe and occur earlier in glaucomatous eyes
advanced and, in general, histopathological findings are likely
 It is generally believed that the disease is multifactorial and results 
pauasspouos iud ui uas asoui ot reus aq cn
in an imbalance between intraocular pressure and vascular
glaucoma
perfusion of the optic nerve head. In addition, mechanical
 In Beagles, as in humans with POAG, the precise mechanism for
pressure on the ganglion cell axons at the neuroretinal rim may
aqueous outflow obstruction remains unclear. However, the site
interfere with axonal flow and result in retrograde neuronal
of increased aqueous outflow resistance in POAG appears to
degener ation
reside in the trabecular meshwork and its extracellular matrix. In
Mol, lo ,ewoonej6 uoisuat jewnou, 'dvod jo jasqns e Alqeqoid 
addition to the accumulation of abnormal, enzyme resistant
tension glaucoma' is a disease in which optic disk cupping.
glycosaminoglycans in the extracellular meshwork of the TM of
atrophy of the optic disk, and visual field loss may occur in the
affected dogs, abnormal amounts of myocilin protein have been
 absence of a demonstrable elevation of intraocular pressure.
identifed in eyes of affected Beagles.
428
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.9 Retinal disease in acute
goniodysgenesis glaucoma, pathology.
(A) Gross photograph of a canine globe
posterior segment from a dog with
clinical glaucoma for 3 days before
enucleation. The globe, which was fixed 
in glutaraldehyde and opened so that the 
fundus is visible, showing radiating 
spokes of translucent retina (arrows)
(B) Photomicrograph, of the retina from
a dog with glaucoma for 1 day. showing
edema and hypereosinophilic necrotic
 ganglion cells (arrows). in glaucoma,
necrotic ganglion cells can reliably
be found histologically only in dogs
that have had enucleation within 2 days
after the onset of clinical disease.
(C) Photomicrograph, of the retina from
 a dog that had optic nerve trauma and
enucleation 2 days later, showing
extensive ganglion cell necrosis, which
 suggests that a wave of ganglion cell
necrosis occurs before the clinical onset
of glaucoma in dogs.
C
Lens luxation glaucoma (Fig. 13.16)
Secondary to glaucoma with enlargement of the globe
(buphthalmos)
● Lens luxation is a risk factor for glaucoma for a variety of
■ Cataract
reasons, not all of which are understood. Complicating
Breed-related zonular ligament dysplasia
interpretation of lens luxation and glaucoma is the fact that lens
 Special features of glaucoma secondary to lens luxation:
luxation often occurs as a consequence of buphthalmos in 
 About half of dogs with glaucoma secondary to lens
animals with glaucoma
luxation do not exhibit the phenomenon of 'tapetal
■Luxation of the lens into the anterior chamber may lead to
sparing.
pupil-block or obstruction of aqueous flow within the
anterior chamber, by either the lens itself, or by anteriorly
prolapsed vitreous, and the relationship to the development
Neovascular glaucoma (Fig. 13.17)
of glaucoma is quite obvious
■
 Luxation or subluxation of the lens in the posterior chamber
A diagnosis of neovascular glaucoma implies that the irido-
or into the vitreous is also a risk factor for glaucoma, but the
 corneal angle is obstructed by peripheral anterior synechiae
mechanism for secondary glaucoma is not as obvious
resulting from a pre-iridal fbrovascular membrane (see Ch. 9)
 The loss of zonular ligament tension might tend to close
 Neovascular glaucoma occurs secondary to an underlying
the ciliary cleft
process which stimulates the formation of the neovascular
 Anteriorly prolapsed vitreous may obstruct aqueous
membrane
outflow
 - Retinal ischemia secondary to retinal detachment
 Lens luxation occurs for a variety of reasons, that are discussed
- Intraocular neoplasia
in greater detail in Chapter 10
- Uveitis
Trauma
Trauma.
429
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 13.10 Retinal pathology
in acute goniodysgenesis glaucoma.
(A) Photomicrograph, of the retina from
 a dog with a 4-day history of glaucoma,
showing segmental apoptosis between
the arrows. (B) Plastic section, of the 
retina from a dog with a 4-day history of
glaucoma, showing segmental severe
edema and apoptosis (arrow) Toluidine
blue stain. (C) Photomicrograph showing
the retina from a dog with 5-day
 glaucoma. Numerous apoptotic cells are
demonstrated with the TUNEL method 
R
brown staining nuclei (D) Electron
micrograph from the same dog as (B)
showing remnants of the nucleus of a
photoreceptor cell undergoing apoptosis
（*）
1
Figure 13.11 Tapetal sparing. (A,B)
Photomicrographs, of the central retina 
from a dog with glaucoma, show the 
superior or tapetal area (A) and the 
inferior or non-tapetal area (B). The 
relative sparing of the superior retina is 
extreme in this dog. but it is
characteristic of most dogs with 
 glaucoma associated with 
goniodysgenesis.
B
430
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.12 Optic nerve disease in
acute goniodysgenesis glaucoma. (A)
Cocker Spaniel, 8 years old: this is the
same image as Figure 13.7(C). The optic
disc is swollen and has indistinct margins.
(B) This is the same eye as (A), 4 weeks
later. The optic disc is slightly pale and 
depressed as judged by the bend in the 
retinal vessels (arrow). The eye was
visual. (C) Low magnification
photomicrograph showing the optic disc
and optic nerve from a dog with a 2-day
history of glaucoma associated with
goniodysgenesis. There is no cupping.
but rather swelling and necrotic neuropil
in the pale staining area (arrows). (D,E)
B
Higher magnifications showing the
necrotic optic disc tissues from the same
image as (C) (*).
431
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 13.13 Optic nerve pathology in
acute goniodysgenesis glaucoma. (A)
Gross photograph of a glutaraldehyde-
fixed canine globe showing the optic disc
from a dog with a 5-day history of
 glaucoma. Softening and early cupping 
of the disc neuropil (arrow) and
coalescing areas of retinal translucency 
are seen. (B) Low magnification
 photomicrograph showing cavitation of
the optic disc neuropil (*) after necrotic
tissue is removed by phagocytosis. (C,D)
Low magnification photomicrographs of 
a dog retina and optic nerve with a
similar history to (A). In (C), H&E showing
 cavitated tissue extending a long distance
from the vitreous surface. In (D), Alcian 
blue-positive vitreous material pushes
deeply into the nerve tissue. Vitreous
material occupies the cavitated areas 
(Alcian blue stain). This phenomenon is 
A
called Schnabel's cavernous atrophy. (E,F)
Higher magnifications of cavitated area
in the neuropil (*) and macrophage cells
Or gitter cells (arrows).
?
D
432
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.14 Optic nerve pathology
in chronic goniodysgenesis glaucoma.
(A) Gross photograph showing a deeply
cupped optic nerve from a dog with 
chronic glaucoma. (B) Low magnification
 photomicrograph showing a deep optic
nerve cup. as is often seen in chronic
 canine glaucoma. (C) Subgross
photomicrograph showing an optic nerve
head similar to (B).
B
433
Figure 13.15 Canine optic disc changes
in glaucoma, funduscopy. All cases have
confirmed glaucoma with various 
intraocular pressures and durations.
(A) Miniature Poodle, 5 years old: the
retinal vesels drop over the edge of the
 cupped disc. (B) Fox Terrier, 4 years old:
the optic disc is severely atrophic with a
 sieve-like appearance of the optic nerve
representing the lamina cribrosa. Despite
the optic disc atrophy, the retinal vessels
appear within normal limits. (C) Mixed 
 Breed, 7 years old: the optic disc has a
prominent sieve-like appearance of the
optic nerve representing the lamina 
cribrosa which is visible because there 
has been a loss of myelin. (D) Siberian 
A
B
Husky, 4.5 years old: Retinal vessels are 
difficult to discern in this subalbinotic 
atapetal fundus. The optic disc within
the myelin sheath is depressed (arrow).
(E) Siberian Husky. 6 years old: the retinal
vessels are easily discernible. The optic 
disc is pale and cupped 3609. (F) Mixed
 Breed, 1.5 years old: this disc is pale and 
cupped, especially in the superior half.
Choroidal vessels and sclera (arrow)
 are present peripapillary due to the
retinal atrophy in this atapetal fundus.
(G) Samoyed, 6 years old: the optic disc
is pale and cupped 360°. Tapetal
hyperreflectivity (arrow) and peripapillary 
pigmentation indicate retinal atrophy.
(H) Samoyed, 5 years old: severe cupping
 prevents visualizing any optic disc
structure. Tapetal hyperreflectivity was
present superiorly (black arrow)
depending on the light incidence.
C
D
 Choroidal vessels are present at the 
white arrow.
B
G
434
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.16 Lens luxation glaucoma.
(A) Dandie Dinmont Terrier, 5 years old:
the lens is subluxated posteriorly and
temporally resulting in a nasal aphakic
Crescent. (B) Sealyham Terrier, 6 years
old: the majority of the lens equator can
be visualized. Ciliary processes (arrow)
can be seen nasally with their zonular 
fibers. (C) Boston Terrier, 9 years old: the
lens has totally luxated into the anterior
chammber. The lens equator is difficult to 
see due to corneal edema. (D) Parson 
Russell Terrier, 5 years old: the entire lens
is luxated into the anterior chamber.
There is regional corneal edema 
secondary to lens contact with the
 corneal endothelium. (E,F) Gross and
A
B
subgross photomicrographs showing
canine globes with lens luxation into the
 anterior chamber. The lens is entrapped 
in the anterior chamber obstructing
 aqueous drainage.
D
F
435
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 13.17 Neovascular glaucoma.
(A) Gross photograph of a canine globe
with retinal detachment, pre-iridal 
fibrovascular membrane and peripheral 
anterior synechia. (B) Magnified view of
the same globe showing the pre-iridal
fibrovascular membrane on the iris 
surface and extending across the angle 
(*). (C) Subgross photomicrograph, from
a Shih Tzu with retinal detachment
associated with vitreoretinopathy.
showing a distorted iris profile (arrows)
because of pre-iridal fibrovascular
membrane and ectropion uvea. (D) Low
magnification photomicrograph, of the 
iris from a dog with neovascular
glaucoma, showing a pre-iridal
fibrovascular membrane (arrowhead) and
mild ectropion uvea (arrow). (E) Higher
magnification of the image in (D)
showing the peripheral anterior synechia
(arrow).
A
B
436
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.18 Glaucoma associated with
ocular melanosis in the Cairn Terrier.
(A) Cairn Terrier, 13 years old: scleral
pigment and a darkly pigmented iris 
were present. (B) Cairn Terrier. 12 years
old: the heavily pigmented iris resulted in
dyscoria and an areflexic pupil. (C) Cairn 
Terrier, 9 years old: the sclera is heavily 
 pigmented, as is the iris. Descemet's 
streaks (Haab's stria) and corneal
vascularization are also present. (D) Cairn 
Terrier, 13 years old: diffuse scleral
 pigment is present. Heavy iris pigment 
resulted in a small pupil that did not 
dilate. The iris pigmentation is most
prominent at the iris base. Pigment
R
is also present on the anterior lens.
(E) Gross photograph showing the globe
from a Cairn Terrier with glaucoma
associated with ocular melanosis. The
excessive pigmentation thickens and
distorts the iris and also the posterior
uvea. (F) Subgross photomicrograph,
from an affected Cairn Terrier, showing a
diffusely hyperpigmented uvea and 
distortion of the iris base, anterior 
diliary body and the limbal scleral tissues.
(G) Subgross photomicrographs from an
 affected Cairn Terrier. The iris base,
anterior ciliary body and limbus are
affected to the point where they
have lost their structural integrity.
(H) Examination with low power
magnification of the choroid and tissues
around the optic nerve is useful in 
determining whether there is excessive
pigment.
?
H
437
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 13.19 Ocular melanosis in breeds
other than the Cairn Terrier. (A) Boxer.
9 years old: the iris is poorly visualized
 due to corneal edema and pupil dilation,
but it is heavily pigmented. The lens is 
luxated posteriorly and temporally
 secondary to glaucoma. (B) Scottish
Terrier, 13 years old: this is a close-up of 
the irido-corneal angle, showing the
darkly pigmented iris. The thickened,
 pigmented pectinate ligaments extend 
from the base of the iris (arrow) to their
corneal insertion. The ciliary cleft is also 
heavily pigmented
B
Glaucoma in canine ocular melanosis
 Focal retro-corneal membrane or Descemet's changes are seen
(Figs 13.18, 13.19)
because fragments of cysts attach to the corneal endothelium
The precise mechanism for glaucoma development in affected
+
 Obstruction of aqueous outflow at the level of the irido-cormeal
dogs is unclear:
angle and ciliary cleft occurs as a frequent complication in dogs
 Multiple cysts within the posterior chamber can push the iris
anteriorly, narrowing the opening to the ciliary cleft
glaucoma'
Posterior synechiae or iris bombe are frequently seen
Ocular melanosis is diagnosed when the uveal tract is thickened
in globes removed because of secondary glaucoma
and distorted by an excess of heavily pigmented tissue
 Pre-iridal fbrovascular membranes are commonly
(see Ch. 9)
encountered, often with concurrent peripheral anterior
Ocular melanosis is often associated with secondary glaucoma
synechiae
Breeds with the highest incidence are:
 Intraocular hemorrhage is common.
Cairn terrier ('pigmentary glaucoma')
- The most commonly affected breed, in which the disease
Glaucoma associated with neoplasia
has been most extensively studied
 Affected dogs usually show bilateral ocular involvement
in dogs
- A dominant mode of inheritance has been proposed in
 Of 5722 cases of neoplasia in dogs in the COPLOW collection,
this breed
1516 cases (26%) have glaucoma as part of the syndrome
Labrador Retriever
 57% melanoma
■Boxer
■
21% iridociliary epithelial tumors
■Dachshund
 5% metastatic tumors
 There is a small, but documented risk of melanoma developing
4.5% lymphoma.
in eyes with ocular melanosis.
Multiple thin-walled iridociliary cysts,
Comparative Comments
pigmentary uveitis in Golden Retrievers
saseasip jo dnoub e ot shajan ewosnelb ajbue-uado Auepuonas
(Fig. 13.20) (see also ch. 9)
well-formed anterior chamber without peripheral anterior synechiae.
Although also documented in the Great Dane, thin-walled
There are a number of types of secondary open-angle glaucoma
recognized in humans:
breeds other than the Golden Retriever
 Inflammatory disorders may cause a trabeculitis or may result in
One-cell-thick cysts of ciliary or iridal epithelial origin fill the
mechanical blockage of aqueous outflow by proteinaceous 
posterior chamber and become plastered against the lens
exudates
equator or the anterior capsule. The cyst can pull the iris back to
 The presence of blood products may produce open-angle
form a posterior synechia
 glaucoma in several ways
The disease is called 'pigmentary uveitis' by ophthalmologists
 Red blood cells from hemophthalmos, or macrophages 
jo uoisiadsip au 'snoane a ui uinoid au jo asneag
containing degenerated blood cells, may block aqueous outflow
pigmented cells and fragments of cysts, and because pigmented
In the case of a vitreous hemorrhage, red blood cells are lysed 
cyst remnants are plastered against the anterior lens capsule
progressively and the rigid degenerating cells ('ghost cells)
isan s  aaas noaisd Au u
may migrate into the anterior chamber and obstruct the
 Morphologically, inflammation is a minor process in affected
trabecular spaces
globes
83t
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.20 Thin-walled iridociliary
Cysts (pigmentary uveitis) in the Golden
Retriever. (A) Golden Retriever, 7 years
old: pigment can be seen on the axial
 anterior lens and near the pupil margin
(arrows). (B) Golden Retriever. 9 years
old: the iris is darkly pigmented.
Ruptured iris cysts are present at the
pupil margin (arrow). The pigment to the
left is on the anterior lens capsule. (C,D)
Magnified gross photographs of the 
posterior chamber, anterior vitreous face
and lens equator, from two Golden 
Retrievers, show the translucent cyst
remnants (arrowheads) and pigmented
cyst remnants on the lens capsule, as 
well as synechia (arrow). (E,F) Low
H
 magnification photomicrographs show
thin-walled cysts and cyst remnants 
spanning the posterior chamber (arrows)
and adherent to the lens capsule (*).
The epithelial cells of the cysts can be 
pigmented or non-pigmented.
1
439
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Comparative Comments (continued)
THE FELINE GLAUCOMAS
 Liquefied cortex may leak from the lens and lead to an influx 
of swollen mononuclear cells, which may obstruct the outflow
Some general features of feline glaucoma
xao sual aut jo uoejanb (ewoneie yiloeud) waisrs
 compared to canine glaucoma
may also lead to the release of particulate material into the 
anterior chamber, which itself can block the trabecular
Glaucoma is relatively uncommon in the cat compared to the
meshwork
dog, although it is possible that many feline cases go
In some patients, a dispersion of pigment from the iris pigmented 
unrecognized. In contrast to the situation in dogs, feline
epithelium may occur. Phagocytosis of melanosomes by the
glaucoma is often an insidious, gradually progressive disease.
trabecular endothelial cells may lead to obstruction of aqueous
Moderate elevations in IOP are associated with few overt clinical
 outflow and glaucoma (pigmentary glaucoma)
signs and cats are frequenty not presented for evaluation until
●The pseudoexfoliation syndrome is a systemic disorder in 
late in the disease process
which there is a deposition of a fibrillary protein-like material on
 Sudden, fulminant onset of disease is not typical of the feline
the lens capsule, zonular fibers, trabecular meshwork, iris, ciliary 
glaucomas, which makes it diffcult to determine the progressive
body, and other ocular structures, as well as in other connective
steps that occur early in the disease process
tissues
 In one recent retrospective study, 73% of glaucomatous cats
 Between 10% and 23% of patients with pseudoexfoliation
were blind at the time of initial presentation. However, some
syndrome develop glaucoma
vision may be preserved in chronically glaucomatous cats
The trabecular meshwork in pseudoexfoliation syndrome also
despite gross buphthalmos
 contains an excessive amount of pigment
 The optic nerve is often more gliotic and atrophic, rather than
· Siderosis, from retained ocular foreign bodies, can cause
 open-angle glaucoma
necrotic
iano au inq sas uouea ieuai jo ssol e Alesidh st aiau
 Blunt trauma to the ocular anterior segment can damage the
 trabecular meshwork and the base of the iris, and produce
retina does not progressively degenerate unless there are other
factors in play, such as trauma.
subsequent scarring in the trabecular meshwork or posterior
structures. This can lead to increased intraocular pressure and the
The majority of cases of feline glaucoma
development of glaucoma
are secondary to other ocular disease
· Additional forms of secondary open-angle glaucoma are
 anterior chamber epithelialization and anterior chamber
 Intraocular inflammation, particularly chronic
 endothelialization
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis (see below), is a frequently reported
 Secondary angle-closure glaucoma is seen in four circumstances in
cause of glaucoma in cats and may lead to elevation of IOP
human eyes:
through a number of different pathogenic mechanisms
·Neovascular glaucoma
pooa yy o paeiai ened aeuoay ienoenu
 Enucleated eyes with neovascular glaucoma are commonly
eonelg Aiepuosas ui nnsai osle Aeu sie apia ui ainssad
seen in human eye pathology laboratories. Neovascular
 Intraocular neoplasia is another important cause of glaucoma in
membranes occur as a complication of diabetic retinopathy.
cats
central retinal vein occlusion, intraocular neoplasia, and 
Lens-associated glaucoma in cats
long-standing retinal detachment. A common feature in all of
  May occur secondary to phacoclastic uveitis resulting from
these is the formation of angiogenic factors acting on the iris
lens trauma
vessels. New vessel production and subsequent contraction of 
■
In contrast to dogs, lens luxation in cats is often secondary
the fibroblastic component of the membrane can draw the iris
to glaucoma or uveitis and seldom directly results in
pigment epithelium through the pupil onto the front of the 
iris, as well as causing peripheral anterior synechiae and angle
glaucoma.
closure
Tumors
Lymphoplasmacytic uveitis (Fig. 13.21)
Sl alaut sowni ol anp eoonejb aunsop-ajbue Aepuonas ul 
mechanical displacement of the iris and lens by tumors of the
Lymphoplasmacytic uveitis is one of the most common causes
dliary body, choroid, or retina, which leads to pupillary
of feline gaucoma, and is second to diffuse iris melanoma as
blockage
the most common cause of feline glaucoma resulting in
Uveitis
enucleation. Of the total number of feline submissions to
 In cases of uveitis, the sticky fibrinous exudate is
COPLOW, 10% are lymphoplasmacytic uveitis with glaucoma
responsible for the formation of peripheral anterior and central
Globes submitted to the pathology lab are enucleated because
posterior synechiae, which cause secondary angle closure and 
of vision loss and blindness due to glaucoma
glaucoma. With severe or prolonged inflammation,
While lymphoplasmacytic uveitis does not invariably lead to
neovascularization will also contribute to the rise in intraocular
glaucoma, globes with concurrent glaucoma are more likely to
 pressure
be submitted for histopathologic evaluation
Trauma
This is an idiopathic uveitis characterized by a
Following surgical or nonsurgical trauma, because of 
lymphoplasmacytic infltrate in the iris and ciliary body
perforation of the cornea or limbus, hypotony and reactionary
The formation of lymphoid follicles is a distinctive feature
fibrosis may lead to peripheral anterior synechiae 
commonly seen in affected globes
compromising the chamber angle.
Other morphologic features often seen in feline
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis are described in Chapter 9
 Pathogenesis of glaucoma in feline lymphoplasmacytic uveitis
440
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.21 Glaucoma associated
with lymphoplasmacytic uveitis in cats.
(A) DSH, 6 years old: the iris was
inflamed. Keratitic precipitates (arrow)
are present inferiorly. Etiology was based 
 on a positive Bartonetla serology.
(B) DSH, 5 years old: multiple dark foci of 
inflammation are present. Etiology was
based on a positive Toxoplasma serology.
(C) Magnified gross photograph of an
affected feline globe showing condensed
vitreous material in the posterior 
chamber (arrow). (D) Low magnification
photomicrograph of another affected cat 
eye showing condensed protein-rich
vitreous material prolapsed into the
posterior chamber (*). (E)
 Photomicrograph of an affected cat eye
showing the iris and irido-corneal angle.
There is an intense lymphoplasmacytic 
cellular infiltrate, including two lymphoid 
follicles. This is a characteristic disease 
feature, which appears in some, but not
all. cats. (F) Photomicrograph showing
the pars plicata of an affected cat.
Inflammatory cells are entrapped directly
within the ciliary epithelial layer (arrows).
This is a common feature of both
inflammation and lymphoma in the eye.
It is not a specific feature of feline 
C
Iymphoplasmacytic uveitis.
 The most frequently cited mechanism is the inflammatory
submissions, 53% have neoplasia. 11% are diagnosed as
infltration with obliteration of the aqueous outflow
melanoma with glaucoma. Of the total feline submissions, 26%
structures
have feline diffuse iris melanoma (see also Ch. 9).
- In many affected globes, the extent of the inflammatory
infiltrate within the irido-corneal angle and ciliary cleft is
Aqueous humor misdirection syndrome
minimal, and these drainage angle structures remain
(malignant glaucoma) (Fig. 13.24)
intact
■Other factors that might contribute to the pathogenesis of
Unlike melanoma, this syndrome is vastly under-represented in the
 glaucoma in lymphoplasmacytic uveitis include:
COPLOW collection. There are a total of 10 cases in the COPLOW
 Lens luxation
collection.
Vitreous prolapse
 Although loss of vision is common, these eyes are not
 Neovascular membranes (rarely seen)
characteristically red or painful
Synechiae.
The disease has an insidious onset in older cats.
Glaucoma associated with feline diffuse iris
Clinical features of aqueous humor
melanoma (Figs 13.22, 13.23)
misdirection syndrome
● In the COPLOW collection, this appears to be over-represented
 Dilation of the pupil with associated anisocoria, as the disease is
relative to clinical incidence of the syndrome. Of the total feline
frequently unilateral at the time of initial presentation
441
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Figure 13.22 Glaucoma associated
with feline diffuse iris melanoma, clinical.
(A) DSH, 6 years old: Chronic glaucoma
resulted in a buphthalmic globe. Iris
detail cannot be seen in this photograph.
(B) DSH, 9 years old: the iris is irregularly
thickened with pale elevated masses
(arrow). (C) DSH, 13 years old: the iris is
heavily pigmented, resulting in dyscoria.
Ectropion uvea or neoplastic infiltrate
accounts for the dark area along the
pupil margin. (D) DSH, 14 years old: the
iris is heavily pigmented with a ragged 
 pupil margin. Pigmented cells are present 
 on the anterior lens capsule.
C
Uniformly shallow anterior chamber associated with anterior
 Subsequently, anteriorly displaced vitreal elements become 
displacement of the iris and lens
condensed, compressed and juxtaposed against the lens and
Decreased pupillary light reflex
ciliary processes.
Decreased menace response
This juxtaposition is responsible for so-called 'cilio-vitreal-
Subtle, glaucomatous abnormalities of the optic nerve head
lenticular block', with elevation in IOP, collapse of the ciliary
Ocular ultrasonography reveals thickening of the anterior
cleft and narrowing of the irido-corneal angle.
vitreous face anterior displacement of the iris and lens, and
clear spaces in the vitreous cavity.
Angle recession (contusion) glaucoma
Morphologic features of the aqueous
(Fig. 13.25)
misdirection syndrome
The defining feature of angle recession is the posterior position
●These globes are very quiet and the changes are easily missed
of the irido-corneal angle
Grossly the vitreous may be partially liquid, or irregular in
This change is usually seen in conjunction with
viscosity
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis and there is seldom a history of
 The anterior face of the vitreous is thickened because of
trauma
excess mucinous deposition with or without a spindle cell
 The existence of a distinct entity of angle recession glaucoma in
juauoduo
cats (and more rarely in dogs) is subject to debate for the
The anterior vitreous is pushed forward, crowding into the
following reasons:
posterior chamber, yet the anterior face of the vitreous remains
 The structures of the normal feline irido-corneal angle are
well defined
widely spaced, and clearly defined criteria that indicate
The changes seen in the optic nerve and retina are as expected
pathologic angle recession are lacking.
with other kinds of glaucoma in cats
This change is usually seen in eyes with concurrent
 It has been postulated that aqueous humor is misdirected posteriorly.
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis, which can be responsible for
Aiae snoana au ui siood uuam padden suuosaq
glaucoma independent of the presence of angle recession
442
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
 Figure 13.23 Glaucoma associated with
feline diffuse iris melanoma, pathology.
(A-D) Gross and subgross images show
cat eyes with feline diffuse iris melanoma
and secondary glaucoma.
A
B
C
D
If, as is the case for the human disease, glaucoma does not
 Lens capsule rupture
develop until years after the traumatic incident, it is unlikely
 Segmental, full thickness, retinal degeneration not otherwise
that this incident will be reported in the history
expected in feline glaucoma
 The proposed pathogenesis of angle recession
 Blunt force trauma deforms the globe pushing the cornea
anteriorly
Spontaneous primary glaucoma is relatively
■
 This sets off a rapid rebound of the lens, pulling on the
rare in the cat
ciliary body causing cyclodialysis
Both open-angle glaucoma, and glaucoma associated with pectinate
ligament dysplasia, have been reported in adult cats. Breeds that may
Morphologic features which support the significance
be at increased risk of primary glaucoma include the Siamese, Burmese
of angle recession as a factor in the pathogenesis of
and Persian. There are ll feline globes in the COPLOW collection
some feline glaucomas
-oui uade-qou pue udo Aaao e pue eone m
 The feline irido-corneal angle is very delicate and the individual
cormeal angle, with no abnormalities seen in the ciliary cleft or the
pillars of the pectinate ligament are small in diameter and, for
 corneoscleral trabecular meshwork
that reason, probably more susceptible to rupture during trauma
Feline open-angle glaucoma (Fig. 13.26)
+
Feline globes with a history of trauma often show cyclodialysis
 These are consistently unilateral
if removed early after the event, or angle recession if removed
 There are clearly evident glaucomatous changes in the retina
long after the event
and optic nerve head
Affected globes often have other features that could reflect
 The Burmese breed is over represented
 previous trauma such as:
■
 There is often a subtle myxomatous change in the stroma
■ Cataract
immediately around the vortex veins in the sclera
443
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
 Figure 13.24 Feline aqueous humor
misdirection syndrome (FAHMS). (A) DSH,
12 years old: this is a profile of the right
eye. The iris is slightly displaced 
anteriorly.The anterior chammber between
the cornea (right arrow) and lens (left 
arrow) is shallow. (B) This is the left eye
of the cat in (A). The lens and iris are
displaced so anteriorly that only a small
dark line represents the anterior chamber
(arrow). (C) DsH, 11 years old: the iris
and lens were displaced anteriorly. A
diffuse anterior cortical cataract is also
present. (D) DSH, 14 years old: the white 
arrow points to the cornea and the black
arrow to the anterior surface of the
mature cataract. The anterior movement
A
R
 of the iris and lens has greatly reduced
the anterior chamber. (E) Gross
photograph of the anterior vitreous and
the lens equator (arrow) showing the
forward bowing of the vitreous and 
the solidified anterior vitreous face (*).
(F) Low magnification photomicrograph
showing the anterior vitreous face, which
is bowing forward (arrow). The solidified 
anterior vitreous face has both an Alcian 
blue component (proteoglycans) and a
PAS component. While not visible in this
slide, usually, there are also spindle cells 
within the PAS component.
C
D
·Feline congenital glaucoma
 Among the histopathologic findings described in congenital
 Sporadic cases of feline congenital or early-onset glaucoma
glaucoma are an abnormal anterior attachment of the iris root
associated with ocular malformations, including 
to the trabecular meshwork, a poorly developed scleral spur and
microphakia, ectopia lentis, iridoschisis, pectinate ligament
uveal meshwork, thickening of the beams of the trabecular
dysplasia, multiple iridociliary cysts and persistent pupillary
meshwork, incomplete separation of the angle structures with
retained fetal tissue, and an abnormal anterior attachment of
A colony derived from Siamese cats with inherited congenital
the longitudinal fibers of the ciliary muscle to the uveal
glaucoma has been established and may serve as a valuable
trabecular meshwork
model for human disease
 Prolonged elevated intraocular pressure in infants and young
Congenital glaucoma is a form of open-angle glaucoma that
children may cause enlargement of the globe (buphthalmos), as
arises in children before the age of two. It appears to be the
the sclera expands and thins. Limbal ectasia and an enlarged
result of abnormal development of the trabecular meshwork
cornea can occur, with circumferential or horizontal tears of
444
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Figure 13.25 lrido-corneal angle
recession and glaucoma in cats. (A-C)
Gross photographs of feline globes show
a wide space between the end of
Descemet's membrane and the iris base 
(*). The cause of this recession of the 
irido-corneal angle is not known, but it 
 might be secondary to prior cyclodialysis
(D) Low magnification photomicrograph
showing the increased distance between
the end of Descemet's membrane 
(arrowhead) and the iris base (arrow).
A
B
D
Figure 13.26 Open-angle glaucoma in
cats. (A) Low magnification
photomicrograph of a feline eye with
open angle glaucoma showing an open
and normal appearing angle (*). (B)
Higher magnification of the ciliary cleft 
from a cat eye with open angle
glaucoma showing an open ciliary cleft 
and corneoscleral trabecular meshwork 
(*). (C) Photomicrograph showing a
scleral vein from an affected cat eye. The
subtle myxomatous thickening around 
the vein (*) is characteristic of open
angle glaucoma and is otherwise rarely
seen. (D) Photomicrograph of a deep
 optic nerve cup in feline open angle
glaucoma.
D
445
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Descemet membrane (Haab striae). Cupping of the optic nerve
There are only 5l cases of equine glaucoma in the COPLOW
Occurs early but is reversible with effective treatment
collection.
Glaucoma is seen in infants and children in association with a
 number of developmental or congenital abnormalities
 19 also have equine recurrent uveitis
including aniridia, Axenfeld anomaly, Rieger syndrome, Peters 
 ll are diagnosed simply as chronic glaucoma
anomaly, and Marfan syndrome.
7 have uveitis other than ERU
 3 are less than 1-year-old and have an anterior segment
dysplasia or early life trauma
+
 4 have trauma as an adult
THE EQUINE GLAUCOMAS
 3 have lens luxation
 2 are listed as open angle glaucoma
As previously stated, equine glaucoma is probably under-recognized
+
 2 have concurrent neoplasia
in clinical practice and under-represented in submissions to ocular
pathology laboratories.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anatomy and physiology
glaucoma. Prog. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 3,
Miller, P.E., Bentley, E., Diehl, K.A., et al., 2004.
16-27.
A clinical and ultrasonographic examination
Gum, G.G., Gelatt, K.N., Esson, D.W., 2007.
Physiology of the eye. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.),
Gelatt, K.N., MacKay, E.O., 2004. Secondary
of the eyes of Bouvier des Flandres dog with
glaucomas in the dog in North America. Vet.
and emphasis on identifying risk factors for
Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th edn.
Backwell, Oxford, pp. 149-182.
Ophthalmol. 7, 245-259.
primary angle closure glaucoma. In: 35th
Annual Conference of the American College
Samuelson, D.A., 1999. Ophthalmic anatomy.
Johnsen, D.A., Maggs, D.J., Kass, PH., 2006.
Evaluation of risk factors for development of
 of Veterinary Ophthalmologists, Washington.
In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.) Veterinary
secondary glaucoma in dogs: 156 cases
DC, p 35.
ophthalmology, 3rd edn. Lippincott Williams
and wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 31-150.
(1999-2004). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 229,
Tripathi, R.C., 1971. Ultrastructure of the exit
1270-1274.
 Mechanisms for retinas and optic nerve
 pathway of the aqueous in lower mammals
Deehr, A.J., Dubielzig, R.R., 1998. A
damage in glaucoma
[a preliminary report on the 'angular
histopathological study of iridociliary cysts
Nickells, R.W., 2004. The molecular biology of 
aqueous plexus'). Exp. Eye. Res. 12.
and glaucoma in golden retrievers. Vet.
retinal ganglion cell death: Caveats and
311-314.
Ophthalmol. 1, 153-158.
controversies. Brain. Res. Bull. 62, 439-446.
Bill, A., 1966. Formation and drainage of
Spiess, B.M., Bolliger, J.O., Guscetti, F, et al.
Morrison, J.C., Johnson, E.C., Cepurna, W..
aqueous humour in cats. Exp. Eye. Res. 5.
1998. Multiple ciliary body cysts and
et al., 2005. Understanding mechanisms of
185-190.
secondary glaucoma in the Great Dane: A
pressure-induced optic nerve damage. Prog.
Brooks, D.E., Strubbe, D.T., Kubilis, PS., et al..
report of nine cases. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1.
Retin. Eye. Res. 24, 217-240.
1995. Histomorphometry of the optic nerves
41-45.
Nickells, R.W., 2007. Ganglion cell death in
of normal dogs and dogs with hereditary
Klaus, G., Moore, D., Pipkorn, M., et al., 2000.
glaucoma: From mice to men. Vet.
glaucoma. Exp. Eye. Res. 60, 71-89.
The causes of glaucoma in dogs: A
Ophthalmol. 10 (Suppl 1), 88-94.
Gelatt, K.N., Brooks, D.E., 1999. The canine
 morphological survey using a collection of
Nickells, R.W., 2007. From ocular hypertension
glaucomas. In: Gelatt, K.N. (Ed.) Veterinary
3980 canine ocular submissions. Vet.
to ganglion cell death: A theoretical sequence
ophthalmology, 3rd edn. Lippincott
Ophthalmol. 3, 255.
 of events leading to glaucoma. Can. J.
Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp.
Gibson, T.E., Roberts, S.M., Severin, G.A., et al.,
Ophthalmol. 42, 278-287.
701-754.
1998. Comparison of gonioscopy and
Radius, R.L., Bade, B., 1981. Pressure-induced
Brooks, D.E., Komaromy, A.M., Kallberg, M.E..
ultrasound biomicroscopy for evaluating the
1999. Comparative optic nerve physiology:
irido-corneal angle in dogs. I. Am. Vet. Med.
in cat eyes. Arch. Ophthalmol. 99,
Implications for glaucoma, neuroprotection,
Assoc. 213, 635-638.
2163-2165.
and neuroregeneration. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2.
Aubin, M.L., Powell, C.C., Gionfriddo, J.R.,
Brooks, D.E., Komaromy, A.M., Kallberg, M.E..
13-25.
et al., 2003. Ultrasound biomicroscopy of
1999. Comparative retinal ganglion cel and
 the feline anterior segment. Vet.
optic nerve morphology. Vet. Ophthalmol.
The glaucomas: general principles
Ophthalmol. 6, 15-17.
2, 3-11.
Bedford, PG., 1980. The aetiology of canine
Bentley, E., Miller, PE., Diehl, K.A., 2003.
Garcia-Sanchez, G.A., Gil-Carrasco, F., Roman,
glaucoma. Vet. Rec. 107, 76-82.
Use of high-resolution ultrasound as a
J.J., et al., 2007. Measurement of retinal
Gelatt, K.N., Brooks, D.E., Samuelson, D.A..
diagnostic tool in veterinary ophthalmology.
nerve fber layer thickness in normal and
1998. Comparative glaucomatology. I: The
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 223, 1617-
glaucomatous cocker spaniels by scanning
spontaneous glaucomas. J. Glaucoma. 7.
1622.
laser polarimetry. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10
187-201.
Miller, PE., Bentley, E., Diehl, K.A., et al., 2003.
(Suppl 1), 78-87.
Pauli, M., Bentley, E., Diehl, A, et al., 2006.
High resolution ultrasound imaging of the
Iwabe, S., Moreno-Mendoza, N.A., Trigo-Tavera,
 Effects of the application of neck pressure by
anterior segment of dogs with primary
F., et al., 2007. Retrograde axonal transport
a collar or harness on intraocular pressure in 
glaucoma prior to, and following the topical
obstruction of brain-derived neurotrophic
dogs. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 42,
application of 0.005% latanoprost.In: 34th
factor (BDNF) and its trkB receptor in the
207-211.
Annual Meeting of the American College of
retina and optic nerve of American Cocker
Smith, R.l., Peiffer, R.L., Jr., Wilcock, B.P, 1993.
Veterinary Ophthalmology, Coeur d'Alene.
spaniel dogs with spontaneous glaucoma.
 Some aspects of the pathology of canine
Idaho, p 76.
Vet. Ophthalmol. 10 (Suppl 1), 12-19.
446
The Glaucomas
Chapter
13
Brooks, D.E., Samuelson, D.A., Gelatt, K.N.,
Objectives, technique and results of a PLD
associated with pupillary block. Am. J.
1989. Ultrastructural changes in laminar
survey. Vet. Ophthalmol. 1, 85-90.
Ophthalmol. 127, 43-47.
optic nerve capillaries of beagles with
Wood, J.L., Lakhani, K.H., Read, R.A., 1998.
Reilly, C.M., Morris, R., Dubielzig, R.R., 2005.
 primary open-angle glaucoma. Am. J. Vet.
Pectinate ligament dysplasia and glaucoma
Canine goniodysgenesis-related glaucoma: A
Res. 50, 929-935.
in Flat coated retrievers. Il. Assessment of
morphologic review of 100 cases looking at
Smedes, S.L., Dubielzig, R.R., 1994. Early
prevalence and heritability. Vet. Ophthalmol.
 inflammation and pigment dispersion. Vet.
 degenerative changes associated with
1, 91-99.
Ophthalmol. 8, 253-258.
spontaneous glaucoma in dogs. J. Vet. Diagn.
Wood, J.L., Lakhani, K.H., Mason, I.K., et al.,
Invest. 6, 259-263.
2001. Relationship of the degree of
 Canine primary open-angle glaucoma
Whiteman, A.L., Klauss, G., Miller, PE., et al.,
goniodysgenesis and other ocular
(POAG)
 2002. Morphologic features of degeneration
measurements to glaucoma in Great Danes.
Gelatt, K.N., Peiffer, R.L., Jr, Gwin, R.M., et al.
and cell death in the neurosensory retina in
Am. J. Vet. Res. 62, 1493-1499.
1977. Clinical manifestations of inherited
dogs with primary angle-closure glaucoma.
Bjerkas, E., Ekesten, B., Farstad, W., 2002.
glaucoma in the Beagle. Invest. Ophthalmol.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 63, 257-261.
Pectinate ligament dysplasia and narrowing
of the irido-corneal angle associated with
Vis. Sci. 16, 1135-1142
Gelatt, K.N., Miyabayashi, T., Gelatt-Nicholson,
Gelatt-Nicholson, K.J., Gelatt, K.N., MacKay.
K.)., et al., 2003. Progressive changes in
 glaucoma in the English springer spaniel.
E.O., et al., 1999. Comparative Doppler
 ophthalmic blood velocities in beagles with
Vet. Ophthalmol. 5, 49-54.
imaging of the ophthalmic vasculature in
primary open angle glaucoma. Vet.
Gelatt, K.N., MacKay, E.O., 2004. Prevalence of
 normal Beagles and Beagles with inherited
Ophthalmol. 6, 77-84.
the breed-related glaucomas in pure-bred
primary open-angle glaucoma. Vet.
Mcllnay, T.R., Gionfriddo, J.R., Dubielzig, R.R.,
dogs in North America. Vet. Ophthalmol. 7.
Ophthalmol. 2, 97-105
et al., 2004. Evaluation of glutamate loss
97-111.
Gum, G.G., Gelat, K.N., Knepper, PA., 1993.
from damaged retinal cells of dogs with
Kato, K., Sasaki, N., Matsunaga, S., et al., 2006.
Histochemical localization of
primary glaucoma. Am. J. Vet. Res. 65.
Incidence of canine glaucoma with
glycosaminoglycans in the aqueous outflow
776-786.
 goniodysplasia in Japan : A retrospective
pathways in normal Beagles and Beagles 
Kallberg, M.E., Brooks, D.E., Gelatt, K.N., et al.
study. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 68, 853-858.
with inherited glaucoma. Prog. Vet. Comp.
2007. Endothelin-1, nitric oxide, and
Martin, C.L., 1975. Scanning electron
Ophthalmol. 3, 52-57.
gutamate in the normal and glaucomatous
microscopic examination of selected canine
MacKay, E.O., Hart, H., Gelatt, K.N., et al.
dog eye. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10 (Suppl 1),
irido-corneal abnormalities. J. Am. Anim.
 2004. Aqueous humor and trabecular
46-52.
Hosp. Assoc. 11, 300-306.
 meshwork myocilin in normal and POAG
Madl, J.E., Mcllnay, T.R., Powell, C.C., et al.,
Bedford, P.G., 1975. The aetiology of primary
 Beagles. In: 35th Annual Meeting of the
2005. Depletion of taurine and glutamate
glaucoma in the dog. I. Small. Anim. Pract.
American College of Veterinary
from damaged photoreceptors in the retinas
16, 217-239.
Ophthalmologists, Washington, DC, p 70.
of dogs with primary glaucoma. Am. J. Vet.
Cottrell, B.D., 1988. Primary glaucoma in the
Gelatt, K.N., MacKay, E.O., Samuelson, D.A.,
Res. 66, 791-799.
Welsh springer spaniel. J. Small. Anim. Pract.
et al., 2005. Aqueous humor myocilin in
Savagian, C.A., Dubielzig, R.R., Nork, T.M.,
29, 185-199.
dogs with glaucoma and cataract. In: 36th
2008. Comparison of the distribution of
Kato, K., Sasaki, N., Matsunaga, S., et al.
Annual Conference of the American College
 glial fbrillary acidic protein, heat shock
2006. Possible association of glaucoma
 of Veterinary Ophthalmologists, Nashville.
protein 60, and hypoxia-inducible factor-
with pectinate ligament dysplasia and
TN, p 67.
lalpha in retinas from glaucomatous and
narrowing of the irido-corneal angle in Shiba
Hart, H., Samuelson, D.A., Tajwar, H., et al.
normal canine eyes. Am. J. Vet. Res. G9,
Inu dogs in Japan. Vet. Ophthalmol. 9,
2007. Immunolocalization of myocilin
265-272.
71 -75.
 protein in the anterior eye of normal and
Alyahya, K., Chen, C.T., Mangan, B.G., et al.
Morrison, J.C., Van Buskirk, E.M., 1982. The
l sop snoieone[g asue-uado Aed
 2007. Microvessel loss, vascular damage and
canine eye: Pectinate ligaments and aqueous
Ophthalmol. 10 (Suppl 1), 28-37.
glutamate redistribution in the retinas of
outflow resistance. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis.
dogs with primary glaucoma. Vet.
Sci. 23, 726-732.
Glaucoma in canine ocular melanosis
Ophthalmol. 10 (Suppl 1), 70-77.
Ekesten, B. Bjerkas, E., Kongsengen, K., et al.
Petersen-Jones, S.M., Mould, J.R., 1991. Chronic
Brooks, D.E., Komaromy, A.M., Kallberg, M.E..
1997. Primary glaucoma in the Norwegian
 glaucoma in Cairn terriers. Vet. Rec. 128,
et al., 2007. Blood flow velocity response of
 Elkhound. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7.
 the ophthalmic artery and anterior optic
619.
 nerve head capillaries to carbogen gas in the
14-18.
Petersen-Jones, S.M., 1991. Abnormal ocular
rhesus monkey model of optic nerve head
Oshima, Y., Bjerkas, E., Peiffer, R.L., Jr., 2004.
 pigment deposition associated with
ischemia. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10 (Suppl 1),
Ocular histopathologic observations in
glaucoma in the Cairn terrier. J. Small. Anim.
20-27.
 Norwegian elkhounds with primary
Pract. 32, 19-22.
 open-angle, closed-cleft glaucoma. Vet.
Mangan, B.G., Al-Yahya, K., Chen, C.T., et al..
van de Sandt, R.R., Boeve, M.H., Stades, F.C.
Ophthalmol. 7, 185-188.
 2007. Retinal pigment epithelial damage.
et al., 2003. Abnormal ocular pigment
breakdown of the blood-retinal barrier, and
Ekesten, B., 1993. Correlation of intraocular
deposition and glaucoma in the dog. Vet.
retinal inflammation in dogs with primary
distances to the inidocorneal angle in
Ophthalmol. 6, 273-278.
glaucoma. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10 (Suppl 1),
Samoyeds with special reference to angle-
Petersen-Jones, S.M., Forcier, I., Mentzer, A.L.
dosure glaucoma. Prog. Vet. Comp.
117-124.
2007. Ocular melanosis in the Cairn terrier:
Ophthalmol. 3, 67-73.
 Clinical description and investigation of
Ekesten, B., Narfstrom, K., 1992. Age-related
mode of inheritance. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10 
Goniodysgenesis-associated glaucoma
changes in intraocular pressure and
(Suppl 1), 63-69.
Ekesten, B., Narfstrom, K., 1991. Correlation of
irido-corneal angle in Samoyeds. Prog. Vet.
Comp. Ophthalmol. 2, 37-40.
Multiple irido-ciliary cysts, 'pigmentary
morphologic features of the irido-corneal
angle to intraocular pressure in Samoyeds.
 Mapstone, R., 1968. Mechanics of pupil block.
uveitis'
Am. J. Vet. Res. 52, 1875-1878.
Br. J. Ophthalmol. 52, 19-25.
Sapienza, J.S., Simo, F.J., Prades-Sapienza, A..
Read, R.A., Wood, J.L., Lakhani, K.H., 1998.
Woo, E.K., Pavlin, C.J., Slomovic, A., et al.
2000. Golden retriever uveitis: 75 cases
Pectinate ligament dysplasia (PLD) and
1999. Ultrasound biomicroscopic
(1994-1999). Vet. Ophthalmol. 3, 241-
glaucoma in Flat coated retrievers. I.
quantitative analysis of light-dark changes
246.
447
Veterinary Ocular Pathology
Feline glaucomas
Wilcock, B.P., Peiffer, R.L., Jr., Davidson, M.G.,
Brooks, D.E., Blocker, T.L., Samuelson, D.A..
Gelatt, K.N., Brooks, D.E., Samuelson, D.A.
1990. The causes of glaucoma in cats. Vet.
et al., 1995. Histomorphometry of the optic
Pathol. 27, 35-40.
1998. Comparative glaucomatology. I: The
nerves of normal horses and horses with
spontaneous glaucomas. J. Glaucoma. 7,
Olivero, D.K., Riis, R.C., Dutton, A.G., et al.,
glaucoma. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 5.
187-201.
 1991. Feline lens displacement: A
193-210.
retrospective analysis of 345 cases. Prog. Vet.
Gilger, B.C., McLaughlin, S.A., 1993. Glaucoma
Ridgway, M.D., Brightman, A.H., 1989. Feline
Comp. Ophthalmol. 1, 239-244.
and corneal stromal abscess in a horse 
 glaucoma: A retrospective study of 29 clinical
cases. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25,
Blocker, T, van der Woerdt, A., 2001. The feline
treated by an intraocular silicone prosthesis
gaucomas: 82 cases (1995-1999). Vet.
and a conjunctival pedicle flap. Equine.
485-490.
Ophthalmol. 4, 81-85.
Pract. 15, 10-15.
Blocker, T., van der Woerdt, A., 2001. The feline
La Croix, N., van der Woerdt, A., Silverman,
Miller, T.R., Brooks, D.E., Gelatt, K.N., et al.,
glaucomas: 82 cases (1995-1999). Vet.
R.H., et al., 2003. Feline malignant
1995. Equine glaucoma: Clinical fndings
Ophthalmol. 4, 81-85.
glaucoma/aqueous misdirection: 16 cases.
and response to treatment in 14 horses. Vet.
 Dietrich, U., 2005. Feline glaucomas. Clin. Tech.
In: 34th Annual Meeting of the American
Comp. Ophthalmol. 5, 170-182.
Small Anim. Pract. 20, 108-116.
College of Veterinary Ophthalmology, Coeur
Wilcock, B.P, Brooks, D.E., Latimer, C.A., 1991.
Hampson, E.C., Smith, R.l., Bernays, M.E..
dAlene, Idaho, p 15.
Glaucoma in horses. Vet. Pathol. 28, 74-
2002. Primary glaucoma in Burmese cats.
Czederpiltz, J.M., La Croix, N.C., van der
78.
Aust. Vet. J. 80, 672-680.
Woerdt, A., et al., 2005. Putative aqueous
Cullen, C.L., Grahn, B.H., 2000. Equine
McLellan, G.J., Betts, D., Sigle, K., et al., 2004.
humor misdirection syndrome as a cause
 glaucoma: A retrospective study of 13 cases
Congenital glaucoma in the Siamese cat - a
of glaucoma in cats: 32 cases (1997-
 presented at the Western College of
 new spontaneously occurring animal model
2003). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 227,
Veterinary Medicine from 1992 to 1999.
for glaucoma research. In: 35th Annual
1434-1441.
Can. Vet. J. 41, 470-480.
 Meeting of the American College of
Trost, K., Peiffer, R.L., Jr., Nell, B., 2007.
Whigham, H.M., Brooks, D.E., Andrew, S.E.,
Veterinary Ophthalmologists, Washington,
 Goniodysgenesis associated with primary
et al., 1999. Treatment of equine glaucoma
DC, p 36.
glaucoma in an adult European short-
by transscleral neodymium:Yttrium
Walde, I., Rapp, E., 1993. Feline glaucoma.
haired cat. Vet. Ophthalmol. 10 (Suppl 1),
aluminum garnet laser
Clinical and morphological aspects (a
3-7.
retrospective study of 38 cases). Eur. J.
Brown, A., Munger, R., Peiffer, R.L., Jr., 1994.
of 23 eyes of 16 horses. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2.
Comp. Anim. Pract. 4, 87-105.
 Congenital glaucoma and inidoschisis in a
243-250.
Coop, M.C., Thomas, J.R., 1958. Bilateral
Siamese cat. Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 4,
Barnett, K.C., Cottrell, B.D., Paterson, B.W..
glaucoma in the cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
121-124.
et al., 1988. Buphthalmos in a thoroughbred
133, 369-370.
foal. Equine. Vet. J. 20, 132-135.
McCalla, T.L., Moore, C.P., Collier, L.L., 1988.
Equine glaucomas
Halenda, R.M., Grahn, B.H., Sorden, S.D., et al.
Phacoclastic uveitis with secondary
Wilkie, D.A., Gilger, B.C., 2004. Equine
1997. Congenital equine glaucoma: Clinical
glaucoma in a cat. Comp. Anim. Pract. 2.
glaucoma. Vet. Clin. North Am. Equine.
 and light microscopic findings in two cases.
13-17.
Pract. 20, 381-391.
Vet. Comp. Ophthalmol. 7, 105-109.
448
Index
Bold page numbers indicate chapter extents
aqueous humor misdirection syndrome, 440,
Buyukmihci, Nedim, x
444
BVD see diarrhea virus under bovine
A
Aspergillus spp., 117
BVD (bovine virus diarrhea), 32, 33
aspiration/injection sites, G5-6, 67
abnormalities, congenital
astrocytoma see glioma
c
developmental or hereditary, 29-57
atrophy. 13,22
infectious diseases, 32-3
ofiris, 250, 251
cairn terrier: ocular melanosis, 280, 281, 282
maternal intoxication, 32
of phthisis bulbi, 97, 103
Callender, George R., 289
specific animal breed, 34-49
 of retina, 16
 cancer see adenocarcinoma; lymphoma;
 dogs see Australian Shepherd; Bedlington;
of tissue, 16
melanoma; mucoepidemoid; neoplastic
Collie; Doberman; Labrador;:
Australian Shepherd, 34, 36
umder inflammatory disease; orbital
Samoyed; Sealyham
avian
sarcoma; squamous cell carcinoma
Rocky Mountain horse, 34, 37, 203, 204,
lenticular reticular metaplasia, 377, 381
Candida spp., 117
249, 255
see aiso raptors
canine
white-tailed deer, 50-1, 52, 53
Axenfeld anomaly, 446
blue eye, 228, 231, 249, 250
sporadic, undetermined origin, 50-4
Briard-beagle dystrophy, 358
se also dysplasia; dystrophy
B
chronic superficial keratitis, 2
achiasma, 401
conjunctiva see canine conjunctiva
acid burn, 94-5, 99
 bacterial infections, 117
cutaneous histiocytosis, 147, 150, 151,
adenocarcinoma, 134, 137, 138, 160, 162,
band keratopathy, 206, 209
152
163
Barron, Charles, x
distemper optic neuritis, 408
agenesis and hypoplasia of eyelid, 144
Bayer, Josef, ix
episcleral onchocercosis, 117, 119
aging tissue, 26
Bedlington terrier, 39, 41, 42
episcleritis, 169, 172-3, 174
 Albert, Daniel, x
Bentley, E., 49
extraocular polymyositis, 120
 Alcian blue stain, 5, 6
Berlin, Rudolf ix
eyelid skin see canine eyelid skin
alkali burn, 95
bi-refringence, 7
glaucoma see canine glaucoma
angiokeratoma [vascular endothelial cell
Bistner, Stephen, x
glioma see glioma
tumor), 230, 234
blastomycosis (Blastomyces dermatitidis), 117,
hemangioma hemangiosarcoma, 188, 189,
angle recession glaucoma, 441-2. 445
270-1, 272
190
angle-closure, glaucoma, 422, 423, 426, 440
bepharitis, eyelid, 150
histiocytosis, cutaneous, 147, 150, 151,
anomalies, ocular
 blood vessels of retina, 351, 352
152
Axenfeld, 446
blue-eyed dogs
lens luxation breed-related zonular ligament
Collie eye, 34, 35, 353, 401
canine blue eye, 228, 231, 249, 250
dysplasia risks, 341-4
eyelid and conjunctiva, congenital, 144-5,
 spindle cell tumors of iris, 303, 308-9, 310
limbal melanocytoma, 234, 238
402
Borgognoni, Thedirico, ix
mast cell tumors, 153-4, 159, 188, 190
Peter's, 29, 31, 46, 48, 49, 204, 250
bovine
meibomian gland adenocarcinoma, 160.
Rocky Mountain horse, 34, 37, 203, 204,
 abnormal ocular development, 32
162, 163
249, 255
diarrhea virus, 379, 385
meningioma, orbital, 131, 136, 138
vascular, 354, 401
fbropapilloma, 158,160, 162
metastatic neoplasia, 309, 311, 312-13
see aiso Peter's; Rocky Mountain horse umder
 optic nerve degeneratiom (vitamin A
multilobular
abnormalities
deficiency), 405
adenoma, orbital, 134, 137,138
anterior chamber collapse syndrome, 227,
squamous cell carcinoma, 164, 181, 182
tumor of bone (chondroma rodens), 131,
238
 thromboembolic meningoencephalitis, 379,
134
aphakia, lens, 324
384
nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis
aplasia, 24-5, 26
virus diarrhea (BVD), 32, 33
(NGE), 169, 172-3, 174
apoptosis (programmed cell death), 12, 14
boxer ulcer (recurrent erosion syndrome), 219,
 optic nerve meningioma by extension, 410,
aqueous glaucoma outflow pathways, 419-20
221, 222
414
449
Index
retinal
subcapsular, opacification and epithelial cell 
onchocerciasis, canine and equine, 117, 119,
 degeneration syndrome, sudden acquired,
metaplasia, 328, 334
175-6, 180
360, 361
cats see feline
papillary mastocytosis, feline, 174, 178
distemper virus, 377, 382, 383
cattle see bovine
pathology of, 166-7
systemic aspergillosis, 277, 278
CEA (Collie eye anomaly), 34, 35
plasmacytic ('plasmoma') of nictitans,
uveitis, asymmetric, 262-3, 264
cells/cellular
canine, 174-5
Lveodermatologic syndrome, 260-3
degeneration and death, 10-12
pseudopterygium in rabbits, 167, 170
canine conjunctiva
apoptosis, 12,14
squamous cell carcinoma, 181, 182, 183,
ligneous conjunctivitis, 167, 169, 171
necrosis, 11-12, 14
184
lymphoma, 188,191
 development/differentation, abnormalities
squamous and reactive papilloma, 192,
melanoma and melanocytoma, 184, 185,
of, 24
195
186, 187
 phagocytic multinucleate, 24
 triamcinolone injection site granulomas.
onchocerciasis, 175, 180
see also aplasia; dysplasia: hypoplasia:
175, 179
 plasmacytic conjunctivitis of nictitans,
metaplasia; neoplasia
tumors of third eyelid gland, 188, 191,
canine, 174-5
exudation, 14, 17
192
squamous cell carcinoma, 164, 168, 181,
chalazion eyelid margin masses, 162, 165
viral papilloma, canine, 190, 192, 193
183
chemical injuries, 94-5
contusion, feline see angle recession glaucoma
and chronic keratitis, 229-30, 232, 233
chondroma rodens, 131, 134
COPLOW pathology service, vii, 1
tumors of third eyelid gland, 188, 191
chondrosarcoma, 103
cornea
viral papilloma, 190, 192, 193, 230
Clerc, Bernard, x
 abnormalities, congenital see corneal
 canine eyelid skin
cosed-cleft glaucoma, 442, 443
abnormalities
 cutaneous melanocytic tumors, 150, 155
Coats, George, ix
anatomy, 202-4
 infundibular keratinizing acanthoma, 152,
Coccidioides inmitis, 117
anterior chamber collapse syndrome, 227,
156
Collie eye anomaly (CEA), 34, 35, 353, 401
238
 juvenile cutaneous histiocytoma, 147, 150,
coloboma
collagenolytic keratitis, 223, 225-6, 227
151, 152
eyelid, 144
dermoid eyelid, 145, 147
mast cell tumors, 153-4, 159
iris, 4, 50
Descemet's membrane, 203
sweat gland adenoma, 153, 157
lens, 45, 324
dystrophies and degenerations se corneal
trichoblastoma, 152, 156
optic nerve, 401-2, 404
dystrophies and degenerations;
cnine glaucoma, 423-39
scleral diseases, 49, 51
endothelium below
 goniodysgenesis-related, 423-7
uveal, 249
edema see edema
 chronic changes
 congenital diseases see abnormalities: under
endothelium
 drainage angle following acute IOP
cataract; corneal; corneal, and under
and endotheliitis, 203, 210, 211, 228-9
eevation, 425, 427
eyelid; lens; optic nerve, retina and
multifocal defects in, 49
 in optic nerve following acute IOP
neovascular
eosinophilic keratitis
eevation, 426, 433, 434
conjunctiva
equine, 216-17,218
 in retina following acute IOP elevation,
 canine see canine conjunctiva
feline, 213, 216, 217
430
cysts, 192, 195
epithelial defects, spontaneous chronic see
pigmentary uveitis, 436, 438, 439
acquired, 123, 124
 erosion syndrome belomu
sequential changes
dermoid eyelid, 145, 147
epithelium, 202-3, 228
drainage angle following acute IOP
and eyelids, diseases of, 143-99
erosion syndrome, recurrent, 219, 221, 222
eevation, 425, 426
melanoma
incision and complications of, 61-3, 64-6
in optic nerve following acute IOP
feline, 187
 injuries, penetrating, 88, 94
evation,425,431,432
and melanocytoma, canine, 184, 185, 186,
keratitis
 in retina following acute IOP elevation,
187
chronic superficial, 2, 212-13, 215
425, 428, 429, 430
 neoplasms and nodular lesions in squamous
fungal, 222-3, 224, 225
lens luxation, 429, 435
cell carcinoma, 176, 178, 180, 181,
keratomalacia, 223, 225-6, 227
 neoplasia associated, 438
182
lamellar corneal stroma, 203
neovascular, 429, 436, 440
conjunctivitis
lipid degeneration, 11
ocular melanosis, 436, 437, 438
canine, 167, 169, 171, 172-6 passim, 173,
 lysis perforation and iris prolapse, 226, 229
thin-walled iridociliary cysts, 436, 438
174, 180, 188, 189, 190, 192, 193
necrosis (cornea nigrum), feline, 217-18,
canthus, lateral, hamartomas of 164, 166, 169
eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis, 173, 177
219, 220
carcinoma
see also episcleritis and canine nodular
neoplasia
meibomian gland, 162
 granulomatous
angiokeratoma, 230, 234
swe also adenocarcinoma; mucoepidermoid;
episclerokeratitis, 169, 172-3, 174
epitheliotropic lymphoma, 230
squamous cell carcinoma
hemangioma hemangiosarcoma
squamous cell carcinoma, canine and
Carlton, William, x
canine, 188, 189, 190
equine, 229-30, 232, 233
Carver, Jacqueline, ix
equine, 188
nigrum (necrosis), feline, 217-18, 219,
cataract, 13, 45, 327-9
feline, 188, 190
perforation, 227,228, 238
age-related, 328
herpes virus keratoconjunctivitis, feline, 173,
and sclera, diseases of, 201-44
categorized by disease extent, 329, 330,
176
sequestration, species other than cat, 218-19.
331-3
ligneous, canine, 167, 169, 171
221
congenital, 327, 328
lipogranulomatous, feline, 23, 174, 179
sequestrum, feline, 217-18, 219, 220
cortical, lens fber opacification, 328, 333
lymphoma, 188, 191
stroma, lamellar, 203
inherited in dogs, 328
mast cell tumors, 188, 190
stromal-invasive squamous cell carcinoma,
 phacoemulsifcation surgery, 70, 71, 72
mucoepidermoid carcinoma, feline, 184,
equine, 230, 233
secondary, 329, 333
185
tear flm, 202
450
Index
 trauma effects, non-penetrating, 84-5
dysgenesis
coloboma, 144
trauma surgical and iatrogenic lesions, 59-71
 goniodysgenesis/anterior segment, 45-9
conjunctival or corneal dermoid, 145,
trauma syndrome, early life, 227, 238
merle ocular, 34, 36
147
ulcer, melting, 223, 225-6, 227
dysplasia, 25
distichiasis, ectopic cilia and trichiasis.
se also sclera
retinal, 33, 39, 40,41, 42
145
corneal abnormalities, congenital and
vitreoretinal, 39, 41, 42
entropion and ectropion, 145
hereditary
see also under retina
hypoplasia, 144
cornea globosa, equine, 203
dystrophy
symblepharon syndrome, 145, 146
keratoconus, 203-4
epithelial, 204, 205
inflammatory lesions of
microcornea, 203
lipid, 206
blepharitis, 150
opacities, 204
night blindness, congenital stationary
cnine cutaneous histiocytosis, sterile
(CSNB), 358
cutaneous granuloma, 147, 150 
band keratopathy, 206, 209
stromal, 204-7, 208
demodicosis, 146, 149
edema, severe, 13, 49, 211, 212, 216
see also under cornea
dermatophytosis ('ringworm'), 147, 149
see also edema
 parasitic dermatitis in horses: cutaneous
epithelial, 204, 205
E
 and ocular habronemiasis/'summer
lipid deposits, acquired, 206, 207
sores', 146, 148
lipid dystrophy and corneal lipidosis, 206
Eberhard, M.L., 119
margin masses, 76
stromal, mineral including crystalline, 204-7,
ectropion, eyelid, 145
canine meibomian gland adenoma/
208
edema
 epithelioma and adenocarcinoma,
see also endothelium umder cornea
cormeal, 13, 49, 211,212, 213, 216
160, 162, 163
cows see bovine
retinal, 13
 lid margin melanocytic tumors
Cyotherapy, effects of, 67-8
tissue degeneration, 13, 15
[melanocytoma), 162, 165
Cyptococcosis (Cryptococus neoformans), 273.
uveal, 13
lipogranuloma (chalazion), 162, 165
274
elecrocautery, effects of, 67, 68
mesenchymal hamartomas of lateral
Cryptococcus neoformans, 117
embryogenesis of tissue, 30
canthus, 164, 166, 169
CSK [chronic superficial keratitis), 2, 212-13,
embryology and spontaneous developmental
squamous cell carcinoma
215
diseases, 30-2
canine, 164, 168
CSNB see congenital stationary night blindness
endothelium see under cornea
equine and bovine, 164, 181, 182
cutaneous histiocytoma, juvenile, 147, 150,
end-stage disease, 97-114
feline, 162, 164, 167, 168
151, 152
feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma, 97,
skin
cutaneous melanocytic tumors, 150, 155
104-12
haired, 76
cyclopia (synophthalmos), 32
 entropion, eyelid, 145
 proliferative and neoplastic lesions, 151,
cysts
eosinophilic keratitis/proliferative keratitis,
155
conjunctival, 123,124, 192, 195
213, 216, 217, 218
bovine fbropapilloma, 158, 160, 162
dermoid, 123
eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis, 173, 177
cutaneous sebaceous adenoma/
epithelial, 22, 228
episcleritis, 169, 172-3, 174
epithelioma, 151-2, 155
intradermal, 123, 125, 126, 151,155
see aiso scleritis
cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis,
irido-ciliary, 250, 251-4, 255
epithelial cysts see umder cysts
150, 155
lesions, 123, 124, 125,126
epithelial dystrophy, 204, 205
epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis
epithelial tumors se under uvea
fungoides), 157, 161
D
equine
equine sarcoid, 158, 160, 162
conjunctivitis and onchocerciasis, 175-6, 180
 peripheral nerve sheath tumors (PNST).
demodicosis, 146, 149
dermatitis, parasitic, 146
157-8, 161
dermatophytosis (eyelid 'ringworm'), 147,
eosinophilic keratitis, 216-17, 218
trichoepithelioma, 152, 156
149
glaucoma, 443-5
see also umder canine; feline
dermoid cyst, 123
hemangioma hemangiosarcoma, 188
Descemet's membrane, 203
indolent ulcer, 216-17
and endothelium, multifocal defects in, 49
 medulloepithelioma of optic nerve head.
 post-operative complications, 62
414, 416
fascitis, nodular, 169, 172-3, 174
rupture and severe corneal edema, 211, 212,
 Ocular anomalies of Rocky Mountain horse.
 FDMI (feline diffuse iris melanoma), 285, 286,
213
congenital, 34, 37, 203, 204, 249,
288-9, 290
diabetic retinopathy, 373
255
feline
diarhea, bovine virus (BVD), 379, 385
ocular habronemias, 146, 148
central retinal degeneration, 360, 362, 363
diarrhea{-{mucosal, bovine virus (BVD-MD),
recurrent uveitis (ERU), 258, 259, 260
conjunctiva
32, 33
sarcoid, 158, 160, 162
lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis, 174,
diseases
senile retinopathy, 365-6, 367
179
 of eyelids and conjunctiva, 143-99
squamous cell carcinoma, 164, 176, 181,
papillary mastocytosis, 174, 178
of lens, 323-47
230, 233
conjunctiva, hemangioma hemangiosarcoma,
of orbit, 115-41
superficial corneal sequestrum, 216-17, 218
188, 189, 190
se also end-stage; inflammatory disease;
Everitt, Jeffrey, x
corneal lysis, perforation, 226, 229
 inflammatory disease, neoplastic
extracapsular extraction lens surgery, 70
corneal necrosis [cornea nigrum), 217-18,
distichiasis, ectopic cilia, 145
extraskeletal osteosarcoma, 129, 133
219, 220
Doberman Pincher, 37-8
eyelid
corneal sequestrum, 217-18, 219, 220
dogs see canine
 congenital anomalies and early life diseases
diffuse iris melanoma, 285, 286, 288-9, 290
Dubielzig, Richard, photographs by:, x, 49,
of
eosinophilic keratitis (proliferative keratitis).
109, 119, 190, 218, 388
agenesis, 144
213, 216, 217
451
Index
eyelid and conjunctiva, diseases of, 143-99
non-specifc ocular tissue changes, elevated
indolent ulcer see recurrent erosion syndrome
eyelid skin
 intraocular pressure, 420, 421
inflammation and immunobiology. 14-24
 apocrine cystadenomas in Persian cats.
underlying pathogenesis, 420
acute, 14-17
153, 158
open-angle, 422,423, 428, 438, 440, 443,
granulomatous, 21, 23
apocrine gland tumor, 153. 157
444, 445
lymphoplasmacytic, non-suppurative, 17
cutaneous melanocytic tumors, 150-1
pathogenesis, critical events, 420-3
surgical, 60
mast cell tumor, 154, 157, 160, 188, 190
IOP elevation, mechanisms for, 421-2
tissue fbrosis, 17
fluoroquinolone-induced toxic retinopathy.
 optic nerve and retinal damage.
see also inflammatory disease
367. 368
mechanisms for, 421
inflammatory disease
herpes virus keratoconjunctivitis, 173, 176
optic nerve and retinal degeneration,
 bacterial infections, 117
infectious peritonitis, 268, 269
mechanisms for, 421
canine extraocular polymyositis. 120
iris prolapse with epithelialization, 226, 229
'pigmentary', 280, 281, 282
cystic lesions
limbal melanocytoma, 234, 239
signifcance and general principles, 420-2
conjunctival cyst, acquired, 123, 124
lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis, 174, 179
 mail-in ocular pathology service, 420
dermoid cyst, 123
Jympho-plasmacytic uveitis (L-P uveitis).
gioma
 salivary/lacrimal ductular cyst, 125
257,258
 optic nerve, 410, 414, 415
zygomatic salivary mucocele, 125, 126
 metastatic neoplasia, 311, 314-15
retinal, 382, 388, 389
 muscle myositis, masticatory, 121
mucoepidermoid carcinoma, 184, 185
globe, 2.5
mycotic infections, 117, 224
 post, traumatic ocular sarcoma see feline
GME (granulomatous meningoencephalitis).
neoplastic
post-traumatic
45-9
canine orbital meningioma, 131, 136, 138
restrictive orbital sarcoma (sclerosing
Golden Retriever: pigmentary uveitis, 436, 438,
canine orbital multilobular adenoma, 134,
pseudotumor), 121, 122
439
137, 138
skeletal osteochondromatosis, 131, 135
 goniodysgenesis/anterior segment syndromes.
lymphoma, 126,128, 129
squamous cell carcinoma, 162, 164, 167,
45-9
metastatic neoplasms, secondary. 138
168, 181, 184
Grahn, Bruce, 359
salivary/lacrimal gland adenocarcinomas,
 systemic hypertension, 370
gram stain, 7
134, 137
toxoplasmosis optic neuritis, 409
granulomatous meningoencephalitis, 408
soft tissue sarcoma
tumors of third eyelid gland, 188, 192
granulomatous scleritis, 232, 234, 236, 237
anaplastic, 128, 131
feline glaucoma, 440-3
Gray, Henry, ix
 extraskeletal osteosarcoma, 129, 133
angle recession (contusion), 441-2, 445
Gwim, Robert M., 165
fbrosarcomas, 127-8, 130
aqueous humor misdirection syndrome, 440,
liposarcoma, 128, 132
444
H
rhabdomyosarcoma, 129, 133
morphological features, 440-1
tumors of skull
canine glaucoma comparison, 440
habronemias, ocular, 146, 148
canine multilobular tumor of bone
diffuse iris melanoma associated, 440, 442.
Haemophilus sommus infection, 379, 384
(chondroma rodens), 131, 134
443
hamartomas of lateral canthus, mesenchymal.
 feline skeletal osteochondromatosis,
 lymphoplasmacytic uveitis, 440, 441
164,166. 169
131, 135
open-angle, 445
Helmholtz, Hermann von, ix
 hyperostotic syndromes, 131
secondary to ocular disease, 440
hemangioma hemangiosarcoma, 188, 189, 190
osteosarcoma, 129, 131, 134
 feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma, 97.
hemorrhage
orbital
104-12, 309, 311
intraocular, 83-4
cellulitis/abscess secondary to tooth rot,
chondrosarcoma, 103
retinal, 76
115, 116, 117
osteosarcoma, 103, 111
herpes virus keratoconjunctivitis, feline, 173.
fat prolapse (herniation), 126, 127
round-cell, 97, 102-3, 110
176
sarcoma, feline restrictive, 121, 122
spindle-cell, 97, 100, 102, 107-9
Hippocrates, ix
sclerosing conditions in canine systemic
uveitis, 113
histiocytoma
histiocytosis, 121, 123
se also feline restrictive orbital sarcoma
fbrous nodular fasciitis, 169, 172-3, 174
soft tissue injury, 117, 118
fbrosarcomas, 127-8, 130
 juvenile cutaneous, canine, 147, 150, 151,
 parasitic infestation and canine episcleral
fbrous histiocytoma, 169, 172-3, 174
152
onchocercosis, 117, 119
Fine, Ben S., 81
histological techniques, 5
 specific organisms, mycotic infections, 117.
Fischer, Craig, x
histoplasmosis (Histoplasma capsulatum), 273.
224
275, 276
vascular lesions, 126
horses see equine
see also inflammation
D
Hunt, Ronald D., x
injury
hydrops, corneal, 211, 212, 213
 cellular and tissue responses to, 9-10
Giemsa stain, 7
hyperviscosity syndrome, retinal, 374
chemical, 94-5
gaucoma, 419-45
hyphema, 83.4
see also penetrating injuries
angle-closure, 422, 423, 426, 440
hypoplasia, 24-5, 26, 33
intradermal epithelial cysts, 123, 125, 126,
aqueous outflow pathways, 419-20
eyelid, 144
151, 155
canine see canine glaucoma
iris, 249,250
intraocular hemorrhage, 83-4
dosed-cleft, 442, 443
intraocular xanthogranuloma, 268
 drainage implant surgery, 72-3
 iridal entrapment or prolapse, 64, 66
equine, 443-5
irido-ciliary epithelial cysts, 250, 251-4, 255
feline see feline glaucoma
immunohistochemical staining techniques, 8
iris
malignant, feline see aqueous humor
immunologic/tissue healing features, unique.
atrophy, 250, 251
misdirection syndrome uder feline
24
coloboma, 4. 50
glaucoma
Inagaki, S., 30
hypoplasia, 249, 250
452
Index
?
limbal melanocytoma, 234, 239
mineralisation, 13
Linde-Sipman van der, Jantine, x
of tissue, 16
Johnson, E.M., 109
Lindley, Denise, x
Mohr, Ulrich, x
Jones, Thomas C., ix-x
lipid deposits, acquired, 206, 207
moon blindness, equine (recurrent uveitis).
lipid dystrophy, 206
258,259,260
K
lipofuscin in retinal RPE cells/lipofuscinosis,
Mould, John, x
13, 358-65
mucoepidermoid carcinoma, 184, 185
keratitis, 74
lipogranuloma (chalazion), eyelid margin
mycotic infections, 117, 224
chronic superfcial, 2, 212-13, 215
masses, 162, 165
collagenolytic, 223, 225-6, 227
lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis, 174, 179
N
eosinophilic (proliferative), 213, 216, 217,
liposarcoma, 128, 132
218
luxation, 339-44
Naranjo, C., 388
fungal corneal, equine and other, 222-3,
 breed-related zonular ligament dysplasia risk,
necrosis, 11-12, 76
224, 225
dogs, 341, 344
feline cormea, 217-18, 219, 220
mycotic, 224
lens, 69-70
necrotizing scleritis, 232, 234, 236, 237
keratoconjunctivitis, 173, 176, 177
secondary, causes of, 341
 of proliferative epithelial cell layer, 76
keratoconus, 203-4
lymphoma, 126, 128, 129
neoplasia, 8, 25
keratomalacia, 223, 225-6, 227
conjunctivitis, canine, 188, 191
see also inflammatory disease; proliferative
keratopathy, band, 206, 209
epitheliotropic neoplasia, 157, 161, 230
 and neoplastic lesions umder eyelid
King, Martyn, 185
and histiocytic neoplasia
skin
Kitt, Theodor, ix
canine, 299, 306
Nettleship, Edward, ix
Konishi, Y. x
feline, 298-9, 305
 neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses of retina,
Kotani, T., 30
histiocytic sarcoma and related tumors,
358-60
303, 307-8
 NGE see nodular granulomatous
L
intravascular malignant
episclerokeratitis
 angioendotheliomatosis, 299, 307.
Nicolas, Eugene, ix
L-P uveitis see lympho-plasmacytic uveitis
310
nictitans gland, 76, 174-5, 188, 191
lacrimal ductular cyst, 125
uveal and histiocytic neoplasia, 298-303
night blindness, congenital stationary, 358
Jacrimal gland, 76
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis, 41, 257, 258,
nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis
adenocarcinomas, 134, 137
440
(NGE), 169, 172-3, 174
laser, surgical
lysosomal retinal storage disorders, 358-60
non-penetrating trauma, 84-8
69 ′00
lysosomal storage disease, 14
corneal effects, 84-5
effects of, 68-9
lens effects, 85-7
Nd:YAG, 69
M
retinal effects, 87, 91-2
Leblanc, Urbain, ix
scleral effects/rupture, 87-8, 92. 93
lens
 Magnusson, Edward Hilding, ix
uveal effects, 85
-induced phacolytic uveitis, 263-4, 265-6,
 Magrane, William C., x
non-surgical trauma, 81-114
267, 276-8
Martin, Charles, x
ocular, in mail-in pathology practice, 81
anatomy, normal, 323
mast cell tumours
 post-traumatic response of ocular tissues, 81,
diseases of, 323-47
canine, 153-4, 159, 188, 190
82-3
aphakia, 324
feline, 154, 157,160, 188, 190
nystagmus, congenital, 401
capsule rupture, 330-6, 334
muscle myositis, masticatory, 121
 cataract see cataract
medulloepithelioma, optic nerve head, equine.
0
coloboma, 324
414, 416
congenital, 45
melanin bleach, 5. 6
ocular pathology, veterinary
 congenital or hereditary conditions,
 melanocytic tumors (melanocytoma), eyelid
abnormalities, 29-58
323-6
margin masses, 162, 165
cornea and sclera, diseases of, 201-44
epithelium role after capsule rupture.
melanoma
eyelids and conjunctiva, 143-200
337-8, 339
canine, conjunctiva and melanocytoma, 184,
gaucomas, 419-48
Juxation see luxation
185, 186,187
lens, diseases of, 323-48
microphakia, 324
canine, uveal, 285, 286, 287
non-surgical trauma, 81-114
 necrosis of proliferative epithelial cell
conjunctiva, feline, 187
optic nerve, 399-417
layer, 76
feline, conjunctiva, 187
orbit, diseases of, 115-41
phacoclastic uveitis, 330, 335, 336
feline, diffuse iris, 285, 286, 288-9, 290
 pathologic mechanisms, 9-28
rabbits, 335,338
 associated with glaucoma, 440, 442.
 principles and practice of, 1-8
phacolytic uveitis, 330, 335
443
retina, 349-98
posterior lenticonus/lentiglobus, 323-4,
 melanosis, ocular ('pigmentary' glaucoma),
surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions,
325
280, 281, 282
59-79
 protein breakdown, 330-6, 334
melting corneal ulcer, 223, 225-6, 227
uvea, 245-322
 septic implantation syndrome, 335.
meningioma, 409-10,412, 413
 see also abnormalities; non-surgical trauma;
337
merle ocular dysgenesis (merle and white spot
surgical trauma
structure, normal, 323, 324
coat color), 34, 36
oculo-skeletal dysplasia syndrome, 41-2, 43-4,
surgery, 69-70, 71, 72
mesenchymal hamartomas of lateral canthus,
45
see also phacoemulsifcation
164, 166, 169
oil Red O stain, 7
lenticonus/lentiglobus of lens posterior, 323-4,
metaplasia, 25, 26
onchocerciasis, 117, 119, 175-6, 180
325
microphakia, lens, 324
onchocercosis, 117, 119
Leonardo da Vinci, ix
microphthalmia syndromes, 50-4
oncosis see necrosis
453
Index
optic nerve, 399-417
bone, 3
atrophy. 2
 achiasma and congenital nystagmus, 401
enucleated globes, 2
blood vessels, 351, 352
anatomy, 399-400
special stains and histological techniques, 5
BVD infection, congenital, 33
head, 399-400
tissue fixation, mailing, 3-4
congenital and hereditary diseases, 353-60
canine asplasia, 403
tnimming and photography, 5
Collie eye anomaly, 353
morphological features of, 410
Peiffer, Robert, Jr, x
congenital disorders, 353-4
coloboma, 401-2, 404
 penetrating injuries, 88-94
retinal folds and dysplasia, 353, 354, 355,
 morphological features of, 402
corneal, 88, 94
356
 congenital and hereditary diseases, 400-4
scleral, 88, 91, 95
stationary night blindness, horses, 353
canine hypoplasia, 400, 401, 402
septic implantation syndrome, 94, 98-9
 degenerations see retinal degenerations.
morphological features of, 401
perforation, corneal, 227, 228, 238
 inherited; retinal degenerations.
inflammation, 408-9, 410, 411
lysis, iris prolapse and, 226, 229
non-inherited
 distemper neuritis, canine, 408
 periodic ophthalmia, equine [recurrent
 detachment see retinal detachment
 granulomatous meningoencephalitis, 408
uveitis), 28, 259, 260
dysplasia, 33, 39, 40, 41, 42
 morphological features of, 408
 peripheral nerve sheath tumors (PNST), 157-8.
edema, 13
neuritis, clinical indications, 408
161
hemorrhage. 76
toxoplasmosis optic neuritis, feline, 409
 persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
inflammatory disease, 377-82
intracanalicular, 400
(PHPV), 37-8, 53
attributable to infectious agents
intracranial, 400
persistent hyperplastic Hrmica vasculosa lentis
canine distemper virus, 377, 382, 383
intraocular, 399
(PHPVL), 37-8, 53
diarrhea (BVD) virus ,bovine, 379, 385
intraorbital, 400
Peruccio, Claudio, x
herpes viral retinitis, camelids, 379, 384
intrascleral, 400
Peter's anomaly, 29, 31, 46-7, 48-9, 204, 250
thromboembolic meningoencephalitis,
optic disc, 399, 401, 403
phacoclastic uveitis oflens, 330, 335, 336, 338
bovine, 379, 384
optic papilla, 399
phacoemulsification surgery, 70, 71, 72
Toxocara canis ocular larva migrans, 380,
 papilledema, 405
phacolytic uveitis, 263-4, 265-6, 267, 276-8,
382, 387
and degeneration in vitamin A deficient
330, 335
toxoplasmosis, 380
cattle, 405
photography. 5
West Nile virus in raptors, 379-80, 386
swelling, trauma and degeneration, 405-7
 PHPV see persistent hyperplastic primary
ischemia, regional, 76
gaucomatous optic neuropathy, 405
vitreous
neoplasia, 382-90
papilledema, 405
 PHPVL see persistent hyperplastic Fumica
 glioma (astrocytoma), canine, 382, 388,
 degeneration in vitamin A deficient
wsculosa lentis
389
cattle, 405
phthisis bulbi, 22
primary neoplasms, 382
trauma and malacia, equine, 405, 406,
atrophy of 97, 103
tumors with features of neural
407
'pigmentary' glaucoma (ocular melanosis),
differentiation, 382-3, 389
swelling, trauma and proptosis, dogs and
280,281,282
neurosensory, 350-1
cats, 407, 408, 409
pigmentary uveitis, 436, 438, 439
 pigment epithelium, 351
tumors, 409-16
plasmacytic conjunctivitis of nictitans, canine,
retinopathy see retinopathy
glioma (astrocytoma), 410, 414, 415
174-5
tear, 376-7, 378
medulloepithelioma of optic nerve head,
Plosz, Bela, ix
toxicity, 10
equine, 414,416
 PNST (peripheral nerve sheath tumors), 157-8,
trauma
meningioma, 409-10, 412,413
161
 wian lenticular metaplasia, 377, 381
meningioma by extension, canine, 410,
 polarized light, 5, 7
 morphological features of, 377
414
 post-traumatic response of ocular tissues, 81.
bunt (contusion), 377, 379, 380
proliferative optic neuropathy, equine, 414
82-3
 traumatic retinopathy, morphologica]
orbit, diseases of, 115-41
 principles and practice of ocular pathology, 1-8
features of, 377
 orbital fat prolapse [herniation), 126, 127
proliferative keratitis see eosinophilic keratitis
vascular disease, 370-4
orbital meningioma, canine, 131, 136, 138
proptosis and optic nerve trauma, 95-6, 101-2
anemia, 374
orbital multilobular adenoma , canine, 134,
protein exudation, 14, 17
diabetic retinopathy, 373
137, 138
Prussian blue stain, 7
hyperviscosity syndrome, 374
 orbital sarcoma, feline restrictive, 121, 122
systemic hypertension, 370, 371, 372
 orbital sclerosing conditions in canine systemic
R
vasculopathy. 76
histiocytosis, 121, 123
see also glaucoma
Aonee gu apu ss Ainju anss os [nqo
radiotherapy, complications following, 76
 retinal degenerations, inherited, 354-8
disease
raptors, 379-80, 386
atrophy, generalized progressive retinal,
osmotic cataract, 13
recurrent erosion syndrome
354-5, 357,358, 359
 osteochondromatosis, feline skeletal, 131, 135
boxer ulcer, 219, 221, 222
dystrophy and congenital stationary night
osteosarcoma, 103, 111
equine, 258, 259, 260
blindness, 358
refringence, 7
lysosomal storage disorders and neuronal
P
retina, 349-97
ceroid lipofuscinosis, 358-60
 abnormalities see displasia and neoplasmia
retinopathy, multifocal canine, 358, 359
 pannus see chronic superficial keratitis
belou
retinal degenerations, non-inherited, 360-9
papilledema of optic nerve, 405
age-related degenerative changes, 365-6
central, taurine deficiency, feline, 360, 362.
papilloma, squamous and reactive, 192, 195
 lipofuscin accumulation, 365
363
 pathologic mechanisms, 9-28
 peripheral cystoid degeneration, 365
lipofuscin in RPE cells, 3G0, 364
 pathology laboratory and conditions
 plant toxicity and sheep. 368
accumulation, 365
 infrequently encountered, 2-5
see also retinopathy
clinical features associated with increase,
adnexa and other soft tissues, 2-3
anatomy, 350-2
360
454
Index
large amounts, effects of, 362-5
spindle cell tumors/sarcomas
neoplasia, 25
morphological features associated with
 feline post-traumatic ocular, 97, 100, 102,
optic cup. 31
increase, effects of, 360-2
107-9
embryogenisis, 30
sudden acquired retinal degeneration
 of iris in blue-eyed dogs, 303, 308-9, 310
exudation
syndrome, 360,361
spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial defects
macrophage-rich. 19
retinal detachment, 374.7
see recurent erosion syndrome
protein, 17
consequences of, 374-5
squamous cell carcinoma
fbrosis in inflammation, 17, 21
factors contibuting to, 374, 375
bovine, 164, 181,182
fixatives for, 3
factors maintaining normal attachment, 374
canine, 164, 168, 181,183
handling procedures, COPLOW
morphlogical features of, 375, 376
equine, 164, 176,181,230,233
recommended, 2-5
as artifact of tissue processing, 376
feline, 162,164,167, 168,181,184
hemosiderosis, 12
retinoblastoma in animals, 390
Stades, Frans, x
inflammation suppurative, 18
retinopathy
 Staffordshire Bull terrier, 37-8
mineralisation, 16
diabetic. 373
stains
post-traumatic response of, 81, 82-3
equine senile, 365-6, 367
 Alcian blue, 6
toluidine blue stain, 7
feline fluoroquinolone-induced toxic, 367,
Giemsa, 7
Toxocara canis and retina, 380, 382, 387
368
gram, 7
toxoplasmosis, 20
light-induced (photic), 367, 368
immunohistochemical techniques, 8
retinal, 380
ovine, Scrapie, 368-9
melanin bleach, 5, 6
trauma
traumatic (acute, peracute and chronic), 377
oil Red O, 7
blunt (contusion), 377, 379, 380
Ris, Ron, X
 polarized light, 5. 7
optic nerve and proptosis, 95-6, 101-2
ringworm, eyelid (dermatophytosis), 147, 149 
Prussian blue, 7
syndrome, early life, 227, 238
Rocky Mountain horse: ocular anomalies, 34.
silver, 7
 see also non-penetrating; non-surgical
37,203,204,249
toluidine blue, 7
 trauma; surgical trauma
round-cell post-traumatic ocular sarcoma,
trichrome, 5, 6
triamcinolone injection site granulomas, 175,
feline, 97, 102-3, 110
Verhoeff's van Gieson, 7
179
 RPE see retina pigment epithelium
von Kossa, 7
trichiasis, eyelid, 145
Rubin, Lionel, x
Ziehl-Neelsen, 7
trichrome stain, 5, 6
Ruff, Giordano, ix
staphyloma, 230, 232, 235
Trucksa, Robert, x
stromal dystrophy, 204-7, 208
tumors
s
surgery
angiokeratoma, 230, 234
cataract (phacoemulsification), 70, 71, 72
bone, 131, 134
salivary ductular cyst, 125
 glaucoma drainage implant, 72-3
cutaneous, 150, 151, 152
salivary gland adenocarcinomas, 134, 137
intrascleral prostheses and evisceration,
eyelid, 150, 155, 162, 165, 188, 191
sarcoma see inflammatory disease, neoplastic;
73-5
feline, 153,157, 188, 192
orbital sarcoma
Jaser, 68-9
melanocytic, 162, 165
 SARDS (sudden acquired retinal degeneration
lens, 69-70, 71, 72
see also epithelial umder uvea; glioma;
syndrome), 360, 361
surgical trauma and iatrogenic lesions, 59-79
 histiocytoma; mast cell; meningioma;
Saunders, Leon, ix-x
full-thickness corneal incisions, 64-6
spindle cell
Schobert, C., 388
 glaucoma drainage implant, 72-3
sclera, diseases of
intraocular surgery, complications of, 59-63
coloboma, 49, 51
intrascleral prostheses and evisceration
Jimbal melanocytoma
surgery, 73-5
Uberreiter, Otto, ix
canine, 234, 238
lens surgery, 69-70, 71, 72
Uberreiter's syndrome (chronic superfcial
feline, 234, 239
radiotherapy and ocular complications, 76
keratitis), 2, 212-13, 215
penetrating injuries, 88, 91, 95
 tissue effects of electrocautery, cryotherapy
uvea, 245-322
staphyloma, 230, 232, 235
and surgical laser, 67-9
anatomy, normal, 245-9
see aiso scleritis
sutures, adverse reactions around, 64, 66
anterior uvea
scleritis
Swanson, H.L., 49
ciliary body. 246-8
necrotizing, 232, 234, 236,237
 symblepharon syndrome of eyelid, 145, 146
iris, 245-6
see also episcleritis
synophthalmos, 32
posterior uvea, choroid, 248-9
sclerosing pseudotumor, 121, 122
Szutter, Laszlo, ix
canine ocular melanosis, 280, 281, 282
Scrapie in sheep. 368-9
coloboma, 249
SCTBED seespindle cell tumors
T
see also Collie eye
Sealyham terrier, 39, 41, 42
degenerative, hyperplastic, and age-related
 septic implantation syndrome injuries.
taurine deficiency, 360
conditions, 250-5
 penetrating, 94, 98-9
tear flm, 202
cysts of irido-ciliary epithelium, 250-5
septic lens implantation syndrome, 335, 337
teratogenesis, 32, 33
iris atrophy 250, 251
sheep
tissue
edema, 13
intoxication, maternal, 32
aging. 26
epithelial tumors, 291-8
and plant toxicity, 368
atrophy, 16
feline ocular neurological tumor, 295-6,
Scrapie, 368-9
degeneration, edema, 13, 15
302
silver stain, 7
development/differentation, abnormalities
irido-ciliary epithelial tumors in cats, 295,
Simons, Kenneth, x
 of, 24, 31
299, 300
Smith, Hilton A., ix-x
aplasia and hypoplasia, 24-5, 26, 33
morphological features, 295, 301
snake bite, 95, 100
dysplasia, 25
 irido-ciliary epithelial tumors in dogs.
Snape, Andrew, ix
metaplasia, 25, 26
291-4
455
Index
morphological features, 292, 297
neoplasia, 282-315
pathological features, 293, 298
melanocytic, 282, 283-6, 287-90
medulloepithelioma, 296-8, 303, 304
metastatic, 309, 311, 312-15
Wardrup, James, ix
feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma, 309,
neovascular proliferation and tissue fbrosis,
Whiteley. Herb, x
311
255
white-tailed deer, 50-1, 52, 53
inflammation-uveitis, 255, 257
clinically significant complications, 255
Wilcock, Brian, X
canine asymmetric uveitis, 262-3, 264
neoplastic membranes, 255
wound dehiscence, 65
canine ocular larva migrans with Toxocara
non-neoplastic diseases, 249-82
Wyman, Milton, ix
canis, 278-9, 280
congenital, 249
canine uveodermatologic syndrome, 260-3
canine blue eye, 228, 231, 249, 250
x
equine recurrent uveitis, 258, 259, 260
iris hypoplasia and aniridia, 249, 250
feline infectious peritonitis, 268, 269
merle ocular dysgenesis, 34, 36
xanthogranuloma, intraocular, 268
feline lympho-plasmacytic uveitis, 257-8
 persistent pupillary membranes, 249-50
intraocular xanthogranuloma, 268
uveitis, 113, 268
Y
Jens-induced phacolytic uveitis, 263-4,
equine recurrent, 258, 259, 260
265-6, 267, 276-8
lympho-plasmacytic, 41, 257, 258, 440
Yanoff, Myron, 81
 systemic infections and parasitic diseases.
Yoichi Konishi, x
266, 268, 270-1, 273-8, 279
V
Young, Stuart, x
lymphoma and histiocytic neoplasia,
298-303
Van der Linde-Sipman, Jantine, x
Z
in cats, 298-9, 305
vascular endothelial cell tumor, 230, 234
in dogs, 299, 306
Veratrum califormicum toxicity, 32
Zarfoss, K.M., 1
histiocytic sarcoma and related tumors
Verhoeff stain, 7
Zeiss, C.1., 109
303, 307-8
vitreoretinal dysplasia, 39, 41, 42
Ziehl-Neelsen stain, 7
intravascular lymphoma in dogs.
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome (VKH)
Zimmerman, Lorenz E., x
malignant angioendotheliomatosis.
260, 279
zygomatic salivary mucocele, 125, 126
299, 301, 307
von Kossa stain, 7
456