Fluid Therapy
for Veterinary Technicians
and Nurses
Charlotte Donohoe
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Fluid Therapy
for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Fluid Therapy
for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Charlotte Donohoe, RvT, vTs (EcC)
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inic., Publication
This edition first published 2012 @ 2012 by Charlotte Donohoe
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ,
UK
Editorial offces: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/
wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific
clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted
a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the
Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1484-1/2012.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
tra demarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned
subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Donohoe, Charlotte.
 Fluid therapy for veterinary technicians and nurses / Charlotte Donohoe.
p- ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1484-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Fluid Therapy-veterinary. 2. Body Fluids-physiology. 3. Veterinary Medicine-methods.
4. Water-Electrolyte Imbalance-veterinary. SF 910.W38]
636.089'63992-dc23
2011036435
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not
be availa ble in electronic books.
12012
To my parents: Thank you for always believing in me and for constantly supporting me, no matter
whattheendeavor.
To my husband and my children: Thank you for your patience, your understanding, and your love,
help, and support through this enormous project. I couldn't have done this without you.
To my mentor, Dr. Karol Mathews: You are a special human being. I hope you realize the impact that
Thank you so much for giving me the opportunity to explore the limits of my capabilities. It has been
quite an adventure.
Contents
Preface
ix
1
Body Water
3
2
Patient Assessment
15
3
Routes of Administration
35
4
Fluid Pumps and Tools of Administration
67
5
Calculating Rates of Administration
87
6
Patient Monitoring
107
7
Complications of Fluid Therapy
135
8
Fluid Types
149
9
Fluid Selection
167
10
Parenteral Nutrition
179
11
 Blood Transfusions and Blood Component Therapy
195
Appendix: Answers to Review Questions
221
Index
227
PowerPoint documents of figures and PDFs of questions and answers available for
download at www.wiley.com/go/donohoenursing.
vii
Preface
As the practices of veterinary nursing and veterinary technology evolve, technicians are
blessed with more and more responsibility. As our profession grows, we must accept new
challenges and strive to maintain a level of knowledge and technical skills that allows us
to perform routine as well as unexpected procedures with grace and confidence.
Fluid therapy is fundamental to many aspects of small animal practice. Its role is
 multifaceted because fluids are used as a supportive measure in surgical patients, as a
means of nutrition in hospitalized patients, and as the backbone of therapy in severely
compromised animals.
Given that the role of fluid therapy is so important, the objective of the technician
should be fluency in all of its aspects. The technician is responsible for obtaining and
 maintaining intravenous access, monitoring a patient's responses to fluid therapy, and
noticing and reacting appropriately to unexpected or undesired changes in a patient's
condition that are a result of therapeutic interventions.
To carry out these responsibilities, we must be well versed in the principles that guide
a  r  sn rn s  a ar r n
with respect to fluid therapy. However, these are often either too basic or too advanced
with respect to the information covered. This text has been compiled with the goal of
 bridging the gap between these two extremes.
Small animal practices often rely on their technicians to provide current, safe, and
practical technical expertise with respect to catheter placement and monitoring of intra-
venous fluid therapy. This text includes details related to these areas that can help guide
technicians in deciding the appropriate approach to intravenous therapy for their respec-
tive practice.
 In addition, information pertaining to long-term fluid therapy, intravenous nutrition,
varieties of equipment, and potential complications associated with fluid therapy has
also been included.
This text presents technician students with a wealth of new information with which
they can put new skills and ideas to safe use. It offers experienced technicians new ideas,
ix
Preface
additional information, and detailed facts to support their current role while increasing
their knowledge base. For advanced care technicians, this text solidifies the rationale
behind many of the techniques and theories learned on the job while presenting new
information and differing opinions for consideration.
Acknowledgments
All of the illustrations in this text were created by Rachel Wallach. Rachel, I can't thank
 you enough for sharing your time, your creativity, and your generosity with me through-
out this project.
I would like to include a special thank you to Vicki Titus and Holly for their patience,
their eagerness to help, and their special contribution to the cover of this book.
Charlotte Donohoe
FluidTherapy
for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
BodyWater
Body water is typically described by referring to how much of an animal's body weight
it represents. It is most often defined as a percentage and thus can be calculated for any
patient. In the average healthy animal, total body water is equivalent to 60% of total
body weight. An animal's body condition must be considered before determining the
expected volume of body water. Because fat contains little or no water, an obese animal
will have less than 60% of its body weight devoted to water. Animals that are exces-
sively thin have a higher percentage of weight, roughly 70% as body water. Neonates
also differ from the average healthy adult because water comprises roughly 80% of their
body weight (Michell et al., 1989).
Body water is housed in several different compartments. Of the 60% of body weight
that is fluid, 40% is maintained in the intracellular fluid space (ICF) and 20% in the
extracellular fluid space (ECF) (Wellman et al., 2006). Although the extracellular space
houses a smaller volume of body water than the intracellular space, it is an extremely
important consideration during fluid therapy.
 In illness, fluid loss occurs through different routes. Initial losses may cause a distur-
bance in one of the body's compartments, but these losses eventually are distributed and
shared across all compartments (Fig. 1.1A, B). Water is borrowed from one space to
replenish another. The compartments that are smallest by comparison experience a more
a an a s r an  s n  nn 
lular space is small to begin with, losses from this space must be addressed, and it is
the first compartment that is replenished by intravenous fluid therapy.
Much of the extracellular fluid is found in the tissues, bathing the cells, and is referred
to as interstitial fluid (ISF). This ISF represents approximately three-quarters of the total
ECF, translating into about 15 % of the patient's body weight. The remainder of the ECF
is found in the vascular space and represents 5% of total body weight. Body water housed
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
120%
100%
100%
%08
Body
Weight
60%
60%
Body
Water
40%
40%
Intracellular
Fluid
20%
20%
15%
Extracellular
Fluid
Interstitial
Fluid
5%
Plasma
Water
(a)0%
Figure 1.1. (a) Percentages of body weight represented by each body water compartment.
Chapter 1:Body Water5
Body Water Compartments
Intracellular
Space
Interstitial
Intravascular
Extracellular
Space
Space
Space
RRC
(b)
Vessel Wall
R.ulnlicch
Figure 1.1. (Continued) (b) The different compartments that house body water. RBC, red blood cells. Illus-
tration by Rachel Wallach.
within the vasculature is referred to as plasma, the noncellular portion of the blood. At
first glance it may seem that these numbers do not play a vital role in the day-to-day
routine of the veterinary technician. Howe ver, it is important to recognize that without
the ability to estimate the fluid volume in the extracellular compartment, we cannot plan
The synovial joints, the aqueous chambers of the eyes, and the cerebrospinal space
contain a small portion of ECF (-1% body weight) and are known as the transcellular
fluid compartments (Wellman 2006) (Fig. 1.2).
In the healthy animal the movement of fluid throughout these compartments is well
controlled. There is a natural tendency for water to move in a manner that will balance
the solute concentrations between compartments. Solutes are the dissolved substances 
that reside within body fluids. When the solute concentration of a compartment is
altered, water moves into the compartment with the higher solute concentration to
restore balance.
 Body water compartments are separated by a semipermeable membrane, which
means that water and certain solutes may pass through the membrane and others may
not. The process of osmosis occurs when water passes through a semipermeable mem-
brane and is drawn toward a space that has a higher solute concentration (Wellman
2006). Movement of water into an area of higher solute concentration dilutes the solute
and reinstates equilibrium.
For the various body water compartments to carry out their physiologic responsibili-
ties, it is sometimes necessary to maintain water within a compartment and prevent its
movement into higher solute areas. Various solutes within the compartments are respon-
sible for this regulation. Due to their inability to pass freely through semipermeable
membranes, these solutes exert a force on the interior of their respective compartment.
6Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Bone.
Joint Capsule
Cartilage.
Synovial Fluid
Figure 1.2. The synovial joint is one of the potential spaces that houses a small portion of the extracellular
body water. Illustration by Rachel Wallach.
Figure 1.3. Osmosis is the process by which water moves through a semipermeable membrane from an area
of lower solute concentration to an area of higher solute concentration. The result is that the solute concentra-
tion on either side of the membrane is the same. Illustration by Rachel Wallach.
This force, referred to as osmotic pressure, is the amount of force required to keep water
within a compartment (Guyton and Hall 2000d). A compartment with higher solute
concentration has greater osmotic pressure. This compartment exerts the stronger pull
(between two compartments) and draws water toward it, across the semipermeable
membrane (Fig. 1.3).
Chapter 1:BodyWater7
Intracellular
Mg
Space
Mg
Na +
Mg
Interstitial
Intravascular
Extracellular
Mg
Space
Space
Space
Cl
RBC
K
Mg
Mg
Na +
MC
Na
R.wllch
VesselWall
Figure 1.4. The appropriate compartments for a variety of ions. Illustration by Rachel Wallach.
Electrolytes and their fluid compartments
The extracellular and intracellular fluid compartments contain different concentrations
of important solutes called ions, which are electrically charged particles found through-
out the body water compartments. The term electrolyte refers to the combination of
ions to form a substance that will break down in water.
Electrolytes have an important role in maintaining acid-base status within the body.
A second but no less important role of electrolytes is to provide osmotic pressure and
regulate the movement of body water between compartments.
The extracellular and intracellular spaces contain high concentrations of sodium
(Nat) and chloride (Cl ) and potassium (K+) and magnesium (Mg), respectively (Guyton
and Hall 2000c) (Fig. 1.4).
Sodium has a positive electrical charge associated with it and referred to as a cation.
It is the most plentiful cation in the ECF. Sodium plays an important role in maintaining
the volume of water in the extracellular compartment. It is exchanged between the
intracellular and extracellular compartments with ease. Each cell membrane houses a
 pump that exchanges sodium for potassium. When sodium concentration reaches an
unsuitable level within the cell, the sodium potassium pump removes a sodium ion
(positive charge) in exchange for a potassium ion (positive charge) (Wellman et al., 2006)
(Fig. 1.5). This mechanism maintains a higher concentration of sodium outside the cell,
making it an important regulator of osmosis (water will diffuse into areas of higher
sodium concentration).
 Chloride has a negative charge associated with it and is referred to as an anion. It is
the most abundant anion in the ECF compartment. It too can move in and out of cells.
The ECF also contains a substantial amount of bicarbonate and a small amount of
8Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Nat/K+ Pump
Na+
Na
K+
Na+
Na
K+
K
K+
K+
Na+
Na+
K+
<+
K+
R.alich
Figure 1.5. The sodium potassium pump is responsible for moderating the exchange of sodium and potas-
sium between the intracellular and extracellular spaces. Illustration by Rachel Wallach.
potassium. Despite their smaller numbers, these ions have important physiologic roles
and impart severe consequences when their concentrations are altered.
The ICF compartment is characterized by high concentrations of potassium (cation)
and magnesium (anion). Potassium is vital to normal cellular metabolism due to its
important influence has on the movement of water into and out of the cell. Disease(s)
causing damage to, or death of, cells results in cellular potassium leaking into
the extracellular space. This is of particular interest in the clinical setting when we
consider how often we see abnormalities in serum potassium levels. Hyperkalemia,
the condition in which the level of potassium within the blood is elevated, can lead
to severe arrhythmias (Stepien 1999). In particular, bradyarrhythmias and cardiac
arrest are significant concerns with hyperkalemic patients. Magnesium, phosphate, and
protein molecules also impart a regulatory influence on the movement of water between
compartments.
 The concentration of electrolytes within a solution can be expressed in several dif-
ferent ways. One of the formats encountered frequently in fluid therapy is millimoles
 per liter (mmol/L). This measurement denotes the molecular weight of the electrolyte in
a volume of solvent (Wellman 2006).
Water Gain and Water Loss
The volume of water that normally exists in the body is fairly consistent. Animals have
two primary means of obtaining water: drinking and eating. A normal healthy animal
regulates its drinking based on its body's requirements. For example, the body of an
animal that has been exposed to an extremely hot environment is likely to lose a larger
volume of body water than normal due to its panting (increased loss of water via respi-
ratory tract) than an animal resting in a cool indoor environment. The loss of water
Chapter 1: Body Water9
from the ECF compartment lowers the concentration of water and increases solute
concentrations in that compartment. This decrease in water concentration in the ECF
compartment sets in motion a chain of activities, ultimately resulting in an increased
water demand (increased thirst).
In the literature, a wide range of values is published for the volume of water normally
consumed by a healthy animal in one day. In canines, water consumption varies between
 50 and 100 mL/kg per day, whereas felines are expected to consume somewhere between
40 and 70mL/kg per day (Wellman 2006). The volume of water obtained through an
animal's diet can vary depending on the type of food consumed. Canned food has a
higher water content than dry kibble, and as a result, animals on a canned diet consume
less water than those on a dry diet. Semi-moist kibble is also available for canines and
felines. This type of diet falls in the middle of the moisture range, containing more water
than kibble but less than canned food.
Dietary proteins, carbohydrates, and fats are broken down into smaller blocks as
they are digested. Carbohydrates are reduced into simple sugars, fats into fatty acids
and glycerol, and protein into amino acids. One of the processes involved in digestion
is oxidation, defined as the combination of a substance with oxygen. Water is one of
the products of this process and as such is made available to the body through the
digestion of food (Guyton and Hall 2000a). Regardless of the type of diet, the metabo-
lism of it produces small amounts of water.
Water is removed from the body in three ways. It is excreted in the urine, excreted
in the stool, and lost via the skin and respiratory tract. The body ultimately attempts
 to maintain balance between compartments despite continuous gains and losses of body
water. Fluid must be exchanged between compartments to maintain this balance.
ments. Several circumstances influence when water is exchanged between compartments.
As previously discussed, solute concentration regulates movement of water across a
semipermeable membrane. The use of fluid therapy involves many different solutes that
are most often delivered into the intravascular space. In light of their contribution to
fluid therapy, we discuss plasma proteins and sodium and chloride, the solutes, and the
roles they play in the movement of fluid between compartments.
Plasma protein
The protein molecules found within the plasma are large in size and have a high molecu-
lar weight. In solution, particles with a high molecular weight are called colloids. An
important characteristic of plasma proteins is their contribution to osmotic pressure.
When referring specifically to the force exerted by plasma proteins, it is acceptable to
use the terms oncotic pressure and colloid osmotic pressure interchangeably (Wellman
2006).
 Recall from the discussion regarding osmotic pressure that solutes that cannot pass
through a semipermeable membrane exert force on one side of the membrane and draw
water into their compartment. The same is true of proteins. Protein molecules are large
and do not readily fit through most capillary pores. In health, the concentration of
plasma proteins in the vascular compartment is higher than that throughout the inter
stitium (Guyton and Hall 2000b).
Colloidal osmotic pressure is one of the important forces governing the movement
of fluids throughout the extracellular compartment (between the interstitium and
10Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
intravascular spaces). This is of particular interest in two situations frequently encoun-
tered in fluid therapy.
Hypovolemic shock is a condition encountered in veterinary patients and with fre-
quency in emergency medicine. It arises from a depletion of intravascular volume that
is typically precipitated by trauma, severe acute disease, or prolonged illness (Wingfield
2002). Patients that suffer from hypovolemic shock experience a subsequent decrease
in cardiac output and blood pressure (hypotension). Blood flow is prioritized to areas
that are vital to the animal's survival. Blood flow to the periphery is diminished. Tissue
perfusion (flow of blood) in these areas is maintained or minimized, respectively.
 Hypovolemic patients require administration of fluid therapy to preserve perfusion
to vital organs; this is accomplished by increasing the intravascular volume. In severe
cases of cardiovascular collapse, fluids known as colloids are occasionally used as a
component of therapy. Colloids are fluids rich in large molecules and as such tend to
stay in the vascular space (they are too large to pass through healthy capillaries). They
add to the colloid osmotic pressure within the vascular space, which encourages fluid
from the extravascular space to shift into the vasculature. The increase in vascular
volume means an increase in venous return and consequently an increase in CO.
In patients suspected of having damaged or leaky capillaries, plasma proteins become
 an important consideration for a different reason than increasing colloid osmotic pres-
sure. Where they can be used to a patient's benefit in the previous example, the use of
colloids can be detrimental in disease states that alter capillary permeability, such as in
cases of sepsis or with burn victims (Dhupa 2002). Leaky capillaries cannot effectively
maintain large molecules within the intravascular space. If proteins escape into the
interstitium, body water will follow. This movement of body water will upset the balance
between compartments and lead to interstitial edema (Dhupa 2002). Colloids (synthetic
or natural) must be avoided or be used with extreme caution in patients experiencing
disease or injury that compromises the integrity of the capillaries.
Solutes and their inffuence
Solute molecules, such as sodium and chloride, move between the vascular and intersti-
tial spaces with greater ease than protein molecules. However, this does not preclude
these ions from having an extreme influence on the movement of body water (Fig. 1.6).
Fluids developed for use in medical settings have varying amounts of solute concen-
trations providing flexibility to tailor the fluid therapy to specific patient needs. It is
helpful, then, to understand how the delivery of hypertonic, hypotonic, and isotonic
 solutions to the intra vascular compartment affects therapy.
A fluid is considered isotonic if it has the same solute concentration as the one to
which it is being compared. Of particular interest to veterinary technicians is the
comparison with the ECF. If an isotonic solution is delivered intravenously, it will
distribute evenly throughout the interstitial and intravascular spaces. Because there are
no dramatic differences in solute concentration, there is no significant shift of water
between compartments. The delivery of an isotonic fluid increases the volume of the
entire extracellular compartment. Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) is an example of an
isotonic fluid
A bypotonic fluid has a solute concentration lower than that of the ECF When deliv-
ered intravascularly, this fluid causes a shift of water into the cellular space so that the
solute concentration of extracellular fluid returns to normal. Both compartments (ICF
Chapter 1: Body Water 11
Hypotonic
lsotonic
Hypertonic
H2C
R.aeiicc?
Figure 1.6.
Solutions with different solute concentrations have specific effects on the cell. Isotonic solutions
do not cause extensive movement of water (MzO) into or out of the cell. Hypertonic solutions cause movement
of HzO out of the cell. Hypotonic solutions cause movement of HzO into the cell. Illustration by Rachel
Wallach.
and ECF) end up with an overall increase in volume, but the gain is more substantial
within the cells. An example of a hypotonic solution is 0.45% sodium chloride.
Hypertonic fluids have a higher solute concentration than that of the ECF. Addition
of this fluid to the intravascular space causes a dramatic increase in solute concentration,
causing water to move from the interstitium and the intracellular space into the vascu-
lature. This large movement of water then dilutes the solute concentration to return the
vascular compartment to its normal solute concentration. An example of a hypertonic
solution is 7% sodium chloride.
Hypertonic fluids must be used with caution because they borrow water from the
intracellular compartment. Dehydrated patients have little to spare in their intracellular
compartment, and adjunctive therapy is often needed to protect these cells from further
fluid loss.
Chapter Summary
Body water represents 60% of body weight in the healthy animal. The volume of water
housed within the body is divided into different compartments called the intracellular
and extracellular spaces. The intracellular space identifies all that water housed within
the cells throughout the body. The extracellular space contains the remainder of body
water that is found outside of the cells. The extracellular space is further divided into
 the intravascular and interstitial spaces. The interstitial compartment holds water found
between the cells but not within the vasculature. The intravascular space corresponds
to the water that circulates throughout the vasculature at any given time. The body
water within the vascular space is the noncellular component of blood and is also
referred to as plasma.
12Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Electrolytes are combinations of ions that break down in water. Their balance is of
critical importance to the health of all animals. Different electrolytes are found in specific
concentrations in the intracellular and extracellular compartments.
Colloid osmotic pressure, or oncotic pressure, refers to the strong force exerted by
proteins found in plasma. These proteins are too large to pass through semipermeable
membranes. They exert a force across the membrane that helps maintain the balance of
water in its respective compartment.
Fluids that influence flow of water into and out of the cellular space can be isotonic,
hypotonic, or hypertonic. Isotonic fluids have the same solute concentration as the
intracellular space. Hypotonic fluids have a lower solute concentration than the intracel-
lular space. Hypertonic fluids have a higher solute concentration than the intracellular
space. These cause no net change in movement of water a net movement of water into
the cell, and a net movement of water out of the cell, respectively.
Review Questions
1. What percentage of body weight is composed of water in the average healthy
animal?
2. Is the percentage of body weight represented by water higher or lower in neonates
than in adults?
3. The water housed within the intravascular space contributes approximately what
percentage of body weight?
4. What is osmosis?
5. What are the two main electrolytes found in the extracellular space?
6. Which electrolytes are found primarily in the intracellular space?
7. Which molecules contribute to oncotic pressure within the vasculature?
8. Fill in the blanks with the correct answer.
Hypovolemic shock is a condition in which patients experience a decrease in
and
due to a loss of volume from their intravascular
space.
a. Packed cell volume and blood pressure
 b. Cardiac output and heart rate
c. Packed cell volume and heart rate
d. Cardiac output and blood pressure
Answers to the review questions can be found on page 221 in the Appendix. The review
questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley.coml
goldonohoenursing.
Further Reading
Dhupa, N. 2002. Burn injury. In W. Wingfield and M. Raffe M., eds. The Veterinary
ICU Book, 973-981. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Guyton, A., and J. Hall. 2000a. Dietary balances; regulation of feeding; obesity and
starvation; vitamins and minerals. In Textbook of Medical Physiology, 803-814.
Philadelphia: Saunders.
Chapter 1: Body Water13
Guyton, A., and J. Hall. 200ob. The microcirculation and the lymphatic system: capil-
lary fluid exchange, interstitial fluid, and lymph flow. In Textbook of Medical Physiol-
ogy, 162-174. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Guyton, A., and J. Hall. 2000c. The body fluid compartments: extracellular and intra-
cellular fluids; interstitial fluid and edema. In Textbook of Medical Physiology, 264-
278. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Guyton, A., and J. Hall. 2000d. Transport of substances through the cell membrane. In
Textbook of Medical Physiology, 40-51. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Michell, A., R. Bywater, et al. 1989. Regulation of body fluids. In Veterinary Fluid
Therapy, 1-19. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Stepien, R. 1999. Cardiovascular emergencies. In Manual of Canine and Feline Emer-
gency and Critical Care, 37-63. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA.
Wellman, M., S. DiBartola, and C. Kohn. 2006. Applied physiology of body fluids in
dogs and cats. In DiBartola, S., ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in
Small Animal Practice, 3-25. St. Louis: Saunders
Wingfield, W.E. 2002. Fluid and electrolyte therapy. In W.E. Wingfield and M. R. Raffe,
eds. The Veterinary ICU Book, 167-188. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Patient Assessment
In many cases the veterinary technician is the first person to evaluate a patient present
 ing to the clinic with some degree of urgency. A brief examination can gather pertinent
information with respect to the hydration and volume status of the patient. Note that
hydration (normal or dehydrated) and volume status (normo/hypovolemia) are not
synonymous. They are often seen together but can also be present alone, and each should
be evaluated in every patient.
Dehydration
The terms debydration and bypovolemia are often used interchangeably; however, it is
incorrect to do so. Each term refers to a separate condition affecting the body. Hypo-
volemia and dehydration are often concurrent in emergency patients but can occur
independently as well.
Dehydration is a condition that arises when excessive amounts of body water are
lost. This deficit causes water from within the cells to move into the extracellular space.
Some of this water also redistributes to the vasculature (Mensack 2008). Hypovolemia
 refers to a deficit in fluid volume that is circulating throughout the body. The intravas-
cular space is the compartment most affected by hypovolemia, and as such, initial
therapy for this condition can differ from the treatment of dehydration.
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
@ 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
15
16Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians andNurses
Dehydration
The extravascular compartment includes the cells and the space surrounding the cells
(interstitium). Each cell is responsible for a specific function and requires specific condi-
tions to fulfll these responsibilities. The interstitial compartment must provide an envi-
ronment that is suitable for the cells to thrive. In other words, the compartment must
house a liquid medium via which nutrition can be supplied to the cells. To meet these
requirements, a fine balance of fluid is maintained.
Conditions may arise causing a disruption of the fluid balance in these compartments.
As previously mentioned, dehydration is caused by excessive loss of water from the
body. Types of dehydration can be described in relation to the amount of other solutes
that remain in the compartments.
Hypotonic dehydration describes loss of water that has a low concentration of dis-
solved particles. Patients with chronic congestive heart failure eventually develop this
type of dehydration if left untreated. The solute concentration within the compartment
is greater than that of the fluid lost.
Hypertonic dehydration involves the loss of fluid that has a high solute concentration.
This type of dehydration can be caused by exercise, anxiety-producing events, or even
heat stroke (DiBartola and Bateman 2006)
 Isotonic dehydration is caused by many disease processes. Vomiting, anorexia,
diarrhea, and hemorrhagic shock are common causes of isotonic dehydration. Body
 n n m  on   s e s is si  
compartment.
Hypovolemia
Hypovolemia is the condition in which there is a decrease in the volume of blood cir-
culating within the vasculature. The vascular space contains blood (the cellular portion
of intravascular body water) and blood plasma (the noncellular portion). Hypovolemia
 refers to the loss of blood plasma and/or blood from the intravascular space.
 Blood plasma is composed of approximately 90% water and carries dissolved pro-
teins, glucose, and carbon dioxide. It is where the blood cells are suspended and the
 means by which they are transported throughout the vasculature.
The vascular system transports blood and blood plasma throughout the entire body.
 It carries oxygenated blood to the tissues and carries carbon dioxide and other waste
S s s sd  s a on  sss i  ae si
heavily on the heart for its ability to contract and send newly oxygenated blood back
into systemic circulation. Organs and tissues depend on the circulating blood volume
and suffer varying degrees of damage when that volume is not delivered, as is found in
hypovolemic states.
In sickness, intravascular volume can be depleted in a variety of ways, ultimately
leading to hypovolemia if the disease process is left untreated. Trauma, toxin ingestion,
prolonged vomiting or diarrhea, severe hemorrhage, and conditions causing extreme
vasodilation (sepsis, anaphylaxis) are common causes of hypovolemia.
Fluid loss that involves a higher proportion of solute than water causes movement
of water from the extracellular space toward the intracellular compartment. Some of
Chapter2:Patient Assessment17
this water is borrowed from the intravascular space (Mensack 2008). The loss of fluid
volume from the intravascular space leads to hypovolemia if the condition causing the
fluid loss is left untreated.
Animals that experience massive hemorrhage also enter a hypovolemic state as their
intravascular volume is depleted through direct loss of blood from one or more vessels.
Evaluating Patient Hydration and Volume Status
Clinical evaluation of hydration status begins with the physical examination. The vet-
erinary technician should begin the assessment of the patient with an initial hands-off
visual assessment of the animal's overall demeanor. A patient's critical illness (or lack
thereof) cannot be diagnosed solely based on their demeanor; however, it is an important
observation to make and include in the overall assessment. The animal's attitude may
indicate how significantly it is affected by its current volume and hydration status.
An entire thorough physical examination may not frequently be performed by the
technician, but a preliminary evaluation is warranted in any patient that presents to the
hospital with even the slightest of health concerns. The technician can initiate the assess-
ment of the patient's hydration status by measuring the following parameters.
Skin turgor/skin tent
Skin turgor refers to the elasticity of an animal's skin. It is evaluated by measuring the
skin's ability to return to its normal shape and position. Skin tent is the term used to
describe not only the process by which turgor is evaluated but also the shape that the
skin is stretched into to observe its elasticity. Several areas on the patient's body can be
used to evaluate a skin tent. The most frequently used area is the skin on the dorsal
aspect of the neck slightly cranial to the scapulae. Additional sites for skin tent evalu-
ation include the skin over the thoracic vertebrae, over one scapula, along the dorsum,
or on the dorsal aspect of the skull between the ears. It is advisable to tent the patient's
skin in more than one location to fully evaluate the skin turgor (Figs. 2.1 and 2.2).
 In a normal, adequately hydrated patient, a skin tent typically returns to its normal
position within 1 to 2 seconds. The technician may notice a slight delay in skin reposi
tioning in a patient that is approaching 5 %-6% dehydration. An increase in the duration
of the skin tent is definitely noticeable by 6%-8% dehydration, and a patient whose
skin remains in a tented shape is likely approaching the 10%-12% dehydration range
(Miller et al., 1992).
Nursing considerations
 Note the age and body weight of each patient when evaluating skin tent/turgor. Geriatric
and overly lean patients may have a prolonged skin tent, whereas juvenile or obese
patients may maintain skin elasticity (have normal skin tent) despite dehydration.
It is important to remember that this is a subjective test that cannot be used alone
to determine an estimation of hydration status. It should be used along with other
information garnered throughout the physical examination to provide a reasonable
estimate of patient hydration.
18Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figures 2.1 and 2.2. Skin tent. The skin is raised and observed as it returns to normal. A prolonged skin tent
Can be a sign of dehydration.
Mucous membrane moisture
Every preliminary examination performed by the technician should include the evalua-
tion of mucous membrane (MM) characteristics (Fig. 2.3). With respect to hydration
status, MM moisture is of particular interest. MM moisture is most often assessed using
a patient's gums. (Although other areas are accessible for evaluation of capillary refill
time, they are not quite as helpful as the gums for assessment of MM moisture.) To
assess MM moisture in the oral cavity, the lateral aspect of the lip is lifted and gentle
Chapter 2: Patient Assessment19
Figure 2.3. Checking mucous membranes. Color and moisture of mucous membranes helps identify dehydra
tion and poor circulation if present.
pressure is applied to the gums just above the gum line. The level of moisture on the
buccal side of the lip can also be noted. The technician should note whether the MMs
fee moist and slightly slippery (normal), excessively moist and slippery, or dry and
slightly tacky/sticky (possible sign of dehydration). Patients often have noticeably dry
gums by the time they are estimated at 6%-8% dehydrated. A patient that is 10%-12%
dehydrated has dry MMs (Miller et al., 1992).
Nursing considerations
MMs must be evaluated as part of a clinical picture because their characteristics can
change based on a number of factors. A patient may present with abnormal MM
moisture due to a variety of causes. For example, consider whether the patient has
 been panting (canine) or open-mouthed breathing (feline) before presentation. In these
cases, it is not unreasonable to find tacky MM in the patient during the initial assess-
ment. Patients that are experiencing extreme nausea and/or vomiting may present
with excessively moist, slippery MM that could wrongly imply that the patient is well
hydrated.
Eyeposition
Eye position is another parameter that may provide clues to the hydration status of a
nd sd e  s sssse  n   r
discussed (skin tent, MM moisture), it is important to recall that this evaluation is sub-
jective and should not be used alone to determine the hydration status of an animal.
In normally hydrated animals it is unusual to see severely sunken eyes or eyes that
seem to recess into the bony orbit that surrounds them. Animals that present moderately
to severely dehydrated often have appreciable space noticeable rostral to the globe of
the eye near the medial canthus. The eyes take on a sunken appearance and, in severe
cases, can take on a dull appearance as well (Fig. 2.4).
20Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 2.4. Eye position. Sunken eye position is often present in dehydrated animals.
V
Nursing considerations
Age, ocular trauma, and retrobulbar and ocular disease can affect the position and
appearance of a patient's eyes. Evaluation of eye position and eye clarity is subjective
and must be used in conjunction with other physical examination findings to estimate
a patient's hydration status.
Mentation
of dehydration it is experiencing. It is not difficult to imagine that dehydrated animals
will not present as bright and energetic as those with normal hydration and minimal
illness. A profoundly dehydrated patient that is also hypovolemic rarely appears bright
and alert. The brain is an organ that depends heavily on external sources for energy. It
 does not maintain its own energy supply. Because its metabolic demands are so high,
the brain requires a constant volume of blood circulating to provide sufficient energy
 to meet its metabolic needs. When these needs are not fully met, the presenting animal
may have little energy or interest in his or her surroundings and in extreme cases can
be recumbent and stuporous.
V
Nursingconsiderations
Mentation is a characteristic that varies significantly with different types of illness. It is
not a parameter that indicates specific degrees of dehydration or hypovolemia but rather
is a feature to be noted and considered along with the presenting complaint and initial
physical assessment.
Vital parameters
During the initial physical assessment, vital signs can help the technician determine
whether a patient's intravascular volume status has been significantly affected by its illness.
Chapter 2:Patient Assessment21
In a hypovolemic state, the animal has inadequate blood volume reaching its tissues
and organs. The body has compensatory mechanisms to counteract the effects of hypo-
volemia, but the condition and the process causing it must be reversed to preserve the
future health and functionality of the organs.
Heart rate
Cardiac output (CO) is the product of heart rate (HR) and stroke volume (SV) (Miller
2002). SV is the volume of blood pumped into circulation by the left ventricle during
one contraction. An increase or decrease in either of these parameters (SV or HR) influ-
ences CO in the same direction (a direct relationship). A decrease in the volume of blood
circulating within the vasculature results in a smaller volume of blood flowing into the
proximal vena cava for delivery to the heart. Decreased blood volume entering the right
atrium leads to a decreased SV because less blood returning to the heart supplies less
blood to be pumped out of the heart by the left ventricle. The result is that a decrease
in circulating blood volume causes a decrease in SV, subsequently decreasing the volume
of blood leaving the heart (CO).
 Decreased CO causes diminished blood flow to tissues and organs (decreased perfu-
sion). Poor tissue perfusion means that the cells are not receiving adequate oxygen and
 n  n n ia  id o  n o  s
death (Wingfield 2002a).
A reduction in circulating blood volume leading to a decrease in systemic blood pres-
sure (BP) is one of the triggers that set in motion a chain of compensatory mechanisms.
These mechanisms offer temporary protection for the body's vital organs. The primary
goal of these protective measures is to maintain tissue perfusion. These mechanisms
 provide a degree of protection to vital organs during times of compromised health and
poor perfusion (Peitzman 1993).
The chain of events initiated by a decrease in BP is complex and involves many dif-
ferent systems within the body. The following is a condensed version of what
transpires.
A decrease in BP is identified by receptors in the major arteries. These receptors are
often referred to as baroreceptors or stretch receptors. The following is a very simplified
version of the reaction they evoke:
■ Receptors note a fall in BP in one of the main arteries
 Information is transmitted to brain
 Brain activates sympathetic nervous system
■ HR and myocardial contractility are increased
 Vasoconstriction reduces the capacity of the vasculature
 Venous return increases due to diminished capacity of peripheral vessels
An increase in HR contributes to an increase in CO, which leads to improved perfu
sion and protects against the effects of hypovolemia. Note that these are temporary
short-term measures that the body institutes in the early stages of hypovolemia. Further
protective strategies are launched by the body in persistent states of hypovolemia but
are beyond the scope of this discussion.
 If the veterinary technician's initial assessment of a patient includes a finding of
tachycardia, this information should be used in conjunction with the patient's history
to begin to assess the patient's volume status.
22Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 2.5. The femoral pulse is palpated on the medial aspect of the hind limb. Pulses are evaluated for rate
and pulse pressure
Nursing consideration
 Recall that there are many reasons why a patient's HR may be elevated during the initial
examination. Tachycardia is not exclusive to hypovolemia. Pain, anxiety, hypoxia,
hyperthermia, and cardiac disease are but a few factors to consider while troubleshoot-
ing tachycardia.
Puise quafity
 To evaluate the quality of a patient's pulse, the technician should consider how strong
the pulse is against the digit, how long it lasts, and whether either of these characteristics
fluctuates. Heart rhythm should also be assessed during palpation of pulses and any
arrhythmias noted and later recorded via electrocardiogram (ECG).
 Pulse pressure should be palpated at a minimum of one site on the patient's body.
Ideally, pulses are evaluated in the femoral arteries as well as the dorsal pedal arteries.
Femoral pulses are easily palpated in both feline and canine patients (Fig. 2.5). The
pulse is appreciated in the crease between the hind limb and the caudal abdomen at
almost the most dorsal point. The artery runs over the femur and can be palpated on
the limb side of the crease using very gentle digital pressure. Too much pressure will
obscure the pulse.
Pressure quality can be evaluated using one side, but a more thorough evaluation
includes evaluation of bilateral femoral pulses. This is good practice because arterial
thrombosis can impede one femoral arterial pulse and not the other.
Patients that present in hypovolemic states exhibit alteration in their pulse pressure.
As previously discussed, when blood volume is diminished, less blood returns to the
heart and CO decreases. If the heart is pumping less blood into the arteries, it makes
sense that the associated arterial pulses will be appreciably weaker. Consequently, hypo
volemic animals typically have pulses that are described as weak or thready (Kaplan
Chapter2:Patient Assessment23
Figure 2.6. Dorsal pedal pulses are found on the cranial medial aspect of the hindfoot. The technician should
become familiar with locating and palpating pulses at this location.
The technician must palpate femoral pulses in healthy as well as compromised
 patients to develop the ability to compare and accurately describe pulse quality.
Dorsal pedal (DP) pulses are often excluded from the initial physical assessment. At
least one hind foot should be palpated to confirm the presence of DP pulses and to
evaluate the strength of these pulses (Fig. 2.6).
DP pulses are usually the first pulses that disappear when an animal is hypovolemic.
This is in part due to one of the body's compensatory mechanisms. In states of dimin-
ished circulating blood volume, the heart, brain, and kidneys are prioritized above all
other organs and tissues (Wingfield 2002b). Because the peripheral limbs do not have
a vital role in sustaining life, circulation is routed away from them toward higher prior
ity areas. Lower blood circulation to these limbs causes DP pulses to be weak. Once
again, in severe cases, DP pulses are absent. It has been suggested that DP pulses disap-
pear at a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of approximately 60mm Hg or when hypovo-
lemia is so severe that the animal can no longer compensate (Wingfield 2002a).
Quick assessment tests
Part of the initial patient assessment includes collecting data such as vital parameters
and various blood chemistries. Quick analysis tests (QUATS) are tests that can be run
at cage side and provide preliminary information pertaining to the patient's hydration
and volume status. Specific tests included in QUATS differ between hospitals depending
on availability of equipment and personnel. An example of QUATS performed in a
high-volume emergency and critical care setting might include packed cell volume (PCV)
and total solids (TS), blood urea nitrogen (BUN) stick, blood glucose (BG), venous blood
gases, electrolytes, blood lactate, and activated clotting time. In a lower volume hospital
QUATS might be restricted to PCV/TS, BG, and BUN stick because routine health checks
24Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
do not necessarily need to include such extensive QUATS as those previously listed.
Results from each test can provide additional evidence to support findings of the initial
physical assessment.
Packedcellvolume
PCV refers to the percentage of intravascular fluid that is occupied by red blood cells.
In varying degrees of illness PCV can deviate in either direction. Interpretation of
changes in PCV can provide information to support or refute estimates of patient hydra-
tion status developed during the initial physical examination. Evaluation of PCV in
conjunction with TS is key to understanding the composition of fluid lost or gained.
Increases in PCV and TS
Increases in PCV can indicate several conditions. The condition most relevant to this
section is dehydration. A dehydrated patient often displays an elevated PCV in conjunc-
tion with an elevation of TS at the time of presentation (Fig. 2.7).
Excessive water loss from the extracellular compartment disturbs the fine balance of
water throughout the body. For example, an animal that is vomiting or experiencing
diarrhea loses excess body water from its extracellular compartment. The intravascular
space is included in this compartment. Ongoing losses of this kind lead to depletion of
water, causing the intravascular space to become hypertonic. Another way to perceive
this change in balance is to consider that water is borrowed from the intracellular
space in times of desperate need in the extracellular compartment (DiBartola 2006).
 As the condition or illness persists, less body water is available to maintain the volume
of the extracellular space. This leads to a change in solute concentration of that
compartment.
Depletion of water from the intravascular space, which is part of the extracellular
compartment, causes hemoconcentration. The ratio between water, red blood cells, and
Figure 2.7. PCV tubes: Assessing PCV is an important part of the initial physical examination. Interpretation
of PCV results can offer valuable information that contributes to the determination of patient hydration status.
Chapter 2:Patient Assessment 25
CRITOSEAL
CRITOCAPS"
Figure 2.8. Supplies necessary for measuring PCV and TS.
plasma proteins (TS) is changed. The concentration of red blood cells and proteins
circulating in intravascular fluid increases because the overall fluid volume is smaller.
Increased PCV and decreased TS
An increase in PCV in conjunction with a decrease in TS can be interpreted slightly
differently than the previous example. A TS that is lower than normal in the face of an
ele vated PCV is likely an indication of pathology involving protein loss.
Decreased PCV and TS
Many forms of illness cause anemia. To provide appropriate therapy for anemic patients
we must determine what is causing a decrease in PCV. Accurate interpretation of a
decreased PCV also involves consideration of TS (Fig. 2.8).
A decreased PCV in conjunction with decreased TS is most often representative of
whole blood loss (DiBartola 2006). A trauma patient has likely sustained damage to
 blood vessels and/or organs. A compromise to the integrity of a blood vessel leads to
some degree of blood loss. It is the entire blood component that is lost from either of
these compartments; not just red blood cells (RBCs) or proteins. So we note a decrease 
in both PCV and TS
Decreases in PCV and TS may not be evident immediately post hemorrhage because
the redistribution of fluids takes time to manifest. In addition, PCV may appear slightly
elevated while TS remains low if the patient's spleen has contracted in an effort to
compensate for the blood loss (Mathews 2006b).
In the face of blood loss the initial goal of fluid therapy is to replace the volume lost
from the intravascular compartment. Serial measurements of PCV/TS are not as helpful
in guiding fluid therapy protocols as they are in the dehydrated patient because these
values are affected by so many other factors. For example, ongoing loss of blood, splenic
contraction, and infusion of natural or synthetic colloids each cause changes in PCV or
26Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 2.9. The BUN stick is a fast and easy test that can be run using a small amount of blood. These results
aid in determining hydration status.
TS, respectively (DiBartola 2006). Rather, the therapy is guided by evaluation of volume
status and should focus on BP, HR, MM color, and perfusion. This type of monitoring
is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6.
A decrease in PCV/TS may be appreciated in patients that have received fluid therapy.
The patient that initially presents with elevated PCV/TS due to dehydration will likely
display a drop in both of these values once rehydrated. It is important to note that an
initial drop in values that coincides with initiation of fluid therapy is not indicative of
blood loss. Continued or significant decreases in PCV/TS that extend beyond the point
of rehydration should be investigated.
Blood urea nitrogen stick
This form of test is simple and convenient and available to most veterinary practices
(Fig. 2.9). A small drop of whole blood is placed on a reagent strip for a set amount of
time (usually 60 seconds). At the end of the prescribed time period the blood is washed
off and the color of the strip is compared with a number of colors on the container
 provided. Each color corresponds to a range of values of BUN. Evaluation of the BUN
stick provides another valuable piece of information that is considered during evaluation
of patient hydration status.
Urea is a waste product that ends up in the blood and is ultimately filtered by the
kidneys. Some of the urea is excreted in the urine and some of it returns to the blood.
Because urea is a solute found in the blood, a loss of body water is reflected by an
increase in the concentration of urea. Abnormally high BUN results can indicate a host
of disease processes; however, an increased concentration of urea can also be an indica-
tion of dehydration.
Many other factors can cause elevations and decreases in BUN. As with most other
means of patient evaluation, BUN must be used in conjunction with other physical and
clinical data to provide valuable information regarding patient hydration status.
Chapter2:Patient Assessment27
Venous blood gases and electrolytes
An in-depth discussion of blood gases and electrolytes is beyond the scope of this text.
Dehydrated and/or hypovolemic animals can display many different patterns in their
blood gases, ranging from virtually normal to severe metabolic acidosis with respiratory
compensation. Blood gas measurement is a very useful tool available for guidance of
fluid therapy; however, there is no definitive result that is diagnostic for dehydration.
Lactate
 Illness causing loss of body water can result in decreased perfusion if water loss is pro-
found, such as that seen with protracted vomiting with or without diarrhea. As poor
perfusion reduces delivery of oxygen and nutrients to the tissues, diminished oxygen
results in an environment in which cells carry out their functions in a state of hypoxia.
Under normal circumstances cellular metabolism takes place in aerobic as well as
anaerobic conditions. In hypoxic states, there is a shift toward anaerobic metabolism.
This change causes an increase in the amount of lactate produced. Lactate spills out of
the cells and into the blood. The excess lactate overwhelms the liver and the kidneys,
organs that are normally responsible for metabolizing, buffering, and excreting lactate.
As lactate levels increase, blood pH decreases (Mathews 2006c).
Elevations in lactate do not exclusively indicate conditions involving loss of body
water. However, it is frequently noted that patients presenting in dehydrated or hypo-
volemic states are also found to have lactate levels above normal.
Urine specific gravity
The urine specific gravity (USG) measurement is most informative if obtained before
administration of fluids. It is not always possible to obtain a urine sample from a criti-
cally ill patient shortly after presentation; however, should urine become available, even
the smallest volume can be used for measurement of USG.
 Most forms of veterinary practices possess a refractometer as part of their standard
equipment. This instrument provides a fast and accurate measurement of USG (Fig.
2.10).
Figure 2.10. A refractometer is used to measure urine specific gravity.
28Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 2.1Range in Normal Blood Pressure Measurements
Canine
 Feline
Systolic
100-160mm Hg
110-150mm Hg
Diastolic
70-120mm Hg
70-130 mm Hg
Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP)
80-120mm Hg
100-150mm Hg
Sources: McCurnin, D. Clinicat Textbook for Veterinary Technicians, Saunders 1994; Wingfield, W. The Veterinary ICL/ Book,
Teton NewMedia 2002; Wingfield, W. Veterinary Emergency Medicine Secrets, Hanley & Belfus 2001.
USG is a measurement of the concentration of solids in the urine. In health, the
kidneys excrete a specific concentration of waste products that are filtered from the
blood. In the dehydrated patient, the body attempts to conserve water by instructing
healthy kidneys to excrete less urine. The volume of waste product does not change
dramatically, which leads to a higher solute concentration in the smaller volume of urine
excreted. Dehydrated patients possessing healthy kidneys present with a higher USG
than animals in perfect health (DiBartola and Bateman 2006).
Blood pressure
BP monitoring is available to many technicians in emergency and critical care settings
but may not yet be part of the standard of care in private primary care facilities. Its
lack of availability in these settings does not dictate that technicians practicing in
primary care clinics should not have at least a basic understanding of BP monitoring.
Veterinary medicine is a perpetually growing field, and with the increasing availability
 of affordable equipment, it is likely that BP monitoring will become the standard for
all clinics in the very near future. Two types of BP measurement are used in veterinary
medicine: direct arterial BP measurement (also known as invasive monitoring) and
indirect BP measurement (noninvasive monitoring). The invasive technique involves
placement of an indwelling arterial catheter; noninvasive techniques rely on machine
sensitivity and require less technical nursing. Equipment used for BP is discussed in
Chapter 6.
The initial physical examination should include BP measurement where available.
Despite how thorough the physical examination might be, there is always more informa-
 r s ia a r  d n e    n 
administration to each individual patient. BP has three components that are measured
 and recorded. Systolic BP refers to the pressure that exists in the arteries during the
phase of cardiac contraction (systole). Diastolic BP refers to the pressure in the arteries
during the rest phase of the cardiac cycle (diastole). The MAP is the average pressure
throughout the cycle of the heart. Canine and feline patients display a range of blood
 pressures (in good health) that are accepted as normal (see Table 2.1). A MAP of 100,
with a systolic/diastolic of 120/80 is a value that can be used for comparison because
these numbers fall roughly in the middle of the acceptable range.
The technician can use the MAP to establish how immediately the patient requires
medical intervention. MAP measurements of 70mm Hg and below represent compro-
mised tissue and organ perfusion (Hammond and Walters 1999). Patients with MAPs
Chapter2:Patient Assessment29
of 70 mm Hg or less need a greater degree of intervention and more intensive monitoring
than those that present with near normal MAP values (>80mm Hg)
Case Studies
Administration of intravenous (IV) fluids is the core of intervention in critically ill
Ame ud e  aq papasns Ao si iei Ad e si ssase i sd
and/or administering emergency drugs. The following cases illustrate the changes brought
about through appropriate use of fluid therapy. Vitals were used at time of presentation
to determine the immediacy of each patient's need for fluids. Once various volumes had
been administered, vitals were used to reassess the patient's response to fluids and deter-
mine whether or not therapy should continue as prescribed.
Case 1
Signalment: 9-year-old male neutered standard poodle
 Presented to hospital with history of anorexia, vomiting, lethargy, and two episodes
of diarrhea. Upon admission physical examination revealed the following:
■Body weight: 29.7kg
 Temperature: 40.0°C
 Pulse: 210 beats per minute (bpm)
■Pulse quality strong
 Respiratory rate: panting
 MMs: pink, tacky
■ Capillary refill time (CRT): <2 seconds
 BP: 140/84; MAP: 106
 Lactate: 5.3 mmol/L
 Nursing considerations
Tachycardia, elevated body temperature, and elevated lactate are of most concern in
this patient. Many factors could be responsible for each of these abnormalities. Based
on the patient's elevated lactate and elevated HR, it was determined that his perfusion
was compromised.
 Initial intervention included a fluid bolus of 10mL/kg (300 mL) IV Plasmalyte A given
Over 15 minutes. The patient's vitals were reevaluated after the first fluid bolus and
reflected a significant improvement in HR (120bpm). BP also changed but remained
within normal limits before and after fluid bolus. It is interesting to note that after IV
administration of 300mL of crystalloid fluids, the patient's BP increased from 140/84
MAP of 106 to 166/94 MAP 116. Many factors may have contributed to this increase
(fear, pain, anxiety), but it is also likely that increasing the circulating blood volume
with a fluid bolus played a role in instigating this change in BP.
Upon completion of the fluid bolus the patient was placed on IV fluids at two times
maintenance rate. Three hours after admission his body temperature had also improved
significantly and had decreased from 40.0°C to 38.1°C. Febrile patients have additional
30Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
fluid requirements during rehydration. Once a fluid rate has been determined, an addi-
tional volume (0.1 X maintenance rate) should be added for each degree Celsius that
the patient measures above normal (38.5°C) (Mathews 2006a).
Lactate measurement was repeated 8 hours after commencement of fluid therapy and
had decreased to 3.0 mmol/L. An additional 12 hours of fluid therapy resulted in a
decrease to a lactate of 1.8 mmol/L, which is within normal limits.
 Improvement in each of these parameters was a direct result of fluid administration.
The early stages of fluid therapy led to an increase in intra vascular volume and a decrease
in heart rate (fewer beats needed to achieve similar CO once intravascular volume had
increased). Once the patient was placed on a moderate rate of continuous IV fluids, his
body temperature began to normalize. Perhaps the most impressive change brought
about with this fluid therapy was the normalization of the patient's lactate. Improved
 perfusion allows appropriate delivery of oxygenated blood to the cells. Improving this
patient's perfusion meant that the cells were no longer functioning in anaerobic condi-
tions, thus producing less lactate.
Case 2
Signalment: 2-year-old male neutered dachshund
 Presented with a history of hemorrhagic vomiting of approximately 12 hours dura-
tion. The owner also noted blood in the dog's stool. On presentation to the referring
veterinarian the dog was found to have the following vitals:
 Quiet, alert, and responsive
■HR: 108 bpm
 Respiratory rate: 42 breaths per minute
 MMs: pale pink, moist with prolonged (>2 seconds) CRT
Extremities: cool
The initial blood work revealed an elevated RBC count (10.3 x 10'"/L) (normal:
5.5-8.5 x 10'2/L); elevated packed cell volume 67.8% (normal: 37%-55%); elevated
hemoglobin 212g/L (normal: 133-197g/L). The patient received a 10 mL/kg IV bolus
of Plasmalyte over 15 minutes. Repeat examination post fluid bolus revealed improve-
ment in peripheral perfusion. The dog's MMs were a deeper pink, the extremities were
thought to be warmer, and the dog's CRT was <2 seconds. The referring veterinarian
evaluated the patient and felt that he was stable enough to transfer to a tertiary care
facility.
The patient presented to the referral hospital approximately 2 hours after initial
arrival at his regular veterinarian. He had the following vitals:
HR: 144bpm
 Respiratory rate: 32 breaths per minute
 MMs: pink and tacky
■ CRT: 2 seconds
■Temperature: 37.9°C
 Slightly prolonged skin tent
 Blood pressure: 151/61; MAP 101
 Estimated dehydration: 7%
Chapter 2:Patient Assessment31
Initial blood work revealed a PCV of 65% (normal: 37%-55%); TS of 62g/L (60-
80g/L); lactate of 2.2mmol/L (normal <2mmol/L); and BUN stick: 30 to 40 mg/dL
(normal <15 mg/dL).
Nursing considerations
Tachycardia, tacky MMs, and prolonged skin tent are of concern in this patient. After
reviewing the patient's blood work, polycythemia (elevated PCV), mildly elevated
lactate, and elevated BUN are of further concern. Despite initial intervention by the
referring veterinarian, these findings point toward the conclusion that this patient is
dehydrated.
The patient received a 20mL/kg IV fluid bolus of 0.9% NaCl over 30 minutes. Blood
gases showed that he was mildly alkalemic, which prompted the use of an acidifying
solution (NaCl). After the bolus, the patient was started on a continuous IV infusion of
0.9% NaCl at two times maintenance rate for 6 hours. Vitals and QUATS were reevalu-
ated after the initial 6 hours of fluids and showed improvement.
Heart rate had decreased to 96 bpm, MMs were pink and moist, CRT was <2 seconds,
lactate decreased to 1.0mmol/L, BUN stick decreased to 5 to 15mg/dL, PCV/TS
decreased to 53/4.0, and BP was mildly elevated at 178/60; MAP 116.
The fluid therapy prescription was changed in response to the vitals. The patient's
low total solids were of particular concern and a colloid infusion (Pentaspan) was
added to provide oncotic support to the intravascular space. Crystalloid therapy was
changed from 0.9% NaCl to Plasmalyte A because the patient's metabolic alkalosis had
resolved.
Chapter Summary
The main focus of this chapter has revolved around the effects of body water loss
and how they are detected during the physical examination. Recall that dehydration is
a condition that involves an overall loss of body water in excess of what the patient
is able to replace. Most water loss occurs in the intracellular and interstitial
compartments.
A patient's hydration status should be evaluated during the technician's primary
survey. Tacky or dry MMs are frequently noted in the dehydrated patient. Sunken eye
position, prolonged skin tent, and mild changes in mentation are also signs that a patient
is suffering from some degree of dehydration.
Hypovolemia refers to a decreased volume of fluid circulating within the vasculature.
 This condition leads to poor perfusion and puts vital organs and tissues at great risk as
a result.
Many veterinary patients suffer from dehydration and hypovolemia simultaneously.
Each condition can exist independent of the other and each can be life threatening if
left untreated.
A primary survey examination includes vital parameters that are useful in determining
whether or not a patient is hypovolemic. Volume-depleted patients present with an
elevated HR, decreased pulse amplitude, weak or thready pulses, and possibly a pro-
longed CRT. Initial lab work often reveals elevated PCV and TS; elevated BUN stick;
elevated lactate, and elevated USG
32Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Review Questions
1. Define hypovolemia.
2. List three parameters easily evaluated by the technician at the time of patient
admission that may reveal the hydration status of the animal.
3. How does hypovolemia affect cardiac output?
4. In the face of hypovolemia, the body benefits from the activation of its natural
protective mechanisms. Ultimately, what is the goal of these protective
measures?
5. Why is it prudent to palpate femoral pulses on both hind limbs?
6. If dorsal pedal pulses are not palpable to the experienced technician, what assump-
tions can be made with respect to the patient's status?
7. An elevated PCV/TS can indicate that the patient is (a)
, whereas an
elevated PCV and decreased TS could indicate (b)
. (c) Howe ver, normal
to elevated PCV and low TS in the face of recent hemorrhage is also possible.
Why is this?
 8. A dehydrated animal with normal renal function should excrete urine with a
(a)_
urine specific gravity (USG). (b) Why is this the case?
Answers to the review questions can be found on pages 221-222 in the Appendix. The
review questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley.
com/go/donohoenursing.
Further Reading
Cooper, E., and W. Muir 2007. Continuous cardiac output monitoring via arterial pres-
sure waveform analysis following severe hemorrhagic shock in dogs. Crit Care Med
35:1724-1729.
DiBartola, S., and S. Bateman. 2006. Introduction to fluid therapy. In S. DiBartola, ed.
Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 325-344. St.
Louis: Saunders.
DiBartola, S. 2006. Disorders of sodium and water: hypernatremia and hyponatremia.
In S.DiBartola,ed.Fluid,Electrolyte,and Acid Base Disorders in Small Animal
Practice, 47-79. St. Louis: Saunders.
Hammond, R., and C. Walters. 1999. Monitoring the critical patient. In L.G. King, ed.
Manual of Canine and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 235-246. Cheltenham,
UK: BSAVA
Hughes, D. 1999. Fluid therapy. In L.G. King, Manual of Canine and Feline Emergency
and Critical Care, 7-22. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA.
Kaplan, P. 1992. Monitoring in Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Medicine,
21-37. St. Louis: Mosby.
King, L., and R. Hammond. 1999. Manual of Canine and Feline Emergency and Critical
Care. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA.
 Mathews, K. 1998. The various types of parenteral fluids and their indications. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract28:489-490.
Chapter2:Patient Assessment33
Mathews, K. 2006a. Fluid therapy: non-hemorrhage. In K. Mathews, ed. Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care Manual, 347-373. Guelph, Ontario, Canada:
LifeLearn.
Mathews, K. 2006b. Hemorrhage. In K. Mathews, ed. Veterinary Emergency and Criti-
cal Care Manual, 619-629. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Mathews, K. 2006c. Lactate. In K. Mathews, ed. Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Care Manual, 400-405. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Mensack, S. 2008. Fluid therapy: options and rational administration. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 38:575-577.
Miller, C. 2002. Applied cardiovascular physiology. In W.E. Wingfield and M. R. Raffe,
eds., The Veterinary ICU Book, 1-14. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Miller, M., S. DiBartola, and E. Schertel. 1992. Conventional and hypertonic fluid
Critical Care Medicine, 618-627. St. Louis: Mosby.
Peitzman, A. 1993. Hypovolemic shock. In M. Pinsky and J. Dhainaut, eds. Pathopbysi-
ologic Foundations of Critical Care, 161-169. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
Wingfield, W.E. 2002a. Cardiopulmonary arrest. In W.E. Wingfield and M. R. Raffe,
eds., The Veterinary ICU Book, 421-452. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia
Wingfield, W.E. 2002b. Fluid and electrolyte therapy. In W.E. Wingfield and M. R. Raffe,
eds., The Veterinary ICU Book, 166-188. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia
Routes of Administration
Fluid therapy is administered in many different settings throughout the practice of vet-
erinary medicine. The means by which fluids are delivered must be selected based on a
variety of factors. It is helpful to know the anticipated duration of fluid therapy, the
patient's current hydration/volume status, the patient's current health concerns, and the
patient's approachability before determining the ideal route for fluid administration.
With this information the health care team can decide on the safest, most efficient route
for delivery of fluids
Gastrointestinal Tract (Enteral Fluid Administration)
The enteral route is often overlooked as a potential path for fluid therapy. This is likely
due to the fact that many of our patients requiring fluid therapy are exhibiting clinical
signs that involve some form of disruption in their gastrointestinal (Gl) health. Animals
whose history includes episodes of vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal distention, esophageal
trauma, or decrease of esophageal motility will not tolerate fuid therapy via the enteral
route. If GI health is without compromise, enteral fluid therapy may be considered for 
patients with mild disturbances in their hydration or volume status. In other words, if
it is appropriate to replace fluid deficits slowly, the enteral route is a suitable choice. In
contrast, if the patient is suffering from severe blood loss or acute hemorrhage, the
 enteral route is not a suitable route for volume resuscitation. This is because fluid deliv-
ered to the GI tract would require too much time to redistribute and replenish the
intravascular space.
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
@ 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
35
36Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 3.1. This type of tube can be used as a nasoesophageal feeding tube. The tube is a worthwhile inven-
jaayies Aieun alew auuen jo jaayien uaxo eseu e se pasn ag osje ue l! asneag wal! Aiol
Benefits associated with enteral fluid therapy include the potential for delivery of large
volumes of fluid as well as delivery of fluids with a variety of caloric densities. If caloric
support is not a concern, the clinician should choose a maintenance fluid that is similar
to the extracellular compartment with respect to solute concentration. The fluid may
contain dextrose (2.5 %-5%) that aids absorption and can help prepare the patient for
enteral feeding that may play a role in the therapeutic plan.
Patients that are not voluntarily ingesting liquids may be candidates for placement
of one of a variety of different feeding tubes. Tubes can be placed using mild to moder-
ate sedation or general anesthesia depending on the type of tube required. In most cases,
clinicians place enteral feeding tubes such as esophagostomy and percutaneous gastros-
tomy tubes. However, the veterinary technician is trained in and responsible for delivery
of fluids as well as care and maintenance of tubes for the duration of their dwell.
Nasoesophageal Feeding Tubes
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes (NE tubes) are flexible plastic or rubber tubes that are
passed into the esophagus via the patient's nose (Fig. 3.1). These tubes are relatively
easy to place and are most often placed and secured by the technician. A variety of types
of tubes are available, which allows the technician to select an appropriate length and
diameter for each patient. The tube should fit with relative ease into the opening of the
ventral meatus but should not be markedly smaller than its diameter. The length of the
tube must allow for its passage beyond the nasopharynx and into the esophagus. A tube
that is too short will not permit passage far enough into the esophagus. In contrast, a
tube that offers excessive length may still be used providing the excess is safely and
securely fastened on rather than in the patient.
The technician should have all necessary materials within reach before beginning the
placement procedure. In most cases the patient would prefer not to undergo NE tube
placement, and for this reason the technician must perform the procedure quickly and
Chapter 3:Routes of Administration37
effciently. Scrambling for materials mid-placement lengthens the process, stresses the
patient and technician, and typically prevents successful positioning of the tube.
The patient's nose can be numbed with a topical anesthetic (ophthalmic drops work
well) approximately 10 to 15 minutes before beginning. It is advisable to place drops
 in both nostrils in the event that the first attempt does not result in successful placement
of the tube. In some patients one side provides easier access than the other. Having both
nostrils prepared with drops allows efficient use of the technician's time and avoids a
wait once in the midst of the procedure.
NE tubes must be measured before placement to ensure the fluid is delivered to the
desired location (the esophagus). The tube is measured by holding it against the patient's
body and determining the length of tube needed to extend the tube from the seventh
intercostal space to the tip of the nose. The tube should be held with the open end
 (connection port) distal to the patient and the closed delivery end at the location of the
seventh intercostal space. In so doing, a permanent marker can be used to draw a small
line on the tube where it reaches the level of the tip of the nose. The tube can then be
passed using the level of the black mark as a guideline for depth of placement. Once
the tube is measured, the proximal end can be lightly lubricated with an oral anesthetic
such as 2% viscous lidocaine gel. Only a thin layer of lidocaine gel is necessary to
facilitate smooth introduction of the tube.
The tube is placed in the nostril and guided in a ventromedial direction to enter the
ventral meatus. The tube should encounter little to no resistance if advancing along the
correct path. In some patients it is possible to observe a swallowing reflex as the tube
 passes through the larynx. This event is not witnessed in every instance.
Once the tube is advancing well, the technician can use the measured mark on the
tube as a reference point at which to stop advancing. Once the mark is at the distal end
of the rostrum, the tube has advanced far enough. The tube can be secured to the patient's
face using a number of different methods. In the author's experience, sutures or tiny
drops (pinpoint size) of Krazy GlueTM are the most successful way to secure the tube.
Proper placement of the tube must be confirmed before using the NE tube for fluid
therapy or delivery of nutrition. This is accomplished with a series of actions. First, the
technician can attach a 5-mL syringe to the port of the tube and apply gentle negative
pressure. If the tube is in the esophagus, the negative pressure should remain relatively
constant and the aspiration should yield no fluid. If negative pressure is achieved, the
tube can be withdrawn 2 to 3 cm and negative pressure reapplied. The rationale for
repositioning the tube is to rule out the possibility of bronchial placement of the tube.
 Negative pressure will remain constant if the tube is in the esophagus and not the lower
airway.
If aspiration continuously yields air, it is likely that the tube has been placed incor-
rectly and is in the trachea. A radiograph is useful to verify the tube's location. If there
is any uncertainty at all, the tube should be removed and the procedure repeated.
If the initial or subsequent aspirations suggest correct placement (negative pressure),
a small volume of sterile saline is injected into the tube. The patient is closely observed
for any sign of discomfort or distress associated with the delivery of fluid through the
tube. Placement of the NE tube in the patient's airway normally leads to moderate
amounts of coughing once the saline has been injected. If the patient swallows or licks
the lips when saline is injected and does not cough, the tube is likely in the correct
location.
 A radiograph of the patient's cranial thorax can corroborate correct placement of the
NE tube.
38Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Complications are infrequent with NE tubes. If complications do arise, they are
usually among the following:
 Tracheal intubation due to difficulty with placement
 Vomiting leads to removal of tube and/or animal chews tube once it has been vomited
into mouth
 Mild nasal discharge or rhinitis may be seen in animals with NE tube in place for
 prolonged period of time
Nursing considerations
 NE feeding tubes can be used for continuous delivery of fluids or intermittent boluses
of fluids
■ NE tubes are not an appropriate selection for patients that are vomiting or
regurgitating
 NE tubes should not be used in patients that are semi or unconscious
 Patients can eat or drink with NE tubes in place if desired
Esophagostomy and Gastrostomy Feeding Tubes
The esophagostomy and gastrostomy tubes are most often reserved for patients that
require long-term support (Fig. 3.2A-C). In addition, they are a more likely choice for
patients that require nutritional support, in clinic or at home, rather than patients that
require fluid therapy alone. Supplemental fluids can also be delivered via esophagostomy
(A)
Figure 3.2. (A) A patient with an esophagostomy tube bandaged and secured in the cervical region
Chapter3:Routes of Administration39
Figure 3.2. (Continued) (B) Gastrostomy tubes can be used in animals that are unable to tolerate feeding
eueuo anpai oi aaals Apog ym ueol agnn aosonse () en leusauose raddn jiu u
of tubestoma.
The clinician places these tubes, but they are monitored by the technician. Because
these tubes are used in most tertiary care hospitals, much information is available with
respect to surgical placement of tubes. See the suggested reading section for procedural
information.
Tube care is simple but is an important contribution to the comfort of the patient.
Each of these tubes involves a stoma that must be kept clean and free of external debris.
The stoma should be monitored for signs of discharge, excessive swelling, or excessive
redness. The site should be cleaned daily or every other day with warm water and gauze
The esophagostomy tube stoma is bandaged using a layer of padding, such as Conform
(Kendall) or Protouch Plus (synthetic orthopedic padding, BSN Medical), and a wrap
such as Vetrap (3M) as the outer layer. Gastrostomy tubes can be covered with an
40Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
is an expandable cotton-blend material that can be cut into a T-shirt of sorts. The stocki-
nette is doubled and an additional hole is made in the first layer to allow the tube to sit
between the two layers of material. This keeps dirt and debris off of the tube and away
from the stoma while keeping the tube fairly low profile to avoid accidental removal.
The tubes should be securely capped with an appropriate adapter whenever they are
not connected to continuous infusions. Otherwise, the technician should evaluate the
connection site and fluid infusion set for cleanliness and replace as needed
Subcutaneous Fluid Administration
Subcutaneous (SC) administration of fluids is widely used in small animal medicine. It
 is a practical means by which fluids can be delivered to noncritical patients. Advantages
to SC administration include low cost, decreased demand for advanced technical skills,
improved patient acceptance, and lack of need for hospitalization. Feline and small
-s pe   im a aq i  P dxa sid a
charged in the care of their owners, which makes SC fluid therapy an attractive option
for clients. This route can be used with a moderate degree of safety providing that the
patient does not have any underlying cardiac disease.
Limitations to SC fluid administration include the volume of fluid that can be admin-
istered to a patient at one time. Each SC site can tolerate approximately 10mL/kg of
 ho saed an iq sa ad d rad as aq uo as ao u an i
compromised when he or she is laden with multiple sites of SC fluid administration.
 Fluids are administered along the dorsum of the animal's body between the scapulae
and lower lumbar vertebrae. Given the restricted area for administration, it is common
for a patient to receive between one and three boluses of SC fluids at a time.
The practice of SC fluid administration varies between veterinary hospitals. Several
guidelines should be considered when using this style of fluid therapy. For example, not
all fluids can safely be delivered into the SC space. Fluids containing dextrose or high
up to 30mEq/L of K+ can be used (DiBartola and Bateman 2006). Delivery of isotonic
fluids is required; lactated Ringer's solution and normal saline (0.9% NaCl) are well
tolerated in most patients. Increased patient comfort is achieved by warming fluids to
body temperature when possible. In addition, administration of warm fluids can improve
blood flow to the area and expedite absorption of fluids as a result.
It is acceptable to deliver SC fluids via needle and syringe; however, administration
using a sterile bag of fluids with a drip set and needle is safer. The needle and syringe
method requires that the fuids be delivered under pressure while the solution set allows
fluids to flow into SC space using the force of gravity. Although the skin and subcutane-
 ous tissue adapt to the presence of the fluid volume with time, faster delivery via syringe
forces the fluid volume into a confined space that is less forgiving without the benefit
of time (DiBartola and Bateman 2006).
An 18- to 20-gauge needle is suitable for most patients, but very small patients may
require a 22-gauge needle to achieve cooperation. Ideally the needle is attached to a
sterile administration set and a new bag of intravenous (IV) fluids. The administration
set can be either a macro drip or micro drip. A macro drip delivers the same volume of
fluid in a shorter time than the micro drip.
Chapter 3: Routes of Administration41
Despite the safety and usefulness of SC fluid administration, there are circumstances
during which this type of therapy is contraindicated.
SC fluid therapy relies on the peripheral tissue to absorb and carry fluid to the vas-
culature. If blood flow to peripheral vessels is compromised, the absorption of the fluid
is slow and distribution of the fluid to the rest of the body is diminished (Mensack
2008). For this reason patients that are severely hypotensive, markedly dehydrated, or
hypothermic are not candidates for SC fluid therapy.
Intraperitoneal Fluid Administration
The peritoneum is the layer of serosa that lines the abdominal cavity and covers the
 organs within the abdomen. The peritoneal membrane is divided into two sections. The
parietal peritoneum lines the inner wall of the abdomen. The visceral peritoneum covers
the organs that lie within this compartment. The two sections are continuous and joined
by the connecting peritoneum. The kidneys are found outside of the peritoneal mem-
brane and are thus described as retroperitoneal organs.
The peritoneal cavity is the area that lies between parietal and visceral peritoneum.
It contains a small volume of fluid that serves as lubrication between the two serosal
layers. No organs are housed within the peritoneal cavity.
Intraperitoneal (IP) fluid administration involves delivery of fluids into the peritoneal
cavity. IP fluid administration is not a routine procedure in current veterinary practice.
However, there are some benefits to this route if no other is available. Given the relative
size of the peritoneal space, a moderate volume of fluids can be delivered without com-
 promise to patient comfort. Fluid is absorbed from the peritoneal cavity over approxi-
mately 24 to 48 hours (Ogg 2003). This lengthy time of absorption makes IP fluid
therapy inappropriate for patients experiencing hypovolemic shock. Pediatric patients
may be an exception to this in the event that venous access is unobtainable. It is neces-
sary to use isotonic fluids for delivery into the peritoneal cavity to avoid causing
unwanted fluid shifts
Strict aseptic technique is mandatory when introducing a catheter into the peritoneal
cavity. Introduction of bacteria can cause moderate to severe inflammation. Peritonitis
is a condition involving swelling of the peritoneum. It is an extremely painful condition
that is also life threatening. Given that peritonitis is a possible complication associated
with IP fuid therapy, this route is not routinely recommended in veterinary patients
(DiBartola and Bateman 2006).
Intraosseous Fluid Administration
Intraosseous (IO) fluid administration is extremely useful in veterinary medicine. Fluid
delivery is achieved via a catheter or needle inserted into the marrow of select long
 bones. The intraosseous space is structurally stable and provides a compartment whose
accessibility does not change in times of compromised health. Whereas vascular access
can be difficult to obtain in a cardiovascularly collapsed patient, the shape and size of
the intramedullary space does not vary in response to a patient's volume status. For this
reason, IO fluid administration is an excellent alternative to IV fluid therapy in
42Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
q oe uno ra  e n oe sd p r oos
achieved in very small or neonatal patients in whom vascular access is unobtainable
A distinct advantage to IO fluid administration is the quick redistribution of fluids.
Movement of IO fluid has been compared with delivery of fluid into the proximal vena
cava (Gelens 2003). The volume and rate of fluid administration is similar to that
encountered with IV fluid therapy. The rate at which fluids flow through a catheter is
determined by the diameter of the catheter itself. A catheter with a large diameter and
short length is appropriate for rapid administration of fluids. The diameter of the inside
of the catheter is ultimately what determines the maximum rate at which the fluids will
flow (Waddell 2004).
 In addition to catheter diameter, catheter position can affect the flow rate of IO fluids.
If the IO catheter is positioned right against the wall of the cortex, fluids may not flow
freely into the marrow. If the catheter takes up bony material within its lumen during
placement, it may become occluded.
 Complications may arise but are uncommon with the IO route of administration.
Pain during placement of the catheter is a common finding. The periosteum is very sensi-
tive and should be locally anesthetized before placement. Patient discomfort is also a
concern with elevated fluid rates. Flow by gravity is believed to be more comfortable.
IO fluids can be warmed to improve patient comfort (Wingfield 2002a). An additional
complication of concern using IO catheters is damage to regional nerves. Incorrect
placement can lead to catheter-induced trauma to nerves (Mathews 2o06).
 Further complications, such as osteomyelitis, can arise if strict aseptic technique is
not followed. It is an
therapy. Another potential complication with this route of fluid delivery is that personnel
may have difficulty identifying landmarks (Olsen et al. 2002).
The trochanteric fossa of the femur, the greater tubercle of the humerus, and the tibial
tuberosity are the most widely used sites for IO access (Figs. 3.3 and 3.4). Limbs affected
annula
Lateral Condyle
Medial Condyle
Fibula
Tibia
Figure 3.3. Intraosseous catheters can be used for patients in whom intravenous access is unobtainable. The
tibial tuberosity is one of the preferred locations. Illustration by Rachel Wallach.
Chapter3:Routes ofAdministration43
Cannula
Head.
Trachanter
Trochanteric Fossa
.lich
Figure 3.4. The trochanteric fossa of the femur is another choice location for an intraosseous catheter. llus-
tration by Rachel Wallach.
by trauma, infection, or pathologic fracture are inappropriate sites for IO fluid
administration.
Once the site has been selected, the surrounding area should be generously clipped
and surgically prepared. The periosteum is numbed by injection of approximately 1 mL
of 1% or 2% lidocaine (DiBartola and Bateman 2006). A spinal needle, a hypodermic
needle, or an IO catheter can be used for fuid administration. The catheter is inserted
into the medulla in the direction of the long axis of the bone. A gentle rotation can be
 apaau au ssd on rpno u anssand po unde au m uno u pan
catheter into the marrow. The catheter should be passed up to the hub, so the hub is
seated on the surface of the skin. The patency and appropriate placement of the catheter
can be confirmed using a slow injection of heparinized saline flush (1 IU heparin/1mL
0.9% NaCl). The flush should flow with virtually no resistance.
Once proper placement has been established, the catheter can be secured using
medical tape, padding, and standard catheter bandaging materials. The patient's comfort
is an important consideration when securing the catheter. Padding to cushion the hub
Of the needle is ideal, but securing the catheter is of utmost importance.
Nursing considerations
The tissue surrounding the bone should be evaluated as soon as continuous fluid infu-
sion has begun. Further, routine investigation of the bandage and catheter site will alert
the technician to any potential problems that may arise. Sites should be evaluated a
minimum of once daily; twice daily is ideal.
Troubleshooting difficulties with IO catheters is similar to investigating IV catheters.
Inappropriate positioning of the catheter can lead to interruption of flow. If the catheter
is against the wall of the cortex, the needle can be rotated slightly so that the bevel is
moved away from that surface.
Obstruction of flow can also be due to bone becoming lodged in the lumen of the
catheter as it passes through the periosteum. This results in a bone plug. The plug can
be removed by flushing with heparinized saline.
Fluids routinely delivered via IV therapy are acceptable for delivery through the IO
route. Providing patient comfort is well established (with respect to IO catheter), this
44Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 3.5. Spinal needles can be used as intraosseous catheters.
 route can be used beyond the emergency phase of treatment. Typical use of the IO route
is limited to between 12 and 24 hours. In many cases, it is used only until the point at
which IV access is obtainable. Although uncommon, it is possible to administer fluids
at an IO site for up to 3 days (Gelens 2003).
Several types of catheter-like devices are available for use in IO therapy. Selection is
based on size and age of patient as well as availability of materials. Regardless of which
style of catheter is chosen, a standard solution set can be connected to the hub and used
for fluid administration.
Hypodermic needles are well suited as IO catheters in neonatal patients. Size varies
with operator preference, but 18- to 20-gauge needles work well with most neonatal
patients. Large or adult patients are better matched with spinal needles or IO catheters.
The benefit of these two types of catheters is that they have a stylet. The presence of
the stylet not only provides some rigidity to the catheter, but also prevents a bone plug
from becoming lodged within the catheter. An additional advantage of IO catheters
end of the catheter. This helps avoid obstruction of flow if the catheter is butted against
the wall of the cortex.
Intravenous Fluid Administration
The IV route is widely accepted as the most useful and versatile means of administering
fuid therapy to veterinary patients. Fluids can be delivered in large volumes and can be
 given expediently when necessary.
Chapter3:Routes ofAdministration45
Hospitalized animals benefit from IV fluids during prophylactic, general health, and
be tailored to individual patients. A patient that is mildly dehydrated can receive replace-
ment fluids delivered as a continuous rate infusion over a predetermined period of time;
typically hours to days. There are many ways in which the clinician can determine the
volume of fluids necessary for a given patient. The following is an example of one
method of replacing the dehydration deficit (BW = body weight):
(BW)x(% dehydration)x(1000)
= Volume to be delivered to patient: half as bolus over 15 to 30 minutes;
half as replacement over 12 to 24 hours (Wingfield 2002b)
 a i r u sd  id paa a rias
volume support, which can be achieved by administering an IV bolus of fluids. Fluid
boluses are frequently delivered to patients during the emergency phase of treatment.
The patient must be closely monitored for its response to each bolus. Careful attention
is paid to all of the patient's vital parameters. Serial thoracic auscultations must be
 included in the monitoring to ensure no sudden changes develop with respect to lung
sounds.
 The IV route is also useful as a means of replacing fluid deficits, replacing ongoing
 losses, and providing maintenance fluids to patients that cannot meet their fluid needs
independently.
This method allows for delivery of a variety of different types of fluids. Crystalloids,
natural and synthetic colloids, blood products, cytotoxic (chemotherapeutic) drugs, and
parenteral nutrition can all be delivered IV. Many pharmaceutical products used in
veterinary therapy are available for IV use. The benefit of giving medications via the IV
route is that repeated delivery does not require that the animal be injected each time
 sas aan  sd a  ni aq n s  si  
infused slowly with fluid administration. Aseptic technique is mandatory for each punc-
ture of the injection ports. IV catheters are available in several different styles, diameters,
and lengths.
Nursing considerations
IV delivery of fluids should not be undertaken without recognition of potential compli-
cations. Although current techniques allow for very safe and successful use of this route,
improper care of IV delivery systems and fluids can be detrimental to the patient. Failure
to use strict aseptic technique during placement of catheters, as well as during setup of
fluid bags, syringes, and associated equipment, can lead to inflammation and/or infection
at the catheter site. Phlebitis is also a potential problem associated with use of improper
technique.
While deciding whether or not to provide IV therapy to a patient, the veterinary team
must consider if it is appropriate to do so in their specific clinical setting. Patients receiv-
ing IV fluids require constant and sometimes intensive monitoring. Therapy can be
Equipment intensive as well: Catheter supplies, infusion sets, infusion pumps, monitoring
equipment, and technical personnel are but a few of the necessary tools.
Placement of the IV catheter is one of the cornerstones of fluid therapy. This is a skill
that should largely be the responsibility of the technician. Catheter size, material, style,
and location are selected based on patient species, size, and health requirements
46Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Intravenous Catheters
The frequent use of IV fluid therapy in humans has provided the veterinary medical
community with many different types of catheters. Catheter size is determined by the
 measurement of the outer diameter of the cannula. Size is described as catheter gauge.
There is an inverse relationship between catheter gauge and diameter size. Larger
gauges correspond to smaller diameter cannulas; smaller gauges correspond to larger
diameter cannulas. IV catheters are available in a range of sizes. Catheter diameters
most commonly used in small animal practice typically fall between 24 and 14
gauges. Catheter diameter is an important aspect of IV fluid therapy because there
is a direct relationship between the rate at which fluids will flow and the inner
diameter of the catheter. According to this relationship, high rates of fluids are most
appropriately administered via a large diameter (small gauge) catheter (Waddell
2004).
Catheters are also available in different lengths. Selection should be based on
patient anatomy, the location of catheter placement, and the intended use. Patients
  d  s   n    
catheters are appropriate for smaller patients or for those that have disproportion-
ately short limbs.
 Long catheters placed in the jugular vein may reach the cranial vena cava. Long
catheters placed in the medial or lateral saphenous veins may reach the caudal vena
cava. These catheters are termed central venous catheters or central lines.
IV catheters are available in different materials. The material can contribute to associ-
ated complications. Placement of IV catheters involves a small amount of damage to
the vessel. The body can repair this damage by forming a clot. In some instances, an
 inappropriate amount of clotting occurs and the clot breaks off and forms an obstruc-
tion (thrombus) within the vessel lumen (Fig. 3.6). Thrombus formation is provoked by
catheters that are rigid or have rough surfaces. In addition, some catheter materials
allow seepage of certain components causing additional insult to the vessel. This is
referred to as the reactivity of the catheter and is a feature that varies according to the
materials used (Waddell 2004).
Thrombus
R.blaliaeh
Figure 3.6. Thrombus formation in the vascular space is a complication associated with intravenous catheter
placement. Illustration by Rachel Wallach.
Chapter 3:Routes of Administration47
Polyurethane
 Flexible material
 Can retain shape throughout longer dwell times
 Low reactivity
 Excellent choice for longer term catheters
 Fairly low risk of thrombosis
Teflon
 Rigid material
 Allows for easy insertion
 Leads to increased incidence of vessel damage
■ Prone to kinking
 Higher incidence of thrombus formation than other materials
 Not suitable for long-term use
Silicon
 Extremely flexible
 Can make insertion difficult: guidewire required for placement
Very low reactivity
 Excellent for long-term dwell
Polyvinyl Chloride and Polypropylene
High reactivity
 Not widely available due to rate of complications
Three styles of IV catheters are generally seen in small animal practice: butterfly,
Over-the-needle, and through-the needle types.
Butterfly catheters
These devices use a short needle attached to a length of plastic tubing with a syringe-
compatible port (Luer) on the distal end. Between the distal end of the needle and the
tubing are wings used for directing the needle during placement (Fig. 3.7A).
The rigidity of the needle makes it an inappropriate choice for long-term fluid therapy.
Movement of the cannula within the vessel can cause damage to vessel walls and lead
to perivascular delivery of medication. Despite this fact, some clinical situations may
require that the butterfly catheter be secured in place for a short duration (delivery of
injectable anesthetic as a slow bolus). The wings can be used as anchors for tape to
provide additional stability. This type of catheter can be used for a brief infusion, deliv-
ery of anesthetic, or collection of blood in most small animals. The sharpness of the
needle improves ease of placement and increases patient comfort during venipuncture.
Butterfly catheters are available with a needle length of 1 to 3 cm and tubing length
between 8 and 30cm. Needles are available in sizes between 18 and 27 gauge.
48Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
A
(B)
Figure 3.7. (A) Butterfly needles can be used for blood collection but are not appropriate for long-term
delivery of intravenous fluids. (B) Over-the-needle catheters are preferred for intravenous catheterization.
Over-the-needle catheters
Over-the-needle catheters are composed of a metal stylet covered by a flexible cannula
(Fig. 3.7B). The stylet has a bevel at the end and terminates with a sharp point. The
exterior cannula, the catheter, has a slightly tapered end that is blunt.
The stylet guides the catheter through the skin and introduces it into the vessel (Fig.
3.8). The entire length of the stylet should not be advanced into the patient. The stylet
is maintained in place until it is apparent the catheter is within the lumen of the vessel
Chapter 3:Routes of Administration49
Figure 3.8. Correct hand position for cephalic intravenous catheter placement.
Figure 3.9. Recommended hand position for placement of sterile intravenous catheter placement.
(Fig. 3.9). The catheter is advanced until the hub reaches the point of insertion (Fig.
3.10). The stylet is removed once the catheter is seated within the vessel.
One of the benefits of over-the-needle catheters is the similarity in size of catheter
and stylet. Because the catheter slides over the outside of the stylet, the hole created by
the stylet is no greater in diameter needed for introduction of the catheter. This mini-
mizes leakage at the site of insertion.
This style of catheter is used with great frequency in veterinary medicine. It provides
versatility with respect to the intended use of the catheter. Over-the-needle catheters can
 be used for fluid therapy, direct arterial blood pressure monitoring, serial arterial blood
collection, and as a placement aid for central lines (modified Seldinger technique).
50Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 3.10. Index finger can be used to advance catheter off stylet.
Catheters can safely dwell at one site for several days providing they are patent and
evaluated a minimum of once daily for any sign of redness or inflammation. Many
practitioners schedule replacement of over-the-needle catheters every 72 hours. It has
been demonstrated that catheters may remain in place for up to 7 days without com-
plication (Mathews and Brooks 1996). Current trends suggest that increased dwelltimes
are not necessarily the cause of complications or of increased incidence of infection
(Marsh-Ng et al. 2007). Over-the-needle catheters may remain in place as long as they
 are functional and necessary and the patient has no sign of discomfort.
Some over-the-needle catheters are equipped with wings that lie on either side of the
hub (at 0°and 180°). Critics of the over-the-needle catheter claim the catheter is difficult
to secure. As a result the catheter moves in and out of the skin at the point of insertion
 and contaminates the venipuncture site by introducing bacteria found on the integument
(Waddell 2004). This drawback is minimized, although not completely eliminated, by
the existence of wings on the catheter hub. The wings can be used to secure the catheter
onto the patient's limb using white medical tape. Securing the wings stops the catheter
from rotating within the vessel and reduces the amount of movement in and out of the
skin.
 Over-the-needle catheters are typically used in peripheral vessels. Due to the anatomic
features of most feline and canine patients, catheter location occasionally leads to
obstruction of flow. If catheters are placed proximally on a limb, flexion of a joint often
occludes the catheter. This is a minor drawback that can be avoided if appropriate
attention is paid to catheter positioning at time of placement.
Nursing considerations
When placing these catheters care must be taken not to remove and replace the stylet
within the lumen of the catheter. It is sometimes helpful to back the stylet out of the
catheter and examine the catheter for evidence of blood flow that has not reached the
distal end of the stylet. This is not good practice because reintroduction of the stylet
causes microscopic injury to the tip of the catheter. In extreme cases the stylet may not
Chapter 3:Routes of Administration51
reach the end of the catheter but rather puncture through the wall of the catheter while
 being reintroduced. Fraying or burring of the proximal end of the catheter causes damage
to vessel walls, increasing the potential for development of thrombosis (Spencer 1982).
Securing over-the-needle catheters in place is an important step in preventing catheter
related complications. A simple method using four pieces of white medical tape has
proven successful in the Ontario Veterinary College Teaching Hospital's small animal
intensive care unit.
Figure 3.11. Supplies necessary for placement of sterile intravenous catheter.
Supplies (Fig. 3.11)
 Luer adapter (PRN Adapter by Becton Dickinson)
 Two pieces medical tape (-2 cm width) long enough to wrap around patient's limb
 Two pieces medical tape (-1 cm width) long enough to wrap around patient's limb
 One adhesive bandage with sterile cotton pad in middle (Band-Aid)
 Bandage material for padding (Conform by Kendall)
 Self-adhering bandage material (outer layer) (Vetrap by 3M)
Method (Fig. 3.12A-D)
 Thin tape adhesive side up placed under wings of catheter then folded back and
wrapped around limb adhesive side down
 Thin tape, adhesive side down, anchor short end on wing using nondominant thumb,
wrap under luer adapter and over second wing (makes shape of V) then around
patient limb
 Gentle pressure is applied to V shaped tape to encourage catheter to sit toward patient
 Apply sterile adhesive bandage with catheter insertion site being covered only by
sterile gauze square
 Avoid having adhesive tape covering point of insertion
 Apply second thick tape, adhesive side down in same manner as the second thin piece
of tape
A
(C)
Figure 3.12. (A-D) The thumb can be used to exert gentle pressure on the catheter, maintaining it within
Catheter tothepatient'slimb.
52
Chapter 3:Routes of Administration53
(D)
Figure 3.12. (Continued)
 Apply padding: start at distal limb and travel proximally (Figs. 3.13 and 3.14)
 For distal limbs, paw may be included but two toes should be visible and palpable
 Cover entire shaved area
 Apply self adhering outer bandage layer (Fig. 3.15)
Through-the-needle catheters
Through-the-needle catheters are long flexible catheters contained within a sterile plastic
sheath before placement. The sheath is attached to the proximal end of the catheter at
the base of the needle. Once the needle is placed the catheter is passed through the
needle into the vessel (Fig. 3.16A-C)
Needle sizes range from 16 to 22 gauge and are between 3 and 5cm in length. Cath-
eters are available from approximately 20cm to over 60cm in length.
 The entire through-the-needle system is closed, which helps maintain sterility during
placement. Catheters can be placed into the jugular vein or through a medial or lateral
saphenous vein. Insertion at any of these locations should place the end of the catheter
within the cranial vena cava if the catheter is an appropriate length.
A surgical preparation of the chosen site is performed before placement. The needle
is inserted through the skin. It is helpful to pick up a small section of skin and pass the
needle through the tented skin and into the SC space before attempting insertion into
the vessel. Once the needle has passed through the skin, the vessel is located and the
needle punctures the vessel wall and enters the vessel lumen. A small flash of blood can
be visualized in the proximal end of the catheter if needle placement is successful. At
this point the catheter is advanced, using the outer sheath, until the entire catheter is
seated within the vessel. The needle is withdrawn completely from the skin and enclosed
within the needle guard or peeled away depending on the type of catheter used. The
needle guard is secured to the patient and the catheter site is bandaged using a layer of
 padding and an outer adhesive layer. It is beneficial to use a lighter colored outer wrap
54Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 3.13. A layer of cotton gauze is used as a base layer of padding on the limb. Bandages should be
placed from the toes in a proximal direction.
Figure 3.14. Padded layer of gauze. The technician should try to leave only the two longest toes visible at
the distal end of the bandage (not the entire paw).
 on jugular catheter bandages so any occurrence of strikethrough bleeding does not go
unnoticed.
The catheter's position within the vena cava has many benefits. Measurement of
central venous pressure is achieved via placement of a central line. Medications delivered
through a central venous catheter achieve a higher concentration of drug in the blood
vessels surrounding the heart (Drobatz 1999). This is particularly helpful during car-
diopulmonary resuscitation.
The size of the vena cava and its associated volume of blood flow permit collection
of blood samples with greater ease than via peripheral vessels. Sampling through a central
line also facilitates collection of more substantial volumes. With a slightly faster draw
time, blood drawn from a central line can be used for tests, such as a coagulation panel,
Figure 3.15. A layer of self-adhesive bandaging is used as an external layer.
Intracatheanrwunsy
Ne3831641
(A)
002464
Intracath
19.04
(B)
Figure 3.16. (A-C) Through-the-needle catheters may be used for central venous catheterization.
55
56Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
(C}
Figure 3.16.(Continued)
that are often not feasible when using a small peripheral vessel. An additional benefit of
through the needle catheters is that blood collection is achieved without repeatedly invad-
ing the patient. This is a significant contribution to the overall comfort of the patient.
 Repeated needle puncture of ports or luer adapters may compromise their integrity
Routine changes of fluid lines and luer adapters are good practice. Although catheters
can remain in place indefinitely, lines and luer adapters should be changed every 72
hours. As an additional safety measure, ports may be swabbed with gauze square or
cotton ball soaked in a bacteriostatic solution before any injection.
Samples may be drawn from the catheter using a three-syringe technique
Materials
 One syringe with 3 mL heparinized saline (1 IU/mL)
 One syringe with 0.5 to 1.5 mL heparinized saline
 One syringe with no additives, appropriate size for sample needed
 Bacteriostatic swab for injection port
 Blood collection vials
Technique
 Pause fluid infusion and clamp line at point closest to patient but distal to injection
port
 Swab port before introduction of each needle
 Using small heparinized saline syringe, inject approximately half the volume into the
catheter being careful not to empty syringe
 Apply negative pressure to syringe and withdraw blood from catheter using slow
steady pressure
 Mix blood with heparinized saline by gently inverting the syringe once or twice
 Recall that catheter is now full of fresh whole blood and can clot if too much time
passes at this stage
 Remove blood sample using empty syringe and place sample in required vials
Chapter 3:Routes of Administration57
 Slowly inject heparinized blood sample into catheter ensuring there are no blood clots
in syringe (blood should not be able to clot in heparinized syringe)
 Use 3 mL heparinized saline flush to clear catheter of any blood
 Use caution with volume of heparinized saline administered to patients receiving
heparin therapy
 Remove only the volume of blood needed for analysis to avoid iatrogenic anemia
Through-the-needle catheters permit delivery of multiple types of fluids. Positioning
within the vena cava allows for safe delivery of hyperosmolar fluids such as total or
 partial parenteral nutrition (Mazzaferro 2007).
As the name implies, IV placement of this type of catheter is achieved by advancing
the catheter through a needle. To accommodate passage of the catheter, the inner diam-
eter of the needle must be larger than the outer diameter of the catheter. This is a
drawback associated with this style of catheter. The needle puncture creates a hole that
is larger than the space occupied by the catheter once it is in place. Bleeding and leakage
of fluids can occur at the insertion site (Spencer 1982).
Another potential difficulty encountered with through-the-needle catheters involves
securing the needle and needle guard once the catheter is in place. Needle guards can
be sutured and/ or glued to the patient's skin. In some instances, movement of skin in
the cervical region alters the positioning of the needle guard and causes a kink in the
catheter as it enters the SC space. Similar difficulties can arise with needle guards affixed
to a distal hind limb. Patient movement may apply pressure to the needle guard and
cause kinking at the point of insertion. This complication is not a concern with through-
the-needle catheters placed via peel-away needles.
Multilumen Catheters
 Double-, triple-, quadruple-, and five-lumen catheters are available for use as central
venous catheters (Figs. 3.17 and 3.18). Double- and triple-lumen catheters are used
frequently in intensive and critical care settings within veterinary medicine. Separate
Figure 3.17. Peel-away catheters can be used for central venous catheterization.
58Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 3.18. Double-lumen catheters are separated into two entirely separate compartments (lumens) within
one catheter
lumens permit simultaneous delivery of multiple fluid types as well as medications that
 are incompatible with other infusions. Total or parenteral nutrition can be delivered via
one lumen while medication, crystalloid fluids, or other therapeutics are delivered safely,
but separately, through the same catheter.
Multilumen catheters are appropriate for long-term use in patients whose peripheral
access has been exhausted or in patients that require serial blood sampling.
Catheters are available in many sizes and lengths and can suit the largest canine patient
to a small feline patient. Double-lumen catheters range from 4F to 14F in lengths of 5 to
7cm. Triple-lumen catheters start at 5.5F and are available up to 12F depending on the
manufacturer. These are available in lengths between 8 and 60 cm. Quad-lumen catheters
start at 8.5F and are larger than what is necessary for most small animal patients.
Multilumen catheters are placed by the modified Seldinger technique. A minimum of
 two people are involved in this procedure. A second person is required even if the patient
is anesthetized because the operator cannot simultaneously occlude the vein and place
the catheter.
The entire procedure is performed with strict adherence to sterile technique (Figs.
19-29). A large margin is clipped and surgically prepared. The operator should remain
sterile for the duration of the catheter placement. If the operator prefers to flush the
multilumen catheter with heparinized saline before placement, this must also be done
using sterile technique.
A small catheter or introducer needle is used to gain access to the vessel. Many of
the central venous catheter kits provide an introducer needle; however, an 18- or 20-
 gauge over-the-needle peripheral catheter may be used in its place.
A guidewire or J wire is passed through the introducer and advanced several centi-
meters into the vessel. The needle is withdrawn and a vessel dilator is passed over the
guidewire. A small incision is made in the skin at the point of insertion of the guidewire
to facilitate introduction of the dilator. A moderate amount of force is needed to pass
the dilator through the vessel wall. The dilator serves to widen the opening surrounding
the guidewire so the larger diameter of the catheter can pass through. When the dilator
 is removed, sterile gauze may be applied at the point of insertion because bleeding often
Occurs. The catheter is fed onto the guidewire. It is important to maintain a hold on the
guidewire while advancing the catheter. The guidewire will appear through the distal
Chapter 3:Routes of Administration59
 injection port. The operator must continue to hold the guidewire until the catheter is
seated within the vessel and the guidewire can be removed.
 A small amount of blood is aspirated from the catheter until the air that was in the
catheter is collected into the syringe. The catheter can then be flushed with heparinized
saline. The same procedure is repeated for each port. The catheter is then secured in
 place using suture and/or glue. Sterile gauze can be applied to the point of insertion and
covered with an adhesive drape to seal out any contaminants. A layer of padding is
applied over the adhesive drape and followed with an adhesive layer of bandage.
Expandable adhesive bandage material that is light in color is a good choice for the
outer wrap because it is soft, flexible, and light enough in color that any amount of
strikethrough is readily apparent. The injection ports may be secured to the outer wrap
Figure 3.19. A generous area is shaved before catheter placement.
Figures 3.20-3.29. Jugular placement of central line. Sterile technique is mandatory.
Figure 3.20-3.29. (Continued)
60
Figure 3.20-3.29. (Continued)
61
Figure 3.20-3.29. (Continued)
62
Chapter3:Routes of Administration63
 before connection to fluid lines. This will provide an additional anchor for the catheter
and further decrease its chances of being accidentally dislodged.
Nursing considerations
Patients undergoing placement of central lines (through the needle or modified Seldinger
technique) should be sedated where cardiovascular status permits. This procedure
requires technical expertise and is accomplished with greater haste if the patient is
comfortable and still. Topical anesthetic such as lidocaine cream may be applied to the
clipped area approximately 20 to 30 minutes before the procedure. This will provide
additional comfort to the patient and facilitate placement of the introducer needle or
Over-the-needle catheter.
 It is possible to advance the guidewire into the heart during placement of the multilu-
men catheter. If the guidewire enters the right atrium it may instigate arrhythmias.
Monitoring heart rate and rhythm by means of an electrocardiogram can alert the
operator to placement of the guidewire within the heart. If this occurs, the wire does
not need to be removed entirely from the patient. It is likely that it only needs to be
withdrawn by a few centimeters. Cardiac rhythm should return to normal once the
guidewire is appropriately positioned within the proximal vena cava.
Through-the-needle and multilumen catheters can be used in many of the same situ-
ations. Each style of catheter requires a certain degree of technical expertise. If the per-
sonnel responsible for placement of the catheter have experience placing over-the-needle
 peripheral catheters, placement of central lines is a skill that can be quickly learned.
A study comparing catheter placement via the modified Seldinger technique with
through-the-needle technique found that each method presented a similar level of chal-
lenge to an operator who had no previous experience with either. The most significant
difference was that placement via the modified Seldinger technique took a longer time.
Success rates were similar for each method. Further comparison found that blood col-
lection took the same length of time from each catheter type (multilumen vs. through
the needle) (Portillo et al. 2004).
With respect to vascular trauma, the modified Seldinger technique for placement of
a central venous catheter caused less damage than the through-the-needle catheter when
caused hematomas, whereas less than 90% of the modified Seldinger technique catheters
resulted in the same findings. In addition, the average size of hematomas caused by the
through-the-needle catheters was double that of the catheters placed by the modified
Seldinger technique (Portillo et al. 2004).
Chapter Summary
Many routes are available for administration of fluid therapy. Selection should be made
on a patient-by-patient basis, considering the signalment of the animal, the urgency of
its needs, and the nature of its illness. The GI tract is an appropriate route for fluid
therapy in patients that suffer no preexisting compromise of their digestive system. This
route is appropriate for slow replacement of fluids and not suitable for patients in a
hypovolemic crisis. The Gl route is used via patient eating and drinking, via nasoesopha-
geal feeding tube, or via esophagostomy or gastrostomy tube. Esophagostomy and
gastrostomy tubes are reserved for patients requiring longer term therapy.
64Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
SC administration of fluids is convenient, economical, and technically available to
most small animal practices. Its use is appropriate for treatment of mild dehydration.
This route is not appropriate for critically ill patients due to the slow absorption of
fluids from the SC tissue.
The intraperitoneal space can accommodate relatively large volumes of fluid. This
route is not widely used in small animal practice due to the potential for serious com-
 plications. Redistribution of fluids is slow, which makes this route an inappropriate
choice for hypovolemic or se verely dehydrated patients.
IO delivery of fluids is underused in small animal practice. This route provides
an alternative to IV therapy when illness has lead to cardiovascular collapse and
subsequent difficulty obtaining venous access. Fluids delivered to the IO space are
redistributed quickly, making this route an appropriate selection for hypovolemic
 patients. Technical ability and availability of appropriate materials may be limiting
factors.
The IV route is an extremely versatile means by which fluid therapy is administered.
This route provides access for delivery of crystalloids, colloids, blood products, and
 parenteral nutrition. Large volumes of fluids may be delivered into the vascular space,
able in a vast number of materials, gauges, and lengths.
IV therapy relies on appropriate selection and use of catheters. The three main
types of catheters are butterfly catheters, over-the-needle catheters, and through-the-
needle catheters. These are useful for short-term, moderate, and long-term use,
respectively.
catheter used in small animal patients. These catheters, along with most through-the-
needle catheters, can be used in the jugular vein or through a peripheral vein to access
the cranial or caudal vena cava, respectively. Catheters that terminate in this location
are referred to as central venous catheters or central lines. They are frequently used for
measurement of central venous pressures and collection of serial blood samples in inten-
sive and critical care patients.
Review Questions
1. When is it inappropriate to use the enteral route for fluid therapy?
2. What is important regarding the length of the nasoesophageal (NE) tube that is
selected for a given patient?
3. What are the landmarks used for measuring an NE tube?
4. What volume of fluid can safely be administered at each subcutaneous (SC) injec-
tion site?
5. Under which circumstances should the SC route not be selected for fluid therapy?
6. Name two significant advantages to the intraosseous (IO) fluid route.
7. Name two drawbacks of the IO route for fluid delivery.
8. Name four sites frequently used for IV access in cats or dogs.
9. With respect to safety and decreased incidence of catheter-associated complica
tions, what catheter material is highly recommended for small animal patients?
Chapter 3:Routes of Administration65
Answers to the review questions can be found on page 222 in the Appendix. The review
questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley.comf
goldonohoenursing.
Further Reading
Abrams-Ogg, A. 2003. Critical and supportive care in pediatrics. Proceedings of the
Western Veterinary Conference.
Burrows, C. 1982. Inadequate skin preparation as a cause of intravenous catheter-
related infection in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:747-749.
DiBartola, S., and S. Bateman. 2006. Introduction to fluid therapy. In S. DiBartola, ed.
Fluid,Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice,325-343.St.
Louis: Saunders.
 Drobatz, K. 1999. Triage and initial assessment. In L. King and R. Hammond, eds.
 Manual of Canine and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 1-6. Cheltenham, UK:
BSAVA.
Gelens, H. 2003. Intraosseous fluid therapy. Proceedings of the Western Veterinary
Conference.
 Greene, C., and J. Hoskins. 1990. Drug and blood component therapy. In J. Hoskins,
ed. Veterinary Pediatrics, 29-42. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Maki, D., and M. Ringer. 1991. Risk factors for infusion-related phlebitis with small
peripheral venous catheters. Ann Intern Med 114:845-854.
Marsh-Ng, M., D. Burney, and J. Garcia. 2007. Surveillance of infections associated
with intravenous catheters in dogs and cats in an ICU. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
43:13-20.
Mathews, K. 2006. Monitoring fluid therapy and complications of fluid therapy. In S.
DiBartola, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice,
377-391. St. Louis: Saunders.
Mathews, K., and M. Brooks. 1996. A prospective study of intravenous catheter con-
tamination.J Vet Emerg Crit Care 6:33-43.
Mazzaferro, E. 2007. Intravenous catheterization. NAVC Clinician's Brief, 37-40.
Mensack, S. 2008. Fluid therapy: options and rational administration. Vet Clin Small
Anim 38:575-586
Michell, A., R. Bywater, et al. 1989. Routes and techniques of fluid administration. In
Veterinary Fluid Therapy, 121-148. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Olsen, D., B. Packer, et al. 2002. Evaluation of the bone injection gun as a method for
 a f eso   a  g d  ss
31:533-540.
Portillo, E.M., A. Mackin, et al. 2004 Comparison of the modified Seldinger and
through-the-needle jugular catheter placement techniques in the dog. Proc Am Coll
Vet Intern Med Conf.
Spencer, K. 1982. Intravenous catheters. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 12:3
533-543.
Tan, R., A. Dart, and B. Dowling. 2003. Catheters: a review of the selection, utilization
and complications of catheters for peripheral venous access. Aust Vet J 81:136-139.
Waddell, L.S. 2004. Advanced vascular access. Proceedings of Western Veterinary
Conference.
66Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Wingfeld, W.E. 2002a. Emergency vascular access and intravenous catheterization. In
W.E. Wingfield and M.R. Raffe, eds. The Veterinary ICU Book, 58-67. Jackson, WY:
Teton NewMedia.
Wingfield, W.E. 2002b. Fluid and electrolyte therapy. In W.E. Wingfield and M. R. Raffe,
eds. The Veterinary ICU Book, 166-188. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Internet Resources
www.norfolkaccess.com/Catheters.html#Anchor-Catheter-49575.
Fluid Pumps and Tools of
Administration
Administration Sets
Administration sets are the sterile lines used to deliver fluids to the patient. A spike that
breaks the seal on the bag or bottle of fluids; a drip chamber; one or more clamps to
halt flow, and one or more injection ports are found on standard administration sets.
Additional features such as filters, Y-type ports, micro and macro drip specifications,
and length of fluid lines can vary significantly.
The variety of features available with administration sets allows for patient-specific
selection. The technician should consider the size of the patient, its health status, and
potential fluid needs before selecting an administration set. This is of particular impor-
tance in patients whose fluids are not being delivered via infusion pump. Fluid infusion
d aq n q d pa  o a  oe aq Aap  sd
grammed by the hospital personnel. This eliminates the need for manual calculation of
drip rates and allows flexibility with respect to selection of drip chamber size.
Drip chambers
The drip chamber is a compartment that lies at the end of the fluid line closest to the
fluid bag or bottle (Fig. 4.1). It is primed during the setup of the line and maintains a
constant volume of fluid within the compartment until its source is depleted. The
chamber is primed by gently squeezing its sides once or twice and allowing it to fill to
a designated fil line approximately halfway up the wall of the compartment. Completely
filling the drip chamber with fluid prevents the technician from evaluating the rate or
quality of fluid flowing through the line. Maintaining the chamber at approximately
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
@ 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
67
68FluidTherapyforVeterinaryTechniciansandNurses
Figure 4.1.  A drip chamber is attached to the bag of sterile intravenous fluids. Drops can be counted in this
chamber to estimate flow rate and to ensure fluids are flowing properly
half its capacity prevents large volumes of air from passing into the line and subsequently
into the patient.
 Drip chambers are available in different sizes. The sizes represent the number of drops
delivered by the chamber per milliliter of fluid. Two sizes that are useful in small animal
practice are 10gtt/mL and 60gtt/mL. It is easier to tailor the fluid rate using a 60 gtt/
mL drip chamber for small canine and feline patients. The 10gtt/mL set is referred to
as a macro drip, and the 60gtt/mL is referred to as a micro drip. Additional sizes are
available for use in large animal patients.
Once the drip chamber is attached to the fluid source, it is important that the bottom
of the chamber (attached to the fluid line) hangs below the fluid source. If the fluid line
and drip chamber hang above the fluid source, the air that rises to the top of the chamber
will flow into the line and eventually into the patient (Fig. 4.2).
Clamps
Most fluid lines have a series of plastic clamps that can occlude the flow of fluids at
different levels throughout the line. Rolling clamps have a wheel that is advanced on
the line and exerts increasing or decreasing pressure on the fluid line depending on the
direction in which the wheel is rolled (Fig. 4.3). Flow can be completely obstructed using
the rolling clamp. Patients receiving fluids without the advantage of an infusion pump
have their rate of fluid delivery adjusted using this clamp. It is important to monitor the
position of the clamp and the drip rate of the fluids at frequent intervals. If a pump is
not responsible for delivering fluids, the rate can be inadvertently adjusted with acci-
dental movement of the rolling clamp. It is possible to disrupt flow entirely or to deliver
a fluid bolus, each of which could be dangerous for the patient.
Injection ports
Several injection ports lie within the line of the administration set (Fig. 4.4A, B). The
ports can be used for injection of medication, catheter flushes, or for continuous rates
A
Figure 4.2. (A) Drip chambers must be suspended in this manner to avoid air flowing into delivery set.
(B) Hanging the drip chamber in this position allows air and not fluid into delivery set.
69
Figure 4.3. Roll clamps are included in lines to adjust flow rate.
(A)
(B
Figure 4.4  (A) Needleless injection port. (B) Syringe attached via Luer lock to needleless injection port.
70
Chapter 4:Fluid Pumps and Tools of Administration71
Figure 4.5. Needle-lock devices can be used to piggyback additional fluids (such as infusions of
narcotic analgesics) into the main fluid line. These are used with needle-compatible infusion sets.
A needle is seated in a plastic sheath that locks onto the fluid line once the needle is inserted into the
port. Opposite end of sheath is the Luer port, attached to a syringe or to the catheter end of a fluid line. This
device allows a connection between two lines or between a syringe and an infusion set that theoretically
cannot come apart. With excessive patient movement, the needle-lock device may be disrupted or develop
small leaks.
of infusion of medications piggybacked onto the main fluids. Extended or frequent use
of injection ports can weaken the rubber and compromise the integrity of the port. Fluid
infusion sets should be changed at least every 72 hours to maintain safety and sterility
(Mathews and Brooks 1996).
Specific devices exist that facilitate one fluid line being connected to another via an
injection port (piggybacking). The devices have a Luer on one end and a needle on the
 opposite side. The needle is contained within a sheath that locks onto the primary line.
The Luer side (opposite the needle) is attached to a second infusion set. The fluid from
 the second infusion set passes through the needle into the lumen of the primary infusion 
and is delivered concurrently.
 These devices are useful in practices that frequently have constant rates of infusions 
added on to primary fluid infusions. The ability to lock the secondary line onto the
primary line is a major advantage (Fig. 4.5).
Where needle-locking adapters are not available, a hypodermic needle may be attached
to a fluid line and piggybacked onto the primary line via the injection port. The main
disadvantage to this setup is the ease with which the needle can accidentally slip out of
the port.
At the Ontario Veterinary College Teaching Hospital, injection ports are wiped
with 70% isopropyl alcohol before invasion with any type of needle or needleless
system. Because small animal patients' fluid lines are occasionally in contact with
the ground (during canine walks) or with the urine, vomit, or feces of a critically
 ill patient, wiping with an alcohol swab is a means of cleansing the injection port
before use.
72Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 4.6. Extension sets add length to delivery sets and provide additional injection ports.
Extension Sets
A single administration set is often not long enough to compensate for the movement
of a patient within a kennel or a run. Fluid delivery sets with additional injection ports
can be used to extend the length of the original drip set. Extension sets have Luer adapt-
ers on either end that are compatible with drip set and catheter, respectively. The exten-
sions do not have a drip chamber and can be used in succession to increase the length
of the fluid line (Fig. 4.6)
Extended fluid lines are beneficial and can contribute to the safety of the medical
team in cases where a patient is fractious or defensive and unapproachable. Chemical
restraint can be administered from a safe distance using one of the many injection ports
on the fluid extension sets.
Burettes
A burette (trade name: Buretrol) is an instrument that can be used as a part of the fluid
delivery set (Fig. 4.7). It is a plastic cylindrical chamber designed to hold smaller volumes
of fluid. There is a vent on the top of the chamber as well as an injection port. The
chamber has a volumetric scale on its side to allow for measurement of fluid. The burette
has a universal spike on one end and a port that is compatible with a universal spike
 On the other end. The line between the fluid bag and the burette is equipped with a roll
clamp. The line leaving the bottom of the burette is equipped with a straight clamp.
Burettes are placed within the fluid line, between the fluid bag and the drip chamber.
A burette may be used to infuse a specific volume of fluids, a dose of medication over
 a set amount of time, or as a continuous rate infusion. Where infusion pumps are not
available, the burette provides added safety by decreasing the likelihood that a patient
receives a dangerously large volume of fluids. The line between the bag and the burette
may be clamped to allow delivery of the small volume within the burette and nothing
further from the fluid bag.
Chapter 4: Fluid Pumps and Tools ofAdministration73
Figure 4.7. Burettes can be used to infuse medication over predetermined lengths of time.
 Delivery of medications is achieved by fully or partially filling the chamber and adding
the dose of medication into the fluids. In this manner, the fluids carry the dose of medi-
cation to the patient as a slow and steady infusion.
Exampfe A
A patient is on a fluid rate of 75 mL/hr. The patient is scheduled to receive 400 mg of
an intravenous (IV) medication as a slow push (over 20 minutes). The burette is filled
to 25 mL with IV fluids and the 400mg of medication is injected through the port at
the top of the chamber. The fluid rate is continued at 75 mL/hr and the 25 mL of fluid
containing the medication is infused over 20 minutes. Once the medication is delivered,
the burette must be refilled promptly to avoid air passing into the delivery set.
Example B
The prescribed dose is 0.2 mg/kg per hour If the animal is 10 kg, its dose is 2.0mg/h. To
make up an infusion that will last for 6 hours, the burette is filled to 150 mL (6 hours worth
of fluids) and 12 mg of the analgesic medication is added. The concentration of the medica-
tion is 10 mg/mL, which means that 1.2 mL of analgesic is added to 149 mL of fluid. Note
that 1 mL of fluid is removed to accommodate for the volume of medication being added.
This will deliver a CRI of analgesics to the patient over a 6-hour period of time.
Miscellaneous Administration Sets
Vented sets
Specific administration sets are necessary for fluids being delivered from a plastic or
glass bottle. If the container cannot collapse in response to the vacuum created by the
siphoning fluids, the flow will cease. This is not of concern with traditional fluid bags
74FluidTherapyforVeterinaryTechniciansandNurses
aal sdund uinui uo pou suad ioy sias uoensue ui pasn ane suass roenai mid a't an
systems adjust fluid delivery rate and are calibrated in milliters per hour.
because they can change their form in response to fluid volume. Vented administration
sets may be used with fluid bottles to eliminate the accumulation of negative pressure
within thebottle.
Rate flow regufator system
The rate flow regulator system is a section of infusion line equipped with a dial that sits
within the line (Fig. 4.8). It is used to dial a specific number that corresponds with a
flow rate for a given patient. These must be used with extreme caution in the busy criti-
cal care setting. Because the Dial-a-Flo infusion systems do not have any electrical
component, there is no notification or alarm to alert the technician there is a problen
with an infusion. Further, with mobile patients, it is not uncommon for lines to become
tangled or kinked. The Dial-a-Flo system uses gravity rather than a positive pressure
flow (such as with volumetric infusion pumps). If the line or catheter is less than perfectly
positioned, it is possible that the gravitational flow of fluids will not overcome the minor
obstruction.
An advantage to the flow regulator system is that the technician is not required to
count drops to determine a rate of flow. In addition, by setting the flow regulator to a
 preselected rate, there is less opportunity for accidental overdose.
The rate prescribed by the clinician is selected on the dial and the designated volume
should be delivered in milliliters per hour. Ranges vary, but most of these systems accom-
modate between 5 and 250mL/h (Abbott Product Information).
Filters
Administration sets with inline filters must be used for delivery of blood products
 ai sy an rd p an  sd   a it )s
safety of their IV administration. The filters remove white blood cells, fat, platelet
Chapter 4:Fluid Pumps and Tools of Administration75
Figure 4.9. Blood transfusion administration set with filter in drip chamber.
microaggregates, and blood clots that may have formed within the product (Mathews
et al., 2006). Microaggregates are bundles of microscopic particles that can form in
stored blood products. Most filters used in transfusion sets have pores that are 170 μm
in diameter; other sizes are available.
Y-type infusion sets
As the name implies, these infusion sets are Y shaped and have two universal spikes,
each with an inline filter, and are connected to a communal administration set. The main
advantage to the Y-type sets is the ability to administer two products simultaneously.
For example, if packed red blood cells and fresh frozen plasma are available from the
same donor, the patient may receive concurrent infusions from each individual bag
through the Y-type set.
Pressurebags
Pressure bags are used to increase the rate of flow of whichever type of fluid is being
administered (Fig. 4-10). The pressure bag consists of opposing panels and two open
ends. The length of the bag varies according to the size of the fluid bag it is meant
to encase. Pressure bag sizes include 500mL, 1, 3, and 5L. The front panel is made of
76Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
au ssaidms 'jie po liny padund aie sheg ainssaid sheg ainssaid ou! paasui aie sheg pinid ot't auni
fluid bag, and facilitate fast delivery of fluids.
mesh to facilitate observation of the fluid level within the fluid bag. The back panel is
 a double layer of fabric connected to a hand pump. The bag of fluids is placed within
the pressure bag, and the pump is used to inflate the back panel. As the panel inflates,
pressure increases and squeezes the fluid bag forcing fluid out through the drip chamber
cates the amount of pressure being applied to the bag of fluids. There are also cautionary
markings that indicate safe and unsafe inflation pressures.
Volumetric Infusion Pumps
 Fluid infusion pumps are a standard of care in human hospitals (Fig. 4.11). The same
is true of their presence in emergency and referral veterinary hospitals. Although infu-
'os a q a  sand ad u uo s nou ar sdd s
An infusion pump is an excellent tool that facilitates and simplifies the administration
 Oof fluid therapy to veterinary patients. When used properly an infusion pump can save
time, improve accuracy of dosing, and manage multiple infusions, thus allowing for
more productive use of the technician's time.
Infusion pumps are made by many different manufacturers and are available in
several different styles. Some are capable of managing one infusion (one fluid bag and
one administration set); others are capable of managing three or four infusions at once
(Fig. 4.12A, B).
Benefits of infusion pumps
Once a fluid type and delivery set has been selected for a patient, an infusion can be
started quite quickly with the help of an infusion pump. If the animal's rate of fluid
delivery has been decided ahead of time by the clinician, the rate and volume to be
delivered are set on the pump and the infusion begins. Loading fluid lines into the pump
Chapter 4:Fluid Pumps and Tools of Administration77
G
Baxter
CLR
Figure 4.11.
Infusion pumps come
in many different styles.Single pumps are a popular choice in small
animal practice.
is done with relative ease and becomes a simple and fast process once the veterinary
 technician has some amount of experience with the pump.
Volumetric infusion pumps deliver fluids with a high degree of accuracy. Additional
precision is achieved through alarms that indicate when flow is not progressing at the
rate at which it was prescribed. Infusions delivered without a pump may significantly
slow or cease altogether if patient position or catheter patency prevents flow. Without
an audible notification that the flow has changed, it may be difficult for the veterinary
technician to promptly observe this change. Occlusion alarms on infusion pumps alert
the technician to a change in flow rate, which allows the problem to be identified and
 corrected immediately. As such, the pumps contribute significantly to the accurate deliv-
ery of fluids.
 Infusion pumps also notify the veterinary technician, via alarm, if a significant volume
of air is in the fluid line. This notification allows the technician to remove the air from
the line, preventing it from flowing into the patient. Fluids being delivered without the
 benefit of an infusion pump may silently carry small volumes of air through the delivery
set and into the patient.
Drawbacks of infusion pumps
Perhaps the biggest drawback associated with infusion pumps is their cost. Despite the
number of benefits associated with pumps, cost can be prohibitive.
78
FluidTherapy forVeterinary Technicians andNurses
2
2
1
3
(A)
2
1
D8
(B)
Figure 4.12. (A) Double infusion pumps can be used for a single patient on multiple infusions or for two
pumps in addition to double pumps.
Some of the infusion pumps available for veterinary medicine can only be used with
a specific infusion set. The infusion sets cannot typically be used with other pumps, and
 in some cases cannot be used without a pump. The need for such specific accessories
increases the cost associated with use of the pump. There are many infusion pumps
available that are designed for use with standard infusion sets, thus making use of equip-
ment that already exists in the inventory of the average veterinary hospital. Before
Chapter 4:Fluid Pumps and Tools of Administration79
selecting an infusion pump for the veterinary hospital, it may be worthwhile for the
technician to seek feedback from other fluid pump users. Peer comments and experience
may highlight advantages and drawbacks associated with certain infusion pumps. This
can contribute significantly useful information and potentially avoid the purchase of a
notoriously frustrating or disappointing piece of equipment.
Q
Nursing considerations
There are features on most infusion pumps that are largely the responsibility of the
technician. Although these are not consistently identified by the same title on all pumps,
the features they represent are standard.
Rate
The rate is the speed with which the fluids are delivered to the patient. Measurement is
made in milliliters per hour (mL/hr). This parameter is entered at the start of the infu-
sion and is a variable prescribed by the veterinarian.
 Fluid infusion pumps allow for expedient rate changes. By pausing the infusion, a
new rate may be entered on the keypad, and delivery starts at the new rate as soon as
the infusion is restarted.
Pumps can deliver fluids at extreme rates. Capacities differ between manufacturers,
but it is not uncommon to be able to deliver rates as low as 0.5mL/h or as high as
999 mL/h. The technician must exercise great care when programming the infusion rate.
Volume to be infusec
The volume to be infused (VTBI) is another value set by the technician at the beginning
of the infusion. This setting provides an end point for the pump. When this point is
reached, an alarm sounds, notifying the health care team that the desired volume has
been delivered to the patient. This is a useful tool because it provides a convenient point
at which the patient can be reevaluated and the progress of fluid therapy assessed. It is
important to resist the urge to program a large volume to be infused in an attempt to
prolong the time between audible alarms. Instead, the VTBI should be revisited fre-
 quently, and each reprogramming should be for no greater than 2 hours at a time. For
example:
 Patient receiving 20mL/h of fluids
 VTBI set for 20 mL and patient is rechecked in 1 hour
 Fluid therapy well tolerated
 VTBI set for 40 mL and infusion continues for 2 hours
 Patient is reevaluated; VTBI can continue to be set in 40-mL increments
Setting fluid boluses
It is vital that veterinary technicians understand the principles of rate and volume to be
 infused if they are responsible for setting infusion pumps to deliver fluid boluses.
Once the veterinarian has prescribed a bolus, technicians must be confident in thein
calculations and concepts. There are several ways to calculate rate and volume; the fol-
lowing is one example:
80Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
A20-kg dogis prescribed a 10 mL/kg bolus to be delivered over 15 minutes. The volume
of the bolus will be 10mL/kg x 20kg = 200mL. Therefore the volume to be infused is
200 mL. To set a pump to deliver 200 mL over 15 minutes, the technician needs to deter-
mine what the rate must be in milliters per hour. The following equation is helpful:
Rate (mL/h} = [60 min/h × volume to be infused (mL)]/infusion time (min)
For the preceding example, the equation would be:
Rate (mL/h) = (60 min/h x 200 mL)/15 min
Rate (mL/h) = 12,000/15 = 800 mL/h
The infusion pump would be set with a rate of 800 mL/hour and a volume of 200 mL
to be infused. This would give the patient a 10 mL/kg bolus over 15 minutes. Confusing
the rate with the volume to be infused can be catastrophic. In our example, the patient
would receive a volume of 800mL instead of 200 mL.
It is good practice to verify calculations and/or check them with a coworker before
setting infusion pumps because it increases the safety of the infusion.
Total volume
This feature calculates a current total of the volume of fluid that has been infused since
the beginning of the infusion. It is not programmed by the technician, but she or he must
clear the previous totals before starting each new patient's infusion. Failure to do so
allows volume to accumulate from one patient to another in some brands of pumps. It
 is advisable that the veterinary technician become familiar with whichever style of pump
is in use to clarify whether this feature automatically resets with each new infusion.
Silence
The silence button is a feature used with great frequency in high-volume hospitals. Any
alarm that sounds can be temporarily muted by depressing the silence button. Techni-
cians find this key particularly useful because it can become taxing if several pumps are
alarming simultaneously. The silence feature will be in effect for a predetermined amount
of time before it allows the alarm to return to its alert sequence.
Lock
The lock feature is typically located at the back of the infusion pump. It is often a switch
that protrudes from the pump slightly so that accidental activation of the switch is
improbable. Once the lock feature is activated, changes cannot be made to any of the
infusion settings. In essence, the keypad is rendered useless while the lock is on. (This
can be frustrating when the alarm is triggered because the silence button is also disabled
by the lock).
At the Ontario Veterinary College Teaching Hospital, the intensive care unit techni-
cians frequently use the lock feature when a specific volume or temporary infusion is
being administered. A crystalloid bolus, 30-minute infusion of medication, or a blood
transfusion can be initiated by the technician and then the pump can be locked. The
number of technicians, clinicians, and students who could inadvertently reset the volume
Chapter 4: Fluid Pumps and Tools of Administration81
to be infused without realizing the volume should not have been reset is quite high. By
locking the pump, the technician forces the subsequent operator to reconsider which
course of action is appropriate once the alarm sounds.
Troubleshooting volumetric infusion pumps
As with any equipment used in the veterinary hospital setting, technicians must develop
 a repertoire of solutions for a variety of difficulties they may encounter.
Placement of fluid line
Careful placement of the fluid line is essential to avoid fluid traveling in an inappropriate
direction. Each infusion pump has a single specific method to load the infusion set, and
q dnd aun ou nd si au aue  'uodaxa inoum pamo aq is soa
ward, the motion of the pump will reverse the flow, and in extreme cases, blood will
flow from the animal into the line.
Air
 Infusion pumps are designed to notify the health care team if a large volume of air
should pass through the line in the pump. When this situation arises, the infusion stops
to avoid air going into the patient's vasculature. When removing the air from the line
the technician must practice sterile technique. The fluid line is clamped at the closest
point to the patient. Heparinized saline flush (1 unit heparin per milliliter of saline) is
administered into the injection port, proximal to the clamp, and into the catheter to
maintain patency. The door to the pump must be opened and the line removed from
the pump. The injection port is swabbed with an antibacterial solution. A 6-mL or
12-mL syringe and 20-gauge needle can be used to evacuate the air from the injection
port closest to the air, but the port should be between the air and the patient. Fluid from
the bag will be evacuated with the air, but the patient will be unaffected because the
line has been clamped and is closed to the patient.
Once the air has been removed from the line, the syringe and needle are discarded
appropriately. The line is replaced in the pump and the door is closed. The line can be
unclamped once it has been replaced and locked into the pump. The pump is restarted
and should flow without alarms if the air has been effectively removed.
Occlusions
The occlusion alarm is one of the more frequently heard alarms. Volumetric infusion
pumps have sensors that detect if pressure is rising within the section of fluid line within
the pump. Any compromise to the rate of flow will cause a subsequent increase in the
inline pressure and trigger the occlusion alarm. Factors that impede flow are numerous
and in some cases unavoidable.
Administration sets that have been in use for 2-3 days occasionally develop kinks or
crimps where they have repeatedly been positioned within the pump mechanism. These
interruptions often lead to an occlusion alarm. Placing a new section of the administra-
tion set within the pump mechanism can alleviate this problem. However, if the admin-
istration set is beginning to show its wear, it is likely that the set should be completely
changed for a new one.
82Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
It is possible to catch the administration set in the door as it is being closed. This is
not often immediately apparent but may be the source of the occlusion alarm and should
be investigated.
Veterinary patients are often responsible for occluding their own lines and triggering
 occlusion alarms. Animals that circle or pace in their kennels can cause such severe
twists in their lines that fluid can no longer flow. In many instances, this is unavoidable.
The line may be clamped at the port most proximal to the patient. A heparinized saline
flush will maintain catheter patency while the line is untangled. In addition, clamping
the port proximal to the patient ensures that when the fluid line is removed from the
pump and untangled, there will be no sudden flow of fluids into the patient.
Occlusions may also arise due to catheter-associated problems. IV catheters that
have been improperly secured, have shifted due to tremendous patient movement,
or have become clotted will prevent smooth progression of flow. In addition, catheters
that have caused vascular trauma, inflammation, or thrombophlebitis will impede flow
and cause an occlusion alarm. Catheters should be investigated as a cause for any occlu-
sion alarm if there is no other obvious culprit. Changes in catheter patency can be subtle
and difficult to recognize because the catheters are not easily visible to the technician
due to bandaging. Daily evaluation of the catheter site is necessary, but more frequent
inspection might be warranted if fluid infusion becomes problematic.
High rates of infusion, such as with fluid boluses, can be subjected to a greater
number of occlusion alarms. Because the fluid rate is higher than normal, a slight
obstruction or decrease in patency will cause a much faster buildup of pressure in the
fluid line. In this instance, if the fluid rate can be safely decreased, even slightly, it may
 alleviate the occlusion pressure alarm situation. If it is not possible to decrease the rate
of flow, a pressure bag may be the next best substitute to provide a high rate of flow
without constant interruptions by pump alarms.
Syringe Pumps (Syringe Drivers)
A syringe pump is a tool with many uses in fluid therapy (Fig. 4.13). The pump is
designed to infuse small volumes of fluid at rates that are generally slower than those
 achieved by volumetric infusion pumps. As such, a syringe pump may be used to infuse
small volumes of fluid to a small patient during fluid therapy, finite volumes of blood
products for transfusion medicine, continuous rates of infusion of narcotic analgesics,
or singular slow infusions of medication.
There are many ways to deliver fluids using a syringe pump. It is helpful that the
technician can program doses to be delivered by volume, by rate, by time, and by dose.
Several pieces of information must be entered into the syringe pump's processor to
 ensure accurate delivery of fluid. Syringe volume, syringe manufacturer, patient weight,
prescribed dose, drug concentration, and infusion rate are the main variables pro-
 grammed by the technician with each use of the syringe pump.
 The syringe drivers are designed to accommodate a number of different syringe sizes;
most are compatible with 1-mL to 60-mL syringes. Once the syringe has been loaded
into the pump, it is necessary to indicate the syringe manufacturer This is necessary
because syringe shapes are not consistent throughout suppliers (Fig. 4.14).
After programming the brand of syringe and confirming that the pump has recognized
the correct volume of syringe, the technician is responsible for programming the patient's
?
Figure 4.13. Syringe drivers can be used to deliver constant rates of infusions of medications or for single
doses that are delivered over shorter periods of time.
SELECT
MOE
Baxte
Figure 4.14. Syringe pumps are also useful in very small patients that require infusions at very low rates.
83
84Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
body weight, dose, and drug concentration (if needed for medication delivery) to com-
plete the pump setup. If a single volume of fluids is being delivered, the technician can
program a rate of flow and have the appropriate volume of medication drawn up in the
 syringe before seting up the pump. Setting up the syringe pump can be as simple or as
nar si aed au ursu po ad ae o pseq papaau se xado
Alarms
 Syringe pumps are equipped with occlusion alarms, end-of-infusion alerts, and syringe-
u oi e ue um padna are sd asu e ui suu a
1 n  uaq sr rd r p sas a jo usd a i
nonfunctional.
 The reasons a syringe pump occlusion alarm may sound are similar to those found
d p e sano sp o mo   sd a sd isn e 
an increase in volume, and subsequently pressure within the line. When the alarm is
 appreciated, the technician should appraise the patency of fluid lines and assess catheter
site and catheter limb.
Troubleshootingsyringepumps
Syringe pumps are quite reliable and typically run with few complications. However,
the complications that can and do arise can impart severe consequences if not handled
appropriately. It is important to remember that despite the reliability of mechanical
equipment used for fluid therapy, the use of this equipment can never entirely excuse
technicians from using their skills of observation. Fluid bags and syringes should be
assessed frequently to ensure that the volume expected to have been infused bas been
infused. Further, connections between fluid lines, needle lock adapters, and miscella-
neous infusion lines should be monitored for any signs of wear or leakage.
 Assessment of syringe pump function is often instigated by the sound of an occlusion
alarm. The technician must respond promptly to the alarm and determine its cause. It
has been demonstrated that alleviating an occlusion alarm can deliver a bolus (of the
substance being infused) to the patient (Donmez et al., 2005). The size of the bolus
varies depending on the size of syringe being used. The larger the syringe, the larger the
bolus that the patient accidentally receives when the occlusion is alleviated. One study
found that a 10-mL syringe led to a 0.09-mL bolus, and a 60-mL syringe led to a 1.03-
mL bolus (Kim and Steward, 1999). In many cases, the delivery of a bolus of fluids at
this volume would be inconsequential. However, if the syringe pump is being used for
the delivery of medication, such as narcotics, inotropic, or antiarrhythmic drugs, delivery
of this size of bolus could be detrimental to the patient. This danger is heightened if the
 patient is a neonate, small feline, or teacup canine breed.
It is unlikely that occlusions will be avoided in every infusion delivered to veterinary
patients via syringe pump. To increase the safety of the infusion, the technician may
choose to disconnect a section of the fluid line so that the potential bolus is not delivered
to the patient. In addition, to decrease the size of an inadvertent bolus, the technician
may choose to use a small-volume syringe for the infusion if possible to do so.
There are further benefits to using a small-volume syringe with a syringe pump. In
addition to the decrease in size of inadvertent bolus previously mentioned, using a
smaller syringe also contributes to increased promptness of the occlusion alarm (Kim
Chapter 4:Fluid Pumps and Tools of Administration85
and Steward 1999). Larger syringes led to an increased length of time between the onset
of the occlusion and the sounding of the occlusion alarm. Smaller syringes had the
 opposite effect. In one study 7.4 minutes elapsed between onset of occlusion and onset
of alarm when a 10-mL syringe was used. The same study found a delay of 84 minutes
between occlusion and alarm when a 60-mL syringe was used (Kim and Steward 1999).
These findings do not indicate that larger syringes should not be used with syringe
pumps, but rather that the infusion must be continuously monitored to verify it is pro-
gressing according to plan.
Flow rate is another factor that contributes to the length of time between onset of
 occlusion and onset of alarm. Lower flow rates correspond with greater lag time between
Occlusion and alarm, whereas higher flow rates are associated with quicker onset of alarm
(Donmez et al., 20os). If one considers that occlusion alarms respond to pressure eleva-
tions within the fluid line, it fits that higher rates would be quicker to increase inline fluid
pressure. Because syringe pumps are primarily used for smallinfusions with relatively low
flow rates, it behooves the technician to assess the line frequently to ensure forward flow.
Some syringe pumps are equipped with a function that allows the operator to
program different levels of tolerance for inline pressure. It is safer to select a low pres-
sure limit and tolerate higher sensitivity and more frequent alarms than to select a high
tolerance for pressure and allow prolonged lengths of time to elapse before onset of the
alarm (Hee and Lim 2002).
Chapter Summary
 Infusion or administration sets are fluid lines that facilitate deliver of fluids to veterinary
 patients. These sets are composed of a universal spike, a drip chamber multiple clamps,
multiple injection ports, and a Luer adapter.
Drip chambers allow the technician to monitor the continuous fall of drops during
infusion. In systems that do not involve a fluid pump, the drip chamber is used to count
drops of fluid to verify flow rates. For this reason, the drip chamber must not be over
filled during priming. There is a fill line indicator on the chamber that demonstrates the
fluid level that accommodates drip counting. The common sizes of drip chambers in
small animal medicine are 10 and 60 gtt/second.
 Miscellaneous adapters may be used in conjunction with the administration set to
lengthen the fluid line, accept other infusions, filter blood and blood products, or infuse
multiple fluid types simultaneously.
 Burettes measure smaller volumes of fluid and have a gradation on the side of the
 chamber to facilitate measurement of volume. They are a helpful tool during emergency
situations because they can house a small volume of fluids that is not dangerous to the
patient should it be infused in its entirety. On the contrary, if fluids are started at the
onset of an emergency, it is possible to focus on other immediate concerns and acciden-
tally infuse a dangerous volume of fluids to the unstable patient if there is no burette
in the fluid line. Further, burettes can be used to deliver constant rates of infusion of
medications and/or analgesics over a predetermined amount of time. They are a precious
tool in the critical care setting.
Volumetric infusion pumps are accurate and reliable and can be used with a large
margin of safety provided the operator is well versed in management of the pump. Rate
and volume to be infused are the primary features programmed by the technician at the
86Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
beginning of the infusion. As the infusion progresses, it is the responsibility of the tech-
nician to maintain safe operation of the fluid pump and ensure that the volume to be
infused is reached but not exceeded.
Syringe pumps are excellent tools that facilitate delivery of extremely small volumes
of fluid via very low fluid rates. Smaller syringes are safer to use with syringe pumps
than larger syringes.
infusion of drug or fluid. Occlusion alarms are often preset at a specific pressure point,
but in some models, this feature can be programmed.
Occlusion alarms are triggered by a number of different issues. Alarms may be slow
to sound if the fluid rate is low or the syringe size is large. Technicians must check IV
lines and catheter sites frequently to ensure there are no problems with the infusion.
There are few negative aspects to using volumetric infusion pumps in the veterinary
setting. Provided the technician is aware of the potential complications and can respond
to alarms in a timely and effective manner, infusion pumps are an asset to any veterinary
n a  a  s a p ae  ad
Review Questions
1. Why should the drip chamber be positioned with the fluid line facing down?
2. Which drip chamber sizes are most frequently encountered in small animal
medicine?
3. When is an inline filter a required characteristic of an IV administration set?
4. A variety of different syringe sizes can be used with syringe pumps. With respect
to obstruction of flow, is it safer to use larger volume or smaller volume syringes?
5. List two benefits associated with burettes.
Answers to the review questions can be found on pages 222-223 in the Appendix. The
review questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley.
com/go/donohoenursing.
Suggested Reading
Donmez, A., C. Araz, and Z. Kayhan. 2005. Syringe pumps take too long to give occlu-
sion alarm. Paediatr Anaesth 15:293-296.
Hee, H., and S. Lim. 2002. Infusion technology: a cause for alarm. Paediatr Anaesth 
12:780-785.
Kim, D., and D. Steward. 1999. The effect of syringe size on the performance of an
infusion pump. Paediatr Anaesth 9:335-337.
O'Kelly, S., and J. Edwards. 1992. A comparison of the performance of two types of
infusion device. Anaesthesia 47:1070-1072
Mathews, K., and M. Brooks. 1996. A prospective study of intravenous catheter con-
tamination. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 6:33-43.
Mathews, K., H. Scott, and A. Abrams-Ogg. 2006. Transfusion of blood products. In
K. Mathews, ed. Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Manual, 667-681. Guelph,
Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Metheny, N. 1992. Intravenous therapy. In N. Metheny, ed. Fluid and Electrolyte
Balance, 149-168. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott.
Calculating Rates of Administration
Technical Calculations
The International System of Units is a classification of measurements used throughout
the world. When referring to measurements made within this system, it is common to
use the term SI units. The SI system includes terminology used to quantify scientific
measures such as length, weight, electricity, and amount of substance. Table 5.1 lists the
terms of particular interest in the study of fluid therapy.
 Calculating the volume of fluid to be delivered to a patient and the rate at which it
is to be delivered are the most fundamental calculations the veterinary technician must
make. These values are prescribed, in part, by the veterinarian. It is the responsibility
of the technician to calculate, initiate, and monitor the infusion to the patient and ensure
that the prescribed fluid therapy is delivered without incident.
The fluid therapy prescription is arrived at through consideration of the patient's age,
weight, hydration status, cardiovascular status, and health history. The clinician can
 determine the volume and speed with which fluids are delivered in several ways. In some
cases, a calculation is made that takes into consideration the estimated percentage of
dehydration, the volume lost, and the ongoing losses the patient is experiencing.
It is also common for the clinician to request that fluids be given at maintenance rate
or a multiple of maintenance rate. This rate is based on the estimation that healthy adult
cats and dogs lose approximately 50mL/kg per day of fluids through the natural pro-
cesses involved in metabolism (Mathews 1996). Metabolic water is lost in feces, urine,
and through respiration. As such, the intravenous (IV) fluid required to replace these
losses (when patients cannot do so for themselves) is deemed the maintenance fuid rate
because it is designed to replenish naturally occurring losses.
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
87
88
FluidTherapy for Veterinary Technicians andNurses
Table 5.1 SI Units Commonly used in Fluid Therapy
Name of Unit
Abbreviation
What It Measures
Meter
m
Length
Kilogram
kg
Weight
Second 
Time
Mole
mol
Amount of substance
Figure 5.1. A healthy 15-kg dog requires preanesthetic fluids.
Calculating a maintenance rate
When the technician is given orders to start a patient on maintenance fluids, it is neces-
 an r a s  a a  m sd a mo o 
patient in a given hospital. For the purpose of this text, the previously mentioned rate
 of 50mL/kg per day (or maintenance fluid rate) is used. Note that patient age and size
 play a role in determining maintenance fluid rates. Very young animals have a higher
fluid requirement than middle-aged adult animals. This is due to the fact that in good
health, 75%-80% of the total body weight of a puppy or a kitten is water. In contrast,
the body water content of an adult animal is closer to 60% of their total body weight.
Chapter 5: Calculating Rates of Administration89
Size of the patient should also be considered when deciding on a maintenance fluid
 n     e a  s r 
animals. For example, the maintenance fluid rate for a 6-kg patient might be 54 mL/kg
per day, whereas the maintenance fluid rate for a 70-kg patient is more likely to be
29mL/kg per day (Mathews 2006).
Example 1
A 15-kg dog is admitted to the hospital for a routine procedure (Fig. 5-1). The veteri-
narian requests that the dog receive Plasma-Lyte A (PLA) at the maintenance rate for 4
hours before the procedure.
 Maintenance is 50mL/kg per day
 Body weight is 15 kg
 Rate = 50mL/kg × 15 kg/24 hours
 Units of kilograms cancel each other out
 Rate = 750mL/24 h
 Rate = 31.25 mL/h
 Rate = 31mL/h
 If the clinician has prescribed that this rate be given for exactly 4 hours and no longer,
 s nd a a p a a n   a
 Total volume to be infused (VTBI) = 31 mL/h x 4 hours
 Units of hour cancel each other out
 Total volume to be infused = 124mL
The technician must consider other variables depending on the system used for the
infusion. For example, if the infusion is being delivered via volumetric infusion pump,
there are two settings to be programmed. Using the previous calculations, it is known
that the rate is 31 mL/h and the VTBI is 124 mL. A fluid bag can be hung with no other
adapters, and the pump will deliver the predetermined volume of fluids.
Another alternative is to hang a burette in the infusion line and fill it with 124mL
of fluid. This is not a necessary step but rather a course of action that increases the
safety of the infusion. If another member of the patient care team were to continue the
infusion once the pump had delivered the preprogrammed volume, the empty burette
in the infusion line would encourage the person to investigate whether or not the delivery
should continue.
Delivering the infusion without the benefit of a fluid pump would require further
calculations. Once the rate is determined, it is necessary to set the drip rate for the infu-
 a a  paa ss a  sd n a 's 
of drops per second (gtt/s) required for a rate of 31 mL/h.
To calculate the drip rate, the technician must know the number of drops that the
set delivers per milliliter. This information is available on the outside packaging of the
drip set. For the purpose of this text, we assume a 15 gtt/ml set is in use.
 It is known from previous calculations that the patient requires 31 mL/h
 Determine the volume of fluid required per minute by dividing the hourly rate by 60
(there are 60 minutes in 1 hour)
90Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 31 mL/h/60 = 0.52 mL/min
 Another option is to multiply 31 mL/h x 1 h/60 min if it is easier to visualize the units
that cancel out
 Once the rate per minute is known, it can be multiplied by the drip factor obtained
from the packaging to determine the number of drops per minute
 0.52mL/min × 15 gtt/mL = 7.8 gtt/min
 os ad sdop yo rqu a s so 1 x 8 /  smno il 
the patient should receive
 7.8 gtt/min × 1 min/60s = 0.13 gtt/s
Because counting 0.13 gtt is virtually impossible, the technician must work in units
of time slightly greater than 1 second. By multiplying the preceding by a factor of 10,
 ose n  ss ti   a  ii   si s
a more user-friendly format. Once the number of drops per minute has been calculated,
the equation can be reversed as follows:
 60 s/7.8 gtt/min = 7.69 s/gtt
 One drop is delivered every 8 seconds by rounding up to the next whole number
It is easiest to count the number of seconds between drops for most infusions delivered
to small animals.
A formula that makes the preceding calculations flow more smoothly is the
following:
Drops/min = total volume to deliver (mL) x number of drops/mL ÷
total time of infusion (min) (Metheny 1992)
Using the data from the previous example, 31 mL × 15 gtt/mL ÷ 60min = 7.76gtt/
min, approximately 8gtt/min is a reasonable rate to watch and set up with a drip set.
The 1-minute time frame could be further divided into more manageable segments if
the technician so chooses. By dividing both sides of the rate by 4, it is determined that
in a 15-second interval, the patient should receive roughly 2 drops of fluid.
Example 2
A 4-year-old male castrated domestic shorthair cat is presented to the hospital with a
48-hour history of vomiting and inappetence (Fig. 5.2). The cat weighs 3.8 kg. The clini-
 a a s on i s uo p aq id a i sis 
 Fluid rate = maintenance rate × patient weight × 2
 Rate = 50 mL/kg per day x 3.8kg × 2
 Rate = 380mL/d
 Rate = 380mL/d x 1 d/24 h
 Rate = 15.8mL/h
 Next determine the rate in mL/min: 15.8mL/h x 1 h/60 min = 0.26mL/min
 Factor in the drip set 0.26 mL/min × 15 gtt/mL = 3.9 gtt/min
 To determine how many seconds between drops: 60s/1 min × 1min/3.9gtt = 1gtt/
15.4s
Chapter 5: Calcufating Rates of Administration91
Figure 5.2. A 4-year-old domestic shorthair cat has a 48-hour history of vomiting and inappetence.
Administering 1 drop every 15 seconds is not ideal because this slow drip rate could
allow a clot to develop in the catheter between drops of fluid. This example highlights
one of the reasons that drip chambers are available in different drip factors. If the pre-
ceding example were calculated using a 60 gtt/mL drip chamber, one would anticipate
that the drops would flow more frequently.
 Recall that it was calculated the patient needed 15.8 mL/h
 15.8mL/h x 1 h/60min = 0.26mL/min
0.26 mL/min x 60 gtt/mL = 15.6 gtt/min
 60/15.6gtt/min = 1 gtt/3.85 s; rounded up to 1 gtt/4s
This is a more reasonable rate of flow in terms of maintaining catheter patency. As
the preceding example illustrates, it is helpful to use a drip chamber with a greater
number of drops per milliliter for smaller patients (i.e., <10kg).
Example 3
A 32-kg, 6-year-old female spayed German shepherd presents to the hospital with a
complaint of se vere diarrhea, depression, and anorexia (Fig. 5.3). She is estimated to be
6% dehydrated. The clinician recommends that the dog be hospitalized and started on
IV fluids. What is her fluid requirement over the first 24 hours of her hospital stay?
Assume that a 15 gtt/mL drip set is being used.
 If the dog is 6% dehydrated, this estimation can be used to calculate an approximate
volume of fluid that needs to be replaced.
 6% dehydration = 6/100 × 32kg = 1.92kg
 1000mL or 1L of water weighs 1kg; 1.92kg = 1.92L
 So at 6% dehydration, the 32-kg German shepherd is at a deficit of approximately
1.9L
 Maintenance fluid requirements for the shepherd are calculated to be 50mL/kg per
day x 32kg = 1600mL/24 h
92Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 5.3. A 6-year-old German shepherd with diarrhea and depression.
The clinician requests that the dog's fluid deficit be replaced over a 24-hour period.
The technician must calculate the volume of fluid needed to compensate for the patient's
maintenance requirements in addition to the fluid deficit and replace the total of the
two over 24hours.
 Maintenance requirement 1600mL + deficit 1900mL = 3500 mL over 24 hours
 a s  a s t o  r  
 3500 mL/24 h = 145.8mL/h (round up to 146 mL/h)
146 mL/h × 1 h/60 min = 2.43 mL/min
 2.43 mL/min × 15 gtt/mL = 36.45 gtt/min
 60 s/36.45 gtt/min = 1 gtt/1.6 s
 If a volumetric pump was being used for this infusion, the rate would be set at
146mL/h and the VTBI would be set to deliver 2- to 4-hour increments at this rate,
292mL—584mL at a time. The total volume that needs to be delivered in the 24-hour
period is 3500 mL. Using a burette in the infusion line may be helpful for administration
of medications for this patient, but the hourly fluid rate is almost equal to the volume
of a burette. Refilling the burette every hour may not flow smoothly with the other
activities taking place in the clinic and may prove to be an inefficient use of technician
time.
The use of a rate flow regulator in the delivery set is also appropriate for this
dog. The technician must evaluate the flow frequently and ensure that the bag is
Chapter 5: Calculating Rates of Administration93
Figure 5.4. Additive labels should be used on all fluid bags to clarify what has been added, when it was
added, and by whom.
emptying at an appropriate rate. It is often helpful to use a strip of white tape on a
fluid bag to monitor the progress of fluids into the patient. Fluid level within the bag
can be marked on the white tape in intervals, and the time can be recorded with the
level marked.
Fluid additives
-a   ds a o a    s
 si (  sd (t's  a aa   in so
a jo u asoq s aro p pue ruaa a u sadn e se pas
patients in this setting are hypokalemic as a result of their illness and subsequent lack
of appetite. Solutions such as potassium chloride, potassium phosphate, and magnesium
sulphate may be added to fluid bags to restore electrolyte balance to small animal
patients. LRS and Normosol R are popular fluid choices for many patients on short-term
fluid therapy. Note that these fluids do not contain a suffcient amount of KCl to main-
tain adequate levels for patients in ill health. KCl must be added to these fluids to supple-
 ment or support the patient's potassium level.
the concentration of the additive in use as well as the prescribed dose. Electrolytes may
 be added to full or partial fluid bags. For this reason, the technician must be able to
calculate appropriate volumes rather that memorize the dose that is to be added to a
fuill bag.
The clinician prescribes the rate of electrolyte supplementation. This prescription is
typically in the form of a required concentration prepared in the primary fluid infusion.
A hypokalemic patient might be prescribed KCl supplementation at a dose of 30 mEq/L
If the technician is starting the infusion and has an entire 1-L bag of fluids, the addition
of 30 mEq of KCl is fairly straightforward. Once the concentration of KCl is known, it
is used to determine the volume, in milliliters, of KCl to be added.
94Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
WOKDIAL
EXEMAYL2
1000mL
Plasma-LyleA
plasma-Lyte③A,
Injection
Injectable
'saied swaleyody uaalddns oi spini snouanenui oi pappe uao s! apouo wnisseod s's aunss
Example 1
Make up a 1-L bag of PLA with 30mEq KCl/L (Fig. 5.5). A bottle of KCl is available
in a concentration of 20mEq/10mL or 2mEq/mL. It is necessary to find out what
volume will supply 30mEq of KCl.
 This is easily determined by cross multiplying and solving for x
 2mEg/1 mL = 30mEq/x mL
 2mEq ×x mL = 30mEq× 1mL
2x = 30
x=30÷2
x = 15
To add 30mEg of KCl to a liter of fluids, the technician must add 15 mL of KCl at
the previously mentioned concentration.
Example 2
A severely hypokalemic patient is prescribed an infusion of 0.5 mEq/kg per hour of KCl
for 4 hours. The patient is receiving PLA at a rate of 20 mL/h. The KCl infusion will be
 delivered via burette. The patient weighs 10kg. The stock solution of KCl is provided
as 20mEq in a 10-mL bottle (2mEq/mL).
Chapter 5: Calcufating Rates of Administration95
Figure 5.6. A German shepherd presents to the hospital and is found to be hypoglycemic on initial blood
work.
 dose: 0.5 mEq x 10kg/1 h = 5 mEq/h
 5 mEg/h ÷ 2mEg/mL = 2.5 mL/h of KCl
 4 hours worth of this infusion would require 10mL of KCl (4 x 2.5)
 If the patient is receiving 20mL/h of fluids, the 4-hour infusion will have a total
volume of 80mL (20 × 4). We know that of this 4-hour infusion volume, 10mL must
be KCl. To infuse the volume over the allotted time, it is preferable to combine 70mL
of PLA with 10mL KCl for a total of 80mL and a 4-hour total infusion time.
Example 3
 A 45-kg German shepherd has presented to the hospital in a hypoglycemic crisis (Fig.
5.6). The dog has had two IV boluses of dextrose as well as 2 10 mL/kg boluses of PLA
The dog is now slightly more stable, and the clinician has requested that the patient's
fluids be supplemented with dextrose. The prescribed fluid regime is PLA plus 5% dex-
trose as a constant rate infusion. The stock solution of dextrose is 50%. There is a
burette in the administration set whose volume is 150mL. The clinician requests that
the burette be used initially; the bag can be supplemented once the patient's initial
response to the infusion is documented.
To determine concentrations of solution the following equation is useful:
96Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Volume to add (mL) = strength required ÷ strength available × final volume
volume to add (mL) = 5% ÷ 50% x150 mL (burette) = 15 mL
The following is another equation that is useful for calculating the volume of fluid
to add to a solution to arrive at a desired concentration:
C x V = C x V2
For the previous example: 50% x V, = 5% x 150mL
0.5 V, = 0.05 x 150
0.5 V, = 7.5
7.5 ÷ 0.5 =V
V = 15 m
 Both equations yield the same result. The technician has the liberty of choosing
whichever equation he or she prefers.
Because 15 mL is being added to a 150-mL burette, it is preferable to remove 15 mL
PLA from the burette before adding the dextrose.
Constanf rates of infusion
 In the emergency and critical care seting it is frequently necessary to deliver drugs to
 patients as a continuous infusion. This is achieved through administration via syringe
 pump, as an additive to a burette, or as an additive to a fluid bag. The drug is delivered
at the same rate over a predetermined time period or within a predetermined volume
of fluid.
Several pieces of information are required before the technician can make the neces-
sary calculations and set up a constant rate of infusion (CRI). The infusion is prescribed
a ps u a n ao aui  ro y a nd  ad aso e s
formats; milligrams and micrograms are the most common in the small animal setting.
It is necessary to know the concentration of the drug and the weight of the patient.
Depending on the method of delivery, it may be necessary to know the fluid rate as well.
Once the clinician has prescribed a CRI, the technician must calculate the dose with
respect to the patient's weight. Further, if the infusion is going to be delivered in a fluid
infusion, it is necessary to calculate how much drug is to be added to the fluid within
the bag or burette.
Example 1
A 15-kg patient is prescribed a constant rate of infusion of butorphanol as an analgesic
for some mild discomfort. The dose is 0.2mg/kg per hour. The concentration of the
butorphanol on hand is 10 mg/mL. The animal is currently on two times maintenance
rate of fluids. There is a burette in the administration set.
 Calculate the dose: 0.2mg/kg per hour × 15 kg = 3 mg/h
 The concentration of butorphanol is 10mg/mL
 it is necessary to determine how many milliliters contain 3mg
Chapter 5:Calcufating Rates of Administration97
 3 mg/x = 10mg/1 mL
 Solve for x by cross multiplying: 10x = 3
 x = 10/3
 x = 0.3mL
 0.3mL of butorphanol will deliver 3 mg so the dose just calculated can be changed
to 0.3mL/h
 If a syringe pump is available, the drug is drawn up in a syringe, the pump is pro-
grammed to deliver 0.3 mL/h, and the line is piggybacked into the main infusion line.
 If the technician opts to deliver the drug in a burette, it is necessary to calculate a
convenient volume of fluids to which the drug can be added.
 The fluid rate for this patient is twice maintenance:
Maintenance = 50 mL/kg per day x15 kg = 750 mL/d
2 × maintenance = 1500 mL/d = 62.5 mL/h (round to 63 mL/h)
Most burettes can hold 150mL; if the fluid rate is 63mL/h, then filling the burette
with 126 mL of fluid will provide enough for 2 hours of infusion.
 Two hours worth of butorphanol can be added to the 2 hours worth of fluid in the
burette, so it is delivered as a constant rate infusion.
■ It is vital that the burette be labeled according to the volume of additives it
contains
 0.6 mL butorphanol in 126 mL fluid will provide the appropriate dose of analgesics
for this patient
 The drawback to this method is that the burette must be replenished every 2 hours
This CRI could also be prepared in a bag of fluids, assuming that the infusion is going
to continue for a prolonged amount of time.
 The bag of fluids contains 1000mL
 At a rate of 63 mL/h, the bag should last for 15.9 hours:
 1000mL: x hours = 63mL:1 hour
 x = 1000/63 = 15.9 hours
 If the patient is receiving 0.3mL/h of butorphanol, then multiplying this by the
number of hours, the bag will last will yield the volume of butorphanol to be added
to the bag.
 15.9 hours x 0.3 mL/h = 4.77 mL
 The technician must add 4.77 mL of butorphanol to the bag of fluid to provide a CRl
of butorphanol to this patient for the next 15.9 hours.
 It is imperative that the bag be appropriately labeled with the volume and type of
drug added.
Nursing considerations
When preparing medications for CRI, the technician must be familiar with the charac-
teristics of the drug. For example, some drugs are light sensitive and must be protected
once they have been removed from their original bottle. This is of particular interest
98Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
when discussing CRIs because long infusions may expose drugs to light for prolonged
periods of time. In the previous example, the butorphanol would have been exposed to
light for nearly 16 hours. The technician must investigate whether or not it is safe to
do so before setting up the infusion.
If it is likely that the patient's fluid rate will change throughout the duration of the
infusion, it may not be practical to prepare an entire fluid bag with the additive to be
delivered. As the fluid rate changes, the CRI is no longer delivered at the volume at
which it was intended. The concentration in the bag is constant, so any change to fluid
rate will drastically change the volume of drug being delivered.
 In example 1, 1000 mL of fluid contained 4.77mL (47.7mg) of butorphanol, which
is equal to 0.0477 mg butorphanol/1 mL of fluid
■ At twice maintenance the patient was getting 63 mL × 0.0477mg = 3.005 mg/h of
butorphanol.
 If the fluid rate is changed to 2.5 times maintenance the patient will receive 78.13 mL
x 0.0477mg = 3.72mg/h of butorphanol, which exceeds the dose originally
prescribed.
Changing fluid rates can significantly alter the dose of drug delivered to a patient.
This is an important consideration for the technician when choosing the means of CRI
administration.
Example 2
A 7-kg cat is recovering from a pelvic fracture repair. The cat is prescribed a CRI of
fentanyl as an analgesic at a dose of 3pg/kg per hour. The concentration of fentanyl is
50μg/mL. The cat is receiving 22mL/h of PLA.
 3μg/kg per hour x 7kg = 21 μg/h
 21 μg/h ÷ 50μg/mL = 0.42mL/h
 A full burette (150mL) would last this cat for 6.8 hours at 22mL/h
 6.8hr at 0.42mL/h of fentanyl would require the addition of 2.9mL of fentanyl.
Example 3
A 35-kg dog is prescribed a CRI of metoclopramide at a rate of 1 mg/kg per day. The
concentration of metoclopramide is 5 mg/mL. How much metoclopramide does the dog
need added to its fluid bag if the drip rate is 145 mL/h?
 Calculate the dose: 1 mg/kg per day × 35 kg = 35 mg/d
 Calculate the dose per hour: 35 mg/d ÷ 24 hours = 1.46 mg/h
 Calculate the volume per hour: 1.46 mg/h ÷ 5 mg/mL = 0.29 mL/h
The dog requires 0.29 mL/h of metoclopramide.
 Calculate how many hours of therapy are provided by one 1000-mL bag of fluids
■ 1000 ÷ 145 = 6.9hr/bag
 6.9 hours of fluid x 0.29 mL/h of metoclopramide = 2.00 mL of metoclopramide to
be added to the fluid bag
Chapter 5: Calculating Rates of Administration99
Table 5.2 Useful Conversions and Equations
Goal
Method
Example
Calculate % of solution
Weight in grams + volume
1 g cephalexin + 10mL x 100 =10%
in milliliters × 100
Calculate concentration if %
Move decimal to right one
5% dextrose = 50mg/ml
solution known
 space and add a zero
Volume required to dilute to
 Strength required + strength
10% dextrose solution + 50% dextrose
specific concentration
 available × final volume
solution × 1 000 ml = 200mL into 1-L
bag of fluids
Determine volume required to
C,V = CV2
How much 50% dextrose is added to
obtain specific concentration
C = concentration
150-ml burette to make a 5% solution?
V =volume
5 × 150 = 50 × V
V = 15mL
Convert pounds → kilograms
Multiply by factor 0.45
2l b x 0.45 = 0.9kg
Convert inches → millimeters
Multiply by factor of 25.4
1 in × 25.4 = 25.4mm
Convert fluid ounces → milliliters
Multiply by factor of 28.4
4 oz × 28.4 = 113.6ml
Convert mL → liters
Divide by 1000
10mL/1000 = 0.01 L
Convert Iliters → mililiters
Multiply by 1000
1 L × 1000 = 1000mL
Nursing considerations
When adding very small volumes of drug to large volumes of fluid, it is uncommon to
remove the volume of fluid that corresponds to the additive before its addition. However,
if a large volume of drug is added into a volume of fluid, it is more accurate to remove
an equal amount of the fluid before addition of the drug. For example, if the technician
is preparing a 1-L bag of PLA as a 5% dextrose infusion, 100 mL of dextrose must be
added to the bag. To maintain and improve accuracy, 100mL of Plasmalyte should be
removed from the bag before addition of the dextrose.
When preparing CRIs using very small volumes of additive, it is acceptable to add
the drug to the fluid without removing an equal volume of fluid beforehand.
Example 3
A 33-kg Doberman is being treated for heart failure attributed to dilated cardiomyopa-
thy. The clinician has prescribed dobutamine as a constant rate infusion at 5 μg/kg per
minute. Dobutamine has been made up as a 0.5 mg/mL concentration in 0.9% sodium 
chloride. Calculate the volume of fluid to be delivered to the Doberman.
■Dose: 5μg/kg/min x 33 kg = 165 μg/min
 Dose in milligrams: 165 μg/min ÷ 1000μg/1 mg = 0.165 mg/min
 Calculate milligrams per hour: 0.165 mg/min x 60 min/h = 9.9 mg/h
 Calculate milligrams per hour: 9.9mg/h ÷ 0.5 mg/mL = 19.8 mL/h
 The patient will receive 19.8 mL/h of the dobutamine solution in 0.9% NaCl.
100Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Despite the technician's capability to calculate and convert figures, some facts inevi
tably must be committed to memory. Table 5.2 summarizes helpful fluid therapy conver-
sions and equations.
Chapter Summary
This chapter summarized the veterinary technician's most frequent calculations. Perhaps
the most basic calculation is the determination of fluid rate. This is prescribed by the clini-
cian but may be calculated by the technician. The prescription may come in the form of
milliliters per kilogram per day, or as a shorter form, it may refer to how many times
maintenance the patient should be receiving. Once the rate of fluid delivery has been
determined, it may be necessary to determine a total volume to be delivered over a set
 period of time. On an infusion pump, this is classically referred to as volume to be infused.
When an infusion pump is not available, the technician must calculate the fluid rate
 and then determine the number of drops per second (gtt/sec) that the patient requires
to receive said fluid rate. In small patients it is more useful to calculate the number of
seconds per drop because the former would require counting drops in fractions, which
is not very accurate.
Once a patient's weight is known, it is possible to calculate the volume associated
with an estimated percentage of dehydration. The percentage is converted into a fraction
and multiplied by the patient's weight. The volume in liters is the patient's volume deficit.
Clinician's orders may vary with respect to how slowly or how quickly this deficit is to
be replaced. The maintenance rate of fluids must also be considered when calculating
the rate of replacement.
Supplementing fluid therapy with electrolytes, dextrose, narcotics, and medications
is a common occurrence in emergency and critical care settings. It is imperative that all
calculations correspond to the correct body weight of the patient, the correct drug
dosage, and the correct concentration of drug to be added. These two common equa-
tions can be used for this type of calculation:
1. C, x V, = C x V2
2. Volume to add = strength required ÷ strength available × final volume
Constant rates of infusion (CRIs) are another style of medication delivery commonly
used in the critical care setting. CRIs can be used for efficient delivery of pain medica-
tion as well as to deliver medications that have a short duration of action. CRls are
calculated based on the concentration of the drug and the weight of the patient. They
are prescribed in many different ways, with drug dose and units of time fluctuating
depending on which drug is being administered.
When adding large volumes of medication or alternative supplement to a fuid solu-
tion, it is necessary to remove an equal volume of the solution before adding the medi-
cation. This is required to maintain the same final volume and ensure the drug will be
delivered at the appropriate strength over the appropriate amount of time.
As with any calculation involved in daily practice, it is prudent that the technician
always double-checks the math or have a coworker complete the same calculations for
verification. It is far easier to correct a mathematical mistake before fluids or medica
tions are administered to the patient than it is to deal with the repercussions of the same
Chapter 5: Calculating Rates of Administration101
mistake after the fact. Errors in dosages are easily avoided by taking a few extra seconds
to check calculations.
Practice problems
1.A
A hypoglycemic patient requires an infusion of 10% dextrose. The stock solution
is 50% dextrose. Calculate the volume of dextrose to add to a 500-mL fluid bag.
 2. A 25-kg dog is prescribed a continuous rate infusion of metoclopramide (5 mg/mL)
at a dose of 2mg/kg per 24 hours. The dog's fluid rate will be 100 mL/h. What
volume of metoclopramide must be added to a 1-L bag for this patient?
3. A cat is admitted to the hospital after being hit by a car. Once the cat has been
stabilized, received analgesics, and been fully examined, she is placed in a kennel.
The cat is prescribed a CRI of butorphanol at 0.2mg/kg per hour. The cat weighs
5 kg, and her fluid rate is 15 mL/h. Calculate the volume of butorphanol to be added
to a burette that contains 75 mL of fluid.
4.  A 12-kg diabetic ketoacidotic canine patient requires supplementation with potas-
sium and phosphorus. The clinician would like to accomplish this by administration
of KCl and potassium phosphate (KPO4). The prescribed dose of KPO4 is 0.02 mmol/
kg per hour. The prescribed supplementation of potassium is 30 mEq/L. The patient
has a new 1-L bag of fluid with no additives hanging and has a 150-mL burette in
the administration set. Because the fluid therapy prescription is likely to change
frequently, it is prudent to make up the current supplements for addition to the
burette. The fluid rate is 50 mL/h. The concentration of KCl is 20mEq per 10-mL
 bottle. The concentration of KPO4 is 3 mmol phosphate/mL and 4.4 mEq potassium/
mL. What is the volume of each solution that must be added to the patient's fluids
to meet the requirements of the fluid prescription?
5.
 You are providing care to a patient that has just undergone a thoracic limb
amputation. The analgesic plan for this patient is concurrent CRIs of fentanyl and
ketamine. The dog weighs 43kg. Her fluid rate is 130 mL/h. Her analgesics are
prescribed as 3 μg/kg per hour of fentanyl and 0.2 mg/kg per hour of ketamine.
Fentanyl is available with a concentration of 50μg/mL and ketamine 100mg/mL.
 Hint: With such a high fluid rate, it is practical to make up this infusion in a 1-L
fluid bag.
6a. A 4-kg 6-year-old domestic shorthair cat is admitted to the hospital after being
 diagnosed with pancreatitis. The cat is prescribed a CRI of butorphanol, which is
to be preceded by a loading dose of 0.2mg/kg. The CRI will run at 0.2mg/kg per
hour. Initially, the cat is placed on 15 mL/h of PLA. There is a 150-mL burette in
the line. The concentration of butorphanol is 10mg/mL. Calculate the volume of
butorphanol to be added to a full burette.
6b. After running the infusion for 5 hours, the clinician requests that the fluid rate be
changed to 8mL/h. How much butorphanol should be added to the remaining
75 mL of fluid?
6c. An alternate situation might be that the cat is very comfortable and the clinician
asks that the CRI be decreased to 0.1 mg/kg per hour after the infusion has been
running for 6 hours. What is a simple approach to adjusting the burette?
 7.  A hypotensive patient is prescribed a constant rate infusion of dopamine at 6μg/kg
per minute. The patient weighs 12kg. Dopamine is supplied as a 5-mL vial with a
concentration of 40 mg/mL
102Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
7a. The orders are to make up a bag of dopamine for infusion using the contents of
the 5-mL vial and combining them with a 250-mL bag of 0.9% NaCl. What is the
concentration of the dopamine infusion in the bag in milligrams per milliliter?
7b. What is the concentration of the dopamine infusion in micrograms per milliliter?
7c. Calculate the infusion rate in milliliters per hour for the patient just described.
8.A hypotensive tachycardic patient is admitted to the hospital with a 4-day history
of vomiting and anorexia. The current weight of the patient is 15 kg. The clinician
orders a 15mL/kg bolus over 15 minutes. At what fluid rate should the pump be
set? What is the volume to be infused?
9. A 12-kg dog is admitted to the hospital and found to be 8% dehydrated. The clini-
cian requests that the dog be started on fluids immediately and that the dog's fluid
deficit be replaced over 24 hours in addition to its maintenance fluid requirements
(50mL/kg per 24 hours). Once the dog has IV access, the clinician also requests
delivery of a 10mL/kg bolus over 15 minutes.
9a. Calculate the rate and volume to be infused for the fluid bolus assuming that an
 infusion pump is being used. The maximum rate for infusion on the pump is
1999 mL/h.
9b. Calculate the dog's fluid rate for the first 24 hours of hospitalization.
Answers to practice probfems
1.
 Concentration required/concentration available x volume required = volume to add
 Volume of dextrose to add = 10%/50% x 500 = 100mL of 50% dextrose is
added to bag
 Can also be written as 0.1/0.5 x 500 = 100mL of 50% dextrose
 Prior to addition of dextrose, 100 mL should be removed from bag to maintain
same final volume.
2.
 Calculate rate with respect to patient's weight: 25 kg × 2 mg/kg per 24 hours = 50 mg/
24 h
 Calculate rate per hour: 50 mg/24 h = 2.1 mg/h
 Calculate
volume
per
hour:
:2.1 mg/h ÷ 5mg/mL = 0.42 mL/h
metoclopramide
 Calculate how many hours of fluid therapy this bag will provide at rate of
100 mL/h: 1000mL/100mL per hour = 10 hours
■ Calculate volume of metoclopramide needed for 10-hour infusion: 10
hours x 0.42 mL/h = 4.2mL
 4.2 mL metoclopramide should be added to 1000-mL bag.
3. Calculate the rate according to patient weight: 5 kg x 0.2mg/kg per hour = 1 mg/h
 Calculate the volume per hour: 1 mg/h ÷ 10mg/mL = 0.1 mL/h
 Calculate how many hours the infusion will provide: 75 mL ÷ 15 mL/h = 5 hours
■ Calculate the volume of butorphanol needed for 5 hours: 0.1mL/h x 5
hours = 0.5 mL of butorphanol to add to burette
4. Calculate rate of KPO4 according to patient weight: 12kg x 0.02mmol/kg per
hour = 0.24 mmol/h KPO4
 Calculate volume of KPO: 0.24mmol/h ÷ 3mmol/mL = 0.08 mL/h KPO4
 Calculate how many hours of infusion: 150mL ÷ 50 mL/h = 3 hours
 Calculate total KPO4 needed for 3-hour infusion: 3 hours x 0.08 mL/h = 0.24 mL
KPO to be added to burette
Chapter 5: Calculating Rates of Administration103
 It is necessary to calculate what K+ is contributed by this volume of KPO4: 0.24mL
KPO x 4.4 mEq K+/mL = 1.1 mEq K+
What is the equivalent of 1.1 mEq K+/150mL in mEq/L?
 mEq K+/150mL = xmEq K+/1000 mL = 7.3 mEq/L
 Calculate difference between 30mEq K+/L and 7.3 mEq/L: 30 - 7.3 = 22.7mEq/L
 This difference is made up by KCl supplement
 Calculate how many milliequivalents of K+ are needed to arrive at the concentra-
tion of 22.7mEq/L in the 150-mL burette: 22.7/1000 = x/150 = (22.7 x 150 ÷
1000) = x = 3.4mEq K+ required from KCl
 Calculate volume of KCl required to give 3.4mEq K+: 3.4mEq ÷ 2mEq/
mL = 1.7 mL KCl to be added to burette
5.
Calculate rates according to patient weight:
 Fentanyl: 43kg × 3 μg/kg per hour = 129 μg/h
Volume of fentanyl = 129μg/h ÷ 50μg/mL = 2.6 mL/h
 Ketamine: 43 kg x 0.2mg/kg per hour = 8.6 mg/h
 Volume of ketamine = 8.6mg/h ÷ 100 mg/mL = 0.09 mL/h
 Calculate number of hours ofinfusionin 1000-mL bag: 1000 mL ÷ 130 mL/h = 7.7
hours
 Calculate volume of fentanyl and ketamine required for 7.7-hour infusion:
 Volume of fentanyl = 2.6mL/h x 7.7 hours = 20.0mL fentanyl
 Volume of ketamine = 0.09 mL/h x 7.7 hours = 0.69 mL ketamine
 Because the volume of fentanyl to be added is fairly large, 20mL of fluid should
be removed before addition to maintain the same final volume
6a. Calculate the dose according to patient weight: 4kg x 0.2 mg/kg per hour = 0.8 mg/h
 Volume per hour = 0.8 mg/h ÷ 10 mg/mL = 0.08 mL/h
 Calculate how many hours of infusion are in full burette: 150mL ÷ 15 mL/h = 10
hours
 Calculate volume of butorphanol needed for 10 hours: 10 hours x 0.08mL/h
= 0.8 mL butorphanol added to burette
6b. Calculate the concentration of butorphanol in the burette: O.8mL of butorpha-
nol x 10mg/mL = 8mg butorphanol in burette
 8mg/150mL = 0.05 mg/mL is concentration in burette
 Calculate volume left in burette: 5 hours × 15 mL/h = 75 mL
 Remaining volume in burette is 75 mL
 Calculate number of hours of infusion in burette at new fluid rate:
75 mL ÷ 8mL/h = 9.4 hours
 Calculate butorphanol remaining in burette: 75 mL x 0.05 mg/mL = 3.75 mg
butorphanol in burette
 Prescribed dose of butorphanol was 0.8 mg/h (0.08 mL/h) butorphanol according
to first calculations
 Butorphanol required for remaining 9.4 hours: 9.4 hours x 0.8 mg/h = 7.52 mg
 Currently have 3.75 mg butorphanol in burette but require 7.52
 Calculate difference: 7.52 - 3.75 = 3.77 mg
 3.77 mg ÷ 10 mg/mL = volume of butorphanol to be added = 0.37 mL
6c. To halve the rate of the infusion of butorphanol that is currently in the burette, it is
simplest to double the volume of fluid in the buretrol. By adding 60 mL of fuid, the
concentration of butorphanol, and hence the dose delivered, is decreased by half.
7a. Calculate how many milligrams of dopamine are added to the bag: 5 mL x 40mg/
mL = 200 mg
104Fluid Therapy for VeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses
 Calculate the concentration of the bag: 200mg/250mL = 0.8mg/mL is the con-
centration of dopamine in the 250-mL bag
7b. 0.8 mg/mL × 1000 μg/1 mg = 800 μg/mL
7c. Calculate the rate according to the patient's weight: 6μg/kg/min × 12kg = 72μg/min
 Calculate the volume of dopamine: 72 μg/min ÷ 800μg/mL = 0.09 mL/min
 Calculate the volume per hour: 0.09 mL/min X 60min/h = 5.4mL/h is the rate
of delivery of the dopamine solution
8.  Calculate the volume of the bolus with respect to the patient's weight: 15 kg X 15 mL/
kg = 225 mL total volume of bolus and is set as the volume to be infused
 Calculate the fluid rate required to deliver 225 mL in 15 minutes
 Fluid rate is programmed in milliliters per hour
 225 mL/15 min = x mL/60 min; solve for x
 225 × 60 ÷ 15 = 900mL/h is the fuid rate required to deliver 225 mL over 15
minutes
9a. Calculate the volume to be infused for the fluid bolus: 10mL/kg × 12kg = 120mL
 What fluid rate is needed to deliver 120 mL in 15 minutes:
 x mL/60min = 120mL/15min
 Solve for x: 60 × 120 ÷ 15 = x; x = 480mL/h
 The pump should be set at a rate of 480mL/h and a volume to be infused of
120 mL for the fluid bolus
9b. Calculate the patient's fluid deficit: 8/100 x 12 kg = 0.96L or 960 mL to be delivered
over 24 hours.
 The maintenance requirements for this dog are 12 × 50 = 600mL/24 h
 Total volume to deliver over 24 hours = 960 mL + 600mL = 1560mL
 Hourly rate = 1560 mL ÷ 24 hours = 65 mL/h is set as the rate on the pump for
the fuid infusion over 24 hours.
Review Questions
1. A dog receiving fluids at a rate of 55 mL/h is found to be hypokalemic on its most
recent blood work. If the dog is prescribed fluids with 30mEq KCl/L, how much
KCl should be added to the 700mL remaining in the fluid bag?
2. Calculate a constant rate infusion (CRI) of fentanyl (3 μg/kg per hour) for a 25-kg
dog. How many milliliters of fentanyl does the dog receive per hour? The stock
solution of fentanyl has a concentration of 50 μg/mL
3. If no pumps, syringe drivers, or burettes are available, the fentanyl can be given
by adding an appropriate volume to the bag. If the dog is receiving 75 mL/h of
fluids and there are 600mL left in bag, how much fentanyl should be added to
the bag to provide the CRI above?
4. Your patient has been prescribed IV fluids with a 5% dextrose solution. How
much dextrose should be added to a 100-mL burette to achieve this concentration?
The stock solution of dextrose is a So% solution.
5. The clinician has prescribed a metoclopramide infusion at 2mg/kg per day for
your 25-kg patient. The patient is receiving fluids at a rate of 50mL/h. Assume
that you are making up a 1-L bag of fluids for this patient and are required to
put the medication directly into the bag. How much metoclopramide should you
add to the bag?
Chapter 5: Calculating Rates of Administration 105
Answers to the review questions can be found on page 223 in the Appendix. The review
questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley.comf
goldonohoenursing.
Further Reading
Bill, R. 2000. Percentages. In Medical Mathematics and Dosage Calculations for Veteri-
nary Professionals, 97-110. Ames: Iowa State University Press.
Bill, R. 2000. Solving for the unknown value x. In Medical Mathematics and Dosage
Calculations for Veterinary Professionals, 111-141. Ames: Iowa State University
Press.
12-1-12-21. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Mathews, K. 2006. Fluid therapy non-hemorrhage. In Veterinary Emergency and Criti-
cal Care Manual, 347-372. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Metheny, N. 1992. Intravenous therapy. In Fluid and Electrolyte Balance: Nursing
Considerations, 149-168. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Moore, M., and N. Palmer. 2001. Basic principles. In Calculations for Veterinary
Nurses, 13-33. Oxford: Blackwell Science.
Moore, M., and N. Palmer. 2001. Changing the concentration of a solution. In Calcula-
tions for Veterinary Nurses, 33-55. Oxford: Blackwell Science.
Wanamaker, B., and K. Massey. 2004. Practical calculations in pharmacology. In Applied
Pharmacology for the Veterinary Technician, 51-66. St. Louis: Saunders.
Patient Monitoring
Once a veterinary patient has been passed into the care of the technician, it is the tech-
nician's responsibility to become familiar with the patient. It is the technician's role to
monitor every aspect of the patient's condition so he or she may be alerted to any
changes that may interrupt the animal's convalescence.
Once technicians assume care of the patient, it behooves them to do their own assess-
ment of the patient to determine their appreciation of the animal's current status. Some
of the characteristics documented during a physical examination involve subjective
appraisal. For example, what one person considers as pink mucous membranes may be
considered by another as dark pink or injected. In addition, palpation of pulses may be
difficult for one hospital staff member but not for another. The discrepancy between
absent femoral pulses and easily palpable femoral pulses can lead to much confusion if
it is not called into question until a time of crisis.
 It is preferable for technicians to familiarize themselves with their patients as soon
as care has been transferred. In so doing, much confusion may be avoided during times
 at which judgment is called into question.
Vital Signs
 Vital signs are monitored every day in hospitalized patients. In the emergency or critical
care setting, vitals are monitored several times a day and in some cases even hourly. By
following trends in an animal's vital signs, the health care team is better able to predict
when the animal's status is changing. This allows for more prompt reaction to any
changes that arise.
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
@ 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
107
108Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Vitals are measured using the caregiver's senses and abilities as well as using technical
equipment. Despite the availability of highly specialized equipment, technicians must
 maintain their ability to monitor patients without relying heavily on electronic measure-
ments. In the event that equipment malfunctions or delivers questionable results, techni-
cians must be able to estimate the patient's condition relying solely on subjective
measurements.
Temperature
Measurements of patients’ body temperature are taken a minimum of twice daily in
hospitalized animals. Intermittent monitoring can be performed much more frequently
in patients that begin to show unexpected changes in temperature.
Measuring core body temperature is achieved through placement of a temperature
sensor called a thermistor (Greer et al. 2007). The thermistor is placed in a body cavity
that is centrally located within the patient's body. Placement in the esophagus is common
in anesthetized patients. Thermistors may also be placed in the urinary bladder or in
 the pulmonary artery. Techniques required for placement of these catheters are invasive
and time consuming. For these reasons, it is impractical to measure core body tempera-
ture in the private practice or critical care setting.
Critically ill patients may require continuous monitoring of body temperature. This
technique is mainly reserved for patients that are anesthetized, mechanically ventilated,
or at risk of overheating due to excessive work of breathing. Continuous monitoring is
achieved by maintaining a flexible probe within the animal's rectum (Figs. 6.1 and 6.2).
To stabilize the probe, tape may be fastened to the probe and anchored around the
patient's tail. It is important not to secure the tape too tightly around the patient's tail
in the event that circulation might be compromised.
Intermittent measurement of body temperature can be achieved by placement of a
thermometer in the patient's rectum but may not be tolerated by some patients. In addi-
tion, this method may be inappropriate for some patients depending on the nature of
Figure 6.1. Some patients require continuous monitoring of body temperature. Rectal temperature probes
are well tolerated by most patients.
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring109
Figure 6.2. To reduce contamination between patients, disposable plastic sleeves should be used to cover
thermometers before use. These are discarded after each use.
Figure 6.3. Thermometers placed well into the axilla provide a temperature comparable with rectal tempera-
their illness. Patients that have undergone rectal surgery, have severe coagulopathies, or
are extremely aggressive may not be ideal candidates for rectal thermometry. Rectal
thermometry provides temperature values that closely resemble those of the body core
(Greer et al. 2007). Howe ver, values may be erroneous if the thermometer fails to contact
the mucosal surface and is instead inserted into a fecal ball.
 Placement of the thermometer deep in a patient's axilla is well tolerated by most animals
(Fig. 6.3). Measuring axillary temperature requires that the thermometer be held firmly
under the patient's limb, ensuring it is at the most dorsal and proximal point possible.
Axillary temperatures must be evaluated with caution. Variations in temperature
may be noted from one caregiver to the next depending on how the thermometer is
positioned. Further, axillary temperatures do not consistently match rectal temperatures
obtained at the same juncture in the same patient. Measurements taken from the axilla
are of a slightly lower value than those obtained via rectum (Craig et al 2000).
110Fluid Therapy for VeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses
Axillary temperature measurement can be used appropriately in patients whose tem-
peratures have followed a stable trend and are unlikely to change with any degree of
suddenness. Where accuracy is an absolute necessity, such as with patients at risk of
infection or sepsis, ventilated patients, or patients with cardiac disease, it is a priority
to have a reliable and repeatable temperature such as that obtained via rectal tempera-
ture (Greer et al. 2007).
 Measurement of body temperature via infrared (IR) thermometer is another technique
 d  e    r     
brane inserted into the patient's ear. The device measures heat that radiates across the
tympanic membrane. Due to the anatomic differences between humans and small
animals, it is necessary to use an IR thermometer specifically designed for veterinary
use. Due to the apparent fluctuation in reliability of these instruments, they have yet to
gain commonplace status within the veterinary health care community.
Increases in body temperature
Normal body temperature for canine and feline patients most often lies between 37.5°C
and 38.5°C. These animals can demonstrate mild fluctuations in body temperature
 prompted by the stress of merely being present in the veterinary hospital. Body tempera-
ture is considered elevated when it reaches 39.1°C.
Elevations in body temperature occur for many reasons. It is important for the techni-
cian to be familiar with possible causes of increased body temperature (i.e., infection,
inflammation, excessive muscular activity) and to be able to differentiate between fever
and hyperthermia.
Hyperthermia is the term that describes a patient whose body temperature is increased
due to external causes. The increase in body temperature is not a defensive strike, as in
the presence of infectious agents, but rather a result of the animal producing more body
heat than it can effectively deal with. Patients in oxygen hoods or small cages, seizing
work of breathing is excessive can all develop hyperthermia if not carefully monitored.
Generally speaking, hyperthermic patients are at a greater risk of developing body
-  n ( e) snd ixd  a are n sn
 peratures put the patient at risk for severe tissue injury and possibly death if the hyper-
thermia is not promptly reversed.
 Febrile (pyrexic) patients have an elevated body temperature due to causes that exist
within the patient's own body. Common causes of pyrexia include inflammation, infec-
tion, sepsis, neoplasia, and reaction to transfusion of blood product. Although any of
these causes can lead to an extremely elevated body temperature, hyperthermic patients
typically experience higher temperatures (Lagutchik 2002).
It is important to differentiate between hyperthermia and pyrexia because each con-
dition is treated differently. Patients that are hyperthermic are responding to an envi-
ronmental cause. As such, the technician is able to change the patient's environment and
initiate cooling measures if the patient's body temperature is significantly elevated.
Cooling should be initiated if the temperature exceeds 39.5°C (Mathews 2006b). Large
 hux o a uo dn ape spaq ro saoeds ae e  sauq sd
circulation reduces the chances of patient overheating. If the patient's body temperature
reaches dangerous levels, the patient will benefit from placement of a fan in relatively
close proximity and may respond to the application of cool water. As body temperatures
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring111
approach 41.0°C to 42.0°C, more aggressive measures are required. The patient's intra-
venous (IV) fluid line may be placed in a cool water bath. Further intervention may
involve ice packs around the patient and infusion of room temperature saline into the
bladder via a sterile urinary catheter Flushing the bladder in this manner allows heat
to transfer to the saline, which is then removed from the bladder via urinary catheter.
The saline should remain in place for no longer than 5 minutes (Mathews 2006a). Active
 cooling should end once the patient's temperature has returned to approximately 39.0°C
to 39.5°C (Walters 2002).
Patients that are pyrexic have an elevated body temperature that is a result of the
body's attempts at defending itself. Temperatures reaching 41.0°C or higher require
active cooling as just described. Temperatures below 41.0°C should be monitored closely
but do not require active cooling. Providing this external cooling would make the
patient's body work harder to maintain the higher temperature and thus use more of
the patient's precious energy reserves. Pharmaceutical intervention with antipyretics or
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories is appropriate in pyrexic patients but inappropriate for
hyperthermic patients (Walters 2002).
Decreases in body temperature
The term bypothermia refers to decreased body temperature. Normal body temperature
for cats and dogs falls between 37.5°C and 38.5°C. A patient with a temperature below
37.5°C is hypothermic. Varying degrees of hypothermia are described as mild, moderate,
and severe. The technician often encounters patients that fall in the category of mild
hypothermia (34°C to 37*C) because postoperative patients and patients with heart
failure generally fall within this range (Mathews 2006a).
Warming of a mildly to moderately hypothermic (30*C to 34°C) patient is achieved
by providing a warm, dry environment for the animal. Warm blankets, oat bags (Fig.
6.4), circulating air or water blankets, water bottles, or microwaveable discs can be
placed in close proximity to the patient to provide some additional heat (Figs. 6.4, 6.5,
6.6A, B, and 6.7). It is imperative that none of the external heat sources are in contact
with the patient's skin. Thermal burns are a devastating consequence of heating instru-
ments being placed against a patient's skin.
When monitoring a hypothermic patient, the technician must be constantly aware of
other vital parameters. Mentation, heart rate, blood pressure, and mucous membrane 
color are all affected by decreased body temperature.
Severely hypothermic (28*C to 30*C) patients require more invasive monitoring and
rewarming techniques (Mathews 2006a). Lavage of urinary bladder or of pleural space
or peritoneal cavity with warm sterile saline or dialysis fluid, respectively, is an extreme
measure reserved for patients that are severely hypothermic and/or cardiovascularly
unstable (Mathews 2006a; Wingfield 2002).
Heart Rate
Heart rate (HR) can be measured via several different routes. The simplest of these is
palpation of pulses. This is an extremely noninvasive procedure that is well tolerated
by most patients. One of the benefits of palpating pulses is that it can be performed on
112Fluid Therapy for VeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses
IMIW-X
against the animal's skin.
 Figure 6.5. Microwaveable disks can be placed under fleeces and blankets to provide warm housing.
 a recumbent patient with little disturbance to the animal. A true resting HR can some-
 times be noted if the animal remains stress free and allows easy access to its femoral or
dorsal pedal pulses. Weak or absent pulses immediately alert the technician to the fact
that the animal needs prompt attention and intervention. This type of instant evaluation
yields more information than measurement of HR by any other means. Poor pulse
quality can indicate hypovolemia, hypotension, hypothermia, and several other types of
 dysfunction. In this regard, monitoring HR using pulses provides additional information
that is not obtained by simple auscultation or electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring.
HR can also be measured via thoracic auscultation (Fig. 6.8). Auscultation depends
 on the use of a stethoscope but is a reliable means of obtaining an HR. This procedure
 may be subject to technical difficulty if the patient is experiencing an abnormal accu-
mulation of fluid in the pleural or pericardial space.
Chapter 6: Patient Monitoring113
2
Figure 6.6.  Bair huggers circulate warm air around the patient and rewarm animals with less risk of iatrogenic
thermal injury.
Measurement of HR is also achievable via ECG. A patient may be connected to an
intermittent or continuous ECG for monitoring of HR and rhythm. For the sake of
patient comfort, it is preferable to shave small areas of fur and place ECG pads on the
patient's skin (Fig. 6.9). The adhesive pads have small buttons to which ECG leads are
clipped to facilitate measurement of rate and rhythm. It is important that the gel pad
114Fluid Therapy for VeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses
Figure 6.7. Circulating hot water blankets can be used for patients that cannot maintain body temperature.
Figure 6.8. Auscultation of the patient's heart should be included in every assessment of a new patient.
(surrounded by the adhesive material) is in complete contact with the patient's skin.
 Interruptions in this contact can lead to artifact or absence of ECG tracing.
Artifact can also be the result of patient movement or loose connections between the
patient and the lead or between the lead and the machine. If difficulty is encountered
during the technician's attempts to obtain an ECG tracing, these problem areas should
be investigated promptly because they are often easily corrected.
Many different situations can cause a change in patient HR. If the technician observes
a sudden change in HR that is not explained by exercise or a change in position, the
change warrants further investigation.
A patient's HR changes in response to several conditions. Any change in HR warrants
evaluation of other vital signs to determine whether they have been affected as well.
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring115
Figure 6.9. Animals expected to be on continuous ECG monitors benefit from placement of adhesive pads
rather than clips.
Tachycardia
As the technician monitors a patient, changes in HR may occur in subtle or dramatic
forms. Increases in HR and progression to tachycardia (accelerated heart rate) can be
the result of physiologic changes that a patient is undergoing throughout an illness.
The technician can develop a repertoire that includes causes of tachycardia to be
investigated once an elevation in HR is noted. Other vital parameters should be mea-
sured as part of the investigation.
One of the simplest causes to investigate is pain. Assuming the patient is cardiovas-
cularly stable and that hypovolemia and hypoxia have been dismissed as potential causes
for tachycardia, the technician may administer a cautious dose of analgesics. The ani-
mal's reaction to the analgesics will allow the technician to quickly determine whether
or not pain is the cause of the elevated HR. If the patient's HR decreases and the patient
seems to respond positively to the dose of analgesics, the likely cause of the change in
HR was pain.
Anxiety may also be a cause of elevated HR. A large and important part of the tech-
nician's role is to provide a comfortable, clean, stress-free environment for hospital
patients. If all comforts have been provided and the patient's anxiety level is still very
high, it may be necessary to offer some mild sedation to ensure that the patient does
not do itself any detriment.
-xo jo uonns uoaaa  jo aseo e ose si uoaaxo anss asa
ated blood is carried out in part by arterial blood flow. Presuming that red blood cells
 are being appropriately bound with oxygen as they travel through the lungs, the forward
motion provided by the heart should distribute adequate levels of oxygen to the remain-
e e oi as   axo ass mo o s u q a jo ra
output (CO) (recall that CO = HR X stroke volume). This is an extremely simplified
version of what transpires, but it is meant to illustrate that hypoxia can be a cause of
tachycardia.
Hypovolemia is another common cause of tachycardia. Receptors throughout the
vasculature sense that vascular volume is below what is optimal for the particular
116Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
animal. Through a series of complex events, the body responds by attempting to increase
cardiac output. As with the example mentioned earlier, one of the ways in which the
body can increase CO is to increase HR.
A hypovolemic patient may present with tachycardia or may develop tachycardia if
possibly aggressive fluid therapy, may be necessary to counter the effects of hypovolemia.
Clinician's orders may include a fluid bolus followed closely by reevaluation of the
patient's vital signs. If the fluid bolus provides some degree of relief from the hypovo-
lemia, it should be indicated by an associated decrease in HR. If many physiologic
factors are contributing to the patient's tachycardia, there may not be as notable a
response to the fluid bolus. Slight improvements in HR and volume status may be per-
 petuated with additional fluid boluses, provided each is followed by a thorough assess-
ment of the patient's vitals and its response to the fluid bolus.
Hypokalemia, another potential cause for increases in HR, is also treated by means
of fluid therapy. Should arrhythmias arise as a result of hypokalemia, they will be
reflected by an increase in HR, possibly irregular pulses, and abnormal heart sounds
may be noted on auscultation. Potassium supplementation is necessary in severely
affected patients to avoid the development of cardiac arrhythmias.
Hypercarbia, toxin ingestion, hyperthermia, cardiac arrhythmias, and heart failure
are also causes of elevations in HR. Causes of tachycardia can be relatively benign, such
as with stress; or extremely dangerous, such as with an arrhythmia. It is imperative that
the technician monitor a patient's heart rate with all of these possibilities in mind. Any
increase in HR should be fully investigated
Bradycardia
Bradycardia refers to a heart rate that is slower than what is normally expected for a
given patient. In the emergency and critical care setting, this condition is often appreci-
ated at time of presentation of a patient. This is in contrast to tachycardia, which may
develop for a variety of reasons at any point during the patient's illness. Although a
hospitalized patient may develop bradycardia during its illness, I would argue that the
opposite is more common.
Causes of bradycardia include but are not limited to hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia,
toxin ingestion, and increased intracranial pressure. Patients suffering from any one of
these conditions will benefit, if not absolutely require, hospitalization and support that
 includes fluid therapy. However, fluid therapy does not play the same role in bradycardic
patients as it does with tachycardic patients. With respect to hypovolemia, tachycardic
that once the volume has been replenished, the heart does not need to work as fast to
circulate the blood volume. It is much less common to be in a situation where the effects
of fluid therapy reverse bradycardia. Treatment of bradycardia is usually achieved with
 pharmaceutical intervention, often including the use of electrolyte therapy.
Respiratory Rate
Respiratory rate (RR) is measured in the conscious patient by counting the number of
chest excursions that the patient has within a certain time frame. Regardless of the time
period used to count breaths, the RR is documented in breaths per minute.
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring117
During a physical examination, respiratory rate may be counted via thoracic ausculta-
tion. Auscultation is performed to evaluate the patient's heart and lung sounds, but it may
be used to obtain an RR as well. This is not the easiest method for counting RR, however.
Counting RRs in anxious or active patients may be difficult to accomplish. It is best
to monitor RR a slight distance away from the patient where possible. When RR is
evaluated at time of presentation, for example as a part of a triage examination, the
technician may choose to count the RR while the patient is being held by the owner. If
this is accomplished before the technician approaches the patient, there is a better chance
that the animal's RR will not yet be elevated as a result of anxiety. In large dogs that
are not able to be held by the owner, it is still advisable for the technician to count RR
from a distance where possible. In many cases, the canine patient is curious enough that
sniffing of furniture and floor space will hinder the acquisition of a true RR.
 In the hospital setting, approaching the kennel without opening the door and without
 alerting the patient is a means by which the technician can get a true representation of
the patient's respiratory pattern at rest.
In addition to monitoring RR, the technician must be well versed in monitoring
respiratory noises and patterns. Becoming familiar with thoracic auscultation and which
sounds are normal for healthy patients is a requirement of the emergency and critical
care technician.
Patients that develop moist lung sounds, crackles, or wheezes may do so as a result
of excessive administration of fluid therapy.
Tachypnea
Tacbypnea is the term used to describe an abnormally elevated respiratory rate. Dyspnea
 is the term used to describe a patient that is having diffculty breathing. Dsypnea is often
accompanied by tachypnea, but tachypnea can be present alone. Causes of tachypnea
are numerous; the technician should be familiar with common causes in the event that
multiple forms of intervention are necessary.
Tachypneic or distressed patients should immediately be placed in an oxygen-rich
environment or have oxygen administered via flow by or via nasal cannula. Providing
 possible causes of the tachypnea.
Common causes of tachypnea include but are not limited to primary lung disease,
pleural space disease, anemia, pain, anxiety, and neurologic disease. Anxious or painful
 patients are unlikely to show changes in clinical signs despite the addition of oxygen to
their environment, which may help caregivers determine the true cause of the patient's
tachypnea. Conversely, a patient that is tachypneic due to hypoxia should demonstrate
a slight decrease in RR once supplemental oxygen is provided.
Additional monitoring with pulse oximetry is helpful in tachypneic patients. Portable
pulse oximeters are available in most veterinary hospitals and used with frequency and
confidence (Fig. 6.10). They do not require a great degree of technical skill and are well
tolerated by most patients. Pulse oximeters measure patient HR and the percentage of
hemoglobin that is saturated with oxygen in arterial blood. Normal ranges for healthy
patients breathing room air are expected to fall between 95% and 100%. Oxygen
supplementation is recommended if the saturation of oxygen (Spo2) drops to 92% or
less (Hammond and Walters 1999).
Patients receiving long-term fluid therapy should be monitored closely for signs of
increasing respiratory rates. Pulmonary edema and pleural effusion are possible
118Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 6.10. Pulse oximeters are practical and useful during patient assessment.
complications associated with fluid volume overload (Rudloff and Kirby 2001). Both of
these conditions lead to elevated respiratory rates and difficulty breathing. Prompt
intervention is needed to reverse the effects of fluid overload. For these reasons, the
 technician must be diligent with respect to monitoring respiratory rates of fluid therapy
patients.
Bradypnea
Bradypnea is the term describing a respiratory rate that is abnormally low. This condi-
tion is not as frequently encountered as tachypnea. Complications related to fluid
therapy rarely, if ever, result in bradypnea.
Common causes of decreased RR include narcotic administration, toxin ingestion,
and increased intracranial pressure. In se vere cases, where the patient's RR is low enough
 to compromise tissue oxygenation, mechanical ventilation may be required.
crisis that has them hospitalized. Fluids may be used for the purpose of diuresis, drug
 administration, or simply to provide the animal's maintenance fluid requirement during
a period of diminished health.
BodyWeight
Patients receiving fluid therapy must undergo a minimum of once-daily measurement of
body weight. Emergency and critical care patients should optimally be weighed at least
twice daily and, in some circumstances, more frequently than that.
Weight measurements are achieved in many different ways depending on the type of
walk-on scales that are excellent for use with most canine patients (Fig. 6.11).
Feline patients and some small or toy canine breeds may be difficult to assess using
the large floor scales. For these patients it may be less of a challenge to weigh the animal
Chapter 6: Patient Monitoring119
saed Aioenge aiel ylam oi Aem juauauo e si ales joo t 'iig ann
in a carrier or while they are being carried by a caregiver If the caregiver stands on the
scale with the patient, the caregiver's weight is subtracted from the total to provide the
current weight of the patient.
 Small tabletop scales are most accurate for small patients and tend to be slightly less
daunting for these animals because many of the scales have raised sides that provide a
sense of security (Fig. 6.12).
An important consideration while trending body weight is that the patient be weighed
on the same scale each time a weight is obtained. This eliminates the possibility of
inadvertent misinterpretation of weight changes that can arise using two scales that are
calibrated differently (Fig. 6.13).
Monitoring changes in body weight provides a means of determining whether the
patient is retaining any of the fuid being delivered throughout its therapy. It is widely
that a loss or gain of 0.5 kg (500g) over a short period of time represents a loss or gain
of 500mL.
Fluid gains and losses are also monitored through urinary output; however body
weight is a simple and fast method of estimating a patient's response to fluid therapy.
m Apoq u sauo ieun os Adeau  a jo peo aqn napisu on suod si 1
can be appropriately evaluated. For example, a patient receiving fluids due to dehydra-
tion and hypovolemia should gain weight as the fuid deficit is replaced. This weight
gain is expected. In contrast, a patient suffering from septic peritonitis may experience
a weight gain that exceeds what is expected of this patient. In sepsis, several physiologic
120Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 6.12. Tabletop scales are portable and can be used in multiple areas of the hospital to weigh small
patients.
 Figure 6.13. A mobile scale can be used for small and medium-size patients and can double as a treatment
table.
changes take place that have widespread consequences for the patient. For example, the
capillaries can sustain damage and become overly permeable. Proteins leak through these
capillaries, escape the vasculature, and leak into the tissues. This shift causes the colloid
osmotic pressure to decrease in the vessels and increase in the tissue. The increased
 number of proteins in the tissue attracts body water and draws it into the tissue space.
As fluid leaves the vasculature and flows toward the tissues, the patient may become
hypovolemic despite fluid therapy. The fluid that is leaked into the tissue space accumu-
lates and causes a temporary weight gain in the patient (DiBartola 2006). This is some-
times referred to as “third spacing."
and eventually return to normal. Subsequently, protein levels within the vasculature also
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring121
return to normal. Fluid that had leaked into the tissues eventually shifts back into the
vasculature, drawn there by the reinstated colloid osmotic pressure. This massive fluid
shift back into the vascular space leads to a dramatic increase in urine output. Although
the patient is still receiving fluid therapy, the urinary losses typically exceed the volume
that is gained through IV therapy. The overall result is that the patient undergoes weight
loss.
Recall that serial measurement of body weight is reflective of fluid lost or gained
 a o pd  e o s  o   a  a 
as 12 hours).
Central Venous Pressure
Central venous pressure is a parameter measured via a catheter placed into a central
vein. The tip of the catheter must lie within the proximal or the caudal vena cava to be
able to measure CVP. Measurement is achieved through one of several methods (Tables
 6.1 and 6.2). Hospitals that benefit from the availability of advanced monitoring systems
have the capacity to measure CVP using an electronic transducer and computer that
calculates CVP and displays it on a digital monitor (Fig. 6.14). Simpler methods involve
the use of a manometer and a fluid line, a technique that is within the means of most
veterinary practices (Fig. 6.15, and 6.16A, B). Hospitals that do not have access to a
 manometer may also fashion a homemade version using a fuid line and a ruler.
 CVP measurement allows the health care team to monitor the effects of fluid therapy
with a great degree of insight. Placement of the catheter within the proximal vena cava
provides an estimation of the pressure within the right atrium. For the purpose of this
description we can consider this point to be the beginning point of the cardiac cycle. It
fits that in knowing the pressure that exists at this point we have a sense of the volume
of blood arriving at the heart. The blood that arrives at the heart to begin another cycle
through the cardiovascular system is referred to as preload.
CVP measurements are not solely interpreted with respect to volume and preload,
but they are also reflective of cardiac function. For example, an elevation in CVP may
 be explained by an increase in circulating volume, but it may also be a reflection of the
heart's inability to provide forward momentum. A decrease in the heart's ability to pump
blood in a forward direction would also result in elevation in pressure within the right
atrium and proximal vena cava.
● Fluid line primed and connected to central venous cathetel
● Other end of fluid line connected to three-way stopcock
· Stopcock connected to manometer
Seg piny ol papauuos s! leyi au!l pinly oi papauuoo jaawouen ●
● 0 measurement on manometer is at level of right atrium
· Line is primed while stopcock is off to patient
● Manometer is filled
· Stopcock opened to patient
● Fluid level in manometer drops while pressure equalizes with central venous pressure
● Level of fluid in manometer is central venous pressure reading
122Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 6.2 Measurement of Central Venous Pressure Using Electronic Transducer
● Lines are primed before connection
● Rigid fluid line connected to central venous catheter
● Opposite end of rigid line connected to transducer
● Fluid line from transducer to fluid bag
● Transducer is turned off to patient and machine is calibrated to zero
● Stopcock turned off to fluid bag.
·Transducer measures pressure change
● Computer cable from transducer to monitoring hardware transfers information that is then
displayed in wave and numeric form on screen
Figure 6.14. A transducer converts information obtained from blood pressure measurement and relays it to
CVP measurements must be taken throughout the course of fluid therapy to observe
the patient's response to fluids at different intervals. The benefits of CVP monitoring
are derived from observing trends for each patient rather than using a single measure-
ment. This is in part due to the fact that the chambers of the heart are compliant to a
certain degree and can accommodate changes in circulating volume without eliciting a
change in CVP that is measurable at a given point in time (Spiess and Gomez 1998).
 By repeating measurements, the technician is able to record a range of values for each
patient and be well aware when a specific change is outside the acceptable range for
that animal.
CVP is measured in two different units: cm HO or mm Hg. To convert mm Hg to
cm HzO, the value obtained in mm Hg is multiplied by a factor of 1.36 to obtain cm
HO. A range of 0 to 10cm HzO is accepted as normal for canine and feline patients
(deLaforcade and Rozanski 2001). Although a value that falls within this range is con-
 sidered normal, it is most important to obtain a measurement for the individual patient
that is defined as a starting point. In so doing, the technician is able to reevaluate the
patient's CVP and know in which direction it has progressed as the patient has received
fluids.
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring123
+
ized equipment.
Decreased CVP
It is common that patients who present with a history of several days of anorexia,
vomiting, and/or diarrhea show signs of hypovolemia or hypovolemic shock during the
initial physical examination. These patients are perceived to have a decreased circulating
volume within their vasculature that can be confirmed through the use of CVP measure-
ment. IV access and fluid therapy should be initiated immediately to counter the effects
of severe hypovolemia. At a point that it is appropriate to do so (available technical
personnel, decrease in clinical signs of hypovolemic shock, palpable or visible central
venous access) a central line can be placed for measurement of CVP.
The CVP of a volume-depleted patient most often falls below the normal range and
resuscitated, the technician can monitor CVP and guide fluid therapy according to the
patient's response. One or several fluid boluses may be required before the CVP rises
above OcmHzO. Severely volume-depleted patients may not display a change in CVP
until multiple boluses are administered. Provided that the patient is not experiencing any
 degree of cardiac disease, a goal of an increase of 2 to 4cm HzO is appropriate (Hansen
2006). If continued measurement reflects an immediate return to the baseline value, the
circulating volume has still not been augmented to a suitable level. Resuscitative efforts
(fluid boluses) should continue until the increase in CVP takes slightly longer to return
to its baseline value. A 15-minute guideline for return to initial CVP is reflective of a
near normal circulating volume and successful volume resuscitation (Mathews 2006c).
124
Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
(A)
(B
Figure 6.16. (A) For CVP measurement, a manometer can be devised using a fluid line and a ruler. (B) The
zero point on the ruler is positioned at the level of the right atrium.
Increased CVp
Elevations in CVP reflect in increase in the volume of blood returning to the right atrium
or an increase in the pressure within this chamber. Animals suffering from heart disease
have a diminished capacity to propel blood forward through the heart.
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring125
Another situation in which pressure rises in the proximal vena cava occurs when a
patient is the recipient of overzealous fluid administration.
Patients with heart disease and patients receiving fluid therapy for several days are
at greater risk for volume overload (deLaforcade and Rozanski 2001). CVP measure-
ments should be obtained several times daily in these patients so the technician is
promptly alerted to trends showing increasing values. Significantly elevated CVPs
-d jo ys ie nd a d  in poo aa o a a (o ooi)
monary edema (Hansen 2006).
Nursing considerations
Proper technique is the cornerstone of accurate CVP measurement. One of the most
important considerations is the placement of the O point of the measurement system.
Regardless of whether a ruler, manometer, or transducer is in use, the zero point must
lie as close to the right atrium as possible. To position this point correctly, the technician
can use the following landmarks:
 If the patient is lying in lateral recumbency, the right atrium is estimated to be at the
level of the manubrium
 If the patient is lying in sternal recumbency, the right atrium is estimated to be at the
level of the scapulohumeral joint
When recording CVP measurements the technician should also record which position
the patient was in at the time of measurement, including whether the lateral recumbency
was right or left.
 As with any measurement made using an intravascularly placed catheter, complica-
tions may arise if the catheter becomes kinked or clotted. The technician can improve
efficiency by flushing the catheter before measurement to ensure the CVP reading is not
affected by catheter obstruction. In addition, if other fluids are being delivered into the
same catheter, it is imperative that all other ports and lines be clamped at the most
proximal point. The only port that should remain open is the one being used for the
CVP measurement, and it should be the most proximal port possible. The line distal to
this port is also clamped and its infusion is temporarily suspended. It is prudent to verify
that all connections and wires are securely connected if an electronic transducer is in use.
Blood Pressure
Measuring blood pressure is achie ved via several different methods. Different equipment
is required depending on which method is selected; choice may be made based on prac.
tice type, cost, and availability of technically skilled hospital personnel. Each blood
pressure measurement system has advantages and drawbacks, and there is some vari-
ability with respect to accuracy.
Indirect blood pressure measurement
Obtaining an indirect BP involves the use of either a Doppler or an oscillometric blood
pressure measurement system (Figs. 6.17 and 6.18). The Doppler method uses a small
126Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
probe that contains a crystal that senses the movement of blood flow when placed over
a peripheral artery. The probe is accompanied by a speaker through which the sound
of the flow is rendered audible to the operator Flow is temporarily obstructed by infla-
tion of a cuff placed proximal to the probe. A sphygmomanometer is used to inflate the
cuff and subsequently slowly deflate the cuff. The pressure reading is made when the
whooshing sound of blood flow becomes audible once again. The pressure obtained by
a Doppler is the systolic blood pressure of the patient.
The Doppler probe is positioned after a small patch of fur is clipped over an acces-
sible artery and contact between the skin and the probe is facilitated by application of
gel. It is important that the technician is aware of the pressure being applied to the
probe; only gentle pressure is necessary to maintain proper positioning over the artery.
If the technician applies a significant amount of pressure, it may be impossible to appre-
ciate any sound at all. Further difficulty may arise if the patient is hypothermic. Cold
temperatures cause a decrease in peripheral circulation, and as such, arterial flow is
diminished and occasionally difficult to hear with a Doppler. When the patient's blood
pressure is extremely low, it may be impossible to obtain a reading with the Doppler
Oscillometric pressure measurements are made using an electronic machine that
provides numeric results in digital format. A cuff is also used with this style of blood
 pressure measurement and is attached to the mechanical inflator rather than a manual
one. Cuff size influences the results obtained with each reading. The technician should
select cuff size with care and try to use cuffs whose widths are approximately 40%-60%
of the limb circumference. Selection of a cuff that is too small will cause artificial eleva-
tion of blood pressure. Too generous a cuff size will provide a pressure that is falsely
low (Waddell 2004).
Oscillometric measurement is a very complex procedure. The following is a simplified
description of the processes involved. The oscillometric machine occludes the patient's
artery by inflating the cuff with air. The machine senses the return of blood flow as it
releases the air pressure within the cuff. As the artery oscillates with the flow of blood,
 the systolic blood pressure is measured. The diastolic pressure is measured at the point
at which the oscillations quickly become insensible. Mean arterial pressure (MAP) is the
blood pressure at which the oscillations reach their widest amplitude (Waddell 2004).
oscillometric blood pressure.
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring127
Figure 6.18. Oscillometric blood pressure measurement is a type of indirect blood pressure measurement
Cuff size is selected according to patient size.
Patient position is an important consideration when measuring BP via the oscillomet-
ric method. The cuff should be positioned in close proximity to the level of the heart
 It is preferable to have the patient in sternal or lateral recumbency to achieve this goal.
Patient movement will interfere with the machine's ability to distinguish the true motion
of the artery and will result in artificial values.
Most oscillometric blood pressure equipment also provides a value for the patient's HR.
The machine has the ability to count the number of oscillations of the artery that occur in
a minute and will provide a reasonable estimate of heart rate in ideal conditions.
Direct arteriaf measurement
Direct arterial blood pressure (DABP) measurement is regarded as the most accurate
way of monitoring blood pressure (Fig. 6.19A, B). It is more technically challenging
128Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
IB
Figure 6.19. (A) Direct arterial pressure measurement is obtained via an arterial catheter in the hind limb. A
rigid fluid line is connected to the catheter, through the PRN Adapter, and then to a transducer and pressur-
ized fluid bag. (B) The transducer (lower left by the sterile lap sheet) converts information regarding the pressure
changes it senses and conveys the information to the computer.
than indirect methods but yields more information and is thus suitable for more intensive
patients.
 Placement of an arterial catheter is the foundation for DABP monitoring. This pro-
cedure is similar to that for placement of a venous catheter. Arterial catheter placement
is slightly more of a challenge due to the reactive potential of the arterial wall once it
is invaded by the catheter. The walls of the arteries are more muscular than those of
other vessels and can tightly constrict around the catheter, making it difficult to advance
off the stylet. Another challenge encountered with arterial catheterization is the difficulty
with which the vessels themselves are visualized. Whereas a vein is often easily visual-
ized, raised, and palpated, an artery is not occluded and does not visibly rise when filled
with blood. The arteries are palpable and once the pulse has been identified, a location
for catheter placement may be selected.
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring129
 'sna a se  s an  as aq  s pai
ized saline flushes are required with greater frequency in arterial catheters than with
venous; every 2 hours is adequate to maintain arterial line patency.
The equipment required for measurement of DABP may be cost prohibitive to some
practices. Many of the machines available for this purpose also measure CVP, ECG,
end tidal carbon dioxide, and in some cases even pulmonary capillary wedge pressure
(Fig. 6.20). To measure DABP, a rigid fluid line with a sterile hypodermic needle at
its end is inserted into the injection por/Luer adapter that is secured to the arterial
catheter. The line is connected to a pressure transducer, which is then connected to
another fluid line and pressurized fluid bag via a three-way stopcock. The transducer
is also connected to the electronic monitor via computer cable. As with the confgura-
tion of lines for CVP measurement, the transducer should be maintained at the level
of the patient's heart. The stopcock is turned off to the patient while the monitor is
calibrated to zero. Once this is achieved, the stopcock is opened to the patient and
the transducer interprets and conveys the arterial pressure to the monitor where it is
displayed.
Critically ill patients benefit from continuous monitoring of arterial blood pressure
because their condition can change with such rapidity. If the monitoring is continuous,
it is still prudent to flush the arterial catheter from time to time to ensure patency. Table
6.3 lists the advantages and disadvantages associated with the different methods of
blood pressure measurement.
Hypotension
 Hypotension is appreciated in many emergency and critical care patients. It is defined
as a MAP below 60mm Hg. Various culprits may be responsible for the patient's low
blood pressure. Hypovolemia, bradycardia, sepsis, and hemorrhage are some common
causes of hypotension. Another common cause of hypotension is anesthesia.
As a patient's blood pressure drops, perfusion to tissues and organs is compromised.
At MAPs below 60mm Hg, perfusion to the kidneys and brain is inadequate.
Hypotension can be treated by providing intravascular volume through fluid admin-
istration. It is the clinician's responsibility to determine what volume of fluid can safely
be administered in any given situation and how quickly it should be delivered. Choices
for volume expansion are not limited to crystalloids but can include synthetic colloids,
natural colloids, and/or additional blood products. Fluid therapy plays a vital role in
treating many causes of hypotension.
Hypotension in the face of fluid intervention may indicate the need for pharmaceuti-
cal therapy such as vasopressors or positive inotropes (Mathews 2006e).
Hypertension
Hypertension is defined as an elevated blood pressure and used to describe a patient
whose systolic blood pressure is greater than 145 mm Hg (deLaforcade and Rozanski
2001). Disease processes leading to hypertension include renal disease, hyperthyroidism,
pheochromocytoma, and neoplasia.
Fluid therapy is often used as part of the overall intervention for hypertensive
19:6
109.
111/46
2.5
37.9
Figure 6.20. The waveform of the direct arterial pressure is second down from the top. The blood pressure
e ym spuodsao ainssaid ieape aun ui aids aem yoea leyi aon ais nuaji aul ie peai s! luawainsea
complex on the ECG (an increase in pressure follows each contraction).
Table6.3
 Advantages and Disadvantages Associated with Different Methods of Blood Pressure Medication
Method of Blood
Advantages
Disadvantages
 Pressure Measurement
Doppler
● Relatively inexpensive
● Only provides systolic pressure
·Portable
● Debates exist with respect to
· Accurate
adding 10mm Hg to pressures in
● Sensitive enough to read low
cats
pressures
● Difficult to hear in noisy or busy
● Ability to determine pressure in
hospital setting
 presence of arrhythmia
Oscillometric
● Minimal technical ability needed
· Cost
● Provides systolic, diastolic, mean
●Poor reliability with patient
 arterial pressure, and heart rate
 movement, arrhythmia.
●Repeat pressure measurement
hypothermia, vasoconstriction 
available at preselected intervals
●Alarm settings for pressures
 outside normal range
Direct arterial
● Considered most accurate
● Technical expertise required for
method
placement of arterial catheter
● Means of continuous blood
● Cost of monitoring equipment,
pressure monitoring
transducer
●Allows for waveform analysis
● Catheter maintenance
● Invasive procedure for patient
(catheter placement)
130
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring131
Urine Output
Monitoring urine output in hospitalized patients can provide additional information
that is useful in the management of fluid therapy. Whether the patient is nonambulatory
and requires a urinary catheter or can manage to urinate outdoors or in a litter box,
the technician may collect urine to evaluate volume and urine specific gravity (USG).
that the volume of urine output can be partly predicted once the patient's deficit has
been replaced.
per hour (DiBartola 2006) of urine if renal function is adequate. The hourly volume of
 yo pod is e raao  a q po si sd e q pad a
During this time period all of the patient's urine should be collected. This calculation is
more readily achieved if a 24-hour time period is broken into 4- or 6-hour intervals. If
a 20-kg dog urinates 200 mL every 4 hours, that dog is passing 50mL/h, which satisfies
d s no yt tt oi o j nuan  a
Urine collection can be carried out via several different methods. Consideration
should be given to the nature of the illness of the patient and the patient's ability to
ambulate when decided on the means for urine collection. Free catch or free flow urine
may be obtained from most canine patients if they are able to walk outside. The fact
that this sample may be contaminated by the environment is a drawback associated
with this method of collection. In addition, it may be difficult to capture the entire
volume of urine being passed as the dog may hesitate or may knock the collection con-
tainer while posturing to urinate.
Where animals choose to urinate on bedding, the bedding may be weighed before
placement in the kennel and then again once it has been urinated on. The difference in
weight can be used to estimate the volume of urine excreted. A total of 100g of urine
is approximately equal to 100 mL. Urine measurements in feline patients can be facili-
tated through the use of a nonabsorbent material in the litter box.
Another option for small but ambulatory patients is the use of a metabolic cage.
These cages have a slanted bottom with a drain in the center. A collection system is
placed under the drain to collect any urine that is passed in the kennel. The patient rests
on a flat elevated grate and passes urine through the grate if inclined to urinate in the
kennel. Collection and interpretation of urine production can be compromised if the
patient manages to spill the water bowl because that liquid will also collect in the system
underneath the kennel.
Patients that are nonambulatory, that are at risk of urine scald, or that require inten-
sive monitoring of urine output (as with renal failure patients) are candidates for
indwelling transurethral urinary catheters. Placement of urinary catheters in both male
 and female cats and dogs is a procedure that requires a moderate amount of technical
 expertise. However, with appropriate knowledge, guidance, and practice, the veterinary
One of the reasons that urine output is measured is so it can be compared with the
volume of fluid that has been delivered to the patient during the course of its fluid therapy.
 This is an additional means by which fluid therapy can be monitored. Assuming renal
function is normal, the patient's INs (fluid given to the animal) should closely match
the OUTs (urinary output plus or minus vomitus, diarrhea, etc.) once hydration and
volume status have been replenished. Urine output that does not meet the 1 to 2 mL/kg
132Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
per hour minimum may be indicative of persistent hypovolemia. Inadequate urine output
may also be due to fluid shifts such as third space losses or ongoing vomiting or
diarrhea.
 Monitoring urine output (volume) should be accompanied by measurement of specific
gravity. Patients whose intravascular volume is depleted conserve volume by excreting
less urine. The concentration of solids within the urine is high due to the low volume
of urine. As a result, the USG is higher in these animals. An animal whose volume status
is adequate or who has undergone volume resuscitation has little to no need to conserve
volume and thus can excrete less concentrated urine. These patients pass urine with a
lower USG.
Patients receiving fluid therapy often have a USG in the 1.020 to 1.030 range if renal
function is adequate. A dehydrated patient whose renal function is adequate should have
a USG greater than 1.030 (canine} and 1.035 (feline) (Mathews 2006d)
Chapter Summary
Monitoring hospitalized patients can be an extremely intensive process. Many param-
eters are recorded and evaluated throughout this practice. The job of patient monitoring
is usually dedicated to the technician. The technician must evaluate each patient using
his or her own powers of observation, regardless of how recently the patient has been
evaluated by another party. Some aspects of patient monitoring are subjective, and as
such, the technician will benefit from developing his or her own baseline interpretation
of the patient's status. This baseline establishes a starting point from which the techni-
cian can easily observe a change in patient status.
Temperature should be measured a minimum of twice daily in hospitalized patients.
Intermittent temperatures are most often monitored using a digital thermometer via
rectal or axillary routes. More invasive methods of temperature measurement include
continuous monitoring via rectal probe, core temperature measurement via thermistor,
and infrared thermometry.
Normal temperature for cats and dogs falls between 37.5°C and 38.5°C. Tempera-
tures outside this range warrant investigation. A patient is considered hypothermic if its
temperature falls below 37.5°C. Warming may be achieved using blankets, oat bags,
hot water bottles, circulating hot air blankets, or circulating hot water blankets. With
use of any of these warming aids, it is imperative that the technician provide some type
of buffer, such as a towel or blanket, between the patient and the warming aid. This is
necessary to avoid the possibility of thermal burns.
  si   d    an  si s
the patient's body from within. Patients that exhibit a body temperature greater than
39.5°C should be gently cooled. More invasive cooling measures are undertaken when
temperatures reach 41*C and above.
HR and RR are monitored via several different routes. The most reliable sources of
information are often the technician's powers of observation. Patient's that are moni
tored without a large degree of invasion often maintain resting HR and RRs that provide
the technician with a truer sense of patient status. Intermittent or continuous ECGs or
pulse oximetry are also helpful tools for monitoring HR and RR
Chapter 6:Patient Monitoring133
Body weight should be measured at least once a day in hospitalized animals. Sudden
fluctuations in patient weight may be attributed to fluid gains or losses. One kilogram
of body weight represents 1 L of fluid. The same scale should be used each time a weight
is measured for a specific patient.
 Central venous pressure measurement and blood pressure measurement are also valu-
n e a  i   n  a i s a
skills and can involve the use of expensive monitoring equipment. Noninvasive (indirect)
 blood pressure measurement is the most appropriate tool for the private practice setting
because central venous catheterization and arterial catheterization are not required.
 Indirect blood pressure measurement can be accomplished using a Doppler system or
an oscillometric monitor.
 Measurement of urine output and USG yields information that is useful in tailoring
fluid therapy. Volume of urine passed by a patient can be compared with the volume of
fluid that the patient has received. It is helpful to know how much of the fluid therapy
has remained with the patient. USG illustrates how concentrated the patient's urine is.
In states of hypovolemia or dehydration, healthy kidneys conserve body water, which
should cause an elevation in USG. Well-hydrated or diuresed patients have a lower USG
Monitoring is a vital part of fluid therapy and largely the responsibility of the veteri-
nary technician. It is necessary that the technician understand the importance of this
role and ensure that every monitoring skill be used to its fullest extent.
Review Questions
1. Continuous temperature measurement can be achieved using a rectal probe. When
might it be inappropriate to use this tool?
2. What is the difference between pyrexia and hyperthermia?
3. What is tachycardia?
4. Define bradycardia.
 5. Identify two methods of measuring fluid gain or loss in a patient receiving fluid
therapy in a hospital.
6. Weight gain or loss of 500g over a short period of time represents a fluid gain or
loss of approximately what volume?
 7. CVP measurements that fall below the expected normal range may indicate which
of the following conditions?
 8. Elevated CVP measurements can indicate
9. Fluid therapy patients with normal renal function are expected to produce at least
ml/kg per hour of urine?
Answers to the review questions can be found on page 223 in the Appendix. The review
questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley.com!
goldonohoenursing.
Further Reading
Craig, J., et al. 2000. Temperature measured at the axilla compared with rectum in
children and young people: systematic review. BMJ 320:1174-1178.
134Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Delaforcade, A., and E. Rozanski. 2001. Central venous pressure and arterial blood
pressure measurements. Vet Clin North Am 31:1163-1174.
DiBartola, S., and S. Bateman. 2006. Introduction to fluid therapy. In Fluid, Electrolyte,
and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 325-344. St. Louis: Saunders.
Greer, R., et al. 2007. Comparison of three methods of temperature measurement in
hypothermic, euthermic, and hyperthermic dogs. JAVMA 230:1841-1848.
Hammond, R., and C. Walters. 1999. Monitoring the Critical Patient. In Manual of
Canine and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 235-246. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA.
Hansen, B. 2006. Technical aspects of fluid therapy. In S. DiBartola, ed. Fluid, Electro-
lyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 344-376. St. Louis:
Saunders.
Kunkle, G., et al. 2004. Comparison of body temperature in cats using a veterinary
infrared thermometer and a digital rectal thermometer. JAAHA 40:40-46.
Lagutchik, M. 2002. Fever in the ICU patient. In W. Wingfield, ed. The Veterinary ICU
Book, 671-685. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Mathews, K. 2006a. Accidental hypothermia. In Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Care Manual. 291-296. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Mathews, K. 2006b. Hyperthermia/Heatstroke/Malignant hyperthermia. In Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care Manual, 297-303. Guelph, Ontario, Canada:
LifeLearn.
Mathews, K. 2006c. Management of acute renal failure. In Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care Manual, 709-722. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Mathews, K. 2006d. Monitoring fluid therapy and complications of fluid therapy. In S.
DiBartola,ed.Fluid,Electrolyte,and Acid Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice,
377-391. St. Louis: Saunders.
Mathews, K. 2006e. Sepsis/Septic shock. In Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
Manual, 588-596. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Rudloff, E., and R. Kirby. 2001. Colloid and crystalloid resuscitation. Vet Clin North
Am 31:1207-1230.
Spiess, B., and M. Gomez. 1998. Hemodynamic monitoring. In Longnecker's Principles
and Practice of Anesthesiology, 802-828. St. Louis: Mosby.
Waddell, L. 2004. Blood pressure monitoring for the critically ill. Proceedings of Western
Veterinary Conference.
Walters, J. M. 2002. Hyperthermia. In The Veterinary ICU Book, 1130-1136. Jackson,
WY: Teton NewMedia.
Wingfield, W. 2002. Accidental hypothermia. In The Veterinary ICU Book, 1116-1129.
Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Complications of Fluid Therapy
Complications associated with therapeutic administration of intravenous (IV) fluids
i ae o i asu sd a ui a n ym  nu o
fall into one of two categories: catheter-associated complications and fluid-associated
complications.
Catheter-Associated Complications
Fortunately, it is not extremely common to encounter problems associated with IV
catheters. Many potential hazards can be avoided with proper care, preparation, and
monitoring carried out by the veterinary technician.
As discussed in Chapter 3, appropriate use of catheters begins with selection of a
catheter that is suitable for a particular patient. Use of short large-bore catheters is ideal
for delivery of fluid boluses in patients that require rapid resuscitation. In contrast,
patients receiving long-term IV therapy that involves the use of many different fluid
types and compositions will be better served by centrally placed multilumen catheters.
 It is important to consider the health status of the patient before placement of an IV
catheter because catheter type or location may be unsuitable due to the nature of the
animal's illness. Hind limbs should not be selected for IV sites in patients experiencing
 diarrhea. In contrast, forelimbs are not the ideal choice for patients that are vomiting.
Animals that would benefit from placement of a central line may not be ideal candidates
due to coagulopathy or immune-mediated disease. All of these issues must be considered
before placement in an attempt to reduce the potential for catheter-related complica-
tions. The nature of veterinary care is such that our patients may soil themselves in
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
135
136Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
times of ill health. Such situations may lead to contamination of catheter sites and sub-
sequent catheter-associated infection.
Vascufar inffammation and infection
In addition to patient soiling and self-contamination, catheter sites that remain clean
throughout the dwell time may develop infection as a result of improper preparation
before placement (Burrows 1982). Human studies have shown that the most common
bacterial isolates from infected catheter sites are organisms considered to be normal skin
dwellers such as Stapbylococcus epidermidis and Stapbylococcus aureus (Marsh-Ng
2007). It is not uncommon to find growth of one of these organisms once the catheter
is cultured. However, it is uncommon for the patient to develop septicemia as a result
of this colonization (Tan 2003).
To reduce the chance of catheter contamination, the technician must prepare the
catheter site in a way that minimizes the presence of normal skin flora. Catheter sites
may be prepared in a variety of ways. The following are some guidelines that contribute
to clean, safe placement of IV catheters.
 Clean area for procedure
 Have supplies ready on clean surface
 Have patient lying on clean surface
 Ensure a large clean field surrounding catheter site
 Clip large area of fur
 Using gauze squares soaked with surgical scrub, scrub entire area (3 to 5 minutes)
 Using gauze squares soaked with alcohol, wipe area several times until square
shows no debris
■ Using gauze squares soaked with tincture of chlorhexidine or iodine, wipe area
several times ensuring no debris on gauze
 Use aseptic technique for placement of catheter
 Catheter tip/proximal end of catheter should be only part of catheter that contacts
patient
 Dry, clean gauze square may be placed around limb to cover hair line to minimize
any contact between catheter and skin or hair at periphery
ment of central lines
 An adhesive bandage with sterile pad (such as Band-Aid) can be placed over the point
of insertion to maintain sterility
 Clean tape and bandage material will help sustain the clean environment of the
catheter
 Sterile technique should be continued through connection of infusion set and fluid
bag
 Lines should be kept off hospital floors whenever possible
 Fluid lines should be changed every 48 to 72 hours
IV catheters can become somewhat mobile within the vessel despite efforts to place
them securely. Catheters may rotate slightly or move inward and outward. Any move
ment is detrimental to the health of the vessel within which the catheter is placed
Motion from the catheter causes irritation to the interior wall of the vessel. In addition,
Chapter 7: Complications of Fluid Therapy137
the in-and-out motion of the catheter can drag organisms from the skin into the vessel,
another event that causes vessel irritation. Phlebitis is the term used to describe a blood
vessel that is inflamed. An affected vessel typically appears slightly reddened and feels
warm and somewhat hardened or ropy to the touch. If any of these symptoms are noted
in a patient receiving IV therapy, it is necessary to remove the catheter and seek IV
access elsewhere.
Phlebitis can also be caused by the type of fluid being infused. Solutions that contain
glucose, amino acids, lipids, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, or chemotherapeutic agents
all have a higher tendency to irritate the interior of the blood vessel (Maki 1991).
Administration of parenteral nutrition is more safely achieved using a central line for
 this reason. The solutions used for parenteral nutrition are rich in amino acids and lipids
and better tolerated by larger vessels.
Other factors affecting the development of phlebitis include catheter material, length
of placement, catheter size and width, and patient health (Maki 1991).
Embolism
An embolus is a structure found within the vasculature (abnormal) that travels through
a vessel and causes an obstruction. The term embolus does not specifically describe the
nature of the structure causing the obstruction. It is possible for a patient to suffer from
an air embolism or even a catheter embolism. A thromboembolism is a blood clot that
can travel throughout the vasculature and cause an obstruction.
It is important to use extreme caution while removing an IV catheter because an
accidental cut through the catheter can cause a catheter embolus. The technician should
try to cut bandage material that is far from the catheter site. In addition, the catheter
stylet should not be removed and replaced during placement because the stylet is likely
to bore through the cannula and can also cause a catheter embolus in this manner
 A catheter embolus may be removed from a peripheral vessel if action is prompt. A
tourniquet placed proximal to the catheter site will help reduce the chance of travel
 beyond the limb. A venous cut-down procedure may allow the clinician to locate and
remove the catheter fragment (Spencer 1982).
An air embolism may accidentally be delivered to a veterinary patient receiving fluid
therapy. Air bubbles in a solution set, an empty fluid bag, or administration of IV medi-
cation are but a few examples of where air emboli may originate. Small air emboli are
most often clinically insignificant in veterinary patients. However, large or rapid IV
boluses of air can cause cardiovascular collapse and shock (Tan 2003).
Intraosseous catheters
As with any type of catheter, infection is a possible cause of postoperative patient illness.
Patients may suffer from osteomyelitis as a result of catheter contamination. Catheter
position can also lead to complications in patients whose fluids are accidentally delivered
extravascularly. This leads to cellulitis, a condition that can be painful to the patient
In some cases, improper placement of intraosseous (IO) catheters can damage the sciatic
nerve (Moore 2006).
IO delivery of fluids at extremely high rates is thought to be painful to the patient
 In addition, fluids that are cooler than room temperature also cause discomfort when
delivered via IO catheters (Moore 2006).
138Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Jugufar catheters and centraf fines
Jugular catheters are excellent tools that facilitate many of the monitoring tasks under
taken by the veterinary technician. Although infrequent, problems do arise despite
efforts to prevent them. Some difficulties are catheter specific; these were discussed in
detail in Chapter 3. Other complications are associated with central lines or jugular
catheters in general and are the focus of this discussion.
Thrombosis is of particular concern in many patients that warrant a jugular catheter.
These patients are often critically ill and suffer from more than one condition. The
potential for jugular vein thrombosis is increased in patients with immune-mediated
disease, sepsis, or pancreatitis (Waddell 2002). Much consideration is needed to weigh
the risks and the benefits associated with jugular catheter placement in these patients.
Patients with coagulation disorders are at high risk for developing complications with
placement of central lines. It is not recommended to place these catheters in animals
that have severe coagulopathies in the event that hemorrhage occurs and is not com-
pressible. If the animal's coagulation capabilities are not severely diminished, it may be
necessary to risk placement of a central line due to the severity of the animal's other
clinical signs. Central lines should be placed in a location where compression of the
vessel is possible. In the event that the catheter site undergoes some degree of bleeding,
the technician should be able to manage the blood loss if the site is accessible. Placement
of a jugular catheter is safer if carried out at a more cranial location rather than access-
ing the vessel farther down near the thoracic inlet.
Multilumen central lines may develop kinks at the site of insertion if the catheter hub
and wings are not secured in line with the catheter. Difficulty obtaining blood samples
is a relatively frequent occurrence with central lines. Some catheters sample with ease
from one port and not at all from another. One can speculate this difficulty is related
to catheter position and that it is possible for a port to butt against a valve or vessel
wall, preventing the user from obtaining a blood sample.
Central lines often provide two or more separate lumens within the catheter. Patients
can receive fluids through one lumen and have the additional port(s) available for sam-
pling or administration of medications. These extra ports are usually maintained with
a heparin lock, which is achieved by flushing the Luer adapter with heparinized saline
at a concentration of 1 IU/mL. The flush is administered every 4 hours as well as after
administration of medications or withdrawal of blood samples. The port is clamped
 after the flush, and the heparin helps prevent formation of a blood clot. In some cases,
a blood clot forms within the lumen of an unused port and causes an obstruction. The
technician is unable to flush the port if this occurs. Once the port is obstructed, it is no
longer useful and can be labeled as such to save time. The catheter does not need to be
removed or replaced if a superfluous port becomes obstructed. As long as the catheter
provides adequate IV access and shows no signs of irritation, it can be left in place.
Suturing the catheter in place presents a challenge to the technician. Mild misdirection
of the distal catheter and fluid lines may allow movement of the catheter. Sutures that
are excessively tight will cause the patient discomfort. If the sutures are not snug enough,
however, the catheter may move in and out of the patient's skin. This motion can lead
to introduction of bacteria to the vessel resulting in a higher potential for infection
(Spencer 1982).
Any movement of the catheter within the vessel also increases the risk of phlebitis
Because central lines are located in major vessels, the occurrence of phlebitis or throm-
bosis imparts more severe consequences when related to these catheters than with other
Chapter 7: Complications of Fluid Therapy 139
peripherally placed cannulas. Jugular thrombosis, obstruction of the jugular vein by a
blood clot, is a complication associated with jugular catheters. Patients with jugular
thrombosis display a hardened ropy jugular vein that is sometimes warmer than normal
to the touch. Obstruction of the jugular vein can lead to facial swelling (edema), nasal
congestion, and dyspnea (Tan 2003).
Nursingconsiderations
Daily evaluation of catheter bandages is a critical part of patient monitoring. Its impor-
tance should not be forgotten. Many patients present mildly or markedly dehydrated.
It is at this juncture that catheter bandages are most often placed. Within several hours
of initiation of fluid therapy, it is not uncommon to observe signs of swelling in the
tissues proximal and distal to peripheral catheter bandages. In some instances, this
swelling is not associated with infection but rather is evidence that a bandage suitable
 a j sa o pan l    mo si d no  
cellular space and tissues, and at times, bandage changes are needed to accommodate
this expansion. Evaluation of the patient's toes and proximal limb is necessary to ensure
the tissue is not expanding over the edges of the bandage.
Complications Associated with Fluid Choice
Selection of fluid type should be made with consideration given to an individual patient's
specific needs. Illness causes a wide range of alterations in an animal's metabolic status
 and body fluid composition. Selection of a fluid that is inappropriate for a given patient
can contribute to worsening of the condition and, in extreme cases, patient death.
Acidosis and afkafosis
An in-depth discussion of blood gases, acidosis, and alkalosis is beyond the scope of
this text. However, to discuss arguments in favor of one fluid choice over another, it is
necessary to have a basic awareness of these principles.
pH is the term used to describe the degree to which the blood is alkaline or acidic.
Changes in pH are affected by hydrogen ions, carbon dioxide, bicarbonate (HCOs), and
electrolytes. Normal pH for canine and feline patients ranges between 7.35 and 7.45.
 Deviation below this range is representative of an acidemic state, whereas deviation
above this range is representative of an alkalemic state. In sickness, animals often have
a pH that departs from normal range. This departure can be the result of a primary
 cause or a combination of the primary cause and the body's reaction to this cause.
Several mechanisms within the body are responsible for maintaining balance between
acids and bases. To simplify this discussion, the focus here is limited to the lungs and
the kidneys.
Respiration contributes to the maintenance of proper pH by removing carbon dioxide,
which is an acidifying component, from the animal's blood. Respiratory failure can lead
to an increase in CO2, leaving an increased acid component and thereby decreasing the
pH of the animal's blood. The opposite is also true. If an animal has an increased respi-
ratory rate, an increased amount of CO2 is exchanged in the lungs and removed from
140Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 7.1Common Causes of Acid Base Disturbances
Metabolic acidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis
 Ethylene glycol toxicity
Sepsis
 Renal failure
Poor perfusion
 Metabolic alkalosis
Hypoxia
Gastric vomiting
Severe hypokalemia
 Pyloric obstruction
 Hyperadrenocorticism
Respiratory acidosis
Laryngeal paralysis
Upper airway obstruction
Heatstroke
Neuromuscular diseases (tetanus, botulism, polyradiculoneuritis
Pleural effusion
Pneumonia
Respiratory alkalosis
Hyperventilation
Heatstroke
Pneumonia
the blood. In this case, a diminished acid component is left and the pH of the blood
increases. This is an extreme simplification of this process. These two conditions are
respectively named respiratory acidosis and respiratory alkalosis.
The kidneys also play a role in maintaining acid base balance. The lungs elicit changes
in acid-base balance that are affected within minutes, whereas the kidneys elicit a slower
change.
 Bicarbonate is an ion found in the blood and represents the primary base component
found in the plasma. Bicarbonate ions are conserved by the kidneys and returned to the
 blood depending on the hydrogen ion concentration. This is the main contribution of
the kidneys to maintaining acid-base balance
In times of illness, symptoms such as vomiting, diarrhea, fever, and anorexia can
cause alterations in concentrations of various ions found in blood. Where blood gas
analysis is available, it is prudent to evaluate a patient's acid-base balance before initiat-
ing fluid therapy.
 Fluids used to treat veterinary patients are often categorized with respect to their
d  n  si      s
status before initiating fluid therapy so that the ill effects of administering an inappro-
priate solution are avoided. Table 7.1 summarizes the common causes of acid-base
disturbances.
Fluid considerations
The fluid therapy prescription is not determined by the technician. It is the decision of the
 primary care clinician, and fluids are selected with specific goals in mind. The technician
is often responsible for initiating the delivery of these fluids, and knowledge surrounding
why specific selections are made can assist the technician in patient monitoring.
Chapter 7: Complications of Fluid Therapy 141
Crystalloid solutions are fluids frequently used in veterinary practice. Their constitu-
tion is mainly water mixed with sodium or glucose. These solutions are available with
a variety of different electrolyte concentrations. Administration of crystalloids is appro-
priate in many clinical settings. These solutions equilibrate relatively soon after admin-
istration and redistribute throughout the interstitial and intracellular compartments.
Different therapeutic goals may be achieved through the use of crystalloid solutions
including replacement of fluid losses and provision of maintenance fluid needs.
Crystalloid solutions are categorized as either replacement solutions or maintenance
solutions. Within these categories, fluids are further divided into acidifying solutions
and alkalinizing solutions. Attention to these details contributes to appropriate fluid
choices for patients receiving IV therapy.
Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) is an acidifying crystalloid solution. The pH of 0.9%NaCl
is roughly 5.5; the same is true of LRS.
Alkalinizing solutions contain a component that is metabolized to HCOg. LRS,
Plasma-Lyte A, and Normosol R are examples of alkalinizing solutions.
Fluid selection is made with consideration to the pH of a solution, its acidifying/
 alkalinizing properties, its electrolyte composition, and its propensity for redistribution.
Choice of an acidifying solution can be a great detriment to a patient suffering from
metabolic acidosis. In contrast, using an alkalinizing solution such as LRS to treat a
patient with severe liver disease is counterintuitive because the lactate within the solu-
tion is metabolized by the liver. LRS also contains calcium. As such, it is not a suitable
fluid to pair with blood products and may not be an appropriate choice for a hypercal-
cemic patient.
Glucose-containing solutions are used with caution in veterinary patients. The glucose
in the solution is metabolized by the body leaving free water to be redistributed to the
body water compartments. This free water can lead to complications in patients that
cannot tolerate the additional volume, such as patients suffering from heart failure
Glucose-containing solutions also pose a greater risk than non-glucose-containing
solutions where there is potential for extravascular administration. Extravasation of
glucose solutions can lead to pain and swelling surrounding the catheter site.
Many patients that present to the veterinary hospital with severe illness are acidemic
as a result of their disease. Alkalinizing solutions are frequently used at the onset of
fluid therapy and help to restore appropriate acid-base balance. Plasma-Lyte A, Plasma-
Lyte 148, and Normosol R are alkalinizing solutions. Acidifying solutions are used with
less frequency, the most common being 0.9% sodium chloride (NaCl) (Mathews 1998).
Although acidosis and alkalosis are not the only conditions treated by fluid therapy, it
is good practice to consider acid-base balance when making fluid selections.
Coffoids
Colloids are fluids that contain large particles. The size of these particles makes it dif-
ficult for the colloids to leave the vasculature. As the colloids stay within the vascular
space, the large particles exert a force that attracts water; colloids succeed in maintain-
ing or drawing water into the vasculature.
 Both synthetic and natural colloids are used in veterinary patients. Plasma and fresh
frozen plasma are natural colloids. They are blood products and as such require special
storage protocols and may be challenging to obtain. However, their use in the critical
      d       s
142Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
conditions. Synthetic colloids are more easily stored and have less potential than natural
 colloids for causing an undesirable reaction in the patient.
Colloids help increase the intravascular volume by attracting water. Concurrent
administration of colloids and crystalloids can quickly replenish the intravascular volume
of a cardiovascularly compromised patient. The colloids also maintain the crystalloids
within the vasculature for a longer period of time than they would normally remain.
As with any type of fluid administered to the veterinary patient, complications may
arise if colloids are not used judiciously. Administration of colloids with crystalloids
requires the volume of crystalloids to be reduced. Failing to reduce crystalloid volume
may cause the pressure exerted by water molecules within the vasculature to exceed
normal levels. This pressure is termed intravascular bydrostatic pressure and is the force
exerted by water in an outward direction (leaving the vasculature). The intravascular
hydrostatic pressure is increased due to the volume of crystalloids maintained in the
vascular space. The increase in pressure leads to an increase in filtration at the level of
the capillaries and subsequently to water shifting out of the vasculature and into the
interstitium. Once in the interstitium the excess fluid leads to interstitial edema. Edema
can be the result of overadministration of crystalloids in conjunction with colloids, but
it can also be the result of overadministration of crystalloids alone.
The formation of edema within the interstitial space causes changes in cell structure
within the tissues. Body water moves differently as a result, and pitting edema is the
undesirable outcome. When the application of gentle pressure on a peripheral limb leaves
an indent in the patient's skin that is slow to disappear, the patient has pitting edema.
Synthetic colloids have been reported to cause minor changes in coagulation times.
To avoid serious complications associated with synthetic colloids, these products should
be avoided in patients with preexisting coagulopathies (Mathews 2006a).
Overadministration of fluids
The science of fluid therapy is not exact. Upon presentation of emergency and critical
care patients, the clinician puts forth his or her best effort in estimating the degree to
which the animal is dehydrated or the volume of blood that has been lost. Every effort
is made to replace the volume needed to restore the animal to health. In some cases, the
volume delivered to the patient is overestimated and fluid therapy leads to overhydra-
tion. Effective monitoring reduces the chances of overhydration and alerts the medical
team promptly if early signs of overhydration are detected. Patient monitoring can also
help evaluate whether fluid therapy is yielding an appropriate response from the animal
and help guide potential changes in the therapeutic plan.
Many clinical signs are associated with overadministration of fluids. Some of these
signs are subtle, such as a slight increase in respiratory rate, pulmonary edema, patient
 restlessness, an increase in heart rate, or an increase in urine output. Other symptoms
of fluid overload, such as chemosis, interstitial or peripheral edema, serous nasal dis-
 charge, and vomiting and diarrhea, are more obvious and rarely missed during patient
evaluation.
Chemosis
Edematous patients may display conjunctiva that appear swollen and pronounced.
The conjunctiva themselves are edematous, a condition that may arise with
Chapter 7: Complications of Fluid Therapy143
overadministration of fluids. This condition is referred to as chemosis and is one of the
later signs of overadministration of fluids to appear (Mathews 2006b).
Serous nasal discharge
Many canine patients have a slight serous discharge from their nose on a regular basis
Appearance of new discharge or a noticeable increase from normal volume can indicate
that the patient has received more fluids than it can manage. Close observation of any
patient with serous nasal discharge is warranted.
Periphera! (interstitial) edema
Overadministration of fluids can cause an increase in the intravascular hydrostatic pres-
sure. This increase in pressure results in larger volumes of fluid being filtered at the level
of the capillaries. Subsequently, fluid shifts out of the intravascular compartment and
moves into the interstitial space. The excess of fluid in the interstitial space is known as
interstitial edema and is easily detected in a variety of locations on the animal. Recall
that the technician can more easily distinguish between what is normal and what is
edematous for a given patient if she or he has personally evaluated the patient before
the onset of therapy.
 The region surrounding the hock is an ideal area for assessment of edema. Because
this area typically carries little excess tissue or fat, the inability to locate landmarks such
as the lateral saphenous vein, the tendon located on the caudal aspect of the limb (Achil-
les tendon), or the beginning of the muscle bed cranial to the hock is attributed to the
presence of interstitial edema.
 Canine patients may develop edema around the lower portion of their head and neck,
the area often referred to as jowls. In the edematous patient, this area becomes pendu-
lous and quite mobile.
Puimonary edema
Pulmonary edema is a serious complication associated with fluid therapy (Fig. 7.1). If
the technician is not evaluating respiratory rate and ausculting lung sounds throughout
patient treatment, it is possible to miss the signs associated with pulmonary edema
because their onset may be subtle.
Fluid therapy causes an increase in the pressure caused by water within the pulmonary
interstitium (hydrostatic pressure). As this occurs, fluid leaks from the interstitium into
the alveoli causing pulmonary edema. Clinical signs encountered with pulmonary edema
include an increased respiratory rate, productive cough with foamy and/or bloody
sputum, decreased oxygen saturation, and tachycardia. Pulmonary edema is a risk for
any patient receiving fluid therapy; however, animals that have diseases such as preexist-
ing inflammatory conditions, pancreatitis, or sepsis are at greater risk for developing
this complication (Mathews 2006b).
Pleural effusion
Pleural effusion is the abnormal accumulation of fluid within the pleural space (Figs
7.2 and 7.3). Under normal circumstances, a small amount of fluid is present within the
144Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 7.1. Lateral thoracic radiograph demonstrates pulmonary edema.
Figure 7.2. Thoracic radiograph demonstrates pleural effusion.
pleural space. Its function is to lubricate the surfaces of the visceral and parietal pleurae
 and reduce friction throughout the motions of respiration.
When excess fluid accumulates within this cavity, it occupies the potential space
routinely used during respiration. It becomes increasingly difficult for the animal to
expand its lungs to their fullest extent. The result is a respiratory pattern that is rapid
and shallow. Oxygenation is compromised, and the patient experiences increasing levels
of respiratory distress.
Common causes of pleural effusion are decreased oncotic pressure, increased intra-
vascular hydrostatic pressure, and inflammatory processes. Overadministration of fluids
contributes to an increase in hydrostatic pressure and can lead to pulmonary effusion
if left untreated. In addition, a patient with pulmonary edema as a result of overhydra-
tion is also at risk for developing pleural effusion (Mathews 2006b). Fluid from the
Chapter 7: Complications of Fluid Therapy145
Figure 7.3. Thoracic radiograph demonstrates pleural effusion. Note the scalloped look of the right side of
the lung outline due to the fluid surrounding the lungs.
pulmonary edema is able to shift across the pleural membrane (visceral pleura) and
move into the pleural space causing it to become an effusion.
Chapter Summary
The potential for complications associated with fluid therapy is ever present. Awareness
of this potential coupled with diligent patient monitoring contributes to a reduction in
the risk of development of complications associated with fluid therapy.
When fluid therapy is initiated, consideration must be given to the health status of
the patient, the purpose of the catheter placement, and the expectations for length of
catheter dwell and fluid administration. Appropriate selection of catheter type and loca-
tion plays an important role in the safety of fluid delivery.
Strict aseptic technique must be followed during placement of any catheter. Fluid
administration sets, fluid bags, and fluid additives must be handled with the same degree
of cleanliness because introduction of bacteria at any level is detrimental to patient health
146Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Securing and bandaging of catheters is an important role carried out by the techni-
cian. Catheter movement within the vessel can cause mild to marked damage to the
vessel wall. Trauma to the vessel leads to inflammation within the vessel, also known
as phlebitis. The occurrence of phlebitis is also influenced by other catheter character-
istics. Catheter material, length, and bore size are also associated with an increased risk
of phlebitis.
Thromboembolism, catheter embolism, and air embolisms involve the abnormal pres-
ence of each of these substances within the vessel. They are mobile within the vasculature
and can cause severe complications.
Catheter bandages should be evaluated daily to ensure that patient rehydration has
not led to swelling of the limb surrounding the bandage.
Central lines are extremely useful tools in critical care medicine. As with any other
form of IV therapy, strict aseptic technique is mandatory during placement of central
lines as well as during any form of handling throughout their use. Common compli-
cations associated with these catheters included kinks, blood clots within one or
several lumens, and failure to sample. Placement of jugular catheters requires selec-
tion of a site that is easily compressible should bleeding exceed expectations during
placement.
Movement of the catheter within the jugular vein can lead to inflammation and
obstruction of the vessel. Venous obstruction at this location is accompanied by clinical
signs such as facial swelling/edema, nasal congestion, and possibly dyspnea.
 Fluid selection is an important part of therapy and can be associated with a variety
of complications. Fluids should be chosen with the goal of selecting a fluid type that is
appropriate for each individual patient. Electrolyte content, pH, rate of redistribution,
and goals of therapy (replacement vs. maintenance) are all characteristics that should
be considered during fluid choice. Selection of inappropriate fluids can lead to a deterio-
ration of the patient's condition.
 Overadministration of fluid therapy is an unfortunate complication of fluid therapy.
Despite the efforts of the medical team, hydration estimates can be overzealous, and
latent preexisting conditions can remain undetected in newly admitted patients. Over-
administration of fluids can lead to the clinical signs listed in Table 7.2. Note that
individual patients may display one or several of these clinical signs. Investigation of
even the slightest change is warranted to allow prompt treatment of fluid overload.
Table 7.2Clinical Signs Associated with Fluid Overload
● Increased respiratory rate
●Restlessness
· Coughing
● Peripheral edema
● Pulmonary edema
· Chemosis
● Serous nasal discharge
·Vomiting
● Diarrhea
● Pleural effusion
Chapter 7: Complications of Fluid Therapy147
Review Questions
1. Phlebitis refers to
a. A skin irritation cause by clippers
b. Excessive bleeding from the catheter site
c. Normal skin flora
d. Inflammation of a blood vessel
2. A thromboembolism is a
that can cause an obstruction anywhere in
the vasculature.
3. Central lines may be contraindicated in which of the following patients?
a. Patients with diabetes
b. Patients with airway disease
c. Coagulopathic patients
d. Anemic patients
4. List three possible clinical signs associated with overadministration of fluids.
5. Assessing the area surrounding a patient's hock is helpful in identifying
which complication associated with fluid therapy?
Answers to the review questions can be found on page 224 in the Appendix.The review
questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley.com!
goldonohoenursing.
Further Reading
Burrows, C. 1982. Inadequate skin preparation as a cause of intravenous catheter-
related infection in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:747-749.
Hughes, D., & A. Boag. 2006. Fluid therapy with macromolecular plasma volume
expanders. In S. DiBartola, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small
Animal Practice, 621-634. St. Louis: Saunders.
Maki, D., and M. Ringer. 1991. Risk factors for infusion-related phlebitis with small
peripheral venous catheters. Ann Intern Med. 114:845-854.
Marsh-Ng, M., D. Burney, and J. Garcia. 2007. Surveillance of infections associated
with intravenous catheters in dogs and cats in an ICU. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
43:13-20.
 Mathews, K. 1998. The various types of parenteral fluids and their indications. Vet Clin
North Am 28:483-513.
Mathews, K. 2006a. Fluid therapy: non-hemorrhage. In Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care Manual, 347-372. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Mathews, K. 2006b. Monitoring fluid therapy and complications of fluid therapy. In S.
DiBartola, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice,
377-391. St. Louis: Saunders.
Mazzaferro, E. 2008. Complications of fluid therapy. Vet Clin Small Anim Pract
38:607-619.
148Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Rudloff, E., and R. Kirby. 2009. Fluid resuscitation and the trauma patient. Vet Clin
NorthAm 38:645-652.
Spencer, K. 1982. Intravenous catheters. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
12:533-543.
Tan, R., A. Dart, and B. Dowling. 2003. Catheters: a review of the selection, utilization
and complications of catheters for peripheral venous access. Aust Vet J 81:136-139.
Waddell, L. 2002. Advanced vascular access options. Proceedings of American College
of Veterinary Internal Medicine Conference.
FluidTypes
Choosing a suitable fluid type for intravenous (IV) therapy is a task that deserves much
thought. The needs of individual patients differ, and there is not one single fluid type
suitable for all veterinary patients. Selection of appropriate fluids is the responsibility
of the attending clinician. However, it is prudent for the technician to have a basic
understanding of the differences in the fluids available for therapeutic use.
Fluids are divided into the categories of crystalloids and colloids. The colloids can
be further divided into synthetic colloids and natural colloids.
Crystalloids
Crystalloids are the most commonly used type of fluid in veterinary practice. These
solutions contain varying degrees of sugar or salt. They consist of relatively small low
molecular weight particles and as such are not restricted in their movement throughout
body water compartments.
Recall that oncotic pressure is the force exerted by proteins within the vasculature
that draw water from the extravascular space into the vascular space. Osmotic pressure
is the pressure generated by the contents of the interstitium and applies a force from
the interstitium into the blood vessel. Finally, hydrostatic pressure is the force exerted
by particles within the vasculature that push out of the vessel.
Crystalloids do not contribute to oncotic pressure, but they do contribute to osmotic
pressure. This is partially due to the fact that crystalloid administration has its most
noticeable effects in the interstitial space. Crystalloids that are delivered IV do not
remain in the intra vascular space indefinitely. Rather, they cross the vascular membrane
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
149
150Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
RC1n
0m
njectuonUsCNg
Piasma-Lyto@A
0.9%USP.In
NaCi
Figure 8.1. Plasma-Lyte A, lactated Ringer solution, and 0.9% sodium chloride are common selections for
replacement solutions.
and enter the interstitial compartment. This happens relatively quickly; within approxi-
mately 1 to 2 hours of administration (Rudloff 2001). By this time, most of the crystal-
loids have left the intravascular space. It is estimated that 1 hour after IV delivery of
crystalloids, only 20%-25 % of the volume administered remains within the vasculature
(Silverstein 2009).
Replacement crystaffoids
Crystalloid fluids can be subdivided into the categories of maintenance solution or
replacement solution. Replacement solutions are the first choice of crystalloids for
fluids are isotonic and have a sodium concentration similar to that of the extracellular
fluid.
 Replacement crystalloid solutions also contain components that affect the pH of body
water. Acetate and lactate are two examples of buffers found in replacement crystalloid
solutions. Lactate is metabolized by the patient's liver to form bicarbonate. Bicarbonate's
influence raises the pH of the blood. The presence of buffers makes Plasma-Lyte A (PLA),
Normosol R, and lactated Ringer solution (LRS) excellent choices for intravascular
volume support in emergency and critical care patients. The buffers found in these
replacement fluids contribute to the fluids’ alkalinizing capability. The pH range for
PLA, Normosol R, and LRS is from 6.5 to 7.4 (Mathews 2006a). These fluids also
contain electrolytes, which are important considerations for patients needing volume
resuscitation. Electrolytes are lost in varying quantities depending on the nature of the
illness affecting the patient. On the contrary, some diseases cause elevations in certain
electrolytes, another important consideration during fluid selection because the clinician
may wish to avoid increasing an already elevated electrolyte value.
Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) is also a replacement solution but does not contain any
buffers or electrolytes other than sodium and chloride. The absence of buffers means
that 0.9% NaCl is considered an acidifying solution (Moore 2003). The pH of 0.9%
Chapter 8: Fluid Types151
JB1314
NaCI 0.45%
POTONIC/HYPOTONIQUE
SIWENOUSFLUIDANDELECTROLYTE
ORINECTIONUSP-qS
OURINUECTIONUSR-QS
UEEEANDINSPECTBAG/SEEDIRECTIONSFORUSE
STNOTBEUSED INSERIES CONNECTIONS/STORE
8CTO30°C
HENTIONS USAGE UNIQUE/ JETER PORTION
ARER ENTRE15CET30°C
?
Baxter
SANS LATEXFREE
saugaONL4Z3Y4 870-19
Figure 8.2. This 0.45% sodium chloride is an example of a maintenance solution.
NaCl is 5.0. Normal saline is often the fluid of choice in patients with hyponatremia or
 in patients whose profuse vomiting has led to a metabolic alkalosis. Animals suffering
from a pyloric obstruction often present to the hospital with a profound hypochloremia.
In this instance, 0.9% NaCl may be the replacement crystalloid of choice to reestablish
appropriate chloride levels (Metheny 1992).
Maintenance crystalloids
Maintenance crystalloids contain less sodium than replacement fluids (Fig. 8.2). The
concentration of sodium is approximately half that of the plasma ( Rudloff 2001). Hos-
pitalized animals often fail to consume an adequate volume of water via eating or
drinking to maintain their hydration and overall volume of body water. After establish-
ing that the patient's hydration and vascular volume are within normal limits, it is often
necessary to maintain this status via continued fluid therapy. Maintenance fluids are
primarily used in hospitalized animals to prevent loss of body water and electrolytes
when the animal is not inclined to maintain these on their own. It is not uncommon for
replacement crystalloids to be used for maintenance of hydration status in patients
152Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
whose illness causes ongoing losses in excess of those associated with normal metabolic
function.
Approximately an hour after IV administration, -10% of maintenance crystalloids
remain within the vasculature. For this reason, maintenance crystalloids are rarely used
for replacement of intravascular volume. They are most often given at a slower rate
with a goal of replenishing the extravascular spaces. The primary reason for using
maintenance crystalloids is that the fluids equilibrate throughout the body water com-
partments, partially replenishing the intravascular and interstitial spaces, and more
adequately replenishing the intracellular space. As such, these fluids are indicated in
 no rn iq sss   s    a in sd
tain their body water balance via normal means.
Maintenance crystalloids are characterized by a low sodium concentration and a low
chloride concentration. These fluids also contain potassium and in some examples
contain dextrose as well. Maintenance fluids are hypotonic, whereas replacement fluids
are isotonic. For this reason, maintenance fluids should not be administered at extremely
high rates over short periods of time (as a bolus). Bolus administration of maintenance
crystalloids can lead to complications such as cerebral edema (Silverstein 2009).
Examples of maintenance crystalloid solutions are 0.45% NaCl, Normosol M, and
Plasmalyte 56.
Hypertonic saline
Hypertonic saline (HTS) is a crystalloid solution used for rapid volume expansion (Fig.
8.3). The term bypertonic refers to the fact that its concentration of sodium and chloride
is greater than that of normal saline (0.9% NaCl). This also means that its concentra-
tions of Nat and Cl are greater than that of plasma.
HTS replenishes the intravascular space by drawing body water from the interstitium
and intracellular space into the vasculature. In so doing, the vascular space is quickly
replenished and fluid is held within the space by the hypertonicity of the solution for a
short time. The numerous sodium particles eventually diffuse out of the vascular space,
Figure 8.3.Hypertonic saline acts quickly to draw fluid into the intravascular space.
Chapter 8: Fluid Types153
and the hypertonic effects of the HTS cease to exist. The diffusion of sodium out of the
vasculature occurs approximately 30 minutes after infusion, and as such, the effects of
HTS are short lived.
HTS is an excellent fluid choice for the treatment of severe hypovolemic shock;
however, its use must be carried out with caution. HTS is not appropriate for use in
patients that are severely dehydrated. These patients do not have adequate body water
stores in their intracellular and interstitial spaces to permit fluid to shift safely out of
 these compartments. To avoid causing intracellular dehydration, it is advisable to admin-
ister HTS and follow administration with a crystalloid solution to maintain the body
water volume in the interstitial and intracellular compartments.
Patients with cardiac disease are also at increased risk of complications if HTS is used
during their therapy. An animal whose heart is not functioning at a normal healthy
capacity is unlikely to be able to tolerate the rapid increase in intravascular volume
associated with the administration of HTS
HTS should not be used in patients that are hypernatremic or at high risk for devel-
oping hypernatremia. Because the infusion itself raises serum sodium levels, it is of
particular danger in patients already manifesting this condition.
With illness involving uncontrolled hemorrhage, there is much debate regarding the
benefits of HTS. Studies have shown that low-volume resuscitation is associated with
positive outcome in patients suffering from severe trauma and hemorrhage. In addition,
it appears that the use of hypertonic saline is an appropriate way to achieve low-volume
resuscitation and that the benefits of its use are plentiful.
When compared with LRS, the volume of HTS required to augment intravascular
volume is much smaller, meaning that infusion times are shorter (Mensack 2008). HTS
has also demonstrated a protective relationship with red blood cells. In trauma patients,
various factors combine to cause red blood cells (RBCs) to become less flexible than
normal. When these cells lose their flexibility, they also lose the ability to pass through
semipermeable membranes with their normal ease. HTS has been shown to contribute
to the maintenance of RBC flexibility, a trait associated with more positive outcomes
postresuscitation (Homma et al. 2005).
HTS has also been reported to protect against acute lung injury, contribute to a
decrease in acute gut injury, avoid activation of inflammatory processes, and decrease
intracranial pressure (Homma et al. 2005; Sheikh et al. 1996).
Nursing considerations
Administration of hypertonic saline solution requires continuous monitoring and nursing
care. Blood pressure, heart rate, and electrocardiogram should be monitored throughout
administration. Extremely rapid infusion of HTS may cause hypotension and bradycar-
dia (Mensack 2008). Judicious use of this crystalloid fluid improves its safety.
Colloids
In contrast to crystalloid fluids, colloids are fluids that contain large molecular weight
particles. When administered into the intravascular space colloids remain, whereas
crystalloids eventually move into other compartments. This is because the colloid
154Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
molecules are larger in size than the healthy capillary pores. An exception to this rule
occurs when a patient's endothelium is compromised and its capillaries develop leaks
(e.g., during sepsis, severe trauma, or burn injuries). An additional difference between
crystalloids and colloids is that colloids contribute to oncotic pressure, whereas crystal-
loids do not (Bateman 2003). As such, colloids offer far greater vascular volume expan-
sion per volume administered than crystalloids do.
 In health, colloids delivered into the vasculature not only hold fluid within this space,
but they also draw fluid from other compartments. Patients suffering from loss of body
water from the interstitial and intracellular compartments will be further compromised
by the fluid shift caused by colloid administration. For this reason, crystalloids should
be administered alongside colloids. Adjunctive crystalloid administration will help with
volume expansion of the intravascular space but will also replenish the extravascular
spaces.
 The primary effect of colloids is exerted on the intravascular space, and colloids do
not act to replenish the extravascular compartments. Administration of crystalloids in
addition to colloids is recommended for protection of the interstitial and intracellular
compartments.
associated with colloid administration include anaphylactoid reactions, volume over-
load, and in some cases vomiting and hypotension. Colloids must be used with caution
in animals with cardiac disease or renal compromise because vascular volume expansion
is not well tolerated in these patients.
Synthetic colloids
Colloids are divided into the categories of synthetic and natural. Synthetic colloids
are composed of gelatins, dextrans, and hydroxyethyl starches. Some examples of
synthetic colloids are dextran 40, dextran 70, hetastarch, pentastarch, and Oxyglobin
(Fig. 8.4).
Figure 8.4. PENTASPAN is an example of a synthetic colloid
Chapter 8: Fluid Types155
Hetastarch
Hetastarch particles have a molecular weight that exceeds dextrans. These large particles
remain in the patient's plasma for -36 hours. Negative side effects of hetastarch admin-
istration are minimal but do exist. Some animals have been reported to experience
allergic reactions post administration of hetastarch (Center 2006). Rapid bolus admin-
istration may cause histamine release in feline patients. This reaction is avoidable in
most cases if the hetastarch administration is achieved over a period of 15 to 20 minutes.
  ap  aa   p s  sis  s
 in coagulation. This compromise has not been associated with spontaneous or clinically
significant bleeding.
Dextrans
Dextran 40 and dextran 70 contain large molecular weight particles compared with
crystalloids but smaller than those found in hetastarch. In situations requiring rapid
vascular volume expansion, dextran 70 is the more popular choice of the two. This is
because its particles (molecular weight of 70 Da) exert a greater attractive force on body
water than those contained in dextran 40 (4o Da).
Dextrans have a shorter life in the patient's plasma than hetastarch molecules. An
additional drawback to these products is that they interact with RBCs in such a way
that difficulty may arise with future cross matches of the patient's blood. If it is likely
that the patient may need transfusion of blood products throughout its therapy, it is
advisable to draw blood for typing before administration of Dextran solutions. Dextrans
also interact with platelets, causing minor prolongation of coagulation times (Bateman
2003). Similar to hetastarch, anaphylactic reactions may arise with the use of dextrans
(Center 2006).
Pentastarch
One of the primary advantages to pentastarch is its association with fewer effects on
coagulation than the other synthetic colloids. It has the same beneficial effects as hetas-
tarch, interferes less with platelet function, and is eliminated more quickly. After 24
hours, only 10% of the total volume infused remains in the patient's plasma. As with
the other synthetic colloids, its use is not recommended in patients with cardiac or renal
compromise. These patients are unable to manage the sudden increase in intravascular
volume.
Oxyglobin
Oxyglobin falls into the subcategory of hemoglobin-based oxygen-carrying fluids. Oxy-
globin is a sterile solution for IV use. It is a hemoglobin-based product carried in a
balanced solution of salt. Its primary use is for the treatment of anemia. Oxyglobin
exerts effects similar to the other synthetic colloids in terms of vascular volume replace-
ment. It also provides additional oxygen-carrying capacity through its increased con-
centration of hemoglobin. Its administration effectively expands plasma volume. In some
            
leading to volume overload (Bateman 2003). Oxyglobin also causes vasoconstriction
and can cause increases in blood pressure. Extreme care during selection of volume and
rate for IV delivery of this product increase its margin of safety.
156Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
ERINARYTEACHINGHOSPITAL
NITE
DATECOL
ATEEXI
AG SIZ
PECIES/B
Figure 8.5. Fresh frozen plasma is a natural colloid. It is helpful to know the recipient's blood type before
administration of any blood product.
 Because Oxyglobin contains no RBCs, it is not necessary to perform any type of cross 
match before its administration. An additional benefit to this product is that it may be
stored at room temperature and has a fairly lengthy shelf life (3 years).
A disadvantage of Oxyglobin is that once it has been administered, it is diffcult to
interpret various laboratory results for the recipient. Medical personnel may notice a
discoloration of the patient's skin, urine, mucous membranes, and/or sclera with use of
this product. None of these changes have been reported to be permanent. Oxyglobin
remains in the patient's circulation for approximately 24 hours.
Negative side effects associated with the use of Oxyglobin include vomiting and
melena, but these complications are rare. At time of print, Oxyglobin is unavailable.
Natural coffoids and blood products
Natural colloids are high molecular weight solutions derived from species-specific
donors. These include frozen or stored plasma (SP), fresh frozen plasma (FFP), whole
blood (WB), and human serum albumin (HSA), which is available in different concen-
trations (Fig. 8.5). Natural colloids have a similar effect to synthetic colloids in that
they increase intravascular volume and exert more lasting effects on this compartment
than crystalloid fluids. In addition, natural colloids such as fresh WB and FFP contain
Chapter 8: Fluid Types157
clotting factors that may be beneficial to patients whose coagulation abilities are com-
  od  so n  a s n  sd
support because smaller volumes achieve similar effects to large volume crystalloid
administration. Natural colloids are particularly useful in resuscitation efforts in patients
that have suffered massive trauma and significant loss of blood volume.
A number of drawbacks are associated with the use of natural colloids, but these are
far outweighed by the benefits. Caution should be exercised using any of the natural
colloids because they are all components of species specific blood. As such, it is possible
for patients to experience anaphylactoid reactions during or after administration.
Fresh frozen plasma
FFP is obtained by separating components of WB. Once blood has been collected,
plasma may be separated from the cellular portion by centrifugation. The blood is cen-
trifuged at high speed, and the plasma is withdrawn and stored separately. If the plasma
is separated and frozen within 6 hours of collection, it is considered FFP (Brooks 2003),
FFP is stored at very low temperatures (-20°C) for up to 1 year.
FFP is often used in patients with coagulopathies. It may be used in animals with
anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity, vitamin K deficiency, hepatic disease, von Willebrand
factor deficiency, or disseminated intravascular coagulation. In recent years, FFP has
 been a popular component of treatment for pancreatitis. Despite this trend, it has yet
to be proven that FFP is beneficial for these patients.
Although FFP contains a significant amount of proteins, it is not the most effective
way to raise protein levels in a hypoproteinemic patient.
Albumin is one of the most important proteins found in plasma. It represents 50%
 of total plasma protein and generates most of the plasma's oncotic pressure (Trow
et al. 2008). Decreased plasma protein levels can have considerable side effects in
 patients already compromised by illness.
FFP may be used as an initial means of diminishing the negative side effects of hypo-
proteinemia, but the volume required to raise protein levels significantly renders it an
inefficient method of treating this condition. Canine plasma contains 25 to 30g of
albumin per liter (Cohn et al. 2007). To improve albumin concentration in hypoalbu-
minemic patients, it is recommended to administer 6 to 10 mL/kg FFP every 8 hours.
This is thought to raise albumin levels by 0.5g/dL (Logan et al. 2001). In a 25-kg
canine patient, this would require administration of 250mL FFP three times daily.
 Although FFP is effective at decreasing the side effects of hypoproteinemia, such as
peripheral edema, it is a costly means of doing so. In addition, administration of such
large volumes of FFP may exhaust available supplies and may also pose a risk of volume
overload to the respective patient. Commercially available natural colloids, such as
human serum albumin, may be a more appropriate choice than FFP for treatment of
hypoproteinemia.
Stored plasma
 Stored plasma (SP) is a natural colloid obtained by separating whole blood via centrifu-
gation. In contrast to FFP, SP is not required to be separated and frozen within 6 hours
of collection. The main difference between FFP and SP is the absence of coagulation
factors in SP. SP still contains albumin and globulin, but it does not contain clotting
factors V & VIll, important coagulation components that are present in FFP. FFP is
158Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
relabeled as SP if it is stored beyond the 1-year mark. With lengthy storage, coagulation
factors lose their potency, and the plasma is no longer useful for its hemostatic effects.
SP can be frozen at -18*C for up to 5 years (Wardrop 2004).
Stored plasma is useful in several situations where coagulation factors are not required.
an o ra (ro't> ai sii nd s as m si
with SP (Mathews 2008). With severe protein loss, fluid is able to leak out of the vas-
culature and lead to interstitial edema. Administration of SP supports oncotic pressure
 and draws fluid into the intravascular space. Patients with marked hypoalbuminemia
can also benefit from administration of SP for similar reasons. Animals with leaky capil-
laries are less likely to develop edema with administration of SP. However this product
 must be used with caution because compromised capillaries may also leak large protein
particles and lead to more severe edema. If large proteins leak out of the vascular space,
they still have the capacity to attract water but will do so in the interstitium. Further
accumulation of water in the interstitium further contributes to the formation of edema.
Stored plasma may also be used in conjunction with other blood products. For
example, in animals suffering from whole blood loss, SP may be administered in con-
junction with packed red blood cells (PRBCs) to replenish blood volume. This may be
the only option in clinics where WB is not available. Where SP and PRBCs are available
from different donors, test doses must be administered for each product to determine
which product, if any, has triggered an adverse reaction in the patient.
Human serum albumin
Human serum albumin (HSA) is a colloidal solution suitable for IV administration in
canine veterinary patients. It is derived from human blood obtained from donors in
registered blood donor programs. The serum is separated from the blood cells and
undergoes a rigorous sterilization process. Donors are required to participate in a screen-
ing process within 2 months of their donation. Screening tests include but are not limited
to illnesses such as hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus. Despite
the precautions used during collection of human serum, it is advisable for veterinary
staff to use gloves when handling HSA or preparing for patient administration.
After the serum is sterilized and bottled, it takes on a pale yellow tinge and remains
transparent. It contains approximately 96% albumin (Mazzaferro et al. 2002). HSA is
 a natural colloid, and its particles are larger than those contained in crystalloid solutions.
In addition, the HSA particles are quite uniform, with similar weights and sizes. The
 solution is highly water soluble, and its particles carry a negative charge (Martin 2004).
HSA does not contain clotting factors.
HSA is packaged in bottles and available in quantities of 50, 100, 250, or 500mL.
These volumes are available in different concentrations: 25% for the two smallest
volumes or 5% for the two largest volumes.
The 5% solution contributes an oncotic pressure similar to that of plasma. As such,
it is considered isoncotic and remains in the intravascular space without causing tre-
mendous intercompartmental fluid shifts. The 25 % solution is considered hypertonic to
the plasma and generates an oncotic pull that exceeds that in the normal intravascular
space. The hypertonicity creates an exaggerated pull and draws body water into the
vasculature. One of the benefits encountered with use of the higher concentration of
HSA is that a small volume of this solution generates a large effect. Opinions differ
slightly, but it is generally accepted that administration of 25% HSA draws a volume
of body water between three and five times the volume of HSA administered into the
Chapter 8: Fluid Types159
vascular space (Cohn 2007; Martin 2004). So administration of 100 mL of 25 % solution
generally augments the intravascular volume by approximately 400 mL within -1 hour
of administration.
As with any blood product, benefits and drawbacks are associated with administra-
tion of HSA. One of the major benefits of HSA is that it has a relatively long shelf life;
 oe s aq  soq au '  s ads o sai ss
to 3 years at room temperature. Once the bottle has been spiked for use, it should be
used within 4 hours. The solution remaining in the bottle after 4 hours should be dis-
carded. To facilitate delivery, different concentrations of HSA may be generated by
sterile combination of HSA with 0.9% NaCl or 5% dextrose solutions. Sterile delivery
from the HSA bottle is achieved through use of a vented solution set. Because the bottle
is unable to collapse as the solution leaves, a vent is required to relieve the vacuum or
negative pressure that develops within the botle. A needle through the rubber stopper
is an unsuitable solution because there is no barrier preventing environmental contami-
nants from entering the bottle through the needle hub. Vented solution sets include a
filter that maintains sterility by blocking microparticles from entering the solution via
thevent.
Few drawbacks are associated with the actual product of HSA; however, there are
important clinically relevant drawbacks associated with its administration to the veteri-
nary patient. With respect to the product itself, the main disadvantage is the associated
cost. Cost varies depending on the country of purchase and the product manufacturer
selected, but it is consistently higher than that associated with other natural colloids
Drawbacks associated with administration generally involve adverse reactions from
respective patients. It is important to remember that HSA is a product derived from a
different species, and as such, it is essentially a foreign protein being introduced into
the patient's vascular space. Administration of HSA may lead to side effects such as
hypothermia, hypotension, vomiting, diarrhea, urticaria, and facial swelling. Hypocal-
cemia is a complication also associated with HSA administration caused by the increased
level of albumin suddenly available in circulation. Free calcium binds to albumin; with
more albumin available, there is an increase in the frequency of this reaction. The result
is a decrease in ionized calcium.
There is no way to predict which patients will have severe reactions to HSA, making
continuous monitoring mandatory during infusion. Patients may show signs of anaphy-
laxis after receiving extremely small volumes of HSA (Cohn 2007). In addition, it is
generally recommended not to administer additional HSA transfusions more than 7 days
after the initial infusion because the patient may develop product specific antigens,
predisposing to more severe reactions (Trow et al. 2008). However, a 2005 study
included two patients that received multiple HSA transfusions months apart with no
adverse reactions (Mathews and Barry 2005).
dose of HSA before administration at full transfusion rate. Test doses allow the techni-
 cian to monitor the initial reaction of the patient after only a small volume has been
administered at a relatively slow infusion rate. The technician should perform and record
a patient temperature, pulse, respiration (TPR) before starting the test. Once this is
accomplished, the HSA may be delivered via infusion pump at a rate of 0.25 mL/kg per
hour. This rate is delivered for 15 minutes and then a TPR is repeated. Any significant
changes in any of the measured parameters should be investigated, and the clinician
should be promptly notified. In my experience, it is most common to measure elevations
in the TPR parameters, but the opposite is also possible. If there is any uncertainty with
160Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
respect to whether or not the patient is in the early stages of a transfusion reaction, the
test dose may be repeated and the patient's vitals measured once again. If there are
further changes to the patient's vitals, the clinician may choose to treat the patient with
antihistamines and continue the transfusion or discontinue the transfusion permanently
and find an alternative product.
 Despite all precautions, it is also possible that the patient experience a delayed trans-
fusion reaction. There may be no noticeable change in patient vitals, comfort level, or
demeanor during the transfusion. Reactions have been reported up to 7 days posttrans-
fusion of HSA. These tend to include urticaria, facial edema, and pruritus (Cohn 2007).
In spite of the potential for adverse reaction to HSA, the usefulness of this solution
renders it an obvious choice in specific clinical situations. Indications for HSA transfu-
sion generally involve hypoalbuminemia or clinical signs related to illness that affects
functions strongly associated with a patient's albumin concentration
Albumin plays many important roles in a healthy animal. Approximately 40% of an
animal's total body albumin is found within the vascular space (Mathews 2008). It is
responsible for 80% of oncotic pressure (Trow et al. 2008). Albumin is partially respon-
sible for maintenance of intravascular volume. At normal levels, it reduces microvascular
 permeability and in so doing, contributes to maintenance of normal albumin concentra-
tion through prevention of albumin loss. Albumin is also responsible for binding differ-
ent substances within the circulatory system. It transports drugs, metabolites, and
electrolytes and plays a significant role in maintaining fluid balance. Hypoalbuminemia
is often associated with generalized edema and ascites.
Patients with refractory hypotension, severe hypoalbuminemia, peritonitis, or hypo-
volemia may be candidates for HSA transfusion. It is often the solution of choice when
other colloidal infusions have failed to reverse clinical signs.
HSA transfusion is not used to treat conditions involving hypoxia or coagulopathies
because it does not offer oxygen-carrying capacity, platelets, or clotting factors. This
solution is not appropriate for patients that are severely dehydrated, experiencing
cardiac insufficiency or failure, or those that are anemic.
 It is reported that coagulation times may increase in human patients after administra-
tion of HSA. This is mainly due to a decrease in platelet count and the dilution of clot-
ting factors associated with the increase in intravascular volume (Martin 2o04).
Whole blood
The term whole blood is entirely descriptive of the contents of this fluid type. It is blood
that has been collected from the intravascular compartment of a donor animal and
 mixed with an appropriate volume of anticoagulant plus or minus cell nutrient. The
blood is not centrifuged, separated, or frozen before administration to a recipient. It is
refrigerated during storage and should be maintained at a temperature between 1°C and
6°C (Fig. 8.6).
WB is delivered to the recipient via a blood transfusion administration set, which has
a filter with pores that measure 170 μm in size (Green 2002). The filter is required to
remove any clumps or blood clots that may have formed during the collection.
WB stored in citrate-phosphate-dextrose-adenine (CPDA)-1 is safely stored for up to
28 days. Depending on the condition of the recipient and the reason for transfusion, it
may be preferable to administer WB that has been stored for a short period of time.
For example, a patient that is anemic due to hemolysis will benefit from WB that is less
than 5 days old (Green 2002). As blood is stored, the RBCs become less viable as they
Chapter 8: Fluid Types 161
Figure 8.6. One unit of canine whole blood is approximately 450mL.
age. Older RBCs are more fragile and thus more susceptible to destruction via hemolysis.
 In contrast, an anemic patient whose blood volume is depleted due to hemorrhage, with
no evidence of coagulopathy, can benefit from fresh WB or blood that has been stored
for more than 5 days.
Stored WB contains levels of ammonia that increase in direct relation to the length
of storage. Patients with hepatic encephalopathy or elevated levels of ammonia should
receive WB that is less than 5 days old if transfusion is necessary (Mathews 2006a).
WB is the fluid of choice for patients suffering from rapid loss of RBCs and plasma
(WB). This loss is commonly seen in cases of trauma and anticoagulant rodenticide
toxicity. Severe hemorrhage may occur during some types of surgery; WB is indicated
in this situation as well.
Packed cell volume can also be used as a guideline for WB transfusion. Canine
patients with a packed cell volume (PCV) less than 25% and feline patients with a PCV
less than 20% are candidates for WB transfusion (Mathews 2006b). If there is a coagu-
lopathy present in addition to the anemia, it is most beneficial to transfuse fresh WB
because it still contains clotting factors and functioning platelets. WB should be used
and RBCs, it may be faster to transfuse WB than to organize and thaw individual com-
ponents (i.e., FFP).
Packed red blood cells
PRBCs are obtained from WB via centrifugation (Fig. 8.7). The cells are stored in CPDA-
1 at a temperature between 1°C and 6°C for up to 35 days (Green 2002). If the blood
is collected into a bag that contains cell nutrient additive, the shelf life of PRBCs is
extended to 42 days.
PRBC transfusions are administered through a blood filter set whose pores are 170μm
in size. Recipients typically require packed cells if they have a condition involving the
specific destruction of RBCs. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and hemobartonel-
losis (Mycoplasma baemofelis) are two examples of diseases that involve red cell
162Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 8.7. One unit of canine PRBCs. The PCV of this unit is 67%.
destruction. Anemia associated with either of these conditions is best treated through
transfusion of PRBCs.
PCV may also be used as a guideline for PRBC transfusion. As a general rule, a
patient whose PCV is 15% or less and who is showing clinical signs associated with
anemia requires a blood transfusion with a PRBC product. Other guidelines for PRBC
transfusion are a PCV less than 18% with concurrent red cell destruction and a PCV
less than 20% in a dehydrated patient (Mathews 2006a). Recall that dehydrated patients
typically present with PCVs that reflect hemoconcentration. If the patient is anemic and
dehydrated, it is likely that the patient's true PCV will be less than initial measurements
suggest.
 Patients with chronic anemia are also candidates for PRBC transfusion. The cardio-
vascular system in these animals has had time to compensate for their anemia and as
such may be overwhelmed by administration of WB. In addition to the cells the animal
requires, WB also contributes plasma to the intravascular volume. This may cause
volume overload in a compensated animal. It follows that a patient with cardiac insuf-
ficiency is a candidate for PRBC transfusion rather than WB.
Platelet products
 Blood products are available for use in patients that specifically require platelets. Platelet-
rich plasma and platelet concentrate are both commercially available or can be harvested
from donated WB via centrifugation. Cost, frequency of use, and shelf life are significant
drawbacks associated with platelet products. Platelets must be stored at room tempera-
must be kept on a rocker (in continuous motion) and used within 24 hours of collection
(Fig. 8.8)
 Platelet products are indicated for patients whose platelet numbers or lack of platelet
function is so severe that spontaneous bleeding has begun. Petechiae, bleeding gums,
epistaxis, or hemorrhage may be appreciated in these patients. Transfusing thrombocy
topenic patients with platelet products is possible, but the small number of platelets
obtained through the transfusion is typically not enough to be clinically relevant. Where
Chapter 8: Fluid Types163
Figure 8.8. One unit of platelet concentrate. This product must be stored in motion and kept on a rocker.
gentlytitrated.
a choice of products is available to the clinician, platelet concentrate is thought to be
the more efficient product of the two (Green 2002)
Nursing considerations
Any transfusion of blood products or blood components can cause adverse reactions in
the recipient. The outer surface of RBCs is coated with small structures primarily com-
posed of protein. Most of the animals within a species have the same protein structures
at similar locations on their RBCs. Variation in this arrangement does occur within a
species, and from this variation arise the different blood types. The structures that are
consistent are antigenic. The exceptions in the species have slightly different protein
structures at slightly different locations on the surface of their RBCs. The structures
present in a smaller proportion of the species are allogenic (Green 2002). Transfusion
of one of these blood types to an animal that possesses the other blood type stimulates
an immune response in the recipient. The recipient's body produces antibodies in 
response to the foreign protein. The reaction of the antibody is to bind to the donor
antigen. In large numbers, this antigen binding can cause RBCs to clump together. This
reaction is severe and immediate; in others, it can be delayed and slightly less severe.
Blood type is an important consideration when any blood component therapy is
instituted. Canine patients are split into three categories for the purposes of transfusion
medicine. The protein structures found on canine RBCs are referred to as dog erythro-
cyte antigens (DEAs). DEA 1.1 and DEA 1.2 are antigens found at specific locations on
the RBC. Dogs that are lacking antigens at either of those locations are typed DEA 1
negative. Dogs that have antigens at either location are typed DEA 1.1+ or DEA 1.2+.
 A dog that is positive at either location can receive blood from another dog that is posi-
tive at either location. A DEA 1+ dog can also receive DEA negative blood with relative
safety. A DEA negative patient should not receive DEA positive blood because this can
       n      
164Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
positive blood for the first time, it is unlikely that the patient has already formed anti-
bodies. For this reason, a noticeable reaction may not arise for several days after the
transfusion. If another DEA positive transfusion is given to the patient 7 to 10 days
 later, the animal has presumably had time to stage an immune response, and it is likely
that the reaction to the second transfusion will be severe (Green 2002).
 Feline blood types are similar in principle to canine blood types. Cats are either type
A, type B, or type AB. Most cats are type A, with type B cats highly represented by the
purebred population. Type AB is quite rare. The main difference between canine and
feline blood types is that cats do not need an initial transfusion of a foreign blood type
to develop antibodies; they are born with the respective antibodies. If a type B cat is
transfused with type A blood, it is possible that this single transfusion may cause a
severe life-threatening reaction in the recipient (Castellanos et al. 2004).
 Immediate transfusion reactions involve destruction of the foreign RBCs. This is an
immune-mediated response and involves intra vascular destruction of the RBCs. Clinical
signs involved with this type of reaction include hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria,
vomiting, fever, facial swelling, and tachycardia (Mathews 2006a).
 Delayed reactions are typically less severe than immediate reactions and may involve
pruritus, facial swelling, fever, and seizures. Other adverse reactions are possible even
  sd axa h s  si s ai sir a 
insufficiency are susceptible to vascular volume overload with the administration of
natural colloids. Clinical signs of volume overload include but are not limited to cough,
tachypnea, dyspnea, and vomiting.
ChapterSummary
There are many choices to make when selecting an appropriate fluid for an individual
patient. Note that the characteristics associated with the different types of fluid make
 them appropriate for some situations and inappropriate for others.
Crystalloid solutions are perhaps the most commonly used fluids in veterinary prac-
tice. They contain low molecular weight particles and generally have a concentration of
sugar or salt. The movement of crystalloid solutions is not restricted, and they flow
freely out of the vascular space within a short time of administration. Crystalloids do
not contribute to oncotic pressure, but they do contribute to osmotic pressure.
Crystalloid solutions are divided into maintenance fluids and replacement fluids.
Replacement fluids are used to treat animals that are dehydrated on presentation and
suffering from ongoing losses due to illness. These fluids are isotonic and contain a
sodium concentration similar to that of the extracellular space. Some replacement solu-
tions contain buffers and have a pH that has an alkalinizing effect on the patient's blood.
 Maintenance solutions contain less sodium than replacement fluids and are hypotonic.
They are used for maintenance of body water and primarily replenish and maintain the
intracellular space.
 Colloids are large molecular weight solutions that remain in the intravascular space
after administration. They are often used to increase intravascular volume because their
oncotic effects draw fluid from other body water compartments.
Synthetic colloids are widely used in small animal practice. When compared with crys-
talloids, synthetic colloids have an increased cost and greater number of adverse reactions
associated with their use. However, if compared with natural colloids, synthetics have a
greater shelf life, lower cost, and fewer reactions. Lack of oxygen-carrying capacity and
absence of coagulation factors are two drawbacks associated with synthetic colloids
Chapter 8: Fluid Types165
Natural colloids are beneficial to patients suffering from severe hemorrhage, coagu-
lopathies, and chronic anemia. Although they may elicit adverse reactions in some
patients, they have a relatively large margin of safety when used judiciously. Blood
products offer the benefits of coagulation factors and oxygen-carrying capacity; a com-
bination not offered by any other type of IV fluid in veterinary medicine.
Canine and feline patients must be typed before administration of blood products.
Transfusion of mismatched blood components can elicit severe life-threatening reactions
in the recipient.
Small animal practitioners are fortunate to have a wide variety of fluid types from
  d  s      
and forethought to the practitioner provided they have a basic understanding of fluid
types and their appropriate uses.
Review Questions
1. Identify three important characteristics of crystalloids.
 2. Circle the appropriate answer. Maintenance crystalloids contain more/less sodium
than replacement crystalloids.
3. The concentration of sodium in hypertonic saline is
0.9% NaCl.
a. higher than
b. lower than
c. the same as
4. Why is hypertonic saline used for fluid resuscitation of hypovolemic patients?
 5. Colloids contain large molecular weight particles. Why is this of benefit in fluid
therapy?
6. Why must one exercise caution when using HTS or colloids for volume
expansion?
Answers to the review questions can be found on page 224 in the Appendix. The review
questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley.com!
go/donohoenursing.
Further Reading
American Thoracic Society Consensus Statement. 2004. Evidence-based colloid use in
the critically Ill. Am J Resp Crit Care Med 170:1247-1259.
 Bateman, S. 2003. Using synthetic colloids. Proceedings Western Veterinary Conference.
  n     s     
thetic colloids: is there an influence on renal function? Anesth Analg 96:376-382.
Brooks, M. B. 2003. Blood component therapy. Clinical use in small animal practice.
Proceedings American College of Veterinary Medicine.
Castellanos, I., C. Couto, and T. Gray. 2004. Clinical use of blood products in cats: a
retrospective study. J Vet Intern Med 18:529-532.
Center, S. 2006. Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disturbances in liver disease. In S.
DiBartola, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice,
437-477. St. Louis: Saunders.
Cohn, L. A., et al. 2007. Response of healthy dogs to infusions of human serum albumin.
Am J Vet Res 68:657-663.
166Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
DiBartola, S., & S. Bateman. 2006. Introduction to fluid therapy. In S. DiBartola, ed.
Fluid,Electrolyte,and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice,325-344.St.
Louis: Saunders
Green, M. 2002. Transfusion medicine. In W. E. Wingfield, ed. The Veterinary ICU
Book, 189-201. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Homma, H., et al. 2005. Small volume resuscitation with hypertonic saline. J Trauma
59:266-272.
Logan, J., et al. 2001. Clinical indications for use of fresh frozen plasma in dogs: 74
dogs (October through December 1999). JAVMA 218:1449-1455.
Martin, L. 2004. Human albumin solutions in the critical patient. Proceedings Interna-
tional Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Society.
Mathews, K. 2004. Indications and guidelines for “fluid" management in various situ-
ations. Proceedings Western Veterinary Conference.
Mathews, K., and M. Barry. 200s. The use of 25% human serum albumin: outcome
and effcacy in raising serum albumin and systemic blood pressure in critically ill dogs
and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 15:110-118.
Mathews, K. 2006a. Fluid therapy: non-hemorrhage. In Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care Manual, 347-372. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Mathews, K. 2006b. Monitoring fluid therapy and complications of fluid therapy. In S.
DiBartola, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice,
377-391. St. Louis: Saunders
Mathews, K. 2008. The therapeutic use of 25% human serum albumin in critically ill
dogs and cats.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 38:595-605.
Mazzaferro, E., E. Rudloff, and R. Kirby. 2002. The role of albumin replacement in
critically ill veterinary patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 12:113-124.
Mensack, S. 2008. Fluid therapy: options and rational administration. Vet Clin Small
Anim 38:575-586.
Methany, N. 1992. Intravenous therapy. In Fluid and Electrolyte Balance, 149-168.
Philadelphia: JB Lippincott.
Moore, L. 2003. Crystalloids/Colloids/Oxyglobin/Blood products. Proceedings North
American Veterinary Conference.
Rudloff, E., and R. Kirby. 2001. Colloid and crystalloid resuscitation. Vet Clin North
Am 31:1207-1229.
Sheikh, A., et al. Cerebral effects of resuscitation with hypertonic saline and a new low
sodium hype. Crit Care Med 24:1226-1232
Silverstein, D. C. 2009. Daily intravenous fluid therapy. In Small Animal Critical Care
Medicine, 271-280. St. Louis, MO: Saunders.
Trow, A. et al. 2008. Evaluation of use of human albumin in critically ill dogs: 73 cases
(2003-2006). JAVMA 233:607-612.
Varicoda, E., et al. 2003 Blood loss after fluid resuscitation with isotonic or hypertonic
sodium chloride for the initial treatment of uncontrolled hemorrhage induced by
splenic rupture. } Trauma 55:112-117.
Wardrop, K. J. 2004. Plasma transfusion in the dog. Procedings Western Veterinary
Conference.
Internet Resources
Product information regarding pentastarch: http://pentaspan.homestead.com/enter.html
Fluid Selection
Processes Involved in Fluid Selection
This chapter outlines the decision-making process involved in selecting fluid types for 
specific illnesses. It is true that there is often more than one choice of fluids that is
appropriate for any given patient. With this in mind, you should appreciate that the
path chosen in each example is but one option in many and used to illustrate the thought
process involved.
Fluid selection is an important component of any patient's therapeutic plan. The clini-
cian must consider a number of factors before choosing the fluid type most suitable at
the outset of fluid therapy. Recall also that the fluid type used during the initial stages
 of fluid therapy may not continue to be the ideal fluid type for the patient's dynamic
condition and changing needs. For example, a patient that presents in decompensatory
shock requires immediate intervention and fluid support. Once this patient has been
the hospital with mild signs of ill health might receive only one type of fluid throughout
its stay in the hospital.
Patient Evaluation
Ideally, each patient should benefit from a physical examination before the onset of fluid
therapy. Understandably, this examination is not always achievable in the early stages
of an emergency. Vascular access often is obtained and fluid therapy instituted while the
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
@ 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
167
168Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
clinician is performing a primary evaluation. Nevertheless, the patient's hydration status
and perfusion are parameters that need be identified as soon as possible upon
presentation.
 Perfusion is estimated by evaluation of the animal's mucous membrane (MM) color
and capillary refll time (CRT). Heart rate and pulse quality are also indicators of perfu-
sion. Pale MM color prolonged CRT (>2 seconds), elevated heart rate, and weak pulse
pressure are often appreciable in patients whose perfusion is compromised. Body tem-
perature is typically decreased in poorly perfused animals, and the extremities are often
cool. These patients require fluid therapy to begin as soon as possible.
Hydration status is estimated through evaluation of MM moisture, skin tent, and
ocular position. Animals with tacky or dry MM, prolonged skin tent, and sunken globes
are suffering from some degree of dehydration. Mild hydration deficits typically do not
require emergency intervention and can be corrected over a longer period of time than
poor perfusion. Recall that prolonged dehydration can lead to poor perfusion. In this
instance, fluid therapy should begin as soon as possible.
Vomiting and Diarrhea
Vomiting and diarrhea are common ailments for which animals are presented to the
veterinary hospital. Body water is lost both through direct expulsions of fluid as well
as through lack of intake. The loss of water leads to a decrease in the volume of the
extracellular compartment. The fluid lost is isotonic, and there is no shift of water
between compartments. The extracellular compartment is the first to be affected, and
if the illness is treated before the animal is severely compromised; the other compart-
ments will suffer little to no effects. If water loss is purely the result of the animal being.
unable to drink, the loss is considered hypertonic because there is no equivalent loss of
sodium (Brown and Otto 2008)
Patients whose primary complaints are vomiting and diarrhea tend to show signs of
dehydration more slowly than animals that suffer from diarrhea or vomiting secondary
to other disease processes. For example, a dog that has recently suffered a dietary indis-
cretion can tolerate the loss of body water through vomiting far better than a dog whose
vomiting is a side effect of septic peritonitis or septicemia.
Clinicalsigns
Clinical signs associated with vomiting and diarrhea include, but are not limited to, a
decrease in body weight, decreased urine output, increased packed cell volume (PCV), and
increased total protein (TP). Mild dehydration may not cause an increase in heart rate;
however, prolonged dehydration leads to hypovolemia and is reflected by an increased
heart rate and weak to thready pulses ( Table 9.1). Hypovolemic shock is the stage at which
the body's compensatory mechanisms have been overwhelmed by the loss of water and
can no longer maintain the blood volume circulating within the vasculature.
Hospitals with advanced monitoring equipment have the capacity to trend the
patient's central venous pressure and blood pressure, two parameters that are affected
by prolonged dehydration and hypovolemia. Continuous monitoring of these parame
ters allows for significant insight into fluctuations in patient status. In addition, lactate
is a valuable monitoring tool. Hypovolemic animals suffer a decrease in oxygen delivery
Chapter 9: Fluid Selection169
Table 9.1Physical Examination Findings as Related to Degree of Dehydration
Estimated Percentage
Skin Turgor
Mucous
Heart Rate
Pulse Pressure
of Dehydration (%)
Membranes
<5
 No abnormal finding 
Moist
Within normal limits   Strong
 No abnormal finding 
5
Tacky
Within normal limits
Strong
>
Mild to moderate 
Dry
Mild to moderate
Strong
increase in skin tent
increase
10
Moderate to marked
Dry
Tachycardia
Decreased
increase in skin tent 
 pulse pressure
12
Marked increase in 
Dry
Tachycardia
 Decreased to
skin tent
absent
to their tissues (the result of a decreased circulating volume). The decrease in oxygen
delivery forces metabolism to occur in hypoxic conditions. This anaerobic metabolism
produces lactate, which can be measured in the animal's blood. Elevated lactate levels
are often present in dehydrated patients, but these levels are quick to normalize as fluid
therapy progresses.
Gastric fluid is rich in sodium (Na) and chloride (Cl). Vomiting of gastric contents
may cause a hyponatremia and hypochloremia. If emesis involves more than just gastric
contents, electrolyte imbalances become more complex. Potassium is also lost in vomitus
and feces. Decreased or absent food intake is also a cause of potassium loss. Anorexia
coupled with the loss of gastrointestinal fluid make hypokalemia a common finding in
vomiting and diarrhea patients.
Choosing fluids
Does the patient need fluids?
If an animal is suffering from gastrointestinal upset, it can be mildly or severely affected
by the illness. In general, animals whose symptoms have not resolved promptly on their
own will need intervention and fluid therapy. It is often the case that patients presented
to the emergency hospital with a complaint of persistent vomiting and diarrhea is at a
point in their illness where they are in need of fluid therapy. Physical examination will
confrm the need for intervention and indicate the urgency with which it must occur.
drated, hypovolemic, and experiencing marked electrolyte abnormalities. Regardless of
how severely the patient is affected, the fluid therapy plan should begin with the resus-
citation and replacement phases and transfer into the maintenance phase as improve-
ments are trended through the patient's vital signs.
What level of intervention is necessary?
Profound dehydration, hypovolemia, and shock are indications for the initiation of the
resuscitation phase of fluid therapy in vomiting/diarrheic patients. Fluids can be deliv-
ered in small volumes (boluses) while the technician diligently reevaluates the animal's
170Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
vital signs between boluses. Replacement fluids can be delivered in volumes of 10 to
20 mL/kg intravenously (IV) over 15-20 min and repeated as necessary. Technicians must
be extra cautious delivering fluid and fluid boluses to patients that are thought to have
any degree of cardiac disease. Extra caution is also warranted when delivering fluids to
patients with marked hypoalbuminemia.
What goals does the clinician have in mind when prescribing fluid
therapy for this patient?
The goal of the resuscitation phase is to restore normal MM color and normal capillary
refill time and to improve pulse pressure, heart rate (likely decrease), and mentation.
Clinical evaluation of urine output, central venous pressure, blood pressure, and lactate
can confirm success of the resuscitation phase of fluid therapy.
Which fluids should be administered?
Several factors must be considered when selecting the type of fluid for a patient. The
clinician must decide to what degree the animal is dehydrated and how the animal has
lost body fluid. For example, if the animal was involved in an accident and known to
have lost a significant amount of blood, the clinician may opt for crystalloid fluids
coupled with a blood product. The availability of blood products will obviously dictate
the choices made in individual situations. If the animal is found to be hypovolemic and
compromised cardiovascularly, the clinician must recall that the patient requires prompt
delivery of fluids but also requires fluids that will provide and maintain volume within
the intravascular space. In this instance, the clinician might select a crystalloid and
deliver it in conjunction with a synthetic or natural colloid.
The fluid selection for a vomiting and diarrhea patient follows the same thought
process; consideration must be given to the degree to which the animal is compromised.
Blood products are not typically necessary for these patients because there is rarely a
significant blood volume lost in the vomiting and diarrheic animal. Crystalloids are an
excellent choice because some will remain in the vasculature and most will be distributed
to the extravascular space. Furthermore, the vomiting patient is losing body fluid rich
in Nat and Cl. Selecting a fluid that will replenish these electrolytes will benefit the
patient.
 Replacement crystalloid fluids are isotonic. They are ideal for patients experiencing
vomiting and/or diarrhea because they provide water and Na*. Their Nat concentration
is very close to that of the extracellular space, the space primarily affected by vomiting
 and diarrhea. By delivering this type of fluid in the initial stages of therapy, the clinician
is able to restore the intravascular volume as well as to correct the animal's dehydration.
The constitution of replacement crystalloids also makes them safe for use during resus-
citation if needed before the replacement phase of fluid therapy. Maintenance fluids are
 inappropriate during the initial stages of fluid therapy because they contain an inade-
quate concentration of sodium.
Consideration must be given to the animal's metabolic status when selecting fluids
which means that absolute diagnosis of metabolic acidosis or alkalosis is often beyond
the clinician's reach. However, many patients that present with vomiting and diarrhea
as a primary complaint have some degree of acidosis. As such, they benefit from the use
of a buffered solution in their fluid therapy plan.
Chapter 9: Fluid Selection171
Plasma-Lyte A, Normosol R, or lactated Ringer solution are all appropriate fluids for
the replacement phase of the vomiting/diarrhea patient's fluid therapy plan. These solu-
tions also contain buffers and will help offset acidosis if it is present (Rudloff and Kirby
2001).
 In the event of hypovolemia and compromised perfusion, synthetic or natural colloids
would be an appropriate choice as an adjunct to the crystalloid fluids. The addition of
 colloids provides oncotic support and keeps the crystalloids in the vascular space for a
longer period of time. Patients that are moderately to severely compromised as a result
of their gastrointestinal disturbance may also be suffering from the loss of albumin
through their gastrointestinal tract. Colloid boluses should be considered when total
 proteins drop to less than 4.5 g/dL (Brown and Otto 2008).
Although plasma may be beneficial to the se verely compromised patient, whole blood
does not impart significant benefits to the vomiting/diarrheic patient. If the patient's
gastrointestinal disease includes a perforating ulcer and/or severe anemia, whole blood
may be an appropriate product to include in the animal's fluid therapy plan.
By which route should the fluids be delivered?
In mild cases of dehydration, crystalloid fluids can be delivered via any number of dif-
ferent routes. Where possible, fluids may be given by mouth; however, this is not typi-
cally possible for patients whose primary complaint is vomiting.
The subcutaneous route is also a suitable means of fluid delivery in mild cases of ill
health, but it certainly limits the volume of replacement fluids that can be delivered.
IV delivery of replacement fluids allows the clinician to fine-tune delivery rate and
volume and also provides the means to deliver fluid boluses when necessary. In addition,
cases that require colloids as part of their therapy may receive them promptly if venous
 access has already been established for delivery of fluids.
Where IV access is unobtainable, intraosseous catheter placement may be necessary.
 This route may be useful in stabilizing the patient, facilitating administration of enough
fluid to restore intravascular volume and allow the technician to obtain IV access.
The maintenance phase of fluid therapy begins once the animal's hypovolemia has
been corrected. Dehydration is corrected more slowly and should be addressed over the
following 12 to 24 hours. Ongoing losses such as persistent vomiting and/or diarrhea
must be accounted for and estimated volumes of each should be added to the daily
volume of maintenance fluids being delivered.
Maintenance fluids distribute more rapidly than replacement fluids and are used to
replenish the extravascular space. IV infusion of maintenance fluids achieves approxi-
 mately 10% of volume infused as a remainder in the vascular space 1 hour after infusion
(Mensack 2o08). The solutions commonly used for the maintenance phase of fluid
therapy include 0.45% NaCl, 0.45% NaCl with 2.5% dextrose, half-strength lactated
Ringer solution with 2.5% dextrose, Normosol M, and Plasma-Lyte 56.
It is not uncommon for critically ill patients to remain on isotonic replacement solu-
tions for the duration of their hospitalization. This is primarily due to the safety of these
balanced electrolyte solutions, but it is also a result of the constant fluctuation in fluid
balance encountered with critically ill animals
Continuous monitoring of fluid therapy recipients is mandatory. The technician
should be aware of the patient's vital parameters and try to perform at least two tem-
perature, pulse respirations per 24-hour period. Markedly compromised animals require
more frequent monitoring.
172Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 9.1. This trauma patient sustained multiple severe bite wounds during an altercation with another
dog. Boluses of Plasma-Lyte, coupled with a bolus of PENTASPAN, were administered during the resuscitation
phase of this patient's fluid therapy. The patient was hypotensive and hypovolemic at presentation.
Trauma
Traumatic injury is a common cause for presentation to an emergency clinic or veteri-
nary hospital (Fig. 9.1). Injuries can be sustained in a wide variety of ways and are not
always evident externally during the patient's initial physical examination. Trauma
patients most often require fluid therapy as part of their medical intervention, but there
is controversy surrounding when these fluids should be delivered and what quantity the
patient should receive.
 In the event that the animal is able to receive medical attention in the field, the
clinician/technician must consider whether or not it is prudent to deliver fluids before
arrival at the hospital. The following questions may help guide the medical personnel
 in their decision regarding initiation of fluid therapy prior to transport to the nearest
veterinary facility:
1. Will initiation of fuid therapy significantly delay the animal's transport to a well-
equipped facility?
In situations involving a very short trip to a veterinary hospital, the patient may
benefit more from prompt arrival than from remaining at the site of the accident to
receive fluids. If the trip to the clinic is very short, focusing on arriving at the clinic
without delay is likely to be more beneficial to the animal (Sadow 2001).
 2. Will the animal receive a large enough volume of fuids during transport to make it
worthwhile delaying transport by setting up fuids?
Consider whether or not intervention with fluid therapy will have the time to make
a difference during the trip to the clinic. If the animal needs to be transported for
quite some distance, it will likely benefit from the fluids feasibly delivered over that
time period. A short ride may not even allow enough time for a fluid bolus (10 to
15 minutes). This may lead the clinician to initiate fluid therapy once the animal has
arrived at the hospital
Chapter 9: Fluid Selection173
 3. Is the animal experiencing a major hemorrhage?
The clinician may elect aggressive fluid therapy in an effort to restore adequate cir-
culation and blood pressure in the early posttrauma period. This is controversial
because studies have suggested that aggressive fluid therapy is counterproductive in
patients with massive hemorrhage. Raising blood pressure may lead to displacement
of a clot that has tenuously formed at the injured site. Studies have suggested that
aggressive fluid therapy in the trauma patient can lead to increased hemorrhage and
increased mortality (Sadow 2001). To avoid this possibility, it is recommended that
fluid therapy be directed toward restoring a low normal blood pressure, effectively
Pq e s on assd o d   o ds
blood clot (Rudloff and Kirby 2008). Recall that the goals of fluid delivery post-
trauma should be to minimize blood loss and restore or preserve the water within
the body's compartments.
The emergency database obtained upon arrival at the clinic should always
include packed cell volume/total solids (PCV/TS). This simple inexpensive test pro-
vides valuable information that can help guide posttraumatic fluid therapy. Trauma
patients may have experienced internal hemorrhage that may or may not have
 a sd s rs a ie s  a a a  pas
cian with information with regard to blood loss in the following way: A total
solids (TS) less than 6.5g/L in an animal that has recently experienced some form
of trauma (but was previously healthy) is suggestive of internal hemorrhage
(Rudloff and Kirby 2008). This is true in the presence or absence of anemia. The
relationship between anemia and hemorrhage is self-explanatory; however, a
 normal PCV does not rule out hemorrhage as a possibility but may indicate splenic
contraction as a result of hemorrhage (Guyton and Hall 2oo0b). The spleen acts
as a reservoir and houses many red blood cells (RBCs) in excess of those used
hourly. Blood loss initiates a chain of events including stimulation of the sympa-
thetic nervous system. The sympathetic nervous system causes the spleen and the
splenic vessels to contract, thereby forcing the RBCs out of the spleen and into
circulation.
If it is determined that the patient is experiencing a major hemorrhage,
whole blood or blood products will be of great benefit to the patient. In the absence
 of these, the animal will still require fluid therapy to support the cardiovascular
system.
4. Will the animal survive without immediate delivery of resuscitative fluid therapy?
A quick examination of the trauma patient provides the clinician with enough infor-
mation to determine whether or not the injuries are life threatening. In addition,
 palpation of pulses, evaluation of MMs, and observation of respiratory pattern will 
communicate the degree to which the animal's cardiovascular system is compromised.
The clinician must use this information to determine whether or not the animal's
injuries are life threatening and require immediate initiation of fluid therapy as part
of the resuscitative efforts before transport.
Many trauma situations occur in the absence of a mobile veterinary care team,
but similar considerations should be made at the veterinary facility that initially sees
the patient. Transport of the trauma patient to an emergency or referral hospital
should not take place unless the animal is stable. Many tertiary care facilities welcome
the referring clinician to call for advice should they require it before transferring a
se verely traumatised patient.
174Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Fuid choices
Many of the trauma patients that present to a veterinary care facility require some form
of fluid therapy. It is important that each patient be considered as an individual and the
fluid therapy plan be tailored specifically to that patient. The patient's condition may
change rapidly, for better or worse, which dictates that the technician must monitor the
animal closely and be prepared to make corresponding changes in fluid delivery rates.
It is undesirable to have one standard approach to the treatment of trauma patients
whereby all patients receive the same type of fluid at the same rate, regardless of the
situation. Judicious use of fluids is even more important because trauma patients are
known to be at higher risk of complications that arise from fluid therapy than other
patients receiving fluids (Rudloff and Kirby 2008).
Does the animal need fluids?
The need for fluid therapy is determined through the initial physical examination. The
examination provides the clinician and technician with an emergency database or base-
line vital signs that can help direct fluid delivery. Animals severely compromised by their
injuries often have pale or gray MMs, weak pulse pressure, and tachycardia. The pres-
ence of these abnormalities suggests hypovolemia and indicates that the animal should
receive fluids.
What are the goals of fluid therapy?
Hypovolemia is a common consequence of trauma. Major impact or collision causes
damage in a multitude of ways. Physical destruction or disruption of tissue can lead to
direct loss of blood and/or maldistribution of blood flow. The goal of fluid therapy, in
the initial phases of the emergency, is to replenish the intravascular volume, restore
perfusion, and eliminate life-threatening hypovolemia.
Which fluids should be administered?
Crystalfoids
Balanced electrolyte solutions are suitable for the resuscitation phase of therapy
for the trauma patient. These solutions provide water and electrolytes to the intravas-
cular space and are also distributed to the interstitium over time. Plasma-Lyte 148,
Plasma-Lyte A, and Normosol R are examples of fluids commonly used to treat trauma
patients.
Caution must be used when delivering these fluids because the patient may have
sustained damage to its vasculature. Damage to the vessels allows for leaks and can lead
to interstitial edema.
Colloids
Colloids can be used in conjunction with crystalloids to preserve the colloid osmotic
pressure within the vasculature. By essentially holding the crystalloids fluids within
the intravascular space, colloids can decrease the likelihood of edema formation in the
interstitium as well as decrease the amount of crystalloids necessary to replenish
the intravascular volume.
Chapter 9:Fluid Selection175
Hypertonic saline (HS) is not considered a colloid; however, it may help achieve
the goal of intravascular volume replacement in a similar manner The high salt concen-
tration of HS changes the osmotic force within the vascular space and causes fluid to
shift from the interstitium and the intracellular compartment into the intravascular
space. This process allows for delivery of a smaller volume of resuscitation fluids and
achieves rapid volume replacement in the trauma patient. An added benefit of HS is
that it decreases intracranial pressure, which is a helpful side effect if the animal has
sustained head trauma (Rudloff and Kirby 2008).
Whole blood
In cases of severe blood loss, it is prudent to transfuse the patient immediately. Unfor-
tunately, it is often the case that the technician does not have the benefit of time and is
thus unable to cross-match blood products before delivery. Depending on availability,
whole blood or packed red blood cells may be used for transfusion. Hemorrhage is
 siop ui itt pue sh uaamiaq sey sso poo j ha a panapisuo
same is true of blood loss of 23 to 32mL/kg in cats (Mathews 2006). Life-threatening
hemorrhage can be treated using whole blood. The transfusion can be delivered at a
rate of 10 to 22mL/kg per hour (Day 2006).
Trauma patients are managed differently among clinicians, largely due to the range
of products, technical support, monitoring equipment, and expertise available in differ-
ent clinical settings. By treating each patient as an individual with specific needs and
judiciously monitoring and trending their vital signs, the clinician will be better able to
Pyloric Obstruction
A patient that presents with a pyloric obstruction typically has a predictable electrolyte
disturbance in addition to its visible clinical signs. These animals present an interesting
opportunity for consideration of fluid selection.
Obstruction at this level of the gastrointestinal tract leads to vomiting and inappe-
tence. Because the obstruction occurs at the pylorus, the vomitus is composed largely
of gastric contents. Hydrochloric acid is lost in vomit as well as water, sodium, and
potassium. The loss of hydrogen ions contributes to a metabolic alkalosis. In addition,
the loss of body water through persistent vomiting leads to dehydration and eventually
a decrease in vascular volume.
Many of the illnesses affecting veterinary patients lead to metabolic acidosis. Pyloric
obstruction is particularly interesting because it leads to metabolic alkalosis. Rather than
the often selected alkalinizing solution, this condition is one that may be treated with
 an acidifying solution.
Consideration must also be directed toward the particular components lost with
 gastric vomiting. Hyponatremia and hypokalemia are products of this ailment as well.
If one considers that a solution for fluid therapy must initiate correction of the previ-
ously mentioned disturbances (metabolic alkalosis, hyponatremia, hypokalemia), then
selection of 0.9% NaCl would be a solid choice for patients with pyloric obstruction
(Wingfield 2002). Many other gastrointestinal disturbances cause metabolic acidosis and
are appropriately treated with a more alkaline solution such as lactate Ringer solution
(pH 6.5) or Plasma-Lyte (pH 5.5). In addition to replacing Na losses, 0.9% NaCl is
176Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 9.2 Potassium Supplementation Guidelines for Intravenous Fluid Therapy*
Serum Potassium
Total of mEq KCl to Add to 1000-mL Bag
≤2.0
80
2.0-2.5
60
2.5-3.0
40
3.0-3.5
3.5-5.5
20
*Potassium should not be adrministered at rate5 greater than 0.5 mEq/kg per hour
more acidic than other popular replacement fluids (pH 5.0). For this reason it is suitable
for an animal that is vomiting gastric contents. To address the potassium losses, it is
prudent to supplement the 0.9% NaCl with KCl. The rate of KCl replacement depends
on the patient's potassium level (Table 9.2).
Chapter Summary
There is more to the decision process than meets the eye with regard to selecting fluids
a i aes a ro io s as yo 'ssno sa p  r
regardless of the condition of the patient, this is not always the best practice. Length of
illness, duration of fluid therapy, acid-base status, and cardiovascular status of the
patient must be carefully evaluated before initiation of fluid therapy and fluid selection.
As with any aspect of fluid therapy, the individual patient must be considered and treated
appropriately for its particular set of circumstances.
Review Questions
1. Which patient characteristics can be evaluated to obtain information regarding
perfusion status?
2. Evaluation of hydration status or dehydration is somewhat subjective. Which
characteristics are measured during this evaluation?
3. A patient presents to the hospital with a complaint of 48 hours of vomiting and
diarrhea, as well as a decreased appetite. Is the clinician more likely to prescribe
replacement fluids or maintenance fluids?
4. Which fluids might one choose for fluid resuscitation of a vomiting and diarrhea
patient?
 5. Name thre goals of fluid therapy for the trauma patient.
Answers to the review questions can be found on page 224 in the Appendix. The review
questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley.comf
go/donohoenursing.
Chapter9:Fluid Selection177
Further Reading
Brown, A., & C. Otto. 2008. Fluid therapy in vomiting and diarrhea. Vet Clin North
Am 38:653-675.
DiBartola, S., & S. Bateman. 2006. Introduction to fluid therapy. In S. DiBartola, ed.
Fluid,Electrolyte,and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice,325-344.St.
Louis: Elsevier.
Guyton, A., & J. Hall. 2000a. Physiology of gastrointestinal disorders. In Textbook of
Medical Physiology, 10th ed., 764-771. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Guyton, A., & J. Hall. 2000b. Vascular distensibility and functions of the arterial and
venous systems. In Textbook of Medical Physiology, 10th ed., 152-161. Philadelphia:
Saunders.
Mensack, S.2008. Fluid therapy: options and rational administration. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 38:575-577.
 Rudloff, E., & R Kirby. 2001. Colloid and crystalloid resuscitation. Vet Clin North Am
31:1207-1229.
Sadow, K. 2001. Prehospital intravenous fluid therapy in the pediatric trauma patient.
Clin Pediatr Emerg Med 2:23-27.
Weinstein, S. 1997. Principles of parenteral fluid administration. In Plumer's Principles
 Practice of Intravenous Therapy, 6th ed., 317-344. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wil-
liams & Wilkins.
Wingfield, W. 2002. Fluid and Electrolyte Therapy. In The ICU Book, 167-188. Jackson,
WY: Teton NewMedia.
Parenteral Nutrition
The Decision to Provide Parenteral Nutrition
Veterinary patients in the advanced care setting are faced with many different stressors 
and a variety of challenges throughout their illness and during their convalescence. The
hospital environment itself is far different from what is familiar to a household pet. In
addition to the stress of hospitalization, the animal is confronted with illness, limited
exercise, and potentially unfamiliar or unpalatable dietary offerings. The multitude of
challenges faced by emergency or intensive care patients contributes to changes in their
metabolism and changes in their dietary needs. Failing to provide adequate nutrition
during these changes sets the stage for malnutrition, impaired healing, and subsequent
or additional illness. The fact that a patients' nutritional needs must be addressed despite
the adversity of their situation has led to the use of the parenteral route for provision
of nutrition in patients that are unable to receive adequate nourishment orally.
 Intravenous (IV) nutrition is frequently used in intensive or critical care settings. The
two forms in common use are referred to as partial parenteral nutrition (PPN) and total
parenteral nutrition (TPN).
Partial Parenteral Nutrition
PPN is an IV fluid mixture that can provide roughly half of a hospitalized animal's
caloric requirements (Proulx 2002) (Fig. 10.1). PPN is used in patients perceived to need
supplemental nutrition for a period of up to 5 to 7 days (Mathews 2006). It is composed
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
179
180Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 10.1. Parenteral nutrition solution (PPN) can be compounded by hospital pharmacies. Solutions can
be mixed in private practice. Absolute sterile technique is mandatory.
of dextrose, vitamins, amino acids, triglycerides, electrolytes, trace minerals, and lipids
 In some cases multivitamins are added to the solution on a per patient basis, and they
are injected daily into the fluid bag by the technician. Further adjustments may be made
to the mixture according to patient needs. For example, protein content can be increased
wounds or animals suffering from hypoalbuminemia may benefit from PN with higher
protein content. In contrast, a patient with hepatic encephalopathy would benefit from
slightly lower protein content.
Standard dextrose concentration in PPN solutions is 5% (Freeman and Chan 2006).
 This component of PPN is also one that can be tailored to individual patients based on
their illness and endocrine status. Hyperglycemia is an important concern in critically
 ill patients, and judicious administration of dextrose, coupled with frequent patient
monitoring, is necessary to avoid this complication.
 Electrolytes are an important component of PPN, but interestingly they are not deliv-
ered as a standard inclusion in all hospitals. Some clinicians prefer to reserve the ability
to alter electrolyte administration as the patient's needs change, and as such, they opt
to deliver electrolytes as a separate supplement to facilitate adjustment. In general,
sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and chloride are provided in the PPN solution.
zinc, chromium, copper, and manganese because these become particularly depleted
(Freeman and Chan 2006).
Chapter 10:Parenteral Nutrition181
As previously mentioned, vitamins may be added to the PPN as it is mixed or may
be administered by the technician on a daily basis. Vitamin supplements should include
B vitamins, which are light sensitive. These need to be infused within 6 hours of admin-
istration (Mathews 2006). Patients receiving PPN for longer than 4 or 5 days also benefit
from vitamins A, D, E, and C.
Total Parenteral Nutrition
 TPN is an IV solution designed to provide 100% of a patient's nutritional requirements
(Proulx 2002). Its components are similar to that of PPN but with a more substantial
protein and calorie content. TPN is formulated with a far higher dextrose concentration
than PPN and contains 50% dextrose in the standard solution. TPN is typically reserved
for animals that require parenteral nutrition (PN) for longer periods of time, typically
longer than 7 days (Proulx 2002). In comparison with PPN, TPN has a greater cost and
more complications associated with its use (Freeman and Chan 2006).
Lipids
Lipids are a calorie-dense solution delivered in conjunction with PPN or TPN. They are
made up of natural fats, fat-soluble vitamins, triglycerides, phospholipids, and waxes
(Crandell 2005). The lipid solution is a concentrated source of energy and essential fatty
acids. Its use provides calories that supplement PPN/TPN but does so in a manner that
is efficient with respect to the volume delivered (Figs. 10.2 and 10.3).
Administration of lipids to critically ill patients is not undertaken without concern.
Side effects such as immunosuppression and hypertriglyceridemia are associated with
the use of lipids. Immunosuppression appears to be a more common side effect in criti-
cally ill patients that receive lipids as part of their PN (Crandell 2005). These side effects
are of particular concern when lipids are made with safflower oil or soybean bases
(Freeman and Chan 2006).
Because PPN and TPN can be used in conjunction with, or in the absence of lipids,
their use must be well thought out and prescribed by the attending clinician on a case-
by-case basis.
Parenteral Nutrition in the Advanced Care Setting
Why is parenteral nutrition necessary?
Weight loss, specifically loss of lean body mass, is detrimental to the health and well-
being of any veterinary patient (Fig. 10.4). Animals whose caloric requirements are
failing to be met experience delayed wound healing, decreased strength, and even dis-
ruption of their immune system. In broader terms, loss of lean body mass has a negative
impact on the patient's convalescence, delays their mobility, and lengthens their stay in
the hospital.
Critically ill animals expend much of their energy improving their health. Their bodies
experience an increased demand for appropriate calories, and as such, their needs are
182Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 10.2. A small bag of lipid solution may be infused in conjunction with the parenteral nutrition
solution.
different from those of a healthy resting animal. Proulx (2002) differentiates between
simple starvation, a lack of adequate calories and protein, and stress starvation, a lack
of adequate calories and protein in conjunction with illness and injury or physiologic
stress. Providing a distinction for the starvation that occurs during ill health helps
emphasize that a healthy animal has different caloric needs than a sick animal. Loss of
 body mass and starvation occur more rapidly in the injured or diseased animal than in
an otherwise healthy one.
An illness that prevents or discourages an animal from eating for several days sets in
motion a chain of events. Inadequate caloric intake causes the body to use its stores of
hepatic glycogen. Once these stores have been exhausted, muscles are exploited as a
protein source. Specifically, the body mobilizes the muscles’ amino acids. The use of
 muscle mass as a protein source is not without consequence and has been linked with
changes in the normal structure of the organs (Proulx 2002). An animal can endure
starvation and prolong its survival by using alternative energy sources within its body.
However, these means are successful for a finite period of time and not in the face of
additional disease. PN can mitigate the effects of the body's catabolic response to starva-
tion by providing an external source of protein and energy. Its use in the critical care
setting allows the clinician to decrease the chance that the patient will suffer from
disease-related malnutrition throughout its hospitalization. PN may also be used as
dietary support for patients that present in an established state of malnutrition.
Figure 10.3. Lipids are also available in large bags.
Figure 10.4. Starvation is apparent in this emaciated canine.
183
184Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
When is parentera! nutrition appropriate?
 Not every hospitalized patient is a candidate for PN. Many patients are able to maintain
their caloric intake through normal eating and drinking. Animals that are inappetent,
 unable to prehend food, unable to masticate, or have had gastrointestinal disease or
procedures involving their gastrointestinal tract may be adequately fed via the enteral
route using nasogastric, esophagostomy, gastrotomy, or jejunostomy tubes. Whenever
 o a ais is a a a a e sd e aa i assd si a!
do so. Enteral feeding is known to have a lower incidence of infection and complications
than parenteral feeding (McClave et al. 2009). Generally speaking, patients that are
candidates for PN are those that cannot tolerate feeding by any of the previously men-
tioned means.
 PN may be the chosen route of nourishment in animals that are currently or are at
risk of becoming malnourished, in animals whose history involves 3 days of anorexia,
in animals expected to be anorexic for greater than 3 days, or in animals that are at
risk of significant loss of muscle mass during their hospital stay.
Timely initiation of PN is an important responsibility carried by the clinician. One
 must consider that the animal that has been ill for an unknown period of time before
admission is likely malnourished and will benefit from prompt administration of PN
(Figs. 10.5 and 10.6). In contrast, a patient that has recently sustained trauma was
presumably healthy before its accident. Barring any trauma-related damage to the diges-
tive system, PN may be withheld from this patient for a day or two to determine whether
it will resume eating on its own.
The physical examination is one approach to evaluating a patient's nutritional status.
The combination of the physical examination and the history provided by the patient's
owner allows the clinician to develop a reasonable estimation of the presence or absence
of malnutrition, starvation, and/or weight loss. Table 10.2 highlights areas that should
receive particular attention during the nutritional assessment portion of the physical
examination.
Figure 10.5.Malnutrition is evident in this dog. This animal has been suffering from its disease for a prolonged
period of time. This body condition did not develop suddenly.
Chapter 10: Parenteral Nutrition185
Figure 10.6. Patients suffering from neoplastic disease become cachectic if their disease is left untreated.
Table 10.1Potential Candidates for Parenteral Nutrition
· >3 d anorexia
·Protracted vomiting
● Gastrointestinal obstruction
· Unprotected airway
● Traumatic injury
● Severe infection
· Sepsis
● Open/Draining wounds
· Acute pancreatitis
● Mechanical ventilation
There is no hard fast rule about when PN should be initiated for a particular patient
because each situation is unique (see Table 10.1). What is important to consider is
that an animal requiring supplemental nutrition will benefit from the administration
of that nutrition as early as possible. In some cases, this must be by the parenteral
route. Studies have shown that despite the complications often associated with PN, it
is preferable to begin feeding parenterally than to delay feeding until the enteral route
is available (Powell-Tuck 2007).
Parenteraf nutrition administration
PN must be administered in specific ways. The method chosen by a particular veterinary
health care team is decided based on the materials available to them. Labor is also
186Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Weight
As per owner/medical records
Weight loss
Muscles
Muscle wasting
 Overt signs of weakness
Hair coat
Dull
 Poor quality
Lack of grooming
Wounds
Presence of old wounds
 Delayed wound healing
Eyes
Sunken eye position
Organs
May be decreased in size
an important variable that affects the safe administration of PN. Most advanced care
settings are well equipped, both with adequate numbers of trained staff and with appro-
priate materials, to deliver IV feeding safely to their patients. Smaller hospitals, in
 particular those that do not ofer 24-hour care, may have a more difficult time making
arrangements that are safe for the patient. PN is a very useful tool in veterinary medicine,
but it must not be undertaken without appropriate patient supervision. Delivery of PN
with IV fluids over a period of time when the clinic is not staffed with a technician
(overnight) leaves the patient vulnerable to a host of complications.
Catheter selection
PN can be administered through an IV catheter. Because the catheter will most likely
be in place for several days, it is important to choose a material that has a lower ten-
 dency to cause IV damage. Thrombus formation is a concern during PN administration
due not only to the presence of the IV catheter but also to the high osmolarity of the
solution being infused. The osmolarity of the infusate can cause irritation and inflam-
mation within the cannulated vessel. The catheter causes a direct physical irritation to
 the lumen of the vessel within which it is seated. The physical damage predisposes the
vessel to develop a thrombus.
Some materials have been found to be less irritating to the intravascular lining and
thus less thrombogenic than others. Many studies have been undertaken to determine
materials suitable for use in long-term indwelling IV catheters. The overall consensus is
that silicone and polyurethane catheters have a low incidence of associated thrombus
formation and intravascular irritation. These catheter materials are recommended for
use with PN infusions (Proulx 2002). Teflon is an example of a catheter material that
is thrombogenic (Tan 2003). Polyethylene and polyvinyl chloride catheters are also not
recommended for use with PN infusions (Freeman and Chan 2006).
A human study involving 190 oncology patients investigated the complication rate
associated with polyurethane catheters. A total of 206 catheters were placed, and the
average patient stay was 101 days. The results demonstrated that the complication
rate was low; 1 catheter was considered infected of 12 that were removed, and only
one thrombosis was recorded (Volkow et al. 2003). Another study involved the IV
Chapter 10:Parenteral Nutrition187
placement of implants in the femoral veins of rats. The researchers compared silicone,
GORE-TEX, and stainless steel implants with respect to vascular irritation and throm-
bus formation. The implants were left in place for 4 weeks, at which point the vessels
were evaluated. The silicone implants had a rare incidence of thrombi and elicited
mild perivascular inflammation. The GORE-TEX and stainless steel implants caused
moderate amounts of thrombi and moderate perivascular inflammation (Melvin et al
2010). By selecting catheters known to be made with nonthrombogenic material, the
technician can decrease the likelihood of catheter-related complications while admin-
istering PN.
Catheter sites and solution sets
Catheter sites must be selected with consideration of the PN being delivered. It is neces-
sary to deliver TPN via central venous catheter, but PPN may be delivered through a
peripheral catheter.
TPN is a calorie-dense fluid that is hypertonic to blood. Its delivery into a peripheral
vein leaves the patient at a higher risk for thrombophlebitis and vascular irritation. A
central line provides a safer route for delivery of TPN and is commonly placed in a
 jugular or saphenous vein. Despite the peripheral location of the saphenous vein, a long
catheter fulfils the requirement of a central line when its tip lies in the proximal vena
cava. The delivery of TPN into such a large vessel decreases the risk of vascular irrita-
tion. Whenever possible, the jugular vein should be selected over the saphenous site
because hind limb catheters are contaminated more easily due to their proximity to
patient waste (urine/feces).
Multilumen central lines offer the added advantage of separate lumens to dedicate
to individual fluids. One lumen can be labeled TPN and used exclusively for its delivery.
This exclusivity maintains an infusion line with a decreased number of opportunities
for bacterial contamination: The absence of line invasions, medication administrations,
and blood draws preserves the integrity of the ports and IV line.
PPN is a more versatile product in the sense that it may be delivered via central
venous catheter or peripheral catheter. A small-gauge catheter (preferable to larger
gauge) in the cephalic or saphenous vein can accommodate PPN delivery. A drawback
to using a short peripheral catheter is that the line can rarely be dedicated for the
explicit use of PN. The technician should strive to provide a catheter that can be
labeled solely for nutrition so that additional invasions of the line are limited, if not
 entirely eliminated. (Ambulatory canine patients require lines to be invaded for saline
flushes when being removed from their cages for walks.) In the event that the periph-
eral catheter is the sole IV access in the patient, a three-pronged port may be used to
allow multiple lines to feed into one catheter. In essence, the PN line is still dedicated,
and the contact with other IV fluids is kept to a minimum because the three-pronged
 port is attached directly to the catheter. The infusions mix for a brief period as they
pass through the catheter into the vein. A special technique is observed during medica-
tion administration in this instance. The PN line and the additional port/line are
clamped and flushed with heparinized saline, and the medication is administered and
followed by an additional flush.
A 1.2-pm inline filter can be included in the infusion set to avoid any clumps of lipid
 or large particles from the PN solution being administered to the patient. PN lines should
be changed frequently to diminish the possibility of contamination. Each hospital should
develop its own protocol with respect to management of PN lines. As a guideline, it is
188Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
recommended that TPN/PPN lines be changed every 24 to 48 hours (Matthews 2006;
 on ioa  a  n a  sn on ie  s ( xo
24 hours worth of PN at a time. In so doing, the entire solution system can be replaced
in a timely manner. Patients that are not having their solutions sets changed every day
should at least have the catheter bandages removed and the catheter site inspected daily.
 PN lines and ports can be wiped using a gauze square soaked in an antibacterial solu-
tion to maintain cleanliness between line changes. Should lines become contaminated
with any organic material, they should immediately be replaced.
Volumes and administration
The goal of nutrition therapy is to eradicate malnutrition if evident at time of presenta-
tion, to provide calories and energy to avoid malnutrition as a result of illness, and to
prevent loss of lean body weight during hospitalization. To determine how much an
animal requires during its illness, formulas have been created to facilitate calculation of
a patient's PN needs. There is variation with respect to clinician preference, and not all
hospitals use an identical formula. However, the notion of energy requirements at rest
 and energy requirements during the stress of illness is widely accepted and involved in
the determination of a patient's PN needs.
Before determining the animal's food requirement during illness, it is necessary to
have an idea of the animal's caloric requirement in good health. The following formula
 is used to determine the resting energy requirement (RER) of an individual animal:
RER = 70 x (weight in kg)07s (Freeman and Chan 2006)
In the event that calculation of an exponent is not available, the formula can be changed
to a slightly simpler format that provides a reasonable alternative:
RER = (30× weight in kg)+ 70 (Mathews 2006)
The simplified version is used for patients weighing between 2 and 25 kg.
 Thoughts surrounding caloric requirements during illness are varied. Some suggest
that the RER must be multiplied by a predetermined factor that corresponds to the
degree of illness experienced by the patient. Others argue that a predetermined number
 e ui a is on paq Aa si i i pe d ne og as nou s
rate that satisfies the RER and make changes to the PN rate based on patient response.
At this time, both approaches are practiced and appear to be used based on clinician
preference.
 Upon initiating nutrition therapy, the technician is also responsible for carrying out
orders corresponding to administration rates. The infusions are delivered in conjunction
with crystalloid fluids in most patients. The technician must monitor fluid administration
with due diligence because infusion pumps can be confused and infusion rates can be
inadvertently reset in busy hospitals. Each infusion rate should be checked hourly. The
technician should also be aware of the total volume of fluids received by the patient on
an hourly as well as a daily basis.
Due to the calorie-dense content of TPN, this infusion should be slowly introduced
to the patient. Gradual introduction allows the animal's metabolism to become accus-
tomed to the altered content of nutrients in the blood. TPN infusions should also be
weaned gradually and should not be suddenly discontinued (Proulx 2002).
Chapter 10:ParenteralNutrition189
Complications
Medication administration and fluid therapy are never undertaken without the knowl-
edge that complications can arise. Proper education surrounding possible complications
-i an in d  si in 'ao n rd  ds id  s
cian administering care to the critically ill patient be familiar with the types of complica-
tions that are most likely to occur with each type of therapy. Knowing which problems
are commonly associated with PN allows the technician to perform effciently and to
troubleshoot small changes in patients' vitals and general well-being.
 Complications associated with PN generally fall into one of two categories: mechani-
cal or physiologic. Mechanical complications are often a specialty of the advanced care
technician because she or he operates many different forms of equipment, catheters, and
devices every day. Physiologic complications can be of greater consequence to the patient
because they reflect changes that have already begun to affect the animal's health. The
threat of these complications is the reason for the diligent patient monitoring carried
out by the advanced care technician. She or he must be able to alert the clinician
to slight changes in the patient to permit prompt tailoring of the nutritional therapy
prescription.
Mechanical complications
Mechanical complications encountered during nutritional therapy are similar to those
involved with any IV infusion. Most often, they are related to a structural compromise
Of the infusion catheter. Peripheral catheters are subjected to varying degrees of patient
movement and can be dislodged, kinked, disconnected from the fluid line, or even acci-
dentally removed from (or by) the patient. To decrease the likelihood of any of these
difficulties, the catheter must be placed with much attention to positioning and to secur-
ing the catheter to the patient. Any compromise of sterility behooves the technician to
remove the catheter and choose a new site. Disconnection of the PN line from the cath-
eter may allow the catheter to be salvaged, but this must be determined on a case-by-case
basis depending on the degree to which the catheter has been exposed. If sterility is
compromised, the catheter should be removed. Any event involving disconnection of
lines from the catheter requires that new infusion lines replace those previously attached
to the bag in use.
 Central lines fall prey to similar mechanical diffculties as peripheral lines. Jugular
catheters also have the potential to kink, become obstructed, or disconnected from infu-
sion lines. It is less likely for central lines to be inadvertently removed; however, it is
possible. Because placement of central lines is a technically demanding and time-
consuming practice, it is important that any opportunity to avoid replacement of these
catheters be seized. Although we strive to maintain central lines in place, it is of signifi-
a possible source of infection.
Infection
IV catheters can be a source of infection in any patient. The integument is host to a
number of microbes that are for the most part harmless to the healthy individual.
However, failure to properly cleanse the skin before catheter insertion in an immune
compromised or ill animal allows for inoculation of bacteria during catheter placement
190Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
 Diligent use of sterile technique during placement contributes to catheter safety by sig-
nificantly reducing the probability of contamination. Maintenance of clean catheter
bandages and an unsoiled catheter site also contributes to catheter health in the sense
that bacterial populations are kept to a minimum and are less likely to invade the punc-
ture site.
 Failure to adhere to strict aseptic technique is not exclusively responsible for catheter-
 related infections. Presence of a foreign material, such as an indwelling catheter, within
long-term catheters. A coating develops around the catheter a short while after it has
material within its vessel (Lloyd 1997). The film that coats the catheter is primarily
made of fibrin. It is also able to form a fibrous extension at the catheter tip. Opinions
vary with respect to the degree to which the fibrin sheath is responsible for catheter
related infection. A study by the American Pediatric Surgical Association in 1991 con-
cluded that the fibrous film surrounding the catheter protected the catheter by keeping
the number of adherent bacterial populations in check (Lloyd 1997). Current thought
suggests the presence of fbrin sheath provides an ideal spot to which micro thrombi
 and opportunistic bacteria can adhere. The combination of a foreign object and a hyper-
tonic infusate present within a vessel sets the stage for lumen irritation and thrombus
formation. Thrombi that adhere to the fibrous coating surrounding the catheter provide
an ideal site for future infection (Opilla 2008)
 PN infusions are thought to put patients at risk for bloodstream infections. It is dif-
ficult to pinpoint which facet of nutrition therapy is most responsible for this tendency.
Infection can be a result of poor sterile technique during catheter placement, microbial
contamination during preparation of the infusate, contamination of the PN solution at
time/point of use, catheter contamination, or patient susceptibility due to immunosup-
pression or other metabolic complications.
Hyperglycemia
Regardless of the circumstances surrounding the use of PN, there is an associated risk
for development of hyperglycemia. It is thought that hyperglycemia is the most common
metabolic complication associated with the use of PN in veterinary patients (Freeman
and Chan 2006). Hyperglycemia is a disturbance with consequences that affect many
body systems. Its negative effects on the heart are caused by vasoconstriction and inflam-
 mation. In addition, hyperglycemia causes alterations in quantities of free fatty acids.
These acids are damaging to the cells of the myocardium (King et al. 2007).
Hyperglycemia and brain injury have an intricately woven relationship. Opinions
differ with respect to whether hyperglycemia worsens the brain injury or whether its
presence is a sign of the presence of significant injury. Despite these opposing theories,
 there is agreement that hyperglycemia in brain-injured patients is linked to a poor prog-
nosis (King et al. 2007).
Elevated blood glucose in critically ill patients causes further complications by stimu-
lating the coagulation cascade and altering the inflammatory mechanism. The disruption
of normal inflammatory processes has multiple consequences, not the least of which is
an increased risk of infection. Hyperglycemia alters the inflammatory process and
reduces its ability to respond appropriately to bacterial contamination. The result is that
bacteria populations are able to grow with little disruption. In this way, hyperglycemia
reduces an animal's ability to fight infection.
Chapter 10:Parenteral Nutrition191
Two main mechanisms are responsible for the development of hyperglycemia during
nutrition therapy. The first involves the composition of the PN solution. There is a direct
link between the concentration of dextrose in the PN infusion and the patient's blood
glucose level. PN solutions containing higher concentrations of dextrose lead to eleva-
tions in patient blood glucose.
The second set of circumstances that leads to hyperglycemia involves the animal's
response to stress and the physiologic changes associated with this response. One of the
body's responses to stress or severe illness is to release surplus cortisol and catechol-
amines. One of the important functions of these hormones is to cause an increase in
blood glucose levels.
 Understandably, a critically ill patient whose body is responding to the stress of their
illness and whose primary source of nutrition contains a significant amount of dextrose
is a high-risk candidate for hyperglycemia. The body's response to stress is a factor that
is beyond the control of the animal's caregivers. Instead, the clinical team must focus on
the delivery of PN, tailoring its ingredients to suit patient needs. Avoidance of dextrose
overfeeding is key to minimizing the occurrence of hyperglycemia. Provision of dextrose
at a rate of 4mg/kg per minute or less is recommended (Btaiche and Khalid 2004).
Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia is an avoidable complication associated with PN. It is typically encoun-
tered during discontinuation of PN rather than throughout therapy. Abrupt cessation
of the PN infusion leaves insufficient time for the body to adapt to the decrease in
dextrose previously received IV. Patients diagnosed with liver disease, malnutrition, or
hypothyroidism are at an increased risk of developing hypoglycemia during withdrawal
of PN (Btaiche and Khalid 2004).
Hypoglycemia associated with discontinuation of PN occurs soon after the infusion
has been stopped. Glucose monitoring is important, particularly within the first hour
that the patient is off PN. Drops in blood glucose can be avoided by gradually weaning
the animal off the infusion rather than abruptly stopping it. Slowly decreasing the fluid
rate over 1 to 2 hours should be suffcient to avoid hypoglycemia in most patients.
Refeeding syndrome
 Refeding syndrome is an uncommon complication associated with PN. The fact that
it can be life threatening makes it an important inclusion in the PN discussion despite
its infrequency.
Several metabolic disturbances can arise at the outset of PN therapy. Providing nutri-
tion to a body that has been without for an extended period of time causes a spike in
insulin production and release. Insulin causes potassium and glucose to move from the
extracellular space into the intracellular space. It also causes magnesium and phosphates
to move in the same direction. As a result, the extracellular space develops a deficit of
 these important electrolytes. Hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, and hypomagnesemia
are the primary disturbances involved in refeeding syndrome.
Clinical signs of hypophosphatemia include weakness and intestinal ileus. In severe
cases red cell hemolysis and thrombocytopenia have also been documented as clinical
signs of hypophosphatemia.
Patients that develop hypokalemia may develop signs such as muscle weakness, poly-
uria, and polydipsia. Ventroflexion of head and neck may be witnessed in some cats.
192Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Cardiac function is also affected by severe hypokalemia and can manifest as supraven-
tricular or ventricular arrhythmias (DiBartola and Autron de Morais 2006).
The effects of hypomagnesemia are widespread and difficult to specify. However, two
important considerations for the technician are the role of magnesium in cardiac con-
cardiac arrhythmias and muscle spasms. Muscle spasms due to hypomagnesemia are
 uncommon in canine and feline patients.
Vitamin imbalances are also a component of refeeding syndrome. The spike in insulin
observed on initiation of PN also results in increased synthesis of proteins. Thiamine is
needed for this synthesis, and the overwhelming demand that occurs with refeeding
syndrome can lead to a thiamine deficiency (Abood et al. 2006).
Refeeding syndrome can be avoided in most veterinary patients by beginning the
PN infusion slowly and gradually increasing the patient's caloric intake. Additional
strategies for circumventing this complication are to administer multivitamins in
conjunction with the TPN or PPN and to monitor electrolytes regularly throughout
nutrition therapy. In so doing, electrolyte disturbances can be identified early on and
promptly treated
Chapter Summary
PN is a useful tool in the advanced and critical care setting. Many veterinary patients
lack the desire to eat during a bout of severe illness. Other patients have the desire to
eat but not the physical ability. PN provides a route for these patients to receive calories
and vitamins despite their medical conditions.
 PN can be formulated to provide a percentage of the patient's daily caloric require-
ments or the entire caloric requirement. Lipids and vitamins are a beneficial addition to
the base formulas of PPN and TPN.
  a     s       s
nutrition through an IV catheter. Diligence with cleanliness and sterile technique are
mandatory when working with PN bags, fluid lines, and catheters.
Review Questions
1. What is parenteral nutrition?
2.
What is the difference between TPN and PPN?
3. When should PN be considered for a particular patient?
 4. Identify four complications potentially associated with delivery of PN.
5. What is the refeeding syndrome?
review questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley
com/go/donohoenursing.
Chapter 10:Parenteral Nutrition193
Further Reading
Abood, S., M. McLoughlin, et al. 2006. Enteral nutrition. In S. DiBartola, ed. Fluid,
Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 601-619. St. Louis:
Saunders.
Btaiche, I., & N. Khalid. 2004. Metabolic complications of parenteral nutrition in
adults.Part 1.Am } Health Syst Pharm 61:1938-1949.
Chittick, P., & R. J. Sherertz. 2010. Recognition and prevention of nosocomial vascular
device and related bloodstream infections in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med
38(8 Suppl):S363-372.
Crabb, S., & L. Freeman, et al. 2006. Retrospective evaluation of total parenteral nutri-
tion in cats: 40 cases (1991-2003). J Vet Emerg and Crit Care 16:S21-S26.
Crandell, D. 2005. Use of lipids in parenteral nutrition. Proceedings IVECCS; Atlanta,
GA;527-529.
DiBartola, S., & H. Autron de Morais. 2006. Disorders of potassium: hypokalemia and
hyperkalemia. In S. DiBartola, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in
Small Animal Practice,91-121. St. Louis: Saunders.
Freeman, L., & D. Chan. 2006. Total parenteral nutrition. In S. DiBartola, ed. Fluid,
Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice,584-600. St. Louis:
Saunders.
 King, G., M. Knieriem, et al. 2007. Hyperglycemia in critically ill patients. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 29:360-362
Lloyd, D. 1997. Central venous catheters for parenteral nutrition: a double-edged
sword.}Pediatr Surg32:943-948.
Mathews, K. 2006. Nutritional support for the injured or diseased cat and dog. In
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Manual, 499-519. Guelph, Ontario, Canada:
LifeLearn.
McClave, S., R. Martindale, et al. 2009. Guidelines for the provision and assessment of
nutrition support therapy in the adult critically ill patient. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
33:277-316.
 Melvin, M., et al. 2010. Silicon induces minimal thromboinflammatory response during
28-day intravascular implant testing. ASAIO J. 56:344-348.
Opilla, M. 2008. Epidemiology of bloodstream infection associated with parenteral
nutrition. Am } Infect Control 36:S173 e5-8.
Parker, J. W., and R. W. Gaines Jr. 1995. Long-term intravenous therapy with use of
peripherally inserted silicone-elastomer catheters in orthopaedic patients. J Bone Joint
Surg Am 77:572-577.
 Pasquel, F., et al. 2010. Hyperglycemia during total parenteral nutrition. Diabetes Care
33:739-740.
 Powell-Tuck, J. 2007. Nutritional interventions in critical illness. Proceedings of Nutri
tion Society 66:16-24.
 Proulx, J. 2002. Nutrition in critically ill animals. In W. E. Wingfield, ed. The Veterinary
ICU Book, 202-217. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Stratman, R., C. Martin, et al. 2010. Candidemia incidence in recipients of parenteral
nutrition. Nutr Clin Pract 25:282-289.
Tan, R., A. Dart, et al. 2003. Catheters: a review of the selection, utilisation and com-
plications of catheters for peripheral venous access. Aust Vet J 81:136-139.
Volkow, P., et al. 2003. Polyurethane II catheter as long-indwelling intravenous catheter
inpatients with cancer.Am}Infect Control31:392-396.
Blood Transfusions and Blood
Component Therapy
Transfusion medicine is a standard of care in emergency and specialty practices. As the
knowledge base in the field has grown, transfusions have been made safer through the
development of fast, accurate, user-friendly point-of-care blood typing equipment and
cross-matching procedures. Although transfusion of blood and blood products is never
without associated risks, pretransfusion testing, donor screening, and proper sample
handling contribute to the safe use of blood component therapy in all types of veterinary
care settings.
Blood Components
Whole blood (WB) is the term used to describe blood that has been collected from a
donor and has remained intact with respect to the cells and plasma it contains. It is
mixed with an anticoagulant and preservative to maintain its integrity but otherwise
has been unchanged.
 Blood components are the products derived from WB that have been separated, typi-
cally by centrifugation, and preserved in smaller volumes. The goal of centrifuging WB
is to end up with a specific cell population or fluid type in the highest concentration or
purest form possible. For example, WB is often separated into a unit of packed red
blood cells (PRBC) and a unit of fresh plasma (FP). Different descriptors are used for
 the plasma component as its composition and function change according to how and
when it is processed. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP), platelet concentrate (PC), and cryopre-
cipitate (Cryo) are also blood components yielded by the centrifugation of WB.
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Tecbnicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
@ 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
195
196Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Feline blood donation yields smaller volumes of WB than canine donations due to
the smaller size of the donor. WB is still divided into components, but the process is
usually limited to production of a unit of PRBCs and a unit of plasma.
 Blood transfusion or blood component therapy can involve the administration of one
or more of the previously mentioned components to an individual patient. In contrast,
the use of blood components also allows one donation to potentially benefit more than
one patient by using the separated components to treat different conditions in separate
animals.
Blood and blood products are obtained from a source that is suitable for the needs
of an individual practice. Blood banks are organizations that provide blood products to
veterinary practices throughout North America. Most are accessible online, which facili-
tates cost comparison and simplifies the ordering process.
Alternatives to blood banks are available. Individual veterinary practices must decide
what is appropriate for their situation. Consideration should be given to the availability
of suitable storage options for blood products, client base, frequency of emergency admis-
sions, and presence or absence of equipment needed for the safe administration of blood
products. In smaller, quieter practices, it may be feasible to have a list of available donor
animals that can be on call for the occasional emergency requiring blood. Alternatively,
a practice may benefit from hosting its own blood donor program, either using resident
Blood Donors
To preserve the health and well-being of canine and feline donors, it is imperative that
these animals be screened before selection for donation. Guidelines have been developed
to assist in donor selection.
Canine blood donors
Because blood collection is usually a quick and simple process, dogs with an easygoing
personality often do not need the aid of chemical restraint for their donation. Canine
donors should be outgoing dogs, comfortable with restraint, and have no history of
aggression. Dogs that meet other donor criteria but have minor anxiety can still enter
the blood donor program because mild sedation is often all that is necessary to overcome
their apprehension.
Canine donors should be between 1 and 7 years of age and weigh at least 22kg
(50lbs). In addition to the personality and age requirements, certain health criteria must
also be met. Potential donors should have no history of heart disease or seizures. Physi-
cal examination should not document any abnormal findings that may be related to
potential or progressive disease conditions (i.e., enlarged lymph nodes, bumps that may
be undefined tumors). Preventive medications are acceptable for potential donors, but
other than heartworm and other antiparasitic medication, donors should not be taking
medication regularly.
Fefine bfood donors
Unlike their canine counterparts, selection of potential feline donors is not as personality
dependent. Cats that are notoriously extremely fractious are certainly not ideal
Chapter 11: Blood Transfusions and Blood Component Therapy197
candidates for blood donors. However, it is rare to find a feline donor that is not objec.
tionable on some level. For this reason, feline blood collection is always undertaken
with the benefit of chemical restraint. Standard operating procedures may vary from
one donor program to the next. Feline donors may receive injectable sedation or anaes-
thetic or receive full general anaesthesia with inhalants.
Feline donors should have a body weight that is not less than 4.5 kg (10 lbs). The cat
should be between 1 and 7 years of age. Other criteria are much the same as those for
canine donors. The potential donor should have no history of heart disease or murmur
and no history of seizure activity. Preventive medication is acceptable, but the cat should
not be receiving other medication regularly.
Prescreening potential donors
Once the initial donor selection criteria have been met, the candidates should undergo
routine blood work, and vaccines status should be examined and updated if necessary.
Blood work should consist of a complete blood count, a platelet count, and a full bio-
chemical profile.
Canine donors should be screened for von Willebrand factor disturbances, tick-
borne disease (i.e., babesiosis, Lyme disease), heartworm disease, and brucellosis. In
addition, it is prudent to consider diseases that may be endemic to a particular
geographic location and screen for these if possible. Donors should be vaccinated
for distemper, rabies, and parvovirus as a minimum standard of care. Fecal testing
and thorough physical examination  should confirm the absence of parasitic
infestations.
 Potential feline donors should be screened for common viral infections such as feline
leukemia virus and feline immunodeficiency virus. Mycoplasma baemofelis and heart-
worm screening are also recommended for potential feline blood donors. Cats should
be fully vaccinated against rabies, feline viral rhinotracheitis, calicivirus, and panleuko-
penia. Fecal testing and physical examination should be performed to ensure the can-
didate is parasite free. All donors should be blood typed before admission to a blood
donor program.
Blood Types
Different blood types exist within the canine and feline species, respectively. It is impor-
tant to identify the blood type of each recipient and each donor. Transfusion of a blood
component that differs from that of the recipient can lead to severe and sometimes fatal
transfusion reactions in the recipient.
Canine blood types
Red blood cells (RBCs) are coated with antigens, structures made of protein and
complex carbohydrates. An antigen is a material that causes antibody production when
introduced into the body. Canine blood types are classified in a system that identifies
specific dog erythrocyte antigens (DEAs). There are seven different blood groups catego-
rized by this system. Each blood type is grouped according to the location of the antigen
on the RBC membrane. The positions on the membranes are organized using a numeric
198Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
system. Dogs may or may not have antigens at the locations identified as 1.1, 1.2, 3, 4,
5, and 7, and they can also be positive or negative for the Dal antigen (Tocci and Ewing
2009). DEA 1.1 and DEA 1.2 are the most clinically relevant antigens with respect to
transfusion medicine. DEA 1.1 negative dogs are those that do not have an antigen at
the location 1.1. Dogs that are DEA 1.1 positive have an antigen at that location. DEA
1.1 negative dogs that receive a transfusion from a DEA 1.1 positive donor will start
producing anti-DEA 1.1 antibodies shortly after receiving the transfusion. The antibod-
ies adhere to the foreign RBCs and eventually destroy them. This type of reaction is
known as a delayed reaction and typically not life threatening. More severe transfusion
reactions involve much more acute destruction of RBCs; they are immediate and life
threatening.
The nomenclature associated with blood types is most commonly abbreviated to
A- or A+ based on the DEA 1.1 and 1.2 locations. An A- patient does not have an
antigen at either location, but an A+ patient can have an antigen at either or both loca-
tions. For this reason, clarification of donor/recipient compatibility based on blood
typing performed using typing cards should be carried out by way of cross matching.
A+ dogs can safely receive A- blood because there is no foreign antigen to which they
react. The opposite situation, an A- dog receiving A+ blood, introduces RBCs with
antigens at locations that are foreign to the A- dog, and an immune reaction is initiated.
Because dogs are not born with an anti DEA 1.1 antibody, an A- dog can usually safely
receive one A+ transfusion but no further A+ transfusions subsequent to that (Tocci and
Ewing 2009). Dogs with the A- blood type are considered universal donors because
they can safely donate to A- or A+ recipients.
Felineblood types
The feline blood type classification system identifies cats as having blood type A, B, or
   sd a   a p  a  a 
States is type A (Green 2002). In contrast to canine counterparts, some cats are born
with preformed antibodies that will attack foreign blood types. Cats that have type B
blood possess anti-A antibodies and can mount a life-threatening reaction to their first
of A+ blood due to the absence of preformed antibodies).
Type A cats are sometimes but not always born with anti B antibodies. Roughly 30%
 of type A cats have these antibodies before ever receiving a transfusion of type B blood
(Green 2002). Whereas B cats transfused with incompatible blood products generally
have severe reactions, A cats more often experience a milder reaction.
As the science of transfusion medicine progresses, more antigens are being discovered.
So far, these have been unrelated to the DEA and A and B antigens in dogs and cats,
respectively. For example, the DAL antigen in dogs was first reported as recently as
2002 (Blais 2002) and published in 2007. At the moment, DAL antigen negative dogs
are rare. Because DAL antigen typing is not yet widely practiced, it is possible that many
DAL-negative patients may receive an initial transfusion of DAL-positive blood. As such,
they will become sensitized to the DAL antigen and risk severe hemolytic transfusion
reactions in the future.
Similarly, the discovery of the Mik antigen in cats was first presented in 2005 (Wein-
stein 2007). The anti-Mik antibodies are also thought to be naturally occurring in cats,
similar to the anti-A antibodies in type B cats.
Chapter 11: Blood Transfusions and Blood Component Therapy199
Blood Typing
Due to the potential for life-threatening transfusion-associated reactions in recipients,
blood typing before transfusion is a necessity. Undoubtedly, situations arise that dictate
immediate delivery of blood products and do not allow the clinical team the luxury of
time for compatibility testing. These situations are few, and as such, we are most often
able to increase the safety of transfusion medicine by performing blood typing test(s)
before administration of blood products.
Blood typing relies heavily on the visible reaction that occurs when blood aggluti-
nates. Agglutination is the process in which RBCs come together and stick to each other
 in a nonspecific pattern (Fig. 11.1). The cells join in random order and collect in a clump
shaped like a cluster of grapes (Mathews 2006). The agglutination pattern is not to be
confused with rouleaux, a grouping of cells comparable with a stack of coins.
A common method of blood typing uses a small sample of blood and a pretreated
card with reagent-filled windows. There is an appreciable reaction with the reagent in
 one of the test windows that allows the operator to determine the animal's blood type.
Animals with diseases involving autoagglutination present an interesting dilemma for
blood typing. Because their blood is already agglutinating, it cannot be certain that the
reaction noted on a test card is actually due to reaction with the reagent rather than
autoagglutination due to the patient's disease. In dogs with a confounding test result, it
is safer to assume that the patient is negative for RBC membrane antigens that are
common in the species and to transfuse with a blood from an A- donor. In cats, it is
difficult to follow the same reasoning, but if no other options are available and the
patient is a domestic short- or long-haired cat, it is likely that the cat is type A. Further
testing is required before transfusing auto agglutinating patients due to the diffculty
encountered in interpreting agglutination on blood typing cards.
Canine blood typing
Blood typing cards are a user-friendly point-of-care testing method used to differentiate
DEA 1.1 positive dogs from DEA 1.1 negative dogs. The cards only screen for antigens at
the 1.1 location and can only be used as a preliminary testing method for determining the
blood type of a canine patient. A dog that screens as A- on a typing card still has the
88
Agglutinated RBC's
Figure 11.1. Red blood cells stick together in this arrangement in a process called agglutination. Illustration
by Rachel Wallach.
200Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
 potential to be positive for the DEA 1.2 location. Because the card does not screen for this
location on the RBC membrane, it is not a foolproof way of ensuring that the dog is truly
A-. If the recipient's blood type is in question and A- blood is available, it is considered
safe practice to administer an A- transfusion to the patient even with the potential for the
patient to be antigen positive at DEA 1.2. Conversely, if it is the donor's blood that tests
negative on the typing card, further testing is still required in case the donor is positive for
 DEA 1.2. Administering blood that types negative on preliminary screening to an A-
recipient can have serious consequences if the donor is in fact DEA 1.2 positive.
 Use of the blood typing cards is straightforward, and the instructions provided are
clear and easy to follow. In general, canine typing cards involve a window to test for
autoagglutination, two control windows, and a test window. The reagents in the windows
are reconstituted with the diluent provided. Once reconstituted, a drop of patient blood
is applied and the liquids are stirred with individual stirrers provided in the package
The card is then rocked and the tester observes for signs of agglutination. Agglutination
agglutination, the patient is DEA 1.1 positive. If the patient test window shows no reac-
tion, the patient is DEA 1.1 negative.
 Further testing is required to identify blood types specifically in blood donors. It is
beneficial to identify whether canine donors and recipients are positive or negative for
the Dal antigen as well. This process is not possible using the test cards.
It is important to remember that the efficacy of the typing cards may be compromised
in patients with autoagglutination or marked anemia.
 Blood typing can also be performed using a technique that involves columns of gel
rather than flat cards. Small tubes are used to house the reagents. At the lower end of
the tubes, the gel acts as a filter and only the RBCs that are not agglutinated pass through
the filter and congregate at the bottom. The cells that agglutinate are easily observed
suspended in the gel medium at the lower end of the tube. Benefits associated with this
 method of blood typing include easy interpretation and preservation of the reacted cells
 in the gel. The stability provided by the gel allows the agglutinated cells to be reviewed
for a longer period of time. To date, the results obtained from the gel method are largely
compatible with those obtained from the card method (Tocci and Ewing 2009).
Felineblood typing
Feline blood typing is carried out in much the same manner as canine. Species-specific
blood typing cards are used and the method is similar (Fig. 11.2).
 Feline typing cards have three windows coated with dried reagent. The first window
is used to verify that the patient is not autoagglutinating. Its test is completed before
initiating the rest of the typing procedure. The second and third windows determine
blood type.
 The reagent windows are reconstituted using the diluents provided with the test. A
drop of the patient's blood is then incorporated onto each window and mixed well with
ede si   mom a  sn s n s   
the reagent window for type A, then the cat is blood type A. If the agglutination is
 e q oi seade au  ' d poa si ien a g mom ui de
both windows, the cat is type AB.
Blood typing cards for cats provide a true blood type for each animal screened. In
contrast to the typing cards for dogs, which only type the location for DEA 1.1 and
may falsely identify a 1.2 positive donor as A-, the feline typing cards firmly ascertain
whether the cat is type A, B, or AB.
Chapter 11: Blood Transfusions and Blood Component Therapy201
Figure 11.2. Blood typing cards are a convenient way to determine feline blood types. Tests can be used at
Cage side and are a cost-effective way of increasing the safety of feline blood transfusions.
Determining Donor Recipient Compatibility
 In addition to blood typing donors and recipients, the safety of blood transfusions can
be increased by determining whether the donor blood is compatible with the recipient
blood. It is possible for the recipient to react to the donor's blood despite having the
same blood type. This is in part due to the existence of RBC membrane antigens that
 are not yet recognized and for which no cage-side screening or typing yet exists.
Major crossmatch
 The major crossmatch is performed to determine the compatibility of donor blood and
recipient blood. Proper completion of the cross match that yields no evidence of agglu-
significantly reduce the chances of a hemolytic reaction in the recipient.
 In this procedure RBCs from the donor are washed and then mixed with serum from
the recipient. Evidence of agglutination confirms that the donor blood is not compatible
with the recipient and should not be used for a transfusion in this patient. If there is no
suggestion of agglutination, the donor and recipient are compatible and the blood can
be used for transfusion. It is important to recall that despite a compatible result from
the cross-match screening, a recipient may still have a reaction to the transfusion that
results in red cell destruction.
Agglutination confirms that the recipient has a preformed antibody to the donor's
 RBCs. The cross match does not determine whether this antibody was present from birth
or whether due to sensitization via previous transfusion of blood products. In either case,
the cross match gives a visibly appreciable result that rules out the donor sample tested.
Because the cross match relies heavily on agglutination as a marker of incompatibility
the test is less reliable in patients whose disease involves autoagglutination. Patients
suffering from immune-mediated hemolytic anemia are often autoagglutinating. A cross
202Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
match performed for one of these patients will likely yield a positive result due to the
ongoing destruction of RBCs that is a part of the disease. Cross matches may not be a
valuable pretransfusion screening test for these patients.
Minor cross match
The minor cross match evaluates the compatibility between the donor's plasma and the
recipient's blood. The recipient's RBCs are washed and mixed with donor plasma. After
is inspected for evidence of agglutination. If agglutination is documented, the transfusion
would not be compatible with the recipient.
Blood Collection
Operating procedures vary from practice to practice. The following methods can be
used as a guideline for the processes involved for safe and smooth blood donations.
These are by no means the only methods available
Canine blood donation
The goal of the technician should be to make the donation process as smooth, stress
free, and comfortable as possible for the donor. The technician should use any oppor-
tunity to decrease the amount of anxiety that a donor may experience. If donors have
 been selected according to recommended guidelines, most will have a personality that
is not highly stressed to begin with
A standard canine blood donation involves removal of approximately 450 mL of WB.
A guideline of 16 to 18mL of blood per kilogram of body weight should maintain the
collection within safe parameters (Ogg 2001). Dogs donating through a blood donor
 program can typically donate blood every 3 to 4 weeks.
A physical examination should be performed before every donation. Accurate record-
keeping is essential. Once the physical examination is completed, a small blood sample
may be obtained from a peripheral vessel to evaluate the donor's packed cell volume
(PCV). Dogs with PCVs less than 40% should not be used for donation (Giger 2010).
A stick blood urea nitrogen (BUN) should also be included in the precollection
examination.
 The technician should record which jugular vein is used and which peripheral vein
is catheterized (if any) for each collection. The same vessel(s) should not be used in
consecutive collections but should be alternated at each visit. Once the jugular vein has
been selected, the hair is clipped and topical anaesthetic cream is applied to the skin.
The cream should be applied approximately 30 to 60 minutes before collection; with
60 minutes the goal. Covering the shaved area may increase the efficacy of the cream.
Sedation is required for some canine donors. Practices that choose to place peripheral
intravenous (IV) catheters can administer sedation by this route. Otherwise, the techni-
cian should choose a route that involves as little time and discomfort as possible. A
narcotic analgesic is a sound choice for sedation for the canine blood donor. Low doses
of butorphanol (0.2mg/kg) or hydromorphone (0.05 mg/kg) offer the added benefit of
Chapter 11: BloodTransfusions and Blood Component Therapy203
Figure 11.3.
 Closed systems are used for canine blood collection. The double bag allows for separation of
components.
analgesia as well as sedation. Other sedatives may be used, but the technician should
avoid administering medications that cause hypotension because they can complicate
the collection and potentially compromise the donor's safety. Glycopyrrolate is helpful
to reduce the secretion of saliva in the sedated animal (0.005 mg/kg) (Mathews 2006).
A three-stage surgical preparation of the shaved area over the jugular vein is used to
rid the skin of dirt and debris. The dog is then placed in lateral recumbency. The person
restraining the dog is also responsible for occluding or *holding off" the jugular vein.
The technician places the large gauge needle into the jugular vein and holds it in place
throughout the collection process. Care should be taken not to move the needle back
and forth or in and out of the vessel. Trauma to the vascular lining can lead to compli-
cations after collection.
The average volume of WB collected from a canine donor is 450mL per donation.
Collection systems are available that are preloaded with anticoagulant (Fig. 11.3). These
are closed systems where the needle is attached to tubing that leads directly into the
collection bag. The bag is weighed before, during, and after the donation to measure
the volume of collected blood. A vacuum tube can be placed on a small scale so that
once the suction is activated and the blood flows into the bag, the scale continuously
measures the volume in the bag. Once the goal volume is reached, the suction is turned
off and the needle is withdrawn from the donor's jugular vein.
Blood should be directed out of the lines and into the bag after collection. The WB
is mixed with the anticoagulant and a small volume can be allowed to flow back into
the tubing. A clamp is then applied to the line close to the bag to ensure that no further
blood product leaks out of the bag and into the line. Additional clamps can be placed
at intervals along the line to provide small volumes of blood that can be used for PCV
evaluation and other screening tests. The remainder of the collection line and the needle
should be disposed of appropriately.
Pressure should be applied to the donor's neck at the venipuncture site immediately
upon termination of collection. Pressure should remain for several minutes to curtail
hematoma formation. The donor's neck can be wrapped temporarily as an additional
precaution.
204Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
The donor should remain in the care of the technician until time of discharge. A quiet
and comfortable housing situation that facilitates frequent post-donation monitoring is
ideal. The donor should be well rewarded for the contribution.
Felineblood donation
 Each hospital must decide on a standard operating procedure that is safe for feline
donors in their care. One of the main variables encountered with feline donation in
    e      ss s 
precautions and patient well-being supersede other goals.
Each feline blood donor should be examined before the blood collection. Tempera-
ture, pulse, and respiration (TPR) should be recorded in the animal's patient record, as
well as body weight on the day of the donation. A small amount of blood work is
recommended before donation. The sample may be obtained from a peripheral vessel
or from a peripherally placed IV catheter prior to injection of any medication or flush.
In some blood donor programs, peripheral catheters are not placed until the feline donor
 aosd an uo sadap se po  azsa r pas aaq s
approachability of the cat. Moderate sedation can be achieved via intramuscular or
subcutaneous (SC) injection, which often facilitates placement of an IV catheter.
Blood collected from the IV catheter or the peripheral vein should be used to evaluate
PCV/total solids (TS) and stick BUN as a minimum database. Feline blood donation
should not be carried out if the donor's PCV is less than 28% (Mathews 2006).
 If the protocol includes sedation but not anaesthesia, the donor should receive oxygen
via face mask once sedation has taken effect. Donors that are intubated and anaesthe-
tized receive oxygen via endotracheal tube with their anaesthetic gas. The cat's eyes
should be lubricated with ophthalmic ointment. At the Ontario Veterinary College feline
donors receive 90 mL of SC fluid before donation. Most often this is 0.9% sodium
chloride.
A generous area around the jugular vein is clipped and surgically prepared (Fig. 11.4).
The phlebotomist must have clean hands and should observe strict aseptic technique
when handling the prepared area of the jugular vein and the butterfly needle. Wearing
gloves is advisable; however it may add an element of difficulty when palpating the
jugularvein.
 Blood is collected into a 60-mL syringe that has been preloaded with 8 mL of anti-
coagulant (Fig. 11.5). Venipuncture is best achieved using a butterfly needle (19G works
well), and the tubing is subsequently attached to the syringe once the needle is seated
in the vessel. A slow steady negative pressure is applied to the syringe to withdraw
blood. The syringe should be inverted often throughout the donation to ensure that the
anticoagulant mixes well with the blood.
Monitoring the patient is paramount to safe blood donation. Heart rate, respiratory
rate, and blood pressure should be evaluated frequently. It is common for the systolic
 blood pressure to drop quite low once the collction reaches the point at which 40mL
have been withdrawn. The technician must use judgment with respect to whether or not
it is safe to continue the collection. In most cases, the blood continues to flow into the
syringe without too much difficulty and the collection can be completed without inter-
ruption. In the event that the blood draw becomes more challenging and less blood is
flowing into the syringe despite continuous negative pressure, the collection should be
Chapter 11:Blood Transfusions and Blood ComponentTherapy205
Figure 11.4. A three-stage prep is used on a generous area of the jugular vein of feline donors
terminated immediately and the patient should be fluid resuscitated. In uncomplicated
donations, the donor receives the remainder of the fluid IV after collection (60 mL 0.9%
NaCl). It is important to deliver these fluids slowly. Fast delivery of IV fluids post dona-
tion expands the intravascular space very quickly. Bradycardia and pulmonary edema
are possible undesirable side effects (Ogg 2001).
As the cat recovers from the sedation or anaesthesia, the animal should be visible to
the technician at all times. Frequent evaluation of temperature, heart rate, and blood
pressure are recommended during the recovery phase. Hypovolemia is still a possible
side effect in spite of the replacement fluid therapy that the donor received pre and post
donation. The cat should be alert, ambulatory, normothermic, normotensive, and eating
well before discharge from the hospital.
Processing Blood and Creating Components
Anticoagulant is mixed with WB to render it useful post collection. Two- and three-bag
blood collection systems come preloaded with the anticoagulant citrate phosphate dex-
trose adenine (CPDA). The citrate component is an anticoagulant that prevents blood
clots from forming once the blood is mixed in the collection bag and line. The phosphate
acts as a buffer for the products created as a result of RBC metabolism. The dextrose
206Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 11.5. Feline blood collection involves a slow and steady aspiration of blood into a prepared syringe.
 and the adenine are included in the bags to preserve the cells in a healthy state (Lucas
et al. 2004).
Acid, citrate, and dextrose (ACD) is another anticoagulant used for blood donation.
 Blood mixed with ACD typically has a shelf life of 21 days (Green 2002). Adsol and
Nutricel are RBC preservatives. These products can be added to PRBCs to lengthen the
safe window for use of the component. They typically extend shelf life to approximately
30 to 35 days (Lucas et al. 2004).
Fresh whole blood
Blood removed from a donor and not processed in any way other than mixed with
anticoagulant is referred to as fresh whole blood (FWB). As such, it contains all of the
blood components: RBCs, white blood cells (WBCs), coagulation factors, platelets, and
plasma proteins. FWB should be administered to the recipient within 4 to 6 hours of
collection to conserve as many beneficial characteristics as possible (Chiaramonte 2004).
For example, coagulation factors and platelets lose their effectiveness as more time
elapses between collection and administration.
FWB not used for transfusion within 6 to 8 hours of collection can be saved and used
as stored WB, which is refrigerated at 4°C and is usable for up to 35 days if mixed with
CPDA 1 (Figs. 11.6 and 11.7).
Chapter 11: Blood Transfusions and Blood Component Therapy207
ing on the bag. Clear identification is necessary to contribute to the safety of transfusion medicine. The circular
received blood products.
Figure 11.7. Feline whole blood is stored in smaller bags. The bags can be spiked or the blood can be
Indications
FWB is the product of choice in a number of clinical situations. Patients that have
undergone trauma resulting in massive acute hemorrhage use not only the red cell
oxygen-carrying capacity in WB but also the coagulation factors. Similarly, a patient
with a coagulation disorder may also benefit from a transfusion of FWB. Anemia arising
from loss of WB rather than simply RBC destruction may be treated with FWB transfu-
sion to replenish the cellular component as well as the plasma component of the animal's
intravascular body water. A transfusion of 20mL/kg of FWB can raise a patient's PCV
by approximately 10% (Chiaramonte 2004).
208Fluid Therapy forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses
WB contains the same RBCs and plasma proteins as FWB, but many of its coagulation
factors are no longer functional. Factors dependent on vitamin K remain active in WB,
but factor VIlI, von Willebrand factor, and factor V are inactive. For this reason, WB is
not the product of choice in patients that require coagulation factors or platelets because
these are rendered inactive by refrigeration and as time elapses after collection.
Packed red bfood ceffs and fresh frozen pfasma
 is u io pd a d  () ed o s
banking programs (Figs. 11.8, 11.9, and 11.10). FWB is centrifuged at roughly 4000
rotations per minute for between 10 and 15 minutes (Chiaramonte 2004; Lucas et al.
aui oi ana suauoduon ou! paneiedas ag uen pooig aloym say payoed auilal jo lun auo a'tl aun
small volume removed from feline donors, feline blood is separated into PRBCs and FFP only,
Figure 11.9. A unit of feline FFP. FFP is stored in boxes as well as bags. The box is an additional means of
protecting the frozen product.
Chapter 11:Blood Transfusions and Blood Component Therapy209
Figure 11.10. Closed systems for canine blood collection are also available with three bags.
2004). Opinions vary regarding the appropriate temperature at which the blood should
be centrifuged. Most recommend storing and centrifuging FWB at 4°C if it is to be used
for PRBC and FFP products. Once the FWB is centrifuged, the plasma is separated from
the RBCs. This is facilitated through the use of the two- or three-bag collection system
whereby the products are maintained in a closed system and sterility is preserved via
transfer of products through sterile lines between bags.
PRBCs can be stored at 4°C for up to 20 days unless they have been prepared with
a preservative. Preservative solutions allow PRBCs to be refrigerated for up to 35 days
(Gibson 2007).
 Plasma is considered FFP if it is separated and frozen no more than 8 hours after col-
lection from the donor. (Note: Plasma must be frozen by 8 hours, not beginning to freeze
by 8 hours.) If these guidelines are followed, the FFP contains coagulation factors and
plasma proteins that are useful in many situations. FFP is stored at -20° for up to 1 year.
Fresh plasma (FP) is the product name for FFP that has been thawed, not used, and
refrozen, that has not been used within 1 year of freezing, or that has not been separated
within 6 hours of collection from donor (Gibson 2007).
Indications
 PRBCs are similar to WB in that they can provide oxygen-carrying capacity to anemic
animals. One of the benefits of PRBCs is that the volume of the transfusion is far smaller
than that of a WB transfusion despite a similar number of RBCs. The concentration of
210Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
359
Figure 11.11. Patients actively bleeding due to thrombocytopenia are candidates for platelet concentrate
transfusions.
the PRBCs is much higher, and the PCV of a unit of PRBCs generally runs between 70%
and 80% (Green 2002). PRBCs are an appropriate choice of blood product for patients
with anemia that do not have an associated hypovolemia. Animals that are at risk for
Or extremely sensitive to volume Overload should be transfused with PRBCs over FWB
 to reduce the volume of fluid delivered. The technician can expect to see a 1% increase
in PCV for every milliliter of PRBC per kilogram that a patient receives (Mathews 2006).
FFP is indicated in animals that have coagulation defects whether these are inherited
include vitamin K deficiency, von Willebrand factor deficiency, and hemophilia. Acquired
coagulopathies that may be treated with FFP include warfarin toxicity, disseminated
intravascular coagulation, and liver failure.
Platelet-rich pfasma and platelet concentrate
 Platelets are fragile elements of FWB. They require special handling to preserve their
function. The decision to make platelet products must be made before blood donation.
The blood must be collected into a latex-free, heparin-free system and must not be
refrigerated at any time prior to separation of components (Fig. 11.11).
To create PRP, FWB is centrifuged at a lower speed and for a shorter time than for
FFP and PRBCs. The plasma supernatant is separated as with other plasma components,
Chapter 11: Blood Transfusions and Blood Component Therapy211
but due to the special centrifugation, it contains a higher concentration of platelets. If
platelet concentrate (PC) is desired, the PRP is centrifuged again. The PRP should be in
a bag that is part of a closed system with a second empty bag. Once the PRP has been
spun, the top layer of plasma is moved into the second bag. This second bag can then
be frozen and is considered to be FFP. The small volume left in the initial bag should
 be approximately 50mL and is the component referred to as PC (Green 2002).
 Ideally, the platelet products are used promptly after separation. If this is not possible,
they can be maintained at room temperature for up to 5 days. The products should be
kept on a rocker that sustains continuous gentle motion.
 If platelet products are derived using an open collection system, sterility is not as
reliable. PRP and PC are not refrigerated and as such should be used within 4 hours of
collection if an open system is used during production (Gibson 2007).
Platelet harvesting by apheresis is a less common but very effective practice. Blood
is removed from a donor and processed in a closed system before being returned to the
donor. As the blood is removed, it is mixed with anticoagulant as it passes through the
apheresis circuit. The components are then separated via centrifugation. This process
yields PC, and the plasma and RBCs return to the donor. Benefits of this system include
a higher platelet count in the PC, fewer stray RBCs and WBCs in the PC product, and
a decrease in immune reaction in the recipient (Callan et al. 2009). Hypocalcemia is a
possible side effect for the donor due to the use of citrate anticoagulant in the blood
that is returned after apheresis.
Indications
 Blood components that target high platelet numbers are reserved for very specific situ-
ations (Fig. 11.12). Because the amount of platelets obtained from one unit of PRP or
PC is still relatively small, a transfusion of these components might make little difference
to a thrombocytopenic animal. In immune thrombocytopenia purpura (ITP) patients,
the infused platelets are also attacked by the immune system and destroyed. The use of
PRP or PC is controversial for these patients. In some clinical settings it is feasible to
load platelets with products that combat the immune-mediated disease that seeks to
 destroy them. In this situation it may be appropriate to provide an ITP patient with a
PRP or PC transfusion (Mathews 2006). Patients with life-threatening active bleeding
due to platelet defects or disorders (thrombocytopenia or thrombocytopathia) may also
require platelet transfusion (Callan et al. 2009).
Cryoprecipitate
Cryoprecipitate (Cryo) is a component derived from FFP. The plasma is slowly thawed
and then centrifuged while there is still a small amount of frozen plasma in the bag.
The centrifuge is set for 5000 rpm for 5 minutes. Ideally, the temperature in the centri-
fuge should be close to 4°C. A white precipitate forms after the FFP is spun, which is
separated from the liquid plasma. The supernatant is still a functional blood product
because it is rich in clotting factors, albumin, and globulin. The substance remaining in
the bag is the Cryo, and it contains high concentrations of von Willebrand factor, factors
VIII, XI, and XIl, and fbrinogen.
 Both the C and the C supernatant must be refrozen after separation. They may be
stored for 1 year at -20*C (Chiaramonte 2004).
212Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 11.12. Platelet concentrate can be administered via syringe driver.
Indications
Cryo transfusions are reserved for patients with von Willebrand factor deficiency or
hemophilia A (factor VIll dysfunction). Cryosupernatant may be used in hypoprotein-
emic patients or for patients with coagulopathies not specifically related to factors
remaining in cryoprecipitate.
Blood Transfusions
The decision to deliver blood products to a hospitalized patient is one that requires much
thought and planning. Transfusions, although potentially lifesaving, are also associated
to markedly improve the margin of transfusion safety, but it is impossible to completely
eliminate the risks associated with the administration of blood products.
Before administering a blood transfusion it is necessary to determine which blood
d a ri pus u a us na r as is si 
reason for the transfusion. For example,
 Does the patient require oxygen-carrying capacity?
 Does the patient require clotting factors?
Chapter 11:Blood Transfusions and Blood Component Therapy213
 Has the patient received previous transfusion(s) of blood products?
 Is the patient normovolemic or hypovolemic?
 If the patient is anemic, is the condition acute or chronic?
Answering these types of questions facilitates selection of a blood component that is
 appropriate for individual patients. Decisions regarding blood product selection are also
influenced by which components are available. An acutely anemic animal can beneft
from a PRBC transfusion or a WB transfusion, but the clinical situation may be such
that only one of the two products is available. In contrast, a hospital that has its own
blood donor program may be flush with blood products and have the choice of all of
the different components. The technician must consider how to best use their resources
regardless of the ease with which she or he can access blood products
Setting up a transfusion
Blood products are delivered through special blood administration sets that house a
filter within the line. In most systems the filter is found in the drip chamber. The blood
flows out of the bag, through the spike, and into the filter so that any small clots that
might have formed during storage are trapped by the filter and not delivered to the
 patient. Pore sizes of 170 μm to 270 μm are recommended for blood component therapy.
Smaller sizes are available, but these are prone to obstructing and also can flter out
platelets (Giger 2010). Platelet products must only be delivered through nonlatex trans-
fusion sets.
Once the blood component has been selected, the bag should be visually examined
to confrm the absence of large blood clots. Bags should also be inspected for any
possible breach of sterility because frozen products can easily sustain cracks to the
bag before thawing. The technician should confirm that the product chosen is the
correct component, the correct blood type, and that its use is taking place before its
expiration date.
 Frozen products may be thawed using a gentle warm water bath or in a commercial
plasma thawer. Care must be taken not to overheat the product because excessive
warmth can encourage growth of bacteria that may be present. Overheating blood
products also destroys clotting factors and can denature plasma proteins.
The line delivering the blood product can be piggybacked onto the main fluid infusion
set. It is advisable to connect the blood administration line to a port close to the animal,
particularly if the flow of fluids with or without blood products is very slow. There is
no need for the blood product to sit in the fluid line for any longer than necessary. As
 hospitals move toward needleless practice, it becomes easier to piggyback lines using
Luer lock ports.
Monitoring the transfusion
The patient must be examined before beginning the transfusion. Pretransfusion tempera-
ture and pulse is recorded on the patient's chart. Blood products are delivered slowly
for the first few minutes so that the technician may observe any sign that the patient is
reacting to the infusion. A small dose known as the test dose is administered after the
TPR. Test doses are administered at a rate of 0.25 mL/kg per hour. At the Ontario Vet-
erinary College Teaching Hospital, we administer the test dose over 15 minutes. For
214Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
example, to determine a test dose for a 48-kg dog:
Rate = 0.25 mL/kg per hour = 0.25 mL x 48 kg = 12 mL/h
Volume to be infused (over 15 minutes) = 12 mL/60 min: x mL/15 min
cross-multiply = 12 mL x15 min ÷ 60 min = 3 mL
Thus the 48-kg dog will receive a volume of 3 mL of blood over 15 minutes at a rate
of 12mL/h for its test dose.
Once the test dose has been administered, the TPR is repeated and recorded on the
chart. Increases in any of the parameters of the TPR are concerning and may be reflec-
tive of incompatibility of the blood product. A second test dose may be administered
if there is any doubt that the patient may be staging a reaction to the blood transfu-
sion. After the second test dose is administered, another TPR is performed. Discretion
'aop isn aun 1eadan on anedondde aq rou Ae 1 sseo aos u aseoaq Aressaoau st
 If the animal is displaying any other signs of transfusion reaction after the first or
second test dose, the transfusion should be terminated and the clinician should be
consulted. If there are no further changes to the animal's condition, it may be possible
to continue the transfusion. The clinician should be alerted regarding any change in
the patient's condition associated with infusion of a blood component. In some cases,
it may be appropriate to treat the animal with diphenhydramine (0.5 mg/kg) either
prophylactically, before the start of the infusion, or after the test dose if there are mild
concerns (Chiaramonte 2004).
The transfusion may continue at a higher flow rate if there are no changes to the
animal's TPR or condition during the test dose. It is recommended that blood compo-
nents be delivered within 4 hours of being spiked. Extending the transfusion time
increases the chances for contamination. A rate for the transfusion can be determined
by dividing the volume of the bag by 4 hours, which results in a rate in milliliters per
hour. For the average canine unit of blood, the calculation would be as follows:
 450mL ÷ 4h = 112.5mL/h
 The flow rate can be rounded up or down to 113 or 112mL/h, respectively
Transfusions may need to be administered over longer periods of time for patients that
have concurrent heart disease or that may be compromised by faster infusions.
Patients should be closely monitored throughout their blood product transfusion.
Close monitoring should continue for the 24-hour period following transfusion as well
because delayed transfusion reactions are possible.
The recipient's packed cell volume should be measured 1 to 2 hours posttransfusion
to determine the impact of the blood product. This evaluation is not mandatory if the
transfusion did not include RBCs.
Transfusion Reactions
Transfusion reactions are a potential threat that cannot be entirely eliminated. Several
different types of transfusion reactions are documented in recipients. These vary with
regard to the cells that trigger the reactions, the timing of the onset of the reaction, and
Chapter 11: Blood Transfusions and Blood Component Therapy215
 the clinical signs witnessed in the recipient. Transfusion reactions are categorized into
four groups that are highlighted here.
Immune responses staged against antigens found on RBC membranes are the most
  n os      s n 
the blood product. The RBCs are destroyed within the vascular space (acute haemolytic
  n a s  ) se   n  (s
under the category of acute immunologic reactions. The technician may appreciate
increases in temperature, heart rate, and respiratory rate with a concurrent decrease in
blood pressure. The patient's urine may develop a brownish tinge due to hemoglobin-
uria, a by-product of the intravascular hemolysis.
The recipient may also react to donor WBCs and platelets found in the transfused
component. In this type of reaction, the patient develops a mild fever. The RBCs are
not destroyed and there is no hemolysis. This reaction, known as an acute febrile non-
hemolytic reaction, is observed within half an hour of the start of the transfusion
(Chiaramonte 2004). Clinical signs of this reaction can be evident for close to a full day.
It is also classified as an acute immunologic reaction.
Acute nonimmunologic reactions include a wide range of clinical signs and physio-
logic changes that take place during or shortly after the transfusion. These include
electrolyte defects, volume overload, contamination of blood products, and damage
sustained by blood component due to mishandling (Hohenhaus 2006).
Immunologic and non-immunologic transfusion reactions can also be delayed. The
delayed immunologic reactions that occur posttransfusion are a result of antibodies
that develop in response to foreign antigens. Preventive measures such as cross match-
ing and blood typing do not prevent this type of reaction. Clinical signs such as
 purpura are associated with these reactions and can manifest 1 week posttransfusion
and last for up to 2 months (Chiaramonte 2004). Purpura is a term that describes
small reddish purple markings that appear on the patient's skin. The recipient's allo-
antibodies attack and destroy the patient's platelets, potentially leading to thrombo-
cytopenia. The red or purple marks, similar to but larger than petechiae, are areas of
bleeding underneath the animal's skin. Delayed nonimmunologic transfusion reactions
are the result of disease transmission through transfused blood components. Blood
from a donor with a viral infection exposes the recipient to the disease. Development
 of that disease in the recipient is an example of a delayed nonimmunologic reaction
(Hohenhaus 2006).
The technician must be diligent in the monitoring routine during administration of
reactions is imperative. Cessation of the transfusion is warranted until the clinician can
be notified of the changes in patient status. Thorough evaluation of the patient and
consideration of individual patient needs and circumstances must be undertaken by the
medical team before institution of further treatments.
Autotransfusion
  n  n  si p  n q ssad a si is
has been collected from a hemorrhage into one of its body cavities (abdomen or thorax)
(Figs. 11.13, 11.14, and 11.15). This type of transfusion, like any other, has associated
risks and benefits. Ideally, WB, FWB, or PRBCs should be available for a patient expe-
riencing a life-threatening hemorrhage.
Figure 11.13. Sterile technique is observed while inserting a large-bore catheter into the peritoneal cavity.
This patient has a hemoabdomen. Blood is collected for potential autotranfusion.
Figure 11.14. Negative pressure is created using a syringe attached to an extension set attached to the cath-
eter. A three-way stopcock facilitates transfer of the blood into a collection system.
216
Chapter 11: Blood Transfusions and Blood Component Therapy217
Figure 11.15. Blood is infused into the collection bag and can be stored for the patient from whom it was
collected. Alternatively, it can be immediately transfused into the patient. A typical blood transfusion set is
recommended due to the presence of an inline filter.
The patient's blood is removed via large-bore catheter into a syringe and, where pos-
sible, it can be transferred through a closed system into an anticoagulant loaded collec-
tion bag by way of a three-way stopcock. An inline filter is required for administration
of collected blood back into the patient's vasculature.
Transfusing the patient's own blood back into circulation has the benefit of providing
body temperature appropriately typed blood product at little cost to the client. In con-
trast, autotransfusion is plagued by multiple opportunities for the blood to become
contaminated.
Autotransfusion is not an acceptable mode of blood transfusion in patients whose
hemorrhage is associated with a neoplastic process. For example, a dog that has a
 hemoabdomen due to rupture of a splenic mass is not a candidate for autotransfusion.
It is possible that some of the blood contained within the abdominal cavity has been
present for an unknown length of time (associated with previous subclinical episodes of
bleeding), and as such it is not suitable for reintroduction to circulation. Furthermore,
the blood within the abdominal cavity is the product of a ruptured tumor and is thought
 to contain cancer cells. Autotransfusion of blood potentially containing neoplastic cells
is counterintuitive.
Chapter Summary
Transfusion medicine is a valuable tool in emergency and critical care medicine. Blood
can be collected from donor animals and divided into sections called components. Blood
components include packed red blood cells, plasma, platelet-rich plasma, platelet con-
centrate, and cryoprecipitate. Each of these components can be transfused to a recipient
in need of specific hematologic support providing the product is of the same blood
type as the recipient's. Blood typing and cross matching are tests that identify an
animal's blood type and determine the compatibility of donor/recipient blood samples,
218Fluid Therapy forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
respectively. Identifying a patient's blood type and assessing compatibility of samples
contribute to safe transfusion of blood products. Despite cautious screening, blood
transfusion reactions are still possible and can be life threatening.
Autotransfusion is the process by which an animal's blood is removed from a body
cavity posthemorrhage, mixed with anticoagulant, and given back to the patient. This
 process also has associated risks and should be reserved for the extreme situations where
 no other blood product is available.
Review Questions
1. What are the ideal age and weight requirements for canine blood donors?
2. What are the ideal age and weight requirements for feline blood donors?
3. Of the dog erythrocyte antigens, which locations are the most clinically relevant
with regard to transfusion medicine?
4. Cats also have their own blood types. Name the three feline blood types and
identify which of these is the most common feline blood type in the United States
and Canada.
5. Blood collected from a canine donor is collected into a closed system preloaded
with which additive?
6. What is the purpose of this additive?
7. Which blood product would be most appropriate for administration to a patient
that is severely anemic but is not hypovolemic and has a total protein within
normal limits?
8. Which vital signs are recorded and compared before and after a patient receives
a test dose of a blood product?
9. What is autotransfusion?
Answers to the review questions can be found on page 225 in the Appendix. The review
questions are also available for download on a companion website at www.wiley.com!
go/donohoenursing.
Further Reading
Blais, M. et al. 2002. Canine Dal blood type: a red cell antigen lacking in some dalma-
tions. J Vet Intern Med 21:281-286.
Callan, M., E. Appleman, and B. Sachais. 2009. Canine platelet transfusions. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 19:401-415.
Chiaramonte, D. 2004. Blood-component therapy: selection, administration and moni-
toring. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 19:63-67.
Gibson, G. 2007. Storing blood: what can I do and how? British Small Animal Veteri-
nary Congress Proceedings; Birmingham
Giger, U. 2010. Transfusion medicine—do's and don'ts. Proceedings World Small Animal
Veterinary Association Congress; Switzerland.
Green, M. 2002. Transfusion medicine. In W. E. Wingfield, ed. The ICU Book, 189-202.
Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Hohenhaus, A. 2006. Blood transfusion and blood substitutes. In S. DiBartola, ed. Fluid,
Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 567-581. St. Louis:
Elsevier.
Lucas, R., K. Lentz, and A. Hale. 2004. Collection and preparation of blood products.
Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 19:55-62.
Mathews, K. 2006. Transfusion of blood products. In Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Care Manual, 667-681. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: LifeLearn.
Ogg, A. A. 2001. Practical blood transfusion. In M. J. Day, A. Mackin, and J. Little-
wood, eds. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion
Medicine, Chapter 15. Quedgeley, Gloucester, UK: British Small Animal Veterinary
Association.
Prittie, J. 2010. Controversies related to red blood cell transfusion in critically ill
patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 20:167-176.
 Rozanski, E., and A. de Laforcade. 2004. Transfusion medicine in veterinary emergency
and critical care medicine. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 19:83-87.
nary teaching hospital: 308 patients (1996-1998 and 2006-2008). J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 20:441-445.
Tocci, L., and P. Ewing. 2009. Increasing patient safety in veterinary transfusion medi-
cine: an overview of pretransfusion testing. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 19:66-73.
Weinstein, N. 2007. A newly recognized blood group in domestic shorthair cats: the
Mik red cell antigen. J Vet Intern Med 21:287-292.
Appendix
Answers to Review Questions
Chapter 1
1. 60%
2. Higher. Approximately 80% of body weight is water in neonates.
3. Approximately 5%
4. Osmosis is the process by which water passes through a semipermeable membrane
into an area of higher solute concentration.
 5. Sodium and chloride are the primary electrolytes found in the extracellular space.
6. Potassium and magnesium are the most common electrolytes in the intracellular
space.
7. Oncotic pressure arises from the presence of plasma proteins and other large high
molecular weight particles within the vascular space.
 8. d. Cardiac output and blood pressure
Chapter 2
1. Hypovolemia is a deficit in circulating fuid volume.
 2. Any three of the following: skin tent, eye position, mucous membrane moisture, or
mentation.
3. A decrease in circulating volume leads to decreased stroke volume. Because cardiac
output is the product of stroke volume and heart rate, a decrease in stroke volume
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
@ 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
221
222Appendix:Answers toReview Questions
leads to a decrease in cardiac output. As such, hypovolemia leads to decreased cardiac
output.
 4. The goal of the physiologic changes seen with hypovolemia is to maintain tissue
perfusion and preserve organ function.
 5. Palpation of one femoral pulse and not the other can fail to identify arterial throm-
bosis affecting the quality of one femoral pulse and not the other.
6. Dorsal pedal pulses are thought to disappear when the patient's mean arterial pres-
sure is less than or equal to 60mm Hg. One can assume that if there is no palpable
dorsal pedal pulse, the patient is hypotensive and possibly hypovolemic.
7. a. Dehydration
b. Protein loss
c. Splenic contraction
8.a. High
 b. The kidneys conserve water in times of dehydration. If the same solutes are
excreted in a smaller volume of urine, the USG is higher due to the increased
solute concentration.
Chapter 3
1. Animals that suffer from conditions involving vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal disten-
 sion or decreased motility are not candidates for enteral fluid therapy.
2. The tube must be measured to ensure that the proximal end reaches beyond the
nasopharynx and into the esophagus.
3. The tube is measured from the tip of the nose to the seventh intercostal space.
4. An animal can safely receive 10mL/kg of fluids at each SC injection site.
5. Patients with marked hypotension, marked dehydration, or hypothermia are not
candidates for SC fluids. Circulation to the periphery and skin is diminished during
these conditions, which will inhibit distribution of fluids delivered by this route.
6. Any two of the following: The IO compartment doesn't collapse; fluids are quickly
redistributed; can deliver high volume and can deliver at fast rate; can deliver same
fluids as IV route.
 7. IO catheters can be difficult to place due to challenges associated with identifying
 proper landmarks. Osteomyelitis is also a potential complication with IO catheter
placement.
8. Cephalic vein, lateral saphenous vein, medial saphenous vein, jugular vein
9. Polyurethane
Chapter 4
1. By positioning the line in this manner, the technician avoids air traveling into the line
and subsequently into the patient.
2. 10gtt/s and 60gtt/s
3. An inline filter must be used when the patient is receiving blood products.
4. Smaller volume syringes are safer because back pressure is recognized more quickly
in the smaller volume syringe and a line occlusion alarm will sound sooner than with
a larger volume syringe.
Appendix:Answers to Review Questions223
 5. Any of the following are acceptable answers:
a. Preset volumes avoid infusion of excess volume in an emergency setting.
b. Burettes can be used for constant rates of infusion.
c. Burettes can facilitate quick changes of drug concentrations.
d. Burettes can be used for slow infusion of medications.
e. Burettes are far less expensive than syringe pumps or syringe drivers.
Chapter 5
1. The technician should add 10.5mL of KCl to the remaining 700mL of IV fluid in
the bag.
2. The dog will receive 1.5 mL/h of fentanyl.
 3. A total of 12mL of fentanyl is added to the bag to provide 1.5 mL/h of fentanyl for
8 hours of fluid left in the bag.
4. Adding 10mL of 50% dextrose to the IV fluids in the burette will provide a
solution of 5% dextrose. (Note: Some clinics prefer to remove 10mL of IV fuids so
that the total volume is 100mL and the 5% dextrose solution is slightly more
accurate.)
 5. A total of 8.3mL of metoclopramide should be added to a 1-L bag of fluids to
provide this patient with 2mg/kg per day of metoclopramide at a fluid rate of
50mL/h.
Chapter 6
1. Patients that have recently undergone rectal surgery are not suitable candidates
for continuous temperature measurement via rectal probe. In addition, animals
with severe coagulopathies should not be monitored using these probes. Patients
that are extremely aggressive might also be unsuitable candidates for this type of
monitoring.
2. Pyrexia describes an elevated body temperature that arises when the body attempts 
to defend itself (e.g., against infection). In this condition, the body's regulation of
temperature is disrupted and reset. Hyperthermia refers to any condition in which
 body temperature is elevated above normal.
 3. Tachycardia is the term used to describe a heart rate elevated beyond what is nor-
mally expected for a particular animal.
4. Bradycardia describes a heart rate that is slower than what is normally acceptable
for a given patient.
5. Serial body weight measurement, measurement of urine output, and calculation of
fluids IN compared to fluids OUT are all acceptable ways of estimating fluid loss or
 gain in a hospitalized patient.
6.A total of 500g of body weight is comparable with a volume of approximately
500mL of fluid.
7. b. Hypovolemia
 8. b. An increase in circulating volume
9.1-2mL/kg
224Appendix: Answers to Review Questions
Chapter 7
1. d. Inflammation of a blood vessel
2. blood clot
3. c. Coagulopathic patients
4. Any three of the following: increased respiratory rate; restlessness; increased heart
rate; increased urine output; chemosis, edema; nasal discharge; vomiting and
diarrhea.
5. Peripheral edema
Chapter 8
1. Any three of the following: small low molecular weight particles; move freely through-
out body compartments; enter interstitial compartment quickly; do not contribute to
oncotic pressure; do contribute to osmotic pressure.
 2. Maintenance crystalloids contain less sodium than replacement crystalloids.
3. a. higher than
4. Hypertonic saline increases osmotic pressure and draws fluid into the intravascular
space. This is helpful in patients whose intravascular space is lacking in volume.
 5. The large molecular weight particles remain in the intravascular space creating an
  mep sd anssnd onoo paseau a assnd oo u asea
other body water compartments into the vascular space.
6. HTS and colloids draw fluid into the vascular space. If capillaries are leaky or
damaged and HTS or colloids leave the vascular space, they will draw fluids into the
compartment into which they have passed. This can lead to interstitial edema, pul-
monary edema, and other complications detrimental to patient health.
Chapter 9
1. The technician can evaluate mucous membrane color, capillary refll time, heart rate,
and pulse quality.
 2. Skin tent; eye position; mucous membrane moisture
3. Replacement fluids
 4. Plasma-Lyte A, Normosol R, and lactated Ringer solution would all be appropriate
 in this situation.
5. Restore intra vascular volume; restore perfusion; treat hypovolemia
Chapter 10
1. A means to deliver nutrition via the intravenous route to patients that are unable to
receive it by the oral route or via their gastrointestinal tract.
2. TPN delivers 100% of the patient's nutritional requirements; PPN delivers 50% of
the patient's nutritional requirements.
Appendix:Answers to Review Questions225
3. There are many different reasons to consider that a patient might benefit from PN.
The most common guidelines include the following:
a. The patient has been anorexic for 3 days
b. The patient is expected to be anorexic for at least 3 days
c. The patient's illness is such that the animal is expected to lose muscle mass during
hospitalization
d. The patient has undergone gastrointestinal surgery or is unable to receive enteral
nutrition.
4. Any of the following complications can arise: catheter occlusion, kinking of admin-
istration sets, compromise of sterility (patient soiling of lines), infection, hyperglyce
mia, hypoglycemia, or refeeding syndrome (rare).
5. A condition that arises when an animal that has been without nutrition for a pro-
longed period of time finally receives some form of feeding. The animal's body carries
 a n     ssd sd j  e 
electrolyte disturbances. The disturbances most commonly seen in refeeding syn-
drome are hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, and hypomagnesemia.
Chapter 11
1. They should be between 1 and 7 years of age and weigh at least 22kg.
2. Cats should be between 1 and 7 years of age and weigh at least 4.5 kg.
 3. DEA 1.1 and DEA 1.2 are the most important antigens to identify when blood typing
 donors and recipients.
4. Cats have either blood type A, B, or AB. The most common blood type in cats is
type A.
 5. The bags contain citrate phosphate dextrose adenine (CPDA).
6. CPDA is an anticoagulant and preservative that maintains the integrity of the cells
while prolonging their shelf life.
7. Packed red blood cells would be the ideal choice for this patient because what the
animal requires most is the red blood cells.
 8. The patient's temperature, pulse, and respiration are measured both before and after
the test dose. Increases in any of these vital signs after the test dose warrant close
monitoring and may indicate that the patient is having a reaction to the blood
 product being administered.
 9. Autotransfusion refers to the intravenous delivery of whole blood that has been col-
lected from a body cavity of the same patient. The blood is collected into an
anticoagulant-loaded closed collection system and can be given back to the patient.
The blood is administered through an inline filter to ensure no clots are delivered
intravenously.
Page numbers in italics represent figures; those in bold, tables.
acid, citrate, and dextrose (ACD), 206
air, and infusion pump use, 81
acid base disturbances, 139-140, 140
alkalosis, 139-140, 140
acidosis, 139-140, 140
alkalosis, metabolic, 175
fluid selection in, 170
American Pediatric Surgical Association, 190
metabolic, 175
ammonia, in stored WB, 161
in pyloric obstruction, 175
anemia, 25
acute immunologic reaction, 215
jatrogenic, 57
acute nonimmunologic reaction, 215
PRBCs for, 161-162
additives, fluid, 93-95, 93-96, 100
and WB transfusion, 160
administration, routes of
anorexia
choosing, 63
and acid-base balance, 140
for enteral fluid, 35-36, 63
case studies, 29, 91
esophagostomy and gastrostomy feeding tubes,
CVP in, 123
38-39, 3840, 63
anticoagulants, in blood processing, 205-206
and fluid selection, 171
antigens, 197
intraosseous, 41-44, 42-44, 64
apheresis, platelet harvesting by, 211
intraperitoneal, 41, 64
arterial blood pressure, continuous monitoring of,
intravenous fluid, 44-64, 46, 48-62
129
nasoesophageal feeding tubes, 36, 36-38, 63
arterial catheterization, for DABP monitoring, 128,
subcutaneous, 40-41, 64
128-129
administration sets
aseptic technique
for blood transfusions, 160, 213
for catheter insertion, 190
burettes,72,72-73,85-86
for IV catheter placement, 136, 145
clamps, 68, 70, 85
assessment, patient
drip chambers, 67-68,68, 69, 85
case studies, 29-31
extension sets for, 72,72,85
of dehydration, 15-16, 31
filters, 74-75,75,161,187
of hydration and volume status, 17-29, 18-20,
injection ports, 68, 70, 71, 71, 85
22-27, 28
pressure bags, 75-76,76
of hypovolemia, 16-17
rate flow regulator system for, 74, 74
autoaglutination, 199
replacement of, 81
autotransfusion,215,216,217,217,218
selecting, 67
axillary temperature measurement, 109, 109, 110
vented sets, 73-74
Y-type, 75
Bair huggers, 111, 113
agglutination,199,199
bandaging, for IV catheters, 136, 139, 146
and crossmatching, 201
bicarbonate, 140
of RBCs, 163
blankets, hot water, 111, 114
Fluid Therapy for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, First Edition. Charlotte Donohoe.
 2012 Charlotte Donohoe. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
227
228Index
blood
blood typing
creating components of,205-206
canine,199-200
cryoprecipitate,211-212
feline, 200,201
fresh frozen plasma, 208,208-210, 209
necessity of, 199,217
fresh whole blood, 206-208, 207
blood typing cards, 200, 201
packed red blood cells, 208, 208-210,
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 26, 26, 202
209
blood volume, and pulse quality, 22
platelet concentrate, 210-211
body water
platelet-rich plasma, 210-211
and body weight, 45
processing,205-206
compartments for, 3-6, 4-5, 6, 11
bood banks, 196
defined, 3
blood collection, 202
electrolytes in, 7, 7-8, 8, 12
canine, 202-204, 203
gain and loss, 8-11
feline, 204-205, 205, 206
boluses, in fluid delivery, 79-80, 82
blood components, 195, 217
bradyarrhythmias, 8
blood component therapy, 195
bradycardia, 205
bood donation, 196
causes of, 116
blood donors, 196
treatment of, 116
canine, 196
bradypnea, 118
determining recipient compatibility for, 201-202
burettes, 72,72-73, 85-86,89,92
feline, 196-197
butterfly catheters, 47, 48, 204
prescreening, 197
blood gases, measurement of, 23, 27
cage, metabolic, 131
blood loss
capillary refill time (CRT), 168
fluid selection in, 170
cardiac output (CO), 21
fluid therapy in, 25
case studies
blood pressure (BP)
depression, 91
decrease in, 21
diarrhea, 29 (see aiso diarrhea)
direct arterial measurement of, 127-129, 128,
patient assessment,29-31
130, 130
catheters
hypertension, 129
daily evaluation of, 139, 146
hypotension,129
intraosseous, 137
indirect measurement of, 125-127, 126, 127,
for PN administration
130
selection of, 186-187
monitoring,28
sites and solution sets for, 187
normal range for, 28
urinary, 131
bood products, 156
catheters, intravenous
delivery of, 74, 75
butterfly catheters, 47, 48, 204
fresh frozen plasma, 157
complications associated with, 46, 46, 135-136
human serum albumin, 158-160
central lines, 138-139, 146
immune response to, 163-164
embolism, 137, 146
packed red blood cells, 161-162
jugular catheters,138-139,146
platelet products, 162-163, 163
vascular inflammation and infection,
stored plasma, 157-158
136-137
whole blood, 160-161, 161
main types of, 64
blood transfusions
materials for, 46-47
immune response to, 163-164
measurements for, 46
indications for, 212-213
multilumen,57-63
monitoring of, 213-214
over-the-needle, 48-53, 48-55
reactions to, 214-215
selection of, 135, 145
setting up for, 213
site preparation for, 136, 145
blood types, 197
hrough-the-needle, 53-54, 55-56, 56-57
canine, 163, 165,197
central lines, 46
feline, 164, 165, 198
complications associated with, 138-139, 146
identifcation of, 200
indications for, 137
nomenclature for, 198
maintenance of, 138, 146
index229
placement of, 63
Dial-a-Flo infusion systems, 74
for TPN administration, 187
diarrhea, 24
 central venous catheterization, through-the-needle
and acid-base balance, 140
catheters for, 55
case studies, 29, 91
central venous catheters, 57, 57, 58
choosing fluids for, 169-171
central venous pressure (CVP)
clinical signs of, 168-169, 169
decreased, 123
CVP in, 123
increased, 124-125
fluid selection in, 170, 171
measurement of, 54,121,121,122,125
digestion, oxidation in, 9
units for measurement of, 122
direct arterial blood pressure (DABP) measurement,
cerebrospinal space, ECF in, 5
127-129, 128, 130, 130
chemosis,142-143
disks, microwaveable, 111, 112
chloride (Cl)
dog erythrocyte antigens (DEAs), 163-164,
in fluid maintenance, 7, 7,8
197-198
in gastric fluid, 169
donor recipient compatibility, determining, 201-202
citrate phosphate dextrose adenine (CPDA)
Doppler method, of BP measurement, 125-126, 126,
in blood collection systems, 205
130
WB stored in, 160
dorsal pedal pulses, 23, 23
clamps, for fluid administration sets, 68, 70, 85
dressing, for IV catheters, 136, 139, 146
collection systems, for blood transfusion, 203,
drip chambers, 67-68, 68, 69, 85
203
drip rate
colloid osmotic pressure, 9-10, 12
formula for, 90
colloids
setting,89
characteristics of, 153-154, 164
complications associated with, 142
edema
indications for, 141-142
peripheral {interstitial), 10, 143
natural, 156,156-164,161-163, 165
pulmonary, 143,144
side effects associated with, 154
electrocardiogram (ECG), 22, 113-114, 115,
synthetic,154,154156,164
132
for trauma patients, 174
electrolyte, use of term, 7
constant rate infusion (CRI), 73, 96
electrolytes, 23,27
continuous infusion, calculating, 96
concentration of, 8
conversions, for fluid infusions, 99, 100
in PPN, 180
crackles, 117
role of, 7
crossmatching, 201-202, 217
supplementation with,93
cryoprecipitate (Cryo)
embolism, IV catheters associated with, 137,
derivation of, 211
146
indications for, 212
emergency database, 173
crystalloids, 141
equations, for fluid infusions, 99, 100
characteristics of, 149-150, 164
esophagostomy tube, 38, 38-40, 63
hypertonic saline, 152, 152-153
extension sets, 72, 72
maintenance,151,151-152,164
extracellular fluid (ICF)
replacement, 150,150-151, 164
body water in, 3, 4-5, 11
for trauma patients, 174
in eyes, 5
eye position, and hydration status, 19-20, 20
dehydration
eyes, ECF in, S
causes of, 15,16
explained, 15
febrile (pyrexic) patients, 110-111
hypertonic, 16
feeding, enteral, 184
hypotonic, 16
feeding tubes, 38-39, 38-40, 63
isotonic,16
femoral pulses, 22.23
depression, case study, 91
fever, and acid-base balance, 140. See also pyrexia
dextrans,155
filters
dextrose
for IV administration sets, 74-75, 75
fluid supplemented with, 95-96
for PN administration, 187
in PPN, 180
for PRBC transfusions,161
230Index
fluid choice
and hydration, 21-22
and acid-base balance, 141
monitoring,111-112,115,132
alkalinizing solutions, 141
tachycardia, 115-116
complications associated with
thoracic auscultation of, 112, 114
acidosis and alkalosis, 139-140, 140
hemoconcentration, 24
colloids, 141-142
hemorrhage, massive, 17, 173
overadministration,142-146,144,145,146,
hetastarch, 155
146
hospitalization
crystalloid solutions, 141
 isotonic replacement solutions during, 171
glucose-containing solutions, 141
nutrition during, 179
fluid loss, in hypovolemia, 16-17. See also blood
hospitals
loss
monitoring equipment of, 168
fluid maintenance. See aiso maintenance rate
PN protocols of, 187-188
plasma protein in, 9-10
human serum albumin (HSA), 156
solutes in, 10-11
benefits of, 158
fluid movement, control of, 5
derivation of, 18
fluid rate, 100.See aiso maintenance rate
test dose of, 159
fluids. See also colloids; crystalloids
transfusion reaction to, 160
choosing suitable, 149, 164
hydration, 15
hypertonic,11,12
clinical assessment of
hypotonic,10-11,11,12
eye position in, 19-20,20
isotonic,10,11,12,40,170
heart rate in, 21-22
fluid selection, 167, 176
mentation, 20
patient evaluation in, 167-168
mucous membrane moisture, 18-19, 19
in pyloric obstruction, 175-176, 176
pulse quality, 22, 22-23, 23, 31
for trauma patients,172, 172-175
quick assessment tests, 23-24
fluid therapy, ix
skin turgor/skin tent, 17, 18
complications associated with, 145
vital parameters, 20-21, 31
catheter-associated, 135-139
evaluation of, 168
fluid choice,139-145,144,145,146
hydrostatic pressure, 149
overadministration, 142-146,144,145,146,
hypercarbia,116
146
hyperglycemia, during parenteral nutrition, 190-191
goals of, 174
hyperkalemia, 8
maintenance phase of, 171
hypernatremia, 153
monitoring of, 171
hypertension, causes of, 129
USG in, 132
hyperthermia,110,132
fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 156, 157, 209
hypertonic saline (HTS), 152, 152-153, 175
indications for, 210
hypocalcemia, 211
packaging of, 208, 209
hypoglycemia, 95, 191
preparation of,208-209
hypokalemia,116
fresh plasma (FP), 195
dinical signs of, 191-192
fresh whole blood (FWB). See also whole blood
in GI upset, 169
compared with whole blood, 208
in pyloric obstruction, 175
components of, 206
hypomagnesemia, 192
indications for, 207
hyponatremia, in pyloric obstruction, 175
hypophosphatemia, clinical signs of, 191
gastrointestinal tract, fluid administration via, 35-36,
hypotension,129
63
hypothermia, 111
gastrostomy tube,38-40,39,63
hypovolemia
gel method,of blood typing, 200
CVP in,123
guidewire, in central line placement, 63
defined, 16, 31
guidewire catheters, 64
explained,15
fluid selection in, 171
heart rate (HR)
pulse quality in, 22-23
bradycardia, 116
achycardia in, 116
elevation of, 22
hypovolemic shock, 10
index 231
immune responses, to blood transfusion, 215
magnesium (Mg), in fluid maintenance, 7, 8
immune thrombocytopenia purpura (ITP), 211
maintenance fluids, 171
inappetence, case study, 91
maintenance rate, 87
infection, PN therapy associated with, 189-190
calculating, 88,88-93,91, 92
injection ports, 68, 70,71, 71, 85
"twice maintenance," 90
International System of Units, 87
malnutrition
interstitial fluid {ICF), 3, 4-5, 11. See also edema
physical features suggesting, 184, 186
interstitial space, crystalloids in, 149
PN in, 182
intracellular fluid {ICF), body water in, 3, 4-5, 11
manometer, CVP measured with, 121, 121, 123,
intraosseous (IO) fluid administration, 41-44, 42-44,
124
64
mean arterial pressure (MAP), 28, 28
access sites for, 42, 42-43, 43
defined, 126
advantage of, 42
in hypotension, 129
catheter-like devices for, 44, 44
mentation, and hydration, 20
complications associated with, 137
metabolic acidosis, 175
complication with, 42
metabolic cage, 131
indications for, 171
metabolic water, 87
monitoring, 43-44
meter, in fluid therapy calculations, 88
intraperiotoneal (IP) fluid administration, 41, 64
Mik antigen, in cats, 198
intravascular space, 3, 5, 5, 154
millimoles per liter (mmol/L), 8
intravascular volume, in sickness, 16
mole, in fluid therapy calculations, 88
intravenous fluid administration, 44. See also catheters,
molecular weight, 8
intravenous
monitoring
benefit of, 45
during blood collection, 204
catheters for, 46, 46-64, 48-62
of blood transfusions, 213-214
determining volume for, 45
of fluid therapy, 171
potential complications of, 45
monitoring, patient, 107,132, 133
intravenous fluid therapy, potassium supplementary
blood pressure, 125-130, 126-128,130, 130,
guidelines for, 176, 176
133
intravenous {IV) nutrition, 179. See also parenteral
of body weight, 118-121, 119, 120, 133
nutrition
central venous pressure, 121,121-125, 122,
jons,7
122-124, 133
heart rate, 111-116, 115, 132
jugular catheters, complications associated with,
respiratory rate,116-118,132
138
tachypnea, 117-118
jugular vein
temperature,108,108-111,109,112-114,
for catheter placement, 53
132
central line placement in, 58, 59-62
urine output,131-132,133
thrombosis of, 139, 146
vital signs, 107-108
mucous membranes (MMs), evaluation of, 18-19,19,
kidneys, and acid-base balance, 140
168
kilogram, in fluid therapy calculations, 88
multilumen catheters, 57, 57,58
complications associated with, 138
lactate, blood, 27
placement of, 58-59, 59-62,63
lactated Ringer solution (LRS), 40, 141, 150,
for TPN administration, 187
150
uses for, 58
compared with HTS, 153
multivitamins, in PPN,180, 192
for vomiting/diarrheic patients, 171
lactate levels, monitoring of, 168-169
nasal discharge, serous, 143
lethargy, in case study, 29
nasoesophageal feeding tubes, 36, 63
light, reaction of drugs to, 97-98
complications associated with, 38
lipds, in TPN, 181, 182, 183, 192
confirming placement of, 37
lock feature, for infusion pumps, 80-81
insertion of, 36-37
Luer adapter, 70, 71, 85
neoplastic disease, cachexia associated with, 185
Luer lock,71
normal saline, 0ne-half (0.45% NaCl), 151, 152
lung sounds, moist, 117
normal saline (0.9% NaCl), 40, 141, 150, 150-151
232Index
Normosol R, 141, 150
infection, 189-190
for trauma patients, 174
mechanical,189, 192
for vomiting/diarrheic patients, 171
refeeding syndrome, 191-192
nutrition. See also parenteral nutrition
indications for, 184, 184-185, 185, 185
enteral, 184
partial (PPN), 179-181, 180
during hospitalization, 179
timely initiation of, 184
nutritional support, 38
total (TPN), 181
nutrition therapy, goal of, 188
volumes for, 188
PENTASPAN, 154
oat bags, microwaveable, 111, 112
pentastarch,155
occlusions
perfusion, fluid selection in compromised,
with infusion pump use, 81-82
171
with syringe pumps, 84
peritoneal cavity, 41
oncotic pressure, 9-10, 12
pH, changes in, 139
defined, 149
phlebitis
of HSA, 158
associated with IV catheters, 137, 146
Ontario Veterinary College Teaching Hospital, 71, 80,
central lines associated with, 138
213
physical examination
 oscillometric pressure measurements, 126-127, 127,
in blood collection, 202
130
BP measurement in, 28
osmosis, process of, 5, 6
before fluid therapy, 167
osmotic pressure, 5-6, 6, 149
nutritional status in, 184, 186
 Osteomyelitis, from catheter contamination, 137
preliminary evaluation, 17
overadministration of fluids,142
piggybacking, 71, 71
chemosis, 142-143
plasma, 3,4-5,5,11. See also fresh frozen
peripheral edema from, 143
plasma
pleural effusion, 143-145, 144, 144, 145
composition of, 16
pulmonary edema in, 143
platelet-rich, 195, 210
serous nasal discharge in, 143
stored,156,157-158
overload, fluid, clinical signs of, 146
Plasma-Lyte A (PLA), 141, 150
overload volume, clinical signs of, 164
for trauma patients, 174
over-the-needle catheters, 48-53, 48-55
for vomiting/diarrheic patients, 171
placement of, 49, 49-51
Plasma-Lyte 148, for trauma patients, 174
securing in place, 51-53, 52-53
plasma protein, and fluid maintenance, 9-10
supplies for, 51, 51
platelet concentrate (PC), 195
oxidation, in digestion, 9
administration of, 211,212
oxyglobin,155-156
packaging of, 210
preparation of,211
packed cell volume (PCV), 23, 24, 24-26, 25
platelet products, 162-163, 163
as guideline for PRBC transfusion, 162
platelet-rich plasma (PRP), 195, 210
posttransfusion, 214
platelets
for postraumatic fluid therapy, 173
indications for, 211
supplies for measuring, 25
preparation of products from, 210-211
for WB transfusion, 161
pleural effusion, 143-145, 144, 144, 145
packed red blood cells (PRBCs), 195
Potassium chloride, as fluid additive, 94,
indications for, 209-210
94-95
packaging of feline, 208
potassium (K)
preparation of, 161, 208-209
in fluid maintenance,7,7-8
stored plasma administered with, 158
in gastric fluid, 169
pain, in cardiovascular assessment, 115
supplementation guidelines for, 176,
parenteral nutrition,179,192
176
administration of, 185-188,188
preload,121
in advanced care setting, 181-188, 183-185, 186
prescription, fluid therapy, 87
complications of,189, 192
pressure bags, 75-76, 76
hyperglycemia, 190-191
pulmonary edema, 143, 144,205
hypoglycemia, 191
pulse oximetry, 117, 118, 132
index 233
pulse quality
skin turgor, evaluaiton of, 17, 18
evaluation of, 22,22-23, 23, 31
small animal practices, ix
poor, 112
sodium (Na*)
pumps, fluid infusion, 67, 76, 77. See also syringe
in fluid maintenance, 7, 7, 8
sdund
in gastric fluid, 169
benefits of, 76-77
sodium potassium pump, 7, 8
calculating maintenance rate with, 89, 100
solute concentrations, 10
double, 76,78
solute molecules, 10
drawbacks of, 77-79
solutes, defined, 5
lock feature of, 80-81
spinal needles, as intraosseous catheters, 44, 44
maintenance of, 79-81, 86
starvation, stress vs. simple, 182
occlusion alarms on, 77
sterile technique
potential complications of, 86
during autotransfusion, 216
silence button for, 80
in PN therapy, 189, 192
syringe pumps, 82,83,84-85
stoma care, in feeding tube maintenance, 139
troubleshooting, 81-82
stored plasma (SP),156,157-158
purpura,215
students,technician,ix
pyloric obstruction, 151, 175-176, 176
subcutaneous (SC) administration, 40-41, 64
pyrexia (fever), 110-111, 132
supplements, calculations for, 100, 101
symovial joints, ECF in, 5, 6
quick analysis tests (QUATS), 23
syringe pumps (syringe drivers), 82, 83, 86
alarms for, 84, 86
rate
setting up,82,84
for fluid delivery, 79
troubleshooting, 84-85
maintenance,87,88,88-93,91,92
systolic blood pressure, 126
rate flow regulator, 74, 74, 92
reactions, transfusion, 214-215
tachycardia,21-22,115-116
red blood cells (RBCs), 197
tachypnea, 117-118,118
agglutination of, 199, 199
technical calculations, 87, 87
in crossmatching, 201
for continuous infusion, 96
refeeding syndrome, and PN, 191-192
conversions and equations for, 99, 100
replacement fluids, 170, 171
for fluid additives, 93-95, 93-96,100
 respiration, and maintenance of proper pH,
maintenance rate,88,88-93,91,92
139-140
technicians
respiratory rate (RR)
advanced care, x
bradypnea, 118
role of, ix
measurement of, 116-117
temperature
tachypnea, 117-118, 118
decreases in, 111, 112-114
resting energy requirement (RER), 188
increases in, 110-111
resuscitation phase, of fluid therapy, 169-170
monitoring, 108, 108-111, 109, 112-114,
132
saphenous vein, for catheter placement, 53
normal, 132
scales
temperature, pulse, respiration (TPR)
mobile, 120
in blood collection, 204, 205
tabletop, 119,120
and test dose for HSA, 159
walk-on, 118,119
thermistor, 108
screening tests, for HSA donors, 158
thermometers, 108, 108
second, in fluid therapy calculations, 88
disposable plastic sleeves for, 108, 109
sedation, for blood collection, 202-203
placement of, 109
Seldinger technique, modified, 58-59, 59-62, 63
"third spacing," 120
semipermeable membranes, 5, 6, 6
thromboembolism, IV catheters associated with, 137,
sepsis, physiologic changes in, 119-121
146
shock, hypovolemic, 10
thrombosis
SI units, 87
central lines associated with, 138-139
skin tent, 17
jugular,139,146
evaluation of, 168
jugular catheter associated with, 138
234Index
thrombus formation
monitoring, 107-108
with IV catheters, 46,46
with test dose for HSA, 159
during PN administration, 186, 190
vitamin imbalances, in refeeding syndrome,
through-the-needle catheters, 53-54, 55-56, 56-57
192
drawing samples with, 56-57
vitamins, in PPN,180,181,192
needle guards with, 57
volume status, 15
placement of, 53-54
volume to be infused (VTGI), 79, 100
total parenteral nutrition (TPN)
volumetric infusion pumps, 76. See also pumps
administration of, 188
vomiting,24
risks associated with, 187
and acid-base balance, 140
total solids (TS), 23, 25, 25-26
case studies, 29, 91
decreased, 25-26
choosing fluids for, 169-171
increases in, 24-25
dinical signs of, 168-169, 169
for postraumatic fluid therapy, 173
CVP in, 123
total volume, in fluid administration, 80
fluid selection in, 170, 171
transcellular fluid compartments, 5
hemorrhagic, 30
ransducer, CVP computed with, 121, 122
von Willebrand factor, 211
ransfusion medicine, 195,198,217.See also blood
von Willebrand factor deficiency, 212
transfusions
tansfusion reactions, 214-215
water. See body water
rauma patients, 25
water consumption, 9
early evaluation of, 173
water gain, diet and, 9
fluid choices for, 174-175
water loss, 8-9
initiating fluid therapy for, 172
weight, body
transport of, 173
monitoring, 118
scales for monitoring, 118-119, 119,
urine, collection of, 131
120
urine output, monitoring, 131-132, 133
serial measurement of, 121
urine scald, 131
weight loss, 181, 183
urine specific gravity {USG), 27, 27-28, 131, 132
wheezes, 117
whole blood (WB), 156,160-161, 161
vascular system, 16
centrifugation of, 195
vasculature, body water within, 5
compared with FWB, 208
vena cava, cranial, for catheter placement, 53, 54, 57
fresh,206,207-208
vented administration sets,73-74
indications for, 171
vital signs
for trauma patients, 175
assessment of, 20-21,31
in blood collection, 204, 205
Y-type infusion sets, 75